

Denham Street Methodist Cutrch
HAWTHORN WEST
1886 - DIAMOND JUBILEE - 1946
60 Years
Anniversary Celebrations
PROGRAMME
APRIL 28th to MAY 12th
DATES TO REMEMBER:
Sunday ..... April 28
Saturday .... May 4
Sunday ..... May 5
Tuesday ..... May 7
Saturday .... May 11
Sunday ..... May 12
SOLOS ..... ANTHEMS
An Augmented Choir
INVITATION
The Minister, Trustees and Officers very heartily
invite you and your friends to be present at
these Services.
“Let us go into the House of the Lord.”—Psalm 122, 1.
Rev. T. P. H. WOODFORD .... Minister
Mr. HAROLD TASKER .. Choir Conductor
Secretary: Mr. V. J. WASLEY Treasurer: Mr. S. R. SMITH


Denham Street Methodist Church
(HAWTHORN WEST)
Diamond Jubilee Celebrations
1886 60 YEARS 1946
28th APRIL to 12th MAY
Dear Friend,
It has been decided to celebrate our Church Diamond
Jubilee by holding the special services and weeknight
functions set out in our programme.
It is felt that, in addition to these special functions and
a “BACK TO DENHAM STREET MOVEMENT,” the
best way to mark the Jubilee is to make a great combined
effort to provide funds for urgent repairs to the Church
organ and property.
The war prevented us executing many essential re-
pairs and renewals which, now that Victory is ours and
peace has been restored, we hope to put in hand as soon as
those funds are available.
May we suggest that you show your appreciation of
this Victory and the part played by the Church during those
anxious war years, by making your offering commensurate
with the value you place on the Church and the good work
done by it in building up the character of your children.
Surely we could give no more fitting expression of our
gratitude to God for all that the Church means to us and
our cnildren than Dy helping to KEEP IT, and to maintain
it in good condition and pay for its upkeep.
We commend to you the TEMPLE DAY and BAN-
QUET on Saturday, 4th May, when the minister and offi-
cers will be in the Church trom 10.30 a.m. to 6.30 p.m. to
receive your THANK OFFERING.
Accommodation for the BANQUET in the school hall
is limited and your early advice that you will be a diner is
essential to ensure you will have a place RESERVED and
will not be disappointed.
We appeal to you to contact all those returned boys
and girls who left Denham Street for war service, and give
them a hearty invitation to all functions, particularly the
TUESDAY NIGHT’S WELCOME on 7th May.
All the services are clearly indicated in the programme,
and the Minister, Trustees and Officers of the Church very
cordially invite you and your friends to be present, if pos-
sible, at all of them.
TEA will be provided after the P.S.A, Sunday, 12th
May, for those remaining for the evening service.
On behalf of the Church.
Yours sincerely,
T. P. H. WOODFORD
Minister.
“Let every man give as he is able according to the Blessing
of the Lord.” —Deux lb. 17.


PASTORAL REPORT
To the Members of our Church and Congregation.
Dear Friends,
It surely befits the occasion of a great national deliver-
ance, to follow on with the spirit of a Jubilee.
In 1880, the late Dr. W. H. Fitchett, appealed for a
Church at Lower Hawthorn. In 1883, the present site of
our Denham Street Church was purchased. The building
was erected by the late Mr. J. Potts, whose two daughters
still regularly worship with us. The opening ceremony
took place on May 2, 1886, the services being taken by Dr.
Lorimer Fison, Rev. A. R. Edgar and Dr. I. Watkin.
The first minister appointed (in 1889) was Prof. A. E.
Albiston, M.A., 8.D., who is still a dynamic force in Metho-
dism, and has frequently occupied the pulpit since those
earlier years. Our hearts are lifted up in gratitude to God
for all experiences and memories during those years up to
this Diamond Jubilee. How much our dear friend, the late
Mr. Fred Dimond, would have loved to join in this celebra-
tion is told in his great record of faithful service as Trust
treasurer.
This too, is one of the Lord’s acceptable years, for 1945
saw the surrender of both strong enemies of the Allied
Nations after such a terrible struggle. We trust the first
Peace Conference will produce a formula by mutual agree-
ment, that will outlaw war and ensure a lasting peace. Our
leaders need our prayers.
Our rejoicing is sanctified by our indebtedness to the
fighting forces and all who supported them. We must
prove it by our greater unity and co-operation in the task
of removing all disruptive influences, and endeavouring to
secure equal opportunity for all.
We joyfully welcome home the returning men and
women, and thank God for sparing them, especially the
P’s.O.W., so many of whom have been compelled to endure
indescribable sufferings. It is a miracle that they survived.
To all who suffered the loss of their mfen and women, we
offer our deepest sympathy.
We again deplore the death of some of our church
stalwarts, among them being Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Coates.
They have left behind very fragrant memories of home
loves, friendships, and loyal service for Christ and the
Church. One of our finest and most promising young men,
Ray Manson, was also suddenly called to higher service re-
cently. Our deepest sympathy is extended to these families.
Others have left the district, some through marriage,
and employment elsewhere, among them being Mr. and
Mrs. Albert Stephens, Mr. and Mrs. Lord, Misses Byatt,


Gibson and Albon. We wish them the very best and thank
them for their unstinted service. Mr. Stephens held many
official positions, with great honor to himself and profit to
the church.
Our general activities have been well maintained.
Services have been better attended, and new worshippers
have been welcomed. The Men’s Society has had a very
profitable year. The Ladies’ Guild and W.A.O.M. have held
most interesting and helpful meetings, and attractive plans
have been formed for the coming year. The Young People’s
Club has been carried on with enthusiasm, and great praise
is due to the officers. The M.G.F. is associated with it. The
Basket Ball team had a good season but were eliminated in
the semi-finals. This year the girls will be all out to win.
The Cricket Club has also done very well. We congratulate
the players on winning the pennant again. It is hoped to
re-establish the Tennis Club. Intending members will
please notify Miss Inez Ellis, 52 Barkers Road.
Our service of intercession and meetings for Bible
Study have been continued, and are a source of blessing.
During the year we have lost Mr. Tweddell, our organ-
ist, through removal. After the Anniversary, Mrs. Edgar
Tatnall will take up the work, and we wish for her a happy
time in this important service. Mrs. Charles Glasgow is
acting temporarily, and will officiate over the Jubilee Cele-
brations.
We much regret that Mr. J. Jolly has been compelled,
under medical advice, to resign from his position as con-
ductor, and Mr. A. Tickell as Trust steward. No words
could adequately express our appreciation to them for their
long, efficient, conscientious and voluntary service. Mr.
Jolly’s successor is Mr. Harold Tasker, for whom we wish
the best results from the loyal support of the Choir which
has done excellent work.
The Sunday School Anniversary was a success. We
are hoping for improvement in the senior school, and
parents are urged to send the boys and girls along. We
have a good staff of teachers and officers. The Kinder-
garten report is again a splendid one.
Many of our church members have suffered illness
during the year, and some are still far from well. We con-
tinually remember them in prayer and loving sympathy.
Mrs. Guard and I relinquish our charge of the Denham
Street pastorate with regret, but are grateful for the many
real friendships formed during our three years term. Con-
ference has appointed Rev. T. P. H. Woodford, who comes
with a good reputation for Christian leadership. I wish to
express my thanks to the people for their support, and
trust that the incoming minister will enjoy a full measure
of their co-operation in his great task.
Yours in the Master’s service;
May, 1946
W. H. GUARD.


ANZAC SUNDAY, APRIL 28
REFERENCE SERVICES
11—President’s Assistant, Rev. HOWARD SECOMB.
7—Rev. T. P. H. WOODFORD
SATURDAY, MAY 4
TEMPLE DAY
The Minister will be in the Church from 10.30 a.m. to
6.30 p.m. to receive your Thankoffering.
JUBILEE BANQUET at 6.30 p.m.
in the School Hall. Tickets 2/6
Chairman: President of Conference (Rev. Eric H. 0. NYE)
Guests of Honour: Prof. A. E. ALBISTON, M.A., 8.D..
and Mrs. ALBISTON.
JUBILEE SUNDAY, MAY 5
11—Dr. C. IRVING BENSON
3—Lieut.-Col. A. E. COATES P.S.A.
7—Dr. F. W. BOREHAM
TUESDAY, MAY 7
In School Hall at 8 p.m.
WELCOME HOME SOCIAL to Members of Fighting
Services.
SATURDAY, MAY 11
In School Hall, 2.30 to 5
SUNDAY SCHOOL CHILDREN’S PARTY.
JUBILEE SUNDAY, MAY 12
11—Rev. A. R. WILSON, M.A., B.Com.
3—Dr. W. L. CARRINGTON P.S.A.
s—Tea provided by Ladies’-Men’s Society.
7—President of Conference, Rev. ERIC H. O. NYE
W. D. Vaughan Pty. Ltd. Print. 126-128 Denmark St., Kew,
