

rtf ift
/Wtr
CL*j (jk^tuU-
_ VAm-lf.* 1 -* 3
U 7^19/0
2n<oz.




Art. 11. Voyage de Dentrecasteaux , envoyi dla Recherche de
la Perouse, public par Ordre de Sa Majeste VEmpereur et
Roi, sous le Ministcre de -S'. E. le Vice-Amiral Deeres, Comte
de CEmpire. Redige par M. de Rossel, Ancien Capitaine de
Vaisseau. 2 tom. avec un Atlas, a Paris, 1808.
\\Z HEN the treaty of Paris had put an end to what is usually
* * called the American W ar, and given repose to Europe, the
French government, unwilling to appear outdone by the British
nation, however unable to cope with her in any thing connected
with maritime affairs, resolved on fftting out an expedition of dis-
covery in the Southern and Pacific oceans, with a view of com-
pleting w hat our celebrated navigator Captain Cook w as supposed,
by his premature death, to have left unfinished.
It will be in the recollection of many of our readers, that two
frigates, La Boussole and L’Astrolabe, were prepared for this oc-
casion ; that a number of persons, eminent in the various branches
of science and the arts, were engaged, and that the command was
conferred on M. de la Perouse; that the expedition left Brest in
August 1785 ; and that the last accounts received of it were dated
March 1788 from Botany Bay. Three years having elapsed w ith-
out bringing any further tidings, it may easily be imagined that,
independent of the anxiety felt by the relations and friends of those
who had embarked in the expedition, a very general solicitude was
directed towards the uncertain fate of the two frigates; and it must
ever remain as an honourable trait in the character of the National
Assembly of 1791 > that, in the heat and ferment of a great change
then operating on men’s minds, and amidst concerns of the highest
importance, they found time and inclination to pay so much defe-
rence to the public feeling and to private distress, as to adopt the
only means which could afford the least chance of gratifying the
one, and relieving the other. It not only passed a resolution to
petition the King to order all his ministers, consuls, and agents
residing in different countries, to induce, by suitable rewards, all
navigators, and particularly those proceeding to the South Seas,
to make every possible inquiry for La Boussole and L’Astrolabe,
but also to request that his Majesty would give directions for the
immediate equipment of one or tw o vessels, for the double pur-
pose of ascertaining, if possible, the fate of La Perouse, and of
extending the knowledge of geography, of the arts, sciences, and
commerce. Accordingly two frigates, La Recherche and L’Espe-
rance, were ordered to be equipped at Brest, and Vice-Admiral
n 3 Dentre*


22 Dentrecasteaux — Votfdge-a*la Recherche de la P house. Fee.
from talents, his courage, his
prudence, and Iqng appointed to the command of
ad expedition which, *to use me words of the unfortunate Louis,
* presented une occasion de perfectionner la description du globe,
et d’accroitre les connoisances humaines.’
Little ground of hope, it is true, could exist as to the safety of
either of the ships after such a lapse of time; but the case was far
different with regard to that of the people. The multitude of un-
frequented islands, scattered over the wide surface of the Southern
and Pacific oceans, the steady breezes, the mild weather and
smooth water that generally prevail in those seas, were circum-
stances which rendered the expectation not unreasonable, that the
whole or a part of the officers and seamen might have survived the
wreck of the ships, and escaped in their boats to some of those
islands. Numerous instances are on record of more extraordinary
preservations from shipwreck; and in distressing cases of this na-
ture, hope should never be abandoned till all the chances are de-
monstratively against it. Of this description we consider the loss of
the Blenheim and Java to be a case in point. The tremendous hur-
ricane, the deep-rolling sea, the situation of those ships when last
seen, and above all, their ill condition forbid us to cherish the sha-
dow of a hope that any part of their crews escaped a watery grave.
Yet, even in this case, it was highly meritorious in the Commander
in Chief of the India station, to send the son of Sir Thomas Troll-
bridge, like another Telemachus, to explore the coasts and creeks of
Madagascar and the neighbouring islands, in search of a lost father.
It would afford us great pleasure to be able to include the
Court of Directors of the East India Company in the praise that
is due to the national assembly of France and to Sir Edward Pel-
lew. We regret exceedingly that they have not allowed us to put
on record their laudable anxiety to relieve, by every exertion in
their power, the most painful and distressing situation in which the
friends of at least a thousand individuals are placed, by the appre-
hended loss of no fewer than eight ships in one season, a loss
more melancholy and disastrous, than the annals of the Company-
have yet recorded. From all the inquiries however which we
have been able to make, we do not find that one single step has
been taken to ascertain the fate of the unfortunate sufferers.
Some of the Directors, we are told, hope and believe that three
or four of the latter missing ships may yet ‘ turn up.’ To hope
and believe is a cheap and comfortable doctrine for the professors
of it, but it affords little consolation to others of less sanguine
temperament, who are suffering the excruciating torment of sus-
pense. But the doctrine of resignation is also brought forward to
stifle complaint. If public calamity and private misfortune are to
be ascribed solely to the fixt and unerring decrees of Providence,
then


1810. Dentrecasteaux —Voyage ala Recherche de la Per oust. 23
then indeed might acquiescence be accounted virtue; but this is a
doctrine of which the tendency, we most fervently hope, will never
benumb the native energies of Englishmen, though there is but too
much reason to fear it hasalready affected the heads of some of them.
Since no state of mind can be more agonizing than that of
doubt and uncertainty, as to the fate of those connections that are
nearest and most dear to it; and since very considerable doubts
are entertained on the subject of the four last missing ships from
India, humanity loudly demands that a search should be made on
the coast of the great island of Madagascar, and the numerous
islets in its neighbourhood. That the whole of the companies of
those and of the other four ships, so well furnished as they were
with boats, should have perished, is scarcely within the calculation
of probabilities, especially when it is considered how many more
unexpected and well authenticated preservations from shipwreck,
by means of boats, are on record. The extraordinary escape of
Captain Bligh, after sailing more than 3000 miles in an open boat,
must be in the recollection of every one. Captain Inglefield, left in
the pinnace of the Centaur, when that ship sunk in the very middle
of the Atlantic, at a time when the sea was running mountains high,
reached in safety the island of Fayal; and when the Lady Hobart
packet foundered by striking against an island of ice, the cutter and
jolly boat, after tossing on a dreadful sea for seven days, landed
their crews in safety in Conception Bay. Numberless other in-
stances might be adduced, sufficient one w ould suppose to encou-
rage hope and instigate research. When the Grosvenor Indiaman
was cast away on the coast of Africa, and the passengers and crew
escaped on shore, there is no doubt that, had timely aid been sent,
the whole of them might have been restored to their friends, in-
stead of falling a sacrifice to the revenge, whether justly or unjustly
provoked, of the native Kaffers, The expedition of the Dutch
boors failed only in its object because it was too late; but it ef-
fected a curious discovery of a tribe of people, called Hamboonas,
consisting of about 400 persons, all sprung from three white wo-
men, still living, who were evidently Europeans, and who most
probably had been preserved from shipwreck when in a state of
infancy. Had these three old women died, previously to the dis-
covery of this tribe, how would its singular appearance, so different
from that of all the neighbouring people, have puzzled future
travellers ! The mention of this fact brings to our recollection a
recent and extraordinary discovery, which affords an awful and in-
structive lesson by shewing how seldom criminals escape divine
vengeance, however successful they may have been in flying from
the punishment due to the offended laws of their country. It may
also in its consequences be highly important to the natives of the
numerous islands scattered over the Pacific ocean. The following
s 4 relation


relation was transmitted officially to the Admiralty from Rio de
Janeiro by Sir Sidney Smith.
‘ Captain Folger, of the American Ship Topaz of Boston, relates that,
upon landing on Pitcairn’s island (Incarnation of Quiros) in lat. 25° 2' S.
long. 130° O' W. he found there an Englishman of the name of Alexander
Smith, the only person remaining of nine that escaped in his Majesty’s
late ship Bounty, Capt. W. Bligh. Smith relates, that after putting Capt.
Bligh in the boat, Christian, the leader of the mutiny, took command of
the ship and went to Otaheite, where great part of the crew left her, except
Christian, Smith and seven others, who each took wives, and six Otahei-
tean men servants, and shortly after arrived at the said island, where they
ran the ship on shore, and broke her up; this event took place in the
year 1 790.
‘ About four years after their arrival (a great jealousy existing) the
Otaheitcans secretly revolted and killed every Englishman except him-
self, whom they severely wounded in the neck with a pistol ball. The
same night the widows of the deceased Englishmen arose and put to
death the whole of the Otaheitcans, leaving Smith the only man alive
upon the island, with eight or nine women and several small children.
-On his recovery he applied himself to tilling the ground, so that it now
produces plenty of yams, cocoa nuts, bananas, and plantains; hogs and
poultry in abundance. There arc now some grown up men and women,
children of the mutineers, on the island, the whole population amount-
ing to about thirty-five, who acknowledge Smith as father and comman-
der of them all; they all speak English, and have been educated by him,
(Captain Folger represents) in a religious and moral way.
‘ The second mate of the Topaz asserts that Christian the ringleader
became insane shortly after their arrival on the island, and threw him-
self off the rocks into the sea; another died of a fever before the massacre
of the remaining six took place. The island is badly supplied with
water, sufficient only for the present inhabitants, and no anchorage.
* Smith gave to Captain Folger a chronometer made by Kendall,
which was taken from him by the Governor of Juan Fernandez.’
Extracted from the log book 29th Sept. 1808.
(Signed) William Fitzmaurice, Lieut.
If this interesting relation rested solely on the faith that is due
to Americans, with whom, we say it witlx regret, truth is not al-
ways considered as a moral obligation, we should hesitate in giving
it this publicity. The narrative, however, states two facts on
which the credibility of the story must stand or fall—the name of
the mutineer and the maker of the time-piece; we have taken the
trouble to ascertain the truth of both of these facts. Alexander
Smith appears on the books of the Bounty as follows i Entered 7th
Sep. 1787 Ab. Born in London. Aged 20. Run 28th April 1789.
One of the mutineers:’ and it appears also that the Bounty was
actually supplied with a time-piece made by Kendall.
We liave been led into these prefatory observations with a view,
not only of cherishing hope in cases not absolutely desperate, but
of stimulating to exertion in the speedy application of the means
24
Dentrecasteaux — Voyage, a la Recherche de la Rerouse. Feb,


10. Dentrecasteaux — Voyage ala Recherche de la Perouse . 25
to ascertain, at any rate, the real fate of those who are supposed to
have suffered shipwreck. We shall now proceed on our long
voyage of discovery with M. Dentrecasteaux, premising however
a few words with respect to the history of the work under our exa-
mination. Its editor, M. Rossel, embarked on the expedition as
Lieutenant de Vaisseau, but on the death of Vice-Admiral Den-
trecasteaux and of the two Captains Huon and D’Auribeau, the
latter of which happened just as the voyage had terminated, he took
the command as senior officer. On the arrival of the frigates at
Sourabaya, a Dutch settlement on the eastern coast of Java, they
had the mortification of learning the unfortunate situation of their
country, the sanguinary proceedings of the revolutionists, the mas-
sacre of the king, and the war with England in which the Dutch
were likewise involved. In consequence of this intelligence the
voyage was here declared to be at an end; the frigates were dis-
mantled, and the officers and crew separated themselves into two
parties, one espousing the cause of the royalists and the other that
of the republicans. As senior officer, though attached to the royal
party, M. Rossel was permitted to take charge of all the journals,
charts and observations; and the collections of natural history were
entrusted to the care of those gentlemen who had made them. The
several officers and civilians availed themselves of the opportunity
of getting to France by a fleet of Dutch Indiamen then on the eve
of sailing for Europe; but before they had doubled the Cape of
Good Hope, the Dutch had changed sides and were at war with
England. Their East India ships were of course eagerly looked
after fiy our cruizing squadrons, and that which had on board the
naturalists, with their whole collection, was captured by his
Majesty’s ship the Sceptre, near St. Helena. M. Rossel, with his
papers, charts and journals, shared the same fate, being taken by
an English frigate on the north coast of Scotland. The papers
were deposited in the Admiralty; and M. Rossel, thus circum-
stanced, accepted the offer made to him by Lord Spencer of em-
ployment in the hydrographical department of that office, where
he continued in arranging the papers, copying the journals and
finishing the charts, until the passing of the decree which allowed
the return of emigrants to France, when he availed himself of the
opportunity, and was allowed to carry with him complete copies
of all the papers relating to the voyage. Having now transferred
jiis loyalty to a new sovereign, he soon became a true and faithful
subject of the great Napoleon, to whom, of course, he dedicates
his ponderous work, assuring him ‘ that he can only consider his
labours of any use, in so far as they shall obtain the approbation of
his Majesty.’ Whild employed in the British Admiralty, M.Rossel
is said to have conducted himself with great propriety, and was
considered as a man of some talent—lt may be so, but he has led


us a most wearisome route over the surface of no less than fifteen
hundred pages of broad quarto, two thirds of which, however, we
shall spare our readers the trouble and fatigue of wading through.
Jn fact, that part which describes the proceedings of the voyage
consists only of 590 pages of the first volume, and to this part only
we request the attention of our readers for the present.
Vice-i\dmiral Dentrecasteaux sailed from Brest with the two
frigates La Recherche and L’Esperance on the 29th September,
1791, and on the 13th of the following month anchored in the bay
of Santa Cruz in the Island of Tenerifte. While at this place, they
discovered a remarkable difference in the quantity of the declination
of the magnetic needle from the true pole of the earth, or, as we
call it, the variation of the compass, when observed on shore, and
when taken on board the ships. At their observatory on the former
it was found to be N. 21° 33' W.; on the mole it was N. 23° 43'
W.; and on board La Recherche N. 18° 7' W. Nearly the same
difference had been remarked here by La Perouse, and ascribed by
him to the ferruginous quality of the soil of Teneriffe, a remark
which the present navigators verified, by comparing an observation
made on board one of the frigates with another that was taken on
the top of a house, thirty feet above the surface of the ground,
when the two results w ere found to be nearly the same. The soil
equally affected the inclination, or dip, of the needle.
In the track of calms, squalls, and frequent heavy rains, that
generally prevail in the neighbourhood of the line, the vice-admiral
caused those precautions to be observed, 4hich were so success-
fully put in practice by Captain Cook, for preventing disease among
the seamen. He attributes the phosphorescent appearance of the
sea to the twofold operation of animalculae in the water, and of a
highly electrified atmosphere, by which the luminousness of these
and other objects become greatly increased: and the ground of this
opinion he states to be his constant observation that the light was
most vivid when the air was most strongly charged with the electric
fluid, that is to say, in dense stormy weather, when the mercury in
the barometer descends very low. l On those occasions,’ he ob-
serves, ‘ the larger kinds of fish, as they dart along, become lumi-
nous.’ (p. 15.) In the justness of this observation he was after-
wards fully confirmed by the appearance of the sea in a storm,
on the night of the 14th of April, in latitude 42° 14' S., longitude
127° 47' E.
‘ During the whole of this night the sea was continually phosphores-
cent. Voluminous masses of water appeared to be rolling like globes of
fire; and during the reiterated and violent squalls of wind and hail a blaze
of fire raged on the ocean with the greatest fury; at such times the points
of the conducting rods were distinctly perceived to throw out plumes of
electric fire. The mercury in the barometer had then descended to 2 J
inches


inches 6 lines, for the first time it had been so low. It was also the first
time, in the course of the voyage, that the meteor, usually called feu
Saint-Elme , had been observed playing at the mast-head, and on that
account 1 thought it worthy of remarking that its appearance was simul-
taneous with the phenomenon of an illuminated sea.’ —p. 47.
On the 17th January, 1792, the expedition arrived at the Cape
of Good Hope, where the Vice-Admiral received a dispatch that
had been transmitted to him from the Isle of France by M. de
Saint Felix, the commander of the French squadron in the East
Indies. In this dispatch were contained the depositions of two
masters of French merchant vessels, who had been at Batavia wdien
Captain Hunter and the officers of the English frigate Sirius,
wrecked on Norfolk Island, arrived there. The depositions stated
that those English officers asserted that, in their passage from Bo-
tany Bay to Batavia on board a Dutch vessel, they had seen, near
the Admiralty islands, some canoes which gave the most unequivo-
cal marks, that the inhabitants of those islands had recently com-
municated with Europeans; some of them wearing pieces of the
uniform, and others the sword-belts, of the French marine. It was
also stated that Captain Hunter, who had seen La Perouse at
Botany Bay, entertained no doubt that these articles were procured
from the wreck of his two frigates. The depositions however were
at variance with each other: one of them having stated the uni-
forms, and the other mentioned only the sword-belts; one said that
the people made signs as if they wished for razors to shave them-
selves ; the other, that they held up white flags as the signal for the
ships to come near them: other matters of an improbable nature
were also stated; besides, Captain Hunter was still in Table Bay
when M. Dentrecasteaux entered it, and went away without
making any communication on the subject. It was found, more-
over, that he had positively denied to the Governor and Com-
mander of the forces at the Cape, that he had made any such state-
ment, and that the depositions, as far as regarded himself and his
officers, were totally false and groundless. Still, however, as M.
de Saint Felix had laid so much stress upon them, as to dispatch
a frigate to the Cape for the sole purpose of communicating their
contents, the Vice-Admiral, in spite of his better judgment, and
contrary to his instructions, determined to steer a direct course for
the Admiralty Islands. This determination appears the more ex-
traordinary, as La Perouse, In his last dispatch, on leaving Botany
Bay, states distinctly,
‘ I shall proceed from hence to the Friendly Islands, and carry strictly
into execution my instructions relative to the southern part of New Cale-
donia, the island of Santa Cruz of Mendana, the south coast of the Arsa-
cides of Surville, and the Louisiade of Bougainville, and endeavour to
discover whether this last land be connected with New Guinea, or sepa-
rated from it.' (Instructions, p. 24.)
Here


23 Dentrecasteaux — Voyage ala Recherche de la Perouse. Feb.
Here is not the least allusion to any intention of visiting the
Admiralty Islands. If therefore we were much surprised that the
commander of the expedition should so easily have been diverted
from his instructions, by accounts so vague, contradictory, and ab-
surd, avowedly resting on the testimony of a British officer, who had
denied all knowledge of the matters stated, we were not less so, on
finding him, after leaving Table Bay, cruizing along the eastern
coast of Africa, within six or eight leagues of the shore. This was
an unfortunate course, whether he intended to make for the Admi-
ralty Islands, by passing to the northward of New Holland, or to
the southward of Van Uieman’s land. We had conceived it to be
ascertained long ago, that the sure way to reach any part of New
Holland, or even the .island of Java, was, in the first instance, to
stretch to the southward of the Cape, as far as the parallels of 38°
or 40° S. in order to catch the Strong westerly winds which usually
prevail in those latitudes. Accordingly, at the end of 20 days beat-
ing about to little purpose, he discovered his error, and saw that
it would be impossible for him to reach Timor, as he had intended,
by that route, on account of the monsoon; the same reflection, he
tells us, occurred precisely at the same moment, to M.Huon, the
commander of L’Esperance. They agreed therefore to stand back
to the southward and shape a course for the islands of St. Paul and
Amsterdam; and from thence round the southern extremity of Van
Dieman’s land. Here we cannot avoid remarking, that Dentrecas-
teaux appears not only to have shewn a w ant of decision, ill suited
to the character with which he was invested, but a want of skill also
as a navigator, by which nearly a month was lost, in point of time;
and what is infinitely more important, several months of wear and
tear were completely sacrificed without an adequate object.
On the 28th of March they perceived the island of St. Paul,
(which M. Rossel thinks proper to call Amsterdam.)
* The summit of this island,’ says M. Dentrecasteaux, 4 of which I
was desirous to fix the position that had not yet been determined, was
enveloped in clouds, which, on a nearer approach, we perceived to
consist of thick smoke, from whence flame was presently observed to
issue. This conflagration, on uninhabited land, gave rise to a conjec-
ture among some of us, that it might be a signal, made by some unfor-
tunate persons who had escaped from shipwreck to this island, to ask for
assistance; it was obvious, however, that the mass of fire was too consi-
derable to suppose it had commenced only on the first appearance of the
ships.' (p. 41.)
Passing within four cables length of the island, they observed the
strata of rock to be exactly parallel and horizontal, and concluded
that an organization so regular could not proceed from a volcanic
origin ; yet, jets of smoke were emitted from the crevices between
the strata.
* These


1810* Dentrecasteaux —Voyage a la Recherche de la Ptrouse. 'J9
‘ These jets/ he observes, ‘ shewing themselves at intervals, appeared
to our naturalists as almost infallible indications of subterranean fire.’
Nothing can he more unsatisfactory than this account. TW
smoke and tire which enveloped this island were either natural or
artificial; if natural, it would have been highly curious and de-
sirable to examine the structure of this little point thrown up in the
midst of the ocean, and detect nature in the very act, as it were, of
carrying on one of her most magnificent operations : if artificial, the
probability was, that it had been lighted by some unhappy persons
who had escaped shipwreck, to be consumed, perhaps, in the very
fire they had kindled with a view of pointing out their miserable
situation, or to perish by the slow and lingering process of famine.
It is true, they could not be the people he was in quest of; yet it
might be supposed that a kindred sympathy for others, in like dis-
tress, would have induced him to send a boat on shore. He did no
such thing, but got out of the cloud of smoke as fast as he could,
which was not, he tells us, until they were five leagues distant from
the island. The only information we have of this island is contained
in the ‘ Authentic Account of the Embassy to China/ and was
collected from a seal-catcher on the neighbouring island of Amster-
cs c?
dam. This man says it is covered with frutescent plants, and that
the shore abounds with pumice stone: he made no mention of any
appearance of fire, natural or artificial, though his visit to it was
only six months after it had been passed by M, Dentrecasteaux.
We have observed that M. Rossel has thought fit to call this
island Amsterdam. It may be proper for us, before we proceed
farther, to state, that we have been favoured with the opportunity
of comparing his book with the original manuscript of Dentrecas-
teaux, wherein it is distinctly stated, that ‘ conformably with the
English charts , we have called it St. Paul,' which passage M.
Rossel has completely falsified, by saying that they did not con-
form themselves to the English charts, but followed the appella-
tion as given by the Dutch. Had it merely depended on the in-
sertion or exclusion of the negative particle, we should willingly
have ascribed it to an error of the press; but there could be no
mistake in his altering the words St. Paul for Amsterdam. Trifling
as this alteration may appear, we have no doubt that M. Rossel was
ordered to make it by some of those minions of the French govern-
ment who direct the press; and that as far as his authority extended,
as he tells us in his preface, 1 La relation du voyage a 6te redige
d’apres le Journal meme du Contre-Amiral Dentrecasteaux, ecrit
en entier de sa propre main.’ Be it remembered, however, that
he had only a copy of the original journal. We are the more in-
clined to this opinion of his not being a free agent, as in some
other places, we observe, he has been obliged to soften down the
praise bestowed by the Vice-Admiral on Capt. Cook, Capt. Bligh,
and


and other English navigators. In general, however, it is but justice
to say that he has been faithful to his original.
On the 20th of April they arrived in the Bay of Storms, on the
south-east point of Van Dieman’s land, on the north side of which
the frigates anchored in a harbour called by them Port du Nord,
and which is described as being sale and commodious, the water
smooth in the worst of weather, and the surrounding shores beau-
tifully covered with forest trees.
‘ In vain should I attempt to describe the sensations with which the
first appearance of this solitary harbour inspired me, placed as it is at
the extremity of the earth, and closed in so completely, that one might
there consider one’s-self as shut out from the rest of the world; every
thing partakes of the wildness of rude creation ; here, at every step, re-
united to the beauties of unmolested nature, one meets with traces of
her decrepitude, trees of vast height, and bulky in proportion, without
a branch along the trunk, but their summits crowned with evergreen
foliage, some of them appearing as ancient as the globe; so interlaced
and so close as to be impenetrable, they act as supporters to other trees
of equal dimensions, but tottering with age, and fertilizing the earth on
which they grow by their ruins reduced to a state of corruption.’ —
(P 54.)
In those magnificent forests the naturalists discovered several
new species of plants and birds, all of which we imagine, with
other subjects of natural history, have been described by M. La-
billardiere, whose book has not yet come under our observation.
A great number of the largest trees had their trunks hollowed out*
apparently by means of fire, and were intended as huts to shelter
the natives from the inclemency of the weather; one of these, at
the height of a man from the ground, measured 2 5 feet 8 inches in
circumference. The hollow side invariably faced the East, which
is generally the quarter towards which the strong winds blow.
Capt. Cook met with the same kind of hollow trees at Adventure
Bay, not many leagues distant from the same place. No natives
made their appearance, but,
‘ One of the naturalists found some bones, which he concluded to be-
long to the body of a very young girl; they were discovered among the
ashes of one of the places apparently used by the natives for cooking their
victuals. Some fragments of broiled flesh were attached to these bones.
A fact, thus isolated without other indications, especially among a peo-
ple of such simple manners, is not sufficient to authorize conjectures so
reproachful to human nature, sinking it below the most ferocious beasts
of prey, which at least spare their own species. May we not rather con-
clude, from this one fact, that these savages are in the habit of consum-
ing by fire the last remains of the human body ?’ (p. 78.)
Here again we find the Vice-Admiral indulging in vague conjec-
ture, on grounds so very slight as in no degree to warrant either
of the conclusions drawn by him; indeed it is by no means clear
that


that Mons.le Naturaliste did not mistake the bones of a kangaroo
for those of a young girl.
While the frigates continued in this bay, a discovery was made
of a passage between Van Dieman’s land and the islands to the
southward of it; which, though of little importance to the general
interests of navigation, since the discovery of Bass’ Streights, fur*
uishes a secure and commodious anchorage for ships in need of
such a retreat. They gave it the name of Canal de Dentrecas-
teaux, and it is thus described.
‘ A navigator can never be accused of exaggeration in betraying a sort
of enthusiasm at the sight of an anchorage prolonged to the extent of
24 miles, equally safe in every part of it; where not a rock occurs;
where he may let go the anchor without the least hesitation; and where N
the shores may be approached within a cable’s length without any dan-
ger; where the surrounding aspect is, moreover, highly delightful,
though appearing monotonous at first sight from the uniform verdure of
the trees, with which all the hills, piled on each other, are clothed,
from the summit of the most elevated down to the water’s edge, but
varied nevertheless by the many picturesque retreats formed by the sinuo-
sities of the numberless bays of this channel, and by the rivulets falling
into them; the latter, however, confined to the shores of the main land.
At a season so far advanced, and in a gulph which bears so menacing a
name (Storm Bay), the discovery of such an anchorage is calculated to
procure to a seaman, a luxury which, to be able to express, must have
been felt.’ (p. 100.)
On each side of this channel a few natives were occasionally
seen, and among others a woman appeared with a covering over her
breasts, &c. This object immediately produces another conjec-
ture from the Admiral, namely, that the concealment was rather
the effect of the severity of the weather, than of any idea she had of
decency; and he draws this conclusion from Captain Cook’s having
described the natives of Adventure Bay as going entirely naked.
Having lost nearly a whole month at this place, for we really are
not able to discover an adequate object to detain them so long, they
set sail on the 28th of May, and on the 16th of June made the island
of Pines on the southern extremity of New Caledonia. From
hence to the northern extremity we are assured that they examined,
with minute attention, every point along the western coast, stand-
ing in with both frigates close to the reef of coral rock, which is
stated to bind the whole extent of the island, or islands, as it were,
with an uninterrupted chain, whose edge rising to the surface of
the sea, shows, even in the calmest weather, a silvery rippling line,
far as the eye can reach; thus warning the adventurous navi-
gator of the dangers that surround him: not only here, but in
almost every part of the Pacific ocean, these dangers and the
line that indicates them occur. The unbroken reef of New Cale-
donia would not allow even their boats to pass to the shore, and


32 Dentrecasteaux — Voyage ala Recherche de la Rerouse. 1' eb.
as they saw neither natives nor canoes, it was presumed that it
might equally prevent their coming out, and thus contribute to that
mildness of character, which Capt. Cook had described the natives
on the opposite side to possess. The Admiral, however, adds,
that being in latitude 22° 4' S., they did see an opening in the
reef, but that on approaching close to it, they observed the sea
breaking with violence within a creek, to which on that account
they gave the name of he Havre Trompeur. 1 his was rather an
unfortunate appellation, for had they examined it with that atten-
tion which is required from navigators sent on Voyages of Dis-
covery, they would have found the Havre Trompeur to be one of
the most beautiful and extensive harbours perhaps in the world,
for the discovery of which we are indebted to Capt. Kent of the
Buffalo, who in 1803 anchored there for some time.
‘ This beautiful and extensive harbour/ says Capt. Kent, * is formed
by islands, many of them of considerable size, which are about four
miles within the coral reef that extends (excepting a few breaks) along
the whole S.W. side (of New Caledonia), distant offshore from four to
eight miles; but considerably more from the north and south ends,
where the land is out of sight when close in with the reCf. The reef is
level with the water's edge, and towards the sea as steep to as the wall of
a house; we sounded frequently within twice the ship’s length of it with
a line of 150 fathoms, without being able to get bottom.' (Capt. Kent's
Journal.)
To this harbour Capt. Kent has given the name of Port St. Vin-
tent, and from the mean of several observations, has laid it down
as follows;—Latitude 22° O' 10" S. longitude lGo° 55 1 20" E.
He describes the passage into it as three-quarters of a mile in
width, the anchorage Avell sheltered, the water perfectly smooth,
ihe depth 12 fathoms down to four, the bottom muddy.
‘ During our six weeks stay/ says Capt. Kent, * we were visited by
many of the natives, bringing fish, yams, sugar canes, spears, clubs,
and fishing-nets, neatly made, the whole of which they were happy to
exchange for such things as might be offered ; red or scarlet cloth was
what particularly struck their fancy; iron they knew' not the use of,
consequently shewed no inclination to possess it. On the whole they
Were a superior race of black people, answering the description given by
Capt. Cook of the inhabitants of Balade on the N. E. side of the island/
(Captain Kent's Journal.)
The Vice-Admiral laments that he was prevented, by the breakers
6n the uninterrupted line of coral reef, from landing the naturalists
on this coast of New Caledonia, hitherto unknown to Euro-
peans. We could have wished that in this dilemma he had em-
ployed them in examining what has never yet been done, the struc-
ture, at different depths, of those w all-sided fabrics, w hose perpen-
dicular columns are supposed to descend to the very bed of the
ocean.


1810. Dentrecasteaux —Voyaged la Recherchede la Perouse. 33
ocean, ‘ deeper than aid ever plummet sound/ and in endeavouring
to trace the history of those insignificant beings, whose means appear
to us so inadequate to the end, and whose stupendous productions
extend for thousands of miles, and cover millions of acres of the Pa-
cific ocean, finally becoming the basis or foundations of new islands.
This is a subject on which we are nearly destitute of information;
and it is to be lamented that the French naturalists should have
lost so many occasions, in the present voyage, of directing their par-
ticular enquiries into the nature and composition of coral rock, and
of the marine worms by which they are supposed to be constructed.
Leaving New Caledonia, and the line of breakers which extends
fifty leagues to the N. W. far out of sight of any land, the Vice-
Admiral passed on the 9th J uly the Eddystone rock, discovered by
Lieutenant Shortland, which is stated to be incorrectly laid down
by that officer. According to their observations, its lat. is 8° 18'
S. long. 154° 10' 38" £. of Paris. The following day they fell
in with the Treasury Islands, and passed close to Bougainville’s
island on the north-western extremity of the group of Solomon’s
islands, all of them surrounded by reefs of coral rock. Some of
the natives crossed the line of breakers in their canoes, one of
which, from her size, was supposed to be a vessel of war; having
forty men on board, all, except sixteen, armed with bows and ar-
rows, which they offered in exchange for mirrors, nails and bits of
iron: but nothing was coveted by them with such avidity as red
cloth. They were entirely naked; their hair black and frizzled, then-
faces and bodies painted; and they had every appearance of being a
savage and ferocious race of men; their features however relaxed
on hearing some lively tunes on the violin. They still continue to
answer the description long since given of them by Bougainville.
From the 17th to the 24th July the frigates remained at anchor
in Carteret Bay, New Ireland, where incessant torrents of rain
prevented the navigators from making a single observation, either
of the sun or stars. Keeping the track of Captain Carteret, through
St. George’s Channel, on the 29th July they reached Vendola,
one of the Admiralty islands, which was supposed to be near to the
spot where the depositions stated the traces of the ships of La P -
rouse to have been seen. Observing some natives, who shewed no
inclination to come oft' to the ships, a boat was sent on shore; the
inhabitants now flocked to the beach in great numbers : the air of
confidence with which they advanced, and their open and pleasing
countenances, were highly prepossessing. They offered various
ornaments, and even their arms, in exchange for trinkets of diffe-
rent kinds and pieces of red cloth, all of which however they re-
ceived with apparent indifference; but when a nail was shewn to
them, they manifested extreme anxiety to get possession of it.
vol. in. no. V. c Many


Many of them had strings of shells round their waists, which, the
Admiral supposes might have been mistaken by the Dutch ship
for French belts, while the colour of their skins might have given
the idea of French uniforms. So credulous is man in believing
what he wishes to be true, that even themselves thought they
perceived, long before they came near enough to see objects dis-
tinctly, men covered with red cloth; and the branches and roots of
a tree, tumbling about in the breakers on the edge of the reef,
were at once converted into the wreck of La Perouse’s ships:
‘ tant on aime le merveilleux, et tant on est dispos6 si le saisir avec
avidite!’
4 These islanders,’ he observes, ‘ cover their private parts with a shell.
| know not whether they wear it for the sake of ornament or decency,
but the custom appears to be peculiar to the inhabitants of this group
of islands, no mention being made of it in any voyage. The women
wear a girdle. The air of content that is painted on their countenances,
a fine climate, a fertile and abundant island, especially in cocoa-nut trees,
all appear to announce the happy lot w hich these people enjoy,’ (p. 136.)
Having satisfied themselves that not the least trace of the ships
or crew of La P6rouse was discoverable among the Admiralty
islands; they stood away for the Negro islands of Morelle, which
they observed to be covered with cocoa-nut trees. Numbers of
canoes appeared on every side among the reefs and small islands, all
seemingly employed in fishing. Some of them came off to the
frigates, and were anxious to procure knives, nails and iron of any
kind, for which they offered in exchange different sorts of orna-
ments, arms, and even the shells which covered their nakedness.
They appeared to be, in all respects, the same happy, cheerful,
and contented people as those of the Admiralty islands. We
cannot approve of an experiment made by the Admiral ‘ to excite
the admiration’ of this unsuspecting people, by causing a musket
to be fired; and still less the childish trick of placing a lighted
candle in a paper lantern and setting it afloat on a plank, which,
as the ship receded, appeared to approach them; and caused so
much affright that they speedily withdrew and disappeared alto-
gether : and we most cordially agree with him * that he ought to
have spared them this cause of alarm, which could only tend to
create distrust.’
Passing Los Ermitanos, the Thousand isles of Morelle, and
berless rocks and islands bound together by reefs of coral, they ar-
rived on the 17th August, on the coast of New Guinea. In standing
through Dampier’s straits, they observed a large proa bearing a flag;
but the appearance of the two frigates excited no curiosity in the
people on board, nor in those of the numerous craft that were seen
passing and repassing on every side : a certain proof of their near
' . , approach


approach to some European settlement. On the sth September
they accordingly arrived at Amboyna.
A whole chapter employed in describing the government, the
productions, commerce, religion and population of a Dutch settle-
ment established two centuries ago, being, in our opinion, totally
out of its place in a voyage of discovery, we shall make no cere-
mony in passing it over without farther notice.
Having remained at this place a little more than a month to re-
fit the frigates and refresh the crews, M. Dentrecasteaux, on the
18th October, again set sail; and keeping along the west coast of
New Holland and doubling Cape Leween, or S. W. Cape, an-
chored on the 9th December, in a bay to which he gave the name
of Esptronce, after one of the frigates. This bay is within a clus-
ter of islands to which Vancouver two years before had given the
name of Termination Islands. Standing oft’ at this point to the
southward, Dentrecasteaux continued along the coast about nine
degrees farther to the eastward than Vancouver had done. Had
he stood on a little farther, he would have effected the important
discovery of Bass’s Strait, which separates New Holland from Van
Dieman’s land; the merit of which was reserved for a landsman
whose name it properly bears. This young man, the surgeon of
the Reliance, solicited a boat at Port Jackson from the governor,
to run down the coast and make observations.
‘ 1 fitted out,’ says Captain Hunter, ‘ a good whale boat for him,
victualled and manned to his wish. On finding when he had got the
length of Cape Howe, that the shore inclined westward, he continued
to trace it along till he came to a steep and high promontory, in lat.
39° S. From this Cape the land lay along W. N. W. He continued to
steer in that direction for about sixty miles beyond this headland, where
he found an extensive harbour, but his provision becoming short, and
his boat leaky, he was compelled to return/
This discovery was made in 1798, near six years after Dentre-
casteaux conceived there might be such a passage, but had not the
resolution to stand on and determine so important an object, not
only for his own views at that time, but for the benefit of naviga r
tion in general, for the future.
The whole line of coast on this part of New Holland, usually
called Nuyt’s land from a Dutch navigator of that name, is the
most dreary that can well be imagined, consisting of drifts of sand,
salt-lakes, and swampy marshes. M. Riche, one of the natural-
ists, lost his way among the sand-hills, and was absent two days
from the ship. Worn by fatigue and famished with hunger, he
became at length completely exhausted. In this state, when hope
had nearly abandoned him, he discovered a small spring of fresh
water, which caused him to exclaim, * Even an atheist, on a bless-
g & inig
1810. Dentrecasteaux —Voyage ala Recherche de la Ph ouse.


ing so unlooked for, would bring back his thoughts to the benevo-
lence of a deity.’ M. Riche is not the first man whom misfortunes
have recalled to a sense of religion. The only discovery made by
him of any interest was a valley among the sand hills, covered with
the remains of a subverted forest; the trees broken off at a few feet
from the ground, and the whole converted into calcareous stone.
On the 21 st January, 1793, they again visited the Bay of
Storms, and anchored in Port du Sud. They had now much in-
tercourse with the natives, whom they found to be a mild, inoffen-
sive and good humoured people, without suspicion or distrust.
Each family appeared to live and eat apart, and the men were ob-
served to shew a remarkable degree of affection and tenderness for
their children. Their food consisted of shell-fish, lobsters, sea
slugs, and other marine productions; they refused to taste of any
kind of victuals, and even of wine or spirituous liquors which were
offered to them by the seamen. They shewed not the least incli-
nation for trinkets or other articles, and consequently no disposi-
tion towards theft. Some of the tallest and stoutest men had two
wives each.
The conjecture made by the Vice-Admiral on their former visit,
that they ate human flesh, he is now anxious to do away, and ex-
claims, ‘ Oh ! que I’on dfit rougir de les avoir l’annee
de se nourrir de chair humaine !’ In fact he describes
them to be the most harmless and unoffending of mortals.
The frigates again came to anchor in Adventure Bay. Here they
searched for the fruit trees which had been planted by Capt. Cook,
and discovered some of them still in existence, but so weak and
languishing as to hold out no hope of their ever bearing fruit; no
traces were found of the hogs left there by our celebrated navigator.
They now steered a direct course for the Friendly islands,
where they arrived on the 23d March, and brought the ships to
anchor at Tongataboo, Here we are, as it were, on classic ground,
and feel ourselves perfectly at home; and we have no hesitation
in avowing our predilection in favour of Captain Cook’s account
of those islanders, where the description differs from that of M.
Dentrecasteaux. Indeed to the Injudicious conduct of the Vice-
Admiral, and to that excessive vanity which seems to be inherent
in the breast of a Frenchman, may be attributed all the disputes,
squabbles, and actual hostilities in which they were engaged with
the natives. Conceiving some of the armed people to be more
turbulent than the rest, while carrying on their traffic on shore, the
officers deemed it necessary to take precautions against a surprize.
Let us hear what these precautions were.
* On the same evening it was thought advisable to inspire them
with awe by making them acquainted with the use of our fire-arms,
Tww


1810. Dentrecasteaux —Voyage a la Recherche de la Perouse. 57
Two birds were suspended from the branch of a tree at a little distance,
and one of our best marksmen presented himself, in lull confidence of
bringing them down at the first shot, but he missed,them twice: a second
marksman renewed the attempt —his musquet missed fire; peals of
laughter now burst forth on every side, and particularly from that quar-
ter where the armed people were assembled. One of these drew his
bow, and pierced one of the birds; his expertness was rewarded with
the greatest applause, and contrasted, in a manner sufficiently mortify-
ing, with the little success which had attended our first efforts. A third
marksman now presented himself and brought down the second bird: —
but the first impression was made; and it was remarked that the confi-
dence of these people in their own strength was augmented, and the fear
of our fire-arms weakened in proportion. The insulting air now per-
ceptible among them made me conclude that our means of defence were
too weak, and that it would be necessary for one of the frigates without
loss of time to approach the island of Panghaimadoo, in order to over-
awe them by the appearance of our cannon.’—p. 279-
In the same night one of their sentinels was knocked down on
his post, and his musquet carried off; and those who had vainly
endeavoured to strike terror into the savages, became now alarmed
in their turn. All was confusion, and all flew to arms. The natives
kept their ground, and the party of warriors refused to withdraw.
The Esperance hauled close in shore, the tents were struck, and
every thing was speedily re-embarked. All intercourse was declared
at an end, till the person should be delivered up who had committed
the outrage on the sentry. Soon after this several of the chiefs
came on board, bringing with them the supposed culprit, whom
they proposed to put to immediate death ; but the Admiral was
satisfied with giving him a severe flogging. Harmony was once
more restored; but, on account of the daring robberies that were
committed, quarrels and bloodshed speedily ensued.
The inhabitants ofTongataboo had a perfect recollection of the
visits of Captain Cook. His memory was held dear by many of
them, especially by the family of Fatafe. Others, however, are
said to have taxed him with cruelty. One person only, according
to Captain Cook’s journal, is said to have been wounded; but M.
Dentrecasteaux observes that more than one were seen by them
with musquet balls through different parts of the body. After
much enquiry, they found that the horses and cows which had been
left by Captain Cook were all dead; but their hogs were most abun-
dant, and had greatly improved by the cross with those of Europe,
many of them weighing not less than two hundred pounds. Not
the least vestige could be traced of any thing that had belonged to
La Perouse; no medals which he carried out with him, and of
which they had exact copies; no trinkets, no French clothes, nor any
e 3 thing


58 Dentrecasteaux — Voyage ala Recherche de la Perouse. Feb
thing belonging to their nation. They proceeded therefore to the
N. Westward, and on the 17th April, came to anchor in the har-
bour of Balade, on the North-east extremity of New Caledonia,
having passed the islands of Tanna, Annatom and Erronun, three of
the New Hebrides, without discovering any trace of the objects of
their search. Here the Vice-Admiral found the natives to resemble
in their persons those of Van Dieman’s Land, differing from them
however in every other respect; ferocious in the extreme, and the
greatest thieves he had yet met with. He is perfectly astonished
that Forster should have described them as so amiable and mild a
people, when he pronounces them, from what he saw, to be the
worst of cannibals.
‘ This people, who are said to have exhibited such marks of horror
on seeing the sailors eating animal food, because they imagined it to be
human flesh, are themselves anthropophagi, are ravenous after human
flesh, and use no pains to disguise their avidity for it. This very day,'
continues he, ‘ one of these ferocious savages gave a human bone with
pieces of broiled flesh upon it to M. Piron, which was the cup-bone of
the knee of a youth of 14 or 15 years of age: to prevent mistake, the
savage was asked what it was, and he pointed to the place to which it
belonged. This same bone being brought on board and presented to
two natives, they finished the remains of the flesh attached to it. Ano-
ther native was seen devouring a slice of flesh, which, by the skin, was
ascertained to be human, —p. 333.
With all these proofs of the Vice-Admiral, and with all the
skulls and skeletons of human beings which he saw piled up in
different places, we yet doubt exceedingly if there exists upon the
face of the earth, a race of beings who delight in devouring human
flesh; and we are persuaded that, if the practice exists at all, it
must either arise from a mere ceremonial of tasting the flesh and
blood of some powerful and detested enemy, or from being driven
to it, as the last resource, by famine. This might have been the
deplorable state of the New Caledonians at that time; for he de-
scribes them as meagre miserable-looking beings, and tells us that
they were observed to eat calcareous earth. They had lost the breed
of hogs left them by Captain Cook; which causes the Admiral to
observe that, ‘ it is not likely people who spare not one another,
should afford time enough for animals to multiply their species.’
With the favourable testimony of Captain Cook and Mr. Forster
before the visit of M. Dentrecasteaux, and of Captain Kent sub-
sequent to that period, M. Rossel must excuse us if we place
more reliance on the justness of the character of the New Caledo-
nians as we have received it from our own countrymen, than on
that which he has given us from M. journal.
In


1810. Dentrecasteaux —Voyage d la Recherche de la Perouse. S 9
In the propriety of many of the Vice-Admiral’s observations on
the condition of the Pacific islanders, we most cordially agree; as
when he observes, that their disposition to thieving, for instance,
and their mutual animosities are, in a great degree, owing to the
articles w hich we carry among them. Could iron be made to pro-
duce iron, then indeed this metal would be the greatest of all be-
nefits that could be conferred on them ; but w hat must be the situ-
ation of that savage, who is unfortunate enough to possess the last
nail, or the last knife ? he must either fall a sacrifice to the man
who is stronger than himself, or it must become the apple of gene-
ral discord, and the cause of civil war and desolation. With re-
gard to thieving, it may be observed that, among a tribe of savages,
whose precarious subsistence depends chiefly if not altogether on
chance, cunning and strength are the only laws by which property
can be acquired and secured. Among such a people, stealing can
scarcely be considered as a crime, and may be accounted a virtue.
It is stated in a recent publication, that a savage was deliberately
shot while stealing a bit of red rag from a staff, because it inter-
rupted the person from completing the observation of an angle : it
must be confessed that the conduct of the thief was innocence it-
self when compared with that of the murderer. The truth is, the
conduct of voyagers has generally been incompatible with the cha-
racters of the people with w hom they held communication: and
it is painful to reflect that the intercourse of Europeans with the
South-sea and Pacific islanders has done them no good: on the
contrary, it has tainted their bodies with new diseases, and cor-
rupted their minds with new vices ; it has created new wants, and
furnished new incitements to hostility, without conferring on them
any one benefit to compensate the multitude of evils arising from
this calamitous traffic.
Finding no trace of La P6rouse among this ‘ effroyable peuple,’
who had even forgotten Captain Cook, and gave no indications
that Europeans had ever visited their coast, except by their avidity
for iron, M. Dentrecasteaux took his leave; and on the 21st May,
the frigates came to anchor off the Isle of Santa Cruz: here the
French quarrelled with the natives, and shot one of them in an af-
fray. On passing Solomon’s islands, their frigates were attacked
by a number of light, well-constructed, and gaily-decorated proas.
The men in them were naked, but ornamented with plupies, brace-
lets and necklaces of shells and mother-of-pearl. From hence,
stretching along the northern coast of Louisiade, and the South
Eastern side of New Guinea, they passed the Straits of Dampier,
along the North coast of New' Britain. The natives of Louisiade
appeared to be more civilized than those of the islands which they
had recently passed; they wore a covering round their loins, and
c 4 used


used shields as weapons of defence; they had large proas with
masts : they were anxious to procure pieces of red cloth, but per-
fectly indifferent as to iron, whence the Admiral concludes that
he was the first European who had visited that part of the coast.
M. Dentrecasteaux’s health had for some time been on the de-
cline, and the scurvy had found its way into the ships. M. Huon,
the commander of the Esperance, died before they left New Ca-
ledonia ; their provisions, especially their bread and water, were
becoming short; their wine was turning sour; every thing there-
fore considered, it was deemed advisable to make the best of their
way to the island of Java. On the Bth July, they made the coast
of New Britain, and on the 2()th of the same month M. Dentre-
casteaux departed this life. The command now devolved upon
M. D’Auribeau, who determined to execute the intentions of the
Vice-Admiral, and make the best of his way to Java. Passing
the Admiralty islands a second time, and coasting New Guinea,
they anchored for a few days at Boni, in the island of Waigiou.
Hence they stood for Cayeli, in the island of Bouro, where they
continued several days; but this being a Dutch settlement, and
inhabited by half-cast Portuguese, Chinese and Malays, afforded
nothing worthy of particular notice. Directing their course
through the strait of Boutoun, they arrived at Sourabaya, in the
island of Java, on the 2?th of October, 1793; where, as we have
already observed, the voyage was declared to be at an end, ‘ the
ulterior events being equally foreign to the voyage of Vice-Admi-
ral Dentrecasteaux, and to the end which government proposed
by it.’
M. Rossel, after paying many handsome compliments, deserv-
edly, we have no doubt, to the character of his deceased friend,
thus concludes his encomium :
‘ We are bold enough to flatter ourselves that geographers and men of
science will now rank him among the number of those illustrious navi-
gators, who have acquired a right to the gratitude of all nations; and
that every reader will feel a lively interest for the religious and tender-
hearted man who deserved so well of humanity.’ —p. 448.
We can by no means subscribe to M. Rossel’s opinion that either
geographers, or men of science, will consider M. Dentrecasteaux
to have * acquired a right to the gratitude of all nations,’ for the dis-
coveries made in the present voyage. We sincerely believe that he
was, what M. Rossel states him to be, ‘ a religious and tender-
hearted man’; but, amiable as such a character unquestionably is
in private life, we do not conceive it to be the best adapted for
an undertaking that demands many other qualifications. We do
not mean to say that M. Dentrecasteaux’s piety stood in the way
of his duty; but we have po hesitation in asserting that his own
journal


journal furnishes incontestable proofs of inactivity, and a total want
of curiosity. Satisfied with v&in and idle conjectures grounded
on the reports of his officers, he seldom gave himself the trouble
of setting his foot on shore. We have seen his want of resolution
and apparent want of skill, on leaving the Cape of Good Hope ;
his vague speculations, and total want of curiosity at the island of
St. Paul; his want of perseverance on the South coast of New
Holland, which lost him the merit of discovering Bass’s Strait;
and his mistaken conjectures at Van Dieman’s land ‘ injurieuses d
la nature humaine’: the dread indeed of cannibals seems to have
haunted him through the voyage. With simple uneducated and
uncivilised nature, he appears to have been wholly unacquainted.
But the most serious charge against him is the extraordinary delay
in visiting the Friendly islands, to which La Perouse had distinctly
stated his determination of proceeding from Botany Bay. He did
not arrive at them till the 23d March, 1793, though they are within
a month’s sail of Van Dieman’s land, which he left on the 28th
May, 1792. This is not all; on the 16th June, when at New
Caledonia, he passed the Friendly islands within eight or ten days’
sail, when the wind was at S.W, and consequently as favourable as
it could blow : to have taken them in his way to the Admiralty
islands, could not therefore have delayed him three weeks ; pro-
bably, not a fortnight. Thus nearly twelve months may be said
to be lost, in arriving at that point to which he was directed, by his
instructions, to proceed without delay, and where intelligence was
most likely to be received. La Perouse and his companions might,
for aught he knew to the contrary, be fallen into the hands of sa-
vages, and anxiously expecting their release, w'hile he was amusing
himself with circumnavigating New Holland, drinking coffee with
the Dutch governor of Amboyna, or composing memoirs on the
commerce, population, and religion of that settlement.
We are most willing to bestow on the memory of M. Dentre-
casteaux that character to which he appears justly entitled that
of a truly good and honourable man ; but w e should ill acquit
ourselves of the duty which we o\ve to the public, were we to
admit that the choice of his sovereign, on the present occasion,
was the most happy ; or that the Admiral fulfilled the expecta-
tions of the unfortunate monarch whose confidence in his 1 ta-
lents, resolution, and prudence,’ led him to imagine that he would
be able— ‘ de perfectionner la description du globe, et d accroitre
les connoissances humaines.’
When M. Rossel holds out the discovery of Dentrecasteaux’s
channel, and of a few degrees of the barren coast of Nuyt s land,
to be of such magnitude, as to induce the British Admiralty in
1797 and 1798 to ground a voyage on the information contained
in


42 Dentrecasteaux —Voyage d la Recherche de la Perouse. Feb.
in the Vice-Admiral’s journal, we cannot believe him to be seri-
ous. In fact no such expedition, as he afterwards confesses, was
sent out in either of those years. In 1801, Captain Flinders
sailed from England in the Investigator for the purpose of com-
pleting the survey of New Holland, and especially of the coast of
the great gulph of Carpentaria, which is diametrically opposite to
that part of New Holland where the French frigates carried on
their operations.
Our remarks on the remaining part of the work must be very
brief. In the first volume an appendix is subjoined to the ac-
count of the voyage, containing a scientific statement of the me-
thod employed in laying down the charts and plans of the great
Atlas, illustrated by a number of figures engraved on 32 plates,
making, with the letter-press, an addition to the volume of nearly
200 pages. The second volume consists of 692 pages. It will
be sufficient to enumerate the contents of the chapters. The first
is ‘ A Description of the instruments employed in making the
observations.’ The second, ‘ Enquiries into the errors arising,
either from the instruments, the observations, or the tables ; and
the method of correcting or reducing them.’ And the third and
last, ‘ Tables containing the astronomical observations.’ This
volume, it will be seen, bears an air of science which will alone
deter many from opening it: more indeed is made of trivial mat-
ters than could possibly be necessary, or even desirable, in a work
of this kind. It has too much science for the practical navigator,
and too much common-place practice for the mere man of science.
Indeed the whole substance of the voyage might with ease have
been brought into the compass of a moderate-sized quarto ; but
with a moderate-sized quarto the Great Nation would not have
been satisfied.
though tremendously large, is made up entirely of
detached portions of charts, plans of bays and harbours in small
compartments, several being contained on one sheet, and of etch-
ings of coasts and headlands. Some of these are pretty enough,
and we have only one objection to make to them—they are not
accurate. This assertion we conceive ourselves called upon to
substantiate by proofs. We shall take the very first plate of
‘ Views’ in the book, which is that of the island of St. Paul. This
island we know to be covered with that species of coppice usually
called brushwood, without a tree of any description; yet it would
appear, from the first View, which has been copied from Valentyn,
that the whole coast of that side of the island was covered with
trees (cabbage-stalks, a painter would call them) at least a hun-
dred feet high! whereas in all the other views they have given of
this island, some of them taken within a few cables length of the
shore,


1810. Dentrecasteaux — Voyage a la Recherche de la Perouse. 43
shore, there is plenty of fire, and smoke, but not a single shrub to
break the barren uniformity of the surface. The second instance,
is the chart of New Caledonia, which we are assured is con-
structed 1 avec la plus grande precision,’ and from observations
that were taken with the greatest attention and exactitude, parti-
cularly in the vicinity of Havre Trompeur. Now we know from
Capt. Kent’s observations, made during his stay of six weeks in
Port St. Vincent, that there is not one line of truth in that part
of the chart of New Caledonia, as laid down in this Atlas. Capt.
Kent found one of the finest harbours in the world; the French
declare positively that there is no harbour : Capt. Kent says that
the distance of the reef from the coast is from four to eight miles;
the French assert, from accurate and repeated observations, that
it never exceeds three miles, and frequently runs nearer to the
coast. Capt. Kent says that within the reef, and between it and
the coast, are a number of islands, not only at Port St. Vincent,
but on each side of it, forming, as he conjectures, other harbours;
the French have not laid down one single island in the vicinity of
this harbour, nor on the whole lihe of coast from the S.E. to the
N.W. extremity of New Caledonia, except a few near the middle,
obviously placed at random; yet the mountains and promontories
are all shaded down to the coast, as if they had been accurately
measured and actually surveyed.
.. -/vJLctittKm * -


