

TERRITORY OF PAPUA.
Depopulation of the Suau
District
BY
F. E. WILLIAMS,
M. A. (Adelaide) ; Di p. Anthropology (Oxfotd)
GOVERNWENT ANTHROPOLOGIST.
Anthropology, Report No. 13.
1933
PORT MORESBY:
WALTER ALFRED BOCK, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




A Wood-Carver of Suau.




TERRITORY OF PAPUA.
Depopulation of the Suau
District
BY
F. E. WILLIAMS,
M.A. (Adelaide)-, Dip. Anthropology (Oxford),
GOVERNMENT ANTHROPOLOGIST.
Anthropology, Report No. 13.
19 3 3
PORT MORESBY:
WALTER ALFRED BOCK, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




PREFACE.
OECTIONS I-IX of this report were written
in 1926, after a stay of two months in
the Suau district. Except for a few minor
- alterations and additions they are pub-
II t lished here in their original form.
When I visited the district I was instructed to report
specially on the Soi festival, hence the long discussion in
Section IX, which may seem like a digression. It claims
relevance to the main subject, however, in that it illustrates
the working of the Psychological Factor.
The last section, No. X, was written in 1932. It
endeavours to bring together the rather scattered points
of the preceding nine, and to develop more fully the
theme of Section VII, viz. the Pood Supply, which now
appears to the writer to be the most important.
F.E.W.
Port Moresby,
10th October, 1932.




CONTENTS.
Page.
I. —Introductory ... ... ... 1
II. —The Native Attitude ... ... ... 4
111. —Disease and Death ... ... ... 7
Epidemics... ... ... ... 8
Endemic Disease and Sanitation ... ... 9
A Medical Survey ... ... ... 11
IV. The Birth-Eatb ... ... ... 12
Purposive Restriction ... ... ... 12
Contraception ... ... ... 13
Abortion ... ... ... 11
Infanticide ... ... ... 15
Motives for Birth-Restriction ... ... 16
Sterility ... ... ... ... 20
Venereal Disease... ... ... 21
Sexual Laxity ... ... ... 21
Premature Cohabitation ... ... 24
The Difficulty of Impregnation ... 25
V. —lnfant Mortality ... ... ... 27
Pre-Natal Mortality ... ... ... 27
Death at Childbirth ... ... ... 28
Death during Babyhood ... ... 29
Training in Midwifery and Mothercraft ... 30
Surveillance ... ... ... 32
Vl.—Recruiting and Depopulation ... ... 33
Vll.—The Means of Subsistence ... ... 35
VIII. —Inbreeding and Cross-Breeding ... ... 38


IX. —The Psychological Factor ... ... 41
Effects of European Influence ... ... 43
Substitutes for Lost Interests ... ... 44
Christianity ... ... ... 45
Education ... ... ... 47
Work... ... ... ... 47
Play ... ... ... ... 48
The Case of the Soi ... ... ... 49
X.—Conclusion : The Reform of Native Horti-
culture ... ... ... ... 66
Administration and Depopulation... ... 56
Summary of Factors Discussed ... ... 58
New Factors ... ... ... 58
Old Factors ... ... ... 61
The Food Supply ... ... ... 62
Qualitative Limitation of the Food Supply 62
Suau Diet ... ... ... 62
Introduction of Pulses and Cereals ... 63
Quantitative Limitation of the Food Supply ... 64
The Rotation of Areas ... ... 65
Native Gardening Methods ... ... 66
Amount of Work... ... ... 66
The Reform of Native Horticulture ... 67
Garden Boarding Schools ... ... 67
Appendix... ... ... ... ... 69


Depopulation of the Suau District.
I —Introductory.
“ jLTHOUGH it still remains uncertain whether
the total population of Papua is increasing or
decreasing, there is unfortunately no doubt as to
the serious depopulation of certain areas.
In the East and in the islands of the South-East,
there is, as His Excellency has observed, “certainly a de-
crease, occasionally rather an alarming one ”j 1 and the
Chief Medical Officer, in an examination of the Census and
Native Taxation returns, has drawn attention to the
specially serious deficit of births relative to deaths in the
Eastern Division. It is “particularly marked,” he says,
“in the district west of Suau up to and including Bona
Bona.” In this area, commonly known as the Suau
district, the seriousness of the decline has been stressed
by Mr. Vivian, the Assistant Resident Magistrate, and has
for some time been a matter of observation and concern to
Mr. Rich of the London Missionary Society of Fife Bay.
There can indeed be no doubt as to the fact of a de-
cline in population in the Suau district, and Mr. Vivian’s
figures are such as to give cause for anxiety. Extending
over a period of six years ending 1924-25, and referring to
the coast from Samarai to Mullens Harbour, including the
adjacent islands of Bona Bona, Suau, Baibaisige and the
Brumers, they show that a population of 6,211 has de-
creased by 638 (births, 369; deaths, 1,007). It has been
pointed out to me that births, being to the native of less
social significance than deaths, might fail to be reported,
and thus escape notice in the checking of the census ; but
even when we have made allowance for such possible error
the figures cannot indicate anything but a serious decrease.
1. Annual Report, 1922-23, p. 16.


The present report, while it may in some degree apply
to other cases of depopulation in the Territory, is based
upon evidence obtained in the Suau district itself. To
work intensively, even for a short period, in one more or less
defined area seemed to promise better results than would
an extensive tour through all the areas in which depopu-
lation has been reported. Accordingly I have spent rather
more than two months on the coast between Suau Island
and Boroai (on Mullens Harbour), a district which presents
one of the best examples of the subject of investigation,
and is further recommended by the fact that its social
anthropology has been already worked out by Mr, Arm-
strong. 1
While a number of possibilities have been examined
it cannot be claimed that any decisive causes for a sudden
falling off in the population have been brought to light.
Least of all is it possible to point to one particular factor
and say that it explains everything. Various people have
various nutshells in which the whole explanation of the
matter is contained. In this report I have provided a bag
of assorted nuts, some of which may prove to be rotten,
while others will merely contain a little that is useful. It
will be apparent that the report is in many respects incon-
clusive.
It suffers in its scope from one serious restriction. As
I shall endeavour to point out later, there seems pressing
need for a very thorough investigation by a medical man
on the spot. A doctor may be able to detect with his eye
evidences of disease or harmful practice which are not
readily made known to a questioner; for the latter has to
contend not only with the ignorance but with the stupidity,
and frequently the guile, of his informants. To one whose
duty lies mainly in questioning natives it would come as
an occasional relief if he were able to study them without
talking at all, as a geologist for instance studies rocks.
There is a directness about the latter method which is
impossible with questioning and answering. Further the
delicacy of certain aspects of the present subject and the
native fear of disapproval make one suspect a considerable
amount of dissimulation. It seems, therefore, that the
next step in considering the depopulation of the Suau
1. Anthropology Report No. 1, The Suau-Tawala. 2nd Edition in press, Government
Printer, Port Moresby.


district ought to be a more direct one, viz. a thorough-
going medical survey.
In the meantime I shall set down the results of the
inquiries I have made from my own point of view. It is
desirable however to be as clear as possible upon one point
before proceeding. It has been suggested by some that
the depopulation of Melanesia was in progress before the
advent of the white man ; and the suggestion would natur-
ally apply to this and other districts of Papua. A number
of old men on Suau Island agreed in their description of
(1) an epidemic of some eruptive disease which might be
smallpox; (2) a memorable drought and famine; and (3)
an epidemic of what was apparently dysentery. All these,
particularly the famine it would seem, caused great
mortality, and they were all some years antecedent to the
coming of “ Tamate,” or Chalmers, the first white man to
settle in Suau. I was assured that these three visitations
had greatly reduced the population before Chalmers arrived,
and that since that time the numbers had steadily dwindled.
Thus, if we could judge from the evidence of these old
men, it might be claimed that depopulation had commenced
in Suau before the coming of the white men, as if the three
successive disasters mentioned above were blows from
which the race was never to recover.
But such evidence, based on native tradition and
observation, is far from trustworthy. We do not doubt
that the population has been diminishing since the coming
of Europeans, but it is the usual assumption that the
decline began after this important event; that is to say
the depopulation is assumed to be a comparatively recent
phenomenon. This conclusion seems obvious when we
compare the cases of certain other native peoples. In the
southern parts of Australia for instance the aborigines had
presumably been established for ages previous to the advent
of Europeans. It would be trying coincidence too hard to
suppose that they had been gradually declining until, just
within the last half century —a mere point of time —they
have become virtually extinct. We can hardly do other-
wise than attribute their extinction to the settlement of
Europeans in Australia. Similarly with the Melanesians
in the Bast of Papua. As we may suppose them to have
been long established there and to have become thoroughly


adapted to the environment, it seems prima facie unlikely
that they should decrease unless some important change
were made in their life. The varied influences brought to
bear upon their life by the settlement of Europeans are
held to constitute this important change, so that Europeans
are made indirectly responsible for the dying out of the
native population. Ido not think this general proposition
can be contested.
If we must assume depopulation to be a recent
phenomenon, then we must seek for recent causes; and
these should presumably be found to depend somehow on
the relations between native and European. We cannot,
if we stick to our assumption, make long-standing customs
or tendencies of native life responsible for a sudden decrease
in numbers. They would be merely factors in the status
quo ante. There are, nevertheless, some such long-standing
customs and tendencies which are inimical to increase.
It may be almost as important to discover these old
tendencies as the recent influences which are presumably
responsible for the recent decline.
In the present report the distinction between these
two kinds of factors should be clear enough, but I may give
one example. Introduced disease is one of the new causes
which has certainly contributed to recent depopulation.
Recurring periods of scarcity constitute one of the old
causes which have prevented increase but which cannot
account for a sudden decline. In the ensuing pages both
these kinds of influence will be dealt with, for, if we are
intent on arresting present depopulation then no adverse
influence, however small, should be ignored.
II —The Native Attitude.
The natives are generally aware that their numbers
are decreasing; and older informants represent the decrease
as very great, though their statements cannot be taken at
face value; these older folk perhaps like to look back upon
a Golden Age and magnify the advantages of which the
younger generation are ignorant. But while there is a
general feeling of regret at the present state of affairs it
cannot be said that the feeling is a very lively one. There


is nothing like alarm or despair. The native’s attitude,
in fact, is fatalistic and approaches very near to apathy,
I do not think, however, that he generally contem-
plates the possibility of actual extinction; he does not
visualize such a result. Being assured in one village that
the deaths were in excess of the births, I have given a
demonstration with stones on the ground proving that this
would result in ultimate extinction. This appeared to
surprise those who saw it, and they assured me that matters
would mend before they reached such an unhappy pass.
I have met with no evidence for deliberate race-suicide,
and I do not think the people have any such intention.
Mr. Vivian, however, tells me that at Bona Bona (which
I did not visit) he was given to understand by the people
that they had this end in view. I take this, if it were
meant seriously, to be an isolated instance.
On the contrary those whom I have questioned
appeared to desire families. Women have said they
thought four or five a proper number of children; and those
who are childless, both men and women, have professed
themselves, I believe truly, to be disappointed. So far I
have never met a native who wanted to die without issue.
In those other parts of the Territory that I have seen large
families are eventually the means of power and importance.
In the district under discussion, where descent is matri-
lineal, it is of course to the mother’s side rather than the
father’s that these advantages belong, though this does not
alter the case. Although children require feeding, and
mean more work while they are young, they are potentially
extra hands, and by the time a man has reached the age
when he is likely to bear any prominent part in a feast-
giving, the more descendants and dependants he has the
better. At any rate some offspring is desirable to support
the parents in their old age. In point of fact there are
few natives so hard-hearted as to let an old man go hungry,
whatever their relation to him, but it is the recognized and
entirely natural thing for old people to be supported by
their children and their children’s families. lam not aware
that these obvious principles are disregarded in the Suau
district. If any men or women are without children it is
in the generality of cases regarded as a misfortune. On
the whole I think we may dismiss the notion of a wide-
spread intention of race-suicide.


Native explanations of the decline are interesting
rather than practical. Regarding the birth-rate and the
frequent childless marriage there is a good deal of per-
plexity. The latter is often accepted without any attempt
at explanation, in the fatalistic manner with which we are
familiar; but not infrequently we find the men charging
the women with definite responsibility. There is a belief
that various medicines are taken as contraceptives, and
also that abortion is practised. But men have no definite
knowledge of these medicines and methods, explaining that
they are women’s affairs; while I am assured that the
women who make use of them do so secretly for fear of
the anger of the men. This subject, of contraceptives and
abortifacients, will be dealt with later.
The native theory of the increased death-rate (presum-
ing it to be increased) is heard often enough to be mon-
otonous. Mr. Armstrong has drawn attention to it in his
report. 1 The rise in the death-rate is ascribed to a great
access of sorcery; and this again to the rule of Govern-
ment and Mission, and the resultant pacification of the
country. Formerly, it is pointed out, a delinquent, e.g.
and adulterer, if caught in the act would be speared by the
offended husband and his friends. Nowadays such sum-
mary methods are prohibited by law, and the aggrieved
party must have recourse to the black art. It is difficult
to see how this change should affect the death-rate, for
whereas now allegedly, the victim dies by sorcery, he
formerly died by a spear-thrust. It has been explained
by one or two informants, however, that the offences
meriting death are now more frequent, since the open
retribution of death by violence is hardly to be feared any
longer.
One old man, explaining why so many more people
died nowadays, said very shortly that it was due to tobacco.
Expanding his answer somewhat he said that tobacco was
the ruin of women’s virtue. Whereas in his youth women’s
favours were not easily obtained, it was now only necessary
to go into the garden and show a stick of trade twist.
Tobacco led to adultery, and adultery to death by sorcery.
The usual explanation, however, is without any such
logical link. The abolition of fighting, i.e. of retaliation
1. loc. cit. p. 43.


by violence, is said to have led to an access of sorcery, and
this is somehow made responsible for an increase of deaths.
It is said also that sorcery itself (or the suspicion of it)
was in former days likely to be punished by violent death ;
hence, with the removal of this threat, it flourishes. It is
of course impossible that such a rule could have been
generally carried out in former days, because the suspicion
of sorcery is so exceedingly characteristic of these people
that violent reprisals for it would have wiped them off the
earth long ago.
While it is obviously impossible to make the explana-
tion hold water, the fact remains that the present-day
native attributes depopulation largely to sorcery. It is of
course the favourite hypothesis again, merely the last
resort of the native who is confronted by a fact that “ beats
him.” So strong however is the belief, that on two
occasions I have heard a rather startling suggestion:
instead of undergoing a paltry six months’ imprisonment,
at the end of which he is free to make magic anew, the
sorcerer should be taken to Samarai and killed by the
Armed Constables.
While one need not treat this hypothesis seriously,
viz., that the increase of deaths is due to an increase of
sorcery, there can still be no doubt that the belief in
sorcery has an injurious effect on population. Until the
difficult task of stamping out that belief has been achieved
(and this can only be in the long run by education) we may
be sure that illness and disease will continue to have in
general a deadlier effect because the native, who is notor-
iously suggestible, so often ascribes them to the irresistible
influence of black magic.
III —Disease and Death.
I am not able to enter into this subject as fully as it
deserves. Mr. Vivian’s figures would indicated that the
annual death-rate (averaged for six years) in the Suau and
adjoining districts was 27‘02 per 1,000. It will be shown
later that many children die at birth, and it is certain that
most of such deaths are not made known to the census
officer. Therefore the death-rate is actually higher than
27'02. This figure however will indicate the rate of deaths


due to old age, accident, and disease. The totals for each
year are not ascertainable, and I do not know whether the
rate has been rising throughout the period. The question
of infant mortality will be deferred, and the subject of the
present section will be that of disease and death.
Epidemics.
The Chief Medical Officer has reviewed this matter
in his examination of the Census in which he considers
the Territory as a whole. The diseases are roughly classi-
fied as epidemic and endemic. Among the former he
mentions dysentery which “ undoubtedly affected the
population fifteen years ago but has not been a serious
factor the last five years.” He also says that “ Influenza
and associated pneumonias have probably been a real
factor in increasing the death-rate during the last five
years.” Some are of the opinion that in such epidemics
we have the principal solution of the problem of de-
population. There can be no doubt of their terrible effect,
and the comparative freedom which Papua has enjoyed
shows the value of a rigid system of quarantine.
In the first section I mentioned an epidemic which
preceded the white man in the Suau district. A descrip-
tion—if only from the memories of old men —will serve
to show the awful effects of a pestilence among natives —
effects which must have been more deadly then than they
could be at the present day. This epidemic, called Ttipi-
tupi (which apparently means scabs or pustules), happened
some years before the arrival of Chalmers at Suau. A
man named Masiula of Suau Island had been visiting a
village in Mullens Harbour. He saw such a number of
burials taking place that he left in some alarm and returned
to the hamlet of Eloelo on Suau Island. He was supposed
to have brought the tupitupi with him, for very soon it
broke out in Suau also. The disease appeared on the face
and spread over the limbs and body. An old man held
small pebbles on either side of his nose, and in the corners
of his eyes to show how he had been disfigured with lumps,
and a red leaf on his thigh to show the colour they took.
When the lumps broke out and turned red, he told me, the
patient was beyond recovery. He spoke of the horrible
stench of the disease. Great numbers died and were
dragged off by the arm, and buried two together in shallow


graves. Some died within a fortnight; my old informant
recovered in the fourth month, and this, he said, was only
because he had two wives who looked after him well.
I do not know whether these symptoms are too im-
aginative to square with those of smallpox. But Chalmers
appears to have no hesitation in giving that name to the
epidemic which swept the coast about the year 1870, and
which may well be identical with the one mentioned in
Suau. His vivid description is worth quoting. Although
he did not see these things himself they must have been
very fresh in the memories of his informants. Referring
to the times of real scarcity which occur in New Guinea,
he writes: “It may have been in such a season that small-
pox, sixteen or seventeen years ago, swept along the coast,
and cut down the people in hundreds, wiping out whole
families, dead bodies lying about to be devoured by pigs,
no one being strong enough to bury them; others were
put into canoes and sent off to sea. In some homes both
parents were dead, and only little children were left to care
for one another. In other homes infants were left all
alone, father, mother, brothers, and sisters all dead. God
only knows how any survived.” 1
It is doubtful whether an epidemic would have quite
such disastrous effects now as it did in 1870, but once
started it is exceedingly difficult to control. Influenza for
instance —-the most evasive of infections to quarantine —
has entered Papua and done considerable damage in recent
years. It only remains to observe the same vigilance of
quarantine which has so far kept the country comparatively
free.
Endemic Disease and Sanitation,
Epidemic diseases may in general be regarded as new
causes, and, in so far as they occur, be held partly re-
sponsible for depopulation. The typically endemic diseases,
such as yaws and malaria, and also the widely prevalent
hookworm, are long-established influences which have no
doubt kept the population down, and although we cannot
pretend that they explain the present depopulation, they
are still harmful influences and inimical to increase. As
these, particularly yaws and hookworm, are being dealt
1. James Chalmers. Pioneering in New Guinea , 1887, p. 318.


with in a very effective manner, they may be dismissed
from further discussion. As for the difficult subject of
malaria, Dr. Strong has made two suggestions, viz. some
system of quinine distribution if funds are available, and
the carrying out of some operations, draining, etc., to
prevent mosquitoes from breeding near villages. Both are
of course no more than palliatives; but it is at present too
large an order to stamp out malaria in New Guinea as it
is said to have been stamped out in Panama.
Dr. Strong mentions tuberculosis as a contributory
factor. The natives have a name — Ya’e —for lung disease
accompanied by pain and wasting (as distinguished from
Oso, a mere cough or cold), and I have been assured that
this is pre-European. But whether it is phthisis, and
whether phthisis is introduced or not, I am unable to say.
We may note in this connection that the native style of
house is sometimes condemned, usually on the ground of
stuffiness. One ventures to think however that any drastic
change in house construction is likely to do more harm
than good. It is quite possible that phthisis, e.g. if it be
a newly-introduced disease, may flourish more in the old-
fashioned house than in the airier dwelling that commends
itself to European taste; but apart from this and similar
possibilities, we should bear in mind that the native house
has for many generations served the needs and fitted the
tastes of the natives. It cannot therefore he regarded as
a cause of recent depopulation in itself, but only so if it is
favouring the spread of some fatal disease, as, e.g.
tuberculosis. It is our business to discover whether this
is the case before we compel the native to substitute for
his time-honoured architecture some truly uncomfortable
and draughty innovation. We should find whether
infection is abroad before we institute too severe a fresh-
air treatment. It seems idle then to blame the dwellings
until we know what percentage of disease, particularly
tubercular, there is in the area under discussion.
General sanitation has no doubt undergone some
improvement while the people have been dying off, so we
cannot, generally speaking, attribute depopulation to the
dirty and insanitary condition of the village or its inhabi-
tants. This is again only one of those old tendencies by
improving which we may hope to effect some slight
improvement in the general situation.


I may refer in passing to the question of clothes. I
would not for a moment defend the use of European clothes
by natives save for special and very limited purposes. On
aesthetic grounds obviously, and beyond this on social or
even moral grounds, it stands condemned. But I cannot
help thinking that from the health point of view, which
alone concerns us here, we are prone to make too much of
the matter. To say that clothing has any serious effect
on the death-rate is, I believe, to make it a scapegoat. In
the present case clothing is one of the last and least
considerations, because the fact is perfectly plain that the
people are dying off without it. In the Suau district, as
in most of Papua, European clothes are exceedingly rare.
A Medical Survey.
I have not been very successful in obtaining descrip-
tions of native complaints, and much less so in diagnosing
those that I have seen. This is of course the work of
another Department; and I trust the following suggestion
will not be regarded as undue interference on the part of
a layman. Deaths occur from time to time unreported,
and of course undiagnosed —except by the natives, who in
the majority of cases might only record “ death by sorcery.”
It is impossible for the Travelling Medical Officer to be
everywhere at once, and impossible under the present
system that he should be able to examine all cases of
disease in any one locality. For he has not unlimited
time, and many cases are probably concealed from motives
of shame, mistrust, or mere cowardice.
In the present inquiry I think one of the most im-
portant aspects has not been fully examined. I would
suggest a thorough medical survey of some well-defined
district in which depopulation was known to be marked;
as, e.g. (1) Suau Island and the villages on the mainland
immediately opposite; or (2) The Boroai group of villages
north of Mullens Harbour; or (3) the Engineer Group,
where, I understand, the case is especially serious. Any
such convenient area in this region, however, would do as
well as another. Nearly all share the unhappy qualification
of a great excess of deaths over births.
In such an area a Medical Officer might be quartered
until he has completed the survey in his own time and to


his satisfaction. The time might be a matter of months.
Every individual who lived within the area should he
subjected to examination, or indeed be given a complete
“overhaul.” The examination should be made compulsory;
for only in this manner could it be complete. By means
of such methodical inquiry the incidence of various diseases
in a depopulated area could be determined, and it might
be possible to discover how far disease was actually re-
sponsible for the depopulation of that area. The results of
such an investigation might reveal facts of value which
would admit of a general application.
IV —The Birth-Rate,
The problem of the birth-rate is in the present case
of greater difficulty, and, I venture to think, of greater
urgency than that of the death-rate. No fact is more
significant in the present inquiry than the large proportion
of childless women. There can be no doubt that the birth-
rate is at present inadequate, and it is proposed in this
section to examine various possibilities which may explain
this phenomenon. I reserve the important question of
infant mortality until later.
Purposive Restriction.
We may first consider the purposive restriction of
births. The direct evidence for this is extremely slight.
For my own part I have never seen anything to prove it,
and I have never heard a direct confession of any value.
This, however, is only natural, as the native knows well
enough that the practice is disapproved of by the Govern-
ment. Informants will often say that other people in
general practise birth-control, while they deny it them-
selves. This is worth something: it probably indicates
that purposive limitation is known to the people in general,
including those informants who deny it. Most of those,
it may be noted, who have studied Melanesian depopulation
agree in the opinion that the practice exists, though no
one, I believe, can speak with any certainty as to its prev-
alence. I shall first discuss briefly the possible methods
of birth-control. They are classified as (1) Contraception;
(2) Abortion, and, if the last may logically be included (3)
Infanticide.


Contraception. I have heard of no mechanical means
of contraception. The only means suggested are mura-
mura, or medicines. lam confident in the opinion that
such medicines are thought to be used far more often than
they are used. The case is precisely similar to that of
sorcery, which is imputed in the vast majority of cases
quite wrongly. In both matters the reasoning is a priori :
it is argued that there “must be ” a cause for sterility as
there is for death. In the one case it is said that an enemy
made magic: in the other, that the woman took some
muramura.
Definite examples of such medicines are hard to come
by, and furthermore no example, so far as my knowledge
goes, has ever yet come to light which has possessed any
proved value as a contraceptive. One old woman admitted
to me the knowledge of such a contraceptive, which proved
to be a kind of grass growing in the village. This was to
be eaten with taro. I kept a specimen which I regret to
say I have since lost. I can therefore do no more than
vouch for the very harmless appearance of it, and observe
that common sense, at least, would put it down as value-
less for contraception. Mr. Rich mentions two trees, with
the native names Neguia and Mage Mage of which I attach
specimens in the hope that they will be analysed, and in
the expectation that they will be found quite harmless. 1
While it seems likely that, physically speaking, these
contraceptives are ineffective, it has been suggested that
the desired result follows from their use by virtue of auto-
suggestion. I can only express a layman’s opinion that
this seems the height of improbability. Suggestion is
assuredly potent in sorcery, but it is hard to believe that
it should affect the process of conception. Apart from
this difference I should venture to push the analogy between
contraceptive medicines and sorcery a little further: not
only are they both supposed to be used far more often than
1. Specimens of these were forwarded to Institute of Tropical Medicine, Townsville, and
the following reply was received
“Both these specimens proved to belong to the Fig family and have been identified by
the Director of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, as follows
‘ Mage Mage— This matches Ficus benjamin L., which is represented by two speci-
mens from New Guinea in our herbarium, viz., Lauterbach 870 and Hollrung 673.
Neguia— This cannot be matched with anything in the herbarium, but it appears
to come near F. ampelos, Burm.’
The milk of Fig trees is astringent and it is quite possible that it might be used as a
contraceptive by the native women.”


they really are, but even when they are used, they are both
physically speaking, futile.
To show how this native theory of contraceptives may
be merely a guess-work explanation I mention the belief
which I discovered in one village, that white employers
gave their indentured boys some medicines which on re-
turning to their homes they gave to their wives to make
them permanently sterile.
Abortion. Under this heading I refer to miscarriages
deliberately effected. There is no doubt that these occur,
although the matter is kept as secret as possible. I am
assured that women would bring about their own abortions
unaided, and, if possible, without witness of any kind,
because their men would be angry at the loss of a child.
If this be so one may ask, How is it that the practice is
known to occur? It is not improbable, indeed, that even
abortions do not occur so frequently as they are supposed
to.
There are said to be some drugs used. Mr. Armstrong
writes : “A certain plant (blue flowered convolvulus ?) is
a simple, much used for various complaints, and is said to
be used for venereal and for preventing conception (or
causing abortion ?). The boiled leaf of a certain plant is
certainly used for causing abortion. Possibly this is a
poisonous plant which acts by a general poisoning effect,
for the natives say it is dangerous and sometimes causes
death.” 1
I have not succeeded in getting any information on
this subject that is worth treating seriously. One method
of which I heard was to powder fragments of Nahua, or
volcanic glass, and eat them in sago. It was not clear
whether this was meant to prevent conception or procure
abortion, though it seems drastic enough for suicide. An-
other method was simply to drink sea-water.
It may be true that natives possess some abortifa-
cients, but the single case of confession that I have heard
is hardly a convincing one. A young woman admitted
having had a miscarriage and denied having used any
mechanical means. She explained that as a young wife
1. loc. cit. p. 20.


she had been given a mixture to drink and also to eat with
her food. Her mother’s sister had given her this medicine
because she was considered too young for child-bearing.
Subsequently she had a miscarriage which she attributed
to the medicine. But this proved to be a “year” after-
wards. I presume we may safely say the medicine had
nothing to do with the miscarriage.
It seems probable that when abortions do occur they
are brought about by mechanical means, i.e. by violence
rather than by medicines. Several women have said that
they may be caused by tying a cord tightly about the
middle; another method was to press and squeeze about
the chest and then drink saltwater. There is a belief that
during gestation the foetus is first lodged high in the body
about the level of the breasts and that as it develops it
gradually descends. The abortion, I was assured, can be
successfully effected only in the early stages of gestation.
Infanticide. Infanticide is strenuously denied by all.
I do not know of any real evidence to show it is practised,
and against it we have a certain amount of presumptive
evidence in the fondness of parents for their children, and
in the abhorrence with which the idea of killing them is
professedly regarded.
The predominance of males is sometimes accounted
for by the suggestion of female infanticide. In a society
that to some extent practises matrilocal marriage it might
be expected that female children should be even preferred
to male, and I have asked a number of young women
whether they would rather have a boy or a girl for a child.
In a striking majority of cases they have said a girl. Ido
not think female infanticide would be practised any more
than male infanticide.
The question whether infanticide is practised at all
remains really unsolved. But it must be confessed that
there is one serious ground for suspicion. Under the
heading of Infant Mortality I will show that a considerable
percentage of infants apparently do not survive birth. The
percentage might seem almost too large to set down to
natural causes combined with ignorant and unskilled
midwifery. It is therefore a possibility, founded as far as


I know merely on suspicion, that unwelcome children are
done away with at birth. 1
Motives for Birth-Restriction.
The motives for alleged birth restriction in Suau are
various and not always clear. I have been told that young
wives are too young for child-bearing —not that they were
incapable of it, but that, as mere girls, they should not
yet undergo the pains and troubles of motherhood. This
was a common opinion and it was said that women would
sometimes see to it that their daughters should not become
mothers too early. I have not often heard that women
greatly dreaded the pains of child-birth, but more frequently
that they found a baby somewhat of a nuisance by reason
of the constant care it required, and the extra work. ■
Men have invariably denied complicity in the matter
of birth restriction, and professed ignorance of the methods
used. Personally I am disposed to absolve the men in
general from blame in the matter, because, apart from the
fact that there is no direct evidence against them, there
seem to be hardly any intelligible motives.
The four principal points raised at the recent con-
ference of Papuan Clergy, Teachers and Village Repre-
sentatives at Dogura (North-East Coast) are all of interest
here. But Ido not think that the motives for restriction
suggested would be generally applicable in the area at
present under discussion. The first, viz. “ The fear that
there would not be enough food to support a large popu-
lation ” was never raised in my hearing in the Suau
district. It would at any rate be difficult to reconcile with
the general attitude of the people there in regard to de-
population. They rather deplore the present decrease in
their numbers as if it were a thing beyond their control;
and I heard no suggestion of a decrease in the food supply
as directly accounting for it. In fact they are ready to
admit that the food quest is easier now and more profitable
than it used to be. I do not wish, however, to dismiss
this consideration out of hand, and will examine it at
greater length later on.
1. Dr. Strong tells me that in the Baniara district (North-Eastern Division) during the
early days infanticide was prevalent, and that it was possible to obtain direct confessions of
the practice. But this was before the native was fully aware that the Government regarded
it with disapproval. Now, of course, one never hears a direct confession, though it is possible
that the practice may still continue.


The second motive suggested is “ the desire on the
part of the men to have large supplies of food for such
times as feasts, so that they may appear as important
persons at such times; if there are many children they
will eat the food, so the father will not be able to swagger
when a feast is being celebrated.” While I would not
venture to deny that the above motive may sometimes
hold, it is not easily reconciled with what I take to be the
feeling of natives at large. Feasts of consequence are
organized or presided over by men of consequence, i.e. by
older men, and the food is largely provided by contribu-
tions from all their relatives and dependants. Not only
at feasts however, but at all times, a man’s sense of im-
portance and his power to appear important depend largely
on the number of his dependants or followers. The man
who has a big following of sons or nephews is on the way
to being a “ big ” man himself. It is certainly true that
young children must keep down the surplus necessary for
feasts as well by what they eat as by the share which they
claim of the mother’s labour; but I cannot think that this
supplies a common motive for birth restriction.
The third reason, viz. “that it is futile to bear children
only to satisfy the greed of the evil spirits ” (to whom the
high rate of infant mortality is ascribed) is a specific one,
and does not apply to that part of the Eastern Division
with which this report is dealing.
Nor, I think, does the fourth, viz. the “ Strong public
opinion, especially in the female section of the community,
that there is something disgraceful in having a large
family,” the mother of many children being compared to
a pig. I have heard the comparison with the pig made
in regard to a woman who (hypothetically) bore triplets,
but never in regard to one who merely bore a large family.
At any rate such a prejudice does not square with the
opinion of “ one division ” (which it is I do not know).
“In one division where there is a large population, the
officer reports that the day of payment is made the occasion
for a holiday, and all the women and children appear in
gala dress, and the scene of operations is surrounded by
practically the whole population of the village concerned.
The admiring throng applauds the mothers, the applause


being commensurate with the bonus received, the mother
of an unusually large family receiving quite an ovation. 1
The four motives above discussed apply to the sphere
of the Anglican Mission, viz. the North-East Coast of
Papua. Although I have not been able to refer them to
the Suau district with any confidence, I do not presume
to question the validity of the findings. The motives,
however, as pointed out by Bishop Newton, (i are all
anterior in their origin to Government and Mission in-
fluence, and should as such influence develops become less
and less effective.” This places them in the category of
the Old causes, the restrictive influences which have kept
down the population, but which cannot be responsible for
a sudden and recent decrease.
Now, in so far as such recent decrease may be due to
birth-restriction we must seek for a new motive which will
account for bringing birth-restriction into practice more
widely or frequently. Such a motive has been suggested
by Dr. Rivers, who regards voluntary birth-restriction as
the most potent cause of the decline in birth-rate in
Melanesia, and who finds the motive for it to be a general
discontent and loss of heart among the people, which
makes them argue that it is useless to bring children into
the world to face the present unhappy conditions. 2
I cannot say I have hitherto discovered any attitude
of this kind in those parts where I have worked; and I
am strongly inclined to believe that the motive for birth-
restriction, where it is practised, is personal —in fact that
the native woman contemplating abortion is decided by
the thought of all the work and trouble another screaming
baby will give her rather than by any altruistic regard for
the baby’s future. If this be the case we are still without
a reasonable explanation of why birth-restriction should
have increased in recent years.
All observers seem to agree that abortion is practised,
though they differ on the question of its prevalence, which
indeed remains a matter for conjecture. Dr. Seligman
concluded that it was “ a somewhat infrequent event.”
Mr. Rich on the other hand says that “ unwanted children
1. Director of Native Taxation, quoted by His Excellency, Annual Report, 1922-23, p. 16.
2. Essays on the Depopulation of Melanesia , p. 104.


are frequently aborted ” and Mr. Abel of the Kwato Ex-
tension, who knows his natives very well, believes that I
have treated abortion as a factor of decline too lightly.
Comparing the birth-rate in the native villages with that
in the Mission Settlement, the last-mentioned writes (of
abortion), “ The fact that we have cases at Kwato,
strongly denied at the time, but circumstantially attested
to, where there is so strong a public opinion against the
practice, as the result of Christian teaching, would lead to
the supposition that where public opinion on the matter
was not general in the native villages, it would be a practice
commonly resorted to.”
While it must be insisted that generally speaking we
have only an a priori case for the prevalence of abortion,
it may be that I have attached insufficient importance to
it : it may occur more frequently than some of us imagine.
I will not attempt to go further into the possible
motives for abortion, but it is conceivable that there may
be a comparatively recent fashion for the practice, i.e. the
knowledge of it and the bad example may be passing from
woman to woman. Much is ascribed in the vaguest terms
to the break-up of custom which follows contact with
Europeans but we may safely enough say that it leads in
tribal life to a growing sense of irresponsibility : a man
or woman can nowadays do much more as he or she likes.
If a woman knows of a comparatively easy way of ridding
herself of a burden, and sees other women putting it into
practice, then she may not hesitate to follow their example :
such public opinion as stood against it is so weakened as
to fail in deterring her.
For practical purposes, i.e. in order to prevent depopu-
lation, I think we should assume, even if we cannot prove
it, that abortion and purposive restriction in general are
prevalent customs, and we should adopt what measures
we can to do away with them. One measure, that of
surveillance, is suggested under the heading of Infant
Mortality (p. 32). But there is another of much wider
application : it is that of propaganda and teaching. It can
do no harm to impress on natives that abortion is a bad
practice, whether they are guilty of it or no; and the good
effects of such teaching are no doubt evident, e.g. among
the Kwato people. Our course is therefore to seize on


every opportunity, whether it fall to Mission or Govern-
ment, to impress upon intelligent natives that abortion is
a threat to the existence of their race. To this one point,
viz. the prevention of abortion, we may apply a general
remark of Mr. Abel’s : “ . . . with a strong minority really
alive to the menace and bent upon obviating disaster, there
is hope that from the vital remnant of the race, the race
can and will be saved.”
Sterility,
We now come to what is perhaps the most important
aspect of the depopulation question, viz. that of sterility.
It seems that the most significant fact before us is the
large number of childless women. We have already dis-
cussed the likelihood of deliberate birth-restriction: but,
as I have stated before, childless women always say that
they cannot help being childless. There is no reason why
we should always think this to be false.
Several causes have been suggested for sterility in the
Suau and other districts. But until the fact of sterility
has been medically proved in a fair number of cases it will
be remembered that these which I am about to discuss are
still no more than causes of a supposition. Ido not know
if it is possible for a medical man, when assured by a woman
that she has never conceived, to decide from physical
evidence whether or no she is speaking the truth. If this
were possible we should have a definite case to consider,
instead of one which is clouded by the shyness or deliberate
prevarication of our informants.
In the first place it is not impossible that sterility is
due to a racial defect. In this case the defect would no
doubt belong to the males as well as to the females. The
question of male sterility, as far as I am aware, remains
entirely uninvestigated in this region. I have no evidence
to prove it in any case, but merely one or two suggestive
facts. Questioning a group of ten married men in Boroai,
for instance, I found that, while one of them had had six
children, the remaining nine had none. One of them, an
old man, had married four wives in succession and not one
of them had brought forth a child. If we were to ascribe
these lamentable facts to sterility, it might well be that
the defect lay with the males as much as with the females.


If, as in another case, a widow after a long and childless
marriage with her first husband, bears a child rather late
in life to her second, it would seem that the lack of issue
in the first marriage was in all likelihood due to some defect
in the husband. It is for medical science to explore this
possibility, if some satisfactory means can be devised for
dealing with so delicate a matter. In the meantime I
have no real grounds for saying that there is likely to be
a racial tendency to sterility among the natives of this
region. It is only suggested here as a possibility.
The are several influences, however, which are said to
make for sterility which may be discussed in turn:
Venereal Disease. The first is Venereal Disease.
According to Dr. Strong the Eastern Division, and one or
two other districts were “ notorious as areas dangerous on
this account twenty years or so ago.” I imagine that the
present incidence of venereal disease in the Suau district
as well as the effects of previous infection are matters for
a medical survey to investigate.
Dr. Gliblin has informed me that, apart from what is
usually known as venereal disease, the Medical Depart-
ment knows of a certain prevalence of other affections of
the genital organs which are contagious. These, which
are due in the main to shortcomings of hygiene, might, I
am assured, account for a certain degree of sterility. These
are at least concrete influences. They naturally come
within the scope of the Medical Department which takes
practical measures to deal with them.
Sexual Laxity. In the opinion of Mr. Eich, who has
for a long time been observing the trend of matters in Suau,
an influence of prime importance in limiting the birth-rate
is that of sexual laxity. He speaks of “The tremendous
increase in promiscuous sexual intercourse which prevails
in these more peaceful days, and which the old men tell
me was altogether unknown in the old times, when such
practices were visited by death to the parties concerned.”
He mentions the custom of prostituting unmarried girls
and says, “ As a class prostitutes are not prolific in any
land, and Papua is no exception to this rule ”; and he
asks that “ the Government should punish sexual offence


with such added stringency as would tend to eliminate
this factor making for sterility of the people.” 1
It is very generally claimed that sexual laxity or some
measure of promiscuity tends to make women sterile.
Apart from the obvious fact that it spreads venereal in-
fection I do not really understand why this should be so,
but neither do I propose to contest this very common
assumption at present.
It is a risky thing to differ with Mr. Rich on questions
of fact regarding his own district, but I cannot help think-
ing he may have attached more importance to this matter
then it deserves, i.e. in so far as it bears upon the question
of depopulation. As it is, however, a matter of general
importance, I will proceed to discuss it at some length.
(1) Pre-Nuptial Laxity. Sexual laxity may be found
among married people or unmarried people. In the latter
case there is no native law against it. Girls are fancy-free,
and often have a number of lovers before they marry and
settle down to fidelity. There is no sexual restraint be-
tween the girls and their lovers (though I have been told,
truly or no, that sexual intercourse does not take place so
frequently between them as between married couples). It
is regarded as a good thing, it would seem, for a girl to
remain faithful to one “ sweetheart,” and finally to marry
him. But fickleness is, and, it would appear, always has
been, extremely common. There is no trace of a former
“ law ” or custom against it, the only restriction being that
of totemic exogamy. It is true the latter restriction seems
to be breaking down, but on the whole I do not think that
the “ tremendous increase in promiscuous intercourse ”
could be made to apply to the conduct of the unmarried.
On the other hand one might expect that the influence of
the Mission has in general put some check upon this
licence: it has certainly done so in some limited degree.
Mr. Rich also refers to the custom of prostituting girls
before marriage. This custom, known as Eno-eno, is said
to be nowadays practised by the bush villages, and one or
two recent instances prove that it has not entirely died
out along the coast. An unmarried girl will spend some
months in continuous prostitution with the object of ac-
1. Letter to Government Secretary, 4.2.1924.


cumulating wealth before her marriage. Her parents not
only condone but instigate the practice: for the takings
are presumably theirs (I am not aware what share, if any,
goes to the girl as a dowry). The girl herself is entirely
free, and the custom was never universal; that is to say,
some girls made eno-eno, others did not. The girl spends
these few months in other villages, because in her own the
young men would be in many cases “brothers,” and there-
fore not customers. Boys pay extravagantly, and a girl
may amass basketfuls of ornaments. lam candidly of the
opinion, however, that this practice is to some extent falling
into disuse, and that for the reason made plain by the
natives themselves, viz. fear of Government and Mission
disapproval.
In view of these conclusions of my own, viz. (1) that
general sexual laxity of the unmarried has not increased
to any important extent, and (2) that pre-nuptial prosti-
tution ( eno-eno ) has decreased, I cannot regard either of
them as a cause of recent depopulation. They do not
therefore stand in the category of new causes but in that
of the long-standing influences inimical to increase.
Whatever view we take of sexual freedom before marriage,
however, there can be no doubt that the specific custom
of eno-eno —in which the more lovers the better —is a
thoroughly bad one which needs to be discouraged.
(2) Married Laxity —Whereas there is no native law
against sexual laxity among the unmarried, there is a
definite “ law ” against, or rather customary prohibition
of, adultery. There was, of course, no legal means of
enforcing this prohibition among the people of Suau, and
an offence was punishable only by retaliation. Where the
aggrieved husband had the necessary pluck or a sufficient
backing of friends, this retaliation was no doubt made
with spear or club, so that unlawful lust would perhaps
be deterred by the fear of death. Informants have given
various opinions as to increase or decrease of marital in-
fidelity since the coming of the white man, but the balance
is certainly in favour of the former, the reason commonly
given being that the thought of six months’ imprisonment
is much less effective a deterrent than the thought of a
violent death. This evidence— and we have no other —
would make it appear that sexual laxity among the married


has increased of late years. But, notwithstanding, it does
not seem to have assumed any alarming proportions, and
it is certainly not to be compared with the freedom which
characterizes the life of the unmarried.
While I feel disposed, in the matter of depopulation,
to give less weight to these considerations than does Mr.
Rich, I do not of course endeavour to condone them
entirely. Some stronger measures against adultery and
eno-eno might help to stamp out practices which are
undesirable in themselves and which, if only by the
spreading of venereal disease, probably have some adverse
effect on population.
Premature Cohabitation. lam indebted to Dr. Harse
for a definite and very plausible theory to account for the
low-birth rate. He points out that sterility may be due
to endometritis, or chronic inflammation of the womb;
and he also suggests that endometritis, which is known to
be common in Papua, frequently originates in precocious
sexual intercourse, i.e. before the proper development of
the female organs. It is impossible to set much store by
this theory until medical investigation has actually
demonstrated the presence of endometritis or endocervicitis
in the population of Suau. In the meantime, however,
we may discuss the question of early marriage and early
intercourse.
Of actual child marriage there is, as far as I know, very
little evidence. 1 As a rule a girl is in the physical sense
fully developed before she actually takes a husband. The
question is at what age girls begin intercourse. There is
a rough-and-ready rule which I have often heard given,
viz. that girls do not accept lovers until their first strip
of tattoo is made from neck to waist. It is well known
that the girls of this district first have their faces decorated,
next their waist and hips, and then their bodies. By the
time this last operation is in progress the girl has usually
matured. Dr. Seligman states definitely (in regard to
girls of Tubetube) that this tattooing of the body is not
executed until the appearance of the first menses.
There is reason to doubt, however, whether this
restriction upon young men and girls is always observed.
1. Mr. liambton of the Anglican Mission gave me some surprising evidence, though, of
child marriages in the hill villages behind Dogura, N.E. Coast.


There is no great harm in children playing at sexual
intercourse (which I have never seen, but only heard of);
but I have confessions from one or two young men that
they have initiated little girls. It is said that the girl is
the tempter, and the boy merely compliant, though one
may be left to judge how much truth there is in this. It
may be regarded as certain, however, that little girls are
not raped, or the matter would become public. It is easy
to see that such a way of initiating a young girl into sex
might lead to long-lasting and serious results, viz. to the
endometritis or endocervicitis of the theory. I cannot
say, however, that I have discovered grounds for saying
this is a common practice, though it may be so. It would
be very difficult to expose cases, because of the fact that
both parties are consenting. It is obvious of course that
any such case discovered should be punished, but it is
probably only by education that the practice (whatever
may be its prevalence) can ever be uprooted. In the
meantime, before we worry overmuch regarding the
possible cause, we should make certain of the fact, i.e. we
should discover the actual prevalence of endometritis.
The Difficulty of Impregnation. It would be absurd
to question the adequate association of the sexes among
natives, who are presumably as adept in these matters as
most white people. Sexual unions are said to take place
frequently, and Mr. Armstrong limited the chief recreations
of the young to love making, sexual intercourse, and feasts.
Natives are, nevertheless, capable of prolonged abstinence,
as for instance in the fast preparatory to the great feast or
Soi, when not only the grincipal feasters, or Hudi men,
but the whole village abstain from intercourse. There is
also the characteristic fact that intercourse even between
married couples seldom takes place in the house (unless they
occupy it entirely alone). The Suau house is divided into
two compartments, one end occupied by men and the other
by women, so that there is often a lack of real privacy. The
sense of shame is intense in the native. Cohabitation is
therefore in the normal case alfresco and entirely secret.
It has been suggested that this usage is against the chances
of conception. But another suggestion is that sexual re-
lations are over-frequent. We may probably leave the
matter quite confidently as it stands.


It is very difficult to explain, however, why girls,
though admittedly cohabiting with great freedom, perhaps
for years before marriage, yet seldom produce children.
It is, of course, proper and normal for a young man who is,
or thinks himself, responsible for a girl’s pregnancy to
marry her, though sometimes he balks at the hurdle and
the child is born illegitimate. It seems that no great
disabilities attach either to such a child or to its mother,
who will eventually have no difficulty in marrying. But
as a rule bastard children are not welcome.
This general fact, viz. that unmarried girls cohabit
without producing children, may be explained (though not
very definitely) in more ways than one. It may be that
single girls succeed in doing away with unwelcome children
before or after birth in the ways that have already been
suggested; and it is possible (though I think improbable)
that they have effective means of contraception. But
Professor Seligman debates this question at some length,
and after considering the above possibilities he is driven
to a different conclusion. “Wherever the confidence of the
natives was gained,” he writes, “it was admitted that
abortion was induced, but the most careful inquiries failed
to produce evidence that the practice was as frequent as
might be expected considering the prevailing liberty. In
fact with every a 'priori reason for expecting abortion to be
commonly produced I came to the conclusion that in fact
it was a somewhat infrequent event. I believe that the
only deduction from the facts I have set forth is that
Papuasian girls are less easily impregnated than the women
of the white race.” 1
Such an explanation would hold for the rarity of
marital as well as extramarital births. Other observers
have been struck by the native belief that repeated con-
nections are necessary for impregnation; a native will be
incredulous and somewhat amused at the notion that only
one act is sufficient. As Dr. Seligman has implied, this
belief may have its rise in the actual difficulty of impreg-
nation.
It is fairly obvious that in so far as the difficulty of
impregnation explains the low birth-rate we are confronted
by an influence that admits of no known remedy. The
1. C. G. Seligman, Melanesians of British New Guinea, p. 500.


same applies to the hypothesis of a racial tendency towards
sterility. But the other factors, vizi. Venereal Disease,
Sexual Laxity, and Premature Cohabitation, admit in
varying degrees of remedy. The Medical Department is
engaged in stamping out the first named: and this is a
work of obvious importance. The other factors are men-
tioned in the present report for what they are worth. But
it is fairly certain that, in so far as they exist, they are
inimical to increase, and I think we should do what we
can to discourage them.
V —Infant Mortality.
The subject of infant mortality is important enough
to deserve separate treatment. Every observer has been
impressed by this aspect of the case, and here at least we
have something definite to go upon.
Pre-Natal Mortality,
We may first briefly refer to pre-natal mortality, if
such a term is permissible, i.e. to accidental miscarriages
as distinguished from those which are produced intention-
ally, and which have already been dealt with.
A number of women have admitted miscarriages; in
some villages however, e.g. Boroai (where I questioned
forty-two women) they were entirely denied. The denial
is probably due to shyness, as it seems hardly likely that if
they occur in one place they will be unknown in another.
The native is aware that miscarriages are more likely to
occur during the earlier stages of pregnancy: but neither
then nor later does the expectant mother lie up. One may
sometimes see women in an advanced condition going to
their work and apparently without untoward result. The
miscarriage is attributed to some sudden strain or accident.
Several have said that in carrying a great weight of taro
down from the gardens on the hill-sides, or in climbing a
fence with this load on their backs, they have felt a sudden
pain which has been followed by illness and a miscarriage.
I do not imagine that such accidents are relatively frequent
among natives, but it is certain that expectant mothers are
not treated with the same care as is considered necessary
in civilization.


00
Married women
05
questioned.
CO
Woman with no sur-
CD
viving children.
CO
O
Women who have
allegedly never
conceived.
H-i
Total surviving
05
children.
Average surviving
CO
child per woman.
Or
05
Total children died.
Number of these
who died at any
age afte babyhood.
CD
Number who died as
babies.
CO
o
Number who died
immedi ately at
birth.
Death at Childbirth
In the course of questioning women as to the number
of children they have borne, I have been increasingly as-
tonished at the number who are said to have died at birth.
It is not always easy to discover whether such children
are actually still-born, or whether they have died im-
mediately after birth. The number given in the last
column of the following table refers however to children
who, according to their mothers, had never been suckled.
The women questioned belonged to Suau Island,
Savaia, Aro Aro, and Boroaai. The last district was the
worst, where actually 22 per cent, of the children born
were said not to have survived birth.
One striking case deserves mention although it does
not belong to our district. Questioning a Boianai man
quite at random I learnt that his wife had borne him eleven
children : the first ten of them had died without being
suckled, and only the eleventh had survived. The in-
formant could count and professed himself quite certain as
to the facts, nor could any amount of cross-questioning
drive him from his position. He had no explanation to
offer save that in the cases of the unlucky ten “ his wife’s
inside had been too hot.”
Such high percentages may be explained on the hy-
pothesis of infanticide, though, as I have observed, this is
always denied. Furthermore, in a case such as the last,
I do not believe that a man would have dared to give that
long catalogue of infant deaths if he believed that his
children were killed, or even if he had the idea in his
head. Nevertheless we are not able to deny that in-
fanticide ispractised: it remains an admissible explanation.


It seems likely however that ignorant methods of
native midwifery are in some degree responsible for this
high rate of infant mortality. In the above case it
transpired that in her first ten confinements the wife of
my informant had been assisted by her mother; in the
last, and only successful one, she had been assisted by a
different woman, one by the Christian name of Lilian, who
acted alone. Even though successful this midwife cannot
have had much training. According to her own showing
she had never assisted at another case, and her experience
had been derived from the bearing of her own child —only
one —when she had been helped by her mother.
I have not been successful in obtaining any detailed
description of confinement in the Suau district, and I
certainly would not venture to condemn any methods of
midwifery on my own account. But Mrs. Turner of Lawes
College, who is a trained nurse, writes, “ So far as my
experience goes there is nothing in the nature of ‘meddle-
some midwifery.’ The mother is left to give birth to her
child by natural means, and if her powers fail, her native
attendants know of nothing to do for her.” Only twice
had Mrs. Turner been summoned to cases where instru-
mental delivery was necessary; though, she adds, “It is
of course possible that a strong woman might survive a
prolonged labour which would yet kill the child.” Mrs.
Turner believes that “ a large number of children do not
survive birth just because the attendants are afraid to give
the slap on the back that is often needed to make the child
cry.” Mr. Rich, agreeing generally with the points here
raised, says, “ Newly-born children are often allowed to die
through ignorance of proper obstetric methods and often
the sheer indifference of the mother.”
On the whole it appears that there are no regular
midwives and little finesse (unless it be for magic) in native
obstetrics; any and every woman may act on occasion,
and her knowledge is derived mainly from personal experi-
ence. It therefore seems likely that many deaths which
are reported to occur immediately at birth may be due to
the ignorance or carelessness of the midwife.
Death during Babyhood.
The suckling of children is often prolonged, sometimes
till the first molars are appearing; sometimes even till the


milk teeth are beginning to fall out. 1 But from a very-
early stage, perhaps a day or two after birth, the child may
be given chewed taro from the mother’s mouth. It is said
that this more than questionable treatment is a means of
quieting a very fretful baby. The feeding of children with
taro in the early stages of suckling is unfortunately a very
widespread custom. It may also be worth mentioning that
women are secluded for some time after childbirth, and
must submit to a restricted diet, from which meat and fish
at any rate are excluded.
Training in Midwifery and Mothercraft.
It is not suggested that infant mortality will account
for a recent large decline in numbers. We may suppose
that it has always been a serious drain on population, and,
as far as it may be attributed to ignorance, it is not likely
to be higher now than formerly. (Only through the
medium of infanticide could we perhaps assume that it has
increased latterly; and in that case we must pre-suppose
an extra and modern motive for infanticide. As I said
before, I have no real evidence for any such motive.)
Infant mortality is therefore one of those long-established
influences operating against increase. But here we have
a defect which is remediable. There is now a serious
leakage of life, and it is no doubt possible to do something
to check it.
One means is education. Native women obviously
stand in need of some training in “ Mothercraft.” The
harmfulness of the present mode of feeding, for instance, is
only to be countered by instruction. It might be worth
while also to encourage more care in the conduct and
treatment of women during pregnancy.
Further, if I am right in believing that primitive
obstetrics are at fault, it would be worth some trouble to
provide mothers with safer and better attention. I am
assured that at Fife Bay, where native mothers sometimes
avail themselves of the trained care of Mrs. Turner, the
infant mortality is reduced accordingly. The great
difference between conditions on the station at Isuleilei
1. lu some cases it would seem that suckling goes on much longer. No doubt the record
instance—quite exceptional of course—is that of the man of Didiutuna, not long dead, who
was nicknamed Kanasusu or ‘Milker,” because he used to suck at his mother’s breast after
he had grown to manhood, and would insist on her compliance.


and those in the villages of the district —increase on the
one hand, and uniform decrease on the other —are, I venture
to think, due in no small degree to the assistance of a
trained nurse, and the subsequent proper care of children.
It is a rare thing, I understand, for native women to
come into Samarai for their confinement. Not only the
fear of hospital, which most natives unfortunately feel,
but their almost insuperable modesty discourages them.
Added to this is their laziness and indifference: they do
not willingly undertake a long journey for a purpose which
they think can be fulfilled well enough at home. Native
women are apparently confident in their own ability as
midwives and no doubt enjoy the confidence of their
patients. There seem to be few cases of deaths of mothers
in childbirth, and it cannot be denied that natives in
general set a much smaller value on life than we do, so
that if infants die at a very early stage, before they have
gained a strong hold on the affections of their parents, the
matter is not regarded very seriously. One is sometimes
surprised at the indifference with which a mother will
speak of the death of an infant.
In view of this it seems that if an obstetric hospital
were feasible it should be within easy reach of the area it
is to serve. Further, it is certain that native women
would rather be attended by a nurse than by a doctor,
simply by reason of their sense of shame. Ido not know
whether it would be practicable to employ a number of
trained nurses for work among natives —particularly ob-
stetrical work. There would certainly be difficulty in
obtaining the services of European women, so that I would
suggest the employment of, say, Samoan nurses, if they
are available, or perhaps the training of half-caste women.
It might be possible to establish a series of stations on the
same lines as the Mission stations which are controlled by
teachers; in fact the Missions might undertake to co-
operate in this matter and combine the two systems, so
that in time every Mission station should be an obstetric
hospital. Whether it would be possible to train Papuan
natives for the purpose lam not prepared to say; though
it will be obvious that even the most elementary training
in midwifery and mothercraft would not be entirely wasted.
It would not be actually necessary for a native mother to


attend the station for her confinement. The nurse (other
than a European) might visit cases within reasonable
distance; though there is no doubt that the hospital system
would be more satisfactory.
There is one very serious obstacle to the scheme
proposed here, viz. that of mere native conservatism: it
is likely that a native woman would prefer the dirt and
privacy of her village, and the attention of some magic-
making old hag, to the strangeness of a station even a few
miles away. It might be considered unfeasible to make
attendance at hospital compulsory, but every means of
encouragement should he employed. 1
Surveillance.
There is another measure which, if it be practicable,
would, I think, be attended with good results. In some
Divisions the Village Constable comes into the Magistrate
to report all births and deaths as they occur. It would be
more effective still if he were made to report all cases of
pregnancy —not necessarily to the Magistrate but to the
nearest station, whether it be Government or Missionary.
A constable with the usual amount of officiousness could
probably be relied upon to do this to the best of his ability,
though he might not have the co-operation of his villagers
until public education had made it a matter of conscience.
If, however, the system could he introduced it would be
possible to exercise some surveillance over pregnant women,
and they would have to account for their children. If the
child did not come to birth the woman should at least he
subjected to magisterial and perhaps medical examination.
Such a system might do much to check the practice of
infanticide —if it exists —and the practice of abortion,
which it is tolerably certain does exist.
In general, we may hope that infant mortality—
whether the causes be natural or whether they be really
child-murder —may eventually he checked by a change of
public spirit. Mr. Rich has suggested that one of the
first remedies against depopulation should be a vigorous
1. Obstetrical aid and Infant Welfare work, previously carried on independently by some
of the Missions, have received definite Government support since 1930 (See Annual Report,
1930-31, p. 17). Stress is laid on the training of native girls to do work similar to that of the
European nurse. It is not part of the scheme to insist on attendance at Mission hospitals,
but rather to disseminate the knowledge of infant welfare and obstetrics as widely as possible
through the villages.


scheme of propaganda among natives. In no respect
could such a scheme be more helpful, I think, than in that
of preventing infant mortality.
To emphasize, in conclusion, the importance of this
factor in depopulation, I quote the opinion of the Rev.
Durrad, who speaks for Melanesia at large : “ One is
justified in believing that if all the babies born were to
grow up, these islands, instead of becoming more and more
a wilderness, would soon be thickly populated.” 1
VI. —Recruiting and Depopulation.
Indentured labour is often cited as one of the causes
of depopulation, the argument being that the absence of a
portion of the young manhood must affect the birth-rate
adversely. It is probable, however, that this influence is
sometimes over-emphasized. While it is likely that the
absence of a certain proportion of potential fathers will
keep down the birth-rate, this is not, in my opinion, one of
the really important factors in the problem. It does not
compare in importance with the apparent sterility of many
women, and it does not explain this sterility.
The effect which might be expected to ensue from the
absence of certain males is in some degree counterbalanced
by the fact that there is a striking preponderance of males
over females in the population. Of this fact (which has
been taken as itself a sign of depopulation) I do not know
the explanation. But in the few instances where I have
compared the number of marriageable men actually at home
in a village with those of marriageable women, they have
been found usually about equal. I regret that this par-
ticular inquiry has not been more systematic, but it is
certain that one does not find villages populated merely by
old folk and languishing spinsters. Even-if there were a
great number of women who could not marry simply be-
cause of the rarity of men, they would not, while condemned
to spinsterhood, be likewise condemned to celibacy. As a
matter of fact, however, one might say that practically all
women marry, unless disqualified by sheer deformity, and
further that they marry quite soon enough. (Some would
have it that they marry too soon.)
1. Essays on the Depopulation of Melanesia , p. 16. Of great interest in connection with
this subject are The Proceeding of the First National Conference on Infant Mortality and
Public Welfare, Philippine Is., 1921.


At this point we should notice Pitt-Rivers’s theory
that a “ progressive surplusage of males is an index of
decline ” and further his implication that, through the
agency of polyandry, it is indirectly a cause of decline. 1
This incidently squares in theory with a certain well-
known method of exterminating rabbits; but it is certainly
worth pointing out that if, as Pitt-Rivers maintains, a
progressive surplus of males actually favours a decline in
population, then the contention of others that the
depletion of males by recruiting is one of the prime causes
of depopulation will find itself in difficulties. If the first
theory be sound we might almost expect recruiting, at
least of unmarried men, to have a valuable corrective
influence. It is obvious that the'two theories make a bad
pair in harness.
The recruiting of married men however is certainly a
questionable practice, and the cases are all too numerous.
Motives for “ signing-on ” are various. Not infrequently
the husband leaves on account of some domestic quarrel;
maybe he is in need of money; in at least one case, where
the motive remained unspoken, I felt justified in attribut-
ing it to the age and downright ugliness of the wife.
The indenture of married men may very plausibly
hold down the birth-rate, presuming their wives remain
faithful, or manage to dispose of any unwelcome result of
infidelity. In point of fact it is a very potent and excusable
cause of infidelity. The three-years term seems to me
indefensible for married men, for this reason alone, viz.
that it is very natural for a wife so deserted to cleave to
another man. In fact one might suggest that a married
man who signed on for three years should ipso facto divorce
his wife ; though this would be unsatisfactory if there were
children.
In general, then, the absence of men on indenture
appears to have some adverse effect on the birth-rate,
though, except in the case of married men, not such a
serious effect as is sometimes assumed. There is, however,
another argument against recruiting. As Dr. Strong has
made clear the absence of many able-bodied men makes
1. G. Pitt-Rivers, The Clash of Culture , Eoutledge, 1927, p. 15. “ if the men exceed
the women, the women become polyandrous” ; and p. 260, ‘... we may even legitimately
suppose that the practice of polyandry is itself one of the direct causes ... of the decline and
extinction of peoples.”


the food quest and proper housing more difficult, and
thus indirectly favours an increase in the death-rate. But
despite these arguments it would be, I think, impossible to
regard recruiting itself as a factor of leading importance in
the depopulation of the district at present under discussion.
Accordingly I would not recommend the closing of
this district to recruiters except as a last resort. Such a
course might entail hardship to the natives themselves as
well as considerable inconvenience to employers. It would
be preferable, in order to prevent a possibly serious de-
pletion of any district, to adopt some standing rule, such,
for instance, as that which Mr. Yivian suggests in a letter,
viz. “ for every one year away, two years at home.” As
for the three years term, it is, I believe, a bad thing for
village life in any case. But with a married man it should
be made impossible, unless his wife becomes free to marry
again. In the case of a married man with children, the
maximum might be made one year.
The alternative, in the case of married men, seems to
be that their wives should accompany them. But I am
aware that this is, generally speaking, in opposition to the
confirmed policy of the Government, which aims at estab-
lishing a system of peasant proprietorship, and the preser-
vation of village life. It may be possible, however, to
argue that “settlements” on European plantations would
thrive in respect of population. I am not familiar with
the arguments which are put forward in favour of this
system, but if a good ease can be made for it in respect of
population, then, however contrary to present polic} ? it may
be, it would certainly deserve consideration.
VII —The Means of Subsistence.
It has been pointed out by others that in such an
environment as Mailu Island, which is of very limited
area, and through a large part of the year severed by rough
seas from the mainland, a great increase of population is
not to be expected. The Mailu people, like most others,
have to support themselves, and unless we suppose some
reform in the means of procuring food, it is easy to see
that the limits to increase on the island itself would be
somewhat definitely set. It is one of those areas in Papua
to which Malthusian arguments are clearly applicable.


But it will be obvious that in the vast majority of this
Territory, as in the vast majority of the Suau district
itself, there is nothing in the actual environment to prevent
the population from multiplying itself time and again.
The peopling of Papua as a whole is remarkably sparse,
and this is not for a moment to be ascribed to an in-
sufficiency of natural resources.
And yet in some measure the population has in the
past been checked by the difficulty of the food quest, or
has suffered reverses from natural calamities. Periods of
scarcity are still very common, owing to the sometimes
prolonged spells of dry weather. I have already referred
to a famine still remembered by old folk as guriam lailai,
the “ great hunger,” which caused terrible mortality along
the Suau Coast. Many circumstantial details attest the
reality of the disaster. The people found their food in
roots and leaves, and died in the bush seeking it; men
were so weak that they fell from the coconut palms
in trying to climb them; almost every coconut on Suau
Island was finally cut down for the sake of its “cabbage,”
or edible heart. Informants spoke of the protruding bones
and the pot-bellies that resulted from inanition and in-
digestion. Selfishness and violence flourished. Girls
were keen in offering their favours in the hope of cadging
a little share of food, but the sight of their skinniness left
the young men obdurate ; though, my informant added, as
soon as the scarcity had passed and food was plentiful, it
was the young men who were keen and the girls who were
obdurate.
As His Excellency has pointed out, the times of
scarcity still recur, but there is no longer the same great
mortality, because of the relief which communication has
made possible. Nor is it only in respect of actual drought
that the improvement is apparent. The food quest, as
natives themselves have said, has been simplified since the
advent of the white man, merely by virtue of the steel
knives and axes which he has brought with him. Whereas
formerly the difficult task of clearing greatly circumscribed
the garden area, that task is now made easy, and every
man may have a large garden of his own.
In short it would be impossible to ascribe the decline
in population to reduced means of subsistence, because


A Suau Garden Clearing
Feeding the Pigs, Suau Island.


there is no reliable evidence that the food supply has
suffered any diminution. The fact that recruiting may
withdraw a number of labourers from the gardens is counter-
balanced by the increased facility of modern gardening.
It is only possible to say that the means of subsistence,
being in some degree limited, has consequently prevented
increase and kept the population down to a certain level.
The difficulty of the food quest is therefore another of those
long-established influences by altering which we may hope
to improve the present situation.
It may be, as appeared in the conference held by the
Anglican Mission {vide p. 16) that the fear of scarcity has
led to deliberate birth-restriction. I do not know how
general this attitude and its consequence may be, but it is
certain that scarcity will keep down the population in an-
other way. Whether, as I have heard suggested, general
malnutrition favours sterility, I am unable to say, but it
must beyond doubt raise the death-rate. This effect, one
understands, will be especially apparent among the old
people and the very young; but it will also be in some
degree general. Though death by starvation must be very
unusual, scarcity will notwithstanding have a fatal effect
by reason of lowered vitality and susceptibility to disease.
It will be obvious that the limitations to the means
of subsistence mainly reside, not in any lack of natural
resources, but in the imperfect exploitation of them. It
is not necessary to enter into a description of gardening
methods in the Suau district. They could be improved
along the lines suggested in a previous report on the Garden
Culture of the Orokaiva, 1 though it must be admitted that
on the steep hill-sides of the Suau district gardening is
generally less easy than on the plains of the North.
The food of the Suau natives consists in the main of
taro, sweet potato, yam, banana, and coconut, with sago
as a standby in time of want. Their flesh diet of pigs and
fish is comparatively plentiful. Principal among these
items is taro, and a scarcity of this vegetable probably
amounts to a general scarcity.
The use of imported foods is apparently regarded in
some respects as harmful; but it is hardly open to doubt
1. Published in Orokaiva Magic , F. E. Williams (Oxford University Press, 1928).


that the introduction of some new crops for native culti-
vation would improve the situation. If by one means or
another the gardens could be made to yield a greater
abundance and variety of food, it is fair to suppose that
this would have a favourable effect on population in the
future. 1
VIII —Inbreeding and Cross-Breeding.
Depopulation, as well as the frequently poor physique
of natives, is sometimes put down ,to inbreeding. As far
as the Suau district is concerned it seems unlikely that
the plea can hold good. Summing up the facts of exogamy
in this area, Mr. Armstrong writes that they “ sometimes
make it difficult for a man to find a girl in the vicinity
who is not tabu to him. This extended exogamy of the
Suau-Daui peoples is, no doubt, the main reason why these
people have married to a considerable extent in other parts
of the Territory.” 2 In certain adjacent areas, however,
the rules are not so strict. At Wagawaga (Milne Bay) for
instance it is “ common for the members of two totems
constantly to intermarry.”
On the whole there can be no doubt that there is a
certain amount of close breeding under natural conditions
of native life. Very frequently the rules of exogamy per-
tain to one side of the family only, i.e. the father’s or the
mother’s, according to the rule of descent. Where both
sides are tabued, moreover, the tabu frequently does not
apply in practice unless the parties live in close proximity.
But whatever the rules of exogamy may be, there is in
primitive life always a certain degree of local endogamy.
We find in a thinly-populated and fairly well defined
district like that of Boroai, for instance, that of fifteen
men (all belonging to the actual village, or small group of
hamlets called Boroai), seven had married women of the
same village, five had married women of the adjacent
village called Eumavaifu, and only three had found their
wives in distant parts. Formerly, when warfare was
common and travel much restricted, it is to be supposed
that any degree of inbreeding which this system of local
endogamy brought about must have been far more intense.
Nowadays when natives travel frequently and far, when
1. This aspect of the question is discussed at greater length in Section X.
2. loc. cit. pp. 41 and 42.


they may even settle for long periods in distant parts of
the Territory, the supposed evils of inbreeding must be
more and more counteracted.
It is apparently recognized that inbreeding does no
harm per se but only as it brings out faults or weaknesses
which may be inherent in the stock. Whether it has the
effect of directly impairing fertility among human beings
awaits definite proof, though experiments with other
animals would apparently Justify the assumption. 1
In the meantime, however, one may doubt whether
the degree of consanguinity which has obtained generally
among natives is so close as to deserve the name of in-
breeding, and whether it has been really responsible for a
falling off in population. At any rate it is virtually im-
possible to make it responsible for a recent rapid decline
since the coming of the white man, for recent influences,
by making inter-communication possible, have been work-
ing steadily against it. 2
While we may not attribute the depopulation —par-
ticularly of the Suau district —to inbreeding, it does not
follow that some benefit might not come from an infusion
of new blood. The native people, as things stood, was
nicely adapted to previous conditions; it might not be so
well adapted to the new conditions. Pitt-Rivers has
argued that the primitive population is not only psycho-
logically but also physically unadapted to new conditions
such as those which follow the intrusion of a higher
culture. Apparently it must become gradually extinct
unless there is a “blood-substitution” to render it fit to
thrive under the new conditions. 3
It is reasonable to suppose that blending may lead
to greater variability, and thus to great adaptability, both
psychologically and physically, though whether it can be
depended on to remedy the situation by correcting the
balance of sexes (which seems the pivot of Mr. Pitt-
Rivers’s thesis) remains doubtful.
1. The subject is discussed in Thomson, Heredity , pp. 386-90.
2. The evidence of the Fiji Commission of 1896 regarding consanguineous marriage is
interesting. “ ... it is shown conclusively that this factor had not contributed towards
Fijian decadence, but rather that these consanguineous marriages were more fruitful than
marriage between wholly unrelated persons ” (quoted from Dr. Rivers, Essays on Depopulation
of Melanesia, p. 88).
3. Sex Ratios: Man, 1924,65.


There is one important point which in this connection
has not been made clear. Is “ miscegenation ”to be
accepted in a general sense, or does it mean miscegenation
between the primitive stock and the actual bearers of the
higher culture to which the primitive stock is to be more
or less adapted ? In the present instance there seem to
be three possibilities: (1) a wider system of intermarriage
among indigenous tribes of Papua; (2) blending with alien
blood, presumably Asiatic; and (3) blending with the
European population of Papua. One may assume, per-
haps, that it is the last alternative which Mr. Pitt-Eivers
would have in view in the present instance, though if it is
primarily through the adjustment of the sex balance that
the adaptation is to be made, then either (1), (2) or (3)
might presumably have the desired effect.
Since a number of people, usually I imagine drawing
a bow at a venture, have said that an infusion of new
blood (by which they imply Asiatic or Malaysian) would
solve the population problem, it may be worth while to
discuss briefly the three above alternatives. Current
views on miscegenation —not always easily reconcilable —
have been summarized by J. W. Gregory in The Menace
of Colour, Chapter X. The general solution of the question
appears to be that the interbreeding of races is followed by
improvement unless they he too diverse.
A biological basis is suggested for the prejudice
against miscegenation between white and coloured races :
“ . . . where two nearly related races are associated inter-
breeding eliminates the deleterious factors from the off-
spring . . . Where, however, two widely distinct races are
in contact the inferior qualities are not bred out, but may
be emphasized in the progeny. The application of this
principle to the human race is not yet definitely established,
but it is widely expressed in modern eugenic literature.” 1
The chapter is full of warnings regarding the evils of blend-
ing between white and coloured races. The specific
question of fertility remains in the background, but al-
though opinions differ on this matter, there appears to be
evidence that in America, at least, “ the offspring of a
union between pure black and white parents is, on the
1. op, oit. p. 228.


average, much shorter lived and much less fertile than the
race of either parent.” 1
In view of these findings it would seem that the first
alternative, viz;, the interbreeding of indigenous tribes in
Papua, might be followed by good results, and as it is
slowly proceeding at present it may be regarded as a whole-
some tendency. As for the introduction of Asiatics, apart
from the entirely debatable effect it might have upon the
fertility of the native population, there are political and
social arguments against it which may be regarded as
insuperable. The introduction of Asiatics would solve
many problems, but I may quote the conclusion of Professor
Gregory regarding the “ Cape Boys ” —the hybrid offspring
of Asiatics and Negroes who might be said to constitute
an African parallel; “ the hybrids between people in very
different grades of culture, such as the ‘Cape Boys,’
though they have been very useful in subordinate services,
are rather a warning than an encouragement to the mis-
cegenation of distinct races.” 2
The last alternative, viz. that of intermarriage be-
tween whites and natives, seems to be fundamentally
opposed to the general public opinion of British colonizers,
so that it may presumably be dismissed.
IX—The Psychological Factor.
In the last of the Essays on the Depopulation of
Melanesia, Dr. Rivers has put forward the theory that
depopulation is to be ascribed ultimately to what he calls
the Psychological Factor, i.e. more specifically to the
present loss of interest in life. This latter he attributes
mainly to “ unintelligent and undiscriminating action
towards native institutions”; and he suggests that “this
loss of interest forms one of the reasons, if indeed it be not
the most potent of all the reasons, to which the native
decadence is due.” 3
Dr. Rivers maintains that the psychological factor
influences both the birth-rate and the death-rate. In the
former case its application apparently depends on the
wilful restriction of births. Discussing the other possible
1. p. 230, quoting Professor N. S. Shaler.
2. op.-cit. pp. 227-8.
3. op. cit. p. 94.


causes of sterility he concludes, “ There is little doubt,
however, that if we take Melanesia as a whole, causes of
this kind are trivial or of slight importance as compared
with voluntary restriction ... We have here only another
effect of the loss of interest in life which I have held to be
so potent in enhancing mortality. The people say them-
selves : ‘ Why should we bring children into the world
only to work for the white man?’ Measures, which, be-
fore the coming of the European, were used chiefly to
prevent illegitimacy have become the instrument of racial
suicide.” 1
The argument would be that, as life is not worth
living for the parents, it is likewise not worth living for
the potential children; why, therefore, take the trouble
of rearing children ? I would not attempt to assert that
such an argument is entirely absent among the natives of
Suau, the restricted area with which this paper deals. I
can only say that, among the plausible motives for birth-
restriction which have come to my notice, this one has
never been included, either in Suau or in any other part
of Papua. In explanation of this it may well be true
that the native of Papua has never been subjected to the
evil and discouraging influences which have obtained in
parts of wider Melanesia. But however this may be, I
doubt whether we could say that birth-restriction practised
because of despondency was a factor of very great import-
ance in the depopulation we are considering.
It is not impossible, however, that the psychological
factor may affect the birth-rate in a different and more
subtle manner. While it is unlikely that the sexes should
have lost much of their attraction for one another, it
remains as a remote possibility that the psychological
factor should actually stand in the way of conception.
Thus it is common knowledge that certain animals and
birds do not breed in captivity. I will not venture to
compare the Papuan native to a caged bird, or an elephant
at the Zoo —the cases are hardly parallel, however much
his liberty has been restricted. But if in the one case the
inability to breed is due apparently to psychological con-
ditions, it is not impossible that the same might be true
in the other. This, however, may be dismissed as no
more than a suggestion. '
1. op. cit. pp. 103-4.


The influence of the psychological factor on the death-
rate is more easily understood. Many observers have
drawn attention to the remarkable ease or readiness with
which a native may die. He is liable to throw up the
sponge very soon and yield himself to what he thinks
approaching death with a really fatal hopelessness. The
lack of the will to live is greatly increased when life seems
not worth living, and the argument is that the imposition
of new and unwelcome duties, and the restriction of former
interests and activities, have really had this effect upon
native life since the coming of the white men. The result
is that the native’s powers of resistance are impaired, and
he easily goes under to any kind of sickness. The im-
portance of this factor cannot be denied, and I propose to
discuss at some length its relation to the natives of the
Suau district.
Effects of European Influence.
The results of European influence, governmental,
missionary and commercial, may be considered under two
main headings, viz. (1) the growth of new activities and
interests, and (2) the loss or suppression of those that
existed formerly. The whole difficulty consists in the
fact that too often the former does not balance with the
latter.
(1) New activities and interests frequently though
unavoidably contain an element of compulsion. Such are
the various duties imposed by the Government, like carry-
ing, road making, and the sanitation of villages. The tax,
while it has done much to stir the native into energy,
cannot be said to have added a pleasant zest to existence;
and plantation labour, while a new experience for the
villager, is not always a thoroughly happy one.
(2) On the other hand the decay or sometimes the
suppression of former activities, while unavoidable, has not
always been attended with the happiest consequences.
Chief among such activities is that of war. There can be
no question as to the necessity for pacification, and yet
even this has not proved an unmixed blessing. War must
have given a keenness to native life which is sadly lacking
in these times of peace ; and, paradoxical as it may seem,
it is even questionable whether the abolition of fighting


has on the whole favoured an increase of population. Mr.
Armstrong apparently thinks that war in this region
resulted in very few casualties and my own inquiries,
though much more limited, lead me to endorse his opinion.
It is actually a question whether the direct loss of life in
war was not more than counterbalanced by that keen
spirit to the present lack of which we may in part attribute
the present decline. There are, moreover, indirect evils
which have come with the cessation of fighting. The oft-
repeated native argument that sorcery has in consequence
flourished more rankly than before may perhaps be dis-
missed, although we cannot gainsay the evil importance
of sorcery itself. But one of the ill-effects of pacification
has been the decentralization of villages with the conse-
quent limitation of social interests and concerted activities.
In another important respect are former interests
seen to suffer, viz. by the decay or sometimes the sup-
pression of customs and ceremonies. Although Govern-
ment and Mission may endeavour to preserve neutrality,
the customs are nevertheless subjected to adverse influences
under which they languish and sometimes die outright.
Too often they are not adequately replaced and the result
is an unwholesome dullness and apathy in village life. It
is not necessary to enlarge on this subject which has been
spoken of so often before; but I may say, upon a general
impression, that village life in the Suau district seemed
somewhat more dull and apathetic than I have seen it in
other parts of the Territory.
Substitutes for Lost Interests.
These two effects, positive and negative, of European
influence being considered together, it will be obvious that
on the one hand we should do what we can to provide the
native with suitable hew interests and activities; and not
less, on the other, that we should be chary of restricting
too severely his old interests and activities. Many of the
latter must inevitably disappear, and for these we should
find at least effective substitutes. But I have always held
that some of them need not vanish entirely, but might
well remain, with modification and adaptation, as distinc-
tive features of native life. After dealing briefly with the
new activities and interests which may stand as substitutes,
1. op. olt. p. 43.


I shall take the opportunity of discussing the Soi , or annual
feast (upon which criticism was invited), as one of those
customs which might very feasibly be permitted to remain.
Christianity. One of the best “ substitutes ” put
forward is Christianity. But there are at present two
difficulties standing in its way, the first depending largely
on the second. In the first place, then, it does not reach
far enough. The disintegration of old custom has out-
stripped the spread of Christian teaching; and I doubt
whether, beyond the scope of the European Mission
stations, Christianity can be said to provide a real or ab-
sorbing interest. Discussing the important mourning
customs of Suau, Mr. Armstrong has said, “ There is
sound argument for modifying the process of mourning in
general, but to say ‘ leave aside completely your mortuary
customs and adopt Christian mortuary customs ’ is both
foolish and harmful, unless the organization of the Mission
is so extensive as to embrace all the people in one big
station in which their environment is completely changed
and in which the new generation grows up under the close
supervision of a large staff of white and, to a certain extent,
Samoan and native teachers.” 1 This obstacle, however, it
will be argued, must disappear with time and the continued
efforts of the Missionary; but I think Mr. Armstrong has
rightly named the somewhat difficult conditions on which
success depends, and the continuation of his paragraph
contains no very sanguine prophecy: “ Such conditions
are not likely to he even approached by the Kwato Mission,
even though the Kwato Mission, in all probability, makes
the nearest approach, so far as Papua is concerned.”
The second and more important objection is that the
Christianity taught is not always of the right caste to be
acceptable. This remark will not be regarded as a slur
upon the Christian religion at large. Our attitude will
depend upon the solution of one question: whether the
Gospel should take precedence of the native, or the native
of the Gospel. It need hardly be said that one who is
impartially concerned with native affairs will take the latter
view; and such a one need not hesitate to express the
opinion that any form of Christianity which does not prove
acceptable to the native, and which will not provide him
1. loc. cit. p. 32.


with an absorbing interest, needs to be changed to meet
the case. I have already suggested in another report how
Christianity, without sacrificing any essential feature,
might fittingly adopt some attractive ritual, and even in-
corporate certain native usages in order to recommend
itself to native minds. 1 It is by some kind of adaptation,
I believe, that the comparatively slow progress of Christi-
anity might be accelerated, and that the newly-accepted
faith should be made a really permanent and satisfying
substitute for the dead customs and beliefs. It will be
borne in mind that we are speaking of Christianity as pro-
viding an interest for the apathetic native. If it is to do
this effectually, it must be acceptable.
It would not be possible to apply these remarks to every
individual Mission, least of all perhaps to the Mission in
this Suau district. I have no hesitation in saying that
the kind of religious teaching on the large station at Fife
Bay seems eminently suitable to the needs and desires of
the people. No visitor can fail to be impressed with the
vigor and liveliness of the whole establishment; and I do
not suppose there are any happier people in the Suau district
than those who live on Mr. Rich’s station. Yet one cannot
help thinking that the excellent tone of that settlement is
due to the personality of those who control it as much as
to the substance of their teaching. It cannot for a moment
be claimed that the same spirit prevails in the average
village Mission station under the direction of a native
teacher, and the shortcomings there visible are largely due
to the teacher’s inability to infuse into his people that
wholesome and energetic spirit which permeates the station
at Fife Bay. Thus, I think, we find ourselves once more
at the proposition of Mr. Armstrong, viz. that Christianity,
if it entail the absolute substitution of Christian ceremonies
for native, can only be maintained on the supposition of
something resembling an all-embracing Mission station.
It means in short the necessity for someone to keep the
native “up to the scratch ” of Christianity. I believe,
however, that a preferable alternative would be a Christi-
anity with a stronger admixture of attractive elements,
which a native might embrace with more readiness, and
retain with more sincerity.
1. Report No. 6, “ The Taro Cult,” Chap. XI, in Orolcaiva Magic, Oxford Press, 1928.


Education. Three other important substitutes which
are being offered may be referred to in somewhat general
terms. They are Education, Work, and Play.
Education is beset by the same difficulties as religion.
Firstly there is the difficulty of spreading it, and, as in the
case of Christianity, it is all too apparent that effective
education is in the main acquired on the European station
alone; for good native teachers are rare. This difficulty
will, of course, become progressively less, but the spread of
education, like that of religion, will depend in no small
degree on the acceptability of that education. And in so
far as we are at present speaking of the interest which
education is to provide, then its value also will depend on
its acceptability. Once more I may refer to the successful
methods practised at Isuleilei, and in particular to the
evident enjoyment which the young people take in their
station life. While not wishing to see the mistake of
education made easy, one would venture to recommend in
general those kinds of instruction which per se would
recommend themselves to the learner, and which would do
most to widen his interests.
Worh. The next substitute is Work. It is against
reason to suppose that work, unless it be artistic or creative,
can be an end in itself to the native. The motives for
“ signing-on ” are many and various, but the joyful prospect
of hard work is not among them. The difficulty is really to
provide an incentive for work. I need not elaborate this
question here. It is well known that one of the principal
features of the native policy of the Government is “to
encourage, or if necessary to compel, the native to work
for his own benefit.” 1 As in course of time the benefits
become more obvious any necessity for compulsion will
probably disappear, for the incentive to work will be strong
enough.
The sort of attitude that this policy aims at producing
is already evidenced here and there in the Suau district.
One might mention “ Jacky ” Yaruka, who owns a planta-
tion opposite Suau Island numbering 1,123 trees, who has
six indentured boys in his employ, and who proposes, at
the next Boi, to buy and slaughter a bullock. Another
proprietor is Sam, a Christian Village Constable, who, with
1. The Population Problem in Papua, J. H. P. Murray, Annual Report, 1922-23, p. 16.


the assistance of his relatives, cultivates a plantation of
more than 1,000 trees (according to his own estimate) at
Iributa, and whose ambition it is to build a house with a
corrugated iron roof for the future use of his two infant
daughters. Mr. Rich made it a sort of vicarious ambition
that there should be “ a whaleboat —native-owned —in
every bay along the Suau Coast ”; and the number of
native-owned boats show that there is at least a certain
amount of the spirit of enterprise in this so called moribund
population. It is to be hoped, and perhaps expected, that
when such enterprise becomes more wide-spread, the people
at large will have regained some of that interest in life
which is a condition, in the theory, to a thriving
population.
I may quote a paragraph of MacMillan Brown’s
regarding the Javanese “ the most prosperous, the most
civilized, and the most prolific man of the East,” in which
he gives a very confident opinion of the effect of work upon
population : “ Java has become the ‘ garden of the world,’
the most populous and yet the most prosperous region on
earth, because some master, the Hindu, the Arab, the
Portugese, the Dutchman, has never allowed its people to
idle, and that in a zone that incites to idleness. The last
has been the best guardian of their interests. He has not
allowed their land to pass into the hands of large mon-
opolists ; he has compelled them to work; but he has also
safeguarded them against famine ; he has developed their
country and taught them how best to work. The result
is that their numbers have risen from two millions in the
end of the seventeenth century, to thirty in the beginning
of the twentieth.” 1
Play. The last, though I think not necessarily the
least, of these substitutes is play. The fact that in natural
native life there is comparatively little game-playing need
not deter us from encouraging a new habit. The fact
seems to be that few primitive societies have developed or
acquired the interest in games, both for the player and the
spectator, which bears so large a part in our own civilized
life ; and there is no denying that they have missed a lot
of fun. There are no doubt some who will consider this
fourth substitute to be merely frivolous. But they forget
1. The Dutch East (Kegan Paul), pp. 9,10.


A Suau Dance.
Some of the Older Generation, Suau Island.


how far the playing of games makes life from week to week
worth living for ourselves; and in the humdrum existence
of the village, so sadly deficient in fire and thrill since the
abolition of fighting, the need for some mental tonic or
some outlet for energy and emotion is doubly apparent.
Cricket has been played for years in many villages, and
has no doubt added something to the zest of life. On the
recreation ground in Samarai itself, for instance, one is
delighted to see the number of natives making use of the
cricket pitch. The prosperity of the game is due principally
to the Missions, who have shown themselves aware of the
need for a healthy recreation; and it can go much further
before it begins to be overdone. For the present, indeed,
one is tempted, even at the risk of irreverence, to suggest
“ Less Christ and more cricket.”
But it is another type of game which I would advocate,
viz. football or hockey ; and a most essential factor is'that
such games should give rise to emulation. Consequently
it is not a mere game that is wanted, but a series of inter-
village matches. Such an experiment has already been
tried in one Division and has so far, I understand, aroused
just the sort of enthusiasm which is desired. If, as we
read, Association football has been making headway against
the old pastime of bull-fighting in Spain, it is not too
much to expect that it may become a fair substitute for
the old pastime of head-hunting in Papua. On the whole
it seems that the present-day native stands in need of an
occasional thrill, of some legitimate excitement and fun.
The ideal is not that, having given up his old wicked ways,
he should “ stop quiet ” and remain in a condition of
utterly dull and respectable quiescence. He does not now
need a sedative so much as an explosive.
The Case of the “ Soi"
Having dealt with these four “substitutes” or new
activities and interests I may turn to the other side of
the question, viz. that of the old activities and interests
which may be in some measure retained. Those which
are most frequently in debate are of course the ceremonies;
and the remainder of this section will be devoted prin-
cipally to a discussion of the Soi. For a description of
the ceremonies of Suau and the feasts which invariably


accompany them readers must turn to the account given
by Mr. Armstrong in Report No. 1, Section 11.
Feasting is a feature of primitive life to which we
sometimes attach insufficient importance, or which we
regard as merely an animal indulgence. Without making
any comparison between the average native and ourselves
in respect of gastronomical excess, I should still hesitate
to call him, as some are prone to do, a mere glutton.
And indeed, as for the over-consumption of food by natives,
I have heard of it far more frequently from Europeans
than I have ever seen it with my own eyes in association
with the natives themselves. Even for minor feasts, of
which, as Mr. Armstrong says, there are dozens of varieties,
there is always some excuse ; there is some occasion to
celebrate, and the rites of hospitality to perform ; and over
and above these there are always to be considered the
power and prestige which accrue from a display of
generosity. There can be no doubt that “ apart from love-
making and sexual intercourse amongst the young, and
betel-chewing and tobacco smoking amongst both young
and old, feasts are the chief form of recreation.” I find
it difficult to see how feasts in themselves can be con-
demned. Referring to an incident in which a native
teacher upbraided the villagers for holding a small feast,
Mr. Armstrong says, “ it struck me that this persuasive
interference was totally uncalled for and thoroughly harm-
ful.” 1 I can only say lam in complete agreement with
his attitude.
With regard to the long succession of mortuary feasts,
it is more easy to understand the opposition of the
Missionary, because these feasts seem contrary to the teach-
ing which he feels it his duty to impart. “The Missions
naturally take up a very hostile attitute to these mortuary
feasts, on the ground of their heathen character rather than
of any proved harmfulness.” 2 And yet to suppress the
mortuary feasts without an effective substitute is to deprive
the native of a very essential feature of his emotional life.
“ Not only are the mortuary feasts a necessity for the
people; even the native teacher will not forego them, even
though he be a perfectly good Christian, for the feast is
1. op. cit. p. 30.
2. op. cit. p. 31.


such an excellent vehicle for expression of grief and respect
for the dead person.” 1 The Suau native has six mortuary-
feasts accompanied by certain ceremonies, and the last of
the six may take place two years after death. I do not
think a burial service, without even a subsequent mass for
the souls of the departed, is a sufficient substitute for these
six feasts,- unless it be to a native who is thoroughly imbued
with and thoroughly understands Christianity. Once
again one may plead the necessity for a religion that affords
sufficient emotional satisfaction for primitive minds. Is
it entirely unfeasible that these feasts, which are in the
main observances and embody very little doctrine, should
be allowed to continue side by side with Christianity ?
The great event of Suau social life is the Soi, or
series of feasts which normally take place in various villages
during the last three months of each year. During the
season just over the Soi was forbidden by the Magistrate,
and consequently I have not had the advantage of witness-
ing its celebration in any village. It has, however, been
described by Mr. Armstrong, and principally on the
strength of the account he gives we may discuss its im-
portance in regard to the native’s interest in life.
Now there is no denying that to the native of Suau
the Soi is the big event of the year —much more so than
the Melbourne Cup to the people of Melbourne, or even
Christmas Day to the people of Christendom. Not every
village in the district actually celebrates the Soi, but every
village is likely to participate and contribute. Preparations
begin months ahead and during the period of celebration
there is great activity everywhere. It may not be too
much to say that the Soi, which focuses the efforts of so
many people, and for such a time, is the chief interest in
life at present remaining to the inhabitants of Suau. It
should therefore be allowed to remain unless we can convict
it of sufficient harmfulness to warrant suppression. We
may discuss the pros and cons of various features.
One of the first objections, and I think the most im-
portant, will be that the Soi means annually a great waste
of time and energy. The characteristic feature of the
festival is the wholesale exchange of pigs. It is true there
is always some technical excuse for the exchange, the
1. op. cit. p. 32.


paying off of an old debt or the contracting of a new
obligation, but the bare fact remains that a man may
travel scores of miles to a distant Soi taking with him a
100 lb. pig, and may return after it is all over with another
100 lb. pig. At any celebration a number of pigs will be
killed for the feeding of the guests, but a far greater
number will be simply “ swapped.” 1
It cannot be denied that from the economic point of
view this sort of exchange is futile; and yet to the native
it is obviously a thing of great importance. Foremost
among his motives perhaps is that of self-display: he re-
joices to show himself a man of substance by parading his
pigs. But an additional excuse for the practice is found
in the truly native habit of exchanging equal gifts in order
to show goodwill, or at least to deny hostility. Thirdly
there is certainly the pure delight in a great display of food.
Pigs are to the native the most important of all food, and
to see as great a display of them as the Soi provides is, I
believe, a genuine treat to every man and woman there : it
is immensely impressive and immensely reassuring; a
proof of their power, of the strength of their position.
Such motives as these are important in native eyes and
they must not be discounted if we have any regard for
native feelings.
The remedy for this great waste of time and energy
seems to lie in speeding up the Soi, an experiment which
Mr. Rich has already tried. He has attempted to reorgan-
ize the whole festival under a new name, Loroheala, and
the most important reform consists in the shortening of it.
“ The people themselves,” he writes, “ are agreed that the
whole feast programme for the Coast should now extend
over three months, instead of the long-drawn-out pro-
grammes of former years.” Provided the other alterations
are not too drastic I think that this highly desirable reform
could be put into effect without destroying the Soi as a
whole. In short it need not be only com-
pressed.
Another objection is that the Soi entails cruelty to
pigs, and this cannot be denied. Ido not hear that the
1. “for two or three months a large' amount of energy is expended in labour which
produces no return, e.g, the carrying of three pigs from Logea to Bonabona, and the bringing
back of two a few days subsequently; also fasting for a month or more and thinking all the
time about nothing but pig.” Armstrong, op. cit. p. 44.


methods of killing the pig are especially cruel: it is speared
or stabbed with a knife to the heart. (I have no evidence
actually from the Suau district that the operation is in-
tentionally prolonged so as to give the animal a lingering
death and ensure a maximum of squealing.) It is rather
in the transport of pigs that the cruelty consists. As any
one animal may be exchanged several times over during
one annual Soi, it must accordingly be carried from village
to village, and remains trussed up for days on end. But
it is usually carried from one feast to another on a canoe
rather than on a pole between two men, and as the Suau
canoe is fitted with a small removable platform (on the
side opposite the outrigger) for the special accommodation
of the pig, one at least of the discomforts to which the
animal might be subjected is done away with.
It is to my mind questionable whether we should
interfere overmuch with the time-honoured custom of
carrying pigs, and even whether we should be too tender-
hearted towards a dumb animal that must be sacrificed in
the interests of human beings. If Elia and his fellow
students could debate, with much learning and pleasantry,
whether it were justifiable to whip a pig to death in order
to improve its flavour, me might fairly debate whether the
present methods of transporting and killing pigs are so
inhumane as to warrant condemnation of the Soi. It
seems rather a case for the punishment of individual
offenders than for action against the community.
Mr. Armstrong refers —though not presenting the
matter as an objection —to the frequency of quarrels and
riots at the Soi. Some may think this a ground for sup-
pressing the feast, though if so it seems as unreasonable
as the ground sometimes given for suppressing dancing,
viz. that it provides too many chances for “ immorality.”
A general fracas is as undesirable as the supposed debauch,
but it is unjust to suppress enjoyment and gaiety merely
because they may lead to an excess.
The principal objection to the Soi, according to some
observers, lies in the Hudi, or fasting custom. Since Mr.
Armstrong has described this I need only refer to the


passage. 1 As he points out, the sole object is to make the
tasters gigibori , i.e. to induce a kind of “ hotness ” which
will attract numerous pigs to the Soi and so make it a
success. (The pigs, it must be understood, are always
village pigs. As one highly-educated informant said,
everyone “ would laugh like Hell ” if a man brought a bush
pig to a Soi.)
The way in which the gigibori operates is to make all
who are approached with requests answer them with
generosity. If one who has obeyed all the tabus of the
hudi asks another to send pigs to his feast, he will not be
refused, because of the gigibori that is in him. The word
seems to mean literally “ heat,” but here indicates a sort
of animal magnetism which it is impossible to resist.
The nature of the tabus is such as to induce this hot-
ness in those who practise them. It is for this reason that
cold wet foods are prohibited; taro for instance must be
roasted in the fire, not seethed in the customary way;
sugar-cane is forbidden; so also is water, and the only drink
permitted is warm coconut milk. The sobo , or “circular
construction of plaited coconut leaf ” in which the hudi
men live during their fast is said to be “ like an oven.”
Washing is obviously out of the question ; so also, though
less obviously, is sexual intercourse. Yams were forbidden
food because, as one old man was ingenious enough to
explain, they came from the sea, i.e. the cold and watery
element, and he proceeded to recount a tale of how yams
had been brought out of the sea and planted on Normanby
Island. Fish are, of course, forbidden, and, rather in-
explicably, all flesh of animals.
There can be little doubt that these tabus are observed
with great strictness by the actual hudi men, and to some
extent also by the others who are helping in the conduct
of the Soi. If they were disregarded, the effect would
1. “ From now onwards there is a state of rigid fasting of all cold and boiled foods and water
on the part both of the Soi tanuagana and those relations helping him and also on the part of
his relations-in-law who are bringing pigs. This fasting was really initiated prior to this by
the drinking of salt water. In this ‘ hudi ’ period practically only baked taro and hot cocoanut
milk is consumed, and as little as possible of either . . . Sleeping even is made uncomfortable,
since the person while in the house lives in a ‘ sobo,’ a circular construction of plaited cocoa-
nut leaf, in which a man is barely able to curl himself up. All sexual intercourse is rigidly
tabu. The sole object is to make the person ‘gigibori ’ and to induce the catching of pigs.
Others, scouring the villages for pigs, must observe the same tabus, even though engaged in
hard manual labour.
This period lasts for one or two months, and sometimes longer—a delay in any one village
will occasion delays everywhere to the east, since in general no Soi can take place until all
those of the west are over. The natives fully recognise the danger to health when there is a
prolongation of the fasting period in this way.”


become apparent in the obduracy of those who were asked
to supply pigs, and the Soi would be a failure. If there
were only a few pigs people would account for the fact by
saying the tabus had been broken, and thus the promoters
of the feast would be utterly put to shame.
Although restriction was placed on the variety of
foods, I was often assured that the quantity was not of
necessity reduced. It seems, though, that in practice the
hudi period entails some degree of fasting, and at the end
of it a man may be almost emaciated. Like St. Francis
the hudi man is “ content with few and very wretched
meats and though his motive is not the same it cannot
be called discreditable to him. We have here another
instance of the strict self-abnegation of which the native
is often capable.
It is sometimes claimed however that the hudi is
actually dangerous to health. In cases where the period
is unduly prolonged this may be the case, though ordinarily
I imagine no serious effects will result from a temporary
limitation of diet. Mr. Armstrong has considered this
question, and recommends that measures be taken to
reduce the period of fasting to its minimum. It might be
possible to add some articles to the permitted diet (which
already includes taro, sweet potato, and banana), such
as would not be incompatible with the object of the hudi,
viz. the requisite dryness and heat.
I have been assured by natives that one of Mr. Eich’s
stated objections to the hudi is simply its dirtiness. This
objection is certainly based on fact, though we need not
regard it very seriously. The idea that washing will dispel
mana seems to be a common one, but in the present instance
the difficulty (if it calls for a remedy) might be overcome
by using hot water to wash in. I have not asked any
natives if this small alteration would be acceptable; but
as washing in hot water is so unusual a practice, and as
it seems not entirely incompatible with the object of the
hudi, it is possible that it might be accepted even as an
extra rite connected with the fast.
On the whole, while not regarding the hudi in par-
ticular or the Soi in general as pretty customs, I fail to
see in them any really serious harm. For the present I


would not recommend any measures to suppress them, but
only such slight modifications as may be thought necessary
and such as have been proposed.
If the Soi and the Jmdi are to pass away, they may
be safely left to do so quietly —not deliberately extermin-
ated, but rather suffered to die in peace —though I should
prefer to see them remain as a much modified annual
festival, bereft of what unpleasant features they possess,
but still constituting a distinctive survival from the past.
Supposing they do survive, it is inevitable, and I think
desirable, that they should lose some of their importance
as the “substitutes” gain in importance. In the meantime
however, and as far as population is concerned, if we are
to attach the importance to Dr. Rivers’s theory of the
Psychological Factor which I believe it deserves, it seems
that a permanent suppression of the Soi and the Jmdi
would be a very unwise measure.
X —Conclusion: The Reform of Native Horticulture.
In the foregoing sections the problem of Depopulation
has been attacked from several sides, and a good many
factors, or alleged factors, have entered the discussion.
These factors are not all of the same importance; some
have been dismissed altogether, and others, while not
entirely negligible, are admittedly of no great consequence.
In regard to these latter and to the more important points
which have emerged, I have endeavoured to suggest some
line of action. But it is plain that the report lacks con-
clusiveness : no single all-sufficient cause of Depopulation
has come to light, and no single line of action has been
suggested as a panacea.
In the present section, which is written six years
after those that precede it, I shall attempt (1) to point out
what I think should be our general attitude toward the
problem; (2) to summarize the points raised in the pre-
ceding sections; and (3) to expound at greater length what
I now think to be the most important practical measure.
Administration and Depopulation.
Depopulation has been much discussed, and from
many points of view, as witness the recent joint session


of Anthropological, Medical, Geographical and Historical
sections at the Sydney meeting of the Association for the
Advancement of Science. But amid a multitude of coun-
sellors there is so far no unanimity; and the problem
continues to be pressing. Now the Administrator and the
Missionary, in so far as they use the scientific method, do
a great deal to advance the inquiry; but they must do
more than merely seek the cause of Depopulation; they
must apply the results of scientific investigation. They
are under an obligation from which the pure scientist is
free, viz, the practical obligation (perhaps with a senti-
mental reinforcement) to do something to save the race.
The final responsibility falls upon the Administrator: not
only must he bend his mind to the theoretical problem,
but he must take action for the moment. While, then,
the theorists continue to wrangle, he must be up and doing.
It has been assumed throughout that Depopulation in
the Western Pacific dates from the intrusion of Europeans
or European influences, and that it is actually a result of
European contact. It might be argued that the sole effect-
ive remedy was therefore to remove the Europeans, But
this would be merely to side-step the problem. We must
take it that Europeans are politically and economically
established in the Pacific; they have come to stay; and
it is our business to discover if possible some means of re-
viving native population which is reconcilable with their
presence.
A number of factors, as we have seen, bear on the
subject, and it seems that our course should be to give due
attention to each and all of them, even to those which can
affect the issue in only small degree. I have elsewhere em-
ployed the simile of the business manager who finds his
establishment steadily losing ground. He will certainly
look for some major cause; but in the meantime he insti-
tutes searching economies in every department; small
leakages which did not matter in times of prosperity may
now make all the difference between a debit and credit
balance. By attention to details as well as to major aspects
of management he may succeed in tiding his business over
till better times arrive. Similarly in dealing with the
problem of Depopulation we should bear in mind as guiding
principles the sayings that “While there’s life there’s hope”


and that “Every little helps”; and our practical source
for the moment should be to leave no stone—however small
—unturned.
Summary of Factors Discussed.
Taking this attitude we may re-examine the earlier
part of this report. If only for the sake of analysis it is
worth recalling the division of factors into New and Old.
If we assume that Depopulation in the Pacific is post-
European, then the causes of actual decline should be found
among circumstances arising from European contact:
these are the New factors. But before European influence
was ever felt in the Pacific there must have been forces at
work to keep the population within bounds; these cannot
in themselves be made responsible for recent decline, but
they always have been and still are inimical to increase.
These are referred to as the Old factors. It may be as
profitable to deal with these as with what are considered
to be the causes of recent decline; in fact as I shall en-
deavour to show, it is by attention to one of the Old factors
that we may be able to solve the whole problem.
We may briefly review under the above two headings
the factors mentioned in the earlier sections of this report;
and I shall take the opportunity of referring to one or two
fresh points.
New Factors.
Introduced Disease (pp. 8,9) is presumably one of
the most important of the New factors. Epidemics of in-
fluenza, dysentery, measles, and whooping-cough have
all done a great deal of damage; and it is well known that
what is to us a mild disease, like measles, may be very
fatal when newly introduced among natives. Great im-
portance must also be attached to Yenereal Diseases (p. 21)
for their effect on the birth-rate. I have not tried however
to develop the question of Disease and Death in the present
report because it is not one in which lam qualified to speak.
Recruiting and Labour (p. 33) constitute another
of the New factors: they may influence population in at
least two ways: (1) by removing potential fathers from
the village; (2) by reducing the number of food-getters.
As far as the Suau district in particular, and Papua at large,
are concerned, it does not appear that recruiting and labour


have exerted a very strong influence; though it is obvious
that, without the safeguard of restrictions, they could be
carried to very harmful lengths. lam disposed to think
now that the second of the above-mentioned influences is
the one by which recruiting and labour would be likely
to do more harm. Incidentally it is obvious that Statutory
Labour (of which no mention has hitherto been made in
the report) might be carried to a length where it would be
prejudicial to population, for the same reason, viz. that it
draws able-bodied men away from the food quest.
Such New factors as the wearing of European clothes
(p. 11) and eating of European preserved foods maybe treated
lightly, for they seem of trivial importance, and, in the
Suau district at any rate, they can hardly affect the issue,
since the people have been dying off without the aid of
either. Nevertheless if either practice can be proved harm-
ful it will be in accord with the policy suggested here to
discourage it.
Of real importance however is the Psychological Factor
(p. 41) or the Loss of Interest in Life. It seems easier
to believe that this should increase the death-rate by
weakening the native’s powers of resistance than that it
should decrease the birth-rate by means of purposive restric-
tion. We are not able however to deny that it may have
the latter effect; and it is worth while using every means
in our power to discourage abortion. The only means I
can suggest are those of propaganda (pp. 19, 20) and, if it be
feasible, surveillance (p. 32). In the meantime we should
do what we can to maintain the native’s interests in life
and to replace those interests which he has lost or appears
to be losing (pp. 48ff).
The growing Surplusage of Males has been put forward
by Pitt-Rivers as a New factor; and insofar as it brings
about polyandry he implies that it is not only an index,
but indirectly a cause, of Depopulation (p. 34). If the
high degree of masculinity is a biological phenomenon we
are hardly in a position at present to prevent it. But it
may be a social phenomenon connected with female infanti-
cide. We have no evidence that this is anywhere a prev-
alent custom, however, and all we can do is to exercise
vigilance against it as a possible crime. As for the Sub-
stitution of Monogamy for polygamy, we must expect that


the Missions will continue to support the former; but the
Government of Papua at any rate take no action against
the latter except in the case of Village Constables, and
there it is for special reasons. The ordinary villager is still
free, as far as the law is concerned, to have as many wives
as he can get. One may be permitted to doubt whether
the decline of polygamy, in so far as it exists, has affected
the population to any appreciable extent. At any rate the
strictly monogamous Mission settlements have a very
satisfactory rate of increase.
The Rev. W. J. Saville of Mailu and the late C. W.
Abel of Kwato have both independently drawn attention
to an evil resulting from the pacification of the country,
viz. the tendency toward Decentralization and the resultant
Isolation of very small units. Mr. Saville argues that it
is responsible for psychological evils, viz. a loss of interest
in life, a loss of healthy inter-community competition, and
a relaxing of the restraints to which individuals were more
closely subjected when they lived in larger communities;
Mr. Abel finds in it economic reasons for purposive
limitation of families ;“ A man and his wife, living alone
in some secluded little bay, as they are commonly to be
found living to-day, can only exist so long as they can be
free from the encumbrance of a family.”
Decentralization is obviously one of the New factors.
While it is indirectly attributable to pacification, I regard
it as a new phase of the food quest. Whereas formerly
small units had to travel far to the scene of their garden
work and return to the safety of the fold by night, they
may now, under conditions of security, prefer to settle
more or less permanently on the actual site of their
gardens. 1 This may in itself lead to an increase of the
food supply; but it certainly entails evils of the kind that
Messrs. Saville and Abel have pointed out, and a Regulation
already exists to deal with the problem. 2 But too summary
measures are to be deprecated. The only sound remedy
for this growing evil lies, I believe, in the sort of
horticultural reform, aiming at more intensive cultivation
of the soil, which is advocated at the end of this section.
1. “ Orokaiva Garden Culture,” in Orpkaiya Magic, pp. 155-6.
2. Native Regulation No. 90 beginning: “The practice of people abandoning their old
homes in settled villages and scattering themselves in small groups over the face of the
country is growing in the land. Experience proves that this isolated way of living tends to
breed animosities, to increase superstitious fears and to debase those that follow it.”


Old Factors.
We may now turn to a summary of the Old factors
which have served to keep the population down. That of
Native Warfare need hardly be included, since in the Suau
district it has ceased to be operative; and perhaps it was
never, comparatively speaking, a very serious drain on
population in that region. Speaking of Papua at large
however it cannot be denied that warfare was a factor of
considerable importance. (In the Depopulation of the
Morehead district in the far West one would hardly
hesitate to call it the most important of all.) For native
warfare is largely a matter of surprise and massacre, and
since women victims were as common as men, the effect
in depleting population must not be minimized. Yet once
having stamped out warfare we may find ourselves on the
horns of a dilemma : there is liable to ensue the listlessness
and lack of tone to which, as the Psychological Factor, so
much importance has been attached. But warfare is one
of the native customs which we cannot encourage: all we
can do is to offer some stimulating substitute (p. 49).
The individual warfare of Sorcery continues (pp. 6,7).
I do not advance it as a factor of any great importance
but it is nevertheless a harmful influence. I think definite
measures against the overt practice of sorcery are justified;
against the general underlying belief in it the sole genuine
remedy is that of education, and we must be content to
wait a long time for any results.
Coming to the pre-European Endemic diseases (p. 9)
we encounter one of the Old factors of real significance
And it becomes doubly significant in relation to the New
factor of introduced disease, because of the native’s lowered
powers of resistance. Once more however I pass this
important factor by with no more than a mention.
Infant Mortality has been stressed in the report
(p. 27) as one of the Old factors which admits of definite
remedial measures: so many countries have discovered
that, by giving thought to the matter and taking action,
this perpetual drainage of life can to a large extent be
stopped, that we may safely predict the same of Papua.
Reference has been made to the work of obstetrical
assistance and infant welfare (p. 30).


One or two other Old factors have been referred to
as of minor but not negligible importance, viz. Defective
Hygiene (pp. 10,21) and certain Sexual Practices (pp. 21-4).
The Food Supply.
There remains one among the Old factors that was
touched upon rather lightly in Section YIII, viz. the
Limitation of the Food Supply. In recent investigations,
notably those of R. W. Cilento, 1 the question of food
supply in relation to depopulation has come into greater
prominence; and I propose in the last part of this report
to enter into this question more fully, because here, if
anywhere, I believe we have the real remedy for depopula-
tion in sight.
Qualitative Limitation of the Food Supply.
The food supply may suffer from limitations in two
general respects, (1) in quality or variety, i.e. generally
speaking in “ value ” ; (2) in quantity. We may there-
fore speak of the Qualitative and the Quantitative aspects
of food deficiency.
Now, to consider first the Qualitative aspect, I do not
think that the food supply has suffered to any appreciable
extent since the advent of the Europeans. It has been
pointed out by others that a too exclusive diet, e.g. of rice,
such as used to be given to plantation labourers, is
definitely injurious. But this use of European foods does
not extend to the Suau district. There were no stores in
the neighbourhood of my investigations, and the amount
of European food brought home by signed-off labourers is
negligible. They bring home tobacco and trade goods,
but not rice and flour and tinned meat; what they do
bring is merely a drop in the bucket. Food deficiency
owing to a change of diet may therefore be ruled out as
far as the Suau district is concerned; for the fact is that
the people of that district have not changed their diet.
Suau Diet. The staple food is taro ( udo ); as sub-
sidiary vegetarian foods there are yams (generically apoi,
with numerous varieties, legabu, gahagaha, hisari, gave,
peopeo, etc.) ; taitu ( saratu) ; bananas iasai) ; coconuts
(niu) ; breadfruit ( unuri ); sugar-cane ( garu); sago ( rabia );
1. Diet and Nutrition in Northern Melanesia , Medical Journal of Australia, Sept. 10,
927; and The Causes of the Depopulation of the Western Islands of the Territory of New Guinea ,
Government Printer, Canberra, 1928.


a kind of andropogon called godihu ; wild mangoes ( vaivai );
okari nuts ( gamagari ); mangrove fruits ( mavani ); certain
wild fruits {siai, heahu , etc.); and finally a number of
leaves which are used as “ cabbages ” in stews, e.g. Jcovai,
damaia, heahu , taro leaf, and so on. For flesh diet they
rely mainly on pigs, which are very numerous; other game
is not very plentiful. The supply of fish is moderately
good.
The above list, which is not complete, represents the
diet which has supported the Suau population in the past
and which still continues to do so. So far from being
depleted in respect of variety by European influence it has
on the contrary received some additions, e.g. manioc;
Queensland arrowroot (called anumone)-, pumpkins (su-
geru) and their leaves; water-melons ( simsim ); oranges; 1
lemons; papaws ( mauyopi ), etc.
On the face of it we cannot make a qualitative
deficiency of food responsible for a recent decline in
population, seeing that the quality remains virtually the
same as it used to be and that any change it has under-
gone is actually in the direction of improvement. It does
not follow however that the quality of the Suau diet is all
that it ought to be. It is indeed a very restricted diet,
and it may be that what sufficed to support the population
previously is insufficient to support it in face of the
adverse influences, viz. the introduced diseases, to which
it is now' subject.
The Vitamin argument I leave severely alone, firstly
because of my ignorance of the subject, and secondly
because it seems that a complete series of experiments
should be conducted upon all the varieties of Suau food,
particularly the minor items, before we can safely speak
of vitamin deficiency.
Introduction of Pulses and Cereals.
But apart from this it seems reasonable to advocate
a reform in the character of the native food supply on the
grounds that the previous limitations to it have constituted
one of the factors tending to hold the population down,
and that the substitution of a staple diet of higher value
1. Mr. L. P. B. Armit informs me that as far back as 1896 he remembers oranges and
lemons on Suau Island and the neighbouring mainland. The lemons on Suau Island were
said to have been planted by Chalmers.


may open the way to a new expansion. In a report on
Practical Education 1 I have advanced arguments in
favour of introducing pulses and cereals. These argu-
ments do not rest only on the superiority in food value of
these products to the root crops, but also on the social and
educative improvements that would follow a new kind of
horticulture. It is this direction, I believe, that the
qualitative improvement of the native food supply should
take.
I do not propose to go over the various products that
might be used to achieve the end in view and which would
be suitable to Papuan climate, but I may quote the words
of Carr-Saunders in regard to one of them: referring to
the cases of China, Japan, and Java, he says, “ Eice requires
a warm damp climate and, wherever rice has been intro-
duced into lands with such a climate, population has become
dense.” 2
Quantitative Limitation of the Food Supply.
We may now consider the quantitative aspect of food
deficiency. The question arises whether the natives now
have more or less food_per caput then they used to. On the
one hand it is probable that any general lassitude or loss of
interest in life will lead to a decrease of effort in food
production; and I am strongly of the opinion that the
discouragement of feasting, which forms such an important
part of native social life, would cause a reduction of output.
In our particular area, for instance, the suppression of the
soi would without doubt greatly restrict the raising of pigs.
In so far then as the Psychological Factor exists, it must
have an unfavourable effect on the food supply. The same
is true of indentured labour and work for the Government:
by using up some of the time which would otherwise be
given to the food quest they have to some extent cut down
the food supply of the villages. On the other hand however
there is the introduction of steel axes and knives, which
have immensely facilitated the heaviest part of garden
work, and probably compensate for the above-mentioned
losses. There is really no sound reason for believing that
th eper caput food supply is less now than when it supported
what we assume was a stable population.
1. Submitted March, 1929. To be published 1933. The ideas were previously outlined
in The Garden Culture of the Orokaiva,” pp, 152-65, Orokaiva Magic (Oxford University
Press, 1928).
•2. Ency. Brit . 14th Ed., p. 232.


But, though we may grant that the present supply is
not diminished, it still remains doubtful whether the old
supply was really enough. I have mentioned in Section
YII the recollection of a famine that occurred in pre-
European days; and periods of scarcity must have descended
almost annually on the people then as they still do now.
In fact, it appears that the population has always been
scraping along, sometimes indeed with too much to eat,
but often with too little. If this be the case we must
regard the quantitative limitation of the food supply as
one of the Old factors which have always served to hold
the population down.
Without any reference to the quality or value of the
food it is obvious, I imagine, that a mere insufficiency of
it will be unfavourable to population. The death-rate will
be increased by a lowering of resistance. As for the birth-
rate I am not competent to say whether general malnutri-
tion is against fertility, but it will certainly provide a
temptation for birth-restriction. (Although I was unable
to establish this motive for restriction in the Suau district,
it remains a plausible one and investigators in other areas
have rather set store upon it.) The argument here is that
with a more bountiful food supply these factors will be
removed and we may then expect an expansion of popula-
tion to follow.
The Rotation of Areas. Let us glance briefly at the
native’s food quest and see why he cannot feed himself
better. It is very difficult to apply the concept of Optimum
Density to Papuan conditions; for it is obvious that Papua
as a whole could support a far greater population than it
does : a great deal of reasonably fertile land within reason-
able reach is never cultivated. It appears that typically
each group has its own roughly-defined territory, beyond
which it does not willingly carry the food quest. It is
largely a matter of mere distance. Papuan gardeners work
on the chena otjhum system, felling areas of forest to make
garden clearings which, after serving one year or two, are
abandoned and overgrown. Proceeding by this uneco-
nomic method they used up the land within available
distance (incidentally helping to denude the forests) and
finally may come round to use again the patch of land
which was abandoned to the jungle some fifteen or twenty


years before. The system, which I have elsewhere de-
scribed as the Rotation of Areas, 1 besides being a destructive
one, involves no small waste of time and energy.
Native Gardening Methods. The actual gardening
methods are very primitive. Like other natives of Papua
the Suau gardener has one tool —a digging-stick; and this
he uses only for planting and uprooting. He does not
practise tillage, or irrigation, or fertilizing, or the rotation
of crops; and he has no effective means of food storage.
The Suau district is hilly and clothed mainly with rain
forest; it is not particularly favourable for gardening.
Cultivated patches are found on the hill-sides, and the
earth is banked up against horizontal logs so as to form
shallow terraces. The district is much less fertile than
the plain of the Northern Division, and the work of garden-
ing is harder and less profitable than that described in
Report No. 7, which deals with that region.
Amount of Work. It is true that the native might
put more energy into the food quest than he does: he
might attack the more inaccessible slopes which he now
leaves alone; or he might trudge to and from a more
distant garden site. 2 In fact, even under present conditions
the native could get more off his land if he were prepared
to work harder. But we must take him rather as we find
him in regard to his willingness to work. He does not see
fit to sacrifice the leisure .which he regards as his right, or
to restrict the social activities in which he finds his main
interest, merely in order to work longer hours in his garden.
It seems then that there are limits set to the native’s
present food-producing capacity by (1) the restriction of
gardening to certain roughly-defined areas which are
worked on the uneconomic principle of the Rotation of
Areas; (2) the primitiveness of gardening methods; and
(3) the amount of energy which the gardeners are ready
to put forth. Under these limitations they have been
producing enough food to support a stationary population
under pre-existent conditions, but they cannot produce
enough to encourage, or even allow of, a great increase.
1. See Orohaiva Magic, pp. 153-6.
2. Taking advantage of modern security the natives have been pushing out and establish-
ing small scattered settlements with the idea, I believe, of facilitating the food quest. But
as we have seen (p. 60) this process of Decentralization brings evils in its train and may very
well be one of the factors influencing Depopulation. On general grounds it is not to be en-
couraged.


It is here submitted that when the natives are able to
produce a greater abundance and better quality of food,
their numbers may automatically begin to increase.
The Reform of Native Horticulture.
But how are we to bring about such a change ? I
have no great hopes that we shall induce the native to
work harder without some real incentive. Not that we
should despair of this : commercial incentives are slowly
being added to those he already has, and the prospect of
gain will do a great deal to stimulate production. But in
his own village and garden the native insists on his right
to rest, and plenty of it. Despite his powers of endurance
and his occasional outbursts of energy he is by preference
a leisurely worker who likes to stop work when he is tired
or uninterested. ■ Returned labourers have assured me
that this is a right and proper custom, with the ancestral
sanction to support it; and they have even spoken with
a sort of resentment of the white man’s fashion of regular
and unremitting toil. We cannot expect the native in
his own garden and under no sort of supervision to work
harder than he has been used to.
We must obviously adopt some other method of ap-
proach, some method which will enable the gardener to
greatly increase his food production without greatly in-
creasing his work; and the right method, I believe, consists
in the reform of native horticulture. I have dealt at length
with this subject in the report already referred to (p. 64).
That report advocates not only the introduction of new
crops, but the schooling of natives in the use of tools; the
practice of tillage ; rotation of crops; irrigation, where it
is possible; domestication of animals; preservation and
storage of harvests; and the preparation of food for eating.
Garden Boarding Schools. In order to bring about
such reforms I think the ideal course would be to establish
Garden Boarding Schools, in which the pupils would be
disciplined in the practice of these new garden methods and
the cultivation of the new products that were thought
suitable. An essential condition would be the simplicity
of the methods taught. They must be superior to any-
thing the native gardener knows, yet such as he could
readily adapt to the conditions of his own garden land.


For the object of this instruction would he to disseminate
the new knowledge and, more than that, the new habits,
among a peasant population. Kesidence in the school
w T ould be made as agreeable as possible; instruction would
be devoted firstly, but not wholly, to horticulture; the
pupils would grow or rear their own food-stuffs, and, not
unimportantly, would learn the most attractive ways
of preparing them. The idea is that they should come to
regard the luxuries of the school as indispensable, or at
least desirable, and that they should finally leave school
with the determination and ability to cultivate the new
crops, by the right methods, in their own gardens.
I shall not enter into details here. The general aim
is that of a more intensive mode of cultivation, using some
or other of the important food crops which are at present
practically unknown to Papuan horticulture, but which
stand at the base of more thriving native civilizations in
other countries. To quote from the report in which this
scheme is put forward: “ The great object of horticultural
reform is in my opinion a more intensive culture of the
soil, the advantages of which are not only economic but
social. On the one hand it will ensure a steadier and larger
output of food products and will make possible the cultiva-
tion of new and important crops ; on the other it will tend
to settle the native population, to complicate and develop
their social life, and to give them a new and engrossing
interest in living.” To these arguments for horticultural
reform I would now add that in my opinion it offers the
best hope of solving the problem of Depopulation.
68


Appendix.
Cruelty to Pigs.
It cannot be denied that the sufferings of pigs in the
Soi are often very severe. Mr. C. A. Leonard, the A.K.M.,
Eastern Division, secured the assent of the natives them-
selves to the following reforms :
1. Pigs to be carried in nets instead of being lashed
to poles often for days, with the frequent [?]
result of broken legs.
2. When the place of ceremony is reached, the pigs
to be kept in pens instead of remaining lashed
to poles.
3. Killing to be done with despatch.
4. Whenever injured in transport the pig to be
killed immediately.
The natives who helped frame these rules very frequently
broke them afterwards, but nowadays anyone guilty of
undue cruelty to pigs is severely punished and this objection
to the Soi has largely been removed.
Personally I should not recommend any departure
from the customary method of killing, but as this was
called in question on grounds of cruelty the following
was submitted: —
“ I would suggest that instead of being speared the
pigs should be shot. This would be worth
doing only in the event of a big feast. The
Magistrate should be notified in such a case
and one or more Armed Constables should be
detailed to attend and do the shooting.
I believe this might be a welcome innovation to the
natives, as I am sure it would he to the pigs.
If the village had 49 pigs to slaughter (and I
believe that was the number recently at
Domara) the sound of 49 rifle shots would
provide a sufficiently noisy and impressive
ceremony for the villagers. I doubt whether


any native is yet so blase as not to be impressed
with the sight of sudden death at the rifle’s
point, or anything but pleased with the noise
of it. Further, since the range might be any-
thing down to one inch, we might rely upon
straight shooting, and the pigs would be assured
of an instantaneous death. Lastly, and I
think most importantly, the presence of a
couple of police as killers at a big feast (pro-
vided these men were reasonably tactful)
might be made to lend an appearance of
Government support and sympathy.
The slaughtering would need to be done with a
touch of ceremony and of course with pre-
cautions against casualties among the villagers.
But for the fear of this one might even recom-
mend that the recipient, or the man who does
the spearing on behalf of the recipient, should
actually be allowed to handle the rifle —if he
were game to do so. One need hardly say that
to the officiating A.Cs. the occasion would be
a very magnificent one. Moreover, apart from
killing the pigs, they might by their presence
exercise some restraint, and could at least re-
port any undue cruelty which the pigs suffered
before they were slaughtered. Of course the
police should be forbidden to meddle or be
officious: they should confine themselves en-
tirely to their job.”
Apropos of a rough-handling to which pigs were
subjected at a feast (resembling the Soi) at Domara the
following proposal was added: —
“ In the unsavoury work of taking anthropological
measurements there is always one redeeming
feature —that is the fun the natives have in
being weighed and seeing others weighed on
the spring scale. Since in these feasts along
the South Coast and elsewhere so much im-
portance belongs to the exchange and com-
parison of live pigs, I believe the actual
weighing of them would rouse great interest
and even excitement. Any boy can see the


action of the scale and follow the pointer, and
along the South Coast there are many boys
who could read and record the numbers. It
would not be difficult to make the weighing
amount to a ceremony. It might even be
some compensation for the rough-and-tumble
which was seen at Domara during the night
before killing, and which ought presumably to
be forbidden.”




INDEX.
Abel, Rev. C. W., pp. 19, 20, 60
Abortion, pp. 6, 12, 14, 15, 18, 19, 32, 59
Administration and Depopulation, pp.
56, 57
Adultery —
increase of, possible, p, 23
measures against, p. 24
sorcery and, p. 6
America, p. 40
Armstrong, W. E., pp. 2,6, 14, 25, 38,
44, 45, 46, 50. 51, 53, 55
Asiatics, pp. 40, 41
Association for Advancement of Science,
p. 57
Australian aborigines, p. 3
Axes, pp. 36, 64
Birth-rate —
Eastern Division, p. 1
inadequacy of, p. 12
indenture and, pp. 33, 34
limitation of food supply and, p.
65
Mission settlements, p. 19
native explanation of declining, pp.
6, 7
psychological factor and, pp. 41, 42,
59
venereal disease and, p. 58
Birth-restriction —
methods of, pp. 12-16
motives for, pp. 16-19, 65
See also Contraception ; Abortion.
Boianai, p. 28
Bona Bona, pp. 1, 5
Boroai, pp. 2, 11, 20, 27, 28, 38
Brown, Macmillan, p. 48
Canoe, p. 53
Cape Boys, p. 41
Carrying, p. 43
Carr-Saunders, p. 64
Census, p. 1
Cereals, pp. 63, 64
Ceremonies, decay of, p. 44
Chalmers, pp. 8,8, 9
Child marriage, p. 24
Children, desire for, p. 5
Christianity —
adaptation of, p. 46
birth-rate affected by, p. 19
mortuary customs and, p. 51
“ Substitute,” pp. 45, 46
Cilento, R. W., p. 62
Clothes, European, pp. 11, 59
Conference of Papuan clergy, p. 16
Constables, armed, p. 7
village. See Village Con-
stables.
Contraception, pp. 6, 12-14, 26
See also Birth-restriction.
Cricket, p. 49
Cross-breeding. See Miscegenation.
Customs, decay of, p. 44
Dancing, p. 53
Death-rate —
indenture and, pp. 34, 35
limitation of food supply and, p.
65
psychological factor and, pp. 41,
43, 59
sorcery as affecting, p. 6
Suau district, pp. 1, 7
Decentralization, pp. 44, 60, 66 (footnote)
Divorce, p. 34
Dogura, pp. 16, 24 (footnote)
Drought, pp. 3, 36
See Scarcity.
Durrad, Rev., p. 33
Dysentery, pp. 3,8, 58
Education —
sorcery and, p. 61
“ Substitute,” p. 47
Endemic disease, pp. 8,9, 10, 61
Endogamy, p. 38
Endometritis, pp. 24, 25
Engineer Group, p. 11
Eno-eno , pp. 22, 23, 24
Epidemic, pp. 3,8, 68
European clothes, pp. 11, 59
foods, pp. 59, 62
European influence —
depopulation result of, pp. 3,4, 57
effects of, p. 43
Exogamy, pp. 22, 38
Family, disgrace of having large, p. 17
Famine, p. 3
Feasts —
birth-restriction and, p. 17
importance of, p. 50
Fertility, miscegenation and, pp. 40, 41
Fife Bay. See Isuleilei.
Fiji, p. 39 (footnote)
Fish, pp. 37, 63
73


Pood —
European, pp. 59, 62, 63
imported, p. 37
preparation of, p. 67
storage of, p. 67
Suau, pp. 37, 62, 63
tabus on, pp. 54, 55
Food quest —
decentralization result of, pp. 60,
66 (footnote)
difficulty of, pp. 36, 37, 65, 66
modern facilitation of, pp. 16, 64
reform of, pp. 63, 64
Food supply —
birth-restriction and, pp. 16, 17
limitation of, p. 62 fi
need to improve, p. 38
psychological factor and, p. 64
recruiting affecting, p. 58
Football, p. 49
Gardening—
methods of, pp. 37, 66
sites of, pp. 60, 66
See also Horticulture.
Giblin, Dr. W. E., p. 21
Gigibori, p. 54
Gregory, J. W., pp. 40, 41
Harse, Dr. W. T., p. 24
Hookworm, p. 9
Horticulture, reform of, pp. 60, 67, 68
Hospitals, obstetric, pp. 31, 32
Houses, native, pp. 10, 25
Hudi, pp. 25, 53-56
Hygiene, defective, p. 62
Impregnation, difficulty of, pp. 25, 26
Inbreeding, pp. 38, 39
Indenture, pp. 33, 35, 43, 47, 58
Infanticide, pp. 15, 16, 28, 30, 32, 59
Infant mortality, p. 27 ff.
causes of, pp. 27, 29,
30
high rate of, pp. 7,8,
15, 28
prevention of, pp. 30-
33, 61
propaganda and, p. 33
Infant welfare, p. 61
Influenza, pp. 8,9, 58
Institute of Tropical Medicine, p. 13
(footnote)
Intensive cultivation, pp. 60, 68
Introduced disease, pp. 4,8, 9, 58, 63
Irrigation, pp. 66, 67
Isolation, p. 60
Isuleilei (Fife Bay), pp. 30, 46, 47
Java, 48
Knives, pp. 36, 64
Kwato, pp. 19, 45, 60
Lawes College, p. 29 ■
Loroheala, p. 52
Mailu, pp. 36, 60
Malaria, pp, 9, 10
Males, surplus of —
female infanticide, p. 15
indenture and, p. 33
polyandry and, pp. 34, 59
Malnutrition and sterility, pp. 37, 65
Malthusian arguments, p. 35
Matrilineal descent, p. 5
Measles, p. 58
Medical Department, pp. 21, 27
investigation, need for, pp. 2,3,
11, 12
Officer, Chief (Dr. Strong), pp. 1,
8, 10, 16 (footnote),
21
Travelling, p. 11
Melanesia —
depopulation of, p. 3
essays on depopulation of, pp. 33
(footnote), 41
Midwifery, pp. 15, 29, 31
training in, pp. 30-32
Milne Bay, p. 38
Miscarriage, pp. 14, 15, 27
Miscegenation, pp. 39-41
Missionary, scientific inquiry by, p. 57
Missions —
Anglican, pp. 18, 24 (footnote), 37
monogamy and, p. 60
mortuary customs and, pp. 50, 51
games, p. 49
See also Isuleilei; Kwato.
Mission settlements —
birth-rate in, pp. 19, 60
Christianity and, pp. 45, 46
Monogamy, pp. 59, 60
Mortuary customs, pp. 45, 50
Morehead district, p. 61
Mosquitoes, p. 10
Mothercraft, training in, pp. 30-32
Native Taxation, Director of, p. 18
(footnote)
Negroes, p. 41
New factors —
distinguished from old, pp. 4, 58
summarized, pp. 58-60
See also —
Decentralization;
European contact;
European clothes ;
European foods;
Indenture;
Introduced disease;
Males, surplus of;
Monogamy;
Psychological factor ;
Statutory labour.
Newton, Bishop, p. 18
Northern Division, p. 66
Nurses, training of, pp. 31, 32, 32 (foot-
note)
Obstetrical aid, p. 61
Old factors —
distinguished from new, pp. 4, 58


Old factors — continued —
summary of, pp. 61, 62
See also —
Birth-restriction, motives for;
Endemic disease;
Pood quest, difficulty of ;
Pood supply, limitation of ;
Inbreeding;
Infant mortality;
Sanitation;
Scarcity, periods of;
Sexual laxity;
Sorcery;
Warfare.
Oranges, p. 63
Orokaiva, p. 37
Pacification, effecting, pp. 43, 44, 60
Philippine Islands, p. 33 (footnote)
Phthisis, p. 10
Pigs—
at soi, pp. 51, 52, 54, 55
cruelty to, pp. 52, 53 and Appendix
raising of, p. 64
plentiful, pp. 37, 63
Pitt-Rivers, pp. 34, 39, 40, 59
Plantation labour. See Indenture.
Plantations, native (private), pp. 47, 48
Plantation settlements, p. 35
Play, as substitute, pp. 48, 49
Polyandry, pp. 34, 59
Polygamy, pp. 59, 60
Population of Suau district, p. 1
Propaganda, pp. 19, 20, 33, 59
Prostitution, pp. 21, 22, 23
Psychological factor, pp. 41 if, 59, 61,
64
Pulses, pp. 63, 64
Quinine, p. 10
Quarantine, pp. 8, 9
Race suicide, pp. 5, 42
Recruiting, pp. 33-35, 37, and see In-
denture
Rice, pp. 62, 64
Rich, C. F., pp. 1, 13, 18, 21, 29, 32, 46,
48, 52
Rivers, Dr. W. H. R., pp. 18, 39 (foot-
note), 41, 56
Road making, p. 43
Root crops, p. 64
Rotation of areas, pp. 65, 66
crops, pp. 66, 67
Samarai, p. 49
Samoan teachers, p. 45
Sanitation, pp. 10, 43
Saville, p. 60
Scarcity, periods of, pp. 4,9, 36, 37, 65
Schools, garden boarding, pp. 67, 68
Seligman, Dr. C. G., pp. 18, 24, 26
Settlements, plantation, p. 35
Sexes, balance of, p. 39
Sexual intercourse, pp. 24, 25, 27, 50, 64
laxity, pp. 21-24, 27, 62
Shaler, Prof. N. S., p. 41 (footnote)
Signing on. See Indenture.
Smallpox, pp. 3, 9
Sorcery —
deaths ascribed to, pp. 6, 11, 13
harmfulness of, pp. 7, 61
increase of, alleged, p. 44
Soho, p. 54
Soi, pp. 45, 49 ff
Soi —
forbidden, p, 51
hudi, custom at, pp. 53-56
importance of, p. 51
pigs at, pp. 51-53, 64
quarrels at, p. 53
waste of time in, pp. 51, 52
Statutory labour, p. 59
Still-births, p. 28
Strong, Dr. W. M. See Medical Officer,
Chief.
Sterility, pp. 20-27
Sterility —
birth-restriction and, p. 42
“Medicines” causing, pp. 13, 14
promiscuity and, p. 22
racial tendency toward, pp. 20, 21,
27
recruiting and, p. 33
Subsistence, means of, pp. 35-38
Substitutes, pp. 44-49, 56
Suckling of children, pp. 29, 30
Suicide, racial, pp. 5, 42
Surveillance, pp. 19, 32, 33, 59
Taro, pp. 37, 54, 55, 62
Tattoo, p. 24
Tax, p. 43
Tillage, pp. 66, 67
Tuberculosis, p. 10
Turner, Mrs., pp. 29, 30
Venereal disease, pp. 14, 21, 22, 24, 27,
58
Village Constable, pp. 47, 60
Vitamins, p. 63
Vivian, Mr. A.R.M., pp. 1,5, 7, 35
Volcanic glass, p. 14
Warfare, pp. 38, 43, 44, 61
Whaleboat, p. 48
Whooping-cough, p. 58
Work, as substitute, p. 47
native, pp. 66, 67
Yams, pp. 37, 54, 62
Yaws, p. 9
Zoo, breeding in, p. 42
Printed and published by Walter Alfred Bock, Acting Government Printer,
Port Moresby.—6sl2/2.33.
75
