

I fefpt I
I SAVINGS’ BANK!
H OT . i H
f$ NEW SOUTH WALES. |
S’ SSTASZ.ZSXSBD 1832,
| Depositor's pass Booh. 1
No.
This Book must be produced whenever Money is paid into.
or withdrawn from, the Bank.
All communications by letter must be accompanied by
return postage stamps.
Remittances to the Bank must be made by Post Office Order
or by Draft or Cheque on a Bank in Sydney.
The Bank will not remit Money to the Country, (see' Rule 8.)
THE SAUK IS OPEN FOR RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS
MONDAV ... from 10 to 2 o’clock
TUESDAY... ... „ 10 to 2
THURSDAY „ 10 to 2
AND TO TAKE IN MONEY ONLY ON
The Sauls is CLOSSB during: the First and Second
"Weeks in January of each Year,
WEDNESDAY „ 10 to 2 „ MR
FRIDAY „ 10 to 2 „ , aft
SATURDAY EVENINGS, from 7 to 9 o’clock ®




ft 5
SAVINGS’ BANK
ITEW SOUTH W-A-XiIES.
lEsta&ltssfjeh in 1832.
Head Office— Barrack Street.
Southern Branch— Bo6, George Street, South.
THE BANK IS OPEN
RECEIPTS & PAYMENTS
MONDAY from 10 to 2 o’clock.
TUESDAY „ 10 to 2 „
WEDNESDAY „ 10 to 2 „
THURSDAY „ 10 to 2 „
FRIDAY „ 10 to 2 „
AND TO TAKE IN MONEY ONLY ON
SATURDAY EVENINGS, from 7 to 9 o’clock.
The Rank is CLOSED during: the First and Second Weeks
in January of each Tear.
<S}£Bne£*
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEOROE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.


Brand) Banks are esta&ltsijeti tn tije fallowing batons
Parramatta —JOHN TAYLOR,
Windsor —W. WALKER,
East Maitland —A. G. CULLUM,
West Maitland —J. T. TEGG,
Bathurst —T. M. SLOMAN,
Goulburn —R. CRAIG,
Singleton —W. DUDDING,
Wollongong —CHAßLES E. SMITH,
Newcastle —HENRY STOKES,
Clarence Toion —EDWIN E. LOWE,
Carcoar —W. BADCOCK WARNER,
Orange~W. T. EVANS,
Scone —JOHN GARRETT,
Mudgee— W. KELLETT, Junior.
Grafton —THOMAS PAGE,
Accountant.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Brand) Enspertur:
DAVID MITCHELL.


Jfiiiigf pill if JMn Jiiiiilf Will#
ESTABLISHED in 1532.
President:
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR-IN-CHIEF.
Ftce^resilient:
CHRISTOPHER ROLLESTON, Esq.
trustees:
CHARLES FRITH, Esq.
THE HONOEABLE THOMAS WAEE SMART, Esq., M.L.C.
THE HONORABLE JOHN CAMPBELL, Esq., M.L.C.
GEOEGE HILL, Esq.
THE HONOEABLE GEOEGE THOENTON, Esq., M.L.C.
EDWAED FLOOD, Esq.
THE HONOEABLE JOHN BLAXLAND, Esq., M.L.C.
EDMUND FOSBEEY, Esq.
THOMAS WALKEE, Esq.
JOHN ALGEE, Esq.
FEANCIS WILLIAM HILL, Esq.
THE HONOEABLE ALEXANDEE CAMPBELL, Esq., M.L.C.
CHAELES SMITH, Esq.
CHAELES COWPEE, Esq.
GEOEGE ALFEED LLOYD, Esq.
THE HONOEABLE JOHN SUTHERLAND, Esq., M.L.A.
EDWAED LORD, Esq.
Jftanajjtng trustee:
WILLIAM HENEY CUFF.
Accountant:
HENEY WISE.
Accountant —Southern Branch :
GEORGE WILSON.
Solicitor:
W. W. BILLYARD.


E/EG-TTL-A.TXO3ST S
FOE THE
CONDUCT AND MANAGEMENT OF THE AFFAIRS
or THE
safriMojs §auk of fjUfo Maks,
Issued pursuant to 26th Victoria, No. 11, c. 14.
RULE I.
The Bank shall be open on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednes-
days, Thursdays, and Fridays, from 10 a.m. to 2 r.M., both to
pay and receive money, and on Saturday Evenings to receive
Deposits only, from 7 to 9 o’clock.
RULE 11.
The Bank shall be closed for the first fortnight in Janu-
ary, for the purpose of calculating the Interest on the Depositors’
Accounts, and for the Annual Balance of the Books.
RULE 111.
A Meeting of the Trustees for the General Business of
the Bank shall be called twice in each month, but the Managing
Trustee may call a Special Meeting at any time upon giving one
clear day’s notice in writing.
KULE IV.
The Accountant or Cashier and other officers shall attend
in the office of the Savings’ Bank, at Sydney, on each day


appointed for receiving Deposits and making Ee-payments, and
such accountant or other officer shall enter in the proper books
to be kept for that purpose, the proper number and name of
the Depositor and the amount of every deposit and re-payment,
as the case may* be, when made.
EULE V.
The Books shall be open to the inspection of the Trustees;
but it is expressly required that no person engaged in the
management of this institution, shall disclose the concerns of any
Depositor.
EULE VI.
Persons becoming Depositors in this Bank must, on
making their first Deposit, disclose their names, professions,
business, and residence, and shall thereupon receive a Pass Book
containing a copy of the Buies and Begulations of the Bank,
and the receipt of such book shall be an acknowledgement that
they have received due and full notice of such Eules and Eegu-
lations of the Bank, and that the same are binding upon such
Depositor and his or her representatives.
EULE VII.
All Deposits and lie-payments shall be entered in a
Pass Book or duplicate, to be furnished to each Depositor on
opening an account with the Bank, in which the sums received
or paid on each occasion shall be entered in words at length,
and signed with the initials of the proper officer of such Savings’
Bank, to be appointed by the Trustees for that purpose.
EULE VIII.
Payment shall only be made to Depositors personally
on producing their Bank Pass Book or to the bearer of an order
in such form as the Trustees may prescribe, and signed by the
Depositor, and properly witnessed to the satisfaction of the


Trustees which order must be accompanied by the production of
the Pass Book. The Officers of the Bank shall diligently en-
deavour to prevent fraud, and to identify every Depositor,
transacting business with the Bank; but, in case any person
presenting a Depositor’s Book, and producing . an Order pur-
porting to bear the signature of the Depositor, or stating himself
or herself to be the Depositor named therein, shall unlawfully
obtain any deposit or sum of money from the Bank, during the
hours of business, the Bank shall not be responsible for the loss
so sustained by such Depositor nor be liable to make good the
same.
KULE IX.
In case any Depositor shall lose his or her Pass Book, the
Depositor is inquired to give immediate notice thereof to the
Managing Trustee, or the Accountant of any District Branch, in
which such deposit may be made, who, upon a declaration of such
loss, to be made in the form prescribed by the Trustees for
that purpose, and payment of five shillings by way of fine,
and upon the applicant identifying himself or herself to the
satisfaction of the Managing Trustee in Sydney or of the local
Trustees of any District Branch as being the actual original
Depositor, such Depositor shall, within one month from the
date of such Notice, receive another Pass Book with a copy
of the said Depositor’s Account as it shall then stand in
the Ledger with the word Duplicate written at the top of the
iirst page. But if any money shall have been drawn from the
Bank by any other person producing the original Pass Book
and representing himself or herself to be the Depositor men-
tioned therein before such notice shall have been given to the
Managing Trustee, or District Accountant, or if such Depositor
shall fail or neglect altogether to give such notice, the loss shall
fall upon the Depositor so losing his or her Pass Book.




Deposits an (^Repayments.
Amount. Initials.


Deposits and Repayments.


Deposits and Repayments.
Amount. Initials.


Deposits and Repayments.














Deposits and Repayments.




Deposits and Eepayments.
Amount. Initials.


Deposits and Repayments.




EULE X
Every person who shall have deposited any sum not less
than twenty shillings in the Savings Bank shall be entitled to
receive Interest upon the same at the rate to be from time to
time fixed by the Trustees, and it shall be in the power of the
Trustees to limit the Interest so as not to be payable on any
sum exceeding One Hundred Pounds, provided that Interest
shall not be allowed on any sum less than One Pound nor on odd
shillings and pence and that the Interest shall be calculated by
Months, omitting odd days, and such Interest shall be added to
and incorporated with the sum which may be then standing in
the Book to the Credit of the Depositor.
EULE XI.
Each Depositor shall'in the Month of February in each
year produce or cause to be produced his or her Pass Book at the
proper office of the Savings Bank for the purpose of being
inspected, examined and verified, with the Books of the said
Savings’ Bank in such manner and on such day or days as shall
be for that purpose named and appointed in and by any notice
which the said Trustees shall cause to be published in the local
papers.
EULE XII.
The following shall be the Eegulations under which money
may be withdrawn: —
1. Sums not exceeding £5 may be withdrawn on any day
appointed for making payments on giving seven days written
notice.
2. For sums exceeding £5 and not exceeding £2O, fourteen
days’ notice will be required.
3. Exceeding £2O, twenty days.
Provided always that payments shall be made only on the days


appointed for that purpose. Provided also that the Trustees
may in their discretion dispense with any such notice.
RULE XIII.
Any sum not being less than one shilling, nor exceeding
£2OO, shall be received in deposit, but no interest will be
allowed on any excess beyond £lOO.
The Trustees reserve the option of rejecting or returning
the deposits of any persons whom they may deem it inexpedient
to admit or continue as a Depositor.
RULE XIY.
It shall be lawful for the Trustees, by order of the
Gtovernor in writing, under the hand of the Colonial Secretary,
to receive any deposit from or on behalf of any person serving
under any sentence for a criminal offence, and to allow interest
thereon in like manner as on other deposits, and to pay over
to any such person the principal sum and interest thereon at
the expiration, or upon the remission of his sentence.
RULE XY.
The Trustees are authorised and empowered to receive
and will receive any deposit of money from, or for the benefit
of any person under the age of twenty-one years, and it shall be
lawful for the Trustees to pay such person his or her deposit
and the interest thereon and the receipt of such person attested
by one Witness shall be a sufficient discharge,—notwithstanding
such person's infancy for any money so paid.
EULE XYI.
Deposits may be made by married women and it shall
be lawful for the Trustees to pay any sum of money to a
married woman in respect of any deposit made by her with or


without notice of her marriage unless the husband of such
woman shall give to such Trustees notice in writing of such
marriage and shall require payment to be made to him, in
which event it shall be lawful for such Trustees in their discretion,
to pay all or such portion of such money so deposited by such
woman, less by the repayments, if any, heretofore made therefrom,
together with any interest or profits due in respect of the same,
to such husband, or to such woman, as to them, the said
Trustees, shall seem proper.
RULE XVII,
It shall be lawful for any other Savings’ Bank and all
Friendly Societies, legally established, and for all Charitable
Institutions, by their Treasurer, or other proper officer in that
behalf appointed, to pay into the Savings’ Bank, all or any portion
of the Funds of such Savings’ Bank, Friendly or Charitable In-
stitution so established respectively and as an ordinary Depositor
to receive the usual rate of Interest allowed by the Savings’
Bank to the Depositors therein, and by such Treasurer or other
proper officer to receive back all or any portion of the funds
due on such account to such society and the receipt of such
Treasurer or other Officer shall be a sufficient discharge to the
Savings’ Bank in respect of any such payment or payments.
RULE XVIII.
If any Depositor, being illegitimate, shall die intestate,
leaving any person or persons who, but for the illegitimacy of
such Depositor, would be entitled to the money due to such
deceased Depositor, it shall be lawful for the Trustees, to pay
the money due to such deceased Depositor to any one or more of
the persons who shall have claimed such money, and who in their
opinion, would have been entitled to the same according to law
if the said Depositor had been legitimate.


RULE XIX.
No Depositor shall have claim on the Savings’ Bank in
respect of any deposit, unless such deposit shall be made at the
office of the Savings' Bank during the hours for which such
Bank shall be open, and on the withdrawal of any money a
receipt in such form as the Trustees shall direct, shall be signed
by the party receiving such money, and such receipt shall be
a sufficient discharge to the said Trustees and their officers
for the sum therein expressed to be received.
RULE XX.
If any dispute shall arise between the Trustees of the
Savings’ Bank or their Officers and any individual Depositor
therein or any person who is or claims to be Executor, Adminis-
trator, next of Kin, or Creditor of any deceased Depositor, in any
such case the matter so in dispute shall be referred to the arbi-
tration of two indifferent persons one to be appointed by the
Trustees and the other by the other party, and in case such
Arbitrators shall not agree then by an Umpire having no interest
in such matter or in the Savings’ Bank, who shall be nominated
by the Arbitrators before they commence the inquiry. And the
award order or determination of the said Arbitrators or the said
Umpire shall be binding and conclusive on all parties, and
shall be final to all intents and purposes without any appeal.
RULE XXI.
In case any Depositor in the Savings’ Bank shall die
leaving any sum of money in the said Institution belonging
to him or her at the time of his or her death, not exceeding in
the whole, including interest, the sum of one hundred pounds
and probate of the Will of the Deceased Depositor (if any Will
have been made) or Letters of Administration of his or her


estate and effects be not produced to the Trustees of the said
Institution, or if notice in writing of the existence of a Will
and intention to prove the same, or to take out Letters of Ad-
ministration, be not given to the said Trustees within the period
of two months from the death of the said Depositor, and in the
latter case unless such Will be proved or Letters of Administration
taken out within the period of three months from the death of
the said Depositor, it shall be lawful for the said Trustees to pay
any debts of such deceased Depositor and defray the expenses
of his or her funeral and divide the residue to or amongst any
person or persons who shall appear to such Trustees to be the
Widow, or entitled to the effects of such deceased Depositor
according to law, or according to any general or special order
which the Trustees may make in that behalf, and the payment
of any such sum of money shall be valid and effectual, with res-
pect to any demand of any other person or persons, as next of
kin, legatee, or personal representative of such deceased De-
positor, against the funds of such Savings’ Bank or the Trustees
thereof.
RULE XXII.
In case any Depositor in the Savings’ Bank shall die
leaving any money in the said Bank or there shall be any
interest due thereon belonging to him or her at the time of his
or her death exceeding in the whole the sum of one hundred
pounds, the same shall not be paid to any person other than a
duly constituted executor or administrator of the deceased De-
positor.
RULE XXIII.
If any payment be made from the funds of the Savings’
Bank by the Trustees, as directed by the two next pre-
ceding sections, and the party claiming or receiving the same


shall afterwards be proved not to have been lawfully entitled to
the same, the Trustees shall be held indemnified as against the
demand of any other person whomsoever. Provided also that
any lawful representative of such deceased Depositor shall have
remedy for the money so wrongfully paid against the person who
shall have received the same.
RULE XXIY.
The Trustees of this Bank will not be liable, for any
claim which may be made upon them with regard to any
deposit in any of the District Branches of the Bank, which does
not show the initials of the District Accountant, and one of the
District Trustees of such District Branch to the amount in the
Pass-book.
RULE XXV.
All money deposited under a fictitious name, shall be
\ forfeited to the Bank at the discretion of the Trustees.
Savings' Bank,
Sydney , Vltli December , 1866,
Passed at a Meeting of the Trustees, this day,
( Signed ,) GEO. 0. ALLAN,
Managing Trustee.
Approved with the advice of the Executive Council.
{Signed,) JOHN YOUNG.
Joseph Cook & Co., Machine Printers, 370, George-street, Sydney.




