

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
DEPRECIATION.
INCOME TAX ORDER No. 1217.
(Revised.)
GENERAL RULINGS ON THE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED
FOR DEPRECIATION UNDER SECTIONS 54 TO 62
OF THE
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT ACT
1936-1944
AND
SCHEDULE OF RATES OF
DEPRECIATION.
By Authority:
L. F. JOHNSTON, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed In Australia.)
6976. — Price 6D.
Issued by the
Federal Commissioner of Taxation.
1st December, 1944.




COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Federal Taxation Department,
Canberra, A.C.T.
Income Tax Order No. 1217.
Revised as at Ist December, 1944.
J.63/282.
INCOME TAX.
DEPRECIATION.
General rulings on the deductions allowed for depreciation under
sections 54 to 62 of the “ Income Tax Assessment Act 1936-
1944 ”, and schedule of rates of depreciation allowed.
iSections 54 to 62 of the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936-1944
provide for a deduction on account of depreciation, and read as
follows: —
54. (I.) Depreciation during the year of income of any property, being
plant, or articles owned by a taxpayer and used by him during that year for
the purpose of producing assessable income, and of any property being plant or
articles owned by the taxpayer which has been installed ready for use for that
purpose and is during that year held in reserve by him shall, subject to this
Act, be an allowable deduction.
(2.) In this section, “plant” includes —
(o) animals used as beasts of burden or working beasts in a business
other than a business of primary production, and machinery,
implements, utensils and rolling stock; and
(5) fences, dams and' other structural improvements on land which is
used for the purposes of agricultural or pastoral pursuits but
does not include improvements used for domestic or residential
purposes.
55. In the first calculation of the depreciation to be allowed in respect of
any unit of property, an estimate shall be made by the Commissioner of the
effective life of the unit assuming that it is maintained in reasonably good
order and condition, and the annual depreciation per centum shall be fixed
accordingly.
56. (1.) Subject to this section, the depreciation allowable under this Act in
respect of any unit of property shall be—
(a) the percentage fixed under the last preceding section, or under the
previous Act, of the depreciated value of that unit at the beginning
of the year of income; or
(6) at the option of the taxpayer (to be exercised within the time, in the
manner, and subject to the conditions prescribed), the percentage
so fixed of the cost of that unit.
(2.) The deduction allowable in respect of any unit of property shall not
exceed the depreciated value of that unit.
(3.) Where any property has been bought by the taxpayer, no amount paid
by him, which has been allowed or is allowable under this or the previous Act
as a deduction to him from the assessable income of any year otherwise than on
account of depreciation, shall be deemed to be part of the cost of the property.
57. Where depreciation has been allowed to a taxpayer, whether under this or
the previous Act, in respect of any year prior to the year of income, the method
of calculating the depreciation to be allowed to him in respect of the year of
income shall, unless altered with the leave of the Commissioner, or in the
exercise of the option referred to in the last preceding section, be the same as
that applied in the last preceding calculation.
6976.


58. (1.) Where the depreciated value under this Act of any property at
the beginning of the year of income is higher than its depreciated value at
that time under a State Act relating to Income Tax, and the Commissioner is
satisfied that if those values were equal the corresponding values in each
subsequent year would remain equal, the Commissioner may allow, in lieu of
the depreciation otherwise allowable, an amount of depreciation calculated as if
the depreciated value at the beginning of the year of income under the State
Act had been substituted for the depreciated value at that time under this Act.
(2.) Where the last preceding sub-section is applied in any assessment, a
further amount of depreciation shall also be an allowable deduction in that
assessment, being an amount determined by the Commissioner, which shall not
be less than one-tenth part of the difference between those depreciated values
at the beginning of the year to the assessment of the income of which this section
is first applied, provided that the further amount shall not in any ease exceed
the amount required to make the depreciated values of the property under this
and the State Act equal.
(3.) Where depreciation has been allowed under this section in respect of
any property in any assessment of a taxpayer, depreciation shall be allowed
under this section in all future assessments of that taxpayer in which deprecia-
tion in respect of that property is allowable, until the depreciated values under
this Act and the State Act are equal.
59. (1.) Where any property of a taxpayer in respect of which depreciation
has been allowed or is allowable under this or the previous Act, is disposed
of, lost or destroyed at any time in the year of income, the depreciated value of
the property at that time, less the amount of any consideration receivable in
respect of the disposal, loss or destruction, shall be an allowable deduction.
(2.) If that consideration exceeds that depreciated value, the excess, to the
extent of the sum of the amounts allowed and allowable in assessments for
income tax under this Act and any previous law of the Commonwealth in respect
of depreciation, shall be included in his assessable income of that year.
(2a.) Notwithstanding anything contained in the last preceding sub-section
or in section sixty-two of this Act, where, during the present war, a unit of
property to which this section applies is lost or destroyed, and the whole or any
part of the consideration received or receivable in respect of that loss or destruc-
tion would, but for this sub-section, be included in the assessable income of the
taxpayer, the Commissioner may, if the taxpayer so requests in writing when
lodging the return of income to which the request applies, or within such further
time as the Commissioner allows, in lieu of including the consideration or part
thereof in the assessable income of the taxpayer, successively reduce the depre-
ciated values of —
(а) any unit of property acquired by the taxpayer during the year of
income to replace the unit of property so lost or destroyed; and
(б) any other units of property in respect of which depreciation is
allowable to the taxpayer under this Act,
by such amounts as, in the aggregate, are equal to the lesser of the following
amounts;—
(c) The amount of the consideration which would, but for this sub-
section, be included in the assessable income; or
(d) The sum of the depreciated values which are to be so reduced,
and calculate the depreciation allowable in respect of those units of property
on their depreciated value as so reduced.
(2b.) Where the amount of consideration which would, but for the last
preceding sub-section, be included in the assessable income of the taxpayer in
accordance with sub-section (2.) of this section exceeds the sum of the
reductions made under the first-mentioned sub-section, the amount of that
excess shall be included in his assessable income.
(2c.) Where, after the year of income in which the unit of property is so
lost or destroyed, but not later than two years after the termination of the
present war, the taxpayer acquires a unit of property to replace the unit of
2


property so lost or destroyed, the Commissioner may, if the taxpayer so requests
in writing not later than the date of lodgment of the return of income of the
year during which the unit of property is so replaced—
(«) amend any assessment in which the consideration received or receiv-
able in respect of that loss or destruction or any part thereof was
included in the assessable income by deducting from that assessable
income the lesser of the following amounts;- —
(i) The amount of the consideration so included; or
(ii) The depreciated value of the unit of property so acquired;
and
(6) reduce by the same amount the depreciated value of the unit of
property so acquired, and calculate the depreciation allowable in
respect of that unit of property on the depreciated value as so
reduced.
(3.) The consideration receivable in respect of the disposal, loss or destruc-
tion means—
(a) in the case of a sale of the property—the sale price less the expenses
of the sale of the property;
(h) in the case of loss or destruction of the property—the amount or
value received or receivable under a policy of insurance or otherwise
in respect of the loss or destruction:
(c) in the case where the property is sold with other assets and no
separate value is allocated to the property—the amount determined
by the Commissioner;
(d) in the case where property is disposed of otherwise than by sale—the
value, if any, of the property at the date of disposal.
59a. — (1.) Where a .taxpayer has, after the thirtieth day of June, One
thousand nine hundred and thirty-eight, acquired or installed any property,
being plant or articles in respect of which depreciation is allowable under
section fifty-four of this Act, he may, either prior to, or within two years
after, the termination of the present war, make application in writing to the
Commissioner to have the deduction allowable for depreciation in respect of
that property ascertained in accordance with the provisions of this section, and
the Commissioner shall refer the application to a Board of Referees.
(2.) Every such application shall be accompanied by a certificate, obtained
within the period specified in sub-section (4.) of this section, signed by the
Secretary of the Department of Munitions, or the Secretary of the Department
of Supply and Development, or the Secretary of the Department of Commerce,
or by any person authorized in writing by the Secretary of any of those
Departments to sign certificates for the purposes of this section, or by any
other prescribed authority, certifying that the property in respect of which the
application is made was acquired or installed, as the case may be, for use
primarily and principally in, or in connexion with, the prosecution of the
present war.
(3.) If the taxpayer satisfies the Board of Referees —
(a) that, either prior to, or within two years after, the termination of
the present war, that unit of property has been discarded, sold or
otherwise disposed of;
( b ) that the value of any unit of that property as at the thirtieth
day of June next succeeding the termination of the present war is
less than its depreciated value; or
(c) that its actual effective life, as estimated by the Board after the
termination of the present war, is, or will be, shorter than the
effective life estimated by the Commissioner in pursuance of
section fifty-five of this Act,
the Board may determine —
(i) the annual depreciation per centum of that unit of property; and
(ii) the assessments to which that annual depreciation per centum'shall
apply.


and the Commissioner shall allow the amount of depreciation ascertained in
accordance with the percentage so fixed by the Board in lieu of the amount
which has been allowed, or would, but for this section, be allowable, under
section fifty-four of this Act in respect of that unit of property.
(4.) The period within which the certificate specified in sub-section (2.)
of this section may be obtained shall be —
(а) where the property has been installed or acquired prior to the date
of the commencement of this section —the period of six months
immediately succeeding that date; or
(б) where the property is acquired or installed on or after the date of
the commencement of this section —the period of six months imme-
diately succeeding the acquisition or installation of the property.
(5.) The Commissioner may, in any case, in his discretion and upon reason-
able cause being shown by the taxpayer, extend for a further period, not
exceeding sixty days —
(а) the period of two years specified in sub-section (1.) of this
section; or
(б) any period of six months specified in the last preceding sqb-section.
09b. — (1.) Where any building constructed or acquired by a taxpayer after
the thirtieth day of June, One thousand nine hundred and thirty-eight, is used
by him for the purpose of producing assessable income, or of carrying on a
business for the purpose of producing assessable income, the taxpayer may,
either prior to, or within one year after, the termination of the present war,
make application in writing to the Commissioner for the allowance of a,
deduction ascertained in accordance with the provisions of this section, and
the Commissioner shall refer the application to a Board of Referees.
(2.) Every such application shall he accompanied by a certificate, obtained
within the period specified in sub-section (5.) of this section, signed by the
Secretary of the Department of Munitions,. or the Secretary of the Department
of Supply and Development, or the Secretary of the Department of Commerce,
or by any person authorized in writing by the Secretary of any of those
Departments to sign certificates for the purposes of this section, or by any
other prescribed authority, certifying that the building was constructed or
acquired, as he case may be, for use primarily and principally in, or in con-
nexion with, the prosecution of the present war.
(3.) If the taxpayer satisfies the Board of Referees that—
(а) the building was sold or otherwise disposed of prior to the first
day of July next succeeding the termination of the present war
at a value which is less than the net cost of the building; or
( h ) the value of the building as at the thirtieth day of June next
following the termination of the present war (or, where the Board
determines the question prior to that date but after the termination
of the present war, the value as at the date on which the Board
determines the question) is less than the net cost of the building,
and, in either case, the loss or deficiency is wholly or mainly due to conditions
arising as a consequence of the present war, an amount ascertained by
distributing the loss or deficiency proportionately over the period commencing
on the date when the building was constructed or acquired, as the case may
be, and ending on the date when the building is sold or otherwise disposed
of or on the thirtieth day of June next following the termination of the present
war, whichever date first happens, shall be an allowable deduction.
(4.) For the purposes of this section-
fa) the term “building” shall include any alteration, addition or
extension which is made, after the thirtieth day of June, One
thousand nine hundred and thirty-eight, to any existing building;
(б) the net cost of the building shall be deemed to be an amount equal
to all expenditure of a capital nature incurred in constructing or
acquiring the building, and, where the taxpayer, in consequence of
the construction or acquisition of the building, has ceased to use
any other building which he had used in carrying on his business,


shall include such amount of any loss (not being a loss which is
an allowable deduction) sustained by him as a result of that cessa-
tion as the Board of Referees determines, less in any case—
(i) any suni provided, or to be provided, directly or indirectly,
by the Commonwealth or a State, or by any public
authority of the Commonwealth or a State, towards the
cost of constructing or acquiring the building, not being
a sum provided or to be provided by way of loan;
(ii) an amount equal to any part of that expenditure in respect
of which depreciation has been allowed or is allowable
under section fifty-four or section fifty-nine a of this Act;
and
(iii) all amounts received or receivable under a policy of
insurance or otherwise in respect of the loss, destruction,
or diminution in value of, or damage to, the whole or any
part of the building; and
(c) a building shall be deemed to have been constructed or acquired,
as the case may be, on the date when it is first used for the
purposes for which it is constructed or acquired, notwithstanding
that the construction may not have actually been completed on
that date.
(5.) The period within which the certificate specified in sub-section (2.) of
this section may be obtained by the taxpayer shall be—
(а) where the building was constructed or acquired by the taxpayer
prior to the date of the commencement of this section—the period
of six months immediately succeeding that date; or
(б) where the building is constructed or acquired by the taxpayer on or
after the date of the commencement of this section —the period of
six months immediately succeeding the construction or acquisition
of the building, as the case may be.
(8.) The Commissioner may, in any case, in his discretion and upon
reasonable cause being shown by the taxpayer, extend for a further period, not
exceeding sixty days—
(а) the period of one year specified in sub-section (1.) of this section; or
(б) any period of six months specified in the last preceding sub-section.
59c. For the purposes of the last two preceding sections, a Board of Referees
may assign to any plant, article, or building, or to any alteration, extension or
addition to any building, such value as it thinks just.
59d. — (1.) The Treasurer may, on the recommendation of a Board of Referees,
appoint such expert and technical advisers as the Board recommends to assist
the Board on the hearing of any application under section twenty-three A, section
fifty-nine a, section fifty-nine B or section seventy-two B of this Act.
(2.) Any expert or technical advisers so appointed shall act in an advisory
capacity only.
(3.) There shall be payable to any expert or technical advisers so appointed
such fees and expenses (if any) as are prescribed.
59e. A decision of a Board of Referees under section fifty-nine A or fifty-nine
B of this Act shall be final and conclusive.
60. — (1.) Where, either before or after the commencement of this Act, a
person has acquired any property in respect of which depreciation has been
allowed or is allowable under this or the previous Act, he shall not be entitled
to any greater deduction for depreciation than that which would have been
allowed to the person from whom the property was acquired if that person had
retained it;
Provided that, where under section fifty-nine of this Act an amount is
included in the assessable income of the person selling the property, the person
acquiring the property shall be allowed depreciation calculated on the sum of
that amount and the depreciated value of the property under this Act at the
time of the sale.
(2.) This section shall not apply where the Commissioner is of the opinion
that the circumstances are such that depreciation based on the actual considera-
tion given should be allowed.


til. Where the use of any property by the taxpayer has been only partly for
the purpose of producing assessable income, only such part of the deduction
otherwise allowable under section fifty-four or section fifty-nine of this Act
in respect of that property as in the opinion of the Commissioner is proper shall
be an allowable deduction.
(12. In this Division “depreciated value ” of any unit of property at any time
means—
(a) where depreciation has been allowed or is allowable, under this Act
or any previous law of the Commonwealth, in respect of that unit
in assessments for any period prior to that time—the cost of the
property less the amount of all depreciation so allowed or
allowable; and
(ft) where depreciation has not been allowed or is not so allowable —the
cost of the property,
less, in any case to which paragraph (a) or (ft) of this section applies, any
amount by which the depreciated value is reduced in pursuance of sub-section
(2a.) or (2c.) of section fifty-nine of this Act.
Method of Arriving at Percentage Rate.
The percentage rate is determined from the estimated length of the
effective life of the unit of plant. Section 55 of the Act provides that the
Commissioner shall make an estimate of the effective life, assuming that
the unit is maintained in reasonably good order and condition.
The effective life is taken to be the average life of average plant
working under normal conditions, e.g., 20 years’ average life represents
5 per cent, rate of depreciation.
Application of Rates.
Standard Hates. —The rates shown in the depreciation schedule of
this order marked “ C ” shall be regarded as standard rates for the
particular class of business or industry concerned. These standard rates
will have uniform application in all States unless a taxpayer demon-
strates that conditions in any State are such that a variation of those
rates is justified.
The allowance for depreciation will be, as a general rule, based on
plant on hand at the beginning of the income year. The additions to
and disposals of plant during the income year will be taken into account
in arriving at the value of plant on hand at the beginning of the
succeeding income year. This general rule is not inflexible and, upon
application by any taxpayer, a proportional allowance may be made
for depreciation of plant owned and used, or installed ready for use
and held in reserve, during a part of the income year.
Vaviations from Standard Bates. —Where the facts of a particular
case indicate that a departure from the standard rate—either higher or
lower—is justified, the Deputy Commissioner is empowered to vary
the rate to meet the circumstances of the case.
The necessity for variation of the standard rates will generally arise
from one or more of the following causes; —
(a) The consistent writing off by a taxpayer of depreciation at
a rate lower than the standard rate.
(h) Conditions existing in the locality in which the plant ia
situated.
(c) Plant operating in excess of normal working time.
As to (a), where it is found that a taxpayer is consistently writing
off depreciation at a rate lower than the standard rate, and there are
no special circumstances existing, then the Deputy Commissioner will


apply (she lower rate adopted by the taxpayer. If special circumstances
exist which warrant an increase in the rate of depreciation written off
by a taxpayer, those special circumstances should be placed before the
Department.
As to ( b ), climatic and other conditions may exist in the locality
in which the plant is situated, which cause depreciation in excess of
that represented by the standard rates. Where such conditions are
demonstrated, a rate of depreciation will he adopted which the circum-
stances justify.
As to (c), the standard rates are based on plant working normal
hours according to the type of plant and the practice of the industry.
Where the time worked exceeds the normal working time, the excess
of time will be divided by 2, and the result will be the numerator and
the normal working time the denominator of a fraction, which multi-
plied by the standard rate, will give the percentage to be added fo the
standard rate, e.g. —
Standard rate —10 per cent.
Normal working time —S hours per day.
Actual working time —12 hours per day.
Excess working time —4 hours per day.
Numerator —4-f-2=2.
Denominator 8.
Percentage to be added to standard rate -/'s of 10 per cent.=2|-
per cent.
Rate to be allowed —10 per cent. -f- per cent. = per cent.
Where the plant works in excess of normal hours for part only of
a year the time worked over the whole year will be the basis for
calculating the added percentage to be allowed. In the example given,
if the plant had worked 12 hours per day for six months of the year,
and the normal time of 8 hours per day for the remaining period of
the year, the rate of depreciation allowable would be —
Actual working time —
8 hours per day for 6 months, and
12 hours per day for 6 months.
Average working time —10 hours per day for 12 months.
Excess hours —2 hours per day.
Numerator 2-f-2=l.
Denominator 8.
Percentage to be added to standard rate —g of 10 per
per cent.
Rate to be allowed —10 per cent. -j~ I 5 per cent. = 113 per cent.
The application of the formula illustrated in the foregoing examples
generally has the effect of limiting the increase in the standard rates to
a maximum of double the rates fixed for normal working hours. It has
been recognized, however, that the wear and tear of plant in war-time
has been accelerated owing to such causes as the use of the plant to full
capacity without cessation for periodical overhauls, and the use of
unskilled operatives. To meet these abnormal conditions, the Deputy
Commissioner is empowered to increase, to a maximum of treble the
standard rates, the depreciation allowable in respect of plant or articles
used primarily and principally in, or in connexion with, the prosecution


of the present war, in any case where it is demonstrated by the taxpayer
to the satisfaction of the Deputy Commissioner that such an increase is
warranted. (See also later notes on “ Depreciation of Plant or Articles
and Buildings in Consequence of Use in Connexion with War ”.)
Overall Bates. —Rates of depreciation have, in a number of cases,
been fixed to cover groups of items of plant and a fair average rate
fixed for the group. The object of this is to simplify matters both for
the taxpayer and for the Department. This method has, in some
businesses, enabled the Department to fix an overall average rate of
depreciation for the business as a whole, and has operated very greatly
for the convenience of the taxpayers and the Department.
Alternative Methods Under Which the Deduction for
Depreciation may be Calculated.
The Act provides alternative schemes under which the deduction
for depreciation may be calculated.
A taxpayer may select either one of the methods prescribed by
section 56 (1) (a) or ( h ). The allowance will be based on the method
prescribed by paragraph (a) unless the taxpayer exercises an option
to have the allowance calculated under the method provided by para-
graph (h). If it is desired to exercise the option, notice to that effect
must he given in the prescribed form either prior to or at the time the
return of income is furnished. (Regulation 7.) It will be applicable
to all items in respect of which a deduction for depreciation is allowed
by the Act. It is not permissible to select one method for application
to some assets and the other method for application to other assets.
The exercise of the option cannot have retrospective application.
Where a taxpayer has exercised his option, he shall not, except
with the leave of the Commissioner, depart from it in any subsequent
year.
Diminishing Cost Method—Section 56, Paragraph ( a ).
The allowance for depreciation under this paragraph is calculated
on the diminishing cost of the asset affected. For example, if the
cost value of the asset was £lOO and the average percentage rate is
5 per cent., the depreciation for the first year would be £5. For the
second year the allowance would he calculated on £95, being the cost
diminished by the previous allowance for depreciation. The
deduction for each subsequent year would he similarly calculated. A
detailed example of this method of calculating depreciation is contained
in Schedule “ A ” hereto.
The allowance will be made in each assessment during the period
of use of the property in the production of assessable income. When the
property ceases to he so used and is disposed of, lost or destroyed, the
provisions of section 59 will come into operation. (See later notes on
“ Disposal, loss or destruction of depreciated property ”.)
Prime Cost Method—Section 56, Paragraph (b).
The allowance for depreciation under this paragraph is calculated
on the prime cost of the asset affected. For example, if the cost of
the asset was £lOO, and the estimated life is ten years, one-tenth of the
cost, i.e., £lO, will he allowed as depreciation in each year during
the estimated life of the asset.


An example of this method of calculating depreciation is contained
in Schedule “ B ” hereto.
This allowance is made in each year of the estimated remaining life
of the particular property. If the property is disposed of, lost or
destroyed, the provisions of section 59 will come into operation. (See
later notes on “ Disposal, loss or destruction of depreciated property ”.)
Change Over From Diminishing Value to Prime Cost Method.
Where a taxpayer elects to have the method of calculation of
depreciation changed from an allowance on diminishing value to one
on prime cost the amount to be allowed as a deduction in each year
subsequent to the change over will be arrived at by applying the
percentage set out herein to the cost of the subject plant.
Example.—Assume that in respect of plant purchased on 30th
June, 1930, the following facts were found: —
(a) Cost of plant —£1,000.
( h ) Estimated life of plant —10 years.
(c) Rate of depreciation—lo per cent.
Assume further that the change to “ prime cost ’’ method is made
as from Ist July, 1935, and that the written-down value at that date
is £592, the amount to be allowed each year subsequent to the change
over will be 10 per cent, of £l,OOO, i.e., £lOO (£92 in the last year)
until the depreciated value is eliminated or the plant is disposed of,
whichever happens first.
Depreciation Under Commonwealth and State Acts—Uniform
Rates and Values.
Section 58 lias been inserted in the Act with a view to the adoption,
for both Commonwealth and State purposes, of uniform allowances for
depreciation. This entails the adoption of uniform values for plant,
a uniform method of calculating depreciation, and uniform rates of
depreciation.
The section sets out the manner in which uniform values are to be
arrived at, by providing for the adoption, as the depreciated value
for both Commonwealth and State purposes, of the lower of the two
values.
Where the Commonwealth depreciated value is lower than the State
depreciated value the adjustment necessary to bring the values into
line will be made by the State Commissioner. Where the reverse
position exists the adjustment will be made by the Federal Com-
missioner. In the latter case if the Federal Commissioner is satisfied
that, if the values were equal they would remain equal in each subse-
quent year, depreciation will be calculated on the basis of the lower
State depreciated value plus a further allowance of depreciation
amounting to not less than one-tenth part of the difference between the
depreciated values at the beginning of the year of income of the assess-
ment to which this section is first applied. The further allowance is to
continue each year until the depreciated values are equal.
Example.—Assume the depreciated values to be £I,OOO State and
£1,300 Commonwealth as at the Ist July, 1935. The Commonwealth
Department will adopt the State depreciated value of £I,OOO, and


calculate its normal deduction on that value, and will allow further
depreciation of not less than one-tenth part of the difference
between the depreciated values, viz., £3OO, i.e., not less than £3O per
annum until the difference in depreciated values is allowed in full, or
until the plant is disposed of, lost or destroyed, when depreciation will
be adjusted under the provisions of section 59 of the Act.
Where the difference in depreciated values—Commonwealth and
State—-is relatively small, the amount of the difference may be brought
to account in one adjustment.
The adoption of the principle of the section will be of considerable
benefit to the taxpayer in the preparation of the depreciation schedules.
In order to effect the adjustment, the Deputy Commissioner will
require to have sufficient information to enable him to determine the
depreciated values (Commonwealth and State) as at the commencement
of the income year in respect of which the adjustment of values is made.
If the Department is not in possession of the required information, it
will be necessary to obtain it from the taxpayer.
Where the taxpayer is assessable in one State only, and is assessable
for Federal and State income tax in that State, the adjustment will be
made by the Deputy Commissioner of that State. Where, however, the
taxpayer is assessable in more than one State, the adjustment of values
becomes more complicated, for the reason that the Federal assessment
is issued by the Deputy Commissioner, Central Office, whilst the State
assessments are issued by the Commissioners of the States concerned.
In such cases, therefore, in addition to the establishment of uniform
values, methods and rates as between the Commonwealth and a State,
there may be a necessity to establish similar uniformity as between tbe
States. The Deputy Commissioner, Central Office, will need to allocate
the Federal depreciated values to the plant in each State in which
plant is situated, and then exchange information with the States con-
cerned as to the value and basis upon which depreciation is allowed
by each Department.
The effective working of this provision of the law will depend, to
a very large extent, upon the co-operation of taxpayers who desire full
uniformity of allowance for both Federal and State assessments.
Plant Installed Ready for Use.
Depreciation under the previous Act was allowed on plant owned
and used for the production of assessable income. Provision is now
made for an allowance of depreciation not only on plant owned and
used, but also on plant installed ready for use for the purpose of
producing assessable income and during the year held in reserve. No
allowance is made on plant purchased and placed in store and, although
held in reserve, not installed ready for use.
Property Used Partly for Producing Assessable Income.
Attention is drawn to tie provisions of section 61. Where property,
on which depreciation is allowable, is used in part only for the produc-
tion of assessable income, the deduction to be allowed is such part of
the depreciation otherwise allowable in respect of that property as, in
the opinion of the Commissioner, is proper.


Depreciation on Factory Buildings.
Depreciation is allowed on buildings to the extent that they form
integral parts of manufacturing plant. “ Buildings ” form integral
parts of plant, wholly or in part, when, and to the extent that, the
structures are absolutely essential to the support of the working plant.
When treating buildings, wholly or in part, as integral parts of a
manufacturing plant, the depreciation to be allowed is to be calculated
only on that part of the total capital cost of the buildings or structures
which represents additional expenditure, if any, necessarily incurred
for the purpose of installing the plant in the buildings, over and above
the estimated amount that the buildings would have cost if they had
not been required for the purpose of installing such plant.
The rates of depreciation which may be allowed are —
Stone, brick or concrete structures . . . . 1 per cent.
Other structures • . . . . . 3 per cent.
There may, however, be wooden factory buildings, as in the 'Case
of butter factories, where the conditions under which the work must
be carried out cause rapid depreciation in parts or the whole of the
building. In such cases the rate of depreciation will depend upon the
life of the structure, having regard to the conditions mentioned. (See
later notes on “ Depreciation of Plant or Articles and Buildings in
Consequence of Use in Connexion with War ”.)
Structural Improvements, &c., of Primary Producers.
For Federal purposes deduction for depreciation of plant, &c., is
allowable in respect of fences, dams, and other structural improvements
on land owned by the taxpayer and used for the purposes of agricultural
or pastoral pursuits. These items are treated as the working plant of the
agriculturalist or pastoralist, and the allowance of the deduction is
designed to permit the persons mentioned to recoup out of annual
profits of their business, free of income tax, the cost of the improvements
mentioned.
The term “ agriculture ” should be taken as including horticulture,
viticulture and all pursuits dealing with the cultivation of the soil.
The law forbids an allowance in respect of any property used
for domestic or residential purposes. This limitation has been inter-
preted by the Court to refer only to improvements used for the tax-
payer’s domestic or residential purposes, and not to improvements used
for the domestic or residential purposes of employees of the taxpayer
engaged in working the property.
There are two classes of primary producers to be considered, viz.:—
(1) Those who have some land already -producing income, and
who use their own money in making the improvements,
or have partly or wholly repaid money which was
borrowed to enable them to make the improvements.
(2) Those who have borrowed money from their banks or private
individuals, to open up virgin country which is the only
land they hold for pastoral or agricultural purposes.
Glass (1). —This person will be treated as having employed his
own money in the construction of the assets as from the date of their
construction. Similarly with a person who may raise an overdraft for
the first time, or borrow money elsewhere than from a bank to be


used in the construction of the assets on his pastoral or agricultural
land. In the assessments of this class, the depreciation deduction will
be allowed as from the date of construction of the specified assets.
Class (2). —The person concerned will he treated as having
employed his own money in the construction of the assets as from the
date of their construction. However, it is to be borne in mind that the
taxpayer will not receive any benefit by the allowance of a deduction for
depreciation until he begins to gain some assessable income from the
property. A rule has, therefore, been established which will enable
such a person to request the Department to defer his deduction until he
begins to gain assessable income from the land. The number of years of
this delay will, in such a case, have to be deducted from the total
estimated life of the asset, so that the percentage deduction to be
allowed will be increased to the amount required to amortize the cost
of the assets during the unexpired estimated life of the asset, dating
from the year in which assessable income is first derived from the land.
Where the depreciation is to be allowed as from a date after the
construction of the assets, as in class (2), the amount of the deduction
to be allowed is ascertained as follows: —■
(a) The average life of the asset is determined by the Deputy
Commissioner as from the date of its construction.
( b ) The cost of construction or the purchase price is found.
(c) The percentage of cost to be allowed as a deduction is
ascertained by finding the number of years remaining of
the average life of the asset as determined under (a) and
dividing it into 100, e.g., assume average life to be 35
years, and assume that the property does not produce
assessable income for ten years, the unexpired period of
the average life then remaining would be 25 years. 100
divided by 25 represents 4 per cent. The cost of the
asset would be amortized at the rate of 4 per cent, per
annum on the diminishing value basis or prime cost
basis as may be selected by the taxpayer under the pro-
visions of section 56.
There may be exceptional cases to which this rule
might not reasonably apply. These must be dealt with
specially upon submission of the facts.
General. —A person who becomes entitled to a deduction in respect
of assets owned and used by him for pastoral or agricultural purposes,
is subject to the provisions of section 59 when he sells the subject
assets.
Purchasers of land and improvements will be allowed deductions
for depreciation on the cost to them of the specified improvements and
the above rules will be applied as far as is practicable to purchasers
in each of the classes.
Evidence of cost of the assets will be required by the Department.
Such evidence as may exist should be obtained and submitted to the
Department. The cost price to be amortized by depreciation deduction
is the actual cost price to the claimant taxpayer, so that each case must
be dealt with according to its own facts.


When the improvements subject to depreciation have been purchased
with land in one lump sum, the cost of the improvements for purposes
of depreciation should be taken to be the value determined by the
Department, preferably by agreement with the taxpayer, as the part of
the purchase price which is reasonably applicable to the improvements,
having regard to their condition at the date of sale.
The foregoing deals ill the main with the allowance of depreciation
on assets created on land owned by taxpayers and used for the purposes
of agricultural or pastoral pursuits.
In Regard to Lessees. —A lessee who has leased lands with improve-
ments thereon and has paid a specified sum for those improvements, or
a lessee who has erected on land, leased by him, income-producing assets
for use by him during the period of his lease and who is not entitled
to a deduction under section 88 (2) of the Act, will be allowed a
deduction for depreciation on such assets as are specified in section 54.
A lessee who has merely leased land and improvements is not
entitled to amortize the expenditure on the improvements under either
section 54 or section 88 (2), but in such a case the lessor is deriving
rent income from the land and improvements so leased, and is entitled
to the deduction under section 54 on account of depreciation of such
structural improvements, &c., as are specified in the section.
Expenditure on Unsuccessful Bores. —Total expenditure on success-
ful and unsuccessful bores may be regarded as the cost of the successful
bores and depreciation calculated on the basis of that cost.
In the case of a bore which has ceased permanently to flow, the
bore is regarded as a failure as from the date when the permanent
cessation of flow took place, and any cost not written off by way of
depreciation should be added to the depreciated cost of the remaining
working bores.
Disposal, Loss or Destruction of Depreciated Property.
'Section 59 provides that where plant is disposed of, lost or destroyed
at any time in the year of income the difference between the depreciated
value and the consideration receivable shall be an allowable deduction.
If the consideration exceeds the depreciated value, the excess, to the
extent of the sum of the amounts allowed or allowable in assessments,
shall be included in the assessable income of that year.
The effect of the provisions of this section is to provide for, inter
alia, an allowance of a deduction for obsolescence of plant so far as is
practicable in an Income Tax Assessment Act.
The allowance provided for in this section takes place in the year
in which property in respect of which the depreciation deduction is
allowable, may be disposed of, lost or destroyed. “ Disposed of ”
includes “ thrown on the scrap heap ”, and “ lost or destroyed ” includes
loss or destruction by fire, flood or otherwise and losses of ships at sea.
The consideration receivable will include, in the case of the sale
of property, the sale price less the expenses of the sale; and, in the
ease of property lost or destroyed, the amount receivable under a policy
of insurance. The amount by which the consideration receivable exceeds


the original cost is to be excluded from assessable income because profit
made on the disposal of property which was not acquired for purposes
of resale is not profit to which the Act applies; it is an accretion
of capital.
The general scheme of section 59 has been temporarily modified by
the insertion of sub-sections (2a.), (2b.) and (2c.) relating to con-
sideration received or receivable, usually under a policy of insurance,
in respect of the loss or destruction, during the war period, of any unit
of property to which the section applies. Briefly, the new sub-sections
provide that, if the taxpayer so desires, the assessable portion of that
consideration may be excluded from the assessable income, the depre-
ciated value of other property in respect of which depreciation is allow-
able being reduced by amounts which, in the aggregate, are equal to the
amount so excluded from the assessable income. These special pro-
visions apply to assessments for the financial years 1942-1943 et seq.,
that is, to assessments in respect of income derived during the year ended
30th June, 1942, and subsequent years within the period of 'the
present war.
Any request for the application of the provisions of sub-section (2a)
must be made by the taxpayer, in writing, when lodging the return of
income to which the request applies or within such further time as the
Commissioner may allow.
Where the property lost or destroyed is not replaced during the year
of loss and the amount of the consideration to he included in the
assessable income exceeds the depreciated value of other assets of the
taxpayer which are subject to depreciation allowances, the amount of
that excess or the assessable portion of the consideration, will be
included in the assessable income of the taxpayer. Sub-section (2c.),
however, provides that if the property is replaced prior to, or within
two years after, the termination of the war, the taxpayer may, if he so
desires, have the assessment amended by the exclusion of the amount so
included in his assessable income, and the cost price of the new property
will he reduced by a corresponding amount.
Any request for such an amendment must be made by the taxpayer,
in writing, not later than the date of lodgment of the return of income of
the year in which the property is replaced.
Depreciation of Plant or Articles and Buildings in Consequence of
Use in Connexion with War—Sections 59A and 59B.
Special provisions of a temporary nature —relating to plant or
articles and buildings acquired, installed or constructed after the 30th
June, 1938, for use primarily and principally in, or in connexion with
the prosecution of the present war —were inserted in the Income Tax
Assessment Act by Act Ho. 50 of 1942.
If a taxpayer considers that the depreciation allowed by the Com-
missioner on plant or articles acquired or installed for war purposes
is insufficient to cover all wear and tear and diminution in value, he
may apply to the Commissioner to have the deduction allowable for
depreciation in respect of that property determined by the Board of
Eeferees in accordance with the provisions of section 59a. The deter-
minations will he made by the Board after the war, except in those


eases where an earlier determination is made possible by the fact that
the property is scrapped or sold prior to the termination of the war.
If the Board finds that the taxpayer is entitled to a higher rate of
depreciation, the Commissioner is given power to amend the assessments
affected by the determination and to refund any tax overpaid.
Section 59b was enacted to provide for a special deduction in
respect of the diminution in value of, or the loss on sale or disposal of,
buildings constructed or acquired for war purposes after the 30th June,
1938. For the purposes of the section, the term “building” includes
any alteration, addition or extension made after the 30th June, 1938,
to any existing building. If the taxpayer satisfies the Board of Eeferees
that the value of the buildings or alterations, &c., as the case may be, at
the end of the war, is less than the net cost (as defined in the section),
or that, before the Ist July next succeeding the termination of the war,
the buildings were sold or disposed of at a value which is less than the
nepoost, the Board may determine the amount of the loss or deficiency
which is wholly or mainly due to conditions arising as a consequence
of the war. The amount of the loss or deficiency thus determined will
be distributed proportionately over the period indicated in sub-section
(3.) and the amount allocated to each year will he allowed as a
deduction in the assessment based on the income of that year.
Although applications for special deductions under the provisions
of sections 59a and 59n may be made at any time prior to, or within
the stipulated period after, the termination of the present war, the
certificates which are required to accompany such applications must he
obtained by prospective applicants from the appropriate departmental
authority within the period specified in the Act.
Where the plant, articles or buildings were acquired, installed, or
constructed before the commencement of the Act, i.e., before the 6th
October, 1942, applications for tbe certificates should have been made
prior to the 6th June, 1943. In the case of plant, articles or buildings
acquired, installed or constructed on or after the 6th October, 1942, the
certificates should be obtained within the period of six months immedi-
ately succeeding the date of acquisition, installation or construction.
The Commissioner has power to extend the period of six months within
which the certificates may be obtained for a further period not exceed-
ing sixty days. Where an applicant for a certificate has made his
application to the certifying authority within the specified time, and
has furnished all the supporting information which could reasonably
be expected of him, a certificate issued by the appropriate authority,
even though issued outside the specified period, will be regarded as
complying with the conditions of sections 59a or 59b as the case may be.
Certificates may be obtained from the Department of Munitions, the
Department of Supply and Shipping, the Department of Commerce
and Agriculture, the Department of Aircraft Production or the Depart-
ment of the Navy. Applications for such certificates should he made,
on the appropriate special form, to the Department which is in a
position to certify that the applicant’s property was acquired, installed
or constructed for war purposes.


The certificates should be retained by the taxpayer and need not be
furnished to the Taxation Department unless and until an application
is made under sub-section (1.) of sections 59a or 59b in respect of the
relevant property.
Acquisition of Depreciated Property.
Section 60 provides that a taxpayer when acquiring any property
shall not be entitled to any greater deduction for depreciation than
that which would have been allowed to the person from whom the
property was acquired if that person had retained it, except in
cases where the Commissioner is of the opinion that the circumstances
are such that the depreciation should be allowed on actual consideration
given.
Where an amount representing the difference between the depreciated
value and the consideration given is included in the assessable income of
the vendor the person acquiring the property will be allowed deprecia-
tion on the sum of that amount and the depreciated value of the
property at the time of sale.
It is common practice for businesses owned by individuals, partner-
ships or companies to be transferred to a company, or a new company
formed to take over the business as a going concern. In such cases it
frequently happens that the assets are written up in value far above
the value to w T hich their cost had been reduced by depreciation under
the Act. The written-up values generally represent in these cases the
estimated cost of replacing the assets. The purchasers, in such cases,
if allowed a deduction for depreciation based on the written-up values
at which they nominally acquired the assets, would obtain an unfair
advantage over those owners who continue to conduct their businesses
without alteration of manner of ownership. In no case is the deduction
for depreciation calculated by reference to the possible cost of replacing
any plant or machinery, &c. A deduction is always calculated by
reference to actual cost, i.e., actual money expended to acquire the asset.
This necessitates excluding all added value represented by a writing up
of the book values of any items of plant, &c., and the greatest care
should, therefore, be exercised to see that depreciation allowance is not
calculated upon a written-up value.
It will be noted, however, that where an amount representing the
difference between the depreciated value and the consideration given
is included in the assessment of the vendor, or where the Commissioner
is satisfied that the circumstances are such that the allowance, based
upon the actual amount of consideration given, should be made, the
deduction calculated on that basis may be allowed.
In the case of property acquired otherwise than by purchase, e.g.,
by inheritance or gift, the allowance for depreciation to the person
acquiring the property shall be not greater than that which would have
been allowable to the deceased if he had lived, or to the donor if he
had retained the property. The depreciated value of the property at
the date of acquisition shall be the basis of the allowance for
depreciation.


Railway and Tramway Tracks.
The proper allowance to be made in the cases of railway and tram-
way permanent way is considered to be a deduction of the annual
amount required to be set aside to recoup the outlay in constructing the
track.
It is, however, very difficult to ascertain the probable cost of renew-
ing a track, and in these circumstances the course which has been
adopted as the most reasonable has been to place railway and tramway
tracks on the list of items in respect of which a deduction will be allow-
able on account of depreciation.
A uniform rate of depreciation on railway and tramway tracks
cannot, however, be fixed, because the conditions under which the
tracks are built and worked in the various States differ so widely from
each other. It is, therefore, left to the discretion of the Deputy
Commissioner, subject to the application of the following rules r
(1) The rate to be fixed should be the percentage which would
be required to recoup the cost over the estimated life
of the track, e.g., life twenty years, percentage 5 per cent.
(2) If a track becomes liable to emergency stress, such as
exceptional loading on special occasions, this should be
taken into consideration when ascertaining the probable
life of the track.
In some cases, however, conditions may be present which make it
inequitable or impracticable to fix a rate of depreciation in the manner
set out above. Where such a case arises a deduction will be allowed of
the expenditure on replacements of track (i.e., renewals of the
foundation of the track as distinct from renewals of occasional rails
or sleepers and junctions and crossings which are already allowable as
repairs) in the year in which the expenditure is incurred.
This order supersedes Income Tax Order 1196.
L. S. JACKSON,
Commissioner of Taxation.


METHOD OF CALCULATING DEPRECIATION ON THE DIMINISHING
VALUE OF THE ASSET.
—
Plant
say-
10 per
cent.
Power
Plant
say 5
per cent.
Build-
ings
say 5
per cent.
Lose
on sale
of
Plant.
Total
Depre-
ciation
Allow-
ance.
Original cost
First year’s depreciation to 30th June, 19 ..
£
6,420
642
£
4,100
205
£
8,340
417
£
£
1,264
Value at beginning of second year
Second year’s depreciation to 30th June, 19
5,778
578
3,895
195
7,923
396
U69
Value at beginning of third year
Add additional plant erected at beginning of
third year
5,200
520
3,700
7,627
Third year’s depreciation to 30th June, 19
5,720
572
3,700
185
7,527
376
U33
Value at beginning of fourth year
Fourth year’s depreciation to 30th June, 19
5,148
514
3,515
175
7,151
357
1,046
Value at beginning of fifth year
Less value of plant sold on 30th September- —
£
4,634
3,340
6,794
Original cost .. .. 400
Written down at 5 per cent.—
' First year . . .. 20
380
Second year . . .. 19
361
Third year .. .. 18
343
Fourth year .. .. 17
326
Plant sold for .. . . 250
To be allowed in year of sale .. *76
Deduct written down value of plant sold
326
••
Fifth year’s depreciation to 30th June, 19
4,634
463
3,014
150
6,794
340
*76
1,029
Value at beginning of sixth year . .
4,171
2,864
6,454
SCHEDULE A.


METHOD OF CALCULATING DEPRECIATION ON THE PRIME GOST OF THE
ASSET.
Total
Estimated Life of Asset—10 years. Allowance.
£ £ " £ £ £
Original cost .. .. .. .. 8,460
First year’s depreciation .. .. 846 .. .. . . 846
Additional plant purchased at
of second year
Second year’s depreciation
beginning
7,614
846
532
53
899
Third year’s depreciation
6,768
846
479
53
899
Fourth year’s depreciation
5,922
846
426
53
899
Fifth year’s depreciation
5,076
846
373
53
899
Sixth year’s depreciation
4,230
846
320
53
899
Less plant sold for
3,384
267
250
Seventh year’s depreciation
846
17
17
863
Eighth year’s depreciation
2,538
846
846
Ninth year’s depreciation
1,692
846
846
Additional plant purchased at
of year
Tenth year’s depreciation
beginning
846
846
4,210
421
1,267
Eleventh year’s depreciation
3,789
421
421
Less plant sold for
3,368
3,500
Twelfth year’s depreciation
.. Excess
*132
Nil
Plant purchased at beginning of year
Thirteenth year’s depreciation ..
*Tol be included as income
in year of sale
4,000
400
400
Fourteenth year’s depreciation ..
3,600
400
400
Less plant sold for
3.200
4.200
Excess 1,000
Excess of actual cost
over depreciated
value, viz., £4,000-
£3,200=£800, to be
included as income
in the year of sale
Nil
SCHEDULE B.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
A
Acid Chambers
5
Actors’ Accessories
20
Adding Machines and Typewriters
10
Advertising Samples and Designs for decorative steel and iron work ..
2*
Aerated Water Plant ..
7*
(Syphons, bottles, stoppers, syphon boxes, and boxes treated as
stock.)
Aeroplanes (Commercial)
25
Agricultural Implements
10
Agriculturalists. (See Primary Industries)
Air-conditioning Plant
7J
Structural alterations and additions associated with the installation
of such plant which form an integral part of the plant ..
1
Amusement Machines and Other Equipment—
Electric Dodgems—Allowances similar to those applying in respect
of scooter boats shown hereunder —
Midget Cars —■
(a) Cars
33i
. (ft) Racing Track
10
Pin Tables
Replacements
Scooter Boats —
(i) the boats and their own internal electric motors and their
own trolley rods
33J
(ii) electric equipment and structural equipment providing
power to drive the boats and structural equipment to
accommodate them in the water pond
5
Slot Machines ..
20
Surfo Planes (rubber surf shooters)
50
Artificial Manure Manufacturing Plant
5
Automatic Eire Sprinklers
6
B
Bacon Curing Plant—
Fixtures (including overhead Tracking)
5
Other
7*
Bands —
Band Instruments and Music Stands ..
5
Sheet Music
Replacements
Uniforms ..
10
Bakers’ Plant..
5
Battery (Dry) Manufacturing Plant—
Bobbin Tamping Machine
5
Cathode Filling Machines—
Not subject to chemical action
5
Subject to chemical action ..
7*
Cathode Mixing Machines
10
Cooking Baths
5
Dolly Making Machines —
Low built type
10
High built type
5
Powdering Barrel Mill
7J
Rock Crushing Machine
10
SCHEDULE C.
KATES PER CENT. OF DEPRECIATION FIXED BY THE FEDERAL
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION FOR ALLOWANCE IN INCOME TAX
ASSESSMENTS.
Notb. —The rates shown are those fixed for plant of average type used under normal
working conditions. Special conditions may require either a higher or a lower rate.
Deduction on account of repairs is allowed in addition.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Battery (Dry) Manufacturing Plant — continued.
Sifting Machine (Disintegrator)
n
Stamper Machine Tools
5
Wetness Testing Machine
7*
Wrapping Machines and Associated Appliances ..
5
Bedding, Linen, Crockery, &c. (Hospitals, Hotels and Boarding Houses)
Replacements
Bee-farming Plant (Beehives, Frames, Extractors, Wax Press, Storage
Tanks, &c.)
Replacements
Belting, ordinary (on the assumption that original belting cost would
form part of the cost of a particular machine) ..
Replacements
Bicycles—
Motor
15
Ordinary
10
Billiard Tables
Biograph Machines
10 •
Biograph Films (in use)
Nil
Biscuit-making Plant ..
5
Blue Manufacturing Plant
n
Boarding House—
Bedding
Replacements
Carpets
20
Crockery, Cutlery, Glassware and Cooking Utensils
Replacements
Furniture and Plant
5
Linen
Replacements
Linoleums ..
u
Boats—
Sailing, Rowing and Motor
n
Lugger (Oyster Fishing)
n
Oars, Sails, &c.
Replacements
Pearling
5
Boat Sheds
Nil
„ „ Jetties
2*
Boilers
5
Bonemilling—
Steam Vat ..
5
Cage Mills ..
H
Bagging Machine .. ..
5
Bookbinding Plant and Machinery
5
Boot and Shoe Polish Manufacturing Plant
Vi
Boot and Shoe-making Lasts
Replacements
Boot and Shoe-making Machinery—Owned by taxpayer
Vi
Boot and Shoe-making Machinery—-Leased by taxpayer
Nil
(Installation expenditure in connexion with the obtaining and in-
stalling of the leased machines will be treated as an asset owned
and used by the lessee for the production of income and will be
written off at the rate of 7J per cent, per annum.
In respect of any premium paid for the lease, in addition to annual
rent, a deduction of the sinking fund required to recoup the
premium paid is allowable.
The lessors of such machinery are allowed 7| per cent, per annum
depreciation on the cost of such machines.)
Bores
Vi
Boring Plant ..
10
Bowser Machines. {See under “ Oil Companies’ Plant ”)
Bowser Machines, Tanks for. {See under “ Oil Companies’ Plant ”)
Box (Cardboard) Manufacturers’ Machinery
5
Brandy Making—Distillery Plant
Vi
Breweries—
Casks
Vi
Condenser Pipes
5
Crates
25
Schedule C— continued.


■
Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Breweries —cord inued.
Expansion Pipes
2i
General Plant
5
Piping—other (including steam, water and air pipes and copper beer
pipes)
24
Brick Kilns
5
,, ,, , Chimney Stacks
Nil
dirickmaking Plant
'5
Broom and Brush Manufacturing Plant —
Process Plant
71.
Tools and Dies
Replacements.
Buggies, Sulkies, Drays, and Wagons (Farms and Stations)
10
Buildings, which form integral parts of manufacturing plant and
machinery—
Stone, brick or concrete structures ..
1.
Other structures (see special rate for “ Butter Factories’ ”
Buildings)
3
Buildings—
Freezing Works —
Brick, stone or concrete
1
Entirely of wood ..
6
Other material —(Such rate as may be fixed in the particular case)
Cork Board used in Insulating Cold Storage Chambers ..
5
Buildings, which do not form integral parts of manufacturing plant
and machinery (including magazines for storing explosives)
Nil
Bullocks (Working)
10
{See notes to item “ Live Stock, Working Beasts and Beasts of
Burden.”)
Butchers’ Plant
5
Butter Factories’ Plant —
♦Factory Buildings:—
Brick or concrete ..
1
Wood
5
Wharf structures ..
2i
General Plant—
Engineers’ repair shop and blacksmiths’ forges, lathes, drilling
machines, &c. .. .. .. ...
5
Loose Tools
Replacements
*Box Nailing-room —
Brick or concrete
1
Wood . .
5
♦Launches
5
♦Wharves
2i
Windlasses
5
*Tanks for Hot and Cold Water —Wood or Iron
5
Conveyers—Chain for conveying boxed butter
5
*Ammonia Condensing Coils
12*
*Water Cooling and Aerating Plant ..
12-|
* Ice-making Plant ,.
7*
Ice Moulds
20
Tramway Rails —Wood or Iron
Replacements
Motor Vehicles
15
Motor Lorries for Collecting Cream Cans
20
Horsed Vehicles
10
Horsed Wa gona for Collecting Cream Cans
15
Horses
10
(Special Allowance under Special Conditions.)
Manufacturing and Treating Plant —
♦Weighing Scales
5
*Testing Apparatus
5
• Represents maximum rate.
Schedule C — continued .


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Butter Factories’ Plant— continued.
Manufacturing and Treating Plant — continued.
5
♦Steaming Trough, &o., for Cleaning Cans
♦Can-washing Machines
10
♦Butter-packing Machines
10
♦Pumps, Brine and Cream
10
*Cream Tanks
10
* Pasteurizing Plant
I2i
15
♦Brine Tanks
m
Chums
15
*Butter Workers
16
♦Ammonia Coils for Cooling Chambers
10
✓Power Plant —
/ Steam Boilers .. . . • . • • • •
Steam Engines .. .. . . . . ■ • r
5
Electric Generators and Motors, &c., &c. . . .. J
Power Transmission—
Shafting, Pulleys and Belting
5
■jBelting . .
Replacements
Conveyers
5
Piping
n
c
■Cables and Wires (Overhead) —
Insulated ..
~y
*Bare
3
♦Cables and Wires (Underground)
2
Cake-making Plant
5
Camels
10
Cameras —
Used for Street Photography . .
25
Other .. .. .. .. •■
5
Canning Plant, Fruit and Vegetable
5
Carts used bv Brewers, Flour Millers, and other tradesmen ..
10
Carpet Cleaners—
Carpet Beating Machines
Electric Motor for Driving Carpet Beating Machines
5
Electric Sewing Machine
10
Electric Vacuum Cleaner
10
Carpets—
20
In business places
In picture theatres .. .. ..
20
In professional chambers
10
Case-making Plant
n
Cash Registers
5
Casks
Catering Plant (Crockery, Cutlery, and Cooking Utensils)
Replacements
/Cement Making Plant ;.
n
Cement Pipe Manufacturing Plant
74
Chandeliers in Theatres
5
Cheese-making Plant —
124
*Pasteurizing Kettles and Kay Pasteurizers
*Cheese Treatment Plant
10
Manufacturing Plant ..
74
Chutes
Replacements
♦ Represents maximum rate,
t No depreciation but cost of new belting when incurred.
Schedule C — continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Cigarette Papers—Cutting and Folding Plant
10
Cinematographs
10
Clothes Peg Manufacturing Plant
7*
Clothing, Millinery and White Work Manufacturing Plant—
Sewing Machines
10
Other Plant
5
Coal Mine Gangways . .
2*
Collieries —
Anchors, Mooring Chains, and Breast Chains
Replacements
Jetties and Plant thereon (in exposed places) —
Jetties
5
Plant
n
Rolling Stock (trucks for carriage of coal)
H
Skips in Coal Mines ..
H
Sidings, Chutes, and Shafts, if privately owned by taxpayer claiming
depreciation
Replacements
Gangways ..
2*
Commercial Travellers’ Outfits —Tin Sample Boxes and Leather Bags
12*
Compressors—
Air and Oxygen Types
5
Ammonia—
Vertical . .
u
Horizontal
5
Concrete Mixers
10
Confectioners’ Machinery
5
Container-makers’ Plant (waxed paper type)
n
Conveyances (Horses, carts, &c.)
10
Costume Stands
Replacements
Costumes, Theatrical ..
20
Cotton Manufacturers’ Machinery—■
Conveyors ..
10
Engine, Gas
6
Gas Producer Plant ..
n
Gin
10
'Cranes, Electrical or Otherwise ..
5
Crates. See under “ Breweries.”
Crockery and Glassware in Hotels and Restaurants
Replacements
Cyanide Vats (galvanized iron) ..
Replacements
D
Dairy Plant, Farm (for rates applicable to factory plant, see under
“ Butter Factory Plant ”) —
Power
5
Other
10
Dams. See under “ Primary Industries.”
Dentists —
Carpets
10
Electric Motors
6
Furniture and Fittings
2*
Instruments and Plant. (If the taxpayer so desires, the cost of
replacements of drills or burs may be allowed in lieu of depreciation
on those items) .. .. .. ■ • • ■
5
Linoleums .
7*
Designs used in connexion with stamping decorative steel and iron
2*
work
Designs used in Jacquard looms, charged as a manufacturing expense
Nil
Diathermy Plant
7*
(Including screening of the apparatus to suppress radio interference.)
10
Dictaphones ..
Schedule C — continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Dies —
Jewellers’
Replacements
For Kit-bag Frames
Replacements
Used in connexion with Steel or Brass Metal
Replacements
Distillery Plant (Brandy, &c.) ..
n
Distilling (Oil and Tar) Plant. See 0. and T.
Doctors’ Instruments (excluding X-ray and Electro-cardiograph
—which see)
Replacements
Drays and Wagons (see under “ Farmers’ Plant ”)
10
Dredges
5
Dredging Machinery used in mining operations
n
•Dried Milk Plant
n
Drying Kilns (Brick or Concrete for timber drying)
10
Dunnage
Replacements
E
Electric Signs. (See also “ Neon Signs ”)
Replacements
/ Electrical Machinery and Equipment—
/ Accumulators and Storage Batteries
7*
Alternators, Dynamos, Motor-Generators, Notary Converters
5
Boilers
5
Buildings which form integral parts of manufacturing plant and
machinery—
Stone, Brick or Concrete Structures
1
Other Structures
3
Buildings which do not form integral parts of manufacturing plant
and machinery
JNil
Chimney Flues
Nil
Choke Coils
2*
Distributing Centres—Switch gear
5
•{Electric Transmission Lines ..
2
Engines, Condensers, Pumps ..
5
Hand Tools and Loose Plant ..
Replacements
House Installations ..
5
Instruments, Testing Apparatus, Meters, Indicators—fixed and
portable ..
7*
Lamps, Arc
10
Lamps, Incandescent
Replacements
Lighting Arresters ..
2
✓Machinery, not specified herein
/ Overhead Wires and Cables—
5
Insulated
5
•Bare
2
Standards, Iron or Steel (including Brackets and Cross Arms)
H
Starting Gear, including Compensators, Switches, &c.
5
Switchboards
Replacements
Transformer Boxes . .
2i
Transformers (Static)
**
•Underground Wires and Cables
2
Electric Tramway Equipment—
Bare Overhead Trolley Wires
u
•Cables (underground)
2
Cars and other Rolling Stock ..
5
Meters
7i
Motors
Replacements
{Permanent Way.
• Represents maximum rate,
t A special rate will be fixed in each case.
X Plus replacements of soles, cross arms, &c.
Schedule C— continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed .
Electric Tramway Equipment— continued.
Plant and Machinery and Machine Tools
5
Poles, Steel (set in concrete) ..
2i
Poles, Wooden —
Set in Concrete
5
Not set in Concrete
10
Standards, Brackets, &c., for Tramway and Electricity work
H
Tramway overhead equipment (Suspenders, Terminals, &c., for
Trolley Wires and other overhead equipment, hut not inelud-
ing the trolley wire, or brackets and fittings on poles) ..
H
Electro-cardiograph
5
Engineering Works (Machinery installed)
5
Engines
5
Eucalyptus Oil Plant—
Boilers
5
Stills — coolers
2i
Tanks
2*
Experimental Plant
Nil
Explosive Manufacturing and Chemical Plant
n
Explosives, Magazines used for storage of
Nil
F
Farmers’ Plant (see also “ Primary Industries ”) —
Bee-farming Plant (Beehives, Frames, Extractors, Wax Press,
Storage Tanks, &o.)
Replacements-
Bores
n
Boring Plant
10
Buggies, Sulkies, Drays and Wagons . .
10
Dairy Cattle. See note under “ Live Stock
Dairy Plant —
Power
5
Other
10
Fruit-growers’ Plant, Dips, Pans, Spray Pumps, &c.
10
Homes. See note under “ Lve Stock ”,
Implements, Agricultural
10
/Plant, Agricultural ..
10
/ Station Plant
10
Stud Stock. See note under “ Live Stock ”,
Tanks (Galvanized Iron) —
Rain Water
5
Bore Water
10
Tanks, Butter Milk (used in pig-farming industry)
Replacements
Tanks, Earth
Nil
Tanks, Underground
Nil
Traction Engines
10
Tractors, Motor
10
Wells
Wheat Stacks. See under “ Wheat Stacks.”
Windmills ..
5
Working Beasts and Beasts of Burden.
See notes under “ Live Stock.”
Ferry Steamers
5
Fertilizer Manufacturing Plant ..
5
Films (in stock)
Nil
Films (in use)..
Nil
Fire Sprinklers (Automatic)
5
Firewood and Timber. See under “ T.”
Fishing Nets . .
Replacements
Floating Dock
0
Schedule C — confirmed.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Floors — Maltsters’ Steel
Replacements
*Flour-milIing Plant and Machinery
n
Silos, Steel and Concrete
i
Bins, Wooden
3
Foundation for Stacks
Replacements
Foundations of Plant and Machinery which form integral parts of such
plant and machinery
2
Foundry (special rates will be fixed in special cases, upon applica-
tion) —
Furnaces and converters
10
Laboratory..
5
Ladles
10
Loose Tools
Replacements
Machine Tools
5
✓Machinery and Plant
/ Moulding Boxes
5 '
10
Patterns
2i
Plant and Tools (excluding furnaces, converter and ladles)
U
Rolling Mill Engine ..
n
Freezing Cabinets (e.g., Frigidaires) — Portable, for shops
Freezing Works. {See also “ Refrigerating Machinery.”) —
5
Buildings —
Brick, stone or concrete
i
Entirely of wood ..
5
Other material. Such rate as may be fixed in the particular case.
Cork Board used in Insulating Cold Storage Chambers . .
5
Fresh Food and Ice Co. Plant ..
71
Frigidaires
5
Fruit and Vegetable Canning Plant
Fruit-growers’ Plant, Dips, Pans, Spray Pumps, &c.
Fruit-growers’ and Market Gardeners’ Glass Houses
5
10
Nil
Furnaces and Flues (assay work)
Replacements
Furniture and Fittings —
In business places
In Doctors’, Lawyers’ and other professional men’s consulting rooms
5
a*
In Hospitals
5
In houses let furnished
n
Furniture and Plant used in connexion with Hotels and Boarding
Houses ..
5
Furniture and Seating in Picture Theatres
n
Furniture-making Plant
n
G
Galvanized Iron for roofing stacks
Replacements
Galvanized Iron Manufacturing Plant, Rates will be fixed on applica-
tion to the Department.
Galvanized Iron Tanks —
Rainwater ..
5
Borewater ..
10
Galvanized Iron Vats (cyanide) . .
Replacements
Galvanizing Plant
10
Gangways — Coal Mine ..
2i
Gas-making Plant —
Boilers
5
Buildings—
(a) Retort Houses, ('oal Stores. {See “ Retort Houses.’’)
(6) Other Buildings
Nil
Coal Crushers
5 ■
* Represents maximum rate.
Schedule C — continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Gas-making Plant— -continued.
Coal Stores—
(a) Being Stores enclosed by brick or steel walls and a roof and
containing tramways, coal conveyors, coal elevators and
coal breakers. {See “ Retort Houses.”)
(b) Being open air Stores, consisting of brick or concrete walls.
without roofs or without any plant or machinery built
into the walls
Nil
Coal Wagons
-H to 7i
Coke Handling and Screening Plant
Coke Wagons. (.SVe “ Vertical Retort Houses.”)
n
Condensers—
Exposed Type
H
Enclosed
3
Cranes
5
Chains and Buckets or Grates for Cranes
Replacements
Electric Motors
5
Engines, Steam Engines, Electric Motors. Gas Engines. Gas Ex-
hausters and Blowers, Hydraulic Power Plant
5
Excavations—
(a) for levelling purposes only
Nil
(6) to construct roadways ..
Nil
(c) to accommodate plant or machinery such as brick or metal
lined underground tanks, containing plant for automatically
dealing with tar and f mmoniacal liquors
3 .
(on lining and
plant only)
{d) Tar holding tanks, not containing any building plant
Nil
(r) for accommodating machinery requiring to be erected below
the ordinary ground level —
Metal lined ...
3
Reinforced concrete lined ..
Nil
Fences
Nil
Furniture and Fittings (Office)
5
Gas Exhausters and Blowers ..
5
Gas and Water Fittings
n
Gas Holders
3
*Gas Mains ..
4>
Gas Testing Apparatus—
Glassware
Replacements
Mechanism
3
Hydraulic Power Plant
5
Machine Tools and Hand Tools—
Machine Tools
5
Loose Hand Tools
Replacements
Meters- —
Wet
2*
Dry
4
Meter Testing Apparatus
3
Motor Cars and Cycles—
Travellers’ Cars
20
Other Cars and Cycles
15
Wagons and Lorries
15
Prepayment Fittings
10
Pressure Regulators, or Governors and Distributing Meters
3
Pumps
5
Purifiers
3
Retaining Walls
Nil
* Represents maximum rate.
Schedule C — continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Gas-making Plant— continued.
{Retorts, horizontal and inclined ..
7J
' 2
f ,, vertical
15
Retort Houses and Machinery and Coal Stores associated therewith —
Charging and Discharging Machines—
For liorizontal retorts
10
For inclined retorts
8
Coke Conveyers, not including driving gears ..
20
Coke Wagons
n
Driving Gears
10
Retort House Walls and Smoke Stack ..
2
Retort Benches
6
Roads
Nil
Scrubbers ..
:i'
Service Pipes
O
Station Meters
2i
Steam Locomotives ..
5
Street Lamp Columns and Lanterns
•>1
Sulphate Plant
n
Tar Refining Plant ..
H
Tar Extractors—
(a) Stationary
2*
(6) Rotary
5
Tar Mixing Plant
U
Telpher Plant —
(a) Structural Steel Rests for tramway
3
(h) Spiral Elevator
10
(c) Motor Trucks ..
5
id) Coke Bins
Replacements
(e) Power Rods
Replacements
Tools. {See “ Machine Tools and Hand Tools.”)
Tramways—
Overhead Tramways
3
Ground Tramways ..
Nil
(Replacements of rails, sleepers, points and crossings, &c., are
allowable as incurred.)
Washers—
Livesey Washers ..
2
Other Kinds
3
Water Fittings
n
Water Gas Plant
r,
Water Tanks
O
Weighing Machines ..
5
Wharves
5
Gas-making Plant, Optional Rates —
At the option of the taxpayer an all round rate of 4 per cent, on all
items of plant and machinery, except the following items on which
the rates shown, shall be applied :—
Retorts—
■(■Vertical
15
{Horizontal and inclined
U
*Mains ..
2
Meters—
Dry ....
4
Wet ..
2*
Prepayment Fittings
10
Service Pipes
5
Street Lamp Columns and Lanterns
2* '
* Represents maximum rate,
f Plus repairs but not including replacements.
X Plus replacements of retort cores and settings.
Schedule C — continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Gas-making Plant— continued.
At the option of the taxpayer, doc. —-continued.
Wharves
5
Furniture
5
Adding Machines and Typewriters. .
10
Cash Registers ..
5
Motor Cars —
Travellers’ Cars
20
Other cars and cycles . .
15
Motor Lorries
Gas Producer Units. (Depreciation to be allowed at the rate applicable
15
to the vehicle to which the unit is attached.)
Gelatine and Glue Manufacturing Plant — ’
Drving Trays
Replacements
Other Plant
n
Glass Bottle Manufacturing Plant —
Chimney Stacks
Nil
Process Plant
Other Plant. (The ordinary rates shown herein as being
applicable
n
to such plant.)
Glass Houses (Fruit-growers’ and Market Gardeners’)
Nil
Gramophone Records used by Broadcasting Companies
Replacements
Gramophone Record Presses
Graziers’ Plant. (See under “ Farmers’ Plant.”)
10
H
Hairdressers' Plant
5
Hat Manufacturing Plant and Machinery..
n
Harness
10
High Frequency Current Machines (Surgical)
n
Hoardings
5
Hop Frames, Breakwdnds, Wooden Troughing
Replacements
Hop Kilns
5
Hop-picking Machines ..
u
Horse Rugs ..
Replacements
Horses {See note under “ Live Stock.”)
10
,, Refrigerating Works
12|
Shipping and General Carriers
12J
Hospitals—
Replacements
Bedding, Linen, Crockery, &c.
Furniture . .
5
Hotels—
Bedding
Replacements
Carpets
20
Crockery, Cutlery, Glassware, and Cooking Utensils
Replacements
Furniture and Plant
5
Linen
Replacements
Linoleums ..
n
Hulks, Coal ..
6
1
Ice-making Machinery—
n
*General machinery ..
Pipes
‘Condenser ..
u
Motor Lorries
15
Ink Factory Plant
i>
Irrigation Plant
5
• Represents maximum rate.
Schedule o— continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
j
Jam-making Plant
r>
Jetties, Boat Sheds
H
Jetties, Collieries {in exposed places)
Jewellers —
5
Dies
Replacements
Fittings—Window Pads, Trays, and Jewel Cases
Replacements
Plant
10
Jockeys’ Accoutrements—Saddles, Whips, Boots, &c.
Judges’ Robes
K
* Kilns (Brick) ..
Replacements
74
5 ’
/ ,, ,, Chimney Stacks
Nil
Kilns, Brick or Concrete for Timber Drying
10
Kilns, Hop ..
5
Knitting Machines
n
Lamson Tube System . .
10
Launches
Laundry Plant
Libraries —where taxpayers do not deal with their lending stock in
trading account—
10
Circulating
10
Law including law reports
2J
Other Professional ..
5
Music lending
Libraries—Circulating. As an alternative to allowance for deprecia-
tion, taxpayers are permitted to deal with their lending stock in a
trading account. Where a library is kept by a bookseller who does
not keep a separate record of his lending stock, such stock may be
taken into General Trading Account.
Lifts and Elevators—
15
Electric
6
Hydraulic
Lighters (Coal). {See also “ Ships, Steamers, Lighters, &c.”) —■
5
Wooden, iron or steel
6
Linoleum
74
Linotype metal
Replacements
Linseed Oil Manufacturing Plant
Live Stock—
74
Dairy Cattle
Nil
Stud Stock
Working Beasts and Beasts of Burden—
Nil
In businesses other than Primary Production
In business of Primary Production to be included in the Stock
Schedule at the values prescribed for live-stock.
10
Locomotives ..
5
Loose Tools ..
Replacements
Lorries (Motor)
M
Maltsters’ Steel Floor ..
15
Replacements
Manufacturing Stationers’ Plant
71
's
Match Factory Plant ..
5
Meat Works Plant
74
Schedule C — continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Merry-go-rounds—
If fixed and protected from weather
s Others
7J
“Millinery Manufacturers—
10
Sewing Machines
Other
5
Mining Machinery and Plant
7*
Where mining machinery is situated in Broken Hill or other places
where dust storms are frequent, additional depreciation may be
allowed as is deemed expedient in view of the damage caused by grit
and dust getting into the bearings of the machinery.
Nil
Mining Development Works
Monumental Masons’ Plant
7J
Motor—
Buses
15
Cars—
Travellers’ Cars and Cars for hire
20
Other
15
Lorries
15
Vehicles
15
♦Motor Bodv Building Plant
10
Motor Cycle Building Plant
10
Motor Pepairing Plant and Machinery
10
Motor Tractors ..
10
Moulding Machinery (wood)
7i
Moving Picture Equipment—
10
Talking Machines
Cinematograph
10
' f u sic Rolls
N
Nail Manufacturing Plant
15
5
Neon Signs—Owned by Taxpayer
5
Newsreel Equipment used to Produce Sound Newsreels—
10
Arc Lamps
Batteries
U
Biographs ..
10
Cameras (silent)
5
Electric Motors
5
Film Editing Equipment
10
Instruments
7i
Insulated Cables
5
Lenses
Nil
Meters
H
Microphones .. .. . .
.10
Radio Accessories
10
Radio Set ..
10
Sound Amplifier Equipment . .
10
Sound Cameras
10
Sound Equipment
10
Sound Reproducing Equipment
10
Transformers
Oil Companies’ Plant and Machinery—
10
n
/Refining Plant
* Pipe lines—Terminals to refinery
,, Underground carrying oil ..
6
• Represents maximum rate.
Schedule C— continued ,


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Oil Companies’ Plant and Machinery— continued.
Pumps, Pipe Lines (not elsewhere included) Motors and Control Gear
and Fittings
5
Tanks containing—
Natural Crude Oil and Redistillates ..
0
Other Oils
.”)
Rate to be 6 per cent, for residual oil tanks when the residual oil
comes from a source producing oil of high sulphur content.
Tanks Underground
11-
Plant and Machinery (not elsewhere included) ..
n
Motor Cars and Cycles—
Travellers’ Cars
20
Other Cars and Cvcles
15
Tank Wagons, Lorries and Ruses
15 .
Trailers and Carts
10
Kerbside Pumps
10
Kerbside Tanks
10
Punts
5
Lighters and Other Craft —
Wooden ..
5
Iron and Steel
5
Rail Tank Cars
5
Railway and Tramwav Lines and Permanent Way
5
Wharves and Jetties..
2*
Aircraft ..
25
Aircraft Refuelling Equipment
10
Laboratory Equipment
5
♦Drums
25
Trade Utensils (including Sales and Garage Equipment) . .
n
Office —
Typewriters and other Office Machines
10
Carpets ..
20
Linoleum
n
Furniture and Fittings
Ophthalmic Surgeons’ Plant
5
10
Organs (mechanical)
10
Oxygen Acetylene Plant—
High Pressure Plant
H
Low Pressure Plant ..
5
Oxygen Manufacturing Plant
n
Oyster Pishing, Pearl Pishing—
Diving Gear (Diving Dresses and Air Pipes)
Replacements
Helmet and Corselet..
10
Lugger
n
Pump
u
Running Gear, Sails
p
Replacements
* Pasteurizing Kettles and Kay Pasteurizers
Pastoralists’ Plant (See under “ Farmer’s Plant.”).
Patents and Trade Marks
12J
Nil
Patterns—Discarded
Nil
Patterns in Foundry . .
2*
Pearl Fishing—
Diving Gear (Diving Dresses and Air Pipes)
Replacements
Helmet and Corselet
10
Lugger
7*
Pearling Boats (Western Australia and Queensland)
5
Pump
u
Running Gear, Sails
Replacements
♦ Represents maximum rate.
6976—2
Schedule C — ■continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
*Permanent Way.
Phonograph* Record Presses
10
Photographers’ Plant {See also “ Cameras ”) —
Cameras
5
Lenses
Nil
Photo. Engraving Plant
o
Pianolas and Mechanical Organs
10
Pianos
5
Picture Frame Manufacturers’ Plant
n
Picture Theatres —
Carpets
20
Chandeliers..
5
Furniture ..
n
Seating
71
Ventilating Plant
5 •
Piston Ring Manufacturing Plant—
Engineering Works Plant
5
Precision Machines ..
n
Motors
5
Overhead Gear, Equipment, Belting, &c.
5
Plaster Manufacturing Plant
12*
Poles, Steel (Set in concrete)
2*
„ Wooden —
Set in concrete
5
Not set in concrete
10
Pottery Plant
5
Poultry Partners—
Incubators ..
0
Egg Boxes and Fillers
Replacements
Prickly Pear Poison Plant —•
Containers {of poison)
Replacements
Sand-stone Kilns
Replacements
Primary Industries {See also “ Farmers’ Plant.”) —
Fences (subject to condition of sub-section 3 of section 56)
3
Dams
Earth Tanks
Nil
Barns and Stables and similar structures not being structures used
for domestic or residential purposes —
Stone or brick or cement walls
2
Wood and/or iron walls ..
3
Woolsheds —
Stone or brick or cement walls
u
Wood and/or iron walls
2
Such improvements being on land owned and used by taxpayer
for the purpose of carrying on agricultural or pastoral pursuits.
Brick Water Tower ..
1
Bridges, Wooden
5
Concrete Sheep Dips..
2
Earth Levee Banks ..
Nil
Iron Grain Silos
3
Tanks used as containers in the pig farming industry
Replacements
Printers’ Plant and Machinery—
Linotype Metal
Replacements
Machinery ..
n
Type
16
Producer Gas Units. {See “ Gas Producer Units.”)
Pumps
5
Punts
5
0
Quarrying Plant and Machinery..
10
• A special rate will be fixed in each case.
Schedule C — continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
R
Radium
Nil
„ Plaques and Needles
10
Rafts, Punts, and Launches
5
tRailways—Permanent Way.
Railway Construction Contractors
20
Record (disc) Presses—Gramophone
10
♦Refrigerating Machinery (See also “ Freezing Works ”) —■
Cabinets
5
Condenser Pipes
n
Expansion Pipes
2i
Frigidaires ..
5
General Machinery ..
H
Refuse Destructor
5
Restaurants—
Carpets
20
Crockery, Cutlery, Glassware, and Cooking Utensils
Replacements
Furniture and Plant
5
Linen
Replacements
Linoleums ..
n
Rice Milling Plant
n
River Plant, Patent Slip, Standing Ways..
5
Road-making Plant—
General Asphalt Plant
10
Crushers and Bins
10
Motor Trucks
15
Steam Rollers
5
Air Compressors and Motors ..
u
Road Graders
10
Roller Skates
20
Rolling Stock used on Tram Lines
2*
Rolling Stock used on Timber-getters’ Railways ..
10
Rolling Stock (Trucks) —Railways
10
Rontgen Ray (See “ X-ray.”)
H
Ropes
Replacements
Rope and Twine Manufacturers ..
5
Rubber Companies’ Plant—
Process Plants
n
Moulds
20
S
Saddlery and Harness ..
10
Safes, Bank—
Portable
24
Other
Nil
Salvage Machinery—
Anchors, Blocks, Shackles, Wire Ropes, Chains, Buovs and other
Gear for Salvage Work .. .. .. .. ..
Replacements
Boat, Surf .. .. .. .. .. ..
6
Boiler, Vertical
oi
Diving Gear
Replacements
Engine Hoisting
24
Piping, for Pumps ..
Replacements
Piping, Steam
Replacements
Pumps, Centrifugal, direct acting, and connexions
24
Pumps, Duplex Boiler Feed ..
24
• Bepresents maximum rate,
t A special rate will be fixed in each case.
6976.—3
Schedule C — continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Salt Manufacturing and Refining Plant ..
10
Samples of decorative steel and iron work — Advertising
2*
Sanitary Contractors’ Plant (cans and lids)
Replacements
Saw-making Plant
Saw-milling Companies’ Plant. (See, under “ Timber and Firewood
and Saw-milling Companies.”)
5
Scales (Platform)
5
Sewing Machines
10
Scenery (Theatrical)
Replacements
Shafting
Nil
Shearing Machines
7*
Ships, Steamers, Lighters, &c. (See also “ Lighters (Coal) ”)
5
Shop Fittings
5
Sidings .. .. . . .. .. .. • ..
Nil •
Skating Rink Floors .. .. .. .. ..
Nil
Skating Rink Fittings (Open Air)
5
Skips in Coal Mines
7i
Slate Works ..
5
Slips and Standing Ways
5
Smelting Plant
12*
Soda Water Fountains
7*
Sprinklers, Automatic Fire
5
Stable Implements
Benlacements
Stamping Blocks, used for designs of decorative steel and iron work ..
5
Standards, Iron or Steel (including Brackets, Cross Arms, &c.)
2*
Stands for Costumes
Replacements
Standing Ways (Patent Slip for Shipping) .. ■
5
Station Plant
10
Stationers’ Manufacturing Plant
n
Steam Shovels
Steel Foundry. (See under “ Foundry Plant.”)
5
Steel Rolls for rolling steel window frames
Replacements
Stevedoring Plant
Replacement
of ropes, &c.
Stereos and Blocks
Replacements
Steam Ploughs
5
Stone Crushing Plant ..
10
Sugar Mills
7*
Sulkies, Buggies, Drays and Wagons
10
Sulphuric Acid Chambers
5
Acid Plant ..
5
Surfo Planes ..
50
Surveyors’ Instruments
Replacements
Syphons, Stoppers, and Bottles, &e.
Replacements
T
Talking Machines (Moving Picture Equipment)
10
Tank Manufacturing Plant
Tanks (Galvanized Iron) —
5
Bain Water
6
Bore Water
10
Tanks, Earth
Nil
Tanks, Underground ..
Nil
Tanners
5
Tar Distillation Plant ..
Tarpaulins—
7*
Beal
15
Tarred Hessian ,. .. .. ..
Replacements
Schedule C — continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
Telephones and Lines owned by taxpayers—
Instruments
5
Cables and Materials and including other portions of systems
Replacements
Tennis Courts of Bituminous Composition
5
„ „ Other ..
Nil
Tennis Court Equipment (Hose, Nets, Stop-netting, Matting, Oreen
cloth, and Electrical Fittings ..
Replacements
Tents, Ropes and Blocks
Replacements
Theatrical Accessories—Wigs, Costumes, &c.
20
Theatre Plant—
Cloths, &c.
5
Small Articles
Replacements
Theatre and Skating Rink Seating Accommodation and Furniture
74-
Chandeliers in Theatres
5
Timber and Firewood and Saw-milling Companies—
Buggies, Drays, Carts, &c.
10
Cottage Furniture
U
Dumping Plant
n
Electric Light Fittings
5
Engines and Boilers ..
n
Electric Motors
5
Harness used for heavy haulage
15
Locomotives
5
Locomotives, on bush railways
10
Log Hauling Plant . .
20
Motor Cars
15
Office Fittings
Replacements
Way.
Plant and Machinery
10
Railway Rolling Stock
74
*Rails laid on road.
Steam Radiators
5
Telephone Lines—
Instruments
5
Cables and other Materials ..
Replacements
Trucks on bush railways
74
Water Conservation (Piping, Windmills, Pumping Machinery)
5
Wharves
24
Whims .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
15
Live Stock—
Draught Horses
20
Hacks
10
Bullocks .. .. .. .. .. ..
10
Rates on all Timber and Firewood and Saw-milling Companies’
plant used for haulage have been fixed in this case on account of
the mountainous nature of the country usually exploited.
Lower rates would be allowable in flat country.
Tinsmiths’ Plant
5
Tobacco Kilns
5
Tools (loose) ..
Replacements
Totalisator Machines ..
74
Traction Engines (oil or wood fuel)
10
Tractors, Motor ..
10
Trade Marks and Patents
Nil
Trade Utensils
Replacements
Tramway Equipment. ( See under “ Electric.”)
Travellers’ Outfits—Tin Sample Boxes and Leather Bags ..
124
Type (Printers’)
15
Typewriters and Adding Machines
10
* A special rate will be fixed In each ease.
Schedule C— continued.


Item.
Percentage
Allowed.
u
Umbrella Manufacturers —
Cutting Boards
10
Lathes
Nil
Motors
5
Sewing Machines
10
Undertakers’ Plant .. .. .. ..
5
V
Vegetable and Fruit Canning Plant
5
Ventilating Plant
5
w
♦Water Mains
2
Weaving Machinery (silk and cotton)
7*
Weighbridges
4
Weighing Machines
10
Wells
24
Wharves
24
Wharf Sheds ..
Nil
Wheat Stacks —Galvanized Iron, Hessian and Timber
Replacements
Whiteworking Plant—•
Sewing Machines
10
Other
5
Windmills
5
Wine-making Machinery
5
Wire \used in construction of fencing. {See under Primary
Wire netting j Industries “ Pences ”.)
Wireless Plant used in Broadcasting—
Steel Masts
24
Wooden Masts
74
Inside Equipment
15
Wireless Sets in Public Places of Amusement
10
(If installed in motor vehicles for entertainment of passengers,
wireless set is regarded as a part of the vehicle for depreciation
purposes.)
74
■"Wood working Plant ..
Wool Humping Machinery
74
"Wool Scouring Machinery
6
Woollen Manufacturers’ Machinery
6
Wrapping Machines
10
X
X-rav and High Frequency Current Plant
74
(Including screening of apparatus to suppress radio interference.)
i
* Represents maximum rate.
By Authority; L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
Schedule C — continued.
