

THE ASSOCIATION TO
PROTEST AGAINST THE
DUPLICATION OF INCOME
TAX WITHIN THE EMPIRE
DEPUTATION
to the Rt. Hon. A. Bonar Law, P.C., M.P. (Chancellor of
the Exchequer), at the Treasury, Whitehall, S.W., at 11 a.m.
on Saturday, May 12th. 1917.
JAS. TRUSCOTT & SON, LTD., London
Published by the Association to Protest against the duplication of Income Tax
within the Empire.
Office of the Association, 27 Clement’s Lane,
LONDON, E.C.


MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
OF
THE ASSOCIATION
TO PROTEST AGAINST THE DUPLICATION OF
INCOME TAX WITHIN THE EMPIRE.
FREDERICK DUTTON, ESQ., Chairman.
HENRY BULL, Esq., Honorary Treasurer.
Gilbert Anderson, Esq.
Percy Arnold, Esq.
J. B. Braithwaite, Esq.
Neville D. Cohen, Esq.
Frederick Dyer, Esq.
W. H. Gardiner, Esq.
Leslie Harris, Esq.
W. E, Hearson, Esq.
W, E. Lane, Esq.
P. D. Leake, Esq.
Hon. H. S. Littleton
Ernest Makower, Esq.
C. C. McLeod, Esq.
Hon. M. L. Moss
Sir Cornthwaite H. Rason
Robert Reid, Esq.
George Scales, Esq.
George Slade, Esq.
Andrew Williamson, Esq.
Hon. J. G. Jenkins, Secretary , 27 Clement’s Lane, E.C.


DEPUTATION
To the RIGHT HON. A. BONAR LAW, P.C., M.P. (Chancellor of
the Exchequer), at the TREASURY, WHITEHALL, at 11 a.m., on
Saturday, May 12th, 1917.
The following Associations, Societies and interests were
REPRESENTED AND INTRODUCED BY J. ANNAN BrYCE, Esq., M.P. :
FREDERICK DUTTON, Esq., Chairman,
HENRY BULL, Esq., Hon. Treasurer,
The Association to Protest against the Duplication of Income
Tax within the Umpire.
SIR THOMAS ROBINSON, K.C.M.G.,
GENERAL SIR NEWTON MOORE, K.C.M.G.,
HON. F. W. YOUNG,
SIR JOHN McCALL,
Agents-General for Australia.
LT.-COL. RICHARD REID,
Agent-General for Ontario.
HON. J. G. JENKINS, Hon. Treasurer,
C. E. MUSGRAVE, Esq., Hon. Secretary,
The British Imperial Council of Commerce.
JAMES MARTIN, Esq.,
Deputy Chairman of the London Chamber of Commerce
and Member of the Executive Council of the Association
of Chambers of Commerce of the United Kingdom.
SIR WESTBY B. PERCEVAL, K.C.M.G.,
Chairman of the Special Committee of the London Chamber
of Commerce dealing with Double Income Tax,
SIR J. D. REES, M.P.,
Indian Residents in England and Investors.
GENERAL H. PAGE CROFT, M.P.,
The Imperial Mission.
SIR HARRY WILSON, K.C.M.G.,
The Royal Colonial Institute.
ANDREW WILLIAMSON, Esq.,
C. C. McLBOD, Esq.,
F. DYER, Esq.,
E. V. REID, Esq.,
Australian , Indian , South African and New Zealand
Merchants and Investors.


DOUBLE INCOME TAX.
REPORT OF THE DEPUTATION TO THE
RT. HON. A. BONAR LAW, P.C., M.P.,
May 12th, 1917, at 11 a.m.
Mr. J. Annan Bryce, M.P., introduced the gentlemen form-
ing the Deputation and pointed out that they represented
important bodies and investments amounting to many
millions. They felt, he said, the injustice of Double Income
Tax was so flagrant that it ought to be remedied at once,
and they did not consider the amount to be sacrificed by
making a reasonable change would be so great as seriously
to diminish the Revenue of the country: it should not be
.above one and a half to two millions sterling which was an
•exceedingly small sum in view of the scale of expenditure at
the present time. He concluded by saying that they hoped
the reform would be brought about in this year’s Budget.
The Hon. J. G. Jenkins apologised for the absence of the
Rt. Hon. Lord Desborough, K.C.V.O. (President of the
London Chamber of Commerce and of the British Imperial
•Council of Commerce), the Hon. O. G. Wade (Agent-General
for New South Wales), Sir Thomas Mackenzie (High Com-
missioner for New Zealand), Sir Peter Mcßride (Agent-
■ General for Victoria), the Hon. Herbert C. Gibbs, and
Stanley Machin, Esq. (Chairman of the British Imperial
Council of Commerce). He read a resolution passed at a
meeting of The British Imperial Council of Commerce held


in June, 1916, when every Dominion overseas was repre-
sented. The resolution was as follows;
“ While recognising that the Chancellor of the
Exchequer had admitted the injustice of the Double
Income Tax on the same income within the Empire, and.
has offered slight relief in the Finance Bill now before
the British Parliament, this Conference strongly urgea
that further relief to those suffering from these heavy
and unjust burdens should be immediately granted by
His Majesty’s Government.”
Mr. Frederick Dutton, on behalf of the Association to
Protest against the Duplication of Income Tax within the
Empire, tendered the sincere thanks of that body to Mr.
Bonar Law for receiving the delegation, appreciating as they
did the great number of calls upon his time. They were
there, Mr. Dutton continued, to ask for a greater measure of
concession than was given by the last Finance Act. As
regards the general principle, he thought, in view of what
the Chancellor had said in the House relative to the
decisions of the Imperial Conference that he, the Chancellor,
recognised the force of their contention. So far as securing
a basis for a single Income Tax throughout the Empire was
concerned, it was a matter they could leave for the present,
but, unless further concession were made meantime the
unfortunate victims of Double Income Tax were left in the
position of having to pay for an indefinite period taxation
which, as regards many incomes, amounted very nearly to
confiscation. They regarded this as an intolerable position
and one against which they were justified in making the
strongest possible protest. There was a misapprehension
as to the extreme breadth of the community affected by the
Double Income Tax; it had been often emphasized as if it
were merely a matter confined to individuals, but the effect
went much further: the injustice covered an enormous range
of limited companies which had vast sums invested in the
Dominions; these were engaged in vast operations, agricul-
tural, pastoral, commercial, manufacturing, mining, banking,
etc., and were all affected by the Double Taxation; that
accounted for the support given to this movement by the
Chambers of Commerce throughout the Empire. The delega-
tion and those they represented appreciated the immense harm
which it would cause to Imperial trade, and there was a
danger of this aspect being overlooked. They were there
to ask that a further measure of relief should be given by
the British Government apart from the question of the
single tax to be taken in hand afterwards. As regards the


Dominion Governments it would be difficult to show good
cause for any request to them to relax their income taxation
at the present moment. Their general principle for Income
Tax was that the tax should be imposed only on income
derived in the country which taxed it. New Zealand had
already in their Finance Act made provision against Double
Income Taxation so far as they were concerned.
The Dominion Governments had in the main imposed
severe taxation because of the part they were taking in the
War, and had made very great contributions to the Imperial
Forces. There were only two ways in which their expendi-
ture could be provided for, namely, indirect and direct
taxation. The principle of indirect taxation by Customs
Duties was in the old days principally resorted to, but now
with the restriction on imports caused by the scarcity of
freight, an Income Tax was the only means of raising their
war requirements. He thought it was fair to remind the
Government of what the Dominions had done in the present
orisis, what in fact the investment of British capital in the
Dominions and India had done for the Empire. Australia
for instance provided three great staple commodities,
namely, food, wool and minerals. Without the aid of
Australia in those three great indispensable requirements it
would have been difficult for us to have got on at all. Those
commodities had been produced by the investment of British
•capital and the only gratitude shown was to single the
investor out not only to pay war expenses in Australia but
also in addition the enormously increased taxation for war
expenditure in the United Kingdom.
The Deputation were asking for an enlargement of the
■concession already contained in Section 43 of the last
Finance Act. The amendment which Mr. Bryce moved last
year was to set off the whole of the tax paid in the
Dominions. That amendment having been rejected by the
House, they wished then to move a further amendment
which would in principle effect the same purpose on a lesser
scale: they were not, however, allowed by the Chairman
to move the amendment. The Deputation now desired to
ask that the concession under Section 43 should be enlarged
from Is. 6d. in the £, as it stood now, to a maximum of
3s. 6d. They were told there was nothing against the justice
of their contention, but there was the loss to the Revenue.
The Treasury, however, whenever they talked about the loss
did not take into consideration the other side of the
balance sheet, namely, the Revenue lost by the Double
Taxation owing to the removal of companies and individuals
from this country, which, in existing conditions, unless


further relief were given would continue in an increased
degree. As a guide to this question of loss he asked that
a return might be published of the amount which had
already been allowed under the Provisions of Section 43 of
the Finance Act of 1916.
Mr. James Martin, as Deputy-Chairman of the Council of
the London Chamber of Commerce and also as a member of
the Executive Council of the Association of Chambers of
Commerce of the United Kingdom, said the 6,000 or 7,000
members of the former body were not directly but indirectly
interested, because the tax was unjust and therefore was a
bad tax. If maintained it must lead to retaliation. He
appealed to the Chancellor to take the matter into con-
sideration and not leave it over. The Imperial Government,,
he affirmed, was strong enough to show a good example.
Sir Westby Perceval drew attention to the distinction
which should be made between Double Income Tax and
Double War Tax.
Double Income Tax was a grievance of long standing, but
it was recognised that certain aspects of it involved mutual
adjustments between the various Dominion Governments and
the Home Government rendering an immediate settlement
difficult.
Double War Tax, however, was in a different category,,
and was an impost from which immediate relief was sought.
He urged that it was obviously unjust to tax the same
property or profits twice over, for a war which was common
to the whole Empire, and when the expenditure incurred for
its prosecution was equally beneficial, whether made here
or in the Oversea Dominions.
Both here and in the Dominions, the increase of taxation,
over and above the pre-war rate, was War Tax pure and
simple. Before the War, in Great Britain the Income Tax
did not exceed Is. 6d., and, speaking broadly, in the
Dominions the taxes were not more than the equivalent of
that sum. Therefore, it was within the mark to say, that
any increased taxation either here or in the Dominions over
Is. 6d. was now being collected solely for war expenditure,
and it was a manifest injustice for the Home Government to
impose War Tax on income earned in the Dominions which'
had already been subjected to War Tax there.
Mr, McKenna, the previous Chancellor, had recognised
this, and made a concession of Is. 6d. when it could be shewn
that that amount had been paid on the same income in the
Dominions. This, however, was not the full measure of


relief, for it is obvious that with an Income Tax of 55., of
which at least 3s. 6d. is War Tax, that 3s. 6d. and not Is. 6d.
is the amount up to which relief should be granted. This,
as a strict act of justice, was demanded now.
It was gratifying to know that after the War, preferential
trade relations were to be established between the different
portions of the Empire, but the continuance of the impost
complained of was in direct opposition to this policy and a
most serious impediment to British Trade within the Empire,
placing the British trader and investor in the Dominions at
a serious disadvantage.
The loss of Revenue which would accrue from the remis-
sion of the Double War Tax was a small matter compared
with the injury being done, and the hardships imposed,
which were of a serious nature.
He understood that Mr. McKenna estimated the loss of
Revenue, involved by his concession of Is. 6d. at one and a
half millions. If this be correct, a concession of 3s. 6d.
would mean a loss of Revenue of three and a half millions.
Even if the amount involved reaches twice that sum, it
would be a small matter considering the grave interests
involved by the continuance of an impost which is not only
unjust but impolitic.
Sir Westby urged that conditions which had been brought
about by the War should be remedied during the War and
not postponed.
In conclusion, he pointed out that the, grievance com-
plained of was accentuated by the Provisions of Section 5
of the Finance Act of 1914, which caused income earned
outside Great Britain to be taxed whether remitted to this
Country or not.
Sir J. D. Rees, M.P., said that, being a Director of some
of the largest industrial concerns in India, he felt bound to
say that this Double Taxation was desperately hard on them.
He mentioned, by way of illustration, tea companies which
had to pay English and Indian tax, and now Super-tax
was to be added, though the authorities in India did not
seem to understand the underlying principle of Super-tax.
Owing to the length of time taken by previous speakers, he
felt it impossible to detain Mr. Bonar Law longer on a
Saturday morning, but he asked him to requite this con-
sideration by speedily redressing a great and admitted
grievance.
Brigadier-General H. Page Croft, M.P., desired to refer
to two points only. In the first place, he thought he could say


that all those who had had the Imperial cause nearest to
their hearts through so many years felt that Double Income
Tax was a fearful blow against the whole principle of
Imperial unity, and he urged the Chancellor to consider
the untold damage which the system did, though it had
been borne most patiently. Secondly, they all felt that the
one hope for quick recovery after the War was confidence
right through the British Empire: if they were pressed to
invest their money in Australia for the post-war recon-
struction they could not do it; no business man but only
philanthropists could consider such a proposition.
The Hon. P. W. Young, speaking on behalf of the Agents-
General for Australia, pointed out that in the agitation for
relief as far as Australia was concerned the Governments
and the commercial community were exactly of one mind
and were anxious for some further consideration of the
subject and some immediate relief. The problem postponed
by the Imperial Conference was obviously a pure question
of Double Taxation, for War Taxation would dissolve of
itself. Consequently, while the greater problem was post-
poned, he asked that the more immediate, more temporary
and acute problem of Double War Taxation might be at
once dealt with. He came into contact with many, includ-
ing those who were in this country purely on account of
the War, having members of their families fighting, and their
sense of grievance was very real, though it was not expressed
to the full becaiise of the ardour of their patriotism during
this awful War. Imperial unity must be impaired by a
growth of this discontent unless the grievance was met to a
reasonable extent by what the Deputation were there to
request. If the present system were continued, the Imperial
Government would lose by devious ways the income they were
grasping, and at the same time there would inevitably be a
danger of the present unanimous sense of loyalty being
impaired, as the dissatisfaction would most likely be much
more pronounced after peace is made.
Colonel Richard Reid, speaking for the Agents-General for
Canada, said that the Chancellor would be aware of the
great natural resources of that Dominion awaiting develop-
ment. They were not so much concerned about the power
of attracting capital; what concerned them more than any-
thing else was the source of that capital. It would exert a
great influence upon Canada if capital came from foreign
countries rather than from the Empire itself. ' They felt
that the policy of Double Income Tax w 7 ould discourage the


investment of British capital within the Empire, or at all
events would not encourage it. The majority of people in
this country made no distinction between America and
Canada in their investments, and after the War that would
be emphasised, for the United States, having become our ally,
there would no doubt be a stronger tendency to invest there.
Accordingly they felt that some preference should be given
in order to attract capital to the Dominions rather than that
it should be invested in foreign countries. Finally, he
emphasised the Imperial' standpoint, the most important
point in connection with the whole matter.
Mr. Andrew Williamson, who had been asked to represent
the views of the large Mercantile Firms and Companies, Com-
mercial, Financial, Pastoral, and Mining, carrying on trade
between the United Kingdom and the Dominions, said he
would confine his remarks within a very brief statement.
He wanted to bring out certain important facts with regard
to the present position. In the first place, he desired to point
out that the Resolution bearing on this question of Double
Income Tax which had been passed at the War Conference
was dangerously susceptible of leaving a wrong impression
on the mind of the Government. While the broad question
of Double Income Tax might be left over for matured
deliberation and conference and final adjustment till after the
War, so far as this taxation represented a Double War Tax,
that could not be left over for adjustment till after the War
without irreparable injustice being done to those suffering by
it. Unfortunately Australia, from circumstances with which
we were all familiar, was not able to be represented at the
Conference, and on this particular point Australia bulked
to far the largest extent of all the Dominions. This was
apparent by mere statement of the facts. In Australia there
were the Income Tax Acts of the various States, and then
the Federal Income Tax, which latter was a purely War Tax,
never imposed before, and which had been raised within the
last year, in the case of individuals, to 6s. 3d. in the £, and in
the case of companies to Is. in the £ on the Undis-
tributed Profits; to these had to be added the British Income
Tax and Super-tax. The British Income Tax of ss. in the
£ was to the extent of 3s. 6d. a War Tax, so that those who
paid 6s. 3d. in Australia and again ss. on the same income
in this country were paying a Double War Tax to the extent
of 3s. 6d. in the £ on the same income. He submitted that
it was unjust and morally wrong to tax the same income
twice for the same purpose, and in fact no serious attempt
had been made to justify this except upon the grounds of


financial necessity. The same plea of financial necessity
for injustice and wrong-doing was urged by the German
Government in defence of their unrestricted submarine war-
fare, but their plea is scornfully rejected by the British
Government and by all other civilised peoples. Further, the
German Government contend, and truly, that without their
unrestricted submarine warfare they cannot win the War,
and yet it is scorned as a reason. The British Government
cannot contend that without perpetuating this unjust taxa-
tion they cannot win the War. The whole amount involved
is far less than one day’s War expenses. We contend that
this Double War Tax should be remitted now. Such relief
given now would still leave open for settlement after the
War the broad question of the Double Income Tax in times
of peace. The Government have already admitted in
principle the reasonableness of our contention by the relief
given in the 43rd Section of the Finance Act of 1916, but to
be consistent the relief should be to the extent of 3s, 6d. (the
War Tax), not of Is, 6d. (the peace tax). Again, prepara-
tion for after-war conditions, as regards the British Empire’s
trade and commerce, is recognised as a matter of the most
vital consequence to the Empire, and it is clear that whatever
tends to hamper or restrict the free flow of capital and
trade within the Empire, or to produce friction or a sense
of injustice will prevent the best results from being obtained.
It is beyond dispute that the continuance of this Double
Taxation is producing, and will continue, as long as it lasts,
to produce disturbance and disintegration in these trade
conditions. It is of the utmost importance to the best
Imperial interests that the marvellous manifestation of
loyalty that this War has evoked throughout the Empire
should be encouraged in every possible way, and it is little
short of disastrous that taxation and injustice of this kind,
which is keenly felt and bitterly resented, and that with a
growing intensity, should be persisted in until some in-
definite date after the War. To do so is to fritter away
this invaluable asset of loyal patriotic feeling in large
sections of the community, and it is most earnestly urged by
us that at any rate some further concession should be
granted.
Mr. Bonar Law, having thanked the delegation for the
opportunity of hearing their views and those of the bodies
they represented, to which he had listened with great
interest, said that he recognised the strength of the feelings
which had been expressed. On the principle there was no
difference of opinion between them and him. Just as they


hoped to see a general principle of preference applied within
the Empire, so this Double Income Tax question was one
of the matters they desired taken in hand. When they came
to the question of doing it now, however, he took a different
view. Suppose, he said, any of them had money to invest,
abroad; what they looked at first was the security and then
the rate of interest. The rate of interest an investor would
consider would not depend upon a certain fixed amount of
taxation in the parts of the world in which he invested his
money, but the net return. Sir John Rees had spoken of tea;
let them suppose the Government of India instead of putting
their tax in the form of Income Tax levied it upon produc-
tion so much to the pound. It would be unfair to a country
which did not call the impost Income Tax, if you simply said
you would deduct from Income Tax here, any Income Tax
paid elseAvhere in the Empire: you would overlook taxes
paid in another form. As to dealing with the question at
once, Mr. Bryce had said the Exchequer had, in some
directions, received more money than had been estimated;
that was true, but even since this year’s Budget had been
framed some of the restrictions which had now been imposed
would mean that we should get a smaller amount of income
than had been expected from the same sources. The main
difference of opinion between himself and the delegation,
however, was that their idea seemed to be that we could not
go to the Dominion Governments and ask them to forego
Revenue, but could only approach the British Treasury.
But the Prime Ministers of the Dominions did not take that
view: they considered it must be a matter of reciprocity and
not that the whole loss ought to fall upon the British
Exchequer. That made the question of how the matter was
to be dealt with a very difficult and complicated one.
Looking at it from another point of view, if it were decided
to charge no Income Tax in this country except the amount
of the Excess beyond what was charged in the Dominions,
that again meant that British capital invested say in
Australia, where the Income Tax was higher than in this
country, would make no contribution whatever in the United
Kingdom. From one point of view that was fair because
the tax was all spent on the War, but the question came
in as to which of the two Governments was better able to
afford part of it, and that was the question which the
Representatives of the Dominions would be prepared to
consider. The real point was that they could not afford to
give away Revenue just now, and that had been recognised
by the representatives of the Dominions who were in
England now. It was quite true there was injustice but he


knew of none of the war taxes which did not inflict injustice
on some as compared with others. He might add that he
could not hold out any hope of making a change in the
present year. He hoped that did not mean permanent harm
to the Empire, as had been suggested. He believed that
in the long run the great bulk of those affected would feel
that though the burden upon them was greater than on
others the war could not last long and they might rest
assured that every effort would be made immediately after
the War so to arrange taxation as to assist and encourage
investments Avithin the Empire.
Mr. Annan Bryce thanked Mr. Bonar Law for receiving
the Deputation and urged him again to examine the question
the chief features of Avhich he briefly emphasized. In reply,
Mr. Bonar LaAV stated he could promise that the points
would be carefully considered.


[Copy.]
27, Clements Lane,
London, E.C. 4,
May 23rd, 1917.
The Rt. Hon. A. Bonar Law, P.C.,
Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Treasury Chambers, S.W. 1.
Sir,
DOUBLE INCOME TAX.
My Committee have had under consideration the reply
which you made to the Deputation on the 12th instant and
desire to make the following observations thereon: —
1. They agree with you that it is the “net return”
which guides an investor in regard to the advisability or
otherwise of investing in any particular security or in
any particular country, and it is for that very reason
that they urge the importance of a further concession
being made as regards Double Income Tax because upon
Australian income the burden is now so oppressive as
to force wherever possible the withdrawal of capital
already invested and to prohibit any possibility of
further investment in any form which would involve the
payment of Income Tax here as well as there until
duplication of this form of taxation is avoided. To a
lesser but still important extent the same objections
apply as regards investments in the other Dominions
where Income Tax exists and the rate of which is
continually increasing.
2. Your argument that unfairness’ would arise if a
further concession were made as regards Double Income
Tax because in a Dominion a tax might be imposed upon
“ production ” of any particular article as an alternative
to “ Income Tax,” appears to my Committee to be
entirely covered by the wording in Section 43 of the
Finance Act, 1916, of the definition of “ Colonial Income
Tax ” which would seem to have been framed purposely
to meet the case you quoted as an example if the Indian
Government imposed a tax on the production of tea.
3. The members of the Deputation were pleased to
hear from you that the Prime Ministers of the


Dominions in recent conferences admit that their
respective Governments should share with the British
Government whatever loss of Revenue is involved in
giving legislative effect to the principle of one Income
Tax only on the same income within the Empire: but
they must again enter a most emphatic protest against
the suggestion that any difficulty of arranging between
the Governments the exact proportion which each is to
bear of any such loss of Revenue justifies that each
Government should continue to impose and receive the
whole amount of its present or future individual income
taxation. On the contrary, the fact of that admission,
coupled with the admitted injustice of the Double
Taxation, should lead to the conclusion that the same
course should be followed as regards Double Income
Tax as you have provided in Section 20 of the Finance
Bill now before Parliament as regards the Excess Profits
Tax, namely, of charging the rate of tax which is highest
and taking power to arrange by adjustment with the
Dominion Governments how such tax is to be appor-
tioned, pending the final establishment of one Income
Tax only which it is promised will be proceeded with
after the conclusion of the War.
4. Your reply seemed to suggest that you were still
under the impression that we were asking that the whole
amount of Colonial Income Tax should be set off against
the British Tax so as to produce the result that British
capital invested in Australia would make no contribution
whatever in the United Kingdom, whereas it was made
quite clear by several speakers that we were content for
the time being to ask that the concession should he
limited to the difference between Is. 6d. in the £ and
the actual amount of the British tax, so that in any case
all income received by any British taxpayer here from
any Dominion would contribute at the rate of Is. 6d. in
the £ (slightly more than the equivalent of the Income
Tax in force here before the War) irrespective of the rate
of tax which such income had previously to bear in the
Dominions whence it was derived.
5. I am desired to repeat the request made by Mr.
Dutton at the Deputation that the Treasury should pre-
pare and issue a return of the amount represented by
the allowances which have been made up to date under
the Provisions of Section 43 of the Finance Act, 1916,


and that, if possible, such return should show separately
the amount allowed as regards income derived from
1. Australia.
2. New Zealand.
3. South Africa.
4. India.
My Committee trust that it may be found possible to
give these figures at an early date as some guide to what
amount appears to be involved if the further concession
which is now asked for were conceded.
The foregoing observations are limited to the points that
arise upon .your reply to the Deputation, but I am desired
to add that my Committee again urge upon your earnest
consideration the many other arguments which were brought
before you on that occasion showing the urgent need for
further concession and the serious injury to Imperial
interests which will result if it is not done, and, notwith-
standing what you then said, they still urge and hope that
further concession will be made in the Bill now before the
H ouse.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) J. G. JENKINS,
Secretary.






