

THE ASSOCIATION TO
PROTEST AGAINST THE
DUPLICATION OF INCOME
TAX WITHIN THE EMPIRE
DEPUTATION
to the Rt. Hon. W. F. Massey, P.C. (Prime Minister of
New Zealand), and the Rt. Hon. Sir Joseph Ward, Bart., P.C.,
K.C.M.G. (Finance Minister of New Zealand), at the Offices of
the High Commissioner for New Zealand, 413, Strand, W.C.,
at 12 noon on Friday, December 22nd. 1916.
Published by the Association to Protest against the duplication of Income Tax
within the Empire.
Office of the Association, 27 Clement's Lane,
LONDON, E.C.
JAS. TRUSCOTT & SON, LTD., London.


MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
OF
THE ASSOCIATION
TO PROTEST AGAINST THE DUPLICATION OF
INCOME TAX WITHIN THE EMPIRE.
FREDERICK DUTTON, ESQ., Chairman.
HENRY BULL, ESO., Honorary Treasurer.
Gilbert Anderson, Esq.
Percy Arnold, Esq.
J. B. Braithwaite, Esq.
Neville D. Cohen, Esq.
Frederick Dyer, Esq.
W. H. Gardiner, Esq.
Leslie Harris, Esq.
W. E. Hearson, Esq.
W. E. Lane, Esq.
P. D. Leake, Esq.
Hon. H. S. Littleton
Ernest Makower, Esq.
C. C. McLeod, Esq.
Hon. M. L Moss
Sir Cornthwaite H. Rason
Robert Reid, Esq.
George Scales, Esq.
George Slade, Esq.
Andrew Williamson, Esq.
Hon. J. G. Jenkins, Secretary, 27 Clement’s Lane, E.C.


DOUBLE INCOME TAX.
DEPUTATION
to the Right Hon. W. F. Massey, P.C. (Prime Minister of
New Zealand) and the Right Hon. Sir Joseph Ward, Bart., P.C.,
K.C.M.G. (Finance Minister of New Zealand), at the Offices of the
High Commissioner for New Zealand, 413, Strand, W.C., at 12 noon,
on Friday, December 22nd, 1916.
The following Associations, Societies and interests were represented:
Frederick Dutton, Esq., Chairman.
Henry Bull, Esq., Hon. Treasurer.
Hon. J. Gr. Jenkins, Secretary.
The Association to protest against the
Duplication of Income Tax within
the Empire.
The Right Hon. Lord Desborough, K.C.Y.0.,
President.
Stanley Machin, Esq., Chairman.
The British Imperial Council of
Commerce and the London
Chamber of Commerce.
Sir Algernon Firth, Bart., President.
Lord Southwark, Vice-President.
R. B. Dunwoody, Esq., Secretary.
The Association of Chambers of Com-
merce of the United Kingdom.
James Martin Esq., Deputy Chairman.
Sir Westby Perceval, K.C.M.G., Chairman of the
Special Committee on Double Income Tax.
F. Faithfull Begg, Esq., Vice-President, and Chairman
of the Financial Section.
Charles E. Musgrave, Esq., Secretary.
The London Chamber
of Commerce.
C. C. McLeod, Esq., Chairman of the East India Section of the London Chamber
of Commerce and London Jute Association representing India.
Percy Arnold, Esq.
George Scales, Esq.
Robert Reid, Esq.
Australasian Chamber of Commerce in London,
Sir Charles Lucas, K.C.M.G., Chairman.
Sir Harry Wilson, K.C.M.G., Secretary.
The Royal Colonial Institute.
Sir John A. Cockhurn, K.C Mil,
R. W. Jeans, Esq.
A. Michie, Esq.
Australasian Banking and Insurance
interests.
Sir Kenneth Anderson, K.C.M.G.
Sir Montague Kelson, K.C.M.G.
Shipping.
E. V. Reid, Esq.
R. E. Bush, Esq. |
Messrs. Dalgety & Company, Limited.


Sir John Rees, M.P.
F. A. Keating, Esq.
Acton Adams, Esq.
J. A. Agnew, Esq.
Joseph Temperley, Esq.
Mining, Mercantile, Investment Development and
Timber Industries.
Sir C. H. Rason, Australian Bovril Estates, Limited.
Andrew Williamson, Esq., British Australian Society, Development and Invest-
ment Companies.
J. W. McMillan, Esq., New Zealand Land, Loan and Mercantile Agency.
F. Dyer, Esq.
W. Soper, Esq.
W. E. Heai’son, Esq.
Representing South African Mercantile interests.
Gilbert Anderson, Esq.
George Goodsir, Esq.
E. EBison, Esq.
S. T. Boys, Esq.
New Zealand and Australian Produce.
J. B. Braithwaite, Esq.
C. G. Tegetmeier, Esq.
Electric and Tramway Companies.
Robert Reid & Co., Ltd.
Henry Bull & Co., Ltd.
Byng, Harris & Co., Ltd.
Ross, Glendining & Co., Ltd.
David Cohen & Co., Ltd.
McDonald, Scales & Co., Ltd.
Moss Davis, Esq. (Hancock & Co.)
W. Gardiner & Co., Ltd.
Joseph Nathan & Co., Ltd.
M. Macower & Co., Ltd.
Australian and New Zealand Merchants.
Hon. H. S. Littleton.
P, D. Leake, Esq.
Gerald 0. Parsons, Esq.
Income Tax Reform Association.
Several otters interested in Oversea business and investments were present.
. The Hon. J. G. Jenkins (Secretary of the Association to Protest against
the Duplication of Income Tax within the Empire) announced that Sir Thomas
Mackenzie (High Commissioner for New Zealand), who was in full sympathy
with the objects of the deputation, was unfortunately prevented from attending
as he was engaged with the Dardanelles Commission. Mr. Jenkins also read
a letter of apology for absence from Lord Desborough (President of the British
Imperial Council of Commerce and of the London Chamber of Commerce),
who wrote that he was in full accord with the case as presented previously to
the Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes (Prime Minister of Australia).
Mr. Stanley Machin (Chairman of the British Imperial Council of Com-
merce and Vice-President of the London Chamber of Commerce), formally
introduced the deputation and drew attention to its very representative
character. The grievance which they desired to bring forward could not, he
suggested, be unknown to Mr. Massey and Sir Joseph Ward. Various com-
mercial associations of the United Kingdom, the British Imperial Council of
Commerce and Association of Chambers of Commerce of the United Kingdom,
and so on, had passed resolutions strongly condemning the tax. The deputa-
tion had, he said, already had the honour of being received by Mr. Hughes,


the Australian Prime Minister, who thoroughly sympathised with their con-
tention. It seemed exceedingly unlair that persons within the Empire should
be called upon to pay Income Tax twice over on the same income, with the
result that, in some cases, the total reached 13s. in the £. He referred to
the fact that the increase in taxation due to the War greatly accentuated the
grievance, and expressed the view that the present condition was unwise from
the Imperial point of view and exceedingly unfair from the point of view of
equity; it would unsettle many important businesses, many of which were
already transferring their domicile to the Dominions. (Hear, hear.) They
hoped the new Government, in face of united expressions of opinion both
from the United Kingdom itself and the Dominions, with the added support
of the Dominion Governments, would, recognise the unanswerable character
of their ease. (Cheers.) •
Mr. Frederick Dutton (Chairman of the Association to Protest against the
Duplication of Income Tax within the Empire) said the Association of which
he was Chairman, brought into being only twelve months previously, repre-
sented the first organised effort to deal with what they regarded as a most
important and at the same time difficult and complicated question. The general
principles were familiar and need not be stated to the Prime Minister and
Treasurer of New Zealand when he was able to refer to the fact that in the
New Zealand Finance Act of that year had been introduced a Clause. (Sec-
tion 92) providing that, as regards New Zealand, where any part of the income'
of a person resident there was shown to have been derived from some other
country within the British Dominions and to be chargeable with Income Tax
in that country, then it would be entirely exempt in that Dominion even if
the rate of tax in the other country were less than the New Zealand rate. For
this first official and legislative recognition of their contention he took the
opportunity of tendering to the New Zealand Government the hearty thanks and
appreciation of the Association. The only direct action the Association could
take likely to produce practical results was with the Government in the United
Kingdom and the Imperial Parliament. (Hear, hear.) They did what they could
in connection with the Finance Bill of 1916 to get some substantial relief even
if they could not at once get the whole way along the road they were trying
to travel; their activities were confined to the Clause —ultimately Section 43 of
the Finance Act —under which those who paid above 3s. 6d. obtained a certain
measure of relief, i.e., up to a limit of Is. 6d. Mr. J. 4nnan Bryce, M.P., had
moved an amendment, prepared by the Association, to chrry this a considerable
degree further—that was to say, to give effect to the suggestion made by
General Botha at the Imperial Conference in 1911, when he (the speaker) be-
lieved it was Sir Joseph Ward himself who brought the subject forward. The
suggestion was that the whole of a Colonial Income Tax should be deducted
from the United Kingdom Income Tax, but this had been ruled out by the then
Chancellor of the Exchequer on the ground that while there was nothing to
be said against the injustice of the principle, he could not afford to lose the
money. He did not wish now to comment upon such an argument as that as
he had already done so when addressing the Prime Minister of Australia as
one of the deputation which waited upon him on this same subject just on the
eve of his departure for Australia in June last. The effect of the amendment
moved by Mr, Bryce would have been to entitle the taxpayer to a refund of the
whole tax paid elsewhere in the Empire, where it would probably, Us a general
rule, be less than in the United Kingdom. However, they were unable to make
any progress with the amendment—in fact it was met by the then Treasury
representatives here, he regretted to say, with altogether unnecessary political
hostility. (Hear, hear.) This question of double Income Tax undoubtedly
presented many difficulties of detail and if, instead of a mutual desire to find
a solution of such difficulties, they were seized upon as a means of obstructing
progress, it was not easy to get on. They made an attempt also to get rid of
the injustice by which tax is now charged upon income whether brought into


the United Kingdom or not; it was common knowledge that income, instead
of being withdrawn, is frequently left in a Dominion, whose development is
assisted thereby. Here again, however, no success had been attained in the
last session of Parliament. They had been in constant correspondence with the
Treasury, but were put off with the often repeated reply that the matter, owing
to its complications, would have to be dealt with by an Imperial Conference after
the War was over. But until that t'ime arrived those who paid at the higher rate
were being practically bled to death, principally by reason of the War. (Hear,
hear.) The Imperial Conference which, it appeared, the new Government were
now calling, would, he hoped, provide an opportunity for considering the double
Income Tax question at once. It was not too much to expect that, though
many other questions of enormous importance would be brought forward,
the Conference would be able to devote some attention to the matter which
was the subject of his observations, which affected the whole question of
Imperial finance. Ko doubt, as adjustments would have to be made, the
ground could be prepared to a large extent before the Conference met. As
regards matters of detail, the Association would address a communication to
Mr. Massey and Sir Joseph Ward. Mr. Dutton then drew attention to some
recent remarks of Lord Kintore, at a meeting of the Sulphide Corporation,
which, as the most recent of many similar utterances, put the whole question in
a very forcible way. “This duplication of taxation (said Lord Kintore), falling
upon the same earnings and resulting from the fact that although the bulk
of our business is in Australia we have our registered domicile in this
country, is certainly an anomaly and an injustice which, if it continues, will
have the effect not only of driving all Anglo-Australian companies out of this
country, but all free English capital out of Australia. Both countries are
therefore interested in a speedy and equitable settlement?” In conclusion, he
laid emphasis on the fact that they were not seeking in any way to avoid
taxation or objecting to the rate of taxation, but simply to get rid of the
injustice of a duplication of Income Tax. In seeking to accomplish this aim
the Association which he represented felt that they were dealing with a
question which not only caused individual hardship but was one which affected
the economic interests of the Empire in a most vital manner. (Cheers.)
Sir Westby Perceval, K.C.M.G. (Chairman of the JDouble Income Tax
Committee of the London Chamber of Commerce) said that the Committee
he represented naturally regarded the matter chiefly from the point of view
of its effect upon the commerce of the Empire. They felt very strongly that
the best method of curing the ravages of the War was to seize every possible
means of stimulating British trade and increasing production, to both of
which the double Income Tax was diametrically opposed. It placed the British
trader at a disadvantage with his competitor and impeded that free flow of
population and capital within the Empire which was necessary to its develop-
ment. The War had taught them that for the future the Empire must be more
self-contained and one part must not seek to legislate to the detriment of
another part of it. The Treasury admitted the injustice of the double tax, but
said it was only one of many anomalies which existed in connection with the
Income Tax, and sought refuge in the usual Koyal Commission to be appointed
after the War. To that they took very strong exception. Personally, he
thought the matter so urgent that it should not even wait until the Imperial
Conference met. Mr. McKenna had conceded the principle that two war taxes
on the same property is wrong and to correct this he has allowed a rebate of
three-tenths of the ss. Income Tax imposed. If Mr. McKenna could have
contended that the war tax was only represented by three-tenths of the total
tax it might have been to some extent reasonable, but the position was just
the reverse and it was nearer the truth to say that of the total tax seven-tenths
was war tax and three-tenths taxes for general purposes. This being so, the
rebate should be seven-tenths and not three-tenths, or, in other words, 3s. 6d.


instead of Is. 6d. He (the speaker) thought if that point were pressed on
the Chancellor of the Exchequer he could not fail to see that it was sound,
and that it was not only unjust, but unwise and foolish in the extreme to
continue such an impost. To attempt to budget to defray the whole cost of
the War was impossible and the War must be paid for chiefly out of capital;
therefore a few millions more or less raised as revenue were unworthy of
consideration when compared with the grave injustice and the injury to British
trade and Imperial development which was involved. He hoped the New
Zealand representatives would assist in getting immediate relief. As a further
illustration of the injustice, he referred to the case of a company having share-
holders on the English and Colonial registers. Whilst those of the former
who were not liable to pay the full ss. deducted from dividend payments could
put in a claim for repayments, the Colonial shareholders could not. The
time had come when the Governments of the Dominions should take a firm
stand in this matter and insist upon something being done. As things stood
the Home Government was poaching upon the taxable resources of the
Dominions in a way which was unfair to them, and to which they might very
properly object.
Mr. Massey asked whether he was correct in assuming that the deputation
sought the assistance of the New Zealand Government in obtaining the remedy.
They were, he supposed, satisfied with what the New Zealand Government had
done in New Zealand. [The Delegates: “ Yes.”]
Sir Westby Perceval concluded by saying that he hoped Mr. Massey and
Sir Joseph Ward would be insistent in requiring some immediate measure of
relief, leaving the final settlement of details to be worked out on a later occa-
sion. If this were not done serious injury would result to the commerce of the
Empire, and the development of the Dominions, both of which were all
important factors in the future well-being of the British peoples. (Cheers.)
The Bt. Hon. Lord Southwark, Vice-President of the Association of
Chambers of Commerce of the United Kingdom, in the absence of Sir Algernon
Firth, the President, introduced the representatives present of that body,
saying that the Association of Chambers of Commerce were in entire sympathy
with the object the deputation had in view. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. F. Faithful! Begg, Vice-President of the London Chamber of Com-
merce and Chairman of the Finance Section, who followed, said the subject
was so extensive and interesting that he would like to expand it, but that was
not the time or the place. The Association to Protest against the Duplication
of Income Tax within the Empire had published recently a report giving full
particulars of the situation and had now promised a further report formulating
certain definite proposals. There had been a glimmer of light in the fact that
the late Chancellor of the Exchequer had made a small concession, the advan-
tage of which was that the principle of their claim was established, thus giving
them encouragement to endeavour to get further relief. He could say, from
long experience, that nothing could exceed the financial immorality of Chan-
cellors of the Exchequer. Pressure alone appealed to them, and by insisting
upon the harmful results they might have a chance of\naking some impression
on the Exchequer. (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Acton Adams thought that income should be levied at its source. Gold
should pay Income Tax where it was produced, farms products where the land
was situated, etc. Bringing money to the United Kingdom and spending it
there conferred a benefit upon the country. It had been no use appealing to
the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s sense of justice. He hoped the New Zealand
Government would point out the injury the City of London (where so many
were engaged in directing profitable enterprises in the Colonies) would receive
by driving the head offices away, whereby great loss would be inflicted upon
the City. (Hear, hear.) •


Sir John Cockburn, K.C.M.G., speaking for the Australasian Chamber of
Commerce in London and Anglo-Australian banks and insurance offices,
endorsed the remarks of previous speakers as to the injustice of the double
tax and urged the inexpediency of injuring the representatives of British
Colonial commerce in the United Kingdom who were already providing very
largely the sinews of war and- were engaged in activities essential to the
success of the Allies; it was not good business, he said, to crush them; they
had been taught at school, in their Latin grammars, that it was the part of a
good husbandman to shear the sheep, not to flay them. It was the function of
an enlightened State to secure an annual clip from the taxpayer, but not
to flay him out of existence. (Cheers.)
Mr. Gerald O. Parsons (Secretary of the Income Tax Reform League), said
his Committee desired to associate themselves with what had been put forward
that day; the matter, they considered, was one of urgency.
The Rt. Hon. W. F. Massey (Prime Minister of New Zealand), in reply,
congratulated the different speakers on their brief and businesslike statements.
He did not, he said, need to refer to the injustice or hardship of double Income
Tax as they were all agreed on that point. The sympathy of New Zealand
had already been expressed in the most practical form possible by legislation
the preceding year. (Hear, hear.) He had been glad to hear one of the speakers
make clear that there was no intention on the part of the deputation to ask the
Parliaments of the Dominions not to tax income made in the Dominions, because
they could not possibly go back on what had been done in that way. What
appealed to him was the effect the present system would undoubtedly have in
the Dominions if allowed to continue. No Dominion could, without outside
capital, carry on its development. New Zealand could not do so without
serious hardship, and the system of taxation they were discussing would, if con-
tinued, restrict the investment of British capital in that country; that was his
point of view. (Hear, hear.) Unfortunately the difficulty had been accentuated
at a very awkward time, during the war period. He felt bound to say that he
had a great deal of sympathy with the Chancellor of the Exchequer when the
latter said he could not afford to go without the money. Funds were necessary,
but, personally, he did not believe that the burden should be adjusted in propor-
tion to the strength of the back and no one back should be required to carry
a double burden. The tax should be collected in the most equitable form
possible, but he did not consider what was being done at present was equit-
able. Reference had been made to the Imperial Conference which, the Prime
Minister had stated, was to be called. Most of the Dominions would welcome
the decision. Personally, he thought it should be convened without delay;
indeed they in New Zealand considered it a pity it was not held very much
earlier. No one knew yet when it would be possible for the Conference to
meet. Naturally, previous consultation with those interested would be neces-
sary, but he hoped the earliest possible date would be selected, for we could
not afford to wait. He had no doubt that double Income Tax was one of the
matters to which the attention of the Conference would be directed, and he
had no hesitation in saying that the subject would receive the consideration it
deserved. If Sir Joseph Ward and himself could assist they would surely
do so. (Cheers.)
The Prime Minister of New Zealand having another engagement then with-
drew, Mr. Stanley Machin having previously expressed the sincere thanks of
the deputation to Mr. Massey for his courtesy and kindness in meeting them.
The Rt. Hon. Sir Joseph Ward, Bart., K.C.M.G.: Mr. Chairman and Gen-
tlemen, —The importance of the matter that you have come to represent to the
Prime Minister and myself is fully recognised by us. It is not new to me.
Some years ago I made representations to Mr. Asquith when he was Chancellor
of the Exchequer, and again to Mr. Lloyd George when he was Chancellor


of the Exchequer, but .neither could see their way to make the change. Per-
sonally, I strongly support this important reform, as I have always held
it to be wrong to penalise the same Income Tax payers within the Empire
by asking him or them to pay twice by way of Income Tax on earnings made
in any one part of the British Dominipns. I found that while the two former
Chancellors of the Exchequer were very courteous and considerate the diffi-
culties that represented themselves at the time were in their judgment insuper-
able. But at the present juncture it seems to me to be infinitely more impor-
tant than ever before that this question, which is so very vital to the Empire
as a whole, should not be allowed to continue upon its present basis. (Hear,
hear.)
I am not going to discuss the present conditions brought about by the
War —you are all familiar with them—but the existence of a war of such a
gigantic nature, imposing enormous taxation upon British taxpayers in all
parts of the British Empire, for the purpose of providing the monies to carry
on the struggle, is all the more reason why the taxation to carry on the
ordinary affairs of the individual parts of the Empire, as well as the additional
taxation required to provide for the huge war expenditure, should be upon a
basis that not only does not create friction but should be placed upon a basis
to prevent a continuance of a constant feeling of irritation now existing
amongst responsible citizens all over the Empire. (Hear, hear.) My own
opinion is, and I hold it very strongly and have held it all through, that within
the Empire itself a system should not be allowed to exist, either in the Mother-
land or in the young Oversea Dominions, whereby Income Tax is levied —except
upon the basis of paying it to the Government of the country in which the
income is earned. (Hear, hear.) I believe that to be a fair and equitable
basis, and it seems to me that the British Government should leave nothing
undone to institute such a reform. We in Hew Zealand are certainly ready to
establish this system.
It is one of my duties in connection with my position as Finance Minister
of New Zealand, while in London, to make these representations to the Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer. (Hear, hear.) They were made by me to the two
former Chancellors of the Exchequer, and it will be my duty to make them to
the present Chancellor of the Exchequer and to represent from our stand-
point how essential it is for the British Government to trim their financial sails
to meet the Empire evolution now taking place, and which after the War will
create an entirely new condition of things, and certainly there, are going to
be great alterations in the commercial world so far as the trade of the
Empire is concerned, and now is surely the time to commence to put the taxa-
tion affairs of the financial ship of State in order, so that the Motherland and
the Oversea Dominions can effectively beat to windward against the implacable
foes of the Empire in the years to come.
In my opinion it is not improbable—at all events, I think it is not im-
possible—that the financial burden imposed by the War will or should be
shouldered by the Empire as a whole, by some process of pooling the public
war loans, by a well thought out system of conversion which would enable the
total sum to be obtained at a much lower rate of interest than is now being
paid by any portion of the Empire ; the scheme to include, of course, a sinking
fund which will ensure the extinction of the debt in a given period. The war
taxation to raise the revenue for this purpose should be ear-marked and kept
separate and distinct from the taxation required for the ordinary revenue
of the different parts of the Empire. Such an arrangement is as essential to
the Mother Country as to the Dominions. Now if we are to have a combination
of what I term a strong Empire to bring about this desirable and, I believe,
practical end—unity of financial work over the whole of the Empire in connec-
tion with the War —we cannot hope to have the good will of the people of New


Zealand and the other Dominions, who undertake their share of these matters,
unless they see that reason and right are the basis of the taxation, and this
cannot be as long as there exists a system of charging the same British people
in the same Empire twice over upon the same earnings. (Hear, hear.)
Now, in regard to New Zealand’s legislative action in reference to this
matter, which has been mentioned here to-day, I merely wish to say that
the Clause I put into our Land and Income Tax Act last year was to prevent
residents of New Zealand paying Income Tax twice. The Clause reads:—
“ Income derived by a person resident in New Zealand but not derived
from New Zealand shall be exempt from Income Tax if and so far as the
Commissioner is satisfied that it is derived from some other country within
the British Dominions and that it is chargeable with Income Tax in that
country.”
The meaning of this is, that if a person in Netv Zealand is deriving
income in another British country and is being taxed in such country on that
income he would not be mulcted by another tax in New Zealand upon the
same amount. My idea in inserting the Clause was to have reciprocity in this
respect throughout the Empire.
We are already under this Clause rebating Income Tax in cases where
payment has been made twice to the British Government, and also to the New
Zealand Government.
In regard to taxation of profits imposed to meet war expenditure, in the
Finance Act of last year I provided the following Clause: —
“ In any case where excess profits are chargeable with Excess Profits
Duty under this part of this Act and are also chargeable in Great Britain
with Excess Profits Duty under any Act of the Imperial Parliament im-
posing an Excess Profits Duty, the Minister of Finance may agree with the
Chancellor of the Imperial Exchequer, or other authorised for
the apportionment between the Imperial and the New Zealand Govern-
ments, towards the supplies necessary for the services of His Majesty of
the Excess Profits Duty derived pursuant either to this part of this Act
or to such Imperial Act as aforesaid (whichever provides for the greater
amount of such duty) and may further agree that in any such case the
Excess Profits Duty chargeable pursuant to the other of such Acts shall
not be collected.”
This you will understand is framed with a view to preventing an unfair
contribution as far as excess profits are concerned by the same people or
institutions trading in Britain and New Zealand, and I quote both those
Clauses, affecting as they do both Income Tax and Profit Tax, to give a
practical illustration of what we are doing in New Zealand in regard to
these important matters.
Our legislation is framed with a view of obviating hardship and unfairness
and our laws concerning Income Tax and Profits Tax are framed so that
payment will fall upon the taxpayer in London or New Zealand fairly and
equitably. In other words, the legislation is being enacted to ensure that
British taxpayers are not penalised at both ends because of the want of
recognition by the Government at each end. It is unjust to continue such an
inequitable system that has so long prevailed.
It is not a matter of talking, we are doing it, and I have evidence in my
possession which shows conclusively that we have already given considerable
relief in New Zealand to prevent the double Income Tax being imposed. So
I want to make it quite clear that on this matter of the double Income Tax
our evidence is in accordance with your evidence, and our duty is to impress
this upon the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and I hope the Chancellor will


see the basis of reason and justice upon which this is being done. If the
Imperial Conference meets it must consider this matter, and I feel perfectly
certain that all the oversea representatives will unanimously support what it
is you desire. Speaking from the financial standpoint we are quite willing, in
New Zealand, so to adjust our local finance as to avoid the necessity for
imposing the double burden of Income Tax upon the same single firm, company,
professional man, or private individual within the Empire, which is so detri-
mental to the Empire’s development both from the New Zealand standpoint
and from your own.
Until the War is over I do not see how it is possible for the British
Chancellor of the Exchequer or any of the finance Ministers in the overseas
countries to know quite what permanency of finance, due to the War, they
have to permanently arrange for; but it is quite clear that until the War
is over, in this country and also in ours, we have to collect a portion of the
profits made to help to finance the War. At present the British Government
collect 60 per cent, and we in New Zealand collect 45 per cent. Now I admit at
once that when you take two parts of the Empire—Britain and New Zealand—
the two Profits Taxes amount to 105 per cent. (Laughter.) Well, I say that
ought not to be. It can be imposed and collected as the law stands. All the
same, I foresaw not only the incongruity of it, but the desirability of having
some understanding and workable arrangement with the British Chancellor of
the Exchequer to obviate that, that is why I inserted the Clause, which I have
quoted, to enable reciprocity to be effected with regard to the Profit Tax as
between the British Government and the New Zealand Government. lam of
opinion that the British Government should provide a similar Clause in their
Act as I have quoted to you. Then I think what ought to be done —and I
want to say it to you because it is you who have to bring pressure here as
well as us from the Oversea Dominions, upon the people interested—is to
bring about a basis by which 60 per cent, between the Motherland and the
Oversea countries only should be charged where it affects one taxpayer upon
the basis of a fair division. I recognise that we have got to be content with
less than the Old Country because the greater part of the financial burden
for carrying on the War falls upon the British Exchequer, and my own idea
about the matter is that we should arrange with the Chancellor of the Imperial
Exchequer that the total amount collected from every profit taxpayer where
both countries are affected should not exceed 60 per cent, of the excess profits
earned over and above the standard profits in the country in which the head
office of the business is situated, and that sixty one-hundred and fifths'(say
57 per cent.) of such 60 per cent, should be paid to the British Government
and forty-five one-hundred and fifths of the 60 per cent, (say 43 per cent.)
should be* paid to the New Zealand Government. That is, that instead of
105 per cent, of war profits being collected by the two countries, that we should
between us collect, say, 60 per cent., and divide that amount equitably between
the two countries. We must have our portion, because we are incurring large
liabilities for loans and war purposes. But if we want the people who are
laying the golden eggs to keep on laying them until the end of the War, and
possibly for some time afterwards, for all I know to the contrary, we must
approach them on the basis of reason, and my idea is that instead of New
Zealand taking 45 per cent, and the British Government 60 per cent, we
should go on fair lines, and what I have indicated is both feasible and practical
and certainly would be accepted as fair by those who are rightly called upon
to give up a considerable portion of their profits made during this war period.
In that way we would bring about an arrangement for equitable war profits
taxation, and the business man (whom, wherever I have been, I have found
ready and willing to pay whatever was necessary for carrying on the War in
that respect) would look upon it as a position that was possible for him to
comply with until this War is over, however long that may be. (Cheers.)


I would like to say, in conclusion, that I am very glad to be armed with
the additional recommendation and support of the important and influential
deputation which is here to-day, and that we shall be encouraged by that
support to continue our efforts to have the double Income Tax within the
British Empire removed, because if we are proposing, as I think we are, in
real earnest to try and change the conditions of trading within the Empire
after we have won the present War, it is an anomaly, indeed it is much worse,
it is unjustifiable if not an absolutely insulting anomaly, to say that we are
going to make our own British traders in this respect worse off than traders
from foreign countries. So I want to say that my opinions, like those of Mr.
Massey, are fully in accord with what has been represented here to-day,
and that I will certainly do my utmost to further your laudable efforts.
And I hope, if I may be permitted to say so to you, representing as you do
very influential people, that there will be nothing in the shape of any mis-
guided weakness in regard to the attitude taken up by this country concerning
the suggestion of a great outside country, that we should knuckle down to
any premature peace proposals before this War is over. (Applause.) lam
quite certain that New Zealand will stand shoulder to shoulder with the
Motherland and do its part until we have carried out the purposes of this
War, namely, the attainment of a definite and complete victory over our
unscrupulous and implacable foes, and that peace proposals should only be
considered when we are absolutely conquerors, and that the peace so secured
may be on a permanent basis and so prevent the repetition of another horrible
war in the years to come. (Cheers.)
Lord Southwark said he wished, on behalf of the deputation, to heartily
thank the Prime Minister and Sir Joseph Ward for receiving them and favour-
ing them with such clear and encouraging speeches.
Sir Joseph Ward briefly replied, and said it had been a pleasure for
them to have the subject so clearly put before them by the different speakers.
He wished to thank them most cordially for the attention with which they had
listened to his remarks. He would like to express his thanks, and theirs as
well, to the Hon. J. G. Jenkins, for arranging such a representative deputation.
(Cheers.)


Copy of letter addressed to the Bt. Hon. W. F. Massey, dated 23 rd January,
1917 :
27, Clements Lane, London, E.C.
DOUBLE INCOME TAX.
The Rt. Hon. W. F. Massey, P.C., Prime Minister of New Zealand.
Savoy Hotel, Strand, W.C.
Dear Sir,— Referring further to the deputation which waited upon you
and Sir Joseph Ward upon this subject on the 22nd December last, I am now
able to lay before you some further observations and suggestions which, as
our Chairman, Mr. Dutton, said in his speech, could not be gone into on
that occasion, and would therefore be embodied in a written communication.
So far as this Association is concerned, they are in entire agreement
with the view expressed by yourself, that throughout the Empire the basic
principle of income taxation should be to tax income in that part of the
Empire where it is produced. The desirability of this principle being adopted
is already indicated at the commencement of the explanatory memorandum
published by this Association jointly with the London Chamber of Commerce.
It has been felt by this Association, however, that there are practical
difficulties which may prevent that principle from being accepted for the
present in its entirety.
As examples of such difficulties may be mentioned: —
1. The principle followed in this country of taxing the owner of the
income, if he resides here, on all his income irrespective of the
source from which it is derived.
2. That usually the rate of Income Tax ruling in this country is higher
than in any individual Dominion.
3. That in the great self-governing Dominion of Canada, at present no
actual Income Tax forms part of its source of revenue.
In their published documents and discussions, this Association has always
it clear that there was no desire on the part of those liable to the
payment of Income Tax in this country to pay on any part of their income
at a less rate than any other taxpayer. This result would be produced if the
principle before referred to were adopted throughout the Empire, especially
in view of the difficulties (Nos. 2 and 3) mentioned above, as a person deriving
income from Canada under existing conditions would not pay any Income
Tax at all, and similarly deriving it from India or South Africa would pay less
than other taxpayers.
The principle embodied in what is now well known as the Botha suggestion,
as applied to the United Kingdom, that without altering any of the fundamental
principles on which Income Tax is collected in this country credit should be
given as regards income derived from any Dominion, for any Income Tax
paid in such Dominion, so that the difference, only should be paid to or
retained by the British Treasury would, however, in its practical operation,
involve one Income Tax only at the higher rate. Thus, if the United Kingdom
rate is higher than the Dominion rate, the taxpayer here would pay the
same rate as any other taxpayer of his class, although the amount would, under
the Botha principle, be divided partly between the Dominion and the United
Kingdom.


It is only since the formation of this Association, and its endeavours to
educate public opinion on this question, that the members of the House of
Commons are, in a general sense, beginning to recognise the importance of the
Imperial questions involved, and to see the necessity of the anomaly and in-
justice being remedied; but the officers of the Association who have been
brought most in touch with them during the debates on the Finance Act of
last session have to recognise that there is a very strong feeling, not only
in the House but also amongst the general public, that if the Botha principle
were to be taken as a basis for consideration the Imperial Treasury should not
be asked to surrender the wffiole amount of a Dominion Income Tax, as if the two
rates of taxation were the same the Imperial Treasury would receive nothing,
although the person owning the income would be residing here. It is con-
stantly urged, therefore, that whatever is conceded should be divided between
the United Kingdom and the Dominion in some agreed proportion. As long
as that feeling preponderates it would be a bar to the acceptance by the
Imperial Legislature of the principle of income being taxed solely in the
place where it is derived. Thus it is that the Treasury here fall back always
on the excuse that the matter is one involving adjustment betwmen the
different Governments and must be deferred for the assembling of an Imperial
Conference.
Another conclusion which experience forces upon us is the difficulty of
getting progress made in dealing with this question unless there is the friendly
desire to arrive at a solution as distinguished from the alternative of utilising
the undoubted complexity of arriving at a solution as an excuse for putting
the matter on one side for as long as possible. The present Chancellor of the
Exchequer may be more sympathetic or appreciate more fully the importance
of the Imperial interests involved than his predecessors, and especially his
late predecessor, Mr. McKenna, who showed no disposition other than to
obstruct the objects of the Association as much as possible. In such a state
of things as last mentioned it becomes impossible, or at all events very
difficult, to get a majority of members of the present Parliament to support,
on a division, any question involving a substantial diminution of income to the
Imperial Treasury, which the Government are opposed to.
While thus generalising on certain aspects of the question, we should like
also to draw your attention to the reply made by the Prime Minister of
Australia, Mr. Hughes, to the deputation which waited upon him on the
22nd June last: —
“ He agreed with the contention the deputation had put before him.
The principle involved seemed to some extent to encroach upon, or to
impair, the full right of the Dominion to tax for its own purposes. It was
.clear that if there were two authorities, both having the right to tax
one income, there could remain to the subordinate authority (and, after
all, they were subordinate) only that which the other left. Further, it
was impossible for them to fashion an equitable system of taxation if in
regard to a very great portion of the corpus of the income to be taxed
another body, a separate Legislature, had the power also to impose taxa-
tion on a scale and under circumstances about which they were not con-
sulted, and which might not coincide with, which might be in violent
conflict with, their own objects. Such a condition tended to impair the
effect of their oven taxation and might compel them to resort to other
systems of taxation or to a higher rate. This was merely incidental, but
when, if ever, an Imperial Conference was convened to consider a number
of questions of urgency, the power of taxation of incomes derived in the
Dominions and remitted to the United Kingdom would have to be con-
sidered most seriously.”


In view of the fact that discussions between representatives of the different
Governments, at some time or other, seem to be unavoidable, and based upon
such consideration as this Association has been able to give to the difficulties
which have been brought to their notice, it would seem that such difficulties
would largely disappear if there could be a greater measure of standardisation
on financial details throughout the Empire in regard to: —
1. The principle on which Income Tax is made payable.
2. The method and procedure of collection.
3. The period of the fiscal year.
As regards No. I. — There are three different principles applicable in the
United Kingdom, New Zealand and Australia alone.
UNITED KINGDOM. —Income Tax is payable on the income of any person
or company resident or registered in the United Kingdom, no matter whence
the income is derived.
NEW ZEALAND. —The principle, until the Finance Act of this year, was
th e same, but has now the very important exception as regards income not
derived from New Zealand, but from another part of the Empire, that it is
exempt in New Zealand if subject to an Income Tax in any other part of the
Empire.
AUSTRALIA. —Income Tax is payable only on income derived directly
or indirectly by the taxpayer from sources within Australia, and is not affected
by the question whether the taxpayer is or is not resident in Australia,
Also, in Great Britain Income Tax is calculated almost entirely on income
earned during*the current year of taxation, whereas in New Zealand and the
Commonwealth of Australia it is calculated on the income earned during the
year preceding the year of taxation.
As regards No. 2.—ln the United Kingdom tax is, as far as possible, collected
at the source, and that would seem to apply also to New Zealand.
In Australia, on the other hand, under the Federal Act, the individual is
the person principally assessed, and as regards companies they are only liable
to assessment on the amount of their undistributed profits, which, as a general
rule, would involve only a small portion of the annual profit as compared with
the amount paid away in dividends.
The details of the income taxation of the States in Australia also seems to
vary considerably both from the Federal taxation and from each other, but
beyond noting the fact it does not seem necessary to go into details at present.
As regards No. 3.—The United Kingdom fiscal year runs from 6th April to
sth April.
In New Zealand, from Ist April to 31st March.
In Australia, from Ist July to 30th June.
The inconvenience of these different variations is seen in the practical
operation of Section 43 of the British Finance Act of 1916, which at present
represent the maximum of concession which has been made in this country.
This section is as follows: —
“If any person who has paid, by deduction or otherwise, United
Kingdom Income Tax for the current Income Tax year on any part of
his income at a rate exceeding 3s. 6d. proves to the satisfaction of the


Special Commissioners that he has also paid any Colonial Income Tax in
respect of the same part of his income, he shall be entitled to repayment
of a part of the United Kingdom Income Tax paid by him equal to the
difference between the amount so paid and the amount he would have paid
if the tax had been charged at the rate of 3s. 6d., or, if that difference
exceeds the amount of tax on that part of his income, at the rate of the
Colonial Income Tax equal, to that amount.
“ In this section the expression ‘ United Kingdom Income Tax ’ means
Income Tax charged under the Income Tax Acts; and the expression
‘ Colonial Income Tax ’ means Income Tax charged under any law in
force in any British Possession or any tax so charged which appears to the
Special Commissioners to correspond to United Kingdom Income Tax.”
Objections to that section as it now stands are: —
1. That it should apply to all Income Tax payers in this country and
not only to those who pay at a rate exceeding 3s. 6d. The smaller
rates applicable here are a concession to the smaller income as
against the larger one, and it is an injustice to the smaller income
in so far as it is composed of any income derived from a
Dominion which has already been subject to Income Tax there,
that the owner should not have the same concession as those who
pay at a rate exceeding 3s. 6d.
2. That its practical operation will be much impeded in regard to
income derived from New Zealand or Australia by the words
“the same income”; it would have been much simpler if the
right to a return were made to depend upon Colonial tax, having
been paid on any income during the same fiscal year period as that
in which the British Income Tax had been paid.
3. That apart from the difficulties in the way of getting relief from it
as now worded, the relief it gives being limited to Is. 6d. in the
£ as a maximum, is altogether inadequate to the rates of taxa-
tion now in force, and which are certain to continue during the
War, and in all probability for a long period afterwards.
In Sir Joseph Ward’s reply to the deputation he mentioned suggestions
which had been put before the Imperial Government as regards “ Excess
Profits Taxation,” that there should only be one taxation and that the amount
should be shared between the Imperial Government and the New Zealand
Government in the proportion of 60 per cent, to the former and 40 per cent,
to the latter.
A similar suggestion in principle has been brought before this Committee
by one of its members, Mr. P. D. Leake, as regards Income Tax for an alterna-
tive clause to Section 43 of the English Finance Act, based upon the analogy of
the reciprocal provision in Section 20 of the English Finance Act of 1894 as
regards Probate Duties. The suggestion has for its object to provide for the
whole of the Colonial Income Tax being refunded on the principle of the Botha
suggestion in all cases in which the colony which has received the Income Tax
assents in its turn to refund to the Imperial Government a proportion (to be
agreed) of the amount so refunded. A copy of Mr. Leake’s communication is.
attached hereto and seems well worthy of consideration.
■ t^ S s^a^ ky Mr. Dutton at the deputation, we endeavoured last session,
without success, to get Section 43 of the Finance Bill amended so as to give
Af effeCt t 0 the Botha suggestion. The Chancellor of the Exchequer
(Mr. McKenna) and the Financial Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. Montagu)


opposed the amendment moved on our behalf by Mr. Annan Bryce, M.P., and
on a division the voting wa* 128 against and only 32 for.
It was intended in that event to move another amendment, based upon the
principle of getting relief limited to the difference between the rate of Income
Tax before the War and the higher rates caused by the War, for which purpose
ls.-6d. in the £ was taken as the ante-War rate, but we were not allowed to
move this other amendment, the Government intervening to procure a ruling
by the Chairman of the Committee that it was covered by the decision of the
House on the other amendment.
We made a further appeal to the Chancellor of the Exchequer that the
Government should themselves, upon the Report stage, amend the section so
as to give a larger measure of relief, and in your reply to the deputation you
spoke on the possibility of relief being given during the War from the higher
taxations caused by the War. I am desired by my Committee to attach also for
your information a copy of the letter which we addressed to Mr. McKenna on
this subject.
We also endeavoured last session unsuccessfully to get The Empire excepted'
from the operation of Section 5 of the Finance Act of 1914, making income
from sources enumerated in that section liable to pay Income Tax in this
country even if the income were never brought here. The operation of this
section is very prejudicial to the interests of a Dominion in which income
from property may be derived, and which it may be desired wholly or partially
to leave there for further developing a particular property or industry, and
the policy involved should be challenged and arrangements, if possible, made
for legislative revision by the Home Government.
Another point of detail which is much complained of, was dealt wittr
by Sir Westby Perceval. A person resident here is entitled to certain abate-
ments off his income, and pays at a lower rate, if his income does not exceed
the amounts mentioned in Section 26 of the 1916 Finance Act. On the other
hand, a person living, say, in New Zealand, and whose income wholly or partially
is derived from property or investments in this country, but whose total income
would, if that person lived in this country, entitle him to a lower rate of
Income Tax under Section 26, is denied the privilege of that section. He has
to submit to the deduction from his income here of tax at the maximum rate
on the assumption presumably that the Home Government has no means of
ascertaining or checking the total income of a person not actually resident
here. This anti-imperial detail should also be amended.
Another question which has engaged the attention of this Association is
the principle involved in the ■“ absentee ” taxation. One of the fundamental
principles this Association contends for is that if the Empire is to be treated
as one both property and persons should be free to circulate within the Empire
from one part to another, without being subject to any penalty for so doing.
Under the New Zealand Acts to some extent, and under the Australian Acts
to a larger extent, a person is penalised either for not living or for not having
lived in those countries as regards taxation on any income derived from them.
To say that in such such cases the owner of capital should be subjected to
additional income taxation because he does not bring his person as well as
his capital to the Dominions, seems hardly likely to stimulate investment, and
the Committee feel they are justified, as a matter of Imperial interest, in-
urging upon the Dominion Governments the abolition of all extra taxations,
based solely upon the principle of “ absenteeism.”


On the assumption that the Imperial Conference will be held in London
some time next month on war problems, it is submitted that the opportunity
should be utilised to arrange for some more substantial relief against double
Income Tax being immediately granted, and the other points referred to also
being dealt with.
These questions appear to my Committee to have a vital bearing on
Imperial finance, which is certain to be one of the war matters the Conference
will have to deal with.
Yours faithfully,
J. G. Jenkins,
Secretary.
27, Clements Lane, London, E.C.
Copy of letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, dated July 11th, 1916;
‘ DOUBLE INCOME TAX.
The Rt. Hon. Reginald McKenna, Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Whitehall, S.W.,
July 11th, 1916.
Dear. Sir, — On June 22nd I had the privilege, together with the Chairman
of this Association, of listening to the debate in the House of Commons on
the above subject, and I am desired by my Committee to point out to you
certain statements made during the debate which may have influenced members
in their voting on the amendment moved by Mr. Bryce to Clause 28 of the
Finance Bill. The late Financial Secretary to the Treasury, in the course of
his speech, referred to the “ wealthy Australian merchants, in the City of
London,” and inferred that the agitation for relief from the existing system
of double Income Tax was being carried on mainly on their behalf. This
inference is not in accordance with fact. The number of Australian merchants
in London and British shareholders in the City who have protested against
the payment of double Income Tax are not more numerous than those who
reside in this country and derive part or the whole of their income from land
or money left in India or the Colonies in connection with business undertakings
when they returned to this country. Regarding your own speech at the con-
clusion of the debate, my Committee regret to have to record their opinion
that you must have spoken under a misapprehension. Your statement that
“ any Australian who has property in this country from which he draws a profit
pays Income Tax in this country, and pays Income Tax in Australia ” does
not coincide with the Commonwealth Income Tax Assessment Act (No. 34) of
1915, Section 10, which reads: “ Income Tax shall be levied and paid in and
for each financial year upon the taxable income derived directly or indirectly
by every taxpayer from sources within Australia.” The Income Tax Acts in
the different Australian States are also clear and distinct in their provisions
that Income Tax is only payable on income earned or produced in the State.
The position is as follows: A person living in Australia may receive £IO,OOO
a year from investments in this country upon which he pays Income Tax here,
but no Income Tax is claimed from him in Australia on such income, even if the


whole of it is forwarded to him. If a person lives in this country who derives
an income of £IO,OOO from investments or business in Australia, he would pay
the Australian Income Tax on that income, as it is produced “ from sources
within Australia,” and he would also pay Income Tax in this country on the
same income, whether such income is remitted to this country or left in
Australia for investment or the extension of business. To my Committee there
appears no argument in support of the continuance of such an inequitable law.
The late Financial Secretary to the Treasury stated in the course of his
speech that the Government in the concession made were doing something
which is not done by the Dominions which have the same Income Tax principle
as this country, and he mentioned British Columbia and New Zealand as
examples. Mr. J. W. Wilson later on in the debate called attention to a
recently passed ‘‘ Income Tax in Canada where they have made a reciprocal
arrangement with regard to avoiding double tax.” So far as the law in New
Zealand corresponded with the law in this country, it should have been pointed
out that Sir Joseph Ward in his Budget speech on June 16th, as reported in
the Press on the 17th, distinctly stated that they proposed “ to abolish the
duplication of Income Tax by exempting in New Zealand income earned else-
where within the British Empire which has already been taxed there.” It is
quite evident that some members of the HoUse, owing to the speeches made
from the Treasury Bench, and the lack of explanation in reference to
Australia and New Zealand, were not clearly acquainted with the position;
this is borne out by the fact that one member of the House has written to me
stating that he intended to vote for the amendment moved by Mr. Bryce until
he heard you speak; no doubt others were similarly persuaded. My Committee
wish to emphasise the fact that the Commonwealth of Australia Income Tax
has been imposed solely and exclusively as a means of providing for the
Australian war expenditure. With equal truth it may be said as regards the
United Kingdom Income Tax that everything above Is. 6d. in the £ has been
necessitated by the same cause. It, therefore, follows that those who have to
pay the Australian and the United Kingdom war tax on the same income are
being compelled to pay twice over for the war expenditure. This fact is, in
the opinion of my Committee, an unanswerable argument, and should ensure
most earnest consideration and every possible endeavour to rectify such an
unjust system of taxation.
For a temporary addition to the Treasury funds my Committee consider
a serious injustice is being adhered to, which has already engendered a bitter
feeling in the minds of many of those who lived for years in India or the
Colonies, and have left their hard-earned capital invested in those countries.
And it is also resulting in business houses being removed from and homes
broken up in this country, as well as other injurious effects on the unity of the
Empire and the development of our Dominions, which have been clearly pointed
out in the publications of this Association, copies of which have been previously
forwarded to you. My Committee have therefore felt it to be their duty, on
behalf of those who to their knowledge are suffering from these admittedly
unjust impositions, to bring the matter to your personal notice, and to most
earnestly urge, not only in their interest, but in the interest of the future
development and unity of the Empire, that you should, even now, give the


subject further and favourable consideration. It is therefore respectively sug-
gested that the Government themselves should, on the Report stage of the Bill,
consider: (l) The advisability of amending Section 5 of the Finance Act of
1914, as was proposed; (2) to regard the question of Clause 28, in the Bill
as introduced, from the point of view of ante-war conditions, as we point out
all additions to the rate of tax here above Is. 6d. in the £ are “ war taxation,”
and that the whole of the Australian Commonwealth Income Tax is “ war
taxation ” pure and simple. Why should not the Government enlarge
Clause 28, by allowing to be repaid to any Income Tax payer in this country
anything he has paid here over and above Is. 6d. (instead of as now only over
and above 3s. 6d.) to the extent of the amount proved to have been paid for
Colonial Income Tax on the same income? These concessions, if granted,
would greatly ease the situation, pending the whole subject being dealt with at
the next Imperial Conference, as promised by the Government.
Yours faithfully,
J. G. JENKINS,
Secretary.




