

Descriptive Catalogue
OF
PICTURES. &c.,
IN THE
ART GALLERY
OF THE
International Exhibition , Sydney ,
1879-80.
“ The Pencil speaks the tongue of every land
—DRYDEX.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
PUBLISHED
P. E . Reynolds, Fine Art Dealer,
426 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY ,
AND
43 ELIZABETH. STREET, MELBOURNE.


-McR
Invites inspection of his very cimicc and exienAu* stock A
ENGRAVINGS,
PHOTOGRAPHS,
OHROMO^EITHOGRAPHS,
OLEOGRAPHS, <kc., &c.
Being all of a high-class character, and embracing copies of the leading
works published during the last few years.
4
Mr. (Reynolds has lately shown portions of his
Collection of Works of Art in all the Colonies,
and his name is well known throughout Aus-
tralia, as being the leading house for (Pictures.
d
ENGRAVINGS, after English, French, and German Paintings,
PHOTOGRAPHS, from Ancient and Modern Pictures.
CHROMO-LITHOGRAPHS, after Birket Foister, Rowbolham,
&c., &c.
OLEOGRAPHS, A large Stock of Prang’s American.
P. E. REYNOLDS,
FINE ART DEALER,
426 GEOEGE STREET, S^TXDJSTE'S",
AND
43 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.


DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE
OF
PICTURES, &c.,
IN
THE ART GALLERY
OF THE
TNTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION
SYDNEY, 1879-80.
“ THE PENCIL SPEAKS THE TONGUE OF EVERY LAND.' —Deydkn.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
'PUBLISHED BY
P. E. REYNOLDS, Fine Art Dealer,
426 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY;
And 43 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.




PREFATORY NOTE.
JN a collection of Pictures so large and so varied in
f character and quality as that which has been
assembled in the gallery erected for their reception
in the grounds of the Garden Palace, it is almost
impossible that all should receive the attention of
the visitor, who, at the same time, runs the risk of
overlooking some which are eminently deserving of
his careful notice, if not of his particular study.
Under such circumstances, the Publisher trusts
that a brief Descriptive Catalogue, or Hand-Book,
in which the more striking works will be indicated,
with a few words of explanatory or critical comment
would be acceptable to the public. And hence the
preparation and issue of the present Brochure.


GROUND PLAN OF THE GALLERIES.


DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE.
British Court.
OIL PAINTINGS
Note. —The first fourteen of the following pictures are
hung in the vestibule, on either side of the entrance to the Bri-
tish Court.
1. “The Unwilling Salute ” —J. C. Horsley, R.A.
A nurse-maid and her two youthful charges, in the costume
of the early part of the last century, are seated under the
chestnut trees in Bushy Park, and the attentions of a pri-
vate grenadier to the good-looking abigail are interrupted
by the arrival on the scene of a handsome young officer,
who ogles the girl, much to the annoyance of his subordi-
nate, compelled by the discipline of the service to salute
his irresistible rival and superior.
2. “ Dessert.” —T. Davidson.
A daintily-attired lady is selecting grapes from a bowl full on
the dinner waiter, while her daughter receives and places
them in a basket.
3. “ The Daughter of the House ” —J. R. Dicksee.
A winsome young girl bearing a salver of luscious fruit.
5. “A Bird Cage” —Mrs. Alma Tadema.
A child with a doll listening in rapt attention to the sweet
trill of a caged nightingale.
6. “Tombs of the Mameluke Sultans, Cairo” —F. Dillon.
An intensely hot sunset behind the tombs of the Mamelukes,
in front of which a devout Mussulman has spread his
carpet for evening prayer.
7. “Jack o' Lanthorn” —R. Redgrave.
A Puck-like figure luring a belated traveller through a reed-
grown marsh.
8. “ Father’s Nets ” —F. Moscheles.


9- “ Going through the Orchard” —T. G. Cotman.
ro. *• Woodland Stream ” —H. Campion.
ii- “ Meeting of Scotch Jacobites ” —C. Calthrop,
Seven conspirators, dreadfully in earnest, are pursuing their
deliberations with respect to the next rising at a long table
in the panelled chamber of a country mansion.
12. “ Finishing Touches ” —C. E. Perugini.
A lady of the last century, with her head thrust through the
curtains of her dressing-room, is having her white wig
powdered by her frisenr , whose assistant is heating the
curling tongs at the fire.
13. “A Late Visitor”—E. Sainsbury.
14. “Eaves Dropping”—F. Dillon.
A cleverly painted interior of an Oriental house, with two
gossips seated on a divan, while a young girl listens to
their conversation in a shadowy recess.
15. “ On the House tops”—A. Elmore, R.A.
“ That which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be
proclaimed upon the house tops.” The piece of gossip
which is being whispered between the two Moorish women
in the shadow, concerning the beautiful girl who is crouch-
ing on the step, will presently be noised abroad through
the city, as the fine central figure, who is clapping her
hands to attract the attention of her neighbours, is intent
upon divulging the scandal to all and sundry. The pic-
ture offers a graphic illustration of the architecture, cos-
tumes, and out-of-door life of the Algerines.
16. “Friends and Foes”—A. W. Bayes.
17. “Where heaves the Turf”—J. Fulleylove.
19. “Rest”—W. H. Hopkins.
20. “A Gipsy Encampment”—C. E. Johnson.
A charming little bit of rural English scenery, painted at the
season when the summer is mellowing into autumn.
31. “ Happy Children ” —C. Bauerle.
22. “Gleaners” —H. R. Robertson.
23. “The Mufti’s Solace” —W. C. Horsley.
A clever reproduction of the architectural decorations of an
Eastern interior.


24. “The Model” —F. R. Stock.
25. “Portrait of Sir C. Nicholson" —Lady Nicholson.
Interesting, like No. 44, from local associations.
26. “ Britoraartis and her Nurse ” —G. K. Watts. R.A.
Careless in drawing, coarse in texture, and weak in colour.
27. “The Young Cavalier”—W. Fyfe.
A picture which recalls the earliest efforts of Vandyke.
Equally fine in colour and expression.
28. “ Samson and Delilah ” —Sir F. Leighton, P.R.A.
Illustrates a fine passage in Milton’s Samson Agonistes. A
picture in which the artist has caught the spirit, and
reproduced the style and manner of the old masters. The
alluring beauty of the fair enchantress offers a strong and
striking contrast to the massive frame and anguish stricken
countenance of the blind and remorseful athlete.
29. “Joan of Arc”—P. H. Calderon, R.A.
The visionary maiden of Domremi, after a night of reverie,
spent in the fields, sees in the dispersion of the mists by
the rising sun an omen of the forthcoming delivery of her
beloved country from the thrall of its English invaders.
40. “ Esau ” — G. F. Watts, R.A.
Grandiose rather than great.
31. “ Portrait of G. C. Ogg”—W. Fyfe.
32. “ Pettoe ” —G. A. Storey, A.R.A.
33. “ Leafy Lanes ” —A. Johnston.
34. “ Crossing the Bar, Scarborough”—[. Mogford.
35. “ Waiting for the Ferry ” —W. H. Hall.
36. “Among the Buttercups”—Val. Davis.
37. “The Victory cutting the Franco-Spanish lane at Trafalgar”
-—A. Ballin.
38. “The Royal Family in 1857” —Belli, after Winterhalter
(Royal collection).
This is one of four pictures graciously lent by Her Majesty
the Queen to the Royal Commission for the Australian
Exhibitions. It represents the Royal Family at a period
when the domestic felicity of our Sovereign was probably


at its height, and before the shadow of a great affliction
had fallen on it.
40. “ The * Cleopatra ' in a Hurricane ” —K. W. Cooke, R.A.
41. ‘‘Mamma’s Flowers”—K, (1. Girardot.
42. “A Coming Storm”—T. R. Miles.
43. “ H.R.H. the Princess of Wales”—C. Baxter.
An excellent likeness of *• the Rose of Denmark.”
44. “The Three Sons of Sir C. Nicholson ” —Lady Nicholson.
45. “ The Queen receiving the Sacrament ” —C. R. Leslie, R.A.
(Royal Collection).
Highly interesting both as a work of art and as an historical
record. It was the solemnity which closed the Coronation
ceremonial on the 28th June, 1838. All the figures are
portraits, and most of the illustrious personages pour-
trayed have since passed away. Conspicuous among the
group are the Queen’s political preceptor, Lord Melbourne,
and her loyal adviser and famous subject, the Duke of
Wellington. Close to her Majesty are her excellent
mother, the Duchess of Kent, the beautiful Duchess of
Sutherland, and the unfortunate Lady Flora Hastings,
who was “ done to death by slanderous tongues.”
46. “ All among the Barley ” —-By E. K. Fahey.
A most difficult and unpromising subject, triumphantly
treated. Every stalk and ear of the growing grain, and
every poppy, corn flower and weed seems to stand out
from the rest, and to have been painted as if it were an
individual portrait.
47. “Marriage of the Prince of Wales”—W. P. Frith, R.A.
This is a splendid subject, splendidly painted. For bril-
liancy of colour, mastery of arrangement, and skilful
drawing, it is quite a chef d'oeuvre. Note the exquisite
texture of the robes, the beauty of the architectural details,
and the luminous atmosphere which seems to bathe all the
actors in this gorgeous pageant.
48. “ After the Apple Harvest ” —J. Hetherington.
49. “ The Water lane ” —C. J. Lewis.
50. “ A Welsh view”—C. J. Lewis
Two clever landscapes.


<5 1. “ Opening of the Vienna International Exhibition in 1873 ”
—N. Chevalier.
Swiss by descent, Russian by birth, English by adoption,
and Australian by many years residence in Victoria, this
artist has made for himself a fine position in the mother
country. The picture under notice, which has been lent
to the Exhibition by H.R.H. the Prince of Wales, com
tains upwards of 100 portraits. On a platform profusely
decorated with plants and flowers are seated the Emperor
and Empress of Austria ; the Prince of Wales, the Crown
Prince and Princess of Germany, the Duke of Connaught,
the Crown Prince of Denmark, the Count of Flanders, the
Countess Girgenti, the Princess Amalia of Coburg, and
the Duke of Coburg, are also present, and a vast con-
course of princes and nobility of all nations occupy the
second and successive rows of seats. The Archduke Carl
Ludwig is represented in the act of reading the first
address.
52. “ Carse of Gowrie ” —E. Hayett.
53. “ The Royal Procession to St. Paul’s Cathedral, on the 27th
of February, 1872, the day set apart for a solemn thanksgiving
on account of the Prince of Wales’s recovery from what
threatened to be a fatal illness ” —N. Chevalier.
The cavalcade is depicted passing up Ludgate Hill, and
underneath the gorgeous arch erected for the occasion, on
its way to the grand old edifice which terminates the vista;
the streets being lined with enthusiastic crowds and the
houses on either side decorated with flowers and tapestry.
The picture is no less remarkable as a work of industry
than as a work of art.
54. “ The Home of Many Generations”—F. Walton.
55. “ A Song Without Words”—Miss Fontana.
56. “ Maternal Affection ” —H. H. Couldery.
57. “ On the Thames ” —H. Campion.
58. “The Miller’s Belongings”—J. G. Bingley.
59. “On the Portland Road ” —T. Griffiths.
60. “ Caerleon Cove H. H. Cauty.
61. “ A Normandy Farmyard.”—H. Hume.


62. “ Cupboard Love ’’ [. C. Horsley, R.A.
Four children importuning the maid for sweetmeats, as she
is about to unlock the closet containing the preserves.
One curly pated little fellow is besieging her with a kiss ;
and her capitulation appears to be inevitable.
63. “Lenore”—A, Elmore, R.A.
A composition as mystical and imaginative as the extra-
ordinary German poem it is intended to illustrate.
64. “A Summer Folod”—H. R. Robertson.
65. “My Baby Sleeps ’’ —W. Griffith.
66. ‘‘Temptation of Adam”—J. Barry, R.A.
Painted by the friend and protege of Edmund Burke ; and a
good specimen of an artist of the last century, whose
works are now seldom seen.
67. “ A Brook in the Meadows ” —T. Sidney Cooper, R.A.
The English rival of Cuyp and Paul Potter, see also No.
128, and note the admirable drawing of the cattle, and the
life-like texture of their coats, upon which the golden light
of the setting sun falls with a softened glory, that is
reflected from their sleek sides.
68. “ Will He Come?”— Mrs. Goodman.
69. “A Sunny Bit” —T. G. Cotman.
70. “ Evening Primrose ” —Miss A. F. Mutrie.
71. “Gossip at the Style” —W. Bromley.
72. “Among the Ferns” —C. Bauerle.
73. “ Elstead Bridge, Surrey”—J. M. Barber.
74. “ Christ Raising the Widow’s Son ” —W. C. T. Dobson, R.A.
The figure of the Saviour is somewhat deficient in majesty
and beauty ; but the artist has been quite successful in
depicting the awe, wonder, mystery, and delight, with
which the bystanders survey the miracle that has been
wrought in their presence.
75. “ The Old Mill at Pembroke” —M. E. Dockree.
76. “ Dittisham ” —D. Law.
77. “Pygmalion’s Galatea”—E. Armitage, R.A.
The sculptor, in despair of the fulfilment of his prayer that
the masterpiece of his genius should be endowed with a


soul, bows his head upon the pedestal. While he does so
the statue wakens into life ; and though the lower limbs
are still marble, the head and arms and torso glow and
throb with the warm current of existence.
78. “ From Birnam Hill to Ben-y-gloe”—A. S. Kdward.
80. “ Dalgarrog Mill”—J. Aumonier.
81. “The Mother of Moses ” —E. Armitage, R.A,
82. “ From the Ballad of Sir Patrick Spens ” —J. Archer.
83. “ Mowers ” —J. M. Barber.
84. “ Spring Time in Egypt ” —F. Goodall.
A companion picture to No. 93. Both are full of local
colour, and vividly present the hot atmosphere and
oppressive glare of the scenery in the Valley of the Nile.
85. “ The Five Sisters of York ” —Mrs. Jopling.
Every Reader of “ Nicholas Nickleby ” must remember the
pretty episode of these fair girls, whose memory is still
perpetuated in the Minster of their native city.
86. “ Convalescents ” —A. D. Lancaster.
A group of inmates of a hospital for convalescents, in various
stages of recovery. A truthful and pathetic sketch from
life.
87. “Ophelia”—R. Lehmann.
A striking picture portraying the fair Ophelia, when the
envious bough, which she had hung with garlands in her
mental distraction, gave away, and she sank into the
stream, singing snatches of sweet melodies, and thus making
a swan-like end.
88. “ Pass of the Lyon ” —A. K. Brown.
89. “In that sweet Mood”—Rosa Koberwein.
91. “ Millstream in Wales ” —E. A. Waterlow.
92. “ The Penny Story Book ” —Miss M. Brooks.
93. “ The Banks of the Nile ” —F. Goodall.
94. “ Evening : Girl and Dogs”—R. Ansdell, R.A.
Mr. Ansdell is the legitimate successor of Sir Edwin Land-
seer ; and, like him, gives you the mental character as well
the life-like forms of the animals he depicts. They are not
dumb ; for their eyes are eloquent with a language of their
own. In proof of which, turn to No. 142, the Anxious
Mother, from the same pencil.


95- “ Morning in the Market Plane. Cairo ’’ —R. Dowling.
A picture full of animation, variety, and character, uncon-
ventionally treated and solidly painted. Tasmania has
reason to be proud of her son.
96. "A Modern Bacchante” —-C. E. Perugini.
The clever caricaturist of Vanity Fair has produced a delight-
ful work, representative of a Kentish maiden passing
through a hop garden in “the season of yellow mists and
fruitfulness,” crowned and laden with the aromatic flowers,
which are ripe for the pickers.
97. “ On the Banks of |the Kanagawa ” —F. Moscheles.
A pleasant glimpse of the out of door life of the interior of
Japan.
100. “ A Wounded Knight ” —P. F. Poole, R.A.
101. “ Farm near Fairlight ” —J. W. B. Knight.
302. “ On the Beach, Kent”—L. Watt.
103. “ A Little Picnic ” —L, Watt.
104. “A Bridal Welcome, Florence ” —F. W. W. Topham.
Young girls decorating the interior of a church, with garlands
of flowers, in preparation for an approaching marriage
ceremonial.
105. “Sheep-fold in Winter”—W. E.
106. “ Carting Turf ” —T. Griffiths.
108. “ Doge and Senate in Council” —Sir J. Gilbert, R.A.
The head of the Government in Venice has hastily convoked
the Senators to consider the urgent news just received
from Cyprus, as described in the first act of Othello.
109. “ Mist and Sunshine ” —H. Moore.
no. “Partridge Shooting”—R. Ansdell, R.A.
113. “Home, Sweet Home” —J. W. B. Knight.
114. “ Fair Margaret”—J. B. Bedford.
115. “ Bedouin Caravan en route to Mount Sinai”—R. Beavis.
A very fine picture. Observe how admirably the camels
coming towards the spectators are foreshortened ; and
with what fidelity to nature their ragged coats, their
callous knees, their pad-like feet, and shambling gait, have


been depictured ; as also the scrupulous accuracy and
high finish exhibited in the multifarious burdens they carry,
comprising all the worldly possessions of the wandering
tribe, to whom these “ ships of the desert ” belong.
117. “The Towing Path”—F. F. Cox.
A most characteristic bit of English river-side scenery.
118. “ Foolish Virgins ” —A. Hill.
An impressive rendering of the well-known parable.
ng. “White Lilac” —Miss M. D. Mutrie.
Singularly true to nature.
120. “The Last Chapter”—Sophia Beale.
Let us hope it is the artist’s last effort.
121. “A Provincial Tour, South Devofi ” —J. Hetherington.
122. “ Song of Solomon ” —F. Dicey.
An attempt to give literal expression and material form, to
what in all probability is a purely spiritual allegory. The
picture has some fine technical qualities.
124. “Lieut. Cameron’s Welcome Home”—C. W. Cope, R.A.
When the adventurous traveller returned to his native
village, his father, the rector of the parish church, held a
thanksgiving service in gratitude for his safety. He and
his curate have come forth to meet him; and his mother,
a proud and happy woman, clings to his side with fond
affection, while the villagers have taken the horses from
his carriage and are drawing him to church in triumph;
young and old vieing with each other in demonstrations of
friendship and gratification.
T 25. “Joseph and his Brethren”—l). W. Wynfield.
The favourite of Pharaoh, has just had the cup taken from
Benjamin’s sack, which stands open in one corner of the
picture, and his brethren are kneeling in supplication to
the now powerful vicegerent of the Egyptian king.
126. “ Porten Cross Castle” —J. M'Culloch.
128. “ Minster Marshes, East Kent”—T. Sidney Cooper, R.A.
One of the gems of the gallery. Drawing, colour, light,
atmosphere, and general arrangements, are masterly in the
extreme.


t2g. “ Grand Canal in Venice ” —(Canaletti ?).
The Ducal Palace, the Campanile and the Riva dei Schia
voni, are seen upon the left; and on the right is the sump-
tuous Church of the Sta. Maria della Salute, up the steps
of which the Doge and his train are ascending to pay
their devotions to “ Our Lady.”
131. “Dawn of Christianity in Britain”—L. L. Pocock.
Into the squalid hut of one of our barbarous forefathers, a
missionary from Rome is entering with the sunshine, and
bringing to the inmates his message of peace and good-will.
132. “ Loot”—J. E. Hodgson.
An Oriental brigand displays to the chief of his band, who is
seated in a stable, the booty of which he has robbed an
European officer; and the leader is seen scrutinizing the
miniature of a child, taken probably from the neck of the
murdered victim.
133. “Andrea del Castagno”—J. Collier.
The portrait of a celebrated fresco painter, who is represented
at work on a scaffold, decorating the external walls of a
house in Florence.
134. “ Non Angli sed Angeli Sunt ” —K. Haswelle, A.R.S.A.
One of the noblest pictures in the English Court, and
deserving of prolonged examination. Some beautiful chil-
dren have been brought as captives from Angle-land to
Rome, and are crouching on the steps of one of the
majestic basilicas. They arrest the attention of the
thoughtful and benevolent Gregory, who exclaims with a
pardonable pun—“ They are not Angles but Angels;”
and from that hour the resolve takes possession of his
mind to Christianize a country producing so fine a race of
people. And so it came to pass that Britain first heard
the preaching of the Cross.
135. “ Making Hay while the sun shines”—F. Chester.
139. “ Linen Gatherers” —Val Prinse, P.A.R.A.
A number of bonnie Scotch lassies, with handsome faces and
the gait of princesses, returning from the breezy drying
grounds among the heather, with their baskets of linen.
140 “ Threshing-floor at Gilgal ” —R. Beavis.
The custom of treading out the corn by means of oxen,


spoken of in the Bible, still continues in the East; and
this picture is a fine illustration of the ancient practice,
ar well as of the modern usage.
142. “The Anxious Mother”—R. Ansdell, R.A.
It may be doubted whether Ansdell has ever painted any-
thing finer than this wistful ewe and her two black-faced
daughters.
143, “ Preparing for the Festival”—J. H. Walker.
145. “ On the Road to Llanwrst”—J. Bromley.
A clever study of romantic rock forms, spotted with vividly
coloured lichens; and of shoal water, with a rippled surface,
giving back broken reflections of the white clouds overhead.
146. “ Our Soldiers : Past and Future” —A. Stocks.
A veteran’s grandson is reading a tale of military adventure
to the old man, and both reader and listener feel an
absorbing interest in it; the boy, because it kindles ambition
in his bosom ; and the superannuated soldier, because it
recalls the glorious past.
148. “The Old Curiosity Shop”—J. W. Chapman.
Little Nell and her grandfather are seen, as the novelist has
described them, surrounded by the quaint, fantastic, and
picturesque objects with which their strange abode was
filled.
150. “Loch Carron, Ross”—J. Archer, R.S.A.
153. “At Greenwich” —V. P. Yglesias.
154. “First of May, Haslemere”—Mrs. A. E. Pratt.
155. “ Haunt of the Fallow Deer”—E. N. Downard.
156. “ Miss Thackeray’s Elizabeth”—L. Alma Tadema, R.A.
157. “Waiting”—Mrs. Goodman.
159. “ English Flowers”—W. Hughes.
160. “ The Forest of Balloch-Rhui, Balmoral”—A. MacCallum.
161. “James IV. before Battle of Flodden”—J. Faed.
According to an old Scotch chronicler, while the king was
engaged in his devotions in the church of Linlithgow, a few
days before the battle, an old man in a long gown suddenly
appeared to him, and abruptly exclaimed—“ Sir King, my
mother has sent me to thee, desiring thee not to go where


thou art purposed, which if thou do, thou shalt not fare well
in thy journey, nor none that is with thee. Further, she for-
bade thee not to meddle nor use the counsel of women,
which if thou do thou wilt be confounded, and brought to
shame.” While the king was thinking what answer he
should make, the old man vanished like a ghost. Sir
David Lindsay, who stands on the right, and John Inglis,
Marshall of Scotland, who is seated on the left, are stated
to have been eye-witnesses of the mysterious proceeding.
James neglected the warning, and he and every man of
note in the army, except Lord Home, perished on the
fatal field of Flodden.
162. “ Going to Market” —W. Bromley.
163. “Tramps”—H. H. Cauty.
164. “Spring”—L. Alma Tadema, R.A.
165. “Sunflowers” —L. Alma Tadema, R.A.
166. “ Dorothy”—Miss Fontana.
168. “ The Founder’s Tomb”—S. Fry.
169 “ Rosetirae” —Miss L. Starr.
170. “ O’er the Downs” —T. Graham.
WATER-COLOUR DRAWINGS.
The general average of quality is higher in this court than in
that which contains the oil paintings. It is a branch of art in
which our countrymen and countrywomen peculiarly excel, and
visitors may form a very good idea of contemporary workmanship
from the really fine collection which has now been brought
together; including, as it does, specimens of Sir John Gilbert,
J. Absolon, Carl Haag, T. C. Dibdin, J. Mogford, Louis Haghe,
E. A. Goodall, O. W. Brierly, Miss Clara Montalba, E. S. Warren,
and W. Severn. Among the landscapes we would direct
attention to Nos. 8, 10, 14, 21, 40, 45, 57, 58, 60, 73, 81, and 93.
As specific studies of foliage, Nos. 34 and 52 must not be over-
looked. The giant beech tree, and the forest glade beyond, in
the second of these pictures, is superbly painted. The architec-
tural drawihgs, are also, for the most part, of a high order of


merit, as witness Mr. Dibdin s three charming pictures of Rouen,
Mr. Bayliss’ interior of St. George’s Chapel at Windsor, Louis
Haghe’s splendidly executed view of the rood-loft in the Church
of Dixmude, Miss Clara Montalba’s brilliant transcript of the
interior of the Cathedral of St, Mark, in Venice, with the bishops
doing homage to the newly elected Doge ; and Carl Haag’s scene
in the cloisters of the Stiptskirche. Among the Oriental sub-
jects Mr. Severn’s street in old Cairo ; Mr. Goodall's impressive
picture of the great pyramid at sunset, with the hyaenas prowling
and the kites wheeling round, the human bones which have been
disentombed in the foreground ; the same artist’s Silk and Calico
Bazaar in Cairo, and Mr. J A. Benwell’s Desert Travelling in the
Valley of Mount Sinai, may be indicated as choice productions of
the respective artists. Of the figure pieces, the palm must be
awarded to Sir John Gilbert’s noble composition, so rich in colour,
so full of character, and so skilfully arranged, bearing the title of
Louis XIV. Transacting Business with his Ministers in the Apart-
ment of Madame de Maintenon.” The Grande Monarque holds a
state paper in his hands, and turns for advice concerning it to
the woman who, in spite of her faded beauty, still maintains her
ascendancy over him, while the statesmen who form his privy
council await the utterance of the white-haired old lady with cour-
tier-like deference. Mr. Absolon’s three figure-pieces—an emi-
grant family listening to the reading of the Bible on deck during
a Sunday evening, while the vessel is bowling along at ten knots
an hour before a fair wind; a French cure', on his way to mass,
laying his hands in benediction on the heads of some of the
children of his flock ; and the wife of Camille Desmoulins, one of
the prominent actors in the great French Revolution, watching
with sad wistfulness the walls of the Luxemburg, in which her
husband is confined —are characterised by the easy grace and
naturalness which mark his productions ; while the visitor must be
careful not to overlook that really grand work by Mr. O. W.
Brierly, the marine artist, representing whale boats saving a
wretched crew. It will bear the closest scrutiny, and the locality
in which the tragic incident occurs is painfully like the scene of
the appalling wreck of the Dunbar. There are also some charm-
ing flower pieces, which may be left to speak for themselves
We subjoin a list of the Water-colour drawings, the number-
ing of which commences on the left hand of the entrance from
the court containing the British oil paintings :
i. “ Fruit piece ” —Westcott.


2. “ Roses ' —Henrietta Miller.
3. " Jug of Roses” —Henrietta Miller.
4. I'm Monarch of all I survey”—J. (1, Cotrnan,
5. “ The Old Sundial, Hastings”—Gustave Bouvier.
6. On the Coast of Devon ” —C. J. Barraud.
7. “The Time at Mention” —Joseph Dakin.
8. “ An English Village ” —W. F. Stocks.
9. “A Path through the Ferns, near Falmouth”—J. Mogford.
10. “ Ben-na-Ca!each, Ryle Akin, Skye”—J. Maculioch.
it. “ Gossips of Many Years” —Miss Mead.
12. “A Farm Yard” —T. Wade.
13. “Thirlwall Castle, Northumberland ” —H. G. Hine.
14. “ English Homestead on Sussex Downs ” —Charles Earle.
15. “Inferior of Chapel of St. Peter’s Orphanage”—J. P.
Siiaddon.
r 6. “Rouen, the ‘Butter Tower’ of the Cathedral” —T. C.
1 hbdin.
i 7. “ London Street” —E. Beckman.
tB. “ Edinburgh, from Calton Hill ” —W. Severn.
19. “ Church at Hux on the Meuse, Belgium”—R. P. Spiers.
20. “ The Emigrant Ship, Sunday Evening ” —J. Absolon.
21. “ Evening ” —E.*Hargitt.
22. “View from St. George’s Hill, Weybridge, Surrey”—Mrs.
Marrable.
23. “At Wareham, Dorsetshire” —H. G. Hine.
24. “The Common”—A. D. Fripp,
25. “ Autumn’s Touch ” —G. Lucy Lyon.
26. “The Slipway, Ryde, Isle of Wight”—Mrs. A. Pratt.
27. “Court of Justice, Cairo” —R. P. Spiers.
28. “ Ben Nevis, from Lochlochy”—A. P. Newton.
29. “ Boscastle, North Coast of Cornwall”—W. Severn.
30. “ Wall Flowers ” —Mrs. A. L. Guerin.
31, “On the Downs, Somersetshire ” —Minnie Watt.


,2. “Loch Earne ’’A. Houston, R.S.A.
33- “ Guy’s Cliff, near Warwick ' —A. B. Donaldson.
34. “ Ancient Larches, Engadine ” —Mrs. Marrable.
35. “ Treviilet Mill, near Tintagel, Cornwall ” —J. H. Mole.
36. “ Bam boro ugh Castle”—E. Loft.
37. “Azaleas” —Mrs. A. L. Guerin.
38. “ Glen Sannox ” —J. A. Houston.
39. “North Side of Choir, Westminster Abbey” —E. A. Heffer.
40. “ Cornish Harvesting, near Grange wood ” —J. Mogford.
41. “ Cottage at Shere, Surrey ” —Mrs. A. L. Guerin.
42. “Striped Azalea Tree”—Mrs. A. L. Guerin.
43. “ Cuniag, Stark, White Castle, near Arrochar ” —J. A. Hou-
ston.
44. “ May Time in England”—F. Smallfield.
46. “Duncraggan, Trosaachs, Scotland”—J. Bannatyne.
47. “ Ryde Boat off Portsmouth ” —Edwin Hayes.
48. “ A Study near Hurley Mill, on the Thames ” —E. Duncan.
49. “ Choir of St. Mark’s, Venice ” —Miss Clara Montalba.
50. “ Mont St. Michael, Coast of Normandy”—G. Nattress.
51. “ Brambletye ” —T. R. Smith.
52. “A Clearing in the New Forest, Hants”—E. G. Warren.
53. “ Preparing the Banquet ” —J. M. Jopling.
54. “ Louis XIV. transacting Business with his Ministers in the
Apartment of Madame de Maintenon ” —Sir John Gilbert.
55. “ Interior of St. George’s Chapel, Windsor ” —W. Bayliss.
56. “ Wreck in the Baltic ” —Miss Clara Montalba
57. “ Easton Broad, near Lowestoft, Suffolk ” —J. Mogford
58. “ Highland Drovers ” —E. Hargitt.
59. “ Druidical Remains ” —J. A. Houston.
60. “ On the Old Road to Llanrwst ” —F. Bromley.
61. “Street in Old Cairo, Grand Vizier’s Palace ” —W. Severn
62. “Venetian Boats Becalmed”—A. Severn.
63. “ Old Road to the Trossachs, Scotland”—J. Bannatyne


64. “Santa Catarina, Lago Maggiore, Italy” —Mrs. Marrable.
65. “ Farm Houses, Shere, Surrey ” —Mrs. A. L. Guerin.
66. “ Warwick Castle ” —L. W. Donaldson.
67. “ Paris, from the Salle d’Apollon of the Louvre " —Sophia
Beale.
68. “ The Miniature ’’—Mrs. O. P. Gilbert.
69. “The Casket” —E. Tayler.
70. “ Madame Desmoulins ” —J. Absolon.
71. “ Far Away ” —E. Taylor.
72. “ Lily ” —J. M. Jopling.
73. “ Colzean Castle, West Coast of Scotland ” —J. Mogford.
74. “ Beatrice” —Miss O. P. Gilbert.
75. “Holy Bible, Book Divine, Precious Treasure, Thou art
Mine ” —Miss E, G. Guinness.
76. “In the Boathouse, Saints’ Day, Guernsey” —Henrietta
Miller.
77. “ Coronation Stone, Kingston-on-Thames”—E. A. Heffer.
78. “ Old Cottages ” —T. Wade.
79. “The Clef d’Or, Rouen”—T. C. Dibdin.
80. “ Loch Vennacner and Ben Venue ” —J. A. Houston, R.S.A.
81. “Venice from the Lagunes ” —E. A. Goodall.
82. “ Near the Pyramid, Sakhara” —E. A. Goodall.
83. “ Carnarvon Castle ” —W. F. Stocks.
84. “ Florence, from Albergo D’Arno”—A. Severn.
85. “ Silk and Calico Bazaar, Cairo ” —E. A. Goodall
86. “ The Greendale Oak, Welbeck, Sherwood ” —E. G. Warren.
87. “Rood Loft in the Church of Dixmude’’—Louis Haghe.
88. “ Whale Boats Saving a Wrecked Crew ” —O. W. Brierly.
89. “ Desert Travelling, Valley of Sinai ” —J. A. Benwell.
90. “ Church of Tredamit, Brittany ” —J. Absolon.
91. “La Maison des Templiers ” —Lennard Lewis.
92. “ Harlech Castle, North Wales ” —J. A. Houston.
93. “ The East Cliff, Hastings, Sussex ” —H. G. Hine.


94- “ 't he Mount of God, Sinai ” —H. A. Harper.
95. ‘‘ A Bit of Wiltshire ” —J. Absolon.
96. “Gate of Justice, Alhambra”—K. A. Goodall.
97. “ Rue de la Grosse Horloge, Rouen ” —T. Dibdin.
98. “A Yew Tree”—Miss Mead.
99. “ Old Letters ” —Miss Ellen Gilbert.
100. “ For the Midday Meal ” —J. Bromley.
101. “ An Anxious Moment ” —Val. Davis.
102. “ Good Friends ” —H. P. Riviere.
103. “The Terrace, Balcarres, Fyfe”—J. M. Jopling.
104. “A Rainy Day”—J. W. Smith.
105. “ A Sunny Corner”—Miss Ellen Gilbert.
106. “A Study in the New Forest A. P. Newton.
107. “In the Cloisters of the Stiptskirche ” —Carl Haag.
108. “ Chapel of St, John, Westminster Abbey ” —E. A. Heffer.
109. “ Wreck of an Indiaman on the Longslips” —W. C. Smith.
1 xo. “Farmhouse between Lymington and Lyndhurst” —J. W.
Smith.
in. “ Brighton ” —James Webb.
112. “ The Thames at Bray ” —A. Stevens.
113. “ Blaven, Skye ” —James Maculloch.
114. “Chrysanthemums”—Henrietta Miller.
115. “ Dutch Pinks Returning from Sea” —Edwin Hayes.
116. “ The Boulogne Boat in a Storm”—A. Severn.


Belgian Court.
1. •• The Studio " —Pierre Ayers.
A good specimen of impasto painting, executed with a flow-
ing brush.
2. “Spring”—J. Portaels.
A young girl in a light summer robe, seated on a flowery
bank, pressing a double handful of violets to her nose and
lips.
3. “The Notched Sword”—C. Soubre.
A veteran has brought his dinted weapon to the village
blacksmith, who surveys it with a curious interest, while
his assistant stands at the bellows ready to blow the glow-
ing embers into a flame.
4. “ Fisherman ” —Felix Coyen.
A Dutch fisherworaan finely posed, and forcibly painted,
awaiting her husband’s return.
5. “ Persecution ” —J. Stevens.
A couple of puppies annoying a canine belle by their im-
pertinent attentions.
6. “ The Quay, at Ostend ” —Francois Musin.
Passengers burring down to an outgoing steamer, in the
midst of squalls of wind and driving rain ; the quay sloppy,
the sky murky, and the water agitated.
7. “ Landscape ” —Victor Kuhnen.
8. “ Farm in the Roman Campagna ” —X, Mellery.
9. “ The Fugitive ” —J. Portaels.
A slave girl who has taken refuge in a cane-brake, and who
sits with clasping hands and eager eyes, listening for the
bay of the bloodhounds. One of the finest figure pieces
in the Belgian Court.
10. “The Christmas Pudding”—A. T. Verhoeven Ball.
One of those genre pictures which require no explanation.


j “ Oak '['fees at Modavc ” —Mdlle. K. Heernaert.
A splendid group of trees, painted with great breadth and
freedom, and very (rue to nature.
12. “ The Tambourine E. Slingeneyer.
A handsome Gitana depicted with magistral skill. Note the
care with which the left-hand, poised upon the hip, and
the puckered drapery have been executed.
“ Flowers and Fruit ” —J. Robie.
A picture which has no superior in the whole collection. A
really magnificent work from the pencil of a born artist—
the son of a blacksmith, who resorted to harsh means for
the purpose of restraining the young man from following
the bent of his genius. The longer the composition is
studied, the more you find in it to admire and please.
14. “ Monks Begging at Antwerp”—E. Seeldrayers.
A burgher of Antwerp, belonging to the 15th century, is
seated at table with his wife, who is reading the Bible, and
their son and daughter. A couple of mendicant monks
have intruded upon the merchant’s privacy, and, as his
views are those of the early Reformers, he is very angry
with the interlopers.
15. ” A Meadow in F’landers ” —Lewis Robbe.
An exceedingly clever cattle piece ; though inferior to Sidney
Cooper’s in the English Court.
16. “Homesick”—A. Serrure.
A country girl, who has taken service in Brussels, pines for
the rural village in which she was born.
17. “ Reverie ’’ —A. Stevens.
A girl seated at an open window in the gloaming, with a
letter in her hand, which has filled her mind with pensive
reflections that are deepened with the soft melancholy of
the hour.
iS. “Naughty Pussy”—E. Farasyn.
The claws of the animal have lacerated the child’s shoulder,
and the pain inflicted wrings from the sufferer some very
bitter tears.
19. “ The lesson in Botany ” —F. de Bruycker.
A professor of the science of plants is explaining their names


and structure, in a warm conservatory, to some apt and
pleasant pupils, who evidently find his lesson a very agree-
able one. Outside the air is cold and winterly, but an
artificial summer glows within.
20. “A Visit”—J. Berlin.
A conversation piece belonging to the old school of French
art. Note the admirable texture of the lady’s dress, and
of the brown satin of the settee.
2j. A Village Shop in Flanders ” —T. Heyerraans.
A young mother with a baby in her arms has just bought a
loaf, and the shopkeeper offers a sugar-stick to the infant,
who stretches out her arms to take it. An elder child is
frightened by the withered face of an old crone seated
near the door, and clings to her mother’s skirts; while a
little girl, scarcely higher than the counter, thrusts forward
a copper coin for lollies.
22. “ Young Girl ofpMbano”—J. Stallaert.
A finely painted profile of a Roman peasant girl, in her holi-
day garb, on her way to mass.
23. “ Bad News ” —J. Berlin.
Chiefly noticeable on account of the skilful treatment of the
lady’s drapery.
24. “ La Folie de Hugo Vander Goes ” —An engraving.
The subject of the picture was one of the most famous
Flemish painters of the 15th century, who entered a
monastery in his old age, and died there. Lapsing into
insanity, it was found that nothing but music had any
power to lessen the disorder of his mind.
25. “Brunette”—L. Herbo.
26. “ The Tower of London ” —A. Musin.
An extremely realistic picture of that well known fortress, of
which, however, the artist has dimished the altitude.
27. “ The Beguinage at Bruges ” —L. Verwe'e.
A very indifferent picture.
28. “View in Delft”—F. Stroobant.
Literal as a photograph, and very hard in colour.
29. “ Sunrise A. J. Heymans.
An attempt to convey the misty indistinctness which all


objects wear in the early dawn of morning ; but the very
want of definition which the artist has succeeded in pre-
serving, renders the picture unattractive to the eye.
30. “Tigers” —A. Clarys.
The heads of four ferocious tigers growling and glaring at
each other. Very properly hung out of sight.
31. “ Map of Africa.”
A monument of hydrographic industry and geographical and
topographical accuracy, entirely executed by hand, and
delineating the routes of the principal explorers of the
dark continent, whilst also defining all that is known of its
physical features.
32. “ Winter ” —H. Van Seben.
A chilly snow piece, with a cold, chill light in the sky, and a
sharp sensation of frost in the atmosphere. The sort of
picture to look at on a hot-wind day.
33. “ Heath, near Westminster”—Verheyden.
A dreary scene in the most sterile district of the country.
It is forcibly painted ; but it looks as if most of the colour
had been laid on with the palette knife
“ The Race ” —A. Clarys.
The two foremost horses passing the winning post. Very
spiritedly painted.
35. “ Deer Shooting.”—J. Rayenmacker.
The wounded animal is just falling in a glade of a leafless
forest, where the snow lies white and thick upon the
ground.
36. “ Old Mill at Bievre ” —A. De Biseau.
Another snow scene on a small scale.
37. “ Reverie ” —A. Kuhnen.
A poor painting.
38. “ View at Anticoli, Corrado, Italy ” —J. Carabam.
Clever workmanship, but an uninteresting motif.
39. “ After Rain ” —Madame M. Collard.
This looks like a mere sketch, and was scarcely worth
hanging.


40. “ Thou Sha.lt not Kill ” —j. Portaels.
A wild, delirious composition, full ol horrors, and as fantastic
as anything ever painted by poor, mad Blake.
41. “ Martha’s Pigeons ” —T. Verhas.
A little girl feeding her flock ; the birds admirably painted,
the rest of the picture crude in colour.
42. “ In the Corner ” —T. Verhas.
A juvenile delinquent, who is sorrowful but not penitent.
43. “ On the Beach, Scheviningen ” —A. Francia.
A fine bit of genuine sea-coast scenery; good throughout.
44. “ Cromwell by his Daughter’s Deathbed.” —Marklebach.
The Protectors favourite daughter has just breathed her last,
and the grim old soldier regards with a solemn compassion
the other members of the family who are being led from
the room oppressed by grief.
45. “ Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi ” —K. Mellery.
A nobly conceived and grandly executed illustration of the
well-known incident in the life of this illustrious Roman
lady, who, when a vain and arrogant friend displayed her
costly gems to her, exclaimed, as she drew her two sons
proudly to her side, “ These are my jewels.”
46. “ Shares Alike ” —H. Gerard.
A couple of poachers, with the proceeds of their illicit sport
upon the table, are haggling over the division of the spoil.
47. “A Winter’s Day”—A. Asselbergs.
A marshy pool, covered with ice, on the edge of the wood ;
with the bare trees and the frosted bracken lit up by the
cold light of a wintry sun.
48. “ The Spoiled Child ” —A. Cluysenaar.
Little Pickle has been left in his father’s studio, and finding
some moist paint on the palette, is daubing with red a
portrait which has been just blocked in.
49. “ Mid-day in the Scheldt”—J. Rosseels.
50. “The Scheldt at Tolen ” —A. Buvier.
Both of these are striking landscapes; and they are addition*
ally interesting, as showing the technical workmanship of
Belgian painters in this department of art : who seem to


secure their Lest olivets bv masses of colour, laid on a.>
d'urner used to lay them on —with his thumb nail.
ji. “ I'he Steen at ivuhncn " —V. Kuhnen.
A remarkably clever picture ; indeed quite a masterpiece in
its way. Note the happy effect of the sunlight inside the
oriel window, and the excellence of the perspective.
ij 2 . “ The Water Mill’’—P. Keelhoff.
A cabinet picture, with some very good points in it.
S - “The Market Place, Nieuport ” —R. Keith de Freres.
Represents a fruit-seller with her wares, spread out before her,
vending apples and peaches.
5.4. “Shooting”—J. Rayemacker.
“ Little Greedy ” —A. Jacobs.
56. “ Italian Peasant ” —V. Kuhnen.
57. “ Business before Pleasure ” —P. Oyers.
A woman and son are seen seated at a table in a restaurant,
and the meal has not been a meagre one ; but the head of
the family, who has forgotten to pay the bill, is tapped on
the shoulder by a waiter, just as the defaulter is prepared
to descend the stairs.
58. “Cows at Pasture ” —Alfred Verve'e.
59. “ The War in Montenegro ” —E. Van den Bussche.
The mountaineers have captured a woman from the enemy.
She makes frantic efforts to escape from her semi-savage
possessors,who are carrying her off to one of their fastnesses
inacessible to all pursuers. The figures are vigorously
drawn ; and the colouring is occasionally brilliant..
60. “ A Cabaret under the Directory ” —A. Glibert.
A Parisian, in the ugly costume of the period, is leaning over
the counter of a wine shop, and relating some of young
Bonaparte’s exploits to the attentive mistress of the
establishment.
6r and 62. “ Etchings ” by A. de Buesseau.
63. “ Mutual Love ” (Terra-cotta) —C. Wiener.
64. “The Captive ” (marble statue)—Th. Vincotte.


German Court.
The numbers of the pictures in this Court, it may be necessary
to remark, commence at 427, and the arrangement of theil
hanging by no means corresponds with their numerical sequence
427. “ Marienkerk”—Andr. Achenbach.
A lurid sunset after rain, by one of the first of living German
artists.
428. “ Help in Sight”—Herman Arnold.
A high tide on the coast of Holland has swept away a portion!
of an artisan’s house, and the whole of the family, after'
having taken refuge in the roofless upper storey, hail with
delight the appearance of a sail just as the sun has gone
down, and darkness is about to close upon the scene.
429. “Village near Munich, in Spring-time”—H. Baisch.
430. “ Good Trade”—P. Baumgarten.
A mendicant friar having obtained a hamper of eggs and a
pullet from a farmer’s wife, munificently offers her little
granddaughter a trumpery present in exchange, a trans-
action which is not at all approved of by the grandfather
upstairs.
43 t. “ Car Party in Upper Bavaria”—Louis Braun.
432. “In the Woods” —Bennewitz von Loefen.
One of the loveliest bits of sylvan scenery in the whole
collection.
433. “ Country Girl ” —Th. von der Beck.
A fair-haired child watching the gyrations of a couple of
butterflies, while a tame rabbit munches some carrots by
her side.
434. “ The Friends.”
A small picture by the same artist.
435. “ Koenigsee, in the Bavarian Mountains”—A. Becker.
A magnificent scene, resembling in some of its features
Milford Sound, in New Zealand.


“ Taking Leave”—Win. Beckmann.
An aged monk bestowing his benediction upon a young
seminarist, who is about to undertake religious duties.
437- “Grazing Cows”—Albert Brendel.
Evidently a study from Nature, as the staring coats of the
animals, must have been painted from life.
435. “ Watched ” —A. von Cramer.
Two Venetian ladies of the Sixteenth Century leaning over
a balcony on the Grand Canal at Venice, in the hour of
sunset, and conversing unreservedly, unconscious that an
eavesdropping duenna is listening under the shadow of a
pillar.
439. “ A Scene in Verona”—George Dehn.
Note the reflection of the setting sun on the angle of the
palace in the rear.
440. “Venice by Moonlight”—Louis Douzette.
A masterly picture. The moon breaking through a cloud
makes a path of silver on the Lagune. In the distance,
the dome and campanile of the church of Sta. Maria della
Salute assume grand proportions in their shadowy massive-
ness, and a torch-light procession streaming into the
edifice heightens the picturesque effect of the composition.
441. “ Marine View” —J. Von Eckenbrechner.
Full of motion and breezy freshness.
442. “ Sunrise at Whatcorabe, near Freshwater Bay, Isle of Wight”
—Herm. Eschke.
A splendid picture, worthy of Danby, to whose work it bears
a striking resemblance. The sun is coming up out of a
bank of fog, and the whole scene is being gradually suffused
by the glory of the dawn.
443. “ Moonrise”—C. L. Fahrbach.
The best features are the clump of trees and the pool of
water in the foreground.
444. “ A Scene at Capri ” —Ernestine Friedrichsen.
An Italian peasant family, seated in a vine-covered perggola
overlooking the Bay of Naples.
445. “ But it is our Secret”—Gaisser.
This might very well serve as an illustration of a well-known


scene in the 11 School for Scandal,” where Mrs. Candour,
Lady Teazle, Sir Benjamin Backbite, Mr. Sneerwell, and
the rest, pull their neighbours’ characters to pieces
446. “ In the Lovely Month of May ” —Albert Grade.
The pair of youthful sweethearts have stolen away from the
rest of the picnic party, and everybody can see at a
glance what is the subject of their conversation.
447. “ Scene in Switzerland ” —Conrad Grob.
A wandering pifferaro, with Punch and Judy marionettes
worked by a string from his knee, stands at the entrance
of a chalet, where the notes of his bagpipe have already
attracted a small and delighted audience.
448. “ Sheep-shearing ” —T. Griinfeld.
Women as well as men are busily engaged in clipping the
fleece from the struggling animals, and the whole scene is
full of animation.
443. “ Sweethearts in Suabia ” —Ernst Hartmann.
The old, old story, prettily and feelingly told by the artist.
450. “Pond near a Convent” —Emil Hellrath.
A large sheet of water set in a grand framework of trees,
and starred with the white flowers of the water-lily. Two
nuns are paddling on its surface in a small boat, and
behind the bell tower of the chapel and the convent garden
are seen through the soft light of the waning day. The
sentiment of the picture is very tranquil and tender.
451. “Study”—C. Heyden.
452. “ Moonlight on the Lagune ” —Conrad Hoff.
The same subject as No. 440, but differently treated.
453. “ Lake of the Four Cantons ” —Horst-Hacker.
A lovely Swiss landscape, with a chalet on a rocky but ver-
dant platform in the foreground, and a lake walled in by
precipitous mountains which hide their loftiest peaks in
the clouds.
45+ “ Expectation ” —Carl Hiibner.
A fisherman’s wife and son anxiously looking for the gleam
of his white sail in the hazy offing.
455. “Roadstead of Helsingdr”—T. Huth.
A light breeze, a calm sea, a sunny sky, with a beautiful


effect of light upon the sails of the vessels reflected in the
water.
456. “ The Enemy in Sight”—Carl Jutz.
457. “ Rhone Glacier ” —O. von Kameke.
A patient and laborious study of mountain forms, depicted
with geological accuracy of form and colour, with a fine
effect of mist creeping up the distant gorge.
458. “Young Fruit”—H. Knackfus.
459. “ The Aunt on a Visit ” —C. Kronberger.
460. “ Forest Scene ” —Gustav Koken.
A bleak plain almost entirely denuded of its timber, and
rendered additionally dreary by the shadows cast from
heavy masses of leaden clouds.
461. “ Winter ” —Same artist.
A kindred landscape covered with snow. A road winding
through it, fringed in places by poplars ; the sun setting,
and flights of crows hovering about in search of food.
. 462. “ Beneath the Palms ” —E. Kberner.
A fanciful composition painted to illustrate the splendid luxu-
riance of tropical vegetation.
463. “ Autumn ” —D. Langko.
Clever effect of marsh land and murky sky.
464. “ Schwarzwald Peasant ” —Carl Lasch.
465. “ Venus and Adonis ” —W. Lindenschmit.
A life-sized composition, of the style of the Lombardic School,
representing the well-known incident of the death of Adonis,
and the passionate grief of the Goddess of Love, who is
attended by the three Graces, while Cupid hastens to her
assistance.
466. “ After School-hours in Belgium ” —W. Linnig, sen.
467. “ At the Gipsys’ ” —W. Linnig, jun.
A couple of young girls consulting an old hag, who burns a
card as part and portion of the pretended divinations.
468. “ Lady and Gentleman on a Balcony ” —Heinrich Lossow.
On the balcony at the Palais Royal.
469. “ Return from Pasture in the Tyrol ’’— Chris Mali.
Two ferry boats laden with sheep and oxen, which have been


grazing on the mountains, are about to cross a beautiful
lake to the homestead.
470. “Music”—William Marc.
A fair violinist is accompanied by a gentleman on a guitar,
and both are evidently absorbed by the composition they
are performing.
471. “Singing Wood-workers in the Bavarian Mountains” —F.
Mayer-Wismar.
A group of three, two men and a young girl, whose vocal
efforts give unqualified satisfaction to themselves.
472. “Politicians”—T, Munsch.
473. —“ Commander ” —lbid.
Two highly finished cabinet portraits by an artist of great
talent.
474. “Ploughing” —E. Ockel.
The oxen painted with a masterly hand.
475. “Prayers”—Erwin Oehme.
A German family in mediaeval costume engaged in prayer at
church ; all the figures, five in number, being crowded into
? one corner of the picture, with a total disregard of
balance, as an element of composition.
4758. “Winter” —Erwin Oehme.
476. “ Decorating the Church for the Wedding Festival ’’— Hugo
Oemichen
A dozen village children, under the direction of the vener-
able pastor, are garlanding the interior of a quaint little
place of worship, with wreaths of evergreens and with
flowers, in honour of the nuptials about to be celebrated
within its walls.
4.77. “Evening”—R. van Poschinger.
A lovely landscape, full of poetry of sentiment and beauty
of expression. All the elements of the scene, the linger-
ing light in the west, the young moon in the sky above,
and the umbrageous trees reflected in the still transparent
waters, breathing serenity and peace.
478. “ Pheasantry in Spring”—E. Rettich.


479- “Animals”—Carl Roux.
Three calves, one of them lifting up its head to receive the
caresses of a little child, held up by its nurse on the other
side of the fence.
4 So. “ The Mother’s Return ” —W. Rogge.
A child who has been sleeping in an antique cradle, with
the sacred monogram carved upon it, wakes up to find
its young mother, who has just returned from a shopping
excursion, bending in love over her darling. The picture
is charming in colour and composition, and sweet in ex-
pression; and the management of the light is admirable;
while there is great depth in the chiaroscuro.
qSiA. “ Beech Forest ” —Ruths.
A fine study of sylvan scenery, and of a woodland stream,
with the horizontal beams of the setting sun, lighting up
the ferny glades with a rosy splendour.
48 ib. “ Spring Landscape ” —Ruths.
A work bearing the impress of the same enthusiastic ad-
miration for nature.
482. “The Return Home” —T. Schrader.
A shy gipsy-looking peasant child, returning from the moun-
tains in charge of a flock of geese, and attended by her
faithful dog.
483. “ Norwegian Coast by Moonlight ” —Herme G. Schanche.
484. “ Cupid ” —Otto Seitz.
The chubby mischief maker is emerging from a mass of
flowers and fruits, vine leaves and blossoms, with his
head in shadow.
485. “ Using Scissors ” —C. M. Seypet.
486. “ Ibid” —Same artist.
In the first of these pictures, a prosperous shareholder
in dressing gown and slippers, smoking a large cigar, and
with a couple of bottles of Roederer on the table by the
side of him, is snipping coupons from one of his bonds.
In the second, a cross-legged tailor suspends the use of
his shears, to regale himself with a glass of stout.
487 A. “Still Life” —Gottfried Schultz.


487. “ Ibid" —Same artist.
Both fruit pictures painted with exceeding care and high
finish, even to the wasp in the one, and the fly in the
other.
488. “The Rendezvous”—G. Schultz-Briessen.
“ They met by chance, the usual way,” after he had come
“ tapping at the garden gate.” Gretchen has laid aside
her knitting to listen to her lover’s whispered nothings ;
but she and he are alike unconscious that her mother is
watching them, with a sour visage from an upstair window.
489. “ Sunday Afternoon at the Grafenberg, near Dusseldorf”—
T. Schiiz.
A favourite place of holiday resort with the art students of
that famous old town. The detail of this picture is very good.
490. “ Wood Scene in West Virginia ” —T. N. T. Von Starken-
berg.
A superb subject, superbly treated. A picture full of beauty
in every part, and as an interpretation of nature perfectly
charming.
491. “ Stable Friends ” —C. Steffeck.
A bay horse licking the back of a white bull-dog, who retracts
his lips, and seems to grin with pleasure at the sensation
he receives.
492. “ Storm in Autumn ” —C. M. Strecker.
Voluminous clouds, dark with their burden of rain, are driven
along by a fierce blast which shrieks among the groaning
trees, lashes into foam the waters of the swollen rivulet,
and fills the air with drift and wrack.
493. “In the Kitchen” —T. Sturzkopf.
An old woman peeling potatoes, with an antique carved chest
before her and the usual culinary utensils around her.
494. “ Stags ” —Arthur Thiele.
A couple of antlered monarchs of the forest in a snowy glade,
with a cold, wintry sky as their approximate background.
495. “ Coast of Capri ” —Adolph Thomas.
A striking effect. Men caulking a boat in a shadowy recess
of the rocks lit up by the fire they have kindled ; while the
red light of the setting sun still lingers on the summits of
the cliff in the backround.


4g6. “ The Cobbler as a Critic ” —Carl Wagener.
A shoemaker in an artist’s studio criticising his execution of
a pair of boots on a picture on the easel.
497. “Landscape with Cows ” —L. Willroeder.
A work in which there is a fine sense of space, distance, and
crisp, fresh atmosphere ; the effect produced resulting from
the free handling of a full brush.
I. Grandmother and Grandchild ” —Paul Meyerheim.
A highly realistic specimen of this celebrated artist’s work.
11. “ Love Longing ” —Oscar Begas.
A languishing young lady who is trimming her hat with an
evident view to conquest.
111. “Windmills near Amsterdam”—A. Hertell.
An illustration of what may be made of a commonplace and
uninteresting theme by a judicious distribution of light and
shade.
IV. “Landscape near Berlin”—T. Jacob.
V. Friendship Endangered”—Paul Meyerheim.
A temporary difference of opinion between a hungry terrier
and his lordly patron on the subject of some bones.
VI. “Deer” —Paul Meyerheim.
The “ dappled foresters” are about seeking a covert for the
night in a sheltered fern brake.
VII. “Awaiting Her Decision”—Amberg.
In an avenue of young beeches the lover has put the
momentous question, and he stands, clasping one of her
hands in both of his, in mute but passionate suspense.
VIII. “ Rainy Day at Meran ” —F. Meyerheim.
It looks as if it always rains at Meran.
IX. “ Erasmus ” —L. Giiterbock.
An excellent likeness of the illustrious scholar, who is repre-
sented as seated, en grande tenue, in his library, examining
manuscript he has just unrolled.


X. “ Sour Grapes’’’—Amberg.
A German maiden is seated in a vine-covered balcony, with
the light dropping in little patches in her muslin apron
and starched ruff, and is looking demurely out upon a
passing admirer, who can only worship her at a distance.
XI. “ Seamstress ” —F. Meyerheim.
XII. “ German Lake ” —T. Jacob.
There are besides in this Court a dozen line engravings from
celebrated painters, ancient and modern, which serve to show
that the countrymen of Albert Durer keep pace with neighbour-
ing nations in this branch of art, for which, indeed, the habit of
patient application so characteristic of the German mind pecu-
liarly qualifies them.


Austrian Court.
1. Racehorse, “ Othello ” —T. Haag.
2. “ Koenig See by Moonlight”—C. Schweninger.
Few lakes have been more frequently painted than this, but
we have here the presentation of it under a somewhat
novel aspect.
3. “An Evening in a Hungarian Forest”—R. Russ.
4. “ The New Vase ” —Majsch.
The new parlour maid, who is dusting the room, has the
curiosity to inspect a china vase. What follows is shown
in No. 7.
5. Racehorse “ Gideon ” —T. Haag.
6. “ Obersee ” —C. Schweninger.
Inferior in treatment to Philip Weber’s beautiful picture,
No. 73.
7 “ The Broken Vase ” —Majsch.
The girl’s clumsiness is on a par with her curiosity, and the
result is she has dropped the vase and shattered it to
atoms.
8. “ The Retail Shop ” —Burger.
A dim interior, with two old crones meeting as buyer and
seller of as much snuff as can be purchased for the
smallest coin of the Austrian realm.
9. “ Study of Sheep ”■—L. Hofner.
The sheep in their cosy winter quarters, and a hen and
chickens foraging about for food. Painted with great
delicacy and accuracy of touch.
10. “ Sheep in Repose ” —G. Ranzoni.
11. “ Ring Strasse in Vienna”—Van Bommel.
Visitors to Vienna will recognize the leading features of this
familiar scene —the Imperial hotel, the long perspective


of stately mansions, the tramway tracks, and the double
avenue of shady plane trees.
12. “Milford Sound, New Zealand ” —E. von (iuerard.
A cabinet picture by the well-known Victorian artist, who is
Austrian by birth, exhibiting some of the most romantic
features of this wonderful inlet.
13. “Agnes Bernauer” —W. Menzler.
A brilliantly painted portrait of the artist’s beautiful wife in
the picturesque costume of the 16th century. The work
recalls the style of Giorgione and his Venetian contempo-
raries.
14. “ View in Holland”—Achenbach.
A small picture of great merit from the easel of an artist
whose reputation stands very high in Europe.
15. “ Cows in Repose ” —G. Ranzoni.
16. “ Cows Drinking ” —Malknecht.
'l7. “Bull-fight in the Roman Compagna”—A. Bourlard.
A grand and powerfully executed composition. A sinewy
black bull, palpitating with passion, has just gored his
antagonist in the flank, and the wounded animal tosses his
head in the air with a roar of agvjny, while the foam falls
in thick flakes from his mouth.
18. “ The Bay of Palermo ” —J. Lojacono.
This is a landscape quite sui generis , and seems to have been
painted in a tent upon the spot. The hot road glows and
quivers in the burning light, which beats with a vivid
radience on the projecting ledges of the rock. The fleshy
leaves of the cactus cast thick shadows on the arid ground,
and a magnificent tree occupies the centre of the scene ;
while to the left a massive range of hills are softly veiled in
a haze of heat, and, on the other side the land dips down-
ward to the sea, which is of an intense blue, with rocky
headlands stretching away in the far distance until they
almost melt in the horizon.
19. “ Cows Returning Home ” —G. Ranzoni.
20. “ Philippine Welser ” —Menzler.
A companion picture to No. 13 ; but this is a blonde, whereas
that is a brunnete. A face of exquisite loveliness and
purity, and painted, like the other, with a masterly hand.


21. “ Austrian Grapes ” —A. Lach.
A clever piece of still life.
22. “ The 'l'wins ” —Malknecht.
A couple of mules, with the stolid look of their kind.
23. “ Sheep Grazing ” —Ranzoni.
24. “ Battle of Lissa ” —Pilttner.
A sketchy representation of the great naval disaster which
Austria inflicted on Italy, when one of the finest ironclads
of the latter went down in the midst of the action.
25. “Joseph 11. of Austria”—Bartsch.
Professedly a sketch of that aimable monarch holding his
weekly audience, at which the meanest of his subjects could
present themselves for the redress of their grievances-
-26. “ Still Life ” —Schodl.
This picture, like Nos 46, 47, 58, and 59, will sustain an
almost microscophic scrutiny. The artist’s fineness of vision
is only equalled by the delicacy of his touch; and his work
rivals in the minuteness of its execution and the elaborate
finish of its details, the labours of some of the old Flemish
painters, who used to spend a fortnight in the patient
elaboration of a lace collar an inch square. Here you
could count the threads upon the table-cloth and unravel
the embroidery. This picture obtained the gold medal at
Paris.
27. “ Pastoral Scene ” —Ranzoni.
A flock of sheep settling down for the night.
28. “ The Coquette ” —Majsch.
A not particularly attractive girl contemplating her features
in a looking-glass.
29. “Alpine Study”—Graber.
A specimen of wood carving representing a Teniers scene in
very high relief.
30. “The Lake of the Four Cantons in Switzerland” —Horst
Hacker.
A striking combination of lake, pine-forest, mountain and
glacier, with the sunlight lingering on the icy heights.
37. “ Plains in Victoria”—E. von Guerard.
A characteristic bit of scenery in the neighbouring colony.


32. “ The Orphans ” —Majsch.
Two ragged waifs of huminity—neglected outcasts of society :
of whom it may be predicted that they will one day become
its enemies. They might serve as portraits of the imper-
sonations of Ignorance and Want, described by Dickens in
his “ Christmas Carol.”
3 P “An Angel ” —Romako.
Never having seen one, we do not feel qualified to pronounce
an opinion upon the accuracy of the portrait.
34. “ Hills in Victoria ” —E. von Guerard.
A literal interpretation of some of the mountain scenery of
that colony.
35. “ The Politician ” —G. Kiihl.
The wearisome prosing on the prominent questions of the day
has sent his listener into a deep sleep. Happy listener !
36. “St. Cecilia” —G. Max.
A picture possessing the highest technical qualities ; painted
by an artist who has achieved a brilliant reputation on the
continent. The saint is on the eve of her martyrdom, and
touching for the last time, with the fingers which are so
soon to be cold in death, the instrument from which she
has been accustomed to elicit such heavenly sounds. As
a mere study of drapery the work possesses astonishing
merit.
37. “ The First Pipe”—Majsch.
A truant school-boy has flung his satchel of books on the
ground, and has chosen a secluded spot in which to indulge
in a few whiffs from a short pipe. Let us hope it will make
him sick.
3 3. “Christ in the Temple”—G. Max.
A sketch for a large picture by the artist who painted “St.
Cecilia.’’
39. “ Winter Scene in the North Sea” —Munthe.
Painted on panel. A work altogether unique of its kind;
wonderful in colour ; and the effect produced something
wholly new in art. A blood red sun sinking behind a sheet
of ice, upon which are a few dark figures of men and birds
—voila tout! but the workmanship is marvellous.


40. “ Lake Grundel ” —Horst-Hacker.
A bright landscape, pleasantly treated.
41. “A Favourite Dog”—Amerling.
Evidently a faithful study from life.
42. “ Hungarian Landscape ” —G- Meszoly.
An artist’s sketch.
43. “ The Beauty of the Village ” —-Schweninger.
Personal beauty must be rare among the females of that
village.
44. “ Landscape after Rain ” —Richter.
45. “ Sea Coast” —Tiesenhausen.
An impressively-painted composition, made up of sea, rock,
sandy spit, and cloudy sky, painted with a full brush.
Note how skilfully the shadows, broken by the ripple, are
depicted.
46. “ The Supper ” —M. Schodl.
47. “The Breakfast”—-M. Schodl.
Both will repay the most attentive examination.
48. “ The Roman Coliseum by Moonlight ” —A,. Arnz.
49. “ The Villa Frascati at Rome ” —A. Arnz.
A dazzling effect of saffron sunset seen through an avenue of
trees.
50. “ A Mountain Church ” —Budinski Dowanski.
Three monks on the way to mass in a sequestered sanctuary.
51. “The Travelling Circus”-—H. Schaumann.
A delightful peep behind the scenes. We are introduced to
the stable and dressing-room of the motley company. Two
monkeys, seated on a docile grey, hold a wreath, which the
trick pony of the establishment has seized upon with his
mouth, while a third monkey is engaged in teasing two
performing dogs with a flag. The ring-master flicks the
pony with his whip to call the animal’s attention to an
apple he is about to give him; and in the background we
see an equestrienne to whom a stage cupid is offering a lyre,
while a small child rolls upon the turf in playful conflict
with a little puppy.
52. 53. “ Roses ” —A. Lach.


54. “ Battle of Heligoland ” —Piittner,
Representing an Austrian Victory over the Danish fleet.
55. “The Pusta ” —O. von Morew.
A muster of military horses after they have been turned out
for summer pasturage.
56. “ Sunday Afternoon”—G. Mayer.
An aged woman reading the Bible in a sunny corner of her
poor cottage.
57. “ The Toilet”—M. Schodl.
Must not be overlooked.
58. “Amateur’s Saloon”—M. Schodl.
A master-piece of microscopic work.
59. “Children in the Meadows” —Beinke.
Boy and girl gathering flowers, knee-deep in the long, lush
grass.
60. “ Alpine Flowers” —Lach.
These, like the roses by the same artist, Nos. 52, 53, and 63,
speak for themselves.
61. “ Bay of Naples”—Achenbach.
A faithful transcript of the famous city, with its glorious bay
and the solemn form of Mount Vesuvius looming large
in the distance.
62. “ The Prize Cow” —Mahlknecht.
63. “ Roses”—Lach
64. “ A Village Fair —the Juggler”—Beinke.
He is keeping some glass balls in play upon his nose, while
his trumpeter calls attention to his feats and a little girl goes
round to collect the coins from a circle of gaping rustics
of both sexes and of all ages, the expressions of whose
interested countenances are cleverly differentiated.
65. “ A Fisher Village on the North Sea.” —Munthe.
Another of this gifted artist’s extraordinary works ; so true to
nature and so peculiar in their manipulation.
66. “ Repose”—Munsch.
A couple of horses unyoked from the waggon and blinking
wearily in the mid-day heat.


6y. “The First Experiment”—Majsch.
While sweeping the room the housemaid finds her master’s
pipe and tobacco, and thinks she will have a smoke. The
inevitable consequences must be left to the imagination.
68. “ Landscape ” —Cicer.
69. “ Austrian Scene ” —Miinsch.
70. “ Roman Woman ” —Russ.
71. “ Great Matron Island, Coast of Canada ” —J. P. Weber.
This picture, which obtained the grand prize in Paris is a
splendid work of art. A wild sea is breaking in foam and
fury upon a barrier of dark and massive rocks, in advance
of which, one huge monolith stands out with startling
distinctness to receive the first shock of the warring waves,
which are shattered into spray, churned into foam, and
dissipated into vapour by this steadfast obstacle. The
sea-birds wheel around it in swift circles ; the wreck of a
bark lies upon a ledge of rock ; the sun is going down in
tempestuous grandeur, and the sky overhead is sprinkled
with two distinct strata of clouds, the lower one of which
is being torn into shreds by the fierceness of the gale.
Note the gleams of reflected light upon the water and
the moist surface of the rocks; as also the sense of dis-
tance behind the monolith, and the airy motion of the
sea birds.
72. “ The Wetterhorn ” —J. P. Weber.
73. “ The Hinter See ” —J. P. Weber.
A charming pair of landscapes ; the artist of which seems to
have instinctively selected the finest point of view, the best
hour of the day, and the most alluring aspects under
which these grand and lovely scenes were capable of pre-
senting themselves.


French Court.
1. Etruscan Vase. The painting and decoration by M. De
Courcy.
2. Blue Lapis Jardiniere.
3. 4. Clodion Vases. Painted by M. Baldisseroni.
5. Rivoli Cup. The ornaments by M. Dammonse.
6. Vase of Salamene. The decorations designed by Madame
Escallier, and executed by M. Celos.
7. Vase. The ornaments by M. Cabau.
8. 9. Vases of Rimini.
* m * The whole of the above are from the National Manufactory,
at Sevres.
10. The Earth. This magnificent piece of Gobelins tapestry
has been prepared for the decoration of the new Hotel de
Ville, from a design by Charles Le Brun, a well-known
artist who flourished in the 17th century. No less than
fourteen accomplished artistes tapissiers have co-oper-
ated in its production, and the work is indistinguishable
from a grand fresco painting, excepting as regards the
softness and smoothness of its surface.
11, 12, 13, 14. Tapestries of a lighter texture and thinner woof,
for decorative purposes. Designed by M. Chabal-
Dussurgey. These are from the National Manufactory
at Beauvais.
THE PICTURES.
The paintings and engravings to which an asterisk is attached
will be found in the Vestibule.
*l5. “A Road”—A. Allonge.
A landscape which deserves a much better place.
16. “ Necera”—J. Aviat.
A finely modelled figure with a beautiful face. The uplifted


hands weaving flowers in the nymph’s dark hair ; but the
flesh tints too much inclining to the hue of old ivory.
17. “ Jeannot in Search of the Kitchen ” —L. M. Baader.
A stupid rustic has blundered into a lady’s dressing room
instead of the kitchen, and is being hastily expelled by her
maid.
18. “The China Mender” —L. M. Baader.
The old man busily plying his vocation is much amused by
the pert and voluble chatter of a magpie, perched on a
tall vase.
ig. “ Haidee ”•—J. Badin.
The face of Lambro’s daughter is less lovely in form and
feature, and less winning in expression than she is des-
cribed by Byron.
20. “ Boy and Grapes ” —J. A. Bail.
Like one of Murillo’s merry Spanish picarones, both in colour
and in sentiment.
21. “LaSoupe”—J. A. Bail.
A much inferior picture to the foregoing.
22. “Cattle” —A. Bance.
23. “ Market Day at Aurillac, in the Landes ” —L. Baiillot.
A peasant woman in broad, flapping hat and thick sabots, is
driving two cows and a couple of pigs to market, while a
young lady on horse back reins in her grey palfrey to allow
the other animals to pass over the ford first.
24. “ The Players at Bowls ” —H. C. A. Baron.
A Watteau-like scene in the time of Louis Quinze.
25. “ On the way to the Shambles”—E. Bayard.
A cavalcade of half-starved horses are being driven across
one of the bridges of the Seine on their way to the
slaughter-house one grey morning during the siege of
Paris, at the same time that two ambulances are passing
on to the Hotel Dieu under protection of the red-cross
flag.
26. “ The Last Temptation of St. Anthony -C. E. de Beau-
mont.
Everybody knows, from the popular song, what form the


saint’s last trial took, and the venerable anchorite wisely
avoids looking at his temptress.
*27. “The Willow Walk on the Banks of the Oise ” —C. J.
Beauverie.
28. “The Path to Cordeville”—C. J. Beauverie.
A highly successful study of a field of growing corn, with
flowering weeds brightening its green monotony, and a
path winding through it.
29. “Sinope, in Lower Normandy”—L. le G. de Bellee.
30. “An Algerian Seller of Pasteques ” —E. Benner.
31. “A Lacustrine Wife and her Child ”
An attempt to depict the appearance, costume, and abode of
the early lake-dwellers ; but an indifferent production.
32. “Luisella” —Jean Benner.
33. “The Siesta” —E. T. Berne-Bellecour.
A small picture executed with a delicacy of touch which
imitates that of Messonier or Gerome.
34. “ An Interior in Auvergne ” —N. Berthon.
A glimpse of the domestic life of the French peasant in one
of the primitive provinces.
35. “ A Woodland -Road in the Forest of Fontainebleau ” —P.
E. Berton.
36. “The Sluice of the Marsh ot Ste. Claire, in Sologne ” —P.
E. Berton.
A good specimen of striking pictorial effect produced with
very little labour, at the same time showing great technical
knowledge.
37. “ Coco’s Last Step ” —P. M. Beyle.
Quite a little tragedy of the homeliest character. The cara-
van of a travelling showman has reached the centre of a
dreary waste, white with snow, when the exhausted horse
(Coco) falls dead. Note the stoical resignation of the
showman, the genuine grief of his wife, and the mental
perplexity of the poor dog.
38. “ The Adornment of the Bride ” —P. M. Beyle.
A brilliant piece of Oriental colour; the scene Algiers ; and
the young lady undergoing the final touch of paint to her


eyebrows, while her ears are being regaled with enlivening
music.
39. “ A Flemish Woodcutter Lighting his Pipe ” —P. Billet.
A father and son are taking a spell of rest in the forest, and
are both lighting their pipes with the expiring embers of
the fire that has warmed their frugal meal.
40. “ Threatening Weather ” —H. Bonnefoy.
A flock of sheep is being driven home from its pasture in
the mountain by the menace of a heavy storm which is
rising up to windward.
41. “A Farm Yard in Brie” —J. P. Bouchor.
42. “ A Marsh in Brittany”—M. Bouquet.
A picturesque landscape, broadly handled, containing two
good passages of colour—the centre of the foreground, the
green bank, and the dim cluster of trees beyond.
*43 “ A Stream in Brittany ” —M. Bouquet.
44. “ The Noontide Prayer, in the great Mosque at Trebizonde”
—F. Brest.
45. “ Kief, on the road from Kerrasonde to Massia” —F. Brest.
Both pictures faithful representations of the architecture and
scenery of the places pourtrayed.
46. “ Marine View ” —A. E. E. Buttura.
The shimmer of veiled light upon the sea, and the transition
from twilight to moonlight in the sky and on the land, are
conveyed with the utmost vraisemblance.
47. “ Night ” —Madame J. Calamatta.
A death-like figure, with closed eyes and an outspread mantle,
is rising in the air out of a bank of clouds tinged with the
dying fires of sunset.
48. “In the Woods ” —G. Calves.
49. “ Mother and Child ” —G. Calves.
50. “ Breakfast ” —J. Caraud.
A young girl, as fresh as the morning, has already commenced
what promises to be an excellent meal; while her cat, bask-
ing in the sunlight, looks on approvingly.
51. “The Two Friends ” —J. Caraud.
A young lady caressing her cat.


52. “ A Sudden Alarm” —N. Chaillou.
The figures of the wounded men, of the white-haired old
woman, and of the child holding the broken water-jar, are
painted with great power; while the chiaroscuro of the
dark hut is remarkably good.
53. “ Low Marsh on the Coast of Normandy” —O. de Cham-
peaux.
54. “ Tire Banks of the Arroux”—O. de Charapeaux.
55. “ Scene upon the Beach at Yport”—A. Charnay.
A confused composition, weak in drawing, and raw and
chalky in colour.
56 “ The Beach at Veules”—P. Cinot.
57. “Moonlight at Yport” —P. Colin.
A weird scene, full of gloom and mystery.
*5B. “ The Fisherman’s Hut—A View in Jersey”—P. Collin.
59. “A Venetian Noble of the 16th Century”—L. J. R. Collin.
60. “ Rosina, a Study ” —L. J. R. Collin.
The flesh tints, hair, and drapery show the hand of a master
of portraiture.
6r. “Jezebel Devoured by the Dogs ”--L. F. Comerre.
A most repulsive subject treated with magistral ability. The
dogs have torn every shred of clothing from Jezebel’s body,
the position of which offers difficulties of drawing and fore-
shortening which have been triumphantly surmounted.
62. “Good Night, Neighbour”—P. C. Compte-Calix.
A picturesque structure by moonlight, with a pretty girl at a
ground-floor window bidding good night to her lover, who
looks out from one of the first-floor windows of the house
adjoining.
*63. “ Curiosity” —P. C. Compte-Calix
An outer door slightly ajar, and a young girl peeping quietly
in.
64. “ Dante”—P. C. Comte-Calix.
A group of musical amateurs have assembled on a grassy
knoll and under the shadow of a chestnut tree, a few miles
from Florence, which is seen bathed in the glow of sunset;
their performance is abruptly interrupted by the appearance


of the austere poet in a wood on the other side of the
stream. Note tiie admirable painting of the costumes.
65. “ The Paroquet—F. Cormon.
The bird is feeding out of the hand of an Eastern beauty, re-
clining upon a carpet in the shadow of an umbrageous
grove.
66. “View of Etaples ” —P. E. Damoye.
67. “ A Village Wedding in Normandy”—E. Decan.
The marriage procession, headed by two musicians, is coming
up the village street; the bride and bridegroom looking as
awkward as people do under such circumstances, and all
the neighbours turning out to see the spectacle.
68. “Feeding the Fowls” —A. Defaux.
A woman cringing their food to a swarm of poultry in the
basse-cour of a farm-house. Each bird has a specific indi-
viduality of its own, and all are painted with masterly ease
and accuracy.
69. “ Effect of Snow ” —A. Defaux.
A striking instance of versatile ability. Without exception, the
finest snow piece in the whole collection. The bare trees
encrusted with crystals on the windward side of their
rugged boles, and on their bare branches ; the sky sombre
with frozen vapour ; a pool thickly covered with slaty ice ;
and the pigs and poultry huddled together under the lee
of some fallen timber, are the constituents of a picture
that almost makes you shiver to look at it.
70. “ The Return from the Fields ” —F. A. Delobbe.
A peasant woman and her youngest child, mounted on an ass,
and accompanied by the child's eldest sister in front, are
wending their way homewards. There is deep twilight in
the narrow sunken lane, with only a sparkle of brightness
on the back of the woman’s cap, on her right shoulder, and
on the top of the boy’s stick.
71. ‘‘Rustic Interior” —J. Desbrosses.
72. “The Flarvesters at Rest”—J. Desbrosses.
A coarse-featured peasant woman, fast asleep on a shock of
wheat, with her husband or lover scanning her features.


73- “ Objects of Art B. Desgoffe.
Highly finished work. The pansies and the spoon handle
are almost as good as Schodl’s delicate delineations of
similar objects.
74. “ Young Girl carrying a Cat” —G. Doyen.
75. “ A Woman’s Head " —E. Dubufe.
A weak though handsome face looking out from a tangled
mass of unkempt hair.
76. “The Widow's Mite ” —E. Dubufe.
This celebrated picture, so tender in sentiment, so expressive
in narrative, so accurate in drawing, so pure in colour, is
widely known by the photographs which have been taken
from it. In subject and style, it belongs rather to English
than to French art.
77. “ Beech Tree Avenue in Normandy” —P. Dubufe.
78. “Banks of the Siagne, near Cannes” —P. Dubufe.
Painted in alow key of colour, and seen under the influence
of a subdued light. The interlacing stems of the trees,
and the larches in the middle distance, painted with a nice
feeling for Nature.
79. 80. “ Loulette and Croquette”—L. S. Faivre-Duffer.
Cupid toying with dogs. Executed with the smoothness of
enamel.
*Bl. “The Poacher” —J. Ferry.
He is staggering along, carrying on his shoulders a deer,
which he has just shot; and the snow, which already lies
thick upon the ground, is still falling.
*B2. “The Lower Marsh at Yport” —M. A. Flameng.
83. “ Oyster Park at Cancale ” —M. A. Flameng.
An unpromising subject skilfully handled. Note the distance,
and the melting of the sea-line into the hazy sky.
84. “ Harvest Women” —C. A. Foulongne.
We do not know in what part of the world harvest women
thus attired are to be met with. We never saw them.
85. “ The Place of the Plebiscitum at Genzano, in Italy” —G.
Garaud.
86. “The Lake ofNemi, Italy”—G. Garaud.


8;. ‘'The Dessert"—A. Gaudefrov.
A sportsman sharing his meal with his favourite retriever.
88. “ Ricciardetto delivering a Nymph ” —A. Gaudefroy.
A not over decent illustration of a passage in Ariosto’s
“ Orlando Furioso.” The execution much more praise-
worthy than the artist’s selection of his subject.
89. “ The Refectory”—A. Gautier.
90. “ The Ray Fish” —A. Gautier.
The huge, flabby fish occupies a central and prominent
position in the picture, the painting of which strikes one
as a waste of artistic ability.
91. “Alms for the Troubadour”—E. Genty.
Highly artificial in composition and sentiment.
92. “The Music Lesson” —P. A. Girard.
Very Watteauish in subject and treatment.
93. “ Landscape”— E. Gluck.
94. “ Autumn Flowers” —R. Gonse.
95. “ The Meeting”—E. G. Grandjean.
96. “ In the Acacia Avenue” —E. J. Grandjean.
*97. “The Knitter” —H. X. Gruyer.
Would serve as a portrait of the keeper of the wine shop
who figures so prominently in the Parisian chapters of
Dickens’s “Tale of Two Cities,"
98. “The Last Cannon-shot of Admiral de Ruvtcr” —T. Gudin.
The Dutch Admiral’s last naval engagement was fought with
Admiral Duquesne, another fine old sea-dog, off the coast
of Sicily, in 1676, when the gallant De Ruyter had both
his legs shot off, and died of his wounds a few days after-
wards.
*99. The Setting Sun” —T. Gudin.
100. “A Reverie" —A. Guerard.
101. “In Brittany during a Snow Storm” —G. Guignard.
An exceedingly clever picture ; only the artist seems to have
forgotten that, under such circumstances, a horse in moth r.
would leave footprints in the snow.


102. “The Fields” from a chanson by Beranger —K. A. Guillon.
Is it not Tope who says that “ want of decency is want of
sense?’'
103. “ bathers at Villerville —L. Hayon.
Raw in colour, the figures wooden, and the sky chalky.
104. “The Pig MarketE. Hedouin.
105. “A Landscape in Poitevin ” —G. D. C. Helie.
106. “The River Allan at Montbeliard ” —G. D. C. Helie.
107. “Salt Marshes at Poulignen, in Brittany”—L. Herpin.
A flat and dreary scene, pourtrayed with literal fidelity.
108. “ Julian de Medici, assassinated in the Church of Sta. Repa*
rata, in Florence, by the conspiracy of the Pazzi ”
E. E. Hillemacher.
Julian de Medici,“who shared with his brother Lorenzo the
government of Florence, after the death of their father,
was foully butchered, while attending divine service and
during the elevation of the Host, by one of the Pazzi and
Bernardo Bandino, with the complicity of the Archbishop
of Piza and two priests. His t-other was also wounded,
but escaped. The assassins were afterwards massacred by
the infuriated populace of Florence, and the Archbishop
was hung pour encourager les auires.
109. “Leda” —A. Jourdan.
A more unobjectionable treatment of the mythological
story than one is ordinarily accustomed to meet with on
canvas.
no. “The Faithful Guardim”—A. Jourdan.
in. “ Lsmenia, Nymph of Diana ” —C. Landelle.
112. “ Coptish Woman selling Oranges in Cairo ” —C. Landelle,
Both of these fine pictures are from the easel of one of the
foremost artists in France, and are admirable specimens of
his talent and manner.
113. “ The Wife of Ephraim the Levite ” —E. H. Laporte.
She has flung herself down —nude, as a matter of course—
on the doorstep and beats passionately at the closed portal
for admission.


i i j. “ Little Red-riding Hood’'- R. S. Lassalle.
The mother seated by the hearth, with her spinning wheel by
her side, is giving explicit instructions to the pretty little
heroine of the undying nursery story.
115. “ The Rising Tide at Vport ’’ —Madame K. l,a Villette.
A clever study of rollers and surf on a rocky shore, with a
steamer in the offing.
116. “ A Cardinal issuing from the Church of Sta. Maria della
Pace, at Rome ” —E. Rebel.
1 ty. “ Chios ” —J. J. Lefebvre.
This work, by one of the most famous painters of the day in
France, is air illustration of the lines by that unfortunate
poet, Andre Chenier :
II visite seuvent vos paisibles rivages
Souvent j’ecoule et Fair qui gemit dans vos bois
A mon oreille au loin vient apporter sa voix.
118. “The Key of the Fields ” —E. Lejeune.
119. “ A Shoemaker’s Family A. Leleux.
The shoes referred to are the wooden sabots worn by the
French peasantry, the maker of which, is plying his
vocation under a primitive shelter by the road side, while
the other members of his family are busily employed also.
120. “Young Girls at the Fountain”—A. Leleux.
121. “ Interior of a Kitchen ” —A. Leleux.
A ge/ire picture painted with Flemish delicacy 7 of detail.
ice. “The Dancing Lesson”—Madame E. Leleux.
The young lady is about to “ come out,” and is being pre-
pared for that momentous event under tire admiring rather
than critical ey 7 es of the rest of the family 7 .
123, “The Happy Adventurer”—Madame E. Leleux.
124. “The Players with Bones”—J. F. F. Lematte.
A picture which obtained the prix tie Rome in 1870. It is
exceedingly graceful in composition, pure in colour, and
correct in drawing. Note the finely modelled figure of the
young girl, who is lying down on the ground, and the
careless and natural ease of the boy who is leaning against
the pedestal. The game,—a very popular one in Italy 7,
and is fully described in Story’s Rolm di Rmna.


125- •* The Bathers”—J. F. F. Lematte.
126. Horses at Liberty ” — l’. I,c More.
1 27. '■ At Full Speed ” —P. Le More.
Three horses well abreast, preparing to take a ditch in a
steeple-chase.
] 28. “ A Soldier of the time of Louis Xill. ” —A. Lesrel.
129. “ 'J'he Amateurs ” —A. Lesrel.
A wonderful piece of drawing and colour, though inhar-
monious in tone. Note the lustre and the exquisite finish
of the plum-coloured velvet coat of the old gentleman with
his back towards the spectator, and the delicacy with
which the embroidery is painted; as also the different
attitudes, expressions, and coloured costumes of the other
nine connoisseurs, who are critically examining the bronze,
as well as the care bestowed upon the manipulation of the
tesselated floor, the rug, the tapestry on the wall, and all
the other accessories.
130. “The F'irst Lilacs of the Season ” —E. Levy.
A flower-girl offering them for sale ; a pleasing subject pleas-
ingly treated.
131. “ Child and Dog ” —E. Levy.
132. “ A Brood ” —T. Lobrechon.
A family group, comprising a mother, and her three children,
the youngest nude ; and all four figures, drawn, posed, and
coloured with a skill and grace worthy of the artist ; the
drapery as finely painted as the faces and limbs ; while the
naked child is perfectly modelled. By the introduction of
a rich panel of amber satin at the back of the group, M.
Lobrichon has succeeded in producing the effect of a
golden nimbus, like that which surrounds Murillo’s Virgin
in the Louvre.
133. “A Child’s Dream"—T. Lobrichon.
A beautiful child, with his golden hair falling in rich profu-
sion over a crimson velvet cushion, is fast asleep on a large
silver salver, surrounded by the materials of a sumptuous
dessert —presumably the subject of his dream.
'134. “ Orchard and Wall Fruits ” —J. Maisait.
Peaches, pears, and their foliage splendidly treated. You


feel as if the Bons Chretiens would melt in your mouth if
you could only detach them from the canvas.
135. “ Washerwomen of Maine at Vignely -J. Maisait.
A composition full of animation and variety.
136. “ A Field of Wheat ” —J. Mallett.
Another successful study of growing corn —in this instance
ripe for the sickle.
137. “ Hymn to the Creator” —A. Marie.
A picture of which the subject belongs to the golden age of
the poets. A woman, surrounded by the loveliness of the
world in its virgin prime, feels her heart throb with grati-
tude to God for having made it so beautiful, and lifts up
her hands filled with flowers in simple, fervent adoration of
the beneficence of their Creator.
138. “The 24th of August, 1572 ” —L. Melingue.
During the atrocious massacre of the Huguenots in Paris on
this day, Charles the Ninth, excited by the sight of the
carnage in the street, began to fire from the windows of
the Louvre, commanding the river Seine, across which a
few wretched fugitives were attempting to escape by swim-
ming, and the royal assassin is reported to have exulted in
the skill with which he brought down his human game,
these being his own subjects.
139. “A Grasshopper C. H. Michel.
We should think the young lady stands an excellent chance
of being frozen to death in such a garb, at such an hour,
in such a place.
140. “ The Bather Surprised ” —C. H. Michel.
141. “The Bad Players” —A. F. Monfallet.
142. “Hie Tea”—A. F. Monfallet.
A conversation piece, in which the faces are uninteresting,
while the costumes, carpets, and furniture have been
elaborately wrought.
143. “ Outskiits of a Forest ” —F. Montenard.
A highly effective landscape, painted with great breadth and
vigour, the atmosphere transparent, the sky capitally
rendered, and the distance fine. Note the skill exhibited in
depicting the ruts upon the cart track, the ditch, the
broken bark, and the roadside herbage.


144- “The Gorges ofGapeau. in Provence'’ -F. More i.urd.
145. “ Meditation ” —M. de Tours.
A dark-eyed beauty in deshabille the face in shadow, and
a ray of light gleaming on the bare shoulder.
146. “ Octavius Augustus at the Tomb of Alexander’' —M. de
Tours.
One of the most striking figure pictures in the gallery. The
head and shoulders of the great Macedonian have been
unswathed from their cerements by order of Octavius, on
his entry into Alexandria; and while he surveys the
shrunken features of the hero with something like awe, he
reverently lays a wreath of honour on his head.
147. “A Bowling Alley in Alsace”—C. A. Pabst.
A charming picture, evidently painted from life. The alley
is overshadowed by a vine-covered trellis, through which
the sunlight falls upon the players, one of whom is leaning
forward to deliver his ball, while most of the bystanders
watch the game with more or less of interest. Nothing
can be more unconventional than the general arrangement
of the figures, which are full of character, while all the
accessories of the scene have executed with the
utmost care, with a true feeling for the picturesque.
148. “The Path to the Minaret at Esneh, in Upper Egypt”—
Madame M. E. Perrin.
149. “The Fete of the Convalescent”—E. Ponsey.
A lady vvho is just recovering from her illness is receiving
the visits of congratulation of her friends.
150. “ The Last Attempt”—L. Ponsey.
A proposal of marriage ; chiefly noticeable on account of the
technical qualities of the drapery, carpet, fire-screen,
clock, etc.
151. “Landscape in Auvergne”—M. Potcmont.
152. “ A Dryad”—-J. N. Ranvier.
153. “ The Fox-chase”—Regamey.
154. “An Odalisque”—T. Robert Fleury.
155. “ Pepina”—Madame Emma Roslin.


156. ‘"The Indiscreet’’ Madame lemma Roslin.
The indiscretion apparently refers to a child thrusting some-
thing savoury within reach of a stealthily approaching cat.
157. “An Odalisque” —P. Rouffio.
“ Somewhat too much of this,”
158. “Grand Performance"—E. A. Rudaux.
Some children giving an al fresco entertainment with a toy
theatre, for the amusement of baby.
159. “ A Victim”—E. A. Rudaux.
A poodle is being put through a course of military drill by
some boys with strong military instincts.
[6O. “Indecision” —J. li. Saintin.
The question in debate with the young lady is—“ Shall I
accept him ? ” Upon the whole, she might go farther and
fare worse.
161. “Parisian Laundress” —J. E. Saintin.
She is unmistakably Parisian in face, manner, dress, and
expression.
162. “The Song of the Oleander”—G. C. St. Pierre.
A group of Arab women in the portico of a Moresque house
in Algiers, one of whom gathers a bunch of oleanders, and
proposes it as a theme for improvisation to the musician
of the party.
163. “A Good Hearty Kiss”-—H. Schlesinger.
An impetuous child clambering up to kiss his mother with
vehement importunity. Note the sheeny texture of her
satin robe.
164. “ Like Grandmamma” —H. Schlesinger.
An arch young maiden has assumed the crutch and cap of
her aged relative, and is mimicking her infirm gait and
stooping posture, much to the perplexity of the cat. A
charmingly painted picture.
165. “ Lilies”—L. de Schryver.
*166. “ Under Fire” —L. Sergent.
A detachment of Zouaves, mostly young recruits, are pre-
paring to receive the enemy’s change, and to undergo their
“ baptism of fire.”


'T67. “Chaos: a Scent: in line Forest of Fontainebleau” —L.
Tanzi.
168. “ Rebecca at the Fountain”- K. R. Thirion.
Another variation of a terribly hackneyed theme.
169. “ Rot’s Wife changed into a Pillar of Salt” —E. Toudouze.
A grandiose composition, hung in a very bad light.
*1 70. “ Landscape in the Forest of Fontainebleau” —H. Trouville.
171. “ Basket of Pansies” —P. Vayson.
A charmingly painted flower-piece.
172. “Shepherds’ Dogs Bathing”—P. Vayson.
'Poo small a subject for so large a canvas.
173. “ Herzegovinian Spinner”—E. Vernet Lecomte.
174. “ Young Tsigan Girl ” —E. Vernet-Lecomte.
Both of them very fine pictures ; rich in colour, forcible in
expression, and full of character.
175. “ The Last Load”—J. J. Veyrassat.
A four-horse waggon, with children perched upon the summit
of the sheaves, and accompanied by the reapers and
gleaners, is wending its way towards the homestead, with
the last load, while the sun is sinking in the west. The
horses —three greys and a chestnut —the waggon, the
figures, and the landscape, are painted with equal ability,
*177. “ Pleasant Gossip ” —F. Vuagnat.
178. “ Bellerive, on the Lake of Geneva ” —F. Vuagnat.
Cows being driven to water in the lake; the animals cleverly
executed, with a nice effective light upon them.
179. “ Free Market in Picardy”—l). P. de Vuillefroy.
An exceedingly animated scene by an artist who is treading
closely in the footsteps of Rosa Bonheur. The market
square of the picturesque old town is alive with horses being
put through their paces, cattle, sheep, pigs, drovers, and
buyers; and the dusty distance is admirably managed.
180. “ The Quay at Sevres, near Paris” —L. V. Watelin.
A vigorously-painted landscape, exhibiting a faithful ad-
herence to fact.
181. “La Colette, in the Island of Jersey”—M. Willerich.


; 82. ■■ The banks of the 111, in Alsace” —J. H. Zuber.
A fine landscape, with a stream of water and a sluice in the
foreground, and a breadth of meadow on which they are
haymaking, in the middle distance, illuminated by a sum
burst; some lightly-timbered uplands in the distance.
SCULPTURE.
183. “ Une Merveilleuse ” —E. Aizelin. Marble bust.
184. “ Enfant ala Vasque ” —L. E. Barrias. Marble group.
185. “Genius in the Clutch of Misery ” —P. A. Bartholde. Group
in bronze.
186. “ Young Girl at her Bath ” —Madame L. Bertaux. Bronze.
187. “Spring”— lbid. Bust in marble.
rBB. “ The Adulteress ” —J. Cambos. Bronze.
189. “ The Grasshopper ” —J. Cambos. Marble.
190. “ The Young Mother ” —H. Chevalier. Group in marble,
igi. “ Child on a Tortoise ” —L. Delaplanche. Bronze statue.
192. “ Education of Bacchus ” —A. D. Doublemard. Bronze.
193. “ Love and the Puppets”—A. Itasse. Marble statue.
194. “ Johnny Laughing ” — lbid. Marble medallion.
t 95. “ Johnny Crying ” — lbid. Marble medallion.
196. “The Smile of Spring” —J. Gantherin. Marble bust.
197. “ The Muse of Andre Chenier” —H. Louis-Noel.
She is caressing the head of the unfortunate poet, who was
guillotined at the time of the French Revolution.
198. “Rebecca” — Ibid. Statue in marble.
199. “ Maroon strangled by a Dog ” —F. Martin. Bronze.
200. “ Louis XL a Prisoner at Peronne ” — lbid. Bronze.
201. “A Flautist ” —D. Rugel. Bronze.
202. “ A Virgin ” —C. Rochet. Marble Statue.
203. “ The Little Bacchante” —P. Sural. Bronze.
204. “ Soap Bubbles” — Ibid. Marble.
205. “Hebe” —A. M. de Vasselor. Marble bust.
206. “ Little Gleaner” —H. de Vaureal. Marble statue.


WATER-COLOUR [)R AWI V(IS.
*207. “ A Presentation at Court, time of Louis the 14th ” —S
Baron.
208. “ Strawberries and Strawberry Plants” —Madame E. Duterrq.
209. “The Banks of the Cousin, near A vail on”—L. Floury.
210. “ The Wolves’ Gorge, Forest of Fontainebleau” — Ibid.
211. “A Recollection of San Germano, in Italy”—C. A. Fou-
longue.
*212. “ Burnt Out” —A. Gaudefroy.
213. “An Italian Butcher ” —E. Rebel.
*214. “ The Struggle ” —C. Lepec.
DRAWINGS.
215. “ Solitude ” A. Allonge.
216. “A Park near Paris ” —M. Lalanne.
217. “ View of Bordeaux ” — lbid.
218. “Winter in the Woods of Brittany”—E. E. A, Miriel
219. “ Summer in the Woods of Brittany” — Ibid.
*220. “ Mamma’s Breakfast ” —J. E. Saintin.
*22 t. “Fontaine to Chaville ” —J. G. Salis.
ENGRAVINGS.
*222. “Tears Cease Not to Flow” —C. Barbant.
*223. Seven Engravings on Wood — Ibid.
224. “The Farm in the Valley”—A. Brunet-Debaisnes.
225. “ Church of Sta. Maria della Salute, ATnice ” — lbid.
226. Three Engravings, “The Approach to Venice,” “The
Funeral of Wilkie,” and the “ Return of Agrippina
Ibid.
*227. “ Playing with a Vulture ” —E. A. Champollion.
228. “The Choice of a Mode!”— lbid.


22 i;. ‘‘The Bath”—K. L. Courtry.
“230. “ The Death of Marceau ” — lbid.
'231. ■■ Poetry” (after Raffaelie) —A. Didier.
232, Three -Engravings in one frame —L. Flameng.
*233. “ Portrait of a Lady ” —E. Hcdouien.
*234. “The Sportsmen’s Repast”— lbid.
235. Seven Wood Engravings in a frame—H. T. Hildibrand.
*236. Frame containing twenty Etchings—M. Lalause.
*237. Frame containing two ditto— lbid.
238. “Gulliver in the Island of Liliput ” —A. F. Laguillermie.
239. Three etched Portraits in a frame —E. P. Le Rat.
240. “ Views of Paris ” (etchings)—A. M. Potemont.
241. “A Parisian in 1795 ” — lbid.
■*242. “ Head of John Baptist ” —C. J. Robert.
SCULPTURE IN THE BRITISH COURT.
■ Genius of Commerce”—Fontana.
■■ Little Musician ” — lbid.
La Sonnambula”— lbid.
■ Industry”— lbid.
- Cupid captured by Venus ” — lbid.
“ Preparing for Bed”— lbid.
“ The Prisoner of Love”— lbid.
“ Portrait Bust of Mr. A. Morris”— lbid.
“ Venus and Cupid” —Simonetti.
-■ Bust of Sir H. Robinson”
Ibid.
NOTE.
There are numerous exhibits in the room set apart for the
architectural drawings and miscellaneous works of art; but as
fresh additions continue to be made from day to day, and the final
arrangement and enumeration of those already received are thereby
rendered impossible, any Catalogue of this court is out of the
question for the present.


The Fine Art Society, London.
MISS 1. THOMPSON’S PIRVBIB.
“ THE ROLL CALL/’ “QUATRE BRAS,”
“BALACLAVA,” and “INKERMAN.
TO BE ENGRAVED IN THE HIGHEST STYLE.
“ The Rom, Cam, ”
from P. E. Reynolds, 426 George Street.
“ Quatre Bras” is in course of publication. The proofs being now in
stock, prints will be published shortly.
“ Balaclava ” and “ Inkennan ” will be published in about twelvemonths'”
time.
Proof Copies of “ The Roll Call ” and “ Qnalre Bras ” can he seen in the Fine
Art Society's exhibit at the Garden Palace .
P. E. REYNOLDS
Begs to call attention to the high-class publications of the Fine Art Society,
London. Copies of Engravings of the following works can be seen at the
Garden Palace, or at 426 George Street: —
‘‘The Egyptian Feast,” by E. Long, A.R.A. Artist’s Proofs, £8 Bs. ; Proofs
before Letters, £6 65.; India Prints, £4. 45.; Prints, £2 2s.
“ The Princes in the Tower,” by J, E. Millais. Prints, £2 2s.
“ Grouse Driving,” by Col. Stuart Wortley. Prints, £1 is.
“Mrs. Langtry,” by E. J. Poynter, R.A. Prints, £1 is.
“ Windsor,” Etching by Seymour Hayden. Proofs, Bs.
In Course of Publication —
“ATALANTA’S RACE,” i;v E. J. Poynter, R.A.
Terms of publication of this important work will be—
Artist’s Proofs ... £lO 10 o Proofs before Letters ... £7 7 o
Lettered Proofs ... 5 5 o Prints 3 3 o
Subscribers'' names received by P. E. Reynolds.
P. E\ ME! YN Qli D S : f . Agent for the Fine Art Society^
426 George St.. Sydney, and 43 Elizabeth St., Melbourne.


S Hll jBOTEij 1;t .ST
OF
Illustrated Works m Art* &c,, &c-.
TO BE OIM'AI NED FROM
P. E. REYNOLDS, 426 George Street.
Modern Art.—A series of line engravings, from the works of
distinguished painters of the English and Foreign Schools,
selected from galleries and private collections in (Meat Britain,
with descriptive text by James Dafforne. Folio, half morocco,
gilt edges ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 10 o
A Brief History of the Painters of all Schools. —By
Louis Viardot and other writers ... ... ... ... ... 140
English Painters of the Georgian Era—Hogarth to Tur-
ner.—Biographical Notices of the Artists, illustrated with 48
permanent photographs after their most celebrated pictures ... 018 o
English Painters of the Victorian Era—Mulready to
Landseer —With 48 illustrations... ... ... 018 O
Benjamin Robert Haydon.—Correspondence and Table Talk,
with a Memoir by his son Frederic Wordsworth Haydon, with
fac simile illustrations from his Journal (2 vols.) ... ... 116 o
New Zealand Scenery.—Chromolithographed after the original
water-colour drawings by John Gully, with descriptive letter-
press by Ur. Julius Von Haast ... ... ... ... ... 550
The “ Graphic ” Portfolio.—A selection of Engravings which
have appeared in the Graphic
Drawing from Nature,—A series of Progressive Instructions
in Sketching, to which are appended Lectures on Art delivered
at Rugby School. Illustrated by 18 coloured plates and
numerous woodcuts, by Geo. Barnard ... ... ... ... 150
Art Rambles in the Highlands and Islands of Scot-
land. —By John T. Reid. With 156 Sketches taken from
nature ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... I 1 o
A History of Architecture in all Countries, from the
Earliest Time to the Present Day.—By James Ferguson,
D.C.L., F.R.S., &c. (2 vols.) ... ... ... ... ... 440
A Hand-Book of Architectural Styles, Translated from
the German of A. Rosengarten by W. Collett Sandars ... 1 1 o
Holland House. —By Princess Marie Liechtenstein. Illustrated 017 6
Holy Land Pictures.—Photographs 5 5°
BOOKS VERY MUCH REDUCED IN PRICE,
Celebrated English Painters—Hogarth to Landseer—their Lives and
Works. Illustrated with 96 engravings from their best pictures, reproduced in
photography. Published at £1 10s. ; reduced to 20s.
Gems of Modern European Art, containing 40 examples of the works of
some of the best masters, with description. Published at 18s.; reduced to 10s.


special fmmimm or warn
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
CHROMO-LITHOGRAPH OF SYDNEY HARBOUR,
FROM NORTH SHORE.
PRICE PIETY SHILLINaS.
“We have been shown by the publisher, Mr. P. E. Reynolds, a large-
sized chromo-lithograph of Sydney harbour. The view is taken from the
North Shore, and shows the harbour and city as they appear when the sun is
rising upon them. The sky and water are suffused with the golden hue pecu-
liar to the hour, and the houses and principal features are brought into very
natural prominence. The outlines of the hills from Sydney away to Waverley
and the various bays are faithfully pictured, the shadows of the bays being
very fairly represented. The rocks and the shrubbery on the North Shore are
treated very tastefully, and the picture as a whole, in its outlines, and the
lights and shadows with which it is finished, gives a pleasing and effective view
of Sydney and its beautiful surroundings.” —Sydney Morning Herald.
“Asa faithful representation of a landscape remarkable for its beauty, it
is sure to find many admirers and purchasers, especially among those who are
familiar with the locality it depicts.” —Melbourne Argus.
THE EXHIBITION ALBUM.
A series of Photographs of Chief Places of Interest in and around Sydney,
containing a beautiful Panoramic View of the City and the Harbour, from the
Observatory, Photographs of Government House, Botanic Gardens, St. An-
drew’s Cathedral, Town Hall, Post Office, Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Museum, University, and Zig-zag Railway. Price, 7s. 6d. Postage to Eng-
land, 9d. ; inland, 5d.
“Will no doubt be in request by visitors and others who desire to possess
good views of Sydney and its public buildings.” —Sydney Morning Herald.
REYNOLDS’ EXHIBITION SOUVENIR,
A series of Views similar to the above, in photo-litho, style. Price, 2s.
Postage to England,
- Pt B, SBmmDB* PabUaha*,
428 GEORGE ST,, SYDNEY, AND 43 ELIZABETH ST., MELBOURNE.


PUIUOATIONS
OF
Memts* &&WFM mmM 00.,
PARIS.
-MtP. E. REYNOLDS^
Has much pleasure in informing lovers of Aft .that he has received from
Messrs. (JofJPIJ- & Co- the following magnificent volumes, illustrating some of
the finest pictures painted during the last few years :
Les Salons De 1872, 1873, 1874, —Each containing 70 Photographs of the
finest pictures exhibited in the Paris Salons of those years. Folio edition,
half morocco, gilt.
Le Salon de 1875. —Containing 70 Reproductions in Photogravure, with
descriptive Sonnets by Adrien Dezamy. Folio edition, half morocco, gilt.
Le Salon de 187$. —Containing 45 Reproductions in Photogravure, with
descriptive Sonnets by Adrien Dezamy. Folio edition, half morocco, gilt,
Le Salon de 1877, —Containing co Photographs. Folio edition, half
morocco, gilt.
Le Salon de 1878. —Containing eo Photographs. Folio edition, half
morocco, gilt.
The Choice Works of M. Fortuny. —An Album of 50 Plates of this
celebrated artist’s best works. Folio, half morocco.
The Decorations of the New Opera House, Paris.—Reproductions
in Photography of the Paintings of Paul IJaudry.
The Choice Works of Th. Gerome. —Two volumes, folio, containing 84
Plates executed in Photogravure, after the original pictures, with a por-
trait of Th. Gerome, and a Biographical Notice by Alfred Arago.
ALSO A VERY CHOICE VARIETY OF
MBBBBS I. PQPJJEAB BNQBAVIEQB,
paQVOQBAPm, PBOPOBBAVUSB&,
Among these are some of the finest works ever published. An inspection
is invited.
P, E. REYMOJ-DS, Soje Agent (of Goupil & Co.,
426 George Sired, Sydney, and 43 Eliaaheti Street, Melbourne.


M ESSRS. L. PRANG AND CO.,
FINE AMT PUBLISHER
BOSTON, USA
IN E. REYNOLDS
Desires to bring under the notice of Visitors to the Exhibition the excel-
lence of the publications of Messrs. Prang & Co. A selection of their
unrivalled Chromos, &c., is to be seen in the Gallery over
the British Court of the Garden Palace, whilst a large
collection is on view at 426 George Street.
The Chromos, consisting of Figure, Landscape, Animal, and Floral Designs,
are noted for their faithfulness to nature and exquisite finish, surpassing
all Continental houses in this respect. Messrs. PRANG & CO. have taken
Medals in London, Vienna, Philadelphia, Paris, &c., as against the produc-
tions of all the World. Visitors have only to look at the specimens at the
Exhibition to see the perfection to which Colour Printing has now attained,
being perfect fac-similes of the Original Pictures, and as they are sold
at very small cost, are very popular with all classes of buyers.
This firm also produce perhaps the most popular CHRISTMAS
CARDS ever published. Year after year new and beautiful designs are
issued, and are well known throughout Australia. This yearth" d
the new patterns are very beautiful and che-de,, ar ’
popular.


ISYIOMS’ MONSfSS
1879-1880.
OVER FOUR THOUSAND PRIZES.
FIRST PRIZE VALUE £5OO.
r. k. i;ky\oi,ds.
To celebrate the year of our International Exhibition, has (with the
permission m'-the Attorney-General);determined upon holding a Mon-
ster Art Union of Twenty Thousand Members. The Prizes
will consist of collections oi Works of Art taken from Mr. Reynolds’
well-known -establishments in Sydney ancVtSTclbourne.-and will consist
of original Oil Paintings, Watercolour i "swings, Engravings, Photo-
graphs, &c. The Art Union will be undeethi supervision of the Hon.
E. Combes, Esq., C.M.G. ; E. L. Mon - t»!iora, Esq., Vict-Prcsidenf;
and E. Du Faur, Esq , Hon. Secretary Academy of Art, Sydney, who
have kindly consented to act as a committee of management in the
feu rests of subso ibers
TH i FOLLOWING IS THE SCi I £! UL.E OF PRIZES-
Frst Prize—A Collectipa of Works of Art—value £5OO
Second ~ • >* £250
Third ~ - . £lOO
Fourth „ •• .. £5O
Ten Prizes, each value £lO £lOO
Fifty Prizes, yich yalue £5 ■■ •• £250
Five Hundred Prizes, each value £1 ■ • ■. £5OO
Five Hundred Prizes, each value 10s. .. £250
'tne. Thousand Priz s each value ss. ■ • • • £250
■" each value 2s. QjL •• £250
Total value £2,500
