

EDWARD FORD-
BY PERMISSION OF LADY FRANKLIN AND
CART. SIR LEOPOLD M’CLINTOCK, R.N., KT., LL.D.
CATALOGUE
FOURTEEN
STEREOSCOPIC SLIDES
OF
Cljc Relics,
OF
Sir |ojm Jfranlvliu’s fejjtbitimt,
Brought home in the “ Fox,” hy Captain
M‘Clintock, in September, 1859.
PHOTOGRAPHED BY LIEUT. CHEYNE, R.N.,
At the United Service Museum, Whitehall, by permission of the
Council of that Institution,
AND PUBLISHED BY HIM AT HIS PRIVATE ADDRESS,
(12, DUNCAN TERRACE, ISLINGTON. N.


F?r 3 2.


BY PERMISSION OF LADY FRANKLIN AND
CAPT. SIR LEOPOLD M’CLINTOCK, R.N., KT., LL.D,
&&BCE2FTXTOB
CATALOGUE
FOURTEEN
STEREOSCOPIC SLIDES
THE RELICS OF
Sir lojm Jroihlm s (S&pjebition,
WITH DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE,
RICE ONE GUINEA,
Or Post free, 225. 6d., Postage by weight being Is. 6d -
Orders, with remittances, will be supplied on
application to J. P. CHEYNE, Lieutenant, R.N.,
42, Duncan Terrace, Islington, London, N.
Post Office Orders to be made payable at Chief
District Office, Lower Street, Islington, N.
PHOTOGRAPHED BY LIEUT. CHEYNE, R.N.,
At the United Service Museum, Whitehall, by permission of the
Council of that Institution,
AND PUBLISHED BY HIM AT HIS PRIVATE ADDRESS,
42, DUNCAN TERRACE, ISLINGTON. N.


F?r 3 Z


BY PERMISSION OF LADY FRANKLIN AND
CAPT. SIR LEOPOLD M’CLINTOCK, R.N., KT., LL.D.
CATALOGUE
FOURTEEN
STEREOSCOPIC SLIDES
OF
Clje |Ulixs,
OP
Sir Jfranlilm s fejjrbitifltt,
Brought home in the “Fox,” hy Captain
M'Cllntock, in September, 1859.
PHOTOGRAPHED BY LIEUT. CHEYNE, R.N.,
At the United Service Museum, Whitehall, hy permission of the
Council of that Institution,
AND PUBLISHED BY HIM AT HIS PRIVATE ADDRESS,
42, DUNCAN TERRACE, ISLINGTON. N,




0) 3i S5/Ff/i%
Xe-5-7 7
Letter from Lady Franklin to Lieut. Cheyne, L.N.
“ 18, Park Place,
“ St. James’s Street,
“January 28th, 1860.
“ Dear Me. Cheyne,
“In reply to your note, I beg
to assure you that I can have no objection to the
publication of your descriptive Catalogue of the
Relics brought home by Captain M'Clintock in
the ‘ Pox,’ nor to the publication of the beautiful
Photographs you have made of them and of the
Record.
“ It gives me much satisfaction that this
work should have been undertaken and worthily
executed by an officer who has himself served with
great credit in three Arctic Expeditions.
“ Sincerely yours,
“JANE PEANKLIN ”




PREFACE.
The first great discoverer of the long sought for
North-west Passage has passed from among us,
and the name of Franklin must, for ages to come,
be revered by every Englishman.
Dying, surrounded by a faithful few, whom he
had carried thus far on a brilliant track of hitherto
unexplored regions, the North-west Passage —in
connexion with his former discoveries on the
northern coast of America—completed, he has left
a name that will spread a soft and sacred lustre
over our land : indeed, we may almost say,
“Franklin lives,” for has he not died only to
spring up afresh and enduringly in the united
hearts of all his countrymen, where his name will
ever be a talisman of enterprise, courage, and
glory!
Could we remove the veil that shrouds in
mystery the fate of those who survived him, what
harrowing scenes would be brought to light! —the
perishing, singly, of man after man, as they became
individually exhausted during their dreary and
hopeless march towards the living world; the still
onward progress of the stronger, who were doomed
to see their more fainting comrades drop, one by


one, without the possibility of affording a helping
hand to save them; the growing knowledge—which
must have slowly but surely stolen upon them like
a dread apparition —that their turn would arrive
next!
And thus must that deadly march have gone
on, until, out of 105 souls, the last man lay down
to die, bringing as it were home, to him, the verifi-
cation of Campbell’s beautiful lines, wherein he
says,—
“ The eclipse of nature spreads my pall, *
The majesty of darkness shall
Receive my parting ghost!
“ Go, sun, while mercy holds me up,
On nature’s awful waste,
To drink this last and bitter cup
Of grief that man shall taste.
Go, tell the night that hides thy face,
Thou saw’st the last of (Franklin’s) race, f
On earth’s sepulchral clod,
The darkening universe defy
To quench his immortality,
Or shake his trust in God!
“ Yes, I shall live again, and shine
In bliss unknown to beams of thine,
By Him recall’d to breath,
Who captive led captivity,
Who robb’d the grave of victory,
And took the sting from death! ”
* In great probability, the last of these heroic men died
at the commencement of winter, when the sun departs for
several weeks from those latitudes.
f Race, —meaning a collective family,—may be applied
here, with regard to Sir John Franklin’s followers, as,
amongst themselves, they were one family, separated from
the rest of the world.


“ It is a remarkable circumstance (says Captain
M'Clintock) that when, in 1830, Sir James Eoss
discovered Point Victory, he named two points of
land, then in sight, Cape Franklin and Cape Jane
Franklin, respectively. Eighteen years afterwards
Franklin’s ships perished within sight of those
headlands.”


A SHORT ABSTRACT
OF THE
VOYAGE OF THE “FOX.”
The number of Government and private expo-
ditions that have been sent out in search of the
missing one, the continued and strenuous efforts
of Lady Franklin—successful at the last, —the
noble way in which the Americans joined the
cause, the generous manner in which French
officers aided, (one of whom —Bellot—lost his life
owing to the disruption of the ice in Wellington
Channel during a heavy gale of wind), —are now
so well known to the country as to need no re-
capitulation here.
Suffice it, then, to glean a few extracts from the
narrative of Captain M'Clintock, who has returned
in safety to England, to reap the reward of
his successful enterprise, bringing with him the
precious Record, and the melancholy Relics of
Franklin’s expedition, and but too well proving
the sad end of those embarked in it.
The steam screw yacht “ Fox,” formerly the
property of Sir Richard Sutton, Bart., was pur-
chased by Lady Franklin from his executors for


£2,000, the expenses of the expedition amounting
altogether to £10,412 19s. She was 177 tons
burthen, and of a build most admirably adapted
for the service she was employed on. Out of the
twenty-five souls composing those who shared in
this expedition, seventeen had previously served in
the Arctic search.
On the Ist July, 1857, the “Fox” left Aber-
deen ; Cape “ Farewell,” the southern extremity
of Greenland, was sighted on the 12th; and on
the 12th August, they arrived in Melville Bay,
mating fast to an iceberg that was aground in 348
feet of water. The great Greenland glacier, which
here takes the place of the coast line, is thus
described by Captain M'Clintock :
“ One cannot at once appreciate the grandeur
of this mighty glacier, extending unbroken for 40
or 50 miles. * * * *
“ Here, on the spot, it does not seem incorrect
to compare the icebergs to mere chippings off its
edge, and the floe ice to the thinnest shavings.
The far-off outline of glacier, seen against the
eastern sky, has a faint tinge of yellow: it is
almost horizontal, and of unknown distance and
elevation. * * * *
“ The glacier serves to remind one at once of
time and of eternity: of time, since we see por-
tions of it break off to drift and melt away; and
of eternity, since its downward march is so ex-
tremely slow, and its augmentations behind so
regular, that no change in its appearance is per-
ceptible from age to age.
“ If even the untaught savages of luxuriant tro-
pical regions regard the earth merely as a temporary
abode, surely all who gaze upon this ice-over


whelmed region, this wide expanse of ‘ terrestrial
wreck,’ must be similarly assured that here ‘ we
have no abiding place.’ * * * *
“ Far within the glacier an occasional mountain
peak protrudes from beneath.”
On the 27th August, the “Fox” was beset
in the pack; and, with the exception of moving a
few yards now and then, remained a helpless fix-
ture, drifting down Baffin’s Bay for the space of
242 days, during which time she drifted a distance
of 1385 statute miles. After several narrow
escapes of total destruction from continued dis-
ruptions of the ice, she was fairly released on the
26th April, 1858, but not before running a gauntlet
at the pack edge (where the open sea meets the
continuous ice), such as, to use Captain M'Clin-
tock’s words nearly, “ might have sufficed to turn
their heads grey in a few hours.” None but
those who know what Arctic Navigation is can
appreciate such a dangerous scene.
Captain M’ Clin took, —to whom great difficulties
served only as spurs to increased energies, and (if
possible) a more set determination to accomplish his
important task, —no sooner got clear of the pack,
than, after getting a few necessaries in a Greenland
port, turned the “ Fox’s ” head to the Northward
again, and, after much anxious work, succeeded in
reaching Beechy Island, the first winter quarters of
Sir John Franklin, on the 11th August, where
he erected a monument that had been sent out
by Lady Franklin, to the memory of Sir John
and his followers. On the 21st, the “Fox”


arrived at Bellot Strait, down Prince Eegent’s
inlet, after having first attempted the Peel
Strait, but not succeeding in forcing either
passage, they were compelled to take up their
winter quarters in Port Kenedy, at the entrance
of Bellot Straits.
On the Ist March, 1859, while travelling, and
being at the time encamped about the position of
the magnetic pole, Captain M’Clintock fell in with
the Boothian Esquimaux, who, numbering about
forty-five souls, were found to have in their
possession some of the relics of Eranklin’s Expe-
dition, consisting of silver spoons, forks, &c.,
which were immediately purchased. From these
natives, information was obtained that a three
masted ship had been crushed by the ice, and
sunk in the sea, to the west of King William’s
Island, but that all the people landed safely; this
information they had received from other Esqui-
maux, but they said, “ they had themselves seen
the bones of the white men upon the island where
they died, though some were buried,”
These natives erected a snow hut for Captain
M’Clintock’s' party, 8 feet in diameter, and 5£ feet
in height, for which they received the payment of
a needle each. On the 20th April this party of
natives gave further information that a second
ship had been crushed by the ice, but instead of
sinking, was forced on shore, and that from her
they had obtained most of their wood, &c. They
stated also, that the body of a man was found on
board the ship ; that it was in the fall of the year
when the ships were destroyed ; that all the white


people went away to the “ large river” (Back’s
Fish .River), taking boats with them; and that in
the following winter their bones were found there.
On the 7th May, Esquimaux of King William’s
Island were fallen in with, from them Captain
M’Clintock purchased six pieces of silver plate,
bearing the crest or initials of Franklin, Crozier>
Fairholme, and McDonald ; the spoons and forks
were sold for four needles each. They stated it to
be five days journey to the wreck (which was on
the western coast of King William’s Land), that
very little remained of it; they had burned the
masts through in order to get them down ; there
were many books, but they had long ago been
destroyed by the weather. One woman said that
many of the white men dropped by the way, as
they went to the “ Great Riverthat some were
buried and some not; they had discovered their
bodies during the winter following.
On the 26th May, Captain M’Clintock dis-
covered a skeleton (which is described after the
contents of No. 3 case of relics).
In the same month, Lieutenant Hobson dis-
covered a deserted boat, and the important Frank-
lin Record, of which Captain M’Clintock got
information in a note left at the cairn by Lieutenant
Hobson;
“ The record speaks for itself, but the
writer in his haste made a mistake with regard to
the date of the ship’s wintering at Beechy Island,
since they passed their winter at that place in
in 1845-6, instead of 1846-7, as is proved by the
internal evidence of the Record itself.”


Captain M’Clintock says:
“We find that, after the last intelligence
of Sir John Franklin was received by us (bearing
date of July 1845) from the Whalers in Mel-
ville Bay, his Expedition passed on to Lan-
caster Sound, and entered Wellington Chan-
nel, of which the Southern entrance had been
discovered by Sir Edward Parry, in 1819. The
‘ Erebus ’ and ‘ Terror ’ sailed up that strait for
one hundred and fifty miles, and reached in the
autumn of 1845, the same latitude as was attaind,
eight years subsequently by H. M. S. ‘Assistance ’
and ‘ Pioneer.’ Sir John Franklin’s Expedition,
having accomplished this examination, returned
southward from latitude 77 deg. north, which is
at the head of Wellington Channel, and re-entered
Barrow’s Strait by a New Channel between Bath-
urst and Cornwallis Islands.
“Seldom has such an amount of success been
accorded to an Arctic Navigator in a single season ;
and when the ‘ Erebus ’ and ‘ Terror ’ were secured
at Beechy Island for the coming winter of 1845-6 j
the results of their first years labour must have
been most cheering. These results were the ex-
ploration of Wellington and Queen’s Channel, and
the addition to our charts of the extensive lands
on either hand. In 1846, they proceeded to the
south-west, and eventually reached within twelve
miles of the north extreme of King William’s
Land, when their progress was arrested by the
approaching winter of 1846-7. That winter appears
to have passed without any serious loss of life;
and when in the spring Lieutenant Gore leaves
with a party for some especial purpose, and very
probably to connect the unknown coast-line of
King William’s Land between Point Victory and
Cape Herschel, those on board the * Erebus ’ and


‘Terror ’ were ‘ all well,’ and the gallant Franklin
still commanded.
“ But, alas! round the margin of the paper
upon which Lieutenant Gore, in 1847, wrote
these words of hope and promise, another hand
had subsequently written the following words :
“ ‘April 25, 1848.—H. M. Ships “ Terror ” and
“Erebus” were deserted on the 22nd April, 5
leagues N.N.W. of this, having been beset since
12th September, 1846. The officers and crews,
consisting of 105 souls, under the command of
Captain F. E. M. Crozier, landed here in lat.
69 deg. 37 min. 42. sec. N., long. 98 deg. 41 sec.
W. Sir John Franklin died on the 11th June,
1847; and the total loss by deaths in the expe-
dition has been to this date, 9 officers, and 15
men.
“ ‘ (Signed) JAMES FITZJAMES,
“ ‘ Captain, H. M. S. “ Erebus.”
“‘(Signed) F. E. M. CEOSIEE,
“ ‘ Captain and Senior Officer.
“ ‘ And start (on) to-morrow, 26th, for Back’s
Fish Eiver.’
“This marginal information was evidently writ-
ten by Captain Fitzjames, excepting only the note
stating when and where they were going, which
was added by Captain Crozier.
“ The marginal information shows that Com-
mander Gore had also died.
“In the short space of twelve months how
mournful had become the history of Franklin’s
Expedition; how changed from the cheerful
‘all well’ of Graham Gore! The spring of 1847
found them within 90 miles of the known sea off
the coast of America; and to men who had already
in two seasons sailed over 500 miles of previously


unexplored waters, how confident must they then
have felt that that forthcoming navigable season
of 1817 would see their ships pass over so short
an intervening space.
“It was ruled otherwise. Within a month after
Lieutenant Gore placed the record on Point Vic-
tory, the much loved leader of the expedition,
Sir John Franklin, was dead ; and the following
spring found Captain Crozier, upon whom the
command had devolved, at King William’s Land,
endeavouring to save his starving men, 105 souls
in all, from a terrible death by retreating to the
Hudson’s Bay territories, up the Back or Great
Fish River.
“A sad tale was never told in fewer words.
There is something deeply touching in their extreme
simplicity, and they show in the strongest manner
that both the leaders of this retreating party were
actuated by the loftiest sense of duty, and met
with calmness and decision the fearful alternative
of a last bold struggle for life, rather than perish
without effort on board their ships; for we well
know that the “Erebus ” and “ Terror” -were only
provisioned up to July, 1848. * * * #
Lieutenant Hobson’s note told me that he found
quantities of clothing and articles of all kinds
lying about the cairn, as if these men, aware that
they were retreating for their lives, had there
abandoned everything which they considered
superfluous.”
On the 30th May, Captain M'Clintock en-
camped alongside a large boat, that had been
discovered a few days previously by Lieutenant
Hobson.
A vast quantity of tattered clothing was lying
in her. * * * This boat had been


evidently equipped with the utmost care, for the
ascent of the Great Fish Eiver. * * *
She was mounted up on a strong sledge. The total
weight of boat and sledge may be taken at
1400 lbs., the boat alone weighing about from 600
to 700 lbs. Captain M'Clintock says, in describing
the boat:
“ But all these were after observations;
there was that in the boat which transfixed us
with awe. It was portions of two human skele-
tons. One was that of a slight, young person ; the
other of a large, strongly made, middle-aged man.
The former was found in the bow of the boat, but in
too much disturbed a state to enable Hobson to
judge whether the sufferer had died there; large
and powerful animals, probably wolves, had
destroyed much of this skeleton, which may have
been that of an officer. * * * The
other skeleton was in a more perfect state, and
was enveloped in clothes and furs: it lay across
the boat, under the after thwart. Close beside it
were found five watches ; and there were two
double-barreled guns—one barrel in each loaded
and cocked—standing muzzle upwards against the
boat’s side.”
On the 19th June, Captain M'Clintock re-
turned on board the “ Fox,” and the other
travelling parties, under Captain Young and
Lieutenant Hobson, returned respectively on the
28th and the 14th June. On the 10th August,
the “ Fox ” left Port Kenedy, her winter quarters,
leaving two of their shipmates buried there,
(these being the engineer and engine driver,
Captain M'Clintock was obliged to manage the
engine himself,) passed Cape Farewell on the 10th


September, and arrived in dock at Blackwall on
the 23rd of the same month.
The extent of new coast line explored by
Captain Young amounts to 380 miles, whilst that
discovered by Captain M'Clintock and Lieutenant
Hobson amounted to nearly 420 miles, making a
total of 800 geographical miles added to the
charts.


CATALOGUE
OF
Cjr,e Jfranhlht §Ulus,
No. i
Found in the Boat with the two Skeletons.
Two double barrel guns, one barrel in each is
loaded, they were found in the after part of the
boat, standing muzzle upwards, and close against
one of the skeletons.
Found at Boss Cairn, Point Victory.
A medicine chest, containing 25 small bottles,
canister of pills, ointment, plaster, oiled silk, &c.
A circular brass plate, broken out of a wooden
gun case, and engraved 0. H. Osmer, E.N.
The field glass, and german-silver top of a
2 foot telescope.
A 6 inch double frame sextant, on which the
owner’s name is engraved, Frederick Hornby, E.N.
A 6 inch dip circle, by Eobinson, marked
I. 22.
Box for dipping needle.


Found at Northern Cairn, near Cape Felix.
A small apparatus for cooking, and a few
brimstone matches, also a tea canister.
No. 2.
Found at the Northern Cairn, near
Cape Felix.
Fragments of a boat’s ensign, the only British
flag recovered from the expedition.
No. 3.
Found lying about the Skeleton, 9 miles
east of Cape Herschel.
The tie of a black silk neckerchief, fragments
of a double-breasted blue cloth waistcoat, with
covered silk buttons and edged with braid, a scrap
of a coloured cotton shirt, silk covered buttons of
blue cloth great coat, a small clothes brush, a
horn pocket-comb.
Found on the east side of Montreal Island.
Part of the rim of some strong copper case,
a piece of iron hoop, two pieces of flat iron, an
iron hook bolt, and a piece of sheet copper.
The finding of the first-mentioned articles
about the skeleton is thus described by Captain
M‘Clintock :
“ Shortly after midnight of the 25th May, when
slowly walking along a gravel ridge, near the beach,
which the winds kept partially bare of snow, I came
upon a human skeleton, partially exposed, with


here and there a few fragments of clothing appear-
ing through the snow. The skeleton, now perfectly
bleached, was lying upon its face, the limbs and
smaller bones either dissevered, or gnawed away
by small animals. * * * The substance
of that which we gleaned upon the spot may
thus be summed up :
“ This victim was a young man, slightly built,
and perhaps above the common height, the dress
appeared to be that of a steward, or officer’s
servant. * * * In every particular
the dress confirmed our conjectures as to his rank
or office in the late expedition, —the blue jacket
with slashed sleeves and braided edging, and the
pilot cloth great coat with plain covered buttons.
We found also a clothes brush near, and a horn
pocket-comb.
“ This poor man seems to have selected the bare
ridge top, as affording the least tiresome walking,
and to have fallen upon his face in the position
in which we found him.
“ It was a melancholy truth that the old woman
spoke when she said * they fell down and died as
they walked along.’ ”
No. 4.
Found in the Boat.
A small Prayer Book ; cover of a small book
of Family Prayers ; Christian Melodies, an in-
scription within the cover to “ G.G.” (Graham
Gore ?) ; Yicar of Wakefield ; a small Bible, inter-
lined in many places, and with numerous refer-
ences within in the margin; a New Testament in
the French language.


No. 5.
Found in the Boat.
A small pair of scissors rolled up in blank
paper, and to which adheres a printed government
paper, such as an officer’s warrant or appoint-
ment ; a small bead purse ; apiece of sealing wax;
German-silver stopper of a pocket flask ; a brass
match box ; a small tin cylinder, probably made
to hold lucifer matches ; a piece of canvas ; cover
of a Testament; part of a grass cigar case; a
piece of scented soap ; a pair of goggles, made of
stout leather and wire gauze instead of glass ; a
seaman’s clasp knife; two small glass stoppered
bottles (full) ; a German-silver pencil-case; a pair
of silver forceps; two spectacle glasses ; a encod-
ing line rolled up on a piece of leather; an awl;
spring hooks of sword belt; a gold-lace band ; a
brass charger for holding two charges of shot; a
glass seal, with symbol of freemasonry; a piece of
thin gold twist or cord; a gimblet; part of a
cherry-stick pipe stem; two table knives, with
white handles, one is marked W. K.; a small
brass pocket compass.
No. 6.
Found in the Boat.
A clay-bowl pipe ; a ball of worsted ; a leather
boot-lace; two pieces of copper; two cases of
needles and thread ; two pieces of handkerchief;
a pair of goggles, having crape instead of glass j a


green crape veil, to protect the eyes from snow-
blindness ; a sailmaker’s palm; ornament of a
marine’s shako.
No. 7.
Found in the Boat.
Two pieces of port fire; roll of waxed twine;
bristles; copper nails ; bullets ; telescopes; wooden
button ; shot, in finger of kid glove; a bayonet
scabbard, altered into a sheath for a knife; a
woollen glove 5 cartridge ; cartridge shot charges ;
shot pouches; flannel; percussion caps; stanchions
9 inches long, for supporting a weather cloth that
was round the boat; piece of canvas ; two packets
of blank cartridge, found in green paper.
No. 8.
Found in the Boat.
Two chronometers, marked “ Parkinson and
Frodsham, 980,” “ Arnold, 2020 three watches ;
eleven silver spoons, and seven silver forks.
“ In the after part of the boat we discovered
eleven large spoons, eleven forks, and four tea-
spoons, all of silver; of these twenty-six pieces of
plate, eight bore Sir John Franklin’s crest, the re-
mainder had the crests or initials of nine different
officers, with the exception of a single fork which
was not marked; of these nine officers, five be-
longed to the ‘Erebus,’ —Gore, Le Vesconte,
Fairholme, Couch, and Goodsir. Three others
belonged to the ‘ Terror,’ —Crozier (a teaspoon
only), Hornby, and Thomas. One of the watches


bore the crest of Mr. Couch of the ‘ Erebus.’
The owner of the unmarked fork was not known ;
nor of three articles having an owl engraved on
them. Captain M'Clintock remarks that the sil-
ver was most likely issued to the men for their
use, as the only means of saving it.”
Block with hook, belonging to boat.
No. 9.
Obtained from the Boothian Esquimaux,
near the Magnetic Pole.
Six spoons and two forks, bearing the crest of
Sir John Franklin; the head of a fish, surrounded
with laurel stems ; silver belonging to Lieutenants
Fairholme and H. Be Yesconte, A. Macdonald,
Assistant Surgeon, and Lieutenant E. Couch
(supposed from the initial letter T and crest a
lion’s head) ; five buttons ; piece of a gold chain ;
a broken piece of silver gilt ornamental work;
handle of a desert knife (by Milikin, Strand) ; a
model of a sledge.
No. 10.
Obtained from the Boothian Esquimaux.
Seven knives made by the Esquimaux out of
materials obtained from the last expedition ; two
files ; arrows, in which wood, iron, or copper had
been used in the construction.


No. 11
The record case ; a 2 foot rule ; two joints of
the cleaning rod of a gun ; a button; a piece of a
brass curtain rod.
Found at the Northern Cairn , near
Cape Felix.
Two pike heads ; some packages of needles ;
metal lid of a powder case ; part of a pair of steel
spectacles ; brass screw, for screwing down lid ;
two eye pieces of sextant tubes ; bungstay of a
marine’s water keg; rib bones of salt pork; two
pieces of white china rimmed with blue.
No. 12.
The Record.
No. 13.
The Yacht “ Fox.”
No. 14.
Captain WGlintock's Portrait.




