

C- y




[From the Proceedings of the Zoological Society op London,
April G, 1875.]
Descriptions of tliree new Species of Australian Birds.
By John Gould, F.R.S., Y.P.Z.S., &c.
Family Psittacid.®.
1. Aprosmictus insignissimus, Gould, P. Z. S. 1874, p. 499.
Head emerald-green, excepting the centre of the crown and a patch
on the nape, these parts being scarlet, the green, forming a narrow
frontal line between the nostrils and the crown ; round the hind neck
a narrow collar of emerald-green ; back, including the mantle and
scapulars, deep grass-green, each feather obscurely edged with darker
colour; lower back and rump shining blue ; upper tail-coverts bright
grass-green; all the tail-feathers above deep grass-green, with in-
distinct narrow bars of darker colour on every one of them ; the
underside of the tail uniform purplish black ; wings green, with a
broad longitudinal patch of yellow; many of these feathers edged
with scarlet, this mark being very distinct and similar to that* seen
in the male of Ptistes ; under wing-coverts greenish blue; inner lining
of quills purplish black, like the lower surface of the tail; under sur-
face of body scarlet, with dashes of bright green on the flanks ;
under tail-coverts green, fringed with scarlet, both mandibles of the
bill bright red as in Ptistes, the tips lighter; legs blackish. Total
length inches, wing 9, tail 7|, tarsus 7 8 .
Hah. Queensland.
At the meeting of this Society held on the 3rd of November 18/4,
Dr. Sclater exhibited a painting of a new Parrot from Queensland on
my behalf, as I was too unwell to attend the meeting: for this bird
I proposed the name of Aprosmictus insignissimus. Since then,
through the kindness of the authorities of the new Zoological Museum
at Brisbane, I have received the actual specimen of this bird, and Dr.
Sclater has again been kind enough to bring the bird before the
notice of the meeting.
As before supposed, this bird is directly intermediate in form
between Aprosmictus and Ptistes. In size it is still larger than the
well-known King Parrakeet ( Aprosmictus scapulatus ), while in co-
loration it is very different, as will be seen by the above description
and measurements taken from the bird itself. That the specimen
was killed before it bad quite completed its plumage is pretty evident
from the incomplete colouring of the crown of the head and nape;
in the other parts no difference is likely to occur.
I take this opportunity of returning my hearty thanks to Mr.
Waller, of Brisbane, and to Mr. Coxen, of the same town, for the
interest they have shown in the matter of this newly discovered bird,
and especially for . the opportunity they have given me of introducing
it to the notice of European ornithologists.
[l]


315 MR. J. GOULD ON NEW AUSTRALIAN BIRDS. [Apr. 6.
2. Cyclopsitta maccoyi, n. sp.
Male. General colour green, the face having all the fantastic
colours of the Harlequin ; on the forehead a band of bright scarlet,
surrounded by cobalt, a shade of the same colour encircling the
latter, narrow above, broader below ; on the cheeks, from the base of
the bill to the tips of the ear-coverts, a hand of scarlet like that on
the forehead; and below this is an obscure band of purplish blue,
gradually fading off into the green of the neck ; flank-feathers tipped
with bright lemon-yellow; quills externally blue, the inner secondaries
green, with the usual tiny patch of scarlet adjoining the back ; tail
green ; under wing-coverts green, the outer ones washed with blue ,
quills blackish below, diagonally crossed near the base with a yellow
band. Total length inches, wing 3|, tail I|, tarsus |.
Female. Differs from the male in wanting the scarlet cheeks: in
other respects similar.
Hah. Rockingham Bay, Queensland.
This pretty little species is quite different from all the Cyclopsitta
known, and finds its allies in C. coxeni and C. diophthahna. It is
one third less in size than C. coxeni, and about equal to 0. dioph-
thahna in dimensions; it is, however, even more beautiful than the
latter in the colours of its face.
I gladly accede to the suggestion of Mr. Waller that this species
should be named after Professor M‘Coy, who has done so much foi
Australian science.
Family Meliphagid^.
3. Ptilotis flavostriata, sp. n.
Head and hind neck dusky blackish, with a distinct shade of
olivaceous on the crown, leaving a pure black patch on each side of
the occiput; hind neck distinctly marked with triangular spots of
dull white; mantle straw-yellow, the bases to the feathers dusky
brown ; scapulars brown, with large triangular whitish spots ; lower
back and rump brown, with dull olive margins to the feathers ; upper
tail-coverts and tail brown, paler at tip, the feathers narrowly mar-
gined with olive ; wing-coverts brown, with large triangular whitish
spots as on the scapulars, the greater series dark brown, tipped with
whitish and margined with whity brown; quills dark brown, externall}
edged with olive and slightly tipped with whitish ; region of the eye
bare and yellow ; the few fe'athers on the ear-coverts hoary ; cheeks
dull olivaceous buff, running into a distinct tuft of bright yellow ;
throat greyish white, washed with olive on the lower part; chest
olivaceous, distinctly streaked with shaft-lines of bright ye ow, t e
breast paler, the feathers being brown with broad triangular longi-
tudinal spots of white; flanks and under tail-coverts light brown,
washed with olive; under wing-coverts yellowish buff; the Jowrr sur-
face of the wings and tail ashy brown, with broad rufous butt mar-
gins to the inner webs. Total length 71 inches, bill wing
tail 3, tarsus
Hah. Rockingham Bay.
[2]




