

DESCRIPTION OF
AND GUIDE TO
JASPER PARK
1 I *3 “32.037 | C A Ki










DESCRIPTION of & GUIDE to
JASPER PARK




DESCRIPTION of & GUIDE to
JASPER PARK
OTTAWA
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
1917




PREFACE
This GUIDE is the outcome of a photographic sur-
vey of the central part of Jasper park executed in 1915
by M. P. Bridgland, Dominion Land Surveyor. The
topographical part of the Guide was written by him and
the historical notes by R. Douglas, Secretary of the Geo-
graphic Board. The illustrations, which are mostly from
the survey photographs, were selected and arranged, and
the book edited by E. Deville, Surveyor General.
The numbers between brackets in the legends of the
illustrations refer to the camera stations of the survey,
marked on the map at the beginning of the Guide.
The map of the Bridgland survey on the 1-62,500
scale, about a mile to an inch, has been published in six
sheets 19 x 22 inches, sold at 15 cents per sheet, or mounted
and' dissected for the pocket at 50 cents per sheet.




CONTENTS
Chapter Page
I LOCATION AND EARLY HISTORY OF THE PARK 13
The Location of the Park . . . David Thompson’s Discovery of the Athabaska Pass
The ambitious plansof John Jacob Astor . . . Alisfortunes of Astoria . . . The Tonquin
Gabriel Franchere, Ross Cox, and Alexander Ross . . . Jasper House . . . David Douglas
the Botanist . . . De Smet, Paul Kane, Milton, and Cheadle ... Sir James Hector
Sir Sandford Fleming . . . Railways through the park.
II GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PARK 29
Beauty of the mountains . . . Vividly coloured lakes . . . Characteristics of Athabaska
river . . . Rapid rise and fall of streams . . . Storekeeper’s narrow escape . . . The
towns of Jasper and Pocahontas . . . Animals . . . Birds . . . Fish . . . Trees and
Plants.
111 TRIPS SOUTH FROM JASPER 39
Oldfort point . . . The Whistlers . . . Mt. Edith Cavell . . . Tonquin valley and Am-
ethyst lakes . . . Athabaska falls.
IV TRIPS WEST FROM JASPER 55
Cabin lake . . . Caledonia lake . . . Dorothy lake . . . Pyramid and Patricia lakes
Snaring river valley . . . Yellowhead pass.
V TRIPS NORTH FROM JASPER 61
Maligne gorge . . . Maligne range . . . Medicine lake . . . Malignelake . . . Jacques
lake . . . Jasper to Pocahontas . . . Snake Indian river and falls.
VI TRIPS FROM POCAHONTAS 73
Snake Indian valley . . . Ronde creek . . . Coronach creek . , . Roche Ronde . . . Roche
a Bosche . . . Moosehorn creek . . . Boule Roche and Ogre gorge . . . Punch Bowl
falls . . . Roche Miette . . . Roche a Perdrix . . . Miette hot springs . . . Fiddle
river . . . Rocky River gorge.
APPENDIX A —Schedule of Trips 83
APPENDIX B—Place-names and heights of Mountains 88
INDEX 93




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Map of the central part of Jasper Park Frontispiece
Page
1. Moose head 13
2. Jasper and the Athabaska valley from the Whistlers 14
3. Entrance to Athabaska pass 15
4. Athabaska and Whirlpool rivers 20
5. Roche Miette and Jasper lake from Alt. Greenock 21
6. Jasper House and Roche Ronde 22
7. Jasper House and Roche Miette 23
8. Fort Edmonton in the time of the fur trade 24
9. On the way to Jasper in the old days 25
10. On the way to Jasper now .... 26
11. Saxifrage 27
12. Bighorn head 29
13. Pyramid lake 30
14. Lake Patricia 31
15. Lake Beauvcrt from Oldfort point 32
16. Superintendent’s residence and offices, Jasper 32
17. Bridge over the Athabaska at Oldfort point 33
18. Superintendent’s residence and offices, Jasper 33
19. Dinner ready? 34
20. Bighorn Sheep 34
21. Goat 35
22. Aloose 35
23. Skunk 36
24. Groundhog 37
25. Porcupine 39
26. Jasper from Oldfort point 40
27. A rest on the way to the Whistlers 41
28. Portal valley from Mt. Tekarra 42
29. Alt. Edith Cavell and Astoria valley 42
30. Alt. Edith Cavell from Chak peak 43
31. Alt. Edith Cavell from Alt. Alaccarib 43
32. Portal Peak 44
33. Circus valley 44
34. Head of Circus valley 45
35. The Portal from Alt. Aquila 45
36. The Portal from Alt. Alaccarib 46
37. Oldhorn mountain and Blackhorn peak from Alt. Alaccarib 46
38. South end of Tonquin valley from Alt. Clitheroe 47
39. The Ramparts and Amethyst lakes from Mt. Clitheroe 47
40. The Ramparts and Tonquin pass from Alt. Clitheroe 48
41. The Ramparts from Alt. Alajestic 48
42. Tonquin valley from Thunderbolt peak 49


Page
43. Mt. Erebus and Eremite glacier 49
44. A glacial stream 50
45. Mt. Fraser from Surprise point 50
46. Dungeon peak from Surprise point 51
47. Amethyst lakes and the Tonquin valley from Surprise point 51
48. The Ramparts and Moat lake from Tonquin hill 52
49. Turret mountain and Mt. Geikie from Tonquin hill 52
50. Barbican peak and the Tonquin pass from Tonquin hill 53
51. The upper valley of the Athabaska 53
52. The Athabaska gorge 54
53. Anemones 54
54. Elk 55
55. Pyramid lake from the top of Pyramid mountain 56
56. The valley of the Athabaska from Mt. Greenock 56
57. Monarch mountain from Mt. Elysium 57
58. South branch of Snaring river from a spur of Mt. Chetamon 57
59. Yellowhead pass 58
60. Clairvaux valley from Mt. Kataka 59
61. White Dryas 60
62. Young Pigeon Hawks 61
63. Lake Beauvert 62
64. On the road to Maligne gorge 62
65. The Maligne gorge 63
66. Maligne river above gorge 64
67. Maligne chalet at the gorge 65
68. Medicine lake from Excelsior mountain 66
69. Medicine lake looking southeast 67
70. The Garonne gorge from Henry House 67
71. Roche Bonhomme from Henry House 68
72. Morro gorge from Snaring river crossing 68
73. Jasper lake from the Palisade 69
74. Snaring river and Mt. Chetamon from the railway crossing 69
75. Chetamon lake 70
76. Roche Jacques from Mt. Esplanade 71
77. South branch of Snake Indian river from Mt. Bistre 71
78. Whitecap and branch of Snake Indian river from Mt. Cumnock 72
79. Goats 72
80. Eagle 73
81. Boule range, looking northeast 74
82. Boule Roche from Bedson ridge 75
83. Boule Roche from the head of Brule lake 75
84. Roche Miette and Pocahontas from Bedson 76
85. Jasper lake from Roche Miette 77
86. Roche a Perdrix, Fiddle range and Ashlar ridge from Roche Miette 78
87. Roche a Perdrix from Bedson ridge 79
88. Fiddle gorge 81
89. Rocky river from Roche Miette 82
90. Goat 82
91. Grouse 83
92. Adder’s Tongue 88
93. Wild Flowers 93


DESCRIPTION of & GUIDE to
JASPER PARK


My life is gliding downwards; It speeds swifter to the day
When it shoots the last dark canon to the Plains of Far-away,
But while its stream is running through the years that are to be,
The mighty voice of Canada will ever call to me.
I shall hear the roar of rivers where the rapids foam and tear,
I shall smell the virgin upland with its balsam-laden air,
And shall dream that I am riding down the winding woody vale,
With the packer and the packhorse on the Athabaska Trail.
I have passed the warden cities at the Eastern water-gate,
Where the hero and the martyr laid the corner-stone of State,
The habitant, courcur-des-bois —and hardy voyageur.
Where lives a breed more strong at need to venture or endure?
I have seen the gorge of Erie where the roaring waters run,
I have crossed the Inland Ocean, lying golden in the sun,
But the last and best and sweetest is the ride by hill and dale,
With the packer and the packhorse on the Athabaska Trail.
I’ll dream again of fields of grain that stretch from sky to sky.
And the little prairie hamlets where the cars go roaring by,
Wooden hamlets as I saw them —noble cities still to be
To girdle stately Canada with gems from sea to sea;
Mother of a mighty manhood, Land of glamour and of hope,
From the eastward sea-swept Islands to the sunny Western slope,
Ever more my heart is with you, ever more till life shall fail,
I’ll be out with pack and packer on the Athabaska Trail.
ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE
Jasper park, Alberta, June 18, 1914


Moose Head
CHAPTER I
LOCATION AND EARLY HISTORY OF THE PARK
Location of the park . . . David Thompson’s discovery of the Athabaska pass . . . John Jacob
Astor’s ambitious plans . . . Misfortunes of Astoria . . . The Tonquin . . . Gabriel Franchère,
Ross Cox and Alexander Ross . . . Jasper House . . . David Douglas the botanist . . . De Smet,
Paul Kane, Milton and Cheadle . . . Sir James Hector . . . Sir Sandford Fleming . . . Railways
through the park
Jasper park is historic ground. More stirring scenes in the upbuilding of Canada
have been staged in it than in any other part of the Rockies.
Men, women and children, representing a score of nationalities, have threaded
its trails, and their ghosts still linger in the shadows, their influence still radiates
in the colours of mountain, valley and stream.
Jasper park has a literature of its own. Among those who have left us the nar-
rative of their experiences within its bounds are David Thompson, the fur trader,
and one of the greatest geographers of the world; Gabriel Franchere, Ross Cox
and Alexander Ross, participants in John Jacob Astor’s attempt to monopolize
the fur-trade; David Douglas, the unwearied botanist, who met an untimely death
in the Sandwich islands; Edward Ermatinger, the young trader; Pierre Jean De
Smet, the übiquitous Belgian missionary to the Indians; Sir James Hector, the
explorer, most accurate of observers; Dr. Wm. Cheadle, first of the tourists; and
Principal Grant, of Queen’s University, seeking a route for a transcontinental
railway.
The town of Jasper, which is the capital of this mountainous kingdom, lies about
200 miles west of Edmonton, just below the confluence of Aliette river with the
Athabaska, the Miette coming from Yellowhead pass to the west, and the Atha-
baska from the glaciers to the south, to pursue its way in a northeasterly direction
to the plains of Alberta and the Arctic ocean.
Four thousand four hundred miles of this region extending to the divide, the
western boundary of Alberta, constitute Jasper park, one of the great playgrounds
of the Dominion. To-day the tourist can reach the heart of it from Edmonton by


either of the two transcontinental railways in nine or ten hours. What a contrast
to that pioneer journey, in 1810, of David Thompson struggling dauntlessly along
with a despondent following, in the depth of winter. 6 or 8 miles a day. reducing
the loads of his dogs, and abandoning even his tent that he might make any pro-
gress at all.
Pyramid Mt.
Mt. Hawk
Mt. Gargoyle.
Morro Pk.
Colin Mt.
Roche Bonhomme
Jasper and the Athabaska Valley
From the Whistlers (25)
Jasper in foreground. Miette river on extreme right. Beauvert, Trefoil. Annette and Edith lakes on the right of the Atha-
baska. Pyramid and Patricia lakes on the left
Jasper park was set aside for public use in 1907. Its present boundaries were
fixed in 1914.
The main river in the park is the Athabaska, which throughout flows in a gen-
eral northerly direction. Some of the finest Alpine scenery of the American con-
tinent is to be found at its head waters. Above Jasper its course is thirty to thirty-
five degrees west of north, but almost due north till near Jasper lake and from
there the general trend of the valley is about twenty-five degrees to the east. The
main tributaries above Jasper are Whirlpool, Astoria and Miette rivers, all entering
on the left side. Miette river, which enters about a mile above the town, is sup-
posed to have at one time drained to both Fraser river and Athabaska river; but
at present its only channel is on the eastern slope of the divide. P'our miles below
Jasper, Maligne river enters from the southeast following a course parallel to the
main valley of the upper Athabaska, and about ten miles below this Snaring river
joins, flowing from a narrow gap in the mountains to the west. Farther north the
streams enter in pairs from opposite sides of the valley forming great trench-like
depressions. The greatest trench is that formed by the valleys of Rocky river and
Snake Indian river, the two largest tributaries of the Athabaska. These rivers
enter the main stream near Flawes, the former from the southeast and the latter
from the northwest. Similar parallel depressions on a smaller scale are formed by


the valleys of Fiddle river and Mooschorn creek, near Pocahontas, and by the
valleys of Jacques creek and Vine creek, near Interlaken.
The events which have shaped the destiny of the park are the discovery of the
Athabaska pass, in 1811, and the Yellowhead pass, about 1826. The former
opened a new route to the trading posts of the Columbia, and twice a year, for many
a season, the mountains resounded with the passage of the brigades with goods and
passengers, between the Pacific and Hudson bay, moving with clock-like regularity.
Sir James Hector says: —
In March, when the snow had acquired a crust, the express, with letters and accounts, started from
Edmonton and continued on to the boat encampment, to which place, by the time they had arrived,
owing to the earlier spring on the west side of the mountain, the brigade of boats had ascended from
Vancouver. The mail from the western department was then exchanged, and taken back to Edmonton,
and thence to Norway House, along with the Jasper House furs.
Entrance to the Athabaska Pass
Looking south from a shoulder of Mt. Edith Cavell (1)
Whirlpool river in foreground
The second time of communication
was in autumn, after the Saskatchewan
brigade returned to Edmonton, in the
beginning of September, upon which
the officers and men bound for the
western department, taking with them
the subsidy of otter skins the Company
annually paid the Russian Government
for the rent of the N. W. coast, crossed
the portage to Fort Assiniboinc, then
ascended the Athabaska in boats to
Jasper pack-horses, reached
the boat encampment and then de-
scended the Columbia to Vancouver,
where they arrived generally about the first of November. The journey from York Factory or
Hudson bay to the Pacific coast by this route generally occupied three and a half months, and in-
volved an amount of harship and toil that cannot be appreciated by those who have not seen boat
travelling in these territories.
Three and a half months from Hudson bay to the Pacific coast was rapid travel-
ling at the time and “express” was an appropriate name.
The Yellowhead pass, with the development of New Caledonia, became, from
its low altitude, of great value as a means of transport for the heavy loads of
dressed leather necessary for making tents, mocassins, bags and pack cords for
the carrying service west of the mountains where moose and deer, and consequently
leather supplies, were scarce. It was, indeed, long known as the Leather pass,
though the Peace River pass was first used for this traffic and appears to have been


again used largely in preference to the Yellowhead pass as the trade grew. The
merits of the Yellowhead pass only received proper recognition with the coming of
the raihvays.
David Thompson, whose pioneer trip has been briefly mentioned, is one of the
great figures in Canadian history. Indeed, a -writer, perhaps himself a Scot, has
asserted that Thompson was a Scotsman, and expatiated on the honour he has
brought to the race. Let it be stated that Thompson was born in London, England,
and that both his parents were Welsh, the family name being originally Thomas.
It was in 1797, at the age of 27, that finding the Hudson’s Bay Company opposed
to his making surveys and trading at the same time, Thompson left its service and
entered that of the “Company of the Merchants from Canada” which, in the
words of Thompson’s biographer, having “much larger and more progressive ideas
was anxious to obtain some accurate knowledge of the extent and character of the
country in which it was carrying on its business.” This was the North West Com-
pany of such daring spirits as Sir Alexander Mackenzie who reached the Arctic
ocean in 1789 by the Mackenzie river and crossed overland to the Pacific in 1793,
and of Simon Fraser who explored the Fraser river from Fort George to its mouth
in 1808.
In 1806, two years after the North Westers had decided to extend their trade
to the country west of the Rockies, the region which is now British Columbia,
Idaho, Washington, Oregon and western Montana, Thompson was sent west to the
North Saskatchewan with considerable powers, and for the next few years he
travelled to and fro through Howse pass, establishing posts, which Duncan Me
Gillivray had essayed to do in 1801, doubtless crossing the same pass. Thompson
was on his usual journey, in the fall of 1810, when he was turned back by the war-
like Piegan Indians of the plains, who, rankling under a severe defeat by the Flat-
heads of the mountains, were determined the traders should supply their foes
with no more munitions. Alex. Henry the younger tells the story thus; —
The first severe check the Piegans ever received from the nations of the waters of the Columbia
was In the summer of 1810, when they met the Flatheads and others marching to the plains in search of
buffalo. The meeting was so sudden and unexpected that the Piegans could not avoid giving battle.
They fought with great courage nearly all day, until the Piegans had expended their ammunition and
been reduced to defend themselves with stones. A small rising ground which divided the two contend-
ing parties enabled them to come to close quarters. At last, the Piegans were obliged to retreat, leaving
16 of their warriors dead upon the field. This defeat exasperated the Piegans against us for strength-
ening their enemies by supplying them with arms and ammunition. They fain would wreck their venge-
ance upon us, but dread the consequences as it would deprive them in future of arms and ammunition,
tobacco, and above all, their favourite liquor, high wine.
The Indian hostility caused the Hudson’s Bay Company to drop out of the west-
ern trade in 1811, but the North Westers were not to be stopped in this fashion.
Thompson altered his route to the north in an endeavour to cross the mountains
by the head waters of the Athabaska river, “a route,” says Alex. Henry, “by which
a party of Nepisangues (Nipissings) and freemen 1 passed a few years ago.”
1 A freeman was the name applied to a man who had left the Company’s service and had since tented about like the
Indians, trading skins and furs.


Striking the Athabaska a short distance below Roundcroft, he crossed the river
and continued along its banks to Brule lake where on an island they came upon
an old hunter’s hut, small, very dirty, without any windows, and with no grass in
the vicinity for the horses. They moved on to a better camp-ground, five miles
north of it, at “a small fountain of water among the pines and aspens, with plenty
of grass for the horses,” where they remained from December 4 to December 29,
preparing for the trip across the mountains.
Having secured provisions by hunting and made snow-shoes and sleds, Thomp-
son sent Wm. Henry back to Rocky Mountain House, on the North Saskatchewan,
with most of the horses, and set out on the final dash across the mountains to the
Columbia river, with a party of thirteen.
Thompson’s journal continues the story thus: —
January 5. Thermometer, —26 very cold. Having secured the goods and provisions we could not
take with us, by 11 a. m. set off with eight sleds, to each two dogs, with goods and provisions to cross
the mountains, and three horses to assist us as far as the depth of the snow will permit. . . .
January 6. We came to the last grass for the horses in marshes and along small ponds, where a herd
of bisons had lately been feeding; and here we left the horses poor and tired, and notwithstanding the
bitter cold, (they) lived through the winter, yet they have only a clothing of close hair, short and with-
out any fur.
This would be, at any rate, as far up the river as the prairie de la Vache. Thomp-
son proceeds: —
January 7. Continuing our journey, in the afternoon we came on the track of a large animal, the
snow about six inches deep on the ice; I measured it; four large toes each of four inches in length to each
a short claw; the ball of the foot sunk three inches lower than the toes, the hinder part of the foot did
not mark well, the length fourteen inches, by eight inches in breadth, walking from north to south,
and having passed about six hours. We were in no humour to follow him; the men and Indians would
have it to be a young mammoth and I held it to be the track of a large grizzled bear. . . .
Thompson reverts to this subject of a monster of prehistoric size at a later stage
of his journal. The Indians had an unshakeable belief in Jasper park being the
haunt of this mammoth.
January 8. A line day. We marched ten miles, and as we advance we feel the mild weather from the
Pacific Ocean.
January 9. Thermometer, —32. SE wind and snowed all day which made hauling very bad. We
could proceed only about four miles. . . .
January 10. Thermometer, —16. A day of snow and southerly gale of wind, the afternoon fine, the
view now before us was an ascent of deep snow, in all appearance to the height of land between the At-
lantic and Pacific Oceans, it was to me a most exhilarating sight, but to my uneducated men a dreadful
sight. They had no scientific object in view; our guide Thomas told us that although we could barely
find wood to make a fire, we must now provide wood to pass the following night on the height of the
defile we were in, and which we had to follow; my men were the most hardy that could be picked out
of a hundred brave hardy men, but the scene of desolation before us was dreadful, and I knew it, a
heavy gale of wind much more a mountain storm would have burled us beneath it, but thank God the
weather was fine. . . . When night came we had only wood to make a bottom, and on this to lay
wherewith to make a small fire, which soon burnt out and in this exposed situation we passed the rest
of the long night without a fire and part of my men had strong feelings of personal-insecurity; on our
right about one third of a mile from us lay an enormous glacier. . . . My men were not at their ease,
yet when night came they admired the brilliancy of the stars, and as one of them said, he thought he
could almost touch them with his hand; as usual, when the fire was made I set off to examine the country
before us, and found we had now to descend the west side of the mountains; I returned and found


part of my men with a pole of twenty feet in length boring the snow to line! the bottom; I told them
while we had good snow shoes it was no matter to us whether the snow was ten or one hundred feet
deep. . . . Many reflections came to my mind; a new world was in a manner before me. and my ob-
ject was to be at the Pacific Ocean before the month of August, how were we to find provisions, and how
many men would remain with me, for they were dispirited; amidst various thoughts I fell asleep on
my bed of snow.
On one of his later trips Thompson found their old camp ground covered by an
avalanche.
Leaving the head of Whirlpool river, the party proceeded down Wood river to
the big bend of the Columbia, where they spent the remainder of the winter build-
ing a canoe for the explorations of the coming spring, events recorded by the names
Boat Encampment and Canoe river.
Wm. Henry crossed the Athabaska pass with supplies in August of this year,
and met Thompson, who had been expecting him, near the mouth of Canoe river
early in September.
Henry had not brought everything with him, and Thompson crossed the mount-
ains for what had been left behind, reaching Henry’s camp on October 4. He
records its situation as lat. 52° S3' 24", long. 118° 35'.
In May, 1812, he again recrossed the Athabaska pass with 120 packs of furs for
the Montreal market, reaching Wm. Henry’s camp on May 11. Henry had by this
time built a house, recorded as being in lat. 52° 55' 16", apparently the Old Fort
and Henry House referred to by subsequent writers as being opposite the present
town of Jasper. Thompson proceeded to Montreal, and never again returned to
the scene of his early explorations.
While David Thompson was fighting his way up the Athabaska, John Jacob
Astor, of New York, in the pursuit of a gigantic scheme for a fur trade monopolv
that would extend from the Great Lakes to the Pacific coast and thence by wav of
the Sandwich islands to China, had despatched a ship, the Tonquin, to plant at
the mouth of the Columbia a trading post, which he hoped would serve as a central
depot and form in time the nucleus of a powerful state.
The first published account of a trip through Jasper park was written by one
of those associated with this ambitious enterprise, which a series of disasters was
to frustrate. This is the “Voyage a la cote du Nord-Ouest de I’Amerique Septentrio-
nale,” printed at Montreal in 1820. Its author, Gabriel Franchere, was one of the
party partially recruited in Montreal among the North-Westers, who sailed from
New York in 1810 on the Tonquin, and founded Astoria in March 1811, an
event, says Washington Irving in his well-known book, “Astoria,” which caused
“a sensation to the most remote parts of the vast wilderness beyond the
mountains.”
The ensuing three years were to be full of sensations. Astoria had its first one
on July 15, at one o’clock in the afternoon, when a canoe was seen coming down
the river, manned by nine men. The boat drew nearer, and soon the British flag
was discerned. A few minutes later one of the occupants stepped on land and
announced himself as David Thompson of the North West Co. The consternation


of the Astorians, seeing competition coming from the direction in which it was
least expected, may well be imagined. Duncan McDougall, who was in charge at
Astoria and was an old North Wester, received Thompson with a cordiality which
was not altogether pleasing to the rest of Astor’s men. Thompson, who, apparently,
was not much impressed by the strength of this rival establishment, had come on a
reconnoitering expedition, after examining the possibilities of the upper waters of
the river and taking formal possession for Great Britain of a site for a trading post
at the confluence of Snake and Columbia rivers.
Astor’s plans were carefully laid, but he was not well served by his associates.
Failure to follow instructions not to permit more than a few natives on the ship
at a time brought about the loss of the Tonquin. When on a trading voyage to
Clayoquot sound, it was boarded by natives who massacred the crew save one man
who managed to set fire to the powder magazine and destroyed both himself and
his enemies. First of those on the ship to be killed was Alexander McKay, the
trading officer, who was Sir Alexander Mackenzie’s companion on his overland
trip to the Pacific ocean in 1793.
Disobedience of orders by the captain of the second annual ship, the Beaver,
(on which Ross Cox sailed as a clerk) took him to China instead of Astoria. The
result was that when the war of 1812 broke out, McDougall did not know what to do.
He feared the Beaver had met the fate of the Tonquin and he abandoned all hope
of reinforcements and supplies, which, indeed, had been sent from New York on
the Lark, in March, 1813, only to be lost in the wreck of that vessel at the Sand-
wich islands. Finally he capitulated, in October, 1813, to the North Westers,
“selling out Mr. Astor at about 40 cents on the dollar.” The purchase was negoti-
ated for the buyers by John George McTavish who had come overland, and who
by a few days forestalled a British man-of-war, which arrived to find the British
flag flying, and to hear that Astoria was now Fort George. Had it not been for this
“nefarious transaction,” as Elliott Coues calls it, Astor would have lost everything.
Several of the clerks of Astor’s company returned home overland by the Atha-
baska pass, among their number being Franchere, Ross Cox and Alexander Ross,
all of whom have left narratives of the journey.
There were 76 men, exclusive of their families, in the brigade with which Franchere
travelled east, in 1814 —Scotsmen, French Canadians, Halfbreeds, Iroquois,
Chinooks, Hawaiians, with their women and children, an extraordinary collection
of human beings.
This crowd on the march or wading the icy waters of the “Grande Traverse”
of the Athabaska, must have presented a curious scene.
Franchere was in the fifth of the ten canoes in which the journey to the Boat
Encampment wag made. Then starting from the summit of the Athabaska pass,
the route descended along the head waters of the Whirlpool river, the riviere du
Trou or Hole river of those days, so called from a deep hole in the Athabaska
near its mouth. The “campement de Fusil” “Gun encampment” was the first
resting place. Farther on was the “Grande batture” and then “campement


cT Orignal” or “Moose encampment,” where horses usually met the party. Pro-
ceeding, the brigade arrived at “la Grande traverse” or “la traverse du Trou”
where the Athabaska was forded, often not without difficulty and danger. The
route continued on the east side of the Athabaska past the prairie de la Vache to
the Old Fort, opposite the mouth of the Miette river, where canoes were waiting.
Hardisty Ck.
Mt. Hardisty
Mt. Kerkeslin
Athabaska and Whirlpool Rivers
From a shoulder of Mt. Edith Cavell (1). The “traverse du trou” was somewhere about here
Franchere reached the Old Fort on May 17. It was beautiful for situation sur-
rounded with prairie and woodland; but the house had been abandoned by the
North Westers four or five years previously. Franchere’s words are; —
Nous parvinmes tous a une vieille maison que la Compagnie du N. 0. avait fait construire autrefois,
mais qu’elle avait abandonnee depuis quatre ou cinq ans. Le site de cette maison est on ne peut plus
charmant; il suffit de dire qu’elle est batie sur une des rives de la jolie riviere Athabaska, et est entouree
de riantes et vertes prairies et de bosquets superbes.
Franchere viewing these fair fields in the springtime, thought it a pity there was
no one there to admire them. To-day they form the site of Jasper.
This uninhabited house is also mentioned by Ross Cox, who returned east in the
spring of 1817, in charge of a brigade of 86 Pacific Fur Company people, which
included Duncan McDougall. Fie describes it as built as a hunting lodge for trap-
pers, but abandoned owing to scarcity of provisions. He gives its latitude as 52°
53' 10".
On May 19, Franchere and his companions having abandoned their canoe,
which was leaking, overtook John McDonald, of Garth, who had set out in charge
of the first canoe of the brigade, at a post which McDonald calls “Jasper Haw’s
House.” The post, which was on the west shore of Brule lake, is described by
Franchere as being in the middle of a wood and almost everywhere surrounded by
steep rocks. A Mr. Decoigne was in charge.


Ross Cox describes the building as a miserable concern of rough logs, with only
three apartments, but scrupulously clean inside. An old clerk, Jasper Hawes, was
in charge. He gives the latitude as 53° 18' 40".
Some distance below Brule lake, on May 25, two of Franchere’s companions
were drowned in the rapids, Olivier Roy Lapensee and Andre Belanger. Only
Lapensee’s body was recovered, and over his grave Franchere erected a wooden
cross, first cutting an inscription on it.
Roche Miette and Jasper Lake from Mt. Greenock (63)
Rocky river below Roche Miette. Talbot lake beyond Jasper lake. Jasper House was on the extreme left of the view
Alexander Ross, in 1825, found difficulty in the same region. He writes: —
From Jasper’s House, the river widens and becomes larger; the current strong, and rapids frequent.
Their appearance admonished us to proceed with great caution; yet, with all our care, we broke one of
our canoes, and before we could get to shore our bark was half filled. Ten minutes delay, and we were
again in the water, but had not gone far before a second disaster sent us ashore. At this place a wooden
cross was stuck up in the edge of the woods, and on examining it I found it marked the grave of one of
the old Tonquin adventurers. . . . On it was cut, in still legible characters “Olivie Lapensie, from Lach-
ine, drowned here in May 1814.”
Ross crossed the Athabaska pass with Sir George Simpson. The North West
Company and the Hudson’s Bay Company had amalgamated four years previously
under the title of the Hudson’s Bay Company, and young George Simpson had
been appointed Governor. Ross notes that a small circular basin of water at the
summit, twenty yards in diameter is dignified with the name of the “Committee’s
Punch Bowl,” in honour of which the Governor treated them to a bottle of wine
as they had “neither time nor convenience to make a bowl of punch, although a
glass of it would have been very acceptable.” “It is,” he adds, “a tribute always
paid to this place when a nabob of the fur trade passes by.”
Ross thus deStribes the arrival at the Old Fort; —
On approaching this establishment, situated under the brow of the mountain ridge, we had antici-
pated a gloomy place; but the very reverse was the case. We advanced, from the water’s edge, up an
inclined plane, some two or three hundred yards in length smooth as a bowling green, and skirted on
each side by regular rows of trees and shrubs, the whole presenting the appearance of an avenue leading


to some great man’s castle, which had a very pleasing effect. Here, however, we found no lordly dwel-
lings, but a neat little group of wood huts suited to the climate of the country, rendered comfortable
and filled with cheerful and happy inmates; and what gave to the place a cheering aspect was the young
grass forming a pleasing contrast to the snow-clad heights around. Here my old friend Joseph Felix
Larocquc, Esq., an old North-wester, and formerly of Columbia, was in charge.
They found Jasper House in charge of “a man by the name of Klyne, a jolly
old fellow, with a large family.”
Michel Klyne was still postmaster in 1834.
Through Jasper park, in the spring of 1827, there tramped with some 50 lbs. of
seeds secured in an oilcloth on his back, which he would trust to no one else to
carry, David Douglas, the Scottish botanist, after whom the Douglas fir is named,
always eager to increase his store of learning, be it even of the Chinook language;
but sometimes “molested out of his life” by the voyageurs of the brigade of which
he was the guest.
He reached Jasper House on May 4. Two days later he overtook a New Cale-
donia packet consisting of George McDougall and four men, who had battled down
their way east by the newly discovered Yellowhead pass, reaching Jasper House
on April 18. Douglas named the mountains on either side of the Athabaska pass
mount Brown, after R. Brown, “the illustrious botanist,” and mount Hooker in
honour of his “early patron, the professor of botany in the university of Glas-
gow.” The higher of these peaks is only 10,500 feet, but till 1893 they appeared on
maps on Douglas’ estimate of their height, as being about 17,000 feet, and the
Photo by Horetzky
Jasper House and Roche Ronde
The mountain on the right is Roche Ronde; the one on the left is Roche a Bosche.
Note the Indian trapper, his camping pack on his back, his flint-lock gun and the big-
horn head at his feet
highest mountains on
the North American
continent.
Douglas mentions
that a fellow Scot,
Thomas Drummond,
assistant naturalist on
the second Franklin
expedition, spent the
summer of 1826 in the
neighbourhood of Jas-
per, going east in
November to Edmon-
ton.
It was with the
York factory brigade
of Edward Ermat-
inger that Douglas
travelled, and his
diary shows us inter-
esting glimpses of this
“agreeable young


man,” as he calls the trader who regaled them over the camp fires with tunes on
the flute and on the violin. Of course, there was dancing. Douglas says dance he
could not, but he endeavoured to please by jumping. We are introduced to an-
other pioneer, who, apparently, had a horse ranch opposite the mouth of Snaring
river. How modern is “old Jacques Cardinal,” who, when Douglas met him at
the Moose encampment, as he came up the pass to meet the brigade with horses,
roasted a mountain sheep and for drink mentioning he had no spirits, pointed to
the river and said: “This is my barrel, and it is always running.”
Photo by Horetzky
Jasper House and Roche Miette
Sir James Hector, who visited the place a few years before Horetzky, describes it as follows:
. . the little group of buildings which form the ‘fort’ have been constructed, in keeping with their picturesque
situation, after the Swiss style, with overhanging roofs and trellised porticos.”
It reads better than it looks
Following the agreement of 1839 with Russia for a lease of a strip of the Alaska
coast line, the Hudson’s Bay Company sent Wm. Glen Rae, C. T. Douglas, John
McLoughlin, junior, and Roderick Finlayson, with 20 servants to take possession
of the Russian establishment at the entrance of the Stikine river. According to
Beckles Willson, some of the members of this party including seemingly Roderick
Finlayson, travelled overland by way of Jasper with the Columbia brigade. At
any rate, in the following year, 3,000 land otter skins in which the rent was to be
paid, were sent across the mountains by the Columbia brigade.
In the spring of 1846, the Belgian missionary, Pierre Jean De Smet, arrived from
Edmonton in a cariole drawn by four dogs, and spent 26 days in the vicinity of


Jasper. A few days later, we find him at the head of the pass cheerfully undertak-
ing a fast of 30 days to reduce his corpulence sufficiently to enable him to continue
his journey to the Columbia, for the first time in his life, on snow-shoes. At the
summit, he met the Hudson’s Bay brigade with which were “old friends,” “Captains
Ward and Vavasseur,” who were returning to England from a mission to the mouth
of the Columbia. Ward took De Smet’s letters for Europe.
De Smet gives the location of Jasper House as the foot of Jasper lake.
Paul Kane, the painter, author of “Wanderings in North America,” visited this
new Jasper House in November of the same year, going west. He describes it as
consisting of
Only three miserable log huts. The dwelling house is composed of two rooms of about fourteen or
fifteen feet square each. One of them is used by all comers and goers: Indians, voyageurs and traders;
men, women and children being huddled together indiscriminately, the other room being devoted,
to the exclusive occupation of Colin and his family, consisting of a Cree sqaw and nine interesting half-
breed children.
This was Colin Fraser, postmaster at Jasper House since 1840. The squaw, it
is interesting to note, was one of 44 people baptised by De Smet on his visit.
Photo by Horetzky
Fort Edmonton in the Time of the Fur Trade
A great city now spreads over this ground. The photographs of Horetzky reproduced here are probably the first
photographs ever taken in Saskatchewan and Alberta. There were no films or dry plates then and it was no light under-
taking to carry a photographer’s outfit across a mountain wilderness, as Horetzky did
In the late fifties, gold was discovered in Cariboo, and Jasper found itself on the
trail in the rush that followed. A party of four goldseekers returned east in 1860
with a pile of $1,600. Well nigh 200 emigrants from the east passed through
Yellowhead pass in 1862, on an overland journey that was for some of them 1,900
miles long. The largest party numbered ISO. Two other parties followed. Their
greatest difficulties began after passing Jasper, and many perished in the mount-
ains beyond. Four were drowned in the Fraser, and two in the Thompson. Of
the last party of five, only two reached safety. This appears to have deterred others.
The gold fever was at its height when Dr. W. B. Cheadle and Viscount Milton
came out from England to explore the west.
Cheadle who later achieved eminence in his profession was 27 years of age and
Milton four years younger. “The North West Passage by Land” is the story of


their adventures. Dr. Cheadle is the author of this entrancing volume, which has
been frequently reprinted since the first issue in 1865.
There were those who thought gold might be found east of the Rockies, and
Milton and Cheadle, at Edmonton, met a band of miners who had been prospecting
on the North Saskatchewan. Their Captain, a Kentuckian name Love, told them
he had come east through the Yellowhead pass. Three members of this party pre-
ceded the Englishmen to the west by a few days.
Photo by Horetzky
On the way to Jasper in the Old Days
The Red River carts, made entirely of wood without a single nail, were used for crossing the great plains. It took two months
from Fort Garry (Winnipeg) to Edmonton, and three weeks more, with pack horses, to reach Jasper. Note the Indian tepee of
buffalo skin
Milton and Cheadle travelled up the Athabaska to the mouth of the Aliette
river, and then followed the latter to the Yellowhead pass. At Tete Jaune Cache
they turned south and with much difficulty worked their way down the North
Thompson river to Kamloops.
Questions in the Imperial Parliament, in 1857, about the lease of the Indian
territories to the Hudson’s Bay Company, which was about to expire, led to the
Palliser expedition to the western prairies. Sir James Hector, AI.D., was the
geologist to this party, and in the unusually severe winter of 1859, he visited Jasper
park from Edmonton. He set out on January 12, going up the river from Fort
Assiniboine, travelling for fourteen days on the ice with dogs. The night the party
reached Jasper House they had to ford a rapid on the Athabaska breast deep,


carrying the dog sledges on their shoulders, although the thermometer was 15
below zero.
Hector ascended to where the Athabaska is but “a small rivulet.”
The return trip to Edmonton w r as begun on February 19, the route being the
direct one through the woods now followed by the railway. Edmonton was reached
on March 6.
Most of the early travel in summer was by canoe. Later, when the Red River
settlement commenced to assume importance, the greater part of the summer
travel to Jasper was across the prairie with native ponies and Red River carts built
entirely of wood without a single nail or piece of iron. The trip from Fort Garry
to Edmonton took over two months; from Edmonton to Jasper, the carts were
discarded and pack-horses resorted to.
Photo by Topley
On the way to Jasper now
The trip from Winnipeg takes 38 hours
In the year 1871, the mountains and
their passes became a matter of na-
tional interest. British Columbia joined
the Confederation, and one of the con-
ditions of the agreement was the
construction of a transcontinental
railway, to be commenced in two
years and finished within ten years of
the date of the union. Search for a
practicable route through the moun-
tains, the chief obstacle to the under-
taking, was at once commenced. The
reports of early explorers indicated
that the choice of routes lay between
the Yellowhead and Howse passes.
As a result of preliminary surveys, in
1871, it appeared that the Yellowhead pass offered the greater inducements,
having less severe grades and fewer difficulties of construction. However, general
exploration was continued until 1876, and many different passes were examined,
all results tending to confirm the first verdict that the Yellowhead pass was
the most suitable.
The most complete account of any of these trips is that of the Sandford Fleming
expedition of 1872, chronicled in “Ocean to Ocean” by Principal Grant.
Sir Sandford Fleming, the Chief Engineer, was very strongly in favour of a
route through this pass, down North Thompson river to Kamloops, and thence
down the Fraser to the coast, practically the same route as followed by the
Canadian Northern railway to-day. By the end of 1879, complete location surveys
had been made, though no actual construction work had been done near the
mountains.
A radical change was, however, made in the whole route of the transcontinental
railway during the year 1880. The general location was moved 150 miles south of
the Yellowhead pass, as so to cross the mountains by Kicking Horse pass.


It is interesting to note that the great advantages of the 1 ellowhead
pass with a summit altitude of only 3,727 feet were early recognized although
not utilized for a railway until the Grand Trunk Pacific was constructed, more
than a quarter of a century later.
The railways enter the Park running in a southerly direction on opposite sides
of the Athabaska river, the Canadian Northern on the left or west bank, and the
Grand Trunk Pacific on the right bank. They continue up the river in this position
until above Jasper lake, where the Grand Trunk Pacific crosses to the same side
of the river as the Canadian Northern, and at the Snaring river the two railways
are only about thirty rods apart. Two miles above this, the Canadian Northern
crosses under the Grand Trunk Pacific, and from there to Jasper continues closer
to the river and considerably lower than the latter. Beyond Jasper both railways
turn sharply to the west up the narrow valley of the Miette river, coming very
close together for about two miles, when the Canadian Northern crosses the Miette
on a long wooden trestle. From here, both roadbeds are cut out along the steep
cliffs which form the sides of the narrow valley, until near Geikie station, when the
Grand Trunk Pacific crosses to the south of the Miette river, and for three miles
the two tracks are laid along the same right of way. The Grand Trunk Pacific
then re-crosses to the north side of the Miette, and from there on, the railways
remain on opposite sides of the valley.
The low grades maintained by these railways throughout their climb to the
summit of the pass are very remarkable. At Parkgate near the eastern limit of the
park, the elevation of the Grand Trunk Pacific railway is 3,283 feet above sea-level,
and at Yellowhead pass, which it crosses through a cut seven feet deep, the eleva-
tion of the rail is only 3,721 feet. This means that in a distance of fifty-two miles,
the total ascent is only 438 feet, an average of less than nine feet to the mile. The
Canadian Northern enters the park about ninety feet below the Grand Trunk
Pacific, and crosses the pass at an elevation of 3,712 feet. In both cases the steepest
grades occur in the valley of the Aliette river between Jasper and the pass, but in
neither case does the maximum exceed one half of one per cent.
Saxifrage




Bighorn Head
CHAPTER II
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PARK
Beauty of the mountains . . . Vividly coloured lakes . . . Characteristics of the Athabaska river
Rapid rise and fall of streams . . . Storekeeper’s narrow escape . . . The towns of Jasper and Poca-
hontas . . . Animals . . . Birds . . . Fish . . . Trees and Plants
The scenery of Jasper park adjacent to the railway is not of the rugged nature
of some of the more remote districts, but nevertheless it has many charms.
As Principal Grant says: —
There Is a wonderful combination of beauty about these mountains. Great masses of boldly defined
bare rock are united to the beauty that variety of form, colour and vegetation give. A noble river with
many tributaries, each defining a distinct range, a beautiful lake ten miles long, embosomed three
thousand three hundred feet above the sea, among mountains twice as high, offer innumerable scenes,
seldom to be found within the same compass, to the artist.
There are many small vividly coloured lakes throughout the park, particularly
in the vicinity of Jasper, and many gorges and waterfalls. In the district to the
north of Jasper the rocks are chiefly of a limestone formation, and there are very
few streams that have not at least one interesting waterfall or gorge. The un-
usually wide valley of the Athabaska, with its many channels and open meadows,
gives a sense of freedom often lacking in mountain regions. Farther back from the
railway are many fine alpine districts where lofty snow-clad peaks and huge ice-
fields offer inducements to those athletic travellers who find their chief recreation
in scaling almost inaccessible heights.
Like other glacier streams, Athabaska river carries a great deal of sediment
and wherever the current becomes sluggish some of this is deposited. The wide
expansions at Jasper lake and Brule lake form excellent settling basins for this
sediment and it is probable that in a few years these lakes will become entirely
silted up. The large sand bars visible in low water near the upper end of these
lakes indicate how rapidly the change is taking place. D.B. Dowling, of the Geo


logical Survey, suggests that a former lake between Brule lake and Jasper lake has
already been filled up. To quote his report (Summary Report 1910, Geol. Survey,
Canada): —
Gravel terraces similar to those on the Bow river are found at
elevations up to 300 feet above the present river. These, no doubt,
belong to the same period as the transported deposits known as the
Saskatchewan gravels. The tributary streams entering on each side
are moving a large amount of gravel into the Athabaska valley, and
in almost every case show a steady growth of fan deposit near the
mouth. Thus, at the mouth of Fiddle river, the steeper grade of the
tributary stream has enabled it to move material towards the
Athabaska river that could not be removed by the current of that
stream. Consequently the river has been forced over against the
rocky walls of the ridges on the north side. At the mouth of Moose-
horn creek, a smaller collection of river-borne material forms a flat
fan, which occupies a part of the river flat. This appears to be due
to the activity of the current of Moosehorn creek. The large tribu-
taries from both north and south, which enter the Athabaska near
Roche Miette, may have been the agents causing the formation of
Jasper lake, by moving material into the valley and thus forming
an obstruction partially damming back the water. Brule lake,
although it seems to be silting up, has no doubt also been lowered
by the erosion of the barrier at the outlet. This barrier consists of
the tilted beds of the Cretaceous sandstone, separated by shale, so
that it forms a succession of hard ribs. The channel being cut through
them from Brule lake to the mouth of Prairie creek, although having
a thoroughly uniform heavy gradient, is still in process of erosion
where each of the ribs crosses it. The gradient in the channel which
has been cut through this barrier steepens perceptibly after leaving
the lake, and there are several rapids, but none at the outlet so that
the erosion which is still going on does not Immediately threaten
the existence of the lake. (View page 77)
Along the east shore of Jasper lake, large sandbanks
have been formed by the wind which carries the fine
sand from the lake shore and deposits it in the more
sheltered places. Between Interlaken and Hawes, a
ridge ten or twenty feet high has been built up for
Photo by Topley
Pyramid Lake
The play of the shadows on the
water and the exquisite colouring of
the lakes make pictures of great beauty
about three miles between Jasper lake and Talbot lake. This ridge, sparsely
timbered with jack pine and spruce, is never more than a quarter of a mile wide
and in some places not more than one hundred yards. Similar action may be
observed along the east shore of Brule lake.
Much of the area within the park has been swept by fire, though fortunately
the heads of many fine valleys have been spared. Some say that this fire was caused
by a quarrel between two tribes of Indians, one of whom started the fire in an
attempt to destroy the other. Now much of the country is covered with old brule
overgrown with small poplar and jack pine. The valley of Athabaska river is
comparatively open with large prairie-like meadows. The timber is a light growth


of poplar and jack pine, interspersed with scattered Douglas fir in the drier parts,
and in the swamps it is chiefly spruce.
As a result of the denuded nature of the country, one very noticeable feature is
the rapid rise and fall of the streams. It is no uncommon sight to see in a harmless
looking stream, a few feet in width, a gravel bar several hundred feet wide covered
with recently uprooted trees, bearing mute witness to the power that has been
exerted. It is related that an early storekeeper who was crossing Fiddle river with
a team of horses and a wagon load of supplies, stopped in the stream to remove
some of the boulders and while doing so heard a roar above him. So rapidly did
the water rise, that to save himself he had to abandon both team and wagon.
Towns. The two places of principal importance within the park are Jasper
and Pocahontas. Pocahontas lies just within the first high range of mountains,
while Jasper is about twenty-seven miles farther in. Pack trains and equipment for
tourists may be obtained at either place, although the majority of guides and out-
fitters have made their headquarters at Jasper. This is probably because Jasper
lies nearer to the higher ranges adjacent to the summit of the Rocky mountains,
regions such as Robson district for example. Both places may be reached by either
the Grand Trunk Pacific or the Canadian Northern railway. At Jasper both stations
are on the west side of the river, are known by the same name and are only about
half a mile apart. At Pocahontas, the Grand Trunk Pacific station, the town and
station are on the east side of Athabaska river, Bedson, the corresponding C. N.
Ry. station being on the opposite side. There is no bridge across the river at that
point, but there are nearly always boats on either side so that little difficulty is
experienced in crossing.
Jasper, a di-
visional point on
the Grand Trunk
Pacific railway,
is also the head-
quarters of the
park staff. Here
the government
has recently
erected an
artistic bunga-
low built of the
boulders so a-
bundant in the
vicinity. In this
building, which =
serves as a resi-
Photo by Devllle
Lake Patricia
Clouds vanish as quickly as they come. Their ever changing shapes and rapid flight across the
mountains are full of interest
dence for the superintendent of the park, provision has been made for the ad-
ministration offices required at the present time. It is the desire of the govern-
ment that other permanent buildings should be of a similar architectural design,


constructed either of logs or wood, so that in the future the town may present an
harmonious appearance in keeping with its picturesque surroundings.
The town lies on a gravelly bench about two miles long and half a mile wide and
approximately sixty feet above the river. To the north and west, there is a steep
Lake Beauvert from Oldfort Point (26)
Tent city on far side of lake. Athabaska river beyond
hill two to three
hundred feet
high,and beyond
this there is a
rolling plateau
about two miles
in width. On
the north this
plateau com-
mences below a
shoulder of
Pyramid moun-
tain, reaching
eastward toward
the railway. P'rom here it extends southward, and swinging to the west above
Jasper, parallels the valley of the Miette for about ten miles. One of the most
noticeable features of this plateau is the number of small lakes and ponds scat-
tered over it, many of which are well stocked with fish. Chief among these are
Pyramid, Patricia,
Cabin and Cale-
donia lakes.
Hidden among
the ridges it is
probable that
many lakes re-
main as yet unvis-
ited by man.
On the opposite
side of the river,
there is a wide
flat extending
north beyond Ma-
ligne river. On
this flat there are
also a number of
Photo by Deville
Superintendent’s Residence and Offices, Jasper
very attractive lakes, the more important ones being Beauvert, Annette and Edith
lakes. This district has been burned over but fortunately much of the timber
surrounding the lakes has been spared so that their beauty is unmarred by fire.


Pocahontas, which takes its name from a coal mining town in southern Virginia, is
situated on the east bank of Athabaska river just within the gateway to the mount-
ains, formed by Boule Roche and Roche a Perdrix, and at the base of that well
Photo by Topley
Bridge over the Athabaska River at Oldfort Point
known landmark, Roche
Mlette. It is a mining town
and the headquarters of the
Jasper Park Collieries. Coal
mines have been opened on
both sides of the river, though
only those on the east side
have been worked extensive-
ly. The coal is bituminous
but somewhat harder than the
Crowsnest coal. The station,
postoffice, mounted police bar-
racks, mine buildings, and
residences are on a small
bench lying close to the river,
while on the bench above,
about three hundred feet
higher, houses have been built
for the miners. On the oppo-
site side of the river at the
mouth of Ronde creek, a short distance above the Canadian Northern station,
Bedson, there is another small settlement.
Animals. During the location and construction of the two transcontinental
railways the greater
portion of the big
game was either de-
stroyed or driven
away from the main
vallet's of the Atha-
baska, the open flats
and grassy meadows
of which had afforded
excellent ranges for
deer while the lower
mountain ranges with
their wide grassy
slopes above timber
Photo by Topley
Superintendent’s Residence and Offices, Jasper
line had been the natural pasture ground of mountain sheep.
Under the efficient protection given by the Parks regulations and the excellent
staff of rangers, there is no doubt that game of all kinds is rapidly increasing.


Mountain Sheep and Goats. The mountains of the Maligne range extending
southeast to the Brazeau are the favourite resort of mountain goats and sheep and
on two occasions the surveyors saw sheep here. Once three allowed them to ap-
Dinner Ready?
Wild animals in the park become very tame. This
bear was quite punctual at the meal hours of the survey
party
proach within fifteen yards before taking
fright and then they ran only about fifty
yards away and started feeding again. A
large herd of sheep is seen daily on the
southern slopes of Roche Miette on the
banks of the Rocky river. These have been
photographed on several occasions by the
local warden at Pocahontas. Mr. A. O.
Wheeler reports that in the fall of 1913 he
saw twenty-six while making one climb in
the vicinity of Shovel pass.
The Rocky Mountain goat may be seen
occasionally near the river but his usual
habitat is in the more rugged mountains
farther back. This animal is found in
almost all of the higher ranges and the
Superintendent reported in the early part
of 1914 that he had seen a number on the
slopes of mount Kerkeslin, near the mouth
of the Whirlpool river. A band of six was
seen on the cliffs of Marmot mountain and
others in the valley of Portal creek.
Caribou. Caribou are seldom seen in
the lower valleys. During the summer their favourite haunt seems to be the high
grassy alps near timber line. Early in the season several were seen below Signal
mountain and in July there were a number at the head of Portal creek and in
Tonquin valley, three one evening
passing close to the horses and within
one hundred yards of camp. Later, on
Mount Maccarib, seven were observed
lying on a snow-spot a short distance
below the peak.
Deer. Deer are plentiful and are
frequently seen in the vicinity of
Jasper, particularly near Pyramid lake
and prairie de la Vache. It is probable
that during the summer months they
Photo by Harmon
Bighorn Sheep
leave the lower valleys and go to the timber or higher slopes to avoid the flies
Moose are to be found in the region lying to the west of Brule lake.
Bears. There are quite a large number of bears and the Park officers are con


tinuallv reporting grizzly, cinnamon and black bear seen on their patrols in many
portions of the park area.
Beaver. Beaver are increasing very rapidly and are singularly devoid of fear,
especially near Brule and Jasper lakes and the streams running into them. One
evening, near Pocahontas, while crossing
the river in a motor boat, two were seen
and although the channel was not more
than fifty feet wide, one continued work-
ing until the boat passed. South of
Coronach creek, a beaver dam had flooded
the trail to such an extent that it was
necessary to swim the horses. Another
colony may be found near the mouth of
the Miette river.
Muskrats. Muskrats are very plen-
tiful in the Miette valley, and near the
summit there are in addition a large
Goat
number of mink including two families of black mink which the local warden
keeps under constant surveillance.
Elk. There are no elk at present in the park but the valley of the Athabaska
from the junction of the Miette to its source is stated to have been noted in early
days as one of the best hunting grounds for elk in the Canadian Rockies. In 1914
the Superintendent found in one trip to the south side of mount Kerkeslin the
heads and horns of over one hundred elk, which seems to bear out that fact. With
efficient protection elk will soon return to the park.
Rabbits. Rabbits are very numerous
and unfortunately are somewhat destruc-
tive of the younger tree growth. They
apparently die off in great numbers every
seventh year. During the years of abun-
dance, the district where they are found is
infested with coyotes, but when the rabbits
die off these predatory animals almost
desert that locality.
The season of 1913 was one during which
rabbits died off in great numbers and
coyotes were rare.
Photo by H. I. Smith
Moose
Marmot. Of other animals the one most likely to attract the attention of the
traveller is the whistler or marmot, which makes its home in rocks near timber line.
There is a large colony among the rocks near the head of Whistlers creek and when
alarmed, the whole valley resounds with their shrill, piercing calls.


Porcupine. Squirrel, etc. The pika or little chief hare, about the size of
a grey squirrel, also makes his home in the high rock slides. He closely resembles a
hare in appearance. Lower down the yellow-haired porcupine is occasionally seen.
Squirrels and chipmunks are very common and many varieties of smaller rodents
may be found by those sufficiently familiar with their habits.
Ptarmigan. Ptarmigan
were seen frequently
throughout the summer
and appeared to be of two
varieties. Several birds
with young, seen in July
near the head of Meadow
creek,appeared muchdarker
than those found in the
mountains farther south,
and gave a call not unlike
the quack of a duck. At
the end of September, a
large flock, many of which
were quite white, was seen
on the Maligne range
behind mount Tekarra.
Several varieties of grouse
may be found, among them
Franklin’s grouse, some-
times called the fool-hen
because it is so tame that
it can be easily knocked
over with a stick, the
dusky or blue grouse and
the ruffed grouse. The
ravages of the coyotes are
a serious check to the
increase of grouse, all of which build their nests on the ground.
Ducks. During the migratory seasons very large flocks of wild geese, swans
and ducks cover the lakes and the enlargements of the Athabaska river, especially
in the vicinity of Interlaken. The sloughs and streams of the Miette river are also
a favourite resting ground.
Eagle and Owl. Birds of prey are not numerous. Several hawks were seen
and in Portal valley a golden eagle was observed three or four times, circling around
the peaks. A number of horned owls were noticed during the summer and in the fall
their melancholy hoot was heard nearly every night. These birds, like the coyotes,
doubtless depend largely on rabbits for their subsistence.
Other birds. The smaller birds include the robin, the humming-bird, and the
whiskey-jack. Crows and ravens visit the park occasionally. Many varieties of
thrushes, sparrows, warblers and other small birds are to be found.
Fish. Most of the year the Athabaska itself is too turbid for fishing, but trout
are numerous in many of the smaller streams. Many of the lakes near Jasper, in-
cluding Pyramid and Patricia lakes, are well stocked, and Jacques lake, lying be-
tween the Maligne and Rocky rivers, is frequently visited by enthusiastic anglers
from both Jasper and Pocahontas.
Trees and Plants. The most common tree in the fire-swept valley of the
Athabaska and along its lower slopes is the jack pine, a hardy tree that is the first
to spring up in the dry burnt soil left by a severe fire. Much poplar, usually small,
but sometimes nine inches in diameter, is found on the flats and along the base of
the mountains. There is throughout a scattered growth of Douglas fir and near
Skunk


Jasper, living trees four feet in diameter mav be found. In the swamps and on
moist ground, spruce and cottonwood sometimes grow to a large size. In the
higher valleys untouched by fire, the timber is chiefly spruce and balsam with a
few spreading pine trees of a variety peculiar to high altitudes. Alder and willow
are found throughout, different varieties of the latter ranging from the lowest
valleys to the extreme edge of timber line.
During the month of July, large quantities of strawberries of large size and ex-
cellent flavour can be gathered on the open flats in the vicinity of Jasper. In August
saskatoon or service berries are abundant in the flats lying to the north of Fiddle
river and very fine raspberries can be found along the trail from Pocahontas to
the Miette hot springs and in the Athabaska valley above Maligne river. Three
varieties of blueberries were seen, but none of them in large quantities. There
were also a few gooseberry bushes but the fruit did not appear to be properly ma-
tured.
An exhaustive study of the flowers and plants of this district has yet to be made.
In 1911, a partial investigation was made by members of the Smithsonian In-
stitution and the results were published in a special edition of the Canadian Alpine
Journal for 1912. Among the more common plants mentioned in the report are the
following: —
Kinnikinnic, Lily (Adder’s Tongue and Wild Orange Lily), Spring Beauty,
Western Pasque Flower, Dryas, Sorrel, Bluebell, Wild Rose, Aster, Fleabane, Lily
of the Valley, Paintbrush and Goldenrod.
There are at least three species of ferns, Parsley fern, Fragile fern and Oak fern.
Orchids also were well represented although they are not very common. Repre-
sentatives of the following families also occur; —
Goosefoot, Purslane, Saxifrage, Vetch, Flax, Primrose, Dogwood, Wintergreen
and Parsley.
Groundhog




Porcupine
CHAPTER III
TRIPS SOUTH FROM JASPER
Oldfort point . . . The Whistlers . . . Mt. Edith Cavell . . . Tonquin valley
and Amethyst lakes . . . Athabaska falls
Oldfort Point. Oldfort Point is a bare knoll lying about a quarter of a mile east
from the south end of the bridge across the Athabaska river. It is a little over
four hundred feet above the river and there is a well-marked footpath leading to
the summit. It may be reached easily from Jasper in about an hour, and for the
amount of labour involved, affords a splendid view of the Athabaska valley.
To the northeast and north lie Roche Bonhomme and the Colin range; in the
immediate foreground lake Beauvert, and farther away Trefoil lakes, Annette
lake and Edith lake, nestling among the green timber. To the left of these,
Athabaska river winds down the valley and disappears around a bend in the dis-
tance. Across the Athabaska the two railways may be plainly seen, the higher one
being the Grand Trunk Pacific. Far down the valley on the west side, the long wall
of Roche De Smet is plainly visible while still farther to the left, Pyramid mountain,
its rocky walls streaked with red, rises to a height of 9,076 feet. To the west lies
Jasper and the valley of Miette river, while close by, the road winds down the hill
between Twin lakes and crosses Athabaska river. South of the Miette, in the
angle formed between it and the Athabaska lies “the Whistlers,” a bare flat-
topped mountain about 8,000 feet elevation.
Up Athabaska river, the view of the valley is cut out by some low rolling ridges
of about the same elevation as Oldfort point, but the view of the peaks is not ob-
scured. Chief among these, Lectern peak, named from its resemblance to a church
lectern, by G. E. Howard in 1913, may be easily identified by its sharp apex and
long symmetrical shoulders, and higher up the river the monarch of the district,
mount Edith Cavell, rears its snow-clad summit nearly 7,500 feet above the valley.


On the east side of the river and close at hand lies mount Tekarra (8,818 feet ) and
to the right of that is mount Kerkeslin, its sharp triangular apex 9,790 feet above
sea-level. Tekarra was the Indian guide of Sir James Hector, Kerkeslin is also a
name given by him. On a clear day, far to the south, may be seen a black square
Jasper from Oldfort Point (26)
Twin lakes and bridge across Athabaska in foreground. Miette valley on the left. The top of Mt. Henry is just visible
over the hill above the town
rock closely resembling the Devil’s head near Banff, as seen from the east, and to
the right of that, a black peak almost as high as mount Edith Cavell. The height
of this peak is 10,988 feet above sea-level while that of mount Edith Cavell is
11,033 feet.
The Whistlers (8,085). This mountain is situated just above the junction of
Miette river with Athabaska river, the summit lying about four miles southwest
of Jasper. A good trail has been built and the trip to it from Jasper and return may
be made easily in one day by saddle horses, or on foot, provided the tourist is in
good physical condition.
Leaving Jasper we follow the wagon road to the Miette bridge, about a mile
and a half from the station, crossing Cabin creek and passing under the railways.
A little beyond the bridge a road turns to the left along the base of some rocky
bluffs and about three hundred yards from the main road a trail turns to the right
up the hill.
As we climb slowly up this trail, the valleys below gradually widen out and the
view constantly takes on new charms. At an elevation of about 5,000 feet the trail
turns to the north crossing a rock slide on a comparatively level grade. This
gives a short breathing space and again tne trail turns up and continues to climb
rapidly until the summit is reached. Here our arrival is announced by a shrill


whistle. The rocks on the summit form the home of a family of marmots commonly
called “whistlers,” after which the mountain has been named.
The summit has a large flat top, and in order to see the whole view it is necessary
to move from point to point. The first view which claims attention is down Atha-
baska river, the whole valley of which lies open for a distance of eight miles below
the mouth of Aliette river
(View page 14). In the
foreground lies Jasper, its
buildings and roads plainly
visible. The railways wind
along the west side of the
river, pass through Jasper
and side by side, turn up
Miette river; finally the
Canadian Northern crosses
the Miette valley on a long
trestle almost below us.
The wide benches above
Jasper are dotted with
lakes, chief among which
are Pyramid and Patricia.
The road to these may be
seen climbing the hill behind
Jasper and winding across
A Rest on the Way to the Whistlers
Railways, trains, houses and men seen from these great heights look like
a world in miniature. Only the mountains retain their gigantic proportions
the bench. Nearer are Cabin lake, Caledonia lake and many others. On the
flat behind Pyramid lake stands Pyramid mountain, its rocky summit rising
about three thousand feet above the timber at its base, and west from it
extends the low range which forms the divide between Miette and Snaring rivers.
In the distance to the right of Pyramid may be seen Roche De Smet, easily disting-
uished by its central peak which rises from the middle of a long serrated ridge.
Still farther to the right, in clear weather, mount Aeolus may be seen, a sharp point
at the west end and a long shoulder extending to the south. This is the highest
peak in the vicinity of Pocahontas.
East of the Athabaska river the road to the Maligne gorge is plainly visible
from the time it leaves Jasper until it reaches the shores of Edith lake. Beyond
lies Colin range, its grey limestone peaks rising high above timbered slopes. Con-
spicuous among these, is the dark face of Roche Bonhomme solemnly gazing sky-
ward, and Colin mountain the highest peak near the north end of the range. Just
to the left of Colin mountain stands one of the peaks of Roche Jacques, a square
black rock.
To the east and across Athabaska river, lies mount Tekarra, the northerly peak
of the Maligne range, while beyond and to the right stands the summit of Watch-
tower. Below lie a series of rolling brule-covered benches, with scattered meadows,
lakes and clumps of fir, while far to the southeast Athabaska river may be seen


winding through the dark valley below mount Hardisty. About four miles away.
Portal creek and Astoria river enter from the west, their numerous channels and
wide gravel bars showing white on the flats below.
To the south, the dominating feature of the landscape is mount Edith Cavell,
its massive top frequently clothed in clouds. Farther to the right, almost due
south, above a high
pass (Marmot pass)
leading from the head
of Whistlers creek into
the valley of Portal
creek, stands the sharp
snow-tipped apex of the
Throne, Blackhorn
nearly equal in height
beside it. Still farther
around, the summit of
Oldhorn may be seen,
easily distinguished by
its sharp, pinnacle-
shaped top and its
precipitous walls.
Mount Edith
Cavell. Almost due
south of Jasper and
Portal Valley from Mt. Tekarra (29)
Portal peak appears in the centre of
the valley. On the right is the Circus
and on the left the Portal. The mouth
of Astoria river is in the left foreground
about fourteen miles
distant in a straight
line, a massive snow-
crowned mountain rises
high above the sur-
rounding peaks, its
white summit some-
times glistening in the
sunlight, but often lost
among the clouds.
Below, some hanging
glaciers showing white
against its dark preci-
pitous rocks, discharge
their masses of snow
and ice into a large
glacier just visible in
the valley beneath.
This is mount Edith
Cavell, named in honour of the heroic nurse who was murdered by the Germans
in the fall of 1915.
Mt. Edith Cavell and Astoria Valley
Looking southwest from (2). Astoria valley on the right, Mt. Fraser at the head of the valley and Oldhorn on the right ot
Mt. Fraser. Cavell lake in foreground. The shape and shadings of the glacier of the Ghost present the appearance of a hying
figure with outstretched wings as outlined in the upper right hand corner, but most of it has been lost in the reproduction


In the cirque between the mountain and the shoulder extending to the north,
there is a hanging glacier about one-third of a square mile in area. This glacier
drains into a larger one about five hundred feet below by a narrow fan-shaped ice-
fall not more than three hundred feet wide at the top. The lower glacier is of
irregular shape extending along the foot of the cliffs for more than a mile, and its
greatest width is a little over half a
mile. The whole forms the glacier
of the Ghost. A well defined medial
moraine marks the junction of the
two parts of the icefield. A short
distance below the snout of the
glacier, nestling in the green timber,
lies a small lake about one thousand
yards long and three hundred yards
wide, which has been named Cavell
lake, while the stream flowing from
it to Astoria river has been called
Cavell creek.
It is doubtful if the mountain
can be climbed from this side, but
from a camp at the lake, the glaciers
and the valley above could be
Mt. Edith Cavell from Chak Peak (5)
Note the hidden knight
examined. The same camp would make a convenient base from which to explore
the long ridge extending eastward toward the Athabaska valley. From points on
this ridge, only 1,500 to 2,000 feet above the lake, splendid views may be
Mt. Edith Cavell from Mt. Maccarib (10)
In front of the mountain Is Verdant Valley
obtained of Athabaska river
looking either up or down, of
the lower part of the Whirl-
pool or of the valley of Astoria
river. Opposite the mouth of
Astoria river on the east side
of the Athabaska is seen the
prairie de la Vache, of which
Ross Cox says: —
From the junction of the two
rivers to the old fort, the country on
each side presents a pleasing variety
of prairies, open woods and gently
rising eminencies; and one spot in
particular, called la prairie de la
Vache (in consequence of buffalo
having formerly been killed in it) forms a landscape that for rural beauty cannot be excelled in any
country.
Of the mountains visible from the ridge, the most imposing are Mt. Edith Cavell
and those to the south, along the west side of the Athabaska. On the opposite


side, in a bend of the river, lies Alt. Kcrkeslin, and farther north, Ml. Hardisty
and the Maligne range.
As might be expected a mountain so prominent as Alt. Edith Cavell could not
fail to attract the attention of mountaineers. Thus Principal Grant writes; —
Portal Peak
Looking northeast
from (7) in the direction
of Portal valley. Circus
valley in foreground.
Athabaska valley beyond
At the end of lake Jasper, a strath from two to
five miles wide, which may still be called the Jasper
valley, bends to the south. Our first look up this
valley showed new lines of mountains on both sides,
closed at the head by a great mountain so white with
snow that it looked like a sheet suspended from the
heavens. That, Valad said, was “La montagne de la
grande traverse,” adding that the road to the Columbia
country up the formidable Athabaska pass, lay along its south-eastern
base, while our road would turn west up the valley of the river Myette.
He mentioned the old local titles of the mountains on this side, but every
passer-by thinks that he has a right to give his own and his friends’ names to
them over again.
The mountain of the Great Crossing was one of the
guide-posts of the early travellers; it marked the place
where the Athabaska had to be forded and the continental
divide crossed. Sir James Hector named it mount Le Due,
and in 1911, A. O. Wheeler named it mount Fltzhugh.
Locally, it was known as mount Geikie, which was a mistake,
the real mount Geikie being some twelve miles farther west. In 1913, shortly after
the construction of the
railway, an attempt to
reach the summit was made
by A. L. Mumm and G. E.
Howard, both members of
the English Alpine Club,
but owing to unfavourable
weather the attempt failed,
although Air. Alumm, ac-
companied by his guide,
ascended to within four
hundred feet of the top.
In 1915 another and a
successful attempt was made
by Professor E. W. D.
Holway and Dr. A. J.
Gilmore. The ascent was
made by # the west arete
from a camp on the wide
grassy pass south of the
mountain, between Astoria
river and Whirlpool river.
Circus Valley
Looking northwest from (8). Glaciers and waterfalls on all sides


Vertex Pk. Mt. Majestic Mt. Estella
Head of Circus Valley
Looking west from (8)
Professor Holway says no great difficulty
was encountered, though there was much
step-cutting part of the way up very steep
slopes.
A good trail has been built from Jasper to
Cavell lake, a distance of about fifteen miles.
This trail follows the wagon road across the
Miette river and then turns south along the
base of the Whistlers. Passing along the flats
on the west side of Athabaska river, it crosses *
Whistlers creek, Portal creek and Astoria river,
and then turns up the last, gradually ascending
along the side of the low ridge on the south
until the lake is reached. Soon after turning up Astoria
river, the trail passes close to a gorge on the main stream.
Most of the way the trail is along open flats or through old
brule but for the last two miles the mountain side is covered
with green timber. In addition to the trail, a good road is
being constructed To this point.
Tonquin Valley and Amethyst Lakes. The trail
leading to Tonquin valley and Amethyst lakes is an old
Indian hunting trail and like all such trails, has not been
spoiled by too much work. Leaving the trail up the west
The Portal from
Mt. Aquila
Looking northwest across
the Portal from Mr. Aquila
(4). Compare with next view-
looking in the direction of the
Portal


side of Athabaska river about four miles from Jasper, it cuts across the flat and
crosses Whistlers creek just at the base of the mountains. A steep climb of over
one thousand feet follows and then it passes along a steep side hill covered with
old brule. Soon it enters green timber and winds through mud, over rocks and
The Portal from Mt. Maccarib (9)
Lectern peak on the right. Portal peak on the left. The Athabaska valley in the distance
Compare with preceding view across the Portal
along stony
hills to the
head of the
valley.
Under fa-
vourable cir-
cumstances,
the head of
the valley
may be reach-
e d from
Jasper in
about six
hours, provid-
ed the horses
are lightly
packed.
Horse feed is
abundant and good camp grounds are numerous. Several mountains are within
easy distance and the valley itself offers attractions to the explorer.
The Whistlers and Indian ridge lie to the north and either one may be reached
easily in two hours. Behind, Whistlers and Indian passes, about 8,000 feet elevation,
lead into a branch of
Meadow creek, but whether
they are suitable for horses
is not known. To the south-
west at the head of the
valley stands Manx peak
with its jagged ridges,
glaciers and rock slides.
Two or three small lakes
lie below the glaciers, and
the rocks still lower down
serve as the home of many
marmots whose shrill calls
Oldhorn Blackhorn
of alarm echo through the Oldhorn Mountain and Blackhorn Peak from Mt. Maccarib (9)
valley. To the south
Marmot mountain, a large flat topped mountain, may be reached easily in two
hours. This mountain gives an excellent view of the Athabaska valley, of Portal
creek and the head of Whistlers valley.


From the head of Whistlers creek the trail .winds up open grassy slopes to the
Marmot pass, behind Marmot mountain, leading to Portal creek. This pass is
about 7,500 feet high. From here the trail descends almost directly down to Portal
Angle Pk.
Thunderbolt Pk.
Mt. Erebus
Outpost Pk.
Surprise Pt.
Fraser Glacier
Alcove Mt. Eremite Mt.
South End of Tonquin Valley from Mt. Clitheroe (11)
Penstock creek and Chrome lake below Eremite mountain. Tonquin valley in foreground. Amethyst lakes on the right
creek, a drop of about 1,500 feet, the lower slopes being covered with fallen timber.
Just above where the trail crosses the creek, the branch from Circus valley joins,
flowing out through a large rock slide.
Fraser Glacier
Mt. Fraser
Dungeon Pk.
Redoubt Pk.
The Ramparts and Amethyst Lakes from Mt.Clitheroe (11)
Circus valley has not yet been explored. It appears to be a rather rocky, barren
valley with three large glaciers at its head. On the north side are three high peaks,
the lowest, Manx peak, being 9,987 feet elevation.


About a mile and a half above the forks, there is a small meadow where feed
for horses can be obtained. From a camp at this point. Lectern peak and the
three other peaks of the range to the east, all over 9,000 feet would be accessible.
Mt. Geikie
Turret Mt.
Bastion Pk. Barbican Pk.
Moat Lake and
Tonquin Pass
Postern Mt.
Tonquin Hill
The Ramparts and Tonquin Pass from Mt. Clitheroe (11)
Amethyst lakes In foreground. The continental divide crosses the pass a few hundred feet beyond Moat lake
Two small lateral valleys could also be explored. On the west side of the valley,
Portal peak, directly above the camp has not yet been climbed.
Redoubt Pk.
Pk.
Mt. Fraser
Dungeon
Casemate Mt.
Postern Mt.
Bastion Pk.
Turret Mt, Mt. Geikie
The Ramparts from Mt. Majestic (16)
Tonquin valley In foreground. Amethyst lakes on the left. Tonquin pass on the right
Three miles above the forks, the valley widens out and timber line is reached.
From a camp here several peaks may be reached. Mount Maccarib, less than two
thousand feet above the camp, is a very easy climb and affords an excellent view


Redoubt Pk.
Dungeon Pk.
Tonquin Valley from Thunderbolt Peak (13)
The Ramparts on the left. Amethyst lakes in middle distance. Chrome lake and Eremite
creek in foreground. The crooked stream from Fraser glacier is Penstock creek; it plunges
underground just before joining Eremite creek
tain. To the west are mount Geikie
and the Ramparts towering dark and
forbidding above open valleys below.
Several other peaks may be reached
from here chief among which are
Oldhorn mountain, Chak peak and
mount Majestic. Of these Oldhorn
apparently offers the most inducement
for the mountaineer, while Majestic
offers a splendid view of the surround-
ing country.
Continuing the journey, two passes
are now open, the one to the south,
Astoria pass, leading into the valley
of Astoria river, above mount Edith
Cavell, and another to the west,
Maccarib pass, leading into the valley
Tonquin Hill
Vista Pk. Mt. Fitzwilliam Mt. Clairvaux
of the heads
of the adja-
cent valleys.
The higher
point to the
west over-
looks Ame-
thyst lakes
and the head
of Astoria
river with its
many glaciers
and lofty
snow-clad
peaks. To the
east mount
Edith Cavell
towers above
all surround-
ing peaks,
while close
by rise the
precipitous
walls of Old-
horn moun-
Mt. Erebus and Eremite Glacier
From Thunderbolt Peak (13)
Eremite creek in foreground
Mt. Basilica
Mt. Curia


of Maccarib creek, a branch of Meadow creek. Horses may be taken over the
former pass and up the valley to its head, but this involves a descent to Astoria
river of over two thousand feet. This would, however, offer an approach to mount
Edith Cavell and an opportunity to explore the valleys above it.
Alaccarib pass to the
west is about 7,100 feet
above sea-level and leads
intoMaccarib valley, which
is open at the bottom with
scattered timber along both
sides l Three miles beyond
A Glacial Stream
Eremite creek from Surprise point (14). Note
the great ice cavern from which it emerges. Penstock
creek the tributary in foreground which comes from
Fraser glacier disappears underground before joining
Eremite creek
Tonquin valley is one of the
beauty spots of the region. Situated
in the heart of the mountains about
five hundred feet below timber line,
the wide meadows along its streams
and the stretches of dark green
spruce and balsam form an ideal
park. Above the timber there are
more open meadows or gentle grassy
slopes, and still higher, the rocky
the pass the west shoulder
of Alt. Clitheroe is reached
and here a good camp
ground may be found in
the timber on the south
side of the creek. This
point, which is at the en-
trance to Tonquin valley,
is the point to which
distances have been given
in the table at the end and
has been selected because
it lies on the direct route,
if the return trip be made
by way of Meadow creek.
It is, however, a very convenient
point from which to ascend mount
Clitheroe or mount Majestic. It is,
moreover, only half a mile from the
north end of Amethyst lakes and four
miles from the south end, three miles from
Tonquin pass beyond Moat lake, or six
miles from the head of the valley below
Vista peak.
Mt. Fraser from Surprise Point (14)
Fraser glacier on the left. The source of the Fraser river
is somewhere back of this mountain
summits of the mountains rise in all their grandeur. Along the south, rising
abruptly four thousand feet above the valley, its base guarded by white glaciers


and dark rock-slides, stands the huge wall of the Ramparts which forms the
continental divide. Mount Geikie, the highest and most impressive peak of this
range, named after Sir Archibald Geikie, the veteran geologist, is just within British
Columbia territory, and close to the head of Fraser river.
Near the south end
of Tonquin valley,
6,450 feet above sea-
level and draining into
Astoria river, there is
a beautiful sheet of
water about three
miles long and a mile
across in the widest
places. This is divided
into two parts by a
rocky peninsula jutt-
ingoutfrom the north
side, and the two
bodies of water thus
formed are known as
Amethyst lakes.
Along the east side,
the shore consists of
swampy meadows,
Mt. Claivaux
Tonquin Hill
Mt Fitzwilliam
Amethyst Lakes and the Tonquin Valley from Surprise Point (14)
Tonquin pass in front of Tonquin hill on the left
Dungeon Peak from Surprise Point (14)
Amethyst lakes at the foot
Mt. Basilica
Mt. Curia
Meadow Ck.
Roche Noire
with a strip of green
forest on the gentle
slopes above. Still
higher, between the
timber and the moun-
tains, wide grassy
meadows form a
favourite haunt of the
caribou. Along the
south and west, the
shore is formed by
rock-slides and steep
moraines pushed down
by the glaciers cling-
ing to the rocky cliffs
of the massive
Ramparts above the
lake. The lakes,
reflecting in their
placid waters the over-
shadowing
range with its
varied snow-
clad outlines
and dark
rugged cliffs,
form a picture
that is seldom
equalled.
An ideal
camp ground
may be found
at the south
end of these
lakes. This
seems the
most favour-
a b 1 e point
Mt. Kataka
from which to attempt the ascent of Oldhorn, whose jagged summit is only
three miles distant. It is also conveniently situated with regard to some of the


Redoubt Pk.
Mt. Fraser
Casemate Mr.
Bastion Pk.
The Ramparts and Moat Lake from Tonquin Hill (15)
The continental divide passes through the top of Bastion peak and crosses the pass a few hundred feet to the right of the
head of Moat lake. The lake, the whole of which is in the view, is about a mile long
Turret Mountain and Mt. Geikie from Tonquin Hill (15)
The extreme top of Geikie is hidden by clouds; it is 4,300 feet above the floor of Tonquin pass at its foot


higher peaks lying to the west. If arrangements could be made to move from
the head of Portal creek to this camp in one day, it would be an easy and
interesting trip for some members of the party, to ascend Maccarib and descend
to the lakes, which are
on the opposite side of
the ridge.
( About a mile and
half from the south
end of Amethyst lakes
and five hundred feet
lower, in the main
valley of Astoria river,
lies Chrome lake; near
the junction of the
streams from the Fraser
and Eremite glaciers at
the head of the valley,
the stream from the
Fraser glacier, Pen-
stock creek, plunges
underground just be-
fore joining the other
one, Eremite creek.
There are fine meadows
Barbican Peak and the Tonquin Pass
from Tonquin Hill (15)
and a beautiful camp
ground here, offering a
splendid centre for the
exploration of the
valleys and glaciers
above. Although not
the highest mountain,
mount Erebus (10,234
feet) is one of the most,
conspicuous, standing
alone, its black rock
walls rising perpendi-
cularly from the glacier
below.
From the shoulder
of mount Clitheroe,
the return trip may be
made by way of Meadow
creek. Although there
is no trail, horses have
been taken down this
The Upper Valley of the Athabaska
Looking south from (1). Mt. Kerkeslin on the left. Whirlpool river in foreground. Entrance to Athabaska pass on the right
valley to the railway. For some distance the bottom is open, but about nine miles
down, or about four miles from the railway, it narrows and is apparently more
heavily timbered. About six miles below mount Clitheroe, the stream passes


below the Forum, and between Roche Noire and mount Arris. Both of these
mountains may be climbed without difficulty and splendid views may be obtained
from either. Mount Arris overlooks the unexplored Crescent valley with its snow-
clad peaks, its snow-fields and glaciers, while the higher
summit of Roche Noire gives a more extensive view of
the surrounding mountains. Two miles beyond, the
mouth of Crescent creek is passed and about thirteen
miles from mount Clitheroe, Meadow creek joins the
main valley of Miette river, eight miles above Jasper.
From here the old construction road is followed to the
town.
Athabaska Falls. These falls are on Athabaska
river about twenty miles above Jasper. They may be
reached in one day by a good trail along the east side of
the river. They are described by Mr. Stanley Washburn,
the war correspondent, in his book “Trails, Trappers
and Tenderfeet,” as follows: —
The river, peaceful and quiet as some great inland waterway, comes
flowing around a curve at a width well on to 200 yards, and then
suddenly the banks close in and the whole volume of water seems to
leap suddenly forward over a ledge less than one-third that width, and
fall into a chasm some 80 feet deep. The walls close in abruptly from
both sides and the vast tumult of water goes surging through a gorge so
narrow that a man could easily leap across from wall to wall. Far down
in the depths is the white froth and resonant roaring of this'vast stream,
which is congested into such meagre space that it seems as though the
walls of stone could not withstand the fury with which it lashes at the
rocky barriers that enclose it. A hundred feet above it, the noise and
thunder created down in the depths are so great that only by shouting
can one make his voice heard a foot away.
The Athabaska Gorge
Anemones


Elk
CHAPTER IV
TRIPS WEST FROM JASPER
Cabin lake . . . Caledonia lake . . . Dorothy lake . . . Pyramid and Patricia
lakes . . . Snaring river valley . . . Yellowhead pass
Cabin Lake. This is a small lake, about seventy-five acres in area, two miles
west of Jasper, on the bench five hundred feet above the town. A dam has
been constructed at the outlet and the lake forms a reservoir from which the water
supply for the town is obtained. Mina lake and several smaller ones lie close to it.
A good trail has been constructed leading to it.
Caledonia Lake. Caledonia lake is a small lake lying on a rocky bench above
Miette river about three and one-half miles west of Jasper. It is well stocked with
fish. It may be reached by following the wagon road up Miette river to near the
point where the Canadian Northern railway crosses. From here a trail to the right
crosses both railways and follows up the left bank of a small stream.
Dorothy Lake. Dorothy lake is the largest of a group of small lakes on the
rocky benches above Miette river. It is about six miles west of Jasper. Among
other lakes close by are Iris lake, Virl lake, and Christine lake. It may be reached
by means of a trail branching from the Miette wagon road, a short distance below
the mouth of Meadow creek.
Pyramid and Patricia Lakes. These are two of the most beautiful lakes near
Jasper and lie close to the foot of Pyramid mountain, on the benches above the
town. Pyramid lake is crescent-shaped with a beautiful wooded islet near the
centre of the curve. Its area is about three hundred acres. Lake Patricia, less than


half the size of Pyramid, is long and narrow with an average width of nine hundred
feet and has no visible outlet or inlet. One hundred and fifty villa lots have been
laid out along the shores of these lakes.
A good driveway has been constructed from the town to Pyramid lake. Starting
behind the town, this road climbs along the hillside to the top of the bench, one
hundred and
thirtyfeet above,
on a two and
one-half per
cent grade.
During the
ascent a splendid
view is obtained
of Athabaska
river and the
lakes beyond.
From here the
Pyramid Lake from the top of Pyramid Mountain (56)
It looks like a map. The small lake beyond is Katrine lake
road crosses the
bench and tra-
verses the north
end of lake
Patricia for over
a thousand feet.
A quarter of a
mile beyond, the
south end of
Pyramid lake is
reached and the
road then winds
along the east shore for about a mile. The total length of this road is about
four miles.
Pyramid Mountain. Six miles northeast of Jasper stands Pyramid mountain,
9,076 feet above sea-level, its dark rugged cliffs stained with red, and on its north
Morro Pk. Mt. Edith Cavell
Pyramid Mt.
The Valley of the Athabaska from Mt. Greenock (63)
The Palisade below Pyramid mountain. Snaring river in front of it
face a small glacier. To the traveller approaching Jasper from the north by railway,
this is one of the most prominent peaks, As summit white with snow the greater
part of the year, rising high above the rocky rampart lying between it and Snaring


river. The mountain is well named as from almost every point of view its summit
preserves a well defined pyramidal shape.
The view from the top is most impressive. To the north, lies the Athabaska
valley and Jasper lake, while above the lake to the right, clear cut against the dark
background, stands Roche
Miette; to the east side the
Colin range, with its sharp
limestone peaks, and the
Maligne valley, Medicine
lake just visible in the
distance; to the south the
Maligne range and below
it Athabaska river, flowing
like a silver thread from
its dark valley near the
head. Close below lies
Pyramid lake, lake Patricia
and many others, and over
the centre of lake Patricia,
the town of Jasper. West
Monarch Mountain from Mt. Elysium (51)
of the Athabaska, between it-and the Yellowhead pass, stretches an imposing
array of mountains, among which the following are conspicuous: Edith Cavell,
the Throne, the Ramparts, Geikie, Roche Noire and Fitzwilliam, the last named
lying just south of Yellow-
head pass. Beyond, to the
west and northwest, a
boundless sea of peaks
stretches as far as the eye.
can reach.
Pyramid mountain may
be ascended in one day
from Jasper or from a camp
at Pyramid lake. The climb
is rather long and arduous
on account of the fallen
timber on the flats at its
base. After timber line has
been reached, the remainder
South Branch of Snaring River
From a Spur of Mt. Chetamon (61)
of the climb is easier and more interesting.
Snaring River Valley. A region of unusual attractiveness and of which little
is yet known, is that lying at the head of the south fork of Snaring river, named
according to Sir James Hector:


after a tribe of Indians that at one time lived here, dwelling in holes dug in the ground, and subsisting
on animals which they captured with snares of green hide, in which manner they used to kill the big-
horn, small deer, and even moose.
Here open grassy summits and wide meadows lie just above timber line and give
easy access to several fine snow-capped mountains which rise to an elevation of
about 9,500 feet above sea-level. The valley of this
branch, and also that of the main stream below the
forks, is very narrow, and heavily timbered along the
lower slopes. Huge rock buttresses, projecting from the
mountains above, overhang the valley in a most imposing
manner and small lakes nestle in the cirques between.
In the basins below mount Henry and Cairngorm, there
are several small
lakes. Both
these basins
drain to the
south fork
through narrow
gaps between
rugged mount-
ains. About
three miles from
the mouth of
Yellowhead Pass
The grade along Miette river is so easy that
it is hardly noticed
Snaring river and about four miles below the forks, the
stream draining the basin behind Pyramid mountain enters through a narrow
canyon.
Access to this valley from the south would be rather difficult owing to the rolling
brule-covered benches lying between it and the Miette. Just below Emigrants
mountain there is a pass about 6,700 feet high leading over a grassy summit into
the open country just mentioned. The trip from Jasper through this pass and down
Snaring river would be one of unusual interest, but what difficulties might be
encountered is not yet known.
Yellowhead Pass. Dr. Cheadle says that the Yellowhead pass derives its
name from being the spot chosen by an Iroquois trapper, known by the sobriquet
of the Tete jaune or “Yellow head,” to hide the furs he obtained on the western
side.
The trip up the Miette valley to the pass is not very interesting unless taken with
some other object in view.
The valley for about eight miles above Jasper consists of a narrow flat, swampy
in places and hemmed in by steep rock cliffs. For about four miles both railways
are on the ftorth side of the valley, then the Canadian Northern crosses to the south
on a high trestle, and about four miles farther on the Grand Trunk Pacific crosses
where the river is only a few feet below the railway. The roads then run side by
side for about three miles when the Grand Trunk Pacific re-crosses the valley.


The trail follows the old construction road, now rather out of repair as a wagon
road, but still a good trail for horses. Just above where the Grand Trunk Pacific
crosses the Miette for the first time and about half a mile from Geikie station,
the road crosses the railway and climbs high up to the rocky bluffs along the north,
Mt. Basilica
Turret Mt. Mt. Geikie
Vista Pk.
Clairvaux Valley from Mt. Kataka (19)
to avoid the swamps in the bottom of the valley. Along this part of the trail many
of the mountains to the south may be seen and Yellowhead mountain, just above
the pass, is continually in view.
A short distance above Geikie station a glimpse may be obtained of Vista peak
and the large glaciers at the head of Clairvaux valley. Although the timber in the
lower part of the valley has been destroyed by fire, the upper part remains un-
marred and its beautiful meadows and dark forests form a delightful contrast to
the rugged mountains surrounding it. The stream enters Miette river through a
deep gorge about two miles west of Geikie station.
At Derr creek, about six miles from the railroad crossing, the road descends to a
large flat known as Dominion prairie. Many years ago a small mining boom was
started here by an energetic prospector, but like many other booms, it is now a thing
of the past. Beyond here the trail again takes to the hillside for about three miles,
when it crosses the Miette and passes over the divide into British Columbia.
During the last three miles, the most prominent peaks seen are Yellowhead mount-
ain on the north side of the pass and the sharp pyramid shaped summit of mount
Fitzwilliam on the south. The Iroquois half-breed who was with Lord Milton and


Dr. Cheadle when they crossed the pass, assured them that these two mountains
should be known from that time forth as Le Montagne de Milord and Montague
de Docteur , but Milton and Cheadle ‘‘took the liberty of naming them mount
Fitzwilliam and mount Bingley.” Fitzwilliam was Milton’s family name, and
the mountain is still known under that name, but Montagne de Docteur and
mount Bingley have both passed into oblivion, the summit being now known as
Yellowhead mountain.
White Drvas


Young Pigeon Hawks
CHAPTER V
TRIPS NORTH FROM JASPER
Maligne gorge . . . Maligna range . . . Medicine lake . . . Maligna lake . . . Jacques lake
Jasper to Pocahontas . . . Snake Indian river and falls
Maligne Gorge. About four miles to the northeast of Jasper there is one of
the finest gorges to be found in the Rocky mountains. It is on the Maligne
river and may be reached by means of a splendid driveway about nine miles in
length.
Leaving Jasper the road crosses the railways and winding down a hill past the
northern of the Twin lakes, crosses Athabaska river at a distance of about one mile
from the town. The river at this point consists of three channels with a bridge over
each. The main channel is to the east and, in low water, the other two are dry.
About one mile farther on, the road suddenly reaches the shore of lake Beauvert.
From this point there is a splendid view of the Colin range and Roche Bonhomme,
the latter being a mountain about six miles away, just beyond Maligne river.
A “bonhomme” is the ill-drawn figure of a man such as scrawled by children in
play and the top of this mountain forms a very well defined profile of a face looking
skyward. This profile is all the more noticeable as it is formed of dark reddish
coloured shale, in striking contrast to the grey limestone of which the rest of the
range is composed. Colin range possibly commemorates Colin Fraser, postmaster
at Jasper house from 1840 to 1846.
For nearly a mile the road now skirts the shore of this lake passing through
poplar and jack pine with clumps of spruce and fir. This lake is entirely fed by
springs as there isjio surface inlet, although a large stream flows from it to Atha-
baska river. On the shore of the lake near the north end, an Edmonton company
has placed a number of tents where accommodation is provided for tourists during
the summer months. This is about three miles from Jasper station by road, though
only about one mile in a straight line.


The road now passes by the east end of the southern of Trefoil lakes and then
cuts across to the banks of Athabaska river which it follows for about a quarter of
a mile. At this point the bank is steep, and about fifty feet above the river. It is
Lake Beauvert
The mountain on the extreme right is Roche Bonhomme. On the left is Hawk mountain and a little to the right the summit
of Colin mountain
also open, affording a splendid view of part of the Athabaska valley and the neigh-
bouring peaks. Then leaving the river bank the road descends slightly to the shore
Photo by Topley
On the Road to Maligne Gorge
Frequent stops are made to admire the landscape
of Annette lake, a
beautiful sheet of water
with shores open at the
west end but heavily
wooded at the east. At
the extreme eastern end,
farthest from the road,
lies Ochre lake, a small
triangular shaped lake
cut off from the main
lake by a very narrow
dike. When visited, this
lake was a flight yellow
colour forming a very
marked contrast to the
deep blue of the other.
A little farther on, we
reach the sandy shore
of Edith lake, a beautiful


blue green lake with two tiny islands near the opposite side. Soon the shores become
more stony and the banks rise steeply about twenty feet above the water. At one
point there has been a camp in a clump of trees overlooking the lake, a charming
spot which no experienced camper can pass without a sigh of regret. Leaving this
lake the road winds for some distance through open country, and then starts the
long climb of 400 feet to the top of the gorge. This
is partly through green timber and partly through
brule, and as the road winds and twists to avoid
steep grades, ever varying views of the mountains
are presented. Finally the gorge is reached and the
road follows along the banks for a quarter of a mile
to the crossing of the Maligne river. At this point
a cabin has been built so that anyone desiring to
do so may remain over night.
The Maligne gorge is one of the most important
scenic attractions in the vicinity of Jasper. The
mouth of the gorge is just above the Athabaska
flats and about a mile from the mouth of the
Maligne river. It is about half a mile in length and
over one hundred and eighty feet in depth. It seems
as though the walls, which in places are not more
than ten feet apart at the top, have a tendency to
close up but are held apart by some large boulders.
Through the dark cavern below the water rushes
with great velocity. The many huge pot-holes in
the walls throughout their whole depth are striking
examples of the wonderful erosive power of water.
At the entrance to the gorge the stream enters by
a cataract with a fall of about seventy-five feet.
A foot-bridge has been built a short distance below
so as to give a good view of the falls and of the
bottom of the gorge.
It is remarkable that only a small portion of the
water of Maligne river enters the gorge from above.
The stream entering is very small except in high
water and is said to become dry in winter. Large
volumes of water appear to enter at different places
especially below the gorge, so that on the flats the
Photo by Topley
The Maligne Gorge
The gorge is so narrow, deep and
dark that only glimpses of the river
flowing at the bottom are obtained
river, although flowing rapidly, is about one hundred feet wide. It is probable
that the surface water entering the gorge is only the drainage from that part of
the valley below Medicine lake, about nine miles higher up. Aledicine lake,
which has no surface outlet unless in extremely high water, receives all the drainage
from Maligne lake and the valley beyond, and it seems likely that this is the
water which after flowing underground for nine miles, emerges below the gorge.


Maligne Range. The trip to the summit of Maligne range is one of the most
popular trips from Jasper. The journey to the north end, Signal mountain, and
return may be made in one day either on foot or on horseback. This is what is
usually done, but if the traveller has more than one day to spare, further explora-
tions along this ridge will prove very interesting.
From Jasper we follow the road to the Maligne gorge for about seven miles till
we come to a trail leading to the right. The government telephone to the summit
also turns off here. Following this
trail, we cross some rough brule-
covered benches overgrown with small
jack pine, and then ever climbing
wind back and forth along the face
of the mountain. As
we ascend higher,
Athabaska valley
with its many beauti-
fully coloured lakes,
gradually comes into
view. Conspicuous
among the lakes is
lake Edith, its colour
varying from a light
green to a deep blue.
Higher up, Pyramid
and Patricia lakes
may be seen nestling
at the foot of Pyramid
mountain.
Photo by Topley
Maligne River above the Gorge
Most of the water flows underground
here. Below the gorge the river is a large
one and the crossing was difficult, some-
times dangerous, for the early travellers
and fur traders Hence the name
“Maligne”—wicked.
About seven hundred feet below the summit of Signal mountain, in the last
clump of timber, there is a splendid camp with good water and plenty of wood.
Front this point either mount Tekarra or Excelsior mountain may be climbed, the
former in about three hours and the latter in about five.
From Signal mountain there is an unbroken view of the twenty-five mile stretch
of Athabaska river with its many winding channels and lakes, while to the west
the course of the Miette river may be traced from Yellowhead pass to its mouth.
■Beth railways are plainly visible, winding up the Athabaska above Snaring river,
passing through Jasper and disappearing toward the pass. To the southwest,
Whistlers creek, Portal creek and Astoria river enter the Athabaska, their wide
gravel bars and numerous channels showing white against the dark background.
Just to the left of the mouth of Astoria river, stands mount Edith Cavell, the do-
minating feature of the landscape, while to the right fascinating glimpses are ob-
tained of the lofty mountains and large snowfields near the divide.


Mount Tekarra lies about two and a half miles southeast of the camp ground
below Signal mountain. The first part of the ascent is a walk along the summit of
the ridge or along the easy slopes above timber line to the north, the latter avoiding
the descent of a slight
dip in the ridge, just
before reaching the
mountain. In a rocky
amphitheatre at the
base of the mountain,
there is a small beauti-
fully coloured lake.
Immediately above a
long shoulder extend-
ing toward Maligne
valley, there is a small
Photo by Topley
Maligne Chalet at
the Gorge
A convenient starting
place for excursions to
the neighbourhood
couloir which offers an easy means
of ascent when the snow is in good
condition.
The view from mount Tekarra is
very similar to that seen from Signal
mountain, except that part of
Athabaska valley is hidden by the ridge to the northwest, but being nearly fifteen
hundred feet higher, it gives a better view of the more distant peaks.
Should time permit, camp may be taken to the head of a pretty little valley
east of mount Tekarra, about four miles beyond Signal mountain, where there
are open meadows and good pasture. Although there is no trail, horses may
easily be taken across by keeping on the benches above timber line. This may be
done in one day from Jasper. From this camp the ascent of mount Tekarra may
be made without difficulty in two hours, or that of Excelsior mountain in
three hours.
The main part of the view from Excelsior mountain, not seen from Signal
mountain, is the Maligne valley and the mountains to the southeast. To the east
lies Medicine lake, a sheet of water fo«t ! ~aad--aTiali~niilesJong and half a mile wide.
To the southeast stands the Watchtower, while beyond stretches an endless array
of snow-clad peaks. A little to the right a huge double-pointed glacier-hung peak
(probably one of those near Maligne lake) rises above the surrounding mountains.
Below the Watchtower, above timber line, lies a valley with grassy flats hemmed in
by low ridges, at the head of which there are some small glaciers and three small
lakes. To the northeast is mount Tekarra, a small lake at its base.
Another trip on foot may be taken by following up the valley in which the camp
is situated. First there is the small lake at the base of mount Tekarra, and higher
up there are two others. At the head of the valley there is a pass leading into the
valley below the Watchtower. From here it is possible to climb the Watchtower,


to explore the valley below, or to follow the ridge to the west, above the Athabaska,
leading to Shovel pass about three miles beyond.
It is quite probable that some game will be seen during this trip. During the
season of 1915, coyotes and caribou were seen below Signal mountain and sheep in
the valley below mount Tekarra. Ptarmigan and grouse were also seen.
Medicine Lake from Excelsior Mountain (31)
The lake is four miles long and half a mile wide
Medicine Lake. This lake
lies in Maligne valley about nine
miles above the gorge, or about
eighteen miles by road from
Jasper, and may be reached in
one day from that point. The
lake is about four miles long and
a little over half a mile wide. The water from the Maligne lake district drains into
it but there is no surface outlet, the outflowing water apparently passing under-
ground and emerging at some place below the Maligne gorge. There is a good
trail up the valley and a wagon road is being constructed.
Maligne Lake. Maligne lake, about forty miles southeast of Jasper, is said
to be one of the most beautiful lakes in the Rocky mountains. It is about twenty
miles long and is surrounded by high snow-clad mountains. It may be reached in
two days either by way of the Maligne valley and Medicine lake or by the Shovel
pass.
Jacques Lake. This is a small lake lying about fifteen miles southeast of Inter-
laken, a flag station on the Grand Trunk Pacific railway. It may be reached by
an old trail leading up Jacques creek and across the heads of two intervening
valleys. As there is no accommodation for tourists at this point, the trip is usually
made from Jasper by way of the Maligne valley and Medicine lake, or from Poca-
hontas by way of the Rocky river. This lake is exceptionally well stocked with fish.
Jasper to Pocahontas. This trip affords interesting views of the Athabaska
valley. The trail, while not by any means good, is passable for horses, except in
very high water when some of the fords are rather dangerous. The trip can be
made equally well from Pocahontas and requires about two days. Leaving Jasper
we follow the road to the Maligne gorge. For anyone who wishes to do so, this is
a convenient point for the ascent of Roche Bonhomme, from whose summit a


magnificent view of Athabaska valley may be obtained. From here the trail winds
through the open woods along the edge of the gorge and down steep rock}" bluffs
until the bottom of the valley is reached. Once in the river bottom, the trail stays
Medicine Lake
looking Southeast
from (37)
Maligne lake in the
distance
on the flats between the river and
the rocky shoulders of the mount-
ains, except where the latter extend
to the edge of the river. Three
miles from the Maligne gorge and
again two miles farther on, the trail
crosses small streams. These
streams apparently come from deep
rocky gorges,
both of which
would prob-
ably repay
investigation.
At the mouth
of the last
one, Garonne
creek, there
are some deserted shacks formerly the home of John Moberly, an early settler
who sold out to the Government to make way for the park. A camp at this
point, which is probably the place known to early voyageurs as “campement de
Cardinal,’’
would be a very
convenient base
for the ascent of
mount Hawk or
Colin mountain.
About four
miles beyond,
the trail crosses
tw r o creeks, both
dry, except in
high water. The
southerly one
comes from a
deep gorge be-
tween mount
Hawk and an
The Garonne Gorge from Henry House (58)
Colin mountain in the background
outlying shoulder. It is improbable that there is any large gorge here but the
valley is extremely narrow with steep cliffs on the north side. The second stream,
Morro creek, comes through a narrow,precipitous valley between Morro peak and


mount Hawk forming a gorge which will no doubt be of great interest when ex-
plored.
A short distance farther on, the trail climbs over a shoulder of Morro peak, from
which a glimpse of the huge rock buttresses up the Snaring river may be obtained
and then drops down
to the railway a short
distance below the
bridge across the
Athabaska river. A
few yards beyond a
small stream breaks
outof a rocky shoulder
above the railroad,
the water being very
cold and tasting
strongly of sulphur.
From here to Inter-
Roche Bonhomme from Henry House (58)
laken the trail follows the right of way, leaving the railroad only to ford streams
or back channels of the river where the bridges are impassable for horses. At this
point an old trail leads to Jacques lake, about fifteen miles to the southeast. It
is used very little and is not widely known. It crosses the summit of Jacques
creek and two other summits before reaching Jacques lake.
Leaving Interlaken the trail follows along a narrow sandy ridge between Jasper
lake and Talbot lake, to near Hawes.
Talbot lake is probably the lake of islands
to which De Smet removed from Jasper
house owing to insufficiency of provisions,
for so large a bod} r -guard as 54 persons
and 20 dogs. The ridge, one hundred to
four hundred yards in width, has been
formed by the agency of the wind which
has carried the fine sand from the shore
of the lake and deposited it along the top
of the ridge. At Hawes it is necessary to
go some distance up Rocky river, and
after crossing to come back along the
shoulder of Roche Miette, in order to
avoid some swamps near the mouth.
Disaster point 1 the end of this shoulder,
has been cut away to make a passage for
Morro Gorge from Snaring River Crossing (60)
l The Chief’s bag got a crush against a rock, and his flask, that held a drop of brandy carefully preserved for the next plum-
pudding, was broken. It was hard, but on an expedition like this the most serious losses are taken calmly and soon forgotten.
—G. M. Grant in Ocean to Ocean.


the railway, and the packers now drive their horses through the rock cut rather than
use the old fur traders’ trail which crossed high up on the mountain. Beyond here the
trail reaches the old construction road and follows it down the valley to Pocahontas.
Snake Indian River and Falls. The falls on Snake Indian river are about
thirty-seven miles from Jasper and the trip requires two days each way. The route
Mt. Greenock
Roche Ronde
Roche de Smet
Boule Roche
Roche Miette
Morro Pk.
Morro Gorge
Jasper Lake from the Palisade (59)
taken leads down the valley of the Athabaska, following the old railway construc-
tion road for about twenty-four miles to where the river emerges from the deep
channel which it has eroded in its own valley, into the wide flats of Athabaska
river. Along these flats it flows northerly for about three miles before entering the
Athabaska. The trip throughout is full of interest and many delightful views of the
mountains are displayed while passing through the park-like woods or open mea-
dows along the Athabaska.
About seven miles below
Jasper is Swift’s ranch.
Swift settled there in
September 1891, but now
resides in Jasper. Every-
body knows Swift.
“His name,” says Washburn,
“is known and respected by
every trapper, pioneer and pros-
pector who has threaded the
wilderness within a thousand
miles.”
Washburn,who had many
a talk with him, relates how
the call of the" wild came
Snaring River and Mt. Chetamon
from the Railway Crossing (60)
to Swift in the early seventies, then a youngster in Buffalo selling lightning rods. In
a few years he had made a reputation for himself as a daring driver of the stage line
that ran from Bismark, North Dakota, to Deadwood. The year 1890 found him


prospecting in British Columbia, then he bought a pack outfit and hit out for the
undiscovered country at the head of the Fraser river. Three months after leaving
Kamloops he reached the Tete Jaune cache at the west end of the Yellowhead pass.
Here Indians advised him to make for Edmonton, but the attractions of Jasper
Chetamon Lake
Looking northwest from (61)
park were too much for him, and he has been
there ever since, trapping and trading.
“In all these years,” says Washburn, “there was
never a poor bedraggled trapper or prospector, red or
white, that was ever turned away from Swift’s with
an empty stomach. If an unfortunate lost his outfit
in the rivers, it was always; ‘lf we can get to Swift’s
place, he’ll fix us out.’ ”
Four miles farther on we reach Snaring
river and through its narrow gorge obtain
a glimpse of the rocky peaks beyond. From
here the road continues along the flat for
about two miles and then swinging to the
left passes close to the base of several high
mountains, the highest being Gargoyle
mountain, whose summit stands 5,500 feet
above the valley. Corral creek, on the
south side of this peak, has a wide gravel
bar, dry except in high water, but about
half a mile beyond, a large stream flows from a spring at the base of a long
shoulder of the mountain.
Sixteen miles from Jasper, Vine creek is reached. An old trail which leads up
this creek into a tributary of Snake Indian river, is reported to cross from there
into the valley of Snaring river. For a distance of four miles up this creek, all the
timber has been destroyed by fire, and for the greater part of this distance the trail
follows the rocky bottom of the creek. The remainder of the valley and the valley
beyond is heavily timbered. From a camp near the summit, the ascent of Roche
De Smet may be made very easily.
A magnificent view of the Athabaska valley and of the mountains to the east may
be obtained from mount Greenock a low peak lying about two miles north of the
point where the road crosses. (View page 21.)
Soon after passing Vine creek, the road goes close to the edge of the south end
of Jasper lake, and then to avoid the cliffs along the shore, climbs up to the bench
some six hundred feet above the lake. It then gradually descends to the flats at the
mouth of the gorge, where the trail crosses Snake Indian river, while the road con-
tinues across the flats to the old ford on Athabaska river, opposite Roche Miette.
This is the place where Sir James Hector forded the river on his way to Jasper
House, January 31, 1859; —
It was quite dark when we reached the base of Miette’s Rock, where a spur of the mountain from the
south compelled us again to seek the river, which we now hound to be a rapid stream, without more than
a mere fringe of ice about its margins. After searching about for a crossing place in the dark without


success, we took the most shallow place we could find, where the river was very rapid, and without taking
the harness off the dogs, unfastened them from the sleighs, and pitching them into the water, pelted them
wfith pieces of ice, so that they swam for the other side of the river. We then got off the edge of the ice
ourselves, and found the water took us about the waist, and getting the sleds, loads and all, on our
shoulders, waded through the rapid, which was about 100 yards wide, and so reached the left bank.
The wind, which had changed at sunset
to NE., was bitterly cold, so that the
plunge into the water felt rather warm
at first, but on re-emerging we at once
stiffened into a mass of ice, for as I found
half an hour afterwards, the thermometer
stood at —ls°. In this state we again
tackled the dogs, that were all frozen
into a lump with their harness, and after
a run of two miles through the woods,
we reached Jasper House at 10 p. rn.
From the crossing the trail
ascends on to the benches on the
north side of Snake Indian river
and leads up the stream.
The river is called Stoney
river on Thompson’s map,
Roche Jacques from Mt. Esplanade (62)
Jacques creek on the right. The head of Jasper lake on the left
1813-14. The name Snake Indian is first found on the Palliser Expedition map.
Sir James Hector explains that there was once a tribe of Indians known as the
Snakes, that lived in the country to the north of Jasper House, but which, during
the time of the North West Fur Company, was treacherously exterminated by
the Assiniboines. They were invited to a peace feast by the latter Indians,
when they were to settle
all their disputes, and
neither party was to bring
any weapons. It was held
about three miles below
the second site of Jasper
House, but the Assiniboines
being all secretly armed,
fell on the poor Snakes in
the midst of the revelry,
and killed them all.
The Snake Indians
proper, whom De Smet says
are so called by reason of
their poverty, which reduces
South Branch of Snake Indian River from Mt. Bistre (67)
them to burrow in the ground like those reptiles and to live upon roots,
seem never to have lived in Canada, and the name may have been used here as
a generic epithet descriptive of any feeble tribe. De Smet, for instance, says;—


Many wandering families of the Carrier tribe and Ashiganes or Sock Indians of New Caledonia,
compelled by hunger, have quitted their country, traversed the east of the mountains and now range the
valleys of this region in quest of food. They nourish themselves with roots, and whatever thev can catch,
many of them have their teeth worn to the gums by the earth and sand they swallow with their nourish-
ment. The winter they are well, for then the moose, elk, and reindeer are plentiful. ./. . By way of a
Whitecap and Branch of Snake
Indian River From Alt. Cum-
nock (66)
dainty morsel, the Indians pluck out
the eyes of fish with the end of the
fingers and swallow them raw, like-
wise the tripes with their whole
contents, without further ceremony
than placing them an instant on the
coals, from thence into the omnibus
or general reservoir, without even
undergoing the operation of the jaws.
The valley of Snake Indian
river is six miles or more in
v. idth and has a wide flat bottom. Through the floor
of this valley for a distance of about fourteen miles,
the river has cut a narrow channel two to four
hundred feet deep. The falls are situated near the
upper end of this channel and are said to be about
forty feet across and sixty feet high. On the benches
about a mile to the north of the trail, and about three
miles from the crossing, there are two fair-sized lakes,
Celestine lake and Princess lake. On the south side
of the river there are three large tributaries entering the main stream below the
falls, two close together about eight miles up and the third about twelve miles
above the ford. These streams have their sources in the higher mountains to
the south and enter the main valley through deep gorges in the ridge extending
northwest from Roche De Smet. About eleven miles up, a tributary enters from
the north, one of whose branches heads below mount Aeolus. Horses may be
taken to the head of this stream, from which the ascent of mount Aeolus may
be made quite easily.
Goats


CHAPTER VI
TRIPS FROM POCAHONTAS
Snake Indian valley . . . Ronde creek . . . Coronach creek . . . Roche Ronde . . . Roche a Bosche
Moosehorn creek . . . Boule Roche and Ogre gorge . . . Punchbowl falls . . . Roche Miette
Roche à Perdrix . . . Miette hot springs . . . Fiddle river . . . Rocky river gorge
Snake Indian River. Snake Indian valley described in the last chapter may
be reached from Pocahontas more quickly than from Jasper, if arrangements
can be made to cross the Athabaska. When the water is low enough to permit ford-
ing the river, it is only six miles to the mouth of the valley.
Ronde Creek. This is a small stream entering the Athabaska almost directly
opposite Pocahontas. Coal mines have been opened nearby and several houses
have been built near its mouth for the miners. It flows through a very narrow and
picturesque wooded ravine, one hundred feet or more in depth. A good footpath
leads for some distance up the ravine.
Coronach Creek. Coronach creek is on the opposite side of the river from
Pocahontas, about four miles above the Canadian Northern station of Bedson.
Its source is a high rocky basin lying behind Roche a Bosche, out of which it flows
through the high perpendicular walls of a narrow gap between this mountain and
the one behind. Winding to the south of Roche a Bosche, it passes within a mile of
Celestine lake, and then recrosses the ridge in a gorge two to three hundreed feet
deep. A smaller and less picturesque stream, heading in the valley between Roche
a Bosche and Roche Ronde, joins the former a short distance above the trail.
Near the mouth of the stream, there are some fine open meadows and park-like
woods. From a camp at this point Roche a Bosche or Roche Ronde may be climbed
without difficulty.
Eagle


Roche Ronde. Roche Ronde is the mountain at the southeast end of the range
lying between Moosehorn creek and Snake Indian river. It lies across the river
from Pocahontas and is about five miles distant. The side fronting the station is a
precipitous limestone wall, seven or eight hundred feet high. Seen from here, in
the early morning light, it shows the clearly defined profile of an Indian warrior
with his war-plumes floating behind him.
Principal Grant thus describes it; —
Roche Ronde was to our right, its stratification as distinct as the leaves of a half opened book.
The mass of the rock was limestone, and what at a distance had been only peculiarly bold and rugged
outlines, were now seen to be the different angles and contortions of the strata. And such contortions!
One high mass twisting up the sides in serpentine folds; another bent in great waving lines, like petrified
billows. The colouring, too, was all that artist could desire. Not only the dark green of the spruce in
the corries, which turned into black when far up, but autumn tints of red and gold as high as vegetation
had climbed on the hill sides; and above that, streaks and patches of yellow, green, rusty red and black,
relieving the grey mass of limestone; while up the valley, every shade of blue came out according as
the hills were near or far away, and summits hoary with snow bounded the horizon.
From the northeast, or south, the ascent of this mountain might offer some diffi-
culty, particularly from the east or south, but from behind, by way of the north
branch of Coronach creek, there is no difficulty. A small lake lies on the saddle
behind the peak, about three hundred feet below the summit.
Though nearly the lowest mountain of the range, it stands thirty-eight hundred
feet above the valley of the Athabaska, giving a magnificent view of the river
with its many
lakes, islands
and winding
channels.
Directly
across the
river rise the
imposing cliffs
of Roche
Miette while
below and to
the right is
the wide valley of the
Rocky river. To the east
and north stand Roche a
Perdrix and Boule Roche,
forming the gateway to the
mountains through which
Athabaska river flows on
Boule Range looking Northeast
from (76)
its way to the
ocean. To the
south lie
Jasper lake
and the upper
valley of the
Athabaska,
while both to
south and
west are in-
numerable peaks grad-
ually increasing in
height as the summit
of Rocky mountains
is approached.
Roche a Bosche.
The meaning of Bosche
is not known. It may
be a corruption of
Bosse, a hujnp. The mountain belongs to the same group as Roche Ronde and
is very conspicuous from the valley.
Moosehorn Creek. This is a small stream entering Athabaska river from the
northwest, a short distance below Pocahontas. The valley is wide and “U” shaped,


with a large meadow at its mouth. Above this meadow, for about four miles, the
stream runs through a deep gorge which it has eroded in the bottom of the valley.
Near the head is a small lake, and a low pass beyond leads into Hay river. The
whole valley has been swept by fire and only occasional clumps of green timber
remain.
Ont h e
south side,
the slopes rise
gradually to
near timber
line, and be-
yond this the
mountains
are steep and
rugged with
precipi t o u s
outlying cliffs
of limestone.
The highest
Boule Roche from Bedson Ridge (78)
The plains of Alberta in the distance
mountain of
the range, in
fact, the high-
es t in the
n e i g hbour-
hood, mount
Aeolus (8,672
feet), may be
climbed by
following up a
small water-
course on the
east side to
the summit of
the ridge behind and then by traversing the arete overlooking Moosehorn creek.
Just above mount Aeolus and about eight miles from the Athabaska a large
creek enters from the west, and beyond the mountains become lower.
On the north side between the creek and the main range, lies a ridge of low hills
through which several large creeks enter the main valley by narrow deep-cut
channels. Beyond these hills, between them and the summit, rises a rock wall
several hundred feet high, which extends in a straight line for about three miles.
Through this wall, the branches of the above stream have cut their channels,
leaving deep rugged gaps. These gorges, of which there are seven in less than three
miles, are found on the branches of the third and fourth tributaries entering from
the north,
above the
mouth of the
main stream.
Far t h e r
south, the
wall is less
distinct, and
on the north
it becomes
coincident
with the main
range.
The sum-
mits of the
mountains of
this range
consist of
peaks, flat
topped and
Boule Roche from the Head of Brule Lake (90)
covered with shale on the side facing the creek, but breaking away abruptly to the north-
east. These peaks ranging from 7,000 to 8,000 feet above sea-level, form the outlying
escarpment of the higher mountains, and overlook the lower foothills beyond.


The old packtrail which followed the creek bottom, crossing and re-crossing the
stream, has been abandoned and a new' trail has been constructed, following the
south bank of Ronde creek and climbing to the benches above. For some distance
it runs near the base of the mountains, and then cuts across the flats toward Moose-
Roche Miette and Pocahontas from Bedson (75)
Pocahontas and Jasper collieries on the left. Athabaska and railways in foreground
horn creek, joining the original trail at the mouth of the creek flowing from mount
Aeolus.
Boule Roche and Ogre Gorge. Boule Roche, five and one half miles north
of Pocahontas, lies on the west side of the Athabaska valley at the entrance to the
mountains. On the north side it is extremely steep and precipitous, while on the
south the slopes though rocky are more gradual. A peculiar wavy form of stratifica-
tion is very plainly marked near the top. From the summit, a long ridge with a
perpendicular w'all facing east, extends southward to the river. Through the end
of this ridge the Canadian Northern has constructed a long tunnel.
About a mile west of the river, the stream draining the valley south of the
mountain flows through a break in the wall, at this point about two hundred feet
high. This ravine has been called Ogre gorge because from one viewpoint an enor-
mous head with mouth outstretched is apparently trying to bite out of a large rock
on the opposite side. There is a tradition that an Indian went into the gorge and
was never seen again.
To reach this gorge from Pocahontas, it is necessary to cross the Athabaska.
Usually a boat is taken as far as the Canadian Northern tunnel, about four miles
down the river and a short distance above Brule lake. From here, the trip is com


pleted on foot as the stream near its entrance to the lake becomes very narrow and
rapid. The whole trip requires about five hours.
Punchbowl Falls. This is a small but very attractive waterfall situated on
Mountain creek, about one thousand yards from Pocahontas. The solid rock has
been eroded so as to resemble
a huge goblet, and from this
the fall derives its name. A
good trail has been built and
some rustic bridges construct-
ed below it, so that it may be
seen to the best possible
advantage.
Roche Miette. One of
the most prominent mount-
ains near the railway is Roche
Miette, a huge barren rock
lying slightly over two miles
south of Pocahontas. Its
summit rises over four thou-
sand feet above the river,
the last thousand feet being
almost precipitous. This
Jasper Lake from Roche Miette (82)
Rocky river in foreground
Pyramid mountain on the left
mountain has been mentioned by nearly every traveller who has passed
through the Athabaska valley.
Principal Grant refers to it as “that imposing sphinx-like head with the swelling Elizabethan ruff
of sandstone and shales around the neck, save on one side where a corrugated mass of partly-coloured
strata twisted like a coil of serpents from far down nearly half way up the head, haunted us for days.
Mighty must have been the forces that upreared and shaped such a monument. Vertical strata were
piled on horizontal, and horizontal again on the vertical, as if nature had determined to build a tower
that would reach to the skies.”
Paul Kane gives us the origin of the name: —
We were now close upon the mountains, and it is scarcely possible to conceive the intense force
with which the wind howled through a gap formed by the perpendicular rock called ‘Miette’s Rock.’
1,500 feet high on the one side and a lofty mountain on the other. The former derives its appellation
from a French voyageur, who climbed Its summit and sat smoking his pipe with his legs hanging over
the fearful abyss.
The projecting shoulders of Roche Miette bar the way to the east side of the
Athabaska river, and before the advent of the railway, it was passed by means of a
steep and dangerous trail which climbed nearly two thousand feet above the river.
No doubt this toifsome climb has tended to add to the distinction of the mountain.
However, since the construction of the railway, the old trail has been abandoned,
and the packers now take horses through the rock cut on the Grand Trunk Pacific at
Disaster point, a much shorter and easier route, though not necessarily a safer one.


Roche Miette may be ascended from Pocahontas in three to four hours. Roads
and trails for the use of the miners have been built almost to timber line on the
north side, where the mountain can be climbed easily. The top is large and undulat-
ing, for the most part covered with reddish shale, and water may usually be found
within one hundred feet of the summit.
Roche à Perdrix, Fiddle Range and Ashlar Ridge from Roche Miette (83).
The valley of Fiddle river is in front of Ashlar ridge in the foreground. The Fiddle gorge across Ashlar ridge is in line with
Roche a Perdrix, the mountain on the left, which is the northwest extremity of Fiddle range. In the distance on the left are
the plains of Alberta
The view from the summit is magnificent, presenting an unbroken panorama of
the Athabaska valley for twenty-five miles, including Brule lake to the north and
Jasper lake to the south. On the west side of the Athabaska lie the valleys of Moose-
horn creek and Snake Indian river, and on the east side just below and to the south,
is the wide valley of the Rocky river, the gorge a few miles above its mouth, plainly
visible. To the north, beyond the gap, between Boule Roche and Roche a Perdrix,
rolling foothills extend as far as the eye can see. In every other direction high
mountains rise, range beyond range, a sea of peaks. Conspicuous among these is
the glacier-crowned summit of Pyramid mountain, to the left of Jasper lake and
the sharp peak of Mount Aeolus on the south side of Moosehorn creek.
Concerning RocheMiette and the geology of the region Professor Coleman says: —
We were now in a region of sharply folded mountains and a splendid anticlinal arch, thousands
of feet high, rose just across the river, a fitting doorway to a superhuman cathedral, for ever closed to
man. Farther up there were synclinal mountains, where the anticlinal arches had been ruptured and
destroyed, leaving what was once the bottom of the valley high up in the sky as jagged pinacles, con-
vincing instances of the lofty' being humbled and the lowly exalted.
Other folds had been flung over on their side and had then been carved by frosts and torrents i nto all
sorts of adventurous shapes, which, though not very lofty, were far more exciting to a geologist than the


huge blocks tilted up to the northeast found in the other main valleys, such as the Brazeau. the Clear-
water and the Bow.
The stiff beds of limestone, quartzite and slate of the Athabaska mountains must have been buried
under a far thicker load of over-lying rock than was the case farther southeast to make them so much
more plastic, and one must
imagine them to have been
thousands of feet below
the original surface when
they were crumpled and
contorted into their present
daring forms.
Roche Miette, around
whose projecting cliffs the
trail curbed beside the river,
Is the most impressive bit
of architecture along the
Athabaska, pushing its bold
front out into the valley
like a commanding fort
with unscalable walls three
thousand feet high, and a
flat top somewhat para-
Roche a Perdrix from Bedson Ridge (78)
Fiddle gorge and Ashlar ridge on the right. Athabaska river in foreground on the left
peted and loopholed. Though it belongs to the third range inward from the edge of the mountains,
the nearly vertical cliff and the square massive front can be seen many miles out on the plains.
Beyond it to the east the lower outlying range has been severely folded, so that one mass has been
named by McEvoy Folding mountain. We lunched near the foot of this peak where there was plenty
of grass in the little openings among the poplars, so that our horses could fill up satisfactorily before
entering the wooded foot-hills just outside the mountains.
Roche a Perdrix. Roche a Perdrix lies about five miles east of Pocahontas
and directly across Athabaska river from Boule Roche. These two mountains,
standing on opposite sides of the river, guard the narrow gateway to the wonder-
land within. Its name, Perdrix, is derived from the peculiar folding of its strata
which is said, from some viewpoints, to resemble the tail of a partridge.
Situated at the west end of the Fiddle mountains., Roche a Perdrix rises abruptly
thirty-five hundred feet above the meadows at its base. From its summit a fine
view may be obtained of the meadows and of the Athabaska valley beyond, of
Moosehorn valley, and of the neighbouring mountains.
Directly below Roche a Perdrix are large meadows and open park lands with a
growth of scattered poplar, spruce and jack pine. These lands are covered with a
luxuriant growth of grass and wild flowers, and in the latter part of the summer
berries are very plentiful. Farther north or west, the country, still level or rolling
gently, is heavily wooded with many small lakes in the timber. Through this dis-
trict the trail passes, winding close beneath Roche a Perdrix and skirting the base
of Folding mountain before it turns down the valley of Maskuta creek.
This is the tfail followed by Grant where the party had the first good view, at
close range, of the mountains.
Suddenly it (the trail) opened out on a lakelet, and right in front, a semi-circle of five glorious mount-
ains appeared; a high wooded hill and Roche a Perdrix on our left, Roche a Myette beyond, Roche
Ronde in front, and a mountain above Lac Brule on our right. For half a mile down from their summits,


Parts per
Grains per
Million.
Gallon.
Sodium chloride (NaCl)
11
0.77
“ sulphate (Na._>S0 4 )
27
1.89
Potassium sulphate (KoSOj
39
2.73
Magnesium “ (MgS0 4 )
324
22.68
Calcium “ (CaS0 4 )
1,104
77.28
“ carbonate (CaC0 2 )
193
13.51
“ phospate tCa 3 (P0 4 )
traces
Oxide of iron, Alumina (FeoOgALOs)
Silica (SiO-,)
45
3.15
no tree, shrub, or plant covered the nakedness of the three that the old trappers had thought worth)
of names; and a clothing of vegetation would have marred their massive grandeur. The first three
were so near and towered up so bold that their full forms, even to the long shadows on them, were
reflected clearly in the lakelet, next to the rushes and spruce of its own shores. Here is a scene for a
grand picture equal to Hill’s painting of the Yo Semite Valley. A little farther on, another lakelet re-
flected the mountains to the right, showing not only the massive grey and blue of the limestone, but
red and green colourings among the shales that separated the strata of limestone. The road now de-
scended rapidly from the summit of the wooded hill that we had so slowly gained, to the valley of the
Athabaska. As it wound from point to point among the tall dark green spruces, and over rose bushes
and vetches, the soft blue of the mountains gleamed through everywhere, and when the woods parted,
the mighty column of Roche a Perdrix towered a mile above our heads, scuds of clouds kissing its snowy
summit, and each plication and angle of the different strata up its giant sides was boldy and clearly
revealed. We were entering the magnificent Jasper portals of the Rocky Mountains by a quiet path
winding between groves of trees and rich lawns like an English gentleman’s park.
Crossing a brook, divided into half a dozen brooklets by willows, the country opened a little and the
base and inner side of Roche a Perdrix were revealed; but it was still an amphitheatre of mountains
that opened out before us, and Roche a Myette seemed as far off as ever. Soon the Riviere de Violon
was heard brawling around the base of Roche a Perdrix and rushing on like a true mountain torrent to
the Athabaska. We stopped to drink to the Queen out of its clear ice-cold waters, and halted for dinner
in a grove on the other side of it, thoroughly excited and awed by the grand forms that had begirt our
path for the last three hours. We could sympathize with the enthusiast, who returned home after years
of absence, and when asked what he had as an equivalent for so much lost time, answered: u I have
seen the Rocky mountains.”
Miette Hot Springs. Situated in a deep gorge on Sulphur creek, a
branch of Fiddle river, there are several hot sulphur springs which are said to be of
great medicinal value and many cures of rheumatism have been reported. The
springs are confined to a zone about two hundred feet wide and range in tempera-
ture from 101 to 128 degrees Fahrenheit. Some circular bathing pools, constructed
from boulders and sulphur rock, are supposed to have been made by the Hudson’s
Bay fur traders. Though there is very little accommodation for tourists at present,
this will doubtless be remedied in the near future and the springs will then rival
those of Banff.
On this creek, a short distance below the hot springs, there is a small gorge,
near which the trail passes, and several small falls have been discovered on the creek
above the springs.
An analysis of the water, made for the Geological Survey of Canada in 1910,
gives the probable composition as follows: —


The springs are about ten miles southeast of Pocahontas. A good pack trail
has been constructed and they may be reached in about three hours.
Fiddle River. This is a large stream entering Athabaska river from the south,
about three miles northeast of Pocahontas. It is remarkable chiefly on account of
the rough tortuous nature of the lower
part of the valley. Within twelve miles
of its mouth it crosses three times
through a pronounced ridge of lime-
stone, each time in a deep gorge.
The first gorge occurs between two
and three miles from the mouth of the
river, where it crosses the ridge for the
first time. This gorge may be reached
by the old construction road down the
Athabaska, which passes within a mile
of the lower end. The upper end may
be reached by taking the trail leading to
the Miette hot springs. This trail reaches
Fiddle river, about five miles from Poca-
hontas, at a point about one mile above
the end of the gorge.
About eight miles from the mouth, the
river again crosses the ridge. Probably
the best way to explore this gorge would
be to leave the trail at the mouth of Sul-
phur creek and follow up Fiddle river
on foot.
The third gorge, about twelve miles
from the railway, is where the stream
crosses the ridge for the third and last
time. The upper end of this gorge may
Fiddle Gorge
be reached by taking the trail to the Miette hot springs. From here a trail leads
to a small stream entering from the south about half a mile above the springs.
Following up this stream, the trail crosses the summit through a beautiful tim-
bered pass about fifty-three hundred feet high and descends into the valley
of Fiddle river a short distance above the gorge. The total distance from
Pocahontas is about thirteen or fourteen miles. Fiddle river, or riviere de
Violon, was known by this name in De Smet’s day. It may have originated from
the fact that the of the main stream and of its tributary resembles some-
what the outline of a fiddle.
Rocky River Gorge. Rocky river, one of the largest tributaries of the Atha-
baska, enters from the east a short distance below Hawes. For five miles above its
mouth, it flows through a wide valley with a gravel bar five or six hundred feet in


width. Above that for about four miles, it flows through a fine gorge about three
hundred feet deep, with many striking features. At the upper end of the gorge,
Swiftwater creek
enters from the
south. There is
another smaller
gorge on this
stream about a
mile and a half
above its mouth,
where the creek
enters the main
valley through
a narrow gap
between the two
mountains.
Rocky River from Roche Miette (82)
Roche Jacques is cut by right border. Mt. Emir is the next
mountain to the left. The tributary of Rocky river in fore-
ground is Makwa creek. The small hill on the left is Makwa
ridge
The gorge of
the Rocky river
is about ten
miles from Poca-
hontas and the
round trip may
be made in one
day. The trail
passes under-
neath the im-
pressive cliffs of
Roche Miette
and turns up the
north side of the
river along the base of the rugged range extending southwesterly from Roche
Miette. If more time is available the trip may be continued to Jacques lake,
about fourteen miles beyond.
The gorge may be reached from Jasper also, the round trip from the latter place
requiring about four days.
Goat


Approximate
Time for
TRIP
distance in
miles
round
trip
Height
feet.
Remarks
Miette valley
2
1 hour
Wagon road.
Pyramid lake
4
2 hours
3867
u
Mallgne gorge
9
5 “
“ passes Beauvert, Tre-
foil, Annette and Edith lakes.
Snaring river
10
6 “
Wagon road.
Cabin lake
2
3 “
3992
Caledonia lake
4
3 “
3810
Dorothy lake
10
6 “
4383
Oldfort point
m
“
3822
Pyramid mountain
1 day
9076
No trail beyond Pyramid lake.
The Whistlers
6
6 hours
Packtrail.
Roche Bonhomme
11
1 day
8185
Ascent requires about 4 hours
from cabin at Maligne gorge.
No trail beyond gorge.
Signal mountain
10
1 “
7397
North end of the Maligne
mountains. Other parts of
the range may be reached by
spending two or more days on
the trip.
Mount Tckarra
13
2 days
8818
By taking horses to Signal
mountain, the trip might be
made in one day.
Excelsior mountain
Prairie de la Vache
IS
10
2 “
1 day
9100
By way of Signal mountain.
Medicine lake
18
2 days
3 “
4785
Trip out and return by Ma-
ligne gorge.
Trip out by Maligne gorge,
and return by Shovel pass.
Jacques lake
30
4 “
Trip out by Maligne valley
and Medicine lake. Return
via Jacques creek and Inter-
laken.
Grouse
APPENDIX A
TRIPS OF INTEREST FROM JASPER


Approximate
Time for
TRIP
distance in
round
Height
Remark?
miles
trip
feet.
Maligne lake
(( u
40
4 days
5 “
Trip out and return by way of
Medicine lake.
Trip out by Medicine lake and
return by Shovel pass.
Athabaska falls
20
2 “
Mount Edith Cavell
IS
2 “
11033
Camp at Cavell lake, (5610
feet). This does not include
the ascent of the mountain.
Whistlers valley
10
2 “
Camp at head of valley. The
Whistlers, Indian Ridge or
Marmot mountain may be
ascended from here in two
hours. Manx peak also
might be climbed from this
camp.
Amethyst lakes and Tonquin valley
22
4 “
6450
(lakes)
The trail passes up Whistlers
creek, Portal creek and into
Meadow creek.
Mount Geikie
25
4 “
10851
This does not include the as-
cent of the mountain.
Yellowhead pass
16
2 “
3720
Yellowhead lake lies about 3
miles beyond the pass.
Pocahontas
35
3 to 4 “
3259
to 2 days necessary for
one way trip on either side of
Athabaska river.
Interlaken
IS
2 “
3291
Snake Indian falls
36
4 “
4000
FROM POCAHONTAS
(West
side of Athabaska)
Bedson
TT
2 hours
3269
Canadian Northern station
across Athabaska river.
Ogre gorge
5
5 “
4 miles by boat to Canadian
Northern tunnel and one mile
beyond on foot.
Boule Roche
8
1 day
7230
The ascent requires 4 to 5
hours from the tunnel.
Moose creek
IS
2 days
One day to head of valley and
one day to return.
Mount Aeolus
8672
Camp would have to be made
about four miles up Moose-
horn creek the first day and
the climb and return the sec-
ond day.
Ronde creek
3
3 hours
1 to \y 2 miles across the Atha-
baska river. Good trail re-
mainder of the way.


TRIP
Approximate
distance in
Time for
round
Height
Remarks
Roche Ronde
miles
trip
1 kg days
feet.
7014
Ascent may be made in three
Coronach creek
5
1 day
hours from Coronach creek.
1 to 13A miles across Atha-
Roche a Boschc
1 “
6966
baska river. Good trail re-
mainder of the way.
Ascent may be made in three
Celestine lake
1 “
4100
hours from Coronach creek.
May be reached in two hours
Snake Indian falls
17
2 days
from Coronach creek. No
trail.
1 to miles across the
Jasper
35
3 to 4 “
3471
Athabaska river. Good trail
remainder of the way.
Trip one way requires \}/i or
2 days.
FROM POCAHONTAS
(East side of Athabaska)
Punchbowl falls
hour
Town
l
1 “
There is a wagon road to the
town on the bench about 300
feet above the station.
Meadows below Roche a Perdrix
7
3 hours
These flats may be reached by
wagon road.
Roche a Perdrix
6
1 day
7002
Ascent feom the meadows be-
low requires 3 to 4 hours.
Roche Miette
3
1 “
7599
Ascent from Pocahontas re-
quires 3 to 4 hours.
Fiddle River gorge (lower)
4
3 hours
Gorge can be entered only in
low water.
Fiddle River gorge (middle)
11
May be reached by way of
trail to hot springs. No trail
up Fiddle river beyond the
mouth of Sulphur creek.
Fiddle River gorge (upper)
14
2 days
The uppper end of this gorge
may be reached by following
the trail over the pass below
mount Utopia.
Hot sulphur springs
10
6 hours
Mount Utopia
14
2 days
8538
Ascent requires 3 to 4 hours
from a camp on the summit of
the pass to the north.
Rocky River gorge
10
7 hours
Jacques lake
23
2 to 3 days
Trail leads by Rocky river
gorge. Return trip might be
made by way of Jacques creek
and Interlaken.
Jasper
35
4 “
Trip one way may be made in
I }/2 or 2 days.


Distance
in miles.
Total distance
from Jasper
Height
feet.
Remarks.
Whistlers creek
4
4
3700
The trail crosses the creek at
the base of the mountain.
Head of Whistlers creek
6
10
6500
Good camp grounds in the
upper part of the valley. The
Whistlers, Indian ridge, Manx
peak and Marmot mountain
may be reached from here.
Marmot pass to Portal creek
1
11
7400
Portal creek
2
13
5900
Near the mouth of Circus
creek.
The Portal
1
14
Lectern peak, mount Aquila,
Franchere peak or Portal peak
might be ascended from here.
Head of Portal creek
2
16
6700
Camp is within easy distance
of Chak peak, mount Macca-
rib and mount Clitheroe.
Mount Majestic or Oldhorn
mountain might be reached.
Astoria pass to the left leads to
Astoria river above mount
Edith Cavell.
Maccarib pass to Meadow creek
2
18
7150
This pass leads into the valley
of Maccarib creek a branch of
Meadow creek.
West shoulder of mount Clitheroe
2
20
6500
Mount Clitheroe or mount
Majestic may be climbed
from here. Tonquin hill may
be reached easily. From here
horses may be taken to Am-
ethyst lakes, Chrome lake or
to the Tonquin pass below
mount Geikie.
Crescent creek
8
28
This point is a short distance
below The Forum, Roche
Noire and mount Arris.
Miette river
Jasper
S
8
33
41
3550
From here the old construc-
tion road leads to Jasper.
JASPER TO YELLOWHEAD PASS
Cabin lake-trail
l
\
It is about one mile from the
road to the lake.
Railway crossing
A
3440
The road crosses below both
railways.
Miette river
H
\y 2
3400
First crossing.
Miette river
A
2
3400
Second crossing.
DETAILS OF SINGLE TRIPS
JASPER TO TONQUIN VALLEY AND AMETHYST LAKES


Distance
Total distance
Height
Remarks.
Caledonia lake
in miles.
1
from Jasper
3
feet.
The trail leaves the road just
Miette river
3450
below the Canadian Northern
bridge across Miette river.
The lake is about one mile
distant.
Third crossing.
Miette river
3'A
8
3580
Fourth crossing. The road
Derr creek
Yellowhead pass
6V 2
3 H
14Ji
18
3721
crosses the Grand Trunk Pa-
cific railway and Meadow
creek, nearby, just below the
crossing a rough trail leads
to Dorothy lake about IY2
miles distant.
JASPER TO MALIGNE
GORGE
Jasper
Athabaska river
ns
ns
3471
3400
Lake Beauvert
IS
2
3356
Trefoil lakes
ns
3 IS
3354
Annette lake
i
4>S
3344
Edith lake
Vi
5
3339
Trail
2
7
3560
Trail to summit of Signal
Maligne cabin
4
9
3770
mountain.
Roche Bonhomme may be as-
cended in four to five hours.
JASPER TO
Jasper
MALIGNE
RANGE
3471
Trail
7
7
3560
The trail branches from the
Maligne road.
Camp below Signal mountain
4
11
6500
Ascent of Signal mount may
be made in one-half hour or
ascent of mount Tekarra in
1 hrce hours.
Camp below mount Tekarra
4
15
6600
Ascent of mount Tekarra or
Excelsior mountain may be
made in about three hours.
The ascent of the Watchtower
might also be made from this
camp.


Figures marked *
arc approximate.
Name and Number
Feature
Height
Feet
Origin.
Aeolus (71)
Mount
8672
Reached on a windy day.
Alcove
Mountain
9200*
Amber (33)
u
8341
Summit is covered with reddish coloured
shale.
Angle
Peak
9500*
Antler
Mountain
8400*
Aquila (4)
Mount
9269*
An eagle.
Arris (17)
“
8875
Ashlar
Ridge
6100*
A smooth wall.
Astoria
River
After the fur traders’ establishment at the
mouth of the Columbia river.
Athabaska
Indian name meaning “place where there
are reeds,” referring to the delta of the
river.
Barbican
Peak
9000*
Basilica
Mount
9400*
Bastion
Peak
9500*
Beauvert r
Lake
Beautiful green.
Beaver
Bluffs
6100*
Bedson (78)
Ridge
6865
Bistre (67)
Mount.
7757
Blackhorn
Peak
9800*
Adder’s Tongue.
APPENDIX B
PLACE-NAMES AND HEIGHTS OF MOUNTAINS


Name and Number
Feature
Height
Feet
Origin.
Bonhomme Roche (34)
A mountain
Resembles a man’s face. Mentioned by
Grant in “Ocean to Ocean,” 1873.
Bosche (Roche a) (68)
“
6966
May mean “hump rock,” mentioned by
Grant in “Ocean to Ocean,” 1873.
Boule Roche
“
7230
Meaning “ ball rock.”
Brown
Brule
Mount
Lake
Named by D. Douglas, 1827, after Robert
Brown, (1775-1858) botanist.
Buttress
Mountain
8809
Cairngorm (55)
A mountain
8564
Gaelic for “yellow.”
Capitol
Mount
7400*
Centre
Mountain
8800
Halfway between Excelsior and Amber
mountains.
Chak (5)
Peak
9114
Indian for eagle.
Chctamon (61)
Mount
OO
o
o
*
Indian for “squirrel.” Two rocks on the
arete resemble squirrels.
Chevron
“
9300* Double pointed.
Christie
“
Named by Hector, 1859, after Chief
Factor Wm. J. Christie, H.B.Co.
Chrome
Lake
Dirty yellow.
Clairvaux
Mount and creek
8800*
“Meaning bright valley.”
Cliff
Mountain
9000
Clitheroe (11)
Mount
9014
Meaning “rock by the water.”
Colin
Mountain
8815
Colin
Range
7024
May be after Colin Fraser, P.M., Jasper
House, 1840-46.
Committee’s Punch Bowl
Pond
After the Governing Committee of the
Hudson’s Bay Co. or of the North West
Co.
Consort
Mount
9460
Coronach (70)
Mountain
8078
Because of howling of coyotes.
Cumnock (66)
Mount
8571
Meaning “meeting of waters.”
Curia
u
9300*
Derr
Creek
Named by J. McEvoy after his packer.
De Smet (Roche) (65)
A mountain
8330
De Smet describes how the Indians
named a peak after him.
Diadem
Peak
9615
Dromore
Mount
8800*
Gaelic for “great ridge.”
Dungeon
Peak
9700*
Edith Cavell
Afount
11033
Named by Geographic Board after Nurse
Cavell.
Elysium (51)
Mount
8025
Overlooks fine meadows.
Emigrants (52)
Mountain
8376
After the Cariboo gold-seekers of 1862
mentioned by Milton and Cheadle.
Emir (43)
Mount
8584
Erebus '
“
10234
A dark rock precipice faces northeast.
Eremite
Mountain
9500
Esplanade (62)
Mount
7521
Flat-topped ridge.
Estella
“
10069
Spanish for “rock.”
Excelsior (31)
Mountain
9100


Name and Number
Feature
Height
Feet
()rigin.
Fiddle
River
Referred to in De Smet’s letter, 1846, as
violin.
Fiddle
Range
Palliser Expedition map, 1865.
Fitzwilliam
Mount
9549
Family name of William Viscount
Milton.
Fortalice
a
9300
An outlying peak.
Franchere
Peak
9225
After Gabriel Franchere.
Fraser
Mount
10726
After Simon Fraser.
Gargoyle
u
8834
A stream flows from its base.
Geikie
10854
Named by J. McEvoy after Sir Archibald
Geikie, the geologist.
Ghost (Glacier of the)
Glacier
From its shape, said to resemble the
figure of a woman flying.
Greenock (63)
Mount
6881
Grisette
“
8500*
Peak of grey limestone.
Hardisty
“
8900*
Named by Hector, 1859, after Chief
Factor Richard Hardisty, H.B.Co.
Hawk (40)
“
8377
Henry (53)
8626
After Wm. Henry, builder of Henry
House.
Hooker
Named by D. Douglas, 1827, after Sir
Wm. J. Hooker, (1785-1865) botanist.
Indian (22)
Ridge
8941
Jacques (Roche)
A mountain
8540
May be after Jacques Cardinal, North
West Co., who had a ranch near Snaring
river.
Jasper
Town
After Jasper House, built by Jasper
Hawes, before 1817.
Kataka
Mount.
8600*
Indian for “ fort.”
Kephala
“
7968
Kerkeslin
u
Named by Hector.
Lectern
Peak
9095
Like a church lectern; name suggested
by G. E. Howard.
Maccarib (10)
Mount
8707
Indian for “caribou” which were seen be-
low the peak.
Makwa (79)
Ridge
7000*
Indian for “bear.”
Maligne
River
Meaning “bad.” Referred to in De Smet’s
letter, 1846.
Manx
Peak
9987
Shape of contours resembles coat of arms
of Isle of Alan.
Marmot (23)
Mountain
8557
There are colonies of marmots on the
mountain.
Medicine
Lake
Referred to in De Smet’s letter, 1846.
Merlin
Mount
8600*
Miette (Roche) (83)
A mountain
7599
Said to be after hunter who climbed it.
Name first mentioned by Franchere.
Monarch
Mountain
9500
Morro (38)
Peak
5504
Spanish for “round hill.”
Muhigan (21)
Mountain
8559
Indian for “wolf.”
Noire (Roche)
A mountain
9594
Summit of peak is “black.”


Name and Number
Feature
Height
Feet
Origin
Oldfort (26)
Point
The hunting lodge of the North West
Company, called the “Old Fort,” was
nearby.
Oldhorn
Mountain
9779
Outpost
Peak
9100*
Penstock
Creek
Is joined by a tributary running under-
ground for short distance.
Perdrix (Roche a) (89)
A mountain
Foliated like a partridge’s tail. Men-
tioned by Grant in “Ocean to Ocean,”
1873.
Pocahontas
Village
After town in Virginia.
Portal
Peak
8700*
Pyramid (56)
Mountain
9076
On Palliser Expedition map, 1865.
Redan
Mount
8500
On Palliser Expedition map, 1865.
Redoubt
Peak
9700*
Ronde (Roche) (74)
A mountain
7014
Mentioned by Grant in “Ocean to
Ocean,” 1873.
Rostrum
Hill
7600*
Shovel
Pass
Named by Mrs. Schaffer, who found snow
shovels in the pass on her way to Maligne
lake.
Signal (27)
Mountain
7397
Telephone near summit.
Sirdar
Mount
9198
Snake Indian
River
After Indian tribe.
On Palliser Expedition map, 1865.
D. Thompson’s map calls it “Stoney.”
Snaring
After Indian tribe. D. Thompson’s map
1813-14.
Surprise (14)
Point
7873
Tckarra (29)
Mount
8703
Named by Hector, 1859, after his hunter.
Terminal
“
9300*
Throne
Mountain
10144
Thunderbolt (13)
Peak
8745
Summit shattered by lightning.
Tonquin (IS)
Hill
7858
Astor Expedition ship, 1810.
Turret
Mountain
9700*
Utopia (80)
Mount
8538
Surveyor’s refuge from flies.
Vache
Prairie de la
Haunt of Buffalo. Mentioned by Fran-
chere, 1820.
Vertex
Peak
9700*
Has extremely sharp triangular summit.
Vine
Creek
Vicinity of creek abounds in red bear
berries.
Vista
Peak
9155
Wabasso
Lakes
Indian for “rabbit.”
Watchtower
Mountain
9157
Whirlpool
River
On Palliser Expedition map 1865.
Whistlers (24)
Peak
8085
Colony of whistling marmots near the
top.
Whitecap
Mountain
9400
Yellowhead
Pass
After Iroquois trapper known as “Yellow
Head,” who cached furs at the west end.




Wild Flowers.
INDEX
Adder’s Tongue 88
Aeolus, Mt..., 41, 72, 75, 76, 78, 84, 88
Alcove mountain 47, 88
Alder tree 37
Amber mountain 88, 89
Amethyst lakes. .45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 84, 86
Analysis of water of Fiddle River hot springs... 80
Anemones 54
Angle peak 47, 88
Animals 33
Annette lake 14, 32, 39, 62, 83, 87
Antler mountain 88
Aquila, Mt 86, 88
Arris, Mt 54, 85, 88
Ashlar Ridge 78, 79, 88
Assiniboine, Fort 25
Assiniboine Indians exterminate Snake Indians. 71
Astor, John Jacob 13, 18, 19
Astoria 18, 19
Astoria pass 49, 86
Astoria river 14, 42, 43, 44, 45, 49, 50, 51, 53, 64,
86, 88
Athabaska falls 54, 84
Athabaska gorge 54
Athabaska pass 15, 18, 19, 21, 22, 53
Athabaska river, 13, 14, 17, 20, 29, 30, 33, 36, 61,
64, 69, 73, 76, 79, 84, 85, 87, 88
Athabaska vallev, 29, 30, 33, 37, 41, 44, 46, 53, 56,
62, 64, 67, 68, 69, 74, 78.
Balsam tree 37, 50
Barbican peak * 48, 53, 88
Basilica, Mt 49, 51, 59, 88
Bastion peak 48,52,88
Batture, grande 19
Bears 34. 35
Beauvert lake 14, 32, 39, 61, 62, 83, 87, 88
Beaver 35
Beaver, Astor’s ship 19
Beaver bluffs 88
Bedson 31, 33, 73, 84
Bedson ridge 88
Belanger, Andre (drowned) 21
Bighorn sheep 29, 34
Bingley, Mt., (See Ycllowhead mountain) 60
Birds 36
Bistre, Mt 88
Blackhorn peak 42,46,88
Blueberries 37
Boat encampment 18, 19
Bonhomme, Roche..l4, 39, 41, 61, 62, 66, 68, 83,
87, 89.
Boom (mining) at Dominion prairie 59
Boschc Roche a. 22, 73, 74, 85, 89
Boule range 74
Boule Roche 33, 69, 74, 75, 76, 78, 79, 84, 89
Brazeau river 34
Bridge over the Athabaska at Oldfort point.... 33
Brigades, Hudson’s Bay Co. 15, 23
Brown, Mt 22, 89
Brown, Robert 89
Brule lake 17, 20, 29, 30, 35, 78, 89
Buttress mountain 89
Cabin creek 40
Cabin lake 32, 41, 55, 83, 86
Cairngorm 58, 89
Caledonia lake 32, 41, 55, 83, 87
Campeinent de Cardinal 67
Campement de Fusil 19
Campement d’Orignal 19, 20
Camp grounds at south end of Amethyst lakes, 51
at Chrome lake 53
at mount Clitheroe 50
on Signal mountain 64
near mount Tekarra 65


Canadian Alpine Journal 37
Canadian Northern Ry.. . . 26, 27, 31, 41, 55, 58, 76
Canoe river 18
Capitol, Mt . 89
Cardinal, carnpement dc 67
Cardinal, Jacques 23, 90
Cariboo, gold discovered in 24
Caribou 34, 51, 66
Casemate mountain 48,52
Cavell creek 43
Cavell lake 42,43,45,84
Cavell, Mt. (See Mt. Edith Cavell)
Cclestine lake 72, 73, 85
Centre mountain 89
Chak peak 49, 86, 89
Cheadle, Dr. Wm 13, 24, 25, 58, 60, 89
Cheadle, Dr. Wm. (quoted on origin of name
Yellowhead pass) 58
Chetamon lake 70
Chetamon, Mt 69, 89
Chevron, Mt 89
Chipmunks 36
Christie, Mt 89
Christie, Wm. J 89
Christine lake 55
Chrome lake 47, 49, 53, 86, 89
Circus creek 86
Circus valley 42, 44,45, 47
Clairvaux creek 89
Clairvaux, Mt 49, 51, 89
Clairvaux valley 59
Clayoquot sound 19
Cliff mountain 89
Clitheroe, Mt 50, 53, 54, 86, 89
Coal mines 33, 73
Coleman, A. P. (quoted on geology of Roche
Miette region) 78, 79
Colin mountain 14,41, 62, 67, 89
Colin range 39,41, 57, 61, 89
Columbia river 15, 18,19
Committee’s Punch Bowl 21,89
Company of the Merchants of Canada (See
North West Company) 16
Confederation 26
Consort, Mt 89
Coronach creek 35, 73, 74, 85
Coronach mountain 89
Corral creek 70
Cottonwood tree 37
Coues, Elliott (quoted on sale of Astoria) 19
Cox, Ross 13,19,20,21,43
Cox, Ross (quoted on prairie de la Vache) 43
Coyotes 35, 36, 66
Crescent creek 54, 86
Crossing, mountain of the Great. (See Mt.
Edith Cavell) 44
Crows 36
Cumnock, Mt 89
Curia, Mt 49,51,89
Decoigne, in charge at Jasper house on Brule lake, 20
Deer 33, 34
Denudation 31
Derr creek 59, 87, 89
De Smet, Pierre Jean.... 13, 23, 24, 68, 71, 72, 89
De Smet (quoted on Snake Indians) 71, 72
De Smet, Roche 39,41.69, 70, 72, 89
Deville, photographs by 31, 32
Diadem peak 89
Disaster, drowning 21
Disaster point 68, 77
Disasters in mountains 24
Docteur, Montagne de. (See Yellowhead moun-
tain) 60
Dominion prairie 59
Dorothy lake 55, 83, 87
Douglas, C. T 23
Douglas, David 13, 22, 23, 89, 90
Douglas fir . 22, 31, 36, 37, 61
Dowling, D. B. (quoted on geology of Atha-
baska river) 29, 30
Doyle, Arthur Conan (poem) 12
Dromore, Mt 89
Drowning disaster 21
Drowning, escape of storekeeper from 31
Drummond, Thos 22
Dryas, white 60
Ducks 36
Dungeon peak 47, 48, 49, 51, 89
Eagle 36, 73
Edith Cavell, Mt.. .39, 42, 43, 44,45, 49, 50, 56,
57, 64, 84, 86, 89.
Edith lake 14, 32, 39, 62, 63,64, 83, 87
Edmonton 24, 70
Elk 35,55
Elysium, Mt 89
Emigrants’ mountain 58,89
Emir, Mt 82,89
Erebus, Mt 47, 49,53,89
Eremite creek 49, 50, 53
Eremite glacier 49, 53
Eremite mountain 47, 89
Ermatinger, Edward 13, 22
Esplanade, Mt 89
Estella, Mt 45,89
Excelsior mountain 64, 65, 83, 87, 89
Fiddle range 78, 79, 90
Fiddle river 15, 30, 31, 37, 78, 80, 81, 85, 90
Fiddle river gorges 78, 79, 81, 85
Finlayson, Roderick 23
Fir, Douglas 22, 31, 36, 37, 61
Fire havoc 30, 32, 59, 70, 75
Fish 32, 36, 55, 66
Fitzhugh, Mt. See Mt. Edith Cavell 44
Fitzwilliam, Mt 49, 51, 57, 59, 60, 90
Flathead Indians 16
Fleming, Sir Sandford 26
Flowers 37, 54, 60,92
Folding mountain 79
Fortalice, Mt 90
Fort George. (See also Astoria), 16, 19
Forum, The 54, 86
Franchere, Gabriel 13,18, 19, 20, 21, 90, 91
Franchere (quoted on Old Fort) 20
Franchere peak 86, 90
Fraser, Colin 24, 61,89
Fraser glacier 47, 49, 50, 53
Fraser, Mt 42, 47, 48, 50, 52, 90
Fraser river 14, 16, 26, 50
Fraser, Simon 16,90


Freemen 16
Fusil, campcment de 19
Game, Big 33
Gargoyle, Mt 14,70,90
Garonne creek 67
Garonne gorge 67
Geese 36
Geikie, Mt.. .44, 48, 49, 51, 52, 57, 59, 84, 86, 90
Geikie Mt. (name falselv applied to Mt. Edith
Cavell) ' 44
Geikie railway station 27, 59
Geikie, Sir Archibald 51,90
Ghost, Glacier of the 42, 43, 90
Gilmore A. J. (climbs Mt. Edith Cavell) 44
Goats 34, 35, 72, 82
Gold seekers 24
Gooseberries 37
Grande batture 19
Grande traverse, la 19, 20
Grand Trunk Pacific Ry 27, 31, 39, 58, 59, 77
Grant, G. M 13,26
Grant G. M. quoted on scenery of Jasper Park, 29
on Mt. Edith Cavell 44
on Disaster point 68
on Roche Ronde 74
on Roche Miette 77
on Roche a Perdrix region 79, 80
Great Crossing, mountain of the.(See Mt. Edith
Cavell), . : 44
Greenock, Mt 69, 90
Grissette, Mt 90
Groundhog 37
Grouse 36, 66, 83
Gun encampment 19
Hardistv creek 20
Hardistv, Mt 20,42,44,90
Hardistv, Richard 90
Hare, little chief 36
Harmon, photograph by 34
Hawes, Jasper 20, 21, 90
Hawes railway station 14, 30, 68, 81
Hawk, Mt 14,62,67,68,90
Hawks 36
Hay river 75
Headquarters of park staff 31
Hector, Sir James 13, 25, 26, 40, 44, 89, 90, 91
Hector, Sir James, quoted on Jasper House. . .23
on Pacific-Hudson Bay brigades 15
on Snaring Indians 57, 58
on Athabaska river at Roche Miette. .70, 71
on assassination of Snake Indians by
Assiniboines 71
Heights of mountains 88, 91
Henry, Alex, (quoted on Piegan Indian defeat
by Flathead Indians) 16
Henry House, site of 18
Henry, Mt 40,58,90
Henry, Wm t 17, 18,90
History 13, 27
Hole river. (See Whirlpool river) 19
Holway, E. W. D. (climbs Mt. Edith Cavell) 44,45
Hooker, Mt 22,90
Hooker, Sir Wm. J 90
Horetzky, photographs by 22, 23, 24, 25
Howard, G. E 39, 44, 90
Howse pass 16, 26
Hudson’s Ray Co 16. 21, 23. 25, 86
Humming bird 36
Indian pass 46
Indian ridge 46, 84, 86, 90
Indian tepee 25
Interlaken 15, 30, 36, 66, 68, 83, 84, 85
Iris lake 55
Irving, Washington 18
Islands, Lake of. (Sec Talbot lake) 68
jack pine 30, 31, 36, 37, 61, 64, 79
Jacques creek 15, 66, 71, 83, 85
Jacques lake 36, 66, 68, 82, 83, 85
Jacques, Roche 41, 71, 82, 90
Jasper Hawes’ house 20
Jasper House, Brule lake 20, 21, 22, 23
Jasper House, Jasper lake 24,25,71
Jasper lake 14, 21, 27, 29, 30, 35, 57, 69, 70, 71,
74, 77, 78.
Jasper park 13, 14, 17, 25
Jasper park collieries 33, 76
Jasper, town of. . . . 13, 14, 20, 23, 27, 29, 31-32,34,
37, 39, 40, 41, 57, 73, 82, 85, 86, 87, 90
Jasper, trips north from. . . .61, 72, 83, 84, 86, 87
Jasper, “ south “ ... .39, 54, 83, 84, 86, 87
Jasper, “ west “ ... .55, 60, 83, 84, 86, 87
Jasper, “ east “ 83, 84, 86, 87
Jasper w r ater supply 55
Kamloops 25, 26
Kane, Paul, quoted on Roche Miette 77
on Jasper House at Jasper lake 24
Kataka, Mi 51, 90
Katrine lake 56
Kephala, Mt 90
Kerkeslin, Mt 20, 34, 35, 40, 44, 53, 90
Kicking Horse pass 26
Klyne, Michel 22
Lapensec, Olivier Roy, drowned 21
Lark, Astor’s ship 19
Larocque, Joseph Felix 22
Leather pass. (See Yellowhead pass).
Lectern peak 39, 46, 48, 86, 90
Le Due, Mt. (See Mt. Edith Cavel!) 44
Love, prospector 25
Maccarib creek 50, 86
Maccarib, Mt 34, 48, 53, 86, 90
Maccarib pass 49, 50, 86
MacKenzie, Sir Alex 16
Majestic mountain 45, 49, 50, 86
Makwa creek 82
Makwa ridge 82, 90
Maligne chalet 63, 65, 83, 87
Maligne gorge 41, 61, 63, 66, 67, 83, 87
Maligne lake 63, 65, 66, 67, 84
Maligne range 34, 36, 41, 44, 57, 64, 83, 87
Maligne river 14, 32, 36, 37, 57, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66,
83, 90.
Mammoth, Indian belief in 17
Manx peak 46, 47, 84, 86, 90
Map of central part of Jasper park 2
Map of David Thompson quoted 71, 91


Marmot 35, 46
Marmot mountain 34, 46, 47, 84, 86, 90
Marmot pass 42, 47, 86
Maskuta creek 79
McDonald, John of Garth 20
McDougall, Duncan 19,20
McDougall, George 22
McEvoy, J 89, 90
McGillivray, Duncan, crosses Howse pass 16
McKay, Alex., killed on the Tonquin 19
McLoughlin, John, junior 23
McTavish, John George 19
Meadow creek 36, 46, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 84, 86, 87
Medicine lake 57, 63, 65, 66, 67, 83, 84, 90
Merlin, Mt 90
Miette hot springs 37, 80, 81
Miette river 13, 14, 20, 25, 27, 35, 36, 39, 40, 41,
58,59, 64,83,86, 87.
Miette. Roche 21, 23, 30, 33, 34, 57, 68, 69, 70,
74', 76, 77, 79, 82,85, 90.
Miette valley 58, 59, 83
Milford, Le Montagne de, (See Fitzwilliam
Mt.) 60
Milton, Viscount 24, 25, 59, 60, 89, 90
Mina lake 55
Mining boom at Dominion prairie 59
Mink 35
Moat lake 48, 50, 52
Moberly, John, early settler 67
Monarch mountain 57, 90
Moose 13, 34, 35
Moose creek 84
Moose encampment 20, 23
Moosehorn creek 15, 30, 74, 76, 78, 84
Morro creek 67
Morro gorge 68, 69
Morro peak 14, 56, 67, 68, 69, 90
Mountain creek 77
Mountain goats 34
Mountain sheep 33, 34, 66
Mountains, heights of 88, 91
Muhigan mountain 90
Mumm, A. L 44
Muskrats 35
New Caledonia 15,22
Nipissing Indians 16
Noire, Roche 51, 54, 57. 86, 90
North Thompson river 25, 26
North West Co 16, 18, 21, 71, 89
“North West Passage by Land” 24
“Ocean to Ocean” 26, 89, 91
Ochre lake 62
Ogre gorge 76, 84
Old Fort 18,20,21,91
Oldfort point 39, 83, 91
Oldhorn mountain 42, 46, 49, 51, 86, 91
Origin of place-names 88, 91
Orignal, campement d’ 19, 20
Outpost peak 47,91
Owl 36
Pacific and Hudson Bay brigades 15
Pacific Fur Company 20
Palisade, The 56
Palliscr expedition. 25
Palliscr Expedition, map quoted 90, 91
Parkgatc 27
Passes (See: Howsc, Kicking Horse, Peace River,
Yellowhead.)
Patricia lake 14, 31, 32, 36, 41, 55, 56, 57, 64
Peace River pass 15
Penstock creek 47, 49, 50, 53, 91
Perdrix, Roche a 33, 74, 78, 79, 85, 91
Piegan Indians 16
Pigeon Hawks 61
Pika hare 36
Pine tree 30, 31, 36, 37, 61, 64, 79
Place-names, origin of 88, 91
Plants 36, 37
Pocahontas 15, 31, 33, 35, 37, 41, 66, 76, 84, 91
Pocahontas, trips from 73, 82,84, 85
Poplar 30,31,36,61,79
Porcupine 36, 39
Portal creek. . . .34,36, 42,45,46, 47,53,64, 84, 86
Portal peak 42, 44, 46, 48, 86, 91
Postern mountain 48
Prairie creek. (See Maskuta creek.) 18
Prehistoric monsters, Indian belief in 17
Princess lake 72
Ptarmigan 36, 66
Punchbowl falls 77,85
Pyramid lake 14, 30, 32, 34, 36, 41, 55, 56, 57, 64, 83
Pyramid mountain 14, 32, 39, 41, 55, 56, 57, 58,
64, 77, 78, 83, 91.
Rabbits 35, 36
Rac, Win. Glen 23
Railway grades 27
Railways 26, 27, 39, 41, 64, 76
Ramparts, The 47, 48, 49, 51, 52, 57
Raspberries 37
Ravens 36
Redan, Mt 91
Redoubt peak 47, 48, 49, 52, 91
Red River carts 25, 26
Red River settlement 26
Robin 36
Robson district 31
Rocky Mountain House 17
Rocky river 14, 21, 34, 36, 66, 68, 74, 77, 78, 81, 82,
85 -.
Rocky river gorge 81, 82, 85
Ronde creek 33, 73, 76, 84
Ronde, Roche 22, 69, 73, 74, 85, 91
Ross, Alex 13,19
Ross, Alex, quoted on drowning disaster and
on Old Fort 21, 22
Rostrum hill 91
Roundcroft 17
Russia, agreement with, for lease of coast line in
1839 23
Sand ridges in the vicinity of Jasper lake 30
Saskatoon berries 37
Saxifrage 27
Schaffer, Mrs 91
Service berries. (See Saskatoon berries.)
Sheep 29,33,34,66
Shovel pass 34, 66, 83, 84, 91
Signal mountain 34, 64, 65, 66, 83, 87, 91


Simpson, Sir George 21
Sirdar, Ml 91
Skunk 36
Smith, H. 1., photograph by 35
Smithsonian Institution 37
Snake Indian falls 69, 72, 84, 85
Snake Indian river. 14, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 78, 91
Snake Indians 71
Snake river 19
Snaring river 14. 23, 27, 41, 56, 57, 58, 64, 68, 69,
70,83,90,91.
Snaring river, south branch 57, 58
Sparrows 36
Springs 37,68,80, 81,85
Spruce 31, 37, 50, 61, 79
Squirrels 36
Stikinc river 23
Stoney river (See Snake Indian river) 71
Storekeeper nearly drowned 31
Strawberries 37
Streams, rapid rise and fall of 31
Sulphur creek 80, 81,85
Sulphur springs 37, 68, 80, 81, 85
Superintendent of Jasper park 34, 35
Superintendent’s house and offices 32, 33
Surprise point 47, 91
Swans 36
Swift, rancher 69, 70
Swiftwater creek 82
Talbot lake 21, 30,68
Tekarra, Mt 36, 40, 41, 64, 65, 66, 83, 87, 91
Tent city 32
Terminal, Mt 91
Tetc Jaune cache 25, 70
Thompson, David 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 71, 91
Thompson, David (Journal quoted) 17
Thompson’s map quoted 71, 91
Throne mountain 42,57, 91
Thrushes 36
Thunderbolt peak 47,91
Tonquin, Astoris ship 18, 19
Tonquin hill 48, 49, 51, 86, 91
Tonquin pass 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 86, 91
Tonquin valley 34, 45, 47, 49, 50, 51,84, 86
Topley, photographs by. .26, 30, 33, 62, 63, 64, 65
Towns 31
“Trails, Trappers and Tendcrfeet” 54
Traverse, Grande ' 19, 20
Traverse, Montague de la grande. (See also Mt.
Edith CavelH 44
Trees 30, 31,36,37
Trefoil lakes 14, 39, 62, 83, 87
Trips, schedule of 83, 87
Trips from Pocahontas 73, 82, 84, 85
Trips north from Jasper. . . .61, 72, 83, 84, 86, 87
Trips south from Jasper. . . .39, 54, 83, 84, 86, 87
Trips west from Jasper 55, 60, 83, 84, 86, 87
Trips east from Jasper 83, 84, 86. 87
Trou, Riviere du. (See Whirlpool river) 19
Trou, Traverse du 20
Trout 36
Tunnel, Canadian Northern Ry 76, 84
Turret mountain 48, 52, 59, 91
Twin lakes 39, 40, 61
Utopia mountain 85,91
Vache, Prairie de la . . 17, 20, 34, 43, 83, 91
Vavasseur 24
Verdant valley 43
Vertex peak 45, 91
Vine creek 15, 70, 91
Violon, Riviere de. (See Fiddle river).
Virl lake 55
Vista peak 49, 50, 59, 91
Voyage a la Cote du Nord Quest 18
Wabasso lakes 91
“Wanderings in North America” 23
Warblers 36
Ward 24
Washburn, Stanley, quoted on Athabaska falls, 54
on Swift, 69, 70.
Watchtower mountain 41, 65, 87, 91
Wheeler, A. 0 34,44
Whiskey-jack 36
Whirlpool river 14, 15, 18, 19, 20, 34, 43, 44, 53, 91
Whistlers’ creek 35, 42, 45, 46, 47, 64, 84, 86
Whistlers’, The, mountain, 39,40, 41, 45, 46, 83,
84, 86, 91.
Whistlers’ pass 46
Whitecap mountain 72, 91
White Dryas 60
Wild flowers 87
Willow tree 37
Willson, Beckles 23
Wood river 18
Yeliowhead lake 84
Yellowhead mountain 59,60
Yeliowhead pass 13. 15, 16, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 57,
58, 59, 64, 70, 84, 86, 87, 91.




