

'■ i




fiPZ.
ACCOUNT
OIP —^
The berry ESTATE
COOLANGATTA.
SHO/\LH/WEN


Sydney ;
W. C. PENFOLD & CO.,
General Letterpress and Lithographic Printers,
183 Pitt Street.
189 5.


THE BERRY ESTATE.
In the United States of America, when a great question comes before the
country, the voice of the farmers, conservative to the backbone, is generally antago-
nistic to the democracy of the towns, and ultimately prevails. By reason of isolation,
the farmer all the world over is slow to think, but when his pocket is in danger there
can be no mistake as to his opinions. It is the misfortune of Australia, that so large
a proportion of the population is concentrated in the towns, and in consequence,
politicians are liable to be inflated with the cheers of the city mob. Looking with
envy on the settled content of the country dweller, the townsman, too often thriftless
and flckle, relies on Government instead of on himself. Legislation has, therefore, a
tendency to be regarded as a panacea for everything ; officials are multiplied, in the
hasty making of laws there is much confusion, and the will of the so-called sovereign
people, expressed at times by illusive elections, has a great tendency to alarm that
most sensitive of all institutions, capital. Confidence is always of slow growth, and
when it is wanting, muscle may starve whilst the vaults of the banks are filled with
gold for which no use can be found.
THE DEVELOPMENT.
Within the past few weeks, the word has gone forth from the management of the
great Berry Estate, at Shoalhaven, that the.work of development must remain in
abeyance until the voice of the sovereign people, centred in Parliament, has declared
its determination either to harass or to deal fairly with capital. Let us fully under-
stand the import of this fiat. Three years ago Dr. John Hay commenced the
development of his great inheritance, and throughout our narrative, the contrast will
be made between the actual deeds of a conscientious landlord and the theoretical ideas
of a fostering State. The will of the late Mr. David Berry was made public at the
time of his decease. One large bequest was given to the University of St. Andrews,
another entrusted to the executors for the founding of a hospital on the estate, another
to the Presbyterian Church, and the residue was left to his cousin. Dr. John Hay.
On the improvement and settlement of people upon the estate. Dr. Hay has spent
during the past three years no less than £185,000. For this outlay he will be enabled
to provide homes for at least 150 additional families. No man feels more fully that
wealth is a responsible charge, and his inheritance has been no sinecure, since every
detail of management has his cognizance, each undertaking is fully considered, and
money is spent with a view of 'producing a moderate, yet certain, return. Belying,
therefore, on Dr. Hay’s responsibility, capital is attracted in order to develop a
proprty the greater part of which three years ago was nonproductive, through not
having been cleared, fenced, bridged, or roaded.
A CONTBAST WITH THE STATE.
Contrast this with the effort made by the State to settle penniless yet honest
labour on the land by means of village settlements. Befuse lands have been, unfortu-
nately, selected ; the industrious and the lazy have been theoretically yoked together
in co-operative harness, and have necessarily pulled diverse ways. There has been no
improving landlord offering a certain tenure, but a limited dole supplied by the State,
and when exhausted, starvation had to be faced.
The new homestead leases of the recent Land Act are an improvement on previous
methods of locating people on the land. Settlement in the past has only succeeded in
scattering selectors like thistledown over the face of the country. Their lot has been


to live isolated from markets, main and rail roads. Their lands have been hemmed in
by large estates occupying the best cultivatable soils, and yet carrying a single
boundary rider to ever so many square miles. These selectors have, in fact, struggled
under every disadvantage only to exist. There can be no stronger contrast than
between the difficulties they labour under and the advantages of a Coolangatta settler.
The enlightened management of the Berry Estate has had from the very first an
ideal exactly opposite to that of the State. Instead of centrifugal isolation there has
been compact settlement.
Dr. John Hay
FUTURE OF UAIRYING
The future of the dairying industry of the colony lies evidently in collecting the
cream from wide areas, and making it into butter at central factories. In IsTewcastle
there is one such ; in Sydney there are five firms making butter. On the ilorth and
South Coast districts central factories are springing up. They buy the cream on its
butter-fat contents, and a large output of butter of perfect uniformity is produced. It
is at once put into cold storage, and if exported is placed on board the steamer without
loss of cold. Good butter always sells well. Like wine, it needs no bush. The
wealthy freely pay high prices for what suits their palate. Hitherto two-thirds of the
butter exported from Australia has opened out badly, and the spirited efforts now
being made to win a golden reputation for Berry butter, will be watched with great
interest. Once more private enterprise will, we feel assured, show the way to


slow-moving departments, not by speechifying, or lecturing, or theorising, but by
spending money judiciously and initiating undertakings that confer benefits alike to
capitalist and producer. By this means the natural resources of the colony are
utilised, population is settled on the land, and confidence inspired. Surely what one
individual can do, the State might well imitate.
HISTORY.
Seventy-four years ago Messrs. Berry and Wollstonecroft took up 10,000 acres,
comprising jungle, swamp, lagoon, and dense impenetrable forest, at Shoalhaven,
including the Coolangatta Mount, on which the residence has been built. In lieu of
payment for the land they covenanted with the Government to take 100 convicts as
assigned servants, thus relieving the State at a critical period of their maintenance
Money and food at that time were very scarce, and the cost of feeding and clothing
each man was estimated at from £l6 to £2O per head. By kindness this undesirable
class of labour yielded satisfactory results ; lands were cleared, timber got, agriculture
pursued, drainage attempted, and settlement attracted. Of the original scrub, jungle,
swamp, and forest there is now scarcely a remnant left. The estate being walled in
by massive cliffs, approach to the highlands was almost impossible, and the only access
was by sea. Immense swamps left by the ocean, and forest lands indifferent for
grazing, needed indomitable pluck to tackle. Timber-getting and cedar export brought
in money from the first. The wilderness gradually gave place to the homestead, and
the forest to the clearing. In addition to the grants made for the support of the
convicts, about 60,000 acres were purchased, and the State got the money, so that hy
1839 there was a resident population of 8,500 persons. Throughout the colony there
IS not a spot which offers such substantial advantages to honest muscle, labouring
under the disadvantage of being without capital wherewith to rent a farm and without
hope to accumulate wealth.


PERSONAL I^^FLUENCE
Mr. Berry ruled his domain with fatherly solicitude. His word was his bond.
Short leases, once granted, became a family inheritance. Men bought into an expiring
tenancy with a heavy bonus, in order to secure the certain renewal of the lease. If rents
could not be met, much was forgiven. Roads and bridges have been constructed, and
kept in repair without the State contributing one penny. The tenants are contented,
neighbourly feeling has prevailed, and local markets have been established.
wonder, then, that at an early date the district captured the Sydney market and
prospered wonderfully. Mr. Berry assisted his tenants in every way, even to providing
a line of three steamers for the conveyance of the tenants’ produce to the metropolis at
reduced rates. When the cream separator was first introduced, lllawarra immediately
adopted it, and set the example to Australia of co-operative union. There are to-day
14 butter factories and creameries on, and adjoining the estate, the furthest being 12
miles from Berry, and now a central butter factory to work up the cream from all the
above, has been erected at the sole cost of Dr. Hay. The splendid system of personal
influence and mutual trust initiated by Mr Berry is being more fully cultivated by
his successor. Mr. Alexander Hay, in his brother’s absence in England, has the
entire management, and associated with him is an able staff, under Mr, Wright, a
civil engineer, once occupying a high position in the Railway Construction Branch.
RECLAMATIOII OF MARSH LAND.
For the first two years little progi’ess appeared to have been made, though
numbers of men were engaged on the works. The great tidal main drains, 12 in all,
varying in depth and width from 3to 20 feet, and extending from Ito miles in
length, ending in massive floodgates built in concrete, took time to excavate and
construct. Then the subsidiary drains had to be cut, making a total of 125 miles of
drains, which now pour their waters into either the Shoalhaven River or Broughton
Creek at low tides. In many places embankments had to be throwm up to protect the
lowlands to a height of 18 in. above high water, to keep back the insidious and always
tresspassing saltwater which covered twice daily thousands of acres of land or mud.
seas of mud dried up on the tide waters being shut off, and shrank and caked
with efflorescent salt, so that no vegetation would cover them ; but the rains washed
out the salt, and sun and air mellowed the soil. After ploughing and being left to
sweeten until freed of salt, rye grass has been sown, and now thousands of acres—once
mud—are waving fields of rich luxuriant green, and will support multitudes of dairy
herds. This reclamation has raised in value the adjoining but indifferent hill lands,
and certain areas of both are included in the farms. The cattle, by instinct, seek the
higher warmer levels to camp at night, and the rich flats afford unrivalled pasturage
by day. In all between 15,000 to 20,000 acres have been reclaimed. Over 50 farms
have been formed out of the 4,000 acres already grassed. 5,000 additional acres are
now ready for subdivision, and 7,000 acres are in process of mellowing. The lucerne
flats of Bodalla have been held up to praise, but their whole extent would be lost in
one reclaimed area at Berry. The rich rye grass pastures of Dapto, will not compare
with the luxuriance of those at Coolangatta, and not a landlord throughout the
countrv can offer such attractions to the farmer poor in pocket, but strong in
intelligence and arm. When a man wants a farm, he states the rent he is prepared to
give, and next day receives a reply in writing. No playing off one applicant against
another, and if the answer be favourable the accepted tenant can commence at once to
plough and prepare his crops. Meanwhile the labourers of the estate fence in the
land, and the builders erect the dwelling-house, together with the necessary farm
premises. In about six weeks’ time these are completed, and not till then does the
rent begin. Supposing dairy cattle are needed, an arrangement can be entered into
whereby the estate supplies them, and payment is made by diverting the rent, so that
the tenant can claim them as wholly his own, The rent thus deferred is adjusted by
being equally spread over the remainder of the lease. The expenditure on house and
buildings is included in the rental, and it is the unwritten custom of the management,
to allow for all additional improvements made by the tenant.


COWS AND CREAMERIES.
Quite a network of creameries extends over the property and on contiguous
estates. The following table presents them in alphabetical order, with their distance
from the new central butter factory at Berry railway station. The other columns give
the number of gallons of milk treated last half-year, and an estimate of the number of
cows has been made by allowing 225 gallons for the yield of each per half year.
John Wright, C.E.
Distance from Berry
Eailway Station.
No. of gals, last half- No. of Cows
year approximately. approximately.
Name of Factory.
*Back Forest
Berry ...
1,400
Bengelala
Cambewarra and Meroo
Comerong Island
1,120
Gerringong
Foxground
*Far Meadow.
Graham...
1,600
Jasper Brush
J endyundy
Toolajooa
Thompson
Wonagee
1,300
2,110
Totals
12,796
* Indicates Creamery only,


THE NEW CENTRAL FACTORY.
In the South Coast district, as elsewhere in the colony, up to last year the
practice has been for each factory to make its own cream into butter, and then forward
it to the Sydney agents, who, after supplying local requirements, exported the surplus
to England, This system did not work with advantage to the producers. Diversity
of brands and variations in quality rendered the English buyer suspicious and hostile,
thus damaging the industry. Out of evil good has arisen. Dr, Hay, having decided
to take the matter into his own hands, has erected a factory that is the largest and
most complete in the colony. Here a uniformly good article will have to he manufac-
tured at all times and seasons. Moreover, arrangements have been entered into for
the disposal of the surplus in England through reliable agents, thus securing to his
tenantry the highest price obtainable throughout the year for their butter. The chief
feature in the design of the factory is the large buttex-room cooled by the iced brine
circulated by the ammonia-compression cold-producing engine, in addition to which
there is storage in the refrigerating chamber for 150 tons of butter. The cream is
delivered to the factory by road and rail. After weighing and sampling, it is emptied
into the ripening vats, placed in an insulated chamber fitted with a patent attemporator
and agitator, through the pipes of which cool brine and warmed water can be cii’culated.
It is difficult to equalise temperature throughout a thick fluid of the consistency of cream,
but Crawford’s patent secures a successful result by a constant to-and-fro motion,
whereby the cream is heated or cooled as needed. The ripening process requires to he
cai-efully controlled by temperature, and when exactly ready the cream is let down into
rectangular box churns —made by Cherry, of Gisborne—wliich by rotation agitate the
contents. One churn is rated at 600 lb., and the other one at 1000 lb., the
latter being the largest churn as yet made. Hot and cold water are laid on
throughout, and all pipes through which cream passes are so arranged as to
be cleansed out by hand, a detail of no small importance. The granulated butter is
taken from the churn and worked on Cherry’s largest rotatory butter-worker, being Bft.
in diameter. When the last trace of butter-milk has been squeezed out, the butter is
spaded into rectangular troughs on wheels, and from which the packers fill the export
boxes. These are of the usual pattern, made of white New Zealand pine, lined w'ith
parchment paper, and branded with the trade mark —a bunch of berries surmounted by
the word Berry. The boxes are stored at once in the cold chamber, and as arrange-
ments have been made for weekly shipments by the mailboats, special railway cars,
cooled by ice, will load on the factory siding, proceed to Sydney by night train, and
the butter will be in the cool chamber of the vessel within seven hours from Berry.
The whole export is to be consigned to Messrs. Weddel, of London, whose repre-
sentative, Mr. Lowe, is yet in the coloixies, and no man knows good butter better
than he.
THE BUTTER MAKER.
All that money and foresight can do to eixsure the export of an unvaryingly good
article has been exhausted, and now two factors I’emain to be noticed—the man who
makes the butter and the farmers who supply the milk, Mr, W, J, M‘Veigh, the
factory manager, has a Victorian repixtation, first at Koroit, under Mr, Crowe, next
was placed in full charge of the Farnham factory, and by producing good butter, made
the concern dividend-paying. To him belongs the honour of first advocating the present
universal system of paying for milk and cream by their butter-fat contents. Suppliers
at that time, some of whom watei’ed the milk, laughed in scorn, bixt factory managers
thought otherwise,and now farmers get full value when qixality of milk makes up for
quantity. Mr. M‘Veigh afterwards established the Geelong central butter factory, and
made a reputation amongst the London agents with his products, since they found they
could sell Geelong butter at the highest rates. It was this that attracted Dr. Hay’s
notice, and an engagement ensued. Having built a factory fitted with all the best
known modern appliances for manufactui’ing butter, and secured the services of a
manager with an English and colonial reputation, it is to be hoped that the producers
will now come forwai’d and support Dr. Hay in his laudable effoi’ts, to better their
condition by supplying the best and purest cream, since upon the producers of milk
and cream depends the quality of the butter.


THE GREAT BERRY CHURK
Messrs. Cherry & Sons, of Gisborne, Victoria, inform us that probably the largest
churn made in America is rated at 600 lb., whereas the giant they have constructed to
the order of the Berry factory is calculated to make 1000 lb. of butter at a time.
Hitherto the largest churn made in Australia was of 600 lb. capacity.
THE GIANT BUTTER-WORKER.
The rotary butter-worker is an essential implement in all butter factories, and
until Dr. Hay entrusted his order of one having a table 8 ft. in diameter, the 6 ft. 6 in
size has been the extreme. Cherry & Sons are certainly to be congratulated on their
design and skilful workmanship.
Mr. McVeigh.
Manager of the Berry Central Butter Factory.


BERRY CENTRAL BUTTER EAGTORV.
■fj BY-LAWS. '
1. All cream supplied to the Factory shall be subject to the approval of the
Manager.
2. All cream shall be passed over, an approved cooler before being canned (if
required).
3. Patrons shall he required to send the whole of their cream to the Factory, the
said cream to he delivered daily.
4. person shall send, and the Manager shall refuse to receive, any cream that
is diluted with water, or skim milk, or any other liquid, or that is adulterated with
any material whatever, or that is tainted, or dirty, or otherwise impure.
5. All cream will be paid for by its butter results.
6. The cream from the milk of unhealthy cows will not be taken, and the Manager
has authority to call in the Inspector of Dairies to report on suspected cases.
7. In the case of newly-calved cows, the cream from their milk shall not be sent
to the Factory until after the eighth milking.
8. All cans and other utensils connected with the bringing of the cream to the
Factory must be kept thoroughly sweet and clean.
9. Cream will be received at the Factory from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. (unless otherwise
specified). No cream will be received on Sunday.
10. A correct account of cream received, with the weight of butter produced
therefrom, shall be kept by the Manager : Such account shall be open for inspection
by patrons at all working hours.
11. The Manager shall have access to any creamery or dairy supplying cream, at
any reasonable hour, to inspect and report its sanitary condition or otherwise.
12. No person shall he allowed inside the premises, except employees, without the
written authority of the Proprietor or Manager.
BY ORDER.
September, 1895.


THE BERRY CENTRAL BUTTER FACTORY.
THE OPENmG CEREMONY.
The central butter factory erected at Berry by tbe trustees of the Berry Estate was
formally opened on Saturday afternoon last, in the presence of a large number of dairy
farmers and other representative men, who were there at the invitation of Mr. Alex.
Hay to inspect the new establishment, and to witness the working of the new machinery
and all the modern appliances forming the plant. The visitors w’ere shown over the
premises’ by Mr. Alex. Hay and Mr. John Wright, C.E., who, Avith the manager
(Mr. W. J. M‘Veigh), fully explained the process of treating the cream and making
the blitter. The proceedings ivatched vdth considerable interest, and all present
agreed that the neiv establishment was a model one, admirably arranged, and should be
of enormous benefit to the dairymen of the district. After the inspection, Avhich
occupied some time, an adjournment was made to the School of Arts hall, where
luncheon was served in good style by Host Lambert, of the Commercial Hotel.
THE LUNCHEON.
The chair at the luncheon was taken by Mr. Alex. Hay, who had on his right
Colonel Bell, the United States Consul; Mr. James Martin, ex-M.P. ; and Mr. Joh
Wright, C.E. ; and on his left, Ur. James Norton, M.L.C., one of the Berry Estate
trustees ; Mr. Philip H. Morton, M.L.A. for Shoalhaven ; and Mr. Alex. Campbell,
M.L.A. for Kiama. There were also present Mr. R. V. Boyd, J.P. (Mayor of Berry),
Mr. C. Graham (Mayor of Noivra), Mr. William Watts (Mayor of Numba), Mr. S. S.
Wells (Mayor of Kiama), Mr. D. L. Dymock (Chairman of the South Coast and
West Camden Co-operative Co.), Mr. John SteAvart (President of the Berry
Agricultural Society), Mr. W. H. Noakes (President of the Shoalhaven Agricultural.
Society), Mr. C. W. Craig (President of the Kiama Agricultural Society), Aldermen
John EAAung, L. Geoghegan, D. Boyd, G. H. Gray, S. Sproule, F. Towers, John
Mathers (Berry), Alderman G. Armstrong (Numba), Alderman Weston (Kiama),
Alderman Jas. Monaghan (NoAvra), Rev. U. M‘Lennan, Rev. J. Colwell, Rev. G. H.
Muzy, Rev. Father Gunning, Messrs. Alick Osborne, J.P., A. J. Colley, J.P.,
C. Robinson, J.P., M. Reynolds, J.P., James Wilson, J.P., G. L. Fuller, J.P.
(Kiama), K. M‘Kenzie, J.P., H. L. Lovegrove, H. U. Morton, W. Maynes,
L). Thorburn, Ur. Samnelson, L. A. MTntyre, H. Bruce, J. Allison, J. W. Fell
(Jersey Milk Co.), E. Blackwell (Sydney), R. Aberdeen, James Stewart, P. W. Hall,
T. Britton, T. M‘Lay, John Housten, J. Giles, E. Blow, U. Blow, J. Robertson,
Z. Bice (Comerong), R. Leeming, F. A. Booth, H. Graham, J. Timms, G. Thompson,
H. Boyd, &c., in all about 100 persons.
The Chairman gave the toasts of “ The Queen ” and “ The Governor,” which
Avere enthusiasticall.y honored.
THE MANAGEMENT OF THE FACTORY.—THE SCHEME
EXPLAINEU BY MR. HAY.
Mr. Hay proposed “ The Visitors,” and stated that in giAung that toast, which
he did with much pleasure, he Avould take the opportunity of explaining his conduct in
inviting the large number present there that day, and also shoAV the basis upon which
the central factory was to be run. He had asked a number of the farmers between
Kiama and NoAvra to meet at Berry that day, to look over the factory, and to hear
from him the exact proposal for its Avorking, so that the farmers and others concerned


a
Z
m
c
0
h
nS
4J
+j
(S
bfl
C
jS
0
0
a


*^><wno(a^ « I
Berry Township.


might be able to judge for themselves. (“ Hear, bear.”) There bad been a lot of talk
during the last few years about fostering this industry, and that industry in the country,
but very little bad been done. (“ Hear, bear.”) If all the talk that they bad bad
were strung together it would reach to London, and, if sufficiently “ supporting,” they
might send their butter home on it. (Laughter.) The trustees of the Berry Estate
during late years bad been assisting largely in the development of the estate, and bad
during that time left the farmers to work out their own salvation, so far as they were
concerned, in the disposal of their produce. He thought it was well that the farmers
themselves bad not done very much, as it gave the management of the estate an
opportunity to come in and establish the factory they bad opened that day, and which
he thought would prove one of the best things that had ever been done for the farmers.
Had it been started by the farmers themselves, it might have been a benefit to the
producers to a degree, but now that the trustees had taken up the scheme they were
determined -to make it a success. (Applause.) Some few years ago the trustees
struck out to develop this part of the district. People scoffed, and declared that what
was proposed to be done could not be done in fifty years. Lands V'hich three years
ago were carrying wild fowl were now carrying children and other good stock.
(Laughter.) Farmers hitherto had had a lot to contend with, and in connection with
the settlement upon the land, he was glad to notice that the Government was going to
assist the producers, and do something like what was done in Victoria. (Voice :
“Yes, tax their land.”) In developing this estate, the trustees were alive to the fact
that their interests were so wrapped up with those of the farmers that they were hound
to make the improvements which had been and were being effected. If their interests
were not identical, the situation would indeed be a very unhappy one. (“ Hear, hear.”)
The trustees recognised also that they would have to do something beside effecting
improvements on the land ; and as their interests were so closely allied to those of the
farmers, they saw they would do well to break down the feeling of distrust that existed,
and adopt a scheme which in henefitting one must benefit both. (“ Hear, hear.”)
Eighteen months ago, at a meeting in Berry, his brother suggested the idea of a
central creamery, and he was sorry he was not there that day to see his wishes carried
out. Since his brother went away, he (Mr. Hay) had had the responsibility of furthering
the movement, and he was pleased that success bad so far attended it. When the first
meeting in reference to the factory was held he was in England, and he made inquiries
into the means of disposing of produce in the home market, and also as to the
prospects of a trade being opened up for the butter of this district. In writing out
here, he advised the establishment of a central factory such as they now had, if they
wanted to keep pace with the times, and hoped to secure a name for themselves ion the
London market by placing a product of uniform quality. He visited Denmark,
Germany, and Austria, and he satisfied himself that the dairying indttstry was one of
the finest things in the world, if properly looked after. He went into the matter fully,
and when in Denmark he saw there was much reason in the advice given to people to
“Go to Victoria ”if they wanted to find out tiie best ways in the industry. The trade
in Denmark was certainly carried out in a scientific way, but there was not much to
learn from that country. The producers there were only two or three days distant
from England, and therefore should have an advantage over this colony, although the
Danes had to stall-feed their cattle eight months in the year. If the people here were
in Denmark, they would be quite as successful as the Danes. (“ Hear, hear.”)
Although we had a greater distance to send our produce, there was the compensating
advantage that the cost of production was cheaper, and if we established our markets
in the same careful way that the Danes had done, by having our trade marked by
honesty, uniformity and excellence of quality, then we should not he afraid of any
competitors. And with the pastures we had, we should be able to turn out quite as
good an article as Denmark did. (“ Hear, hear.”) Shortly after he returned from
England, he proceeded to Victoria, and inspected works at Geelong and other places
in that colony. And although he found that the Victorians were ahead of us with
regard to their factories and appliances, and that their output of butter was greatly in
excess of the output of this colony, he came away convinced that we could here
establish a factory to turn out butter which woiild compete with any product in any
part of the world. (“ Hear, hear.”) It was not desired to have any more meetings


and consequent delay. The trustees saw that it would not hasten things, and after full
deliberation they decided to erect a creamery second to none in Australia, to have a
good management, and to ask the support of the farmers in supplying good cream.
Late returns showed that the annual output of the district was 1,075 tons. There
were 12,800 dairy cows, the milk of which could be treated in Berry, and 450 gallons—
a good average—was allowed from each cow, and 24 lb. milk to 1 lb. butter. But they
desired that the stock should be improved, for as Mr. John Stewart, Mr. Dymock, and
others had pointed out on various occasions, not a third of the number of our cattle
were good for profitable milking. He ■was sure that with a good establishment, a good
manager, and the support of the farmers, they could produce at Berry an article
second to none that had yet been sent away fi’om the colony. They had a good man
as manager ; at any rate, they believed they had. If not, they would have to get him.
And they asked the farmers to support the establishment with the best cream, so that
they could make a good butter, not the trash which had gone from New South Wales
and tended to give the colony a bad name. Now, he knew that the farmers Avanted to
know what the factory was going to pay them. (“ Hear, hear.”) They doubtless
desired to know about the “ £ s. d.” and farmers would not properly succeed unless
they fully considered the question of “£ s. d.” (“ Hear, hear.”) There could be no
sentiment about Avhat they Avere entering upon. It must be regarded from purely a
business point of AueAv. The farmers Avould send their cream to that factory if it would
pay them. The trustees Avould do their best to make it pay the farmers, as their object
Avas to better the condition of the producers. (Applause.) They proposed to receive
cream fi-om anyone—that Avas, any farmer in the district—so long as it wpxiM arriAm at
the factory in a condition to make decent butter. If it was not up to a certain standard
it Avould not betaken. (Voice: “If bad, it can be sent to Sydney.” Laughter.)
Well, they might do that ; at any rate, no bad stuff would be taken at the Berry
factory. (“ Hear, hear.”) The trustees intended to take the highest price in Sydney
weekly, and to give a farthing per lb. more. (Applause.) But there would be a
deduction for AAwking expenses. That, of course, would have to be made, and would
amount to a penny per lb. (Voice: “ I’d give that in, too.”) There have to
be a basis, and if by experience they found they could give more, they Avould do so.
The trustees did not want to make a monopoly, but their desire was to be surrounded
by prosperous people. (Applause.) The producers AA’ould be relieved of all pro rata
responsibility. The trustees Avoxdd take the risk and responsibility of disposal of
shipments. The farmers Avould be paid once a month for their cream, and they would
not be asked to pay any portion of any loss that might be made on a sale. The
trustees w'ould take all risks. (Applause.) From latest London returns, he saw that
Victoria sent home last year 120,389 cwt., and New South Wales only 34,000 CAvt.,
Avhilst birt a few years ago this colony was ahead of Victoria in the trade. He did not
think that most of our farmers last year got for their butter the price of margarine,
which Avas quoted in London at per lb., the best Australian, Ncav Zealand,
and Brittany butter had sold in London at to Is. 2d. per lb. The trustees of
the Berry factory proposed to dispose of a part of the output in Sydney through the
South Coast and West Camden Co-operatiA'e Company. (Applause.) That company
would dispose of the butter to the best advantage. The directors kneAv the market
well. They Avere conscientious men, avlio kneAV their business, and they Avould try to
make good sales. What butter Avas not sold locally Avould be sent 'to the agents,
Messrs. W. Weddell & Co., in London, the representative of wdiich firm, Avhen in
Shoalhaven lately, said, “ Give me your agency and we don’t want any other in Ncav
South Wales, and Avill ask for and take no other.” (“Hear, hear.”) The butter from
this facfory Avould be put up in 561 b. boxes, bearing the registered trade mark, a bunch
of berries (lillipilli), and no consignment Avould be sent away which Avas not of the best
quality. The brand never be injured. Orders had been given to the agents
that should any of this butter arriving in London or elsewhere be found to be of a
quality not up to the standard, the brand to be taken off the box and the butter
sold for it bring. The London market Avas not to be imposed upon.
The people of that great city Avere the keenest business men to be found in the
world, and it would take years to retrieve a position with a man whom they once
deceived. They could only hope to secure a decent market in London by


sending home an article of the highest standard, and the estate trustees were
determined to proceed with their new industry with that end in view. If they could
not do so, and there were others who could, would be asked to take over the
business ; but the trustees hoped there would be no need to ask anyone to do that. He
hoped this industry would be a success for the estate and for the district. What he
meant by a success was that they would produce an article second to none in Australia.
(Applause.) Shoalhaven would then be credited with being one of the first districts to
strike out in this enterprise in a proper manner. The trustees of the estate had so far
done all they could to increase the productiveness of the district. During the last few
years they had added to the 300 farmers on the estate another 60. And apart from
the development of the estate, the trustees had had to see to the housing of the
farmers, and in many cases give them the wherewithal to start in life. They could not


get people with money to settle on the land, and they had to take the best tenants they
could find. The difficulties that the estate had to contend with were well known.
Large legacies had to be provided for, and the estate, like all individuals, had had
its own great work and responsibilities to carry out. Despite the depression,
however, the trustees had gone on improving the estate, and giving a better
fortress to the people of the district. He trusted that farmers who had settled on the
estate would feel a little gratitude to those who had given them assistance, and
would do their best to make the central factory a success. He would call upon
Mr. James Martin to respond to the toast that he had proposed. (Applause.)
View on Goolangatta Road
AI7 FUI7D FOE THE FAEMERS
_Mr. Jambs Martin, in reply, said that it was refreshing for one to come to a
district like this, at a time when there was so much depression throughout the colony.
The Government was being approached almost daily with regard to their assisting
various industries, and he took it that the establishment opened at Berry that day was
a fine object lesson to the people and Government of the country. It was a happy
mean between both contending parties in politics. Such proposals had been made that
day as could only lead to success in this part ; and it was plain from what had been
said that Dr. Hay was providing an insurance fund for the farmers of this district. He
could not think of any proposal that would be of more benefit to the producers, and
likely to add to the success of New South Wales. Whilst Victoria took money from
the pockets of the taxpayers to boom the butter industry, better things were now being
done here by co-operation and private enterprise. If the same energy had been put
into the business of preparing fruit for export, they should now have a good export
trade in fruit. He was very pleased to have an opportunity of bearing testimony as to
what was being done in this part of the colony, and he was sure that the visitors wished


the Berry factory a large measure of success. He believed in private enterpi'ise, and
he hated those people who were always looking to the Government for assistance.
(Applause.! Self-help, hard work, economy and thrift were the only royal roads to
success, and he hoped this industry would largely benefit the gentleman who had had
the enterprise to start it, as also all those who would doubtless support it. (Applause.)
THE TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE.
Mr. Alexander Campbell, M.L.A., proposed “ The Trustees of the Berry
Estate.” He said that they had had practical proof of the great forethought of the
original owners of the estate, and they had during the last few years seen what vast
improvements the trustees had made to that important estate. When they took charge
of it, a large portion of the estate was unproductive and undeveloped, and with the
progressive character of the men, it was not to he wondered that changes would
take place. There had been considerable expenditure on the estate, and portions where
swamps and pools of water once stood as an eyesore were now carrying waving crops
and magnificent pastures for stock. The trustees had done a great deal of good for the
district. Hr. Hay was at present on the Continent, and it was hoped that the people
of this district would further benefit largely by the \dsit of Hr. Hay to the other side of
the globe. In the scheme inaugurated that day they had the latest sign of the
trustees’ anxiety to assist the farmers ; and he trusted that by this factory the ideas
and expectations of the producers would he realised. The trustees were doing really
valuable work in various directions, helping not only themselves, but also the farmers
and many people outside the estate. He believed, as he hoped, that the establishment
of the new butter factory would tend very largely to the securing of a better j,rice to
the farmers for their product, and the keeping of a better class of stock. (Applause.)
Hr. Norton, M.L.C., responded. He said he was sorry to miss that day the fine
genial and honest face of one who had gone from amongst them. He referred to the
H. G. Morton, who had presided over this estate for upwards of 40 years, and whose
face had invariably been seen at gatherings of that kind. He also regretted to miss
the face of one whose absence was the reason for his (Mr. Norton’s) now addressing
tliat meeting. He meant Hr. John Hay, who was at present in Scotland, and whose
visit to the old country would perhaps he of benefit to the people here. After referring
to the early history of Shoalhaven, and stating facts concerning the original owners of
the estate, the speaker briefly dwelt upon the efforts of the present trust to advance the
interests of the district. Mr. Alex. Berry came to this district with a hundred
convicts, and commenced to cultivate the land ; and after the land had been somewhat
improved Mr. Berry was relieved of the convicts, and set about making good settlement.
He cut a canal that gave the only roadway to the district, and all the work that
followed was done without any Government assistance; in fact, Mr. Berry was
punished for having undertaken the work of cutting the canal. The Berrys had been
“ kings ” in the district, and as the people went to Mr. Berry for everything, he was in
truth their “ Government.” Hr. Hay w'as an exceptional man in the district. He had
done more for the district than had ever been done before. He had formed 125 miles
of drainage at a cost of £135,000, and by that work had turned swamp lands into
beautiful pasturages. He had also improved the estate in many other important
respects, and in all had worked without receiving the slightest assistance from the
Government. This new butter factory would certainly be for the benefit of the
farmers. The farmers would take the profit side of the account, and he hoped that
Hr. Hay, who took all risks, would have no loss. He felt sure the farmers wished the
factory success, a good omen of which was their attendance that day. Mr. Alex. Hay
and Mr. Campbell had given some credit to him in that matter, but he did not deserve
any. He disclaimed all credit for the enterprise, as all praise was entirely due to
Hr. Hay. (Applause.)
SUCCESS TO THE HISTRICT.—A HUMOUROUS AHHRESS.
Colonel Bell, Consul for the United States, proposed ‘‘ Success to the Hairying
Industry and Prosperity to the Histrict.” In an eloquent and very witty address, he
said he had been all over the world, and having been shown over the Berry Estate, he
could say that it was one of the most delightful places he had ever seen. He would


have but one objection to living on it, and that was when the time came for him to go,
be should want an extension of bis term. It was a nice district—a fair spot—a lovely
place to visit—a charming place to reside in—too fair a spot for a man to die on—and
if a man could not make a living upon it, be ought to turn up bis toes and go out of
the world like a gentleman. (Laughter.) Self-reliance was what the people wanted
in this country. They did not trust the Government in bis country. They trusted
themselves. (Laughter.) They did not rely upon the Government to do things.
They did not wait for things to turn up ; they made them turn up. (Laughter.) A
great deal had been said in this colony about unlucky men, but there should be no such
people. What they wanted was more dependence by the people upon themselves
remembering that there was no royal road to wealth, and that each man’s success
depended upon himself. The inclination to lean upon the Government was too strong
in this colony. That inclination was so strong, indeed, that he had seen people in
Road from Berry to Coolangatta.
Sydney who actually leant against lamp posts when they wanted to light their pipes.
(Laughter.) Everyone should strike out and help each other, individual vdth
individual, community with community, and state with state, not forgetting that they
were all children of God, and that life was real. There were men in Australia who
might do well for themselves but for their indecision and their habits of indifference.
The average Australian rose at |8 or 9 in the morning, got into his clothes as if he
were afraid of hurting them, and then, with pipe in mouth, went out into the street,
and there stood with his hands in his pockets waiting for something to turn up. Look
at the American ! He rose with the sun, jumped vigorously into his clothes, and after
plunging into his bath and bringing about a healthy bodily glow, Avent forth determined
to make something turn up. (Laughter.) There was no doubt about the American’s
enthusiasm and determination. America owned half the railways of the world, and
more than half the newspapers, and he believed she had a few cows. (Laughter.)


Civilisation would Hot be what it now was but for the United States. Yet the United
States would not be what they were but for the Anglo-Saxon race—the Britisher —the
Englishman. (Applause.) After all, the Australians were much like the Americans.
He had seen lately that a great deal of interest was being taken in the export of live
cattle from Australia, and in a report he sent to his own Government the other day he
stated that they had better cattle in Australia than were raised in his country, and he
believed that to he a fact. In Australia also there was as good fruit as was raised in
America, hut the Australians wanted a little more taste in cultivating it, and a little more
taste in packing and sending it to market. He believed that a market for Australian fruit
could he found in America. It might he said that they had plenty of fruit in America,
hut they should rememher that when it was summer in Australia it was winter in
America, and that made all the difference. He had spoken truthfully of what he had
observed in this colony, and he thoxight more of the, truth than he did even of his own
country. He saw no reason why they could not create a good export trade in butter.
What they had to do was to make a good reputation, and to he careful that they did
not lose it because of one keg of strong butter. They knew’ that a good name was of
the utmost importance. A man might he almost a lifetime building up a reputation,
and yet he might lose it in one day riding three blocks in a Sydney ’bus. (Laughter
and continued applause.)
Mr. R. V. Boyd, Mayor of Berry, briefly responded. He said he had been on
the estate 28 years. When he first came there was not a cart in the district, the first
vehicle he saw being a bullock dray stuck in the road near what was now the public
wharf. Ho one could fail to see the vast progress that had been made on the estate.
He was only six weeks in the colony from the old country when he was settled upon
the estate through the kindness of Mr. H. G. Morton, who he very much regretted was
no longer with them.
Mr. John Stewart, in responding, said that a lot of the dairy cattle at present
in the district were not up to the standard, while they had some as good as any in the
world. There were perhaps none better. The great bulk, however, were not what they
should be, and he did not believe that they were profitable. They would never have
good headway in the dairying industry, nor a really good reputation for that estate,
until owners disposed of the unprofitahle milkers. The feeding of stock was another
matter which should be given closer attention. They should always look forward to
every season as a possibly dry season, and prepare for proper feeding, and not overstock
and allow cattle to remain in the weather without shelter.
Mr. C. W. Craio also responded. He said it w’ould be a good thing if the
colony had more well-managed creameries, and, after providing for local consumption,
sent the hutter to London under a distinctive brand. Nothing could be done with
divided effort, but he believed dairymg could be made a very profitable industry if
conducted on proper co-operative lines.
Mr. James Monaghan said he was very pleased to say that he was born in the
district and still resided in it, and he was glad to observe the progress it had made of
late years. It w’as gratifying to see so much of the sw’amp lands converted into good
meadows, and to see so many good settlers who had toiled long years now becoming
the possessors of the lands. If the new institution started that day was carried on in
the spirit spoken of by the chairman, it would be a good thing for the district and the
colony. What had been long spoken of was now about to be carried into effect,
namely, the making of a large quantity of good-quality butter at one place. Next they
must have concentration of sales, so as to secure the best prices and minimise
expenditure. He was glad to see the central factory started, and he would help it all
he possibly could. (“ Hear, hear.”)
Mr. D. L. Dymock said that the district was to be congratulated upon entering
on a new epoch that day. There was no reason why this colony should not do equally
as well in the butter trade as Victoria. He thought, however, that more attention
should he given to the care of stock. It would be a good thing if they could produce
such stock as was known as the Berry Estate stock years ago. He remembered some
sixty head being sold by Overseer M‘Lean, to Mr. Marks, of Jamberoo, and some of
' them produced 8 lbs. of butter per week each. He agreed with Mr. Stewart that they


should do more in the way of conservation of feed. He knew that farmers were a
hard working lot, but they did not everywhere have a proper system of working. He
was delighted to hear the South Coast Company recognised by the chairman as a big
factor in the industry. Ho one knew fnlly the difficidties which the directors of that
company had had during the late depression, yet they kept their place successfully iii
the trade. The chairman’s recent visit to England and the Continent must prove of
great benefit to the people here, to whom that day was one of great importance.
Twenty-five years ago Berry was unknown ; now it was the most important place on
the South Coast. He hoped that in the future efforts would be made to arrive at one
common end for one common good. All the science now brought to these things was
the outcome of years of labour, and a good deal of what they saw accomplished
nowadays was what had been striven for long ago in the pioneering efforts of
Thomas Sutcliffe Mort.
EARLY DAYS—A FEW CORRECTIOHS.
Mr. John Weight corrected a few of the previous speakers in certain particulars.
Dr. Horton was not right in stating that the late Mr. Berry was relieved of the 100
consigned convicts. Emancipation did not come till 1850, long after Mr. Berry had
completed his contract with the Government in respect of the convicts. Mr. Berrv
was the only man who fulfilled agreements at that period. Mr. Dymock had said
something about the old Berry class of cattle being extinct in 1840, but he
(Mr. Wright) remembered the Berry cattle arriving in Tasmania in 1848. These
were perhaps now unimportant statements, but he liked to have things correct.
(Laughter.)
THE VALUE OF ASSOCIATIOHS.
Associations had never been a success in these parts, and he strongly opposed any
system of co-operation or association in the matter of that factory, as it was essential
for full success that the man having the largest stake in the district should put up the
factory, and then look to the people for support. He hoped what they had seen that
day wonld be a benefit to them. He was sorry that many of them were not farmers.
They were truly graziers and dairymen, but they had none of the implements nsnally
employed by farmers, and they •tilled not 1 per cent, of the land in the year.
THE STOCK-CARRYIHG CAPACITY OF THE ESTATE
He did not agree with Mr. Stewart with regard to the conservation of feed. If the
lands were properly laid down there wonld be good feed all the year round. On less
than 30 acres of land the estate had been feeding 60 head of cattle for some time.
(Voice : “ You are wrong.”) Ho, there was ample proof that he Avas not wrong in
what he said. There Avere cattle now on the place he referred to, and they could be seen
by anyone. And some land laid down a Aveek preAdously Avas noAv carrying at least a
beast to the acre. Regarding ensilage, in Ayhich Mr. Wilson Avas so much interested,
he did not belieA''e it was good feed for dairying. He had always tried to do his best
for the district, and hoped he wonld be misunderstood in anything he might do
or say.
“THE GREAT EHGIHE THAT HEVER SLEEPS.”
Mr. Weight then proposed the toast of “The Press.” They all knew AA'hat an
important institution the Press AvaS. It ayes at times extremely difficult to get rid of
members of the Press —(laughter)—yet it Avould be impossible to do without them.
The toast Avas acknoAA'ledged by Mr. C. J. B. Watson {Shoalhaven News and
Nowra Colonist\ Mr. D. White TelegrapK), and Mr. T. Holland
[Berry Begister^.
“ OUR AVORTHY YOUHG CHAIRMAH.”
Mr. Alex. Campbell, M.L.A., said there was one toast that was not on the
programme, and he Avould propose it. It Avas “ Our Avorthy young chairman.”
(Applause.) Without drinking that, they wonld be nnAvorthy of the consideration
and hospitality shoAvn to them. Mr. Hay possessed those qualities AAdiich should have
him make his mark in this colony. (“ Hear, hear.”)


>
o
■M
0
nS
U.
L.
<u
+->
4->
3
ca
d
i.
+-'
c
(U
o
>
1.
i-
(D
00
®
r
h


Mr. Hay acknowledged the compliraeut. He said that all his efforts were to
promote the best interests of the district, and all things tending in that direction would
always have his support. The hutter factory scheme was originated during his absence
in England, but when in London he was enabled to do much that helped the move-
ment. He trusted that the results wmuld prove to he as good as they hoped.
The proceedings concluded with cheers for the chairman and the trustees of the
estate.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE FACTORY.
The factory, which is said to be the largest in the colony, is situated on the
railway line, a few hundred yards south of the Berry railway station. It is of weather-
board, 100 ft. in length by 40 ft. in width, with a galvanised iron roof, covei’ed with
refrigerating paint, and fitted with a three-shaft louvre to keep the building cool
inside. The factory premises were designed by Mr. John Wright, C.E., and con-
structed by Messrs. Howard and Joseph Kennedy, and both within and without the
factory gives good evidence of all-round perfection. Everything is of the very best.
Everything has been bought and planned and made with a view to the economy of
labour on the one hand, and the excellence of tlie product on the other. From the
time the contents of the cans are poured into the straining vat on the upper storey
until the cream comes out of the churn in the form of butter there is not only no risk,
hut there is even no possibility of one single drop of liquid being splashed against
either the walls or floors, and this is a most important feature in any factory of the
kind.
The ground floor of the building is divided into three large rooms, and the two
outer ones are sub-divided into smaller apartments. In the centre rooms there are the
churns and the freezing machinery, on the right hand side the engine-room and the
room where the cans are scalded ; on the left, the room where the butter is worked, and
the cool storage vault, and up above, of course, the platform to which the cream is
hoisted in cans upon its arrival and stored in ice-cold tanks till the time for its
churning. The process, from first to last, is simplicity itself. The cans of cream are
hauled through a trap-door by what is known as Dobsen’s patent hoist—a chain so
arranged as to run either upward or downward, according to the turning of a small
lever in one direction or the other. The contents are then poured inio a huge strainer,
and carried by means of pipes into a series of vats arranged side by side in an insulated
chamber. Here the cream is rapidly cooled, and here it remains until it is conducted
through more pipes to the churning-room below. There are three churns, one an
enormous rectangular box capable of making 1,000 lbs. of butter at a time ; another,
rather smaller, capable of making 600 lb. ; and another, smaller still, to be used for
experimental purposes. The 1,000 lb. churn is said to he one of the largest in the world,
and the building has been so arranged as to accommodate another churn of the same
size, should that be necessary. The churns are fed through pipes, and the buttermilk
is carried away by another set of pipes to a tank a hundred yards from the building,
so that there is absolutely no handling of either cream or buttermilk throughout the
entire process. When butter is made, it is conveyed to the “ working ” room, and
there, on a huge circular tray—the largest butter “ worker ” in Australia, designed by
Mr. M‘Veigh (the manager) —is subjected to the pressure of wooden rollers, which
effectually kneads into it the necessary amount of salt, and out of it the residuum of
buttermilk. In this room the butter, after being worked, is cut into cubes, embossed
with the trade mark (previously described in these and packed, after which it
is carried in boxes into the cool storage room adjacent. The temperature of the
building is regulated by one of Robinson’s refrigerating machines. The boiler, which
is covered with asbestos lagging to prevent the escape of heat in the room, was supplied
by Messrs. Martin, of Sydney. The chief feature in the design of the factory is the
large butter-room cooled by the iced brine circulated by the ammonia-compression
cold-producing engine (Crawford’s). As arrangements are made for shipments to
London, special railway cars, cooled by ice, will load on the facfory siding, proceed to
Sydney by night train, and the butter will be in the cool chamber of the out-going
vessel within seven hours from Berry.


BERRY CREAMERY
BUTTER.
Fresh from the Farms and
Pastures of the Famous
“COOLANGATTA” (BERRY’S) ESTATE,
Situated in the heart of the South Coast Dairying District.
This CREAMERY is fitted with all the
Itatest and
Slefrigeratmg iVlachincrg
ensuring the manufacture of only the Very Best
and Choicest Butter.
SHOULD CALL AND INSPECT THIS BUTTER
BEFORE PURCHASING ELSEWHERE.
GROCERS
SOXjTEI -A-G-EUsTTS :
00., \iTO.,
SUSSEX & LIVERPOOL STS.,
s"^iD3sr:E]-^.




