

DESCRIPTION
OF
THE NEW HEBRIDES
CEfroup of Islands
IN
THE SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN:
SHOWING
THE ADVANTAGES TO BE DERIVED FROM THE FORMATION OF A
SETTLEMENT ON ONE OF THE ISLANDS,
FOR THE PURPOSE OF
CULTIVATING THE SPICES AND THE MANY OTHER ARTICLES OF COMMERCE
INDIGENOUS TO THE GROUP I
WITH
A BRIEF NOTICE OF THE OBJECTS, &c.
OF
THE NEW HEBRIDES COMPANY,
AND
SOME GENERAL SUGGESTIONS
v OR ORGANISING AN EXTENSIVE AND LUCRATIVE TRADE, BY MEANS OF BRITISH
CAPITAL AND ENTERPRISE, AMONGST THE NUMEROUS ISLANDS AND COUNTRIES
LYING BETWEEN OUR AUSTRALIAN AND INDIAN POSSESSIONS, AND THROUGHOUT
THE INDIAN SEAS GENERALLY; THUS OPENING
A NEW AND ALMOST UNLIMITED MARKET FOR THE CONSUMPTION
OF
BRITISH MANUFiLCTHEBS.
LONDON:
JEREMIAH HOW, 209. PICCADILLY,
1846.






C.Phillips, Engraver, 19 Gracechurch, Strt-London.


DESCRIPTION
OF
THE NEW HEBRIDES
Group of Islands
IN
THE SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN!
SHOWING
THE ADVANTAGES TO BE DERIVED FROM THE FORMATION OF A
SETTLEMENT ON ONE OF THE ISLANDS,
FOR THE PURPOSE'OF - ,
CULTIVATING THE" SPICES AND THE MANY OTHER ARTICLES OF COMMERCE
4 INDIGENOUS TO THE GROUP: ‘‘'W
• >-
WITH
A BRIEF NOTICE OF THE OBJECTS, &e.
OF
THE NEW HEBRIDES COMPANY,
AND
SOME GENERAL SUGGESTIONS
FOR ORGANISING AN EXTENSIVE AND LUCRATIVE TRADE, BY MEANS OF BRITISH
CAPITAL AND ENTERPRISE, AMONGST THE NUMEROUS ISLANDS AND COUNTRIES
LVING BETWEEN OUR AUSTRALIAN AND INDIAN POSSESSIONS, AND THROUGHOUT
THE INDIAN SEAS GENERALLY; THUS OPENING
A NEW AND ALMOST UNLIMITED MARKET FOR THE CONSUMPTION
OF
BRITISH MANUFACTURES.
LONDON:
JEREMIAH HOW, 209. PICCADILLY.
1846.


London :
Printed by A. Spottiswoode,
New- Street- Square.


This group of islands was discovered in the year
1606, by Pedro Fernandez de Quiros, a man who
has been described as “ the last of the great heroes
of Spain; for with him died that spirit of enterprise
which conducted Columbus to the Antilles, and
Cortez to the palace of Montezuma.” He served
in the capacity of chief pilot to Mendaha in 1595,
after whose death he conducted to Manilla the
shattered remains of the squadron, consisting of
two of the vessels; “the third was found stranded
on the coast, with all her sails set, but her people
were dead.” On reaching Peru he at once addressed
himself to the Viceroy, Don Louis de Velasco, for
the purpose of obtaining “ ships, men, and other
necessaries,” to continue the discoveries of Men-
A 2
DESCRIPTION
OF
THE NEW HEBRIDES.
CHAPTER I.
DISCOVERY OF THE NEW HEBRIDES BY QUIROS
IN 1606.


dana ; to use his own words, “ to plough up the
waters of the unknown sea, and to seek out the
undiscovered lands around the Antarctic Pole, the
centre of that horizon.” He presented two memo-
rials to the Viceroy, explaining the motives which
inclined him to this undertaking. He says, “ Be-
cause the shadow seen in the moon in the time of
her eclipse is part of a circle, it is proved that the
form of the body of earth and water which com-
pose it is round. Imagining about this body a line
encompassing it, and dividing it into two equal
parts, calling the one north and the other south,
from this equinoctial line begins the degrees, count-
ing from 1 deg. to 90 degs., which is the greatest
quantity of latitude towards either of the two poles.
Of the north part is already discovered to more
than 70 degs. What remains from thence to 90
degs., although it should be discovered, seems un-
inhabitable on account of the great cold, the in-
equality of day and night, and other inconveniences.
Of the south part is discovered to 55 degs., passing
the straits of Magalhaens, and to 35 degs. in which
is the Cape of Good Hope, or 40 degs. and a little
more, to which ships go in doubling it. These two
points of land, with their coasts on each side, are
already known to all. How are wanting the rest
which remain from these and from this parallel,
and to the west from a lower latitude to 90 degs.,
to know if it is land or water, or what part there is
of both.” It would appear that whilst serving with
Mendana, Quiros conceived the idea of the existence


of a great southern continent, a notion Avhich for
years had been floating vaguely in the minds of the
nautical adventurers of that period. However, the
discovery of that supposed continent had never
formed the object of any particular voyage — not
even of the last expedition of Men dan a, in 1595;
but the discovery of the island of Santa Cruz
during that voyage, induced Quiros to believe that
at length a portion of the great southern continent
had been discovered. “ Hence/’ it has been well
remarked, “ the two memorials which he presented
to the Viceroy are remarkable for a tone of pro-
found scientific research and discussion in that
great geographical question, which is not to be
found elsewhere, until the comparatively recent
discoveries of Cook and Surville.” The Viceroy,
believing that he had not authority to comply with
the demands of Quiros, sent him to Madrid, with
letters to the king and his ministers, strongly re-
commending his views. Philip the Third favour-
ably listened to the project; but it was believed
that the Spanish government wished rather to dis-
cover a route from America to Spain by the East
Indies, and to arrive in that way at the Spice
Islands, and to discover between New Guinea and
China other islands, to which some loose tradition,
of which no one knew the origin, attributed the
greatest riches. But however this might be, Quiros
was quite successful in his endeavours. He left the
court of Madrid “ with the most honourable sche-
dules which had ever passed the council of state.”
A 3


He carried out with him to Lima an order to the
Count de Monterry, then Viceroy of Peru, autho-
rising the fitting out of an expedition; thus, as
Torquemada, in his “ Monarquia Indiana,” observes,
“ throwing into oblivion all that he had endured
for eleven years in the pursuit of so important an
object.” Two vessels and a corvette were built,
“ the strongest and best armed of any that had
been seen on either sea;” for much was expected
from this expedition, which, in the words of the
historian, was “ to give souls to heaven, and new
kingdoms to Spain.”
Quiros set sail from the port of Callao on the
21st of December, 1605, having under him, as se-
cond in command, Luis Vaez de Torres. Six Grey
or Franciscan Friars accompanied the expedition ;
and, in conformity with their wonted respect for
religion, guns were fired on the 25th during the
day, and the ships were illuminated during the
nio-ht, in honour of the solemn festival of the
Nativity.
It is not necessary to give a narrative of the
earlier part of the voyage, of the discovery of the
islands of La Encarnacion, of St. Juan Bautista,
Los Quatros Coronadas, La Sagitaria, and Taumaco
and Tucopia. Quiros having passed the latitude of
14°, at which point he pursued a westerly direc-
tion, and, after one day’s sailing, discovered a vol-
cano, surrounded by land, and inhabited by black
people with large beards. When near this island,
which was named Nuestra Senora de la Luz, land


was perceived to the westward; while in the south,
and towards the south-east was seen “ other land,
still larger, which seemed to have no end, and was
full of great mountains.” After some deliberation,
it was resolved to make for the island in the west,
which received the name of Santa Maria; but after
touching there, Quiros determined to steer towards
the high regions that lay to the south. On the
2d of May he moved the vessels into a large bay,
and, believing that he had at length discovered the
great southern continent, gave it the name of Aus-
tralia Del Espiritu Santo.
The bay, in honour of the festival on which they
had entered it, was named San Felipe y Santiago;
while a port far within, where they anchored, was
called La Yera Cruz. It is thus described in one
of the memorials of Quiros to the king of Spain: —
“ The said port, Yera Cruz, is between two rivers,
one whereof they named Jordan, the other Salva-
dor, which give no small beauty to all their shores,
for they are full of odoriferous flowers and plants.
The strands of the bay are broad, long, and clear.
The sea here is still and pleasant; for, although
the winds blow strong within the bay, the water
is scarce moved. There are in all parts in front of
the sea pleasant and agreeable groves, extending
to the sides of many mountains which were in
sight; and also from the top of one which our
people mounted, were perceived at a distance ex-
tremely fertile valleys, plains, and beautiful and
various rivers, winding amongst the green moun-
A 4


tains. The whole is a country which, without
doubt, has the advantage over those of America,
and the best of Europe will be well if it is equal.”
Quiros further says, u From the breaking of the
dawn is heard through all the neighbouring wood
a very great harmony of thousands of different
birds; some, to appearance, nightingales, black-
birds, larks, and goldfinches, and infinite numbers
of swallows; even the chirping of grasshoppers and
crickets. Every morning and evening were en-
joyed sweet scents wafted from all kinds of flowers,
among them that of orange-flowers and sweet
basil.” As the boats rowed towards this second
Eden, the islanders crowded the beach, and endea-
voured, by friendly signs, to prevent their landing.
The Spaniards, however, leapt on shore ; upon
which a native chief drew a line on the ground
with his bow, and made signs that the strangers
should not pass beyond it. But the second in
command, Luis Yaez de Torres, thinking this would
appear cowardly, stepped across the boundary, and
strife instantly ensued. A flight of arrows on the
one side was responded to by a discharge of mus-
ketry Oil the other, which killed the chief and
several of his followers. From this time all peace
was at an end: the savages rejected every offer of
conciliation, and, by a sudden ambuscade, and open
attack, sought revenge for the blood of their leader.
This ceaseless enmity and the failure of provisions
determined Quiros to quit the place before a month
had elapsed. He had, however, previously taken


possession of the country in the name of the king,
and founded a city under the title of La Nueva
Jerusalen, appointing alcaldes, and corregidors,
and the other municipal officers usual in Spain.
In endeavouring to quit the harbour of St. Felipe
y Santiago, much stormy weather was encountered;
and, for some reason which cannot now be ascer-
tained, Quiros parted company with his consort.
After a vain search for the island of Santa Cruz,
he agreed, in compliance with the opinion of his
officers, to sail for Mexico, where he arrived in the
middle of October. Torres, who remained two
weeks after the departure of Quiros in the bay of
St. Felipe y Santiago, on leaving, sailed along the
west side of Australia del Espiritu Santo, which he
found to be well watered, and possessed of many
ports. He also ascertained that it was no con-
tinent, but an island. He ultimately arrived at
Manilla, in May 1607. Quiros, however, had
reasons for conceiving that he had made the dis-
covery of a continent; and this is the opinion of
Captain Cook, who says: “The northern islands
of this Archipelago were first discovered by that
great navigator Quiros, in 1006; and, not without
reason, were considered as part of the southern
continent, which at that time, and until very lately,
was supposed to exist.”


CHAPTER II
THE PRODUCTION OF THE NEW HEBRIDES DESCRIBED
BY QUIROS.
So deeply was Quiros impressed with the import-
ance of his discovery, that he presented no less
than fifty memorials to the Court of Spain, praying
that an expedition might be sent out to colonise
the Australia del Espiritu Santo. Of these memo-
rials, two are given in Purchas and in Dalrymple’s
“ Historical Collection of Voyages to the South
Seas.” Admiral Burney, in his “ Chronological
History of the Discoveries in the South Seas,”
states the substance of these memorials as fol-
lows :
“ The memorials of Quiros were evidently written
with the express intention of exciting the King of
Spain to send colonies to the Australia; but after
making every allowance for colouring, there can be
no doubt of the country being fertile and pleasant
in the extreme.
“ The soil is a rich black mould; the vegetable
productions are, cocoa-nuts, sugar-canes, yams,
potatoes: there are three different roots which the
inhabitants use as bread; some of these are a yard
in length, and half a yard in thickness, and they
are prepared with little trouble, as nothing more is


requisite than to roast or boil them. There are
oranges, limes, papas, ovos, a fruit like a quince,
almonds and nuts of various sorts, pumpkins and
garden herbs, nutmegs*, mace, ginger, and pepper,
in great quantities; woods fit for building any
number of ships grew in quantities inexhaustible;
ebony and, in the salt marshes, hamboo-canes, the
fruits of which were five or six palms in length.
The Spaniards did not see horned cattle at the
Australia, which they had been taught to expect;
nor are any other quadrupeds mentioned to have
been seen there by them, except hogs; but one of
the natives, who was carried away by Quiros, said
that there were dogs both of a large and a small
breed; goats, and an animal like a cat. Of birds
there were geese, fowls, doves, partridges, and
parrots, and many kinds of smaller birds. There
were honey-bees likewise.
“ Among the fish, which were caught dose to the
ships, Quiros mentioned skates, soles, mullets,
whitings, shads, skuttlefish, sardinas, thornbacks,
gurnets, eels, fish which, in the Spanish language,
are eaM pargQ§, reyes, mac-abas, palom§ta§, &g-.\
and other fish, of which he did not remember the
names.
“ Quiros did not rest his hopes of succeeding in
his application at the Court on representations of
the advantages already enumerated, most of which,
* Both Quiros and Torquemada mention nutmegs growing
here.


consisting of the conveniences of life, might be
thought more calculated to contribute to the benefit
of the settler than of the state. ‘ The riches of
these countries,’ he says, ‘ are silver and pearl; and
besides, nutmegs, mace, pepper, and ginger.’ There
is intimation of cinnamon, and perhaps there may
be cloves, sinces there are other spices, and these
countries are almost parallel with Ternate and
Bachian. The greatest stress is laid upon pearls,
which Quiros seems willing should be esteemed the
most valuable production of these countries. Ac-
cording to the information given by Pedro, the
native of Chicayana, the pearls are found in oysters,
of which there are different kinds and sizes. The
largest oysters are of the size of a good target, and
are by the natives called taquila. Pedro said that
no oyster produced more than one pearl; yet pearls
were found in great quantities, and were held in
no estimation by the natives. He said they were
white, and of a dazzling brightness. Quiros relates
that he had information of fifteen different islands,
of which number Chicayana was one where the
pgarl 9y§t@r§ are found.
“ It does not appear that he carried with him
any of the pearls to show by way of sample; and
it is probable that the unfortunate footing he was
upon Avith the natives did not afford him oppor-
tunity to obtain any.
“ The evidence produced of there being silver at
the Australia is much weaker. Quiros says that in
Taumaco there Avas a man, a great pilot, avlio had


brought from a large country, which was named
Pouro, some arrows pointed with a metal white as
silver; and in one of the houses at the bay of San
Felipe y Santiago were found some heavy black
stones, two of which, each as large as a nut (what
kind of nut is not particularised), Quiros carried
to Mexico. 4 They were seen/ Quiros says, ‘in my
lodgings by Don Francisco Pachoco, a proprietor of
mines, and he showed me that one of them was full
of eyes of silver; and for this reason we carried it
to the house of an assayer, who put it in a crucible;
but gave it so much fire that the crucible broke,
and the experiment failed; yet a part remaining
with me the assayer melted again, and in it was a
small point which expanded under the hammer.
He touched it on three stones, and some silver-
smiths said it was silver touch; but some said the
assay should have been made with quicksilver, and
others with saltpetre; yet the assayer affirmed that
the metal was good, and two silversmiths said it
was silver. The climate of the Australia, as far as
the short experience of the Spaniards enabled them
to judge, appeared correspondent to its other ad-
vantages. Th m was a freshness in the air so
salubrious, 4 that/ says Quiros, 4 neither by labour,
by perspirations, getting wet, being exposed to the
dews, or by other intemperance, did any of the
Spaniards, though strangers to this country, fall
sick. There, fish and flesh kept sound two days,
and no musquitos or tormenting insects were seen
there. 7


“ This description of the temperature may be
considered as applicable only to the particular
season when Quiros was at the Australia, which
was the month of May, and the beginning of June.
The first part of this time the winds were light, in the
latter part they were fresh. Quiros mentions, as a
general indication of the country being healthy,
that very aged people were seen there, and that the
inhabitants lived in houses on the ground ‘ casas
terrenas,’ and not in houses raised from the ground,
as is done in the Philippine Islands, and in other
parts. He might have instanced La Graciosa Bay,
where the houses of the natives are elevated on
posts.
“ It has been remarked, that the islands which
Quiros fell in with after leaving Taumaco were
inhabited by different kinds of people. He gives
generally to the people of these countries the cha-
racter of being cleanly, cheerful, sensible, and
grateful. Punctuation (the tattoo) was in general
practice among them. The inhabitants in the Bay
of San Felipe y Santiago, Torres says, ‘were all
black and naked.’ Quiros, that ‘ they wore a cover-
ing round the middle.’ A young native, a boy
about eight years of age, who was carried away by
Quiros, is described of a dark colour, with curled
hair, good eyes, good shape, and extremely docile
and good-humoured. The Spaniards named him
Pablo (Paul). The people of the Australia were
corpulent and strong; their houses were built with
wood, and thatched. As instances of their inge


nuity and knowledge in the arts, Quiros mentions
that they have flutes and drums, that they weave
nets, make earthen vessels, work on marble and
stone; that their plantations are well laid out, and
enclosed with palisades; that they have burying
places, and that they have vessels well built, Avith
Avhich they navigate to distant countries. The cir-
cumstance which Quiros has saved for the con-
cluding argument of the civilization of the people
of the Australia, and Avhich he afiirms to be a con-
firmation of their vicinity to people more civilised,
is that they cut their hogs, and make capons.
“ All the descriptions of Quiros show the warm
interest he took in his discoveries; and the large-
ness of his expectations may be conjectured from
the opinion which he entertained of the magnitude
and importance of the Australia del Espiritu Santo.
In his representations to Philip, the king, he says,
‘ By all that I have mentioned, it appears clearly
that there are tAvo large portions of the earth
severed from this of Europe, Africa, and Asia.
The first is America, Avhich Christopher Columbus
discovered; the second and last of the world is that
which I have seen, and solicit to people and com-
pletely to discover for your Majesty. This great
object ought to be embraced, as Avell for what it
promises for the service of God, as that it will give
a beginning to so great a Avork, and to so many
and so eminent benefits, that no other of its kind
can be more, nor so much at present, nor hereto


fore, as I can show, if I may be heard and ques-
tioned.’ ”
The preceding extract states succinctly the sub-
stance of the whole of Quires’ statements. How-
ever, on one or two points, we give the words of
Quiros as translated in Purchas. First, he says,
“ The riches which I have seen in these parts
are silver and pearls. Another Captain (Torres),
in his relation, doth report that he hath seen gold;
which are the three most precious darlings that lie
and are cherished in the bosom of nature. We
have also both seen much nutmegs, mace, ginger,
and pepper. There is also notice of cinnamon ; and
it is likely that cloves may be found in those parts,
since so many spiceries and aromatical drugs do
prosper there; and that the rather, because these
countries lie very near the parallel of the Isles of
Ternate, Bachian, and the Mollucas. There are,
likewise, materials for all sorts of silk; and we have
seen anise-seed, and excellent good ebony, and also
other kinds of wood proper for the building of as
many ships as one will desire. Three sorts of
materials there are wherewithal to make cordage,
and one is very like unto our hemp; moreover, out
of the oil of cocoas, whereof I have already made
mention, there is a kind of bituminous stuff ex-
tracted, called Galaga, which may be well used for
pitch. They make also a kind of rosin with which
the Indians pitch their boats, which they call para-
guas ; and since there are goats and cows in these
parts, without question we shall have goat-skins,


leather, tallow, and flesh in full abundance. The
bees which we have seen there do make proof that
there will be no scarcity of honey and wax.”
Quiros sums up all the advantages of the Austra-
lia in these words : —
“ There are found in this country as many com-
modities, both for the support and delectation of
the life of man, a§ may b§ expected from a §oil
that is manurable, pleasant, and very temperate.
It is a fat and fertile land, where, in many places,
clay is found, which will prove of excellent use to
build houses and to make tiles and bricks, and will
serve for whatsoever is usually made of earth.
There is marble, and other good stones, wherewith,
if there be occasion, there may be built structures
of great state and magnificence. The country
aboundeth in wood, fit for all works and uses
whereunto the same are commonly put. There are
spacious and goodly plains and fields, that are
divided and interlaced with brooks, trenches, and
rivers. There are great and high rocks, sundry
torrents, rivers, great and little, on which water-
mills for corn may, Avith commodiousness, be built
aild pke§d; §,§ §1§8 engines t5 make sugar, truck-
ing-mills, forges, and all other instruments Avhich
in their use require water. We have found salt-
pits there; and—which is a note of the fertility
of the soil — there are, in many places, canes,
whereof some are five or six handfuls thick, Avith
fruit answerable to that proportion; the top of that
fruit is very small and hard, and the skin thereof
B


is exceedingly sweet. There are also flints, for
fire, equal in goodness with those of Madrid. The
hay of St. James and St. Philip hath twenty leagues
of bank, and is without mud; into which there is
a safe and sure entrance both by day and night.
The haven called 4 The True Cross ’ is of that spa-
cious capacity that it is able to contain a thousand
ships.
“ If, upon a bare suspicion, Christopherus Co-
lumbus did pursue his design with so much obsti-
nacy, you are not to account it strange in me, if
the things which I have beheld with mine eyes,
and touched with mine hands, do put some kind of
restraint upon me to be importunate. ”
The solicitations of Quiros were at length crowned
with success; and, in 1614, he set out on his way
to Lima, in order to arrange another expedition.
But this gratification he was doomed never to
enjoy: he died, while on his journey, at Panama.


CHAPTER III.
DESCRIPTION OF TANNA, ESPIRITU SANTO, MALLICOLO,
&c. &c.
This group was next visited by M. de Bougainville
in 1768, who besides landing on the Isle of Lepers,
did no more than discover that the land was not
connected, but composed of islands, which he called
the Great Cyclades. After an interval of six years
came Captain Cook, and completed the discovery
of the leading islands. Following the principle of
a submarine chain of mountains, he seems to have
reached its southern extremity.
The most southerly group of this archipelago is
detached from the rest of the chain, and consists of
five islands, which, with the exception of Irumer,
are high, and have no coral reefs.
Tanna, the only one which has been minutely
examined, contains a very active volcano. Messrs.
Forster and Sparrman, the naturalists who accom-
panied Captain Cook in his second voyage, made
an unsuccessful attempt to reach that burning
mountain, which is not one of the highest on the
island. The volcano itself shook, and the ashes
which it spouted forth darkened the atmosphere.
The rain which fell at the same time was a hetero-
geneous mixture of water, sand, and earth, and
B 2


might be called a shower of These sub-
terranean fires seem to contribute much to that
exuberance of vegetation by which the island is
distinguished. Several plants attain here twice
the height they have in other countries, with broader
leaves, and a stronger perfume. In several places
sulphureous vapours are exhaled; in others the
springs are tepid. Tanna has also strata of clay
and aluminous earth, with blocks of chalk and tri-
poli. It abounds in sulphur, and affords traces of
copper. The scenery of Tanna is pleasanter and
more elegant than that of Otaheite, as the moun-
tains do not shoot up abruptly from the middle of
a narrow plain, but are preceded by several ranges
of hills separated from one another by wide valleys.
Here are found bananas, sugar canes, potatoes, and
several sorts of fruit trees. The English found
here the pigeon, u which Rumphius (Herbarium
Amboniense) describes as the disseminator of the
true nutmeg at the Spice Islands.” The natives
showed them specimens of that fruit still surrounded
by the mace. It cannot, therefore, be doubted that
a variety of the nutmeg grows in these islands,
tkeiigh iione were found within the narrow limits
which the English were allowed to traverse.f Mr.
Forster’s words are, “We also met with a number
of East India plants, which we had never observed
in the more easterly islands. But the most valuable
acquisition, in our opinion, was a pigeon which is
* Forster, ii. p. 212. t Id. p. 262.


common at the Friendly Islands. This bird had
the sides of its bill covered with a red substance,
and upon further examination had in its mouth
and craw two nutmegs recently swallowed ; they
were still surrounded with a scarlet coating, which
was their mace, and had a bitter aromatic taste,
but no smell. The nutmeg was considerably more
oblong than the true spice of that name, but had
likewise a very bitter aromatic taste.”
The natives resemble the people of New Holland
more than those of the Friendly Islands. They
are of a brownish black colour, of moderate stature,
but muscular and vigorous. Their beards are
strong, black, and curled. The hair of their heads
is thick and bristly ; their features are expressive
and open; and every thing about them has a mas-
culine and warrior-like air. The singularity of
their ornaments ; the dress which they wear; and
the use of a coarse pigment made of ochre and
chalk, are so many marks of an affinity to the
natives of New Caledonia, New Guinea, and Solo-
man’s Archipelago. On the other hand, these
mm\ 18 hav§ derived their arts from the
same origin with the Polynesians, iheir bows,
made of the best elastic wood, their slings, their
clubs, and their darts, Avith which they can pierce
a plank four inches thick, often remind one of the
arms used in the Friendly Islands. The language
of Tanna, and that of Erromango, to the north of
it, are different; and neither of them has any re-
semblance to the general language of Polynesia.
B 3


The women of the New Hebrides, being treated as
slaves, soon lose the few attractions which nature
has conferred upon them. They are weak and
puny. Captain Cook says, “ I cannot say the
women are beauties, but I think them handsome
enough for the men, and too handsome for the use
that is made of them.” Several of the young girls,
according to Mr. Forster, had pleasant features and
a smile, which became more pleasing in proportion
as their timidity was dissipated. They had hand-
some forms, delicately turned arms, and full and
round bosoms; their clothing reached to their
knees. Their curled hair waved loosely on their
heads, or was fastened in a tress; and the green
banana leaf, which they generally wore in their
hair, formed a handsome contrast with its black-
ness. They repelled with modesty the advances of
our seamen.
A writer in the “ Colonial Magazine,” who visited
this group several times during the progress of
several voyages in the whaling service, between the
years 1828 and 1834, thus describes the island of
Tanna:—
“ TailHa i§ the principal island of the south-
eastern portion of the New Hebrides; two or three
small islets are situated to the eastward of Tanna;
the charts exhibit two of them, Erronan and Anna-
tom; another, called by the natives Irritoc, which we
do not remember to have seen described, lies in direc-
tion about S. S. E. from the S. E. point of Tanna,


and distant from it, perhaps, nineteen or twenty
miles.
11 Approaching Tanna from the north-west a
beautiful prospect strikes the view: the country ap-
pears divided into farms, where meadows, orchards,
arable patches intersected by race courses, avenues
and foot-paths, seem to ape civilisation; and, even
in the transition state, between barbarism and
refinement, reminds the British voyager of his
native country.
“ The volcano, in constant action, during each of
our visits to Tanna, and always sublime and awful,
is seen on a promontory on the west side of the
harbour of Port Resolution, so named by Captain
Cook. This harbour, situated on the south point
of the island, is considered safe and convenient.
Still further to the westward is a bay often resorted
to by whale ships.
“ The natives of Tanna evince a treacherous dis-
position ; their habits are grovelling and their per-
sons are filthy; their faces are besmeared with
tumeric and a sort of charcoal; of their beautifying
applications cocoa-nut oil forms an essential ingre-
dient. The use of tlie betel hut and eheimn is
common at this island as well as the rest of the
group; the effect of which is visible in the usual
black teeth and red lips of a betel chewer.
11 The language of the natives of Tanna seems to
possess a similarity of sound with that of the
Malays. We were not able to procure any informa-
tion respecting the form of government at Tanna,
B 4


nor could we discover any appearance of gradation
in rank among the islanders, excepting that the
oldest men seemed to possess the greatest influence.
“ The island produces yams, tarro, shaddocks,
banana, limes, cucumbers, cocoa nuts, and a species
of sweet potato: sandal wood is abundant at Tanna,
aiid several valuable softs of timber are to be found
there: the clubs of the natives are made of ebony,
many of them are neatly inlaid with pearl, shell,
and stones, and some are beautifully carved. A
peculiar sort of hog is found here ; we have ob-
served many of them, which, when full grown, are
not above the size of a rabbit; rats are abundant
here.
u Ships visiting Tanna are under the necessity of
establishing a communication with the shore by
means of their own boats ; the natives have no
canoes, using only a sort of raft, Avith Avhich they
dare venture only one or two hundred yards from
the beach. When the nati\ r es come off with these
rafts they are always armed, and vigilant to guard
against treacherous attacks. On our first visit to
thi§ i§knd in 1828 5 we held communication with
the inhabitants in the manner above described, and
a bountiful supply of refreshments was procured :
the price of a hog was an empty bottle or a strip of
cloth suitable for what is termed, at the Sandwich
Islands, a rnalo ;for a dozen of large yams, a small
fish hook was considered an equivalent, and other
desirable articles of food were valued at a similar
rate.”


Mr. Forster thus sums up his description of the
vegetable productions of Tanna. He says
vegetable productions of Tanna are very rich and
various; the forests are filled with plants, of which
a great number were new to us, and some were
species known only in the East Indian Islands.
The cultivated grounds, likewise, contain a great
variety of plants which are unknown in the Society
and Friendly Islands, and no less than forty dif-
ferent species are cultivated. Among the sponta-
neous plants we ought particularly to repeat the
mention of the nutmeg, in defence of Quiros’ vera-
city, who reports that he found it in Tierra del
Espiritu Santo, which doubtless belongs to this
group of islands. Whether oranges grow wild, or
are cultivated, is uncertain, as we never met with
a single tree that bore them, but were obliged to
content ourselves with the fruit which the women
sometimes sold us.”
In another place, Mr. Forster says, “We may
here remark that the volcano in Tanna and its
productions seem to contribute greatly to that
prodigious luxuriance of vegetation which is so
ffl this iiW: Many plants here attain
twice the height which they have in other countries;
their leaves are broader, their flowers larger and
more highly scented. The same observation has
been made in various other volcanic countries.”
The other articles enumerated by Mr. Forster are
alabaster and different sorts of minerals. In refer-
ence to the latter he states, “ The principal stratum


of the steep hill (on the west side of the bay) con-
sists of a species of clay, very soft, and crumbling
in pieces when exposed to the air and moisture.
e also found a piece of black sandstone, a sub-
stance resembling rotten-stone, and some pieces of
chalk, which were either pure or tinged Avith a red-
dish colour, arising perhaps from particles of iron.”
Sir Edward Belcher, who visited this group in
1840, mentions, that at this island the natives
brought him “yams weighing thirty-six pounds,
plantains, Malay apples, sugar-cane of very large
groAvth and very tender skin, and a few small
chickens. The ornaments brought were light bows,
arrows, and carved wristbands made out of the
shell of the cocoa-nut.” Sir Edward describes the
natives as occupying a very loav position in the
scale of humanity.
Tierra del Espiritu Santo This island, the
largest of the New Hebrides group, may be termed
Avith more propriety a cluster of islands, for, in ad-
dition to the main body of land knoAvn as Espiritu
Santo, a SAvarm of islets about its shores gives it the
character of an archipelago.
Tke approach to Espiritu Santo from the east-
Avard is not without its dangers: although the land
is high, yet it is not ahvays visible until within a
proximity which claims a regard to caution. In
the night, the high land is generally closely garbed
in mist. There are many good harbours to the
southward of St. Philip’s bay, situated inside the
reefs and islets. The Espiritu Santo islands appear


to be thickly inhabited. The natives, in many
points, appear to differ from those of the other parts
of the New Hebrides: the language, however, closely
resembles that of Mallicolo, Tanna, and the other
islands. The outward show of the savages of Es-
piritu Santo, at a first acquaintance, is that of
friendship; they aim to appear quiet and inoffensive;
but a more intimate knowledge of their habits and
customs contradicts the influence of first impres-
sions. They are deceitful and treacherous, main-
taining the character of the Polynesians for their
two-facedness. They are strong and athletic, and
are well supplied with offensive weapons. They are
the most powerful class of the inhabitants of the
New Hebrides, and the voice of their authority is
heard by the other islands. Each valley of Espiritu
Santo has its independent chief, who acknowledges
no superior; petty warfare consequently exists
among the tribes of the island. The food of the
islanders is composed chiefly of the spontaneous
productions of their land. We could not discover
whether they may be classed with the anthropophagi,
but we believe that animal food is interdicted to
females, who, instead of filling their appropriate
stations, are trampled into a condition comparable
with that of beasts of burthen.
The productions of this island are nearly the same
as those of the other islands. They appear to attach
great value to turtle-shell, small quantities of which
they sometimes possess. The pearl oyster, too, is


very abundant at this island, and, probably, large
collections of that article might be made by traders.
Not far from Cape Cumberland (at the northern
part of the cluster) are to be seen appearances of
several singular antiquities in the shape of ruined
edifices of great size, pillars of regular shape com-
posed of large stones: detached portions of wall and
fragments of cemented masonry are scattered over
a plain of about three miles in extent. The mortar
with which the stones appear to have been con-
nected resembles chenan.
The question naturally arises, from whose in-
dustry sprung these antiquated monuments of
human skill, noAV shrouded in deeper obscurity than
the lava-buried remains of Pompeii and Hercula-
neum? Who knoAvs for AA r hat purpose they were
constructed ? At Avhat era Avere the foundations
laid of those ruins hoav mossed Avith age ? If the
volcanoes and the coral worm have jointly laboured
to form the islands of Polynesia, from what distant
age must the existence of these islands be dated,
leaving untouched the venerable character of these
ruins ? Antiquities similar to these have been found
in Other pttrt§ Of P olynesia. In a settlement north-
east of Cape Cumberland, about five miles distant,
are the remains of another edifice similar to the one
above described: the natives appear profoundly
ignorant of its design, and the mystical Avord “tabu”
croAvns the query of the stranger. The writer en-
deavoured to screAV an idea from the natives, but
the ans Aver from every mouth was “ sklinbi! ”


The shuddering gesture of alarm which marked this
response carried with it a definition which could
not he mistaken by the ear that has heai d the
meaning of “ tabu.”
Stones were observed at Espiritu Santo which
had evidently undergone the action of fire; also those
known by the appellation of iron-stone, and also
many petrifactions.
It should be remarked that Captain Cook merely
coasted along this island; but, to quote the opinion
of Malte Brun, “ he saw sufficient to confirm
Quiros’ description in almost every particular.”
Quiros mentions, amongst the valuable productions
which he saw here, “ pepper.” Now the only article
which Captain Cook obtained from this island was
a branch of the pepper plant. “ The natives fastened
a branch of the pepper plant to the same rope by
which we had lowered down the nails to them, but
it appears, besides this emblem of friendship, they
had nothing else to give.”
Cook mentions that he entered a large and spacious
harbour, Avhich he was convinced was that named
by Quiros, San Felipe y Santiago. The port of La
Yera Cruz was recognised in the anchorage at the
head of the bay : one of the two rivers mentioned
by the Spaniards was visited, “ and if we are not
deceived, Ave saAV the other. ’ He adds, An un-
commonly luxuriant vegetation was everywhere to
be seen ; the sides of the hills were chequered Avith
plantations, and every valley Avatered by a stream.


The columns of smoke we saw by day led us to be-
lieve that it was well inhabited and very fertile.”
Mallicolo This island, or group of islands, in
point of size, ranks amongst the most important of
the New Hebrides. It was at Mallicolo that the
Boussole and Astrolabe, the vessels under the com-
mand of that eminent but unfortunate navigator,
La Perouse, were undoubtedly wrecked in 1788.
Mallicolo was visited in 1827 by Captain Dillon,
who discovered many remains and relics of that ex-
pedition. He says, “ The island of Mallicolo is of
considerable height, and may be seen sixty miles
off in clear weather. The most distinguished trees
upon it are cocoa-nut and bread-fruit trees, a tree
producing a nut, resembling an almond but a better
fruit, and a wild bread-fruit tree producing a very
inferior kind of bread with a kernel in it, and such
as is not known at the Society or Friendly Islands*
Ihe mangrove tree lines the shore in great abun-
dance, and a kind of lime, of which we procured
some for boats’ masts. Fish of various species are
found here, and also turtle, also the barn-door fowl.”
He mentions, also, that “ the natives brought off
several rattans for sale, quite as good as those pro-
duced at Malacca, which may in time become an
article of commerce with New South Wales for couch
and chair bottoms, &c., which is now supplied with
that article from Calcutta and Canton.” Mallicolo
has two or three spacious harbours, but refreshments
are not in abundance as at Tanna. The island,
abounds with sandal-wood, and by adopting a judi


cious method of trade with the natives, great quan-
tities of that valuable article of commerce might be
obtained.
There are in existence, in this island, a number
of volcanos, which emit small quantities of volcanic
matter, but they were never witnessed in violent
action.
Tke language, manners, customs, and habits of
the inhabitants of Mallicolo resemble those of Tanna,
but polygamy is practised among them, and the
appearance of the people is more savage and fright-
ful. They are, likewise, apparently less robust and
healthy than their neighbours, and seem to lack
bodily strength and activity. The houses are built
of a conical shape, and mostly located in contiguity
with a stream of water. Captain Dillon says,
“ During the twenty-five days we anchored off Mal-
licolo, an uninterrupted harmony subsisted between
us and the natives, who regretted our departure with
unfeigned sorrow; and, much to their credit, no
instance of dishonesty occurred, though frequent
opportunities were not wanting to tempt them.”
In speaking of this island, Captain Burney says,
“ This island was discovered by Cook in 1774, and
has afforded proof how well Quiros understood the
meaning of the islanders. Captain Cook writes the
name Mallicolo, which appeared to him to be the
nearest to the pronunciation of the natives; but he
remarks, that the other persons belonging to his
ship understood the natives to say Manicolo or
Manicola.”


Now it is a curious fact that an island called
Manicolo was mentioned by the Indian, Pedro, who
was brought by Quiros from Tierra del Espiritu
Santo.
Dumont d’Urville, in 1828, visited this island,
which he called Yanikoro, where he obtained an
anchor weighing eighteen hundred pounds, a small
cannoib a bar 9f and two brass swivels,
-which had undoubtedly belonged to the expedi-
tion commanded by the unfortunate La Perouse.
M. d’Urville resolved to erect near the anchorage
a small monument to the memory of the intrepid
navigators whose bones were now mingled with
the sand on that fatal shore, and which might at
the same time commemorate the arrival of the
second Astrolabe in search of their relics. The
cenotaph, which was placed in a small grove, was
consecrated by three discharges of musketry and
a salute of twenty-one guns.
D’Urville describes the group of Yanikoro as
being composed of four islands, of which two are
of considerable size and elevation, while the other
two are very small and low; but in point of fact
when viewed from a short distance, the whole
appear as only one, and are not unfrequently so
described. A coral reef, thirty or forty miles in
circuit, surrounds them like a girdle, at a certain
interval from the shore; occasional breaches per-
mitting the passage of canoes from the little har-
bours to the ocean. The sheet of water between


this wall and the land is always in the most perfect
tranquillity.
MM. Lesson and Richards, the botanists of the
expedition, say that “ the islands show large patches
of reddish earth, which, joined with the broken
outline of the mountains, indicate their volcanic
origin. They are in fact covered with a rich
vegetation from the water’s edge to the summits of
the mountains, file highest of wliich, called fopagfi,
is 474 feet high.” They add that “the vegetation
of these islands bears much resemblance to that of
Jsew Ireland and New Guinea, that is to say, that
it has all the characteristics of Asiatic tropical
vegetation.”
Aurora Island This island is situated at the
south-eastern extremity of the group, and is thirty-
six miles long and five broad. Its appearance from
the sea is thus described by Mr. Forster: “We
now approached the island of Aurora, where we
observed a fine beach, and the most luxurious
vegetation that can be conceived. The whole
country was woody, numberless climbers ran up
the highest trees, and forming garlands and festoons
between them, embellished the scene. A neat plan-
tation, fenced with reeds, stood on the slope of the
hill, and a beautiful cascade poured down through
the adjacent forest.”
M. de Bougainville, who landed on this island,
says—“ Nous y avons trouve un espece de figues
particuliere: ” and Mr. Forster says—“ We took a
walk to the eastward along the shore of the bay,
c


and looked into the groves which skirted the flat
hill of which I have spoken before. We found the
groves to consist of cocoa-palms, and several species
of shady fig-trees with eatable fruits nearly the
size of common figs.
Sandwich Island. This island was discovered
by Captain Cook, and is about seventy miles in
circumference, and has an aspect equally fertile as
that of the other islands of the group. The weeds
are adorned with tints of lively verdure and con-
tain a profusion of cocoas. The mountains have
a considerable elevation in the interior, and exhibit
at their feet many lower districts covered with
wood, intermingled with cultivated fields arrayed
in the same golden tints with the corn fields of
Europe. Captain Cook considered this a very pro-
mising island for colonisation.
Erromango. —This is an island which has re-
cently gained a melancholy celebrity as the place
where, in 1839, that excellent and pious missionary
Mr. John Williams, the author of “ Missionary En-
terprises in the South Seas,” was killed whilst
attempting to land in an affray occasioned by a
misunderstanding with the natives.
The other islands of the group are Pic d’Etoile,
San Bartholomew, the Isle of Lepers, Whitsuntide
Isle, Ambryn, Apee, Paoom, Shepherd’s Isles, Three
Hills Island, Monument Island, Two Hills- Island,
Montague Isle, Hinchinbrook Isle, Irronan, Immer,
and Annatom.
It is not necessary to describe these islands in
detail, as their productions are the same as those


of the larger and more important islands of the
group. However, we may give the following ex-
tract from a recent article in the “ Colonial Maga-
zine, n (vol. iv. p. 475.) in which the writer thus
sums up the productions of this group :
“ The vegetable kingdom flourishes throughout
the group in unsurpassing vigour and beauty. The
YSFd&flt °f nature is never changed; every
production, from the most neglected shrub to the
largest tree, is perennial, the decaying branch or
yellow leaf being pushed from its place by its more
vigorous successor. Fertility is everywhere dis-
cernible, from the sea-girt shore to the highest
summits of the hills. Trees without a branch have
been seen of one hundred feet in height. Among the
finest trees, the, orange, bread-fruit, banana, plan-
tains, cocoa-nuts, figs, nutmegs, nectarines, citrons,
pepper plant, almonds, take precedence. Among
the edibles, the farinaceous tarro, the succulent
sugar cane, the yam (some of which grow to the
almost incredible weight of sixty pounds), the
green leaves of the hibiscus esculentus , leaves of the
almond tree, battatas, and the celebrated croton
variegatum , or cajeput oil tree, draccena terminalis ,
&c. are amongst the principal specimens of vegetable
food.” We should add that the same writer men-
tions that thin plates of gold have been found at
this group of islands, For a more detailed account
of the botanical productions of the New Hebrides
we refer the reader to the botanical volume of the
“ Voyage de V Astrolabe,” by M. Dumont d’Urville.
c 2


CHAPTER IV.
OBJECTS ETC. OF THE NEW HEBRIDES COMPANY.
A company is now in process of formation under
the name of the New Hebrides Company, for the
purpose of establishing a settlement exclusively for
trade on one of the islands of this group. The
description which we have already given of the
many valuable productions of the New Hebrides,
a description drawn from sources which are free
from the slightest suspicion or doubt, is, in itself,
sufficient to attract and deserve the attention of the
commercial copnmunity of this country. Indeed,
ever since the discoveries of Captain Cook, the
public mind in England has been more or less
directed towards the state and condition of the
thousand islands that cover the surface of the
Pacific Ocean. We sent forth no expeditions to
wrest from the natives their insignificant posses-
sions. The religious public, anxious as it has ever
been to carry to the uttermost ends of the earth
the knowledge of salvation, sent forth its mission-
aries ; but the results of missionary enterprise have
been recorded elsewhere by one, perhaps the most
distinguished in that gallant brotherhood, “ the
late Mr. Williams,” who received the death of a


martyr at one of the islands comprised in the New
Hebrides group; and on this subject, therefore, it
is not necessary for us to speak.
In the present and succeeding chapter, it will he
our duty first to give a sketch of the views and
objects of the New Hebrides Company; secondly,
a brief review of the past and present state of trade
in the Pacific Ocean and Indian Seas; and, thirdly,
a statement of the benefits Avhich the formation of
such a settlement as that proposed, and the organ-
isation of the trade in this quarter of the world,
cannot fail to confer on the commerce of this
country.
The first object of the New Hebrides Company is
to cultivate the spices which are indigenous to the
New Hebrides, and by that means to throw open
the present odious monopoly of the spice trade,
which, since the year 1623, the Dutch have so
strictly maintained. The effects of this monopoly
are thus described by Mr. Crawford in his work on
the Indian Archipelago (vol. iii. p. 393.) : — “ Since
the close monopoly of the Dutch, the price paid for
cloves to the Dutch on the spot has been eight
times the price paid by them to the cultivator.
When brought directly to England they are sold at
an advance of 1250 per cent, on the natural export
price. The Dutch monopoly has occasioned a cul-
tivation of cloves in Bourbon and Cayenne, which
would immediately cease if the Molucca trade were
laid open, the produce being so much inferior.
The same principles apply to the trade in nut-
, , € 3


megs. From the origin of this commerce down to
the establishment of the monopoly, nutmegs were
sold and transported in the shell, and the natives,
when left to themselves, are still disposed to con-
tinue that practice. The Dutch, to secure their
monopoly more effectually, subject them to pro-
cesses to destroy the powers of germination, con-
sisting in slow kiln-drying and smoking for three
months, and immersion in quick lime.
It is estimated that 10 per cent, of the produce
perishes in consequence of the separation of the
shell. The English, when they conquered the spice
islands in the year 1810, found in store more than
37,000 pounds of bad, broken, and rotten nutmegs.
The natural price of the article ought not to exceed
4 dollars per picul, or 2 \d, per pound; and in
Europe the pound should not exceed 6c?., but it is
in general twelve times that price, and in England,
duties included, seventeen times as much.”
Mr. Crawford adds: “ The consumer pays this
price for no other purpose than that a political
juggle may be played, by which the party which
plays imposes on himself without gaining any ad-
vantage, while the grower is cheated out of his
property and out of his liberty. The consumption
of nutmegs as well as cloves, in Europe, is smaller
at the present day than in the middle ages.”
The means used by the Dutch to maintain this
monopoly are thus described by the same author:
“ The entire monopoly of the spice trade is insured,
as far as regards the production of the nutmeg as


well as the clove tree, to the Banda Islands, and
the latter to Amboyna, by paying little stipends to
the petty princes of the other native countries of
spices for the extermination of the plants ; by send-
ing an annual fleet round the different islands to
see that the terms are literally complied with; and
by declaring the penalty of what they are pleased
to call the illicit trade in spices, banishment for a
noble, and death to an inferior person. Such is
the system of mismanagement by which once the
greatest branch of the commerce of the East has
been reduced to a pittance that could by no means
afford employment for the capital of many mer-
chants of London, Glasgow, and Liverpool.”
A more recent writer speaks thus emphatically
on the same subject: “ British occupation of Java
would also be a death-blow to the sinful practice of
annually sending Dutch ships of Avar to supervise
the destruction of the gifts of a bountiful Provi-
dence; namely, the extirpation of the clove and
other spice trees in all islands except those few in
which spices are cultivated merely as a monopoly,
and which, by keeping up only a very moderate
supply, enables the Netherlander to effect sales at
prices which would soon be reduced to a proper
level, were so disgraceful a system abolished.”
It is well knoAvn that the Dutch have been gra-
dually extending their power in these seas. They
have formed settlements in the island of Noav
Guinea; and, at the period at Avhich we Avrite, they
c 4


are attempting the conquest of the important island
of Balli. Whether they are justified by treaty in pur-
suing such a course of aggressive policy, is a ques-
tion which is open to doubt; but all must regret
that every extension of their power carries with it
an extension of a system close and avaricious to-
wards all other European nations, and cruel, tyran-
nical, and anti-Christian towards the unfortunate
natives with whom they come in contact. But not
content with maintaining this monopoly in the East
with all the strictness which we have described, in
the great European market they practically accom-
plish the same object. To prove this we give the
following statement, which appeared, some time
since, in the city article of a daily paper : “We
have been favoured, by a leading Dutch house in
the city, vvitli the particulars of the sale of spices
at Amsterdam, on account of the Netherlands
Trading Company, which clearly show the great
value of the Dutch settlements to the mother
country, especially as regards the island of Java,
where they are so successfully cultivating the more
COStly products of our East Indian possessions.
This sale may be considered to have produced from
150,000 k to 200,000 k sterling; and as it was not
an annual but merely a partial sale of the year’s
imports, it proves how much the public revenue
must be promoted by the traffic. The following is
a statement furnished of the articles sold and the
prices realised:


Sample No. 1. 855 casks nutmegs at 230 to 255 guilders.
2. 166 „ „ 190 to 195 „
3. 16 „ „ 142 „
4. 110 „ „ 83
1147
C. 16 casks mace, at 216 »
D. 61 „ „ 186 „
E. 124 „ „ 156
F. 32 „ „ 133
No. 2. 170 casks cloves, at 73 „
Twenty-three bags and canisters Java cinnamon, recently
imported, 109 to 175.
“ The cultivation of the last-mentioned product is
new to Java, and is calculated to interfere with the
trade which has so long been carried on in it be-
tween Ceylon and this country. We add that
the Dutch purchasers , who attended the present ,
were prepared to take every thing that was offered; so
that the competition of the English and other foreign
dealers was altogether negatived.”
In the year 1815 the consumption of nutmegs
in all Europe amounted to 400,000lbs.
Mace, in ditto ------ 150,000
Nutmegs in England, in the same year - 100,000
When we had possession of the Spice Islands,
in 1811, the consumption of nutmegs in
Europe was ------ 214,720
Mace, ditto 250,000
At this period, also, the British government en-
deavoured, by every means in its power, to extend
the cultivation of the spice trees by transplanting


them to Bencoolen and Padang in Sumatra, and to
some of our West Indian Islands. In the latter
the experiment failed, it being found impossible to
raise them at a remunerating price. Bencoolen and
Padang have since been ceded to the Dutch. At
Zanzibar the cultivation of the clove and nutmeg
was at one time considered such an object of inter-
est, that, Dr. Ruschenberger states, “ almost every
body in the island is now clearing away the cocoa-
nut to make way for them: ” but the result, even
in 1835, was still doubtful; and it has been found
that the “ more precious spices are incapable of
bearing removal from the region in which they are
indigenous; and that, in the Western Hemisphere
at least, though they grow freely, they lose their
aromatic power.” Now it should be remembered,
that the nutmegs obtained by Mr. Forster, at the
island of Tanna, had “ a bitter, aromatic taste ;”
and therefore, even in an uncultivated state, are
valuable as an article of commerce. The soil of the
New Hebrides, like that of Banda and Amboyna,
the Mollucas, &c. is volcanic; and, to quote the
words of Quiros, “ these countries lie very near the
parallel of the islands of Ternate, Bachian, and the
Mollucas,” The soil and climate being so similar,
cultivation, in a short time, will enable the New
Hebrides Company to rear the “ queen nutmeg,”
and thus to bring the fruit to the highest degree of
perfection.
The following account is the most recent that


we have been enabled to obtain of the state of the
spice trade in Holland.
The import of spices from the Dutch East India
colonies, not every year the same, may be taken at
the following average : —
Nutmegs, 1500 casks, of 400 lbs. weight.
Mace, 700 „ 300 „
Cloves, 800 „ 500 „
The prices vary with the fluctuations of trade,
the actual price being now (June, 1846) 50 and
bid. per pound for nutmegs, 50 for mace, and
cloves 15 c?.
As the spices are not in the entrepot docks, the
home consumption can only be calculated by com-
paring the export with the import. The export,
on an average of six years, may be reckoned at —
1200 casks of nutmegs.
600 mace.
700 „ cloves.
The difference consequently between the exports
and the imports, will be that which is required for
home consumption, and that which remains for the
second-hand trade.
Nutmegs and mace are chiefly sent to England,
and from thence to Persia and Asia. Germany
and North America are also supplied by the Nether-
lands Trading Company. The German demands
are chiefly for mace and cloves; English and North
America, more for nutmegs.
Spices are imported into Holland exclusively by


the Dutch East India Company. The small quan-
tities brought to the English market or elsewhere
are smuggled by the way of Singapore.
The stores of the Netherlands Trading Company
contained on the 31st of May last (1846) —
1100 casks of nutmegs ; against in May, 1845, 1744.
360 „ mace; „ 466.
380 „ cloves; „ 670.
The stores which remain at present for the
second-hand trade, may be estimated at about —
500 casks of nutmegs.
280 „ mace.
400 „ cloves.
All these may be considered as exported.
By a decree of Sept. 8. 1845, the Netherlands
Trading Company is only allowed to sell by public
auction, 1000 casks of nutmegs, 360 casks of mace,
and 600 casks of cloves, at their annual sale. Their
spices being the produce of Dutch possessions, and
imported in Dutch vessels, are admitted free of any
duty.
British trade in the Pacific and in the eastern
seas, has hitherto been left entirely to the individual
enterprise of our merchants. At least, no attempt
in modern times has been made to organise it on
any general and permanent system. A writer in
the “ Nautical Magazine,” on this subject, says (vol.
for 1838, p. 302.): — “The greater part of the
known islands of the Pacific contains a considerable
population, to whom the articles of our manufac


tures become every day more necessary. France,
England, and the United States, send whalers
amongst them every year. In 1814 there were 30
English ships, which returned with 8999 tons of
oil and spermaceti; 34 sailed in 1816, and returned
with 10,332 tons; in 1821, 55 ships, manned with
1396 seamen, returned with 14,398 tons ; and in
1823, 59, containing 1536 men, returned with
17,689 tons. In France, this employment, which
during the Revolution was not followed at all, sends
now from 15 to 20 ships to the Pacific. Even the
number of the American ships is augmented. At
present the whalers from the United States, in the
Pacific, amount to 460 sail, which amount together
to 172,000 tons, the tenth part of the whole tonnage
of that country. The produce which the United
States obtain each year from that part of the world,
is, besides, an inexhaustible source of profit for their
commerce, spices, cochineal, sandal-wood, and a
thousand other costly articles, the trade of which
generally returns good profits.” A writer in the
“Times” newspaper (June 18. 1846) states:
“ You seem to be surprised that the English whalers
should have fallen off, whilst those of the Americans
should have increased. A few words will explain
it, —the greater cost of fitting out whalers here,
the drunkenness, incapacity, and want of energy of
the masters and crews. I have known English
whalers to be out four years and take 1300 or 1400
barrels of oil; and American vessels cruising almost
on the same ‘ground’ would probably have cap-


tured twice as much. It would not interest you
or your readers, were I to enter into the details of
the difference in the modus operandi of English and
American whalers. In the one there is order,
obedience, energy, temperance; in the other, gene-
f ally, want of discipline, drunkenness, and incapacity
to take whales when they do see them. One need
not be surprised at the result. But the object and
(purport of my addressing you is to give you, as
near as I can calculate, the number of foreigners
employed in the American whale trade. I am
’practically acquainted with the subject, for I have
made it a study. A whale ship manning four boats
carries 32 hands, and most of them are now fitted
out for lowering that number of boats. Out of
these (as an average) one-fifth are English, Irish,
or Scotch, one-fifth Western or Cape Yerd Islanders
(Portuguese), and three-fifths American seamen.
The fleet will not employ quite 20,000 men, for
some part of it contains barks, brigs, and even
schooners; but I enclose you a printed list of all
the whalemen, and you may take it for granted
that every vessel above 300 tons carries 32 hands.
There are upwards of 11,000 American seamen in
the service, inured to every danger and to the ex-
tremes of hardship and toil. These men think
lightly of lowering boats after whales on the north-
west coast of America, the ship being at the time
unable to carry a single reefed topsail. I have
little sympathy for Americans, for as a body I do
not believe you could well find a more dishonest


people ; but their energy in bringing this trade to
the pitch it has arrived at, deserves the highest
encomium. Ten years since, Honolulu, the capital
of Oahu, one of the Sandwich Islands, was a small
insignificant village ; it is now a flourishing town,
with streets, dockyards, hotels, and stores ; and all
this has been done by American whalemen. The
north-west fleet generally recruit at Maui (another
of the Sandwich Islands), and the merchants at
Oahu take goods and bills of exchange in return
for the supplies which are furnished to the ships
through them. Two or three hundred of the whale-
men are annually supplied from these islands with
everything they require, and the goods and money
which they circulate in the islands have caused the
present prosperity.”
We should hope that the charge of “ drunken-
ness and incapacity, and want of energy,” on the
part of the masters and crews, is not deserved ;
but there is no doubt that the greater cost of fitting
out whalers from this country is the principal cause
why our trade in the Pacific has not materially in-
creased. The American vessels do not confine their
operations exclusively to whaling: they trade from
island to island, collecting at one time beche le
mer, at another time sandal wood, at another
sharks’ fins, shells, &c., until a cargo is collected
which realises an excellent profit. This would be
not only a very tedious, but a very expensive pro-
cess for English vessels, when the length of the
voyage out and home is considered. Some of our


vessels, however, have traded in this manner with
much success.
One of the objects of the New Hebrides Com-
pany, therefore, in forming a settlement in this
part of the world, is to organise this trade on some
regular and remunerative basis, and for this pur-
pose it is proposed that small vessels, to be built at
the islands or purchased at Sydney, should be
periodically sent to trade amongst the different
islands of the Pacific and the Eastern Archipelago,
to collect cargoes as the American traders at present
do. These vessels, when they had collected a cargo,
would either return to the Company’s settlement
and place in store such articles as were suited for
the home and general European market, or would
sail at once direct with such articles as were suited
for the China or East India markets ; returning in
the former case with a cargo of tea, which could
be easily and lucratively disposed of at Sydney.
This inter-insular trade, if conducted on sound,
diberal, and humane principles, could not fail to be
beneficial to the Company as a commercial specula-
tion ; but it would also have this effect, it would
destroy much of that lawless and irregular traffic
which at present exists in that part of the world;
a traffic which, if it has benefited the trader, has
inflicted innumerable evils on the unoffending in-
habitants of these islands; a traffic which, in too
many instances, has been carried on by men who
call themselves Christians, but who were actuated by
a spirit quite alien to real Christianity. Besides, it


is confidently believed that the constant visits of
the Company’s traders would have the effect of re-
straining, to some extent, the atrocities committed
by runaway sailors and convicts. Not only, in
some of the islands, do men of the United States
and of the civilised states of Europe, profiting by
the advantage of their education, exercise a tyran-
nical authority over the inoffensive natives, and too
often counteract all the efforts of the missionaries,
but they commit with impunity crimes at which
humanity shudders. The following is an in-
stance : —
u This island (Pleasant Island) and many others
in the Pacific are infested by Europeans, who are
either runaway convicts, expirees, or deserters from
the whalers, and are for the most part men of the
worst description, who, it appears, prefer living a
precarious life of indolence and ease with the un-
enlightened savage, rather than submit to the re-
straint of the salutary laws of civilised society.
They live, in a manner easily to be imagined from
men of this class, without either law, religion, or
education to control them, with an unlimited quan-
tity of ardent spirits, which they obtain from dis-
tilling the toddy that exudes from the cocoa-nut
tree. This spirit is not very palatable, but it serves,
to use their own expression, £ to tickle the brain.’
When under the influence of intoxication, the most
atrocious crimes are committed by these miscreants,
who must, both by their pernicious example and
advice, do much injury to this naturally mild and
D


well-disposed race of men, and will retard consider-
ably the great work of civilisation and Christianity
whenever these blessings are offered them by the
servants of God. These fiends frequently urge the
different tribes to deeds of blood, in order to par-
ticipate in the spoils of the vanquished.
“ It appears that, on the 15th of October, 1841,
eleven Europeans were deliberately murdered by
the monster Jones in the following manner : — He
invited them all to visit him, to partake of a feast,
and, when he had got his victims intoxicated with
the island spirit, he gave them food in which he
had previously mixed poison. This proved fatal
to seven; the remaining four having refused to eat,
he watched his opportunity, and shot them. Most
of these men are supposed to have been deserters
from the Woodlark, Sydney whaler. The only
cause which instigated the monster to this whole-
sale murder was jealousy, he being fearful that
some of these unfortunate men might supersede
him in his influence with the natives, over whom
he had hitherto unlimited control. To remove
suspicion from himself, he endeavoured to make it
appear that the deed had been perpetrated by some
of the natives, which they indignantly denied,
and, in consequence, withdrew their countenance
from him; and he was subsequently compelled to
leave the island clandestinely in an American
whaler.” This is an extract from the private log
of Captain T. Beckford Simpson, commanding the
barque Giraffe, published in the “ Nautical Maga


zine” for 1844, p. 103. The same gentleman also
states —
“ It is to be feared that these horrible scenes of
bloodshed and depravity are of frequent occurrence
amongst the Polynesian isles, more especially to
the westward, where no effort has hitherto been
made to introduce civilisation and Christianity.
Vain and futile will be the attempt while these
miscreants are permitted to remain with the na-
tives, corrupting them by their baneful examples
and selfish advice, introducing intoxication and
disease in its many horrible forms, and teaching
this naturally mild and tractable race of men the
grossest depravity.”
We mention this case particularly, as it shows
that these wretches do not confine their atrocities
merely to the natives. If a European can be found
monster enough to perpetrate such a crime as this
on his fellow-countrymen, imagination is at a loss
to conceive what the extent of his crimes would be
when left with no restraint but that of his own de-
praved disposition and lawless will to tyrannise
over the simple and inoffensive natives.
Our trade amongst the islands of the Indian
Archipelago, owing to various causes, but chiefly
to the jealous policy of the Dutch, is in a condition
far from satisfactory. Mr. G. W. Earle, the best
authority on this subject, says (p. 421.) : —
“Few parts of the world present a fairer field
for British mercantile enterprise than the islands
of the Indian Archipelago: for, not only are they
D 2


exceedingly rich in raw produce of the most
valuable description, but the natives, being expen-
sive in their tastes, and passionately addicted to
commercial pursuits, have always displayed the
greatest readiness to exchange their produce for
the manufactures of a more civilised country,
whenever an opportunity has been offered them of
so doing. Nevertheless, our commercial interests
have in no place sustained such deplorable neglect.
Pirates have been allowed to swarm in the imme-
diate neighbourhood of the only settlement which
we possess in these seas, and a rival European
power has been suffered to commit repeated ag-
gressions on our commerce with impunity; so that,
had not the strong desire to obtain British manu-
factures, displayed by the natives themselves, in-
duced them to overcome the above-mentioned and
many other obstacles which have been thrown in
their way, our intercourse in the Eastern seas
must, ere this, have totally ceased.”
The present Government has not shown itself
insensible to the importance of this trade. It has
expressed its intention of establishing a naval sta-
tion and commercial dep6t at Pulo Labuan, off the
the mouth of the Borneo river. Instructions have
been sent out to take possession of that island, but
the sole object of the Government is stated to be
“ to afford protection to our shipping engaged in
the China trade, to form a coal depot for the con-
venience of steamers proceeding to and from Hong
Kong, or the capital of Australia, by way of Torres’


Straits, and to give what may justly be termed the
first development to the seeds of that vast traffic
which we may hereafter be expected to carry on
with various portions of the Oriental Archipelago. 77
The same writer adds, — “ They who have
studied the history of the Archipelago will have
observed that its commerce has always exhibited a
tendency to circulate round a certain point, fixed
arbitrarily, but always approximating towards its
own geographical centre, and that at particular
times it has acquired a very considerable develop-
ment, though causes the most obvious have imme-
diately combined to check it, and prevent the
progress of society dependent upon its growth.
Among these causes piracy may be regarded as
the principal. But if immense fleets of prahus,
manned by thousands of buccaneers, can subsist by
the pillage of the native commerce, how vast and
opulent must that commerce be ! Formerly, be-
fore the enemies of industry had acquired their
present power, the junks of Japan not only visited
annually the Philippines and the Moluccas, but
Cochin China, Champa, Siam, and the extremity of
the Malay Peninsula. The trading prahus of the
Bugis and other islanders, taking advantage of the
monsoons, likewise put forth in great numbers,
and, commencing with the eastern extremity of the
vast group, collected the riches of the whole Archi-
pelago as they advanced westward, and exchanged
and distributed them on all sides till they reached
the Straits of Malacca, the utmost limit of their
D 3


navigation; after which, taking up a quantity of
European goods, they returned leisurely towards
the rising sun, and reached their original point of
departure in the course of about nine or ten
months ; during which, according to the testimony
of an eye-witness, they usually realised a profit of
from 150 to 200 per cent.
“ One of the first and most important effects of
the establishment of a naval station on Pulo Labuan
will be the repression of piracy. Finding them-
selves exposed, not to a passing storm, yielding
prudently to which they might again, in a short
time, resume their career, but to a permanent and
inexorable force, the pirates will speedily make the
discovery that trade is better than robbery, so that
the prahus of the worst miscreants in the Archipe-
lago will, in all probability, soon be seen at Labuan
bartering the productions of the remoter islands for
British goods.
“Up to this moment the natural resources of
Pulo Kalamantan, improperly called Borneo, re-
main altogether undeveloped, and for the most
part unknown. Mr. Brooke has done something in
Sarawak towards showing how valuable the pro-
ductions of that island are, having hitherto de-
frayed all the expenses of his government by the
revenue derived from the antimony mines alone,
roughly and unskilfully worked as they are. As
soon as the new station shall be established, and
the consciousness of security diffused among the
natives, especially those living under Mr. Brooke’s


government, the riches of Kalimantan Avill begin
to render themselves visible. The vegetable tal-
low, the splendid camphor, odoriferous gums, the
spices, pearls, and gold of the interior and the coast,
will be brought to Labuan, and thence diffused
through the east and the west. But the collectors
of this wealth will require to be paid for it in Bri-
tish goods; and thus a market, small perhaps at
first, will be opened on the very threshold of our
naval station, and be enlarged by every operation
that subsequently takes place.”
The population of the Archipelago is said to
amount at least to forty millions. The value of
British merchandize consumed there, though not
inconsiderable in itself, is nothing compared with
the possible number of buyers. At a small native
emporium, lying on the eastern extremity of the
Archipelago, it has been estimated that about
30,000h worth of British goods is sold annually.
The articles which we could obtain in exchange
are spices, the most costly gums, the trepang or
sea slug (beche le mer) for the China market; from
the more easterly islands of the Archipelago pearls,
which are of a rich gold colour, and fetch a good
price in China ; birds of Paradise, tortoise-shell,
mother-of-pearl, ebony, &c. &c.
The great island of New Guinea, one of the
richest countries in the world, is entirely unknown
to our commerce. The Dutch, however, who
neglect no attempt to extend their influence in this
part of the world, have formed a settlement at
D 4


Triton Bay, on the west coast. Captain Lort
Stokes says:
“ The natives trade with the Dutch for fire-arms,
for which they give in exchange birds of paradise,
tortoise-shell, and birds’ nests, from the Arru and
other islands in the Eastern Archipelago. Knives,
stained blue, and cotton goods, are in great request.”
The Arru islands are thus described by Captain
Owen Stanley (Captain Stokes’ Discoveries, vol. ii.
p. 355.):
“ The commerce of these islands appears to have
increased considerably of late years; four or five
ships and brigs, with a number of Macassar and
Bughis proas, whose united crews were said to have
amounted to 5000 persons, having sailed with car-
goes about two months previous to our visit.
“ The produce of the Arru islands consists chiefly
of pearls, mother-of-pearl shell, tortoise-shell, birds
of paradise, ebony, cloves, and massay bark; rosa
mala (an odoriferous wood), and kaya-broku, a
wood much prized for cabinet work. British cali-
coes and iron are the principal articles taken in ex-
change for these by the proas from New Guinea.
The closeness with which the native traders con-
ceal their commercial transactions, even from each
other, rendered it impossible for me to learn the
amount of exports and imports.
“ Each Bughis proa imports to the amount of from
10,000 to 30,000 dollars; and at least one half of
her cargo consists of British goods. Taking the
yearly average of thirty proas, and the amount of


her import cargo at the lowest above stated, this
will give 150,000 dollars, or 32,500 1, sterling as
the amount of British goods imported annually into
Dobbo. This appears a large amount; but it will
be found, upon examination, that it is rather under
than above the actual value. In fact, the greater
portion of our cotton manufactures sold at Singa-
pore is consumed in the less civilised parts of the
Indian Archipelago, where the natives prefer cheap
goods and gaudy patterns ; while the people of Java
and Celebes, &c., prefer their own or Indian manufac-
tures, which, although dearer, are far more durable
than ours. The value of a return cargo of a Bughi
proa at Singapore is about 200 per cent, on the
outlay.
“ Of the timber of the Arru islands there are
several varieties, highly spoken of by the Bughis
(who build and repair their proas there) for their
durability, and the ease with which they are worked.
Although of immense size, the trees are almost
invariably sound; and as they can be felled within
a few yards of the beach, it is not improbable that
at some future period timber may form a valuable
article of export.”
Captain M‘Arthur, the commandant at Port
Essington, in a letter to the Royal Geographical
Society, dated in March, 1846, in speaking of these
islands, says
“ From all I can learn, our manufactures of
cotton goods meet a serious competition by the
Americans, and their trade in the East is rapidly


increasing. Under the present system in the Archi-
pelago, all the produce left to open markets would
not more than suffice for the demands of one of our
small-class merchant ships. Were the Dutch ex-
clusive system once abandoned, then these islands
would present scenes of commerce which are now
suppressed by every ingenuity.
“ The China merchants of Singapore chiefly main-
tain what little trade there is with these islands,
employing natives, or carrying their flags, or else
by means of the Dutch flag in Bughis Prahus. A
solitary vessel has occasionally visited the Arrus;
and 1 believe it is found difficult to obtain a cargo.
Yet these islands are capable of extensive produc-
tions, of the most valuable description, being, per-
haps, more fertile in such things than any known
place on the globe. I am informed that Arab
vessels of large tonnage are encouraged by the
Dutch to convey away the spices which they raise
at Amboyna and Banda. They have no desire to
see a European flag in these waters at all. The
natives are ignorant of the resources they possess,
and, knowing no better, are content.”
In the article beche le mer, of which frequent
mention has already been made, the Americans, at
present, carry on a very valuable trade. Captain
Wilks, in his “ Narrative of the United States’ Ex-
ploring Expedition” (vol. iii. p. 221.), mentions
that a cargo had been collected in the course of
seven months, at a trifling expense, at the Feejee
group (a group contiguous to the New Hebrides),


worth about 25,000 dollars. “ The outfit for such
a voyage is small; but the cost to be incurred is of
some moment, as no assurance can be effected by
vessels bound to the Feejee group; and it requires
no small activity and enterprise to conduct the
trade. The beche le mer is sometimes carried to
Canton, but more usually to Manilla, where it is
shipped to China. 77 In order to show the profits
that arise from the trade in beche le mer, I give
the cost and returns of five cargoes obtained by
Captain Eagleston at the Feejee group of islands: —
Piculs. Cost of Vessel. Sales.
1st voyage, 617 1101 doll. 8021 doll.
2d „ 700 1200 17500
3d „ 1080 3396 15120
4th „ 840 1200 12600
5th „ 1200 3500 27000
“ A further profit, also, arises from the invest-
ment of the proceeds at Canton. Captain Eagleston
also obtained 4480 lbs. of tortoise-shell at a cost of
5700 dollars, which sold, in the United States, for
29,050 dollars net.” Captain Wilks (vol. iv.
p.485.) says: “The American whaling fleet now
consists of 675 vessels, the greater part of Avhich
are ships of 400 tons burthen. The majority of
these vessels cruise in the Pacific Ocean. The
value of the whole fleet, consisting of no less than
25.000. of dollars, yielded an annual return of
5.000. extracted from the ocean by hard toil,
exposure, and danger. The estimated quantity of


oil, imported into the United States, is about
400,000 barrels, the half of which is sperm oil.”
The Americans, however, are still further en-
deavouring to extend this valuable and important
branch of their commerce. In proof of this, we
quote the following article from the “ New York
Morning Herald,” Oct. 13th, 1846 :
“ The Extension oe American Commerce.
“ Now that the excellent ports on the Pacific,
from the thirtieth to the forty-ninth degree of
north latitude, are in our possession, and will be
henceforth depots for our commerce, it is time to
look at the many advantages which are likely to
accrue to us from the extension of our commercial
relations with Asia and Africa, and the numerous
clusters of islands bordering on those countries.
We look upon a railroad across the United States,
with its terminus at some convenient spot on the
shore of the Pacific, as no longer problematical.
It is one of those things that must ultimately be
accomplished : it is at present merely a question of
time. That a scheme ensuring to this country
such vast commercial advantages must prevail, we
have no manner of doubt. That it will take time
to accomplish it, is, of course, beyond question.
“ In several communications made to our govern-
ment, within a year or two, by Mr. Aaron H.
Palmer, a gentleman who has conducted, for the
last fifteen years, an American and foreign agency
in this city, we are furnished with the names of


such places as have not as yet opened commercial
relations with us. We trust that our government
will take steps for the extension of our commerce
to those countries. There are places, as in the case
of China, where it would be necessary to send a
special mission, to secure for our citizens such com-
mercial advantages as would put our merchants on
at least an equal footing with those of other coun-
tries. We hope to see the attention of our govern-
ment turned to this subject as soon as the Mexican
war is at an end.
“ One of the chief views of the British govern-
ment is to make openings for English commerce in
every portion of the habitable globe where com-
mercial advantages are at all attainable. Even to
Shoa, a remote province in the southern portion of
Abyssinia, are her salt, cotton goods, zinc, copper,
beads, &c. &c. carried, over burning deserts that it
requires the greatest determination and physical
energy to cross. In exchange for the goods we
have enumerated, the English obtain gold dust,
ivory, civet, ostrich feathers, peltries, gums, spices,
&c. &c. In Borneo, too, Mr. Brooke, an English-
man, has established himself so well that he has ac-
tually got himself appointed Rajah of a province, and
thus has been enabled to establish a depot for British
vessels in the north-western part of the island.
“ After the establishment of such a communica-
tion with the Pacific as we have adverted to, the
trade of the Sandwich Islands, New Holland,
Borneo, New Guinea, China, and the rich Japanese
Islands would be the first direction of the enter


prise of our navigators. Cochin China, Birmah,
Persia, and the Indian Archipelago, each possess-
ing inexhaustible sources of commercial wealth,
would, in their turn, be the resort of our mer-
chants ; and, taking into consideration the adven-
turous spirit of our people, there is every reason to
believe that our commercial marine would, in a
short time, be the greatest in the world. In ex-
change for our exports, Persia would send us her
fruits, pearls, precious stones, Cashmere shawls,
carpets, and drugs; Burmah her precious metals,
rubies, sapphires, serpentine, catechu, elephants 7
teeth, orpiraent, and teak wood; Cochin China its
raw silk, spices, dye wood, gold dust, and gums;
Japan would give us her diamonds and precious
metals, ambergris, corals, pearls, &c. Even already
we find that American cotton goods are the prin-
cipal articles exchanged at the great annual fair of
Berbera.
“ But it is not alone in Asia and the islands
scattered over the Pacific, that our merchants will
extend their trade. The Comora Islands and
others, and the countries of the interior of Africa,
offer immense advantages in trade and commerce.
American manufactures have been already intro-
duced into Abyssinia; and with the Barbary States
we have, for several years, carried on extensive
commercial transactions. With China our trade
has increased wonderfully since we succeeded in
opening negotiations with that country.
“ We understand that Great Britain has con-
cluded a secret treaty of commerce with Siam, by


which she has secured to herself a monopoly of
privileges and advantages, with the right of intro-
ducing into Siam a number of articles hitherto pro-
hibited.
“ In January, 1846, Mr. Palmer wrote to the
President of the United States, suggesting the ex-
pediency of sending a commissioner to proceed
successively to Johanna, Teheran, from Bushire,
Rangoon, Amurapoora, Hue, Borneo, Celebes, Nan-
gaski, Jeddo, and to land at Zanzibar, Muscat,
Singapore, Manilla, the privileged ports of China,
and the Loo Choo and Bonin Islands; such com-
missioner to be clothed with plenipotentiary powers
to open commercial relations with all those places
enumerated, and several others ; and to have a
chief secretary, a limited number of attaches, and
a physician. The object would be to put American
commerce, in those remote places, on a permanent
footing, and to open new markets for the trade of
our merchants.
“ We trust this suggestion will be acted on.
We know nothing that would conduce more to the
advancement of our commerce than a mis-
sion.
“ We have thus merely glanced at the outline of
the immense commercial fabric that is about to be
raised by our merchants and navigators . The sub-
ject is too vast for one article; and having thus
sketched the outlines, we will, on some other occa-
sion, fill up with the details.”
We are well aware that navigators generally have
a great dread of Torres Straits, through which the


Company propose constantly to trade. This dread,
we believe, has been greatly exaggerated; but even
were the navigation as difficult as described, the
recent surveys of Captains Stokes and Owen Stan-
ley must have greatly diminished the danger.
Mr. Davidson, in his “ Trade and Travel in the far
East,” says, in describing his voyage from Sydney
through these straits, “ We were fortunate in finding
a magnificent entrance into the straits, in latitude
12° 18' south, and were fairly beside the barrier by
9 a.m. This entrance, which is at least three miles
wide, it is worth any ship’s Avhile to seek, for it may
be known by two small rocks on the south side as
you enter, resembling hay-cocks in shape and size;
we saw them three miles off, and they were the only
objects visible above water on the portion of the
barrier within our view. From our entrance we
had a fine run, and found nothing to stop us for a
minute (during daylight) till clear of Booby Island,
at the western end of the straits, which Ave passed
at 10 a.m. on the seventeenth day from Sydney.”
“ These celebrated straits pick up and destroy some
half-a-dozen ships annually, and are so much dreaded
by under-writers, that they refuse to insure loaded
vessels through them. From my oavh observation,
and Avhat I have heard from others Avho have passed
through Torres Straits on various occasions, it ap-
pears to me that a great proportion of this loss of
property arises from carelessness on the part of ship-
masters. The current in the Pacific Ocean runs
very strong to the north-Avest in the neighbourhood
of the barrier; and this current is often forgotten,


or not sufficiently allowed for by ship-masters the
night before they expect to make the reef. At sun-
down, the night before we made it, we were 80 miles
from it; we went under easy sail all night, and from
the distance logged during the night, expected to
make the reef at noon, having made all sail at day-
light ; instead of which, we came suddenly on it at
8 a.m., thus having been thrown four hours out of
our reckoning since sunset the night before. Many
ships, by not heaving to at all, or not doing so in
time the night previous to making the reef, drift too
far to the northward during the night, miss the pas-
sage they were endeavouring to make, and are com-
pelled to run along the reef in search of another,
for there is no getting back to the southward against
wind and current. This neglect throws many a
vessel up to the Murray Islands’ passages, which
are notoriously the most dangerous, and are now
generally avoided by shipping. Then there is hazy
weather occasionally in those parts, even in the
finest months; during its continuance no vessel
ought to approach the barrier, though many are
imprudent enough to do so, and too frequently pay
the penalty. In the barrier there are many gaps,
called £ horse shoes,’ which, in thick weather, look
like real entrances, the breakers at the bottom of
them not being visible from the ship. I have known
many vessels lost by taking a horse-shoe for a real
entrance in hazy weather. Other vessels get wrecked
from paying too little attention to the dangers that
beset them after getting safe through the barrier.
E


There are small patches of reef here and there in the
middle of the many channels that run between the
main reefs; these pick up many vessels that might
be saved were a careful look-out kept on board. I
could give instances of losses happening in each of
these ways, but the careless have suffered so severely
from their neglect that I would not hurt them by
naming the ships.”
Enough now has been said to show the import-
ance of this trade—a trade which, if conducted on
judicious and liberal principles, admits almost of an
unlimited extension. At present it would be pre-
mature to enter more fully into detail, as the course
of action which the Company will pursue must de-
pend, in a great measure, upon the countenance
which the Government may give it. To throw open
the existing Dutch monopoly in spices, and to ex-
tend the field of our commerce, cannot be objects of
indifference to British statesmen.
Those who wish to elevate the character of a large
portion of the human race, and to convey to them a
knowledge of religion, cannot but view in a favour-
able light the substitution of a just, equitable, and
regular system of trade for one which too often has
been the pretext for nothing but violence and op-
pression.
THE END.
London :
Printed by A. Spottiswoode,
New-Street-Square.








