

OUR AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.






Foe Private Circulation only.
DESCRIPTIVE PLAN
FOR A
PROPOSED GREAT CENTRAL
AUSTRALIAN
TRANS-CONTINENTAL RAILWAY,
FROM
MELBOURNE, via DENILIQUIN,
TO THE
GULF OF CARPENTARIA,
WITH BRANCHES
Connecting the Colonies of QUEENSLAND, NEW SOUTH.WALES,
VICTORIA and SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BY
EDWIN TRENERRY.
LONDON:
Feinted by Boot & Clements, 7, Maek Lane, E.C.
1879.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.


DESCRIPTIVE PLAN
FOR A
PROPOSED GREAT CENTRAL AUSTRALIAN
TRANS-CONTINENTAL RAILWAY.
Having lived in the Australian Colonies for a period of
twenty-three years, and during that time become possessed
of large landed property, &c., I have recently taken up my
residence in England for the purpose of devoting a part of
my leisure and means to arrange all preliminaries for
carrying out the undertaking of the building of this great
Eailway.
From an intimate knowledge of the wants of these
Colonies, I feel confident that the time is now ripe for the
development of this enterprise; and I wish to call your
attention to my project, by which the Colonies will be
immensely benefitted, some splendid country opened up for
settlement, and occupation given to thousands of people.
The subject I consider worthy the consideration of the
philanthropist, as well as the capitalist.
The Eailway is at present completed in the Colony of
Victoria, from Melbourne to Echuca, on the south side
of the Murray Eiver (a distance of 150 miles), crossing the
Murray Eiver to Moama, on the opposite side, the line is
constructed from there to Deniliquin (a distance of 50 miles).
This last 50 miles has been opened about 18 months, and
is paying well.
I propose to start from Deniliquin, running from thence
to Hay (100 miles); from Hay to Bulligal (60 miles);


from Bulligal to Cooper’s Creek (500 miles); and from
Cooper’s Creek to the Gulf of Carpentaria (650 miles),
making a total in miles across the continent, from north to
south, of about 1300 miles (see Map).
In addition to this Main line, I propose to construct
another from Wagga Wagga,* in New South Wales, to
Bulligal (150 miles). Here will be the Grand Junction.
Bulligal is in the midst of a line agricultural country,
and will probably become the Chicago of this portion of
the Australian Continent.
From Bulligal, again, I propose to construct the line to
Euston, at the borders of South Australia, a distance of
250 miles; and if satisfactory arrangements can be made
with the South Australian Government (of which 1 have
little doubt), I would continue the line to their capital
(Adelaide) ; or, if they prefer to construct this line on
their own account, to meet us half-way, I should ask a
money grant from them for the advantages that would
accrue to them from the building of the line to their
borders. The distance from Euston (which is on the East
side of the Eiver Murray) to Adelaide is about 250 miles.
Total distance from Bulligal 500 miles.
I also propose to construct a line from Eoma, in Queens-
land, to join the Main line at Cooper’s Creek, distance
450 miles. The Eailway from Brisbane to Eoma is nearly
* This place is already connected by Bail with Goulburn and Sydney, and
the inhabitants of Wagga are now taking steps to urge upon the Government
the necessity of extending the Railway to Hay, on the southern side of the
Murrumbidgee.
From the Melbourne Argus, 28th Nov., 1878.
JEEILDBEIE, Wednesday.
At a large and influential meeting, held this day, at Cox’s Hotel, it was
decided to send a deputation to Sydney, to present a petition to Government,
urging the immediate importance of extending the railway from Wagga
Wagga through Tirana and Jerilderie to Hay, instead of the other route
proposed.


completed, and the continuation of the line to Cooper’s
Creek would open up for settlement some splendid country.
Upon referring to the Map accompanying this pamphlet,
it will be seen that the construction of these different lines
would make the Railway communication between Brisbane,
Sydney, Victoria, and Adelaide, virtually complete. As
before stated, Bulligal would be the Chicago, and merchants
here would have the option of sending the produce coming
from the country beyond, to either one of the different
Ports mentioned, wherever the advantages of a market
would be the greatest. The entire distance (with connec-
tions proposed to be constructed) will be about 2,500 miles,
nearly the same as from San Francisco to the Missouri
Eiver (Omaha). I may take this opportunity of mentioning,
that while making the trip across the American Continent
by Rail, from San Francisco to New York, I came to the
conclusion that the construction of a line across the
Australian Continent would be comparatively an easy
matter, and open up a country incomparably superior to
that lying between the Eastern side of the Sierra Nevada
Mountains and the Missouri River, the greater portion of
which consists of Sand Deserts and Plains, covered with
Alkali and Sage Brush.
There are no great engineering difficulties to be overcome
in crossing the Australian Continent from North to South.
The country through which the Railway will pass,
commencing at Deniliquin as far as Cooper's; Creek, is
mostly level, and consists of fine pasturage taken up for
extensive sheep runs. From Cooper’s Creek to the Gulf
of Carpentaria, as far as is known from the exploring
expedition of Burke and Wills, made in 1861, there are
no large Rivers and no Chain of Mountains to cross, nearly
the whole country is good and well adapted for settlement,
and capable of sustaining millions of people. On account


of the impossibility of getting the wool to market, the
greater part of the country beyond Cooper’s Creek is un-
occupied, except here and there by a few of the Aborigines
and some Chinese and Polynesians, but which country,
when opened up by this projected Railway, would soon
become populated.
I will now proceed to explain the basis upon which the
whole plan of the undertaking rests.
I propose to ask from the Governments of New South
Wales, Queensland, and also from South Australia (if they
prefer our making the line to Adelaide), concessions of
blocks of land of each alternate square; in addition
I purpose asking for Government aid in the form of a
guarantee for interest on the bonds that may be necessary
to issue while the line is in process of construction. I
am, however, confident that the line can be built without
this latter Government aid, and that the concession of the
blocks of land will be all that is requisite for the carrying
out of the enterprise. In addition to the concessions of
the alternate blocks of land along the projected line, the
Queensland Government will be asked for a grant of, say,
one mile square on the Gulf of Carpentaria for all necessary
purposes in connection with the Terminus there.
It is intended to make application to the Victorian
Government, for permission to land all material duty free
at Melbourne, and to convey it to Echuca free of cost ;
and to ask the New South Wales and Queensland Govern-
ments to do the same at their respective sea-ports —Sydney
and Brisbane —and convey material to the termini at
Wagga Wagga and Roma. Also to give free passes on
their lines to all our officials. The same favor will be
asked from the Moama and Deniliquin Co.
In asking these concessions I am only acting in accord-
ance with the plan so successfully carried out by the


projectors of the line across the American continent. On
the Central Pacific and Union Pacific lines the grant in
land was every alternate mile square, and the United
States Government issued bonds in payment, as soon as
each 20 miles were completed.
On account of the nature of the country through which
the line will pass across the Australian Continent—being
mostly pasturage, blocks of the size named— miles
square would be necessary to recompense the projectors
for their enterprise. The probability of the early annexa-
tion of New Guinea to Australia, and the recent valuable
mineral discoveries in the York Peninsula* on the eastern
side of the Gulf of Carpentaria, tend to the founding of some
important city on the Gulf. At present there is no impor-
tant settlement on this the north side of the Australian
Continent; but those who have the prescience to under-
stand the near future-extending development of Northern
Queensland, will see that some great city must rise up on
the Gulf ; and of what immense advantage would it be for
this city of the future to be connected with rail with the
already developed portion of the continent ! Wherever the
terminus of the projected line is located, there for a
certainty will be the city.
In Carpentaria the sea-port towns are Burke and Norman-
town ; those inland are Georgetown and Gilberton.
The distances by sea from the Gulf of Carpentaria to
other ports are as follows :
MILES.
To Batavia ... ... 2,170
„ Singapore ... ... ... 2,720
„ Penang ... ... ... 3,100
„ Madras ... ... ... 4,380
* Large numbers of Miners are now proceeding to this District, and it is
anticipated that by this means the entire Cape Xork Peninsula will be opened
up for settlement.


MILES.
To Ceylon, Point de Galle... ... 4,310
„ Brisbane ... ... ... 1,680
„ Sydney ... ... ... 2,220
„ Melbourne ... ... ... 2,825
~ Adelaide ... ... ... 4,310
„ Hobart Town... ... ... 2,850
„ Wellington ... ... ... 2,920
„ Auckland ... ... ... 2,910
„ Hong Kong ... ... ... 2,780
There is a rapidly growing trade between California and
Australia, and the founding of a city on the Gulf of Car-
pentaria would probably lead in the future to a line of
steamships running direct there, being a considerable saving
in distance, and an easier passage than the one at present
in use. Steamers now run from San Francisco to the
Sandwich Islands; thence to Auckland, New Zealand; thence
to Sydney, and on to Melbourne. Supposing a city to be
founded on the Gulf, the line could be from the Sandwich
Islands direct to Carpentaria.
The present development of the Colony of Queensland
foreshadows the founding of a city on the Gulf, and if my
scheme is carried out as before mentioned, the spot for the
city will be where the railway terminates. * The present
* It was recently stated by the Et. Eev. G. H. Stanton, Bishop of the
New Diocese of North Queensland, who is now in England, that “ Queensland
is the largest of all our Colonies. It is twelve times the size of England,
twice the size of Canada, and half as large again as England, Wales, Scot-
land, Ireland, France and Spain combined. Thousands of our Emigrants
are annually attracted by its many advantages. Emigration has mainly
helped to raise its population within a few years, from 30,000 to 200,000.
Last year no fewer than 5,655 Emigrants sailed for Queensland, but this year
the number has reached 8,549. Besides the settlers there is a large population
of Chinese, Polynesians and Aborigines. Outside a few towns which exist in
the Northern part, the settlers are scattered over a vast area; whereas in
England there are 344 persons to each square mile, in Queensland there are
two miles for every person,”


time seems opportune for the development of this enter-
prise, as the different Colonies are now arranging for loans
for the purpose of extending the lines of railway in
various directions, and while those are in progress I am
anxious to inaugurate this movement for the construction
of this main line, with its connections, across the continent.
I want to secure the co-operation of twenty gentlemen
of well-known position and means, half in England and
half in Australia, to raise £IO,OOO to pay the necessary
preliminary expenses, viz., getting the Acts passed in the
Colonies, paying agents there to attend to the business,
secretary in England, &c., &c. I have placed the amount
at £IO,OOO for the purpose of securing the concessions.
This would bo probably required in three instalments :
£250 first, and two more payments of £125 if necessary.
I will subscribe £SOO with nineteen others, or £I,OOO with
nine more gentlemen, so confident do I feel of the result.
I have submitted my plans to some gentlemen in London,
former residents of California, who, being acquainted with
all the details in reference to the building of the line from
San Francisco to the Missouri Eiver, entirety endorse my
views about the Australian railway, and have promised me
their valuable aid and experience in perfecting all the
arrangements necessary for the successful prosecution
of this great undertaking, which, if it can be carried out,
will be of untold advantage to these Colonies, giving employ-
ment to thousands in the building of the different lines,
opening up for settlement millions of acres which at present
are valueless for want of communication, relieving the old
country of some of its superfluous population, which, by
being properly directed, can here rise to independence, and
add to the wealth of the Colony and to that of England also.
In addition to this it will in a measure tend to revive
trade in some important branches of manufacture in


England, and, after a time, give an opportunity for the
favourable investment of capital on the part of the public
*in general. The ramifications of the scheme are unlimited.
Being, at present, comparatively a stranger in England,
after an absence of so many years, I think it advisable to
terminate this description of my plan for carrying out the
undertaking of building the line across the Australian
Continent from North to South, with a few words in
reference to my own career in Australia. During my
experience there, I assisted in the development of the deep
Gold Mines of Ballarat, more especially the celebrated
Band of Hope Gold Mine, the richest ever discovered in
Australia or in the World. I was for some time Chairman
of this Company and a Director at the time of the visit to
the Mine of the Duke of Edinburgh and Suite.
My landed estate (Tregothnan), situate at Ballan, 45 miles
from Melbourne, consisting of 2,700 acres, valued at£35,000,
is at present let to Donald Stewart, Esq. I have recently
purchased in Melbourne, for the sum of £21,000, the
valuable property known as the Campbellfield Estate,
formerly belonging to the Dight family. I have also
considerable property in Ballarat, &c., &c.
I have merely added these remarks of a personal nature
for the purpose of showing any Gentleman who may be
disposed to join me in this undertaking, that as my
judgment in the Colonies (where it was generally looked up
to) led to great success there for myself and those who
followed me, without wishing to appear anything of an
egotist, I am just as confident, having studied the subject
for some years, that this scheme for building the Railway,
if my ideas can be carried out, will be attended with
success, in like manner, to all parties concerned.
I propose that the Gentlemen who may feel disposed to
join me in forming the Syndicate to raise the £IO,OOO for


the purpose already specified, shall be considered with me
as the promoters of the enterprise, and enjoy all pecuniary
and other advantages equally that may accrue from the
promotion of so vast an undertaking, and at the same time
constitute a Committee in England and Australia, for the
purpose of making all further arrangements in connec-
tion with the scheme, after the concessions have been
obtained.
As soon as the Syndicate is formed I shall be prepared
to return to Australia with a Secretary to arrange all
business in connection with the enterprise.
.Respectfully,
EDWIN TRENERRY.
The Birches,
Lawkie Park Gardens,
Sydenham.
N.B. —For the information of those not sufficiently well
informed as to the general condition of the Australian
Colonies at the present writing, I have appended the letters
that have appeared in the Globe during the past few weeks,
from the pen of the various Agents-General of the Colonies
in England. I have also added some extracts, all pertinent
to the matter, from the circulars published under authority
of the different Governments of Victoria, South Australia,
New South Wales, and Queensland, &c., &c.




LONDON
TO
MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE, SYDNEY,
BRISBANE AND CARPENTARIA.
IN THIRTY DAYS,
Via BRINDISI, SUEZ AND RED SEA TO ADEN;
THENCE TO PORT DARWIN.
Since the promulgation of this scheme to construct the Railway
to Carpentaria, it has been suggested by the Agent-General for
Queensland that it would be desirable to extend the line from
a given point in Queensland (see map) and run across the
northern portion of South Australia to Port Darwin.
The South Australians have constructed the telegraph line
from Adelaide directly across the Continent to Port Darwin,
and elated by their success in this, have also thought of making
a Railway, and thus peopling the interior; but the physical
conditions of this particular region ordain that as the centre
of the Continent is approached, population, and consequently
production, must diminish according to area. This project,
therefore, of building a Railway along the same route as the
telegraph could not be carried out profitably for a century to
come. The country through which we shall pass in the pro-
posed route through New South Wales and Queensland is of an
entirely different character from that in the South Australian
part of the Continent; but by diverging at a certain point in
Queensland (see map), and running across to Port Darwin, the
line would open up for settlement some of the best part of the
northern portion of South Australia. Inasmuch as there is


already considerable population at Port Darwin, it would be
more advantageous to have the terminus there, and it is the
nearest point for the European steamers to run to.
Although it necessitates the construction of another 600
miles of rail, yet there would be a corresponding saving in
distance by sea from Port Darwin to Carpentaria. The dis-
tance from Aden to Port Darwin is about 4,000 miles, which
could be accomplished by a good line of steamers, making 300
miles in each twenty-four hours, in thirteen days as an average
—thus reducing the journey from England to Melbourne, via
Brindisi, to thirty days, with twenty-three days at sea; at
present it is forty-two days, with thirty-nine days at sea.
Another advantage of the passage from Aden to Port Darwin
is that it is all through smooth water, thus avoiding what at
present is the most disagreeable part of the voyage—from King
George’s Sound to Melbourne. Carpentaria would be the
nearest point for the San Francisco Steamers, but as the
greater part of the travel would be by Steamers from
Southampton, running to and fro in the Mediterranean
from Port Said to Gibraltar, Port Darwin would be the
more desirable terminus for the line.
The time occupied at present in the journey to Melbourne
by the route from Southampton is fifty days ; by making Port
Darwin the landing point it would be reduced to forty. Hitherto
one of the great hindrances to the journey to Australia has been
the length of the voyage, hence the preference by emigrants for
the United States of America ; but the voyage being reduced to
thirty days, via Brindisi, and to forty days by the Steamers
from Southampton, it is almost certain that a better class
would go who are now deterred by the aversion to a long
sea voyage —such a class, for instance, as farmers and trades-
men with a moderate amount of capital who find the utter
impossibility of ever doing more in England than to obtain a
livelihood, with no chance (whatever their energy and intelli-
gence) of gaining a competency for their declining years.
The Colonies together are spending some half-million sterling


per annum ill taking out emigrants. This would probably
be saved to them by this better class going out on their own
account, carrying some capital and helping to develop the still
dormant riches of the country.
If the whole scheme is carried out, and Port Darwin made
.the terminus, emigrants on landing here could be carried by
rail, and make their selections along the line, just as they
have done in the United States ; and in the event of the con-
cessions being granted by the South Australian Government,
the line could be commenced at Port Darwin at the same time
as from Deniliquin. Australia is pre-eminently the country
for the redundant population of the British Isles, and every
effort should be made to render the transit there as speedy as
possible. Should the entire scheme be carried out, the mails
from England can be delivered in the different capitals—
Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, and Adelaide, in thirty days
from London.
With the addition of the line from Queensland to Port Darwin
the entire distance would amount to 3,200 miles, the whole of
which could be in running order inside of ten years from the
time of beginning. The distances by this projected line from
Port Darwin to the respective capitals would be :
MILKS •
To Melbourne ... ... ... ... 2150
~ Brisbane ... ... ... ... 2040
~ Adelaide ... ... ... ... 2190
~ Sydney ... ... ... ... 2200
~ Capentaria ... ... ... ... 800
Since it has been determined to add to the scheme by the
extension of the line to Port Darwin, it will require more
work in negotiating with the South Australian authorities.
This will add to the expense ; therefore ten more Syndicate
Shares at £SOO each can be offered, making a total of thirty.
The expense for each Colony is estimated at £5,000.


VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.
(BY ARCHIBALD MICHIE, Esq., Q.C., K.C.M.G.,
AGENT-GENERAL.)
An intelligent mechanic, recently inquiring of the Agent-
General of one of our Australian Colonies about the chances
of “ getting on ” there, closed his questions with: “ Well,
sir, I suppose, if the worst comes to the worst in the colony,
there is always plenty of grub.” Whether intending emi-
grants generally put the point in the same blunt vernacular
or not, we may feel assured that the anxiety implied
in the inquiry is the prominent consideration with all.
“ The prompt nature of hunger,” as Mr. Carlisle somewhere
has it, makes eating and drinking the ever recurring sub-
ject of attention to all, from peer to peasant. “ The prompt
nature of hunger ” thrusts itself into the front of all other
questions and subjects, and will not be denied or postponed.
Your intending emigrant, therefore, makes few, if any,
inquiries about Colonial institutions or politics, and shows
himself marvellously indifferent whether the “Berry” or any
other Ministry are in power. The emigrant, in short, will
not have his attention diverted from what to him absorbs
all other considerations. When he asks you for bread, can
you give him Colonial politics without doing something
altogether irrelevant to your emigrant’s purpose? That
purpose, in the vast majority of cases, is to get a “ fair
day’s wages for a fair day’s work.” That this purpose can
be achieved in Victoria, under as easy conditions as in any
other community under the sun, is manifest enough from


the Colonial information which reaches this country
from time to time through the Melbourne newspapers—
the Argus, the Age,, and Daily Telegraph —not to speak
of many other corroborating authorities.
The number of souls in the Colony at present does not
reach 900,000, and seeing that it is a territory capable of
feeding so much larger a population, it is obvious that
strong hearts and willing arms alone are wanting to grow
food and raiment for many millions in addition to the mere
hundreds of thousands now in this fine country. Partly,
perhaps, on account of Sir Thomas Mitchell, its first
explorer, calling it “Australia Felix,” but mainly from its
actually deserving the title from the fertility of its soil, the
healthiness of its climate, and the beauty of its scenery, it
was the most attractive of the Australian settlements long
before the discovery of gold; and therefore it was inevitable
that when gold was discovered there in extraordinary quan-
tities the rush to Victoria from all the nationalities of the
world would (as it in fact did) exceed in extent every volun-
tary emigration of human beings which has occurred within
the same period of time in our generation.
The intending emigrant, when glancing at a map of New
Holland, and finding distinguished thereon five Colonies,
will be surprised at the apparent smallness of Victoria.
In like manner foreigners, perhaps, who read in every
journal of the importance of Great Britain amongst the
“ Great Powers,” feel at first equally surprised that two
little islands lying outside of the big continent of Europe
should have succeeded in obtaining and holding for so
many centuries the foremost position in the affairs of the
world at large. We. require here, as has been suggested
for the East by Lord Salisbury, “ big maps,” to check the
erring popular imagination. For in point of fact, small as
appears Victoria, occupying the little slice of the fifth division


of the world (some have called her the fifth quarter), she is
only relatively small; and many portions of her territory
are almost without population. The gross area of Victoria
comprises 56,446,720 acres, out of which it has been esti-
mated by competent Government surveyors that at least
33,446,720 acres are well fitted for occupation. Until the
discovery of gold by far the larger part of this territory
was occupied by upwards of a thousand squatters, many of
whom had “taken up,” as the operation was called, vast
principalities under Government regulations, and subject
to very moderate license fees, paid to the Crown. It was
obvious that this state of things could not continue after a
large population had come to the country; so in due time,
and not until after much fighting against what the squatters
called their “vested interests,” large slices of their runs
were put up for sale to farmers and others who desired to
settle on the land permanently with their families. Even
down to the year 1875 we find that the squatting runs were
865 in number, their average size being 26,552 acres. That
these runs were gradually, and even rapidly, becoming
“ small by degrees, and beautifully less,” may be seen in
this : that, according to the Government statist, Mr. Henry
Heylin Hayter, the average size of the runs only two years
before was 28,044 acres. Very large portions of these runs
are freehold, for their occupants have not been slow to pur-
chase out and out as much of the land occupied as they
could, so as at any rate to put these latter portions beyond
the reach of the free selector.
It is in consequence of this very considerable extent of
pastoral occupation that an impression largely prevails in
this country, and apparently even to some extent in the
Colony itself, that there is not now much land left in Vic-
toria for arable purposes. As this is a delusion which
might deter many of the agricultural class in the mother


country from proceeding to this Colony, it is proper that it
should be at once corrected. The same authority which
gives us the number and size of the “ squattages ” also
informs us that 42 per cent, of the entire area of the Colony
is still public estate in the hands of the Government, and
therefore open to the selection of the farming classes.
Year by year, therefore, cultivation has been steadily
abridging the once untroubled domains of the pastoral
occupants, with the gratifying result that the production of
wheat has been doubled in the period between 1865 and
1875; and, on the other hand, the number of squatting
runs were 43 less in number in the year 1876 than in
1875. In the Colony, as in England, farming, to pay, must
be carried on in connection with grazing; so that it is cer-
tain that as time wears on the old heart-burnings between
the pastoral and agricultural classes will disappear, and the
lands naturally fitted for pasture or cultivation, as the case
may be, will be occupied respectively according to their
natural capabilities. It is sufficient to say that there is
enough good land left for settlement to support in comfort
millions more of our fellow countrymen than are likely to
find their way to these shores for many years to come.
With a climate one of the finest in the world, and admitting
of the growth of all European and of many semi-tropical
productions, there is room for every form of industry.
Hence all the cereals and every kind of fruit are success-
fully cultivated, and even the Victorian vintages obtained
very favourable attention at the recent Paris Exhibition.
As may be supposed, wages of all classes of workers in
Victoria are very much higher than in the mother country,
while the prices of all the ordinary necessaries of life are
much lower. House rent may be somewhat higher than
in England, and therefore provident mechanics generally
contrive, by means of some one of the numerous building


societies, to become by thrift the proprietors of their own
houses. On some of the gold fields —at Ballarat more
especially—house rent has fallen very considerably, by
reason of the gold production having greatly diminished,
causing in its turn a corresponding efflux of working miners
and others dependent on their custom. In many parts of
the Colony, however, a comfortable cottage may be rented
for £25 or £BO a-year, and the superior classes of houses
fetch about the same rentals as similar tenements in
London and the suburbs.
Notwithstanding the depression in the building and some
other trades, which, according to the Argus summary of
October 3, 1878, seems for some time to have existed in
Melbourne —a temporary depression which appears to be
the result of political and other causes—we find the follow-
ing given as the rates of wages in the different trades
specified. They will be seen to be greatly in excess of the
rates of remuneration paid for similar services in this
country. Domestic servants in towns, such as housemaids
and nursemaids, from £3O to £36 a year; female cooks
from £35 to £6O a year, according to capacity ; laundresses,
£3O to £4O a year ; cooks for hotels, male and female, from
£SO to £IOO a year; married couples for home stations,
£7O to £9O a year; farming men 20s. a week with rations;
stockmen, £6O to £75 a year; shepherds, from 15s. to 20s.
a week with rations ; drovers, 255. to 40s. a week; in the
building trade stonemasons receive 10s. a day ; plasterers,
bricklayers, slaters, 10s. a day; labourers and pick and
shovel men, from 6s. 6d. to 7s. a day; bootmakers get for
rivetting children’s boots 6d. a pair; for boys’, lOd.; for
women’s, Is.; men’s, Is. 3d. Same rates for finishing.
In some of the best shops rates paid for wellingtons, 10s.;
elastics, 7s. 6d.; closing, Bs. Bakers, first-class foremen
workmen average £3 a week; second hands, from £2 to


£2 2s. a week; butchers, 355. to 40s. a week; boys, 15s. to
205.; slaughtermen from 40s. to 50s. a week; small goods
men (porkbutchers) receive 80s. to 40s. a week, with rations;
brass-finishers and coppersmiths, 9s. to 12s. a day; wages
of cabinetmakers are variable, some getting as much as
£8 10s. a week; some not more than £2 10s. In clothing
factories, tailoresses get from £1 to £1 15s. a week where
work is done on the premises; coopers generally are paid
by piecework, the wages fixed by trade are 10s. a day for
10 hours (in almost all other trades the working day is 8
hours.) Ship carpenters are paid 13s. a day, but work is
irregular; coach-builders, £'2 10s. to £4 a week; drapers,
from £2 10s. to £4 a week; farriers, £2 lss. a week; grooms,
from 80s. to 40s. a week ; coachmen, 355. to 50s. a week;
good gardeners, 255. a week and food; hatters, 18s. to 20s.
per dozen for “regulars;” 12s. to 14s. for low crowns.
In the iron trade, fitters get from 9s. to 10s. a day; boiler
makers and platers, from 12s. to 13s. a day; jewellers,
from 412 15s. to £3 15s. a week; miners, £2 a week for
surface work; £2 ss. for underground work; painters and
glaziers, 9s. a day; plumbers and gasfitters, £3 a week,
8 hours a day; printers, Is. a thousand; lithographers
receive from £2 10s. to 413 15s. a week; stevedore’s men,
lumpers, 12s. a day; sailors, £4 10s. a month; saddlers,
£2 15s. a week; tanners and curriers, 40s. to 50s. a week ;
tailors, Is. per hour; tinsmiths earn from £2 to £3 a week
—most of this work being done by the piece; watchmakers
earn from £2 10s. to £4 a week, and superior hands in
good establishments get still more.
The labour market of an extensively gold-producing
country seems to be distinguished by some peculiarities
not to be found in the labour markets of other lands. The
rate of wages of miners on a gold field must to some,
perhaps to a considerable extent affect the rates paid to


other forms of human industry. For it seems that gold-
digging does not demand any previous knowledge or ex-
perience in those who betake themselves to this seductive
pursuit. In nothing are statistics more valuable than in
making us acquainted with such facts as these. Mr.
Hayter’s pages, amidst so much other interesting matter,
show us that out of 20,120 gold miners (out of a total
number of 52,411) in the year 1871, there were only 858
who returned themselves on the census schedules as having
been previously connected with any description of mining
whatsoever; 6,011 of them had been either farmers or
farm labourers, and would probably sooner or later revert
to the same business again ; 3,845 had been merely general
labourers ; 1,135 had been carpenters ; 795 had been shop-
keepers ; 487 commercial clerks; 392 blacksmiths, all of
whom had probably, in common with many thousands of
others, been attracted from their more certain but less
exciting pursuits to try their luck at the mines. The average
value of the gold won by each miner was ,£93 6s. in the
year 1871, and £lO4 4s. 4d. in 1875, the increase in the
latter year evidently being attributable to the fact that the
number of working mines had become greatly reduced in
the interval, causing a larger share to result to those who
remained at the work. The earnings at the gold-fields
thus seem in some degree to rule the remuneration of other
kinds of labour, as we. see from the variety of callings which
adapt themselves to gold-digging. It must ever be so in a
country which presents to all comers a perpetual splendid
lottery, next to nothing being payable for a ticket. When
the writer of this left the colony, some five years back, a
man who had been a sailor was receiving £3,000 a week
from his “claim ’’ at Sandhurst (Bendigo, as it used to be
called), and the yield has become still greater since. With
such individual experiences as these, so impressive to ordi


nary imaginations, no wonder that the gold fields are a last
resort to some, and a specially attractive pursuit to many
more. As to other callings, the facilities for moving about
from one part of the colony to another, as well as from one
colony to another, by means of railroad and steamboat, are
such that labour has a great tendency to become equalised
in the colonies, so that gluts here or scarcity there being
made known through the press and private letters, the
variations are rarely considerable in different districts or
for long periods of time. It may be remarked with respect
to all the above-mentioned industries that journeymen
much more rapidly rise into masters and female workers
into wives than we find to be the case in the overstocked
labour market of the mother country.
There is to be in the year 1880 an exhibition of the arts,
industries, and products of “all nations ” in Melbourne.
The Government and Legislature of Victoria have so
decided, an Act for the purpose has been passed, a hundred
thousand pounds have been voted for the cost of a building,
and active measures have been taken even in England to
make the affair a success. One may perhaps, if cynically
disposed, ask whether Melbourne is not taking for her
model in this large invitation to “ all nations ” the inflatedly
ambitious frog, who, despite the discouraging comments of
her daughter, “ be-blowed ” herself in her own froggy
imagination up to the noble proportions of the ox; and one
may possibly follow up the unpleasantly critical inquiry by
demanding whether the money the exhibition is to cost
might not be more profitably expended in the construction
of a 100 miles or so of additional railway in some of the
roadless districts of the colony. To all such idle challenges
it is sufficient to say that the exhibition is to be. In
England these exhibitions are beginning to be regarded as
somewhat of a bore ; and Vienna, and our own annual


internationals, and Philadelphia, and Paris, all coming one
after the other on the world in such swift succession, many
people begin to look on them as they do on Shere Ali —
as a decided nuisance. But it must he remembered that
there has never yet been an international exhibition in the
southern hemisphere, and no very valid reason can be
assigned why one of these Leviathan ambulatory bazaars
should not, in a very respectable shape, succeed in Austra-
lia. Of course any approach to such a display as that of
1851, or to the one just closed in the Champs de Mars, is
impossible, and must be so in any new country for many
years. But Australia may, and doubtless will, in these
bad times draw many pretty and interesting objects both
to Melbourne and Sydney, in the hope of finding customers
for them. But why—it may be asked —in Sydney ? Simply
because there is to be a similar exhibition there next year.
Is it demanded why two next door neighbours are going to
hold such exhibitions within a year of each other ? As well
ask why Mrs. Primrose and her two pretty daughters were
never going to be outdone by the aesthetic rivalry of Farmer
Flamborough’s family. But may not the two exhibitions
coming so close to each other involve the failure of both ?
Not at all. Sydney by sea is only some six hundred miles
from Melbourne, and the communication between the two
places by means of powerful steamers is almost daily. The
goods of 1879, therefore, having done service in Sydney,
can be brought south to Melbourne in 1880. And as there
are in both cities a sufficient number of people who have
much more money than they know well how to expend
wisely in their own country, it is by no means unlikely
that both British and foreign contributories to these enter-
prises may come away well satisfied with their Australian
customers. Already the Colonial Office and the South
Kensington authorities are affording both counsel and co


operation in the preliminary work, and if the project fail
of achieving the degree of success expected for it by its
promoters, such failure will only be because, as a Victorian
statesman recently said in the Legislative Assembly, “the
people of England do not understand our ambition.’'’


SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
(BY SIR ARTHUR BLYTH, K.C.M.G., AGENT-GENERAL.)
The Colony of South Australia was founded in the year
1836, and is, therefore, neither the oldest nor the youngest
of the Australian sisterhood of Colonies. It stretches
across the whole Continent, from Ocean to Ocean, a length
of 1,800 miles, the total area comprising 914,730 square
miles, or 585,427,200 acres. In so large a country a great
variety of soil is of course to be found. There are
magnificent plains of Agricultural land, and there are, of
course, some large tracts of very poor and sandy country;
but in these the grand mineral wealth of the Province has
been found, and tens of thousands of acres in the central
portion of South Australia have been taken up for pastoral
occupation, which, for many years, it was supposed could
never be turned to profitable account.
Nothing surprises an Australian, when he visits England,
so much as the great ignorance that he finds existing in
this country relative to Australia. He finds it spoken ot
as one country, whereas it is a country very nearly as large
as Europe, and is divided into separate States or Colonies as
Europe is, and these Colonies are distinct, having separate
Governments, and, in many respects, different laws. There
are five Colonies in Australia proper, Tasmania being an
Island. lam to endeavour to set forth the advantages of
South Australia, the Capital city of which is Adelaide. To
an emigrant desirous of selecting the best Colony in
Australia, South Australia presents, in the first place, very


great advantages by paying the whole expense attendant
upon the emigrant’s getting there—his passage by the ship,
even his railway fare to the port of embarkation (which is
always Plymouth for England and Ireland, and the Clyde
for Scotland), the entire cost of his bedding, mess utensils,
&c., is provided by the Government of South Australia,
without any claim on the emigrant present or to come.
To nearly all who have not made a long sea voyage such
an undertaking is looked upon as a most difficult and
dangerous proceeding, but South Australia has to a greater
or less extent, ever since the year 1886, been carrying
emigrants to her shores, and, I am thankful to say, up to
this time, during a period of 42 years, we have not lost one
single life by shipwreck or by any other dangers of the sea.
The fact is the voyage is a wonderfully safe one, and the
experience gained, and the care taken in the choice of ships,
&c., has led to this very extraordinary immunity from
accident. For the last three years the amount expended by
South Australia on emigration has been over ,£90,000 per
annum. The care of the single females in our emigrant
ships is specially attended to by a matron selected by the
British Ladies’ Female Emigrant Society, of Fitzroy-square,
and on the arrival of a ship at Port Adelaide, all the single
women are immediately removed to the Servants’ Home in
Flinders Street, a Government Institution, regulated and
managed by a committee consisting of ladies of position
in the Colony.
The principle that South Australians act on is that
population in a new country is wealth, and that a certain
proportion of the fund arising from the sale of land should
be spent in bringing out from the mother country some
portion of her reduntant population. It is very difficult to
get a sufficient number of female domestics; in all times
these have been in demand, and although we are always


trying to equalise the sexes, we are always short on the
female side. To those, however, who prefer to make their
own arrangements, and to pay their own passage to the
Colony, we give them a land order, value £2O, which is
available after the party taking it out has resided for two
years in the Province in the payment for land either by the
party himself or by any other person. There is a Govern-
ment Officer appointed to find employment for all the
emigrants, and he attends to all the wants of employers.
Two vessels arrived on the 21st and 22nd September last,
both filled with emigrants, and every single person had
found employment before the 28th September. The great
work of South Australia is of course Agriculture. In the
year 1877-78 the area of land under Wheat was 1,168,646
acres, and for her Wheat South Australia carried off the
first prize at the Paris Exhibition, and got a gold medal for
her Flour. But in addition to Agriculture there is a great
Mining interest, the principal of which is in Copper, now
unfortunately so low in price that none but very rich mines,
such as the Moonta, can continue at a profit. Still, in
1877 Copper and Copper Ore was exported of the value of
£565,099. Next come pastoral pursuits, and this interest
can be no mean one in a small community of a quarter of
a million population, which possesses 120,000 horses,
240,000 horned cattle, 7,000,000 sheep, and 105,000 pigs.
Fortunately for South Australia, she has not pursued
wealth as the only thing to be attended to. Her Educational
system is excellent; well-built, well-ventilated school-rooms
mark throughout the settled districts the attention of the
people to this important matter, and the higher schools,
with a university, show that attention to the highest forms
of instruction has been paid by the Government and people.
Unaided by any other Australian Colony, or by the Home
Government, South Australia constructed the telegraph


right across the Continent, and it is now almost entirely
carried on iron poles; and when a Railway is laid down
through the Continent of Australia it will, without doubt,
follow this line. Then will he the day when the importance
of South Australia will be fully recognised. I am very
glad to he able to say, that I am assured by telegram dated
Adelaide, November 18, that the harvest there is good;
and I am instructed to send an emigrant ship in December
and another the following month. A small handbook,
setting forth all that emigrants can want to know about
South Australia, is freely given to all applicants at No. 8,
Victoria Chambers, S.W. And as one result of this paper,
I hope to get a lot of honest, hardworking men and women
to go to a land where I myself have resided for 38 years.


NEW SOUTH WALES.
(BY THE HON. WILLIAM FORSTER, AGENT-GENERAL.)
The central position of New South Wales, the circum-
stance of her being the oldest and most settled Colony of
the Australian group, and even in some degree the acknow-
ledged superiority of her harbour, and its accommodation,
give her certain advantages over the neighbouring Colonies
as a place of embarkation for emigrants. From Sydney
emigrants can best, as it were, look around them and
survey the other Colonies as a whole. In Sydney they will
find more facilities than elsewhere for obtaining informa-
tion, not only about New South Wales, but also about the
other Colonies. From Sydney the means of transport to
and fro are more generally available. In Sydney the pro-
babilities and opportunities of meeting or hearing about
friends or relatives whose movements and residences are
uncertain, are better than in any other Colony. It is quite
safe, therefore, to advise all emigrants to Australia, gene-
rally speaking, to seek Sydney first before they determine
what shall be their next step.
There can be no doubt that the Australian Colonies as a
whole, and New South Wales in particular, offer “ a better
opening ” for labour or capital, or for industry, enterprise,
investment, or speculation of any sort, than any old
country, but especially to the young and energetic. But
only a better opening, be it understood. ' Let the Australian
emigrant beware of too confident reliance upon a speciality
or idiosyncracy of any sort, whether of professional, me


chanical, or intellectual skill or talent, as an immediate or
certain means of fortune or employment. Let him not
expect to be assisted by monopoly or privilege, of which one
of the forms is “protection to native industry,” which does
not always include new industry, in the exercise or turning
to account of any exclusive craft, faculty, or function. The
sort of man most wanted in the Colonies, generally speak-
ing, is the man who can turn his hand to anything, and
who does not think himself above labour of any sort. It
must be remembered that in these new countries skill and
industry are mainly employed, and that accordingly the
work of Australian colonisation may in particular be
roughly summarised as consisting in the production of raw
material. To this all other occupations are more or less
subsidiary. And among raw material the superior quantity,
value, and importance of pastoral produce, that is to say
of wool and tallow, but of wool especially, give it immea-
surably the first place. Wool, in fact, occupies in relation
to other Australian marketable commodities the position
once attributed to corn in England by Adam Smith and
the old political economists. Its price affects and in a
great measure rules all other prices, inasmuch as it prin-
cipally determines the amount of disposable profits or
income available for the purchase or exchange of other
commodities. So loud and incessant is the demand for
labour from pastoral employers that neither good character
nor experience is ever strongly insisted on. It is certain
that, in the rural districts especially, many more industries
might be developed, and evefi more saving made of raw
material, which is frequently wasted for mere want of
labour to gather and store, if servants were less scarce.
But the labour mostly required is of that indefinite sort
which can be put to immediate use in an emergency.
Let the Australian emigrant accordingly disabuse himself


of that irrational prejudice which prevails among foolish
people against being engaged to be “ generally useful.”
Not that special skill or talent, or that any profession, is
without due honour in the Australian Colonies, in its pro-
per place, and according to fitting opportunities. Every-
thing of the sort, as elsewhere, has at any rate its market
value, and is the more readily recognised for not being too
strongly insisted on. For every complaint which finds its
way into print, thousands of letters come across the seas
from Australian emigrants, urging friends and relatives to
follow them, which are seldom or never, because they were
not intended to be, printed, but of which many may be seen
at Australian Government offices.
Australian labourers and servants have much more of
their own way, and are not only more independent of, but
far more on an equality with, their employers than in the
old country. Every working man instinctively feels, the
moment he lands in Sydney, that, by the change of scene,
he has become a more important personage, commercially,
socially, and politically. And whether the reduction of
the suffrage, or the adoption of what is called universal
suffrage in the Australian colonies, be an effect or only one
of the causes of the general equality, and, moreover, whether
it be regarded as right in principle, or generally beneficial,
or the reverse, it is evident that in a country where every
one, even the poorest or meanest of her Majesty’s subjects,
can acquire the right to vote for the election of members of
the local Parliament, and, consequently, to have a voice in
public affairs, and to influence the Government of the
country, by a mere residence of six months, and where
even a foreigner can become naturalised in two years, the
rights and claims, whatever they be, of the poor man, and
of the working classes, have a better chance of being recog-
nised and provided for, and that a working man stands on


a very different footing than in a country, where multitudes
of his class can exercise no direct influence upon Govern-
ment and legislation.
But probably there is no class of emigrants more desired
or more desirable than the middle class of small capitalists.
What can be done generally with small capital —say a few
hundreds or thousands —in Great Britain ? What, in a
great many cases, except put it out at very low interest,
which gives no saving or return worth speaking of for a
lifetime, or to live upon, or to use, or waste it, till it is
all gone ? No doubt this process may be adopted in the
Australian colonies and often is. The colonist who rushes
into speculation or investment immediately upon landing
might in general just as well fling his money into the sea.
It is almost sure in such case to be sunk in unprofitable
enterprises and speculations, which, of course, are as
common in the colonies as elsewhere. No doubt there are
good as well as bad bargains in mines, farms, stations, and
so forth, but all investment is a mere lottery to the in-
experienced. The wisest plan for capitalists of this descrip-
tion is to enter into some employment, keeping their capital
locked up or at interest, and thus to give themselves time
and opportunity to look about them and judge for them-
selves. There can be no greater mistake than for emigrants
to plunge at once into farming, as the word is understood
in England. In Australia, generally speaking, farming is
something very different from the English notion of the
term. Even if it were the same, it is obvious that differ-
ences of soil, climate, and seasons, would have to he studied
and taken into account. But in New South Wales agricul-
ture proper, or the pure and simple cultivation of the soil,
has seldom, if ever, proved profitable, and to become so it
requires to be combined with some other sort of farming or
business, generally with the depasturing of stock. In New


Zealand and in South Australia agriculture is said to be
carried on under more favourable conditions. But even in
these grain-exporting colonies, and throughout the Austra-
lian colonies generally, wherever the small capitalist or
farmer has entered into competition with the large capitalist
or squatter in pastoral production, although the operations
of the former may have been in many cases, and in a
measure, successful, there is yet good reason to doubt
whether in most cases he might not have turned his time,
labour, and resources to still better account if, instead of
working for himself, he had been all the time in the service
of, and managing or working for another. The number of
men who, beginning with small or comparatively no means,
have made wealth or fortune in the Australian colonies as
overseers, superintendents, or managers of the estates or
property of others, as compared with those who, from
similar beginnings, have succeeded on their own account,
is very remarkable.
No doubt gold has had a greater effect upon emigration,
and has brought Australia into notice and estimation more
than other productions worthier of note. Probably not a
few emigrants propose to themselves to dig or search for
gold the very moment of their arrival in Sydney, and expect
to find the precious metal waiting to he picked up like
pebbles, on the shore or in the streets. These may require
to he told that the places where gold is found—gold fields
or districts, as they are called—are some distance from the
coast, and often have to be reached by troublesome jour-
neys ; that to obtain gold in marketable form and quantities,
or to make its production a profitable occupation, generally
involves considerable labour and preparation, often a great
deal of hardship, risk, and anxiety; that, as a rule, gold is
seldom found on the surface, but has to be dug and lifted
from great depths, or crushed and sifted out of masses of


the hardest rock, or washed and winnowed out of large
accumulations of rubbish. The successful gold-miner makes
a prominent figure. But success is the exception, not the
rule. For one successful gold miner, hundreds are doomed
to continual toil and poverty—some barely earn a sub-
sistence—many never emerge from the condition of a
wanderer and wayfarer, while for the most who earn a good
living, such as can generally be earned in New South
Wales, at this or any other occupation, by a steady, in-
dustrious, persevering man, it is still a life of hard work,
privation, exposure, danger, and disappointment, as com-
pared with almost any other occupation in the colonies. It
has been calculated that the average of wages distributed
among all engaged or concerned in the production of gold
is far less than the average rate earned in most other
occupations. And this estimate is quite in accordance with
the fact of the enormous value of gold as compared with
other commodities, one of the main elements of this value
being difficulty of production. And if the capital, as well
as labour wasted, be reckoned, the contrast will appear
stronger still. In short, gold mining, in all its forms, has
more of the essence of gambling than most other modes of
investing labour and capital. All things considered, it is
better for emigrants to avoid trying their hands at gold-
digging or seeking until they have become fully acquainted
with colonial ways.
In Australia, thorough religious equality prevails among
all Churches and denominations. No established Church
is recognised by, or connected with, the State, although a
slight and rapidly expiring assistance is afforded from public
funds to some four denominations, originally selected upon
the ground of superior numbers. Public instruction is
given to children of all persuasions, classes, and nation-
alities, without distinction. In New South Wales a well


endowed and flourishing university, a free public library,
a museum, and innumerable schools of art or mechanics’
institutes, are open to public use on the same liberal terms.
Hospitals, infirmaries, asylums, and other charitable in-
stitutions, more or less supported by public funds, abound
everywhere.
The popularity of the Land Laws of New South Wales
has been emphatically acknowledged by their imitation and
partial adoption in all the neighbouring colonies. By their
advocates they are regarded as the model, and by their
opponents admitted to be the ne plus ultra of liberal legis-
lation in the matter of public lands. These laws may or
may not be in violation of the principles of political economy
—they may or may not produce a contrary effect to what
was professed or intended by their framers, by affording
indirect facilities, and being, in fact, made available for the
extension or creation of large estates. But the advantages
they hold out on the face of them for the classes of working
men and small capitalists, can scarcely be denied. They
offer a selection from about 180,000,000 of acres of waste
lands, of tracts of land, surveyed or unsurveyed, and vary-
ing from 40 to 640 acres, at the option of the person
selecting, in any part of the colony, at a nominal price of
20s. per acre, payable in the form of a deposit of ss. per
acre, the balance being allowed to remain unpaid, as an
interminable debt to the State, for any number of years,
again at the option of the person selecting, at the low
annual interest of 5 per cent., with entry and occupation
in the meantime, and right of practical freehold after resi-
dence of three years, which becomes actual on full payment,
and of alienation after twelve months’ residence, accom-
panied by improvements upon the land, selected to the
value of the total price per acre. The offer of these advan-
tages has already operated so strongly on the Anglo-Celtic


hunger for land and hearth, that about 12,000,000 acres
have been thus alienated in New South Wales to “ con-
ditional purchasers,” as they are technically termed. It is
true that much of this land has gone to the increment of
large properties. But still these conditional purchasers
form in the aggregate a considerable body of small land-
owners, in whom the conservative instincts of that species
of property cannot fail to develop themselves sooner or
later; and who, at this moment, by their obvious opportu-
nities of local organisation, and the cohesion of common
interests, aided by the general and equal distribution of
political rights above adverted to, are able, whether for
good or evil, greatly to affect their own fortunes as debtors
and tenants of the public estate, as well as the political
welfare and progress of the community.
A general impression prevails that the Australian colonies
offer no encouragement or adequate remuneration for literary
genius, or intellectual talent or labour of any sort. This
view must not be accepted without some allowance and
explanation. The fact is that true genius and intellectual
worth are nowhere more cordially welcomed or appreciated
than in Australia, when they come certified from other
quarters, and when their value has been determined by
competent judges. The difficulty in Australia is that
literary merit cannot be fairly judged for want of a sufficient
element of literary opinion.
On the subject of climate, it may suffice to mention that
invalids from the two extremes of northern Europe and
tropical Asia are constantly recommended by medical men
to seek the temperate medium of Australia, and such
invalids are to be found in numbers through its length and
breadth, who not unfrequently end their convalescence
by permanently settling in the colony which gave them
health.


The expenses of living in the Australian colonies are
less than in England, probably in the proportion of two to
three. Much of this difference arises from, and much more
saving may probably be effected by sensible people through,
the colonial lesson of doing without a number of things
which are regarded as necessaries of life in England.
Among luxuries dispensed with may be included domestic
servants, who are not generally so numerous in Australian
as in English households. But they work harder, and are
not so luxuriously lodged or fed. Clothing and furniture
cost nearly the same as in England, but neither the climate
nor social usages require the same provision to be made.
Bent is lower, but houses are not so good or so complete
in accommodation. But an inferior house in the colonies
is found to answer the same purposes as a better one in
England. Meat and other articles of common consumption
are, on the whole, cheaper than in England, but are con-
sumed in larger quantities, and with greater waste and
profusion. This is the one exception to the custom of
dispensing with unnecessary things, and is caused in a
great measure by the scarcity of labour, and the difficulty
of inculcating upon servants the discipline of economy.
In the country living is easier than in Sydney, but house
accommodation is inferior and less a matter of considera-
tion, while meat becomes cheaper, and its consumption in-
creases, the supply of vegetables being scanty and irregular,
in proportion to the distance from the coast and facilities
of carriage. In all parts, however, of the Australian colonies
absolute necessaries may be easily procured at a reasonable
advance upon metropolitan prices.
It may be partly gathered from the above that if well-
being be measured by luxury and leisure, by abundant
social intercourse, by recreation and amusement, and by
exemption from extremes of hardship and laborious work,


the lives of many domestic servants in London, superior
artisans and mechanics, persons employed by large trading
or manufacturing establishments in any part of England,
and the like, and certainly of most wealthy persons above
the necessity of caring about minute expenses, are in many
respects preferable, and perhaps enviable, as compared
with similar or superior classes in Australia. Accordingly,
none possessed of competence in the mother country, with
fair prospects of its continuance, and who value an easy
and comfortable life, can he advised to convert themselves
into Australian colonists. On the other hand, all who
desire to exchange a condition of virtual or comparative
poverty for a moderate competence with fair prospects of
wealth into the bargain, or to turn their labour or capital
to better use, or to obtain higher wages or profits from the
ordinary run of industry or investment, or who are not
afraid to venture their time and means upon reasonable
■chances of success, will do well to try their luck, and are
not unlikely to have their hopes fulfilled and aspirations
satisfied, in the Australian colonies.
These colonies hold out great inducements for scientific
exploration and research in geology, mineralogy, palaeonto-
logy, and ethnology. Australia is the oldest land on the
face of the globe. It has been longest uncovered by the
sea or by any diluvian submergence. Until a very recent
period, it has remained isolated from the rest of the earth
It exhibits, at no great distance beneath the surface, marks
of its remote antiquity and connection with primaeval
periods—in its peculiar fauna and flora, in its gigantic
tree ferns, in its native oaks or casuarinae, in its arbores-
cent cycads and filaceous forms, in the abundance, univer-
sality, and infinite variety of its epaerids, from trees to
smallest scrubs and plants, in its sarsaparillas and proteacae,
in its strange amphibia and reptilian fishes, in the multitude


of its exclusively marsupial forms of animals, but above all
in its peculiarly autochthonous race of human beings, which
more than any other existing aboriginals seem to link
modern man with his remoter ancestors. Already upon
the very threshold of discovery, as it were, some useful
products have been culled from the Australian vegetable
kingdom. Among these the eucalyptus globulus of Tas-
mania has attained a somewhat unfair prominence and
notoriety for its hygienic and antiseptic virtues. Thousands
of species of Australian mytaceae, including not only num-
berless forms of eucalyptus, but also syncarpus, tristania,
melaleuca, leptospermum, and metrosiderus, possess beyond
a doubt precisely similar qualities. Most of these myrta-
ceous plants are in the highest degree available for all
sorts of marine or land architecture, from ships and palaces
to cockboats and wheelbarrows. The timbers of Australia
are still an unexplored field for the naturalist and practical
artist. Much the same may be said of Australian minerals,
of many of which,, although their value and precious uses
are tolerably well known, and form the chief attractions to
scientific and industrial enterprise, yet of many others un-
questionably the valuable qualities yet remain to be ascer-
tained, and their masses unearthed by the labour, and
for the benefit of, future generations. Australia is still a
mystery, not only to the philosopher and the naturalist,
but to the speculator and commercial trader. Her vast
undeveloped resources constitute some of the strongest
moving and creative forces of colonisation.


QUEENSLAND.
(BY THE HON. E. O. MACDEVITT, EX-ATTORNEY-GENERAL
OF QUEENSLAND.)
In devoting a portion of your space to the dissemination
of trustworthy information on the condition of Australia,
and the prospect it holds out to intending emigrants, you
will meet with the hearty approval and co-operation of
those who are acquainted with that part of Her Majesty's
dominions. In compliance with your request, I willingly
send you the following observations on Queensland.
That Colony occupies the north-eastern quarter of the
Australian continent. It stretches from the northern
boundary of New South Wales to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
It has the Pacific as its boundary on the east, and South
Australia on the west. It lies between the twenty-ninth
and tenth parallels of south latitude, and extends from
138 degs. to 158 degs. east longitude. It has an area of
85,000,000 acres, equal to more than eleven times that of
England. The Tropic of Capricorn nearly bisects the
colony. An equally important division is effected by the
Main Range. This chain of mountains runs throughout
the whole length of the colony —a distance of about 15,000
miles from south to north. It maintains a direction nearly
parallel with the eastern coast, and lies at an average dis-
tance from it of about 100 miles. The average height of
the Main Range is about 4,000 ft. On the east, between
the base of the range and the sea climate depends upon
the latitude, and is warm or temperate, according to the


distance from the equator. But in ascending the range
the temperature becomes gradually milder, so that in a
short space a great variety of climate is experienced : and,
as the result, a notable change on the face of the country
takes place. Westward from the summit of the Main
Range the country opens out into elevated table-lands of
rich volcanic soil. About 100 miles further west still the
country dips again, and declines by slight gradations towards
the centre of the continent. On the downs west of the
Main Range all the products of the temperate zone grow
luxuriantly —wheat, potatoes, oats, barley, maize or Indian
corn, beetroot, turnips, lucerne, &c. As for fruit, the apple
and the pear, the orange and the vine, the fig, the lemon,
and the plum are cultivated easily and yield abundantly.
In short, the farmer from Europe will find that the soil
and climate of central and southern Queensland present
all the conditions necessary to carry on in its perfection
the agriculture he had learnt at home. East of the Main
Range the earth yields easily such semi-tropical products
as tobacco and arrowroot, while the banana and the pine
apple, the passion fruit and the olive, are also cultivated.
North of the Tropic of Capricorn tropical vegetation presents
itself in all its variety and luxuriance. Of the tropical
products sugar is the only one the cultivation of which has
hitherto been attempted on a large scale by the Queensland
farmer. It is easily cultivated and is very profitable.
Hence large sugar plantations have been formed, and so
great has been the production of the article that it figures
considerably among the exports of the colony.
The principal industries of the colony are the pastoral,
the agricultural, and the mining industries. Three-fourths
of the immense area of the country are fit for agriculture
or afford good pasture. The squatter, as the sheep farmer
or grazier is called, has ever been in the van of settlement


nearly all over Australia. Whether looked at from the
point of view of pleasure or of profit, it is doubtful if there
be any other occupation so well calculated to gratify a man
of adventure and enterprise, or reward a man of energy
and perseverance. As the pioneer and first occupier,
it has been the policy of the law to lease to him large
tracts of country at a little more than a nominal rent. He
begins with a very small flock or herd, but in a few years
he finds himself master of many thousands of sheep and
cattle. The climate is so fine that he does not require to
house them, and the unaided bounty of nature gives suffi-
cient food. This is the process of settlement now going on
in the remote districts of Queensland. Ten years hence
the traveller will find princely properties where at present
he would only meet the black man or the kangaroo. Stock
increases with incredible rapidity. There are many proper-
ties in Queensland on which nearly 200,000 sheep, or a
number of cattle of equivalent value, are depastured, and
which were first settled in the way I have mentioned by
their fortunate owners not very long ago.
The increase of population and the advance of settlement
follow the pastoral occupation. On the expiration of the
squatter’s lease the land, if there be demand for it, is sold
out, otherwise the lease is renewed in whole or in part. In
any case the squatter has presumptive rights which give
him a very handsome estate. The farmer combines tillage
with grazing with the best results. In proceeding to culti-
vate his newly-acquired farm he finds that where the soil
is richest it is most thickly covered with timber, . The trees
he cuts down a little above the roots, and burns them.
Then, without further preparation or any manuring, the
seed is roughly put in the ground by the aid of a hoe or
some such instrument. In this way he obtains two crops
annually for years. The stumps left in the ground rot out


in a short time, and are easily removed. Of course there
is a good deal of upland country without timber, and which
must be broken with the plough. It must, however, be
borne in mind that it is not all plain sailing, either with
the farmer or squatter. Now and again he has to encounter
an unpropitious season, such as the one experienced a
couple of years ago. But unfavourable weather does not
cause such constant anxiety as in these countries, and
although sheep and cattle are far more healthy than in
Great Britain, still they are by no means entirely free from
disease. But the crops mature so easily and in such quick
succession, and stock multiplies so rapidly, that the effects
of a bad season are soon got over.
The first few years of a settler’s life must be a time of
unintermitting toil —toil handsomely rewarded, but often
cheerless and lonely. He is sustained, however, by the
prospect of establishing a home for himself and his children.
Under such conditions toil ought to be sweet and solitude
should bring no ennui. Besides he knows that in a very
few years he must have plenty of neighbours, that the
telegraph wire and the railway will soon be extended to
the little township not far off, and he will thus be brought
into communication with the outer world. When he con-
trasts his present position and prospects with those before
him as a working man in Great Britain, he is thankful that
he is in a country which gives such promise of happiness,
and in which, no matter how great his reverses may be, he
need have no apprehension that his children will grow up
ignorant or will ever want a home. Education is free to
every child in Queensland. According to the statement of
an intelligent and trustworthy traveller, “ in Queensland
there is endless wealth in most minerals in commercial
use—particularly gold.” Coal and iron ore of the very
best quality are found in many places. Geologists estimate


the ore overlying the coal deposits at 24,000 square miles.
There are also cinnabar, silver, lead, bismuth, and nearly
every other mineral; but mining is principally confined to
coal, tin, copper, and gold. The tin fields cover an exten-
sive area in the border land between New South Wales and
Queensland. The ore is being found in large quantities,
so as to maintain a considerable population. There are
several copper mining districts, in some of which, as the
Peak Downs and the Cloncurry, there are mines of exceed-
ing great richness. But Queensland is richest in gold.
Every year the area of auriferous country is being added
to by new discoveries. That country is now, in respect of
her gold fields, pretty much in the same condition in which
Victoria and New South Wales were twenty years ago.
Most of the Queensland gold fields have been but recently
discovered, and though yielding enormously, are only in
the first step of development. The area of auriferous
country at present being worked cannot be much less than
4,000 square miles. There is a chain of gold fields through-
out the whole length of the colony, from north to south.
The country in which the Palmer River gold fields are
situate had not been even explored till 1878. It was three
hundred miles distant from the point nearest to it to which
settlement had reached, and two hundred miles distant
from the coast. In a year several large mining communi-
ties settled on it. Its trade called into existence the town
of Cooktown, which now has a population of over 8,000
souls; An extent of country equal to that of England has
thus in a very short time been added to civilisation. The
squatter, the farmer, and the merchant followed the miner,
and thus the work of colonisation goes on. In the same
way an exploration party found gold in 1876 on the banks
of a river now' known as the Hodgkinson. Until then the
country in which it is situate had also been a terra incognita,


but now it is studded with mining villages, maintaining by
its trade the newly-formed port of Cairns, so called in
compliment to its late Governor, Sir William Cairns. The
life of a digger is one of adventure, nearly always attended
with hardships, and often with risk. In newly-discovered
gold fields the digger incurs privations which are frequently
followed by fatal results. For a hard-working man, how-
ever, the gold fields possess the attraction of plenty of work
and wages nearly double the ordinary rate. A good miner,
working for wages, can save at least £7O a year.
Queensland is rich in precious stones —the opal, the
topaz, the amethyst, the diamond, the ruby, and the agate.
The noble opal is widely distributed. But no considerable
portion of the population has, as yet, taken to the work of
searching for these precious stones as a continuous occu-
pation. The climate, as will be gathered from what has
been already said, is different in different places. In Rock-
hampton, within the tropics, the climate resembles that of
Algiers ; in Brisbane the climate almost exactly resembles
that of Madeira; while in some parts of the elevated
regions of the south the winters are nearly as cold as
those of Scotland. The climate of Stanthorp, the capital
of the tin country, resembles that of London. Bright skies,
warm sunshine, a dry and exhilarating atmosphere, are in
the main the characteristics of the climate. The people of
Queensland enjoy greater immunity from disease than,
perhaps, those of any other country. So healthy is the
climate that epidemics are unknown. Many forms of
disease unfortunately too familiar here have not yet made
their appearance in Queensland. As in many other parts
of Australia, one can sleep out on the ground without even
the protection of a tent during the whole of the year except
in the rainy season. The summer heat is tempered by
the trade winds. Hence it is that the country is free from


the great extremes of heat so often felt in other parts of
Australia. The capital of the colony —Brisbane —is a city
remarkable for the beauty of its situation and its fine
public buildings—the Parliament House, the Governor’s
Palace, and the various public offices. The river on which
it is built is crossed by a bridge having a wider span
than London Bridge. In respect of water supply, railway
accommodation, wharves and docks, it possesses everything
that a prosperous city, having a large commerce, can
require. In remote, unsettled districts the land is leased
to the squatters in blocks of not less than 25 square miles
for 21 years, at a rent of 6s. a square mile for the first
seven years, 10s- for the second, and 15s. for the third.
When land is aliened in fee, the quantity allowed to a
single purchaser and the price he has to pay depend on the
position of the district in which the land is situate. If
near the capital or other large towns, the quantity is less
and the price higher than for land in more remote districts.
The Governor, by proclamation, determines the price and
quantity; but he cannot restrict the quantity to less than
640 acres, nor increase it to more than 6,120 acres, nor
can he fix a lower price than ss. an acre, while the maxi-
mum is seldom over £1 an acre. The average price would
be 10s. an acre. The purchase-money is divided by ten,
and may be paid by equal payments yearly for ten years,
without interest. But for the emigrant of more moderate
desires and restricted means there is an opportunity, under
the Homestead Law, of acquiring a freehold at a nominal
sum. The Homestead Law allows the settler up to 160
acres of land, at the rate of sixpence an acre for five years.
If during that time the settler has made a home of it by
residing on and cultivating a portion, he has it made over
to him ip fee free of rent and taxes for ever.
The population of Queensland has nearly doubled every


six years since the foundation of the colony. Her pro-
sperity has increased at a still more rapid rate, and the
future development of the colony promises even greater
results. There is the broad expanse of rich land to be
occupied, the mines to be worked, and the trade sure to
arise in consequence to be carried on. Nowhere else
has capital a safer or larger return, or labour a better
reward. Hence it offers inducements alike to the capitalist
as well as to him who has to depend altogether on his own
exertions, whether in a profession, in trade, or in the
humbler walks of life. The fortune of the individual
colonist will, if he prudently takes advantage of his oppor-
tunity, grow with the growth of the colony. If we take the
value of labour as a standard by which to test the condition
of Queensland we shall find the circumstances of the colony
very encouraging. The lowest average wage for labour is
seven shillings a day; if hired by the year, £4O, with board
and lodging. Much higher wages are generally paid.
Mechanics are paid ten, twelve, and fifteen shillings a day.
Meat is so cheap that the poorest labourers have abundance
at each of their daily meals, and all the other substantials
of life are similarly within reach —tea, bread, sugar, vege-
tables, and fruit. The ordinary hired labourer at the lowest
current wages can save £3O a year. Domestic servants are
paid from £26 to £36 a year. There are only three women
for every five men in the colony; so the fair sex enjoy
great consideration. The Agent-General for Queensland
grants free passages to agricultural labourers and domestic
servants, and assisted passages to mechanics and trades-
men. The Government of the colony makes a liberal pro-
vision for that purpose. As proof of the care taken in the
fitting out of the Queensland Government ships, it is
worthy of remark that, although nearly 80,000 emigrants
have been taken in them to the colony, there has not


been a death on board one of them caused by any marine
casualty. People going to the colony ought to make up
their minds to this, that if they mean to profit by the
opportunities it offers, work —persevering work —will be
required of them. They must even be prepared for dis-
appointment for a time. Many will have “to rough it,”
as the phrase goes. But those whose ambition leads them
to prefer the hard work which begets independence to the
limited exertions sufficient for a livelihood will find in
Queensland the condition of things they desire.


THE COLONIES.
FROM “ THE GLOBE,” OF 15TH JANUARY, 1879.
The series of articles on the Colonies -which have appeared
from time to time in these columns is concluded. We have
left untouched a great many of Her Majesty’s possessions,
such as the West Indian Islands, Ceylon, Mauritius, Fiji,
and India. The papers have, in fact, only dealt with the
American, South African, and Australasian Colonies. They
have not professed to do more than treat of the salient
features of each possession. They will have served their
object if they arouse in the minds of their readers a desire
to know more about the Colonies. Concerning each Colony
precise information is to be obtained in London of a more
minute nature than our limits permitted us to offer. That
the present condition of the people of the United Kingdom
is exceedingly unsatisfactory is a fact which admits of no
dispute. It is equally beyond question that this condition
is mainly due to there being an excessive amount of capital
and labour unemployed. There is no want of money, but
there is an indisposition to employ it. There is in every
direction a surplus of labour. The country has been rudely
awakened from the confidence in which it reposed that it
was to continue to be the workshop for the world. As long
as foreign countries were able to obtain whatever loans of
English capital they desired, they were not unwilling to
purchase English goods. Indeed, a great part of the loans
found their way abroad in the shape of manufactured articles.
But a radical change has lately been witnessed. Fresh relays


of English capital to foreign Governments, or to support
foreign enterprises are no longer forthcoming; on the con-
trary, England is drawing money from abroad in the shape
of annual interest or returns for former loans and invest-
ments. Thus, a vast quantity of goods may now come to
Great Britain without its being necessary to send away
anything to pay for them.
Clearly the country wants fresh customers, fresh fields
for enterprise. It has them at hand in the Colonies, which
acknowledge the same allegiance, are swayed by the same
laws, and inhabited by the same people as are these islands.
The struggling labourers in this country who consume from
one year’s end to the other only the necessities which barely
suffice for subsistence, can earn in the Colonies the means
of purchasing British goods in far greater quantity than if
they remained at home. An emigrant to a Colony thus
becomes converted from a bad customer into a good one.
The question has frequently been discussed as to what is
the worth to a Colony of an adult immigrant, and somehow
the estimate of .£2OO has been arrived at. It would be
interesting to solve the question of what is the gain to a
, country of losing an unemployed adult. Probably there is
nothing living or dead of which it can be said that the
country losing and the country receiving are equally gainers
excepting of emigrants from an over-populated to an under-
populated country. A very pretty riddle or acrostic might
be formulated on the subject. A volume, too, might be
written on the social aspect of the question. What higher
object can men of position set themselves to than that of
aiding in finding careers of usefulness for the unhappy
beings who, for no faults of their own, are condemned to
lives either of crushing poverty or of degraded uselessness ?
To convert men who are a burden to themselves and others
into useful members of society with wants to be supplied,


and supplying in their turn the wants of their fellow crea-
tures, is surely a holy task.
Without discussing the wisdom of the fiscal policy of the
past, it is evident that the course of events has at last
forced on this country as a measure of self-protection the
necessity of making a large use of its magnificent Colonial
possessions. Nothing but vile mismanagement should
suffer to remain poor, unemployed, and miserable the
people of a nation which has within its possessions count-
less acres of fertile unoccupied land. All that man wants,
with the exception of a few products of the sea, he obtains
from the land. It is a disgrace to statesmanship and to
science that Englishmen should starve whilst the finest
land in the world is open to their use. A true Imperial
policy means the drawing into intimate relations of mutual
help the various parts of the Empire, so that each may aid
the others, and all be tenanted by a people who glory in the
feeling that no remoteness of situation or local peculiarity
can rob them of the inheritance, the privileges, and the
claims of fellow countrymen. If all party feeling were for
a time sunk in the common desire to give effect to such a
policy, we should not long be afflicted with the woeful
tales of distress which now arise from every part of
Great Britain.


EXTRACT FROM “ THE HAND-BOOK FOR EMIGRANTS,”
PURLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE SOUNTH
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT.
South Australia is neither the oldest nor the youngest of
the Australian sisterhood of colonies, having been founded
in the year 1836. The colony may he regarded as com-
prising three divisions —South Australia proper, Central
Australia, and the Northern Territory, and it stretches
across the whole continent from ocean to ocean, a length
of 1,800 miles—the total area comprising 914,730 square
miles, or 585,427,200 acres.
A country so large, has, as a matter of course, a great
diversity in its physical features. Magnificent plains of
agricultural land, mountain ranges stretching for hundreds
of miles, and often covered with large timber, and lovely
and enchanting valleys, through which, in winter, creeks —
in some instances deserving the name of rivers—run. On
the other hand, there are in several parts of the colony
long stretches of arid plains on which vegetation is stunted,
and cultivation difficult, if not impossible. On these plains,
however, the greatest mineral wealth of the Province has
been found, and there is every reason to believe that the
earth is still full of riches, which only wait the employment
jot capital and labour to develop.
For many years it was supposed that Central Australia,
as a whole, was a wretched country, which could never be
turned to any profitable account. One result, however, of
the spirited enterprise of South Australia, in carrying a


telegraph line from Port Augusta to Port Darwin, has been
to prove that there is an immense territory fully capable
of carrying large herds of horses and cattle.
The southern part of the colony is wonderfully productive.
The best wheat ever produced in the world has been grown
within a few miles of Adelaide, and at International
Exhibitions, both in England and on the Continent, South
Australian wheat obtained the gold medal for the finest
exhibited by any country. All the fruits that flourish in
England will grow well in this Province. Apples, pears,
almonds, cherries, strawberries, currants, raspberries, goose-
berries, rhubarb, and filberts have been produced in the
southern part of the colony. But, in addition to these, we
can grow in abundance those fruits which are only pro-
duced in hothouses in England. Grapes, peaches, apricots,
nectarines and figs grow in the open air with a small
amount of culture. Oranges do wonderfully well in the
colony, with only a little care. A dozen pounds of grapes
can be bought in the market for sixpence, and a dozen
peaches for threepence or fourpence.
In the northern part of the colony tropical fruits can be
produced to any extent, and tropical industries carried on
with suitable labour. The pine-apple and banana, amongst
fruits, and the sugar-cane, the cotton plant, rice, tea, and
coffee may all be produced—in fact, all the tropical pro-
ducts will flourish there.


EXTRACT FORM “ THE HAND-BOOK FOE EMIGRANTS
TO QUEENSLAND,” ISSUED BY AUTRITY OF THE
AGENT-GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND.
A calculated area of nearly 700,000 square miles, included
between latitudes 29° and 8° south, and from the sea to
longitude 138° east, provides a large hunting ground for
the capitalist seeking investment, and also for the poorly-
paid and over-crowded labourers of the “ old country.”
Deference to a Map will show that there is a main range
of Mountains, separating the Eastern and Western Waters
and running parallel with the Eastern Coast line, and is
joined by another range of right angles to its course,
dividing streams tending North and South.
The Eastern streams flow directly to the Pacific, the
Northern to the Gulf of Carpentaria. A portion of the
Southern ones find their way to the Darling and Murray,
and so to the Southern Ocean through Lake Victoria;
while another portion rarely find their way to the Sea, but
help, during the rainy season, to swell the volume of that
system of salt pans in South Australia, of which Lake
Torrens is the most extensive.
Thus Queensland may be divided into Three Natural
Districts, namely, the East Coast or Pacific, the Carpentaria,
and the Western Interior,
EAST COAST OR PACIFIC DISTRICT.
This country, included between the main range and the
Pacific, is of triangular form, having the boundary of New


South Wales as its base. It is that to which the largest
population has been hitherto attracted, on account of its
varied natural resources —agricultural, pastoral, mining—
and its greater facilities for carrying on such manufactures
as have yet commenced in the Colony.
The principal Eivers on the Pacific slope are the
Brisbane, Mary, Burnett, Fitzroy, Pioneer, Burdekin,
Herbert, Johnston, Endeavour, and Kennedy. On the
alluvial soils of most of these, Cane, Cotton, Maize, and
other tropical and semi-tropical produce are now being
profitably grown, and the areas under cultivation are rapidly
increasing.
All the chief centres of Gold and Copper Mining are also
included in this District. Its pastoral capabilities are more
adapted to the feeding of cattle, as sheep are found to thrive
only on the more elevated Table Lands, being banished for
sufficient reasons from the Coast country.
The Seaport towns of this District are Brisbane, the
Capital, Maryborough, Gladstone, Rockhampton, Mackay,
Bowen, Townsville, Cardwell, and Cooktown. The chief
Inland towns are Ipswich, Toowoomba, Warwick, Gympie,
Springsure, Clermont, and Eavenswood.
CARPENTARIA.
This District would include all the country (within the
Queensland limits) drained by the streams running into the
Gulf of Carpentaria.
The principal Eivers are the Mitchell, Gilbert, Norman,
Flinders, and Albert. Two squatting stations only are
situated on the head waters of the Lynd branch of the
Mitchell; but a late exploration of the Mitchell and its
tributaries, the Walsh, Palmer, &c., has resulted in the


discovery of considerable areas of mineral country, of which
the Palmer Gold Field is the centre, and a large population
is being attracted there in consequence.
A large extent of mineral country has been for some time
worked at the head of the Gilbert, and a few squatting stations
have been taken up in the neighbourhood of the Mines.
The Norman drains a generally poor pastoral country, and
no mines have as yet been discovered on its waters.
The main branch of the Flinders traverses fine open
chalk-marl downs, on which cattle are found to thrive well,
and squatting stations exist all along its course. Its Western
branches, notably the Cloncurry, drain a portion of the
McKinlay range, and are likely to become important from
the Gold and Copper Ores found on their banks.
No agricultural settlement has yet taken place in any
portion of the Carpentaria.
The Seaport towns are Burke and Normantown; those
Inland are Georgetown and Gilberton.
THE WESTERN INTERIOR.
Under this head would he included all that portion of
Queensland lying to the West of the main Dividing range,
and South of the Gulf watershed.
As before mentioned, this is drained by two Eiver systems,
the one consisting of Northern affluents of the Murray,
which include the Weir, Moonie, Condamine, Warrego, and
Paroo Eivers, the other rarely reaching the ocean, but
spreading out into large Lakes in the South or the interior.
The Thompson, rising in the McKinlay range, in about
latitude 21° South, is joined by the Barcoo in about latitude
25°. In seasons of flood these find their way to Cooper
Creek, and thence to Lake Torrens; whilst the Herbert and


other streams rising to the Westward of the Thompson,
run West and South to unknown reservoirs in the interior.
Of all the Murray affluents the Condamine is the most
important, as on its tributaries are situated the Darling
Downs.
This has been considered the finest part of the Colony
for the grazier and grower of cereals. Its rich volcanic soil
and genial climate will justify this assumption.
Within the last twelve months the previously-supposed
worthless country, lying immediately South of the Downs,
has been shown to he of great value, from the large deposits
of Tin found in the Valley of Severn Eiver.
When it is considered that a Coal formation, with several
included Coal Seams, underlies these rich agricultural
Downs, it will be seen that all the elements for the support
of a large pastoral, agricultural, mining, and industrial
population here present themselves.
The country drained by the Weir, Moonie, Warrego, and
Paroo, are essentially pastoral districts. The two latter are
equally noted for their “ salt bush ” plains, and for the fat
cattle reared on them.
The chief towns of the Murray watershed are Toowoomba,
Warwick, Leyburn, &c.
The Barcoo and Thompson Eivers, lying West of the
Murray watershed, are also famous throughout Australia for
the extremely fat cattle leaving their pastures.
Tambo is the chief town of the District.
The Darling Downs is the only portion of the Western
Interior which has yet been brought under the hands of the
Agriculturist ; for though, as far as soil is concerned, the
Barcoo and Warrego Districts are equally available, still the
climate is unsuitable, unless irrigation were brought into
play, and this has not been hitherto attempted, except to
supply vegetables for the tables of the pastoral tenants,


It will be understood, therefore, from what has been
stated, that of these three divisions, the Pacific or East
Coast, and the Darling Downs portion of the Western, are
the two Districts in which the Emigrant will take the most
general interest, as they combine agricultural pastoral, and
mining resources, with all that is needful for the successful
prosecution of manufacturing industry in the future.
A rather more extended idea will now, therefore, be given
in regard to these great interests.


FORM THE “ HAND-BOOK OF GENERAL STATISTICS
FOR NEW SOUTH WALES.”
In the subdivision of the territory of Australia a different
principle has prevailed to that which has obtained in the
United States. Instead of there being many separate
States, some of them of small size, and some wholly in-
land, the mainland of Australia has hitherto been divided
into a few large colonies or provinces, each of which has its
coast-line and its metropolitan port. The less settled por-
tion of Australia will doubtless hereafter be further sub-
divided, but the older colonies may be considered as having
their limits determined. The Australian colonies will,
therefore, separately be larger communities than any of
the States of America—a geographical difference that may
involve important political differences.
New South Wales once included the territory of the
colonies of South Australia, Victoria, and Queensland. Its
present reduced area —not likely to be further diminished
—is nearly equal to the united areas of North and South
Carolina., Tennessee, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, and
Florida, and its coast-line is about the distance from Cape
Sable to Cape Fear.
Its main export arises from the primitive industry of
pastoral life. This is due to the fact that the inland dis-
tricts are so easily accessible —that fine wool is so valuable
a product—that it is procured with so little labour, and
that the soil and climate are so favourable to its production.
In its early years, therefore, the colony has enjoyed the
advantage of acquiring great wealth on easy terms, and a


substantial basis of prosperity is thus laid, supported by
which other industries are arising. In comparison with
its population New South Wales is a wealthy and wealth-
producing community, its export of wool and gold alone
being worth, last year, £6,000,000, for a population of
about 600,000. It occupies at the present period of its
history a singularly advantageous point of departure for a
magnificent future. Its ultimate greatness is assured, and
it offers great attractions to those who would contribute
towards the realization of that destiny.
ADVANTAGES OF NEW SOUTH WALES AS A HOME
FOR THE EMIGRANT.
1. There is ready employment for all classes of laborers and
artisans, at much higher wages than are given to the same
classes of labor in England. In most of the trades the working
day is limited to eight hours.
2. The cost of living for the masses of the people is cheaper
here than in Europe or America. The labouring classes
throughout the Colony live as comfortably as the middle classes
in Europe.
8. Capital intelligently directed finds ready investment, either
in trade, agriculture, mining, or the public stock, at higher rates
than in Europe, and with good security.
4. There is an area of nearly 200,000,000 acres of public
lands, two-thirds of which are occupied by the squatters on
short leases, but all of which, with the exception of proper public
reserves, are open to the emigrant to select from, wherever he
pleases, and on terms within reach of the poorest; and a certain
road to competency, if he be healthy, prudent and industrious
5. The soil and climate are adapted to a great variety of pro-
duce, at a moderate expenditure of labour and capital; and
cultivated with the ordinary skill, will yield excellent returns.


6. Our mineral resources can be surpassed by few other
countries. The gold deposits are spread over a large area, and
have proved as rich as anything hitherto known in the history
of mining. The coal deposits are practically inexhaustible, and
iron, lead, copper, tin, kerosene shale, and other mineral
treasures abound.
7. For merchants and tradesmen no fairer field than Sydney
could be presented. With its position on the eastern seaboard,
with the Southern Islands, San Francisco, and the whole
American Continent, right opposite—with a harbour for ship-
ping unrivalled in the World, and a vast trade already estab-
lished, it cannot fail to secure the chief share of the commerce
of the Pacific.
8. No finer climate can be desired, combining in its variety
the mild warmth of the coast, the invigorating air of the moun-
tains, and the dry atmosphere of the interior.
9. All the chief districts are easy of access by river, road, or
railway, and the rates of traffic are low.
10. All this may be enjoyed among a people whose whole
social life is so like Home that it is scarcely possible for the
emigrant to feel like “ a stranger in a strange land.” The
language, customs, habits, laws, literature, education, religion,
are all thoroughly English; life and property secure; and
government free.
11. Every emigrant, if sober, healthy, and industrious, is
wealth to the Colony, and is made welcome at once never
received with jealousy and suspicion.


OTAGO AND SOUTHLAND, NEW ZEALAND.
Some papers published in the provincial districts of Otago
and Southland, New Zealand, have lately come before us ; and
as we read them, and remember the accounts which come to us
from all parts of Great Britain of the distress prevailing in the
agricultural districts, we ask ourselves how it is that in one
part of the British Empire there should be so much prosperity,
in another so much misery ? From the New Zealand papers, it
is evident that the great anxiety of the people is to get hold of
land to farm ; from the English papers it is clear that those who
have farms have difficulty in paying their rentals. In the first
case we are told of the immense increase in the value of land ; in
the second we are told of liberal landlords, who yielding to the
necessities of their tenants, feel themselves bound to reduce
their rentals. There, we read of land, purchased a few years
since for £2 an acre, selling now for from £ls to £2O an acre ;
here we read of depreciations in every direction. There are
hundreds of tenant farmers in the United Kingdom whose best
hope it is to live on without coming to utter ruin. All hope of
wealth is denied to them. All prospect of careers for their
children, or of comfortable enjoyment of a leisured old age for
themselves, is shut out from them; and yet these men, could
they realise their properties and carry themselves to New
Zealand, would there find ample room for their energies,
generous returns for their labours, prosperity for themselves,
and prosperous futures for their children. When one hears
so much of the equitable working of the laws of supply and
demand, one is puzzled by these disparities. How is it that the
simple machinery is wanting that would take men from the
scene in which their own want of success increases the misery
of others to the land where happy homes await thpm, and where
all that is wanting is men such as themselves to aid in opening


up the country ? The February agricultural statistics of 1878
of the Otago province, which includes Southland, give amongst
others the following results:—Total number of holdings of
land, 4,720 ; freehold land, 2,170,000 ; land rented from the
Crown for pastoral purposes, 7,200,000; land fenced, not in-
cluding wire fencing, 734,000 acres ; by wire fencing, 4,000,000
acres; land in sown grasses, 400,000 acres; land in wheat,
76,600 acres; estimated produce, 2,475,000 bushels; in oats,
87,900 acres ; estimated produce, 8,134,000 bushels ; in barley,
8.000 acres ; estimated produce, 104,000 bushels ; in potatoes,
4,360 acres ; estimated produce, 23,152 tons ; in other crops,
647.000 acres. Quantity of wool exported from Dunedin and
Invercargill (the ports of Otago and Southland) during 1877,
24.700.000 lbs, value £1,400,000. These are some of the facts.
The net result is a determined effort in every direction to bring
more land under cultivation. The colonist’s one aspiration is
to be his own landlord. He knows that every year, as popula-
tion increases and the means of communication are improved,
his land rises in value with scarcely any effort of his own ; he
progresses with the country, which grows in strength and
capability, even as a child grows to manhood. —Railway News,
Jan. 11, 1879.
N.B.—These same remarks will apply with equal force to
Australia.—E.T.


EXTRACT FORM “ THE STANDARD,” OF RECENT DATE.
Few persons are aware of the enormous extent and value
of the railways of the United Kingdom. Only some half a
century has elapsed since they were introduced, and now
the railway interest is one of the largest and richest in the
British Empire. Some interesting statistics which have
been compiled upon this subject appear in a little work just
published upon “ Our Railways.” From this work we
learn that the Board of Trade, in its report for 1848,
gave the number of passengers as 24,000,000. Six years
later there were 6031 miles of line in existence, the pas-
sengers numbered 63,848,539, and the receipts amounted
to £11,806,498. Twenty years subsequently, that is, in
1869, there were in existence 15,145 miles of line, the
number of passengers had reached 305,764,285, and the
total income was now £41,075,321. By the end of the year
1876, however, the progress had been still greater. There
were then in daily use in Great Britain 16,872 miles of
line, with an authorised capita] of £741,802,527, and a
total income of £62,215,775. There is no corresponding
progress to this in any other form of commercial, industrial
or financial enterprise. Some very curious and interesting
details of railway enterprise when in its infancy were
adduced at the Railway Jubilee held at Darlington in 1875.
Forty engines were exhibited, representing the history of
the locomotive. “ The centre of attraction was, naturally,
George Stephenson’s old ‘ Locomotion/ in which steam
was got up; it was thus shown in action, much to the
edification of the spectators. The cost of this first railway
engine was £SOO. It is of 16 nominal horse power, and


weighs 6j- tons; it ran for 25 years on the Darlington and
Stockton line, and, as was said on the first occasion of its
running, sometimes attained a speed of no less than 12
miles an hour!” Yet this speed, which now appears to us
so contemptible, was a great advance on the rate of the
locomotion of the 17th or 18th centuries, which has been
graphically depicted by Macaulay and other historians. In
the “good old times,” as the Quarterly Review reminds us,
“ time occupied by the mail coach in travelling from Lon-
don to Bristol, 122 miles, was 11 hours 45 minutes, with
13 changes; London to Manchester, 187 miles, in 19 hours,
with 20 changes.” Sir Walter Scott spoke of the rapidity
with which he had made the journey from Edinburgh to
London, yet his speed in travelling was only a third of that
attained by our Parliamentary trains. It is impossible to
estimate the effect which railways have had in developing
the trade and commerce of the United Kingdom.
Soot & Clements, Printers, 7, Mark Lane, London, E.C.
