

DESCRIPTION
OF THE
GREAT PICTURE
OF
Christ Raising to Life the Son of the Widow
of Naim ,
BY THE
CHEVALIER WICARS,
LATE PRESIDENT OF THE ACADEMY OF NAPLES.
THE ABOVE
IMMENSE PAINTING
HAS LATELY ARRIVED FROM ROME,
AND IS NOW EXHIBITING AT THE
EGYPTIAN HALL, PICCADILLY.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE PROPRIETOR,
AND SOLD AT THE PLACE OF EXHIBITION, LONDON MUSEUM,
EGYPTIAN HALL, AND ROMAN GALLERY, PICCADILLY.
1817.




DESCRIPTION
OF A
PICTURE.




DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS
OF A
PICTURE
OF VAST
DIMENSIONS AND PROPORTIONS,
REPRESENTING THE
MIRACLE OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST
RAISING FROM THE DEAD THE ONLY
SON OF THE WIDOW OF NAIM.
PAINTED AT ROME IN THE YEARS 1813-14-15,
BY THE
CHEVALIER JOHN BAPTIST WICAR,
Honorary Member of the Royal Society of Arts, and formerly President and Director of the
Academy of Painting at Naples; Member of the Academy and of the permanent Committee
of St. Luke at Rome, and Member of the Academy of Bologna.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE PROPRIETOR,
AND SOLD AT THE PLACE OF EXHIBITION, LONDON MUSEUM,
EGYPTIAN-HALL AND ROMAN GALLERY, PICCADILLY.
1817.




TO
THE PUBLIC.
Egyptian Hall and Roman
Gallery, Piccadilly.
The Proprietor takes this opportunity of pre*
sen ting his acknowledgments to an enlightened
Public, for the most flattering and distinguish-
ed marks of approbation, that have been given
to the plan he conceived of rendering his
spacious buildings subservient to instruction,
as well as to amusement*
We have observed, in a former pamphlet,
that the approximation of the works of different
ages and nations is eminently useful; and
uniting them in exhibitions is certainly recom-
mendable, as they furnish to the artist objects
of emulation, and to the amateur of the fine
arts, the means of cultivating his taste.
B


It is a general opinion on the continent,
that great talents and proofs of genius are not
rare in this emporium of commerce, but, that
they are too much employed in transmitting
the vanity of the present generation to suc-
ceeding ones. We must confess, indeed, that
portraits have hitherto occupied too great a
space on the walls of our annual exhibitions;
as if a good resemblance, or a well-imitated
embroidery constituted excellence in painting.
And, although, this universal taste for por-
traits may be considered as no small encou-
ragement to the artist, yet we think it more
likely, that his pencil may be thus tarnished
in the sordid colours of interest rather than
directed by the brilliant touches of fame. We,
on the contrary, love to see him delineating
traits of history that instruct and delight us;
or with Promethean fire animating the glowing
images of poetry, that communicate rapture
to the soul. Consistently with our plan, we
endeavour, therefore, to procure sublime ob-
jects of comparison, capable of inspiring the
amateur with grander ideas of this pleasing
art; and of stimulating the artist to rival the
magnificent productions we so much admire
in the masters of the 15th and 16th cen-
turies.
Agreeably to this, we have now to add
another elaborate painting to that of The


Judgment of Brutus in our last year’s exhi-
bition. This excited the interest of all who
are conversant in history. The founder of
Roman liberty in this example of inflexible
justice on his own sons, could not fail of ad-
mirers in a country like this, where the
blessings of true liberty are necessary to our
happiness. We made some observations on
the merit of this work, and of the distinguished
artist who conceived and executed this noble
subject; and we flatter ourselves that the
vast work, we now expose to public criticism,
will not be found less deserving of general
admiration.
The subject of it must prove of the greatest
interest; the soul cannot but feel the mild
effusions of complacency on viewing, as it
were, the great Redeemer of the world in the
very act of his divine ministry. All is awful,
grand, sublime. It is, perhaps, presumption
in us to attempt what can only be delineated
by the pencil of genius; but for the better
understanding of this great production, we
offer a short analysis: and, previously, beg
leave to bring forwards a few proofs of the
admiration, it has already produced, in that
favourite seat of the fine arts, the city of
Rome.
b %


Rome, June 36, 1816.
The celebrated picture, representing the Mira-
cle of our Lord Jesus Christ, resuscitating
the son of the widow of Naim, painted by the
Chevalier Wicar, a Flemish artist, long resi-
dent in this city, member of the academy of
St. Luke, and one of the permanent committee
of the same, has never ceased, from the first
moment of its being exposed to the public, to
excite the wonder and admiration of the prin-
cipal artists, Romans and foreigners; as well
as the amateurs of every rank and nation.
On Wednesday, the 19th instant, the artist
was honoured with a visit from His Majesty
King Charles IV. of Spain, and the Infant
Don Francisco. On contemplating this most
classical production, these august personages
condescended to mark their approbation, and
to testify the great pleasure they had received
on seeing this sacred subject so admirably
treated on a canvass of. such extraordinary
dimensions.
On the same day, the study of the artist
was honoured by the visit of various Cardinals
and the Cardinal Lord Chamberlain, all of
whom were lavish in their praises.


A great number of travellers of taste, and
particularly the English, whose curiosity
prompted them to see this picture before they
went to the Vatican to behold the famous
Transfiguration, and the chief works of Ra-
phael, Guido, and other great masters, have
returned to the study of the artist, and have
assured him, that they still found the same
pleasure in reviewing this stupendous effort,
regarding it as a modern production, which of
all others approached the nearest to the style
of the age of Leo X.
The following sonnet was recited by its
author, Mr. Yiviani, a distinguished member
of the academy of Arcadians at Rome, on
the day of a public distribution of prizes to
the candidates in painting and sculpture, in
the month of June last. The grand saloon at
the Capitol , was filled by persons of the
highest rank, amongst whom were the Car-
dinal Gonsalvi, secretary of state, and many
other cardinals, the King of Spain, Charles
IV.; the young ex-king of Etruria, and their
august family; all the foreign ambassadors ;
many of the Roman nobility, and the principal
artists resident in that capital.


TO THE
CHEVALIER WICAR,
ON SEEING HIS ELABORATE
PICTURE,
REPRESENTING
The Miracle of our Lord Jesus Christ restoring to Life
the only Son of the Widow of Naim.
SONNETTO.
Quai disperate Strida, e quai lament!
Di Naim od’io alto eccheggiar per I’etra ?
Veggo una Madre, al cui figliuol da tetra
Morte immatura i rai gli furo spenti.
La vien I’uom Dio, ch’ai tuoni impera, ai venti ;
Al cui cenno T suol crolla, il mar s’arretra j
Ed ella spirto animator ne impetra,
Spirto novel, colmo ai divin portenti:
Ala che dissi ? ove son ? tua man, die ardita
Erode Wicar, fia vasto ingegno altero,
Pinta in gran tela istoria tal m’addita.
Ed e mirabil Si, tuo magistero,
Si; morto il morto par, Si, i vivi ban uita,
Che vide men di me, chi vide il vero.
A LITERAL TRANSLATION.
What are those cries so dire, those wailings loud,
From Naim, I hear resounding thro’ the spheres ?
1 see the widow’s only son, by death
Alost sad, and immature, say; was he slain ?


Behold the Son of God, whom storms obey,
And at whose nod rude mountains crashing fall,
The soul’s great donor, the parent quick implores
A spirit new. Behold, the portent’s done I
Again, what’s this I see ? thy daring hand
Oh Wicar ! yes, with talent great sublime.
Doth trace on canvass vast the fact divine.
And admirable is thy great attempt !
Yes, death doth death appear, and life its semblance
shews,
Than I, he less did see—who only nature view’d.
AN
EPIGRAM
RECITED EXTEMPORE ON SEEING THE
Picture of Christ restoring to Life the Son of the Widow
of Naim, by the Rev. Mr. Canova, brother of the famous
Sculptor of that name. The Poet addresses himself to a
friend —
Poiche con si mirabil magistero
Vedi il figlio di Naim.
Tornare parlante e vero
Tu amico mi rivela
Se sia maggior miracolo
II dar vita a un estinto, o ad una Tela.
THE LITERAL TRANSLATION.
Since by God’s power omnipotent
I see the widow’s son of Naim
Revive ; to speak, again to live !
O thou, my friend, do tell me, pray,
The wonder which most great and rare,
7]o life the dead to raise, or life to canvass gire>


The artist of this stupendous work has long
held a distinguished rank among his cotempo-
raries in the art of design. Unwearied appli-
cation, and perseverance have given him a sur-
prising facility and precision ; of this we have
a proof in that elegant work the Gallerie de
Florence. This, alone, would have sufficed to
have established his fame, had he considered
it more than a primary step towards that de-
gree of perfection, he so much admired in the
sublime productions qf the Vatican.
His genius, aided by industry, allowed him
to penetrate into the inmost recesses of his
art. The collection he formed of original
drawings of the best masters of the 15th and
l<Sth centuries, and q, chronological series of
paintings, enabled him to observe, with dis-
crimination, the style and manner of each;
judiciously imitating their beauties, or pru-
dently avoiding their defects.
Many, therefore, look up to this artist as
the restorer of the pure, grand, and animated
manner, of which we have long despaired of
seeing the productions. For although in the
past age there appeared from time to time
men of talent and genius, yet, on a careful
examination of their works 3 we humbly sub-
mit it, as our opinion, that since the time of
the Caracci, there has not been seen a modern
production, in which so many excellencies


exist, as in that we are about to describe.
The fame of it has already been spread over
the continent by the voices of many hundreds
of travellers of taste and judgment; and we
should have deemed it unpardonable in us, if,
consistently with our plan, we had neglected
to obtain it for our Exhibition.


DESCRIPTION.
The most distant view of the picture will im-
mediately unfold the subject to the mind of
the spectator; our religious education hath
impressed on our hearts, the divine actions of
our great Redeemer. We see him on his way
to Naim, accompanied by several of his disci-
ples and a crowd of people. Not far from
the gates of the city he meets a bier, upon
which they are conveying a corpse for inter-
ment. It was the only son of a widow, whom
we perceive immersed in affliction. Jesus
Christ, moved with compassion, with a voice
of mild authority, commands the bearers to
depose their burthen ; and says, “ Arise, young
man!” Wonder and amazement strike the be-
holders. He that was dead obeys the voice
of the Omnipotent; leaning on his arm, he
faintly raises his head. This is the moment
of action the painter hath chosen, for deve-
loping the various sensations of the human
heart, as differently affected in age, sex, and
rank.


The choice is admirable. What a glow of
animation! What astonishing effect! We feel
inclined to rush into the crowd, and stretch
forth our hands to prove the reality of the
divine prodigy. Our Saviour on the fore-
ground, with solemn and majestic deportment,
commands the miracle. He is truly God in
the form of man. Never did the sublime art
of painting produce a figure, in which dignity
is so w ell depicted.
In the centre, the youth restored to life,
endeavours to relieve himself from the pres-
sure of the ample shroud that covers him; the
yellow pall is already partly thrown back on
the ground, and produces a fine effect with-
out injuring the order of the folds. How
natural! How beautifully simple his attitude !
Doubt, fear, joy, all are expressed in the com-
ing sensation of his new r -born soul.
His tender parent is near him, oppressed
with grief; she supports herself with difficulty
on her two lovely daughters. The eldest,
with vehemence, strives to render her mother
sensible of the great miracle winch is operat-
ing; while the youngest, with clasped hands
shews signs of joy, though not entirely free
from fear. The group of women that sur-
round them take more or less part in the
event according to their age or character;


the effect is altogether fine and striking. The
choice and variety in the motions of the heads,
is worthy of observation; there is contrast
and opposition; the outlines are easy and
flowing, the drapery is light and proper, the
extremities delicate and well drawn.
In the first line there are two of the bearers,
whom terror and amazement have struck to
the ground. The tone of colour is here most
vigorous, the figures of gigantic size are ner-
vous and muscular, and the expression is
characteristic of their condition.
Behind our Saviour are his favourite disci-
ples, St. John and St. Peter: the first is indi-
cated by a sentiment of mild and inward joy ;
and St. Peter is as easily known by the air
of his countenance and his marked admiration.
In the right hand corner of the picture, we
perceive St. Thomas, whose attitude and ex-
pression manifest an anxious and impatient
curiosity to observe well, before he gives en-
tire faith to the miracle. Near to him are
three more apostles ; St. James the elder, who
leans familiarly on the shoulders of St. Mat-
thew and another.
The picture terminates on this side with
three or four figures, one of which represents
the author in the costume of an academician
of St Luke; near him is his friend Mr. Fon


tana, an eminent engraver at Rome. These?
figures are detached by a grotto which forms
a field to them. In this grotto the Jews were
usually confined. Near to Jesus Christ, on a
line with the bier, are two more bearers; a
Pharisee ; a woman, who being terrified, seems
anxious to escape; another woman, in whom
we observe astonishment and curiosity, has
a child with her, who has fled to her for
refuge. There are various other figures, and
amongst them a Levantine, who in the manner
of his country expresses the sentiments of
wonder with which he is penetrated.
The back part of the picture represents the
gate of the city of Naim, and all that can be
seen of the buildings above the walls ; we see
also mount Tabor, near which the town was
situated. There are many more figures which
contribute to enrich the picture, and to the
gradation of the plans.
When we view this fine picture at a dis-
tance, we are pleasingly affected with the
general harmony that prevails throughout;
our eyes repose with softness ; no sharp con-
trast of opposing colours offend us; no one
predominates in prejudice to the other, but
all intimately blend and sympathize together.
The author has conceived his subject with
grandeur and magnificence, and majesty is


combined with elegance; terror and amaze-
ment are mitigated by a sweet reviving joy;
transported with enthusiasm, we are forced
to confess the surprising effect it has on our
hearts.
The subject is so manifest* that the mind
has no room for doubt; and great attention
has been given to preserve unity of idea.
Although the figures are numerous, they do
not seem to overcrowd the picture, nor do we
perceive any that are superfluous. The cos-
tume is properly adhered to, according to sex
and rank. Expression and feeling are the
prevailing sentiments of the soul; all is natu-
ral and just; nothing mean or common. The
figures are grouped with skill in their proper
places, receding or advancing according to
the rules of perspective; no tumultuous dis-
order, but each admirably setting oft* the
others, at the same time connected and dis-
tinct. All qualities that show how maturely
the author had previously considered the
ordering and disposition of his subject, before
he applied his pencil to the execution. The
design is profoundly scientific. What exact-
ness of proportion in the various attitudes, in
their distances and foreshortnings ! The airs
of the heads are finely chosen and varied ; the
limbs full, round, soft, or muscular, according
to their different characters; the hair of the


heads and beards are in a fine manner, and
pleasingly arranged. The colouring is in
general vigorous, brilliant, and true; the
passage of one colour to another is well ma-
naged ; the local colours are rendered more
beautiful by means of tints and demitints,
and by a perfect knowledge of light and shade;
this shews that the painter has formed himself
after the great masters of the 16th century.
Each object has its proper touch; free and
bold, no hesitation or trembling in the pencil,
and on the whole we may observe, impartially,
that though this fine subject has been handled
by several great artists at different periods, it
has never yet been treated, to the best of our
judgment, in a manner more truly grand and
sublime. We think it, moreover, well calcu-
lated to inspire the most lively interest, as it
comes in contact with the finer feelings of the
soul. It will excite in our minds grander
ideas of this sublime art, than we have hitherto
had ; it will purify our taste, and kindle in the
breasts of our own artists the noble fire of en-
thusiasm and emulation,
The path has been well traced by a Rey-
nolds and a West; their followers are nume-
rous and meritorious. Let them not stop in
their career; may they soon produce some-
thing equal, if not superior to this vast com


position, which on canvass and in oil colours,
is the largest painting the hand of art has ever
exposed to public view.
The Dimensions of the Picture are about
thirty feet in length, by twenty-one in height.




THE
CELEBRATED PICTURE
OF
BRUTUS CONDEMNING HIS SONS,
FROM THE LOUVRE,
PAINTED BY
MONS. LE THIERE,
DIRECTOR OF THE ACADEMY OF ROME,
nHICB WAS EXHIBITED EAST SEASON WITH UNIVERSAL APPROBATION,
IS STILL OPEN AT THE EGYPTIAN HALL.
THE
LONDON MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY,
UNQUESTIONABLY THE FINEST IN EUROPE,
IS ALSO OPEN.
