

DESCRIPTION
ELDORADO MINES,
DISTRICT OF BEECH WORTH,
AND THE
DEEP LEADS ADJOINING,
IN A LETTER FROM
J. BBACHE, MINING ENGINEER.
$ £ tfTT'V r £sh
HWbomiu:
MASON, FIRTH & CO., PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST.
MDCOCLXVII.




>-
i
V; a
K
'S z
- J
se as
■§ - CQ J
*“ ptf 03
Ri ci< f') rJCJ
« O S 3
, £—J O
“ -t->
X C 3 O W
C 3 O ,g
k. r —) fd
t=3 r,
.« ■< o
s cr 3




DESCRIPTION
ELDORADO MINES,
DISTRICT OF BEECH WORTH,
AND THE
DEEP LEADS ADJOINING,
IN A LETTER FROM
J. BEACHE, MINING ENGINEER.
PHlxomnje:
MASON, FIRTH & CO., PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST.
MDCCCLXVII.




DESCRIPTION OF
ELDORADO MINES,
BEECHWORTH DISTRICT.
To begin with Kneebones’ claim, see sketch. Just above this
claim the valley of Reedy Creek for six miles up to Sebastopol,
Lower Woolshed, is very narrow, and the bold granite ranges on
both sides shut in the creek with such steep slopes that the
rich deposits of gold and black sand found further up at the
Woolshed and Reed’s Creek in such large quantities have been
limited only to a few patches of very small extent. The
alluvial ground of the Eldorado almost entirely consists of
loose, decomposed granite drift. The present shaft of the
Kneebones claim is 70 feet deep, and the ground immediately
above is only about 40 feet in depth, whilst about 200 yards
below this shaft the deposit is 200 feet in depth, the surface
being quite level. The Kneebones have sunk to the rock
about 60 feet. About twenty men work in this claim, and the
average of every four weeks’ return is never under 100 ozs. of
gold, and about two tons of tin sand. The men work only
in one shift of eight hours. The pump-engine is only twelve-
horse power. Frequent breakage and stoppages take place.
The washdirt is very good in this claim, and exceeds several


hundred yards in width. Next we come to the M'Evoy’s
claim, about 400 yards below the Kneebones’ claim. The
shaft here is sunk down to the granite bed, 220 feet from the
surface. Engine fourteen-horse power. Three distinct layers
of washdirt were passed through in this shaft; one layer, at
the depth of 60 feet, from eight to nine feet in thickness,
very rich; a second layer, at the depth of 90 feet, about five
feet thick; and a third layer on the bed-rock, about five feet
thick, very rich, 220 feet from the surface. These three
successive layers or floors of washdirt have been proved to be
over 400 yards (average) width, running with the whole
length of the claim—about 800 yards. In this claim there
are about 40 men at work, one shift only, of which about 30
men are underground. The 60-foot floor is only worked in
this claim, the engine being too weak to pump the water from
the lowest level. The upper floor now worked is only taken
out six to seven feet, whilst two feet of the washdirt is left
standing, on account of the timbering not being safe to the
full height. The mine is frequently stopped through breakage
of machinery and imperfect appliances. Average yield, about
340 ozs. of gold per four weeks, with about five tons of black
sand. The upper floor in this mine has now been driven in
the direction of the line AB (see plan), from the shaft
towards A, over 400 yards, without having reached the end
of the washdirt, whilst in the direction of B the end has not
yet been ascertained. The claim is over 800 by 500 yards in
extent. According to a careful estimate I have made of the
quantity of washdirt in the upper floor of this claim, it can
be worked, at the present rate of work done, for the next
fourteen years. They raise about 500 trucks of stuff per
diem, two and a half trucks to the cubic yard of washdirt.
At the present rate of working more than fifty years are
required to exhaust this mine.


The Wellington claim is the lowest down of the Eldorado
claims. The shaft is 230 feet in depth. The upper and
second floor are not at present worked in this shaft —only the
lowest at 230 feet. The width of the washdirt on the bed-
rock has now been proved to exceed 400 yards, by an average
thickness of about 5 feet. In the furthest down creek drive,
the stuff has been found richer even than up the creek towards
the M'Evoy’s claim. I mention this as it speaks well in favour
of the ground taken up by Messrs. Bardwell and Herbert. I
have examined personally all the drives and works underground.
It is worked by about 40 men, one shift in 24 hours. Pump-
engine is 15-horse power, which keeps the mine dry, and in
addition pumps water from the creek for the sluice-boxes. All
the water raised from this mine is not enough to wash up the
dirt. From the lowest down creek drive, I took a sample of
washdirt from the bed-rock, which yielded at the rate of about
40 ounces to the hundredweight of black sand—stuff equal to
that raised in the Upper Woolshed in the early days of mining.
Last month’s returns from this mine were 342 ounces gold, and
nearly 5 tons of black sand. Machinery and shaft totally
inadequate for the working of the mine; constant stoppages from
breaking-down of machinery, &c.
Next further down we come to Mr. Bard well’s and the
Ovens Gold and Tin Mining Company’s ground. No shafts
have been sunk here. Four bores have been made about three-
quarters of a mile below the Wellington shaft, which have re-
vealed the same kind of ground as that in the abovementioned
claim. Three distinct floors of washdirt have been found in these
bores, equal to those above described, From the coarseness of the
gold and sand in the Wellington claim in the lowest down drive,
we may reasonably conclude that, instead of falling off in
richness, it has rather increased. This is easily accounted
for, from the rapid fall of the bed-rock on the lowest floor,


which from the Kneebones’ to the Wellington shaft, or
within a distance of three-quarters of a mile, is a fall of 160
feet. This sudden fall in the bed-rock, within so short a
distance, makes it more than likely that the ground below
the Wellington claim has rather increased than diminished
in richness and accumulation of deposit of gold and tin sand.
This I have found an invariable rule on deep leads falling
suddenly. If you examine the sketch-plan carefully, and
notice the points marked shallow, you will perceive how
minutely I examined the ground before the lease-pegs were put
in. From the configuration of the hills on each side of the
valley, I have indicated probable position of the deep lead in
dotted lines. The lower part of Messrs. Bardwell and Herbert’s
lease ground looks like an immense basin. The bores
in the Ovens Gold and Tin Mining Company’s ground, marked
A B C D, show a depth not exceeding 230 feet, which, with the
fall of the surface from the Wellington, gives a fall of
the bed-rock or lower washdirt about 10 feet within
three-quarters of a mile of the ground below the Wel-
lington. From this fact I conclude that the rapid descent
from Sebastopol down to the Kneebones, and from the Knee-
bones to the Wellington, must have been the cause of a heavy
accumulation below the Wellington on the level bed-rock of
the main valley. This is the general opinion of all the
intelligent and experienced miners at Eldorado, You will
also see from the sketch-plan the small area of lead which is
likely covered by the claim held by the Ovens Gold and Tin
Mining Company. lam fully convinced that barely one-half
of the claim covers the lead.
The immense thickness of the washdirt on this lead in the
three floors amounts in the aggregate to not less than twenty
feet in depth by over 400 yards in width. The bulk of
washdirt on this creek in separate floors or beds resembles


more the beds of a coal mine than that ordinarily wit-
nessed in gold-mining in this colony. From the great bulk of
stuff to be operated upon, there is no doubt that, with efficient
machinery and management, any number of men can be
employed; and these floors could be worked from one shaft at
the same time, provided the shaft was made wide enough
at the outset. To show you approximately what could
be done here, I will just estimate what M'Evoy’s claim
would yield per month if worked with such machinery
as that of the Sons of Freedom at Chiltern, where about 120
men are employed in three shifts. At M'Evoy’s 40 men in
one shift, per four weeks, give an average of 340 ozs. gold and
5 tons of black sand, worth together about .£ISOO sterling. 40
men in three shifts would give about £4500 per month, and
one hundred and twenty (120) men £13,500 per month, or
over 3000 ozs. per month. The United Band of Hope at
Ballarat, with an immense outlay of machinery, have made in
gold from Ist July, 1866, to July, 1867, 35,485 ozs., a little less
than an average of 3000 ozs. per month, so that a mine at the
Eldorado like that of the Sons of Freedom at Chiltern would
yield equal returns to the famous Band of Hope, Ballarat. In
M‘Evoy’s claim there are now stored about 90 tons of black
sand ready for shipment direct to England (to fetch the
highest price). If this ground were worked with such vast
machinery as that of the Band of Hope, the returns would be
fabulous. The expense of mining will in every respect be far
below that at Ballarat. There is only light drift (no rock to
sink through), which contains but very little water. Timber
is abundant in the vicinity.
In the Wellington claim the total amount of water is kept
down by a 15-horse power engine, and the water is not enough
to wash up the stuff raised to the sluice-boxes, which has to be
supplemented by another pump raising water from the creek.


fiu o
There is likewise no puddling machine required, as the stuff
is free and open. So. imperfect is the sluicing of the stuff at
Eldorado, that it is estimated by the miners themselves that
not less than 25 per cent, is lost in gold and sand. I have
designed an apparatus by which this could be saved, and also
about £lO wages per week, now paid to the forkers on the
sluice.
The judicious outlay of £lO,OOO will open here a mine which,
in eight months from time of starting, would yield equal to
the Band of Hope. At the outset a contract should be given
to sink to the upper floor, say at 70 to 80 feet, and work the
washdirt from this, say within three months from time of
commencement. A comparatively small capital would be suffi-
cient for this. In the meantime the big shaft would go down
to the lower level. The ground below the Wellington claim
taken up by Messrs. Bardwell, Herbert, and Burkitt, looks
like an immense receiving basin It would be fruitless for me,
by description merely, to give even an approximate idea of the
value of the property. To be fully comprehended, it must be
studied from personal observation. I need not be afraid of
having exaggerated my description of the ground and its
mining capabilities, for I have studiously tried to keep under
the mark.
J. BRACHE.
MASON, FIRTH AND CO., PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE.




