

Descriptive Catalogue
of
KODASCOPE
LIBRARY
MOTION PICTERES
JHYGJG




Descriptive Catalogue
of
Kodascope Motion Picture
Lending Library
The following Descriptive Classified Catalogue has been prepared as an aid
in selecting Library Films.
Kodascope Films are 16 mm. (f inch) in width, have a special perforation, and
are made only on slow burning film, which is free from insurance restrictions.
A full reel of Kodascope Film is approximately 400 feet in length, and has
the same number of pictures as a standard 1000 foot reel of theatrical size film.
It requires the same length of time for projection at normal speed—l 6 minutes.
Suggestions to Subscribers
A Film Library is like a Book Library in that it is subject to constantly
changing demands for the subjects in its possession. Unlike a Public Library,,
however, a Film Library is a business institute, which must earn its expenses
and a fair return upon the capital invested, and it is quite evident that this can
be done only by keeping the films continually in use. This means that the sub-
scribers cannot send in a list of, say, five subjects desired, and expect to get all
five of them at once. In selecting subjects desired, subscribers are urged to send
in a list of from three to five times as many subjects as they desire, otherwise the
Librarians will be compelled to substitute subjects of which some may not be
satisfactory to the Subscriber.
Subscribers will obtain greater satisfaction in the regular weekly use of a
certain number of reels than in the desultory or occasional use of an irregular
number.
Five reels make a very popular programme. Most of the features are of
that length, and will not be divided. Also, with five reels, an excellent miscellaneous
programme can be selected, covering a variety of subjects. For special occasioa*.
programmes of any length can be obtained.
Explanation of Film Charges
The principal item of expense to a Film Library is the replacement of the
film. The continuous use of a Library Film causes it gradually to wear out. This
wear may not be apparent for a long time, but eventually those films—new to-day
—will have to be replaced by the Library with new ones. Therefore, rental
charges must cover the inspection, repair and eventual replacement.
The basing rate shown in this Catalogue is for one day’s use, and for each
additional day reels are held, whether used or not, one-half the daily basing rate
will be added.


Transportation by rail or post is to be paid both ways by subscribers.
Note —Minor repairs, such as breaks, cleaning, etc., will be made by the
Kodascope Library without charge, but serious injury which is caused by care-
lessness will be charged to the Subscriber.
The entire Motion Picture Industry is on a cash basis, and such a service as
that of the Kodascope Library cannot be otherwise.
Because of the high value of the subjects that the Kodascope Library supplies
on a rental basis, a deposit of £5 is required of every Subscriber as a guarantee
that the Subscriber will comply with the rules and regulations of the Kodascope
Library, will pay all bills and will return films promptly and m good condition.
This deposit of £5 remains the property of the Subscriber, and can be with-
drawn at any time that the Subscriber wishes to cease obtaining film service.
Paying for Film Service
The low rental prices charged do not provide for the investigation of credit
standing or charges for collecting. . , .
Kodascope Library Service is furnished only on a cash-m-advance basis,
from which no exception whatever can be made. , . ,
A new Subscriber’s initial deposit of £S, filed with his Application for Film
Service ” establishes a limited, standing credit. .
When the first set of subjects is returned to the Library, a charge for their
rental will be mailed, and should be paid at once, to avoid possible interruption
of film service. , , . j A ..
If the first bill is not paid before the second set of subjects gets back to the
Library, further service may be automatically suspended until the account is pai .
Why Rental is Charged for Every Day Held
The profits of a film library depend upon the continuous earnings of its
films. An idle film not only makes no profit, but it deteriorates in value from
age and changes in public taste. . , .
The fact that the customer may not be using the film does not lessen his
responsibility. .
A taxi waiting for you at the door, a forgotten gas jet burning m a room,
money borrowed from a bank (even though unused), idle films on your shelf-
all have to be paid for by you whether you derive any benefit from them or no
The taxi driver, the gas company, the bank, and the film library are equally
entitled to their necessary charges for service rendered.
The Kodascope Library cannot accept responsibility for unusual delays in
Parcel Post, but films ordered for a particular date are sent by us far enough
in advance to allow for all reasonable delays. Frequently these reels arrive m a
day, or even two days, before the date wanted. If they are held by the subscriber,
used only on the date for which they were ordered, and returned to us the fol-
lowing day, only a single day’s charge will be made. .
If, however, the subscriber wishes to use them before the particular date, he
may do so, but in this case they must be returned the day following such use, u
only a single day’s charge is to be made.


In other words, films ordered for a particular date cannot be used on both
the particular date and also on one or more previous (or following) days, with-
out paying for all the days on which the films are used.
Subscribers are urged to fill in the spaces on the return label, showing the
date on which the films were received, and the date on which they were sent back
to the Library. These dates are accepted by the Library as a basis for charging,
and careful attention to this important detail will avoid misunderstandings.
The letters M,” "S,” or “B” before the consecutive number of any
Kodascope Library subject denote the Library from which they are available.
“M” refers to Kodascope Library, 284 Collins Street, Melbourne.
“S” refers to Kodascope Library 379 George Street, Sydney.
“B” refers to Kodascope Library, 250/252 Queen Street, Brisbane.
SUGGESTIONS
For the Improvement of Film Service
1. Be sure to read and preserve the book of instructions with each machine,
Nine-tenths of all trouble is due to failure to read the instructions.
2. Oil the machine frequently with a very little sewing machine oil or pref-
erably the oil supplied with your projector, but be careful to wipe off all excess
oil, so that it does not come in contact with the film.
3. Keep your gate clean. As the film passes through the gate a certain
amount of emulsion is scraped ofif which, if allowed to accumulate, forms a hard
scale on the guides. Sometimes the friction of this scale is so great that the
perforations of the film are torn by the intermittent movement trying to feed
the films thus tightly held.
The film guides should be wiped with a chamois skin after every film, and
cleaned, whenever scale is found adhering to them.
4. Be sure to leave a full semicircle of loop at both the top and bottom
of the gate. The motion of the film in the gate is intermittent, while else-
where it is continuous. If the loop is too short, the perforations in the film
will be torn, and the film rendered useless, unless the damaged portions are re-
placed. For such damage the subscriber will be considered responsible.
5. Be sure your lamp is properly centred.
6. Be sure that your lenses are clean, and that you have the best possible
focus obtainable while the film is running.
7. Do not run your projector too fast, as in doing so you produce unnatu-
ral movements in the figures on the screen and may injure both film and
machine.
8. Do not run it too slow, as this is productive of unnecessary flicker.
9. Excessive brilliancy is obtained only by sacrificing the life of the
lamp.
10. We prefer that films be returned to us without rewinding —we rewind
during inspection.
KODAK (Australasia) PTY. LTD.
All States and New Zealand




KODASCOPE LIBRARY
S 1000 Wild Animals of Africa Chester-Outing
The party of White Hunters and cameramen, accompanied by African natives,
who are shown first in a native war dance, set out from Nairobi in search of wild
animals and animal pictures, passing a small drove of native cows as they embark.
Their first find is a drove of Zebras, then Water-buck, Giraffes (one of which is
captured), Gnu, Buffaloes, the Eland, Sprin-Bok and Impalla are found. Finally,
a successful lion hunt results in the capture of a huge lion and lioness. An en-
joyable and instructive subject, with clever titles by Katherine Hilliker.
703 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 1001 Hunting Big Game in Africa Chcster-Outing
Starting out from the mountainous district of Toro in Africa, the party, con-
sisting of white hunters, cameramen and African natives, invades the forest in
search of game. Unusual views of African animals in their native haunts result,
the following animals appearing in the order named: Leopard, Dog-faced
Baboons, Wart-hog, Crocodiles, Hippopotami, Rhinoceros and Greater Kudu.
Clever titles add to the enjoyment of the spectator. Instructive and entertaining.
725 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
S 1002 Unblazed Trails Canadian Government
This film is a scenic, following the journeys of Alpinists on unblazed trails
out from Lake Louise, depicting the wonders of Bow Lake, and finally landing
the traveller after many adventurous climbs into the Columbia ice-area and back
to Laggan again.
815 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 1003 A Fast Life Chester
To quote the narrator, “ The Rapids of British Guiana lead a scandalous!}
fast life.” We find this true on a long journey through the turbulent, rushing
waters —only the skill of the boatman averting shipwreck on the jagged rocks in
our course. No sport for weak nerves this, but for others it furnishes thrill after
thrill. We are rewarded also by intimate glimpses into the lives of primitive
Patamonan Indians, and see them weaving cloth, making baskets, cultivating sugar
cane and crushing the stalks, making tapioca, which is one of their main food
staples, and also see their ingenious method of wringing out the poisonous juices
as this food is in course of preparation for eating.
The natives live in jungle homes made of branches and covered with thatched
roofs—the more pretentious ones being of two stories.
798 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.


S 1004 Where the Screen Tree Grows Chester
A Japanese screen design on tapestry of dead limbs upon which Herons are
cleverly embroidered, inspired a desire on the part of the spectator to visit a
country where such scenes are a reality. A trip by aeroplane to some islands
in the Gulf of Mexico brings the spectator to the breeding grounds of millions
of birds among which are seen Pelicans, Buzzards, Herons, Cranes and Man-
o’-war birds. Some of the scenes of the nesting and rearing of the young are
very interesting and beautiful. Final scenes show what might well have been
the original of the Japanese screen design.
708 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
S 1005 In and Out of Kongo San Chester
Kongo San is one of those interesting out of the way places that one reads
about but few have an opportunity to see.
Starting out from the southern portion of Manchuria, we travel through
part of Korea and eventually reach Kongo San, founded by Buddhist Monks
many hundreds of years ago in an almost inaccessible nook surrounded by high
mountains. Here is situated a 500-year-old Monastery in which a colony of
100 monks live in almost complete isolation.
Journeying on, we pass the beautiful Three Day Lake, named from the
fact that its beauty enchanted the Princess who discovered it, so that for three
days she gazed in rapture forgetting either to eat or sleep.
The Kongo River flows through the middle of the valley, being fed by
waterfalls, some of which we are permitted to see. The Flying Phoenix and
the Fall of the Nine Dragons are wonderfully picturesque and fall from great
height.
With the cameraman we climb to the Pinnacle of the Clouds, from which
we gain an extensive view of the wild, mountainous country. And descending
again we get our final view of Kongo San from the sea.
775 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
B S 1006 Old China and New Chester-Outing
A most interesting travel scenic. Much of the trip was taken by boat along
the labyrinthine canal system which covers much of the country. The first part
of the trip is over a canal, which was old as long ago as 486 B.C. Myriads of
boats are seen everywhere, and an innumerable number of very picturesque arch
bridges span the canals at frequent intervals. One junk boat building establish-
ment looks as if it could furnish all the boats required in China. Riverside laun-
dries are seen everywhere, and towing barges by man power seems to be a favour-
ite method of transportation. A curious irrigating pump worked by coolies as a
treadmill is followed by pictures of duck growing, fishing and picturesque sailing
junks. The leaning Pagoda of Su-Chow is reminiscent of the Leaning Tower
of Pisa.
804 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.


M 1007 Greece Post
Greece is interesting to all the world as the home of ancient beauty. Modern
Greece treasures and preserves the wonderful remains of her former architectural
splendour, and we are here privileged to see the Parthenon, Acropolis, Propylaea
Erechtheum, Theseion, Temple of Zeus, Odeion of Herodes and many other
famous buildings.
In our journey we also see many typical scenes, such as close-ups of the
people, markets, churches and houses,
940 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 1008 Lapland Post
An extremely interesting scenic, showing the domestic life and habits of this
singular nomadic people, who live in the Far North, and whose principal industry
is the raising of reindeer. A number of very intimate little home-life scenes lend
a charm to this subject which is seldom found in a scenic film. Children and dogs
are featured quite extensively, and also some peculiarly characteristic faces and
costumes.
The photography is beautiful, and the subject will prove universally satis-
factory to any audience.
895 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M 1009 Children of Holland Post
A visit to the quaint and picturesque city of Volendam, Holland, where our
attention is drawn to the children in their baggy trousers, wooden shoes and
winged caps. We see them at work and at play, rolling hoops, playing football,
etc. Their stiff wooden shoes affect their walk, giving the children a peculiar gait.
They are very particular to leave their shoes at the door when entering the
house.
The streets are really the brick-paved tops of dykes, which keep the water
from overflowing this extremely low, flat country. There are no autos on the
streets, nor do we see any beasts of burden or other means of transportation.
Apparently “ Shank’s mare ” performs this service for rich and poor alike. Many
of the men are fishermen on the Zuyder Zee, and their picturesque boats line the
wharves.
We visit Marken, a small island near by, and observe slight differences in its
costumes from those of Volendam, though the general characteristics are the same,
and, as in Volendam, we see children everywhere. An instructive and fascin-
ating journey to an unusually interesting land
826 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 1010 Poland Post
For 150 years previous to the World War, Poland was in subjection to Russia,
Germany and Austria. These countries were compelled to grant her independence
as the result of the Treaty of Versailles. About two-thirds of the population of
30,000,000 is agricultural, and this subject is concerned largely with the country


life of the peasant class. Polish women have always been renowned for their
grace and beauty. Characteristic types are shown and one is particularly
impressed with the fact that most of the poorer people go barefooted, except to
church. , , , ,
893 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
BMIOII Hungary Post
A visit to post-war Hungary. The war greatly reduced the area of this
country, cutting off more than half of it. The principal people are now the
Magyars, a fine-looking, well-developed race. _ They wear strikingly picturesque
costumes, of which many are seen. We visit Mezo-Kovesd, a quaint city, on
market day, which is the big event of the week, and find that the marketing is
not the only attraction, for these people love to dance, and many demonstrate their
national folk dances to music furnished by a band of wandering gypsies.
900 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
§ IQI2 Athens Post
Athens is one of the world’s oldest cities. In 1068 B.C. it was already a
thriving village. It contains many historic old ruins of once famous temples and
other buildings, and in our trip about the city we see these as well as the more
modern ones. First comes the Parthenon, built about the sixth century 8.C., and
called the “ most perfect monument of ancient art.” Then comes the Stadium. 330
8.C., built of Pentellic marble. This huge structure was the original site of the
Olympic games, and seats 50,000 people. We visit also the Place de la Constitu-
tion, Boulevard de I’Universite, Academy of Science, and the University. On
account of its fascinating history this Greek city is of interest to the whole world,
and one's studies in ancient history are vividly recalled by the scenes in this film.
878 iert standard length.
Rental 5/-.
IH 1013 Children of Roumania Post
Despite, tne tact that tor years the children of Roumania have been victims
of neglect and poverty, they are bright and very responsive. As a rule they know
far more of work than of play. They are too valuable as workers to be forced
to go to school, and only those who want to go to school do so. If they don’t
like the teacher, they stay away.
Each home has its own small flock of sheep, which are generally tended by
the children, and some of the happiest of the Roumanian youngsters are the boy
shepherds up in the remote parts of Transylvania. The farm houses are made
of brick and mortared with mud. The bricks are moulded by girls, who after
becoming expert, can make as many as 200 in a day. The moulded bricks are
baked in the sun. Brick making is hard work for a girl, but the Roumanian
youngsters are used to hard work. We are given other views of them carrying
heavy burdens, and have an opportunity of seeing many types of children at work
and at play.
862 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.


S 1014 Children of Scandinavia Post
These children are characteristically blond, rather slow in action, but not in
mind. Many beautiful pictures of lovely little children in the most bizarre cos-
tumes imaginable. Children of different parts of Scandinavia are shown. Sharp
contrast is drawn between the Lapp children, dwelling in the far North, and
very modern-looking Boy Scouts in Southern Sweden.
There are several interesting scenes of folk dancing, in which the Scandi-
navians excel.
832 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M 1015 Norway Post
Norway is the second Scandinavian country in size. Its entire population
is less than three million souls. In 1905 it broke away from Sweden, and since
that time has had a separate political existence. Many interesting views of the
hardy Norwegians are shown. Excellent close-ups of peasant types, costumes,
etc., as well as views of the country and cities, and the famous Midnight Sun.
875 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M 1017 Serbia Post
This is now one of the principal parts of Jugo-Slavia. Belgrade, the
capital, defied Austria and precipitated the war of 1914. Natives in their pic-
turesque costumes and beautiful street scenes lend a charm to this scenic travel
picture. Closemps of the very peculiar Serbian footwear are interesting and the
types of the inhabitants are excellently portrayed. This subject is characterized
by beautiful photography, and will please audiences interested in scenic or
travel pictures.
892 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
S 1018 Considering Posey Chester
All about llamas. A remarkable, sure-footed beast of burden used in the
Upper Andes, in South America.
We are told that these llamas were among the claimants for the credit of
winning the World War. They transported considerable quantities of vanadium
ore, which was of the utmost value in making munitions, etc.
Some clever photographic stunts are shown by reverse action, and in one
double exposure the llama pack train is shown moving along the edge of a lake,
while their shadows move in the opposite direction just below them. Several
long trains of these sure-footed beasts are seen winding along precipitous trails
through wonderful mountain scenery.
Some of the queer habits and characteristics of the animals are shown, among
others the fact that a herd of llamas can be entirely confined by a single rope
passing around the outside of the herd resting on their bodies, but confining only
their necks. It seems that the stupid beasts lack the intelligence to lower their
heads and pass under the rope.


The title apparently comes from the name given to one of the llamas. An
interesting travel scenic.
751 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
B M 1019 Bohemia Post
A map and introductory titles show us that Bohemia is the most important
state in the new union known as Czecho-Slovakia. The peasants’ dress is the
most picturesque in Europe. A large number of close-ups are given of character-
istic peasant costumes of many different kinds. Some of these costumes have
been handed down for centuries as heirlooms in the families to which they belong.
A number of scenes are shown of the market place in Hradisch, capital of
Moravia.
The photography is very clear, and the environment makes an interesting
scenic.
851 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 1020 Children of the Balkans Post
Very interesting “close-ups” of the little children of Serbia, Bulgaria,
Greece and Turkey. Shown in intimate little domestic scenes of spinning,
ploughing, feeding turkeys, chickens and geese. Helping their parents with the
oddest of spinning wheels; herding sheep and drawing water picturesque
old well with a sweep. As one of the titles cleverly expresses it. Children are
pretty much alike all over the world, and very well worth all the trouble ex-
perienced in their bringing up.”
938 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M 1021 Monkey Land Up the Barito River Burlmgham
The Barito River is in Borneo. In a boat with a shallow stern paddle wheej
we travel up stream with a cargo of supplies for the Dutch soldiers and traders.
The river, over a mile wide, flows through the jungle, where we see queer native
villages of Malays and Arabs, and other villages of Dyaks. There are many
Mohammedans, some of whom try to make converts of the Borneo natives.
Further up the river we see the monkeys—the trees are alive with them, and wc
are afforded “close-ups” and more distant views of monkeys in their native
home.
808 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 1022 Prague Post
This capital of Czecho-Slovakia is one of the most fascinating cities of Europe,
as the spectator soon realises. It is a very old city and many of the churches
and other structures date back for many hundreds of years. The Charles
Bridge, which is one of the most important in the city, was started in 1357 and
completed in 1419. Numerous statues and groups of saints adorn the bridges.


Characteristic types of the inhabitants are shown and a number of beautiful
street scenes, including those taken in the market place. A curious astronomical
clock five centuries old winds up the subject.
887 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
5 1Q23 Mr. Outing Floats a Dream Chester-Outing
A scenic of the River Amazon. Some extremely interesting views in the
harbour and along the docks of the city of Para, together with street scenes of
the same city open the subject. Later, we are transported on the broad bosom of
the mightiest of rivers, making a stop at Manaos, which is one of the great
industrial cities of the interior. The growth and training of the trees on which
calabashes are produced is interestingly portrayed. The City of Iquitos in Peru
is briefly illustrated. A struggle of the natives with the extremely voracious ants
of that country add to the interest, and the ant-eaters are shown busily at work
in their efforts of extermination.
707 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 1024 Children of Poland P° st
The people of Poland are a hard-working, frugal and hardy race. Their
women are the finest looking members of the Slav family. The children are given
little opportunity for education, but are very bright in spite of this handicap and
are eager for education. The children know both work and play, but have little
of the latter, and must do much work first. The girls thresh and spin flax, make
clothes and tend geese, of which each family has a flock. The older boys till the
soil—the younger tend cattle.
Many views of peasants in their houses and of children at work and play
are given.
896 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M 1025 Roumania Post
Many typical scenes in this country, which has been so much in the public
notice since the Great War. Close-ups of peasants old and young at work and
at play, and views in city and in country, are enlightening and of timely interest.
Good photography.
918 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
s 1026 Children of Bohemia Post
The assurance in the sub-titles that Bohemia produces some of the finest
children of Europe is confirmed by the beautiful pictures of them.
We are shown that Bohemia is not at all the sort of a country that has been
exploited in musical comedy and humorous anecdotes. The inhabitants are


sturdy, hard-working, sober and religious people. From this_ picture one might
believe that the wheelbarrow is the most popular national vehicle.
950 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
B M 102 8 Holland Post
This is the most interesting country of Western Europe. Much of it being
below sea level requires dykes to protect the fertile soil within. While most of
the inhabitants of Holland dress in modern costumes, and are of the conventional
type of thrifty and progressive Europeans, we are shown a number of views of
those picturesque little communities of Marken, Edam, and Volendam, in which
the costumes of these localities are shown, and it is easy to understand why artists
and tourists are particularly drawn to these points. Canals traverse the country
in all directions, and there are some beautiful views showing them with their
traffic and the raising and lowering of the quaint and picturesque drawbridges which
occur at frequent intervals. The queer wooden shoes are featured in an interest-
ing manner.
950 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 1029 Where It’s Always Vacation Time
Canadian Government
Winter and Summer views of beautiful Algonquin Park in Canada, situated
200 miles north of Toronto. The Winter views, which are extremely picturesque,
Tow vacationists skating, snow-shoeing, skiing, sleighing, etc., while the Summer
views show them canoeing, swimm ng, playing tennis, fishing, and finally toasting
marshmallows around a huge camp fire.
744 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 1031 l n the Lee of the Horn Chester
Pictures of scenery and life in the uttermost extremity of South America.
Some magnificent glaciers are shown emptying into the sea. Colonies of penguins
are shown, with some interesting close-ups of individuals of the family. Also,
large herds of sea lions. The native Indians of that country are shown in a series
of domestic and home life incidents, basket weaving, etc.
Some original titles by Beth Brown add greatly to the enjoyment of this
short subject.
689 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
§ 1032 Island of Surprise Burlingham
The subject opens in Nagasaki in Japan with some views of the primitive
methods of coaling the steamers by men and women passing baskets from hand to
hand with surprising celerity. Next we approach the Island of Hawaii and have
a few glimpses of sea nymphs on the rockbound coast with thundering surf at


their feet A number of scenes upon the Island follow, with some very realistic
pictures in a volcano, showing rivers of lava breaking violently against the rocky
shores of the pit.
537 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
M 1033 lta 'y Post
Most of the scenes are in Rome, showing both the ancient and the modern
city. There are also a number of characteristic types of the populace, particularly
of the working class. The picturesque costumes of the King’s Guard, the soldiers,
the gendarmes and the monks are shown. A touch of humour is given by a pic-
ture of an Italian beer waggon,
879 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
s 1034 Na P les Post
Naples, the second city of Italy in size, occupies one of the most beautiful
situations in the world. It is on the slopes surrounding the lovely Bay of Naples.
Across the Bay in the distance is Mt. Vesuvius, from which clouds of smoke are
generally to be seen arising. Naples, next to Genoa, is the most important Italian
seaport, and many boats especially from North Africa are to be seen in its harbour.
In our trip about the city we visit the Piazza San Ferdinando, which is a busy
spot. Buses and tram cars are everywhere Then to the Ariago Building, the
Church of San Francesco de Paola, and the old Palace of the King of Naples.
when it was a separate kingdom. .
The eastern part of the city is dark and squalid, and unsanitary conditions
prevail. After a brief glimpse we are glad to come out to the Piazza del Municipio
with its cheerful sunlight and much gayer atmosphere.
904 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
|Q35 Mr. Outing Instructs Chester-Outing
A brief visit to the fascinating Island of Japan, in which we gain glimpses of
many of her more prominent industries. Here is what we see: —Natives bring-
ing in mulberry leaves to feed the silk worms; the unwinding of silk from cocoons,
and the embroidering of finished silks; men making parasols, tubs and pails,
brooms, etc.; a tea plantation; natives picking and drying the tea leaves, sifting
and packing them; a rice plantation, where the shoots are first grown close
together, then transplanted, and when fully developed are very tall; the old and
new methods of threshing rice straw; an old mill in the rice country, and. finally,
the primitive methods of raising water for irrigation purposes by means of a foot
power machine.
Typical views of an intensely interesting country.
734 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.


S 1036 Rome Post
Beautiful views of the ruins, palaces and fountains of the Eternal City,
spread over the plains on the banks of the Tiber, and extending to the Seven Hills.
Among the historic points of interest are shown the Arch of Constantine, the
Forum, the Column of Trajan, Castle and Bridge of Sant’ Angelo, and a series of
splendid pictures of the Coliseum, which is one of the most imposing structures in
the world. Among the modern buildings are shown the Court of Justice, and, of
course, St. Peters and the Vatican.
895 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M 1038 Volendam Post
A splendid scenic of one of the most picturesque cities of modern Europe.
The quaint Dutch costume, the peculiar streets, the crowded canal, and the fleet of
fishing boats, give a number of scenes of exquisite beauty and charm. There are
a large number of intimate close-ups of characteristic types from youth to old
age, making this one of the most interesting scenic pictures in our Library.
950 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 1039 The Movie Star’s Stampede Independent
This subject is full of intense action, showing scenes taken at the ranch at
Culver City of various stunts by cowboys, broncho busters and lariat throwers,
some of the most thrilling horseback riding imaginable, and some even more excit-
ing unsuccessful attempts to ride wild steers. We are assured, and are willing to
believe that—
“ There never was a horse that couldn’t be rode,
There never was a man that couldn’t be throwed.”
The inimitable Will Rogers and his rival, Buck Jones, are shown in trick
roping, and some of the champion bulldoggers and calf ropers are shown in action.
The photography is not of the best, due to the tremendous difficulty of keeping
these skyrocketing horses in the field of the camera, but the spectator is so excited
with the story that he is oblivious of anything else.
' 972 feet standard length.
■ Rental 5/-.
M 1040 Early to Rice Chester
The Mindanao Indians in the Philippine Islands live almost entirely on
rice. From youth to old age it is their principal food. We visit the native
village of Sibulon. The houses are of thatch and everything is extremely primi-
tive. A mother is giving her baby a bath in water poured from a hollow bam-
boo tube. We prefer our own bathtub, thank you! One of the amusements
of the natives is cock fighting. Another is chewing betel nuts. This is a
national habit. We hope it won’t spread! It ruins the Teeth and is far from
tempting to an easterner though the natives get a lot of satisfaction out of it.
A close-up of an old native chief and his fifteen wives shows them all smilingly
and toothlessly chewing while they oblige by sitting for their picture.
717 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.


]yj 1041 Leading a Dog’s Life Sport Pictorial
This subject shows man’s use of the dog in work as well as in sport. The
early scenes are laid in the Far North, where titles tell us that the Eskimo huskie
is invaluable. Then the pictures proceed to show not huskies, but our own domes-
tic type of dog, such as St. Bernard and Newfoundland being used as pack car-
riers rather than as sledge pullers. Then follow several scenes of prospectors raft-
ing down turbulent northern rivers with their dogs on the log rafts with them.
One of the unfortunate dogs is shown after an encounter with a porcupine, which
has severely wounded the dog, with a number of its quills around the dog’s mouth.
Next follow several scenes illustrating Bird dogs working in the brush and point-
ing quail. The training of Belgian Police dogs for high jumping, with slow
motion analysis of the dogs jumping is very interesting. A touch of heart interest
is given at the end with a big jar rolling down hill, and after it comes to a stop
four tiny puppies emerge, one after the other, from the narrow neck of the jar.
This is an interesting subject to everyone who likes dogs,
869 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
5 1Q42 Where They Go Rubbering Chester
The scene is laid in the interior of South America, showing the party en route
on the river in huge canoes. Modern methods of artificial cultivation of the rub-
ber tree, and the gathering and curing of the rubber are first shown. Then the
party proceeds further into the interior, where the natives gather rubber from the
wild trees, and cure it in much more primitive fashion.
Beautiful river scenery and instructive as well as of entertainment value.
739 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
1043 Castles in the Air Chester
This subject covers the life of sea birds on the almost inaccessible cliffs of
Great Bird Rock, at the mouth of the St. Lawrence River. Thousands of gulls,
puffins, murres and other sea birds are shown nesting and breeding with compara-
tive indifference to man. A great manv very fine intimate close-ups of individuals
of the different birds and episodes in their domestic life render this an extremely
interesting natural history subject.
652 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
3 1Q44 Going Up to Iguazu Chester
One of the most magnificent waterfall pictures ever made. A number of the
world’s most famous cataracts are first shown, including Yellowstone Falls, Vic-
toria Falls, Niagara Falls, and other cascades in Jamaica and British Guiana.
Then the spectator is conducted up the Iguazu, through rapids up which the
canoeists drag and pull their canoes, only with terrific struggle, to the bewilderingly
beautiful Falls themselves in the heart of South America. The Iguazu Falls are
shown in every aspect from dozens of viewpoints.
712 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.


M 1045 A Four Mile Smoke Stack Chester
A scenic picture showing the efforts of the cinematographers journeying
from Arequipa in Peru to the summit of the volcano of El Misti, nearly four
miles above sea level. The caravan is shown at numerous points along the way,
at one of which they meet a herd of Llamas, the peculiar pack animals of those
high altitudes. A temperature of 15 degrees below zero, accompanied by a
ninety-mile gale, was experienced by the climbers just before reaching the
summit. Magnificent panoramic views of surrounding mountains arc scattered
through the subject, which derives much of its interest and charm from the
clever titles written by Katherine Hilliker.
716 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
M 1047 Getting Gay with Neptune Chester
A very fine sport subject, illustrating the delightful phases cf life in a girls’
camp in Maine. Splendid scenes of swimming, diving and canoeing are shown.
Several canoe races with so-called war canoes “ manned ” by feminine crews of a
score or more in each canoe.
The closing scenes are of the “ Water Spirit,” as exemplified in a very fine
swimmer clad in diaphanous floating draperies, giving an almost birdlike effect in
the water. Titles by Katherine Hilliker add much to the enjoyment of the sub-
ject, which is particularly recommended to those who are fond of the water sports.
743 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
S 1048 A Waswanipae Week End Chester
A scenic laid in the James Bay section of Canada, showing some wonderful
pictures of shooting the rapids in canoes, also camp scenes, tanning of hides, the
squaws and children engaged in the domestic duties of the home and camp,’ etc.
Intimate scenes of wild life in the heart of Canada. Particularly fine scenes of
waterfalls from many viewpoints.
719 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 1050 The Thrill of the Thoroughbreds Sport Pictorial
The scenes are laid at Saratoga during race week, when millions of dollars
worth of horseflesh contribute to the amusement and sporting proclivities of those
interested in the king oj sports. Slow motion photography enhances the charm
of the subject. The various lotions, liniments, boots, shoes, saddles and accoutre-
ments are shown m detail. Also the jockeys in training, for which the necessity
is explained.
842 fe'et standard length.
Rental 5/-.


S 1051 They Went to See in a Rickshaw Chester
Scenes in Japan, opening with a queer little steam locomotive drawing an
antiquated open car. The traveller naturally prefers a rickshaw, and by slow-
motion photography an extremely rapid rickshaw ride of a very stout lady follows
Next we have typical street scenes in different Japanese cities, with little bits of
character study of individuals. An imposing procession turns out to be merely
sandwich men advertising the leading theatre. Next the spectator is transported
to the country, where some very beautiful mountain scenery is shown with cascades
and waterfalls, winding up with some exquisitely beautiful Japanese bridges, gates
and native temples.
A pleasing and picturesque scenic subject.
717 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 1052 Monkey Land Chester
Some wonderful pictures of shooting the rapids in an African river in canoes.
These scenes are always thrilling on the screen. The rest of the picture is taken
up with numerous close-ups of many different kinds of monkeys, showing the
peculiarities of each variety, and also the wonderful curiosity which is character-
istic of the entire monkey tribe. Some amusing Darwinian titles by Katherine
Hilliker add to the charm of the subject.
709 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
S 1054 Making Man Handlers Sport Pictorial
Edited by Grantland Rice.
An unusually fine film of the United States Military Academy at West Point.
Aside from the strenuous mental training which the cadets receive, they are
obliged to undergo an even more strenuous physical training. During his course
every man must engage in ten different branches of sport, studying each intensively
for a period of six weeks. In addition to views of the cadets on dress parade
and at their setting-up exercises, we see them boxing, fencing, wrestling, swim-
ming and riding, as well as at mess.
819 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
B S 1055 Pelican Island Burlingham
We first see Burlingham studying a map of Florida to plan the adventurous
trip which fills most of the reel with interesting incidents. Logging by primitive
methods and transportation by wood-burning locomotive, is later succeeded by a
boat with an air propeller for navigating the shallow and weed infested canals. A
number of camj) scenes are shown, and in one place a very large number of alli-
gators. An interesting stop at the Silver Springs Lake enables the party to view
the submarine wonders through a glass bottom boat. The wildness of the country


is shown by pictures of wild turkeys, a racoon and a rattlesnake. Finally Pelican
Island is reached, where the thousands of birds furnish an overwhelming spec-
tacle.
A very interesting sport pictorial.
804 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 1056 Mont Blanc Burlingham
Mont Blanc, the “ Fool Killer,” is in the Swiss Alps. It is 15,781 feet high
With Frederick Burlingham, who has scaled it four times, we set out from Cha-
monix toward the Great Mules, or rock pyramids at its base, passing first the
Glacier des Bossons and then the Arve, an icy river flowing from the Mer de
Glace
Climbing the Prevent on mules, and stopping en route to pick huckleberries,
we come to the Aiguille du Midi, which is over 12,000 feet high, and is part of the
same chain as Mont Blanc. We are now at the level where the snow never melts,
but keep on, and after much effort attain our objective.
A final view through a telescope shows us climbers attaining a hazardous
position at the very summit of the rocky peak.
767 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
B 1058 They Grow Everywhere Chester-Outing
A visit to the fascinating Islands of Japan where our wanderings take us
among the Japanese children of all ages. “Little mothers” of eight or ten years
are playing with their baby brothers or sisters strapped on their backs. Other
little Jap girls are having a dancing lesson, still other youngsters playing chess,
balancing on a swinging log, etc. Two little rich girls go through the formality
of eating supper under the watchful eye of their governess and then their couch
is brought in and spread upon the floor and they go to bed with their heads un-
comfortably propped up on a high bolster so that their hair will not be dis-
arranged.
719 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
S 1059 Screen Snapshots No. 13 C.B.C. Film
Intimate domestic, home life and other unconventional pictures of famous
stars of the screen and stage which possess particular interest to their admirers.
Featured in this number are Marilyn Miller, her husband, Jack Pickford, and his
little niece, Mary Pickford Rupp. John Barrymore is shown arriving at the
Warner Brothers’ studio, where he is greeted by them, and also by beautiful Irene
Rich. Harry Myers is a little jealous of Barrymore’s popularity, on which he com-
ments. A 1 Jolson is shown contributing to some charitable function. Mildred
Harris is introduced. Next at a swimming party we see Jane and Katherine Lee
disporting themselves in the water, followed by Ann Forest, who makes a very
good dive. Raymond Hitchcock comes along, but suffers from cold feet. Charles
Hutchison and Charles Beban take to the water with more enthusiasm. Next we
are shown three men who are seldom seen on the screen, but are responsible for


much of its success. They are William A. Brady, Mack Sennett and Rupert
Hughes. Finally, a comic scene of Clyde Cook, seeking to obtain some golf in-
struction over the radio, and working up a very good little sketch on the golf field
later on.
This is a very interesting subject, brimful of life and action from start to
finish, and will be a popular favourite.
873 feet standard length.
Rental 6/-.
S 1060 Screen Snapshots No. 22 C.B.C. Film
Glimpses at popular film stars in “ off-set ” moments. Barbara Castleton left
“ waiting at the church,” finds a husband; Tom Mix and Buck Jones give a brief
Wild West Show, Mike Saks and some bathing beauties appear. Then we see
Charles Ray in his aeroplane. Some of the other stars shown are Clara Kimball
Young, Bebe Daniels, Bryant Washburn, Mary Miles Minter and Mary Thur-
man.
878 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 1061 Screen Snapshots No. 24 C.B.C. Film
Random journeys through Hollywood, in which we catch intimate glimpses
of screen celebrities in “ off-set ” moments. The following stars are included:—
Hank Mann, Marie Prevost, Naomi Childers, Gloria Hope, Ray Howard, Hugo
Ballin, Edward Earle, Miriam Battista, David Butler, Charlie Chaplin, Jack
Dempsey and Douglas Fairbanks.
749 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 1062 Among the Araucanians Chester
This is a native tribe of Indians dwelling back from the seashore in the
mountains of Chile. The subject opens with several views of the boat starting
to visit the land of the Araucanians. Leaving the ship and climbing into the
mountains, we see first very large herds of sheep, and then reach the village of
thatched huts, which is the home of the tribe. Their home life is portrayed and
several views quite interestingly show the various stages in the making of large
earthenware jars. Next we witness a fiesta, which is given to celebrate the initia-
tion of a medicine woman of the tribe. Coarse jewellery made by' the natives
from the silver mined in the neighbourhood is of passing interest, but the most
interesting scenes are the weaving of native baskets in a very skilful and highly
artistic manner. The closing scenes consist of some perfectly magnificent water-
falls, but. unfortunately, the name of the river is not given.
658 feet standard length-
Rental 5/-.
S 1063 Guided and Miss Guided Chester
A charming travel scenic, taken in the Canadian Rockies, and much enhanced
®y the clever titling of Katherine Hilliker. Mt. Assiniboine and Lake Louise
are shown with a transplanted Swiss Village, even to the inhabitants and their


customs. Glaciers and crevasses are shown, and a terrific climb to the summit
by an intrepid woman and two guides keeps the spectator breathless with appre-
hension.
717 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
S 1066 The Fifteen Million Chester-Outing
The spectator is first informed that there is a colony in the State of New
Jersey whose annual birth rate is 150,000,000. Later this astounding fact is
somewhat tempered by the knowledge that the colony is a fish hatchery near
Hackettstown where trout and bass are propagated artificially for the replenish-
ment of the streams. The fish are shown in various stages of their development,
but most of the subject shows a rather general perspective of the various parts
of the plant rather than a very intimate analysis of the fine points of the
industry.
740 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
M IQSB The Happy Duffer Sport Pictorial
Golf is featured as the national game, and we follow, through a day’s sport,
an average poor player, from which the subject takes its title. During the duffer’s
progress we are shown some of the correct methods of holding the clubs as well
as some of the peculiarly clumsy methods for which the average duffer is famous.
This subject will please either the amateur or professional golfer, and has
quite a good deal of interest even for one who cares nothing for the game.
984 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
8 1069 Make or Break Sport Pictorial
Featuring athletic sports, which have been popular with young men from the
time of ancient Greece to that of the modern college man. Very excellent normal
and slow motion photography portrays the actual effort involved in throwing the
javelin, discus, and the hammer, putting the shot, and the track sports of 100 yard
dash, the mile relay, the high hurdle race, pole vaulting and the running high jump.
The strenuous nature of some of the sport is very clearly indicated.
767 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 1070 Polygamy and Palomitas Chester
A visit to a colony of Sea-lions on the rocky coast near Callao in Peru. These
animals attain considerable size. On land they are awkward, but in the water to
which they always flee when alarmed, they are very graceful, and love to play to-
gether. In appearance they resemble seals, but are larger. They are powerful
swimmers, and, despite their size and weight they can swim as fast as 12 to 14
miles per hour, and can remain under water as much as fifteen minutes.
It is customary for the male sea-lions to have a harem of from ten to twenty


wives. Each harem has its own section of the rocks as headquarters, and here
the male rules his wives, and fights for them when necessary.
A natural history subject of unusual interest, which will be enjoyed by both
children and adults.
705 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
S 1071 Open Air Trails Sport Pictorial
Introducing the game of baseball and showing its tremendous appeal
to vast multitudes. Babe Ruth is shown at the bat and making a home run. The
reporters are shown transmitting the news over wires to 100 cities, while thousands
of spectators applaud from the grandstand. Next are shown the tremendous
crowds standing in front of the newspaper bulletin boards at distant points watch-
ing the progress of the game.
From this we are transported to the great open spaces, with an entirely different
kind of sport. First, bird shooting with splendid pictures of a pointer and a setter
working in the fields and retrieving the game which is shot by the sportsman.
An old Kentucky squirrel hunter is shown with his muzzle loading rifle. Next,
in the Canadian wilds, is shown the calling and shooting of a bull moose.
This subject is of particular interest to sportsmen.
915 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 1074 Yellowstone National Park u. s. Gov’t.
Produced under the direction of the Department of the Interior, and gives
an excellent idea of the scenic wonders of America’s greatest National Park.
Starting at Gardiner by motor bus, we visit in turn the mammoth Hot Springs,
the Geysers, the beautiful Yellowstone Falls and Canyon, Yellowstone Lake, etc.
Stops are made at the big hotels and also at some of the individual auto camps.
A herd of buffalo is seen ; also several bears. The spectator is given a vivid and
realistic impression of an imaginary trip through the Park, taken by three young
ladies who introduce the subject and are supposed to have participated in the trip.
This subject will be enjoyed by everyone who likes the grand scenery and
open air life depicted therein.
931 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M-S 1076 Training an Eight-Oar Crew Bray
Men in training for college crew races go through a long period of develop-
ment and exercise. Before they are permitted to row on the water they learn
the proper strokes, first on rowing machines and then on an indoor lake where
special oars with perforated blades are used. Finally they begin their rowing
practice on the river and then comes the big day of the race.
300 feet standard length—on same reel with 7 048, A Reunion
Rental 5/-.
M 1083 Gangway Sport Pictorial
This is a sport picture that will please every sailor or lover of the water. It
opens with scenes on board fast cruisers or destroyers in a heavy sea off the


Delaware Capes. Next follows a very peaceful scene of small yachts racing in
the Larchmont Yacht Club Regatta. Following come a number of canoeing scenes
on Lake George, both under paddle and sail. Then is illustrated the sailing
racing canoe, with details of its centreboard, drop rudder, sliding seat, etc. A
number of scenes of these craft racing in a smart breeze, with acrobatic stunts of
their single-man-crew on the sliding seat, furnish a thrill which is only surpassed
by the closing scenes of high speed motor boats and hydroplanes, speeding at 30 to
60 miles an hour, circling buoys in races, and coming almost head-on toward the
spectator. Everyone fond of boats will be delighted with this subject.
785 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
S 1084 A Championship Tennis Team Novograph
Two tennis champions, William M. Johnston and Gerald L. Patterson, in
fast action before a slow motion camera. It looks easy, but is it ?
A splendid opportunity is afforded for the study of various serves and returns
as practised by experts.
One of the finest films of this type as yet produced.
663 feet standard length —on same reel with 7044, The Clown Pup.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 1086 Indians of the Painted Desert Bray
Intimate views of the Navajo Indians of New Mexico, still living in the
same primitive abode huts as their ancestors; grinding their own wheat into flour
between hand operated stones: baking bread in great out-door ovens, the same
as have been used by them for centuries- We learn that these Indians are skilled
craftsmen and see them making pottery, weaving blankets and making silver
ornaments.
On same reel with M-S 7067, Felix Goes a Hunting.
Total length 928 standard feet.
Rental 5/-.
M 1089 Fish and Totem Sport Pictorial
Illustrating the sport of salmon spearing in Alaskan waters, which are
simply crowded with salmon on their way to the spawning pools. In some
scenes they are shown leaping the cascading waterfalls like a steeplechase. An-
other scene shows sea lions on a rockbound coast, and hunters killing them on
account of their depredations to the salmon.
Finally there are a number of scenes of Alaskan Indian Totems—those
strange family trees of a vanishing race, which have a significance little under-
stood by modern ethnologists.
677 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.


M 1090 Tennis
Featuring William ( Big Bill ) Tilden, Molla Mallory and Helen Wills
Tilden demonstrates elementary principles of correct tennis, showing the
proper grip of the racket and how various strokes should be played. Then, in
both normal and slow motion, are shown three styles of service in common use,
the back hand and other difficult strokes.
Molla Mallory and Helen Wills are shown in exhibition games of great
spectacular interest, and again with action slowed down to permit of studying
the technique characteristic of each player.
All tennis fans will enjoy this picture and many will wish to add it to
their own libraries.
971 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
M-S 1091 Swimmers and Swimming Ins
Beginning with the first step in which children are taught the preliminary
swimming motions at their play, we see swimmers progressing through the suc-
cessive stages of learning to be proficient in the water. Partially in and
partly in slow-motion the crawl, breast, trudgeon and other strokes are illus-
trated. We also see imitations of the swimming methods of various animals,
viz., the frog, seal, porpoise and crab. The latter part of the picture is taken up
entirely with some splendidly executed figures in the water by expert girl swim-
mers who form symmetrical designs such as triangles, squares, circles, stars,
etc., while floating in the water. ,
All swimmers will like this subject, and will be especially valuable to boys
and girls’ camps, the Y.M.C.A., the Y.W.C.A., and other athletic organisations.
757 feet standard length—on same reel with 3040, Fox Hounds and St. Bernards
Rental 5/-.
M 1096 From London to Paris by Air s v E
The daily trip of one of the huge passenger planes in the English Channel
Service. Arrived at the flying field we watch the plane being brought from its
hangar and see its folding wings spread and secured in position for flight. Ten
passengers enter and take seats in the roomy cabin. Each is allowed fifty pounds
of baggage.
Approaching London we have a marvellous view of the Houses of Parlia-
ment, Westminster Bridge with its Big ■ Ben Tower and the other prominent
buildings which as we rapidly pass them stand out with stereoscopic effect. On
we fly over the English farming country with its hedges and well tilled fields
until over Beachy Head, we have our last glimpse of England. Then tea is
served, and in a few minutes having passed a return plane, La Belle France
comes 'into view. Again we pass over a wonderful countryside consisting of small,
intensively cultivated farms, and for a long distance we follow a famous old
road built centuries ago by Caesar and still in constant use. Then we reach
our destination, and after an easy landing we alight in France only two and a
half hours after leaving London.
An extremely interesting subject. Photography excellent.
819 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.


S 1099 California’s Missions Cattle
. California s famous missions originally extended in a chain from Mexico
into northern California. The oldest is that at San Diego built in 1769. Driving
comfortably over beautiful roads which follow the same route formerly travelled
on foot by the monks, we next visit San Juan Capistrano, one of the finest of
the missions, San Gabriel with its chimes, San Fernando, Santa Barbara, which
is one of the most celebrated and one of the two maintained by the Franciscan
Order, San Innes, San Louis, Obispo built in 1772, where the monks first per-
fected durable clay tiles for roofing, then San Juan and finally the Mission
Dolores in San Francisco.
774 feet standard length—on same reel with 3054, Strange Appetites
Rental 5/-,
M 1100 Main Street the World Over Castle
Here we have views of the most famous streets, avenues and boulevards of
the world’s capitals, starting with Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, Fifth
Avenue in New York, Buckingham Palace and the Strand in London, then the
most beautiful parts of Christiania, Stockholm, Unter den Linden in Berlin,
streets in Copenhagen, Amsterdam, Paris, Nice, Milan, Venice, Chicago and finally
San Francisco.
816 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
B M 1103 Stratford-on-Avon Hepworth
The subject opens with a panoramic view taken from a boat following the
windings of the River Avon to the vicinity of Stratford. Then in succession are
shown the birthplace of Shakespeare, the school in which he had his early educa-
tion, Ann Hathaway’s Cottage, “New” Place, where he spent his declining years
and the two magnificent Shakespeare memorials presented respectively by George
W. Childs of Philadelphia and Sir John Gower. There are other pictures of a
quaint 14th Century Inn much frequented by Shakespeare, Harvard House,
where the Mother of John Harvard, subsequently founder of Harvard College
was born, and the Holy Trinity Church where Shakespeare’s remains are in-
terred.
A few of the scenes are somewhat marred by indifferent photography, but
the subject will be of interest to those who have made or would like to make a
pilgrimage to the Shrine of the Immortal Bard.
705 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
S 1106 Roping the Black Panther Adventure
The Black Panther, a native of Java and the Straits Settlements, is very
powerful, and being the most vicious is the most feared wild animal of those
countries. It lurks in a tree or other point of vantage for an opportunity to
pounce upon its victim unawares, and generally overpowers him before he can
offer much resistance.
In this film we see Major Jack Allen with his dog, Venture, and native
beaters, follow a panther into its haunt among the ruins of a deserted temple


where the Major captures it with a lasso. Then the natives build a crate of
heavy branches and carry the panther away for shipment to some menagerie.
834 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
M 1107 Netting the Leopard Adventure
The Leopard is one of the most dangerous members of the cat family. This
film shows two travellers riding through the jungle in India where they are at-
tacked by leopards. The beasts leap upon them, kill their horses and almost
kill the travellers as well. Then Major Jack Allen follows the leopards to their
lair where, armed only with lassos and nets he captures two splendid specimens.
806 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
S 1108 Capturing Lions by Aeroplane Adventure
Major Jack Allen travelling by aeroplane across the desert in Arabia learns
from some native goatherds that their flocks have been attacked by lions. He
decides to try to capture the lions by a novel method. Chains are attached to
the underside of the plane, with anchors at their ends, so that they can quickly
be detached. The flyers then sight their game, and flying low over the desert
they drop their chains over the lions. The furious efforts of the latter to escape
only drive the anchors deeper into the sand. Then the hunters complete their
capture with ropes and cages.
An extremely unusual and interesting picture.
795 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
M 1109 Domesticating Wild Men Martin Johnson
We visit Auki, a Government Station on the Island of Malaika in the
Solomon Islands, and are told that it is dangerous to leave the clearing in which
the station is situated, as the native bushmen are ever on the alert to kill
with their poisoned arrows. Accompanied by a strong guard we later penetrate
into their country, where we see one of their villages and many of the natives,
including the king and queen.
Interesting views of some of the world’s most primitive people, made by a
popular explorer and adventurer.
776 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 1110 Saving Savages in the South Seas Martin Johnson
Sailing in native boats among the Solomon Islands, we come to a Mission
Station where we are in time to witness the parade of natives to the village
church. Generally unclad, the natives don whatever clothes they can for church,
and it is said that they consider the one with most clothes the most pious. We
also see the funeral of a native convert. Then we visit Bungana where there is
a Melanesian Mission School where boys up to 15 years of age are raised as
Christians.
813 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.


M-S 1114 An Old-fashioned Coon Hunt Bra y
By night the party sets out with dogs to hunt a raccoon. Eagerly the dogs
take up the trail and soon announce that they have treed one. A negro climbs
the tree and with a forked stick forces the coon off the branch to which he has
retreated, and the excited dogs soon finish him.
177 feet standard length—on same reel with 7062, Felix Out of Luck
Total length 875 standard feet.
Rental 5/-.
M 1118 Northern Alaska Fox Varieties
Alaska was originally bought by America from Russia in 1767 and turned
out to be a very profitable investment: the finding of gold at Klondyke had much
to do with its prosperity.
It will be of interest to most people who imagine it as a frozen land of
ice and snow.
Apart from mining, salmon fishing, seal raising, farming the silver fox
and the nomadic Eskimos with their herds of reindeer, it makes a picture of
more than usual interest.
680 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
M 1119 The Moose Country Fox Varieties
Illustrative of the country in which the moose is found and descriptive of
its habits-
On 1 Reel
Rental 5/-.
S 1120 Head Hunters of the Ecuador Fox Varieties
On 1 Reel
Rental 5/-.
S 1121 Jungles of the Amazon Fox Varieties
An unusually interesting travel picture showing scientists and cameramen
penetrating unexplored regions in South America. Travelling on foot through
dense tropical jungle with Jivero Indians as pack carriers, some wonderful scenic
country is traversed. Apart from the scenic beauty of their thousand mile trek
the habits of the Jivero Indian are also strikingly portrayed.
On 1 reel
Rental 5/-.
M 1122 Ship Ahoy Fox Varieties
A good reel depicting the fast disappearing sailing ship.
Many striking pictures are shown of life on shipboard in both rough and
calm seas. The agility of these hardy sailors aloft in rough weather is worth
special mention.
It will be of interest to all lovers of the sea-
On 1 reel
Rental 5/-.


M 2003 The Salmon Run Fox Varieties
A descriptive film of the salmon fishing industry, of a very educational
nature.
On 1 Reel
Rental 5/-.
S 2005 My Lady’s Stockings Fox Varieties
An instructional film depicting the cultivation of the silk worm.
On 1 Reel
Rental 5/-.
S 2013 Farming for Fur
Illustrating the raising of Silver Black Foxes for the market.
On same reel with MS 7 064, Felix Brings Home the Bacon.
Total length 766 standard feet.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3002 All Aboard for the Moon Bra y
An animated scientific cartoon in which one goes in a giant rocket on an
imaginary trip to the moon. Gravitation, the attractive force exerted by
the earth and in a lesser degree by the moon is explained, and as we rise from
the earth the attraction grows less and less and that of the moon stronger
until the point is reached where the two forces are equal. From here on the
moon’s force is stronger and we find we are falling upon the moon and have to
reverse the engines to prevent an accident. Views of the moon drawing nearer
are given and finally we arrive and see some typical moon scenery from close at
hand.
736 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
S 3003 Up in die Air After Alligators Chester-Outing
After making a visit to an alligator farm in Florida, where the critters un-
willingly perform for us, we take a trip via hydro-aeroplane into the Florida
Everglades, where we pitch camp and hunt alligators. The expedition is success-
ful, and we capture a strenuous specimen, with which we proudly return to civi-
lisation.
734 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M-S 3005 Sea Lions of the South Pacific Bra v
A large herd is shown on the rockbound coasts of Peru. The difficulty of
landing in order to photograph them is graphically shown, together with herds of
the animals both afloat and ashore.
242 feet standard length —on same reel with 7007, The Puzzle
Rental 5/-.


M-S 3006 The Astronomer’s Workshop Bray
Illustrating the modern observatory as exemplified at Wesleyan College, show-
ing mechanism by which the equatorial telescope is operated and photographs made
therewith for subsequent study and reference. An excellent photograph of the
moon is shown and also a very accurate clock for recording short intervals of time
known as the Chronograph.
188 feet standard length —on same reel with 7008, The Hypnotist.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3007 Origin of Coal Bray
Countless centuries ago large portions of the earth’s surface were swamps.
Tangled vegetation grew in these swamps and fell where it stood. Under the
pressure of the accumulated mass, coal was formed. This wonderful process so
vital to our present day civilisation, which extended over many years, is depicted
by use of animated drawings, through its various stages from the luxuriant vege-
tation of prehistoric ages to the anthracite coal of to-day.
259 feet standard length—on same reel with 7009, Birthday.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3008 Our Animal Friends and Foes Bray
Dr. R. L. Ditmars shows some of the insect pests such as the apple worms
cc over $100,000,000 damage per year; grasshoppers which do
$53,000,000 and the weevil which does $40,000,000 damage and says that our
annual loss due to insect pests is $420,100,000. Birds destroy large numbers of
these pests and thus are our friends. Rats are so destructive that they each
cost ten cents per day. The black-snake catches rats and is our friend.
Then he shows the farm cat, which is supposed to catch rats, but which
finds it easier to kill birds, and draws the inference that it is poor judgment to
kill the black-snake which_ destroys rats, while we pamper the cat which not
only fails to do that, but kills many of our good friends, the insect-eating birds
An excellent subject.
434 feet standard length—on same reel with 7010, Bobby Bump’s Goatmobile
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3011 How the Telephone Talks Bray
Sound waves are shown to be very similar to water waves. A simple ani-
mated drawing shows how these sound waves are converted into electric waves,
or impulses, by the vibration of the diaphragm through the medium of carbon
granules. The flow of electricity and the physical results are clearly shown.
Then at the receiver end, the conversion of the electric waves again into
sound waves through an electro magnet in turn operating another disc is clearly
shown.
A very interesting and instructive description of one of our best known
devices.
374 feet standard length—on same reel with 7013, Bobby Bumps, Detective
Rental 5/-.


M-S 3017 Eclipse of the Sun Bray
Animated diagrams illustrating the comparative size of the sun, moon and
the earth. Path of the earth’s orbit around the sun; path of the moons orbit
around the earth and finally the combination of the three heavenly bodies in
highly accelerated motion. The details of the eclipse of the sun, which occurred
in Tune 1918, are shown with the path of the moon’s shadow across the United
States and the appearance of the sun approaching its complete eclipse and par-
ticularly during the brief interval of totality with the corona and other interest-
ing phenomena At the end is an animated cartoon of a humorous nature show-
ing an astronomer’s efforts to observe the eclipse.
414 feet standard length—on same reel with 3024, Tides of the Moon.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3018 Wild Creatures that Mimic Bray
This subject shows insects which either by form or colouring, or both, so
closely resemble the environment in which they live as to be detected with diffi-
culty. The first subject is the Sumatran Stick Insect, some five or six inches long
and somewhat resembling a gigantic grasshopper, only more twiglike i h e Ameri-
can Stick Insect follows; next the Leaf Winged Locust and the Malayan Walking
Leaf Insect. The latter is indeed much more nearly like a leaf than like any other
insect The similarity extends through a similar veining structure, and in these
veins we are told there exists the same green colouring matter, chlorophyl, which
gives green colour to the leaves and foliage in the vegetable kingdom.
260 feet standard length —on same reel iviih 7021, Felix Makes Good.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3020 Submarine Gardens Bray
A variety of under-the-sea pictures taken from a diving bell off the Florida
Coast, showing sponges, coral and other formations. Two or three divers are
shown swimming under water, salvaging treasure, etc. A very simp e orm o
diving hood is demonstrated.
1 267 feet standard length—on same reel with 7026, Flies.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3021 How Movies Move Bray
An extremely interesting description with very simple pictures, showing first
a strip of film, then how the successive images differ slightly, and explaining how
their successive images projected briefly upon the screen cause the appearance o_
motion. The Geneva Star and cam or Maltese Cross movement is clearly shown,
and a complete projector mechanism in operation with the result upon the screen
completes what is one of the most interesting of popularised educational subjec s.
384 feet standard length--on same reel 7028, Felix Gets Revenge.
Rental 5/-.


M-S 3022 How Brooklyn Bridge Was Built Bray
Building the Brooklyn Bridge was one of the world’s greatest engineering
achievements. In this scientific animated drawing we are shown the way the
excavations for the huge towers were made and the towers themselves built.
Ihe four main cables, each made of thousands of smaller cables, were next
hung m place. Then the roadways were built out in both directions from both
towers at the same time and suspended from the main cables. When the road-
ways finally met, the task of building the bridge was ended.
441 feet standard length—on some reel with 302/, The Birth of the Earth
Rental 4/-.
M-S 3023 The Human Voice Bray
. A scientific subject showing partly in regular photography and partly in
animated drawing the functions of the tongue, larynx, epiglotis, vocal chords
and other organs in forming words and word sounds. A difficult subject treated
from a popular standpoint and clearly showing the relations of the organs
and their respective parts in word forming. One cannot conceive of a more en-
lightening or more fascinating presentation. On account of its universal interest
it will appeal to all.
541 feet standard length—on same reel with 3026, How We Hear
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3024 Tides of the Moon Bray
By animated drawings a graphic explanation is given of the attraction of
the moon’s mass in drawing the fluid water of the ocean toward the side upon
which it is shining and drawing the earth away from the water on the opposite
side. Another illustration shows that the combined pull of the sun and moon,
when in the same direction, causes the excessively high Spring Tides and the
pull of the sun and moon when exerted against each other produces the small
range between high and low water characterised as the Neap Tides.
276 feet standard length—on same reel with 3017, Eclipse of the Sun
Rental 4/-.
M-S 3025 How You See Bray
_ A film explaining how the sensation of sight is transmitted by the eye to the
brain, comparing the processes, step by step, to the somewhat similar mechanical
processes of the camera. This treatment forms a concrete conception of the
functionings of the various parts of the eye. It is unusually interesting to all but
especially so m its connection with physiology. Animate drawings are used
throughout.
275 feet standard length—on same red with 7019, Felix Lends a Hand.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3026 How We Hear Bray
A scientific exposition of the manner in which sound waves enter the
human ear and are translated into brain impressions. Partly in photographs and
partly in animated drawings of the outer, the middle and the inner ear, we fol-
low the various steps. The same clever and non-technical treatment that ex-


plained “The Human Voice” is here used again and the subject is one which
will both interest and instruct.
310 feet standard length—on same reel with 3023, The Human Voice
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3027 The Birth of the Earth Bra >
A scientific animated drawing by Max Fleischer illustrating the Nebular
Theory of the formation of the Solar System. The original molten mass of
the Sun is seen revolving in space and then smaller masses are thrown o
from it each of which continues to revolve on its own axis as well as around
the sun One of the smallest of these masses was this Earth. As it cooled it
contracted, and a hard uneven crust formed on the outside. Later water filled
in the hollows between the higher parts of the crust, thus forming the sea and
the land. „
315 feet standard length—on same reel with 3022. How Brooklyn Bridge
Was Built
Rental 4/-.
M-S 3028 Trained Sea Lions Bray
Evidently taken in a zoological garden, showing the amphibious nature of the
animals and that they are not only wonderful divers, but are also very goo
climbers when out of the water. Methods used in training the sea lions for juggling
acts illustrate the wonderful sense of equilibrium enjoyed by the animals.
319 feet standard length— on same reel with 7024, Felix Tries for Treasure.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3030 Dinner Time in Zooland Bray
A visit to the Zoological Gardens in Bronx Park, New York City, at feeding
time A great variety of diet is required for the different animals, their tastes
calling for such delicacies as fish, eggs, milk, bananas, worms and dried ants. Ine
following animals are seen—Racoon, Brazilian Porcupine, Tropical Tiger Cat,
Madagascar Tenrec (a very rare specimen), Venezuelan Opossum, Honey Be.
Giant Anteater, Owl Monkey, Baboon, Woolly Monkey and a huge Grizzly Bear.
372 feet standard length —on same reel with 7027, Bubbles.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3031 Nearest to Man Bray
A study of the anthropoid Apes. We visit a Zoo and see a Gorilla playing
with a doll. The Chimpanzee comes next. He is sterner, has longer ears and
lives more on the ground. Then we see the clownish Orang-utan.
234 feet standard length—on same reel with M-S 7065, Felix Follows the
Swallows
Total length 885 standard feet.
Rental 5/-.


M-S 3037 Einstein’s Theory of Relativity Independent
, Popular version, condensed from the longer Fadman production by Max
Fleischer.
An extremely interesting and simple exposition of the elementary theory
of Einstein, beginning with the definition of Relativity, and then proceeding by
very simple and well known examples, showing the Relativity of Motion,
Direction, Size, Speed, Time and Measurements. These are illustrated both by
animated diagrams and by ordinary cinematography, whichever best serves the
purpose desired. No attempt is made to demonstrate the more advanced ideas in
Einstein s Theory, but a fair working knowledge of the principles involved is
clearly portrayed and easily understood.
1961 feet standard length—on 2 reels.
Rental 10/-.
M-S 3038 The Fastest Thing on Four Legs Bray
The Whippet, or racing dog, is small, light and, when properly trained, is
remarkably fast. t He has been known to reach a speed of 35 miles per hour.
We see them exercising to sweat off weight, and learn how the trainers throw
them in for a good start in a race.
On same reel with M-S 7070, Felix Gets His Fill.
Total length 843 standard feet.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3040 Foxhounds and St. Bernards Bray
As spectators at a Fox Hunt we see a pack of blooded hounds in action,
and then have a closer view of several of the best dogs. A child comes by in a
waggon drawn by a huge St. Bernard. Then we visit the kennels where the
St. Bernards are raised, and see a large family of puppies lined up for inspection.
212 feet standard length—on same reel with 1091, Swimmers and Swimming.
Rental 5/-.
M 3041 Chumming with the Animals Ditmars
Showing a number of animals, with special reference to their appetites and
methods of feeding. The first animal shown is the Pygmy Hippopotamus, fol-
lowed by a bear being fed by molasses from a spoon. Next we see the Fur
Seals, and are told that they can digest one-third of their weight in fish every
day. Then a Mother Wolf with puppies, and some close-ups of one of the
wolf pups, with an Airedale eating from the same dish. Then follows some
animal stunts, such as the Bison making his wallow of dust to free himself
from vermin, the Giraffe drinking, as an evidence that water can be made to
run uphill; a Monkey apparently engaged in earnest conversation, and some
very beautiful little Flying Squirrels from the Antipodes. Among ultra-rarities
are shown an Australian Marsupial Bear, who looks for all the world like one
of our toy Teddy Bears. Next a pigmy elephant is shown, and the comparison
drawn with the ordinary species. One of the interesting scenes is of a thor-
oughly domesticated ground hog, who assists the keeper in gathering papers
left upon the lawn at the Zoo.


Taken altogether, this is one of the most interesting zoological pictures in
the Library, and the photography is particularly excellent.
976 feet standard length.
Rental 6/-.
S 3042 Animal and Bird Life in Yosemite National Park Pillsbury
A Bear is shown up a tree, and, being tempted with a ginger snap, goes
through a good many movements in a rather precarious position. Finally he
comes down, and there are numerous pictures of him being fed various delicacies,
particularly syrup from a bottle. Several Chipmunks are shown, and their
quick movements are almost beyond the ability of the camera to depict. Next
are several scenes with Deer, including one Doe, so tame that it wanders up and
down the main street of the village, turning out for traffic. A bunch of Elk
is shown, and a mother Grouse so tame that she roosts upon the director’s arm,
and feeds from his other hand. Other birds illustrated are the Water Ousel,
with its peculiar nervous bobbing motion, a Robin with its nest, a Fly Catcher,
and some baby Thrushes before they have their eyes open, and, later, when
about half grown.
The photography of this subject was taken under very difficult conditions,
and it is not altogether perfect, but the unique subject compensates in some de-
gree for this defect. It will be appreciated by nature lovers and others interested
in wild life of the sort described.
885 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M 3043 Housekeeping at the Zoo Ditmars
The subject opens with a thorough sweeping and bathing of the Elephants,
followed by an oiling of their skin, which is sometimes necessary to preserve its
flexibility when the animals are in confinement. Then a baby Orang-Outang
is shown amusing itself in a bucket. Then the Bears are given a bath, and the
Cassowary gives an exhibition in hard kicking. In this, however, he is easily
surpassed by the Kangaroo, who follows. Then the Wild Horse of Thibet is
shown as one of the most vicious of wild animals, in his attempt to attack a
man up a tree, and, later, in tearing a dummy man to shreds. The Russian
Stag is shown to be about equally vicious. Then the Tapir is shown with its
peculiar markings, followed by a couple of Alpacas, who look very much like
young Llamas. The Indian Rhinocerous is shown in his armour plate skin,
and the brilliant colouring of the Axis Deer is in strong contrast. Next follow
close-ups of the Musk Ox, Canadian Lynx, Peacocks, Tortoises and Wild
Turkeys.
989 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 3047 Flower Life in Yosemite National Park Pillsbury
A series of beautiful pictures of flowers growing in the fields, and also
intimate close-ups showing the gradual expansion and opening of flowers of dif-
ferent varieties. The following flowers are featured:—


Knotwced, Thistle, Tidy Tip, Johnny Jump Up, Mariposa Tulip, Hens
and Chickens, Dog Tooth Violet, Prickly Poppy, Monkey Flowers, Fire Weed,
Snow Plant, several varieties, Blue Lilacs, White Lilacs, Snow Drops, Cali-
fornia Poppy and Milkweed.
This picture will be a real treat to all who are interested in flowers, and to
many who are not, because of the slow motion photography showing the
gradual growth and development of beautiful flowers of many varieties.
973 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 3048 Wild Flowers of the Yosemite National Park Pillsbury
Growing and Opening.
Another series of beautiful flowers, which abound in that picturesque spot,
showing many beautiful close-up views of the following flowers taken by slow
motion photography from the opening of the bud to the complete blossom:—
Azalea, Wild Parsnip, Evening Primrose, Blue Flag Iris, Hatweg’s Iris,
Blazing Star, Washington Lily, Blue Lupine, Cone Flower, Mission Bell, Blue
Camass.
It is only by means of slow motion photography that the complete evolution
of these flowers can be seen in a matter of seconds instead of hours.
974 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3051 Carnivorous Plants Bra 7
Portraying by actual photography and animated diagrams the familiar Pitcher
Plant, whose interior is lined with bristly hairs, and secretes a sweet liquid which
attracts insects. They are helpless to escape, and after dying are absorbed by the
plant itself as nutriment.
230 feet standard length—on same reel with 7016, Sparring Partners.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3052 Mountain Sheep Bray-Ditmars
This is a Zooland picture, taken in the Bronx Zoological Gardens, and showing
the extreme agility and sure-footedness of Mountain Sheep, of the African Aoudad,
and of the Himalayan Tahr.
352 feet standard length—on same reel with 7034, Felix in Fairyland.
Rental 5/-.
S 3054 Strange Appetites Bra y
A brief visit to the Zoo at dinner-time in which we watch the Giraffe,
Wart-hog, Brown Bear and Polar Bear eating, and are impressed at the variety
of fare needed.
160 feet standard length—on same reel with 1099, California’s Missions
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3056 A Florida Alligator Farm Bray
The mother alligator remains to guard her nest while the sun's heat hatches
the eggs. The babies are hungry little fellows- Their main diet is fish, but as


they get bigger anything from a man to a mud-hen will do. In fighting, alliga-
tors employ a peculiar rotary movement. They are fierce antagonists, and un-
less prevented, frequently maim one another. Their hides make some of our
finest and most durable leather articles.
On same red with MS 7071, Felix “ Hips ” the “ Hippo.”
Total length 795 standard feet.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3057 Springtime Miracles Independent
Beautiful views of flowers and blossoms beginning with the famous Japa-
nese cherry trees in Washington in full bloom at Easter time, and continuing
with close-up views of dandelions and other flowers unfolding before the camera.
A good flower study.
On same reel with MS 7063, Felix Gets Broadcast.
Total length 918 standard feet.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3060 A Barehanded Fight with an Alligator Bray
Following our leader through the snake-infested swamps of Florida, we
come to the home of the alligators. These creatures when pursued seek their
own battleground, the muddy bottom of the swamp. Boldly wading into the
pools the hunters grope below the surface till they find their prey, whereupon
a battle royal ensues. In this instance the hunters emerge uninjured with some
fine specimens, but one cannot help wondering whether they are always so for-
tunate in escaping harm.
On same reel with MS 7066, Felix All Balled Up.
Total length 976 standard feet.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 3061 Salting a Bird’s Tail Bray
Birds can be made quite tame and persuaded to stay near our homes if
given safe houses and good food. There are many Audubon societies for child-
ren, who are taught to make bird houses and to make friends of the birds. We
are shown different types of bird houses and watch the tenants proudly taking
possession.
On same reel with MS 7068, Felix Finds ’em Fickle.
Total length 915 standard feet
Rental 5/-.
M 3063 Wild Creatures in Captivity Independent
Canines and Felines
Who does not love to see the lions and the wolves and the other wild
animals? Nobody? Well, here are a lot of them in a Zoological Park. The
animals shown are Wild Dogs, Timber Wolves, Red Foxes, Lions, Tigers,
Leopards, Cheetahs, Jaguars, and Mountain Lions. There are several different
species of some of them.
As our visit occurs during feeding time we have a .splendid opportunity
to watch the action of the animals while they are anxiously awaiting their
food and while they are fiercely enjoying it.


We are also fortunate enough to be present _ during the dangerous opera-
tion of clipping the claws of a huge Barbary Lion. It doesnt hurt him, u
he doesn’t like to have it done, and we are mighty glad those bars are so strong.
910 feet standard length
Rental 6/-.
S 3066 Wild Creatures in Captivity independent
Reptiles and Monkeys
The Reptile and Monkey house is always a high spot in one’s visit to a
Zoological Park. Here we find an excellent collection of both groups.
Our first stop is at the cage of the Gila Monster. Next comes the African
Python, and here we have the good luck to arrive just in time to see the elabor-
ate measures that are required to feed this huge reptile.
In another scene we see the head keeper with the aid of a large number
of assistants, extracting the fangs from an African Python. This snake is
twenty-eight feet in length and weighs two hundred and twenty pounds.
Passing on to the Monkeys we see the Lemur Monkeys, the Sphinx
Baboon, a Rhesus Monkey with her Baby, and a Mandril Baboon. Then we
stand with other interested spectators before the cage of some Monkeys who
are at play and busily executing all the monkey-shines in their repertoire.
826 feet standard length
Rental 6/-.
M-S 3068 Muscles of Expression Bray
An explanation of the means by which muscles shortening as they pull,
like a block and tackle, change the expression of one’s face.
On same reel with M-S 7069, Felix All Puzzled.
Total length 950 standard feet.
Rental 5/-.
M 4000 Pets Prox y Chester
The Jenks’ home is all astir with preparations for to which Mr.
Buggins, an out-of-town buyer, is coming, and Mr. Jenks is ‘ way up in the
clouds and hoping to bring down a big order.” In order to keep his three chil-
dren quiet, he decides to buy them some pets, and they all start out to make the
selections. However, Jenks suddenly remembers his appointment, and hurries off
leaving his children to select their own, and telling the chauffeur to take pets and
children home. Being without parental restraint, the children choose what they
really want —a donkey, a goat and a goose, and a little coloured boy friend
brings his pig. Buggins arrives, and things promptly begin to happen. Poor
father rushes upstairs to see why water is leaking through on to his guests, and
finds the goose in the overflowing bath tub. In the next room the donkey is asleep
in a the goat and the pig contribute their share to the general excitement.
But it all ends well, for Bugg : ns falls in love with Jenks’ aunt, and is accepted.
Wonderful photography and delightful humour for young and old.
Juvenile and Adult —942 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.


S 4002 Twas Henry’s Fault Christie
Henry wanted a sport roadster—Betty wanted a sedan. Financially the pros-
pect suggested their compromising on a pushcart. But Betty had saved a few
dollars toward some lovely headlights, and seized by a sudden inspiration, she
invested them in an old flivver and rushed in to Henry’s office with “ Henry, we
have a car!” Henry and the others rushed out to see the car, and then poor Henry
had to stand for a lot of kidding. However, it ran —occasionally. Henry brought
the crowd home that night for a home-cooked dinner only to find that the car and
Betty had run away out to the country, where the former had stopped for a good
long rest. Many complications resulted, but it all came out right in the end, and
even Henry had to admit there was some good in his flivver.
903 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
B M 4003 Hearts and Hats Christie
Featuring Elinor Field and Harry Depp
Two young people are in love, but her father points out that the lover’s in-
come of $30.00 per week would be absorbed in the purchase of a single hat for
his daughter. Our hero discovers that hats at $30.00 each pay a handsome
profit and decides to go into the millinery business. His sweetheart becomes
his best customer, buys three hats and has them sent home C.O.D. Father re-
fuses to pay for them, goes to the shop in a rage, but becomes smitten with
the charms of the fair proprietor, who is none other than our hero, masquerad-
ing in a wig and feminine apparel.
For a widower, Father is a fast worker, and is soon engaged to our hero,
who shows all of the characteristics of a bashful young woman. A marriage
ceremony is performed, but not altogether as Father had anticipated.
937 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
B S 4004 Easy Payments Christie
Harry and Edna wish to be married, and Harry asks her father’s consent,
arguing that while his present income is small, his prospects are good, and that he
can buy and furnish the house on easy payments. Father believes that “ Cash is
King,” and says so, though he finally does consent to the marriage. The house is
bought and furnished, and first payment made. Father’s only comment is “ Wait
till the next payments are due.” When the fatal day arrives he conspires with the
creditors to demand immediate payment, or take their property, and as Harry can-
not pay, the furniture is all moved out. In despair, Harry and Edna go to tell
Father about it, but find him out, and upon returning sadly to their own home, they
are amazed to find everything in place again, and Father calmly smoking and
awaiting them. Upon their admitting that cash is king, and promising not to buy
°n instalments in future, he presents them with the house and contents as his
wedding present.
968 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.


M 4Q05 Jimmie’s Doggone Luck Christie
Timmy buys a white poodle for his little new wife, and after much trouble,
gets it home to her. Miss Spinster buys herself one at the same place. Next day
Miss Spinster tells her coloured cook to take ‘ Whiskers with her when si
goes marketing, but “ Whiskers ” hides in a closet and the cook starts out alone.
Wifie also goes to market, leading “ Fluffy,” who runs away, and crosses the cook s
path. Cook thinks “ Whiskers ” has preceded her to market, and grabs Hutty
and, Wifie suddenly appearing, tries to do the same thing. A not
Thone calls for Jimmie and Miss Spinster. Finally seizing an opportunity, Jim-
mie and Wifie and “ Fluffy ” escape, and Miss Spinster and Cook go home where
they are greeted by “ Whiskers.” But if you value peace and health, don t men-
tion “ dog ”to any of these people. The subject is taboo.
928 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M 4007 Waltzing Around Christie
Featuring Billie Rhodes, Cullen Landis, W m. Bevan
Wifie loves to dance. Hubby despairs of ever getting control of his feet.
Wifie’s winsome friend (Billie Rhodes) attempts to teach Hubby t e terpsi
chorean art on the sly, in his office, so as to be ready for the big Athletic Ball.
In spite of the complications occasioned by a suspicious wife and a jealous
sweetheart, they finally achieve success. Very funny and replete with action.
907 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
BS 4008 A Happy Birthday Chestct
It is hubby's birthday and Mrs. Sweetie Smith has planned a surprise
party for him. But mother-in-law stops in at his office just as he is bidding
Cousin Betty good-bye, and thinking it her duty to protect her daughter from
such a man she sets her dog upon him upon his return home. Very ludicrous
situations'follow. But Cousin Betty comes to the party with the other
guests and her explanation clears the heavily charged air, so all ends happily.
951 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
M 4009 The Wishbone
Two tramps rob a chicken house and after a pursuit escape with a fat hen
which they kill and eat. Holding the wishbone between them they fall asleep
and dream a series of remarkable adventures. The wishbone grants their every
wish, even permitting them to escape from jail by walking right through stone
walls. A fanciful and ridiculous subject—slapstick, but at times rather
humorous though hardly refined.
916 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.


5 4010 Roars and Uproars Chester
The uproarious adventures of the Nutt family, consisting principally of the
daughter, Hazel Nutt, who will inherit 5,000,000 dols. if she marries someone of
sufficiently eccentric character by a certain date.
The introduction of several obviously crazy aspirants for the hand and for-
tune of the fair Hazel furnishes a skeleton upon which to hang enough plot to
make a fairly funny comedy.
The escape of three ferocious lions in the latter half of the comedy supplies
a succession of thrills interspersed with scenes of a highly amusing nature.
Some slapstick element, but nothing objectionable or likely to cause offence to
any audience.
1751 feet standard length—on two reels.
Rental 10/-.
M 4015 An Arabian Nightmare independent
Featuring Hughie Mack and Dot Farley.
Dot is the universal drudge of the small town hotel where she fills every part
from that of a female farm hand up to driving the hotel 'Bus. Hughie is in charge
of the remains of the Ringworm Circus. Some quite funny business of the 'Bus
upsetting because of Hughie's great weight in the extreme rear. Arriving at the
hotel Hughie fascinates Dot with an extravagant yarn about being the Caliph of
Bagdad and telling her about his magic carpet. Later, in her dreams, she is trans-
ported on this magic carpet to the Caliph's harem where she is promptly made the
reigning favorite, but becomes very sick in her effort to carelessly smoke cigarettes
like the other ladies. Upon awakening Dot discovers the reason why she was
dreaming of being fed to the lions.
Some very good laughs in this subject.
1864 feet standard length — on 2 reels.
Rental 10/-.
M 4016 An Elephant on His Hands Independent
Featuring Dot Farley and Hughie Mack.
This is a very funny slapstick comedy of the same order as “ Roars and
Uproars.” The subject opens with some culinary trickery of an amusing sort,
and a clash between a pet cat and the dog. Next comes the news that Hughie has
been left a legacy of 100,000 dols. conditional upon his maintaining the pets left
by his dying Uncle. The family start out in their “ Fierce-Arrow,” to claim the
pets and the legacy. To their horror the Express Agent delivers two full-grown
elephants as the pets. At once it is evident that the legacy is not an unmixed bless-
ing. On the way home the elephants become somewhat obstreperous, and clean out
a fruit stand, etc. Exhausted with his efforts in getting the pets home, Hughie
falls into an uneasy slumber, in which he has a vivid nightmare of Oriental splen-
dour, which the audience enjoys with him. While engaged in a terrific struggle
with a leopard, he awakens to find that he is shaking his wife, who is protesting
in kind.
Then come some perfectly hilarious scenes of the elephants entering and
taking possession of a hotel, where they proceed to traverse the corridors, enter the


sleeping and bath rooms, and even crash through the walls, thus producing a series
of extremely funny situations among the panic-stricken guests.
1941 feet standard length—on two reels.
Rental 10/-.
S 4017 Shot Ambassador
Featuring Billy Moran
A slapstick comedy with humorous titles and excellent photographic
To win the attention of the farmer’s daughter two rivals dress as hunters
in order to emulate a third rival, who apparently is in favor. As hunters they
are failures and succeed only in making themselves ridiculous, incidentally forc-
ing the audience to laugh at their antics.
Rough stuff, but a mirth provoker anyway—if you know what we mean.
871 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
£ The Adventurer Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin.
The funniest comedy Charlie Chaplin ever produced.
As an escaped convict, he escapes in excruciatingly funny ways from half a
dozen guards attempting his recapture. •
Rescuing a beautiful maiden from a watery grave, he poses as a wealthy
yachtsman, and is thus entertained in the home of her millionaire father,_ where
he keeps the other guests in a riot of merriment, until his rival, suspecting his iden-
tity, again puts the police on his trail. Thereupon a chase of Chaplin resumed in
the environs of the wealthy home affords still other variations of clever and
elusive tactics by the ingenious comedian.
1845 feet standard length — on two reels.
Rental 12/-.
M 4022 The Pawnshop Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin.
In another of the Mutual Chaplin series, we find Charlie a clerk in a pawn-
shop. With Chaplin comedy he “ gets off ” some of his best antics, fights his rival
with dough, and tames the biting gold fish with acid. However, the cleverest
wit in the whole picture is where Charlie appraises an alarm clock for hock.
Throughout the picture he is constantly in danger of immediate dismissal, but at
the end, kind fate makes him a hero, and wins for him the esteem of the pawn-
broker and the love of his daughter.
1940 feet standard length — on two reels.
Rental 12/-.
£ 4023 The Floorwalker Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin.
The “ Floorwalker ” is the first of the famous million dollar series of Mutual
Chaplin “ Classics ” to be released.


In this picture Charlie’s experience in a department store, particularly with
the escalator, while somewhat disconcerting to himself, are very amusing to an
audience. Those who enjoy Chaplin will find the “ Floorwalker ” a good slap-
stick comedy, featuring him in one of his best productions.
1734 feet standard length—on two reels.
Rental 12/-.
M 4024 E aS y Street Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin.
Charlie, a down-and-outer, wanders into Hope Mission, where he is reformed,
his first good act being to give back the collection plate which he had stolen. He
then joins the police force, and is assigned to Easy Street, the city’s worst section,
from which as a regular thing the policemen are brought home on stretchers.
But in a characteristic manner he overcomes the ringleader of the ruffians, and
rescues and wins the beautiful mission worker who had reformed him. A regular
Chaplin comedy of the kind everybody likes. Uproariously funny from end to
end.
1757 feet standard length—on two reels.
Rental 12/-.
g 4025 The Immigrant Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin.
One of Charlie’s best subjects.. The first scenes are laid on an immigrant
ship, in which Charlie is a steerage passenger. Some funny seasick scenes on the
deck are followed by a dining-room scene taken in a heavy sea. Amusing acci-
dents to food and the diners occur here, Charlie engages in gambling with dice,
and makes a winning from the other steerage passengers.
The first part closes with their arrival in the so-called “ Land of Liberty,”
and shows their deprivation of liberty by the arbitrary and rough methods of the
immigration officers.
The second part is concerned principally with a restaurant where Charlie tries
to satisfy his hunger on the proceeds of a half dollar which he has discovered on
the street, only to later lose unconsciously through a hole in his pocket. This half
dollar has quite a chequered career before the waiter proves it to be counterfeit.
Charlie meets his sweetheart unexpectedly in the restaurant, treats her to a square
meal and, being wihout funds of his own, cleverly pays the check with a tip left
for the waiter by another patron, and all ends well.
While the photography in his subject is not of the best, the subject matter is
so excruciatingly funny that it will please almost any audience.
1809 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 12/-.
M 4026 The Lucky Dog Ambassador
Featuring Stan. Laurel
The amusing adventures of a comedian and his dog, with a lot of novel and
refreshing variations from the everyday comedy film. A dog show affords


opportunities for a panic stricken audience, followed by their fleeing pets. There
is a lot more to the subject than this brief description. Not enough plot to des-
cribe, but very many funny situations.
The photography is excellent, the humor not coarse, the picture really
funny, and you’ll enjoy it.
1769 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4028 F. 0. B. Africa Warner Brothers
Featuring Monty Banks
A subject which is full of fun and screamingly ludicrous in many places.
Some clever stuff with doughnuts and an umbrella are original and laughable.
Later, our hero drifts into the automobile business where he has some amusing
accidents in America and some hairbreadth escapes later in Africa. Daniel had
nothing on our hero in the lion’s den. An African Chief with cannibalistic ten-
dencies and a live missionary and his daughter to practice on, furnish inspiration
which the director has utilised to the utmost. No one can view this comedy
without hilarious mirth.
1954 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
BS 4029 Her Fractured Voice Paramount
Featuring Beatrice Joy
Our heroine is obsessed with the idea that she can and must sing. Living
on a farm she has lots of open space in which to exercise her voice, but is com-
pelled to admit that not even the cows and chickens will listen to her. During
an opportunity to sing in the choir she awakens every living thing, among
others a number of peacefully sleeping members of the congregation. From the
city comes a smooth-talking man who promises her the world if she will only be
his. They go to the big city where, at a trial given to her in a cabaret, she
nearly causes a riot. Of course, everything ends happily.
947 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
54031 All Wet Joe Rock
Fantastical story of a Cub Reporter who wanders on to a Pirate Ship,
where he goes through a number of thrilling adventures, not only with the
bloodthirsty Pirates, but several of their charming daughters, and one particu-
larly cute youngster known as Captain Kid(d). Just when our hero is in
despair over his pending fate, it develops that the Pirate Ship is location for a
motion-picture play. The Director arrives, only to find that our Reporter has
played havoc with his plans.
912 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.


S 4032 Monkeying Around Haikoom Boys
The Ballroom Boys’ room is very small—so small that they have to resort
to unusual expedients to use it at all. A friend leaving town asks them to care
for his “Mary” until his return and on going to the train to meet her they find
that “Mary” is a pet monkey. Things promptly begin to happen. As a result
of her activities the boys are thrown out of the Millionbucks’ Home, but they
detect some crooks entering, and making their own way back into the house
they bring about the capture of the crooks and their own return to grace.
169 Beef standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4033 Oh Ma, the Rent Taker Ballroom Boys
Percy and Ferdie Ballroom evicted from their boarding house are knocked
down by the car of a millionaire on his way to the boat for Europe. Be tells them
they can use his house while he is gone. But his caretaker rents the house to
Oh Ma, a clairvoyant, who holds his first seance the night the boys and some friends
and a big colored porter arrive. Neither group knows of the other’s presence, but
Oh Ma’s assistants in their weird costumes throw consternation into the Ballroom
ranks and after some highly amusing situations secure the house for themselves.
Slapstick.
1476 feet standard length—on 2 reels.
Rental 8/-.
S 4034 Blowing Bubbles Independent
Featuring Billy Moran and Dorothy Earle
Slapstick comedy showing ridiculous methods of life-saving as practiced
at a sylvan lake in the country. Some funny situations, but not enough plot
to describe.
889 feet standard length 1
Rental 5/-.
M 4036 His Wedding Daze Independent
Featuring Joe Rock.
A narration of the misadventures which befall Joe on his wedding day. Joe
was a farm-boy, and his bride a farmer’s daughter. Until the last minute Joe was
busy with chores, and came late to his wedding, which was on the farm-house
lawn. He had the ill-luck to drop the ring, which was seized by a passing hen,
and Joe had a hard time getting it back again, though he finally succeeded. Not
much plot, but good photography, and a lot of very unusual stunts. Slapstick, but
not coarse. Good comedy.
895 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M 4038 A Brass Monkey Independent
The brass monkey is an East Indian idol which brings good luck to its
worshippers and bad luck to all others. When it is stolen from its temple and
brought to another country its evil powers promptly manifest themselves and


one mishap after another befalls its owners. A slapstick comedy without much
plot but lots of action and some fairly humorous situations.
1646 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
M 4041 The Gasoline Trail Independent
This picture was made from animated sculpture, i.e., little puppets
modelled from clay, clothed and painted to represent human beings. Tom,
the negro, and Jerry, his mule, in a rudimentary series of episodes which are
made more amusing by the titles. The awkwardness of the figures makes the
scenes more ludicrous.
759 feet standard length
Rental 3/'.
8M4042 A Close Call Independent
A strictly juvenile subject in which most of the actors are children. One
little girl slips over a cliff and lands on a ledge a short distance down. While
two other children run for help another goes to her rescue and by climbing up
to her from the bottom of the cliff leads her down to safety.
Juvenile —9o2 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
S 4043 The Whirlwind Independent
Featuring Joe Rock.
Most of the humour in this subject comes from the antics of a very high wind
and its effect upon the small town inhabitants. The hero and heroine are blown
in and out of the scenes through houses, over roofs, and finally into each other’s
arms for the marriage ceremony.
A slapstick subject, which will be appreciated by those who like speed in
comedy.
851 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 4045 Holy Smoke Independent
Mose and his friend are two little animated puppets who are continually
getting into mischief. This time they find an old man smoking his pipe, from
which they take surreptitious puffs with the usual results. They find some gun-
powder and load the pipe with it, producing rather unexpected results.
They have other amusing adventures which will appeal to little folks
rather than to adults.
Rental 4/-.
S 4048 The Fast Male Clune
Featuring Joe Rock. ,
This is a very speedy subject laid in Hurrytown with a comedy in pictures
on the old joke of a passenger who wishes to buy a ticket to go to Morrow.


While he is arguing with the ticket seller a goat eats the ticket. The title is
derived from the fast action of the hero in chasing or being chased through a
number of scenes in and out of trains, upon the roof and elsewhere. Fast and
furious action.
928 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M 4049 His Neglected Wife Independent
Featuring Leatrice Joy
Hubby writes stories —evidently poor ones, for he is advised to write short
ones and thus save paper. Wifey leaves home to seek employment in a large city.
Hubby follows in her trunk after removing contents, which are appropriated by
a tramp. Next follows some slapstick scenes in the city hotel where Hubby
smoking, while still confined to her trunk, causes Wifey to think that there is a
fire in her room. Panic among the guests of the hotel, etc.
949 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
S 4050 Don’t Mary Independent
Mary is engaged to marry Billy, but they have frequent spats. During one
of them a stranger tells Billy that he will inherit his Uncle’s fortune if he is
married by the following day and then the same stranger tells Mary that she
will receive her Aunt’s fortune if she does not marry. Because of their latest
quarrel Mary avoids Billy and he in desperation decides to marry one of Mary’s
best friends. Many complications result, and in the end it develops that the
stranger who had approached them both is an escaped lunatic who is finally
captured and returned to his asylum. A good slapstick comedy with more plot
than the majority. _ Y
1700 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
S 4051 Help Yourself Independent
Featuring Joe Rock.
A typical Joe Rock comedy in which he is assisted by little twins about six
years of age. The disappearance of one of the twins and a misunderstanding
as to the identity of each make a slim plot on which to build a comedy. The picture
is humorous, however, and introduces some novel and clever stunts. It is not
coarse and it will be enjoyed by all who like slapstick comedy.
917 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
JYI4QSS The Submarine Pirate s A Lynch Product
Featuring Syd Chaplin
Syd as an awkward waiter in a hotel overhears an inventor describing to
another plotter, the submarine which he has invented and which they plan to
use in capturing an ocean liner and securing a large amount of gold from it?
cargo. Syd steals the plans and controlling key and after a slapstick pursuit


eludes the plotters and gains control of the submarine. His attempts to direct
T-, are f most disastrous and he has several narrow escapes, as for instance,
w , e boat submerges while he is on deck. He finally captures the liner
which signals for help and attracts a gunboat which destroys the submarine.
. A slapstick comedy with many novel features, a good plot and plenty of
action, as well as many really humorous situations, and far more interest
than most subjects of this type.
2920 feet standard length—on 3 reels
Rental 15/-.
M 4057 Pay or Move Independent
Featuring Monty Banks.
Monty is very unpopular with Betty Benson’s father, though he is in high
ravor with Betty who detests the man father wants her to marry. Every time
Monty comes round father sees him and he has to flee. Then father gets a note
emanding 1,000 dollars or his life. Unknown to him, the man he favors for
Betty is leader of the band of desperadoes who sent the note. Then Monty
comes to the rescue and wins father’s approval by capturing the whole band.
A typical Monty Banks comedy. Action and novelty add interest to the
humor.
1834 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-,
M 4059 Pat’s Patent Burr
Featuring Charlie Murray
A typical Charlie Murray comedy without much plot, but affording op-
portunity for some amusing situations. Slapstick and photographically good
though hardly refined.
1448 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
M 4061 A Wild Goose Chase Harry Asher
Featuring Monty Banks.
Monty and Bill are rivals for the hand of the fair Catherine, and each one
takes desperate measures to get rid of the other. Monty seems to have the
preference, and he buys an engagement ring which he is just about to slip on the
lady s finger when it slips from his hand and rolls away. He follows it only
to see it swallowed by a big goose. Monty chases the goose and his chase leads
him through many adventures, and finally up the outside of a very tall building
and around a narrow coping where he is always in imminent danger of falling
over the edge. His danger keeps the spectator in a state of nervous apprehen-
sion. Finally he captures the goose and regains the ring.
An excellent Alonty Banks subject. Somewhat slapstick, but very well
done and with far more plot and interest than most subjects of this type. Photo-
graphically it is superb. ’
1876 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.


M 4062 Built on a Bluff Grand
Featuring Sid Smith
A slapstick comedy depicting the efforts of a young man to erect a portable
house on the very edge of a high bluff. After great difficulties and many narrow
escapes the house is finished and his fiance arrives with a minister for the mar-
riage ceremony. But their witness, a very fat man, carelessly leans against the
house and pushes it right over the edge.
1767 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4063 Wedding Bells Asher
Featuring Monty Banks, Eva Gregory.
Monty and Eva are about to be married. So is the man across the hall
from Monty. Eva comes to see Monty just as the other man receives a note
from his lady asking him to care for her dog. He .puts the dog in Monty’s
room, accidentally dropping the note, which falls into Eva’s hands. Monty
has a hard time explaining, but has just succeeded when the dog comes from
under his bed. The rest of the picture centres on his efforts to get rid of the
dog, which keeps coming back in spite of all efforts to dispose of him.
’ A slapstick comedy, humorous, and given real interest by the cleverness of
its canine actor. „ ,
1726 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
S 4065 The Golf Bug Independent
Featuring Monty Banks.
The subject opens with the star making some amusing shots and doing
other stunts which arc characteristic of a dub or particularly stupid golfer.
The attitude of the “gallery” adds to the humor of the situation. Later on a
particularly vicious swings into an overhanging hornets’ nest produces the inevit-
able results. There is a drive into a pond and some decidedly original efforts of
Monty to play his ball out of the pond with the assistance of some of the fish.
A little sentiment is lugged in by a country girl being courted by the hired man
and supplanted by Monty who saves her life from a run-away. A white mouse
and an overflowing bath tub furnish additional incidents in a mild slapstick
comedy feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
S 4069 Little, but Oh My! Ay Vee Bee
Featuring Ernest Truex.
The one big ambition of Ernie Biggs’ life is to play on the Cadler football
team but though he is game, he is so small that his chances are pretty slim. The
other players laugh at his efforts, but Ernie is undaunted. Ernie loves a girl
whose father an old football player, wants her to marry only a gridiron hero,—
which is another reason for his ambition to get into the big Cadler-Fulton game.
On the big day Ernie, sitting among the “ subs,” sees his team, being trimmed by


Fulton. He begs the coach to let him play, but to no avail. Then with only five
minutes left to play he has an inspiration which he explains to the coach who
finally consents to let him try it. In the next play Ernie is given the ball and
is picked up by the members of his team and thrown right over the other team,
which strategy gives him a chance to run down the field for a touch-down before
the enemy recovers from its surprise. This wins the game for Cadler and in-
cidentally, the girl for Ernie.
A good clean comedy full of action by this popular half-size actor.
1669 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4071 Trickery Independent
Amusing effects obtained by the alternate use of slow and rapid motion
photography and by reverse-action photography. Beginning with a meal eaten
backward, we watch its effects on the diner. We follow him in a hair-raising
trip by taxi and by subway, the scenery seeming to fly past us until we are sure
we cannot keep to the tracks.
Other amusing or mystifying effects are also given.
725 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
S 4074 The Bashful Lover Ay Vee Bee
Featuring Ernest Truex
, Poor Ernie Biggs was very rich. But he had an aunt who ruled him with
an iron hand. Without consulting him, she even arranged his engagement to a
friend of hers whom Ernie hardly knew, and invited friends to a garden party
at which the announcement was to be made. While some dancers interpreted
“the Spirit of Love” Ernie was sent to his room, but he managed to watch them
and to meet Betty Bliss, the leader, who invited him to call on her. With diffi-
culty he escaped from his aunt and went to meet Betty. Then one predicament
followed another, but Ernie was such a fast worker that he managed to win
Betty and marry her right in front of his aunt, while that outwitted lady
acted as an unwilling witness.
A good comedy with many amusing situations.
1807 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
M 4075 Stick Around Ay Vee Bee
Featuring Ernest Truex
Ern ie Biggs, diminutive detective, is in love with Alice Weston, a dancer
with the Oh Joy show. Alice says she will marry only a man in her own
profession. The show goes on the road and to Ernie’s delight he is ordered to
shadow a male member of the company. Alice secs him frequently but still
refuses to marry him, and Ernie is desperately jealous of her attentions from
other men. One night as he sits in the wings watching the show, a mouse runs
into his trouser's leg and Ernie dashes frantically on to the stage where he dances
about trying to shake the mouse out. The audience thinking it part of the show
gives Ernie’s “act’’ the greatest applause of the evening and keeps demanding
encores ’til Ernie is exhausted. Then the mouse escapes, but upon Ernie’s assur-


ance that he can perform equally well without it, the manager offers him a job
as dancer and Alice promptly says “yes.”
1683 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
B S 4076 The Vagabond Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin
Charlie, a vagabond fiddler, gets into difficulties with some members of a
German band and has to flee. Soon he comes to a Gypsy camp where he sees a
young girl, the drudge of the Gypsies, being abused by them. He intercedes for
her and in true Chaplin fashion overcomes the Gypsies and saves the girl, and
then falls in love with her. But she meets and loves an artist, and poor Charlie
is in despair. In spite of all his efforts, his rival seems to lead in the girl’s af-
fections. Then she is identified and claimed by her wealthy mother, from whom
she had been stolen by the Gypsies. But to Charlie’s delight she refuses to go
without him, and he accompanies her to her mother’s home.
A lot of the typical Chaplin humor, and in addition some Chaplin pathos
which is equally funny,
1956 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 12/ - .
M 4077 The Fireman Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin
The Fire-Captain orders a fire drill and Charlie is the only one who fails
to respond. He is late as usual, and as a result is in continual trouble with the
Captain. Then to make matters worse, he falls in love with the Captain’s girl.
Many hilariously funny scenes of Charlie and the other firemen responding to
fire alarms. In the midst of one fire Charlie learns of another and promptly
drives away to it, leaving his companions with only the end of the broken hose
in their hands. But he effects a rescue and is forgiven and proclaimed a hero.
1921 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 12/'.
s 4078 One A.M. Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin
Charlie has imbibed too freely and upon his return from a late party has
much difficulty in leaving the taxi and paying the driver. His efforts are highly
amusing to all but himself. Finally he enters the house and then has experiences
with a revolving table, a double stairway, and a folding bed, that are side-splitting
to the beholder, but which cause Charlie to fall asleep in a state of exhaustion
on the bottom of the inverted bed.
941 feet standard length
Rental 8/-.
j\| 4079 The Count Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin
A note which inadvertently falls into his hands causes a tailor to try to
impersonate Count Broko and go to the party where the real count is expected.


Charlie is another intruder at the same party, and gets ahead of the tailor by
introducing himself as the Count first. Some hilariously funny situations develop
with much clever foot work on Charlie’s part before the real Count arrives, after
which the tailor is arrested and in characteristic Chaplin manner, Charlie takes
to his heels.
989 feet standard length
Rental 8/-.
S 4080 The Cure Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin
Charlie as an inebriate is sent to a sanitarium to be cured of his bad habit.
But he takes a plentiful supply of liquors with him, and upon discovery they are
ordered to be thrown out and destroyed. The attendant who executes the order,
carelessly drops the bottles into the spring at which the patients enjoy the
“water cure” and the effects on them and on Charlie himself are surprising and
hilariously funny.
Highlights in the picture include Charlie’s experience in a revolving door
with another patient suffering from a gouty foot, and his efforts to escape his
turn for treatment by a brawny attendant in the massage room.
Decidedly pre-prohibition, but screamingly funny.
1834 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 12/-.
B-M4OBI The Rink Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin
Charlie, who is employed as a waiter, disrupts the peace and cuisine of the
restaurant by his bubbling wit to such an extent as nearly to ruin his employer’s
business, although he shift's the blame to another. At noon he leaves the restaur-
ant for his lunch and during the hour drops into a skating rink for a little
diversion. While he is amusing himself in the rink, he meets an heiress and poses
as a foreign nobleman. She invites him to an exclusive roller-skating party that
night. When Charlie arrives he promptly causes so much disturbance by his
nonsense that the other guests attempt to throw him out. After some good
slapstick comedy and unusually clever skating, Charlie eludes all his pursuers
and makes a clean get-away.
1881 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 12/-.
M 4082 Behind the Screen Mutual
Featuring Charlie Chaplin.
Here we find Charlie an overworked assistant stagehand in a “ movie ” studio
Poor Charlie does all the work and his lazy boss gets all the credit. One noon
all the other stagehands quit except Charlie and his boss. From then on Chaplin
has all the work to do. Nevertheless, he does it cheerfully, continuing his “ rapid


fire” comedy and sidesplitting wit. Being an accurate shot he gets a job as a
“super” to throw pastry at his boss and registers ninety-nine per cent, “hits.”
Charlie finally falls in love with a girl disguised as a scene shifter and single-
handed saves her from the vengeance of the striking stagehands, whom she
obstructed in their infamous plans. Action and comedy from the moment the
picture is first flashed on the screen.
1796 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 12/'.
s 4083 Just in Time Chester
Featuring Snooky the Monkey, Rags and Mr. and Mrs. Airedale the Dogs, and
the Kittens.
Snooky the chaffeur is discharged by his employer because he is found smoking
on duty. He attempts to steal Rags, but is frustrated in an amusing manner.
He befriends six little children and treats them to fruit, at the fruit vendor’s un-
willing expense. Kidnappers steal the baby, which escapes and wanders on to
the railroad track, to be rescued by Snooky and his diminutive automobile just
ahead of the express train.
This is a juvenile subject, and with the two following of a similar nature,
exploit the remarkable intelligence of the animals who are featured. It will be
appreciated by children more than by adults.
1639 feet standard length—on 2 reels.
Rental 10/-.
S 4084 Four Times Foiled Chester
Featuring Snooky the Monkey ; Juno the Dog, and the Pony.
Three bold, bad men engaged in a nefarious attempt to kidnap a cunning little
three-year old baby, are cleverly foiled by Hubert, his monkey nurse, who rescues
him first in an auto, then smuggles him out of danger in a suitcase, hides him in
a barrel, with the assistance of Juno and the pony rescues him from a watery grave
and, finally, in an airplane outwits the abductors and brings the baby home in
triumph.
The animal intelligence shown in this picture is remarkable. It is a juvenile
which will be particularly enjoyed by children of all ages and will not be uninter-
esting to their parents.
1476 feet standard length—on 2 reels.
Rental 10/-.
S 4089 Romans and Rascals Vitagraph
Larry Semon
An entirely different Semon comedy, in which Larry drops back a few
centuries to the days of ancient Rome. A bored Caesar catching sight of Larry,
who is carefree and happy, persuades him to change places with him. Larry
has many highly amusing experiences with the treacherous senators and other
enemies of Caesar. When Caesar finally returns, Larry is glad enough to return
to his former humble position.
An imaginative, humorous, though slapstick farce.
817 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.


M 4090 Dunces and Dangers Vitagraph
Larry Semon
The attempts of two “broke” vaudevillians to escape from their creditors.
Seeing three men approaching, they rush to the roof and arc pursued over dizzy
heights, having many hair-breadth escapes, but learn at the last that these men
wished only to tell them they were heirs to a fortune. Slapstick, but humorous.
782 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
S 4091 Bathing Beauties and Big Boobs Vitagraph
Larry Semon
In order to win the approval of his girl’s father, Larry plots to hold him
up, steal his wallet and later return it to him. But the plans go awry when two
sneak thieves intercept the wallet as Larry passes it to his confederate. Then
follows a wild chase over docks, from which they jump to passing motor boats
and back again, swing from derricks, etc., and finally Larry and the girl rescue
the wallet, only to have her father ignore Larry and give all the credit to another
man. Slapstick, fast and funny.
812 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
S 4092 The Fall Guy Vitagraph
Larry Semon
A slapstick western comedy, showing the pursuit of “Black Bart,” a
bandit. The sheriff and his posse are hard riders—their saddles being mounted
on the back of flivvers instead of on horses.
Larry also tries to capture the desperado and has many encounters and
narrow escapes. The bandit’s car runs into a garage and, picking the garage
up bodily, continues its course until finally the bandit is captured. Full of
hilarious situations and unusual stunts.
1940 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
S 4093 The Sawmill Vitagraph
Larry Semon
A good, though slapstick comedy, taken in a lumber mill and full of
dynamite, danger, daring, and typical Semon stunts. There is the usual pursuit
over roofs and over lumber piles, up tall trees, derricks and elevators. Larry’s
gigantic swing on a rope from the top of a falling tree is only one of the thrills.
Thinness of plot is more than compensated for in variety and speed of action.
You’ll like it.
1918 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4094 Golf Vitagraph
Larry Semon
An amusing comedy full of typical Semon stunts. His efforts to learn to
play golf in his home are disastrous to the furniture. So he goes to the golf


club where we see some very clever play with the ball—not by Larry but by a
ground squirrel which continually causes it to disappear from the edge of one
hole and reappear near another, while Larry stands between them hoping for
a chance to drive. Other comedy is furnished by a negro caddy who, when
frightened by a bear, seems glued to the ground. Too many stunts to describe.
Full of action. One of the funniest of his comedies.
1843 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4095 A Night at the Show Essanay
Featuring Charlie Chaplin
Charlie Chaplin in a double role. Charlie as a gentleman causes as much
disturbance in the orchestra, as Mr. Rowdy does in the gallery. He is the
cause of many mishaps in the lobby, and when he finally gets into the theatre,
changes his seat so many times that the audience is much annoyed. Mr. Rowdy
is also up to all kinds of tricks, such as playing the hose on the audience, etc.
Very good Chaplin comedy. It keeps the spectator wondering what will hap-
pen next.
1660 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4096 Shanghaied Essanay
Featuring Charlie Chaplin
Charlie is shanghaied by a sailors’ boarding-house proprietor and the bucko
mate of a sailing vessel. He is put to work first on deck and later in the galley.
After a short spell of seasickness he proceeds to make things interesting for the
officers and the crew in characteristic Chaplin manner. Some of the most amus-
ing business that Chaplin ever conceived occurs in the serving of meals on board
the rolling ship, which is very well reproduced.
100 feet standard length
Rental 6/'.
S 4097 The Bank Essanay
Featuring Charlie Chaplin
Charlie as janitor in a bank is continually in difficulty. The fact that the
cashier’s name is also Charlie gets the janitor into an amusing complication. He
discovers a tie marked “For Charlie” in the office of the stenographer, whom
both admire. Believing the tie for himself, he reciprocates by putting some
cheap flowers on the stenographer’s desk. She in turn believes the flowers are
from the cashier, but on finding out that they are from the janitor, she indig-
nantly throws them away. Charlie discovers the discarded flowers while clean-
ing her office, and, disheartened, goes off to be alone with his grief.
In a spectacular attempt to rob the bank, the real character and cowardice
of the cashier are displayed. Charlie comes to the rescue of the stenographer.
1785 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.


M 4098 The Champion Essanay
Featuring Charlie Chaplin
Charlie, while walking along the street, trips over a horseshoe. As he is
examining it, he glances up and sees a sign: “Sparring partners wanted who
can take a punch."
Putting his good luck emblem under his coat he goes in and joins the
others who are waiting to be tried out as to their ability in boxing. One after
another, they are knocked out. Charlie’s turn drawing near, he slips the horse-
shoe in his boxing glove, with the result that his opponent receives a blow
which knocks him out, and Charlie is the chosen one for the boxing meet.
During the days of practice which follow before the eventful night of the
meet, when Charlie is proclaimed “Champion," there are some typical Chaplin
stunts which will keep even a sleepy onlooker alert.
1836 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/'.
S 4999 The Lyin Tamer Fox Comedy
A clever animal comedy. Not much plot but lots of action. Live lions
cause many of the laughable situations which arise when a traveller and his
guide take shelter in a haunted house.
On 2 Reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4100 Jerry the Giant Fox Comedy
Jerry as a hobo is disturbed from his slumbers in a railway truck by the
Sheriff, and much humor is caused by his efforts to capture Jerry who escapes
and seeks refuge in a circus, where by accident he becomes the star turn. Tiring
of circus life he runs away and is kidnapped by two thieves who had robbed the
circus proprietor. Various circus animals take part in his rescue, showing great
sagacity. It will delight any audience.
On 2 Reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4101 Napoleon Junior Fox Comedy
Juvenile animal comedy of a very humorous order. The main characters,
a little girl and Napoleon, a ragamuffin boy, are thrown together. They set
off in his home-made dog propelled car and, after many funny stunts, get mixed
up with the animals of a travelling circus and taken on board a steamer. They
let many of the animls loose, much to the consternation of the passengers and
circus attendant. Everything ends well, however, by Napoleon bravely per-
suading the animals to return to their respective cages and uniting the little girl
to her parents undr novel circumstances.
On 2 Reels
Rental 10/-.


S 4102 Captain Kid’s Kittens Fox Comedy
An hilariously funny juvenile gang comedy. Not much plot, but contains
many clever tricks by our gang who build an Ark from the remains of an old
boat.
On 2 Reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4103 Wild Puppies Fox Comedy
An extremely clever our gang comedy, showing rival juvenile forces in
mimic battles. Their various stunts to outwit the other fellow are beyond des-
cription, and is equally interesting to adults as well as children. It s a scream.
On 2 Reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4104 Follow the Leader Fox Comedy
A'juvenile gang comedy with their own miniature railroad, circus, train,
menagerie and parades. Children go wild over it.
On 2 Reels
Rental 10/'.
M 4105 The Battling Kangaroo Fox Comedy
Animal comedy in which a boxing kangaroo knocks out the champion, and
two sprinting kangaroos furnish the motive power for a taxi-cab that eats up
distance by “leaps and bounds.”
On 2 Reels
Rental 10/-.
M 4106 The Tennis Wizard Fox Comedy
A Van Bibber society comedy, in which the very ignorance of the hero
causes his unexpected success in winning the championship tennis game against
the really superior skill of his opponent. A real laugh producer.
On 2 Reels
Rental 10/-.
s 4110 A Man about Town Fox Comedy
Featuring Bang Norton, Bob Randall, Hang Dunkinson and Ruth Eddings.
A jazz version of the O’Henry story. Barry Norton, as Amos, dreams of
deeds performed by ancient fighting knights, but in reality is the butt of every-
one in Centreville. His efforts to elude his tormentors is screamingly funny
and will raise a laugh in any audience. Amos sees an advertisement for an elec-
tric strength belt and decides to get one; then the tables are turned. He clears
up the roughs of Centreville, including burglars who had robbed the local bank,
much to the delight of the banker’s daughter, who had up to this always been
his protector. A really funny comedy for adults or children.
On 2 reels
Rental 10/-.


S 4111 Easy Payments Fox Comedy
One of the Helen and Warren society comedies made famous by news-
papers. Helen wants a home and Warren an automobile. Their adventures in
endeavouring to obtain their wishes will dispel the worst case of blues and amuse
any audience of refinement.
On 2 Reels
Rental 10/-.
IVI 4113 The Non-Stop Bride Fox Comedy
Featuring Arthur Housman and Gene Cameron
A good comedy with witty titles. Not much plot but full of action, with
some clever automobile stunts. Somewhat slapstick, but refined, excellent
photography.
On 2 Reels
Rental 10/-.
S 7000 Jumping Beans Out-of-the-Inkwell
The artist brings the little clown some Mexican jumping beans, and plants one
for him. It grows rapidly, climbing way up to a distant planet, and the artist
sends the clown to the top, where he is pursued by a giant, and in order to escape,
ac F to earth. In revenge, the clown draws a stamp pad and a
rubber stamp sketch of himself, and then rapidly makes hundreds of little clowns
hke himself, and orders them to attack the artist, who is soon tied hand and foot.
But he manages to cut his bonds, and then drives all the clowns back into the
inkwell.
743 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 7001 Fishing Out-of-the-Inkwell
The artist and a friend decide to go fishing. The little clown wants to go
too, but the artist sketches a puddle for him to fish in and leaves him at home.
The clown starts to fish, but falls in, and promptly falls in love with a mermaid,
who swims to meet him. He rides a sea-horse, has an encounter with an octopus!
and is swallowed by a huge fish, but finally escapes, and then decides to follow the
artist and his friend and play tricks on them while they are fishing. He sets their
boat adrift, takes their lunch, and finally causes them to get soaking wet. Thev
suspect that he is the cause of their trouble, and when they get home they turn
him back to ink and drop him into the ink well again.
746 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
S 7002 The Challenge Out-of-the-Inkwell
. , Th ® ar tisfs loud snoring angers the little clown, who quarrels with him, and
wishes he were the same size so that he could fight him. The artist draws a sketch
ot himselt the same size as the clown, and a battle royal ensues. Round after
the miniature artist fouls, and the crowd pursues him back
into the ink well.
804 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.


]yj 7QQ3 Felix Saves the Day Pat Sullivan
Willie Brown’s Nifty-nine is scheduled to play the Tar Heels. But Willie
gets in trouble with the police, and is captured and locked up. Felix is desperate.
If it would only rain the game would be called off and postponed until Willie could
get out. Felix takes Willie’s place at the bat, and knocks a high fly—so high that
it hits old Jupiter Pluvius sitting up on his cloud, and in revenge he makes the
rain fall on the players so the game has to be called. Thus Felix saves the day.
Followed on the same reel by—
Out of the Melting Pot
A short series of pictures in which each one, starting as a chaotic blur, gradu-
ally clears and discloses some well-known man.
810 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
S 7004 Trapped Out-of-the-inkweii
The artist having made a sketch of the little clown, amuses himself by making
another sketch of a huge ugly spider, which promptly starts in to chase the clown.
He captures the clown in a lariat made of spiderweb, and then weaves a web
around him, after which the poor clown is tightly bound and served to the spider s
family for dinner. He succeeds in escaping, however, and to avenge himself
upon the artist he spins a rope web about the artist while he is asleep. _ The artist
frees himself with great difficulty, and the clown flees back into the inkwell for
safety.
Clever, imaginative and highly amusing.
845 feet standard length
Rental 4/-.
]yj 7000 Felix in Love Pat Sullivan
Felix is shown serenading the feline sweetheart of his choice. This serenade
seriously disturbs the sleepless individuals in adjacent homes. They bombard Felix
vigorously, and among other things “ coming his way is a copy of “ Aladdin and
His Wonderful Lamp.” Felix also finds the Lamp, and through the power of the
guardian fairy he is transported to Africa, where he has numerous thrilling adven-
tures before he returns home and completes his wooing.
776 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7007 The Puzzle Out-of-the-Inkwcll
Max has a picture puzzle which can be assembled in numerous different ways,
and each time produces an entirely different figure. The Clown is greatly er-
ested in these efforts, and finally becomes a nuisance by his interference. So Max
draws a perambulator, ties the Clown in it and sends him off to Puzzletown. Here
his adventures are weird, indeed, and when he comes back he manages to turn th«
tables on Max and sends him off to Puzzletown.
One of the very best of the Inkwell subjects, and particularly for the young,
although just as interesting to the elders.
698 feet standard length—on same reel with 3005, Sea Lions of South Pacific.
Rental 5/-.


s 7008 The Hypnotist Out-of-thc-Inkwell
A hypnotist calls and tries to sell the artist his book on “ Hypnotism Made
Easy.” The artist tries it on the clown, which he is drawing, and produces aston-
ishing results. The experiment is a great success. The hypnotist then tries it
on another artist in the room, and the experiment on this second subject is brought
to a rude end as the first artist pronounces the hypnotist’s magic words in trying
to bring back the first subject. Meanwhile the clown leaves the page on which
he has been sketched and learns the secret of the hypnotist, which he promptly
tries on the hypnotist and the artist. The entire subject, especially the clown’s
adventure with his shadow, is extremely clever, imaginative and amusing.
754 feet standard length—on same reel with 3006, The Astronomer’s Workshop.
Rental 5/-.
M 7009 Birthday Out-of-the-Inkwell
His birthday finds the little clown up to his usual tricks. In honor of the
occasion, he receives a new hat, and has a hard time making his selection. Then
in order to add to the celebration, the artist sketches a box of fireworks for him,
and the fun begins in earnest.
729 feet standard length—on same reel with 3007, Origin of Coal
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7010 Bobby Bumps and His Goatmobile Bf ay
Spike Smith, Bobby’s rival, has a little waggon in which he invites little
Marie to ride. Bobby promptly gets out his invention, a one-goat-power goat-
mobile, and the temptation to ride in it is too much for Marie, who unhesitat-
ingly leaves Spike to ride with Bobby. Off they go at breakneck speed, not even
stopping for the sheriff, who tries to halt them. But after a few minutes the
motive power baulks, and gives the pursuing sheriff an opportunity to appre-
hend the speeders.
518 feet standard length—on same reel with 3008, Our Animal
Friends and Foes.
Rental 5 /-.
M-S 7013 Bobby Bumps, Detective Bray
Bobby and his dog are greatly enjoying a detective novel, out behind the barn.
Looking over Bobby’s shoulder we see the scenes enacted about which he is read-
ing. Thrillers, all of them. Father interrupts and takes Bobby seriously to task
for reading such books. Just before destroying it, Father decides he would like to
see what it is like, and soon becomes equally engrossed in it. Mother interrupts
Father, and in turn falls under the same spell of the detective story. Bobby and
Fido moralise over the influence of such literature,
577 feet standard length—on same reel with 3011, How the Telephone Talks
Rental 5/-.
S 7014 Surprise Out-of-thc-Inkwell
The Clown is cleverly materialised at the foot of a cliff with his yearning
sweetheart on the peak. In response to his clamorous request, Max starts to draw
a ladder for him to reach the summit. The Clown helps by grabbing the rungs


of the ladder out of the air as fast as Max can draw them, and building them into
position, but Max runs short of ink when the ladder is still some distance from the
top and has to go for a fresh supply. In the meantime Max s_ sweetheart calls at
the studio, and his assistant arranges a little surprise in the visit. Thrown upon
his own resources, the Clown’s versatility is crowned with more or less success.
616 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
M 7015 Mechanical Doll Out-of-the-Inkwell
The clown, feeling full of pep, asks the artist for a job, and is sent oyer the
telephone wire to the theatre to help entertain. Arrived on the stage, he sketches
a mechanical doll which promptly begins to dance. The poorcloympromptly tas
in love with her, and rushes for a parson to marry them. While he is gone, the
movie operator, in oiling his machine, gets some oil on the doll and she com-
pletely dissolves, leaving only a few drops of ink. Upon his return the clown
furiously throws this at the operator, only to meet a similar fate himself, when t e
operator drops some oil on him.
66 7 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
7QI(J Sparring Partners Out-of-the-Inkwell
Max sends his sweetheart a birthday letter with eighteen X’s for kisses. He
asks the Clown to hold the ink bottle while he writes the letter, but in his clumsi-
ness the Clown spills the ink on the letter and' spoils it, upon which Max asks his
secretary to typewrite it. The secretary is called away from the machine, and the
Clown starts to investigate it. Reading the letter still in the machine, and grasping
its significance, he proceeds to jump up and down on the letter X, until he has
greatly increased the age of the young lady. Upon receipt of the letter she rushes
to the office to upbraid Max for his (apparent) heartlessness, and arrives just as
Max is trying to assist his secretary to get the Clown out of her hair, where he has
secreted himself. Max’s sweetheart opens the_ door, and, of course, she puts the
wrong construction upon the scene. Max in his embarrassment shrinks from hte
size to that of the Clown, who immediately proceeds to engage him m a sparring
match and put him to flight. In the end Max and the Clown both take refuge
in the oblivion of the ink bottle.
660 feet standard length —on same reel with 8051, Carnivorous Plants
Rental 5/-.
g 7Q17 Invisible Ink Out-of-the-Inkwell
In Invisible Ink the artist draws a bicycle for the Clown, and although the
audience cannot see it, the Clown gets on and rides easily. The artist then hides
and tells the Clown that if he wants him he must follow along a chalk line, which
he leaves as a trail. Later the Clown does the same thing to the artist, running
away and leaving a chalk line, which gives the artist a merry chase. Finally he
reaches a room in which the walls are covered with sketches, which the Clown
has made of himself. The Clown hides among them, so that it is impossible to tell
which is he and which is only a sketch, but the artist finally frightens the Clown
away, and in his flight he jumps into the invisible ink and disappears.
764 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.


M 7018 Bedtime Out-of-the-Inkwell
Max retires, but is kept awake by the Clown that he has just drawn on the
cardboard. Finally, in despair, Max draws a mountain range and impales the
Clown on the top of one of the peaks. There he curls up and tries to sleep,
but is very uncomfortable, and finally falls off the peak and slides down a terrific
distance to the base, where he starts off on explorations, and has numerous excit-
ing adventures at the Cave of the Winds; is pursued by giants, and finally gets
back to the studio and wakes up again from his dream on the top of the mountain.
Then Max has a dream in which the Clown is his nightmare.
Very amusing to everyone.
634 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
S 7019 Felix Lends a Hand Pat Sullivan
Shivering in a snowstorm Felix reads an attractive advertisement of a Tour
to Egypt. Hunting up a Turkish friend who runs a rug store, Felix is given
transportation to Egypt on the Magic Carpet in return for his promise to bring
back the merchant’s sweetheart. Arriving in Egypt, Felix discovers a tablet of
stone upon which the maiden has written that she is held captive by one of the
desert Sheiks. Felix rescues the extremely ample maiden, only to find that she
is too heavy for the Magic Carpet. Felix returns in despair to his native land
and informs the distracted sweetheart that what he needs is a ten-ton truck.
639 feet standard length—on same reel with 3025, How You See.
Rental 5/-.
M 7020 Felix in the Swim Pat Sullivan
Felix responds to a call for help, and finds a mouse caught in a trap. He
releases the mouse, which promises to return the favour if possible. Later Felix
calls for Willie to go swimming, but the latter does not dare leave his piano
practice. So Felix calls on the mouse for help, and he and his three brothers
take Willie’s place at the piano so successfully that his mother thinks he is still
practising, and Willie and Felix go swimming. Unfortunately for Willie, his
mother learns of the deception, and upon his return promptly chastises him.
762 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 7021 Felix Makes Good Pat Sullivan
In stealing some bones from a neighbouring yard Felix loses his tail and is in
terrible distress until he is able to renew it at a retail store. Having fallen upon
hard times he accepts a position with a lady who is advertising to furnish a nice
home for a cat. His happiness is destroyed again by marauding mice, which steal
his mistress’s milk and frame up Felix for the blame. He finally masters the mice
and makes good with the kind-hearted lady, who furnishes him with a home.
Followed on the same reel by—


Out of the Melting Pot
Following the cartoon are some amusing scenes showing the growth from
apparent chaos of some motion picture scenes from the East Side in New Yo
and elsewhere. „,. .
759 feet standard length —on same reel with 3018, Wild Creatures that Mimic.
Rental 5/-
s 7022 Felix Comes Back Pat Sullivan
Felix is the bane of the butcher’s life, being fond of When Felix
sounds his war cry, the sausages immediately take life and chase Felix ,
fashion. The butcher fixes up an ingenious trap in which he catches Fe [T> a
thinks he has effectually disposed of him. Felix goes through terrible * nbula '
tions, but like most other proverbial cats finally wanders back home, where the
unsuspecting butcher is lulled into fancied security by his absence.
Followed on the same reel by— . . . r
At the end of the cartoon is a short series of beautiful intimate close-ups o
prize-winning Persian and Angora cats that will delight any feline admirer.
751 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
M 7 q23 The False Alarm Out-of-the-Inkwell
The Clown finds fault with Max for the method by which he rolls a cigarette
and smokes it, and offers to show Max just how it should be done. When the
cigarette is lit and drawing well, the still blazing match arouses the curiosity and
alarm of the Clown, who undertakes to extinguish it. Next the Clown becomes
mixed up with the Fire Department in an effort to extinguish a fire m a nearby
penitentiary. His zeal is well meant, but misplaced. On his way back to the t<ire
House the Clown has the misfortune to have his Fire Engine completely burnt up,
and in fact, is much jeopardised himself by the conflagration From this how-
ever, he is rescued by Max, who extinguishes the flames by plunging the Clown
back again in the inkwell and carefully corking it.
855 feet standard length.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7024 Felix Tries for Treasure Pat Sullivan
Felix is enjoying a ball game with his boy chum. In chasing a particularly
active ball, the boy discovers a bottle washed up on the shore with a letter describ-
ing the location of a sunken treasure of pearls. They hastily construct a subma-
rine and proceed in search of the pearls. On the way they have much sport in
watching the various kinds of fish, about which the titles tell some excellent jokes.
A lone shark tries to wheedle the location of the treasure out of Fdix, and when
unsuccessful resorts to a foul conspiracy to rob the submarine of its fuel supply.
Felix discovers the pearls, only to have to pay them as a price for gasoline. We
finally see Felix back home and broke.
672 feet standard length —on same reel with 3028, Trained Sea Lions.
Rental 57-


S 7025 The Battle Out-of-the-Inkwcll
The two artists are busy making sketches of their respective little clowns,
when one of them has the misfortune to knock over his inkwell. He promptly
seizes the other artist’s inkwell, and a quarrel ensues. This quarrel is taken up
by their respective clowns, and the latter have a terrible battle. Having failed
to vanquish each other in a personal encounter, each calls upon an army of dupli-
cates of himself, and they fight all over the screen, until one army drives the
other back into the inkwell.
A most remarkable combination of photography and animated drawing.
785 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
S 7026 Flies Out-of-the-Inkwell
An amusing animated cartoon showing our little friend, the Clown, engaged in
a continual struggle with annoying flies. Sometimes the Clown seems to be
winning m the contest, and at other times it is quite evident that the flies are in
the ascendancy. These animated cartoons are always pleasing, and are sure to
provoke laughter.
596 feet standard length—on same reel with 3020, Submarine Gardens.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7027 Bubbles Out-of-the-Inkwell
, highly imaginative conception of the little clown’s desire to play with soap-
bubbles, and the result when his desire is attained. Grotesque ogres formed by
soap bubbles pursue him, he gets tangled up in bubbles, at times he is on one,
then he is in one. As is generally the case, he ends by provoking the artist and
having to flee back into the inkwell in order to escape him.
620 feet standard length—on same reel with 3030, Dinner Time in Zooland.
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7028 Felix Gets Revenge Pat Sullivan
Felix makes a hit with a small boy, who invites him to come to his home and
live him _ However, the father is firm in his decision to have no cat about
me nouse. _ 1 his angers Felix, who gets even by getting a very old piece of cheese
fin ’ m lth !t f S , a bait ’ lur i n g a plague of rats to come and take up their home in
e old man s house. _ In despair he begs Felix to make it his home and drive
way the rats, but Felix in his disdain stalks indignantly away.
574 feet standard length—on same reel with 3021, How Movies Move.
Rental 5/-.
7029 Felix Gets Left Pat Sullivan
therp P f!? r ell * home hungry, only to find the house empty and nothing
eat His various attempts to find food are all without avail until he
Fplivlc dS a baby a . sleep and its bottle nearl 7 full o f milk. Hunger satisfied
anv S l jcce s ,sful and captures a mouse, but as he doesn’t feel like eating
releasps nil St S? 1 be accepts the mouse’s promise to return at supper time, and
and Felix is lef t supperle C ° meS tbe mouse re f uses to keep the appointment,
600 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.


7Q30 Felix in the Bone Age Pat Sullivan
Felix is very hungry, and in his search for food wanders into a museum
where the sight of huge bones of prehistoric monsters makes him wish he; had
lived in those days when a single such bone would make many meals, budden y
his wish comes true, but now he finds that there are many difficulties and dangers
on which he had not counted. He has thrilling adventures, and, as usual, comes
out all right in the end.
627 feet standard length-
Rental 5/-.
g 7031 Balloons Out-of-the-Inkwell
Max is amusing himself blowing up balloons, when one of them bursts, disclos-
ing our friend the Clown and his young brother. Max asks the Clown what he is
doing there, and is told that he wants to take his brother home, but lacks any suit-
able means of transportation. Max draws a bicycle, which the Clown refuses.
Then he draws a cart and a donkey, which latter promptly kicks the cart into
splinters and scatters the Clown and his brother over the landscape. ,
Finally Max decides to furnish them air transportation via balloon A lot or
amusing things happen, not only with the original balloon, but with a lot ot
others which the Clown himself manages to manufacture m such numbers that
they fly away with the whole house. Max and the Clown both have an awtul
time with these balloons, but finally all ends in the inkwell.
700 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M 7032 The Fortune Teller Out-of-the-Inkwell
The subject starts with an adaptation of the old story of the Bottle Imp, next
introducing a real Fortune Teller who is telling Max’s fortune, and afterwards
agrees to fell that of the Clown by card. The Fortune Teller declared that both
Max and the Clown are “ haunted by evil spirits.”
716 feet standard length-
Rental 5/-,
7033 Felix in Hollywood Pat Sullivan
A clever cartoon, in which in spite of many obstacles, Felix the Cat travels
out to Hollywood, and applies for a job in the movies. He sees Ben Turpin,
Charlie Chaplin and Douglas Fairbanks “ on set,” but fails to get a job until by a
lucky stroke he “butts in” and effects a thrilling rescue which results in his
securing the desired contract.
One of the best of the Felix Cartoons.
711 fdet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M-S 7034 Felix * n Fairyland Pat Sullivan
Felix rescues a fly, which turns out to be a Fairy in disguise, who offers him
any wish that he may make. After some consideration he wishes he were in
Fairyland, and presto! there he is. He sees several of the familiar inhabitants,


and is particularly impressed by the sorrow of the Old Woman who Lived in a
Shoe. She gives him excellent reasons for her grief in the overcrowded condition
of the Shoe with her numerous progeny. Felix spies an Ogre’s Castle, which is
much larger, and has very few occupants. He decides to acquire the Castle as a
home for the old Woman’s growing family. He dispossesses and destroys the Ogre
by a very clever ruse, and the picture closes with the Old Woman moving with
her family from the cramped quarters of the Shoe to the palatial quarters of the
former Ogre’s Castle.
657 feet standard length—on same reel with 3052, Mountain Sheep.
Rental 5/-.
S 7044 The Clown Pup Inkwell
The little clown tries to show his skill as an artist by drawing a picture of
a dog. The artist draws a regular dog. The two begin to fight, and when the
clown tries to separate them, they turn on him, and he flees into the inkwell for
safety.
287 feet standard length—on same reel with 1084, Championship Tennis Game
Rental 5/-.
M 7045 Contest Inkwell
An extremely clever and interesting cartoon, in which our little friend the
Clown engages in a circus performance with a trick mechanical donkey, having two
speeds ahead, viz., mild ” and “ wild.” Of course the Clown rides him on the
first speed, and contestants for the prize get a chance on the “ wild ” speed. Then
Max decides to introduce the Clown to a motion picture theatre audience, and
some extremely clever and interesting combinations of real cinematography with
animated cartoons interspersed will delight every spectator.
This is one of the very cleverest of the Inkwell Series, and can be highly
recommended.
792 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
S 7047 Mother Goose Land Out-of-the-Inkwell
An Inkwell cartoon, in which our little Clown introduces the following well-
known characters from Mother Goose:—
Little Boy Blue, Little Miss Muffett, Three Men in a Tub, Jack and Jill, the
Old Woman who Lived in a Shoe, Simple Simon, Humpty Dumpty, etc.
For the kiddies this will be perhaps the most interesting of the entire Inkwell
Series.
645 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7048 A Reunion Out-of-the Inkwell
For the little clown’s birthday the artist provides a fete to which the
clown s family is invited. An attempt is made to photograph the family reunion
but it is not successful, and the party ends in a near riot.
684 feet standard length—on same reel with 1076, Training an Eight-oar Crew
Rental 5/-.


M 7049 Trip to Mars Out-of-the-Inkwell
Max sends the Clown away to Mars in a specially constructed rocket, but not
before the Clown has placed a can of TNT, with a lighted fuse, under Max’s
chair, so that Max will follow him hastily through space. The various adventures
of the Clown on Mars are shown, also his return to Earth, picking up Max in his
taxi-cab on the way.
614 feet standard length
Rental 5/-.
S 7053 What a Difference a Little Hair Will Make Independent
(No. 2)
Animated cartoon by Marcus featuring in rapid sketch style portrait draw-
ings which by gradual transformation change into the faces of such well known
characters as Charles Murray, Anita Stewart, Lloyd George, Theodore Roose-
velt, Jr., and his illustrious father. These transformations are rather clever,
and the interest is well sustained.
307 feet standard length—on same reel with 4045, Holy Smoke
Rental 4/-.
M-S 7057 Flapper Number One Tony Sarg
A humorous conception in silhouette of the original flappers of early cave
days, showing that the essential characteristics of this interesting species have
not been materially changed, even by the intervening centuries of evolution.
We see a typical pair of gold-diggers in search of excitement and fun while mother
does the work at home. But they make the fatal mistake of letting a “ brother
shifter ” taste mother’s cooking, after which
“ He who once had been their brother
Soon was husband of their mother.”
745 feet standard length.
Rental 4/-.
M-S 7062 Felix Out of Luck Pat Sullivan
Felix on his way home to lunch refuses two invitations to eat, only to
find on his arrival a note saying “out of town for a week.” He chases a mouse
but the mouse escapes. Seeing a man fishing he dives and eats the bait on the
fish hook, but a big fish pursues him and he has a very narrow escape. Finally
he reaches home again and finds his lunch awaiting him—the note having been
left there "only to fool the bill collectors.”
670 feet standard length—on same reel with 1114, Old Fashioned Coon Hunt
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7063 Felix Gets Broadcast Sullivan
Felix watches a fisherman and as he catches fish and puts them in his basket,
Felix sneaks out and eats them. The man discovers his loss and chases Felix,
who tries to escape by climbing the towers of a radio station. But the man goes
inside, turns on the current and broadcasts Felix to Egypt. Here he is pursued
by natives up and down the pyramids and around the Sphinx, and has hard
work saving his life, but as usual in the end he gets home safe and sound again.
652 feet standard length—on same reel with 3057, Springtime Miracles
Rental 5/-.


S 7064 Felix Brings Home the Bacon Pat Sulllvan
Felix having had his tail bobbed to be in style, learns that the style has
changed. He begs a fairy for a new tail and havmg received it decides to visit
fairyland, where he has many adventures, the most important being one in which
he helps to replenish Old Mother Hubbard’s empty cupboard.
675 feet standard length—on same reel with 2013, Farming For Fur
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7065 Felix Follows the Swallows Sullivan
Felix out in the snow, is nearly frozen. Looking up he secs a lot of swal-
lows flying South and he decides to follow them. So he acquires some wings
and starts. His arrival is the signal for numerous stirring adventures. An
elephant pursues him into a lake. Felix hides at the bottoni. The elephant
drinks the lake dry and pursues again. But Felix comes out safely at last and is
ready for more adventures.
631 feet standard length—on same reel with 3031, Nearest to Man
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7066 Felix All Balled Up SulHvan
Felix decides to go in for golf and as you may imagine, develops many un-
usual situations. The end of his tail, with just the proper crook to it, makes a
very effective club, and his drives are deadly.
60Sfeet standard length—on same reel with 3060, A Barehand Fight with an
Alligator
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7067 Felix Goes a-Hunting Sullivan
Tim’s wife makes his life miserable because he cannot afford a fur coat for
her. Felix decides to help him get one and goes hunting. Suddenly he is chased
by a bear and in desperation runs back to Tim s house and the bear follows him
inside. Felix hides, but Mrs. Tim catches sight of the bear and soon takes his
fur coat from him. The bear runs for his life and Mrs. Tim proudly displays
her new bear-skin.
635 feet standard length—on same reel with 1086, Indians of the Painted Desert
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7068 Felix Finds ’Em Fickle Sullivan
Felix’s lady love spurns his gift of flowers and demands a variety that
grows only at the top of a towering mountain. Felix starts up for it and en-
counters fierce bears, tigers and other animals on the way. He is pursued up and
down and around the mountain and finally, just as he reaches his goal and seizes
the flower, he slips and falls toward the ground. But he spreads the petals of the
flower to form a parachute, thus saving his life. And then he learns that the
lady did not want that flower, but the one next to it!
643 feet sandard length—on same reel with 3061, Salting a Bird’s Tail
Rental 5/-.


M-S 7069 Felix All Puzzled Sullivan
Felix * s hungry but the boss tells him he cannot stop to get dinner until he
has finished his crossword puzzle. The missing word is “Something found in
Russia. Felix tickles a mule which kicks him all the way to Russia where ad-
ventures come thick and fast until he is glad to get back to his own country. He
explains that all he found in Russia was trouble, which proves to be the word
needed to complete the puzzle.
685 feet standard length—on same reel with 3068, Muscles of Expression
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7070 Felix Gets His Fill Sullivan
Felix, hungry as usual, hears that food is plentiful down south and decides
to hie him thither. He gets plenty, too, but only after having many thrilling
adventures.
682 fee standard length—on same reel with 3038, The Fastest Thing on Four
Legs
Rental 5/-.
M-S 7071 Felix ‘‘Hyps” the “Hippo” Pat Sullivan
Felix studies How to be a Hypnotist” and then starts out to use his new
power. The results are surprising. His success in finding and recapturing an
escaped white hippopotamus wins him a big reward.
623 feet standard length—on same reel with 3056, A Florida Alligator Farni
Rental 5/-.
S 7073 Felix Finds Out Pat Sullivan
Felix and his schoolboy friend have an adventure with a hot-dog, and the
boy friend is late for school. In trying to help him, “Felix finds out” why the
Moon shines.
On 1 Reel
Rental 5/-.
M 7074 Felix Goes Hungry Pat Sullivan
After being disappointed in his endeavours to steal from a fish shop, a
mouse in a hat store looks like an easy meal, but poor Felix has lots of trouble,
and in the end looses both the mouse and money with which he hoped to buy
food.
On 1 Reel
Rental 5/-.
M 7075 Felix Revolts Pat Sullivan
War is declared against Felix and his tribe by the Town Council on ac-
count of their nightly escapades disturbing the peace. Felix revolts, and leaves
the town at the mercy of rats and mice. In despair the people implore Felix
to return and rid them of this new pest, which he does, and is again proclaimed
a good citizen.
On 1 Reel
Rental 5/-.


S 7080 Felix Grabs His Grub Pat Sullivan
Felix is awakened at dawn by the crowing of roosters, and after his
toilet thinks of breakfast.
Felix has many adventures before he at last satisfies his hunger. Someone
goes short of their morning milk but it is not Felix. This film is a real laugh
raiser for the children.
On 1 reel
Rental 5/-.
S 8001 On the Trail Irvin S Cummings
Featuring Irving Cummings
This is an especially absorbing North-West Mounted Police story, laid in the
picturesque Canadian Rockies. Irving Cummings, a member of the Royal
Mounted, is detailed to apprehend “ Long Shot ” Sanderson, who has killed a
brother policeman out of spite. Before Cummings can locate Sanderson and his
band of outlaws, the latter waylay and rob a tourist party and abduct a young lady
from the group. Cummings, learning the details of the new outrage, continues
his pursuit with renewed vigour. The chase leads him to the snow-covered outlaw
cabin, above the Arctic Circle. By strategy and a terrific fight with Sanderson,
he is able to arrest the band, and return the young lady to her anxious father.
This is a particularly interesting story, and contains plenty of action.
1797 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
M 8002 Corporal Jim’s Ward Irving Cummings
Featuring Irving Cummings
Sergeant McTish, Corporal Jim Campbell and Private Bob Hammon are
stationed in the Sweetwater Post of the Royal North-West Mounted Police on
the outlook for moonshiners. One day Corporal Jim captures of three
two of them rough looking men and the third a young “ boy.” The men are
locked up in the Post gaol, but the boy seems so young that they allow him to
eat with them, and also to remain outside the gaol that night. Next morning they
find all their prisoners gone, but right after making this discovery, the boy comes
back, and explains that he was forced through his fear of the moonshiners, to aid
in their escape, although he later escaped from them and returned to the Post.
To their great astonishment they then discover that the “ boy ” is in reality a girl,
who has been held in the power of the moonshiners, and who tells them a pitiful
story. 1,, -i j
The men are touched, and decide to do all they can to help the girl, and upon
the arrival of Padre that day, they turn the girl over to him to be put in a
school, where she will have good care and an education. Corporal gives the
Padre all his small savings to be used for the various needs of the girl, Mary,
while she is at the school. .
The search for the moonshiners then continues, and results in their capture,
but not until after Corporal Jim has been shot by one of them. His recovery is
greatly cheered by the letters he receives from Mary, and the attachment begun
under such unusual circumstances continues until four years later, when she gradu-
ates from the school, and the story ends as all good movies should the young
couple presumably living happily ever after.
1915 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.


S 8003 Hearts in Exile World
Featuring Clara Kimball Young, Montague Love and Vernon Steele
“ Hearts in Exile,” the novel by John Oxenham, from which the pictures
have been made, was one of the big action successes of the year when it was pub-
lished. The picture play is even more intensely exciting than the book.
In the character of Hope Ivanovna, Clara Kimball Young has a role that
calls for true histrionic ability. The part is a highly dramatic one, telling as it
does, of the love, trials and tribulations of a young Russian girl who is loved by
three men. One of the men, the chief of police, exiles the other two men to
Siberia, and Hope follows Serge Palma, the man she has married, to that hopeless
locality.
In the chilly regions of Siberia where the political prisoners of Russia toil
through a tortured existence, love comes to the heroine in the strangest possible
fashion. This is, throughout the entire length of its five reels, a picture play of
truly absorbing interest. The manner in which fate plays with the three princi-
pal characters in this production is startling and thrilling. Altogether the produc-
tion is on a particularly high plane. The scenic effects are exceptional, the cast is
notable, and the illustrated titles make “ Hearts in Exile ” a film play of extraor-
dinary merit.
4703 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental 15/-.
M 8004 The Beggar Maid Tri-Art
Featuring Mary Astor and Reginald Denny
An artistic production founded on Sir Edward Burne-Jones painting of King
Cophetua and the Beggar Maid, which itself is founded on Tennyson’s poem. A
love story in which the artist helps to smooth the course of true love between the
Earl of Winton and a daughter of his gardener by using them both as models
in his painting, at the same time overcoming the objections of her brother, who
fears that there is so much difference in their social stations that the match cannot
be a happy one. In the end all comes out smoothly, and the lovers are happily
United. Beautiful settings and unusual photographic effects add to the charm of
this subject.
1855 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
S 8005 The Young Painter Tri-Art
Featuring Mary Astor and Pierre Gendron
Inspired by the famous painting of the same title by Rembrandt. A touching,
modern story of a young painter who finds inspiration in a copy of the original
painting.
His ambition to succeed in his profession is fostered by his friendship for the
beautiful girl who takes art lessons from him at his studio on Long Island.
She is the daughter of wealthy parents, and is beloved by a very fine young
man, who was the soldier companion of the young painter during the World-
War.
Realising his inability to provide for a wife in the style that his sweetheart
has been accustomed to, the artist goes away to a city studio, where he befriends
an orphan newsboy, who becomes his companion.


Stricken with illness, the young painter gradually loses his strength until he
is a mere shadow of his former self, when at last discovered by the other man,
who realises that the heroine’s heart is given to the young painter. Alas, the ill-
ness has progressed too far, and the painter passes away, surrounded by those he
loves and who love him. The final scene where his soul leaves its mortal tenement
and follows the master, is one of great beauty and pathos. The entire production
is beautifully directed, and inspired by lofty sentiment and exquisite ideals.
1955 feet standard length —on 2 reels.
Rental 10/-.
M 8006 Hope Tri-Art
Featuring Mary Astor
Founded on George Frederick Watt’s masterpiece of blindfolded “ Hope ”
bending low over her harp to catch the melody from its single remaining string.
In a tale of fisher folk and lighthouses on the Breton Coast, the artist tells the
origin of his picture.
Joan, the light-house keeper’s daughter, marries Pierre, a fisherman, who
goes to sea before their baby is born, leaving Joan with his mother. In his absence
many misfortunes befall Joan —many harp-strings break—and finally when his
ship is sighted it is seen to be afire, and the survivors report Pierre lost. Joan’s
hope is her last string, and she clings blindly to that until, to her joy, Pierre washed
ashore more dead than alive, staggers home to her and their baby son. An ex-
tremely artistic production which gives the painter’s conception a new meaning.
1965 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
S 8010 The Wakefield Case World
Featuring Herbert Rawlinson and Florence Billings
Four priceless rubies are stolen from the British Museum by the Krogan
Brothers, international crooks. While watched through a hole in the wall by the
elder Wakefield, detective, they are themselves robbed by a gang who specialise
on stealing from other thieves, and are therefore heartily despised even by their
own profession.
One of this “ Breen Gang ” is a woman, and when young Wakefield arrives
with other officers previously summoned by telephone by the elder Wakefield, they
break into the Krogan apartment only to find that the Krogan brothers have just
been robbed. One of them is blind from a shot by the elder Wakefield, who
himself lies dead, stabbed by a dagger identified by the police as belonging to the
Breen woman, and having several previous murders also to its credit. Young
Wakefield vows eternal vengeance, and starts for New York, where he learns that
one of the Breen gang has been seen.
On the steamer, but with identity unsuspected by him, are one of the Krogan
brothers, and also a young couple in whose possession are the stolen rubies. Krogan
sees the rubies by means of a periscope held outside of his port hole and reflecting
the interior of the adjacent stateroom. Wakefield falls in love with the young
lady, and later visits her at her father’s home near New York, against the advice
of the chief detective of his New York office. The Krogans have a home of their
own only three miles distant, and by a strange coincidence both Krogan and
Wakefield are visitors at the home of the suspicious characters on the same night.
The thrilling experiences of that night, containing plot and counterplot, attacks


and reprisals, hairbreadth escapes and thrilling chases, keep the spectator in a
fever of suspense and excitement seldom equalled in a screen production. Of
coufse, everything turns out properly, with the villain meeting with his deserts,
and brave heart winning fair lady.
This is a thrilling melodrama, very effectively directed, and lavishly staged.
The photography is beautiful, and the lighting unusually effective and pleasing.
The play is full of fights between the robbers themselves, rather than with the
officers, and the thread of romance runs beautiful and true.
5265 feet standard length—on 6 reels
Rental £l/10/-.
M 8016 The Moonstone World
Featuring Eugene O’Brien and Elaine Hammer stein.
If you are a traveller and have wandered through that beautiful but mysterious
country, India, you must know of the famous Temple of Vishnu. Vast treasures
of priceless value are entrusted to its keeping, and the greatest among these, the
Sacred Jewel of Vishnu, most marvellous of all Indian precious stones.
By day and by night it is guarded by the ever-faithful worshippers of Vishnu.
Yet nothing is safe from the cupidity of those who steal from motives other than
mere gain. Thus we see the great treasure is stolen by an Englishman, one John
Herncastle, who desires it only as a means toward revenge upon the woman who
has rejected his love.
With the priceless treasure he escapes from India, and arrives at his home in
England, there to weave the final strands of the web which shall enmesh her whom
he has loved and lost. But it is the decree of destiny that he shall not live to
triumph, and his mysterious death is the first punishment that the great Vishnu
deals to those who would outrage the sanctity of his Temple. Herncastle has
realized that the theft means death to him, but with fiendish cunning has planned
that, even though he die, his revenge will be carried on by others who shall be
innocent of his purpose less they fail in their parts. Thus does his will desig-
nate Miss Violet Verinder, daughter of a rich and aristocratic English family, as
the recipient of the Vishnu jewel and her fiancee, Franklin Blake, a young Eng-
lishman, as his executor.
When the jewel passes into the hands of Violet, she little realizes the sinister
purpose of Herncastle and the evil influences which the jewel is destined to bring
into her life and the lives of those she loves.
Not until the jewel is finally restored to the Temple of Vishnu does the shadow
of tragedy cease to stalk in its wake and then the mystery is cleared and Happiness
comes again. And from the shadow of the Great Beyond the spirit of John
Herncastle, once gloating at apparent success, slinks away to curse the fates that
robbed him of his revenge at the moment of victory.
4479 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental 20/-.
M 8018 Rope’s End Irving Cummings
Featuring Irving Cummings
A drama of the North-Western Mounted Police, in which Corporal Campbell
again distinguishes himself in wild North-Western style.
In an attempt to rescue a much-abused daughter from her brutal father’s
persecutions, Corporal Campbell is shown in a terrific rough-and-tumble fight, in


which he is finally victorious, only to be in turn overpowered by the arrival of a
pal of the brutal father. The two drag Corporal Campbell several miles through
picturesque mountain scenes to a high cliff, over which they first suspend him
with a rope, and, after taunting him for some time, they cut the rope and allow
him to fall.
Meantime the daughter has reached the Post, and a rescue party starts out to
rescue Campbell from his captors.
After some furious fighting, success attends their efforts, and a year later
we see Sergeant Campbell receiving his reward in the plighted troth of the girl
whom he had so bravely rescued from her unfortunate environment.
Very exciting melodrama in a beautiful mountain setting, hard riding and
fighting. 1634 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 10/-.
S 8019 Patsy’s Jim Irving Cummings
Featuring Irving Cummings
Corporal Jim Campbell, R.N.W.M.P., on duty at an outpost in the Canadian
woods, accidentally startles little Patsy so that she falls into the brook, from
which he rescues her and carries her home. Jim is in love with Patsy’s sister,
Mary, whose reply to his plea is, “ Some day soon.” Private McKnight, of the
same Post, is sent to take a prisoner to town, but the prisoner overcomes him and
escapes, leaving McKnight badly wounded near Mary’s cabin, where he is found
by Corporal Campbell. Campbell asks Mary to take care of Bob, while he goes
on after the prisoner. Bob’s convalescence takes some weeks, during which time
he falls in love with Mary, and when Corporal Campbell returns after having
finally captured his man, he finds that Bob has asked Mary the same question and
she has answered 44 Yes.”
An Irving Cummings’ picture of an unusual type, which will appeal to all
friends of this popular star.
1524 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
M 8021 The Corsican Brothers Dintenfass
Featuring Dustin Farnum and Winifred Kingston
A colourful, romantic dream of the last century, enhanced by the picturesque
settings and costumes of the country where the scene is laid.
Fabien and Louis are twin brothers so alike in appearance, action and thought
that they are hardly distinguishable. A local quarrel breaks out among the hot-
headed Corsicans, and a vendetta is established over a trifling incident. The
Governor of the Island arrives with his beautiful daughter Emily, just after an
assassination due to the vendetta, which is temporarily quelled by Fabien.
Louis goes to Paris to study law, where he continues the romance which was
started with Emily in Corsica. A celebrated duellist, Chateau Renaud, is also a
rival for the affections of the fair Emily. Renaud, however, is a dissolute young
man of wealth with whom Emily has carried on a flirtatious but innocent corres-
pondence during her school days. She begs him to return the letters, which he
promises to do if she will meet him at the Bal Masque to be held that night at the
Grand Opera House in Paris.
The scenes of revelry at the Ball are lavishly displayed, as is a rather baccha-
nalian dinner party given by Renaud at the early morning hour of 4 o’clock. Louis


is present as one of the guests, although not at all in harmony with the surround-
ings. Through a subterfuge Emily is persuaded to come for the letters at that
hour, without realising that she will be precipitated into a meeting with the dissi-
pated diners. In mortification and embarrassment she undertakes to depart, only
to find that the door is locked. Louis, in the most polite manner, solicits the
privilege of escorting her to her home. This act so provokes Renaud that he
challenges Louis to a duel, in which he is killed by the superior skill of Renaud,
whose own seconds point out to him that a duel under the circumstances is nothing
less than murder, unless Renaud should restrain his anger.
At home in Corsica, through a mysterious mental influence, Fabien is con-
scious of his brother’s death, and leaves Paris to avenge him. Events now move
rapidly to a dramatic climax. Fabien visits Emily to discover just what has
become of Louis, and then follows Renaud to the country, where he has fled to
escape public indignation over the death of Louis. Emily and her father follow
rapidly to undertake to prevent the avowed purpose of a meeting, but arrive only
in time to witness the duel between Fabien and Renaud, following which Emily and
Fabien are united amidst the beautiful flowers of Fabien’s lovely home in Corsica.
4806 feet standard length —on 5 reels.
Rental 20/-.
S 8022 The Forbidden City Selznick
Featuring Norma Talmadge and Thomas Meighan.
The scene is laid in the Far East, where Norma Talmadge plays, at first, the
paid of a mandarin’s daughter in old China, whose father seeks reinstatement in
the Emperor’s favour by giving his daughter San San to the Emperor’s household.
But San San is having her own beautiful romance, as the secret wife of the young
American Consul (played by Thomas Meighan).
The Consul is ordered first to Shanghai, and later to Manila. Hastily revisiting
his former post, for the purpose of bringing his wife San San to his new office, he
arrives only to find that her family have disappeared, and left no trace. Heart-
broken, he departs.
Meanwhile, San San is presented at the Emperor’s palace in the Forbidden
City in the gorgeous panoply of the Emperor’s favourite wife. Kneeling before
his Majesty, she opens her mantle to disclose at her breast, Baby Toy, which has
blessed her union with her “ Love Man.” In a rage, the Emperor orders her
father and herself to te executed. Pretending to be moved by her tears, he
promises her release and safe conduct to her home, but has her treacherously
stabbed from behind the curtains as she leaves the room.
The child is saved, and reared in the Emperor’s household, an object of con-
tempt on account of her alien blood.
We next see Toy (also played by Norma Talmadge), now 18 years of age,
insulted by the pure-bred Chinese of the Emperor’s household, who are jealous
of her because of her superior beauty and charm.
After a thrilling escape, she reaches Manila, becomes a Red Cross nurse, and
falls in love with a young Lieutenant of the Army, but they are forbidden to
marry by the Governor-General (her father), on account of her Chinese blood.
Her father does not recognise her, but is conscious of vague reminiscences
which, in a following illness and delirium, cause Toy (now his nurse) to recognise
him as her father. In his convalescence everything is cleared up, and the happy
lovers are united.


Two popular stars in a well-directed, romantic play that will enthrall any
audience.
4848 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/10/-.
M 8023 The Wonderful Chance Seizmck
Featuring Eugene O’ Brien, Rodolph Valentino, and Mary Mansfield
The story develops from a strong resemblance between “ Swagger ” Barlow,
a reformable gentleman crook, and Lord Birmingham, an English nobleman
both parts being played by Eugene O’Brien, .
Barlow has just been released from a penitentiary term for burglary. Going
to visit a former pal, he is invited to participate in a robbery, but declines with
the statement that he is going straight. His pal thereupon undertakes the rob-
bery alone, is detected, and severely wounded, but manages to escape and return
to his room, where Barlow, recognising the urgent necessity for medical attention,
decides to make one more venture in crime to obtain the necessary funds.
In the dwelling robbed, Barlow discovers a canary which he liberates from
sympathy with his own previous confinement. This only clue leads the detectives
to suspect that Barlow, recently released, is the sentimental criminal, but they
cannot prove it.
Meanwhile, Lord Birmingham, coming to America, is abducted by a gang of
which Joe Klingsby (Rodolph Valentino) is the head. By a strange coincidence
Barlow, dodging into the Ritz Hotel to escape a detective shadowing him, is mis-
taken by obsequious servants for Lord Birmingham, whom he resembles. He
tries to play the part, and, as the honoured guest of the Wintons at their Long
Island estate, falls in love with Peggy (Mary Mansfield). Of course Klingsby
is dumbfounded at the appearance of another bogus Lord Birmingham, whom he
has intended to impersonate. # ,
Barlow, back in New York, is recognised by his old pal, wrm tells him of
the kidnapping of Lord Birmingham by the Klingsby gang, of which he is now
a member. Barlow visits Birmingham in confinement, changes places with him,
and later explains the conspiracy when Klingsby attempts to expose the supposed
bogus Lord Birmingham to the Winton household. Barlow is given an oppor-
tunity to work out his own future with the intimation from Peggy that when he
is successful, he will find her waiting for him.
4873 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental 20/-.
S 8024 A Pair of Silk Stockings Selznick
Featuring Constance Talmadge, Wanda Hawley and Harrison Ford.
Sam Thornhill and Mrs. Sam (Molly) love each other more than they realize,
but there are so many things on which they cannot agree that when hubby goes
one step too far and tries to make Molly jealous, a divorce develops. Later Sam
is a guest at Sir John Gower’s houseparty, to which Molly comes seeking shelter
for the night on the pretense that her car has broken down.
Events resulting from the efforts of the host to keep the divorced couple apart
promptly begin to occur, and the presence of an engaged couple among the other


guests introduces complications that are highly amusing. Molly’s silk stockings,
bless ’em, play a prominent part in the capture of a burglar and in the re-uniting of
Sam and Molly, to say nothing of repairing the fractured engagement of the other
couple so that all ends well.
Aside from the all-star cast and excellent acting, the extremely clever plot
of this subject will appeal to all. Clean, witty, humorous and up-to-date —these
are the adjectives which account for its popularity.
Comedy drama —4os6 feet standard length —on 5 reels.
Rental £l/5/-.
S 8025 Chivalrous Charlie Selznick
Featuring Eugene O’Brien and George Fawcett
Charlie is one of those romantically chivalrous young men who should have
lived during the Crusades. He is always being imposed upon by damsels in
distress, either genuine or assumed. His hard-headed and practical old uncle has
no sympathy with the young man’s sentimental adventures and, after he has helped
him out of several scrapes in which he was an entirely innocent victim, he per-
suades the young man to avoid any further adventures.
However, a particulardy distressing case of a beautiful young girl thrown
upon his protection, rather compels him to assist in her escape. This involves
them both in a series of hairbreadth adventures, fighting their way to freedom and
subsequently fleeing from pursuit in automobile, speed boat and motor cycle. Of
course, “ Two Fisted Charlie ” has to beat up one principal villain, with two or
three assistants, besides having his arms full of the fainting female, whom he
finally bears to safety. In the end he finds that his last episode was one carefully
arranged by his uncle with the hope of finally curing him of all romantic notions.
However, when Charlie vanquished the men hired to overcome him, the plot got
beyond the control of his old uncle, but Charlie was lucky enough to end it all
happily.
Comedy drama —42s6 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental 20/-.
M 8026 One Week of Love Selznick
Featuring Elaine Hammerstein and Conway Tearle
A romantic melodrama laid in Mexico and the South-West. Highlights in-
clude an aeroplane crash, a railroad wreck and a flood.
A spoiled daughter of the rich at a “ bathing suit ” party, agrees to marry an
ardent suitor if he can outrace her in an aeroplane contest. Her plane crashes to
the ground in Mexico, where she finds herself in a nest of outlaws. An American
outcast engineer protects her from “ greasers ” and takes her to his shack. He is
wounded by the greasers, and nursed back to health by the heroine. Her hate for
the domineering derelict gradually turns to love. Her fiance proves himself a cad,
and the girl gladly accepts the American after he rescues her from death in a
flood, and proves his worthiness.
A splendid picture; well directed, well acted, well filmed; beautiful scenes


in rugged mountains, heart interest, suspense, thrill and, finally, a satisfactory
ending. It will be sure to please any audience.
6317 feet standard length—on 7 reels
Rental £l/8/-.
S 8029 The Two Doyles Canyon Pictures
Featuring Franklyn Favnum
Donald Doyle, a sober pioneer settler, seeks in the West a home for his
wife and baby girl. His twin brother, Jerry, a happy-go-lucky sort of chap,
left home twelve years before and has not seen him since. Chance takes him at
mealtime to a bunch of cattle rustlers who are secretly headed by Sheriff Owens,
but he refuses to join them. Jerry holds up the Canyon City stage carrying
10,000 dollars and County Judge Brown and his daughter. Jerry finds the
money, but prefers to steal a kiss from the Judge’s daughter, saying that the
kiss is the biggest haul he has ever made. Jerry is chased by a band of maraud-
ing Indians right into Donald’s camp, where the brothers meet, and make
common cause against the redskins. Donald’s wife is shot and Donald himself
so severely wounded that he is left for dead by Jerry who escapes with the
baby. The sheriff and posse trailing Jerry for the robbery find Don wounded
in his camp and through the resemblance to his twin brother arrest him for
robbing the stage. Don realises that Jerry was the real culprit but decides to
sacrifice himself for his brother, as the death of his wife and the loss of his
child leave him without further incentive.
The Judge’s daughter cherishes a secret affection for the bold bandit who
has so unceremoniously kissed her, and discovering Jerry and the baby in a
deserted cabin, Jerry is justified and the Sheriff is confounded and captured'i
The lovers are then married.
This is a very excellent. Western drama with good photography, daring
adventures and just enough sentiment. It is clean throughout and sure to
please.
1852 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
M 8030 Vengeance and the Girl Canyon Pictures
Featuring Franklyn Farnum
Jim Westguard’s father’s death results from the theft of his ranch by
Ward Mitchell. Little Jim swears to be revenged and later as a man he deter-
mines to carry out his vow. But he learns that Mitchell is dead and his daugh-
ter Harriet is the chief stock-owner of the Mitchell Land Co. A strange coin-
cidence brings Jim and Harriet together, but he spurns her after learning who
she is. Later, however, she is captured and held for ransom by a band of out-
laws and Jim goes single-handed to her rescue. He effects this and although
wounded himself, brings her away safely, then falls in love with her. Harriet
also falls in love with him, but Jim feeling that his vow still requires that he


shall have nothing to do with a Mitchell, resolves to give her up and by means
of a hoax causes her to renounce him as well. She then returns to her former
fiance and Jim seeks consolation in the belief that his vow has been fulfilled.
1886 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
B 8032 In Sheep’s Clothing Carlton Kin «
Featuring Carlton King and Vivian Rich.
This is a good little story featuring a clever woman crook and her male
accomplice who come to the small town to temporarily escape a too searching
police investigation and there try to turn another tricky The woman cr ook
attempts to fascinate Jed Bascombe, the Marshal in the little hick town, while
her husband, who is a professional bigamist, but poses as her brother, en-
deavors to captivate the village belle and entice her away to the big city by
stories of wealth and splendor to be enjoyed there. It looks as if they are
about to succeed in their nefarious schemes until we are advised that although
justice moves with leaden Wings it arrives with an iron heel.”
At the very altar the prospective bridegroom, Jed Bascombe, stages a dra-
matic climax by having the prospective bride arrested together with her accom-
plice, and again the cause of justice is triumphant and virtue is its own reward.
1686 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
s 8033 The Better Way Carlton Kin ®
Featuring Carlton King and Vivian Rich
Jed Bascombe is a lovable Town Marshal with an adopted son Jack.
Marion Moore is the daughter of a wealthy but unscrupulous small town mag-
nate, Hiram Moore, who forbids her to meet her sweetheart, Jack, who has
fallen a victim to the use of morphine through his sufferings as a gassed soldier
in the War. A masked bandit holds up a masquerade party and on circumstan-
tial evidence Jack is convicted of the crime, but soon pardoned by the Governor
on account of his former good reputation and war record. As a successful
engineer he sees Hiram Moore arrested for dope smuggling and everything ends
properly. , , , ,
A nice, clear! story showing life’s rewards to the deserving and punish-
ment overtaking those who deserve it.
1841 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
M 8034 Go Get ’Em Independent Films
A typical Western story. The Tarantula’s Gang has killed old Smithers
and June Canby, who brings the news, demands their capture. The sheriff
swears in Clay as Special Deputy, and, in search of the ’Tarantula,
Clay learns that he is Jim Canby—June’s own brother. June begs Clay not
to kill Jim, and he promises to bring him in without using his gun. After
some hard riding and fighting in regular western thriller style he captures the
entire gang except the Tarantula, who is laid low by a stray bullet from the
Sheriff’s gun. , , . 0 ,
1641 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.


S 8040 ** Bill ” Independent
This is a picture which is different. We cannot do better than quote from an
article in “ The Ladies’ Home Journal ” entitled When the Movies are Good”
“ I have just seen a motion picture which in addition to being genuinely
interesting, has also a really high degree of artistry.
Bill ’is an adaptation of Anatole France’s ‘ Crainquebille.’ It is the
saga of an old fruit vender who doesn’t understand much of the world, and
against whom the world beats pitilessly. He is misunderstood, arrested, tried.
He has lost his friends. He tries to go back to gaol where he was comfort-
able. When he wants to be arrested, they refuse to arrest him. What a strange
life, to be sure! A simple piece of character acting finely presented.
It has a great human appeal, which is more far-reaching than any sex appeal,
or heart interest, or suspense. Bill has an instinct for justice, and he sees it
meted out whenever he can in his small circle, particularly to the newspaper boy
and his dog.
“ Alas - he never encounters justice for himself—therein lies the tragedy and
the climax.
This impersonation of one of the masses in a city of three million, and the
genius of the actor who can make his audience follow every detail of commonplace
life with absorbing interest, proves that we touch nature more surely through
simplicity than we do through complicated plots, million dollar sets, and casts of
a thousand people. As a character study portrayed by a great artist of the Comedie
Francaise, this picture is an education to all young actors studying character parts.”
3443 feet standard length,—on 4 reels.
Rental 16/-.
M 8041 Where the North Begins Warner Bros.
Featuring Claire Adams, Fred Huntley, Walter McGail and Rin-tin-tin,
the Wolf-Dog.
In the far North of Canada is situated “ Caribou,” a fur-trading post. Here
live old McTavish and his daughter Felice ; “ Shad ” Galloway, an unscrupulous
man, and factor of the post; “ The Fox,” a renegade Indian ; and Gabrielle Dupree,
trapper and dog-sledge driver, who is in love with Felice.
Previous to the events in the story a blooded puppy being transported through
the wilds in a crate fastened to a dog sledge, had been dropped and lost. Later,
adopted by a pack of wolves, he grew up as a member of the pack, though he
surpassed them all in strength and cunning.
Galloway, regarding Felice with covetous eyes, orders Gabrielle to go to Skagway
with a valuable load of furs, but sends the Fox ahead to kill him and steal the furs.
The Fox shoots Gabrielle, but the latter rolls down a snowbank, and crawls away
badly wounded, while the Fox is hiding the furs. In a following blizzard he is
found by wolves, who are about to tear him to pieces, when Rin-tin-tin, the dog-
wolf, arrives, and fights the pack leader for the prey. . He kills the wolf,' and then
starts for Gabrielle, who, weak from his wound, fights feebly, and falls in a faint.
The dog leaps upon him, but suddenly instinct —the inborn instinct of his ancestors —
tells him that this is Man, his friend. And so instead of hurting him he stays near
to guard him. Later the Fox returns to make sure that Gabrielle is dead, and seeing
him alive shoots at him again. He is about to finish him with a knife, when the


dog leaps to the attack, and almost kills him before the Fox succeeds in making
hIS finally succeeds in making his way back to the post; how Gallo-
way again attempts to injure him ; how the dog and the Fox again meet in deadly
encounter ; how the net of justice gradually tightens about Galloway , how the dog
finally kills the Fox, and brings about the capture of Galloway, and the happy union
of Gabrielle and Felice, will have to be seen to be appreciated. It s the greatest
dog story ever written, the hero is a magnificent animal, with almost human intelli-
gence. And the ending—another surprise—will also delight you. A clean, fine,
thrilling and satisfying picture that will delight every audience.
5789 feet standard length —on 6 reels.
Rental £l/16/-.
M 8042 The Little Church Around the Corner Warner Bros.
Featuring Claire Windsor, Pauline Stark, Kenneth Harlan.
Hobart Bosworth, Alec Francis, Winter Hall and Walter Long.
A Screen Classic showing the triumph of supreme Christian Faith,
David Graham, whose father was killed in the great coal mine, is a boy of deep
religious feeling to which he gives expression in Sunday meetings of the children
who listen spell-bound to his boyish sermons until a bad boy shatters their faith
because David cannot perform the miracle of making a deaf and dumb girl talk
through the faith he expounds.
He is educated by the mine owner and accepts the pastorate of a fashionable
church in the city He is deeply in love with the mine owner’s daughter who
reciprocates his affection, but his conscience continually urges him to go back to
his people of the mines. . . , , . ~ .
The miners feel that proper precautions are not being taken for their safety and
send a delegation which interrupts a reception being given in the city by the mine
owner at which David is a guest and takes the part of the miner delegation m an
effort to persuade the owner to improve the conditions in his mine. Unsuccessful
in this, he leaves the city and goes back to take his place among the miners just as
a cave-in at the mine occurred. . . ,
Then follow a long series of tremendously dramatic scenes m the mine, show-
ing the imprisoned gradually succumbing to the lack of air and the frantic efforts
of the rescuers extending over many hours of time to release them. No stronger
sustained suspense can be imagined than is portrayed during this trying ordeal.
Its effect upon the families of the miners, upon the officers and owner of the mine
and upon the workers, is heart-gripping to every spectator. The final rescue finds
hardly a dry eye in the audience. . . ~ , ,
The supreme thrill comes when the miners move m force to attack the office
and the owner. David Graham pleads from the doorway for peaceful methods
and the little deaf and dumb girl, now grown to womanhood, miraculously recovers
her speech and addresses the astonished and humbled miners for the first time in
This subject is particularly recommended for its high moral tone, not only in
the family, but also with religious and other organizations seeking a subject of
the uplift type. , , , . J 7 „ 7
5481 feet standard length —on 6 reels.
Rental £l/4/-.


S 8045 Peck’s Bad Boy Irvin Lesser
Featuring Jackie Coogan, Doris May, Wheeler Oakman and, Raymond Hatton.
Titles by Irvin S. Cobh.
In this picture, adapted from the book of the same title, Jackie plays the part
of an almost incorrigible but utterly lovable little scamp who annoys the grocer
enrages his father and frightens his loving mother.
The story opens with Jackie releasing the man-eating lion from his cage in the
circus under the mistaken impression that the lion, being a man-eater would be
indifferent to lunching on a little boy. Here we get a good thrill at’ the very
beginning of the story, and are prepared for the series of highly diverting incidents
which follow in rapid succession. Jackie is seen to be lunching continuously, but
indiscriminately on prunes, ice cream, dried apples, dill pickles, bananas, cheese,
etc., and for some inexplicable reason accumulates a “ tummy ache ” from the
mixture. At home and in bed, upon being assured by the doctor that he will not
die if he takes the Castor Oil, he begs the doctor to take away the Castor Oil and
let him die in peace.
The number of escapades in which Jackie engages are too numerous to be
mentioned here, but probably the star performance is capturing a bottle full of
ants which are carefully domiciled in his father’s lumbago pad just before that
worthy puts on the pad to go to church. The ants escape from the pad and their
restlessness produces a completely sympathetic effect upon Mr. Peck to the
hilarious delight of those immediate members of the congregation who become
aware of the source of his anguish.
Justice can hardly be done to this comedy drama in a printed description and
it must be seen to be thoroughly appreciated and enjoyed.
4710 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £l/10/-.
S 8048 My Boy Sol Lesse
Featuring Jackie Coogan.
Little Jackie Blair, a youngster whose father had died in France, started for
America with his mother, but two days out she also died, and the little fellow arrived
in this country alone.
By a strange accident Jackie eludes the Immigration Officers and finds him-
self on the streets of New York, where he recognises an old sailor, Cap’n Bill, whom
he had seen on the pier, and whom he follows to his cheap rooms in spite of the
Cap’n’s efforts to drive him away.
Mrs. J. Livingston Blair, his wealthy grandmother, receives a letter from
Jackie’s mother, written just before they sailed, saying she is bringing Jackie to
this country. The Grandmother immediately starts a search for Jackie, but he has
disappeared from the pier, and all efforts to find him seem useless.
Meanwhile the Cap’n, out of work, has been taken sick, and Jackie makes
valiant efforts to care for him. In spite of himself, the Cap’n cannot help loving
the boy. y 6
Then a strange chain of circumstances which end in Jackie’s pursuit to the
Cap n s rooms by a policeman, an immigration officer and his own grandmother
results happily. His identity is proven, and Jackie goes to live with his grand-


mother whom he readily persuades to give employment to the old Cap'n as well.
This film is one of the deservedly popular ones, featuring this little star whose
clever acting throughout will be greatly appreciated by his many admirers. Humour
and pathos abound. It is a story for children and for children who have grown up.
4592 feet standard length —on 5 reels.
Rental £l/10/-.
M 8Q49 Single Shot Parker independent
Featuring Tom Mix, Geo. Fawcett, and Frank Campeau.
Tvpical wild western story of the cattle rustlers and a dishonest sheriff m
collusion with them. Our hero by hard riding, harder fighting and straight shooting
wins his way to our hearts as well as to that of the ranchman s daug h er, w o
he loves and wins after numerous hairbreath escapes. Through the whole fi
TomTs eSer rescuing others or being rescued himself Darujg: action from
start to finish. Not a great deal of romance—Tom was always shoit on love
making—but oh, how he can fight, shoot and ride.
4328 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental £l/5/-.
s 8050 His Own Law Carlton King
Featuring Carlton King
Jed Bascombe has his own peculiar ways of administrating his office as
Town Marshal, but we cannot help liking him and all his ways He receives
a telegram announcing the robbery of the Washburn home of its family jewels.
He apprehends the wrong young lady, but is quickly made aware of his erro ,
and secures for her a job in the very hotel where the real thief is a By a
series of events the real thief is made to see the error of her ways and confesses
the theft voluntarily to the Town Marshal, who helps arrange the whole
matter so that she is not arrested. The reward for the discovery of the jewels
goes to a particularly worthy recipient and we share with Jed his surprise at th
expression of gratitude by the thief, who is on her way to have another better
There are few more pleasing little playlets than these Carlton King pro-
ductions and we have no hesitation in recommending them to the most fastidious
of film censors. ... , or
1872 feet standard length — on 2 reels
Rental 8/-.
M 8051 Brass Warner Bros.
From the Novel by Chas. G. Norris.
FCatU MonU Blue as Philip Baldwin. Harry Myers as Wilbur Lansing.
Irene Rich as Mrs. Grotenberg. Frank Keenan as Joe Church.
Marie Prevost as Marjorie Jones. Helen Ferguson as Rosemary Church.
Also Pat O’Malley, Ethel Gray Terry and Margaret Seddon.
At an anniversary dinner all the characters are suitably introduced by the
guest of honour, Toe Church.
The story really opens on the Baldwin Ranch, where a lot of girl fruit pickers


from San Francisco are camping, and assisting to gather the fruit, Philip Bald-
win is provoked to find that his irrigating pump is out of order, because Marjorie
Jones has insisted on doing some personal laundry up the stream and some of her
lingerie has caught in the pump. Marjorie is very much of a flapper vamp, and
she soon has the unsophisticated Philip twisted around her little finger and sure
that he is madly in love with her. In spite of his mother’s caution to be sure that
their tastes are similar, Philip rushes into matrimony with Marjorie, only to find
too late that they had no common interests, and very little patience, with each
other’s differences. Their quarrels are very much enhanced by Philip’s mother-
in-law, with whom they five. Marjorie finally leaves Philip and her baby boy,
gets a divorce and marries a dissolute but wealthy Easterner, Roy North. Mrs,
Grotenburg, better known as “ Mamma G,” has lived with the Jones as a boarder
for many years, and she takes Philip’s little boy and rears him as her own. Philip
gradually grows to love the foster mother of his child, and in the end they are
happily married, to the great satisfaction of the spectators.
In this respect the drama is superior to the novel, in that it has a happy and
satisfactory ending, and the character of “ Mamma G,” is made the beautiful out-
standing one of the entire production. The drama will be enjoyed by everyone
who liked the book, and by a great many who did not, on account of its superior
ending.
5886 feet standard length—on 6 reels
Rental £l/10/-.
S 8052 The Bright Lights of Broadway Principal Pictures
Featuring Doris Kenyon, Harrison Ford, Edmund Breeze and Lowell Sherman.
Tom Drake, son of a small town minister, is himself studying for the ministry,
and is organist in his father’s church. He is in love with Irene Marley, a simple
country girl, with a lovely voice and ambition for a stage career. By chance she
meets Randall Sherrill, a theatrical producer, who offers her an opening in the
city. Torn between her love for Tom and her longing for a career, she decides in
favor of the latter and leaves for the city.
Sherrill becomes infatuated with her and deposes one star so as to make room
for her as star in one of his productions, in return for which he forces her to marry
him. The deposed star, goaded by jealousy, wires to Tom that Irene is in danger
and Tom hurries to the city to protect her. He follows her to Sherrill’s apartment
to which he gains admittance just after Irene and Sherrill return from their secret
marriage. Unknown to any of them, the deposed star is hiding behind a curtain
in the next room. A quarrel ensures, and in a struggle for a revolver, Sherrill
shoots and the bullet passing the curtain kills the star on the other side.
Tom is accused of the murder, and when Irene testifies for him and against her
husband, her testimony is thrown out on the ground that she cannot testify against
her husband. Tom is sentenced to be executed. Nearly insane with grief and
outraged at the injustice of the entire situation, Irene finally forces Sherrill, at the
point of a revolver, to oign a confession, with which she escapes. Sherrill pursues
and in a very thrilling chase, first by automobile and then on a locomotive, attempts
to capture her as she is on her way to the prison, hoping to arrive in time to prevent
Tom’s execution. Fate intervenes, and in a thrilling railroad wreck, the pursuing
train bearing Sherrill, collides with another. Sherrill is killed and Irene arrives
at the prison just in the nick of time to save Tom’s life, and of course it ends happily.


One of the most dramatic and stirring subjects conceivable —strong cast, strong
plot, suspense, thrills, desperate situations and a happy outcome. What more
could one ask ?
4810 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £l/5/-.
s 8054 The Return of Draw Egan Triangle
Featuring William S. Hart, Robert Me Kim, Marguery Wilson and
Louise Glaum.
Draw Egan is the head of a band of notorious outlaws, who are closely pur-
sued by the sheriff and a large posse. Up hill and down vale, through stupendous
mountain passes, ride the outlaws, hotly pursued. At a cabin in the mountains
they make their last stand, and a terrific bombardment occurs. The bandits made
their escape through a trap-door. The cowardly member of the band, “ Arizona
Joe,” sneaks out of the back-door, only to fall into the clutches of the posse.
The band scatters, and a little later we see Draw Egan alone maintaining his
usual reputation for bravery in a saloon quarrel, where he is narrowly watched
by Mr. Buckton, who is looking for a town marshal for the neighbouring town of
Yellow Dog.
Next we see Draw Egan as the champion of the reform element in the town
of Yellow Dog, maintaining law and order in the saloon and closing it on Sunday.
1 le is a model town marshal, but much of the credit of his rule is due to his affec-
tion for Myrtle Buckton, the daughter of his sponsor.
“ Arizona Joe ” escapes from the penitentiary, returns to the town, recognises
the marshal as his former bandit chief, and spurred to revenge by the Queen of
the Dance Hall (Louise Glaum), who has been plainly snubbed by the marshal,
he decides to “ show him up ” before the town.
Of course, his friends in the Reform League are aghast at this new informa-
tion, but the marshal, while admitting his identity and expressing his willingness
to “ give up ” at sundown, expresses his intention of holding office long enough
to make a prisoner of “ Arizona Joe.” Joe tries to shoot him from ambush, but
fails, and is victim of the marshal’s unerring aim. After having a few hours to
think it over, the Reform League decides that a live town marshal, even if he is
an ex-bandit leader, is better than a dead one, or one returned to gaol. Therefore,
they retain him as marshal and pronounce him friend. The marshal’s romance
reaches a happy climax, in which we all rejoice.
This is one of William S. Hart’s best type of western pictures, and with
due tolerance for the bar room and dance hall scenes as typical of a bygone era,
the average audience will heartily appreciate this subject.
3882 feet standard length—on 4 reels
Rental £l/4/-.
M 8059 The Americano Triangle
Featuring Douglas Fairbanks and Alma Rubens
“ Now,” said the president of the mining company, “ let your eye make a
dotted line to the point in the map,” placing his finger on Paragonia, Central
America. Douglas Fairbanks fixed his concentrated gaze on the pink-coloured
triangular section dotted with volcanoes and murmured, “ It’s far, far from Brook-
lyn, and I will not go.”


The president tried to make Fairbanks accept his proposition. He offered
him a good salary to go down to Paragonia and open the mines. But money had
no charms as compared to Brooklyn, New York, with its Queensboro subway, its
proximity to Coney Island, and its nice, neat little haberdashery shops with their
breezy Arrow collars, tailored suits and custom shoes.
Just then Douglas saw Alma Rubens. She was playing the role of Senorita
Juana de Castille, daughter of the president of Paragonia. Her dark eyes, Span-
ish beauty, exquisite charm, suggestion of balcony romance and moonlight poetry
changed his mind. “ I’ll go,” said Douggie, “ I have seen some views of Para-
gonia that have changed my mind.”
From that moment things begin to happen. Douglas races after Alma to
tropical Paragonia. He finds that revolutions have been tumbling over one
another, and the old Presidente has been tumbled into prison. There is a very re-
pulsive gentleman by the name of Colonel Gargaras who wishes to marry Senorita
Juana de Castille. The marriage is being forced upon her and it looks as though
he will win out.
In the meantime Douglas is fomenting plots, digging out prison walls, mak-
ing love to Senorita Juana way up on the balcony, knocking Central American
gentlemen on the head and whirling along on at a terrific U.S, pace towards his
goal, Juana. Does he get her? You should see that last fierce gyroscopic wind-up
when Douglas battles four generals and defies an army, and you will find he does.
4304 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £ 1/5/-.
S 8060 Disposing of Mother Woman’s Home Comp.
Featuring Mary Alden
Mother Mansfield lives with her son Matt and his wife, Eva, who is per-
fectly content to leave Mother Mansfield to do all the work of the house while
she has free time for more interesting outside activities. Mother’s own daugh-
ter, Kate Warren, and her husband live nearby and frequently call on her to
come over and take care of the children while they go out for the evening.
One day Mother overheard a family argument between her sons and daugh-
ters as to which couple she should live with, and this so incensed the old lady
that she promptly went into the room and announced that she would not live
with either couple in the future. Instead, she decided to go into business for
herself in competition with her own son and son-in-law.
You will have to see the story to know the outcome. Suffice it to say that
Mother did not lose out by her experiment.
1912 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 6/-.
s 8061 Raffles Independent
Featuring John Barrymore
To the stately manor of Milchester, home of Lord Amersteth, comes Mr.
Raffles, champion cricket player, an old college friend of Bunny Manders who
is in love with Amersteth’s ward, Gwendolyn. Among the guests is a Mrs.
Vidall, who recognises in Mr. Raffles a man she had formerly known as the
Count de Beauderay, and who had disappeared coincidentally with the theft of a
valuable pearl a year before.


The main topic of conversation is “ the amateur cracksman,” a clever thief,
who has committed many daring robberies. Lord Amepteth explains that al-
though Lady Melrose will wear the famous Melrose necklace, there is no danger
of her losing it, since the house is well guarded, and Bedford, England s best
detective, will also be there, especially to guard the necklace.
But in spite of these precautions the necklace is stolen, and as a result ot sus-
picions in Bedford’s mind and of hints dropped by Mrs. Vidal, the net begins to
How he played his game, how he won a bet from Bedford himself, and
used the money to save Bunny from disgrace, how he won Gwendolyn s love,
restored the necklace to its owners, and finally made his clean escape, takes too
long to tell, but it makes a splendid picture.
A detective story par excellence. Clean, well-directed, well acted, with an
interesting plot and a well-developed element. Don’t miss it.
4811 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/5/-.
M 8064 The Safety Curtain Seiznick
Featuring Nonna Talmadge, Eugene O’Brien and Anders Randolph.
Vulcan, a strong man in a vaudeville act, picks up “ Puck ” (Norma Talmadge),
an orphan waif in the London streets, teaches her to dance and makes her a music
hall entertainer, and also his wife, whose lot is a most unhappy one.
Captain Merryon (Eugene O’Brien), is an English Army Officer home on
furlough from India, and a visitor to the music hall where V ulcan and Puck perform
on the evening that it catches fire. Puck saves the situation by continuing her
dance while the safety curtain is lowered, and confines the fire to the stage. e
is rescued by Captain Merryon, and when the newspaper prints a list of all the actors
as dead or missing, Captain Merryon proposes that Puck should marry him and go
back to India as a solution for their mutual loneliness. There Puck cannot quite
give herself up to complete happiness from a haunting apprehension that perhaps
Vulcan may still be living, which is a fact, and he comes to claim her and spoil her
happiness. The plague removes Vulcan as the climax of a particularly dramatic
scene, and all ends well.
4771 feet standard length —on 5 reels.
Rental £ 1.
B 8066 Underpaid Woman’s Home Comp.
Rev. John Foster of the Union Church in Danport, has a hard time mak-
ing ends meet on his poor salary. His sister, Martha, who lives with him, re-
sents the refusal of the wealthy Church Wardens to grant him any increase.
The richest of them, Thaddeus Martin, has a daughter Mary, with whom
Foster is in love, but feeling that he cannot support her properly on his small
income, does not ask her to marry him. . . _ , , n
The big social event of the season is a Musicale at the Martins home.
Foster and his sister attend, but the latter is so poorly dressed that she
starts to leave early rather than face the embarrassment of meeting the other
guests after the entertainment. In the cloak room upstairs she cannot resist
the temptation to try on a beautiful wrap, and in the act of doing this she is


seen by another of the guests. Later, the owner of the coat puts on the wrap
and finds that a vanity case containing 50 dollas is missing. The loss is made
known and the guest who had seen Martha with the cloak on, accuses her. In
her embarrassment, Martha denounces the entire crowd for forcing her and
her brother to live in such poverty that she should feel even a temptation to
steal. In the course of this tirade, she notices the chain of the vanity case be-
neath the cloak of the woman who had missed it. It had dropped down inside
the lining and Martha had not seen it until that moment. This discovery, of
course, exonerated her, but her tirade had its effect and resulted in the desired
raise for her brother, who promptly asked Mary to marry him.
1991 feet standard length—on 2 reels
Rental 6/-.
S 8067 When a Man's a Man Principal Features
From the story by Harold Bell 'Wright.
Featuring John Bowers, Marguerite De La Motte, Robert Frazer
and June Marlowe.
When Larry Knight, wealthy, spoiled, heir to a fortune, asked Helen
Wakefield to marry him, she told him frankly that she could never do so until
he made a man of himself. It hurt, but Larry took the hint and went out to
Arizona where he succeeded in getting a job on a cattle ranch. The contempt
the men at first felt for his inability to ride and rope was lessened by his willing-
ness to work and learn, and he gradually grew very proficient. Phil, the ranch
foreman, became his good friend. Phil was in love with Kitty Reid, who lived
on the next ranch, but Kitty having been to school in the East wanted to go
back and would not marry him. When she met Larry she fell in love with him,
but Larry thinking only of Helen worked to help Phil win Kitty. At about
this time Helen, who had not waited for Larry but had married a friend of his,
came West on her honeymoon. She was amazed to see Larry so completely
changed and working as a cattle man. Larry who had just secretly purchased
Kitty’s father’s ranch as a home for Phil and Kitty, was crushed at the news of
Helen's marriage, but continued to do work for Phil.
Trouble was brewing with cattle thieves, and the ranchmen’s tempers were
tried. One day Larry saw two thieves at their work and captured one of them.
Phil coming up just then thought Larry was part of the gang. Suddenly Phil
was shot from ambush by the other thief. Larry returned his fire, but the thief
escaped. He then carried Phil home and rode after the other and captured him,
but the men believed it was Larry who had shot Phil and when they saw the
empty shell in his gun, they were convinced of it. In the nick of time, the first
thief Larry had captured, admitted that his companion had done the shooting
and Larry was released. Phil recovered and to his joy learned that Kitty had
changed her mind. He also learned that Larry had bought the ranch for him
and Kitty, and they all had to admit that even if Larry was a “blamed million-
aire’’ he was a real man.
There are some truly remarkable pictures of riding broncoes, roping steers
and bull-dogging. Genuine cowboys take the parts of the extras. The director
is to be congratulated on presenting a Western picture of ranch life and the West
as it really is to-day. Superb scenery and photographic perfection help to make
an entirely satisfactory picture that is recommended for any audience.
4754 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/10/-.


s 8069 Let’* Go Truar
Featuring Richard Talmadge, Eileen Percy, Fully Marshall and
George Nicholas.
Barry Macklin, just out of college, spends his time evading the traffic cops,
and trying to convince his father that he is a useful member of the Macklin Cement
Co. Macklin, senr., tells him that while he may have been a halfback at college,
he is a drawback now, and that even now he (the father) is threatened with serious
loss on the Hillsboro contract because he hasn’t a son with sense enough to go and
collect the money due. They are interrupted by more traffic cops, whereupon
Barry takes French leave, eludes the cops, and after a thrilling chase which he
finishes on one of their own motor cycles, boards a freight train for Hillsboro.
Does he collect for the contract ? We’ll say he does. Wait till you see him
fight, and do a complete assortment of those marvellous athletic stunts of his,
incidentally capturing two safe robbers, exposing the mayor and his son, reinstating
the marshal and changing the whole city government, not to mention winning
over his own father and making the nicest girl say “ Yes.”
For speed, stunts, thrills and a thoroughly satisfactory ending, see this great
picture. It is a clean comedy drama, and good entertainment for any audience.
Comedy-drama, 493 7 { feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/5/-.
M 8070 The New School Teacher Burr
Featuring “ Chic ” Sales.
Adopted from stories by Irvin S. Cobb.
Professor Timmons, a well-meaning but erratic young man, has been appointed
school teacher and is welcomed at a reception given in his honor by Mrs. Buck.
Little Waldo Buck, her son, is one of the Professor’s prospective pupils, and for
all his innocent appearance, is their ringleader in mischief. His older sister, Diana,
is engaged to marry Wales who is jealous if anyone else even speaks to her. Due
to Waldo’s activities the Professor has several embarrassing experiences at the
reception, but he does meet Diana who is kind to him. With the opening of school
the Professor’s troubles begin in earnest, and he is only prevented from resigning
by Diana who asks him to “ stick it out ” for her sake. He then takes his boy
pupils on a camping trip which brings him more troubles (to the great amusement
of the spectator), and complications are introduced by the escape of a pyromaniac
from a local institution, for whom the Professor is at first mistaken and who finally
sets fire to the school building. Waldo is trapped in the fire, but is daringly rescued
by the Professor who, having gained a point of safety with his burden, promptly
faints. Wales seizes the opportunity to carry Waldo to his family and claim credit
for the rescue, but Waldo himself recovers consciousness in time to direct the credit
where it was*really due. Wales leaves abruptly and Diana assumes the difficult
role of life-partner to the absent-minded Professor.
An excellent picture. The portrayal of the Professor by the great imper-
sonator, “ Chic ” Sales, leaves nothing to be desired. This is a refined, modern,
comedy-drama of the sort we all want, and is recommended for any audience.
4863 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £l/5/-.


M 8075 Tiger Rose Warner Bros.
Featuring Lenore Ulrich.
A dramatisation of the great stage success with the same star from the story
written by Willard Mack and presented by David Belasco. The screen version
gives a great deal more opportunity for sustained suspense than the stage version.
It was taken in an environment of stupendous snow capped mountains, and the
scenery in many of the locations is superb. Rose, the heroine, is rescued from
a raft floating down river, and adopted by the kindly old Scotch factor at the
Hudson Bay Trading Post. She loves a young engineer with a railroad surveying
party, and the dramatic interest of the story hinges principally upon her hiding
and protecting this lover, who is fleeing, wounded, after accidentally shooting the
man who had brought trouble to the family of his sister. The spectator’s suspense
is wonderfully sustained, and the dramatic situations are frequent and surprising.
Anyone who saw the stage version should see the screen version, and those who
did not should be even stronger inclined to see the picture.
4772 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £l/10/-.
S 8076 Daddies Warner Bros.
Featuring Mae Marsh, Claude Gillingwater, Harry Myers,
Craufurd Kent and Willard Louis.
Reproduced for the screen from David Belasco’s great stage success of the
same title. A Bachelors’ Club has been sadly depleted by the inroads of matrimony,
despite the fact that each backsliding member is compelled to forfeit a cheque for
$5,000.00 upon changing his condition from a bachelor to benedict.
One of the members is late at the meeting, and announces dolefully that he
has agreed to adopt a war orphan, left behind by a former classmate and pal who
fell in action. His example is emulated by the others, who decide to each adopt
an orphan—some with great misgivings.
There is a great deal of quiet humour in the dialogue preceding the actual
selection of children to be adopted. Later, when the orphans arrive, there are
some amusing complications, and the fun soon, grows fast and furious. The old
grouch insists upon adopting a boy and gets a girl instead. The most benevolent
of the Daddies finds that he has adopted triplets. The hero adopts, as he supposes,
a little girl of six, but finds that she is eighteen. The efforts of the amateur daddies
to care for this young orphan asylum produces a condition of hilarity approaching
hysteria.
The gradual evolution of the amateur daddies to professional ones is a de-
lightful story. This picture will be enjoyed by everyone between the ages of six
md sixty, whether they are or ever expect to be daddies or mothers.
4865 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £l/10/-.
M 8077 Conductor 1492 Warner Bros.
Featuring Johnny Hines and Doris May.
A comedy drama of unusual humour and charm.
Terence O’Toole is a young Irishman who decides to seek his fortunes in


America, whence his father had returned after a brief sojourn in the United States
some years before. Some very amusing native Irish scenes occur in the beginning
of the subject. Later, Terry is seen in the capacity of a motorman in a small
American city. The President and Vice-President of the trolley company are
each owners of forty-nine shares of the stock, and the balance of control is vested
in two other shares belonging to a Mr. Rosenthal, who has disappeared. Terry
falls in love with President’s daughter (Doris May), and his suit is advanced by
his rescue of her kid brother, who is racing the trolley car in a diminutive, but perfect
automobile.
Terry lives at a boarding house with forty-seven roomers and two baths,
requiring tickets for Saturday night ablutions. The tricks employed by the
boarders to beat their regular turns are uproariously funny.
Terry’s father joins him, and contributes very ably to the humour of the
story as it expands. One of the funniest specialities in this or any other comedy is
a masquerade roller skating carnival, in which Terry plays the front legs and an
inebriated friend the rear legs of a camel. The screamingly funny antics of this
camel in the Camel Walk and other dances on roller skates convulse every
audience.
Near the end of the story the ownership of the missing certificates is divulged
in a dramatic manner, and their prospective loss is narrowly averted in a thrilling
effort by the senior O’Toole, who is rescued from a burning building by Terry in
a scene of thrilling danger that grips every spectator.
A splendid subject, combining humour and pathos, comedy and near-tragedy,
without a dull moment from start to finish.
5928 feet standard length —on six reels.
Rental £ 1/16/-.
S 8078 Beau Brummell Warner Bros-
Featuring John Barrymore, Mary Astor, Willard Louis, Irene Rich,
Alec Francis and Carmel Myers.
Adapted from the play by Clyde Fitch.
The three angles underlying the theme of “ Beau Brummel ” are the fickle-
ness of fortune, the test of friendship and the instability of popularity. Because
of his intimacy with the Prince of Wales, Beau Brummel is able to influence his
creditors and make himself the arbiter of English society. Women flock to his
rooms in the vain effort to pick up the fragments of a heart hiding its ache behind
the fripperies of clothes. At the height of his popularity, his salient wit makes an
undiplomatic remark, which precipitates him into a deluge of misfortune. How
he rises to heights and then becomes a paupered exile is shown in this photo-play.
Barrymore’s acting, as the Beau, is the best thing he has ever done for the
screen, which is saying a great deal after his memorable effort in “ Dr. Jekyll and
Mr. Hyde.”
Our subscribers are fortunate in having available such a superlative produc-
tion featuring this peerless American actor.
6925 feet standard length—on 7 reels
Rental £l/15/-.


S 8082 The Battling Fool c.b.c.
Featuring Eva Novak and William Fairbanks.
In the little town of Fairview live Mayor Hiram Chadwick, his daughter
Helen, Reverend Josiah Jenkins, his son Mark, and Jerry Sullivan, proprietor of
a pool hall and an old-time prize fighter. Mark is in love with Helen, and one
day hearing a town loafer make a disparaging remark about her, he thrashes him.
The encounter is observed by Sullivan and is interrupted by the mayor who in-
dignantly threatens to run Sullivan out of town, and also orders Mark to keep away
from his house and his daughter.
Sullivan has been so impressed with Mark’s fistic ability that he urges him
to become a prize fighter saying that he can use the money earned to pay his way
through college. Mark does so and becomes a noted fighter. Meanwhile, he loses
track of Helen and does not know that she has been injured and cannot recover
without a spinal operation, which her father will not afford. Mark finally hears
of it on the very day of his biggest fight in which he is to meet the champion. He
rushes for his car and drives to Helen’s house, carries her off to the city in spite of
her mother’s protests, sends for a surgeon and then goes to the fight in time to
avoid losing it by default. He fights desperately, feeling that the money will pay
for Helen’s operation and at last knocks out the champion. Then news comes
that his apartment is afire. He rushes to rescue Helen, and succeeds just as the
spectator is about to have heart failure from the excitement. But the story comes
out all right, and ends as such stories properly should.
4640 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £ 1.
M 8087 Listen Lester Principal Pictures
Featuring Alec B. Francis, Eva Novak, Louis Fazenda, Lee Moran,
Harry Meyers, George O’Hara.
From the Musical Comedy Hit of the same name.
Colonel Dodge, a gay old dog, discovers a new geranium in the garden
of folly, and frowns on his daughter’s suggestion that they take a trip to
Palm Beach. The Colonel is led to change his mind, however, when an old
flame, Miss Arbutus Quilty, suddenly puts in a rather unexpected appearance.
The Colonel tries to avoid her, but subsides when she mentions legal pro-
cedure. That evening the Colonel, accompanied by his daughter, Mary, leaves
for Florida. At the same hotel at which they stop, Jack Griffin, a bachelor, is
registered, and becomes enamoured of Mary.
Soon after, Arbutus comes to the same hotel with a friend, Miss Pink, and
a package of letters which the indiscreet Colonel had written, and around which
the story now centres.
As a result of the confusion which follows, the Colonel hires Lester as a
detective. Lester is retained by Miss Arbutus to keep an eye on Miss Pink; and
the latter hires Lester to steal the letters from Arbutus. During the next few
days the letters change hands no less than fifty times, and cunning, conniving
and comical coincidences play a part in the rapid fire exchange.
The Colonel will have nothing to do with Arbutus, and Jack grows cold
in his attentions to Mary. The two women get together and decide to be kid-
napped, hiring Lester for the job. The kidnapping is effected —the women are
piled on a boat, with the Colonel and Jack in pursuit. On board the boat the two


men are made prisoners. Lester, who has fulfilled his part of the bargain, gets
the letters from Arbutus as remuneration.
In a situation that rapidly goes from bad to worse, Mary is threatened by a
sailor who tries to force his attentions on her. Arbutus, conscience-stricken by
all the trouble she has started, tells the Colonel she will never bother him again.
Faced by this threat, the Colonel realises he really cares for Arbutus, and Mary is
comforted by Jack, who humbly apologises for his former indifference.
4829 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £ 1.
M 8088 Leave It to Gerry Ben Wilson Films
Featuring Billie Rhodes, William Collier, Jr., Claire McDowell, Kate Lester.
Geraldine Brent, tomboy, lives with her widowed mother in the little town
of Oilville. She incurs the enmity of Mrs. Charity Masters, a wealthy woman who
holds a mortgage on her mother’s little home, by giving her son a thrashing for
bullying a small boy. Mrs. Brent’s sister, Mrs. Prescott, is a wealthy widow living
in Los Angeles, and she offers a home and good education to Gerry, who bids her
mother a tearful farewell and goes to live with her aunt. Gerry’s only consolation
is the fact that Daniel Forbes, a boy friend from home, is attending school in Los
Angeles and will be near her there.
Colonel Pettijohn, an oil operator whom Gerry detests for his treatment of
her mother, is at her Aunt’s house when Gerry arrives, and is trying to gain the
hand of her Aunt in marriage. At the very time that he is so engaged, he is also
busy forging some false eviction papers, as a result of which Gerry’s mother is forced
out of her home, and having lost all her belongings is forced to go to the poor house.
She bravely conceals her plight from Gerry, who is in ignorance of the situation
for some time, but when she finally learns of it, she rushes off with Forbes in his car
to rescue her mother from the poor house. Mrs. Brent is in a pitiful state, but
Gerry and Forbes take her back with them to confront Pettijohn at her Aunt’s house
as the guests are all assembled foi: a big reception, during which her Aunt’s engage-
ment to Pettijohn was to be announced. Their arrival, of course, spoils Pettijohn’s
plan, and in the course of their denunciation several other villainous acts of his
are brought to light, as a result of which he is placed under arrest and Gerry’s
mother and her sister are reconciled, and Gerry is so happy at the way things
have turned out that she just can't say no to Forbes when he asks her to marry
him.
4704 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental 15/-.
B 8089 The Satin Girl Ben Wilson
Featuring Norman Kerry, Mabel Forrest and Marc McDermott
Fargo Greg having been wronged by his brother, Silas, a heartless miser,
shoots him and escapes, taking Silas’ Daughter Lenore with him. The shock of
her father’s death destroys Lenore’s memory, and Fargo, by hypnotizing her,
forces her to obey his commands. She becomes the “Satin Girl,” a notorious
gem thief and the despair of the police. In the course of events she appears as a
guest at the house party of Mrs. “Millie” Brown, who is the owner of a famous


diamond necklace. Here she meets Dr. Taunton, who falls in love with her.
The necklace is stolen, and all the guests are searched without success. Later
Lenore is forced against her violent but helpless protests, to steal a ruby from
Dr, Taunton himself. And then because Fargo fears she is learning to love
Taunton, he sends her back to steal some money. Taunton finds her and sens-
ing her plight he questions her and rushes off to capture Fargo. She follows
him and arrives just in time to receive a glancing blow as Fargo shoots at
Taunton. The injury is slight, but the shock serves to restore her memory and
former personality. Fargo’s activities are stopped and Lenore and Taunton arc
happily married.
A mystery story that will thrill every audience. Plot well handled and
players splendidly cast.
4838 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £ 1.
S 8092 His Last Race Goldstone
Featuring Gladys Brockwell, Noah Beery, Robert McKim, Pauline Starke, Tully
Marshall, Alec Francis, Rex Baker and Boomerang, the Wonder Horse.
Richard Carleton and Harold Stewart both ask Mary Glendon to marry
them and she decides in favor of Harold. Richard goes west to forget. There
he pursues and finally captures “Mankiller,” a magnificent wild horse, famous
for its speed and endurance, which he proceeds to tame and train. He meets and
befriends Ted Denny and his wife and baby. Denny, an ex-jockey, has come
west to recover his health and had succeeded in doing so, but is in financial
straits.
Meanwhile Harold has died and Mary brings the baby to the west where
she becomes stenographer to a swindler named Bresnahan.
Bresnahan has a horse entered in the big derby and Carleton enters Man-
killer with Denny to ride him. But on the day of the race Bresnahan who has
bet on his own horse a lot of money left with him by a client for investment,
causes Mankiller to be stolen and hidden. Carleton tells Denny to be in readi-
ness at the track, and then in an aeroplane goes in search of his horse, which he
finds at some distance from the race-track. He jumps from the plane into a lake,
swims to shore, fights singlehanded the three thugs who have the horse, rescues
him, mounts, and races for the track where he arrives just as the contestants,
after two false starts, are lining up for the bell.
In spite of his long unscheduled run, Mankiller wins the race. Bresnahan
seeking to leave town is arrested. And then Carleton meets Mary and repeats
his old qustion, which this time she answers in the affirmative,
A thrilling story, full of suspense and action and with a happy ending.
49f,6 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £ 1/5/-.
S 8093 Othello Export & Import Film Co.
Directed by Dimitri Buchowetski.
Featuring Emil Jannings, Werner Kraus and lea Lenkefly.
Produced in the same Berlin theatre, with its wealth of properties, used by
Ernst Lubitsch in his Pola Negri production. Featuring the star who played the


title role in “Deception,” “Loves of Pharaoh” and “Quo Vadis.”
The story of a terrible tragedy due to jealousy—a drama of terrific power
and compelling interest that has held theatregoers spellbound for three centuries.
All the wealth of imagery and beauty of conception worthy of the finest tradi-
tions in Shakespearean lore arc to be found in this unusual motion picture. It
is magnificently acted and lavishly staged. A production that no lover of
Shakespeare, and no lover of motion pictures should miss seeing.
From its very start this picture moves with a swing and the sensation of
suspense is sustained and accentuated to its climax in the end. A thoroughly
satisfying Shakespearean screen production.
5552 feet standard length — on 6 reels
Rental £l/4/-.
S 8094 Try and Get It Hodkinson
Featuring Bryant Washburn, Joseph Kilgour and Billie Dove.
Adapted from The Saturday Evening Post story, “ The Ringtailed Galliwampus.”
Jim Donovan runs a printing plant where the twelve hour day, twelve dollars
a week and ten minutes lunch were all originated. He tells one of his employees,
Joe Merrill (Bryant Washburn), that unless he can collect a bill of $25.00 against
Tim Perrin within a week he can get another job. Joe finds the bill is seven years
old, and Perrin refuses to pay it, producing a cancelled check for $25.00 which
he claims was made in payment for the bill. Perrin’s principal business is running
a cement works, and he is properly credited with being harder than his own product.
His daughter Rhoda (Billie Dove) has acquired a French accent and started a Parisian
dressmaking shop, which her father is compelled to manage secretly to avoid being
bankrupted by its operation. Joe gets thrown out of the cement works office
several times by Perrin’s rough workmen, and finally lays siege to the dressmaking
establishment where all sorts of funny things happen. Joe manages to make his
various visits cost Perrin many times the amount of his bill, and finally Perrin
tells him that if he will come to his office the next morning (and get there alive)
he will pay the bill. The way in which Joe gets to the cement office —alive-—has
several very good thrills, and when he points out to Perrin some irregularities in
the cancelled check, Perrin recalls the circumstances under which it was given
{not for the alleged bill), and Perrin and Donovan both bid for Joe’s services as
Manager of their respective businesses. Joe, however, prefers a life job working
for Rhoda, and everything ends well.
This is a comedy drama of pleasing parts without any mushy sentiment, and
very amusingly titled. Recommended for all kinds of audiences.
Comedy-drama, 4841 standard length —on 5 reels.
Rental £ 1.
M 8095 The Headless Horseman Hodkinson
From the “ Legend of Sleepy Hollow.”
Featuring Will Rogers.
Washington living’s famous story in which we find those old friends of our
school days, Ichabod Crane, Katrina Van Tassel, Brom Bones and the rest, in a
splendid picture which would have pleased Irving himself.


One day in 1790 there arrived in the little town of Sleepy Hollow, a new school
master from Niewe Yorke, an awkward uncouth man named Ichabod Crane. He
was met by the school committee and citizens and sent to “ board around.” Thus
he met the charming Katrina Van Tassel, daughter of the richest man in the
community. But Katrina had many admirers, most favored among them being
Abraham Van Brunt or “ Brom Bones,” a handsome dare-devil of a fellow who
regarded Ichabod’s arrival in a not-too-friendly manner. Consequently as Ichabod
seemed to find favor in Katrina’s eyes Brom laid plans for his downfall.
In those days stories of witches and goblins found credence. Ichabod was
a firm believer in them and fearful were the tales he could relate. On the night
of the big quilting party at the Van Tassel’s, Ichabod the ungainly, borrowed an
old nag and arrived in what to him seemed great style. Brom was there too,
handsomer than ever, on his fine horse. Katrina smiled on both. As the evening
advanced, tales were told of the headless horseman who had often been seen near
the little church bridge which Ichabod had to pass on his way home. Ichabod
who had come alone grew nervous at the recital and was the last to leave. As he
came to the bridge his horse refused to go forward and Ichabod suddenly saw a
weird black figure on a horse waiting near the bridge. His “ who’s there ” went
unanswered and his hair rose in horror as he finally forced his horse to cross the
bridge and then saw that the other rider was following and that it was the headless
horseman himself! Madly he galloped toward home, but as he glanced behind him
he saw that his pursuer carried his head in his hand and was about to throw it at
him. As the “ head ” fell Ichabod was knocked from his saddle, but being un-
jured he ran off through the woods, while the horseman who was in reality Brom
Bones enjoyed a hearty laugh at his expense. Ichabod left the neighborhood for good
and shortly afterward the marriage of Brom and Katrina was celebrated.
A delightful story, clean, cleverly acted and of both literary and historical
interest. It is recommended for any audience.
4802 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £l/5/-.
S 8096 Luck Mastodon
Featuring Johnny Hines, Violet Mersereau and Robert Edeson.
As the contestants assemble for the annual cross-country run of the Essex
Club, Bob Carter who is “so rich he wears out two pairs of pyjamas to one pair
of shoes,” watches them with indifference until Crosby, an acquaintance, calls
him a quitter and dares him to enter the race. Bob takes the dare, but is soon
hopelessly outdistanced. Just then he sees an elephant which had escaped from a
circus, approaching him, and under the spur of his fear he quickly passes the entire
field and wins the trophy. Crosby calls Rob’s victory just luck and offers to bet
that he could not earn his own living, whereupon Bob bets he can earn $10,000.00
in one year without the help of his fortune.
From that moment his adventures begin in earnest and the spectator is in
a state of continuous laughter as one amusing situation follows another. Bob Suitor
gets an option on some land, starts to build a city, falls in love with the judge’s
daughter, wins her away from a rival suitor, rescues her from a mine, organizes a land
company, and just as his year expires, sells enough stock to raise the $10,000.00
needed to pay his first year’s salary as president.


Talk about luck! Wins in business, wins the girl, and wins his bet.
You’ll like this picture. It is clean, lively, amusing, and cleverly titled, has
a noted cast and is satisfactory in every way. Recommended for any audience,
4909 feet standard length —on 5 reels.
Rental £ 1/5/-.
s 8097 One Arabian Night First National
Featuring Pola Negri and Ernst Lubitsch
Here is the romance of Zuleika, favourite wife of a great Sheik, beloved by
the Sheik’s son, and herself loving a young rug merchant, whorn she has seen
from one of the palace windows. The young Sheik’s pursuit of Zuleika
leads his father to order her execution, but at the critical moment the young
man wins her reprieve by confessing that it is he and not Zuleika who is to blame.
About this time a band of strolling entertainers arrive in the city. A beauti-
ful dancer, a hunchback clown in love with her, and an old hag make up
the company. The old Sheik sees the girl dancing, and adds her to his
harem, where she is made his favourite wife, succeeding Zuleika. The latter,
thus relieved of her obligations to her master, connives with her confidant
Haidee, to visit the young rug merchant at his shop. By a strange chain of
circumstances both the hunchback and the rug merchant are smuggled into
the harem, and the young Sheik also manages to enter.
From his concealment, the hunchback sees the dancer, and the young
Sheik, The old Sheik enters and attempts to kill his son, but the girl steps in
front of him and receives the fatal sword thrust. The young Sheik flees, but
is overtaken and killed by his father. The Sheik then surprises Zuleika and her
lover in the harem, surrounded by the women of the palace. The women try
to thwart the Sheik, but he advances to slay the erring pair. As he raises his
sword, the hunchback leaps upon him and stabs him in the back, The Sheik
expires, and Zuleika and her lover escape from the palace.
This moving picture is the peer of Oriental screen dramas. It has the
atmosphere of an Arabian Nights tale, and will always rank as an exceptional
photoplay. It has both dramatic intensity and comic relief of an unusual order.
4788 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/5/-.
M 8098 The Passing of the Third Floor Back Brennon
Featuring Sir J. Forbes Robertson in Jerome K. Jerome’s famous story.
To a dingy and sordid boarding house in gloomy Bloomsbury Square, London,
peopled with mean-spirited and unhappy failures, comes a stranger, seeking quarters.
The stranger, by refusing to see in the scheming landlady and her quarrelsome
boarders anything but the best, succeeds in calling out the best in each, and one
after the other they become morally rehabilitated. Before his kind smile and
understanding words their bickerings and meanness disappear. They grow more
tolerant toward each other, and at the same time strangely happy.
Finally, when love has replaced hatred as the governing spirit of the house-
hold, the Stranger passes from their midst as mysteriously as he came.


The story is in a large measure symbolical, but aside from its spiritual message
it has many humorous and dramatic qualities.
The screen is fortunate to have secured for the Stranger, Sir J. Forbes Robert-
son, the actor, who created the role and for eight successive seasons played it in
Great Britain, the United States and Canada.
4919 feet standard length —on 5 reels.
Rental £ 1.
M 8115 Kismet Robertson-Cole
Featuring Otis Skinner, Hamilton Revelle, Rose Mary Thehy,
Herschell May all, Eleanor Fair and Leon Bary.
Kismet has been called the one thousand and second story of the Arabian
Nights. It is the tale of the day of days in the life of Hajj, the beggar, who dwelt
in Bagdad in the first year of the reign of the Caliph Abdullah, and begged upon
the stone of the door of the Mosque of Carpenters.
Between the rise of the sun and the coming of night Hajj rises from the dust
to affluence and returns again to the dust from whence he came. He meets his
mortal enemy and slays him in the prison where they are thrown together. He
fights the Wazir of Bagdad, son of his mortal enemy, and drowns him in the pool
of his own magnificent harem, at the same time rescuing his daughter from the
Wazir’s clutches. He is presented to the Caliph, “ the Shadow of Allah upon
Earth,” to whom his daughter Marsinah is married at sunset.
It is a tale wild, improbable, barbaric, romantic ; a tale brim full of colour,
drama, comedy, adventure, intrigue, love-making and suspense.
Written by Edward Knoblock, and directed by Louis J. Gasnier, “ Kismet,”
is added to the role of splendid motion pictures —a thing to go on down the years
as an artistic milestone along the road of the new art.
To see this picture is to see one of the greatest actors of the American stage in his
most popular and celebrated success, supported by one of the most noteworthy casts
ever assembled and presented with a lavish background of Oriental splendour.
6637 feet standard length —on 7 reels.
Rental £ 1/15/-.
S 8116 The Third Alarm f.b.o.
Featuring Ralph Lewis, Johnnie Walker, Virginia True Boardman, and Frankie Lee.
For twenty years Dan McDowell had sat on the driver’s seat of Engine 27
and urged his three horses to the fires. Then came the motor apparatus. The
horses were sold as so much j unk. Dan’s hands were too old to master the steering
wheel. He was discarded, retired at a small pension.
Johnnie, his son, was studying medicine. To keep him in college required
money. Dan, after a weary search, was reduced to digging in the streets. There
he met “ Bullett,” the old fire-horse, pulling the dirt-cart. Man and beast—
discarded as useless.
Old McDowell’s humiliation was complete when he was accused of stealing
the old fire-horse he loved so well. Then he was exonerated and released from
prison just in time to hurry to a big fire. On his way he met “ Bullet,” again
broken loose, and following the habit of years in answering the clanging bell.


Arrived at the fire Dan found that his son Johnnie and June, his sweetheart,
were imprisoned beneath a pile of debris. Mounting “ Bullet/’ Dan rushed through
the flames and the horse, hitched to the debris, freed the prisoners.
Johnnie was able to finish his medical course and marry the girl of his heart,
while Dan found happiness in his appointment as guardian of the ex-fire horses
who had been pensioned and placed under his care for the remainder of their days.
A grippingly dramatic story of American home life ; of the devotion and
sacrifices of a father ; of the loyalty and fealty of a son. Combined with its tense
drama and tender romance are some of the greatest thrills ever yet seen upon the
screen.
4744 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £l/5/-.
j .
B 8118 Beyond the Rainbow R C.
Featuring Harry Morey, Billie Dove, Marguerite C our tot, George Fawcett.
Marion Taylor, Secretary to Edward Mallory, refuses the advances which
he continues to make, even after his engagement to Frances Gardener. Badly
in need of money to care for her frail little brother she accepts James Wade’s offer
of 100 dollars to accompany him to a ball at the Gardener’s, where by appearing
with Marion he hopes to make another girl jealous. During the ball a younger
daughter of the Gardeners circulates several copies of a note reading—“ Consult
your conscience. Your secret is public knowledge.” And the effect on each of
the recipients is surprising and disconcerting. As a result of this prank an at-
mosphere of suspicion prevails. Then Mallory unexpectedly arrives and also
receives a note. Startling complications follow, as a result of which Mallory is
shot and Major Forbes, whom Marion had just met, was accused of the shoot-
ing. But it came out wonderfully. The real culprit was captured, Mallory
recovered. Marion’s little brother regained his health, and when Major Forbes
persuaded Marion to share his heart and home their happiness was complete.
This story is recommended not alone for its strong cast, but for its inter-
esting plot, cleverly sustained suspense relieved by genuine humor, superior
photography and excellent settings.
4879 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £ 1.
S 8119 Captain January Principal Pictures
Laura E. Richards’ well-known story, featuring Baby Peggy, Hobart
Bosworth, Harry Morey, Irene Rich.
On a small island off the coast of Maine live Jeremiah Judkins, keeper of
the light, and “Captain January,” a little girl who had been cast ashore after a
shipwreck. Since then she had been lovingly cared for by Judkins, and her de-
votion is the one big thing in his life. Happily they dream of the future in
which they shall sail the Seven Seas together. Then comes the day when fate
brings to his little island a yacht bearing a Mrs. Morton, who discovers in the
little Captain the daughter of her lost sister, and Judkins sadly consents to her
taking the Captain away with her to Boston. Night after night the little girl
cries herself to sleep, while Judkins unhappily tends his light and longs for her.
Finally, in desperation, the Captain escapes from the Morton home, and finds


her way aboard the boat for “Light Island.” There is a joyous reunion at the
light-house, and it ends in Judkins giving up his position and going to Boston
to live near his little Captain.
A clean, entertaining drama which can safely be recommended to any
audience. It is especially appealing as a juvenile. Strong cast; good photo-
graphy; pathos, humor and deep human interest.
4858 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/10/-.
M 8120 Thelma f.b.o.
From the novel by Marie Corelli.
Featuring Jane Novak.
In a little coast town of Norway live Thelma Guldmar, just returned from
her education in France, and her father, Olaf, a rugged Norseman of royal
ancestry.
Thither, enjoying a pleasure cruise on his yacht, comes Sir Philip Bruce-
Errington, a young man popular in London society. A chance meeting with
Thelma rouses his interest and he is strongly attracted to her. Later, he learns
her name and then contrives to meet Olaf and be properly presented to his
daughter. The young couple soon fall in love and Thelma consents to be Lady
Bruce-Errington.
In London the marriage causes quite a stir and Thelma’s presentation to society
is a brilliant occasion. Her beauty and charm of manner quickly win her many
friends.
But Lady Clara Winsleigh who had previously been disappointed in her hope
of marrying Sir Philip, spitefully plots to estrange the happy couple. How her
plans develop and their outcome make an excellent story.
It is well directed, well titled, well acted and well filmed, and you will [enjoy it.
4733 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £ 1.
M 8122 Superstition
John Bowers, Edward Burns, Marguerite De La Motte, Spottiswood Aiken and
Sheldon Lewis.
Captain Martin Manning retires from the sea and buys a little home near the
harbor where he can be in sight of his ship the “ Swallow.” But a delegation of
sailors from a nearby “ Mariner’s Home ” tell him the old sailors believe the ship’s
presence is bringing them bad luck and order him to leave. Refusing to do so
without a fair hearing, Manning appears at the Home, and tells the inmates the
thrilling story of the “ Swallow ” —a story of plotting and intrigue ;of a treacher-
ously wounded captain and a villainous snake-worshipping crew ; of mutiny, murder,
fighting and shipwreck. It is a stirring tale well told. And it wins the approval
of even the old sailors themselves, who hasten to assure the Captain that he is a
sailor after their own hearts, and they are proud to have him and the “ Swallow ”
near them.
4948 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £ 1.


B 8123 The Snowshoe Trail F. 8.0.
Featuring Jane Novak
This tale deals with the search for a lost mine in the far north country in
which the heroine is unhorsed in fording a turbulent and icy stream. In at-
tempting her rescue, her lover is also washed down the stream and both are
borne over the falls to supposed certain destruction. Their subsequent adven-
tures alone in the wilderness, resulting in the discovery of the mine through the
exposure of a bear den by an avalanche, and their subsequent rescue by a relief
party, afford opportunity for the interest and enjoyment of the spectators.
4935 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £ 1.
B 8124 Nobody’s Kid F B O
Featuring Mae Marsh
The Yorkburg Female Orphan Home was not a cheerful place, though the
girls who lived there were expected to think so and to be very thankful for the
privilege. One of them, Mary Cary, just couldn’t feel thankful. She
lonely and unhappy and rebellious. She regarded Miss Bray, the Superinten-
dent, and Dr. Rudd, one of the trustees, as her natural enemies. The only per-
son who cared for her or tried to understand her was Miss Trent, a graduate
nurse who came to live at the home. To her Mary confided that she didn’t even
know who her parents were I
One day while doing an errand for Miss Bray, Mary overheard a conver-
sation which gave her the longed for information about her family and she
learned that a wealthy uncle was still living. At her first opportunity she sent
him a letter asking him to come for her, and to her great delight he arrived a
few days later. Then came a great surprise. Mary’s uncle was none other than
Dr. Allen, Miss Trent’s “Prince Charming,” from whom she had been separated
by a misunderstanding.
Mary’s happiness was complete when she learned that Miss Trent and
her uncle were going to be married and she was going to leave the orphan home
and live with them.
4650 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £ 1.
M 8126 Captain Fly-by-Night R.c. Pictures
Featuring Jimmy Walker
A stirring tale of old California in the days of Spanish rule.
The depredations of Captain Fly-By-Night have stirred the country side and
his threatened revolution has arrayed the Governor’s troops against him. His
boldness and effrontery defy their best efforts to capture him.
One day two travellers arrive separately at the little Santa Barbara Praesidio.
Each has a pass from the Governor, and each claims to be on a secret mission.
Throughout the story the spectator is kept in suspense as to the identity of these
two travellers. One is Captain Fly-By-Night —the other Senor Rocha, betrothed
to the beautiful Senorita Fernandez of San Diego. But which is which ? Of course,
in the end the mystery is cleared, and it finishes splendidly.


A story of romance and ancient chivalry, of brilliant sword play, desperate
rebellion, daring horsemanship and personal encounter. And withal clean and
highly entertaining. A story to please any audience.
4721 feet standard length~on 5 reels.
Rental £l/5/-.
S 8127 Flesh and Blood Irving Cummings
Featuring Lon Chaney, Jack Mulhall, Noah Berry, Ralph Lewis and Edith Roberts.
David Webster has been unjustly sent to prison through the efforts of a rich
banker, Fletcher Burton. Following a thrilling escape from prison, Webster takes
refuge with a Chinaman, whose friendship repays a debt of gratitude. He reaches
home only to behold his wife’s funeral. The scene left him grief-stricken and bitter
toward mankind, desirous only of wreaking vengeance upon Burton, for which
he waits and watches his opportunity.
Webster’s daughter, Marjorie, known as the “ Angel Lady ” presides over
a Mission which is often visited (unrecognized) by her father, whose one softness
is his love for his daughter. Burton’s son, Ted, falls in love with Marjorie. Webster
finally forces a confession from Burton only to be confronted by his daughter and
Ted, whose happiness will be wrecked if he insists upon using the confession to
vindicate himself.
He tears up the confession and, spiritually uplifted, returns to the prison to
serve out the rest of his sentence.
In this drama, Lon Chaney shows one of the wonderful characterizations of
which he is a past master.
4724 feet standard length~on 5 reels.
Rental £l/5/-.
M 8128-29-30 The Son of Tarzan Independent
In Three Episodes.
The former “ Tarzan of the Apes ” has become Lord Greystoke, living happily
in England. Due to the apprehension of his mother, Lord Greystoke’s son has
been kept in ignorance of his father’s early history. The boy shows, as a natural
inheritance, a tremendous interest in wild animals.
In spite of the objections of his parents, he insists upon visiting a theatre where
Ajax, a trained ape, is being exhibited. Ajax is none other than “ Akut,” Tarzan’s
former companion in the African jungle. He recognises in Jack the familiar
lineaments of his father, and when the father comes to the theatre to take Jack
home, he addresses Akut in the ape language, to the great astonishment of all the
spectators. Of course, after that Lord Greystoke has to tell Jack the story of his
early life. Jack secretly visits the ape’s trainer, and learns some of the ape language.
When his father decides to purchase Akut and return him to the jungle. Jack,
by a clever ruse, leaves home and goes to Africa on the same steamer with the ape.
Later the two take up life together in the jungle. Soon afterwards they rescue
a little waif, Meriem, from the cruel Sheik, who is supposed to be her father, but
but who really had stolen her from her parents when a very little girl in revenge
for punishment properly inflicted upon the Sheik’s brother by Meriem’s French
father, Captain Jacob Jack, Meriem and Akut live a life of thrilling adventures
in the dense African jungle.


Paulvitch, a former enemy of Tarzan, conspires with two other renegades,
Malbihn and Jenssen, to capture Meriem, and obtain a large reward offered for
her return to her father. At first they are unsuccessful. They capture Jack, and
endeavour to make him lead them to Meriem, wounding him when he refuses to
do so. Meriem is recaptured by the Sheik, escapes, and is attacked by a tribe of
apes ; is rescued by Jack, now known for his prowess as “ Korak, the Killer," only
to fall into the hands of Malbihn and Jenssen.
Paulvitch lures Lady Greystoke out to Africa on the specious promise of
restoring her lost son to her, and while Paulvitch and the Sheik are gloating over
the double capture of Meriem and Lady Greystoke, they are overpowered by Lord
Greystoke, “ Tarzan,” who has followed his wife into the African wilds.
Korak, thinking Meriem is dead, wanders disconsolately through the jungle
with Tantor, the elephant. Korak is again seized by the Sheik, and cruelly sen-
tenced to be burned at the stake. Tantor comes to his assistance, pulls up the
stake with Korak bound to it, and rushes off with him into the security of the
jungle. There again they meet Lord Greystoke, who discovers in Korak his long-
lost son, and returns with him to Lady Greystoke and Meriem, who now finds in
Jack the lover rather than the big brother of her earlier years.
This serial is full of action, thrills and sustained suspense. Enjoyable to
everyone, it will be doubly so to those familiar with the book from which it was
derived.
It can be run in three episodes as divided, or better still, all three episodes
shown consecutively in a single evening’s entertainment. Some will prefer it as a
serial, and some as a complete production. It may be obtained either way. Please
indicate which you prefer.
8128— First Episode —“ The Jungle Children —on 2 reels.
Rental 10/-.
8129 — Second Episode —“ Korak the Killer ”■—on 2 reels.
Rental 10/-.
8130 —Third Episode—“ Return of Tarzan”—on 2 reels.
Rental 10/-.
Complete —Rental £ 1/10/ on 2 reels
S 8131 Westbound Limited f.b.o
Featuring Ralph Lewis and Claire McDowell.
Rushing down the road the young switch-tender tries to reach the roadway
where the huge express train makes a sudden turn.
Lying directly on the rails a beautiful young woman is pinioned under a fallen
horse, directly in the path of the oncoming express train in charge of his father, Bill
Buckley, a veteran engineer. Parelleling the railroad train is an automobile in which
Bernard Miller, the President of the railroad is riding. The two men have long been
friends and in a few moments a race is on. Little did Miller realize that his daughter,
Esther, was lying prostrate on the rails.


The young switch-tender, Johnny Buckley, saves the girl, and the romance
between the president's daughter and the engineer’s son begins. Raymond
McKim, secretary to the president, a man with an unsavory past, loves Esther,
but his love is not returned. He seeks to force his attentions upon her, but she
is rescued by Johnny.
In the engine cab with Bill Buckley is his new fireman, Jack Smith, who holds
a grudge against him. To get his engineer in wrong, he changes the signal lights
at the main line switch. Acting on his train orders, Johnny tries to stop his father’s
train at the main line, but finds, to his terror, that he has given the green signal
to go ahead.
Johnny jumps astride his horse, races to the nearby forest and sets fire to
the dry bush. In an instant the entire mountainside is ablaze and a living wall
of fire sweeping toward the railroad.
Engineer Buckley sees the fire and stops his train just before it crashes into
the oncoming Midnight Express.
A thrilling melodrama, well acted, ably directed and full of sustained suspense.
4723 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £l/5/-.
M 8132 Thundering Hoofs f.b.o.
Featuring Fred Thomson, Chas. Mailes, Ann May and Bill Lowery.
Dave Marshall is the son of a big ranchman. Through the plotting of Luke
Severn, who is head of a smuggling band on the Mexican border, he is placed in
a wrong light before Don Juan Estrada, a wealthy Spanish gentleman, and his
daughter, Carmelita. Early in the story, Marshall is forced by Severn’s cruelty to
fight for the protection of the horse Silver King. He wins the fight and the horse.
Later the horse is stolen by Severn and sold for “ bull bait.”
The big scene is set in a Mexican bull-fight arena where Silver King is about
to be gored by a ferocious bull. But Marshall trailing his beloved horse finally
finds him in the arena and hurdling down over tiers of boxes and leaping across
the heads of the crowd he grapples with the bull and finally throws him and saves
the horse. He also wins the love of Carmelita whom he had previously rescued
from a runaway stage coach. Later Severn is branded as the leader of the smugglers.
An unusual story and extremely entertaining. Plenty of thrilling action
with laughs and chuckles scattered through it with a lavish hand. The cast is
excellent and the plot smooth and well developed.
4889 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £l/5/-.
M 8136 The Lighthouse by the Sea Warner Bros.
Featuring Charles Hill Mailes, Louise Fazenda, Rin Tin Tin.
Albert Dorn, shipwrecked off the coast of Maine, is saved by his dog, Rin-
Tin-Tin, after an exciting battle with a man-eating shark. Rin-Tin-Tin suc-
ceeds in getting Dorn to the beach where Flora, daughter of old Caleb Gale, the
lighthouse keeper, finds him, and with the aid of the dog revives him.
Ever since Caleb had been afflicted with blindness he and Flora had lived
in seclusion fearing that his blindness might be discovered and his position taken
away.


Flora offers Dorn a position tending the Light. He soon falls in love with
her, but Flora is infatuated with Edward Cavenna, a dapper young stranger,
whom Dorn instinctively distrusts, as does his dog. When Dorn attends to
the Light, Rin-Tin-Tin is always on hand to help him.
Unknown to Flora, Cavenna is the leader of a band of bootleggers operat-
ing along the coast. His henchmen kidnap Dorn and the dog so that the
Light will be unprotected, and then overcome old Caleb as Flora is asleep in the
adjoining cottage.
Rin-Tin-Tin breaks out of the burlap bag he has been tied in and suc-
ceeds in freeing Dorn’s hands. Dorn sets fire to an oil-soaked rag lying nearby
and Rin-Tin-Tin dashes off with the burning rag in his mouth and drops it
into the Light through the trap door under which the lantern hangs.
From this point the action rushes onwards to an exciting conclusion.
Thrill follows thrill! How Cavenna attempts to kidnap Flora, the fierce en-
counter between the revenue officers and the bootleggers, Rin-Tin-Tin’s heroism,
all have their place in tha amazing series of events which makes “The Light-
house by the Sea” one of the most thrilling pictures ever produced.
4589 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/10/-.
S 8137 The Clash of die Wolves Warner Bros
Featuring Rin-Tin-Tin
In the high Sierras, a forest fire drives the wolves out into the cattle coun-
try, and the country rises in arms to kill off the marauders. The most elusive
and most dangerous of the wolves is Lobo (Rin-Tin-Tin). A price is upon
his head and the rangers scour the country for a shot at him.
Lobo gets a thorn in his foot and, suffering intensely, he turns for aid to
David Weston, a young prospector. David is out working on a claim, whose
samples show a rich deposit of borax. He is alone in his cabin far off in the
country. The lone wolf, relieved of the thorn, stays on at the cabin as a
companion and affectionate friend.
David’s sweetheart, May Barstow, daughter of one of the ranchers, comes
to visit the prospector and recognises the wolf as one who had given her and
Alkali Bill, the ranch cook, a terrific fright on the night of the forest fire. But,
finding Lobo gentle and affectionate, she agrees wih David to disguise him to
protect him from attack.
Lobo, disguised, goes into the town, but there his disguise is lost, and
Borax Horton, the town chemist, recognises him and tries to kill him, but Lobo
escapes through a volley of shots.
This Horton, meanwhile, has been interested in the borax samples that
young David had shown him. His interest flames to mad desire when he comes
across a wonderful secret report on the quality of the borax that the younger
man had made. David is on his way to post his claim when he meets Horton
in a storm in the night. They have a terrific fight. Horton leaves his opponent
for dead and makes off to town with the claim to post it for himself.
Lobo, on the track of his master, finds him lying wounded. Unable to
move himself, David writes a message for May Barstow on his canteen and
gives it to the wolf to bring to the girl at the ranch. Lobo, running through
the fire of cowboys who have been tracking him, gets to the ranch, but there
he faces certain death from the rancher’s guns.


May, who has escaped from a brutal attack by Horton, pleads to let the
wolf have a chance. The ranchers, with the girl and her father, approach the
wolf and May gets the message. She leads a rescue party to David’s cabin. But
Lobo races swiftly far in advance of the ranchers and finds Horton again attack-
ing his master. This time Lobo mkes an end to the villain. Protected by
David and May, he starts a new life with them as they are married.
4941 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/10/-.
M 8138 His Majesty Bunker Bean Warner Bros.
Featuring Mat Moore
“His Majesty Bunker Bean” is a rollicking tale of a young secretary who
discovers, through a clairvoyant’s magic, that in his last incarnation he was
Napoleon Bonaparte. Then he meets and falls in love with Marie, the boss’
daughter. Reviewing Napoleon’s career, he decides that Napoleon was not all he
should have been as far as young flapper ladies are concerned, and he again
consults a clairvoyant. This time he learns that ages before, he had been Ram-
tah, one-time king of Egypt.
Ten thousand dollars has come Bunker’s way by inheritance, and he is in-
duced to part with one-half of this sum for a mummy of Ram-tah. On Ram-
tah's face, he finds a mole very closely akin to one which adorns his own, and
his past is thus assured.
Bunker is called to the country estate of his employer to take dictation,
and remains there for a week, during which time he falls more violently in love
with Marie. Finally, he exercises the prerogatives that were Napoleon’s and
Ram-tah’s and with whirlwind speed, woos and wins Marie.
Just before the wedding. Bunker is called before the directorate of a large
corporation in which he holds 5,000 dollars worth of stock, and an attempt is
made to bulldoze him out of his stock. He again asserts himself, however, re-
fuses, and later sells his stock for 400,000 dollars.
On the eve of his wedding he discovers the mummy of Ram-tah smashed
in his home, and learns that it was merely a stuffed figure, and not a mummy.
He is broken-hearted and his dreams are shattered. Just before the ceremony,
however, a rival tries to stop the marriage and Bunker surprises by annihilating
him in a fist fight. His courage returns, and with it he learns the secret of
Napoleon's success. And so he is married.
This is an hilariously funny tale, and one that you will chuckle over for
weeks.
4981 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/10/-.
S 8139 The Man on the Box Warner Bros.
Featuring Syd Chaplin, Alice Calhoun and Helene Costello
With 50,000 dollars in his pocket, Bob Wharburton arrives in San Diego,
eager for adventure. He meets Lampton who has invented the “Helicopter,’’ a
new flying machine, and in a moment of inspiration, invests his money in
Lampton’s invention and becomes his partner.
The Helicopter soon proves its world-wide importance, and two different
factions become involved in a series of exciting episodes, in their attempt to se-


cure the plans of the flying machine for themselves. On one hand is Count
Karaloff, a Russian, and his spy, Badkoff, who are intent on stealing the plans.
On the other is Col. Annesly, investigating the new plane with the idea of
purchasing it for the U.S. Government, while Bob and Lampton, owners of the
Helicopter, hold the precious plans.
Bob, looking for romance, falls in love with Betty, Col. Annesly’s
daughter, but learns she is engaged to marry the unscrupulous Count Karaloff,
in order to save the Colonel from disgrace.
One night at the Lampton house, Bob is awakened by Mrs. Lampton’s
cries, and when he reaches her room, he finds Badkoff, the spy, rifling the safe
for the plans of the Helicopter. Bob is engaged in an amusing and painful fight
with the spy, when Lampton enters, misunderstands Bob’s presence in pyjamas,
and together with Badkoff, ejects Bob from the house.
Bob finds pyjamas inconvenient for street wear. After many narrow es-
capes and a clever ruse, he manages to get Badkoff’s clothes off that criminal and
on to himself.
Seeking a means of transportation, Bob discovers an old-fashioned omni-
bus, drawn by a discouraged horse and driven by a belligerent cabbie. A rough
and ready fight starts, and, after ousting the driver, Bob proceeds with his cab,
and accidentally saves Col. Annesly and Betty from an accident, with a great
display of courage.
Betty employs Bob as her groom, now that he is without a job, and in a
ridiculously serious manner they begin their romance, but are rudely interrupted
by Karaloff, who has come to the Annesly’s home with Badkoff as his valet, in
search for the plans. Bob decides to disguise himself as Betty’s maid, and thus
vamp Badkoff into giving him the precious papers.
Time and time again the plans are innocently transferred from the Colo-
nel’s possession to the hands of the crooks, then Bob, as the flirtatious maid,
gets them, while the household is in a terrible turmoil.
The police arrive and everybody shows his true colors, Bob explaining that
he has the plans in safe keeping for Col. Annesly and asking for Betty’s hand
in marriage. They are happily married, and Bob looks forward to serenity
after his many reckless adventures.
4915 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/10/-.
M 8140 Lady Windermere’s Fan Warner Bros.
From the play by Oscar Wilde; directed by Ernst Lubitsch, featuring
Irene Rich, May McEvoy, Ronald Coleman and Bert Lytell
Mrs. Erlynnc (played by Irene Rich), a woman of many indiscretions, has
returned to England after many years’ sojourn abroad. Wishing to take her
place in fashionable society, she hits upon the birthday party of Lady Winder-
mere, her daughter, as a suitable occasion.
Lady Windermere (May McEvoy) is ignorant of the fact that Mrs.
Erlynne is her mother, and when Lord Windermere (Bert Lytell), under pres-
sure from Mrs. Erlynne, asks his wife to invite her, she refuses. By mistake
Mrs. Erlynne comes anyway and meets with a frigid reception. Her charm soon
wins over the guests and she fascinates Lord Augustus (Edward Martindel) in
spite of himself.


Later Lord Darlington (Ronald Coleman), a friend of the Windermeres,
in love with Lady Windermere, discovers that Lord Windermere has visited
Mrs. Erlynne. Darlington tells Lady Windermere that her husband is unfaith-
ful and persuades her to elope with him. She leaves for his apartment only to
find there Mrs. Erlynne who had discovered her plans and wants to make her go
home. They quarrel, but when Darlington, Windermere and a unmber of other
gentlemen arrive unexpectedly, they both are driven to hiding.
Windermere sees his wife’s fan and accuses Darlington of having his wife
there. He is about to search the place when Mrs. Erlynne sacrifices her future
by appearing and claiming the fan.
Still ignorant of their relationship, Lady Windermere appreciates the sacri-
fice and gladly returns to her husband. It is he who now condemns Mrs*'
Erlynne and she who champions her cause.
Lord Augustus has been unable to forget the fascinating Mrs. Erlynne
despite the disgrace of finding her in Darlington’s apartment. She has also
fallen in love with him and at last he proposes to her. Finally she finds happi-
ness in his love and the knowledge that, without revealing her relationship, she
has saved her daughter from the mistake that has ruined her own life.
A remarkably clever screen adaptation of a comedy-drama which has had
continuous popularity on the legitimate stage for over thirty years,
5901 feet standard length—on 6 reels
Rental £l/16/-.
S 8142 The Night Club* Paramount
Featuring Raymond Griffith, Vera Reynolds,
Wallace Beery and Louise Fazenda
What good is a legacy of a million dollars to a woman hater, if he must
marry a girl he never has seen in order to get it? Raymond Griffith learns of
this inheritance just after he has renounced all women, because a girl he was
about to marry left him at the altar.
Taking his valet, Ray seeks seclusion in a Spanish village where he hopes
to find few, if any women.
To his great disappointment, women of all kinds seek his company. He
is nearly killed by one of them—a pretty girl in a big automobile. His valet
tells Ray that this girl, Vera Reynolds, is the one his uncle had selected for him
to marry! Ray remarks ecstatically that to marry such a girl would be an easy
way to make a million dollars. Vera, who is an heiress, hears the remark and
at once denounces him as a fortune hunter.
Stunned by her accusation, Ray tells her that she can have the whole for-
tune, that he wouldn't have anything to do with any part of it. Learning from
his valet that, Vera would get the money if he should die, Ray sets out to make
away with himself. He tries a gun, but it won’t discharge; he resorts to hang-
ing himself from a chandelier, but the fixture pulls out of the ceiling. Other
attempts are equally fruitless.
As a last resort, Ray hires Beery to slay him. Then Ray and Vera make
up, so when Ray sees Beery approaching, he flees through the streets. Beery


catches him, only to tell him that he can’t carry out the bargain, as he has re-
formed !
One of the funniest pictures ever made, “The Night Club” will convulse
any audience.
4895 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £2.
*Title misleading. Nothing to do with wild night life in a big city.
S 8143’ The King on Main Street Paramount
Featuring Adolphe Menjou, Bessie Love, Greta Nissen, Joseph Kilgour
and Mario Majeroni.
Adolphe Menjou is a bored king. His ministers advise him a large loan is
necessary to save his country. There are only two ways of getting it, either
through an alliance with the House of Slavonia, or through a lease of oil lands
to American capitalists. The king decides to try America.
At the king’s hotel in New York, while Arthur Trent and his fellow
financiers are waiting for the king to arise so they can discuss the proposed oil
lease, he slips out to Times Square, sees a sightseeing bus marked “Coney Island”
and boards it.
The turnstiles and the gay amusements puzzle him until he becomes
acquainted with a typical American youngster, who introduces him to the
roller coasters, the hot dogs and popcorn; insists that only dudes carry canes,
and finally trades a harmonica for the king’s gold pocket knife.
By a strange coincidence, at Coney Island, the king meets again Gladys
Humphreys, an American girl he had previously met in Paris, and is introduced
to her friend, John Rockland. John invites him to visit him at his home in
Little Falls and the king accepts.
* Later at the hotel, the king orders his secretary to make the arrangements
and the secretary phones John the names of the king's retinue. John is amazed,
but decides to put on a big reception. He turns out the local Boy Scouts, the
girls from Aunt Tabitha’s school, the Mayor—in fact all the local citizens of
prominence, including the undertaker. It is a gala occasion.
Gladys is there, but Trent also shows up to negotiate the oil lease and in-
terrupts the king’s efforts to be alone with her. He makes her promise to meet
him on a second story balcony. She does, but Trent discovers them and they
are locked out. Here the king ceases to be a king, and becomes only an earnest
young man romantically in love. He shields Gladys from the night air with
his dress coat. When the door is opened next morning he protects her reputa-
tion by signing Trent’s lease at the price of Trent's silence. Then he bids the
girl farewell with deep emotion after telling her he must go on “Kinging.”
It’s a perfect role for Menjou. He has the temperament, the air of blase
sophistication, the finished type of acting necessary for it. It is one of his
greatest efforts.
4721 feet standard length—on 5 reels
' Rental £2.


M 8145 The Spanish Dancer Paramount
Featuring Pola Negri, Antonio Moreno, Adolphe Menjou and Wallace Beery
Maritana, a beautiful Spanish gypsy dancing girl, goes in search of Don Cesar
de Bazan of whose prodigality she has heard much. She finds him at a banquet
given by him to his friends and tells his fortune, which she predicts is one of evil.
Don Cesar distributes money amongst gypsies, one of whom steals his
purse. When Maritana hears of this she battles with the thief, is badly
wounded, but forcing the purse from him restores it to Don Cesar. The latter’s
creditors swoop down upon him and he flees.
The King's soldiers capture Maritana and in rescuing her, Don Cesar kills
a captain, for which offence he is sentenced to death. Through the aid of a wily
courtier, Don Cesar and Maritana are married en masque, the design being to
have Don Cesar shot and his bride carried to the King who is enamored of her.
Don Cesar is providentially saved by one of Maritana’s supporters who sub-
stitutes bread pellets for the bullets in the guns of the firing squad.
Eventually the King's friendship for Don Cesar and his bride is won and
all ends happily.
Tremendously dramatic and thrilling, a beautiful production, delightfully
directed, with delicious comedy and romance in every scene. One of the few
characterizations by Pola Negri which is suitable to every audience, and yet
shows her dramatic versatility at its best.
4873 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £2.
S 8146 The Covered Wagon Paramount
Featuring J. Warren Kerrigan, Lois Wilson, Ernest Torrence, Tully Marshall,
Charles Olge and Alan Hale
Way back in 1848, just before the discovery of gold in California, a huge
wagon-train of Pioneers who had gathered on the banks of the Mississippi at
Westport, set out to take up homestead sites in Oregon. The trip was fraught
with great danger. Not only were these hardy adventurers shut off from all
supplies and out of communication with the more civilised East, but Indian
attacks, prairie fires and the fording of rivers, added to the terrors of the over-
land journey.
Will Banion, hero of the story, is under a cloud because Sam Woodhull,
who was with him in the army during the war with Mexico, has accused him of
theft. Molly Wingate, the heroine, is loved by both Woodhull and Banion.
She favors Banion, but cannot marry him while under suspicion. During the
journey, Banion saves Molly’s life several times. Their romance is not only
beautiful but inspiring.
Woodhull becomes Banion's enemy. He and Will have a thrilling fight,
in which Banion proves to be the better man. He spares Sam’s life and later
even rescues him, but Woodhull's hatred continues until he meets his death
while attempting to shoot Banion.
On the way there comes news of the discovery of gold in California and the
wagon-train separates, Banion and part of the wagons going south, and the


others continuing north into Oregon. Molly remains 'with the Oregon con-
tingent and after Banion’s departure learns of his innocence of the theft charged
to him. And a few months later, Banion, with plenty of California gold, fol-
lows Molly into Oregon.
The picture teems with novel scenes, all the events, including a great Buf-
falo hunt, having been re-created with careful attention to realism and histori-
cal exactness. To see it is to live for a time with those hardy fighting frontiers-
men of the late 40’s who, despite the obstacles placed in their path by nature,
Indians and wild beasts, won their way across the trackless wastes of the Old
West to the gold fields of the Pacific Coast.
There has never been such a production. It is a masterpiece which no one
can now afford to miss seeing, and which already seen, can well be seen again.
5589 feet standard length—on 6 reels
Rental £2/8/-
/
M-S 8147 The Wanderer Paramount
Featuring 'William Collier, Jr., Ernest Torrence, Greta Nissen, Wallace Beery,
Tyrone Power, Kathlyn Williams
This is the story of the Prodigal son, the black sheep of long ago, who left
home for the allurements of a wicked city.
Jether, son of Jesse, patriarch of Hebron, is weary of the monotony of his
pastoral life and of the angry chiding of his harsh brother, Gaal. A passing
caravan gives him a glimpse of the beautiful courtesan Tisha, and an ambition
to see the great city beyond the hills. Despite the entreaties of his mother and
the maiden, Naomi, he demands his portion of his father’s gold and, accom-
panied by the evil Tola, leaves for the city. Here he learns to drink and to
gamble and falls into the snare of the siren Tisha.
His portion is quickly squandered in idle and luxurious living and Tisha,
vexed that he is unable to continue to buy her the jewels she craves, transfers
her affections to another. Jealous and desperate, Jether yields to the tempting
of Tola to play with loaded dice, is discovered, humiliated and reviled. He
breaks through the drunken crowd that mocks him and goes to Tisha, whom he
bitterly reproaches for his ruination, only to be seized by her servants and cast
outside.
Shortly afterward, during a night of riotous pagan revelry and feasting,
the vengeance of heaven is visited upon the city. Lightning cleaves the sky,
the statue of Ishtar crashes to the ground, the pillars of the temple totter and
the roof thunders in upon the appalled throng.
A dreadful famine follows—Jether is nearly starved. Finally, after many
tribulations, the humble prodigal returns to his home—changed, ill, in rags.
Tidings of Jether’s return are brought to Jesse, but he is unable to forgive his
son until the intervention of the mother brings about a reconciliation and the
feast is spread to celebrate the wanderer’s return and his betrothal to Naomi.
The director has made the most of this stirring theme and no one can fail
to be impressed, not only by the excellence of the cast and the sincerity of the
portrayal, but by the beauty and lavishness of the settings. It is a masterly
production and will have a universal appeal.
4944 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £ 2.


M 8148 The Fighting Coward Paramount
Featuring Ernest Torrence, Cullen Landis, Mary Astor, Noah Beery and
Phyllis Haver
After years of absence at school in the North, Tom Rumford returns to
his Southern home, where he becomes engaged to Elvira, his father’s ward.
Major Patterson, Elvira's disappointed suitor, challenges Tom to a duel without
cause. Tom, to whom all fighting is repulsive, can see no reason for fighting
for the hand of a girl he has already won and refuses the challenge, thereby
creating a reputation for cowardice. His stern old father, mortally offended,
drives him from home; Elvira returns his ring and the rest of the family spurn
him —all but Lucy, Elvira’s younger sister, who approves of his refusal to fight.
Insulted and scorned, Tom travels down the Mississippi and into the New
Orleans gambling house of “General” Orlando Jackson, where he sees and
shrinks from more fighting. At this point, “Captain” Blackie, a notorious
fighter and killer, feared by all the other men in the place, infuriates Tom by
his insults and Tom suddenly sees red. Heedless of results, he amazes all by
the fury of his attack on Captain Blackie—and by its results—for Captain
Blackie is ingloriously vanquished.
Following this encounter, Tom becomes “the notorious Colonel Blake,”
with a reputation as the most dangerous gambler on the river. Eventually fate
brings him back to his old home town, where Elvira has become the unhappy
wife of Major Patterson, now overseer of her father’s estate, which is badly run
down and heavily mortgaged. Dramatically reappearing incognito, Tom first
awes and humbles the “brave” men of the family and then reveals his identity.
Lucy, who has been waiting and hoping for Tom’s return, is disappointed at
finding him apparently so changed, but when he explains to her that he has
never had but the one fight and that his reputation is all founded on that and
the fearlessness that has now become second nature, everything ends happily.
Thrills and laughter alternate and abound in this unusual story, extremely
well told, of the days when little or no offence called for a fight to defend one’s
“honor.”
4940 feet standard length—on 5 reels.
Rental £l/15/-.
S 8149 Code of the Sea Paramount
Featuring Rod La Rocque, Jacqueline Logan, George Fawcett
Twenty years back, John McDow, Captain of the lightship “Relief” that
guards Great Barrier Reef, disobeyed the code of the sea when he weighed anchor
and took his ship to rescue the girl he loved, from a schooner being battered in
a storm. While the lightship was off its station, a big passenger liner was
wrecked on the reef.
Bruce McDow, John’s son, grows to manhood, a sufferer from his father’s
breach of trust. He is pointed out as a coward and the son of a coward, and
believes himself to be just that. He loves Jennie Hayden, daughter of Captain
Hayden, commander of the crack steamer “Northern.” Hayden hates the name


of McDow, but Jennie manages to obtain for Bruce a commission as first mate
on the lightship “Relief,” although the town is up in arms against him.
Jennie goes for a cruise on the yacht “Neroid.” The captain of the light-
ship is transferred and Bruce is left in command. That night a great storm
comes up. The “Northern” is crawling in with a broken propeller shaft.
Suddenly, in the midst of the terrible gale, a wireless message comes from the
“Neroid” in distress near the reef. The lightship, if it goes to the rescue, is the
only thing that can save Jennie Hayden. And the “Northern,” with 400 pas-
sengers, is groping her way toward the reef, dependent on the light! Bruce
is faced by the same problem as was his father, twenty years before.
But he solves it differently. The lightship remains at the station, and
Bruce, alone in a launch, goes through those mountainous waves to the rescue
of the passengers on the “Neroid.” You will hold your breath as you watch
him fighting his way.
One of the greatest storm pictures ever filmed and more intensely dramatic.
You will see ships buffetted by mountainous waves, a little yacht riding the
tempest like a cockle-shell until it grinds itself to pieces against a reef, a cringing
coward become a red-blooded, fighting he-man and a happy, satisfactory ending.
4935 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £2,
S 8150 The Grand Duchess and the Waiter Paramount
Featuring Florence Vidor and Adolphe Menjou
Florence Vidor, a Grand Duchess, has been forced to flee to Paris with a
vestige of her court, following the rise of revolutionists in her home country.
Attending a theatre one evening, she is seen by Adolphe Menjou, a mil-
lionaire, Beau Brummel, who immediately becomes infatuated with her. When
his attempts to meet her are coldly ignored, he engages a suite of rooms directly
below those she occupies at a prominent hotel, and bribes an old waiter to allow
him to act as a floor-waiter in her suite. In his efforts as a waiter, however, he
fails miserably and ends by spilling a pitcher of cream over her.
Angered by his clumsiness, the Duchess determines to punish him, first
making him a member of her personal staff, then proceeding to make his life
miserable by loading him with every unpleasant task from washing her dog
to shining her shoes.
One evening, unable to sleep, she orders some champagne. Menjou brings
a bottle and two glasses. The Duchess demands an explanation and Menjou
discloses his love for her. Although the idea of falling in love with a servent
is unthinkable to the Duchess, Menjou’s love-making finally sweeps away all
barriers, and he takes her into his arms—just as the court members enter the
room! The Duchess, though realising she is in love with the waiter, is forced
to repulse him out of mortified pride.
The humorous and exciting events that bring the story to a stirring climax
and eventually lead to a happy ending, furnish delightful entertainment.


As the wealthy boulevardier, who masquerades as a waiter, Menjou is his
own sauve, sophisticated self. It is for him a perfect role and he plays it with
the smoothness and the subtlety that stamps the finished actor.
4961 feet standard length — on 5 reels
Rental £ 2.
S 8151 Behind the Front Paramount
Featuring Wallace Beery, Raymond Hatton and Mary Brian
Mary Brian gets Detective Riff Swonson and Shorty McGee, a burglar, to
enlist in the army during the hectic days of 1917. And she does it by vamping
each of them, unknown to the other, just in order to fill a quota of 25 men.
For her father has promised her that if she enlists 25 men, she can go to France
as a war worker.
Beery and Hatton, enemies in civil life, are buddies in the great A.E.F. in
France. They are in a company commanded by Mary’s brother. Each secretly
believes himself engaged to Mary.
Of course it doesn’t take very long for them to get thrown into the guard-
house. Each appeals to Mary’s brother on the ground that he’s a prospective
brother-in-law. The captain goes right to Mary and tells her to set them
right. But meanwhile Hatton’s old profession comes in handy. He picks the
lock, they outwit the M.P.’s and take refuge in a French wine shop, presided
over by a pretty barmaid. When they stagger out, they seek a convenient place
to sleep—and find it is an army provision truck.
And the truck goes to the front!
Beery and Hatton don’t look like friends to a bunch of hungry dough-
boys in the front-line trenches and the pair make their get-away, only to find
that, instead of running to the rear, they ars out in No Man’s Land.
The ensuing scenes are a riot. The air raid, inspection, and especially
the scenes with the tank in No Man’s Land, are among the funniest ever filmed.
The picture starts with a chuckle and works into laughter that continues right
through to the end. It is remarkable in that almost every scene of the picture
contains a laugh.
As a pair of dumb doughboys, who get into all the trouble possible in
the army, Beery and Hatton win first honors. If it hurts you to laugh, don’t
expose yourself to the mercies of this picture. “Behind the Front” will chase
the gloom off the face of the most confirmed pessimist.
4916 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £2.
M 8152 Grass Paramount
“Grass” is the story of an exodus into a promised land.
It is the actual picturization of the semi-annual migration of the Baktyari
tribe in Persia, going through unbelievable hardships in their combat with nature
to obtain grass for their flocks.
These wanderers depend on their cattle for existence. The herds need


grass, without which the tribes would perish. The Chief gives the order and
the entire tribe sets out on its semi-annual pilgrimage for—life.
Coming to a swirling glacial river which must be crossed, they blow up
goat skins, tie them together and make rafts. The women folk, with tents,
goats and a great conglomeration of belongings, climb aboard the rafts, each
with two men furiously paddling at its bow.
Then the flocks and herds are dragged or driven into the water, until the
current seizes them and they are swept off to swim or be sucked under. Soon
the scene is one continuous procession of rafts and dots—each dot the head of
some struggling or drowning animal. No more stirring sight has ever been seen
by human eyes.
Through barren countries without trails, up heart-breaking mountains,
the barefooted and poorly clad men, knee-deep in snow and ice, break trails for
the older people and the very young.
This is not fiction, not the re-enacting of a historical event, but the actual
breath-taking struggle itself.
In all the world, only three white people have ever seen this marvellous
depiction of elemental life and mighty courage. Here are 50,000 natives and
500,000 cattle—struggling, fighting for their very existence.
For 48 days the fight continues, until finally reaching the top of the last
mountain, the tribe see below them the fertile plains covered with life-giving
grass.
The most unusual picture ever made and one that holds the audience spell-
bound to the very end.
3950 feet standard length—on 4 reels
Rental £l/4/-.
S 8153 Hands Up Paramount
Featuring Raymond Griffith, Montagu Love, Marion Nixon,
Virginia Lee Corbin and Mack Swain
Raymond Griffith plays the role of the hero, a Confederate Spy. His
general tells him he must go west to Virginia City, the source of the Union’s
war finances, and divert the next wagon train of gold to the South.
His experiences en route to the western city are exciting and varied, as he
becomes the central figure in holdups, Indian battles and love affairs. He falls
in love with two sisters, a brunette and a blonde, each of whom also falls in
love with him. It is a surprising triangle, but not difficult for the clever lover.
In obtaining the gold, Griffith is arrested for highway robbery. He reveals
his identity as a member of the Confederate Army, expecting to be held merely
as a prisoner of war. He is then informed that the war is over and that he is
just a common robber. As he is about to make a quick exit from this world
through hasty western justice, the girls save him.
The picture is full of hilarious situations. Griffith will make you laugh,
chuckle, grin and roar. An original story, with a combination of Civil War
and western backgrounds, in which Griffith’s rip-roaring adventures as a Con-
federate spy seem to prove that Sherman was wrong, and war is hilarious.
Recommended for any audience, A picture you should not miss.
4888 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £2.


S 8154 The Lucky Devil Paramount
Featuring Richard Dix, Esther Ralston and Edna May Oliver
William Phelps is a young man who demonstrates auto camping outfits in
a store. His longing for the open road is realised when he wins a beautiful
speed car at a Charity Bazaar, throws up his job and starts for the great open
spaces. .
At a tourist camp, he meets a girl and her aunt and falls in love with her
—the girl, not the aunt. They mistake him for a notorious wealthy young
bounder and leave without a word to him. He follows them all over the
country and the rest of the picture deals with the straits he gets into, the money
he is fleeced out of, and with his entering his machine in a big auto race for a
10,000 dollar prize.
The race thrills are tremendous. Never has the screen seen the like of
them. Cars turn turtle, drivers are thrown out, there are collisions, spills, a
fire, skids and hair-breadth escapes, laughs and gasps by the dozen.
Driving his own car because a racing driver whom he had engaged, dis-
appointed him at the last moment, Bill works from eighth to first place, drops
back to fifth and gradually works to first again, in spite of underhanded tactics
of other drivers. As his car comes down the home stretch, a little child runs
out on to the road and in order to avoid hitting her, Bill drives through a fence
and all but turns turtle as he comes to a grinding stop. Then he finds that he
has stripped all of his gears except the reverse, but undismayed he backs out of
the field on to the course again and over the finish line, the winner. And the
race was not all he won, for the girl said “Yes” and he and she decided to go on
with their tour —together.
4903 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £2.
M 8156 “Are Parents People?” Paramount
Featuring Betty Bronson , Florence Vidor ,
Adolphe Menjou. Andre Beranger and Lawrence Gray
The story of a young girl’s efforts to bring about a reconciliation between,
her parents, who quarrel so much about petty manners that they finally obtain a
divorce.
A young doctor friend tells the distracted daughter that parents are people
after all and suggests she give them a “mutual worry,” which she does in the
form of a supposed infatuation for a movie actor. She is expelled from school
when pictures and a “mash” note written by her room-mate are found in her
room. The mother calls up the husband to tell him all about it. He promises
to come right over, really tickled that she has called, for they are both really
in love, though separated.
Betty, believing herself to be a most misunderstood young lady, goes to
Dr Dacer’s office for advice. He is out and she spends the night there awaiting
his return. Her unexplained absence provides the necessary “mutual worry”
for the parents and results in a reconciliation.
Meanwhile, Betty’s own romance has made rapid progress, and although
like her parents, she and the young doctor have quarrelled, everything ends
happily.


The story is simple, but because of its intensely human qualities, extremely
powerful. It introduces humor without making it too obvious; reveals pathos
without begging for sympathy, and develops romance without making it seem
unnatural.
In short, it is a delightful picture that will make its impression on the
playgoer by gently reaching deep into his own experience and drawing him close
to it.
4939 feet standard length—on 5 reels
Rental £l/15/-.
M 8159 The Pony Express Cruze
Featuring Betty Compson, Ernest Torrence, Ricardo Cortez and Wallace Beery
A good western drama woven around the intrigue of rival factions to
separate California from the Union of America early in 1860.
Ricardo Cortez, as ’Frisco Jack, does much to outwit the plotting Knights
of the Golden Circle who were against the Union. There are many exciting
scenes in this subject of hard riding, fighting, attacks on outposts by Indians,
etc. The hero saves the situation in face of all adversiy, inspired by Betty
Compson. She takes the part of Ernest Torrence’s daughter, who is a minister
at an outpost of the pony express.
5 reels.
Rental £ 1/15/-.
S 8160 We’re in the Navy Now Paramount
Featuring Wallace Beery, Raymond Hatton, Chester Conklin and Loraine Eason
Five reels of rollicking fun.
Rental £l/15/-.
S 8161 The Eagle of the Sea Cruze
Featuring Ricardo Cortez and Florence Vidor.
This is a tale of love and adventure—of swashbuckling pirates and Spanish
galleons. It is the romantic story of Jean Lafitte, last of the buccaneers.
Lafitte (with a price on his head), wins the love of the beautiful Mile.
Louise Lestrom. His identity discovered he captures a vessel being fitted out to
rescue Napoleon from St. Helena and sets out on a voyage of piracy.
The abduction of Mile. Lestrom from an American ship, a fight with a
Spanish galleon, ending with the blowing up of the ship and a mutiny, are but
a few of the thrilling episodes of this fine film.
5 reels
Rental £l/15/-.
S 8162 The Lost World Paramount
. Featuring Bessie Love, Wallace Beery and Lewis Stone.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s great story describes how an explorer discovers
a part of South America that is completely cut off from the mainland and where,


as a consequence, the prehistoric fauna has persisted until to-day. Great beasts,
some of them 80 feet or more in length, roam these forests or wade in the shal-
low estuaries, prey on each other and fight amongst themselves, in fact live their
strange lives in the manner in which we know, from geological evidence, their
distant ancestors lived upwards of half a million years ago.
Lewis Stone puts up a great show and Wallace Beery's performance is, in-
evitably, excellent. Bessie Love makes a charming heroine, and Lloyd Hughes
as a journalist member of the Expedition, is a very attractive juvenile lead.
The film finishes with the great saurian crashing through the Tower Bridge
and, apparently homesick, he is last seen heading for the open sea going strong.
5 reels
Rental £l/15/-.
M 8163 The Red Raiders Cruzc
Featuring Ken Maynard, Ann Drew, J. P. McGowan, and the Wonder Horse,
Tarzan
A stage coach rattles across the Western plains. Inside, distinguished from
the other passengers by her comeliness, sits a young woman who is on her way
to join her brother at a ranch dangerously near hostile Indian territory. Atten-
tive to her is a young army officer who has been assigned to a military post in
the heart of th.e Indian domain. The Indians are known to be far from peace-
fully inclined.
An attack on the coach by Indians gives a thrilling chase in which the
young officer, Lieutenant Scott, by clever trickery and wonderful riding, thwarts
the raid and brings the stage safely into the post, where he is acclaimed a hero
by everyone except Captain Ortwell, his superior officer, who resents having any
heroes around the place besides himself.
At the fort, the troopers furnish Scott an outlaw mount, with
the expectation of his humiliation, but to the amazement and delight of all, he
subdues the outlaw in an exhibition of bucking seldom equalled on the screen.
Of course, Captain Ortwell and Lieutenant Scott are rivals for the affec-
tions of the young woman, Jane Logan, who visits the fort. To get his rival
at least temporarily, and perhaps permanently, out of the way, Captain Ortwell
assigns to Lieutenant Scott the dangerous errand of forestalling an Indian raid.
A false message sends Captain Ortwell and the garrison to a distant mining
camp, giving the Indians an excellent opportunity to attack the fort.
A terrific battle ensues, when Lieutenant Scott brings back the troop barely
in time to save the fort and his sweetheart.
5 reels
Rental £l/15/-.
M 8164 Ella Cinders First National
Featuring Colleen Moore and Lloyd Hughes.
Colleen Moore’s big, smiling eyes carry her triumphantly through a movie
contest to Hollywood and success, which every spectator will enjoy to the limit.
5 reels
Rental £l/15/-.


S 8165 The Drop Kick Paramount
Featuring Richard Barthelmess and Alberta Vaughan.
Barthelmess plays the part of a college student who is accused of appro-
priating money from the school athletic fund. There is a girl, of course, and a
love plot. A film full of dramatic action and interest built round the football
field.
5 reels
Rental £l/15/-.
M 8166 Orchids and Ermine Fi rst National
Featuring Colleen Moore and Jack Mulhall.
Colleen Moore, as a switchboard attendant in a cement factory, aspires to
fine clothes and riches. In her efforts to reach these there are many amusing
incidents- The humorous situations created between her and the supposed
valet of an oil millionaire, who turns out to be the real millionaire, are really
most entertaining, and should appeal to any audience.
5 reels
Rental £l/15/-.
S 8167 The Night Cry Warner Bros.
Featuring Rin-Tin-Tin.
Here is a picture that will live as long as there are men and women who
love dogs. It is the story of a dog true to his trust, even when this faithfulness
all but causes his death at the hand of his beloved master. It is a story that will
stir you with its pathos, thrill you with its excitement, astonish you
with the almost human acting of the “wonder dog of the movies,” Rin-Tin-
Tin.
The background of the picture is laid in the sheep ranching country of the
West. Rinty, the sheep herder’s dog, is accused by a neighboring herder of
killing lambs belonging to the latter’s flock. Rinty’s owner stoutly denies the
accusation—but through circumstantial evidence a strong case is built against
the dog, and in the face of the proof of his guilt that is finally submitted, even
Rinty's owner is forced to acknowledge the dog’s guilt.
The law of the range provides but one penalty for the sheep killer—death.
Rinty nearly pays dearly for his alleged crime—but through a series of swiftly
happening and exciting events, his innocence is proved conclusively. Instead of
being remembered as a “killer,” Rinty quite deservedly becomes the pride of the
ranchers.
5 reels
Rental £l/15/-.
New subjects will be continually added to the Library
from time to time ♦


How to start Kodascope Library Service
1. Fill in and sign “ Application ” below (not good without deposit).
2. Make cheque or money order to order of Kodak (Aust.) Pty. Ltd. (not
good without “ Application ”).
3. Send Deposit and “ Application ” together to the Library.
4. Send with them a list of subjects (with alternates).
Be sure to fill in the Maker’s Name and Serial Number of your projector.
If other than a Kodascope projector, Manufacturer’s Certificate Tag must accom-
pany Application.
APPLICATION FOR FILM SERVICE.
KODASCOPE LIBRARY OF KODAK (AUST.) PTY.
LIMITED.
192..
Herewith Five Pounds (£5) deposit, for which please enroll
me as a Subscriber to the Kodascope Library Film Service.
I understand that this deposit is to guarantee that I will ob-
serve the rules of the Kodascope Library, that I will return my
films promptly, that I will not lend, borrow or exchange Library
Films with others, and that I will be responsible for serious
injury to Library Films while they are in my possession.
I agree to furnish a sufficient list of preferred and alternate
subjects or accept substitutes.
{Type of 16 m/m projector used )
{Maker’s Name)
{Serial number of same) ...
{Subscriber’s Signature)
{Address)
Wholly Set Up and Printed in Australia for Kodak (Australasia) Pty. Limited,
By Queen City Printers Pty. Ltd., 492 Collins Street, Melbourne.








