

A P\ O
DESCRIPTION OF AN UNRECORDED ARDISIA OF
NEW GUINEA.
BARON FEED. VON MOELLER, K.C.M.G.,
M.D., Ph.D., F.R.S., F.L.S., &c.




Description of an unrecorded Ardisia of New
Guinea.
By Baron Feed. Yon Mueller, K.C.M.G., M.D., Pn.D., F.R.S.,
F.L.S., &c.
[Bead before the Boyal Society of K.S. W., 2 June, ISS6. ]
Ardisia poeantherea, F. v. M. &, C. Moore.
Glabrous; leaves large, cliartaceous, lanceolar, somewhat acumi-
nated, narrowed into a short petiole, shining on both sides, hardly
paler beneath, entire at the margin, copiously pervaded by trans-
parent short lineoles and dots ; umbels crowded into short terminal
panicles; pedicels about as long as the umbel stalks or longer;
flowers pentamerous ; segments of the calyx elliptical, membranous
at the margin ; corolla pale-bluish or almost lilac-coloured, nearly
twice as long as the calyx, its lobes about three times longer
than the pale tube, broad-oval; filaments hardly half as long
as the anthers; the latter yellow, from a somewhat bilobed
base broad-linear, gradually attenuated upwards, opening in-
trosely by two terminal confluent pores, considerably shorter
than the corolla; style hardly surpassing the stamens, setaceous,
as well as the ovary glabrous.
New Guinea,— Cultivated in the Botanic Gardens of Sydney
by Chas. Moore, Esq., F.L.S. A large elegant plant, of seem-
ingly climbing habit; leaves dark green, to 7 inches long and
to 21 inches broad, thinly penninerved, finely net-veined.
Panicles much shorter than the leaves, the general peduncles
bearing umbel-stalks already from near the base. Pedicels
mostly twice as long as the flowers. Bracts conspicuous,
cymbous-lanceolar, at first outside soft-hairy, Soon deciduous.
Segments of the calyx about £ inch long, densely lineolar and
puiTctular-spotted except towards the hyaline margin. Corolla
tender-membranous, its resinous lineoles and dots dark brownish,
its lobes quite blunt. Anthers about £ inch long. Stigma
not broader than the summit of the style; fruit as yet not
obtained. In its affinity this new species approaches to A ;
porosa from Malacca and the Sunda-Islands, forming with that
plant and with A. paludosa from Madagascar the section Mono
porus, which might perhaps be restored to generic right, unless
carpologic characteristics, against expectation, should be found to
interfere with this segregation, A porosa differs already in less
resinous-glandular leaves and in racemously arranged flowers of
smaller size from the new Papuan congener.
5A 5—87.






