

DBSIE .A-IBILjE
Bulbs & Tubers
AND
HOW TO CULTIVATE THEM.
J. A. STUCKEY.
PEIGE ONE SHILLING. \ '
A eu Lii-mu
' /V
x.- N
ADELAIDE :
PRINTED BY VARDON AND PRITCHARD, GRESHAM-STREET.
V’
T*
it 1 1
*ir
1890.


]
» *
>rrr""' ••
,
\
\
*
' ' , ■ ■ f
■■.■I'. • . , ,.•■■• •• • v - ' :
li '/ftmaB ■■ :V M
- ; .WV’ : ’'■ ,-■ ' .;■". "iiSI Wm
/s' r *» ,'*■ -
I TI 1 HI' "III 11 - ■
i 4 1‘ -■ -■ v • ,/11


V c’c'C'C*
• 21—j-i.
|- ■ |
—^EniERl^v:
A Gauicvtcu - ; c
X V, ...-^
'xc <*. i>
ADELAIDE :
DESIRABLE
Bulbs & Tubers
AND
HOW TO CULTIVATE THEM.
J. A. STUCKEY.
PRICE OITE SHILLING.
PRINTED BY YARDON AND PRITCHARD, GRESHAM-STREET.
1890.


IUDEX.
Pa^e.
Page
Achimemes
... 16
Hsemanthus
...
9
Agapanthus
... 4
Hedychium
. . .
9
Allium
... 4
Hippeastrum
• . .
9
Alocasia ...
... 16
Hyacinth...
. . .
9
Alstroemeria
... 4
Hyacinthus Candicans
. . .
10
Amaryllis
... 4
Imantophyllum
. . .
19
Anemone...
... 4
Iris
...
10
Anomatheca
... 5
Isoloma ...
• • •
19
Anthericum
... 5
Ixia
• • •
10
Antholyza
... 5
Kaempferia
...
19
Arum
... 5
Lachenalia
...
10
Aspidistra
... 16
Leucoium
...
10
Astilbe
... 16
Lilium
• • •
11
Babiana ...
... 6
Medeola ...
• • •
11
Begonia ...
... 16
Mirabilis ...
• • •
11
Blandfordia
... 17
Muscari . ..
0 9 0
11
Bobartia ...
... 6
Narcissus ...
• • •
11
Bomarea ...
... 17
Nerine
• « •
12
Brodiaea ...
... 6
Ophiopogon
• • •
20
Brunsvigia
... 6
Ornithogalum
• . .
12
Oaladium | ...
... 17
Oxalis
...
12
Canna
... 6
Pseonia
• • •
12
Olivia
... 17
Pancratium
• • •
12
Coburgia ...
... 6
Phaedranassa
...
20
Convallaria
... 7
Phormium
...
13
Crinum ...
... 7
Polianthes
• • «
13
Crocus and Colchicum
... 7
Polygonatum
...
13
Cyclamen...
7, 17
Ranunculus
...
13
Dahlia
... 7
Scilla
• • •
13
Dicentra (Dielytra)
... 8
Sparaxis .. .
• • •
13
Dicherisandra
... 18
Sprekelia ...
• • •
14
Dietes (Moraea)
... 8
Sternbergia
. . .
14
Dioseprea ...
✓ f mmm £r, ...
Eucomis . ...
Farf tmiininf fiigi^%ria)
... 18
... 18
Tigridia ...
Tritileia ...
...
14
14
... 8'
Tritoma ...
0 9 9
14
... 18
Tritonia ...
14
Freesia .. CZ...
... 8
Tropaeolum
...
14
/ A Fuukia' ' C..'
Galanthus •••
... 18
... 8
Tulbaghia
Tulip
...
14
15
v f~fr Gesnera ,,,
y Gladiolus ./.
... 19
... 8
Ty daea
Undescribed
...
20
20
Gloriosa ...
... 19
Yallota ...
...
15
Gloxinia ...
... 19
Veltheimia
. • •
15
Griffinia ...
... 19
Zephyranthes
...
15


Desirable Bulbs and Tabers.
Plants.
There seems to be great apathy in this colony in connection with the
cultivation of bulbous and tuberous-rooted plants. Most of them require
but little space or care ; many can be grown in ordinary garden soil;
they usually increase rapidly by offsets or seed, and bloom profusely at
various seasons, yet several hardy varieties are apparently only to be
found in the Botanic Gardens or the florists’ catalogues. One reason for
the popular indifference on this subject is the difficulty in obtaining
the chief horticultural books of reference in Adelaide—and most of these
are published in Europe, so that their directions are unsuited to our
climate. Two cheap books have been issued here to remedy this defect,
but the section devoted to bulbous plants is very short and not very
explicit.
Another hindrance to this much-neglected branch of gardening is said to
be the expense, and one must admit that bulbs and tubers are not cheap
enough for popularity. But it is ludicrous to see as much money paid for
a Cineraria in bloom, or a Coleus which is almost certain to die during
the winter, as would buy one or more bulbs to flourish for many years.
Agapanthus, Allium Neapolitanum, Alstroemeria, Amaryllis Belladonna,
Anemone, Anomatheca, Anthericum, Antholyza, Arum, Babiana, Bobartia,
Brodiaea, Brunsvigia, Canna, Coburgia, Convallaria, Crinum, Crocus and
Colchicum, Cyclamen, Dahlia, Dielytra, Dietes bicolor, Eucomis, Freesia,
Galanthus, Gladiolus, Hsemanthus, Hedychium, Hippeastrum, Hyacinth,
and Hyacinthus Candicans, Iris, Ixia, Lachenalia, Leucoium, some Liliums,
Medeola, Mirabilis, Muscari, Narcissus, Nerine, Ornithogalum, Oxalis,
Pseonia, Pancratium, Phormium, Polianthes tuberosa, Polygonatum,
Ranunculus, Scilla, Sprekelia formosissima, Sternbergia, Tigridia, Tritileia,
Tritoma, Tritonia, Tropaeolum, Tulbaghia, Tulip, Yallota purpurea, Yel-
theimia, and Zephyranthes, can all be cultivated in the open air in this
climate with a moderate amount of trouble.
The beauty of such flowers, and their appearance sometimes wUeu
very few other flowers are obtainable, should commend bulb culture
to all who possess a small piece of ground, a few pots, or a window-
box. As one set decays, it can be removed, and another take its
place, sol as to utilise the space at our command to the best advantage.
Many bulbs can be put away in a box or drawer for months, and then
be planted at their growing season. Others are evergreen, and have
foliage which is always graceful ana refreshing. Gladiolus can be
induced to bloom throughout the year by planting the bulbs in
successive months, and Anemones have bloomed in warm weather
by being kept out of the ground till June. Brodisea grandiflora is


apparently susceptible of similar treatment, as one plant is in flower
while the others are still under ground.
Agapanthus.
Agapanthus, or African Lily, succeeds admirably in the open air, and
does not need to be removed in this climate. It thrives best in strong,
turfy loam, leaf-mould, decomposed manure, and river sand. During the
summer the plants can hardly be overwatered, and clear manure-water,
given while they are in flower, will improve their appearance. The foliage
in this climate is evergreen; the blooms last long when cut, and appear
during summer in umbels on long stalks from 18 inches to two feet in
height. The varieties chiefly grown are two shades of blue, and one very
beautiful pure white species. Agapanthus umbellatus is bright blue;
A. u. albidus, white ; A. u. flore-pleno, double-flowered, and more lasting
than the single kinds; A. u. maximus is very large and handsome, and
there is a variety with variegated leaves, which is desirable for its foliage
as well as its flowers.
Allium.
Allium Neapolitanum is well worth cultivating. It is a scentless onion,
or so agreeably perfumed as to be enjoyable in a bouquet. The flowers
are white, small, but numerous and effective, in umbels on stalks ten or
twelve inches high. With us it bloomed in September, and is quite hardy.
Alstrcemerias.
Alstroemerias thrive with no special soil or care. They belong to the
Amaryllis tribe, and the foliage is remarkable for a peculiar twist in each
leaf as it joins the flower-stem. A similar formation exists in Bomarea
Carderi, which is one of the few climbing bulbous plants, singularly
beautiful, but rather expensive, and uncommon. Alstroemeria aurantiaca
blooms in autumn, has orange-red flowers, and is * very showy; A.
caryophyllaea is fragrant; A. psittacina has bright crimson flowers with
green edges. There are many other varieties.
Amaryllis.
Amaryllis Belladonna blooms with the first rains, or where the
ground is well watered, in February, March, or even January, when
its handsome flowers are most acceptable. The leaves appear after the
flowers; the bulbs are large, deeply imbedded in the ground, and rather
impatient of sub-division or removal. However, they recover and bloom
the second season when transplanted. The flower grows on a stem of
varying height, from one to two feet; it is four or five inches across;
there are several blooms in each umbel, and the colour is a soft shade of
pink, or pale,rose, streaked with a deeper, hue; or in some cases almost
white. Hippeastrum, Brunsvigia, and many others have usually been
classed as Amaryllis, but they are now more carefully named, and
cultivated with more regard to their botanical affinities. There is a
native Amaryllis, Calostemma purpurea, which appears at the same season
of the year as Belladonna, and is found in various shades of colour,
ranging from almost white to purple, in districts where the soil has not
been cultivated. It is a small flower by comparison with other Amaryllis,
but it is fragrant and very pretty.
Anemones.
Anemones do not appear to flourish in this colony. They delight in
a rich, sandy loam; but most will thrive in ordinary garden soil. The


foliage is beautiful as well as the flowers, and if through carelessness or
neglect our Anemones have been lost, they are worth replacing year after
year. There are many varieties of striking shades of colour—scarlet, blue,
creamy white, purple, &c. Anemone Hepatica was a supposed remedy
for liver disease, and another of the family is familiar as a medicine.
Anemone Japonica is rhizomatous, not tuberous-rooted, but it grows to a
height of two or three feet, has evergreen and beautiful leaves, and
bears large white or rose-coloured flowers in March.
Anomatheea.
Anomatheca cruenta is a charming little plant belonging to the Iris
family. It is very obliging as to flowers, having remained in bloom for
weeks about October; and I recently noticed one in a conservatory at
the Botanic Gardens looking very healthy in February. The bulbs are
small, and apt to be overlooked or lost; but they do not need to be removed
from the ground, and like plenty of water when growing. The flowers are
a rich carmine-crimson, having six divisions of unequal size, the three
lower and [smaller being ornamented with a dark spot at the base. The
bulbs increase rapidly by offsets, or they may be obtained by sowing
the pretty crimson seed.
Antherieum.
Anthericum, or Phalangium, is stated to be hardy. It certainly is
perfectly strong in a pot under a verandah, where it will bloom for weeks
in summer, and at other times form a variegated foliage plant of great
beauty. It is easily propagated by subdivision, or from the little plants
which form along the flower-stems, and the only care it requires is
abundance of water while growing. Arthropodiums, natives of these
colonies, are closely allied to Anthericum, and some unfamiliar names
belong to the genus. Chrysobactron Hookerii, Watsonia liliago, Czackia
and Paradisia liliastrum, Lloydia serotina, and Chlorophytum datum
variegatum are synonymous with various Anthericums.
Antholyza.
Antholyza derives its name from a fanciful resemblance between its
flowers and the mouth of an enraged animal. It is a tall gladiolus-like
plant, with scarlet or yellow flowers, which secrete a kind of honey, and it
is an ornamental addition to a large garden. It increases rapidly, seeds
profusely, and blooms luxuriantly in this climate.
Arum.
Arums are all easy of culture, and rich soil is one of the first conditions
of success in their growth. “ A compost of good rich loam, with a third
of sweet manure, thoroughly rotted, or leaf-mould with some sharp sand,
is very suitable.” They are propagated by seeds or division of the roots ;
the best time for this being just as they commence their new growth.
The foliage is particularly handsome, though the flowers in some cases
are so offensively scented that they can only be endured in the open air.
They are of various heights, from nine inches to three feet. Arum
dracunculus, A. Italicum, A. marmorata (of which the leaves are marbled
with yellow), and A. Palsestinum are among the best. Amorphophallus
Pivieri is closely allied to the Arum family, with a flower sometimes three
feet high and leaves 40, inches across, on marbled stems. It is recommended
for table decoration when grown in a pot, and is rather expensive, because it


is so rarely increased by offsets. The so-called Arum Lily, Eichardia
ASthiopica, is well known in our gardens, the variety with white-spotted
leaves being exceedingly pretty.
Babiana.
Babianas are nearly all natives of the Cape of Good Hope, and grow
here without any trouble. They are small plants, some are agreeably
scented, and their flowers are various shades of colour —blue, purple,
scarlet, cream, and lilac. Babiana stricta is one of the best, flowering in
September. They rapidly increase by offsets, and may be propagated
from seeds.
Bobartia.
Bobartia aurantiaca, or Homeria aurantiaca, is chiefly of interest from
the size and uncommon colour of its flowers. The pretty salmon shade
forms a pleasing contrast to the glossy rush-like leaves. It blooms in
spring, and is easily increased by offsets.
Brodisea.
Brodiseas are pretty little plants with narrow, rather stiff leaves, and blue,
white, ar scarlet flowers, which appear here about April. B. grandiflora
a little resembles Chionodoxa Lucilise in appearance, and opens its flowers
in succession, so that the plant is beautiful for some time. B. multiflora is
smaller, but attractive, being lilac or mauve in colour, and produced in
umbels on a stalk from ten to twelve inches high. B. coccinea is known as
Brevoortia coccinea, and is very handsome, distinct from other species, and
requires to be left undisturbed as much as possible. B. ixioides is called
Calliprora lutea, and Milla ixioides, bearing yellow flowers, and thriving in
dry, rich, sandy soil. B. lactea is produced in many-flowered umbels, and
is also called Hesperoscordum lacteum, and Milla hyacinthina. Most of
these bulbs are of easy culture in the open air, or in pots, in a mixture of
loam, leaf soil, and sand. B. grandiflora prefers a shady situation.
Brunsvigia.
Brunsvigia Josephines is a very brilliant addition to any garden. It
continues in bloom for two weeks or more, bearing an immense head of
scarlet or crimson flowers on long stalks, at the summit of a stem eighteen
inches high. It appears here in March, having as many as eighty flowers
on one stem, which are followed by handsome dark-green and luxuriant
leaves. The bulbs are expensive, if of a size to flower, and the plant has
been known to live for twenty years without throwing out an offset.
Canna.
Cannas thrive in many gardens around Adelaide, being from three to five
feet high, with broad, vigorous, ornamental foliage, and handsome flowers.
“ The soil can hardly be too rich and porous. Equal parts rotted dung,
loam, and sand, with a little peat, form a capital mixture for them.” They
bloom here during the summer, and repay liberal supplies of water with
occasional additions of liquid manure by producing long spikes of exceed-
ingly handsome scarlet, red, or yellow flowers.
Coburgia.
Coburgia is now included in the genus Stenomesson. It is said to be
very beautiful, of easy culture, with orange red flowers, four to five
inches long. The foliage is pretty, and the plant hardy ; but it has not yet
bloomed with us.


Convallaria.
Convallaria majalis, or Lily of the Yalley, does not thrive well on the
Adelaide plains. But in our experience it does better in a shady corner
than in a pot, as the plant particularly dislikes being shifted. Many
beautiful specimens have been exhibited here, and with care it will bloom
luxuriantly in the open air. There is a variety with a pink shade in
the usually white flowers, but most people prefer the more familiar and
very beautiful Lily of the Yalley. It begins to start growth about
September.
Crinum.
Crinums may be propagated by seed or offsets. There are numerous
varieties, of which perhaps the best known is the so-called “ Murray
Lily,” which thrives in the open air with no special care or soil. The
leaves, too, are evergreen, so that the beautiful Amaryllis-like flower is
surrounded by long and graceful foliage. There are fifteen or sixteen
flowers in an umbel, each five inches or more long, nearly white, with a
soft streak of rosy pink in the petals. The plant requires plenty of water
during summer, but it well repays any trouble of that kind, by producing
a succession of blooms which appear about November, and remain beautiful
for weeks. The bulbs should not be moved frequently, but each will
bloom better if the offsets are taken away, preserving as many of the
roots as possible.
Crocus.
Crocus and Colchicum plants are apt to pine away in our climate, and
need to be protected from fierce heat. They will thrive in a shady situa-
tion, in well drained, rather sandy loam, and their flowers are not only
beautifultin form, but in variety of colour. White, yellow, and purple,
with their shades and combinations, or with stripes of one colour har-
moniously contrasting with another, produce a charming effect; but if the
hues are to be preserved, the bulbs must be planted in small groups at
some little distance from each other.
Cyclamen.
Cyclamen will exist, and even bloom, in our gardens around Adelaide, but
they are more satisfactory if grown under shelter.
Dahlia.
Dahlias are “ natives of Mexico and Central America. They are divided
into Show, Fancy, Bouquet or Pompone, and Single-flowered. Show Dahlias
are all double, and require to have large flowers of the most perfect form to
be considered good. Selfs and pale-coloured flowers, edged or tipped with
a darker colour, are included under Show varieties. Flowers of a similar
size, but having florets dark-coloured at the base, and striped with a paler
colour or white, are known as Fancy varieties. The Bouquet or Pompone
have double flowers of a much smaller size ; various colours are included,
and all are invariably very pretty ; the habit is dwarf and compact. The
Single Dahlias may be obtained from seed, and are amongst the most
beautiful and useful subjects for cut flowers.” —Dictionary of Gardening.
The recently introduced Cactus varieties are strikingly handsome, and will
no doubt become increasingly popular. Dahlias are of various colors, and
in this climate must be grown in the hill districts to secure perfection, but
with care, judicious watering, and shelter from hot winds, very good flowers
have been obtained on the Adelaide plains. They are usually obtained by


division of the tubers, allowing one shoot to each, after the roots have
started in the spring. The foliage is striking and ornamental, and a Dahlia
garden with masses of white, purple, crimson, yellow, rose, and blended
shades of various colours is a sight not quickly forgotten, especially as it
may be enjoyed in the summer months. They require a rich, moderately
heavy soil to give the best results, and protection from high winds.
Dielytra.
Dielytra originally received its name by a misprint. It should be
Dicentra, from dis, twice, and kentron, a spur, in allusion to the double-
spurred flowers. Dicentra spectabilis has in spring rose-coloured, drooping
flowers somewhat like a heart in form at the base, but provided with two
spurs near the stalk, and opening at the top into ordinary petals. The
foliage is similar to that of the Columbine, and more beautiful. Plenty of
water is necessary when the plants are growing, and here the chief difficulty
is to preserve them from the effects of summer heat and scorching winds.
With us the roots are shaded by a shrub, and a slight mulch has protected
them from decay. The flower has the popular name of “ Lady’s Ear-Drop,”
and is certainly an exquisite addition to a lady’s dress, as it retains its beauty
for some hours without water.
Dietes.
Dietes bicolor is perfectly hardy, and apparently should be called Morsea
bicolor. It belongs to the Iris family, is evergreen with us, and bears
yellow and blackish-brown flowers.
Eueomis.
Eucomis punctata has rather thick leaves, of a pretty shade of green,
and spotted with dark crimson. The flowers are small, arranged in masses
around a long stem, and star-shaped, It thrives in any rich soil, is in-
creased by offsets, and blooms at the end of summer.
Freesia.
Freesia refracta alba is one of the most desirable bulbs in cultivation. It
comes from the Cape of Good Hope, belongs to the order of Irideae ; is
easily grown from offsets or seeds, and blooms luxuriantly in spring. The
flowers are white, most delightfully scented, and from two to three inches
long, being funnel-shaped, and arranged on stalks which bend so as to keep
the flowers upright. Freesia Leichtlinii has a pale yellow hue in some of
the flowers, and the plant is not quite so vigorous as Freesia refracta alba.
Galanthus.
Galanthus nivalis, the beautiful English snowdrop, will bloom here in the
open air, if cultivated in a shady corner, and left undisturbed for years.
Another method is to keep the bulbs in pots or boxes, and remove these to
a cool place for the summer; taking care not to shift the bulbs more than
is absolutely necessary. There are several varieties of Galanthus, one
with reflexed sepals, and another with double flowers; but none of them
are as yet thoroughly acclimatised here.
Gladioli.
Gladioli are too well known to need much description. They like a deep
rich soil, and a sheltered sunny position. The varieties chiefly cultivated
here are hybrids of Gladiolus Gandavensis, which may be induced to bloom
throughout the year by planting the corms in successive months. These


are produced at the end of the roots, in great numbers ; but Gladioli may
also be propagated by seeds. The flowers are of various hues—white,
scarlet, cream, yellow, crimson, and their almost endless combinations.
The spike, which is often 15 inches long, will continue to expand its blooms
by being cut and placed in water in a cool place until they are all developed.
Gladiolus cardinalis has large white spots on three of its petals ; and others
of the genus are known as Babiana stricta sulphurea and Babiana sam-
bucina.
Hsemanthus.
Hsemanthus appears at the end of March or beginning of ipril, and is
sometimes followed by its leaves, sometimes blooms with them. The white
variety has two thick dark-green leaves, and a multitude of stamens in the
erect cup-shaped flower, which is about two inches across. The scarlet
Hsemanthus is larger, taller, and furnished with bright golden anthers on
long stamens. They are easily cultivated, and it is not necessary to remove
them each year. As the bulbs grow they may be stimulated and supported
with weak manure-water.
Hedyehium.
Hedychiums resemble Gannas in their foliage, and the flowers are borne
in terminal spikes of white, lyellow, red, and lemon-coloured masses of
sweetly-scented blooms. They thrive in a compost of good loam enriched
with a little thoroughly decayed manure, rendered porous by the addition
of some sharp sand. They are effective when grown in tubs for decorative
purposes, and in the open air are very ornamental. They bloom during
summer, and are benefited by occasional supplies of liquid manure while
growing. H. coronarium, H. flavum, and H. Gardnerianum are the best
varieties.
Hippeastrum.
Hippeastrums are among the handsomest of Amaryllis. They require
rather heavy, loamy soil, to which some charcoal and crushed bones may
be added. The size of individual flowers, their number, and the variety
of colour which they exhibit, make Hippeastrums exceedingly desirable.
With us, the plant is nearly evergreen, and if supplied with sufficient
water, will thrive in the open air ; but the flowers last longer under shelter.
White with red stripes, pink and white, crimson, scarlet, and such hues
abound, and the varieties are easily perpetuated by offsets, while new ones
are obtained from seed.
Hyacinth.
Hyacinths deserve more care than they usually receive here. They may
be grown in pots and specially-made glasses as well as in the open air, and
the bulbs should be hard and heavy in proportion to their size. If culti-
vated in glasses for the decoration of rooms, the bulbs should be inserted
in moss, and allowed to just touch the rain-water in the glass, in which a
little charcoal should previously be placed. They should then be kept in a
cool dark place until roots are formed, after which a little additional water
and a light position will secure good flowers. A good compost for Hyacinths
in pots is fibrous loam and manure in about equal parts, with some river
sand intermixed. Plenty of water is beneficial, and manure-water may be
given after the flower-spikes appear. Neat stakes are often required to
support the flowers, which are of various colours, blue, pink, white,
red, and yellow. There are both single and double varieties, and the
season during which they bloom may be prolonged by good management.


Hyaeinthus eandieans.
Hyacinthus eandieans, is more correctly G-altonia eandieans, and blooms
in summer on long stalks, quite two feet high. The weight of the white
flowers induces the stems to droop towards the ground, which gives the
plants a graceful appearance. The bulbs prefer a rich leaf mould, with a
little sandy peat added, and are increased by offsets or seeds.
Irises thrive in this climate. They are divided into two classes, and
have two kinds of underground stems. Those with surface rhizomes are
broader leaved than those with bulbous roots, and the flowers are similarly
distinct. All varieties dislike having their roots disturbed, and the rhi-
zomes are likely to rot if kept too wet in winter. The colours are varied,
white, purple, blue, bronze, yellow, and their combinations, but all pleasing,
and some fragrant. Iris Susiana is one of the most remarkable, and Iris
pavonia very singular and delicate. There are many other varieties, each
desirable in its own way, and all requiring but little attention. They
bloom at various seasons, and remain in flower for some time.
Ixia.
Ixias are natives of South Africa, and well repay any care bestowed
upon them. They increase rapidly by offsets, and may be propagated
from seeds, but they then take three or four years to flower; though the
process produces variety of colour in the seedlings. Perhaps the most
beautiful of those grown here is the Ixia with pale green flowers, but it is
becoming rather rare, and difficult to procure. Another variety has a tube
to its flowers from two to three inches long, and is a pretty addition to the
flower-beds in October. Ixias are white, green, salmon, pink, yellow, and
have dark or light-coloured centres to each flower.
Laehenalia.
Lachenalias are small but pretty bulbs from South Africa. The leaves
are rather thick, and often spotted with crimson. They thrive in rich,
sandy soil, but are not difficult to grow in any ordinary garden, and have
bell-shaped flowers hanging from short erect stems, about six inches long.
Laehenalia tricolor appears in spring, with flowers in which green, red,
and yellow are blended. Several of the varieties have white flowers, one
lilac, and one deep purple, but they are not yet cultivated here.
Leueoiura.
Leucoium, or Snowflake, is one of the most useful bouquet flowers we
have. The bulbs increase very rapidly, and bloom during July and
August, sometimes in June. They are much more hardy than the English
Snowdrop, and produce a most beautiful effect when planted in masses,
and freely watered. Few plants are more suitable for cemeteries, as they
require but little care, and are very suggestive of peace and immortality.
There is something wonderful in the gradual development of the pure
white flowers, with their bright green spots, from the first tiny shoot that
appears with the autumn rains, which almost irresistibly suggests a future
life over which death has no puwer ; and, in addition, Snowflakes are
almost universally admired. The larger and handsomer variety is quite
as easily cultivated as the ordinary Snowflake, but it is rather more diffi-
cult to procure. Acis autumnalis is one of the same family, having white
flowers shaded with pink.


Lilium.
Liliums are among the most graceful flowers in cultivation. They are,
however, often disappointing to amateur gardeners, as they frequently die
out with no very apparent reason. Some writers say that the bulbs should
not be allowed to become dry, others warn us against the danger of over-
watering ; and one writer suggested allowing the bulbs to lie upon their
sides in the earth, so that the rain or water should not be able to lodge be-
tween the scales. Nearly all Liliums prefer peat soil, but it must be well
drained, and they should be planted from four to six inches below the sur-
face. Lilium Alutaceum, Auratum, Batemanni, Candidum, Hansoni, Lan-
cifolium, Leichtlinii, Longiflorum, Maximowiczii, Orthrotropium, Parda-
linum, Speciosum, Punctatum, Thomsonianum, and Tigrinum are said to be
“ hardy outdoor varieties.’' The bulbs may be obtained from April to
July, and usually flower a few weeks after being planted. Candidum is
the white lily of Italian paintings, and is one of the easiest to cultivate.
Auratum is perhaps the most handsome of the Liliums seen here, as it
grows to a height of five feet, and has usually large flowers with a gold
streak in the centre of the petals, and crimson spots. Longiflorum eximium
is not nearly so tall, but its pure white flowers are sweetly scented, and
very beautiful.
Medeola.
Medeola, or Myrsiphyllum asparagoides, is grown for its foliage, which
is bright green, in climbing sprays, admirably adapted for dinner-table
decorations, and also for adorning ladies’ evening dresses. It likes plenty
of water while growing ; but the sprays will keep their beautiful appear-
ance for several hours without any water. The tubers grow without any
special care, and begin to shoot about March, belonging, as the name im-
plies, to the Asparagus family. It may be well in this connection to men-
tion that very pretty Asparagus Piumosus nanus, of which the foliage is
extremely fine and graceful. It is sometimes mistaken for a fern, but is
less difficult to keep in good health than most ferns.
Mirabilis Jalapa.
Mirabilis Jalapa is so common that few people cultivate it. But the
white variety is sweetly scented, and the others are brilliantly coloured.
They will grow easily from seed, and usually they bloom during summer.
The flowers are of little value for decoration, as they close with morning
light, and rather rapidly when picked.
Museari.
Muscari is commonly called Grape Hyacinth, It has short stems with
bell-shaped blue flowers in drooping clusters, and its culture is the very
simplest, as it thrives in any garden soil, and increases almost too rapidly.
Narcissus.
Narcissus have been honoured by special attention, and literary ability
has been lavished upon the description of varieties of this most beautiful
flower. It is grown in pots for decorative and forcing purposes in England ;
here it is usually seen in gardens, where the bulbs remain undisturbed and
luxuriant for years. There are two great divisions in the Narcissus family
—one with single flowers on each stem, the other with many, like a Poly-
anthus. These sections are again arranged according to the size of the
crown or cup of the flower and the relation between the length of the


various parts ; but among growers Narcissus are known by fancy names
An annual top-dressing of loam and decayed manure will improve the
plants after the foliage has died down. With us Narcissus bloom in
August, September, and occasionally later in favourable seasons; and they
retain their beauty for a long time in water when gathered. White, white
and yellow, yellow and orange, and the various shades of those colours, are
represented among Narcissus, one being described as having a scarlet cup.
“Sulphur Phoenix,” a rare double variety, is strikingly beautiful, and
sweetly scented. “ Triandrus” has its outer divisions bent back like a
Cyclamen, and the “ Poeticus” varieties come into bloom later than other
kinds Emperor and Empress, Dean Herbert, Horsfieldii, Sir Whtkin,
Moschatus, Gracilis, Bulbocodium, Mary Anderson, Cernuus flore pleno,
Yan Sion, Stella, Butter and Eggs, Minimus, Maximus, and many others
are well worth cultivating, though some of the bulbs are expensive owing
to their rarity. .
Nerine.
Nerines are quite hardy in this climate. They are like Amaryllis Bella-
donna in habit of growth, but smaller, and of a deeper red colour. They
do not require frequent removal, and the soil in which they grow should be
properly drained, as continued watering is likely to destroy the bulbs.
They vary in their flowering season, as some varieties appear with, others
without their leaves, having large numbers of scarlet, pink, or crimson
flowers on stems about a foot high.
Ornithogalum.
Ornithogalum is “ supposed to be so called because the flowers of some
species are as white as milk or hen’s eggs,” from ornithos a bird, and gala
milk. Truly a remarkable reason for burdening a plant with a long name.
O Arabicum is the variety most frequently cultivated here, having large
white flowers with a black centre, and long, vigorous, bright green leaves.
Another kind has long spikes of small white flowers, and the bulbs are
usually half out of the ground.
Oxalis.
Oxalis cernua is not particularly “ desirable in this country, where it
has overrun acres of otherwise good land, but many of the family are very
beautiful and well worth growing, They are perhaps most effective as
borders for garden beds, where the flowers form a vivid line of white or
rose-colour from four to six inches high. The leaves are something like a
Shamrock in appearance, and appear in March or April.
Pseonia.
Paeonias prefer a rich, deep soil, which should be well trenched previous
to their being planted. They are vigorous in habit of growth, requiring
occasional supplies of manure-water, and more space than many “bulbous
plants. The flowers are large and showy, being in many cases, sweetly
scented. The colours are pleasing shades of red blended with white, and
the foliage ornamental as in other Banunculacese. They bloom in early
summer, and should not be frequently disturbed.
Pancratium.
Pancratiums are of easy culture in a compost of loam, peat, leaf-soil, and
sand. They are known as Hymenocallis and Ismene, and Pancratium
Illyricum is the hardiest. “When the plants have once started, their growth


cannot well be too rapid, nor the supply of food too liberal.” The leaves'
are veined, and the flowers produced in numbers among them, being in
many instances sweetly scented. P. littoralis and maritimum are the most
usually cultivated here, blooming in summer or autumn.
Phormium.
Phormiums are natives of New Zealand, and have a very ornamental
appearance. The long, stiff, vigorous leaves make the plant very useful in
decoration, as it is easily cultivated in rich, loamy soil. The flower stems
rise from four to six feet; chiefly dull red or yellow, and the variegated
Phormium is strikingly handsome.
Polianthes.
Polianthes tuberosa, or Tuberose, has long been admired for its strongly-
scented white single and double flowers. At one time it was usually grown
in pots, but it is now found to be more healthy out of doors, where it pro-
duces tall spikes of bloom about March, The tubers need not be removed
except for division, and all the varieties are improved by abundance of
water while growing.
Polygonatum.
Polygonatum, or Solomon’s seal, is similar to Lily of the Valley in
foliage, but much more vigorous in growth. The flowers are borne along
the stems, drooping below the leaves, and are creamy white in colour. It
is of easy culture in moderately good, loamy soil.
Ranunculus.
Ranunculus are exceedingly showy and easily grown tubers. They are
of various colours, and differ considerably in size, the “ Turban” being four
inches across, the “ Persian” smaller. They will thrive in ordinary soil,
and are improved by the application of weak manure-water while growing,
a process which prolongs their blooming season. Yellow, red, white, and
their combinations make ranunculus groups objects of popular admiration
in spring, and the foliage is also beautiful, making a pretty contrast to the
flowers. Ranunculus Lyalli is a very handsome variety, from New Zealand,
having large waxy-white flowers.
Seilla.
Scillas are extremely easy to cultivate in this climate, and they increase
with surprising rapidity from both offsets and seeds. The most familiar of
the family is the so-called “Bluebell,” very much like a single Hyacinth,
and of a pleasing shade of blue. The leaves are graceful and slender, and
the plant about nine inches high. The white variety of Seilla nutans is
most useful for dress bouquets, as it appears after the Tuberose, and is
fragrant as well as beautiful. Seilla Peruviana is low-growing, with
spreading leaves, and solitary dark-blue flowers rising in a dense mass
around a short stem from four to six inches in height. The nomenclature
of this family seems to be in great confusion, for S. lanceolata is also known
as Drimia lanceolata and Lachenalia reflexa. The Squill of commerce is
called Urginea maritima, and others bear the names Barnardia scilloides,
Agraphis paniculata, Ledebouria hyacintha, and Hyacinthus non-scriptus.
Sparaxis.
Sparaxis are so hardy that they cover the ground in old gardens where
they have been undisturbed for some years. They are of all colours but
blue, though purple and lilac are to be found in some varieties ; and the


delicate contrast of shades in each flower makes Sparaxis a very vivid and
valuable addition to our gardens in spring. Sparaxis pendula has drooping
flowers, and is very much taller than ordinary kinds, but it is now classed
as Dierama pendula.
Sprekelia.
Sprekelia formosissima well deserves its title, as one of the Amaryllidese
It is deep crimson, six inches long, and with the three lower petals con-
tracted into a group which forms a most graceful contrast to the more erect
upper petals. In this climate the bulbs require protection from fierce heat,
and plenty of water while growing.
Sternbergia.
Sternbergia lutea is among the first flowers which show that summer is
over. It is brilliant gold colour, and usually appears before the leaves,
though not invariably, and likes plenty of moisture when growing. It is
often called a Crocus, but differs from that genus in the number of its
stamens and the character of the bulbs.
Tigridia.
Tigridias appear in hot weather, thereby enabling us to provide ourselves
with a succession of flowers during the year. They are hardy, easy of cul-
ture, and very brilliant in colour, T. pavonia being particularly handsome.
Tpitileia.
Tritileia uniflora is a white star-shaped flower, which is very effective in
small masses out of doors. The blossoms are sometimes tinged with a blue
shade, which adds to their beauty; but, unfortunately, both flowers and
leaves emit a strong scent of garlic on being touched or broken. Tritileia
laxa maxima resembles an Agapanthus, and is quite free from disagreeable
odour.
Tpitoma.
Tritoma or Kniphofia is desirable from its producing flower-spikes of
scarlet and yellow during many weeks when other flowers are scarce. The
foliage is long and narrow, being so folded as to look like angular channels
of sage-green leaves. The flowers rise two or three feet, and the plant is
easily cultivated in an ordinary garden.
Tpitonia.
Tritonias belong to the Iris family, and are very pretty plants. A common
name —“Glass-eyed Sparaxis”—gives a fair idea of the peculiar trans-
parent appearance of the lower portion of the scarlet petals caused by the
hair-like divisions of their outer edges. Tritonia Pottsii —better known
here as Montbretia Pottsii —is easily grown in the garden, or in pots, and
has erect flowers, like a miniature Gladiolus.
Tropseolura.
Tropseolums, when tuberous-rooted, are grown for their foliage as well
as their flowers. The leaves grow on long climbing stems, which form a
pretty contrast to the scarlet and orange flowers when trained against a
wall or over a frame in a pot.
Tulbaghia.
Tulbaghia alliacea is interesting from the peculiar shade of its flowers
and their appearance in the height of summer ; but, as its name implies, it
has a scent like onions.


Tulip.
Tulips are among the most gorgeous of flowers. They are single and
double, red, white, yellow, and their combinations, and used to be extrava-
gantly expensive. The leaves are broad and handsome, and the bulbs in-
crease {rapidly in ordinary garden soil. They should be preserved from
frost, and in this climate, are apt to divide into minute plants without
flowers, probably because they are not sufficiently nourished. The flower-
ing season may be prolonged by planting the bulbs at intervals of a fort-
night from February to May.
Vallota.
Yallota purpurea, or Scarborough Lily, is another handsome Amaryllis;
which however flowers with its leaves. The scarlet cup-shaped bloom is
three or more inches across, and there are several such blooms in each
umbel on a stalk eighteen to twenty-four inches high. “ The bulbs require
a soil composed of good, fibrous loam, leaf mould, and sand in equal parts,
and should not be frequently disturbed.
Veltheimia.
Yeltheimia yiridifolia has broad, rather thick leaves with reddish or
yellowish flowers, in dense pendulous clusters on stems twelve inches high.
It succeeds in a light loamy soil, and is easily propagated by offsets. The
leaves too, will produce bulbs if pulled off close to the original bulb, and
inserted in pots of soil.
Zephyranthes.
Zephyranthes are small but very beautiful plants from America. The
colours are yellow, white, pink, and red ; and the individual flower is nearly
two inches deep. One variety is known as the Atamasco Lily, another as
Peruvian Swamp Lily, and several are called Habranthus. They have
bloomed in February in one garden where the soil was well watered ; here
the leaves appear in March or April.
Plants Shelter.
While many bulbous and tuberous plants are cultivated here in the open
air, and probably others would be healthier if so treated, there are still
many which will not succeed without protection, even in this climate. Of
this class are Achimenes, Alocasia, Aspidistra, Astilbe, Begonia, Bland-
fordia, Bomarea, Caladium, Olivia, Cyclamen, Dichorisandra, Dioscorea,
Eucharis, Eurycles, Farfugium, Funkia, Gesnera, Gloriosa, Gloxinia,
Griffinia, Imantophyllum, Isoloma, Kaempferia, Ophiopogon, Phaedran-
assa, and Tydaea. It will be seen further on that some of these are known
to thrive out of doors, but as they are usually obtainable only in pots, they
are placed together. One advantage of pot cultivation is the possibility of
inducing plants to bloom at unusual seasons, and of preserving the foliage
or flowers from injury through exposure to rain, hot winds, or frost.
Another purpose gained by this mode of culture is, the decoration of our


homes, churches, or public buildings. In addition, a Hyacinth or Begonia
may become a source of unfailing pleasure to an invalid, if placed in the
window of his sitting room; and few things suggest happier thoughts in
illness, than the development of flowers. For such reasons, plants are
often kept under shelter which do not absolutely need protection; while
there are still others requiring care and heat which are beyond the means
of amateur gardeners. These latter plants are not named here, as they
are too expensive to be considered “ desirable ” by most people.
Aehimenes.
Achimenes are small tubers of which great numbers are usually planted
in a five-inch pot, in light sandy soil, and left there to bloom during sum-
mer. They have hairy leaves, are about eight inches high, and require
tiny stakes to support the plants when blooming. The flowers are of
various hues, blue and purple, crimson, scarlet, orange, rose, and white;
being about an inch and a-half long in the tube, and across the cup of each
bloom. They die down after flowering, and may then be placed in the pot
on an unused, dry shelf for the winter.
Aloeasia.
Alocasias are grown for their foliage, and are frequently exhibited in
Adelaide. One grown in an ordinary shadehouse bad leaves quite eighteen
inches long, and twelve wide, of a deep rich green, and beautifully veined.
They belong to the Arum family, and would probably live with far less
care than is usually bestowed upon them. “ The soil should consist of
fibrous peat, with a little light fibry loam, in large lumps ; to this add a
good proportion of sphagnum and lumps of charcoal, with plenty of silver
sand. Keep the bulbs and soil raised well above the rim of the pots, and
finish off with a surfacing of either sphagnum or cocoa-nut fibre.’ ’
Aspidistra.
Aspidistras are also grown chiefly for their foliage, and are described as
“ hardy ” in some catalogues. They are however, usually grown in pots
under glass, or in the shade of a verandah or sitting-room; and will thrive
in rich loam, leaf soil, and sand. Plenty of moisture is necessary for their
proper development; as the leaves are twelve or eighteen inches long, and
produced in great numbers. The variegated Aspidistra is most useful for
decoration ; and the species is easily propagated by suckers.
Astilbe.
Astilbe Japonica has been known here as Spiraea and Hoteia. It thrives
in any rich soil, has very beautiful foliage, and an exceedingly graceful
plume-like white flower. An abundance of water is necessary to ensure
healthy plants; and they may be increased by division of the roots in
early spring.
Begonia.
Begonias are not all tuberous-rooted, but many of them are provided
with a circular root-stock similar to that of a Cyclamen, from which the
foliage arises during summer, and dies down again, after bearing large and
vivid flowers. One variety with pink blossoms, forms tubers at the point
where the flowers unite with the stem, and these serve the purpose of pro-
pagation ;as they readily root and form new plants. Begonia seed is
oasily obtainable, and being very minute, is apt to be washed out of the


pans if watered overhead. A better plan is, to stand the seed-pan in a
saucer filled with water, and cover it with glass, removing the saucer as
soon as the plants appear. The tubers do not require any special care
when at rest, and will begin to grow at the proper season with no external
inducement; after which they may be repotted in light, sandy soil, com-
posed of leaf mould, loam, and rotten cow-dung.
Blandfordia.
Blandfordias are natives of Australia, but at present they are almost un-
known here. They have brilliant and large bell-shaped flowers on long
stems, and are handsome in appearance. “ The best soil in which to grow
them is loam and peat in equal proportions, with a little rough silver sand
added.” The variety exhibited here, came from a marsh in New South
Wales, and it will probably be difficult to provide them with sufficient
moisture in our dryer climate. They may be propagated by seeds and
offsets, and bloom in summer.
Bomarea.
Bomareas are climbing plants allied to Alstroemeria, which deserve
more attention than they have hitherto received here. The flowers are
orange-yellow, rose tipped with green, purple, vermillion, and crimson in
colour, produced in drooping clusters at the summit of the leaf-stems.
The plants thrive in a compost of peat, leaf mould, loam, and sand; and
though usually grown in pots under glass, will succeed admirably out of
doors, if sufficiently watered.
Caladium.
Caladiums are among the most dainty-looking of foliage plants. The
large leaves are almost transparent, and veined in the most beautiful
colours, harmoniously contrasting with the hue of the foliage. The tubers
may be preserved in fine charcoal while at rest, and started into growth in
early summer. It is customary to keep Caladiums in a stove-house, but
that is by no means necessary, as they droop if exposed to fierce sunshine,
and will continue to develop their leaves, with ordinary shelter. They
succeed in a compost of loam, leaf mould, decomposed manure in small
quantities, peat, and sand; and require abundance of water while growing.
Clivia.
Olivia nobilis is almost evergreen, having long, slender, dark-green leaves,
and drooping flowers of red and yellow shades combined. It seems to
prefer the open air here, and may be increased by offsets or seeds. The
plant is however, usually cultivated in a pot, as it is very ornamental when
in bloom, and consequently useful for purposes of decoration. It blooms
in early summer, or sometimes in April, according to the district in which
it has been cultivated.
Cyclamen.
Cyclamen persicum is well-kaown, and many remarkably large and well-
grown specimens have been exhibited here. The petals are bent back
over the flower stalks, and are darker at the base than at the tip. The
perfume is very enjoyable, and the white, red, or rose-coloured flowers, are
produced in numbers among the dark green leaves. Cyclamen are pro-
pagated from seed, which is best sown as soon as ripe; and they will
thrive in a compost of loam and leaf-soil. The foliage is effective, and not


more than four or six inches high ; C. Neapolitanum being distinctly zoned
with white.
Diehorisandra.
Dichorisandras have beautiful flowers and ornamental leaves. They rise
to a height of three or four feet, and should be potted in a compost of peat,
loam, and leaf mould, with a little silver sand. D. musaica has azure blue
flowers in a dense mass at the end of the leaf-stem; others have purple,
white, and dark blue flowers. The plants require a liberal supply of water
during the Summer, and bloom at the end of that season, or in Autumn.
Dioseorea.
Dioscoreas are grown for their foliage, as the flowers are inconspicuous.
The leaves resemble those of an Ipomea in form, but they are much more
distinctly veined, and change from ruddy brown to pale green while grow-
ing. The tubers are not small, and the plants appreciate plenty of room,
and good nourishment while growing. Apparently D. illustrata does not
need stove heat, as it is thriving in an unusually cold greenhouse, and
instead of dying down as autumn began, it put forth new and vigorous
shoots. Being climbers, Dioscoreas may be trained over ornamental wood
or wire frames, and become very graceful additions to our foliage plants
for decorative purposes.
Eueharis.
Eucharis Amazonica is a native of New Granada, and is said to enjoy a
high degree of heat. As however, the plants are very willing to bloom at
various seasons, the necessary warmth can be provided without artificial
heat; and established specimens have been known to bear two or three
crops of flowers in a year. The bulbs are increased by offsets, which may be
removed and potted in a compost of two parts rich loam, to one of leaf-
mould (and manure, with the addition of charcoal to keep it open. The
flowers are white with a central cup, as in Narcissus, and there are several
in an umbel as in other Amaryllis. The perfume is very enjoyable, and
the contrast between the large dark leaves and the pure white flowers is
remarkably effective.
Euryeles.
Eurycles Cunninghami is like a huge white Agapanthus, but the foliage
is much broader, and less plentiful. It is a native of Queensland ; but
for some unknown reason is cultivated here in stove houses, and is not very
easily procured. One good specimen was in bloom at the Botanic Gardens
in March.
Farfugium.
Farfugium grande should be called Ligularia Ksempferi aurea maculata,
but the name is rather burdensome. It requires a free, moist, rather
peaty soil, and will not endure heat even while at rest. It resembles a
Begonia in appearance, at first sight, but belongs to the order of Composi-
tae, and has yellow flowers. The leaves are vivid green, rather thick, and
beautified with bright gold spots.
Funkia.
Funkias may be grown in an ordinary shade-house, a verandah, or a
sitting-room. They have handsome green leaves arranged in a circle, which
gives them an ornamental appearance apart from the beauty of the flowers.


They like rich soil, and are best left undivided until the plants are of good
size. The flowers are like Liliums in form, and some are sweetly scented.
Another name for the genus is Hemerocallis.
Gesnera.
Gesneras are mostly natives of Brazil. They are cultivated for both
foliage and flowers; and one, at least, is known to be hardy in this climate.
Usually they are treated as pot plants, and cultivated in a mixture of peat,
leaf soil, loam, and sand. The flowers are shades of yellow, red, lilac, and
white; are tube-shaped throughout nearly their whole length; and are
produced in profusion with the leaves.
Gloriosa.
Gloriosa superba is remarkable for the tendrils with which the leaves
are furnished. It has orange and red flowers, and blooms in Summer ; but
it is almost unknown to cultivation here.
Gloxinia.
Gloxinias are deservedly admired for the beauty of their flowers. They
are allied to Gesneras, and may be obtained from seed, as the varieties
have been largely produced by this means. The velvet appearance of the
leaves, the size of the cup-shaped flowers, and the exquisite penciling of
the colours around the inner edge, make Gloxinias a very valuable addition
to our pot plants. They may be induced to bloom throughout the year by
successional potting, and the colours are of nearly every known shade.
White, purple, rose, and pale-blue are among the most familiar hues of
these charming flowers.
Grifflnia.
Grifiinia hyacinthina was seen at the Botanic Gardens in April, and is
extremely beautiful. It resembles other Amaryllis in its habit of growth,
and is streaked with a lovely shade of blue. An effort should be made to
acclimatize the plant, which is a native of Brazil.
Imantophyllum.
Imantophyllums are apparently quite hardy in our gardens. They have
long, narrow, dark green leaves, and erect Amaryllis-like flowers of an
orange colour. They succeed in soil composed of loam, leaf mould, and a
little bone dust and charcoal; and are usually cultivated in pots, because
the flowers will thereby be preserved from injury, and endure for a longer
period. Imantophyllum may be propagated from seed, or by offsets, and
are of easy culture.
Isoloma.
Isolomas require the same culture as Gesneras ; and include Sciadocalyx,
and various other plants. One of the species has orange-red, singularly
shaped flowers, about two inches long, covered with minute hairs, and dark
spots. Others have white, rose, scarlet, or yellow flowers.
Kaempferia.
Xaempferia now includes Cienkowskia, and is grown for its foliage as
well as its flowers. The leaves of X. Gilbertii have a beautiful white
margin, and fall gracefully ; the flowers are purple and white. Other
varieties are X. ornata, X. rotund, and X. Koscoeana ; and all thrive in
fibery loam and peat.


Ophiopogon.
Ophiopogon Jaburan has long, narrow, graceful leaves, and blue flowers
resembling a Grape Hyacinth in appearance. It is of easy culture without
heat in sandy soil; and the variegated Ophiopogon is a desirable foliage
plant.
Phaedranassa.
Phaedranassa chloracea is usually grown under glass, but would probably
prove hardy in our climate. It thrives in loam and sand, and is abundantly
increased by offsets. The flowers are purplish-rose, but they are by no
means readily produced.
Tyseda.
Tydseas require the same treatment as Gesnera, and are now included
under Isoloma. Here, however, they are sold under the old name, and re-
semble Achimenes in general appearance.
Other bulbous plants of recent introduction will probably prove hardy
in our climate, and are worth cultivating until they become more widely
known. Of this number are Aconitum, Asceplias tuberosa, Bessera, Bravoa,
Calochortus, Camassia, Canarina, Chionodoxa, Chlidanthus, Commelina
tuberosa, Cooperia, Cummingia, Cyrtanthus, Elisena, Eranthus, Fritillaria,
Galaxia, Hesperantha, Lycoris, Nemastylis, Pardanthus, Sandersonia,
Schizostylis, Sinningia, Sisyrinchium, Strumaria, Trichonema, Trillium,
Uvularia, and Wachendorfia.
Yardon & Pritchard, Printers, Adelaide.


• ■
‘
v 5 : i - •
■
-


♦
/
