





STATE ADVANCES
COPPRATION
DESINGS
OF
DWELLINGS
JANUARY, 1935
Price, 2/-
COPYRIGHT


Stale Advances Corporation.
Manager:
L. P. D. O’Connor, L.I.C.A.
Assistant Manager-.
C. PagenHanify, M.U.0., F.I.C.A.
Architect:
J{. D. Dickenson, Registered Architect.
1
Stale tAduances Corporation,
Box 600 K, Q.P.0.,
Brisbane.
J anuarij, 1935.




Foreword
vJThis Booklet of Designs of Dwellings, together with
general information relative to the erection of a dwelling, is
issued for the guidance of intending home-builders through
the Corporation.
The information herein will facilitate the preparation
of the plan particulars of the proposed dwelling.
It is not intended that any one of the designs should be
considered an ideal home generally—that could not be
without knowledge of the particular building site and the
requirements of the home-builder, which are essential
factors in the planning of such a home; therefore, no
particular design need be accepted as it stands. If, however,
it should happen that a design meets with the requirements
of a prospective client, he may select same without
alteration.
It is the policy of the Corporation to assist and
co-operate with intending clients in the designing of their
homes, and, by ascertaining their ideas and requirements,
to plan homes which will conform, as far as architecturally
possible, with their desires in detail.
Simplicity of construction is the dominant feature of all
the designs, the purpose being to reduce to a minimum the
initial cost of the dwelling and the consequential later cost
of repainting and repairs.
Intending clients are cordially invited to consult with
the Corporation in respect of any features or points
contained herein, or not mentioned herein, concerning
which they may desire information or advice.
Manager.






Stale Advances Corporation
Information for Guidance
of Intending Applicants
Plan and Specification
The plan and specification of the proposed home is
prepared by the Corporation, the fees for which are set
out in the' leaflets explanatory of the Housing Schemes
operated by the Corporation. The plan and specification
may be specially prepared to suit the particular wishes of
an applicant. The Corporation employs an efficient archi-
tectural staff for the purpose of carrying out such work
and keeps in touch with the latest developments and
improvements in building materials, designs, and matters
concerning domestic architecture generally.
The designs of dwellings in this booklet are known
by design numbers, such as “ Design No. 35 ” or “ Design
No. 40” as the case may be; the number of a particular
design, if selected or referred to by an intending client,
should be quoted.
building Site
Before a building site is purchased, enquiries should
be made to ascertain whether it is generally suitable—
particularly, if the area is subject to local or general
flooding, or continued dampness after wet weather, and if
rates, land tax, and other assessments have been paid.
Information as to water, electric light, gas, or drainage
facilities, if required, and building by-laws of the Local
Authority in respect to allowable distances of a building
from front and dividing fences, should also be ascertained,
and these matters taken into consideration when planning
the home.
The Local Authority will also afford information as
to the position of sewers, and the desirable layout for
drainage schemes.


Preparing the Site to Accommodate fhe Home
In cases where the site for the home is of a sloping
nature, consideratirn should be given, when planning the
home, to avoid undue height of stumps by excavating
and/or building up the ground. This may result in the
steps being shorter and better placed so as to be more
readily accessible. Any necessary building up of the
ground should, however, be delayed until after the stumps
have been placed in position, as it is better that the stumps
be set into the natural earth and the filling-up material
placed around the stumps.
Designing the Home to Suit the Site
This is one of the most important steps to be taken
when considering the design of a home.
The surrounding views, aspects, prevailing winds,
physical conditions and contours of the locality, and, as
before mentioned, the drainage facilities and the
possibilities of excavating and filling, should all be taken
into consideration, and the floor plan designed to suit these
features and circumstances.
The floor plan, which is designed to suit the special
features of a particular site, might require a complete
departure from orthodox ideas of past years, by arranging
the rooms in an entirely different manner from the usual
planning. An example hereof will be seen by referring to
Design No. 56, which has been designed to take full
advantage of a panoramic view from the back of the site, the
view from the front having no features of interest. Brisbane,
and many other towns in Queensland, by reason of hills
and points of eminence, provide many instances where
planning of this nature can be carried out with striking
effect.
Designing the Home for Future Extensions
A home of small floor area may be designed at a
cost within the financial means of the applicant in such a
manner that verandahs, rooms and/or other accommoda-
tion may be added thereto at a future date, with very little
alteration or disturbance of the original structure. .Pros-
pective home-builders desiring this feature should not
hesitate to seek advice from the Corporation thereon.
Further advances to enable clients to enlarge or improve
homes already erected through the Corporation may be
granted.


Furniture in Relation to Rooms
An important point which it is advisable to consider
when planning the rooms, and which has an effect of
providing for comfort, is the selection of suites of furniture
to harmonize with windows, french lights, archways and
other openings in the room. This feature, if overlooked,
can easily spoil the practical and the aesthetic effect as
well as cause inconvenience in the placing of the furniture
in the rooms.
Estimated Cost in Relation to Tender Received
If the estimated cost of any design herein chosen by an
applicant appear to be beyond his financial means by an
amount of, say £5O of thereabouts, he need not, on that
account, discard such design. It is possible that the lowest
tender may be somewhat lower than the estimate shown.
On the other hand, if the tender happen to be beyond the
applicant’s financial circumstances, arrangements may be
made for an increase of the advance or for the deletion of
certain items from the specifications, so as to reduce the
cost of the dwelling to a sum within the means of the
applicant.
Estimated Cost Relative to Each Design
The estimated cost shown under each design is intended
to give only an approximate forecast of the cost of the
dwelling as a result of tenders. Furthermore, such estimated
costs are based on building costs in Brisbane obtaining at
the time of the issue of this booklet. The Corporation,
therefore, does not accept any responsibility for any varia-
tion between the estimated cost of any design and the
tender therefor.
It may be mentioned that many circumstances have a
bearing on constructional costs, among which the following
may be cited:—
(a) The degree of accessibility of the locality for the
supplying and transportation of materials.
(b) Fluctuations in the prices of materials and other
building costs.
(c) The area of the allotment in respect to the
amount of fencing required.
(d) Drainage requirements.


brief Observations on various
Building Materials
and their Uses
Intending home-builders in country districts are
advised not to specify materials not used in their districts
unless there are workmen available, competent in the use of
such materials.
Concrete Stumps
Concrete stumps may be procured already manu-
factured or may be cast in position on the site. Concrete
stumps are recommended to be used when the house is
intended to be erected near to the ground as shown in many
of the designs in this booklet. The extra cost over wood
stumps for a dwelling of average size, with the stumps say
2 feet out of the ground, is approximately £l2.
TDall Papering
Papering of walls is now being effected to a great
.extent in wood framed and sheeted dwellings since the
manufacture of fibrous plaster in this State. This material
can be made to form a solid and unbroken surface to receive
the wallpaper and thus make a very satisfactory job,
thereby removing the prejudice against the use of wallpaper
which has existed in Queensland for so many years.
IPall Panelling
Queensland produces many beautiful timbers which are
manufactured into plywoods and used for the purpose of
panelling the walls of rooms; the more popular plywoods
are Red Tulip Oak, Walnut Bean, and Silky Oak, but
Queensland Pine, Silver Ash, and Maple are also in favour.
It is the practice to surmount the panelling with a frieze
(the space between the panelling and the ceiling) of fibrous
plaster or fibro-cement, which, when painted, forms with
the polished panelling an effective method of wall treatment.


Internal Hardihood Floors
As special and seasoned hardwoods are now available,
hardwood timber may be used for internal flooring with
greater confidence. Among these hardwoods are figured
varieties known as Red Tulip Oak and Queensland Satinay.
Among other varieties are Grey Iron Bark, Spotted Gum,
Blue Gum, Red Lustre, Crows Ash, and Red Stringy.
When used in living rooms and vestibules it is the practice
to treat these floors by having them machine sanded and
polished.
If convenient, intending home-builders are advised
to pay a visit to the showrooms of the Sub-department of
Forestry, Department of Public Lands, George Street,
Brisbane, where they may inspect a wide range of timbers
suitable and prepared for hardwood floors and plywood
panelling, and in many cases the use thereof is practically
illustrated by exhibits.
Ceilings
Other than timber, the three ceiling materials which
may be used are fibro-cement, fibrous plaster, and
art metal, each of which makes a satisfactory job and
produces a pleasing effect.
11? alls Adjoining the bath
In substitution for the less presentable materials, such
as galvanised iron, the walls of the bathroom may be finished
with glazed tiles, tilux, duratile, art metal, or fibro-cement.
Bathroom Floors
Bathroom floors, where skilled workmen are available,
are generally finished by the laying of a terrazzo floor or
a tiled floor.
Drainage
Where proper drainage facilities are available,
advantage should be taken to install a complete drainage
system. Where no drainage facilities are available,
and where the soil is of a non-absorbent nature, the system
of installing absorption trenches or sumps to receive house
drainage is strongly condemned. In these circumstances
it is better to broadcast the water over the surface of the
ground.
The installation of a septic system of sewerage disposal,
where the soil is of a suitably absorbent nature, and where
the Local Authority approves thereof, is recommended.


Item.
Approximate Cost.
Battening between Stumps
£10 to £15, according to the
dimensions of the dwelling.
Concrete Stumps
From £12 more than the cost
of wood stumps.
Water Service (from front
£6.
fence)
Bath
£9, including water connec-
tions.
Washbasin
From £4 15s., including water
connections.
Washtubs
£3 1 os., including connections.
Electric Light Service
£1 5s. per light.
Front Fence (66 feet) ..
From £15.
Dividing Fence . .
£1 5s. per rod.
Drainage into water table or
From £12.
sewer, as approved by the
Local Authority
Sewerage
From £30,
Septic System ..
From £38.
Walls of a room panelled or
From £20, according to size of
papered or finished with
rooms.
fibrous plaster or fibro
cement
Polished hardwood floors to
From £10, according to size of
lounge, dining room, and
rooms.
vestibule
Walls of bathroom adjoining
bath—
Glazed Tiles
£14, approximately 8 sq. yards.
Tilux
£6, approximately 8 sq. yards.
Duratile ..
£4, approximately 8 sq. yards.
Art Metal
£3, approximately 8 sq. yards.
Floor of Bathroom—
Tiles
£8, approximately 5 sq. yards.
Terrazzo
£6 5s., approximately 5 sq.
yards.
Roof covered with Tiles or
From £35 more than the cost
Slates
of a galvanised-iron roof.
Internal painting
From £4 per room.
Approximate Costs of Items
Approximate estimates at the date of issue of this Booklet
of costs of items which may be provided for and included in a
specification of a contract for the erection of a dwelling:—
The installation of electric light, water, or gas services will
not be provided for in the specifications for the dwelling unless
such services are available in the street, and approach the
allotment on which the dwelling is to be erected.


Design No. 35
Estimated Cost, £360
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 850 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost:—Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Water
Service; Washtubs; Bath; Sink; Washbasin; Electric Light; Front
Fence (66 feet).
State Advances Corporation


Design No. 36
Estimated Cost, £430
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,130 square feet.
The following items aVe provided for in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Water
Service; Washtubs; Bath; Sink; Washbasin; Electric Light; Front
Fence (66 feet).
State Advances Corporation


Design No. 37
Estimated Cost, £460
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,170 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps ; Galvanised Iron Roof; Special Floor to Bathroom ; Water
Service; Washtubs; Bath; Sink; Washbasin ; Electric Light; Front
Fence (66 feet).
State Advances Corporation


Design No. 38
Estimated Cost, £465
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,000 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Special
Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ; Sink ; Washbasin;
Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet).
State Advances Corporation


Design No. 39
Estimated Cost, £470
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,210 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Special
Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ; Sink ; Washbasin ;
Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet).
State Advances Corporation


Design No. 40
Estimated Cost, £4BO
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 980 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Concrete
Stumps; Battening between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-
gallon Tank ; Special Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ;
Sink ; Washbasin ; Electric Light; Front fence (66 Feet) ; Polished Hardwood
Floors to Dining Room and Hall.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 41
Estimated Cost, £495
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,210 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost; —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Special
Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ; Sink ; Washbasin ;
Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet).
State Advances Corporation


Design No. 42
Estimated Cost, £520
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,470 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Water
Service ; Washtubs; Bath; Sink; Washbasin; Electric Light; Front
Fence (66 feet).
State Advances Corporation


Design No. 43
Estimated Cost, £525
Brisbane 1934. Floor area, 1,200 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Special
Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ; Sink ; Washbasin ;
Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet); Polished Hardwood Floors in
Lounge, Dining Room and Vestibule.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 44
Estimated Cost, £540
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,170 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Concrete
Stumps; Battening between Stumps ; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon
Tank ; Special Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ;
Sink ; Washbasin ; Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet).
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 45
Estimated Cost, £550
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,150 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost; —Concrete
Stumps; Battening between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-
gallon Tank ; Special Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ;
Sink; Washbasin; Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet); Polished Hardwood
Floors to Lounge, Dining Room, Hall, and Passage.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 46
Estimated Cost, £550
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,280 square feet.
The following items are provided fqn in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Special
Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service; Washtubs; Bath; Sink; Washbasin;
Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet); Polished Hardwood Floor to Lounge.
State Advances Corporation


Design No. 47
Estimated Cost, £590
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,380 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Special
Flooring to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ; Sink; Wash-
basin ; Electric Light; Front fence (66 feet); Polished Hardwood Floors
to Lounge, Dining Room, and Vestibule.
State Advances Corporation


Design No. 48
Estimated Cost, £6OO
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,590 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Water
Service; Washtubs; Bath ; Sink ; Washbasin; Electric Light; Front
Fence (66 feet).
State Advances Corporation


Design No. 49
Estimated Cost, £640
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, not including laundry,
1,350 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Concrete
Stumps; Battening between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-
gallon Tank ; Special Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ;
Sink ; Washbasin ; Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet) ; “ Dinette ”
Furniture ; Panelling to Living Room ; Polished Hardwood Floor to Living
Room.
State Advances
Corporation


Design No. 50
Estimated Cost, £645
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,420 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Special
Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ; Sink ; Washbasin ;
Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet); Panelling to Lounge and Vestibule ;
Polished Hardwood Floors to Lounge and Vestibule.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 51
Estimated Cost, £650
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,080 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Concrete
Stumps; Battening between Stumps; Tiled Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank;
Tiles to Bathroom Floor ; Tiles to Bathroom Walls around Bath ; Water
Service; Washtubs; Bath; Sink ; Washbasin ; Electric Light; Front
Fence (66 feet) ; Panelling to Lounge and Entry; Papering to First
Bedroom ; Polished Hardwood Floor to Lounge and Entry ; Dining Alcove
Furniture.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 52
Estimated Cost, £650
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,510 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Special
Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ; Sink ; Washbasin ;
Electric Light; Front Fence (65 feet); Polished Hardwood Floors to
Lounge, Dining Room, and Vestibule.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 53
Estimated Cost, £660
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,370 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Concrete
Stumps; Battening between Stumps; Galvanised iron Roof; One 1,000-
gallon Tank ; Special Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ;
Sink; Washbasin; Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet) ; Polished
Hardwood Floors to Lounge, Dining Room, Hall, and Passage ; Panelling
or Papering to Lounge, Dining Room, Hall, and Passage ; Papering to First
Bedroom.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 54
Estimated Cost, £660
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,360 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost; —Concrete
Stumps; Battening between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-
gallon Tank ; Special Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ;
Sink; Washbasin; Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet); Polished Hardwood
Floor to Lounge ; Panelling, etc., to Lounge
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 55
Estimated Cost, £670
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,600 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost; —Battening
between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Special
Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath ; Sink ; Washbasin ;
Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet); Polished Hardwood Floors to
Lounge, Dining Room, and Vestibule.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 56
Estimated Cost, £690
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,380 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Concrete
Stumps; Battening between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-
gallon Tank ; Special Floor to Bathroom ; Water Service ; Wash tubs ; Bath ;
Sink; Washbasin; Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet); Panelling or
Papering to Lounge, Dining Room and Hall; Papering to First Bedroom ;
Polished Hardwood Floors to Lounge, Dining Room, and Hall.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 57
Estimated Cost, £7OO
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,410 square feel.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost; —Concrete
Stumps; Battening between Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; One 1,000-
gallon Tank; Special Floor to Bathroom; Water Service; Wash tubs;
Bath ; Sink ; Washbasin ; Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet); Panelling
or Papering to Lounge, Dining Room, and Hall; Polished Hardwood Floors
to Lounge, Dining Room, and Hall.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 58
Estimated Cost, £7OO
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, not including Laundry,
1,150 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Concrete
Stumps; Battening between Stumps ; Tiled Roof; One 1,000-gallon Tank ;
Special Floor to Bathroom ; Tiles around Bathroom Walls adjoining Bath;
Bath ; Sink ; Washbasin ; Water Service ; Washtubs; Electric Light;
Front Fence (66 feet) ; Brick Chimney ; Panelling to Living Room and Hall;
Papering to First Bedroom ; Polished Hardwood Floors to Living Room,
Dining Room, and Hall.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 59
Estimated Cost, £BOO
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, not including Laundry, 1370 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost :■ —Concrete
Stumps; Galvanised Iron Roof; Battening between Stumps; One 1,000-
gallon Tank ; Tiled Floor to Bathroom ; Glazed Tiles to Walls of Bath-
room adjoining Bath; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Bath; Sink; Washbasin;
Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet); Panelling to Lounge, Dining Room
and Hall;' Papering to First Bedroom; Polished Hardwood Floors to
Lounge, Dining Room and Hall.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 60
Estimated Cost, £9OO
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1700 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost. —Galvanised
Iron Roof; Battening between Stumps; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Tiled
Floor to Bathroom; Glazed Tiles to Walls of Bathroom adjoining Bath;
Water Service; Washtubs; Bath ; Sink; Washbasin; Electric Light;
Front Fence (66 feet); Panelling to Living Room, Dining Room, and
Vestibule; Papering to First Bedroom; Septic System and Drainage;
Internal Painting etc. to all Rooms; Polished Hardwood Floors to Living
Room, Dining Room and Vestibule.
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 61—Brick Dwelling
Estimated Cost, £750
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,100 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Tiled Roof;
Papering to Living Room and Front Bedroom ; Septic System and Drainage ;
Tiling to Bathroom Walls around Bath and on Floor; Bath ; Sink ; Wash-
basin ; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Polished Hardwood Floors to Living Room;
Water Service ; Washtubs, etc.; Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet).
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 62 —Brick Dwelling
Estimated Cost, £9OO
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,230 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost; —Tiled Roof;
Brick Chimney ; Papering to Lounge, Dining Room, and Front Bedroom ;
Septic System and Drainage ; Tiling to Bathroom Walls around Bath and
on Floor; Bath; Sink; Washbasin; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Polished Hard-
wood Floors to Lounge, Dining Room, and Vestibule; Water Service;
Washtubs ; Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet).
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 63 —Brick Dwelling
Estimated Cost, £l,OOO
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,330 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Tiled Roof;
Brick Chimney ; Papering to Lounge, Dining Room, and Front Bedroom ;
Septic System and Drainage ; Tiling to Bathroom Walls around Bath and
on Floor; Bath; Sink; Washbasin; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Polished
Hardwood Floors to Lounge, Dining Room, and Vestibule ; Water Service ;
Washtubs ; Electric Light; Front Fence (66 feet).
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 64 —Brick Dwelling
Estimated Cost, £l,OOO
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,340 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost:—Tiled Roof;
Papering to Hall, Living Room, and Front Bedroom ; Septic System, and
Drainage ; Tiling to Bathroom Walls around Bath and on Floor; Bath ; Sink ;
Washbasin: One 1,000-gallon Tank; Polished Hardwood Floors to Living
Room, Hall, Lobby, and Passage ; Washtubs ; Water Service ; Electric
Light; Front Fence (66 feet).
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 65 —Brick Dwelling
Estimated Cost, £1,075
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,450 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost: —Tiled Roof;
Papering to Living Room, Hall, Passage, and Front Bedroom ; Septic System,
and Drainage ; Tiling to Bathroom Walls around Bath and on Floor ; Bath ;
Sink; Washbasin; One 1,000-gallon Tank; Polished Hardwood Floors to
Living Room, Hall, and Passage ; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Electric
Light; Front Fence (66 feet).
Slate Advances Corporation


Design No. 66—Brick Dwelling
Estimated Cost, £1,150
Brisbane, 1934. Floor area, 1,520 square feet.
The following items are provided for in the estimated cost Tiled Roof;
Papering to Lounge, Dining Room, Hall and Front Bedroom ; Septic System,
and Drainage ; Tiling to Bathroom Walls around Bath and on Floor; Bath ;
Sink ; Washbasin ; One 1,000-gallon Tank ; Polished Hardwood Floors to
Lounge. Dining Room, and Hall; Water Service ; Washtubs ; Electric
Light; Front Fence (66 feet).
Slate Advances Corporation


Designs of Front Doors
W.D.19.
W.D.20.
w.D.21.
w.D.22.
W.D.23.
W.D.24.
W.D.25.
W.D.26.
W.D.27.


Designs of Internal Doors
No 2A.
No 3A.
No 1
No 5.
No A.
No 8A.
No 11A.
No 12A.
No 10A.


Designs of Casement Windoms
No 1
No 4
No 5
No 7 W.D
N o 8 W.D.
N o 9 W.D.
No 10 W.D.
No 11. W.D.
No 12 W.D.
N o 13 W. D.
No 14. W.D.
N o 15. W.D.


Designs of Swing Doors
DESIGN. 1.
DESIGN. 4.
DESIGN. 7.
DESIGN. 2.
DESIGN. 5.
DESIGN. 3.
DESIGN. 6.
DESIGN. 8.


Printed and Published by David Whyte, Government Printer, Brisbane.


