

DESIGN FOR LIVING




DESIGN FOR LIVING
AN EXHIBITION ARRANGED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF
NATIONAL GALLERY OF VICTORIA
COUNCIL OF ADULT EDUCATION
EDUCATION DEPARTMENT OF VICTORIA


INTRODUCTION
ERIC WESTBROOK
Director, National Gallery of Victoria
This exhibition is in marked contrast to all previous Travelling Exhibitions which have appeared under the auspices
of the National Gallery and the Council of Adult Education. The aim of this exhibition has been to show articles
which incorporate the principles of good design. All of them have been designed for domestic use. It may be felt
that such articles have little connection with art as it is shown in painting and sculpture. But what is it which makes
a painting a work of art? What marks an artist as a man of above average perception? In both cases it is the forward
thinking and sensitivity to materials and situations which excite us and in turn make us more aware of our own
surroundings.
People as a rule tend to settle into established ways of thinking and doing, but the usual way is not always the
best way. Nowhere is this more evident than in design. It is so easy to continue to use ideas which are already
current, using the same techniques and the same materials in the familiar ways. Thus we have —and accept—an
endless uniformity in manufactured products. In some cases we have reached an arid land where products with entirely
different functions now have the same “look”. Manufacturers, instead of encouraging logical designing to sell their
products, now spend vast sums of money in promoting in the public mind the virtues of those minor variations
on a theme which are now held up as “design features”. They will continue to do so as long as the public continues
to accept the second-rate solution.
In a world where the range of possiblities is virtually limitless; in a country such as ours where products which
can claim export markets are becoming increasingly necessary for economic survival, we appear to have lost the
pioneering spirit needed to exploit those possibilities in the achievement of meaningful design.
And so the articles which have been selected for this exhibition are just as exciting and just as much a mirror
of their age as other works of art. They are the works of designers who are aware of their situation and work
imaginatively and creatively within the limits of their own field.


THE NEED FOR GOOD DESIGN
COLIN BARRIE
Director, Industrial Design Council of Australia
“It is true that excellence is
impossible in the absence of
severe and exacting standards
of attainment and appreciation."
R. H. Tawney.
Simple objects used by man in earlier ages are now treasured exhibits in museums and art galleries throughout
the worfd. Even fragments of such things as a pottery bowl or an early drinking vessel are prized by the archaeo-
logists seeking to add to our knowledge of ancient civilisations.
From these everyday objects a great deal is revealed about the values, social customs, traditions and attitudes
of the period to which they belong. They also provide evidence of the skills and creative capacities of a particular
people. For not only were the men who created the fine objects of the past trained to a high degree of skill in their
craft; the community of which they were a part had a standard of life that gave rise to that design quality. A crafts-
man derived his inspiration as well as his skills from the community in which he lived, and the objects he pro-
duced were, in their turn, used and enjoyed by his fellow men.
A completeness of form, a strong individuality and a validity of purpose is manifested in the designs of earlier
periods. A directness and a logic is evident, as well as visual beauty. This arose from the all-embracing nature of
the process of production. The craftsman was the designer; he was also the master of his materials, for he pre-
pared the raw materials of his trade and knew intimately the characteristics of those materials. He knew what
he could ychieve with the tods he used to then the materials he handled into useful and beautiful objects.
It is not surprising that such a unified production process resulted in goods of a satisfying wholeness, in a unity
of visual and functional elements.
So it is that articles of everyday use reflect the spirit pf their time. This is as relevant to the Objects of domestic t
and working life in our own day as ft was in bygone ages. And that very relevance could be an informative guide
for us in discovering more about the society in which we live. Were we able to detach ourselves sufficiently from
the familiar paraphernalia surrounding us to consider it in terms of design, we could make some penetrating assess-
ments of the values of our time. Future historians will do this when they appraise our utensils and equipment,
considering each object as a total concept of form and shape related to the purpose it was intended to fill.


One of the observations these future historians are likely to make from an examination of the consumer pro-
ducts of our era will be that many of them display a meaninglessness and wastefulness—if, indeed, these things
are not so transitory as to leave nothing for those who come after to evaluate. Historians will, however, also find
evidence of a zest for invention and experiment. They may determine that much of the wastefulness, the lack of
true utility and unity in the objects resulting from this inventive spirit arose from a relatively unco-ordinated
approach to production.
In the mass-production techniques of modern industry, the process of manufacture is divided into many parts.
Specialists are responsible for the various functions involved, and the product which is the end result of their
efforts is thus determined by many different minds and skills. In addition, the remarkable scientific and techno-
logical achievements of our day have given rise to new materials and new processes of manufacture at a rate which
has not been matched by our ability to apply these new techniques in terms of design.
Small wonder, then, that so many of our manufacturers fail to achieve that integration of materials and pro-
duction techniques with the form and purpose of the product which is the essence of good design. Small wonder
that we often fail to take full advantage of the economies in production which are inherent in the techniques now
‘at the service of man.
Science and technology have outstripped our capacity to translate new processes into purposeful and satisfying
products. The need to match technological research with design research has been overlooked, at least in the
field of consumer products. In the sphere of large and highly complex equipment—aircraft, space capsules, com-
puters, submarines, and so on—our society can claim its greatest design achievements. Major design projects of
this kind demand the co-ordination of the highest skills and abilities we can command. Here there is no room for
less than the most rational, most efficient, solution. We are not only impressed by these machines as triumphs
of science and technology, we are also inspired by the expressive, original forms resulting from the design logic
which lies behind them.
That much simpler and smaller things, mass-produced for use in everyday life, can be given qualities of distinction
along with high standards of utility is shown by some present-day design achievements.
Our concern must be to make such designs the accepted background of our daily lives, not the rare achievements
of our time.
What has to be realised is that high standards of design do not come by chance. Manufacturers who aim for high
standards of design in their products implement a policy that provides for original, progressive thinking in relation
to the goods they manufacture.
A significant, world-wide movement towards more enlightened design is now evident. Design is being pro-
moted at the national level, both in the older industrial countries and those which are less advanced. Design councils,
established with the aim of fostering a greater awareness of design among manufacturers and in the community
generally have been set up in many countries. Facilities for the training of designers are being examined in relation
not only to the existing needs of industry but also with a view to providing for the needs of the future.
Design can contribute significantly to a more pleasant way of life. That very human fact is reason enough to warrant
preoccupation with it. There is, however, a colder fact which no manufacturing country can now afford to ignore.
It is that in the era of competitive world trade we are now entering, the capacity for skilful design is becoming a
factor in national survival.


I
MELAMINE WARE DENMARK
Designed by Kristian Vedel . . . Manufactured by Torben Orskov — l96o.
Made from Melamine, an expensive high quality plastic, these containers have the
advantages of great strength and resistance to cutting and heat. They are available
in a wide range of sizes and wonderfully suitable colours. As well as using this
extraordinary plastic, the items are such that they are designed for multiple
use—the flat shapes as dinner plates, dishes or lids; the deep shapes as bowls
or containers. They are stackable so that foodstuffs may be stored separately
and containers and dishes stacked one on top of the other without loss of space.
Gold Medal XII Triennale, Milan, I 96 0; Danish Lunning Prize, 1962, awarded to Kristian
Vedel. Selected for the Metropolitan Museum of Art Collection, New York.
2
PILSNER GLASS DENMARK
Designed by Per Lutken—resident designer and artistic director for Holmegaard Glass
Works—l9sB.
This pilsner glass is typical of a number of products which exploit the fluid
nature of glass to advantage. Although a utility piece, the “Mermaid” tumbler is of
such inherent beauty of shape and colour that it is equally agreeable whether in
use or empty. The attenuated shape is offset by the heaviness of the base. The
moulding of the base in varying thickness, together with the use of subtle colour
creates a pleasing design, making it a piece of sculpture in its own right. Thus
this feeling is a direct result of the material used.
3
CASSEROLE WEST GERMANY
Designed by Prof. W. Wagenfeld... Manufactured by Wurttemberg Metalware Factory — l9s3.
This casserole is made from heavy duty stainless steel because of the use that it
will be put to. It has a very firm solid base together with a copper base for
added heat conduction and rapid cooking. It is simple in shape and contour,
leading to very easy cleaning, and is free of any deep recesses or grooves
around the handle junction and lid fitment. Following the trend of many
kitchen utensils it has a dual purpose for the lid can also be reversed and used
as a serving dish. Professor Wagenfeld was a member of the Bauhaus and
emerged as a leading figure in German industrial design in the early thirties.
Grand Prix awarded to Professor W. Wagenfeld for his contribution to modern design—Xl
Triennale, Milan, 1957. Selected by Museum of Modern Art, New York.
4
DINNER AND COFFEE SERVICE WEST GERMANY
Designed by Heinrich Loeffelhardt . . . Manufactured by Porzellanfabrik, Arzberg —l9s6.
In line with modern trends in architecture and design Arzberg was the first
factory in the world to produce truly simple and modern china in 1931. It is
characterized by clear lines, well balanced and functional shapes. Perfect har-
mony combines with exquisite beauty. Arzberg 2025 has been created by Hein-
rich Loeffelhardt who has designed many award winning shapes in china, glass-
ware and ovenproof glass. The design is based on a pure form of great elegance
and dignity and comes in brilliant white and beautiful patterns. The fine, translucent
china with its timeless elegance blends ideally with modern or traditional interiors.
Selected for permanent exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, the Victoria
and Albert Museum, London, and Design Centres in many capital cities. Gold Medal, XI
Triennale, Milan, 1957.


5
CUTLERY U.S.A.
Designed by Don Wallance . . . Manufactured in Germany for H. E. Lauffer C 0 . —1956.
Knives, forks and spoons reflect changing manners as much as changing con-
cepts of design, however the balance and fine appearance so well understood by
the eighteenth century silversmiths still underlie all good modern cutlery.
However, stainless steel because of its non-corrosive nature and because of
its ease of maintenance may be used for both blade and handle. This technical
detail, together with a new evaluation of eating habits, led to Don Wallance’s
design for this flat-ware in which the knife is a single length of metal model-
led to fit the hand. The fork, often used as a scoop, ends in short tines.
Shown by Museum of Modern Art, New York.
Gold Medal awarded to Don Wallance at X Triennale, Milan, 1954.
6
COFFEE PERCOLATOR AUSTRALIA
Designed and manufactured by Crown Crystal Glass Pty. Ltd. — 1961.
The Agee Pyrex 8-cup coffee percolator is made from glass which can be used
on gas, electric or wood stoves. The simple shapes of the two bowls reflect
the nature of their manufacture and shapes are such that cleaning is easy.
When making coffee, steam pressure forces water into the top bowl over
the coffee grains; it then seeps slowly through the grains and returns to
the bottom bowls. The coffee at no time boils. The upper bowl is removable
and stands in the hollow tube of the lid. The coffee is served from the lower bowl.
Shown at International Design Exhibition, The Louvre, Paris, 1963.
7
VACUUM FLASK ENGLAND
Designed by L. Leslie-Smith . . . Manufactured by Vacco Ltd. — l96o.
In this flask, the “Vacco DeLuxe”, the designers have produced an advanced
design for a popular low-priced article. Plastics have been used for their
advantages over plated metal and so the outer casing is of toughened poly-
styrene with the inner closure of polythene. Both plastics in their finished
form were subjected to rigorous tests against damage—by dropping, tip-
ping, filling with boiling water and measured blows by testing apparatus.
Further tests for liquid tightness, strength, comfort in handling with hot
liquids and insulation were carried out. It is available in three suitable colours.
Design Centre Award, 1962.
8
CERAMIC FLASK AND BOWL JAPAN
As selected by the Japan Craft Centre.
Although no longer the chief manufacturing source of objects for our common
use, the individuality of hand crafted articles finds a ready response. When not
working for industry the craftsrtnan often enriches the characteristic geometric
forms of the twentieth century with his particular sensitivity to materials, fulfilling
our need for objects which transcend the anonymity of mass production. These two
pieces show the sympathy of designer with materials and illustrate, too, the strongly
national characteristics which are usually evident more in hand-made articles than
in those made by machinery. Of particular distinction is the calligraphic design.
Shown in the Japan Design House.


9
STONEWARE DINNER SET FINLAND
Designed by Ulla Procope . . . Manufactured by “Wartsila” — Arabia — l9s6.
Pottery production in Finland centres around the name of the ‘Arabia’ factory which
virtually has sole control over the output of ceramics; there are very few independent
practising ceramists in Finland but ‘Arabia’ employs many talented artists. In the pro-
duction of articles of everyday use, this “Ruska” setting, in special stoneware which
is ovenproof, shows that although the Finns do not have so much of the Danes’ crafts-
menlike traditions of quality, or the technical skills of the Swedes, they do have joy
in creation and a violent urge towards artistic expression. This shows a distinct
difference from the slick aestheticism of other Scandinavian examples.
10
CUTLERY FINLAND
Designed by Bertel Gardberg . . . Manufactured by Oy Fiskars Ab — l9s7.
The Fiskars “Triennale” cutlery is made from the finest stainless steel contain-
ing 18% chromium and 8% nickel giving the knives a very keen edge. Handles are
available in white or black nylon, all stainless steel or Brazilian rosewood.
Those on display are unaffected by any detergent or hot water and maintain their
even lustre with care. Each piece has been designed for a purpose; proportion-
ing of handles and blades shows specific designing as certain functions were
evaluated. A comparison of fish-knife, table-knife and butter-spreader explains
this clearly; yet each maintains the simple, elegant basic shape of the set.
Gold Medal XI Triennale, Milan, 1957.
II
KITCHEN MIXER WEST GERMANY
Designed by staff of Max Braun . . . Manufactured by Max Braun and Company — l9s7.
This kitchen machine, apart from its quite obviously excellent design, has been
included in this exhibition for two remarkable reasons. Firstly, the year of the
design, 1957; when all similar kitchen units were extremely complicated to use
and fussy in detailing the Braun Company produced this break-away machine, which
has been the prototype of many copies. Secondly, the Braun Company has been award-
the Premio, Compasso d’Oro—an award for outstanding company policy in relation
to design—an integrity which is observable in the accessories shown here;
the cookery book, the spatula and the Polyamide bowls.
Braun Company, Premio, Compasso d’Oro, 1957.
12
STAINLESS STEEL HOLLOW-WARE WEST GERMANY
Designer: Professor W. Wagenfeld... Manufactured by Wurttemberg Metalware Factory — l9s3.
The distinguished pieces shown together here are the product of a long and happy
association of designer and manufacturer. The Wurttemberg Metalware Factory is
not only the largest cutlery factory in Europe—it employs 8000 people—but has
since its establishment in 1853, become known for the quality of its products.
S/S like most other materials has cheaper versions; the name stainless steel is no
indication of quality. Because of its extreme strength it must be machine forged;
for these reasons care must be employed in selecting the best designs with highest
standards in material and finish; this is always the policy for W. M. F. Cromargan ware.
Grand Prix awarded to Professor Wagenfeld for his contribution to modern design—Xl
Triennale, Milan, 1957. Selected by Museum of Modern Art, New York.


13
KITCHEN SCALES ENGLAND
Designed and manufactured by George Salter and Co., England — l9sB.
In designing the “Duet” No. 51, the makers have been guided by the principles of
simplicity and accuracy. The resultant machine is successful on both counts. The
large clearly marked dial is easily read; weighing is simple and direct. This kitchen
balance ’does the work of two scales in that it incorporates fine divisions (lib £oz)
for really accurate diet and recipe weighing and a large capacity (101 b) for jam
making, fruit preserving and similar purposes. The machine is pleasing in appear-
ance with the curve of the basin pouring spout subtly repeating the curve of the
face of the body of the machine. Available in a variety of colours.
14
CUTLERY U.S.A.
Designed and manufactured by Gerber “Legendary ” Blades — l 939.
Gerber “Legendary” Blades are produced with handles that are strictly functional
although gracefully designed, and blades that are razor-sharp, extremely hard
and spring-flexible. The blades are made from expensive carbon-tungsten alloy;
weighing more than cutlery steel, fused to cast aluminium handles and with
cutting edges wedge-ground, the design emphasises the function. There are
legends associated with the names of the articles on display: the Snickersnee,
legendary blade of Koko the Lord High Executioner; the Trident, Neptune’s
weapon; the Miming, miraculous blade of Miming, the Norse Gods’ smith.
Selected for the New York Museum of Modern Art Exhibition.
15
GLASS VASE FINLAND
Designed by Tapio Wirkkala . . . Manufactured by Glas Nu — l9s9.
After the second world war, and in spite of the economic difficulties which
followed it, the Finns seem to have achieved a remarkable harmony and maturity
of style in almost all branches of the decorative arts. Perhaps the most striking
of these developments has been in the realm of glassware. Shortly after the
war the designs of Cunnel Nyman (who died in 1948) and Tapio Wirkkala resulted
in a style of glassware which was typically Finnish and yet widely influential.
This was characterized by tall asymmetrical shapes, freely modelled in clear
untinted glass. This vase expresses the fluid nature of glass freely and simply.
16
GLASS BOWLS ITALY AND SWEDEN
(a) Designed and manufactured by the Murano Glass Works — l 949.
(b) Designed and manufactured by Orrefors Glass Works — 1949.
In his “Summa Theologica”, St. Thomas Aquinas wrote: “For beauty three things
are required. First, then, integrity or perfection: those things which are broken
are bad for this reason. And also a due proportion and harmony. And again, clarity:
whence those things which have a shining colour are called beautiful”. These words,
written during the thirteenth century, seem particularly apt in a description of
this small bowl from the famous Murano Glass Works. Although still manufacturing
glass products in the traditional manner this factory is executing works by modern
designers to suit contemporary taste. The Orrefors vase shows an interesting
technique where glass "straws” fuse with the body of the vessel during manufacture.


17
DECANTER DENMARK
Designed by Per Lutken—resident designer and artistic director for Holmegaard Glass
Works—l9sB.
The fine proportions add a rare distinction to the austere design of this “Winston”
decanter. No attempt is made to decorate the pure form; the drawn lines made
when the decanter was turned are sufficient to relieve the severity of the shape
and to accentuate the contour. This object is a good example of the designer’s
principle that nothing can be added or taken away without spoiling the final
product. The simple cork stopper is both effective and harmonious with the whole
approach to this design. Severely functional but beautiful, this decanter is
used with a feeling of great delight.
18
WOODEN ORNAMENTS DENMARK
Designed by Kristian Vedel . . . Manufactured by Torben Orskov and Company — l96o.
These delightful “toys for adults” are typical of an exuberant outlook which is
evident in Danish design. They are turned from oak and the finish reveals the grain
of the timber. The body of the bird is reversible and the head rests on a dished
hollow so that it can assume many positions. The packaging is as thoughtful and as
captivating as the bird itself. Like King Solomon’s lilies, “they neither reap nor
sow”, but are a continuous delight to people who respond to the excitement of
“a thing well done”.
19
CLARET AND LIQUEUR GLASSES DENMARK
Designed and manufactured by Kastrup Glass Works — l9s7.
The simplicity of shape and the beauty of material are the outstanding features
of this Kastrup glass. Certain kinds of glass when molten are of such viscosity
that bubbles do not rise but remain obstinately in fixed position in the fluid.
The artist-craftsman has extended this feature, enlarging the bubble to lighten
the appearance without losing the stability of the glass. The Kastrup company
is fairly typical of a number of European companies, which because of consistently
high standards of design and production, have established a name synonymous
with quality. The elongation of the shape gives elegance and grace.
20
IRONWARE JAPAN
As selected by the Japan Craft Centre.
Japan has a strongly traditional culture; at the same time she is one of the most ad-
vanced industrial countries in Asia. She therefore is in a position where hand-crafts and
machine-made objects are both important. The development of these heterogeneous
groups of products is being made organically. The two kettles and ashtray are designed
with an interesting use of iron and they have the traditional elegance of the Japanese
designer to offset the heavy qualities of the material. The articles are extremely func-
tional, with a fineness and simplicity of line and shape; yet due to hand-craftsmanship,
the kettles appear “warmer” in appearance than other sleeker machine-made ones.
Shown in the Japan Design House.


21
TEA SET JAPAN
As selected by the Japan Craft Centre.
Many Japanese artist-potters with excellent standards of craftsmanship have not
been drawn into the current mass-production waves, since some of them are not
satisfied with mass-production of their traditional wares. It is necessary for
the industrialized production-line factory and the artist-potter to work to-
gether. This porcelain tea set has traditionally Japanese elegance, but also
incorporates the advantages of machine production. The fine white cups show
the traditional lack of handles; the squat tea pot js most elegant and includes
the use of non-heat conducting bamboo. Both cups and tea pots have cane-
like porcelain bases, incorporated during normal manufacture.
Shown in the Japan Design House.
22
TWO VASES FINLAND
Designed by Kaj Franck. Manufactured by Nuutajarva Glassworks — 1960.
Among the more recent glasswork another Finnish style can be discerned, particu-
larly in the work of Kaj Franck and Timo Sarpaneva. These glass objects are
often made of tinted glass and appear in disciplined, angular and often squat
shapes. Similar short cylindrical forms have also appeared among glass lamp-
shades, especially those designed by Lisa Sohansson-Pape. The Finnish look
may not be as familiar as the Swedish or the Danish but it is just as distinctive.
Highly literate and sophisticated, the Finns consider designing a most rewarding
way of life, finding in it a sense of national affirmation and identity.
23
FRYING PAN U.S.A.
Designed and manufactured by the Prizer-ware C 0 . —1958.
Nothing is better than cast-iron for cooking as it quickly spreads and holds an
even heat. However, there are also distinct disadvantages in cooking on the
iron surface. It may become pitted by certain foods and is then very difficult
to clean. By coating iron with porcelain all the cooking advantages are retained
and the product is easily maintained. The porcelain is absolutely resistant
to temperature changes and may be taken directly from freezer to stove without
any fear of cracking, chipping or breaking. Under ordinary conditions of use you
clean it as you would a china plate. Scouring pads and powders are not required.
24
OBJECTS IN TEAK DENMARK
Designed and manufactured by Erik S. Angelo — l9s7.
During a period of short supply of furniture hardwoods, Danish craftsmen found
that timber from the decking and structure of old ships was both suitable
and attractive. Since then teak and Denmark have become synonymous. How-
ever, there are not any specifically Danish species of wood nor any types of
furniture of specifically Danish invention. What is, however, specifically Danish
is the fine technical quality, the high utility value and the sure artistic touch
in design. The trivett and the serviette rings are examples of these character-
istics and in their unadorned usefulness they form objects of timeless quality.


25
TEA SERVICE DENMARK
Designed by R. Schultz . . . Manufactured by Gloria Metalware Factory — l9s7.
Stainless steel is a new material which has demanded a new approach in the field of
design. Because of the extreme strength of the material, limitations have been placed
upon working processes and in turn upon design. Hence most stainless steel objects
are free of any applied decoration, the designer relying upon the proportions to
gain dignity and elegance. The austerity of design has been continued in the wooden
handle of the tea pot for anything superfluous has been eliminated, generally
improving the function. Combined with the easily cleaned qualities of stainless
steel the final result is a highly practical appliance free of applied decoration.
26
SALAD SERVERS DENMARK
Designed by Herbert Krenchel . . . Manufactured by Torben Orskov and Company — l9s7.
In a time when the plastics industry was striving to be accepted, these salad servers
came as an indication of the way ahead. Too often, then, and now, too little was
known of the capabilities of the materials which were, for convenience, classed
together by the generic name of “Plastics”. We know now that there are many
varieties of “plastic”. Each one has its own qualities and each is capable of per-
forming its specific function. In these salad servers, melamine, a particularly
rigid and strong plastic material has been moulded to a strikingly elegant design.
The dull black finish would add distinction to any modern table setting.
27
CLOCKS SWITZERLAND
Designed by Angelo Mangeriotti and Bruno Morassutti . . . Manufactured by Le Porte-
Echappement Universal 5.A. — 1960.
The ivory pedestal and red pebble-shaped “Secticon” transistorized clocks were the
result of three years of intensive design work. The final product was to be mass-pro-
duced, of great precision, to run for as long as possible and to be of such appearance
that the shape was subordinated to the dial. The finished concept has a two
piece precision moulded plastic shell which is easily opened to reveal the compact,
battery-powered movement. The movement is unit made and parts can be easily
replaced. The hourly divisions on the dial are dual marks of increasing thickness.
The outstanding packaging reflects the manufacturer’s regard for their product.
28
DESK LAMP AUSTRALIA
Designed by W. P. Iggulden . . . Manufactured by Planet Products — l 962.
The “Studio” Model K desk lamp has received wide praise and has been selected
by the Industrial Design Council of Australia for the International Industrial
Design Exhibition at the Louvre, Paris, France 1963. It is sturdy but graceful in
looks and movement; its patented equipoise mechanism automatically supports
the lamp and enables instant and effortless adjustment. The simple aluminium
reflector, the luminous push-button switch, the range of very pleasant finishes
and colours all add to the efficiency and convenience of this lamp. The base is remov-
able to allow inter-change of the three types available.
Shown at the International Design Exhibition, The Louvre, Paris, 1963.


29
MEAT PLATTER WEST GERMANY
Designed by Professor W. Wagenfeld... Manufactured by Wurttemberg Metalware Factory — l9s3.
The process of working stainless steel and the material itself are such major factors
in designing for stainless steel that new forms are constantly being evolved for this
material. The extreme strength limits its contour and makes for a simple shape. The
example we are showing is not inexpensive. The nature of the material precludes low
cost except for a low quality product. It is through such low quality articles that stain-
less steel sometimes finds no favour with some people. The subtle indenting of the hand
grips and the angle of the flange are particularly sensitively designed. Stainless steel has
a pleasing satin sheen which is not achieved in any permanent form in plated metals.
Grand Prix awarded to Professor W. Wagenfeld for his contribution to modern design
XI Triennale, Milan, 1957.
30
INSULATED FOOD CARRIER AUSTRALIA
Designed by W. T. Joyce . . . Manufactured by Pyramid Plastics Pty. Ltd. — l 962.
The “Ho-Co” insulated carrier shows the intelligent use of a number of different
plastics. The carrier is available in a range of sizes and colours and is made
from polyethylene for the inner and outer shells; polypropylene for the containers
and insulated lid. The materials used are such that the product can be dropped
without breaking, denting or chipping; the complete unit can be sterilized. Good
insulation is achieved by the use of urethane foam moulded in place. Another well
designed feature is the free-swinging, strongly constructed handle.
Plastics Award 1962; First Prize, Best Consumer Product.
31
MARMALADE POT WITH SPOON DENMARK
Designed and manufactured by Erik S. Angelo — l9s7.
Although such a simple object hardly seems worthy of such an exhibition as this,
such a verdict would be far from a sensitive appraisal of this article’s true worth.
Firstly, it shows the close co-operation between two design conscious firms—the
bowl is made by the Holmegaard Glass Company while the lid and spoon are made by
the E.S.A. Teak Woodworking Company. A close association such as this is typical
of the care that is instrumental in projecting a national image which in its turn
ensures the ready acceptance of Danish goods on any market.
32
CASSEROLE AND GRATIN DISH FINLAND
Designed by Ulla Procope . . . Manufactured by Wartsila — Arabia — 1957.
Finnish designs have a rugged individuality and honesty that match the country
and its people. When Tapio Wirkkala, a sensitive artist in glass, ceramics, plywood
and metal, was asked to name his country’s greatest designer, he replied simply,
“Nature”. A realistic approach to the way casseroles and skillets are used led
to the design of all ceramic sets in which handles are part of the pans and lids
double as separate serving dishes. Finnish cookware goes on top of the stove, in
the oven and to the dining room. The dull matt finish, in subtle black and brown,
sits well on traditional and contemporary tables.


33
COOKING UTENSILS U.S.A.
Designed and manufactured by Corning Glass Works — 1958.
Corning Ware is outstanding not only for its overall rational design but also for
its use of a remarkable material. From a wide range we show this 7" skillet with
cover and stand and the If quart saucepan. This ware has been made from Pyroceram
(the material developed for the nose cones of rockets) —a material which defies
tremendous changes of temperature but is of sufficient beauty to be used at the
table. Another well planned feature is the simple lock-on handle which fits all
models and once fitted cannot slip. The poorest feature of this product comes
from the applied motif which is unnecessary decoration.
34
STONEWARE ENGLAND
BOWL Designed by Bernard Leach. Made by the Leach Pottery, ENGLAND.
JUG Designed by Bernard Leach. Made by the Leach Pottery, ENGLAND.
BOTTLE AND STOPPER Designed and Made by H. R. Hughan, AUSTRALIA—I9S7.
The process used in pottery strongly influences the shape of the object. The raw
material, which is some variety of clay, may take an infinite variety of forms so the
actual design is a result of the process rather than the material. Wet, soft clay may
be worked into shape on a potter’s wheel by a process called “throwing”, the method
by which these are produced. The excellence of a potter’s design depends mainly
upon the elements of shape and texture. Bernard Leach has contributed greatly
towards a revival in pottery. He believes that beautiful objects are for everyday use.
35
STACKING CUPS ENGLAND
Designed and manufactured by A. B. Jones and Son Ltd. — l9sB.
These cups of fine china have been designed to stack and because of their quality,
are now being used on quite a large scale by Qantas Airways. Many such cups
often stack but lose some important quality; these stack well, are aesthetically
satisfying and pleasant to use. At first glance, one might feel that the necessarily
shorter handle could be inconvenient. However, the cup is no less comfortable
than those with normal handles. Another virtue of necessity is the line formed
by the supporting ridge; it is placed in a position that does not detract from the
overall appearance, but rather adds to it.
36
GLASSES WEST GERMANY
Designed by Heinz Loeffelhardt . . . Manufactured by Vereinigte Farbenglaswerke A.G.,
Zwiesel — 1957.
Zwiesel glass, Shape 1007, was designed by Heinz Loeffelhardt, who is also chief
designer for Arzburg and Schoenwald China; for these three companies he has won
many international awards. He has also won awards for Jena ovenproof glass. Shape
1007 is an elegantly conceived set of thirteen pieces with the moulding process
of manufacture evident in the subtle draw-line. Each piece has great dignity and
fineness; the stemmed glasses flow from severe straight-sided bowls through fine
stems and into the bases. The stemless glasses repeat this severity. Use, materials
and manufacture are excellently combined to create this outstanding glassware.
Gold Medal, XI Triennale, Milan. 1957.


37
TELEPHONE SWEDEN
Designed by Hugo Blomberg . . . Manufactured by L. M. Ericsson Telephone Co. Pty. Ltd.
—1958.
The decision of the Swedish Board of Telecommunications in 1959 to release the
Ericfon Telephone, followed nearly ten years research and experimentation by engi-
neers and designers. It was resolved that this unit was to be a one-piece instrument
in the form of a standing microtelephone, since the chief requirement was
ease and convenience of handling. Under these conditions the immediate task was
to design an attractive, light case which was easy to grasp, lift, dial and into
which it was easy to speak. From this has evolved a model of new thinking on
an old form. The unit is efficient, functional, simple and is pleasant to use.
38
BON BON DISH WEST GERMANY
Designed by H. Loeffelhardt . . . Manufactured by the Vereinigte Farbenglaswerke — l9s9.
The principle of versatility is one that finds ready acceptance in articles of simple
everyday use. Many objects double their usefulness by being readily adaptable
to other uses. It is unusual for this principle to be applied to objects such as
the one shown here. Basically, this object is made to delight the eye. The fine
lines of the dishes, their finish and the subtle colours are all aesthetically very
pleasing. However, our pleasure does not stop there. We find that the dishes
are functionally pleasing and that their design allows them to be used together
as a covered unit or each may be used independently in its own right.
39
SALAD SERVERS DENMARK
Designed by Torben Lind . . . Manufactured by Torben Orskov and C 0 . —1960.
These “Twin” salad servers again exploit the use of teak. Most elegant and beauti-
fully made, the servers show a new approach. With a basis of function and material,
a striking, original and simple design evolved. They are turned, divided and hollowed
from a solid piece of teak and are very well proportioned and a pleasure to use. For
convenience of handling, the servers are held together by a thin black melamine
band, and the unit then placed in its container. The container, by the same designer,
is also particularly pleasing and employs a new but very simple closing method.
40
WOODEN BOWL AND NUTCRACKERS DENMARK
Designed and Manufactured by Erik S. Angelo — 1957.
Once again teak is the featured timber in these two items. Wooden surfaces left to
reveal their natural colour and grain pattern, evoke a warm response. The bowl has
been turned from a solid piece of teak to produce a useful article possessing sculptural
qualities of volume and space flow. The undulating rim relieves the mechanical shape
of the bowl. The nutcrackers are a forthright statement of their function but they too,
are relieved of mechanical coldness by the materials used. Tempered brass and wood
have been simply combined in a manner which pleases us by its sense of correctness.
The tapering of the handles adds grace where needed and strength where necessary.


41
TABLE MIRROR ENGLAND
Designed by Colin Beales . . . Manufactured by Peter Cudden — l9s9.
This table mirror of British manufacture is another modern version of a traditional
product, carried out with great delicacy and refinement. The pivoting mirror has
a polished and lacquered brass frame with a backing of scarlet velvet. The tripod
base is made of stove-enamelled steel and is felt based to prevent scratching. The
stand is most stable and on it the mirror swivels easily yet stays firmly in position.
The complete unit is elegantly conceived and manufactured, and may easily be used
by hand or as a table mirror.
Design Centre Award 1961.
42
ENAMELLED PLATE NORWAY
Designed by Professor Arne Korsmo . . . Manufactured by Catherineholm — l9so.
An extremely popular material combination today is that of a new durable material,
stainless steel, and the ancient medium of enamel which has been used in various forms
since the days of the Egyptians. The stainless steel has been silver buffed to gain
a luxurious quality and pattern under the transparent turquoise jewelley enamel.
The simplicity of shape achieved by the stamping process is not detracted from by
the pure colour of the enamel which is fused on under great heat and creates a glass-
hard surface which is resistant to acid and heat.
Grand Prix X Triennale, Milan, 1954. Gold Medal XI Triennale, Milan, 1957.
43
ORNAMENTAL FISH JAPAN
As selected by the Japan Craft Centre.
Good pottery can be obtained at a comparatively reasonable price in Japan, and there
is no other industrially developed country whose people use good pottery so abund-
antly, in their homes. To them pottery is not merely an article to hold food for dining.
It serves as a rest to the mind and a pleasure to the eye; it makes the home life human.
These ornamental fish are used for this purpose. These fish whistles are simple
in shape but show a sensitive understanding of the semi-industrialized nature of
their production. The colour is simple, striking and boldly applied but allows
part of the pottery body of the clay to be incorporated in the colour patterning.
Shown in the Japan Design House.
44
COLD WATER JUG AND GLASSES DENMARK
Designed by Per Lutken, resident designer and artisitic director for Holmegaard Glass
Works—l9s7.
The classic shape of the clear “Iceland” water jug is a natural result of the method of
manufacture by glass blowing. It is completely free of applied decoration and dis-
tinction is gained by the fine proportion and the pouring lip which is moulded and
pinched into the molten glass. The “Copenhagen” tumblers complement the jug
with their simple and beautiful form. Although alike, each glass has been considered
as a separate design; the proportion of height to width is the most important factor.
Those on display are the 7 oz (“Old Fashion”) and the 10 oz and 12 oz “Copenhagen”.


45
HOUSEHOLD KNIFE WEST GERMANY
Manufactured and designed by Felix Gloris-Werk — l9sB.
This company is most anxious to improve the general standard of its design ahd
has worked with well known European designers such as Kaj Bojeson of Denmark,
and Professor K. Scheinpflug of Germany. Apart from using top quality steel which
will retain its edge for a considerable and can be easily re-sharpened, Felix knives
feature a curved blade which follows the natural movement of the arm and thus
permits easiter cutting. The handle has been contour moulded following clay prints
taken from the hands of many women. By manufacturing handle and blade separa-
tely the manufacturers have produced a competitively priced article.
46
CASSEROLE AND STAND ENGLAND
Designed by John and Sylvia Reid . . . Manufactured by Izons and Co. Ltd. — l9s9.
“Anniversary Ware” cast-iron ovenware, because of its simple, pleasing shapes and
subtle range of colours, can be taken to the table. The finish is in acid-resisting
vitreous enamel; tricorn stands are available with rubber feet and designed to
be used with a candle. Many of the old faults evident in such hot equipment have
been avoided and an absence of any knobs on lids makes packing into ovens simpler.
The machined base of the casserole heats evenly, will not distort and allows
the ware to be used on any cooking appliance. However, one may find the re-
moval of a hot lid a little difficult due to a closeness of fit between lid and base.
Design Centre Award 1960.
47
DESK LAMP AUSTRALIA
Designed by W. P. Iggulden . . . Manufactured by Planet Products — l9s6.
The “Fluorostat” fluorescent desk lamp, Model J.F.S., is a very neat solution to
the problem of manufacturing a desk lamp which uses the efficient light of a fluore-
scent tube. The problem of the bulk of the ballast, necessary to convert electricity
into usable power for the fluorescent tube is solved by using its bulk and weight as a
counter-balance to the light unit. It has been so carefully engineered that the light is
stable in any position. The cover of the ballast, perforated to dissipate the
heat, is a welcome contrast to the smooth surfaces of the rest of the lamp.
Shown at the International Design Exhibition, The Louvre, Paris, 1963.
48
CONVECTION HEATER AUSTRALIA
Designed by Email Ltd. . . . Manufactured by Westinghouse Rosebery Pty. Ltd. — l 962.
AHD 24 Westinghouse Convection Heater, Q. 40001, is a very direct statement
of this machine’s function. It has been shorn of all superfluous detailing. The
coloured temperature control, mounted in an easily accessible place is direct
in action and simple to operate. Although quite light for portability, the unit
is stable and unassuming in appearance. Electricity is the most efficient form
of quick heating and the convection heater provides both radiant and con-
verted heat. Unlike combustion heaters no oxygen is consumed by electric heating
and the unit placed in a room gives 100 per cent heating return.
Shown at the International Industrial Design Exhibition, The Louvre, Paris, 1963.


49
RAKE AND HOE ENGLAND
Designed by Brian Asquith . . . Manufactured by Spear and Jackson Ltd. — l 962.
Both the hoe 5992 and rake 5665 have stainless steel heads with 4'9" handles of
tubular anodised aluminium, tipped with plastic knobs. These knobs have been shaped
to provide a firm grip for pushing and pulling. Garden equipment has long lacked
toughness and lightness but here there is both. The head of each tool is made up of
stainless steel casting, welded to a cold rolled blade, and the handle is of I" exterior
diameter aluminium tubing, surmounted by the tough knob of melamine. Each tool is
well proportioned, strong, light and has a feeling of great quality in handling.
Design Centre Award 1962.
50
SWOE AND WRAKE ENGLAND
Designed and manufactured by the Wilkinson Sword Company — l96l.
By the use of new titles for these garden tools—a Swoe and a Wrake, the desig-
ners from the Wilkinson Sword Company are emphasising that these articles
have evolved from rethinking the functions of these tools. Both tools are made
from rust-resistant sword steel for ease of maintainance. The Swoe is an im-
proved hoe with three cutting edges for speed and versatility. The Wrake has
been designed to make light work of cultivation, weeding, levelling, creation of
tilth and general soil preparation. The balance and finish make handling a pleasure.
51
SHEARS ENGLAND
Designed and manufactured by Wilkinson Sword C 0 . —1961.
These light-weight shears have a well designed bearing which keeps the blades
“floating” together. The bearing consists of a series of washers and locks with
a small, built-in oil bath which keep the blades at the right tension. The blades
are made from top quality steel and feature a hollow ground process which
gives each blade a slightly dished shape, so that the only contact between them
is along the cutting edge. The beechwood handles are comfortable to hold and
conveniently spaced to avoid constricting the arm movement. The rubber washer
fixed at the base of the blade prevents the jar as both blades are snapped together.
52
PRUNERS ENGLAND
Designed and manufactured by the Wilkinson Sword Company — l96l.
We are showing three pruners from a range of tools designed with great care and
made from high quality materials. Each Wilkinson pruner works on the principle
of the pruning knife. The holding blade steadies the stem. The curved, keen-edged
cutting blade slices through it in one single, smooth cut; this ensures a perfectly clean
cut with no bruising to the stem. The W. 45 is a precision pruner and features self-
lubricating nylon bearings for effortless action, nylon coated handles and a cushion
stop. W. 43 is a flower gatherer which cuts and holds the stem in a single-handed
operation.


53
CHAIR DENMARK
Designed by Hans Wegner . . . Manufactured by Carl Hansen and Son — 1950.
Modern architecture has changed our ideas about furniture. Storage units are now
often built into the walls of the rooms and the chair has offered the twentieth cen-
tury furniture designers their most interesting problem. There are two basic
solutions to the difficult problem of chair design. The first is the traditional method
of shaping individual pieces and joining them in various ways. This chair made in
natural finish oak and seagrass is designed by one of the most sensitive chair designers
in the world. It has a timeless quality which outlasts the needs of fashion.
54
CHAIR AUSTRALIA
Designed by Michael Hirst . . . Manufactured by Michael Hirst Pty. Ltd. — l96o.
This chair by an Australian designer is typical of many others which show the second
basic solution to chair design. It is the direct outgrowth of new techniques and
materials. The metal frame of the chair does not so much resist the body as describe,
in lines of support, the shape of the body. As no one sits immobile the springing
nature of the metal yields and compensates as the body weight shifts. Although suffi-
ciently elegant to be included in any interior the designer has exploited modern
methods and materials further. Baked enamel and vinyl plastic make it serviceable
outdoors.
55
ARMCHAIR AUSTRALIA
Designed by Grant Featherston . . . Manufactured by Aristoc Industries Pty. Ltd. — l96o.
Chairs imply human sitters—they should receive the body sympathetically. “Scape” is
designed within the ‘organic’ principle—as a ‘negative form’ of the human body. It
consists of upholstered shell-like forms lightly but firmly supported on a fine tapered
frame. Tapering strengthens the steel, making possible extremely fine proportions
and delicately scaled connections with the upholstered parts. The design process
is one of creating ‘more with less’. Space grows evermore valuable, economically
and psychologically. Space flows around and through this chair. We know the
chair takes up little floor space but we feel the spatial excitement!
56
STOOL DENMARK
Designed by Inge Klinenberg . . . Manufactured by France and 50n— 1956.
The box-like frame of the teak stool is simple in construction but very strong.
The frame is made up from several units which lock together; the strengthened
permanent leg joints are decorative as well as structural. The seat has a feeling
of ‘space’ or ‘floating’, created by the steam-bent plywood form being canti-
levered out over the carcase. The seat is fastened to the frame over a large area
and is strong enough to take all the rugged use a stool receives. Some padding
has been used, covered by finely woven woollen fabric available in a range of care-
fully selected rich colours.


57
ELECTRIC SWITCHES AUSTRALIA
Designed and manufactured by the Sturdee Electricals Pty. Ltd. — 1961.
It is pleasing to be able to include such a useful article as an electric switch in this
exhibition. There is no part of the home where good design may be overlooked;
certainly not in such a functional and so often used article as a switch. The “Easy-
Fit” range of flush-mounted architrave and wall plate switches are attractively
finished in white plastic. They feature bronze socket contacts and silver-alloy switch
contacts. They mount almost flush with the wall surface and are unobtrusive.
The workmanship and components are such that the makers guarantee their product.
F. H. Edwards Plastic Industry Laurel, 1962.
58
BARREL BOLT AUSTRALIA
Designed and manufactured by Turner Industries — l96o.
These small, formerly insignificant home items have now been designed to harmonize
with other well-designed door furniture. The neat appearance of the Turner H. 692
series barrel bolt is a good indication of this change. The bolt has an elongated hole
to allow for slight door drop. The finish is available in either chrome plating or
satin nickel. Recessed screws and a spring loaded bolt add to the quality of this item
which is available in two inch, three inch, four jnch and six inch lengths with
quarter-inch bolts for the smaller, five-sixteenth inch bolts for the larger.
59
CHILDREN’S TOYS
(a) The Little Farmer Dusyma
Suitable for 4+ years West Germany
(b) Construction Truck Wammetsberger
Suitable 6+ years West Germany
(c) Roly Color Stack Playskool
From I year U.S.A.
(d) Construction Kit Matador
Suitable 3+ years Austria
(e) Threading Beads Wammetsberger
Suitable 3 years West Germany
( f ) Andy Pandy Puppet
Suitable 7+ years Australia
(g) Construction Train Brio
Suitable 2-5 years Sweden
(h) Miniature Railway Brio
Suitable 7 years Sweden
The toys have been selected because they conform to certain principles. Playing with
toys is a child’s work. They need to be safe, lasting, interesting, absorbing and to stimulate
the imagination.


60
PORTABLE TYPEWRITER ITALY
Designed by Marcello Nizzoli . . . Manufactured by Ing. C. Olivetti and Co. S.t. A. — 1950.
The “Lettera 22”, a portable typewriter, is one of a vast number of products made
by the Olivetti Company in over a dozen countries throughout the world. The
Olivetti Company was awarded the Kaufmann International Design Award for 1962,
“for its use of design as demonstrated, not only by its products, trademarks, letter-
heads, printed matter and publicity, but also in numerous buildings on several
continents. These buildings, whether they be shops, factories, workers’ housing
and community services, vacation colonies or schools, are all designed to facilitate
the work and well-being of clients, visitors and staff.”
Olivetti Company awarded the Kaufmann International Design Award, 1962.
61
PRINTED FABRICS
(a) “Pacifica” Printed Cotton. Australia
Designed and manufactured by Frances Burke Fabric Centre. 1953.
(b) “Totem” Printed Cotton. Australia
Designed and manufactured by Frances Burke Fabric Centre. 1948.
(c) “Lunar” Printed Cotton. Australia
Designed and manufactured by Frances Burke Fabric Centre. 1952.
(d) “Sunflower” Printed Cotton. England
Designed by Howard Carter. Manufactured by Heal Fabrics Ltd. 1962.
Design Centre Award 1962. Cotton Board Award 1962.
Int. Design Award for Printed Textiles—American Instit./lnter. Designers 1963.
(e) “Reciprocation” Printed Cotton. England
Designed by Barbara Brown. Manufactured by Heal Fabrics Ltd. 1961.
(f) “Recurrence” Printed Cotton. England
Designed by Barbara Brown. Manufactured by Heal Fabrics Ltd. 1961.
62
FURNISHING FABRICS ENGLAND
Designed by Nicholas Sekers . . . Manufactured by West Cumberland Silk Mills Ltd. — l96l.
(a) Maestro (c) Delio
(b) Karikal (d) Grisette
The particular merit of this range of fabrics is the subtlety of textural and colour
combinations which give a remarkable richness to the materials. The colours are
of an unusual beauty and are especially suited to the fibres of rayon. A very wide
variety of colours, textures and simple patterns of stripes and checks is obtained
with the greatest economy by the permutation of weft colours across a minimum
number of standard warps.
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award for Elegant Design, 1962.
63
COTTON-TERYLENE CURTAINING ENGLAND
Designed by F. G. Hobden . . . Manufactured by Clyde Manufacturing C 0 .—1959.
“Denison Vision Net”, drip-dry curtaining is a modern version of a traditional
material. The combination of cotton and a small amount of terylene produces an
exceptionally pleasant lace pattern.
Design Centre Award, 1960.


64
WOOLLEN FABRICS
(a) Airplane Fabric and Matching Curtain. Australia
Manufactured by Furnishing Textiles Pty. Ltd. 1962
( b) Wool O’ Wisp Australia
Manufactured by Australaine
Used in Wilson Hall, Melbourne University. 1962
(c) Bedspread Australia
Hand Loomed by Marcella Hempel 1962
(d) Blanket. Australia
Manufactured by Invicta Mills.
Gold Medal for Blanket in Textile Section. 1962
(e) Curtain Fabric. Australia
Manufactured by Hoad Manufacturing Pty. Ltd. 1962
(f) Furnishing Fabric. Australia
Manufactured by Vicars Mills exclusively for Fler. 1962
The range of woollen fabrics illustrates the diversity of wool—the textured hand
loomed bedspread, the finely spun and woven curtain material and the wide range
of colours in the Hoad fabrics. Wool’s rising influence on home interiors is due to
these important properties:
★ Serviceability ★ Fire resistance
★ Insulation properties Dust resistance
★ Noise resistance ★ Appearance appeal
★ Comfort and ease ★ Availability
★ Long life and wear resistance
65
FLOOR RUG DENMARK
Designed and manufactured by Gram Carpet Factory Ltd. — l9s6.
Textiles from an essential part of any room; in some Danish rugs the designers
have been content to let the structure of the yarns and the weaving itself be the
decisive factor. Colour shade is often obtained through simple and restrained
patterns which retain their value and are most useful, achieved by weaving with
different yarns optically blended. Made from 96% pure wool with cotton the tying
thread in the warp, these rugs are available in a large number of patterns and subtle
colours, limited to two colours in any one rug. Five sizes are made, all reversible
and double-woven in a flat weave.
66
WALLPAPER ENGLAND
Designed by Cliff Holden . . . Manufactured by Wall Paper Manufacturers Ltd. — l96l.
“Trifoliate” is designed with two overlapping colours which in printing produce a
third to give extra colour effect and depth. The pattern matches well and the
colours are as light-fast as possible and should not during normal use.
Because of the high quality of these wallpapers and their hand-printing, the rapge
is rather expensive. The judges who awarded the Design Centre Award felt that
the design followed the English tradition in the use of botanical motifs, but was
suitable for contemporary use. It was felt that the paper is much more romantic
and charming than usual and is most refreshing.
Design Centre Award, 1962.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Only through the generous assistance of the following organisations, has this exhibition been possible. The
organisers wish to record their gratitude.
1 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
2 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
3 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
4 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
5 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
6 Crown Crystal Glass Pty. Ltd., 420 Spencer St., Melbourne.
7 Edward S. Ranson Pty. Ltd., 143 York St., Sydney.
8 Japan Trade Centre, 309-313 Pitt St., Sydney.
9 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
10 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
11 Distributors Corporation Pty. Ltd., 24 Johnston St., Fitzroy.
12 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
13 George Salter & Co., (Aust.), 555 Collins St., Melbourne.
14 Myer Emporium Ltd., Bourke St., Melbourne.
15 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
16 National Gallery of Victoria.
17 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
18 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
19 National Gallery of Victoria.
20 Japan Trade Centre, 309-313 Pitt St., Sydney.
21 Japan Trade Centre, 309-313 Pitt St., Sydney.
22 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
23 Myer Emporium Ltd., Bourke St., Melbourne.
24 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
25 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
26 National Gallery of Victoria.
27 Incabloc Promotion Centre, 153 Castlereagh St., Sydney.
28 Planet Products, 713 Nepean Highway, East Brighton.
29 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
30 Pyramid Plastics Pty. Ltd., Sullivan St., Moorabbin.
31 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
32 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
33 Vernon Treloar (Vic.), Pty. Ltd., 300 Little Collins St., Melbourne.
34 National Gallery of Victoria.
35 John Shorter (Vic.) Pty. Ltd., 104 Franklin St., Melbourne.
36 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
37 L. M. Ericsson Telephone Co. Pty. Ltd., 20 Collins St., Melbourne.
38 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
39 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
40 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
41 Thomas Budden & Co., 53 Hume St., Crow’s Nest, N.S.W.
42 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
43 Japan Trade Centre, 309-313 Pitt St., Sydney.


44 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
45 Incorporated Agencies Pty. Ltd., 400 Kent St., Sydney.
46 Myer Emporium Ltd., Bourke St., Melbourne.
47 Planet Products, 713 Nepean Highway, East Brighton.
48 Westinghouse Rosebery Pty. Ltd., Buckingham St., Richmond.
49 Carr and Elliott Pty. Ltd., 297 King St., Melbourne.
50 Frederick R. Baker Pty. Ltd., 34 Queen St., Melbourne.
51 Frederick R. Baker Pty. Ltd., 34 Queen St., Melbourne.
52 Frederick R. Baker Pty. Ltd., 34 Queen St., Melbourne.
53 Myer Emporium Ltd., Bourke St., Melbourne.
54 Michael Hirst Pty. Ltd., 33 Hall St., Hawthorn.
55 Featherston Contract Interiors, 131 Latrobe St., Melbourne.
56 National Gallery of Victoria.
57 Sturdee Electricals Pty. Ltd., 36 Centre Rd., Clayton.
58 Turner Manufacturing Co. Pty. Ltd., 400 Whitehorse Rd., Nunawading.
59 (a) Playways, Kindergarten Union Depot, 228 George St., Sydney.
(b) Playways, Kindergarten Union Depot, 228 George St., Sydney.
(c) Playways, Kindergarten Union Depot, 228 George St., Sydney.
(d) Playways, Kindergarten Union Depot, 228 George St., Sydney.
(e) Playways, Kindergarten Union Depot, 228 George St., Sydney.
(f) Playways, Kindergarten Union Depot, 228 George St., Sydney.
(g) Childcraft, 255 Johnston St., Abbotsford.
(/?) Childcraft, 255 Johnston St., Abbotsford.
60 Olivetti (Aust.) Pty. Ltd., 324 Russell St., Melbourne.
61 (a) Frances Burke Fabrics, 49 Bridge Road, Richmond.
(b) Frances Burke Fabrics, 49 Bridge Road, Richmond.
(c) Frances Burke Fabrics, 49 Bridge Road, Richmond.
(d) Heal Fabrics Ltd., H. G. Sanderson, 328 Flinders St., Melbourne.
(e) Heal Fabrics Ltd., H. G. Sanderson, 328 Flinders St., Melbourne.
(f) Heal Fabrics Ltd., H. G. Sanderson, 328 Flinders St., Melbourne.
62 (a) Sekers Silks Pty. Ltd., 60 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
(b) Sekers Silks Pty. Ltd., 60 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
(c) Sekers Silks Pty. Ltd., 60 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
(d) Sekers Silks Pty. Ltd., 60 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
63 Brown and Dureau Ltd., Temple Court, 422 Collins St., Melbourne.
64 (a) Furnishing Textiles Pty. Ltd., 71 Victoria Crescent, Abbotsford.
(b) Australaine Fabrics Pty. Ltd., 257 Donald St., East Brunswick.
(c) Marcella Hempel, Picton, Sydney.
(d) Invicta Mills Pty. Ltd., South Soad, Braybrook.
(e) Hoad Fabrics Pty. Ltd., Shepherds Place, 60 Russell St., Melbourne.
(f) John Vicars and Co. Ltd., 37 Swanston St., Melbourne.
65 Danish Design Agency, 60 Dudley St., Nth. Melbourne.
66 Wallpaper Decoration Pty. Ltd., 568 Chapel St., South Yarra.


CREDITS
We wish to acknowledge the invaluable help and
criticism given by the following organisations:
Australian Wool Bureau.
Barwood’s Toy Shop, East Kew.
British Trade Commissioner.
Consulate of the German Federal Republic.
Consulate of Japan, Melbourne.
Industrial Design Council of Australia.
Miss Monica Piddington, “Playways”, N.S.W.
Plastics Institute of Australia.
Royal Danish Consulate.
Timber Development Association of Victoria.
Visual Aids Centre—Education Department of Victoria.
Westminster Carpets Pty. Ltd.


GLOSSARY OF AWARDS
In compiling this exhibition, the organisers have tried to put personal choice behind them and have been guided
in their selection of exhibits by panels of design experts who grant various Australian and overseas awards. In
this way it is hoped that the principles of good design may be made abundantly clear. In order that you may under-
stand the importance of these awards we append the following information.
ITALY
COMPASSO d’ORO, an award made by the Rinascente, a large Italian department store. Of great interest is the word-
ing of part of the brief to which the jury works, “. . . products which integrate successfully the three aspects of
industrial design, i.e. technical, functional and aesthetic.”
TRIENNALE, MILAN. This well-known international show is promoted by Italian associations working in the
field of design and its application in modern industrial and decorative arts. Its main aim is to achieve a world-wide
review of the great progress made in this field.
BRITAIN
DESIGN CENTRE AWARDS: From submissions of perhaps 3,000 articles per year the Design Centre may grant
10 awards for those products which its jury considers to be outstanding contributions to design in Britain. The
premier award each year is known as The Duke of Edinburgh’s Prize for Elegant Design. The Council of Industrial
Design at the Design Centre, in London, has a permanent exhibition of outstanding design objects and an index
of photographs and design information.
U.S.A.
THE KAUFMANN AWARD: Many awards are made in the U.S.A. but the most important probably is the Kaufmann
Award. In arriving at its decisions the jury keeps in mind the following considerations:
“they wished to emphasise by their choice the importance of an approach to design that seeks an uncompromising
directness in the treatment of materials, that express an inherent logic of structure and form, that takes into
account the necessary condition that a creative intelligence must function within the framework of modern
industry and technology. They also had in mind the significance of such an approach in the life of the community”.
AUSTRALIA
THE WOOL BUREAU AWARDS. Every year the Wool Bureau makes awards in various categories to promote
the better use of wool.
PLASTICS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA. During Plastics Week, which is held during the last week of September
or the first week in October, awards are announced for outstanding use of plastic materials.
INDUSTRIAL DESIGN COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA. This newly constituted Government body works in a similar
way to its British counterpart and by exhibitions, promotions and a vigorous education programme keeps the
virtues of good design before Australians. By participating iri overseas exhibitions it promotes worthy Australian
contributions before world markets. At present an Australian Design Index is being produced.
DENMARK
THE LUNNING PRIZE, worth $5,000, is intended to “assist talented Nordic art handcraftsmen and industrial
artists, preferably young, for whom a well-planned study trip abroad could be of great, perhaps decisive, importance
to their artistic development and practical contributions.”


WHY NOT AN ART GROUP OR CLUB IN YOUR TOWN?
If you have been interested by your visit to this exhibition and would like to know more about art, the Council
of Adult Education may be able to help. It offers the following services:
Through the Box Scheme Discussion Group Service, groups of from six to fifteen people may obtain books, slides
(35 mm., black and white, and colour), prints, introductory material for the study of European and Australian Art
and Design. This material is most suitable for group study and discussion, but can also be used to provide excellent
evening programmes for clubs, young people’s societies and for illustrated lectures. The cost of material varies.
The general charge to members of discussion groups is £1 per annum for regular service. Books on art may also be
obtained from the General Reading Boxes provided by C.A.E. For full information, of material available, apply to
Discussion Group Director, 4th Floor, 256 Flinders St., Melbourne.
Lectures on art may be arranged occasionally at the request of local organisations if reasonable support is assured.
Such lectures are fully illustrated by 16 mm. films, prints, slides, etc. Write to Director of Classes, 4th Floor, 256
Flinders St., Melbourne.
Practical painting classes are a regular feature of C.A.E. city classes, and are always included in the programme of
Summer Schools. Occasional visits by a tutor in this subject, to give demonstrations of method, can be arranged.
Apply to Director of Classes, 4th Floor, 256 Flinders St., Melbourne.


NOTES






CATALOGUE 0 TWO SHILLINGS
