

Bulletin No. 6
DESIGNING HOUSES
FOR AUSTRALIAN CLIMATES
COMMONWEALTH EXPERIMENTAL BUILDING STATION
PRICE : FIVE SHILLINGS


Bulletin No. 6
Designing Houses for Australian Climates
J. W. Drysdale, 8.E., A.M.I.E.Aust.
Second Edition, 1959
Crown Copyright
DEPARTMENT OF WORKS
COMMONWEALTH EXPERIMENTAL BUILDING STATION
Sydney, 1952


Preface
The functional design of dwellings in relation to climatic factors
was first discussed for Australian conditions in Bulletin No. 3,
which was published during 1947. In 1952, the opportunity
was taken through the publication of Bulletin No. 6 to expand
the treatment of the subject, and to incorporate conclusions
reached from relevant researches undertaken during the inter-
vening period. In particular, physiological aspects of the subject
are discussed in greater detail than was previously possible.
With the need to reprint Bulletin No. 6, another opportunity
has been presented to incorporate in a new edition of the Bulletin
further information which has come to hand through the Station's
continued studies.
Although the experimental studies which provide the technical
background to the recommendations made were conducted
solely in Australia, and the findings are intended to apply only
to Australian conditions, it is believed that the data will be
applicable in other geographical regions where comparable
climates prevail. Similarly, the recommendations, though per-
taining to houses, will nevertheless be applicable in broad
principle to small buildings of similar general construction and
form.
J. W. Drysdale,
1959.


Contents
Preface ii
Introduction iv
1. Physiological considerations 1
2. Climates of Australia 3
3. Some implications of climatic factors in design ... 6
4. Principal design considerations 8
5. Functional requirements 19
6. Orientation 30
7. Physical discomfort 32
8. Recommendations 36
9. References 38
Appendix A: Climatic data sheets for capital cities
Adelaide ... 41
Brisbane ... 42
Canberra ... 43
Hobart ... 44
Melbourne 45
Perth ... 46
Sydney ... 47


Introduction
It has been shown by controlled experiments that most people
would like to live in an environment having a dry-bulb tempera-
ture of approximately 65° F. during winter and of about 76° F.
during summer. Individual preferences vary, but not sufficiently
to invalidate the generalization. However, no climate is as
mild as this, and most impose seasonal extremes or maintain
high temperatures throughout the year which are known to
produce environments outside this comfort-range.
During winter, it is usually possible to be comfortable by
wearing appropriate clothing, or by heating rooms ; but when
the weather is hot, insufficient relief is afforded by reducing
clothing to a conventional minimum, and comfort cannot be
restored without resort to expensive and frequently complex
equipment. Extensive use of such equipment is obviously
impracticable, but it now appears, as the result of investigations
by the Station, that much can be done to offset the rigours of
climate by exercising careful control over design, and by the
selective use of building materials. Data now available for
Australian conditions permit indoor and outdoor environments
to be related for different forms of construction, and from this
it is possible to assess the economics of adapting construction to
suit climate, to make dwellings more comfortable habitations
throughout the year.
Much of the experimental background for statements contained
in this Bulletin is given in the Station’s Technical Study No. 34,
“ Climate and Design of Buildings—The Thermal Behaviour of
Dwellings,” and Special Report No. 11, “ Summer Temperatures
in Buildings.”


1. Physiological Considerations
The human body generates considerable quantities of heat as
the result of intake of food and complex chemical reactions, but
normally it is able to maintain a stable temperature of approxi-
mately 98-4° F. by adjusting the rate at which heat is lost to
its environment. This regulatory process is automatic over a
wide range of temperatures, but if heat is lost too fast or too
slowly, the temperature of the body is changed, and acute dis-
comfort results.
The exchange of heat occurs principally through the agencies
of conduction, radiation, and evaporation, each factor operating
independently of the others, but in a manner determined by the
environment. When the dry-bulb temperature of the environ-
ment is lower than that of the body, heat will flow by conduction
from the body to the air which surrounds it, but if the air is the
hotter, then the body will gain heat by conduction. The
direction in which heat is exchanged by radiation depends upon
the relative temperatures of the surface of the body and clothing,
and of the surfaces bounding the space occupied ; it is not
affected by the temperature of the air, and heat will flow to the
surface which is the cooler.
The rate of evaporation of perspiration, which determines the
rate at which heat can be lost through this agency, is governed
by the difference between the vapour pressure of the environment
and the vapour pressure at the surface of the skin ; it is not
influenced directly by the relative humidity of the atmosphere.
Thus, heat can always be lost from the body by evaporation,
but losses by conduction and radiation decrease progressively as
temperatures rise, and finally the latter factors cause heat to be
received instead of being lost. When the rate of movement of
air about the body is increased, the actions of conduction and
evaporation are strengthened without interfering with the
manner in which they are operating.
Many attempts have been made to develop means for com-
paring environments. Most have been based upon the subjective
reactions of human beings in environments for which dry-bulb
and wet-bulb temperatures and rates of air movement have been
known, and for which radiation has been expressed as mean
radiant temperature, or as globe-temperature. The best known
attempt employs the Effective Temperature Scale, developed
for the American Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers,
and is widely accepted. The working chart is one which allows
for the influences of dry-bulb and wet-bulb temperatures and
rates of air movement, but does not consider radiation or the
influences of clothing and rates of activity.
Although the Effective Temperature Scale was intended to
reveal environmental conditions which would produce the same
immediate subjective reactions, it has been used, perhaps
fallaciously, to gauge the continuing relative stresses imposed by


different atmospheres. It has been assumed for summer con-
ditions, for example, that if an environment has an Effective
Temperature lower than that of another, it is to be preferred
to the latter, irrespective of the actual temperatures and rates of
air movement prevailing.
The Station has demonstrated ( x ) ( 2 ) that the concept of
Effective Temperature is not applicable to some typical con-
ditions experienced in Australia, and has developed another
viewpoint which is considered to have greater practical applica-
tion for persons who are seated and nominally at rest. It
appears that such persons are able to maintain tolerable comfort
until the dry-bulb temperature of the environment has risen to
about 85° F., at or about which temperature tolerable comfort
gives way to discomfort. No practical purpose relevant to this
discussion is thought to be served by attempting to qualify the
degree of discomfort experienced at still higher temperatures
which do not approach the limits of human tolerance.
Similarly, there seems little merit in seeking to differentiate
between levels of winter discomfort induced by cold conditions ;
human beings react unfavourably towards any conditions which
cause thermal discomfort.
Since the attitude of the occupant of a house to his or her
thermal environment must be regarded as the true reflection of
the adequacy of construction, or winter heating system, for the
climate concerned, temperatures occurring indoors, and their
relation to desirable levels, are of paramount importance as
design factors. The subject is discussed further in section 7.


2. Climates of Australia
The climatological subdivision of Australia which the Station
has adopted is one which considers only those differences in
climate which are capable of being reflected in design, or warrant
making some special provision. Other classifications are seen
to be too detailed, and it is apparent that small variations in
climate would not make any significant impact upon indoor
environments.
There are seen to be three major climatic zones : the hot-
humid zone in which temperatures remain high throughout the
year, and their daily range is small ; the hot-arid zone in which
both the daily and the seasonal ranges of temperature are wide ;
and the temperate zone which also experiences wide ranges of
diurnal and seasonal temperatures, at lower temperatures than
for the hot-arid zone, but still resulting in moderately hot
summers and cold winters. These temperature-characteristics are
illustrated below :
Hot-Humid Zone
Summer : High daytime dry-bulb temperatures (85 to 95° F.).
High dry-bulb temperatures at night (75 to 85° F.j.
High relative humidity day and night (70 to 80 per
cent).
Winter : Warm to hot days (75 to 85° F.).
Mild nights (60 to 70° F.).
General : Heavy summer rainfall ; dry winter.
Small diurnal temperature range, particularly
during summer (10 to 15° F.).
Hot-Arid Zone
Summer : Very high daytime dry-bulb temperatures (95 to
110° F.).
Hot nights (70 to 80° F.).
Low relative humidity day and night (20 to 35 per
cent).
Prolonged heat waves ; hot, dry winds.
Winter : Warm to hot days (65 to 80° F.).
Cool to cold nights (40 to 55° F.).
General : Irregular, low rainfall, occurring principally in
summer.
Large diurnal and seasonal variations in tempera
ture (20 to 35° F.).
Temperate Zone
Summer ; High daytime dry-bulb temperatures (85 to 95° F.).
Moderate dry-bulb temperatures at night (55 to
65° F.).
Moderate humidity (30 to 40 per cent).
Winter : Cool to cold days (50 to 60° F.).
Cold nights (35 to 45° F.).


1(5 KO 125 150 155 MO 145 ISO
I i i l 1 1 "" I i
- ' - 5
0T& OfV. J & - 10
DAIWIN aXL
Broome J***J"**J***J“ ",* * 1 I * T I •
Pori- Median I'.'. \ 'J'. ! ."
Bo‘ r :::;:; :J::;: :4WW:: : -*
J 2.. Alice Springs f
!••••• 1 i Lonoreocb • • rPy??t8fl .
I j ( • . nockhomproo
o r ! .‘ ‘ ; : ; ; •' W ' l ' unQ ; : ; ; ; ; • • • ; i \ • ; • ;; ; ; • yOedraciaHxa* * f .■■■*■■■;
'• Gerald Ion /»■ •— — «-_• &WSS^nS|j
1 . . iCook - t-.-j-
to??"”;:;: if< Q jg°9 r !'«::::;: \ I;;:::;:;::::;::;::: ( ::; : oll* 0^2 r^: W
tll'oi:: ::;;:;; -^^T^koi hi«; 00 <-2ag~fk* ji ;y: 50
PERTH6;;; ,o o o o o V-edunOV a. .. . .fori- Augush e Armidole •:;« ; A
l“U; »0OO00 • ■ • ■ • Yl o O O •' f 0 j' CO O O O o o o.. - :. fy
fi o o.o 00000/ \ o o -ytoooo • ■ -oooo Dubbo • o o o; jojjj.j L|„
Y oy fa oooobooooooo n o.,oo g e o.: ::vS^ asHe
pl i foAAOLLAlDL-sa p ? f o o oDamursro .::-.:r
s sis o°fe r o a o o^flFFittjirip iYDNEY
j- Wbony CP* S.S.So o ° |r ;&cXtf5E.RP,A
o i 1° 2 ° 0 2 S 0 ° °«2>«ncilfa ; J-■ ■/ -55
Warrnambool
>XX?vvN I Tropical humid
I la | Sub-tropical humid 5 I
: : :TT: » 2 Hoh arid ZeebanV^*7 LaUnC “ 1 ' 0n " 4 °
000000 % 7a Dry uoorm lemperak ia \
« ~ 5 Temperate
y *■ j » 5a Cool femperahe
1 1 1 I 1 1 1 1 1 1
110 115 120 125 130 155 140 1+5 150 155
Fig. 1. A BROAD CLASSIFICATION OF AUSTRALIAN CLIMATES


General : Rainfall throughout the year, but maximum
precipitation during winter.
Considerable diurnal temperature range (20 to 30°
F.) and a seasonal range '.of about 30° F.
It is common experience that the movements of air masses
across the continent cause some areas to experience climatic
conditions peculiar to two or more climatic zones. Such areas,
for the purpose of the Station’s classification of climates, have
been designated as sub-zones of the climate whose character-
istics predominate. The geographical extent of the climatic
zones are shown on the map, Fig. 1. Except where a range of
mountains or another topographical feature accentuates a change
in climate, one climate merges into another, and no firm bound-
aries actually exist.
Another effect of elevation upon climate is to temper daytime
temperatures, and often, to decrease sharply temperatures at
night.
Although temperatures have been used, for convenience, as a
basis for classifying climates —and temperature is an important
design factor—other features of climates must be considered when
designing buildings. For example, it is essential to know the
quarter and the strength of prevailing breezes which must be
utilized for ventilation, and to know whether or not winds are hot,
cool, or cold, and if they are accompanied by dust or rain. The
prevalence of cloud must also be considered, principally on a
seasonal basis, to ascertain if sunshine is a feature of the winter
climate.
Micro-climatology will enter into individual problems, but the
subject is too complex to be discussed here, and it is the respon-
sibility of the designer to acquaint himself with site conditions,
and to make decisions within the framework of recommendations
made in later sections. The Station, however, has consolidated
and published meteorological data for purposes of design, ( 3 ) for
capital cities and a large number of towns in Australia. Data
for capital cities are given in Appendix A.


3. Some Implications of Climatic Factors in Design
Site conditions vary sufficiently to preclude the possibility that
general recommendations will be applicable directly to the
particular case. It is desirable, therefore, to analyse the major
climatic factors to be considered in design, and to place each in
its proper perspective for the guidance of those who must in-
evitably make compromise decisions.
Dry-bulb Temperature
The dry-bulb temperature of the outdoor environment is
usually registered by means of a glass-stem thermometer located
within a ventilated screen, to ensure that the temperature shown
by the thermometer fairly represents the temperature of the air,
and that the reading is unaffected by radiant heat. Shade dry-
bulb temperature is a complex design factor because of its vari-
ability, and it warrants examination for diurnal changes and
seasonal variations.
If the diurnal change is small, as in the hot-humid zone, it can
be assumed that indoor temperatures will not at any time depart
significantly from the outdoor mean ; but if the range is large,
as in the hot-arid and the temperate climatic zones, the conse-
quent indoor temperatures may depart significantly from the
outdoor mean, and changes in temperature indoors will be greater
than in the hot-humid zone for the same form of construction.
From the seasonal viewpoint, a small seasonal change in tempera-
ture is usually associated with a mild to warm winter, and there
are no problems of winter heating ; but if the change is large, the
actual winter temperatures encountered will determine the
provisions which should be made.
Relative Humidity
The relative humidity of an environment, which expresses as a
percentage the amount of water vapour present in the air to the
amount which can be contained in air saturated at the same
temperature, is assessed from its dry-bulb and wet-bulb tempera-
tures ; the latter temperature is frequently registered in the same
way as dry-bulb temperature, except that the bulb of the thermo-
meter is clothed with an absorbent fabric kept thoroughly wet
with water. If the relative humidity is high when the dry-bulb
temperature is high, conditions are oppressively humid, and
persons seek relief by increasing the rate of air movement about
themselves.
Hot-humid conditions foster the growth of mould on the
surfaces of materials susceptible to attack. There is some
to show that the growth of mould is rapid under
favourable conditions when the dry-bulb temperature is higher
than 75° F., and the relative humidity exceeds 70 per cent.
Prevailing Winds
The quarter and the strength of prevailing winds are significant,
and provide useful data when analysed to establish typical
conditions for summer and winter. The analysis for summer, if


extended to consider separately the wind data for mornings,
afternoons, and evenings, will indicate suitable orientations for
good natural ventilation for various rooms at times when they
will normally be occupied. It will reveal, also, the quarter of
unfavourable winds, hot or cold, and nominate where openings
should be capable of being closed tightly against adverse con-
ditions.
In the humid tropics, wind storms are of some importance,
because they impose critical loads upon structures, and often
bring with them rain which tests the weathertightness of con-
struction. Frequently, however, squalls do not blow from the
same quarter as the breezes which are relied upon to promote
ventilation indoors.
Sunshine
Heat is received by radiation from the sun in quantities which
are dependent upon atmospheric conditions such as cloud and
haze, and not upon the prevailing dry-bulb temperature of the
air. The effect of solar radiation is to increase the temperature
of sunlit surfaces, thereby accelerating the rate at which heat
will flow into the body of the material. In the case of a house,
this effect is favourable during winter, but is undesirable in
summer.
Another aspect of radiation from the sun is the diffuse com-
ponent which provides light, and the designer should consider
requirements for day lighting in conjunction with those for
excluding or admitting the direct component, sunshine.< 5 >
Rainfall
Rain is not usually regarded as a design factor, yet it can have
a direct bearing upon the planning of a house. Rates of pre-
cipitation will affect drainage arrangements, and the constancy
of falls with high wind will influence the weatherproofness
necessary for the construction. Light driving rain continuing
over an extended period can be more penetrating than a sharp
tropical storm. Rainfall will also have some bearing upon the
capacity of storage tanks to be provided for water in districts
where reticulated supply is not available. The principal factor
will be the period between falls which can be relied upon to
replenish supplies.
Other Factors
It is not proposed to discuss at length the problems which are
introduced by frosts and snow, but experience has shown that the
possibility that water may freeze in pipes and burst them has
often been neglected by Australians, with consequent mishaps
and damage by flooding. Similarly, insufficient attention has
been given at times to the provision of vapour barriers at or near
the indoor surfaces of external walls when consistently cold
conditions prevail ; the absence of vapour barriers in the circum-
stances can lead to damaging condensation.
Although insect pests do not constitute a climatic factor, their
prevalance is so intimately related to climate that they, and
protective measures against them, deserve attention.


4. Principal Design Considerations
From the foregoing examination of Australian climates and of
the influence of each climatic factor upon building construction,
it will be seen that considerable relief from severe climatic con-
ditions should be possible if simple principles can be observed.
These principles are discussed in subsequent paragraphs in
relation to the climatic factors which were noted in the preceding
section.
Dry-bulb Temperature
In areas experiencing hot-arid to temperate climates, seasonal
variations in dry-bulb temperature outdoors are such that the
upper limit of temperature for comfort will be exceeded frequently
during summer, and temperatures during winter will often be
below the desirable level for winter comfort. Thus, both summer
and winter problems can be expected ; their relative severities
will vary with the locality concerned.
In the hot-humid climatic zone, the dry-bulb temperature of
the atmosphere is uncomfortably high throughout summer, and
many winter days are also very hot. Minimum temperatures
too, are relatively high during winter, and necessitate the placing
of emphasis upon hot conditions when designing for the humid
tropics.
The daily range of temperatures between minimum and
maximum should also enter into design considerations. If the
range is small (10 to 15° F.), as is the case in the hot-humid
climatic zone, it will have only limited influence upon indoor
environments, but where the range is consistently larger (20 to
35° F.), particularly during summer as in other climatic zones,
it will be undesirable to permit changes of similar magnitudes to
occur indoors.
Whenever the temperatures of indoor and outdoor surfaces
differ, heat will always flow through the construction towards
the surface having the lower temperature, and the quantity of
heat flowing will be related directly to the difference between the
temperatures. Thus, if the weather is hot, heat will flow into
a dwelling, but if it is colder outdoors than indoors, then heat will
flow outwards, such gain or loss of heat always being accompanied
by a change in temperature indoors unless equilibrium is main-
tained by artificial means.
However, there is some opportunity to control the resulting
flow of heat and change in temperature indoors, by the use of
thermal insulation or of some materials, particularly heavy-
weight ones such as bricks and concrete, which are able to store
or liberate large quantities of heat without the occurrence of a
major change in temperature within them. Thin sheet materials,
in contrast, are comparatively light in weight, and have not the
ability to gain or lose large quantities of heat with small changes
in temperature.
The foregoing is illustrated by Fig. 2, developed by the Station
from data compiled from temperature surveys which w'ere con-


Ff\
' l6 l 1 A 7 A\WW\ 1
e / / / "- LJ
s '//
s m. /y- 7 4--f- 4 j
r kJy 7
-e / /
_Q f
-5 12 ■
i. / \ "V>
-b / \l /
8 10 —f rf—L f-j-4 !
i / F F
§ / #
1 8 \"v~ ft fr
— 5ffl-
ts> „
-a 2+
_c
tr>
x
o
2 oil 11111 1.1 III [.Li! 11111111 lil 1 111 111 IJI 111.1111 LJ
80 85 90 95 100 105
BricU caviFy-itiall consFrucHon;
windows closed during day;
windows open during day.
-Timber-frame consFrucFion;
ceilings and exFernal walls
insulated; bare concreFe
floor; windows closed
during day.
Timber-frame consVrucVion;
ceilings and external malls
insuldredr windows closed
; windows closed
during day.
-Timber-frame consFrucFion*,
ceilings insulaFed; ujindoujs
closed during day.
-Timber-frame consFrucFion;
windows open during day.
Max. shade dry-bulb
FemperaFure
Fig. 2. THERMAL-BEHAVIOUR CHART
(Use and limitations of the chart are discussed on pages 8 and 10.)
- °F


ducted in thermal models, and in dwellings located in widely
separated districts throughout Australia. The chart provides
means for assessing the extent to which dry-bulb temperatures
at centrally located positions in dwellings will be lower than
outdoor dry-bulb temperatures during the hottest period of a
summer day. It is intended to apply only to Australian dom-
estic construction of traditional form, in which walls and parti-
tions bear conventional relationships*, and to climatic conditions
which provide a diurnal range of at least 20° F. dry-bulb. The
likely corresponding thermal behaviour of non-traditional
construction can be approximated by interpolation of relative
weights per square foot of area of external walls, so long as
external walls and partitions again correspond with respect to
relative weights.
It will be noted from the chart that the transmission of heat by
ventilating air can offset the thermal benefit inherent in the use
of thermal insulation in timber-frame houses. The corresponding
effect in houses of brick or other heavyweight construction is
much less pronounced.
Unfortunately, the characteristic of heavyweight construction
which provides cool conditions indoors during hot days still
operates at night, and results in unfavourably high temperatures
indoors when it might be mild or cool outdoors. Frame con-
struction, by contrast, heats rapidly and is hot during the day,
but it cools relatively rapidly at night and thereby provides
better night-time conditions than heavyweight construction. In
winter, the rapid response of frame construction to heating
operates favourably, and during sunny days frame construction
is warmer than heavyweight construction ; but frame construc-
tion cannot retain heat so well, and is colder than heavyweight
construction on winter mornings, unless heating is continuous.
These characteristic thermal behaviours of brick and of frame
construction are well understood, and illustrate that optimum
conditions cannot be provided by one weight of construction.
Relative Humidity
Unless special equipment is available, it is not possible to
control relative humidity independently of dry-bulb temperature.
The relative humidity of an environment will increase if its
dry-bulb temperature is reduced, and vice versa.
At winter temperatures, the level of relative humidity does not
materially affect human comfort. This is attributable to the
relatively low rate at which moisture exudes from the body, and
to the ability of air, under normal conditions, to absorb the
moisture as quickly as it is liberated. During hot days, perspira-
tion is produced much more rapidly, particularly after the onset
of sweat-gland activity, and at this stage high vapour pressure
affects the rate at which perspiration can evaporate, and thereby
influences the cooling effect to be obtained.
* For example, frame walls and frame partitions clad with light boarding
or sheeting, or 11-in. brick cavity walls and 4|-in. brick partitions ; sus-
pended timber floors, pitched roof with fibrous-plaster ceilings below.


Prevailing Winds
It is well recognized that air movement is an adjunct to
comfort during hot weather, and that careful control of air move-
ment is necessary during winter if discomfort by draughts is to
be avoided. Thus, it is essential that the designer should take
cognizance of winds on a seasonal basis, and consider, further, the
strength and direction of prevailing breezes during summer for
various times of day and night. During summer particularly,
breezes do not necessarily blow from the same quarter throughout
the day, and a proper understanding of wind conditions will
enable windows to be located in appropriate positions for best
utilization of air movement indoors.
The directions whence winds blow, and the normal wind
velocities, may influence the types of window to be used.
Double-hung windows, hoppers, and top-hung sashes all partially
obstruct the available opening, and are consequently most
effective when breezes are blowing strongly normal to the wall in
which they are fitted. This is true also of louvres, except that
louvres provide greater effective area per unit area of opening.
Alternatively, casements may be used ; they have the advantage
that sashes can be swung clear of the opening, and can be adjusted
to serve as wind scoops should the breeze be blowing obliquely
to the wall in which they are situated.
When arranging for air to be admitted into a house, it is equally
necessary to make provision for it to escape on the leeward side —
otherwise air will not enter in reasonable quantities—and to
ensure that air movement can be induced throughout each room.
If the windows and the door of a room are situated in adjoining
walls, it can be expected that the principal flow of air will be
directly between the windows and the door, and that the remain-
der of the room will be ventilated indifferently in consequence.
Air will be ineffectually directed, also, if sills of windows are too
high. This is of particular importance in the humid tropics,
where sills should be sufficiently low to ensure the passage of air
about persons who are seated or are reclining.
Another practice which should be avoided is that of supporting
partitions clear of floor and ceiling. The openings thus provided
above and below partitions can prejudice ventilation by per-
mitting air to escape during its passage through rooms ; they
further result in loss of privacy between rooms.
It is desirable that prevailing breezes should cause air in the
kitchen to pass outdoors directly. It is common experience that
neglect of this consideration is responsible for the dispersion of
heat and odours from cooking and the preparation of food
throughout the house. The same considerations apply to
W.C.’s, for which there is greater emphasis in most by-laws upon
permanently ventilating the compartment than upon preventing
the dispersion of odours by insisting upon a tightly fitting door.
Figs. 3 and 4 illustrate the direction and frequency of prevailing
winds for a considerable number of areas throughout Australia.


Wind direction towards centre of rose.
Black bars represent morning winds.
Open bars represent afternoon winds.
Lengths of bars represent relative frequencies of direction.
Numerals on bars indicate percentage of winds from the particular direction which exceed 20 m.p.h.
Figures in the centre circle represent the percentage of calms, morning on top, afternoon below.
Fig. 3.
PREVAILING SUMMER WINDS FOR AUSTRALIA—DECEMBER,
JANUARY, FEBRUARY
Based on Research Bulletin No. 5, Department of Home Security, Australia.


White cellulose paint
0-18
Whitewashed galvanized iron
0*22
Glazed white bricks ...
0-26
Yellow cellulose paint
0-33
Glazed cream bricks ...
0-36
Orange cellulose paint
0-41
Aluminium
0-54
Clay bricks and tiles (red) ...
0-60
New galvanized iron ...
0-64
Cement tiles (grey) ...
0-65
Aged asbestos cement
0-75
Green cellulose paint
0-79
Bituminous felt
0-88
Aged galvanized iron
0-90
Black mat surface
0-97
Sunshine
It is considered necessary, in many quarters, that sunshine
should be admitted to every habitable space for at least one hour
each day. The basis of this requirement is somewhat obscure,
and the practice would be inappropriate for a hot climate. A
preferable arrangement would be to utilize the seasonal change
in the path of the sun to provide sunshine indoors during winter,
if the winters are cold, and to prevent the entry of sunshine
during summer. Best seasonal control of sunshine is obtainable
on a northern aspect, where it is possible to observe this functional
requirement without the need to resort to adjustable shades ;
a north wall is effectively shaded by eaves with a normal width
of overhang.
Penetration of direct sunshine into rooms results in a direct
gain of heat indoors. An indirect effect, not less important, is
that of the accelerated rate at which heat flows into a dwelling
when external surfaces become sunlit. When solar radiation
falls upon a material, the amount of heat which is absorbed by it
is proportional to the absorptivity of the material. Typical
absorption coefficients of various paints and materials are listed
below :*
Solar radiation which is absorbed by a material will cause the
material to attain a temperature in excess of that of the air close
to it. The maximum excess (°F.) which is theoretically possible
at the surface of the material can be assessed from the factor
where —
a = surface absorption coefficient (see preceding list).
k s surface coefficient. (This coefficient has a value of
approximately 4 to 6 B,Th.U./sq. ft./hr. for sur-
faces exposed to light to moderate breezes respect-
ively.)
I = intensity of solar radiation. (The value of I varies
with the elevation of the sun and other factors, but
representative maximum values are 300 for hori-
zontal surfaces and 200 for vertical surfaces, both
expressed as B.Th.U./sq. ft./hr.)
* Based on H. E. Becket, “ Exclusion of Solar Heat,” Institution of
Heating and Ventilating Engineers Journal, Dec., 1934 and Apr., 1935,
Table IV.


Wind direction towards centre of rose.
Black bars represent morning winds.
Open bars represent afternoon winds.
Lengths of bars represent relative frequencies of direction
Numerals on bars indicate percentage of winds from the particular direction which exceed 20 m.p.h.
Figures in the centre circle represent the percentage of calms, morning on top, afternoon below.
Fig. 4.
PREVAILING WINTER WINDS FOR AUSTRALIA—JUNE,
JULY, AUGUST
Based on Research Bulletin No. 5, Department of Home Security, Australia.


TYPE OF SHADING DEVICE
Actual temperatures attained will usually be substantially less
than those computed, because the simplified formula makes no
allowance for heat which is conducted inwards from the surface
of the material in service, or for the roughness of the material,
which affects the loss of heat to the air. In practice, walls of
dwellings might attain a temperature of 130° F. while sunlit,
and pitched roofs might heat to about 150° F. during hot summer
days when the dry-bulb temperature of the air is about 100 to
110° F. Thus, the rate of flow of heat into a dwelling, which is
proportional to the temperature differences prevailing, can be
increased several times when walls are sunlit. The principal
effects are twofold: firstly, the temperatures of internal surfaces
will rise, and secondly, heat will be transferred to the air in
contact with them.
During summer, this heating effect is obviously undesirable,
but the additional heat is advantageous in winter. Automatic
control can be provided by deciduous creepers whose foliage is
shed during the cold months when shading is not required.
Shading may be provided alternatively by trellis, shades, louvres,
or vegetation, but frequently these are not strictly functional in
their behaviour.
Thermal insulation incorporated in external walls (and in roof-
ceiling construction) serves to impede the inward flow of heat in
summer, and it will similarly impede the outward flow of heat in
winter. However, such insulation will necessarily retard the
cooling of a house after a hot day, and reduce the warming effect
of winter sunshine in rooms with a northern aspect.
It is essential that ventilation in summer should not be pre-
judiced by the manner in which shade is provided. This is
particularly important in the treatment of windows, which must
continue to admit adequate daylight, and air for purposes of
ventilation. From the radiation viewpoint, it is preferable to
intercept sunshine externally ; once the radiation has penetrated
the glass, the heat which is not reflected by the shading device
is retained in the room. The relative efficacies of different
shading devices are apparent from the following tabulation of
some typical values of solar heat transmitted through shaded
windows :
Internal curtains
Internal roller blinds, fully drawn*
Internal Venetian blind, slats at 45°
External canvas awning
External louvred blind or shutter
* Transmission increases as the colour
80 to 90
40 to 80
45 to 75
25 to 30
15 to 20
of the blind darkens
TRANSMISSION AS COMPARED
WITH UNSHADED WINDOW, %
(All such shading devices will exclude some daylight also, and
due allowance should accordingly be made if it is desired to
maintain a particular level of illumination indoors. Often, the
reduced illumination occasioned by the use of shades is not
disadvantageous at times when the shades need to be in service.)


Solar radiation falling on roofs will produce effects similar to
those noted with respect to walls, but these effects will be more
severe and prolonged than those arising from walls. It is usually
not convenient to shade roofs, but there are instances of roofs
shaded by means of a second layer of sheeting fixed clear of the
main roof, and of flat concrete roofs protected from solar radia-
tion by precast concrete slabs laid on blocks to provide a free
airway between the roof and the slabs.
Special mention is made of the use of verandas to provide shade.
In Australia, verandas have come to be regarded as the proper
means for shading walls, and are now traditional, particularly in
country areas. They are often provided somewhat indiscrimin-
ately, and frequently defeat their purpose by actually detracting
from comfort. There appear to be two main practices ; one is
to provide verandas on three or more sides of a dwelling, and the
other to provide front and back verandas only, irrespective of
orientation. Usually, the verandas are unlined, and frequently
sections of them are enclosed with single-thickness sheeting to
provide additional accommodation.
While verandas will shade walls effectively during the hot part
of the day, the sun may shine strongly beneath them when at
low altitudes, during the morning and the late afternoon. At
these times, vertical surfaces receive solar radiation at maximum
intensities, and frequently canvas or other shades are brought
into service to intercept the radiation. These shades are effect-
ive, but they reduce daylight indoors, and impede air movement
which may be relied upon for ventilation. When verandas are
not lined, air beneath them becomes heated above the tempera-
ture of shade air. This leads to hot air being blown indoors by
the prevailing breeze.
A more direct approach to the shading problem, if site con-
ditions will permit, is to plan principal rooms to face north, to
enable the eaves to shade the north wall and windows in it during
summer, and to shade east and west walls, as required, by
trellis, vegetation, or similar devices. It is not suggested, how-
ever, that verandas should be omitted. They serve a positive
need, but a balanced view would tend to restrict verandas to
requirements for outdoor-living and for protected play-areas for
children. An additional consideration is that of a covered drying
area, which is very desirable in the humid tropics.
Rainfall
In southern Australia, where rain falls principally during
winter, a few only of the problems associated with rainfall are
encountered. Because the weather is usually cold, it is custom-
ary for dwellings to remain closed against adverse conditions, and
for water from roofs and sites to be drained in the most expedi-
tious manner. If rain falls principally during the hot season,
which is the condition in the hot-humid zone and in the hot-arid
climatic zone, an entirely different problem arises, and requires
an adequate solution. The principal new factor, which is acute
where the climate is hot and humid, is that of maintaining the
opposing conditions of weathertightness of construction and
liberal natural ventilation indoors.


Basically, it is necessary to know if rain falls steadily over
extended periods or if it falls as heavy downpours, and whether or
not precipitation is accompanied by strong wind. If rain is
usually not accompanied by wind, there is no special problem,
and the practice of fitting hoods over windows and the use of
louvres or top-hung sashes will suffice. Driving rain will necessi-
tate providing greater protection, and place emphasis upon top-
hung sashes which overlap the openings they serve. It is
possible, however, that rain squalls might blow from a quarter
opposed to that of the prevailing breeze, and tightly fitting
windows or hoppers might then be used on the storm quarter
only.
Rain which falls on a roof is usually collected in gutters and is
drained from the site through pipes. In the humid tropics,
however, gutters are frequently omitted, to avoid the formation
of breeding-pools for mosquitoes, and rainwater is permitted to
discharge directly on to the ground or on to concrete aprons.
This practice needs to be considered in conjunction with the
weathertightness of the construction, because the water cascading
from the roof can be blown against the structure. Despite the
foregoing, there will be occasions when gutters must be provided
for the catchment of rainwater. Under such circumstances, it
would be desirable to grade gutters more steeply than is usual, to
increase the rate of flow as well as to make drainage more com-
plete, and to fit mosquito-wire to permanent openings in all
storage tanks.
After consideration of the preceding general discussion, it will
be realized that orientation is an important factor in the function-
al design of a dwelling. It is important that rooms should be
located to receive favourable breezes at times when the rooms
are normally occupied ; the dwellings should be oriented to
provide maximum self-shading during summer, and principal
rooms should be oriented to permit ventilation to be maintained
during summer rainstorms. There is also some preference to
orient bedrooms away from the east to avoid disturbance of
occupants by early morning sun.
Insect Pests
Some reference has been made already to insect pests and to
the need for protection from them for occupants of a house.
There are two schools of thought : one favours the fitting of fly-
wire screens to all doors and windows ; the other prefers a
screened enclosure for evening-living areas, and sleeping beneath
mosquito nets, because it is difficult to screen a house effectively.
The latter procedure seems to have the greater support and
practical justification, and can be expected to afford superior
ventilation, which is a prime consideration when nights are hot.
In the hot-arid and the temperate zones, flies which abound by
day are often greater pests than mosquitoes, and the screening of
doors and windows is amply justified. The screens will also
exclude flying beetles and insects which are encountered on
summer nights. Reference is made also to termites and to the
need to guard against their entry into a structure. This subject
has already been discussed at length by others.


Bush fires
Bush fires are unfortunately a feature of those Australian
regions where natural vegetation abounds and a hot-dry season
is experienced.
As it is often impracticable to isolate a house so that it will be
beyond the possible range of burning material borne by a strong
wind, it follows that openings in construction will constitute a
hazard in this context, unless they are capable of being closed
tightly, or preferably, are protected by fine wire mesh. Should
flying brands effect entry via unprotected openings in roofs,
gable ends, eaves soffits, or to sub-floor spaces, the properties of
materials used in the construction of the house can well be of
little practical importance as a fire safeguard. Indeed, it can be
suggested that if a bush fire approaches a house so closely that
external woodwork is ignited by radiated heat, it is problematical
whether a brick house or a timber-frame house will be the more
vulnerable in the circumstances, in the absence of adequate
fire-fighting facilities to attack immediately an incipient con-
flagration.


5. Functional Requirements
It would be ideal if dwellings could be constructed with thermal
characteristics which would protect the occupants from all
unfavourable aspects of the climate, yet enable full advantage to
be taken of factors which are favourable to human comfort. No
such solution is possible, and climatic conditions judged to cause
greatest thermal disabilities should thus constitute the bases for
initial design.
Dry-bulb Temperature
The magnitudes and ranges of dry-bulb temperatures are
generally limiting factors in design, and govern the choice and
arrangement of materials for optimum conditions indoors. This
is particularly true for hot-arid to temperate climatic conditions
where the diurnal range of temperature is 20 to 35° F. in summer,
and seasonal extremes differ by 60° F. or more.
Under such conditions the indoor environment should be
controlled to bear the following relationships to outdoor con-
ditions ;
{a) Summer day—cooler than outdoors.
( h) Summer night —as cool as outdoors.
(c) Winter day—as warm as or warmer than outdoors.
( d ) Winter nights—much warmer than outdoors.
(c) Winter mornings—much warmer than outdoors.
Condition (a) can be achieved by the use of heavyweight,
shaded, or insulated construction, as discussed in the preceding
section ; the heavier, or better shaded or insulated the construc-
tion, the cooler will be the indoor environment by day, provided
that there is no undue heat gain through windows. Condition
( b) requires that the construction shall cool rapidly after a hot
day, and this can be approximated without resort to mechanical
ventilation only in frame construction which is clad lightly and
is well ventilated. The quick thermal response of frame con-
struction will make (c) possible on sunny days, but if winter
days are cloudy, then artificial heating will be necessary to
achieve conditions (c) and ( d ). When heating is intermittent,
frame construction responds more rapidly than heavyweight
construction (e.g., brick or concrete construction), but it has less
heat-storage capacity than heavyweight construction ; hence
the latter construction is to be preferred to satisfy condition (<?).
If summer is severe and more prolonged than winter, heavy-
weight construction would be desirable for kitchen, dining room,
and living room, which are occupied by day, and lightweight
frame construction for bedrooms and evening-living spaces.
Composite construction is not commonly used, but there does not
seem to be any reason why it should not be developed.
When winter is the more severe season, either form of construc-
tion can provide comfortable conditions indoors when the natural
thermal characteristics of the construction are aided by wisely
selected heating appliances ; one form of construction is not
eminently superior to the other.


Similarly, the thermal characteristics of materials of construc-
tion need not be a prime consideration in districts experiencing
mild-temperate climatic conditions.
The criteria to avoid physical discomfort are to maintain the
temperature of the indoor environment below about 85° F. during
summer, and to provide a temperature of not less than 65° F.
indoors during winter. For optimum comfort conditions, it is
desirable, also, that the temperatures of surfaces bounding a
room should not be markedly different from that of the air in
the room.
Whenever a difference in temperature exists between indoors
and outdoors, the temperatures of internal surfaces of walls,
floors, and ceilings will differ from that of air in the room ; those
of walls and ceilings will be higher when it is hotter outdoors, and
lower when it is colder outdoors ; floors will usually be at a lower
temperature than that of the air in the room. The actual
temperatures prevailing will determine whether the human body
will gain heat from the surfaces, or lose heat to them. The winter
problem of cold surfaces can also be acute, because cold surfaces
promote loss of heat from the body by radiation, and chill the
air in contact with them.
Theoretical considerations suggest that appropriate treatment
would be to screen hot or cold surfaces from a room by means of
drapes, or by panelling or sheet material having good insulating
properties ; such materials retard the flow of heat to or from the
offending surfaces. During winter, this treatment is very
effective, and in addition facilitates the heating-up of a room
when a fire is lit or other heating is operated, but in summer,
when heat is transferred in considerable quantities through open
windows, wall surfaces so treated continue to behave in this
fashion, and can warm up rapidly, independently of the thermal
characteristics of the backing wall.
At first sight it might be thought that it would be preferable to
limit ventilation during summer, and that keeping windows
closed would promote more comfortable conditions indoors.
This is true to some extent, but when the temperature of air
indoors rises above about 80° F., occupants of a house will seek
additional air movement. If this can be provided conveniently
by a fan which agitates the air in a room, a considerable measure
of relief is usually possible, but many households rely upon
opening windows to outdoor breezes, even if somewhat hotter
that the air indoors, to provide the relief sought. This procedure
is not paradoxical, as might appear to be the case.
Thermal insulation, when incorporated in the shell of a
dwelling, will retard the rate at which heat is received by or lost
from the lining of a room, but the changes in surface temperatures
which will result will depend further upon the thermal properties
of the lining material and the quantity of heat which can be
exchanged for unit change in temperature. An earlier reference
was that lightweight material responds more readily than heavy-
weight materials to exchange of heat ; therefore lightweight
materials will be valuable for lining rooms in which rapid changes
in surface temperatures are desired.


In circumstances where the materials of construction have
been chosen particularly for durability or for structural reasons,
thermal insulation can often be applied to the construction
to retard the flow of heat. Thermal insulation is available
commercially in Australia in three principal forms, namely,
mineral-wool-type insulation, reflective-type insulation, and
insulating boards.
Insulation of the mineral-wool type is usually available in the
form of granules, batts, and blankets ; some suppliers have
equipment for the pneumatic placement of insulation in the walls
and roof spaces of houses already erected. Reflective insulation
is available in several forms and grades ; its efficacy depends on
the use of one or more bright metallic-foil surfaces interposed as a
detached diaphragm between a hot or cold surface and the
surface to be protected thermally. Softboards, normally
marketed as wallboards, are also insulating boards ; other types
of insulating board often require to be faced or be otherwise
protected in service, as they may not provide durable wearing
surfaces.
It should also be recognized that a bright foil surface which is
fixed upward facing in a horizontal plane will gradually become
coated with dust, and that its ability to reflect heat will according-
ly be reduced. Although this is unfortunate, the overall
insulating effect is not impaired seriously, because the method of
fixing reflective insulation usually provides at least one air space
which did not exist previously, and this air space itself provides
a useful measure of thermal insulation. Those types of reflective
insulation which have a paper base should preferably be faced
both sides with foil or some other impervious film.
Because thermal insulation will retard the rate at which heat
will flow from or to a material, it provides means for regulating
the temperatures of the material through which the heat flows.
An illustration of this principle for winter conditions is the
increase in temperature of internal surfaces of a heated room
which will occur when the wall is insulated. Some of the heat
which would have been lost in the uninsulated condition is
retained within the material, and produces a rise in temperature
throughout it. For the summer condition, when the direction
of flow of heat is reversed, thermal insulation can reduce the rate
at which heat is received by a material, and consequently prevent
its attaining a temperature as high as that which would have
been attained in the uninsulated condition.
Windows are difficult to insulate effectively, and double
glazing is usually adopted when the winter climate is particularly
severe. Effective protection for less severe winter conditions
can be provided by heavy drapes or curtains which extend to the
floor, or fit the windows closely. Drapes or curtains of this
nature will prevent air in the room from circulating against the
cold glass, and they provide surfaces which will respond quickly
to intermittent heating. Double glazing does not reduce
materially the transmission of solar radiation.
The foregoing considerations of transmission of heat apply to
floors also, but smaller temperature differences are usually


associated with the same indoor and outdoor conditions. Firstly,
the temperature of air reaching the underside of a suspended
floor will approximate that of outdoor air for a timber-frame
house without footing walls or equivalent protection for the
under-floor space, but if the sub-floor space is protected, which
is the case for a brick house, air beneath the house will be appreci-
ably warmer. Secondly, open fires and radiators, and other
heating appliances which introduce heat into a room above floor
level, fail to influence directly the temperature of the surface of a
floor, which therefore often remains 5° F. or more cooler than air
in the occupied zone of the room.
Thermal insulation alone will not prevent traditional floors
from being relatively cold, because air will convect naturally and
maintain warmest conditions at upper levels in a room. How-
ever, the introduction of heat into a floor or at floor level will
reduce the temperature difference between floor and ceiling, and
provide more equable conditions.
Concrete slab floors in contact with the ground do not vary in
temperature to nearly the same extent as do suspended timber
floors. In consequence, they serve to stabilize the temperature
of indoor environments. Nevertheless the temperatures of
concrete slab floors on the ground can, in winter, fall below the
comfort limit discussed in section 7. The response of such floors
to convective heating is slow ; this characteristic of concrete
slab floors, though a favourable one in summer, is to some extent
undesirable in winter. However, it so happens that the natural
thermal characteristics of a floor are masked substantially by the
application of floor coverings, particularly by those such as felts
and carpets, which afford a measure of thermal insulation.
Suspended concrete floors generally lack inherent thermal merit.
The preceding paragraphs have considered indoor environments
during winter when a room has been warmed, and stable con-
ditions have been reached. These considerations pertain to
situations involving continuous heating during winter, which is
common practice in Europe and the United States, and data for
such regions are broadly applicable in Australia, but when
heating is intermittent, as is customary in many parts of Aus-
tralia, other physical factors operate and assume importance.
When space heating is intermittent, the heat capacity of the
construction will influence the rate at which heat introduced into
a room will raise the temperature of air within the room, and the
rate at which the temperature of the air will fall when the source
of heat is removed, in much the same way as the indoor environ-
ment is influenced in summer.
Because heavyweight construction, of which 11-in. brick
cavity-wall construction is an example, is able to absorb large
quantities of heat without an appreciable rise of temperature
within it, a room with heavyweight walls will warm slowly, as
compared with a room with walls of lightweight sheeting.
However, heavyweight construction, once it is warmed, will
liberate heat for some hours after the original source of heat has
been removed, and can provide comfortable conditions after air
in an equivalent room in timber-frame construction has ceased


to be warm. Thus, when heating is intermittent, and a fire is
lighted during evenings only, brick construction will provide still
warmer morning conditions than frame construction.
One method of assisting air within heavyweight construction to
heat more rapidly is to line walls with lightweight sheeting, such
as softboard, or with wood panelling. (The former is a soft
material and therefore has not the wearing qualities of plaster
or cement render.) Alternatively, heavy-quality wallpaper
might be applied to walls ; it has been found to be similarly
effective to a measurable degree.
If the winter climate is essentially cloudy or overcast, reliance
should be placed upon heating a dwelling continuously from
within if comfortable environmental conditions are to be main-
tained indoors ; no special significance need then be attached to
the weight of construction involved. However, if winter days
are sunny, timber-frame construction will respond much more
quickly to heat received by solar radiation than will heavyweight
construction, and to that extent the former can be expected to
provide more favourable conditions indoors during the day. This
is confirmed by experimental evidence( 10 ) which shows that
traditional frame construction is warmer than brick construction
from mid-morning to late afternoon on sunny winter days.
There is also some evidence to show that the sluggish warming
of brick construction can be partially offset by freely admitting
winter sunshine through large north-facing windows, and that
the benefit of the heat received indoors by the penetration of
sunshine is not lost at night, provided that heavy internal drapes
are fitted to the windows. It appears, also, that heat reflected
from the ground and the sky can be intercepted in summer by
shutters or louvred blinds fitted externally.
It has already been noted than thermal insulation, incorporated
in the shell of a structure, retards the flow of heat through the
construction and thereby reduces the magnitude of the solar
effect indoors ; thus, an uninsulated house, when subjected to
solar radiation, will heat more rapidly than an equivalent insul-
ated house, and will attain a higher temperature. Insulated
rooms, therefore, if not heated from within, will not be as warm
during sunny winter days as equivalent uninsulated rooms.
These effects are most pronounced in rooms where windows are
closed to exclude cold wind, and are distinct from summer
considerations when windows are normally opened for ventilation.
Relative Humidity
The level of relative humidity is a characteristic of climate.
Ambient conditions pertain within well ventilated houses, except
that higher humidities will occur at times as the result of cooking
and ablution processes, and the like.
However, in winter, when a house is closed against inclement
weather, the relative humidity of air indoors can rise markedly
above outdoor levels. As a result, slight cooling of indoor air
such as is brought about by its contact with cold wall surfaces
will lead to the formation of condensation thereon. It follows


that surfaces subject to wetting by condensation in this manner,
or, where relevant, the decorative finishes applied to them, should
be resistant to moisture. (A parallel problem exists in hot-
humid climates where humid atmospheric conditions are conduc-
ive to the growth of mould on paints. See page 6.)
Winter conditions envisaged above lead to the natural outward
migration of water vapour from the warm indoors. Should water
vapour in its passage through construction encounter compon-
ents at temperatures at or below dewpoint temperature, con-
densation will form within the construction, with attendant
dangers to materials and finishes.( 6 ) In circumstances where
the average minimum winter temperature is about 40° F. or
lower, the aforementioned condensation problem is likely to be
acute, and warrants consideration in relation to the conditions
involved. The situation is one which calls for the use of an
effective vapour barrier at the warm (indoor) side of the con-
struction, to impede the entry of water vapour into the
construction.
It follows that water vapour which might nevertheless pene-
trate into the construction should be free to reach outdoors.
Hence, the method of sarking weatherboards might need to be
specially considered in relation to the behaviour of the sarking as
a vapour barrier, in the wrong position for the latter. Where
both treatments are used, the sarking, as fixed, should be more
permeable to water vapour than the vapour barrier.
Prevailing Winds and Natural Ventilation
The utilization of favourable breezes for ventilation is a
constant consideration in the humid tropics, where dry-bulb
temperatures are consistently high during summer and are high
by day at other times of the year. In other climatic zones the
problem is essentially a summer one. Whatever the circum-
stances, an adequate solution depends largely upon planning and
the ability of the designer to orient a dwelling to receive breezes
in rooms at times when they will normally be occupied.
Restful sleep, which is vital to the maintenance of good health
and efficiency, is not possible in a hot, calm environment. It is
recognized, however, that air movement will alleviate conditions,
and functional design must therefore enable full use to be made of
cool breezes which blow during evenings and at night ; evening
breezes will assist the rooms to cool after a hot day, and night
breezes will continue the cooling process and continue to induce
the air movement which promotes greater physical comfort in
summer.
The benefit to be derived from ventilation through windows
will be largely nullified if sills of windows are set too high to
permit the circulation of inflowing air at bed level, or if the win-
dows and door of a room are not arranged to ensure that air
movement is induced throughout the room. Night breezes are
usually light by comparison with daytime breezes.
The daytime problem is more complex : a kitchen requires
copious ventilation, to remove heat and fumes from cooking


processes without dispersion of heat and odours throughout the
house ; the living room, which can be occupied at any time during
the day and evening, needs to be well ventilated in summer during
the greater part of the day. The extent to which these require-
ments can be fulfilled will be influenced by site conditions, and
by the direction and strength of prevailing breezes.
The ventilation of a kitchen is usually a vexed problem in
which planning is a major factor. It is not always feasible to
set cooking stoves into ventilated recesses on the leeward sides of
houses, to provide for the natural removal of heat and fumes, or
to locate them in recesses ventilated by chimney stacks of normal
domestic proportions. In consequence, resort has been made to
the provision of vented canopies over cookers to entrain heated
fumes. Such an arrangement is partially effective for the
purpose, at best, even when a canopy and the flue therefrom
are generously proportioned ; they are relatively ineffectual
where there is a cross-draught over the cooker, as will often be the
case in a kitchen well ventilated by an open window. A power-
operated exhaust fan located in an external wall of a kitchen
might frequently be required to overcome difficulties of the
nature discussed.
The practice of venting appliances and canopies into roof
spaces on the ground of expediency is one which warrants close
scrutiny ; it can be regarded as insanitary, and it is conducive to
the formation of condensation under roofs which are sheeted,
sarked, or boarded.
Verandas have become traditional as outdoor living areas, and
in some climatic zones have come to be regarded as an essential
provision to provide a cool area to which occupants of a house
may resort on hot nights. While it is not denied that a veranda
can serve the purpose intended, it is questionable whether a
veranda is necessarily the solution. A more functional approach
to the problem would be to design dwellings to improve environ-
mental conditions indoors to the point where it would be un-
necessary for occupants to seek relief outdoors. This is usually
possible by open planning and considered placing of windows and
doors for maximum utilization of air movement available
outdoors.
Because verandas serve also as play areas for children, and as
drying space for clothes, they are useful additions to a dwelling,
but some caution needs to be exercised when planning them. If
a veranda is on the windward side of a house, and windows of
rooms open on to it, these rooms will be ventilated by air which
traverses the veranda. It is important, therefore, that inflowing
air should not become hotter as it passes along or across the
veranda. One way of avoiding the trouble is to line the underside
of the roof with boarding or sheet material, and to leave the
veranda open. It has been found experimentally^ 1 ) that an
unlined veranda with a galvanized-iron roof and enclosed with a
single thickness of sheet material and casement windows will
cause air contained within it to rise at least 5° F. above the
temperature of shade-air when the veranda is sunlit and the
outdoor temperature is only 90° F.


Sunshine
References have been made already to solar radiation and to
its heating effect on sunlit surfaces. Sunlit surfaces become
hotter than the temperature of shade-air, and in summer the
problem arises of preventing the effect being transmitted indoors,
yet, in winter it is desirable that a dwelling should respond to
heat received from the sun, as well as to the normal increase of
air temperature. The conflicting requirements suggest that the
selective seasonal shading of construction, rather than reliance
on either thermal insulation or heavyweight or lightweight
construction alone, will assist in the resolution of this thermal
problem.
The effect of shading is that the temperatures of external
surfaces, otherwise sunlit, will be maintained at or about the
temperature of shade-air, and a much smaller outdoor-indoor
temperature difference will be available to drive heat inwards.
To some extent shade is thus equivalent in its effect to
thermal insulation in summer ; the latter retards the flow of heat
by introducing a thermal resistance.
It is not always convenient or economical to shade roofs, but
walls lend themselves to this treatment. Permanent shading
devices in the form of trellis or sheet material, although useful
in summer, will continue to provide shade in winter, and are
therefore not as functional in their behaviour as deciduous
vegetation, which can be grown on light frameworks.
Throughout most of Australia, the normal projection of eaves
and gutters will provide shade for walls which face north (and for
south walls north of the Tropic of Capricorn) during summer
months. When site conditions permit a house to be oriented in
this way, east and west walls only require to be protected other-
wise. The provision to be made will be a minimum if east and
west walls are as short as possible, but verandas should not be
expected to shade east and west walls from direct sunshine during
early mornings and late afternoons, when the sun is at low
altitudes.
When designing for natural lighting, it is desirable to locate
heads of windows as high as practicable, because the intensity
of daylight at points in a room remote from a window increases
as the height of the head of the window is increased. Further,
the penetration of daylight into a room is improved to a greater
degree by raising the head of a window than by increasing the
width of the window by the same amount.
The areas of glass, expressed as percentages of the areas of
floors, which might be used as a guide to reasonable minima for
rooms 10 to 15 ft. deep, and illuminated by windows in one wall,
are given below :


TABLE OF AREAS OF GLASS FOR WINDOWS IN PRINCIPAL ROOMS
ROOM
HEIGHT
OF HEAD
OF
WINDOW
AREA OF GLASS (PERCENTAGE OF
FLOOR AREA) FOR ANGLES OF
OBSTRUCTION OF
NO
OBSTRUCTION
10°
20°
!
i o
°
o
Living \
Dining j
Bedrooms ...
Kitchen
6 ft. 8 in.
7 ft. 8 in.
6 ft. 8 in.
7 ft. 8 in.
6 ft. 8 in.
7 ft. 8 in.
m%
10%
io%*
io%*
25%
20%
15%
12*%
10%*
U)%*
30%
25%
25%
20%
12*%
10%
50%
40%
40%
30%
20%
15%
* Usually regarded as minimum provision.
In bathrooms, the area of glass in windows can reasonably be
6 sq. ft. or 10 per cent of the floor area, whichever is the greater,
and in laundries, 12 sq. ft. or 12| per cent of the floor area,
whichever is the greater.
In the foregoing table, the column headed “ No Obstruction ”
is applicable to a situation in which only sky is visible through a
window from the point which is being considered in the room.
This condition could be realized on a sloping site in a built-up
area, or in the country, but more frequently trees or other
buildings obstruct light. Typical obstructions which are en-
countered on suburban allotments are illustrated in Fig. 5, and
their heights are expressed as angles of elevation above a hori-
zontal plane through the sill of the window. These angles are
to be used when applying the preceding table to windows which
face obstructions.
For situations where it is considered inadvisable to attempt
to maintain the level of illumination in a room by lighting it
from windows in one wall, data have been omitted from the table.
In these circumstances, windows in two walls would be desirable,
but if this cannot be arranged it is possible that a lower standard
of illumination may be accepted without hardship. Daylighting
of houses is a different problem from that of illuminating working
areas in offices and factories, because, in the home, tasks can
often be moved near to windows, and high levels of illumination
are not essential throughout all rooms. Because of this flexi-
bility, normal design procedures need not be followed to arrive
at a satisfactory answer, and the approximations which are
given in the foregoing table will be applicable to most domestic
situations. Broadly, adequate daylight can be expected in
rooms with unobstructed windows of normal proportions at
distances from the window equal to twice the height of the head
of a window above the floor.
Sunlight is frequently associated with conditions of glare,
which constitutes a serious visual disability. Sunlit surfaces
such as window sills, walls of adjoining property, and even light-
coloured ground or concrete, within the field of view can be
troublesome in this regard. Similarly, skies which are bright,
because of the presence of clouds or haze, can be objectionable.


/XA |V7 # j tnc *
lj f4 *\} \ ,llmtt ' in,
i^ 1
[* ~ ~ ' 80'
"V
'^ s ‘ ~~ ’ Tsvo-ihorcy Obstruction
’ ~— Obstruction
' s<
r
SITE PLAN
/ ObsVrocHon . **
, \/
. 4inol«-iterty ObsfrucMon I
> 9 i zs I
SIDE BOUNDARIES
OBSTRUCTIONS AT FRONT
OBSTRUCTIONS AT REAR
Fig. 5. TYPICAL OBSTRUCTIONS OCCURRING ON
SUBURBAN ALLOTMENTS


However, it is not widely recognized that these glare problems
will be intensified if window walls and window framing seen from
within a room are not painted in light colours.
Rainfall
The problem of entraining rainwater which falls on the roof of
a house is universal, and traditional practices for collecting this
water and conveying it away from the building are, in most cases,
entirely adequate. Similarly, domestic construction for cool
climates has been developed in a manner which ensures the
exclusion of driving rain. No special problems arise, because
rain is usually accompanied by cool to cold winds, and it is
convenient to maintain windows and doors closed.
However, particularly in northern Australia, the wet season is
the hot season, and it is essential to maintain effective ventilation
indoors without admitting rain. Sometimes existing practices
fail to exclude rain, and residents in the humid tropics are
prepared to accept the penetration of water if good air movement
can be maintained. Such an attitude is logical if provision is
made to collect water which seeps indoors, and to drain it
outside. It is common experience that some forms of louvres
leak between the blades and their frame, but because the rain
which penetrates will run down the internal surfaces of the
frames, this water can be intercepted readily, and be drained
away without causing damage to adjoining construction or
furnishings.
When rain is not accompanied by wind, wide eaves or hoods
will afford sufficient protection for open windows ; but driving
rain will beat indoors unless other precautions are taken. On
this account, there seems to be a need to develop a tropical
window unit to serve the special needs of the climate. One
functional arrangement would be a frame extending from floor
to ceiling, and containing casements or louvres within the normal
window area and top-hung sashes or louvres above and below.
All three sections could be opened during favourable weather,
and when rain squalls occurred the middle section only need be
closed ; the eaves would protect the top opening, and a liberal
overlap for the bottom panel would ensure reasonable protection
of the opening at the lower level.
Insect Pests
It is customary to prevent the entry of flies, mosquitoes, and
other flying insect pests by fitting screens to windows and by
protecting external doorways with flywire doors. The latter
serve a dual role, by allowing the passage of air while obstructing
insects. The extent to which a house need be protected will
depend largely upon the prevalence of flying creatures, and the
time of day when they abound.
When circumstances dictate that all windows and external
doorways should be screened against flies, as usually is the case
in hot-dry climates, it is a common error to overlook the entry
of flies via chimneys. It is therefore desirable that chimneys,
too, should be fitted with flywire screens. A chimney which
serves a solid-fuel cooker can be fitted with a screen within the
chimney, below the top of the metal flue ; other chimneys, which
might serve open fireplaces, will require screens which can be
removed when it is desired to light a fire.


6. Orientation
If an attempt were made to observe all functional requirements
when designing dwellings to suit climatic conditions, considerable
confusion would result, and it is doubtful whether a workable plan
could be prepared. No matter how important each requirement
might be, there must be compromise to ensure proper relationship
between the several rooms of a house and the purposes which they
are intended to serve. Some examples of needs which can cause
conflicts in design are given below ;
1. All habitable rooms should receive favourable summer
breezes at times when they are normally occupied,
whether or not summer breezes blow from two quarters at
different times of the day. Windows in such rooms
should nevertheless face away from the storm quarter,
and away from the quarter of cold winds.
2. A dwelling should be shaded in summer, and use be made
of self-shading, but shade can be disadvantageous during
winter.
3. Notwithstanding 1 and 2 above, bedrooms should not face
east if the morning sun is to be avoided, and windows of
principal rooms should not overlook adjoining premises.
When a compromise is to be effected, it is first necessary to
decide whether the summer season or the winter season causes
the greater thermal disability in the district concerned. This
can be determined by reference to published data.( 3 ) If it is
judged that summer is the more severe season, and that the
summer climate is hot and dry, then the principal design factors
decrease in importance in the following order :
{a) Utilization of cooling breezes to promote ventilation
indoors.
( b) Use of building materials and thermal insulation,
supplemented by shading devices, to minimize the effect
indoors of solar radiation.
(c) Use of building materials and thermal insulation to
facilitate heating of rooms on cold nights.
{d) Utilization indoors of winter sunshine.
If the summer climate is severe, but conditions are humid
instead of dry, then the important design factors are [a) and ( h )
in that descending order, but there are usually no winter problems
to justify special provisions regarding (c) and ( d ), When the
winter problem is dominant, the sequence becomes {d), (c), and
(6), which places emphasis upon keeping warm.
In those regions where the climate is truly temperate, extreme
temperatures are the exception rather than the rule. In such
districts, the designer need consider only (a) and (d), unless it is
specially desired to design for a few particularly hot or very cold
days to be experienced annually.
Because the directions of prevailing breezes and other
characteristics of climate vary within a climatic zone, no firm
recommendations can be made as to how these conditions can


be satisfied. It must remain the responsibility of the designer
to analyse problems individually, and to interpret functional
requirements within the limitations imposed by site and other
conditions.
If a functional design is to be developed, there must be constant
recognition of such factors as the quarters whence principal winds
blow, and the directions from which solar radiation will be
received at different times of the day throughout the year.
When these climatic factors have been considered with the needs
of various rooms of a house, it will be found that site conditions
will often prevent compliance with all of them. In these cir-
cumstances, particularly, careful orientation of principal rooms
will assist the designer to regulate the effects of the climatic
factors which are involved.
However, in so doing, it is desirable to ensure that windows of
rooms in which quietness is sought are faced away from busy
streets and windows in adjoining premises. This can be specially
important in hot-climate regions where windows must necessarily
remain open ; noise travels relatively unimpeded through an
open window. Noise is attenuated as the distance from its
source is increased, and by trees, shrubs and the like serving as a
barrier against the transmission of noise, but the benefits to be
derived from these should be regarded as being nominal only on
domestic sites of normal size. Thus, the question of privacy can
attain special significance.
Although matters pertaining to planning are expressly excluded
from this analysis of climate and the design of houses, reference
might usefully be made in this context to the added internal
privacy between bedrooms of open construction in hot-humid
climates which is afforded by the insertion of the bathroom or
other utility space between them. Nevertheless, it is to be
recognized that noise is transmitted by air along circuitous paths,
and through openings even as small as those commonly present
between doors and a floor.


7. Physical Discomfort
Preceding sections have discussed the components of climates,
and means whereby the effects of their unfavourable character-
istics might be tempered indoors. The extent to which such
adjustment can be made is frequently variable, and can be a
matter of personal choice, with economic implications. Merit
inherent in proposed measures for the improvement of the indoor
conditions can now be forecast from an understanding of the
reaction of the human body to its thermal environment.
As has been indicated previously, most people would prefer to
live in an environment having a dry-bulb temperature of approxi-
mately 65° F. during winter and of about 76° F. during summer.
People in some climatic zones might wish to make small adjust-
ments to these temperatures for optimum conditions, but the
temperatures quoted will suffice for discussion of the general
case. Within this range of temperatures comfort can be achieved
by adjusting the quantity of clothing worn. At lower tempera-
tures, clothing or heating will restore the proper heat balance ;
beyond the upper limit, however, it is necessary to discard
clothing to maintain tolerable comfort, and frequently the
environment can be sufficiently hot to cause physical discomfort
when clothing has been reduced to a conventional minimum.
Thermal discomfort does not occur at any precise temperature ;
its onset is progressive outside the broad range of temperature
noted above, and is influenced by climatic factors in combination,
and by the activity and dress of the person concerned.
As temperatures rise from the optimum level of about 76° F.
to approximately 85° F., above which discomfort can be expected,
human beings make progressive changes in their mental assess-
ment of the thermal stress of the environment ; comfort is
superseded by indefinite sensations of feeling hot, and finally
discomfort occurs with profuse sweating and other indications
of thermal strain. It is common experience, however, that not
all temperatures within this transition range are uncomfortably
high, and that conditions which they produce can be hot without
being unpleasantly so. Because the distinction between comfort
and discomfort is a matter of individual opinion, it is not possible
to define precisely those conditions which will produce the same
responses from all individuals of a group ; males are generally
less tolerant of heat than females, for example, though the margin
is small.
Dry-bulb temperature provides a convenient index of dis-
comfort at summer temperatures ; it correlates well with sub-
jective reactions, and its numerical value is readily understood in
relation to climatic stress. ( 12 ) However, the measured value of
the dry-bulb temperature of an environment is not the true
measure of the situation ; it requires adjustment to acknowledge
the cooling influence of air movement, and the disabilities of high
humidity and hot surfaces.
For the reason that the weightings which are discussed below
were deduced from investigations concerned with subjective


reactions under conditions of hot discomfort, they are not
intended to be applicable at ambient dry-bulb temperatures below
80° F. At normal summer dry-bulb temperatures of 80° F. and
higher, the dry-bulb index temperature can be deduced by
adjustment of the prevailing dry-bulb temperature in accordance
with the following procedure :< 13 )
Add I|° F. for each 10% increase in relative humidity above
40%.
Subtract 1° F. for each increase of 30 f.p.m. in rate of air
movement above 10 f.p.m. up to 200 f.p.m., provided air
temperature does not exceed 98° F.
Add 1° F. for each 5° F. that the average temperature of a
wall or a ceiling exceeds 100° F.; where more than one hot
surface is involved, this adjustment should be made with
respect to each such surface.
When the foregoing is applied to an environment in which the
dry-bulb temperature is 88° F., the relative humidity 40%, air
movement 100 f.p.m., and the ceiling and one wall have average
temperatures 105° F., the resulting index temperature is—
88 + (li x 0) (1 X 3) + (1 X 2)
= 88 + 0 3 + 2 = 87° F.
Had the ceiling and wall in the above example been insulated
thermally, or otherwise maintained at temperatures approxi-
mating the indoor dry-bulb temperature, the index temperature
would have been 85° F., the nominal threshold of discomfort,
and not above it.
These examples not only highlight the subjective implications
of climate factors in summer, but show also the practical con-
venience of a weighted dry-bulb index of thermal stress for
environmental conditions ; the component weightings reveal
the relative benefits to be derived from alleviatory measures
available at different costs.
The deduced index temperature might be regarded as an
equivalent temperature (but not in the sense of the Equivalent
Temperature index of comfort),( 14 ) in that it is intended to
conjure up a picture of thermal stress commonly associated with
an environment having a dry-bulb temperature of the deduced
numerical value with conditions of moderate relative humidity
and calm air.
Relative humidity is not commonly a comfort consideration in
winter, unless its value should become unduly low. This can
happen when cold air at low relative humidity is warmed for
reasons of comfort. When such warmed air is breathed, mucous
membranes can be irritated, unless the air is artificially humidi-
fied. The winter problem is rather that conditions of high
humidity are conducive to the formation of condensation, as
discussed in section 5.
The movement of air, and increments in the rate at which it
moves, are detected much more readily in winter than in summer
by human beings. In fact, air moving indoors at 40 f.p.m.( 15 )


might well be regarded by many persons as constituting a draught
at temperatures around 65° F.
In parallel to the foregoing, human awareness of warm and
cold surfaces is quickened at winter temperatures. The former
are conducive to comfort, whereas the latter can affect conditions
adversely in two ways ; body heat is lost by radiation to cold
surfaces, and further chilling around feet and ankles results when
air cooled by contact with cold surfaces gravitates downwards,
to spill across the floor of a closed space.
The merit of warming a space by the introduction of heat at
floor level is thus clearly apparent, though such an arrangement
is not without economic and technical difficulties. One such
difficulty is that of introducing heat in a quantity appropriate to
the circumstances, without raising the temperature of the surface
to be walked upon above 80 to 85° F.( 16 ) If higher floor tempera-
tures are induced, feet in contact with the floor will be so warmed
as to cause the body to react as if the environment were truly
warm to hot ; such a condition can be prejudicial to health.
If, however, a person’s feet are placed in contact with a cold
floor, the effect will be that the circulation of blood to the legs
and feet will be restricted automatically, with consequent
chilling of these members. Although critical temperatures have
not yet been clearly determined, a seated person can anticipate
this chilling to occur when the temperature of a floor or of air
immediately above it is about 57° F. and lower, though the
temperature of the air around the torso might be within the
accredited winter comfort range of 65 to 68 °F.
Paradoxically, the conventional open fire, which is both
traditional and popular, is a poor aid to winter comfort ; it is
grossly inefficient, it is highly directional as to the emission of
radiant heat, and it induces strong draughts in the room served.
However, draughts can be reduced by the introduction at or near
the hearth of cold outdoor air needed to satisfy the draught of
the chimney.* 17 )
The foregoing discussion relates to persons who are standing
or seated. When persons are reclining, somewhat different
temperatures are associated with the onset of discomfort, for the
reason that such a posture retards materially the loss of heat from
the body. In summer, this can be a major disability. Where hot-
humid conditions prevail, relief is frequently sought through the
normal use of a fan. Some relief is possible in this way also,
where hot-dry conditions prevail, though the fan might be used
to better advantage at night at an open window to encourage the
inflow of cool outdoor air. A preferred simple arrangement of
assisted ventilation is that employing an attic-type fan, ( 18 ) but
it is not proposed to discuss herein the use of equipment as an
adjunct to comfort.
Reference must also be made to the ingrained belief held widely
in northern Australia that the practice of elevating a house above
the ground is conducive to greater comfort indoors ; an elevated
house is claimed to be cooler than a similar one built convention-
ally nearer the ground.


An examination made of the problem in relation to gradients of
temperature, humidity, and air movement occurring at limited
heights above the ground provided no real evidence to support
the belief.( u ) It was found, on sunny days, that air 15 in. above
the ground was usually 2° F. hotter than air 7 ft. above the
ground, and that on particularly hot calm days the difference
increased to 4 to 5° F.; air temperatures at the 7-ft. level were
usually only 1° F. cooler than air at 4 ft. above the ground. No
humidity gradient could be established, even under simulated
conditions of high temperature and humidity.
Observations of air speeds at heights of 5 ft. and 11 ft. above the
ground revealed, as is to be expected, a greater rate of movement
at 11 ft. than at 5 ft. However, the advantage possible at the
11-ft. level was significant numerically only when the rate of air
movement was judged to be adequate physiologically at both
levels.
Nevertheless, a new facet to the problem results from the
increasing use of concrete slab floors for houses ; doors and
windows, and other ventilation openings at low levels in a house
are accordingly brought closer to the ground than when floors are
timber-joisted, and some minor temperature disability might
well be encountered in consequence. Notwithstanding, the
height of a floor is likely to be determined from considerations of
practical convenience and personal choice, outside by-law
limitations.
The coolest place in an elevated house is the space beneath it ;
the “ ceiling ” is well insulated, the “ floor ” is shaded ground,
and the natural breeze-way is conducive to good air movement.


8. Recommendations
If circumstances permit functional requirements to be
observed, it will be advantageous to adopt the principles which
are summarized in the table hereunder. In this table the prob-
lem of house design is considered on a year-round basis for the
three major climatic zones in Australia, and the suggestions allow
for those situations where there is conflict between requirements
for summer and winter.
OF PRINCIPAL FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS (THERMAL)
TABLE
CLIMATE
ELEMENT/
HOT-HUMID ZONE
HOT-ARID ZONE
TEMPERATE ZONE
Heavyweight construction 01
insulated frame construc-
tion for sunlit walls ; other-
wise frame construction.
Heavyweight constructioi
for living rooms, dininj
rooms, and kitchens ; frami
construction for bedrooms.
Weight of construction not
important, but provisions
for hot-arid zone useful in
districts remote from coast.
Frame construction ade
quate, but heavyweighl
construction offers bettei
resistance to transmissior
of noise.
As for walls above.
As for walls above.
Cladding and pitch to b<
selected primarily foi
weather-resistance. Roofs
may be framed or of heavy-
weight construction.
Cladding and pitch to b(
selected primarily foi
weather-resistance. Roofs
may be framed or of heavy
weight construction.
Cladding and pitch to be
selected primarily for
weather-resistance. Roofs
may be framed or of heavy-
weight construction.
Essential, and if not insul-
ated, should be fixed cleai
of roof to permit roof space
to be ventilated freely.
Essential, and if not insul-
ated, should be fixed clea:
of roof to permit roof space
to be ventilated.
Essential, and if not insul-
ated, should be fixed clear
of roof.
Concrete on ground or sus-
pended, or timber sus-
pended, as desired. Enclose
under-floor spaces, if any.
Concrete on ground or sus
pended, or timber suspend-
ed, as desired.
Concrete on ground or sus-
pended, or timber sus-
pended, as desired. Enclose
under-floor spaces, if any.
Casements, top-hung sashes,
louvres, used extensively tc
minimize blank walling.
Casements, top-hung sashes,
or double-hung sashes, all
capable of being closed
tightly.
Casements, top-hung sashes,
or double-hung sashes, all
capable of being closed
tightly.
Desirable to provide at least
1-in. mineral wool or layer
of reflective insulation
between roof and ceiling,
and in frame walls which
cannot be shaded.
Desirable to provide at least
1-in. mineral wool or layer
of reflective insulation
between roof and ceiling,
and in frame walls though
they be shaded.
Advantageous to lay at least
1-in. mineral wool on ceil-
ings, or layer of reflective
insulation over ceiling joists
of heated rooms.
Not required, except where
space is air conditioned.
Not required.
Required in cool temperature
regions, especially when
walls and ceilings are insul-
ated.
Shade walls by eaves ; ad-
ditional shade optional ;
internal blinds adequate.
Shade walls by eaves or with Shade walls by eaves or wit:
trellis or vegetation ; shade trellis or vegetation ; shad'
windows with shutters or windows with shutters 01
blinds, preferably extern- blinds, preferably extern-
ally. ally.
Not essential, but paint oi
base material should be ol
lightest practicable coloui
if wall or roof not insulated.
Not essential, but paint 01
base material should be o:
lightest practicable coloui
if wall or roof not insulated
Surface treatments and
colours of external surfaces
not important, though light
colours preferable if wall or
roof not insulated.


Although the functional design of a house with respect to
climatic conditions is conducive to more comfortable living
conditions, it is no substitute for efficient planning for con-
venient living. Rather, a sound understanding of climatic
considerations should be applied to offset thermal disabilities
seen to arise from the practical planning of a house as a habitable
unit to suit a particular site.


9. References
1. Drysdale, J. W., “ Climate and Design of Buildings, Physio-
logical Study No. 2,” Technical Study No. 32*, Com-
monwealth Experimental Building Station, Sydney,
1950.
2. Drysdale, J. W., “ Climate and Design of Buildings, Physio-
logical Study No. 3,” Technical Study No. 35, Common-
wealth Experimental Building Station, Sydney, 1951.
3. Keough, J. J., “ Selected Australian Climatic Data for Use
in Building Design,” Technical Study No. 36, Common-
wealth Experimental Building Station, Sydney, 1951.
4. Hindson, W. R. and Mortensen, K. N., “ Fungicidal Treat-
ment of Textiles, Leather and Other Materials,” Circular
No. 12, Defence Research Laboratories, Melbourne,
1948.
5. Phillips, R. 0., “ Sunshine and Shade in Australasia,”
Technical Study No. 23*, Commonwealth Experimental
Building Station, 2nd edit., Sydney, 1950.
6. Anon., “ Condensation in Dwellings,” Notes on the Science
of Building No. 61, Commonwealth Experimental
Building Station, Sydney. (In the press.)
7. Anon., “ Termites (White Ants),” Trade Circular No. 36,
Division of Forest Products, Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research, 2nd edit., Melbourne, 1942.
8. Anon., “ White Ants, Termite-proofing of Buildings in
Australia,” Notes on the Science of Building No. 11,
Commonwealth Experimental Building Station, Sydney,
1950.
9. Beesley, J., “ Eradicating Termites (White Ants) from
Buildings,” C.5.1.R.0. Forest Products Newsletters,
Nos. 234, Sept. 1957, pp. 4-6, 235, Oct. 1958, pp. 1-3,
236, Nov. 1957, pp. 3-4.
10. Drysdale, J. W., “ A Review of Investigations of the Thermal
Behaviour of Buildings, January to August, 1949,”
Technical Study No. 30*, Commonwealth Experimental
Building Station, Sydney, 1949.
11. Drysdale, J. W., “ Climate and Design of Buildings, The
Thermal Behaviour of Dwellings,” Technical Study No.
34, Commonwealth Experimental Building Station,
Sydney, 1950.


12. Macfarlane, W. V., “ Thermal Comfort Zones,” Architectural
Science Review, Vol. 1, No. 1, Nov. 1958, pp. 1-14.
13. Macfarlane, W. V., Private communication, 1959.
14. Dufton, A. F., “The Equivalent Warmth of an Environ-
ment,” Institution of Heating and Ventilating Engineers
Journal, Vol. 4, June, 1936. (Reprint).
15. Bedford, Thomas., “ Comfort in Relation to Warmth and
Ventilation,” Institution of Heating and Ventilating
Engineers Journal, Vol. 22, June, 1954, pp. 85-114.
16. Chrenko, F, A., “ Heated Floors and Comfort,” Institution of
Heating and Ventilating Engineers Journal, Vol. 23, Tan.,
1956, pp. 385-396.
17. Angus, T. C., “ The Study of Air Flow, Ventilation and Air
Movement in Small Rooms as Effected by Open Fire-
places and Ventilation Ducts,” Institution of Heating and
Ventilating Engineers Journal, Vol. 17, Nov., 1949, pp.
378-418.
18. Weston, E. T., “ Ventilating and Cooling a House with an
Attic Exhaust Fan,” Special Report No. 9, Common-
wealth Experimental Building Station, Sydney, 1952.
* Technical Studies Nos. 23, 30, and 32 were formerly known as
Duplicated Documents Nos. 23, 30, and 32 respectively.




Lat. 34° 56' S. Long. 138° 35' E. Elev. 140 ft.
SEASON
SUMMER
WINTER
SHADE DRY-BULB TEMPERATURE :
Mean maximum °F.
84
61
Mean minimum °F.
61
46
•100° F
11
Average number of days when maximum equals I
95° F
20
or exceeds ... ... ... ... ... 1
90° F
30
85° F
41
60° F
47
Average number of days when maximum is less J
55° F
6
than ... ... ... ... ... ... |
50° F
0
45° F
0
RELATIVE HUMIDITY : Average % at time of max. D.B. temperature
36
57
SUNSHINE HOURS :
f
9
52
8
Average number of days when sunshine hours <
6
68
30
exceed ... ... ... ... ... (.
3
78
57
RAINFALL :
Average total points
313
1,100
Average number of wet days (at least 1 point received)
16
47
Maximum rate, points per hour over 5-minute period occurring once
m 10 years ...
330
/
usually received...
S to W
Quarter from which rain is ... ... ... \
seldom received ...
E to
SE
r
morning ...
SW
NE
PREVAILING WINDS : Quarter
afternoon
SW
W
L
night
SE-S
NE-E
DUSTSTORMS : Usual quarter
NW
to N
Appendix A: Climatic Data Sheets for Capital Cities
The letter x signifies throughout that data were omitted because of lack of recorded
Information. Data schedules for summer and winter pertain to the formal 3-months
duration of each season only.
ADELAIDE, SA
Cooling breeze in summer —S to SW.
Warming breeze in winter—NW to N.
Thunderstorms occur on 15 days per annum.
Frosts occur occasionally on the plains and are characteristic of the “ Hills ” country of
the region.
Duststorms occur about 5 days per annum.
Snow falls very occasionally on the Mount Lofty Ranges.
The greatest wind speed recorded in the area is 88 m.p.h. from NW.


Lat. 27° 28' S. Long. 153° 02' E. Elev. 137 ft.
SEA
SUMMER
SON
WINTER
SHADE DRY-BULB TEMPERATURE:
Mean maximum °F.
85
70
Mean minimum °F.
68
50
'100° F
0
Average number of days when maximum equals J
95° F
2
or exceeds ... ... ... ... ... 1
90° F
11
85° F
41
60° F
2
Average number of days when maximum is less 1
55° F
0
than ... ... ... ... ... ... |
50° F
0
45° F
0
RELATIVE HUMIDITY : Average % at time of max. D.B. temperature
49
32
SUNSHINE HOURS :
f
9
43
48
Average number of days when sunshine hours ■<
6
60
70
exceed ... ... ... ... ... [
3
73
80
RAINFALL;
Average total points
1,543
570
Average number of wet days (at least 1 point received)
35
23
Maximum rate, points per hour over 5-minute period occurring once
in 10 years ...
580
/
usually received...
E to S
Quarter from which rain is ... ... ... \
seldom received ...
SW to W
r
morning ...
SE-S
S-SW
PREVAILING WINDS : Quarter -<
afternoon
NE-E
SE-SW
I
night
NE-SE
SW-NW
DUSTSTORMS : Usual quarter
W
BRISBANE, QLD.
Cooling breeze in summer—SE to S.
Warming breeze in winter—N toJNE.
Thunderstorms from WNW occur on about 50 days per annum.
Occasional frosts occur in the area.
Duststorms are infrequent.
The greatest wind speed recorded in the area is 89 m.p.h. from the SW at Archerfleld.


CANBERRA, ACT
SEASON
SUMMER WINTER
81 54
53 34
0 F 1
° F 6
° F 18
° F 33
° F ... 87
° F ... 64
° F ... 22
° u ... 3
37 61
x x
X X
X X
570 614
21 30
Lat. 35° 20' S. Long. 149° 15' E. Elev. 1,837 ft.
SHADE DRY-BULB TEMPERATURE :
Mean maximum °F.
Mean minimum °F.
{loo° F.
95° F.
90° F.
85° F.
{6o° F.
55° F.
50° F.
45° F.
RELATIVE HUMIDITY : Average % at time of max. D.B. temperature
SUNSHINE HOURS:
f 9
Average number of days when sunshine hours < 6
exceed ... ... ... ... ... 3
RAINFALL:
Average total points
Average number of wet days (at least 1 point received)
Maximum rate, points per hour over 5-minute period occurring once
in 10 years ...
{usually received...
seldom received ...
{morning ...
afternoon
night
DUSTSTORMS ; Usual quarter
NW-N & E-S
SW to W
SE & NW W-NW
W-NW W-NW
W-NW
♦ There is no true prevailing wind on winter nights, the predominant winds being E to SE
and NW to N.
" Cooling breeze in summer—SE to S.
Thunderstorms occur on 14 days per annum.
Frosts are frequent, occurring on 55 days per annum.
Duststorms occur on about 5 days.
Snow is rare in the capital, but seasonal in neighbouring hills.
The greatest wind speed recorded at this station is 68 m.p.h. from W.
*
E-SE


SEASON
SUMMER WINTER
69 54
53 41
i° r 0
.° 1
i° 2
° 4
... 84
° F ... 56
... 19
0 ... 2
HOBART, TAS.
Lat 42° 53' S. Long. 147° 20' E. Elev. 177 ft.
SHADE DRY-BULB TEMPERATURE :
Mean maximum °F.
Mean minimum °F.
{loo° F.
95° F.
90° F.
85° F.
{6o° F.
55° F.
50° F.
45° F.
RELATIVE HUMIDITY : Average % at time of max. D.B. temperature
SUNSHINE HOURS ;
f 9
Average number of days when sunshine hours < 6
exceed ... ... ... ... ... L 3
RAINFALL:
Average total points
Average number of wet days (at least 1 point received)
Maximum rate, points per hour over 5-minute period occurring once
in 10 years
{usually received...
seldom received ...
{morning ...
afternoon
night
DUSTSTORMS : Usual quarter
Cooling breeze in summer—SE to S.
Thunderstorms occur on 8 days per annum.
Frosts are characteristic of the inland districts.
Duststorms are infrequent.
Snow is experienced each year on neighbouring mountain.
SE to SW
NE to E
NW-N NW-N
SE NW-N
SE-SW W-N
The greatest wind speed recorded at this station is 87 m.p.h. from W.


MELBOURNE, VIC.
SEASON
SUMMER WINTER
77 57
56 43
F 3
° F 9
F 14
0 F 20
i° * ... 78
|° F ... 38
i° F ... 11
° F ... 0
44 59
41 3
61 23
76 49
605 580
28 50
Lat. 37° 49' S. Long. 144° 58' E. Elev. 115 ft.
SHADE DRY-BULB TEMPERATURE :
Mean maximum °F.
Mean minimum °F.
{loo° F.
95° F.
90° F.
85° F.
{6o° F.
55° F.
50° F.
45° F.
RELATIVE HUMIDITY : Average % at time of max. D.B. temperature
SUNSHINE HOURS :
f 9
Average number of days when sunshine hours < 6
exceed ... ... ... ... ... 3
RAINFALL:
Average total points
Average number of wet days (at least 1 point received)
Maximum rate, points per hour over 5-minute period occurring once
in 10 years ...
{usually received...
seldom received ...
{morning ...
afternoon
night
DUSTSTORMS : Usual quarter
Cooling breeze in summer—SE to S.
Thunderstorms occur on 15 days per annum.
Frosts are characteristic of inland parts of the region.
Occasional duststorms occur
S to W
NE to E
S-SW W-N
SE-SW W-N
NE &SW NW-NE
NW to N
The greatest wind speed recorded in the area is 90 m.p.h. from W.


SUMMER
84
63
4
11
22
37
37
70
82
88
137
11
PERTH, WA
SEASON
Lat. 31° 57' S. Long. 115° 51' E. Elev. 197 ft.
WINTER
SHADE DRY-BULB TEMPERATURE:
Mean maximum °F.
Mean minimum °F.
{loo° F.
95° F.
90° F.
85° F.
{6o° F.
55° F.
50° F.
45° F.
RELATIVE HUMIDITY : Average % at time of max. D.B. temperature
SUNSHINE HOURS:
f 9
Average number of days when sunshine hours ■< 6
exceed ... ... ... ... ... (_ 3
RAINFALL:
Average total points
Average number of wet days (at least 1 point received)
Maximum rate, points per hour over 5-minute period occurring once
in 10 years ...
{usually received,
seldom received .
SW to W
NE to SE
f morning ...
PREVAILING WINDS ; Quarter afternoon
(.night
SE-S N-NE
S-SW SW-NW
S NE-E
DUSTSTORMS : Usual quarter
N to NE
Cooling breeze in summer—S to SW.
Thunderstorms occur on 12 days per annum.
Frosts are characteristic of the region.
Duststorms are experienced occasionally.
The highest wind speed recorded at this station is 80 m.p.h. from W.


SYDNEY, NSW
SEASON
SUMMER WINTER
78 61
64 47
2
0 F 3
° F 6
° F 12
i° ... 27
° B ... 2
° F ... 0
° F ... 0
60 50
39 28
57 59
70 73
1,050 1,218
38 33
Appendix A
Lat. 33° 51' S. Long. 151° 13' E. Elev. 138 ft.
SHADE DRY-BULB TEMPERATURE:
Mean maximum °F.
Mean minimum °F.
{loo° F.
95° F.
90° F.
85° F.
{6o° F.
55° F.
50° F.
45° F.
RELATIVE HUMIDITY : Average % at time of max. D.B. temperature
SUNSHINE HOURS :
f 9
Average number of days when sunshine hours < 6
exceed ... ... ... ... ... 3
RAINFALL:
Average total points
Average number of wet days (at least 1 point received)
Maximum rate, points per hour over 5-minute period occurring once
in 10 years ...
("usually received...
Quarter from which rain is ... ... ... \seldom received ...
{morning .
afternoon
night
DUSTSTORMS : Usual quarter
E to SW
NW to N
NE-S W
NE-E SW-NW
S-W W-NW
Cooling breeze in summer—NE to SE.
Thunderstorms occur on 20 days per annum.
Frosts are rare, except on plains of western district, where they are characteristic.
Duststorms are infrequent, but dust haze is experienced occasionally.
The greatest wind speed recorded in this region is 95 m.p.h. from W, at the Sydney
Weather Bureau.


Number SB 30
June, 195U
Universal Decimal
Classification No.
691 -.620.19(213)
NOTES ON
THE SCIENCE OF BUILDING
BEHAVIOUR OF BUILDING
MATERIALS IN TROPICAL REGIONS
TROPICAL RAIN PORCST
MNtSFAIL
N QLD
TEMPERATURE "*
<v) 2
MEAN MAY
70
MEAN MM.
MEAN 00
RELATIVE 70
HUMIDITY 00
(%) -
00
RAINFALL .
ON) J
J h mUUImI
9A4 A O •
HOT OUT
ALICE SRRMCS
N. TCAArVDNT
This Note has been prepared for inclusion in this series by the
DIVISION OF BUILDING RESEARCH, C.5.1.R.0.,
Graham Road, Highett, 5.21, Victoria.
INTRODUCTION
It is common Belief that hot or tropical climates cause more rapid deteri- tropical monsoon
oration of materials than do temperate climates; nevertheless, popular o*b„ in
views of the severity of so-called tropical conditions are often distorted « imm'nr
and exaggerated. This Note therefore sets out to state briefly, yet temperature “*
clearly, what actually happens, and to suggest remedies in many cases. Much <*f) “
of what is stated can be taken to apply, with less emphasis, outside the mean max "
tropics. mean Mm. „
The accompanying diagrams and map show the typical characteristics and the
regions of occurrence of the climates of Australia. mean
RELATIVE to
Of the materials used in building, those of organic origin (such as timber, "7%™ "
paint, and plastics) are the most likely to deteriorate under climatic influ- «
ovi/to • 4 noTirron4 r> el o I 011 r% V» eo mo + e a a an v\tia/4h«+ o i
ence; inorganic materials (such as metals, and concrete and clay products), “
if properly made, suffer little deterioration. The risk of breakdown of "
materials is always somewhat higher in the tropics than it is in temperate
regions and there is thus always of necessity a correspondingly higher pre- rainfall “
mium on good construction and adequate maintenance. on) „
WEATHERING FACTORS
jImImIjIoInI
raj a 0 0
1.01 Solar radiation and high temperature. In tropical areas, deterioration by
radiation is severe, because of the constant exposure to sunlight of high
intensity. Under, these conditions, materials may deteriorate through ac-
tinic action, or simply through the heating effect of the radiation. (The temperate
latter, by causing expansion in the daytime, followed by contraction in the
cooler evenings, leads to cracking and disintegration.) These effects are M .
greatest in the desert regions, and least in the cloudier, wet regions near £ [TT3
the equator. They can be minimized by reflective treatment or by shading. temperature TT|
TEMPERATURE **
(*F) **
NO
MEAN MAY.
70
MEAN MM.
1 «02 Moisture, rain, humidity, and condensation.. There are several weathering mean min. ”
factors related to the high volume and high intensity of rainfall in the Z
tropics. Firstly, there is greater hazard than in temperate areas from ■*'
MEAN 00
RELATIVE 10
HUMIDITY 00
water penetration and flooding. Secondly, there Is more thorough and more MEAN ”
prolonged wetting of materials, and less chance for drying, and this promotes relative Z
fungal growth. Thirdly, there is high relative humidity, with the deposi- mAhoitt «
tion of dew. <%)
<%) "
M
1.03 Condensation caused by daily fluctuations in temperature can be responsible »
for much damage to materials. Moisture deposited in this way is a serious ”
hazard because of its übiquity and the difficulty of ensuring evaporation „
from confined space's, and also because the combined effects of intimately " A ?>i) LL ■
deposited dew and following sunlight encourage rapid chemical and mechan- 1 "
leal breakdown.
RAMFALL
jIwMjUM
rA4 A • o
jImImUIoImI
9A4 A 0 0
COMMONWEALTH EXPERIMENTAL BUILDING STATION
DEPARTM ENT OF WO RKS AND HOUSING


2.01
t?
NOTES ON THE SCIENCE OF BUILDING
1 .oi+
1 .05
Climatic zones of Australia
2.02
2.03
2.oi+
2.05
2.06
Corrosion on underside
of galvanised-iron roof
2.07
2.09
2.10
The hest way of combating the moisture problem is to provide means
for rapid shedding of water, adequate ventilation, and good drainage.
Biological agencies. Surface moulds may grow on a wide variety of
organic materials, but their effect on building materials as a whole
is small. Disfigurement of paints, and of the surfaces of some
other materials, such as wallboards, is the chief effect.
Attack by wood-destroying fungi is potentially far more serious,
because they may invade the cell structure of wood, causing complete
destruction (see also para. 2.21+ ). Nevertheless, fungal growth
in buildings is not so prevalent as might be imagined, because the
critical moisture content of wood for onset of decay is high.
Of the various wood-boring insects which damage building timbers,
termites are the most destructive. Suitable precautions against
their invasion, even in hot-dry climates, are always desirable.
PERFORMANCE OF MATERIALS
METALS
Iron, steel, and galvanized iron. In hot-dry climates the corro-
sion of iron and steel has been found to be negligible, and even in
hot-humid climates there is little difficulty in preserving exposed
steelwork, particularly when it is freely washed by rain.
On the other hand, galvanized iron is considerably affected by hot-
humid marine conditions, corrosion at the laps and on the protected
undersurfaces being severe. However, when remote from coastal
areas and when well pitched and subjected to rain washing, galvanized
iron lasts many years. Corrosion is most pronounced at the laps,
where evaporation is slow, and on the undersides of the sheets, in
the latter case because of nightly condensation of moisture on sur-
faces which rain does not wash free of corrosion products.
In humid marine localities it may be worth painting galvanized iron
to prolong its life. A zinc dust or zinc chromate primer should be
used to inhibit corrosion. Where possible, the laps should be paint-
ed before the sheets of iron are laid.
Aluminium, and aluminium alloys. Aluminium is an excellent material
for buildings in sub-tropical and tropical localities. Even in
coastal areas, deterioration of aluminium roofing is not excessive,
and what does occur usually takes place on the undersides of the
sheets.
Copper and copper alloys. Like iron and steel, copper and copper
alloys are less affected by tropical atmospheres, even in coastal
situations, than by industrial atmospheres. Insect screens of
bronze wire, and roof gutterings, downpipes, and flashings of copper
are to be preferred to those of galvanized iron.
Lead. Throughout Australia, fatigue cracking of lead in exposed
situations, e.g., roof flashings, is a serious problem. The trouble
is probably intensified by the conditions produced by the relatively
high temperatures of this continent, and by the purity of the metal
ordinarily marketed. It can be reduced by employing low-alloy
leads, such as silver-copper-lead alloy and antimonial lead, and by
using heavyweight sheet, e.g., not under i+-lb., for flashings.
CEMENT AND CONCRETE
Portland-cement products are widely used in hot countries, and are
subject to little deterioration that can be attributed specifically
to the climate.
Cement storage. in humid-tropical regions, if cement is stored
merely in bags, it is particularly prone to deteriorate through pre-
mature hydration. It should be stored in airtight containers, such
as i+h-gallon lidded drums fitted with rubber gaskets.
Water. Water for the washing of aggregates and for adequate curing
is often not available in dry areas, and what there is may be unde-
sirably warm (thus increasing placing difficulties, because of rapid
hydration and premature drying), and it may be too saline. Low
strength, cracking, and excessive permeability, and also corrosion
of reinforcement may result from lack of suitable mixing water
inadequate curing.
Concrete in contact with 3" •' W;. ri concrete may be
attackou s Ip ha to- bedr: <-• , ... is common to use high-alumi-
cement instead of Portland cement. However. in hot rllr
procedure is risky, because high-alumina cement, whe’i h„. dram , un-
de rysta] oiTiati 8j ‘ P, and
COMMONWEALTH EXPERIMENTAL BUILDING STATION


NOTES ON THE SCIENCE OF BUILDING
Water containing acids from the rotting vegetation commonly found
in humid-tropical areas may he aggressive to concrete. Suitable
remedies are the protection of the concrete with bitumen or tar, or
treatment of the water with a neutralizer.
Corrosion of reinforcement. The problem of protection of steel
reinforcement in concrete is not peculiar to the tropics, but in
tropical conditions, lack of fresh water, poor storage of cement,
and primitive labour may increase the difficulties.
2,12
2.13
Cracks and porosity which may develop in concrete of poor quality
permit the entry of water. In any locality, this may rust the re-
inforcement and cause spalling of the concrete.
2.1 U
To ensure sound concrete the following rules should always be ob-
served. Use only clean, well graded aggregate, salt-free water,
and fresh or well stored cement; keep the water-cement ratio as low
as possible; compact the mix thoroughly; cure the concrete well, by
keeping it damp; provide adequate cover of concrete for the rein-
forcement.
2.15
Algal growth on concrete. In tropical areas of high rainfall, con-
crete and other cement products, such as tiles and asbestos-cement
sheet, are particularly susceptible to blackening of exposed sur-
faces by algae.
2.16
Painting with oil-bound or cement paints defers the onset of the
staining, but under severe conditions it is usually apparent after
about three years. Washing of the affected parts with a dilute
solution of a soluble copper salt, such as copper sulphate, helps
to kill the growth, and enables it to be removed by wire brushing;
a3% soft-soap solution followed by a wash with al % copper sulphate
solution is one effective treatment.
Cracking and spalling
of reinforced concrete
MASONRY. CLAY PRODUCTS, EARTH
Building stones. Frost and corrosive gases, the chief agencies of
destruction of masonry materials in the temperate zones, are practi-
cally absent in the tropics, and consequently tropical conditions do
not constitute a hazard for masonry materials. Even stone of quite
low quality is usually found to give satisfactory service.
2.17
2.18
Burnt - clay products. Good burnt-clay products do not appear to show
much deterioration on exposure to tropical conditions, but poor fa-
cilities and unskilled labour often result in under-burnt products of
low quality, and these may undergo serious erosion.
2.19
Earth-wall construction. Water is the principal weathering agent
affecting earth-wall construction.
2.20
Protection from the weather may be given to ordinary earth-wall con-
struction by waterproof washes and renderings, and by correct design
of the structure to minimize erosion by splashing during rain. Earth
stabilized with bitumen or cement, is a much more durable material
than ordinary earth-wall construction, and techniques for its use
are now well established, (see the Station's Bulletin No. 5, "Earth-
wall Construction").
Blackening of rendering by algae
The usual termite precautions should be taken with all earth-wall
construction.
TIMBER
2.22
Deterioration of timber may arise from photochemical effects, from
physical weathering caused by changes of temperature and humidity,
and from fungal and insect attack. Exposure to extremes in climatic
conditions, by causing continual dimensional changes, will produce
checks, splits, warping, and raised grain, and result in poor paint-
holding properties.
Attack by moulds and fungi. Moulds do not affect wood as much as
they do other organic materials, and their effect is not serious.
Any treatments designed to inhibit attack by wood-destroying fungi
and termites will usually give protection against mould growth.
2.23
2,2k
Attack by wood-destroying fungi, as already noted, can be much more
serious; under given prevailing conditions, its extent depends
chiefly on the durability of the species of timber under attack.
Otherwise, the conditions most likely to cause decay are high atmos-
pheric humidity, particularly in closed spaces under buildings, and
high moisture content in the timber, the latter produced by prolong-
ed wetting where there is contact with the ground in exposed situ-
ations subject to continual wetting, and where there are joints and
laps within which rain collects and cannot evaporate.
COMMONWEALTH EXPERIMENTAL BUILDING STATION
8t 8841


ff' 2 8 FEB 1963)^1
' - 4 -'j5>' 2 .33
-~s«* ! * sJ ***"*^
Price 9d >&,
**-/ obtainable from V
o/ \| 3.01
2ITHL BUILDING RtStAUCH lo
1 LIAISON SERVICE j
\ P.O. BOX 2807 AA /
\ MELBOURNE X
NOTES ON THE SCIENCE OF BUILDING
2.25
If non-durable timbers have to be used, these should he treated
(preferably impregnated rather than brush coated) with preservatives
wherever contact with the ground or continual exposure to water is
inevitable; both adequate soil drainage and arrangements to conduct
roof water well away from woodwork and foundations should be pro-
vided.
2.26
Opinions on the preservative value of paint treatments in the humid
tropics vary. Although a sound paint film retards water absorption,
it also prevents the escape of water which may have got into the
timber, and thereby increases the decay risk. Preservative treat-
ment followed by painting is likely to be more successful than paint-
ing alone where combined decay and weathering attack are likely.
2,27
Attack by termites. The incidence of termites (popularly known as
white ants) varies considerably from place to place, and even in
areas where there is great risk of infestation, attack is often
sporadic.
2.28
Information on termite attack and methods of control are given in an
earlier Note, SB 11, ’'White Ants - Termite-proofing of buildings in
Australia”.
Erosion of under-burnt bricks
PAINT
2.29
In hot climates, the performance of ordinary paints is very often
poor, repainting being needed every one to three years. The chief
cause of breakdown is probably the high radiation, which intensifies
physical, chemical, and photochemical deterioration. Doubtless,
the frequent alternation of rain and sunshine, and the constantly
high humidity (which retards drying) militate still further against
good performance in humid-tropical, rain-forest, and monsoonal cli-
mates; the effects of dew combined with radiation may be very se-
vere. Fungicides, though sometimes regarded as inevitable ingre-
dients in paints used in the humid tropics, are not essential in
well formulated sure-drying finishes. In remote areas, prolonged
storage of paints is often necessary, and high temperatures then
cause segregation of the ingredients; paints intended for hot cli-
mates are therefore improved by the use of fillers, e.g., asbestine,
to prevent settling.
2.30
Paint vehicles fortified with alkyd rest-, are outstandingly success-
ful in hot climates; when pigmented with aluminium or micaceous iron
ore. they should have a life of 10 years or more. On steel, these
coaxings are extremely satisfactory as finishings over an inhibitive
primer.
Concrete slab “umbrella”
protecting bituminous flat roof
BITUMINOUS MATERIALS
The weathering of bitumens is brought about largely by chemical re-
actions promoted by sunlight. It results in embrittlement, crack-
ing, and crumbling.
2.32
Experience overseas has shown that exposed bituminous roofing mater-
ials have a shorter life in the hotter areas than in the cooler ones,
and throughout Australia the performance of bituminous roofing is
poorer than in overseas cool areas, such for example, as in Europe
and North America. Possibly the greatest single improvement that
can be made is to provide a reflective surface treatment to reduce
the effects of thermal and actinic radiation, and one highly effect-
ive protective treatment (widely used in the Middle East) takes the
form of an ’'umbrella” of concrete slabs.
Useful reflective treatments are whitewash, aluminium paint, heavy
dressings of white mineral shippings, and tile Blabbing. Such treat-
ments are considered essential for the satisfactory performance of
flat roofs in Australia.
CONCLUSION
Our knowledge of the behaviour of building materials under tropical
conditions, and the reasons for this behaviour, have been stated
briefly in this Note. Contrary to what might have been expected,
the available evidence suggests that problems of tropical weathering
usually differ only in degree from those of more temperate latitudes;
thus it is possible to estimate, by interpolation, the probable be-
haviour of a building material for the range from temperate to trop-
ical conditions.
COMMONWEALTH EXPERIMENTAL BUILDING STATION
POST OFFICE BOX 30 . CHATSWOOD, N.S . W .


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by John Andrew & Co., 21 Phillip Street, Sydney.


