

DESIGN
for
SANATORIA


DESIGN
for
SANATORIA


DESIGN FOR
SANATORIA
Report of the NAPT
Architectural Committee
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION for the
PREVENTION of TUBERCULOSIS
Tavistock House North, Tavistock Square,
London, W.G.i, England
1 95 1


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
BY
WATERLOW & SONS LIMITED


NAPT ARCHITECTURAL COMMITTEE
Chairman :
♦Geoffrey Todd, Esq., C.V.0., 0.8. E., M. 8., F.R.C.P.,
{Medical Superintendent, King Edward VII Sanatorium, Midhurst, Sussex).
Members :
Maurice G. Bland, Esq., 0.8. E., M.lnst.C.E., A.M.1.E.E.,
('Consulting Engineer).
R. Cunningham, Esq., M. 8., D.P.H.,
{Medical Superintendent, Poole Sanatorium, Nr. Middlesbrough, Yorks).
J. E. Geddes, Esq., M.D.,
{Superintendent, Yardley Green Hospital, Birmingham).
Alexander Gray, Esq., F.R.1.8.A.,
{Consulting Engineer).
♦Sir Austin Hudson, Bart., M.P.
T. C. M. Johnson, Esq., F.H.A.,
{Secretary, Papworth Village Settlement, Cambridge).
♦Andrew Morland, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.,
{Physician, University College Hospital, London).
♦The Rt. Hon. the Earl of Morton.
Lionel G. Pearson, Esq., F.R.1.8.A.,
{Consulting Architect) .
♦P. F. Pollard, Esq., F.C.C.S.,
{Secretary, Manor House Hospital, London).
♦Her Grace The Duchess of Portland.
Miss Mary Ruck, R.R.C.,
{Matron, Black Notley Hospital, Braintree, Essex).
E. Harley Stevens, Esq., M. 8., M.R.C.P., D.P.H.,
{Physician Superintendent, Peppard Sanatorium, Henley-on-Thames, Oxon).
♦The Hon. Mrs. A. Stirling of Keir,
{Chairman, Scottish Executive Committee, NAPT).
♦R. R. Trail, Esq., M.C., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.,
{Medical Director, Papworth Village Settlement, Cambridge).
♦Sir Robert A. Young, C.8.E., M.D., F.R.C.P.
Secretary-General: J. H. Harley Williams, Esq., 0.8. E., M.D.
Assistant Secretary : Albert J. Mantripp, Esq.
Observers from the Ministry of Health :
{ln order of serving)
Charles Maitland, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P., M.R.C.S., D.P.H.
T. S. Mclntosh, Esq., M.A., M. 8., F.R.C.P., D.P.H.
B. G. Ives, Esq., M.B.
♦ Members of NAPT Council.


The following specialists also gave advice :
L. G. Blair, Esq., M.R.C.S., M.R.C.P., D.M.R.E.,
[Director, X-ray Department, Brampton Hospital for Diseases of the Chest,
London).
R. C. Brock, Esq., M. 8., F.R.C.S.,
{Surgeon, Brompton Hospital and Guy’s Hospital, London).
The Rev. Douglas Caiger.
D. Barron Cruickshank, Esq., L.R.C.S.Ed., D.P.H.,
{Clinical Pathologist, Papworth Village Settlement, Cambridge).
G. Ivor Davies, Esq., M.D., M.R.C.S., D.P.H.,
{Medical Superintendent, Holt Sanatorium, Norfolk).
H. Morriston Davies, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S.,
{Medical Superintendent, Vale of Clwyd Sanatorium, Ruthin, Wales).
H. Davis, Esq., B.Sc., Ph.D., F.R.1.C.,
{Chief Pharmacist, Ministry of Health).
The late S. Roodhouse Gloyne, Esq., M.D., D.P.H.,
{Consultant Pathologist, King Edward VII Hospital, Midhurst, Sussex).
S. W. Milburn, Esq., M.8.E., M.C., F.R.1.8.A., T.D.,
{Architect).
Miss J. Reed, M.C.S.P.,
{Physiotherapist, Brompton Hospital for Diseases of the Chest, London).
H. F. Rutherford, Esq.,
{House Governor and Secretary, The Hospital for Sick Children, Gt. Ormond
Street, London).
T. Holmes Sellors, Esq., M.A., D.M., F.R.C.S.,
(Thoracic Surgeon, Middlesex Hospital, London).
J. E. Stokes, Esq., M.A., M.D., D.P.H.,
{Chest Physician, Lewisham Group Hospital Management Committee).
The Rev. D. Hubert Thomas, 8.A.,
{Assistant Secretary, The Free Church Federal Council).
C. Price Thomas, Esq., F.R.C.S.,
{Surgeon, Westminster Hospital, London).
L. Thomas, Esq.,
{Group Engineer, Cleveland Hospital Management Committee).
The Rev. Herbert Waddams,
{Chaplain to His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury ).
H. E. The Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster.


CONTENTS
Chapters Pages
Foreword .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . 7
Introduction .. .. . . . . .. . . . . . . .. 9
1. The Beginnings and Development of Sanatorium Treatment {para. 1-4) .. 13
2. The Sanatorium Site {para. 5-22) .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
3. Size of the Sanatorium {para. 23-30) .. . . .. .. .. . . 22
4. Structure of the Building {para. 31) .. . . .. . . . . .. 25
5. Number of Storeys {para. 32-36) . . . . .. . . .. . . 26
6. Windows {para. 37-44) . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . 28
7. Balconies {para. 45-47) .. .. .. . . . . . . . . .. 30
8. The Roof {para. 48) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
9. Ward Units {para. 49-53) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
10. Doors {para. 54) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
11. Sanitary fittings and Plumbing {para. 55-60) . . ~ . . . . .. 35
12. Electric Lighting and Fittings {para. 61—73) • • • • • • • • • • 38
13. Heating {para. 74—82) .. .. .. . . .. . . . . . . 43
14. Floor Covering {para. 83-86) .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 47
15. The Elimination of Noise {para. 87—90).. .. .. .. .. .. 49
16. Interior Decorating {para. 91—92) .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
17. Equipment of Rooms {para. 93-101) .. .. .. .. .. .. 51
18. Ward Services {para. 102-113) . . .. . . . . . . .. .. 54
19. Indoor Cleaning {para. 114) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 58
20. Garbage Disposal {para. 115-118) .. . . . . . . . . . . 58
21. Sputum Disposal (para. 119-126) .. .. .. .. .. .. 60
22. Kitchen and Food Transport {para. 127-135) . . . . . . . . .. 62
23. Washing of Dishes {para. 136) . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 65
24. Laundry {para. 137-139) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 66
25. Facilities for Major Surgery {para. 140-144) .. .. .. .. . . 67
26. Pathology and Research {para. 145-146) . . . . . . . . .. 70
27. Mortuary {para. 147) . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. 73
28. X-ray Department {para. 148-151) .. . . .. .. .. . . 73
29. The Physiotherapy Department {para. 152-157) .. . . ~ . . 75
30. Occupational Therapy {para. 158-163) . . . . . . . . .. 78
31. Recreational Facilities {para. 164) .. .. .. .. .. .. 81
32. The Pharmaceutical Department {para. 165—168) . . . . .. .. 81
33. Out-patient Department and Other Facilities {para. 169-171) . . .. 83
34. Children’s Block {para. 172-175) . . .. . . . . . . . . 84
35. Staff Accommodation {para. 176-183) . . . . .. . . . . . . 86
36. Accommodation for Patients’ Relatives {para. 184) .. .. .. . . 90
37. Sanatorium Administrative Block {para. 185-188) .. . . . . .. 91
38. Chaplain’s Department {para. 189-191) .. . . .. . . .. 93
39. Stores and Maintenance Departments {para. 192-198) .. . . . . 94
40. The Design of Sanatoria for Tropical and Semi-Tropical Climatic Conditions
{para. 199-211) 97
Conclusion {para. 212-214) . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 103
Illustrations . . .. .. .. .. . . . . . . .. i-xvi
Plans .. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. xvii-xx
Index .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 105


ILLUSTRATIONS
Page
Berks and Bucks Joint Sanatorium, Peppard Common. The “10 bed block ”
(1910) i
Berks and Bucks Joint Sanatorium, Peppard Common. “ Kingwood,” adapted
for women patients (1915) . . .. . . .. . . . . .. . . i
Sanatorium “ Zonnestraal ” Hilversum, Holland .. . . . . . . . . ii
Paimio Sanatorium, Preitila, Finland .. .. . . . . .. .. ii
Masson Sanatorium, Trinidad, British West Indies. . . . . . . . .. iii
King Edward VII Sanatorium, Midhurst, Sussex .. .. .. .. . . iv
Sully Hospital, Glamorgan, Wales. Entrance front . . .. . . .. iv
King Edward VII Sanatorium, Midhurst, Sussex. New surgical wing .. v
King Edward VII Sanatorium, Midhurst, Sussex. New surgical wing.
Patient’s room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . v
Broomfield Hospital, Chelmsford, Essex. Second floor balcony .. . . . . vi
Sully Hospital, Glamorgan, Wales. Typical ward interior. .. . . .. vi
Panel Heating. Arrangement of system during progress of work. . . . .. vii
Surgeons’ Lavatory Basins .. .. . . .. . . .. . . .. viii
King Edward VII Sanatorium, Midhurst, Sussex. Main kitchen . . . . ix
Biirgerspital, Basle, Switzerland. Kitchen .. . . . . .. . . .. ix
Food trolleys .. .. .. . . . . . . . . .. .. .. x
Mearnskirk Sanatorium, Scotland. Children’s pavilion .. . . .. . . xi
Mearnskirk Sanatorium, Scotland. Children at play . . .. .. . . xi
Biirgerspital, Basle, Switzerland. Theatre and sterilising room . . .. .. xii
Mearnskirk Hospital, Scotland. Theatre for thoracic surgery . . .. .. xiii
Biirgerspital, Basle, Switzerland. Pathological laboratory .. .. .. xiv
X-Ray Department. Diagnostic room .. .. .. .. . . .. xv
X-Ray Department. Dark room .. .. .. .. .. .. . i xv
Broomfield Hospital, Chelmsford, Essex. Male nurses’ sitting room .. . . xvi
Plans —Sanatorium .. ~ .. .. . . . . . . .. .. xvii
Balconies and Windows .. .. .. .. . . . . xviii, xix, xx


FOREWORD
Some three years ago the NAPT felt that something
ought to be done to bring together modern ideas about the
design and construction of sanatoria and chest hospitals. A
special committee has held a number of meetings in the
intervening time and the present report is the result of its
labours.
The committee began by thinking of design chiefly from
the architectural standpoint. But as its experience grew,
other related questions began to assume equal importance.
It seemed unpractical to consider the actual building of a
sanatorium without at the same time paying some regard to
its equipment. Again, the functions of the sanatorium seemed
bound up with the work of the staff, and this in turn opened
still further avenues which, though not strictly architectural,
have a great deal to do with planning. So that this report
has tended to become a guide to the new sanatorium as a
whole, its design, equipment, and how these can best increase
the efficiency and lighten the labour of the staff.
The Committee are aware of the enormous development
still going on, and the innovations in material which offer
great scope to the planner. There is no finality in such
matters, but in this report we have tried to give a clear
picture of the most modern and effective methods open to
the designer.
For some years to come, at least in Britain, we fear that
little new sanatorium construction can be achieved. Other
building which has an important relationship to health—
houses and schools—will no doubt be given priority. We
believe that the time thus given us for reflection upon the
ideal requirements of a sanatorium for treating tuberculous


patients will allow still further developments, so that when
actual building commences, we may be able to offer our
patients something much better than was possible in the
days before the war. In this connection the committee are
sure that design, by contributing to convenience and comfort,
may have an important bearing on the problem of recruiting
nurses and other sanatorium staff.
Throughout this report we have felt it wiser not to
discuss costs, since these can hardly be considered stable.
Although we have sought to describe the most effective means
of design and construction, we have tried to avoid extravagant
suggestions, and we believe that our recommendations will
be found practical.
Varying views obtained from expert sources may not
have been completely harmonised. Consequently, in matters
of detail, it may appear that conflicting advice is given. The
reader will weigh the pros and cons in the circumstances of
his particular need, and we believe he will be glad to consider
these different opinions.
This report is offered to architects, members of regional
hospital boards and others who may be responsible for
building our sanatoria in the second half of the century.
The NAPT Sanatorium Architectural Committee will
remain in being, and hopes to issue supplements to this report
from time to time.


INTRODUCTION
Before considering the ideal form in bricks and mortar,
steel and concrete, which a sanatorium for treating the
tuberculous ought to take, we should first inquire the purpose
of such a building. Are sanatoria likely to be necessary in
Britain after the next twenty-five years ? What are the main
benefits, from a medical point of view, which we expect the
patients to derive from sanatorium treatment ?
It is well known that even patients who need no active
treatment recover from tuberculosis more quickly in a
sanatorium than in their own homes. In a sanatorium the
patient comes into contact with a great number of fellow
sufferers ; he sees people improving day by day, and in con-
sequence loses some of his fear. Most sanatoria have a fixed
daily routine, and the patient’s day is fully occupied so that
he has less time to brood on his symptoms.
The relationship between doctor and patient is of great
importance in a sanatorium as elsewhere. The almoner,
who is in close contact with the National Assistance Board,
will give advice and help in all financial and domestic
matters. The doctor, the nurse and the almoner can help
to put the new patient’s mind at rest.
Although the present acute shortage of beds makes it
impossible to give immediate sanatorium treatment to every
patient in need of it, we must affirm that this is the ideal to
be striven for. Patients have a better chance of an early
return to normal life if treated in a sanatorium than if they
are given even the best of conditions at home.
In the next few years it is unlikely that sanatorium
building in Britain will take place on a very large scale.


Other needs—houses, clinics and schools—will come first.
There will be time, therefore, after the publication of this
report, for the sanatorium idea in its newest expression to be
discussed and assimilated. We feel, however, that whatever
our readers may think of our opinions upon individual items,
they will be unable to escape the process of reasoning through
which we have reached them. If the basic ideas of sanatorium
care are properly understood, the structure which is built on
such foundations will fulfil its requirements, whatever
differences there may be in detail.


NOTE ON ADAPTATION OF EXISTING PREMISES
Sometimes it happens that large mansions are presented
for hospital purposes, and there is an understandable
temptation to think that it is cheaper to convert such a
building into a sanatorium rather than face the expense of
new construction. This impulse should be firmly resisted.
Modern hospital architecture is so specialised that it is nearly
impossible to adapt an existing building for the purpose.
Permanent inconvenience, high maintenance costs, and
future structural adaptations are the result of many of these
well-meant but short-sighted schemes for using an old
building. There is more, however, to be said for using
converted mansions as nurses’ homes, although even here
the cost of adaptation may be high.
Generally speaking, therefore, adaptation of an existing
building is unsatisfactory, and in the long run expensive. In
cases of urgent need for accommodation, however, it may be
found expedient as a temporary measure to adapt an existing
hospital as a sanatorium. Buildings such as redundant fever
hospitals might be considered. One great advantage is that
they usually possess facilities for the disposal of sputum and
for disinfection.




I. THE BEGINNINGS AND DEVELOPMENT OF
SANATORIUM TREATMENT
I
Although the credit of being the first to treat
tuberculosis in the fresh air belongs to an English-
man, George Bodington (1799-1882), the method
did not come into regular use until long after his
death. Bodington maintained a private house
where his patients were treated under sanatorium
conditions. It was, however, in Germany under
Dr. Hermann Brehmer that the modern sanatorium
method of treatment was developed. He built his
sanatorium at Gorborsdorf (Silesia) in 1859, and in
1888 Dr. Otto Walther, following the same lines,
opened a similar institution at Nordrach (in the
Black Forest), which became even better known.
2
Both these pioneers emphasised the importance
of a general open-air regime rather than a particular
type of climate, but for some time prejudice per-
sisted against any similar attempt at treatment in the
climate of England. Patients from Britain were
sent to Continental health resorts and especially to
Switzerland, where the open-air method was greatly
developed.
3 ~
In the year 1887 Sir Robert Philip opened the
first tuberculosis dispensary or clinic at Edinburgh,
and soon afterwards, about 1890, an open-air
13
THE BEGINNINGS AND DEVELOPMENT OF SANATORIUM TREATMENT


sanatorium was attached to it. At the beginning of
the century, mainly through the branches of the
NAPT, funds were being found to build sanatoria
up and down the country. The King Edward VII
Sanatorium was opened at Midhurst in 1904, and
the Brompton Hospital Sanatorium at Frimley in
the same year. About the year 1936 major opera-
tions on the chest became more frequent, and new
methods of anaesthesia producing greater comfort
and safety for the patient began to be used.
4
After the Second World War, a remarkable
drug named streptomycin, and other medicaments,
of which para-aminosalycilic acid is an example,
came into use. We cannot say what influence these
and other innovations in treatment are likely to have
in the future, but they will certainly affect to some
extent the planning of new sanatoria.
We have not, however, allowed such considera-
tions to weigh with us in the preparation of this
report. We hold the belief that the fundamental
requirements of the tuberculous patient —rest under
open-air conditions —will always be the same, what-
ever additional improvements in drug treatment
may be introduced.
2. THE SANATORIUM SITE
5
In days gone by, when the sanatorium idea was
new, the cure of tuberculosis was associated with
14
THE SANATORIUM SITE


mountain tops and pinewoods, and many of the
early sanatoria were placed at inconvenient dis-
tances from roads and railways. Isolation became
a sort of symbol or fetish for sanatorium treatment.
Many of our institutions still in use today suffer
practical inconvenience from the fact that our pre-
decessors placed them too far away from centres of
population.
6
What value, if any, can we ascribe to such
features today ? We understand more fully than
we did the part change of scene can play in a
person’s health. A change of environment from
moist low levels is stimulating, and can improve the
general physical condition of the healthy as well as
the sick, while return from high altitudes to sea level
may have a depressing effect. The choice of
patients for Alpine treatment requires considerable
experience and discretion, and a knowledge of the
environment to which they will return. Elevations
of a few hundred feet usually provide a sufficient
sense of freshness for town dwellers, and are generally
good. Equable climatic conditions, which avoid
extremes of daily and seasonal temperature change
are also desirable. There is no particular virtue in
high altitude alone.
Climate is not nowadays thought so important
in the treatment of tuberculosis as it used to be.
Patients can get well in very varied surroundings.
15
THE SANATORIUM SITE


Nevertheless, if we can choose a good site with a
suitable climate, we have made a big contribution
to the healing value of a building that is due to
last perhaps for the next thirty to fifty years.
8
The immediate environment of the sanatorium
itself should be rural or semi-rural. Trees, views
and freedom from noise, smoke and factory con-
ditions constitute important factors in the restoration
of the body and the mind to health. Nonetheless
we do not think there can be any doubt nowadays
that in Great Britain the ideal sanatorium should
be placed within reasonable distance of a town,
large or small.
9
The use of such public services as telephone,
gas, electricity, main drainage and water supply is
assured by proximity to a town. Fire risk may be
considerable in certain types of sanatorium con-
struction, and fire fighting arrangements are usually
adequate in centres of population. Main railway
and road services are also available. Admission of
patients is easier, and relatives and friends can visit
more readily. The cost of transporting fuel, repair
materials, consumable supplies and equipment of all
kinds is lowered. Nearness to a bus route will
mean much to the medical and nursing staff who
spend their lives in the institution. To be able to
16
THE SANATORIUM SITE


offer facilities for going to the cinema, or shopping
and for meeting friends, is an important asset which
will materially assist the matron when she is en-
gaging nursing and domestic staff. The patients
like to be near their relatives, and generally prefer
not to be too far away from the scene of their
ordinary life. Anything which can take away from
harassed tuberculous patients the notion that they
are “ lepers ” or outcasts from society is of benefit
to sanatorium treatment.
10
Steep hillsides should be avoided, and the main
run of the buildings should lie along a single contour
of the ordnance map so that unnecessary foundation
works may be avoided. In a building consisting of
a single storey a gentle fall of the ground to the south
will give the patients a good view. In a building of
several storeys, a level site is an advantage from the
point of view of amenity, although a fall to the back
may be helpful in the practical problem of services,
since a basement floor can be more easily ap-
proached there.
II
The physical characters of a site are very im-
portant. A porous surface soil over a well drained
subsoil is the ideal, as it assures the comfort and
convenience of patients while exercising out of doors.
17
THE SANATORIUM SITE


12
In England, a southerly aspect is desirable for
patient accommodation, but some deflection towards
the east is preferable to avoid the glare and heat of a
westering sun. For the same reason, any marked
turning of the main frontage to the west is to be
avoided. In warmer climates, of course, the layout
of the buildings should be planned to minimise the
glare of direct sunlight on the main windows.
13 ~
The area of the sanatorium grounds should be
adequate to assure reasonable privacy and freedom
from the noises of traffic or industry. This requires
careful attention in view of the tendency to build
near towns. It should be remembered that all
hospital buildings tend to expansion, and their
services must also have room. As the latter develop
they are too apt to encroach on patient accommoda-
tion and may create noise, odour, or cinder nuisance
within the grounds. Those who plan and build
should try to visualise the future. It is rare for
institutions to be conceived on too large a scale ;
but the opposite mistake is common. Heed must
be paid to all the services which may be required
including facilities for vocational training, and to
possible extensions of bed accommodation. The
needs of patients and staff for outdoor recreation
should also be considered.
18
THE SANATORIUM SITE


~ 14 “
While the expense of providing lock-up garages
may not be justified, space should be allowed for
the parking under cover of vehicles used by doctors,
nurses, committee members, relatives of patients
and other visitors. The storage of fuel also requires
considerable space.
15
A sanatorium is not merely a hospital where
certain medical and technical services are carried
out. It becomes for many patients their home for
months and even years. Landscape gardening,
trees, attractive pathways, are features which will
pay dividends in the general well-being of those
who live in the sanatorium, and will increase its
prestige among the public.
16
The layout of the grounds should be considered
before construction begins. On a new site every
effort should be made to preserve noble trees. In
laying out ornamental grounds, however, regard
must be paid to the ultimate size which any trees
may attain. As a rule, a distance at least twice the
maximum height to which a particular species grows
should be allowed between trees and buildings.
Excessive shade on the southern aspect should be
avoided.
19
THE SANATORIUM SITE


If possible a landscape architect should be
consulted, especially if the site is of particular
beauty, or if the size of the development justifies it.
I?
Adequate water supplies should be distributed
about the grounds for the preservation of plants and
grass in dry periods. Regard must be paid to fire
risks, and valves for hose connections with good
water pressure must be available. A reducing
valve at the point of entrance of the supply to the
property may be an economy, but it should be
possible to bypass this without delay in the event of
fire, provided, of course the pressure in external
mains is high enough. Hose fittings should be
interchangeable with those of the fire services of the
area.
18
When we emphasise the desirability of an ade-
quate area for the site, we are reminded that dairy
farms, poultry runs, gardens and orchards were
frequently associated in sanatorium plans. These
may not be strict essentials of sanatorium life, but
a barrier of such rural amenities will have perpetual
benefit where there is the threat of future encroach-
ment of population and industry on the sanatorium
boundary.
19
Perhaps the greatest nuisances near large towns
are smoke, noises and odours from industry. It is,


therefore, desirable to plan the sanatorium with this
in mind. A school nearby can be a source of noise.
No sanatorium should be within half a mile of a
railway, and aerodromes should be more than
double that distance away. The power plant,
kitchen, laundry and workshops of the hospital
itself should be placed so that the prevailing wind
does not blow from them to the wards.
20
On the other hand the effect of the sanatorium
on its surroundings should not be ignored —the
possibility of smoke from the boiler chimney blowing
over a residential area, for instance. The presence
of a large new building in the district should also be
considered from the aesthetic point of view—the
“ sky-line ” from distant viewpoints should be
thought of, and hill tops avoided.
21
Before planning the buildings upon the chosen
site, the direction which traffic will take deserves
careful thought. Approach to main stores, boiler
plant, technical stores, workshops and garages
should be convenient, avoiding cross lines and
reducing the length of heavy duty roadway as much
as possible. Service roads within the grounds to
wards and administrative departments, from kitchen,
laundry and similar points, should be planned to
avoid cross traffic.
21
THE SANATORIUM SITE


22
It is well to avoid offence to the eye of patients
and visitors by making sure that no cemetery is on
the direct line of approach to the sanatorium, and
agreement should be reached with the local clergy
that patients dying in the sanatorium should not
be interred near at hand unless their homes are in
that area.
3. SIZE OF THE SANATORIUM
23
How big ought a sanatorium to be ? Let us
assume for the present that the sanatorium we are
planning is to be used chiefly, or exclusively, for
pulmonary cases, and that all the services necessary
for their complete treatment are to be in one place.
The size must be governed by the number of patients
for which one medical superintendent or physician-
in-charge can assume personal responsibility. He
should be able to get to know each patient individu-
ally. This does not mean, of course, that the
medical superintendent will not have assistant and
junior medical officers. Naturally he will not
himself carry out every detail of the treatment.
Nevertheless, his must be the final responsibility,
and since a medical superintendent has many
administrative duties in addition to his clinical
work, it follows that there must exist some limit to
the capacity of one man to give adequate supervision
to his patients.
22
SIZE OF SANATORIUM


24 ~
Human capacities naturally vary, but we think
that if the medical superintendent is to have proper
time to think over his cases, to know patients by
their names, to inspire their personal confidence, to
discuss details with his staff—in other words, be
regarded by the patient as the supreme arbiter of
his health for the time being —then we think that
the maximum number of patients which one man
can handle is between 200 and 240.
25
It may be desirable to place a larger number of
beds in the one institution. In this case, we think
that the medical head of each section should have
independent clinical control of not more than 240
beds, although for administrative purposes and
services the clinical block may be part of a larger
institution.
26
As modern treatment grows more complicated,
it is obvious that each patient needs more attention,
and therefore fewer patients can be handled by the
same number of staff. To this there is, however,
the strong counter-demand of economy by which all
our ideas must be tested. Pathological and surgical
facilities, among others, are costly, and uneconomic
in small units. A concentration of these services in
23
SIZE OF SANATORIUM


large institutions may reduce the cost, but makes
individual attention and personal contact between
staff and patients more difficult.
2?
In view of what has been said about the
desirability of the medical superintendent knowing
his patients extremely well, we feel that this
tendency to increase the size of institutions in order
to bring down costs should be resisted. The finest
service we can give our tuberculous patients depends
on skilled and intimate medical supervision. Such
“ service ” is even more vital than “ services,” and
the best of these will fail, unless the medical staff
have leisure to observe and handle the “ patient-
situation.”
28
There are many well-known examples in
England of sanatoria containing about 200 patient
beds where the senior member of the medical staff
maintains intimate contact with them all. These
have provided the ideal atmosphere for tuberculous
patients and the irregular discharge rate from such
sanatoria is small.
29
In rural areas smaller sanatorium units will be
required. But there has to be a minimum, as well
as a maximum, and we believe that no institution


can be efficiently run for fewer than 50 patients,
and institutions of less than 100 beds will be expen-
sive if they are to have their fair share of services
and amenities. In such sparsely populated areas,
compromise between the optimum size of hospitals
and the travelling problems of patients and relatives
is necessary.
—3O
It is usual to describe a hospital as providing a
certain number of patient beds. But it is true of
sanatoria, even more than of other institutions, that
the actual patient accommodation is only a small
part of the total structure. A modern sanatorium
tends to be a self-contained community, requiring
diverse services and interests that will satisfy all
reasonable demands for intellectual occupation,
social life and vocational training. Assuming that
accommodation is planned to achieve segregation
of the total sputum positive population (allowing a
minimum of 2.5 beds per annual death from the
disease, and an average stay of 18 months) the
success of such a programme depends at least as
much upon the equipment and the amenities as
upon mere number of beds.
4. STRUCTURE OF THE BUILDING
3i
The important question of whether the building
should be of brick, of reinforced concrete, or with a
steel frame-work, will have to be settled by the
25
STRUCTURE OF THE BUILDING


architect, and the choice will vary according to local
conditions, size of the building, and available funds.
It should be remembered, however, that many of
the matters subsequently considered in this report
will have to be modified in the light of the material
actually used for the building. One important
matter —that of prevention of noise—depends to a
large extent upon the structure of the building.
Where ducts or a steel frame are used, noises from
footsteps, radios, and water-taps are magnified and
this point should be considered carefully in the
design. Further reference to this question is made
in paras. 87-90.
5. NUMBER OF STOREYS
32
Now we come to the shape and general plan
of the sanatorium block. The main patient
accommodation, planned with the frontage east of
south, may be somewhat severe in appearance if
the line is not broken. There is no need for the
buildings to be laid out in a simple geometrical
pattern. “ Grouping ”of blocks, and a variation
in the number of floors in each block might produce
a more pleasant impression. The problem differs
from that of planning a hospital for the acute sick
as “ long-stay ” patients require a type of building
more domestic in character than the somewhat for-
bidding multi-storeyed “monoblock” type favoured
for hospitals nowadays.
26
NUMBER OF STOREYS


33
How high should the sanatorium unit be ?
At the beginning of this century the tc bungalow 5 5
type of architecture was considered the best for
sanatorium buildings. Of recent years the reverse
tendency has been in operation, and sanatorium
buildings have risen high into the air. This is
expecially true where land is expensive, and where
the sanatorium block has to be placed in close
proximity to other buildings as, for instance, in a
city, or the grounds of an existing hospital.
34
Two of the principles of modern hospital design
are to reduce the travelling distance and the area of
surfaces which have to be cleaned.
-35“
A sanatorium functions around its main services.
A clear choice must therefore be made, at an early
stage of the planning, regarding the preparation and
distribution of food : between centralised and in-
dividual treatment rooms for each ward : between
horizontal and vertical travel by staff. The classic
pavilion type of sanatorium architecture ensures a
maximum degree of fresh air, but installation,
maintenance and running costs are very high ;
27
NUMBER OF STOREYS


there are lengths of corridor to be kept clean ;
services must often be unnecessarily duplicated, and
heating costs are substantially increased. Nursing
and domestic staff must also walk very much farther
than in a vertical type of construction.
36
For new buildings we favour a compromise
between these two extremes. In our view, the most
convenient arrangement is a building of not more
than three storeys with approximately 80 beds on
each floor, divided into “ ward units.”
6. WINDOWS
37
At least 70 per cent of the frontage of a sana-
torium room should be of glass, provided glare inside
is avoided by suitable screening, and practically all
of this, except for small fixed panes above the sill,
should open. But as well as ensuring fresh air and
sunshine it is important to give good protection
against driving rain, and the type of window should
be carefully chosen to provide this. Louvred
jalousie shutters are not suitable in this country, and
it is better to set windows back from the face of the
building, or protect them with a canopy or shallow
balcony cover.
28
WINDOWS


- 3 8 -
The Casement Window is very generally used
in Britain, and this can be either metal or wood
framed. The casements should swing outwards in
two halves so that one or other can be opened against
the wind in case of driving rain.
39
A Fanlight should always be provided and
should be hinged at the top to open outwards.
Care should be taken to choose fittings that do not
rattle or work loose.
40
The Sliding Folding Window is much
favoured as the leaves fold to the side, in concertina
fashion, and give clear opening to almost any width
desired. The leaves must not exceed 2' 6" in width
and should move freely. These windows are
specially suitable for the “ verandah ” type ward.
41
An alternative is the Horizontal Sliding
Window. This is designed in six leaves, the end
two are fixed, but the four centre leaves slide
horizontally behind the two fixed leaves, thus
providing a two-thirds opening. This window has
nothing projecting to obscure the view and it can
be cleaned from the inside.


42
Glazed French Windows should open out-
wards in the same way as casements, and special
care should be taken to select a sill which is weather-
proof but not so high that it seriously hinders the
transport of beds.
43
Curtains. Light weight curtains which do
not greatly obstruct the light give a furnished
appearance and are greatly appreciated for the
privacy which they afford for nursing and dressing
procedures.
44
Railway Carriage type windows have also
been used and have the advantage that they do not
obstruct the view when opened. They are, how-
ever, not suitable for very low sills and there is
difficulty in keeping out the weather. It is practi-
cally impossible to clean out the recess into which
the sashes slide.
7. BALCONIES
-45-
Balconies, porches and verandahs of various
designs have always been popular in the treatment
of tuberculosis. Under favourable conditions they
30
BALCONIES


enable the patient to lie or sit in the open air. In
a one-storeyed building such balconies present no
problem, and a suitable canopy can be provided to
keep off rain and the direct rays of the sun, since
no interference with upper storeys is caused. But
where there is more than one storey, we have to
take into account the balcony extending from the
floor above with an inevitable darkening of the ward
below which in consequence may never see the sun.
Generally speaking, there are three ways in which
balconies can be constructed :
{a) A continuous balcony in front of patients’
rooms, about 8' wide. These shut out
light and air from patients’ rooms on the
floor below and are lacking in privacy.
{b) The terrace system : the front of each floor
in turn is set back 8' from the storey below,
so that no light and air is shut out from
patients’ rooms. This is a costly method
of construction and wasteful of space on the
lower floors.
{c) A continuous narrow balcony 4' wide and
in front of patients’ rooms. This system
is preferable to (a), but restricts the space
for beds which must be placed sideways.
In this case it is advisable to recess the
glazed door from ward to balcony at an
angle to allow the bed to be brought out
sideways.


- 46 -
As an alternative method the wards may be
designed on the verandah principle with large
windows which slide or fold back. This arrange-
ment takes the place of balconies, and the patient’s
bed can be wheeled right up to the window so that
he enjoys almost complete open air conditions. But
the window sill must be kept low so that the mattress
of the patient’s bed is level with the glass line. The
verandah method is satisfactory, although the
patient does not experience quite the same feeling
of pleasurable exhilaration as he derives from a
balcony.
In some of the French sanatoria there are
individual balconies for each single bed ward.
47
Another method of giving patients opportunities
for open air lying is what are known in German
sanatoria as Liegehalle —or “ reclining rooms.”
These can be arranged at the end of the sanatorium
wing, or inset into a main south wall, the latter being
preferable. Liegehalle at the end of a sanatorium
wing involve much transport of beds, a great dis-
advantage.
8. THE ROOF
- 4» -
A flat roof avoids dead space above the ceiling
which may harbour vermin or be a source of fire


risk. If suitably paved, provided with small heated
enclosures, and served by lifts, the main roof of a
multi-floored building is an ideal place for a tea
lounge, recreation facilities, and roof garden.
9. WARD UNITS
49
If we take 30 as a reasonable number of beds
for one ward unit accommodating ordinary medical
cases, we must consider that in a surgical ward the
number should be lower, 15 to 20 beds being
enough. The governing principle must be the
number of patients which can be satisfactorily
supervised by one sister or charge nurse.
50
The large wards, containing long double rows
of beds, found in older hospitals are now out of
favour, but in sanatoria there are some objections
to providing too many single rooms. Some patients
desire privacy while others need company. There
is always an advantage, however, in having several
single rooms. Generally speaking a convenient
arrangement for one medical “ ward unit ” of 30
beds would be six rooms containing four beds each,
and six rooms each with one bed. As an alternative
some of the smaller rooms might be arranged to hold
two beds. In a surgical ward at least one-fifth of
the total number of 15 to 20 beds should be in single
rooms, and one room should, in addition, be kept
available for emergencies.
G
33
WARD UNITS


51
Concerning floor space per patient in sanatoria
the Ministry of Health advise a minimum area of
90 sq. ft. in single-bed rooms, and in other rooms an
area of 80 sq. ft. per bed. This allowance is minimal
and is somewhat smaller than that recommended
for a general hospital, but the special opportunities
for fresh-air treatment in a sanatorium may allow
this. In view of the danger of cross infection with
streptomycin-resistant strains of the tubercle bacillus
this estimate may have to be revised.
52
Maternity units should be provided in every
complete sanatorium. There is growing apprecia-
tion of the fact that tuberculous women may bear
children with reasonable safety under proper con-
ditions. The maternity unit should include a
labour-room, delivery-room, nursing and sanitary
facilities.
53
Sanatorium management committees may con-
sider the need for providing a paying patients’
section, the accommodation and equipment of
which might be in the form of a mixed ward, and
the number under the charge of one sister should
be 20 beds or less.
10. DOORS
54
There is scope for new ideas in the design of
doors which should be at least 3' 10" wide to allow
34
DOORS


the passage of 3 ft. beds. The service corridor must
be wide enough to allow the free entrance of beds to
rooms. Noise from slamming doors can be avoided
by automatic checks. To simplify nursing super-
vision single rooms should have viewing windows in
the rear doors.
11. SANITARY FITTINGS AND PLUMBING
55
Modern construction which avoids the carrying
of weight on internal walls allows sectional partitions
to be built, which are readily moved to modify room
sizes. Where this plan is chosen it is necessary to
place sanitary fittings on the main walls only.
- 56 -
In the design of sanitary fittings and arrange-
ment of supplies and wastes, precautions should be
taken to avoid all crevices and ledges where dust
can collect. Horizontal runs should be avoided as
far as possible, as vertical pipes are not so liable to
collect dust. It is the present custom to place pipes
in ducts with removable covers ; but there is a
danger that dirt may collect in these ducts and it
may prove to be a case of “ out of sight, out of mind.”
To avoid this danger, pipes should be exposed and
fixed away from the wall on “distance” brackets.
35
SANITARY FITTINGS AND PLUMBING


57
It is not a satisfactory practice to fix sanitary
fittings away from the wall. They should be so
fixed that the tiled surrounds finish flush with the
coved edge of the fitting. It is not enough to place
the back of the fitting against the tiled surround, as
this leads to a vertical joint which will, in course of
time, tend to open up. Fireclay should be used in
preference to china for all sanitary fittings, in order
to reduce breakages. All traps, bends, etc., should
have easily removable caps so that stoppages can be
promptly cleared. It need hardly be stressed that
it is of the utmost importance to employ a first-class
plumbing firm to carry out this work as so much
depends on the design and the quality of the work.
- 58 -
Opinions differ as to the necessity or desirability
of a wash-hand-basin in patients’ rooms. It is
generally considered that in a small unit of one or
two patients confined to their beds, a basin is
desirable ; but it may be a disadvantage in a larger
ward where patients are ambulant and thus able to
go to an annexe to wash or shave. These
occasional visits, during which they meet other
patients, break the monotony, and are good for
morale.


59
Various points in the design of fittings should
be specially noted :
(a) Wash-hand-Basins. There should be a
“ Weir” overflow to all wash-hand-basins,
providing easy access for cleaning. Traps
should be chromium-plated and specially
designed to make the use of anti-siphonage
pipes unnecessary. Easy-clean high-
waisted pillar taps should be fitted so that
jugs and basins can be filled. Stainless
steel basins are now available but are
rather costly.
(b) W.C.s should be either “ corbel ” type
(which means they must be built in) or,
failing this, pedestal-type with rounded
angles. The low-level three-gallon flush-
ing cistern is easier of access than the plug
and chain variety. The health closet with
low seat is considered medically advisable,
and it should be possible to pass wheel
chairs over the pedestals. Stall urinals
should be eliminated : they are unhygienic
and noisy and an encouragement to spitting.
(c) Sinks can be of fireclay with hinged drain-
ing boards or better (though more costly)
stainless steel with “ integral ” draining
boards. The latter type has no concealed
surfaces for dirt and is more easily cleaned.
37
SANITARY FITTINGS AND PLUMBING


(d) Baths. The best type is the parallel-sided
porcelain-enamelled bath with rounded
end. For hospital work this is preferable
to the square type with panelled side.
The size should not be excessive as patients
and staff are inclined to use too much hot
water. It may be set away from the wall,
and be fitted with good grips to assist feeble
patients to lower and raise themselves.
6o
At all points in sanitary units there should be
provided suitable brackets or other means of carry-
ing sputum containers for the use of occupants, and
in each annexe there should be a separate sink or
basin for the cleansing of teeth. There will be a
wide dispersal of droplets of toothpaste, and an
adequate surround of easily polished, impermeable
material, such as glass, stainless steel or glazed
earthenware should be provided.
12. ELECTRIC LIGHTING AND FITTINGS
6i
Where a good main current supply is available
there is no advantage in generating electricity at the
hospital, and the increasing availability of main
supplies has made generation from waste steam a
less practical idea in the United Kingdom. A
secondary source of light should, however, be pro-
38
ELECTRIC LIGHTING AND FITTINGS


vided for the operating theatres. This can be pro-
duced either by a generating plant or by storage
batteries, the latter system being more usual.
62
It should be possible to renew the wiring or
install additional wires without disturbing the
structure or fabric of the building. The wiring
should be protected from damage in continuous
tubing which can be used for earthing the system.
“ 63
For general use the best method of carrying the
wires is in screwed metal conduits which can now
be obtained in aluminium. A special installation
is sometimes considered necessary in very damp
places, such as laundries. The new micro switch
is completely silent, but can be used only with
alternating current.
- 64 -
Three methods of electric lighting are in use
today :
[a) Tungsten. The use of the tungsten fila-
ment lamps is well understood.
[b) Fluorescent. Fluorescent lighting is in
increasing use owing to its superior effici-
ency ( i.e ., lumens per watt.). The cost of
both fittings and tubes is at present much
39
ELECTRIC LIGHTING AND FITTINGS


higher than for tungsten lighting and the
standard five feet tube is too long for use
over patients’ beds and in confined places.
When shorter tubes become general this
form of lighting will be capable of wider
application. Among other advantages,
fluorescent lighting does not produce any
appreciable rise in temperature. It should
be noted that at present the single tube is
unsatisfactory on account of its flickering
effect and some persons are more sensitive
to this than others. Patients also complain
that fluorescent lighting is too “ strong.”
Groups of tubes, however, so installed that
the flickering effect is eliminated, have been
found to give very satisfactory results for
operating theatre use.
(c) Cold Cathode. Cold cathode lighting is
sometimes preferred on account of its in-
stantaneous action and the very long life of
the tubes. Because of the high voltage at
which a tube operates, it is necessary to
place it at a safe height. The initial cost
is high.
- 65 -
Lighting in Wards. The ideal, single light
has not yet been devised for wards, but a com-
plicated wiring system with many control switches
for each patient should be avoided.


66
It is important that electric fittings should be
accessible to bed patients, including those who are
lying on surgical beds of the Fowler pattern. The
raising of the head-end of such a bed moves the
patient farther from the wall behind. Flexes on
call-bells and wireless headphones, and cords on
light switches should therefore be of adequate length.
67
Reading in bed should be enjoyed without
fatigue to the eyes, and an adjustable arm carrying
a light clamped to the head of the bed is often
appreciated. A projecting light bracket fixed to the
wall above the head of the bed is not as convenient
as an adjustable arm fixed to the bed. The former
lights the bed table when the patient sits up but
causes glare in the face if he lies down.
68
A central ceiling fixture should be so shaded
that the direct rays of the lamp do not reach the
patients’ eyes in any position they are likely to
maintain. Night lights, recessed in walls, 12 to 18
inches above the floor and shielded by louvres
directing the rays downwards, are pleasant.
41
ELECTRIC LIGHTING AND FITTINGS


69
Radio. Where there is no public diffusion
service, a master set is usually installed giving a
choice of programmes. Either headphones or
under-pillow instruments may be used as these avoid
noise and disturbance of patients wishing to rest.
A multicore cable should be used from the beginning
to provide selection of programme.
70
Gall System. This may be either by :
(a) Telephone.
(b) Loudspeaker.
(c) Buzzer.
(d) Coloured lights.
For (c) and [d) codes are necessary. The direct
telephone type has the advantage over visual and
buzzer systems of enabling patients to talk to the
nurse on her arrival at the station. This reduces
walking in the wards and corridors. For serious
cases and in single wards a useful fitting to enable
the nurse to be called by the patient is a bell-push
on the wall. There should also be a socket in which
an extension with a pear push can be plugged. This
pear push can be held in the patient’s hand. Call
buttons should be fitted in bathrooms and toilets.
Technical development in call systems continues
and their correct use can enable the medical, nursing
and administrative staff to work more swiftly and
efficiently.


71
Other Equipment. To run cleaning equip-
ment, polishing apparatus, and portable X-ray
plant, a sufficient number of power points, placed
at convenient positions in each ward, should be
installed.
72
Lighting in Corridors. Lighting in service
units and corridors should be good. It is a mistake
to cut down the illumination of parts used in
common. The lighting can be direct, provided it
is so placed that glare into bedrooms is avoided.
Indirect lighting has a softer, less tiring effect, but
is more expensive to run.
“ 73
Outside Lighting. Adequate lighting of
roadways and paths is necessary, but this should be
arranged so as not to disturb patients and should
be controlled by a master switch. At this point it
may be mentioned that drives should be planned to
prevent car headlamps from illuminating wards and
disturbing patients.
13. HEATING
-74“
On the subject of heating, expert opinion has
changed considerably in the last quarter-century.
Originally it was considered that an open-air
43
HEATING


sanatorium required no artificial heating. But
these spartan ideas have given way to the notion of
a temperature which can be regulated, and which
is sufficient to keep out the damp from clothes and
furniture. Heating is an important item in the
yearly budget of maintenance. It is also an ex-
pensive item in capital cost.
is
Panel Heating and Hot Water Radiators.
After a consideration of the advantages of hot water
radiators and of a system of radiation heating using
copper tubes buried in the floor and ceiling, it is
agreed that the most satisfactory form of heating
for a ward is to be obtained from hot water panels
embedded in the ceiling. But this is governed by
two important provisos : the ceiling must not be
too low and the temperature of the water in the
panel must not be too high, otherwise the radiant
heat from the panel is oppressive and irksome for
patients. Nowadays with modern boiler technique
it should be possible for the sanatorium engineer to
regulate the temperature of panel heating so that
it can vary each day with the temperature of the
outside air. This must be done with care, otherwise
panel heating becomes a nuisance. Control by in-
ternal and external thermostats is expensive to in-
stall, but ensures an even temperature and saves
fuel. If it is satisfactorily regulated, panel heating
can make an enormous contribution to the comfort
of patients in bed.


76
It was previously the practice to use water in
the panels at a temperature of i4O°F. or even higher.
It is now considered that the maximum temperature
at the calorifier should not exceed i2O°F. in cold
weather, and that it can be as low as ioo°F. in mild
weather. This requires the panel area to be larger
than previously, but the ceiling can be as low as
9 ft. without causing discomfort.
11
Since sterilising is now required for many
purposes and steam is generally used for this in all
parts of the sanatorium it can also be made available
for warming the water of the panel system by means
of calorifiers. Temperature control at the calorifiers
is a simple matter.
- 7 s -
In the past, hot water radiators have generally
been used in conjunction with a low pressure hot-
water heating system. It is well known that these so-
called radiators act largely by convection, that is, by
setting up a movement of warmed air. But windows
in a sanatorium may occupy the whole of one side of
the ward, and at least some of these are likely to be
open in all weathers. Consequently the high natural
rate of ventilation largely nullifies the effect of the
radiator, even if it has been fixed at the back of the


room. This does not apply to the ceiling panel,
which warms by radiation. Condensation on
furniture and clothes in damp weather is less be-
cause radiation from the panel tends to keep the
surface temperature of articles above that of the
atmosphere.
-79"
The embedded panel system is undoubtedly
more expensive in first cost. It requires more steel
and calls for some increase in building costs. It
can generally be applied only to concrete ceilings
and therefore, in a single storey structure, the build-
ing costs may be increased considerably. However,
since a lower air temperature is usually adequate,
the running costs of panel heating are lower, less
fuel is used, and this will compensate for increased
capital outlay.
8o
We do not wish to infer that heating by other
means is unsatisfactory. Many sanatoria have
ordinary hot water radiators, and are usually satis-
fied with the results. Protagonists of the radiator
system maintain that, among other advantages,
there is an accessible source of heat concentrated in
one spot, which is within easy reach of the inhabi-
tants of the room and this can be made use of for such
purposes as warming towels. Such a source of heat
is not available with the panel system.


Si-
lt is probable that the low temperature electri-
cally heated panels will turn out to be an improve-
ment on either the old fashioned radiator or the
embedded ceiling panel, because of the flexibility of
the system. These panels are easy to clean, can be
placed anywhere in the room, give out the gentle
radiant heat which is desirable and can be shut off
or turned on at will. At the moment the cost of
electric current is high, but with the advent of new
methods of obtaining electric power this may cease
to be a ruling factor.
82
Heating Ducts. Shallow pipe ducts accessible
only by lifting sections of flooring tend to harbour
vermin.
In general, underground ducts should be
commodious enough to permit the passage of work-
men, and the floor above should be intact. Ducts
between buildings may conveniently be enlarged
to serve as underground corridors. They avoid the
cross traffic on the surface and are less affected by
severe weather.
14. FLOOR COVERING
- 8 3 -
If not ventilated underneath, all ground floors
should have an adequate damp course. Floor
47
FLOOR COVERING


covering, or floor material, should be sound absorb-
ing, warm and non-slippery. The surface should
take a wax polish, be unaffected by oil, and not
liable to pitting. Most materials containing pitch
are unsuitable, as this is essentially a fluid, non-
crystalline substance which absorbs oil or wax
readily to its own detriment, and which flows away
from any stress imposed upon it, so that corru-
gations occur.
- 84 -
Sheet linoleum or tiles, laid over concrete should
be of Y thickness. If, for initial economy
material is used an underlying felt will be required.
Some architects prefer patterned linoleum as it is
less liable to show marks. “ Terrazzo ” for corridors,
borders, or in operating theatres and annexes re-
quires to be divided by vulcanite or metal strips to
limit its tendency to crack.
- 85 -
For patient and staff accommodation, there is
much to be said in favour of hardwood floors bedded
on concrete. Teak is ideal for this purpose, but
good alternatives are “ Korkoid ” or Battleship
linoleum.


86
Wherever there is a tendency for water to lie,
as in store rooms, sanitary annexes, mortuary,
kitchen or laundry, quarry tiles on the floors, and
glazed tiles forming a dado, 4' 6" to 5' high, are
desirable.
15. THE ELIMINATION OF NOISE
87
It is difficult to cut down noise, especially in
vertical architecture and its elimination is costly.
This is particularly so in sanatoria where the
windows are usually open. Steam, water and other
pipes in ducts beneath the floor, are sources of
extraneous sound. All possible measures should be
taken to reduce noise at its source. The staff should
be persuaded to wear rubber-heeled shoes, doors
should have silent closing devices, steel sinks and
draining-boards should be packed to prevent drum-
ming, and wheeled trolleys should have adequate
rubber tyres and buffers. There should be rubber
feet or rubber-tyred castors on chairs and other
much moved furniture. Radio loudspeakers and
individual receiving sets should not generally be
used on the wards, but each bed should be equipped
with headphones.
88
Main walls and floors should, because of their
density, reduce structure borne noises to a minimum
D
49
THE ELIMINATION OF NOISE


and if these members are drastically reduced by
skilful engineering, the consequent necessity for in-
sulating materials may involve considerable expense.
Partition walls, however, which must be light, should
be formed of good insulating material. Vertical
pipes should have insulated fixings and ducts should
be sealed at each floor.
89
Finishes for walls, floors and ceilings, which
should be both sound-absorbing and hygienic, must
be carefully selected, and some compromise is in-
evitable. Cork, linoleum and asphalt tile for
floors, and acoustic tiles and plasters for ceilings and
the upper parts of walls will help to deaden sound,
but the lower portion of the walls should be of hard-
wearing and washable materials.
90
There is now less objection made to the use
of curtains in wards upon sanitary grounds than
formerly, and these, apart from giving a pleasant
appearance, are useful sound-absorbers.
16. INTERIOR DECORATING
9i
Interior Decorating. Much can be done to
make the surroundings of the patients harmonious
by judicious selection of colours, and the best advice
50
INTERIOR DECORATING


on interior decorating should be sought. Pastel
shades and matt surfaces are often preferred, but a
smooth surface simplifies washing-down. Bold or
sombre hues should be avoided, even in cold
climates. The bare effect of long corridors can be
successfully broken by a few good reproductions.
92
The common-room accommodation of patients
deserves the attention of the skilled decorator. An
artist can completely transform a drab hospital
without a great increase in furnishing costs.
17. EQUIPMENT OF ROOMS
-93-
Patient beds should be 3' wide and for average
adults 6' 6" overall in length, accommodating a
6' 2" mattress without undue empty space at one
end. A proportion of f beds and mattresses is
welcome for tall men.
-94“
Beds should be resilient without sagging.
Good castors at least 4" in diameter are required at
the head end. Lifting wheels at the foot end should
be standard to allow for ready transport, but stub
legs serve to hold the bed steady and are preferable
to castors. Where patients are to be transported
regularly in their beds to “ salons de cure ” or
51
EQUIPMENT OF ROOMS


treatment rooms, 6" should be the minimum diam-
eter of the wheels. Care should be taken to have
head ends which are adjustable as back-rests, made
to clear the thickness of the mattress which will be
used. Sufficient vertical bars, usually seven, are
needed to prevent pillows working through the back
rest.
95
The bars of children’s cots must be sufficiently
close together to prevent young heads being squeezed
between them. Particular attention should be paid
to the space between the first vertical bar of the side
piece and the end of the cot.
96
Hospital mattresses require regular main-
tenance to preserve their resilience. They are
designed to ventilate as well as to ensure even
distribution of pressure. Thus the internal spring
mattress has advantages over any form of stuffing
such as horsehair or fibre alone. The spring mesh
type is more suitable for steam sterilisation than
pocketed coil springs. Protection from soiling or
infection of mattresses is readily achieved with a
rubberised, acid-resisting envelope cover, but venti-
lation is then sacrificed. Latex foam mattresses
have the same defect. Latex provides a convenient
mattress to handle and many patients are soon
accustomed to the lack of ventilation beneath them,


but others find rubber very uncomfortable even
when a double layer of underblanket is interposed.
Latex foam in an impermeable envelope is suitable
for children’s cots, the covering being readily
cleansed with an antiseptic solution.
97
Coloured blankets of bold hues rarely please all
tastes. Present-day dyes tend to bleach unevenly
in the wash. Pastel shades soil easily and have little
advantage over plain “ white,” which should be
generally used. Blankets can be protected by gaily
patterned counterpanes of washable cotton material.
-98-
Well-filled, good quality, down pillows are a
great contribution to the comfort of patients. A
small supply of alternative fillings may be necessary
for asthmatic patients.
99
Hot pipes may be led through built-in ward-
robes and will help to keep patients’ clothing aired.
Sufficient cupboard space, a bedside table or locker,
a bed table and a chair are necessary. A composite
locker bed-table fitment is sometimes favoured but
may be difficult for a recumbent or feeble patient
to manoeuvre. The locker top may be of plastic
material, resistant to heat. Whatever material is
employed, it should be readily replaceable.


100
It is the practice in certain American sanatoria
to provide each small ward with a toilet room on
one side of the door and a dressing cubicle on the
other, as in some hotels. This deserves considera-
tion as~ an alternative to placing a wardrobe and
basin in the room itself.
ioi
Two simple wall fittings are often omitted from
the rooms of patients as well as from the office
accommodation of doctors and other ward staff.
They are mirrors and occasional picture hooks.
Both should be supplied.
18. WARD SERVICES
102
Every ward requires a small kitchen furnished
with sufficient cupboard space for all china, glass
and cutlery, a cooking plate for making hot drinks,
etc., a water boiler for the tea service, a hot cup-
board for warming plates and a refrigerator of the
household size for storage of day-to-day perishable
food. There should be ample space for food trolleys
and trays, unless there are full facilities for the direct
serving of all food from central kitchen to ward.
54
WARD SERVICES


103
Washing-up facilities should be centralised as
far as possible, and it is important that adequate
lift service and good floor surfaces from wards to
washing-up centre should be provided. If a central
service is not provided, there should be sculleries
adjoining the wards for the washing-up sinks and
crockery sterilisers.
104
Each ward should have a warm, well-ventilated
linen cupboard, but there should also be a central
linen store. Soiled linen should be collected in
hampers or bags on wheels, by staff wearing pro-
tective masks and gloves, and conveyed to a special
room with an external door. In multi-floored
buildings a chute may be provided down which all
soiled linen can be shot to ground level.
105
Each ward unit requires a clinical room with
shelves, sink and bench to be used for simple testing
and routine pathology. A Bunsen burner is essential,
and if coal gas is not available, Calor gas should be
used. The usual equipment for urine testing should
be provided.
106
A chair and trolley room for ward transport
equipment avoids clutter on corridors. It should
be large enough to contain splints, fracture boards
and other impedimenta.
55
WARD SERVICES


icy
The former practice of providing a drying
room for outdoor clothes is less common today,
chiefly because of the change which has taken place
in methods of medical treatment and the consequent
reduction in the number of ambulant patients at
any one time. Where it is necessary to dry clothes,
it is much more efficient to use a drying cabinet
capable of accommodating a dozen garments at a
time Men appreciate a “ smalls ” laundry, ironing
facilities and an airing cabinet as much as women
patients.
108
A hot water-bottle filling tap with a supply
through a steam heating valve or drawing from a
special source is always appreciated by nursing
staff and patients. For airing beds or providing
additional heat to “ shocked ” patients however,
the modern electric blanket is superior to both hot-
water bottles and electric light baths. This type
of blanket sometimes causes interference with radio
reception.
109
A hairdresser’s room with mirror and basin and
a suitable chair is a welcome addition to ward
services for both male and female patients.


no
An unheated flower room is desirable, and the
housemaid’s cupboard should be roomy. The slop
sink may be adjacent to these facilities.
in
In the sluice room there should be bed-pan
washers and sterilisers with heated racks. It is the
modern practice to displace earthenware and
aluminium with stainless steel. Racks for male
bottles, conveniently made of glass or Pyrex ware
are needed. In a compact building it may be
possible to centralise the bed-pan service. A central
unit with a standby is capable of handling the whole
service of a 240-bed hospital if there are a sufficient
number of bed-pans. Such a unit can save time in
the ward, but trolleys constructed for the purpose
are needed, as well as an efficient lift-service.
112
Changing rooms with suitable washing facilities
must be provided for all nursing and ward domestic
staff, expecially since the wearing of protective
clothing is usual. Separate toilet facilities for male
and female personnel are needed.
113
Where the layout of a sanatorium is reasonably
compact, neither food nor beverages should be taken
by the staff in any part of the ward unit. After
57
WARD SERVICES


removing their protective clothing and washing
hands and faces they should be able to go to a
centrally placed buffet for refreshments. Ward
duties should be so arranged that such breaks are a
routine in the time-table. Even in very scattered,
pavilion-type institutions, staff refreshments on the
wards should be discouraged and an effort made to
provide these at a central point. Failing such an
arrangement, staff rest rooms to which they may
retire for refreshment are required on the wards.
19. INDOOR CLEANING
114
To make cleaning more effective the corners of
rooms should be rounded, and narrow edges or
mouldings avoided. A central vacuum cleaning
plant, though expensive to install and hard work to
operate because of heavy hoses, ensures thorough
cleaning, ij" highly polished tubes are sunk into
the walls and opened into the skirting at different
levels. The accumulated dirt is emptied at a point
near the incinerator. An oiled sweeping compound
should be used to reduce dust where such vacuum
connections are not available.
20. GARBAGE DISPOSAL
ns
This is an important problem in ward manage-
ment. Staff should be coached in the idea of dis-
posal at frequent intervals. This can only be done
58
INDOOR CLEANING AND GARBAGE DISPOSAL


if the arrangements are well planned, with pro-
vision for collection, and frequent renewal and
cleansing of receptacles.
116
Garbage can be divided into edible, burnable,
and non-burnable. Refrigeration of garbage has
been used outside the United Kingdom and has
gained popularity, but if this is not possible, covered
receptacles on an impervious base which can be
frequently washed, are required. Cover from the
weather and protection from the winds is needed to
avoid odour reaching the patients and staff. Edible
waste, for feeding to livestock, should be carefully
separated and selected, avoiding citrus fruit skins,
tea leaves, egg shells, and salt in large quantities.
If solid fuel is in use for any purpose an ash bin is
also required.
117
Sputum disposal is generally carried out at a
central point (see paras. 119-126), but a room
should be provided for the collection of used con-
tainers, and storage and distribution of clean vessels.
118
The sanitary towel problem for staff and
patients is conveniently solved (if gas is available)
by ward destructors, but the electrical equivalent
has not yet been satisfactorily developed. The
alternative of covered pails and disposal at a central
destructor is still widely in use.
59
GARBAGE DISPOSAL


21. SPUTUM DISPOSAL
119
The safe destruction of what is after all the most
dangerous source of infection in any sanatorium,
namely, the sputum coughed up from diseased lungs,
is a most important problem. In essentials, it
means removing the sputum from the patient’s
bedside promptly and in such a manner that it is
not spilled or allowed to dry and then making it
innocuous. The amount of handling in its disposal
should be reduced to a minimum and the staff
concerned should wear rubber gloves and masks.
120
There are two effective ways of tackling the
problem ; either steam sterilisation under pressure
of the sputum mugs, flasks, and their contents, or the
use of waxed cartons which are incinerated with the
sputum. As the apparatus required for each
method is quite different, preliminary planning is
important.
121
No system of sputum disposal can be really
effective unless patients themselves are aware of the
possibilities of infection and suitably trained in co-
operating with the staff to avoid them.
60
SPUTUM DISPOSAL


122
Steam sterilisers are available which can deal
with 72 sputum mugs or a very much larger number
of pocket flasks every half-hour, returning these
receptacles washed and sterile with no more hand-
ling than is required to put them into their places
on special trays.
123
This apparatus should be housed in a special
room centrally placed, with floor, walls and shelving
of impermeable materials, for easy disinfection. It
should be in the charge of a porter who may be an
ex-patient trained for the job, and the premises
should be overhauled from time to time by the
bacteriologist. The trolleys used for transporting
the sputum receptacles from the bedside to the
steriliser should be of metal to facilitate disinfection.
124
A better plan, but costing more initially, is
to install a smaller steriliser in each pavilion or
ward unit. This could be placed in the sluice room
which would have to be suitably designed for the
purpose. The higher cost would be offset by the
saving in labour, and the ideal of prompt disposal
of infectious material would be more nearly
approached. But such separate units require some
degree of supervision.
61
SPUTUM DISPOSAL


125
Superficially the use of waxed cartons which are
burnt with their contents in an incinerator would
appear to be the perfect method of disposal. There
are, however, some draw-backs. If the cartons are
used dry, there is some risk of the sputum drying up
before disposal, while the use of disinfectant inter-
feres with the incineration. The cartons are light
and easily knocked over. If fixed in metal con-
tainers these have to be sterilised separately. The
cost of the cartons is a recurring item which cannot
be ignored. In a large institution where steam is
already available for other purposes, steam sterilisa-
tion is certainly the cheaper method.
126
The success of either of these systems will
depend to a large extent on the way it is worked
by the sanatorium staff, and from time to time it is
desirable that the procedure should be examined
and routine tests made by the bacteriologist.
22. KITCHEN AND FOOD TRANSPORT
12?
It is sometimes forgotten what a big part the
ideas and thoughts connected with food play in the
life of a person who is chronically sick and obliged
to stay in one institution for a period of months at a
time. Everyone knows that even under favourable
62
KITCHEN AND FOOD TRANSPORT


circumstances, monotony tends to creep into diet.
We are not, however, concerned here with the
science of dietetics, but with the physical means by
which food is cooked and prepared. We believe
that it will pay the authority who designs a sana-
torium to give special attention to the kitchen
premises, and, equally important, to the means by
which food is conveyed to the patients.
128
We favour a large central kitchen with suitably
grouped rooms for storage and preparation. From
this the food is conveyed to the patients by electric-
ally heated trolleys, so that every patient, whether
he can eat in the dining-room or not, will have his
food on heated plates. The food itself will be hot
and, provided the containers are of suitable type,
the taste will not have been spoilt by delay in trans-
port.
129
The main kitchen, with its ancillary accommo-
dation, should be situated so as to minimise the
distance over which food will have to be trans-
ported to the various wards or departments. When
planning the kitchen, adequate floor space, good
light and ventilation are prime necessities. If roof
lighting and ventilation are used, great care must
be taken over the placing of fanlights because of
possible heat and glare in summer and draughts in


winter. The kitchen is one department of a hospital
where economies should not be made without con-
sulting those who will work there —the cooks.
Before the final plan is drafted, the exact types and
styles of cooking must be known, as well as the
approximate numbers to be catered for at each
meal, so that a proper assessment of the cooking
equipment required can be made.
130
Consideration must be given to the heating
services available — i.e., gas, electricity, steam and
solid fuel. It is inadvisable to rely on gas or elec-
tricity alone for cooking because, should that supply
fail, there is a complete breakdown of the service
of food.
131
Grouped around the kitchen should be pre-
paration rooms for vegetables, fish, meat, cakes and
pastry, as well as a small diet kitchen, and it is
important that all should have convenient access
to the washing-up sculleries.
132
Still-rooms with cold storage and hot plates for
the service of food to the thermostatic trolleys are
essentials. Accommodation adjacent to the still-
rooms must be provided for these trolleys, so that


they can be wheeled to the respective counter or
hot-plate for loading, thus assuring that there is the
best service of food in perfect condition to the
patient. Each trolley should have a separate
electricity power point.
133
A milk room with proper cold storage is
required, as well as adequate refrigeration rooms
for meat and fish. A bread room where all the
bread and butter for the patients can be expertly
cut and spread is an advantage as well as an
economy.
134
The block may include various dining-rooms,
each self-contained with its own service. Separating
doors between the kitchen and other departments
and various service doors should be sound-proof.
135
In addition an office will be required for the
head of the department. Lavatory and changing
rooms should, of course, be provided for the staff,
and a staff-room is advisable.
23. WASHING OF DISHES
136
Washing plates and dishes is an important
feature in any sanatorium. With modern methods
it ought to be possible to sterilise every dish without
E
65
WASHING OF DISHES


an undue proportion of breakages. This is a more
important element in sanatorium life than is gener-
ally realised. Many patients have an exaggerated
fear of infection, particularly infection from others,
as they realise that the majority of sanatorium
patients discharge infection at some time during
their illness. Methods of sterilising plates and
cutlery must, therefore, not only be efficient ; they
must give confidence to the patient, and preserve
in his mind the idea that he comes to no harm
through dining with fellow patients. Special sinks
with steam injectors to keep the water up to a pre-
determined temperature should be used. These
can be combined with the dish-washing sinks so that
cradles containing the dishes, etc., can be totally
immersed.
24. LAUNDRY
137
Each large sanatorium for tuberculosis should
have its own laundry, though this facility can be
shared by a group of hospitals in the locality. The
special problem of the sanatorium is that all linen
must be disinfected before it enters the laundry
itself whether this is part of the institution or not.
-138 -
This involves careful methods of sorting, with
adequate protection for the staff by the provision
of washable overalls and masks. It is a problem
66
LAUNDRY


which should always be given thought by those
who manage sanatoria for the person who sorts the
soiled linen in a sanatorium laundry is as much
in need of protection as the nurse at the bedside.
139 “
Fuel consumption in most laundries is high.
For instance, 200 lbs. of coal may be required to
wash 100 lbs. of clothing. Small laundry units are
extravagant. The whole question of a laundry
service is one in which the undoubted advantages
of an efficient washing-plant near at hand must be
balanced against necessary economies in fuel and
personnel. Where a sanatorium has its own
laundry it should be situated as near the boiler-
house as possible, and the central linen store should
be close at hand.
25. FACILITIES FOR MAJOR SURGERY
140
In the last twenty years profound changes have
come over the nature of the treatment given to
tuberculous patients in sanatoria. Surgical opera-
tions on the chest are now a regular feature of all
modern institutions. Through their aid cavities in
the lung can be closed and portions of diseased
lung removed. Such brilliant achievements of the
surgeon do not diminish the need for rest and open
67
FACILITIES FOR MAJOR SURGERY


air, those fundamentals of the sanatorium method.
But surgical work requires not only an elaborately
organised department for the operations themselves,
but a careful system of “ after-nursing ” carried
out by trained personnel.
141
A very good arrangement is to have the
operating theatre and surgical block (with some
single rooms for post-operative cases) in a separate
building. Or, if the sanatorium as a whole is
of the vertical type, the surgical and theatre
arrangements should be self-contained and on one
floor. A surgical block may be needed only in one
or possibly two sanatoria of each region. Where
such a block is required the emphasis should be on
space within the operating theatre and on easy
access to the X-ray department. The size of the
block must depend on the population which it
serves. Patients after minor operations should be
able to return to the medical wards on the day of
operation, and those for major procedures within
two or three weeks.
142
The doors leading to the theatres should be
wide enough to allow free movement of bed, patient,
and any connecting apparatus such as an oxygen
trolley. The floor should be made of terrazzo


squares or tile and have incorporated in it wiring
for grounding static electricity. It should slope to
ample surrounding gullies. Its walls should be of
material that will withstand hosing. Viewing boxes
with fluorescent lighting should be provided for
X-rays. In certain central sanatoria likely to be
used in teaching, the need for a students’ gallery
and the possibility of television equipment in the
operating theatre should be considered.
~ 143
Wall heating of the operating theatre is prefer-
able to radiators. Suitable means of rapidly ex-
cluding outside light must be provided but, where
daylight operating is considered possible and
windows are made to open, they should be provided
with efficient fly-screens. Ventilating fans must be
quiet. Modern theatres are usually air-conditioned.
144
The Consulting Room should be large enough
to use ample X-ray viewing boxes, apart from the
usual consulting room equipment, such as an exam-
ination couch.
The Surgeon’s Changing Room must be of a
size to contain sufficient cupboard space, wash-
hand-basin and shower.
The Nurses’ Changing Room is a necessity
often forgotten.


The Sterilising Room : at least two instrument
sterilisers should be provided, and ventilation must
be so arranged that the steam from the sterilising
room cannot enter the operating theatre. Floor
space should be generous to allow the setting out
of duplicate instrument-trolleys.
The Anaesthetic Room should have at least
one basin. If twin theatres are not provided, this
room fitted with dark blinds, should be large
enough for performing bronchoscopies, and have
facilities for suction.
The Sluice Room should have an independent
basin for soaking linen.
A Splint and Plaster Room will be needed
for odd emergencies, though not on the scale
required for an orthopaedic unit.
26. PATHOLOGY AND RESEARCH
145
The plan for pathology and research facilities
must be related to their increasing importance in
modern diagnosis and treatment of disease. A series
of interconnecting rooms with reasonable space for
his various functions is desirable for the present day
70
PATHOLOGY AND RESEARCH


clinical pathologist. We give the ideal arrangement
which will have to be modified according to
circumstances.
{a) The room for microscopy must be of a size
sufficient to allow for the apparatus re-
quired in sputum examinations up to
concentration and fluorescent methods.
This room may be combined with that for
haematology, although it is considered
better for all blood work, like culture work,
to have separate accommodation.
[b) Ample space is necessary for general
bacteriological work, but again, as in the
above instance, this room may be combined
with the biochemistry section provided
there is sufficient space for such apparatus
as is now required for the blood sugar and
blood urea estimations.
{c) A separate “ histology ” room is essential
in a sanatorium which has a thoracic unit
and where animal post-mortem examina-
tions are carried out.
(i d) A post-mortem room should be attached
to every laboratory, irrespective of the size
of the institution.
( e ) Where the laboratory is of a large size,
e.g., in a teaching institution, an animal
71
PATHOLOGY AND RESEARCH


POST-MORTEM
ROOM
GENERAL
BACTERIOLOGY
LIBRARY
PUNCTURE
FLUIDS
CONTROL OF
MICROSCOPY
HAEMATOLOGY
CULTURE
THERAPY
ANIMAL
HISTOLOGY
Z.N.
F.M.
B.S.R.
BLOOD
COUNTS
SPUTUM
FOR T.B.
STREPTOMYCIN
HOUSE
DIAG.
TYPING
SURGICAL
UNIT
P.M.
BIOCHEMISTRY
URINE J
——|
URINE
(Quantitative)
Protein, etc.
BLOOD CHEM.
FUNCTION TESTS
CHEMOTHERAPY.
BLOOD LEVELS
STATISTICS
FOLLOW-UP
house is desirable, as it will be necessary
for procedures in diagnosis and in the
typing of organisms.
(/) Outside the actual laboratory, but closely
allied to it, there should be room for a
reference library and for a statistical
department. A basic layout for such a
laboratory as outlined is given in the
diagram.
146
In smaller institutions of course these separate
facilities for the pathological service can well be
combined in less space, but no sanatorium should
be without some provision of this kind, together with
some spare room for occasional or future laboratory
work with fluorescently lit viewing boxes for X-ray


films. This service is becoming recognised as vital
in the detection and treatment of tuberculosis.
Clinical photography may be centered in the re-
search department, or in the X-ray department.
27. MORTUARY
147
The mortuary should be so placed that it is
easily reached from a public entrance. Its actual
situation can be obscured but, its surroundings
should be given careful attention and upkeep.
A minimum of three rooms is necessary. It is
desirable to have a body-store with refrigeration, a
post-mortem room (if this is not provided in the
pathology department), a small waiting-room with
toilet accommodation, and a chapel.
28. X-RAY DEPARTMENT
148
A separate screening room should be installed
in close proximity to the artificial pneumothorax
clinic in a room with separate entrance and exit—
both being adequately light-trapped. Artificial
ventilation will be required. As this apparatus will
be frequently used by personnel who have received
little radiological training, it is essential that the out-
put be limited to 5 milliamperes and that the inherent
protection on the apparatus shall be sufficient to
prevent the operator from exposing himself to the
direct beam, and also to secondary radiation as far
73
X-RAY DEPARTMENT


as possible. In practice, it is found almost im-
possible to make the sanatorium medical officers
wear protective clothing. Some of the protective
gloves on the market are less flexible than others ;
the more flexible kind are recommended, providing
the lead content is sufficiently high, as it is easier to
get operators to use them.
-149-
One radiographic room should be sufficient for
the average sanatorium. If much surgical work is
undertaken, it is convenient to have a lightproof
tunnel from the dark room into the washing and
drying room, so that there is easy access to wet films
and the work of the department is not constantly
interrupted. A separate reporting and viewing
room is necessary, and there should be plenty of
space for storing unused films and filing used plates.
There should be a direct electricity supply to this
department.
150
It is convenient to have the main X-ray
department near the theatre and on the same floor
as the surgical wards. The demand for X-ray
examination is much higher on the surgical wards
and the most satisfactory results are obtained if the
bed is wheeled into the X-ray department, and the
films taken on the static high-powered apparatus.
It is found in practice that this is as a rule less


distressing to the patient than having films taken
on a low-powered mobile unit. Separate waiting
accommodation for both male and female patients
should communicate with the X-ray room and there
should be toilet facilities nearby. A rest room
should be provided for the staff of the X-ray
department.
151
The British X-ray and Radium Protection
Committee recommend that the X-ray room should
be at least 250 sq. ft. and the dark room 100 sq. ft.
in size. They make many other useful recommenda-
tions regarding the requirements of a modern X-ray
department and their report may be studied.
29. THE PHYSIOTHERAPY DEPARTMENT
152
In the modern treatment of tuberculous
patients particularly with the development of
surgery, physiotherapy forms an important part in
their rehabilitation. For patients undergoing major
chest surgery, carefully graduated arm and postural
movements, and localised control of breathing
can prevent poor posture after operation, and can
make the best use of the remaining sound parts of
the lungs. Careful, detailed individual pre- and
post-operative treatment is necessary. Physio-
75
THE PHYSIOTHERAPY DEPARTMENT


therapy is also needed to train patients to get up
after bed-rest. Graduated foot, leg and back
exercises maintain muscle-tone so that such com-
plaints as flat and sore feet and poor posture are
prevented.
153
Another form of physiotherapy that is begin-
ning to be used with marked success is general
physical relaxation training. It is of great benefit
both in bringing about gentle easy breathing and
physical rest as well as mental relaxation. It is
therefore, very useful in the treatment of anxious,
nervous or restless patients and those who are “ poor
breathers ” — i.e ., using too much their upper chests
which should be at rest. Forms of electrical treat-
ment and massage are also needed, for example in
the treatment of fibrositis, lumbago, strains or
sprains, etc., among both staff and patients.
154
It is important that the physiotherapy depart-
ment be central, so that it is not too far away for
weak or wheel-chair patients. If possible, ventila-
tion should be by french windows (or sliding glass
doors) on two opposite sides, so that in summer
there can be a maximum amount of air and in
winter or windy weather good ventilation without
draughts.


155
The department should include, in a fairly
large sanatorium, an office for the head physio-
therapist. The main room needs to be large
enough for group treatments, with plenty of space
for standing exercises, and practice in walking, as
well as for a row of adjustable plinths for exercises in
lying and sitting positions. There should be a full-
length large mirror on at least one wall for posture-
training.
156
Two or three partitioned-off cubicles are also
needed for individual treatments. The number of
these must vary with the amount of surgery done
and the type of wards in the sanatorium. The
larger the wards the more individual treatments it
will be necessary to give in the department. If the
patients are in single rooms, most types of treatment
can be given in them, and fewer cubicles are needed.
Any sick staff will also be treated in the cubicles.
Each cubicle should have a padded adjustable
plinth, a chair, and a stool. The entrance and width
of the cubicles must allow for the passage of electrical
apparatus and wheel chairs or possibly stretchers.
One cubicle should have a sink with running water
(for electrical apparatus). There should be a full
length mirror in each cubicle.


157
In a children’s block or separate children’s
sanatorium, the following are needed :
[a) A large room suitable for children’s graded
classes of posture and strengthening exer-
cises. Ventilation should be as in the adult
department. A large, full-length mirror
should hang on one of the walls.
(1 b ) A smaller room for general ultra light
treatments. This room needs to be well
ventilated and heated through ceilings or
walls. (A water-cooled ultra voilet lamp
for local applications may need a sink and
running water.) The chief item in this
room would be a Centresol (mercury
vapour) or carbon-arc U.V.L. burner,
round which the children should be able
to sit in a circle at a three foot distance.
There should be six to twelve stools and
suitable lockers or chests for eye shields,
goggles and bathing shorts, etc.
30. OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY
158
The tuberculous patient is always a “long term”
patient. His treatment may take six months, a
year, or longer, and with modern lung surgery this
period tends to increase rather than decrease. The
patient’s mental outlook is therefore supremely im-
portant. Boredom, anxiety, and active opposition
78
OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY


are common features of the tuberculous psychology,
and useful ways of filling in time —and possibly
even of evolving a new sort of skill —lie in the
practice of diversional and occupational therapy.
159
Various forms of handwork, drawing, painting,
modelling, are familiar examples. The learning of
a new language, or other more intellectual pursuits,
also come under this heading. Dressmaking and
dress design is popular with women patients.
Nowadays these subjects are taught by visiting
specialists, and for them some accommodation is
needed in every sanatorium.
160
Occupational therapy assists in rehabilitating
manual and heavy workers, and such crafts as
carpentry, bookbinding and weaving should be
taught and supervised in properly equipped work-
shops attached to the department. Such occupa-
tions are useful in the gradual toughening-up process
of patients in order to enable them to return to
normal working conditions.
161
All work should be supervised by trained
occupational therapists who will discuss with the
patients their individual preferences for the various


types of work, and who will allocate and grade the
work according to the doctors’ estimates of the
patients’ capacities and needs.
162
Some eight or nine years ago art therapy began
to play an important part on the diversional side,
and people are now encouraged to bring out latent
talents in this direction. It is surprising how many
patients have found a permanent interest in
painting, both in water-colours and oils. But for
many there must still be hours of enforced idleness
and it is an excellent practice to hang reprints of
good pictures in suitable frames on the walls of
single rooms and spaced out in large wards, so that
the patients may have something pleasant to look
at during their hours of rest and examples of the
work of the great masters to contemplate.
163
Accommodation for occupational therapy
should be generous. It may take the form of
workshops, art rooms, or a store for materials with
teaching-rooms for the occupational therapist.
Fashions change, and occupational therapy alters
with the tastes and abilities of those who practise it.
Therefore it is probably best that the accommoda-
tion designed for this purpose should be of the sort
which can be adapted easily to all forms of occupa-
tional therapy.
OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY


31. RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
164
Sanatorium treatment is often long and can be
tedious if there are few opportunities for entertain-
ment and hobbies. A central hall for concerts and
film shows is important, and attached to it there
should be a library, a quiet room for study, and if
possible, a separate television room.
32. THE PHARMACEUTICAL DEPARTMENT
165
The plan for a pharmaceutical department
must be related to the size of the sanatorium. For
a sanatorium of 200 beds or more, the department
should be capable of providing a service to cope
with modern methods of treatment. It should
provide a centre for the distribution of all medical
and surgical requirements, including a central
syringe service.
166
Separate rooms should be provided for :
(a) Dispensary.
[b) Preparations room.
{c) Sterilising laboratory.
[d) Drug-store.
(e) Dressings store.
(/) Instruments and surgical sundries store.
(g) Medical gases store.
[h) Bottle store.
F
81
THE PHARMACEUTICAL DEPARTMENT


These should be housed together, preferably in one
building, centrally situated in relation to the wards
and departments, and on a service road so as to give
access to heavy lorries delivering supplies. A
small store, outside the building but adjacent to the
department, will be required for inflammable goods.
It will be necessary to provide adequate power
points for gas and electricity, and sinks with hot and
cold water supply in the dispensary, preparations
room and sterilising laboratory.
167
The walls and ceilings of the sterilising labora-
tory should have washable surfaces, and the joins
should be rounded to diminish the harbouring of
dust and to facilitate cleaning. Twin doors to
provide an air-lock, are desirable. An autoclave,
hot-air oven and a water-still should be housed in
an immediately adjacent room.
168
The provision of a full pharmaceutical service
for a smaller sanatorium, e.g., of 50 beds, is a matter
requiring careful consideration. It might be ad-
vantageous to arrange for a service from the depart-
ment of a neighbouring hospital or for the purchase
of the limited requirements in a form ready for use.
THE PHARMACEUTICAL DEPARTMENT


33. OUT-PATIENT DEPARTMENT AND OTHER
FACILITIES
169
In a 200 to 240-bed sanatorium, provision is
required for artificial pneumothorax and pneumo-
peritoneum inductions and refills totalling some
5,000 to 7,000 per annum. This figure includes
staff receiving treatment but not out-patients, the
number of whom depends upon local circumstances.
If the sanatorium is of compact design with
good floors and adequate lifts so that the clinic is
accessible from all wards, the bulk of this treatment
can be carried out at one point.
In addition, pleural aspirations, bronchograms
and other measures can be dealt with in the same
room if a minor operating theatre is not associated
with the radiographic department.
The main room of the refill clinic should
therefore be of adequate dimensions with between
300 and 400 sq. ft. of floor space.
Access by wide doors for the passage of trolleys
or beds is necessary. Good natural lighting is an
advantage but means for rapid blackout should be
provided.
A sterilising room suitably equipped for bowls
and instruments should be adjacent and a linen
store is needed. Scrubbing up facilities are
desirable in the main room.
83
OUT-PATIENT DEPARTMENT AND OTHER FACILITIES


Doors should give access to and from the X-ray
screening unit in an adjacent room which is light-
proof and, associated with this, dressing cubicles are
required. There should be a waiting room for
patients who have been screened prior to refills, and
adequate assembly space is necessary. Particular
attention should be paid to the convenient circula-
tion of the patients and provision for both sexes will
simplify this. Office accommodation for staff and
records should be provided and a small recovery
room may sometimes be an asset.
170
Dentist’s Department. This is a necessary
part of the out-patients’ department, and should
consist of a fully-equipped dentistry, with adjoining
waiting-room and small workshop. At least two
half-day sessions per week are likely to be needed
in a 240-bed sanatorium.
171
Clinical Dark-room. Either a special room
for ear, nose and throat and eye examinations,
or facilities for darkening an existing room are
necessary. The room for the ophthalmologists’ use
should be at least 22 ft. long.
34- CHILDREN’S BLOCK
172
It is important that children of school age and
under should be treated in a separate block of the
sanatorium. This should be designed on roughly
84
CHILDREN’S BLOCK


the same lines as the adult hospital, though provision
for school and play rooms take the place of the
occupational therapy department. If proper hy-
giene measures are observed, there is no reason why
child patients should not use the same services
(kitchen, laundry, etc.) as the adult department,
but of course dining rooms, washing-up facilities,
etc., should be separate.
173
The same general principles of sanatorium
treatment apply to the treatment of intra-thoracic
tuberculosis in children as in adults, but there are
some differences which have to be taken into
account. Chronic pulmonary tuberculosis of the
adult type is uncommon in children of school age,
but there are other pulmonary manifestations where
the outlook is favourable and which respond to
sanatorium treatment on simple open-air lines.
l? 4
In some areas serving a large population,
separate children’s sanatoria have been set up.
These are generally of the single-storey pavilion
type of construction, with open-air balconies and
with teaching facilities to enable the children to
continue their education. For children this type
of building is preferable to the multi-storeyed block,
and for cases not requiring active intervention, a


sanatorium of their own is a good arrangement. A
separate pavilion in an existing hospital might also
be used for the same purpose.
175
For sputum positive cases, suitable for active
treatment, there are great advantages in having a
children’s block in a modern sanatorium where
adequate facilities for thoracic surgery are available.
The accommodation should be very much on the
same lines as the adult, i.e., single and four-bedded
wards, and not more than 36 beds to the ward unit.
The various age groups can thus be sorted out,
potentially infectious cases isolated, and sputum
positive cases kept apart from the sputum negative.
A balcony with an overhead canopy should be
provided, and dining and schoolroom accommo-
dation can be suitably located in a central annexe.
The other services, such as kitchen and laundry,
are more economically provided centrally.
35. STAFF ACCOMMODATION
176
The medical superintendent or chief physician
of a large sanatorium generally lives in a house of
his own some distance away, but suitable quarters
should be provided in the hospital for married and
unmarried members of the staff. Such quarters
have generally been inadequate in the past, and
have left no accommodation for the visiting specialist
86
STAFF ACCOMMODATION


who may occasionally spend a night at the sana-
torium, or for an expanding number of staff.
Imagination should be used to make the living
accommodation home-like, because sanatoria staff
tend to settle down for a few years.
177
Staff accommodation can come under three
main headings :
Medical.
Nursing.
Other Staff.
Medical Staff. For resident medical staff
of junior rank, who are unmarried, a bed-
sitting room with individual bathroom should be
adequate, provided there is generous common- and
dining-room space. There should also be a well-
planned pantry and service-room with adequate
equipment adjacent to the dining-room, and it is an
advantage to have a utility-room where wet coats,
etc., can be hung for drying, and where sports gear
can be stored and cleaned. For those who are
married and for senior doctors there should be self-
contained flats or houses of varying size, but in the
main of five or six rooms including the kitchen. It
is suggested that two guest-rooms, and a small self-
contained flat (with bedroom, bathroom and sitting-
room) for the visiting specialist should be provided.
87
STAFF ACCOMMODATION


178
A library and quiet-room for study and research
is necessary and, since we hope that the teaching of
medical students will become a regular feature of
sanatorium life in the future, the lecture-room
(which could also be used for nurses’ lectures) might
be placed in the medical staff quarters, conveniently
near the library,
179 “
Nursing Staff. Nursing staff accommo-
dation requires to be planned more imaginatively
than has been the custom in the past. The
“ Nurses’ Home,” as we have known it, is no
longer acceptable to senior nursing staff, but one
sufficiently large for the student nurses is still
required. For each student nurse there should be
a well-proportioned bedroom with built-in cup-
boards, bookshelves and fitted basin. A pleasant
common-room and smaller rooms where nurses can
receive and entertain friends are necessary. As
most sanatoria are situated in the country, the
provision of at least two guest rooms in the home
is very desirable. Not infrequently nurses have
relatives or friends wishing to visit them and a
pleasanter atmosphere is created if they can be
accommodated in the nurses’ home.
180
Ample bathrooms and shampoo rooms, facilities
for making tea, an ironing and laundry room for


washing small articles, a small room with a sewing
machine and work table are all conveniences which
help to make a smoothly run home. A cloak-room
with warm pipes is required where any damp outer
clothing can be dried. The nurses’ lecture and
practical demonstration rooms may be in this block
(if the medical lecture theatre near the library is not
used), as well as accommodation for the preliminary
training school nurses and sister tutor’s office.
181
For the senior nursing staff and medical aux-
iliaries planning should allow for self-contained or
residential flats or houses. This is very important
if gross salaries are to be paid to all nursing staff
and medical auxiliaries. The building costs would
have to be such that this accommodation could be
let at an economic rental. But we do not think of
this accommodation as being solely for nurses and
medical auxiliaries ; it should be available for
clerical assistants and other employees of that grade.
As in the case of doctors, the houses should be easy
to run and of varying sizes, but in the main five
rooms should be enough.
182
It is preferable to have the dining-room
accommodation, where main meals are served,
adjacent to the central kitchen. Facilities for light
refreshment should be provided in each block for
G
89
STAFF ACCOMMODATION


the occupants of the residential flats ; those who
occupy self-contained flats or houses would naturally
make their own arrangements. The dining-room
should be planned to give a cafeteria service.
—lB3
Other Staff. Resident and non-resident
domestic as well as maintenance, portering and
technical staff come under this heading. The quota
of accommodation to be provided for these grades
depends very much on how near the sanatorium is
to an urban area. Generally speaking, accommo-
dation for 35 per cent of the estimated total of such
employees will be sufficient.
The planning of this accommodation must be
on similar lines to the nurses’ quarters, so that,
if the staffing situation changes radically in either
direction, the accommodation may be converted
accordingly.
A house, conveniently situated, for the engineer
should not be forgotten.
36. ACCOMMODATION FOR PATIENTS’ RELATIVES
IB4
In a modern sanatorium that carries out all
forms of treatment and thus performs the major
operations of thoracic surgery, it is essential to have
accommodation set aside in close proximity to the
surgical wing for relatives of the dangerously ill.
This accommodation deserves some care in plan-
90
ACCOMMODATION FOR PATIENTS’ RELATIVES


ning, and there should be one self-contained suite
set aside for the purpose in a sanatorium or block
of 240 beds. A small, comfortably furnished room
on each floor of a compact structure is a reasonable
additional provision.
37. SANATORIUM ADMINISTRATIVE BLOCK
185
The administrative requirements of a sana-
torium of say 240 beds will vary with local circum-
stances, individual customs and prejudices— e.g.,
whether the secretary or the medical superintendent
acts as chief administrative officer ; whether the
matron is responsible for the domestic side, and
whether the almoner undertakes work which could
be done by the secretary’s department. The needs
of a “ regional group ” sanatorium under such a
state medical scheme as the British National Health
Service will also be rather different from those of an
independent sanatorium.
186
Greater responsibility falls on the staff of an
independent sanatorium than on that of the group
sanatorium, and provision should be made for this.
We suggest the following staffing plan for such a
voluntary type of sanatorium with 240 beds ;
Secretary.
Assistant secretary/accountant.
Senior shorthand-typist.
Junior shorthand-typist.
91
SANATORIUM ADMINISTRATIVE BLOCK


Records clerk.
Medical staff secretary.
Senior accounts clerk.
Junior accounts clerk.
Wages clerk.
Telephonist/receptionist or hall porter.
Almoner.
Almoner’s clerk.
-187 -
For a group sanatorium of the same size the
following staff should be adequate :
Administrative assistant.
Senior shorthand-typist.
Junior shorthand-typist.
Records clerk.
Accounts staff —according to requirements.
(Much of the work would be done at the
regional group headquarters).
Medical staff secretary.
Telephonist/receptionist or hall porter.
Almoner.
Almoner’s clerk.
188
To accommodate this side of the sanatorium
work, the administrative block should include an
entrance hall for visitors with suitable toilet accom-
modation and hall porter’s or receptionist’s desk ;
SANATORIUM ADMINISTRATIVE BLOCK


a general office opening off the hall for a staff of say
four, with filing cabinets, records racks, stationery
cupboards, duplicating machine, etc. ; a secretary’s
office, adjacent, with private entrance; an accounts
office to accommodate a staff of say four and visiting
audit staff (this should include a lobby easily avail-
able to other staff but with an approach out of sight
of the entrance hall, and a small private office for
the assistant secretary and accountant) ; a board
room near the secretary’s office ; an almoner’s
office opening off the entrance hall, with small office
for clerk ; a matron’s office with assistant matron’s
and clerk’s offices adjoining ; a medical superin-
tendent’s office with medical staff secretary’s office
adjoining ; and staff toilets.
38. CHAPLAIN’S DEPARTMENT
189
In a Ministry of Health circular (H.M.C. (48)
62) it is laid down, concerning the appointment of
chaplains under the National Health Service, that
“ whenever the size of a hospital justifies it, a room
should be set apart for use as a chapel. This should
be made available as far as can be arranged for the
services of any of the denominations who wish to
use it.” In a sanatorium, where so many of the
patients are long-term and often able to walk about,
the need for a chapel is even greater than in a
general hospital.
93
CHAPLAIN’S DEPARTMENT


190
The “ consecration” of a chapel involves a legal
process and restricts the use to which it can be put.
Except in special circumstances, therefore, itwould
be better to do no more than “ dedicate ” the
chapel, in which case it could be used by all
denominations. Wherever possible, however, a
special room should be set apart for Roman
Catholic use.
191
Adjoining the chapel there should be a small
room for the chaplain —to be used as his vestry and
office, and where he can talk privately with in-
dividual patients and relatives. The size of the
chapel and vestry must be based on the size of the
sanatorium. Suggestions are sometimes made that
the Chapel should open into a larger room (such
as the dining-hall) so that larger numbers can on
occasion be accommodated there at special times of
worship. This is generally not practicable. The
chapel should be quietly situated away from the
noise of other activities.
39 STORES AND MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENTS
192
In future there is likely to be some standard-
ising of systems of records and stores issues under
the National Health Service in Great Britain.
Staffing of maintenance departments of hospitals
94
STORES AND MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENTS


has depended on the extent of reconditioning,
structural additions or alterations, which it was the
policy of the administration to carry out by direct
labour, as well as on the type and age of the build-
ings to be maintained.
193
Generally, boiler plant and its distributing sys-
tem providing steam, central heating and domestic
hot water is supervised and maintained in running
order to the requirements of insurance companies
by an engineer who may be responsible also for
electricity supply, external sewage works, water
supply and softening plant, road repairs and main-
tenance of transport vehicles.
194 “
Structural maintenance, minor alterations and
furniture repairs, as well as building work in associa-
tion with engineering services, are conveniently
performed under a buildings supervisor. The
salary of a qualified clerk of works capable of pro-
ducing plans, specifications and estimates may be
offset by an economy in the use of materials and
skilful direction of labour. Such an officer can also
be of assistance to the administrator and this is also
true of a thoroughly competent engineer for that
aspect of maintenance and development work. But
whatever the pattern of administration, generous
storage space for engineering and maintenance
materials is necessary.
95
STORES AND MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENTS


195
A proper system of goods receipts and stores
issues should be maintained by a technical store-
keeper. Under his supervision should be the
technical stores and a builder’s yard for bulky items
such as steam barrel, sinks, stoneware, tiles and
slates, cement, lime and timber. Office accommo-
dation should be planned for technical storekeeper,
engineer, and buildings supervisor. Workshops can
conveniently be grouped in two main units :
(a) For the engineer’s staff—fitters’ shop,
motor mechanics’ shop, electricians’ shop,
blacksmiths’ shop.
(b) For the buildings supervisor’s staff—car-
penters’ shop, joiners’ shop, paint and
glazing shop, upholsterers’ shop, plumbers’
shop.
Both these departments require some covered
storage and open yard space for their equipment
and secondhand materials. Go-operation is neces-
sary between them as much of the work is carried
out in common.
196
Garage accommodation for the transport
vehicles should be conveniently near the engineering
department. It should include inspection pit and
washdown.


197
The extent to which mechanisation should be
carried out in the above departments must depend
upon the amount of work to be done. In general,
labour saving machinery of adequate capacity
should be installed wherever feasible.
198
The buildings should be properly lighted,
heated and ventilated and general attention should
be given to the floors, which may have to carry
considerable weight and withstand rough usage.
Adequate cloakrooms, toilet facilities and showers
should be provided for all maintenance staff as well
as for the men working in the boilerhouse.
40. THE DESIGN OF SANATORIA FOR TROPICAL AND
SEMI-TROPICAL CLIMATIC CONDITIONS
199
The design of sanatoria must, of course, be
modified in tropical and sub-tropical areas by
climate and by different medical and sociological
conditions. New sanatorium building in such areas
would form part of the programme of attack against
tuberculosis and a medical survey should indicate
the type of sanatorium most suited to the conditions.
97
SANATORIA FOR TROPICAL AND SEMI-TROPICAL CONDITIONS


200
Generally speaking, there is a tendency to
over-estimate the contribution of the rural type of
local materials and methods of construction. Too
general a use of these incurs excessive expenditure
in maintaining the hospital buildings in a sound and
sanitary condition. There is an opposite tendency,
however, to under-estimate local experience of the
climate and means of protection against it. This
is important in the case of tuberculous patients who
would be uncomfortable if not protected from sun
and rain as much as they themselves felt necessary.
Conditions may vary between a hot, dry climate
with cool nights, and a warm, wet climate with little
temperature variation between day and night. In
the former case, the buildings should have thick
walls with small openings well protected against the
sun. In this way, the outside day heat is not
transmitted to the interior. In the latter case, the
air must be allowed to flow freely through the build-
ings while rain and sunshine must be kept out.
201
The amount of rain which can enter a building,
even if it has wide eaves, is considerable. Under
most tropical conditions it is impracticable to have
beds out on verandahs, since the leeward side of a
building is unbearable and when rain comes on the


windward side, the patients cannot be moved
quickly enough. Careful siting of the wards is
necessary in order to avoid a west exposure which
is, in most cases, too hot.
202
Air conditioning is expensive to install through-
out a hospital and it is doubtful whether its use is
justified except in climates so unbearable that a
sanatorium could not otherwise be built there. But
in theatres, X-ray rooms and other special rooms it
is, of course, necessary. Care should be taken in such
cases that the temperature is not reduced too much.
In most climates, a large reduction in humidity and
a small reduction in temperature should be made.
For instance, in a climate with a day temperature
of 85 °F. and a relative humidity of 90 per cent,
reduction should be to 78°F. and 50 per cent
respectively.
203
In climates requiring a free flow of air through
the wards, English practice in ward planning need
not be strictly followed. Wards may be three beds
in depth and beds can be placed farther from the
windows (as indeed they must be in many climates
to avoid rain spray). The height of wards depends
on the width of the largest ward on the floor and,
in any case, should be no less than ten feet.


204
Windows to wards should be made to open
completely and should be provided with horizontally
hung sashes on exposed sides. Louvres should be
used sparingly as they collect dust. The lower
panes of windows can be glazed with non-actinic
glass where the sun may strike. It is best to provide
additional ventilation near the floor if only for
psychological reasons. This can be best done by
having some windows to open to the floor on to
verandahs or balconies. Fanlights can be left
entirely void if sufficiently protected by verandahs.
205
Internal doors to wards can be three-quarter
length with space top and bottom and hung on
spring hinges. They need not be louvred and can
be fastened back by cabin hooks. Movable screens
and curtains are not satisfactory if exposed to breeze.
206
The planning of ward ancillaries follows the
usual practice, but if possible such rooms should be
made one foot larger each way to allow more
comfort when working. Shower baths are preferred
and each compartment should allow room for dress-
ing. Showers over ordinary baths are dangerous.
Wash basins should have taps which allow washing
under running water.
100
SANATORIA FOR TROPICAL AND SEMI-TROPICAL CONDITIONS


207
Provision must be made for the parking under
cover of cars of regular staff and covered access to
the covered park is desirable. Mechanical and
other services follow the usual practice. Space
heating, of course, is not necessary. Unheated
water is used, in fact preferred, for ordinary
ablutions. No practical and efficient system of
heating water by the sun appears to have been
installed on a large scale. Some further experi-
ments in this form of heating would be useful.
208
Where no main drainage system exists, sewage
is usually disposed of through settling tanks and
open jointed pipes, while waste water (sullage)
by-passes the sewage system. This method is usual
in the tropics but differs from that employed in
Great Britain, where waste and sewage are usually
dealt with together.
209
Building materials are somewhat limited in
tropical countries. Stone and gravel for concrete
work can be found, of course, in most districts; bricks
are very little used, but hollow clay or concrete blocks
are manufactured, and various forms of oil residue
and bitumen are available for paving. Cement,
steel, pitch-pine, asbestos-cement products, cedar


shingles, building boards, hardware, glass, paint,
clay tiles, materials for drainage, plumbing and
wiring and all equipment are usually imported.
Labour and transport constitute about 50 per cent of
the value of building work in the colonies, local
materials 10 per cent, and imported materials
40 per cent.
210
Reinforced concrete construction can be
adopted with advantage and most buildings may
have a reinforced concrete frame and floors, with
walls of hollow clay or concrete blocks, both of
which are satisfactory for insulation. Roofs of
either single or double slope provide good insulation,
and asbestos-cement corrugated roofing provides
better insulation than corrugated iron. Asbestos-
cement sheets are best used in strips laid in the
form of Roman tiles. Asbestos-cement is subject to
mildew and should be painted to avoid this. Floor-
ing may be of hard-wood, terrazzo, concrete tiles or
clay tiles. A good, jointless, composition floor
should be imported, and asphalt tiles used only if
they resist indentation.
211
Rainwater, unless collected and stored, may be
allowed to run off into concrete ground channels
surrounding the buildings. These channels should
have a shallow V section. Eaves and gutters are


used over entrances only. Rainwater storage cis-
terns should be erected above ground to avoid risk
of contamination.
Mosquito screening may not be necessary if the
grounds and district are cleared of mosquitoes, a
practice now possible and usually adopted.
Similarly, fly nuisance should be abolished at source
and screening, except where food is stored, should
be unnecessary.
CONCLUSION
212
In the previous pages we have attempted to
give guidance on many problems which concern the
designer of a new sanatorium. We do not claim
that these paragraphs have been exhaustive, but we
hope they have been helpful in suggesting new ideas.
Fertility of resource will help us to create for our
sanatorium patients the background against which
modern clinical medicine can have the best hope of
arresting the disease.
213
One consideration which we should like to
emphasise —for many months the sanatorium is the
patient’s home. It is moreover the place which his
relatives and friends come to visit. From the first
acquaintance with the institution the patient sets in
train thoughts which may help him towards recovery
—or the reverse, and those who come to see him


may often adopt the human attitude of judging the
technique of medical treatment (which they cannot
see) by the obvious standard of comfort and con-
venience of the institution which they can judge for
themselves. Bright colours, attractive paintwork,
pleasant carpets and chair-covers, all these mean a
great deal to a sick person. Flower-beds and land-
scape gardening can achieve a large effect for
modest expenditure. In the nurses’ home such
things as ornamental chandeliers, unusual fittings,
may demonstrate inexpensively that this is truly a
home for the nurses for the time being, and may
remove that institutional impression which is so
chilling to enthusiasm.
214
As the organisation of our hospitals becomes
more uniform, the need for a corresponding increase
of amenity, the avoidance of what is stereotyped
and ultra-conventional becomes of great import-
ance. We are all influenced to a large extent by
our surroundings. It is the pleasant duty of the
planner of a sanatorium to contribute to the
patient’s welfare and thus to help him on the road
to cure.
104


The [?] bed block (1910).
“ Kingwood ” —adapted for women patients (1915).
II
I
BERKS AND BUCKS JOINT SANATORIUM, PEPPARD COMMON, OXFORDSHIRE.


By kind permission of the Medical Director.
SANATORIUM “ ZONNESTRAAL ” HILVERSUM, HOLLAND.
By courtesy of the Medical Superintendent.
PAIMIO SANATORIUM, PREITILA, FINLAND.
II


By courtesy of Messrs. W. H. Watkins, Gray & Partners, FF.R.I.B.A.
MASSON SANATORIUM, TRINIDAD, BRITISH WEST INDIES.
III


Aero Pictorial Ltd.
KING EDWARD VII SANATORIUM, MIDHURST, SUSSEX.
Architectural Press photograph.
SULLY HOSPITAL, GLAMORGAN, WALES. Entrance front.
IV


New surgical wing.
New surgical wing. Patient’s room. Ministry of Works Copyright.
V
KING EDWARD VII SANATORIUM, MIDHURST, SUSSEX.


Nursing Mirror photograph.
BROOMFIELD HOSPITAL, CHELMSFORD, ESSEX. Second floor balcony.
VI


PANEL HEATING. Arrangement of system during progress of work. Invisible Panel Warming Association photograph.
VII


Illustrations by kind permission of W. N. Froy & Sons Ltd., Hammersmith. London.
SURGEONS’ LAVATORY BASINS.
VIII


KING EDWARD VII SANATORIUM, MIDHURST, SUSSEX. Main kitchen.
IX


X


Children’s pavilion.
Children at play.
XI
MEARNSKIRK SANATORIUM, SCOTLAND.


Theatre and sterilising room. By kind permission of the Hospital Management.
BÜRGERSPITAL, BASLE, SWITZERLAND.
XII


MEARNSKIRK HOSPITAL, SCOTLAND.
Theatre for thoracic surgery.
XIII


Pathological laboratory. By kind permission of the Hospital management,
BÜRGERSPITAL, BASLE, SWITZERLAND.
XIV


Diagnostic room.
X-RAY DEPARTMENT.


Male nurses’ sitting room. Nursing Mirror photograph.
BROOMFIELD HOSPITAL. CHELMSFORD, ESSEX.
XVI


SULLY NR. CARDIFF
3 Stories
2 Stories 3 Stories
VORDINGBOK : DENMARK
ZONNESTKAAL : HOLLAND
2 Storied Pavilions
PAIMIO : FINLAND
7 Stories
MASARYK : CZECHOSLOVAKIA
6 Stories
SANATORIUM BLOCK PLANS COMPARED.
XVII


CONTINUOUS BALCONY [?] WIDE
(1)
CONTINUOUS BALCONY TERRACE TYPE
(2)
CONTINUOUS BALCONY 4. O" WIDE (3)


VERANDAH TYPE WARD
WITH SLIDING FOLDING WINDOWS
(4)
LIEGE HALLE AT END OF PATIENTS BLOCK
(5)
LIEGE HALLE INSET INTO PATIENTS BLOCK
(6)
XIX


INDIVIDUAL BALCONIES . TYPE. A
(7)
INDIVIDUAL BALCONIES . TYPE. B
(7)


INDEX
Paras.
Accommodation—Patients’ Relatives .. . . .. . . .. . . 184
Staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 176-183
occupational therapy . . . . .. .. . . .. 159
patients’ . . . . . . . . .. 13, 23-30, 36, 49-53
trolleys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
visitors, nurses’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
Acoustic tiles and plasters .. . . . . . . . . . . 89
Additions and alterations . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
Adjustable head ends, beds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
plinths 155, 156
Administrative Block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 185-188, 21
maintenance policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 192
staff lobby . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 188
Admission of patients . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Aerodromes, distance from . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Air-conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
tropics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
Airing beds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
clothes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Alternating current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Altitude 5, 6
Aluminium conduits . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 63
Ambulant patients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58, 107, 189
American sanatoria , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
Anaesthesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Anaesthetic room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
Animal house . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. 145(e)
post-mortems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145(c)
Annexe, washing and shaving, patients . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Antiseptic solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Anti-siphonage pipes . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 59(a)
Appointment of chaplains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
Area of grounds . . .. .. . . . . .. .. . . . . 13
Art rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
therapy . . .. .. . . . . .. .. . . . . .. 162
Artificial pneumothorax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148, 169
ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
Asbestos-cement, tropics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209, 210
Aspect, England . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
tropics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Asphalt tiles . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8g
tropics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210
Asthmatic patients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
Autoclave . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
Back-rests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
Bacteriological work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145 (b)
Bacteriologist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123, 126
Balconies .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 45-47, 174, 175
Basement ~ ~ ~ ~ .. ~ ~ ~ , . .. 10


Paras.
Bathrooms, medical staff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
nurses’ 180
Baths .. 59 (0
Battleship linoleum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Bed accommodation, patients’ . . . . . . . . 12, 24, 30, 36, 49-53
Bed-pan washers . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Bedrooms, nurses’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... 179
Bedside tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Bed-sitting rooms, medical staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177
Bed tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Beds, size of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
transport of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42, 47, 94, 142
Beginnings and Development of Sanatorium Treatment . . . . . . 1-4
Beverages, service of . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. 113
Biochemistry . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 145 (A)
Black Forest . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 1
Blackout 143, 169, 171
Blacksmiths’ shop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195( a )
Blankets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
Blood sugar estimations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145(6)
urea estimations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145(6)
Bodington, George (1799-1882) . . . . . . . . . . .. . . 1
Body-store, mortuary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
Board room . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . 188
Boiler plant . . .. . . .. . . .. . . . . . . 1 39> 1 93
Boilerhouse workers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198
Bookshelves, nurses’ rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 179
Bottle racks . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 111
Bottle store . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 166
Brackets, for sputum containers .. . . .. . . . . . . . . 60
light . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . 67
pipe . . .. . . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . 56
Bread room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
Brehmer, Dr. Hermann .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . 1
Brick buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Bricks, tropics . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . 209
British National Health Service .. . . .. . . . . 185, 189, 192
British X-Ray and Radium Protection Committee .. .. .. .. .. 151
Brompton Hospital Sanatorium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Bronchograms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
Bronchoscopies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . 144
Builder’s yard .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195
Building costs, staff accommodation . . . . .. . . .. . . . . 181
materials .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 1 , 195
tropics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
Built-in cupboards, nurses’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
wardrobes, patients’ . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
W.C.’s 59 (6)
Bungalow type sanatoria . . . . . . . . . . . . 33, 35, 45, 174
Bunsen burners . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. 105
106


Paras.
Bus routes . . .. . . .. . . . . ■ • • • • • • • 9
Buzzer system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • • ■ • • 7°
Cafeteria service, nurses’ . . . . . . . . .. . . • • • • 182
Cakes, preparation room . . .. . . .. . . . . • ■ • • 1 3 1
Call system . . .. . . .. . . • • • • • • ■ • • • 7°
Galor gas .. .. . . . . . • • • • • • • • ■ • • io s
Calorifier .. .. . . . . . . • • ■ • • • • ■ ■ • 77
Canopy, balcony and window .. .. .. .. .. .. 37, J 75
Car headlamps, glare from .. . . .. . . . . . . • • • • 73
Carbon-arc U.V.L. burner .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 1 57(^0
Carpenters’shop .. .. .. .. .. •• •• 1 95(b)
Cartons, waxed .. . . . . . . . • • • • • • • • • 12 5
Casement window . . .. . . . . . . • ■ • • • ■ • • 38
Castors .. . . . . . . • ■ ■ • • ■ • • • • • • ■ • 87, 94
Ceiling light fixture . . . . .. . . . . • • • ■ • • • • 68
panels (heating) .. . . . . . . • ■ • • • • 75, 1 57(^)
Ceilings 79, 89, 167
Cemetery . . . . .. . • • • • • • • • • • ■ • • 22
Central hall .. . . . . • ■ ■ • • • ■ • ■ • • • • •
heating . . . . . . . . • ■ • • • • • • • • x 93
Centralised facilities, general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35, 1 75
bed-pan service .. . . . . . . .. . • • • •• 111
kitchen 102, 128-135, 172, 182
laundry . . .. .. •• ■ . • • • • • • •• 1 7 2
linen store .. . . . . . . . . . ■ • • ■ • 104, 139
pharmaceutical department . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
physiotherapy department . . . . . . 154
refreshment buffet (staff) . . 113
sputum disposal .. .. . . . . . . . . 117, 123
syringe service . . .. . . . . . . . . ■ - • . 165
washing-up .. . . . . ■ • ■ • 103
Centresol (mercury vapour) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •• 1 57(b)
Chair and trolley room . . . . . . . . . . 106
Changing rooms (staff) .. . . . . . . . . . - • • • • 1 12
Chapel 189-191
Chaplain’s Department . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189-191
Chest operations . . .. . . . . . . . . . • • • 14°, J 75,
Children’s Block .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 7 2 ~ 1 75, 1 57
cots . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • • • ■ 95, 96
sanatoria .. . . .. . . . . . . . . • • • • 1 74
exercises .. . . . . . . . . . . . • ■ • • • 1 57(a)
China .. .. 102
sanitary fittings . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Chromium-plated traps . . . . . . . . . . . . • • .. 59 ( a )
Chronic pulmonary tuberculosis . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 173
Church services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • 1 89-191
Chute for soiled linen . . . . . . . . . . . . • • 104
Cleaning equipment . . . . . , . . . . . . . . • • 7 1
Cleaning . . .. .. . . . . . . . . • . 34, 35, 1 ! 4,
107


Paras.
Cleaning garbage receptacles . . . . .. . . . . . . . . 115
teeth . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 60
Climatic conditions . . .. .. .. . . . . . . . . 2, 67, 37
tropics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199-214
Clinic, pneumothorax refills, etc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
Clinical dark room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 1
photography . . . . .. . . . . . . .. .. .. 146
room (Ward unit) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
Cloakrooms, maintenance staff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198
nurses’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180
Codes, call systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7°
Cold cathode lighting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64(c)
storage .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. I 3 2 > x 33
Collection of sputum containers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
of garbage . . . . . . . . . . .. .. .. . . 115
Colour schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 1
Coloured blankets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
lights system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7°
Common-room, medical staff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
nurses’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
patients’ . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 92
Composite locker/bed-table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Concerts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
Concrete ceilings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
floors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
work, tropics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209-2 11
Condensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ■ • 78
Conduits, wiring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . 63
Consecration, chapel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ■ ■ 19°
Consulting room, surgery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
Containers, food . . . . . . . . . . .... . . . . 128
sputum : 60,117,119-126
Continuous balcony . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45( fl )( c )
Contours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • • 10
Convection heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Cooking facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ■ • 13°
Cooking plate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • 102
Corbel type W.C.’s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 59W
Cork flooring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • • • • • 89
Corners of rooms . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . 114, 167
Corridors . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . • • 35> 7 2 > 9 1
Corrugated roofing, tropics . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 210
Costs, building (staff accommodation) . . . . . . . . . . .. 181
capital . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . . • • 27, 74, 79
running and maintenance . . . . .. .. . . 35, 74> 79j 12 5
Cots, children’s . . .. . . .. . . . . . . • • • • 95> 9^
Counterpanes .. .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . • . 97
Covered carpark, tropics . . . . . . .. .. .. . . . . 207
storage space ~ .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . 195
Covers, garbage .. . . .. . . ~ .. . . . . . . 116
108


Paras.
Covers, mattress .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 96
Cradles, dish-washing .. .. ~ ~ .. .. .. .. .. 136
Craft work .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 160
Crockery .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 103,136
Cubicles, individual treatment .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 156
Culture work .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 145(a)
Cupboard space, patients’ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 99
Cupboards .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 102,144
Curtains .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . • .. .. . . 43, 90
tropics.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 205
Cutlery .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 102, 136
Dairy farm .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 18
Damp course .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 83
Dangerously ill patients .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 184
Dark blinds .. .. .. •. .. .. .. . . .. . . 144
room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 149
Daylight operating .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 143
Dedication of chapel .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 190
Delivery of supplies ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 166
Delivery-room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 52
Denominational services .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 189
Dentists’ department .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 170
Design of Sanatoria for Tropical & Semi-Tropical Climatic Conditions 199-211
Design, sanitary fittings .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59
Destruction of sputum .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 119-126
Destructors, sanitary towel .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 118
Diagnosis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 145
Diet 127
Diet kitchen .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 13 1
Dining room, children’s ~ .. .. .. .. ~ .. 172, 175
medical staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177
nurses’ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 182
patients’ .. .. .. .. .. .. 128,134,172,175
Direct electricity supply .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 149
lighting .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. 72
Direction of labour (engineering, etc.) .. .. .. .. .. .. 194
of traffic .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 21
Dish washing .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 136
Disinfectant .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Disinfection .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 123
linen .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 137
Dispensary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 166
first tuberculosis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Distance brackets .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 56
Diversional therapy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 158-162
Domestic administration .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . . 185
hot water supply .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 193
Doors 54, 87, 134, 142, 154
tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 205
K
109


Paras.
Down pillows . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 98
Draining boards .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 59(c), 87
Draughts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 129,154
Dressing cubicles .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. . . .. 100
Dressing store .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 166
Driveways .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 73
Drug store .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 166
Drying room, outdoor clothes .. .. .. .. .. 107, 177, 180
Ducts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31,56,88
Duplicate instrument trolleys .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 144
Dust . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 56, 114, 167
Ear, Nose and Throat examinations .. .. .. .. .. .. 171
Early sanatoria, position of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Earthing, electricity .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 62
Eaves, tropics .. . . .. .. . . .. . . . . .. 201, 211
Edible garbage . . . . . . .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 116
Education, children . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 172, 174
Electric blankets .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 108
Electric Lighting and Fittings .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 61-73
light baths . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 108
Electrical apparatus .. . . .. . . .. .. . . . . . . 156
treatment . . . . .. .. .. . . .. . . .. 153
Electrically-heated trolleys .. .. ~ .. .. .. . . .. 128
Electricians’shop .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195(a)
Electricity, cooking .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 130
powerpoints .. .. .. .. .. .. ..71,132,166
supply 9, 61, 130, 142, 149, 193
Elimination of Noise .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 87-90
Embedded panel heating system .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 75-79
Emergencies .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 144
Emergency cases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
Entertainment .. . . .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 164
Entrance hall, visitors’ .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 188
Environment of sanatorium .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 8, 19, 20
Equipment of Rooms . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . .93-101
Equipment, transport of .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 9
Exclusion of light . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 143, 169, 17 1
Exercise, patients . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..11,13
Exposed pipes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 56
Exposure to X-ray .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 148
External sewage works .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 193
Eye examinations .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . .. 171
Facilities for Major Surgery .. .. .. .. .. .. 140-144
Fall of ground . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 10
Fanlights .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39, 129
tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 204
Felt underlay .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 84
Filling of jugs and basins .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59(a)
110


Paras.
Film shows .. . . .. .. . . .. .. . . . . .. 164
Finishes, walls, floors, ceilings .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 89
Fire risk . . .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9, 1 7> 4-8
Fireclay fittings .. . . . . .. . . .. .. . . . . 57
sinks .. .. .. .. . . .. . . .. . . .. 59i c )
Fish, preparation room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 1
refrigeration rooms .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 133
Fitters’shop .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195(a)
Fittings, electric .. .. . . .. .. .. . . . . .. 61-73
sanitary .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 55-60
Flat roof .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 48
Flexes, electrical .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 66
Flickering (fluorescent lighting) .. . . .. .. .. .. . . 64(6)
Floor Covering .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . . 83-86
Floor space per patient . . . . .. .. .. . . .. . . 51
kitchen .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 129
refill clinic .. . . .. . . .. .. .. . . 169
sterilising room .. .. . . . . .. .. .. .. 144
Floor surfaces .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 103, 142
Floors .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 83-86, 88, 89, 169
tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 210
Flower room . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . no
Fluorescent lighting .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 64(6), 142
methods, microscopy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 145(a)
Fly nuisance, tropics .. .. . . .. .. .. . . . . . . 211
screens .. . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 143
Folding windows .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. 40
Food, distribution .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35, 127, 128
preparation .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. 35, 131
service .. .. .. .. .. .. 102, 113, 127, 128, 132, 134
storage, tropics . . . . . . .. .. . . . . .. . . 2 u
trolleys . . .. . . .. .. . . .. . . .. .. 102
Fowler pattern beds .. .. . . .. .. .. . . . . . . 66
Fracture boards.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 106
French sanatoria .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. 48
windows, glazed .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 42, 154
Fresh air 35. 37. J 54
tropics . . .. . . ~ .. .. .. . . 200, 203
treatment, beginnings .. . . .. .. . . .. . . 1
Frimley .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 3
Frontage. . .. 12,32,37
Fuel consumption, laundry .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 139
supplies . . .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 9
Full-length mirror .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 155
Furnished room, patients’ relatives .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 184
Furniture repairs .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 194
Future expansion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
planning .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Garages 14, 21, 196
111


Paras.
Garbage Disposal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 115-118
Gas .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9, 105, 118, 130, 166
cooking .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 130
General office .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 188
Generating plant .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 61
German sanatoria .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 47
Germany . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Glare 12,37,67,72,73,129
Glass 37, 102
Glazed french windows .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 42
tiles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 86
Goods receipts .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195
Gorborsdorf (Silesia) .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
Gross salaries .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 181
Ground floor . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 83
Grounding of static electricity.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 142
Group treatments .. ~ .. .. ~ .. .. . . .. 155
Grouping of blocks .. . . .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 32
Guest rooms . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177* 1 79
Gullies . . . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 142
Gutters, tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 211
Haematology .. .. .. ~ .. .. . . .. .. .. 145(a)
Hairdressers’ room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 109
Hardwood floors . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 85
Health closet . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59{b)
Heating .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 74-82, 143
Heating ducts . . . . . . . . .. .. .. . . .. .. 82
tropics . . .. .. .. . . . . .. . . .. 207
Heavy workers . . .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 160
Height of ceilings .. .. . . .. .. . . .. . . .. 75
tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 203
Hillsides . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10
Hinged draining boards .. . . .. . . .. .. . . .. 59(c)
Histology .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . . .. .. 145(c)
Hollow clay blocks, tropics .. . . .. .. . . .. . . .. 209
Home-like living accommodation .. .. .. .. .. . . 176, 213
Horizontal pipe runs . . .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 56
Hose fittings . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . . . 17
Hosing of walls .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 142
Hot-air oven .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 167
Hot cupboard .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . .. 102
drinks .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 102
pipes 99
plates .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 132
Hot water-bottle filling tap .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 108
radiators .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 75, 78
supply 59 (<*)> 166
Houses, staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 176,177,181,183
Humidity, tropics . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 202


Paras.
Hygienic finishes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 89
Imported materials, tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 209
Incinerator .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 125
Independent sanatorium .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 185,186
Indirect lighting .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. 7 2
Individual balconies .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 46
treatment cubicles .. ~ .. .. .. . . .. 156
treatment rooms .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
Indoor Cleaning .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ix 4
Inductions—artificial pneumothorax, etc. .. .. .. .. . . .. 169
Infection 121, 136, 175
Inflammable goods, storage .. .. .. . . .. .. . . . . 166
Influence of new treatments .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Injectors, steam .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 136
Inspection pit .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 196
Instrument sterilisers . . .. .. .. .. . . . . .. 144, 169
Instruments and surgical sundries store .. .. .. .. .. . . 166
Insulating materials . . .. .. . . .. .. . . .. .. 88
tropics . . .. .. ~ . . .. .. . . 210
Insurance companies .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 193
Integral draining boards .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 59(c)
Intellectual pursuits, patients’,. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 159
Interior Decorating .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 91-92
Internal spring mattresses .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 96
walls . . . . 55
Intra-thoracic tuberculosis .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 173
Ironing facilities, patients’ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
nurses’ .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 180
Isolation fetish . . . . .. .. ~ .. .. .. . . .. 5
Jalousie shutters .. ~ .. .. ~ .. . . .. .. 37
Joiners’ shop .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195(A)
King Edward VII Sanatorium, Midhurst .. .. .. ~ ~ .. 3
Kitchen and Food Transport .. .. .. .. .. .. 127-135
Kitchen, central 19, 20, 102, 127-134, 172, 182
small ward .. .. . . .. .. . . .. .. . . 102
Korkoid .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 85
Laboratory .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 145-146
layout .. i 45(/)
Labour and transport, tropics .. ~ .. . . . . .. . . 209
Labour-room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 52
Labour-saving machinery (engineering) .. .. .. .. .. .. 197
Landscape gardening .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 16,213
Large wards . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 50, 58
Latex foam mattresses .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. 96
Laundry 137-139,21,63,172
Laundry room, nurses’ ~ .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 180
sorters .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 138
113


Paras.
Lead content, protective gloves .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 148
Lecture room, students’ and nurses’ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 178
Legal process, consecration .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 190
Length of treatment .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 158, 164,213
Library, patients’ .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . . 164
staff .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . • • 178
Liegehalle . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 47
Lifting wheels, beds . . .. .. . . .. .. . . .. . . 94
Lift service .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 48, 103. 169
Lighting, electric .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 61-73,129
Lightproof tunnel . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. H 9
Light switches .. . . . . .. . . . . .. .. .. 65, 66
Light-traps .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . 148
Linen cupboard . . .. . . .. .. .. . . .. .. 104
soaking basin (operations) .. .. . . . . . . . . .. 144
soiled .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. i 37 -1 38
store .. . . .. . . .. . . . . . . 104, 139, 169
Linoleum . . .. .. .. . . .. .. . . . . 84, 85, 89
Lockers, patients’ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 99> *57
Local knowledge of climate, tropics . . .. . . . . . . .. . . 200
Local materials, tropics .. .. .. .. . . . . . . 200, 209
Loudspeaker system . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 7°
Louvres . . . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . . . 37
tropics . . .. .. . . .. .. . . . . .. . . 204
Low-level flushing cistern .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59 W
Low pressure hotwater system .. .. . . . . .. . . . . 78
Low temperature electrically heated panels .. . . .. .. . . . . 81
Main current, electricity .. . . .. .. . . .. .. . . 61
Main drainage . . . . .. .. .. . . . . .. . . 9
tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 208
walls . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . .. 55, 88
Maintenance costs .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. . . 35
departments .. .. .. . . . . .. .. . . 192
of boiler plant .. .. .. . . .. .. . . .. 193
Major surgery .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. . . • • 3» l 4°
Masks, staff . . .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. 119
Massage .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 153
Materials, engineering and maintenance .. . . . . .. .. . . 194
store .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . . . 163
Maternity units .. . . .. . . .. .. . . . . .. 52
Matron’s office .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. 188
Mattresses .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 93, 94, 96
Meat, preparation room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13 1
refrigeration room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 133
Mechanisation . . .. . . .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 197
Medical auxiliaries .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 181
gases store .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 166
students ~ .. .. .. . . . . .. .. .. 178
survey, tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 199


Paras.
Mental relaxation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 153
Mercury vapour burner . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 157 W
Metal containers for cartons .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Micro switch .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 63
Microscopy .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. i4s( a )
Midhurst, Surrey . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 3
Milk room . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 133
Ministry of Health .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51,189
Minor operations .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. 141
structural alterations .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . . 194
Mirrors 101, 109, 155, 156, 157
Mixed ward . . .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . . .. 53
Modern sanatorium method, beginnings . . .. .. .. .. .. 1
Monoblock type of building .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 32
Mortuary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 147, 86
Mosquito screening, tropics .. .. . . .. .. .. . . . . 211
Motor mechanics’shop .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195(a)
Movement of beds .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . . 94, 142
Multicore cable, radio .. .. .. . . .. . . . . .. 69
Multi-floored building .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32-36, 48, 104, 174
NAPT .. .. 3
National Health Service .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 185, 189, 192
Natural lighting .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 143, 169
Night lights .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 68
Noise, prevention of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8,19,31,87-90
Non-actinic glass, tropics .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 204
Non-slip surfaces .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 83
Nordrach, Black Forest .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 1
Number of patients .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 23-30, 49-53
of rooms (staff houses) .. .. .. .. .. .. 177,181
Number of Storeys .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32-36, 10
Nurses’ changing room .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 144
Home 179, 180
Occupational Therapy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 158-163
Office accommodation, stores and maintenance departments . . . . .. 195
refill clinic . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 169
Oiled sweeping compound .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 114
One-storeyed building .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 33> 35> 45
Open-air .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45, 46, 140
regime 2,4, 173
sanatorium, Edinburgh .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 3
Open yard space .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195
Operating theatre .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 84, 141—143
tropics .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 202
Ophthalmologist .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17 1
Orchard .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18
Out-patient Department, etc. .. .. .. .. .. .. 169-171
Outdoor recreation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
115


Paras.
Outer clothing, drying of .. . • .. .. .. .. .. 107,177,180
Output, X-ray .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 148
Overflow, wash-hand basins .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 59 i a )
Oxygen trolleys .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14 2
Paint and glazing shop .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195(^0
Panel heating .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 75~8i
Panelled baths .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59(^0
Pantry, medical staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177
Para-aminosalycilic acid (PAS) .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 4
Parallel-sided baths .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 59(^)
Parking of cars, tropics .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. 207
Partition walls . . .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . . .. 88
Pastry, preparation room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13 1
Pathology .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. 105
Pathology and Research .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 145-146
Pathways .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. is> 73
Patient accommodation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13, 23-30, 36
Patients, admission . . .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 9
Patients’ clothing . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 99
dining arrangements.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 128, 134
exercise .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11 >l3
mental outlook .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 158
relatives and friends .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9, 184
Pavilion type sanatoria ~ .. .. .. .. 33> 35j 1 *35 12 4> l l £ e
Paving (flat roof) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 48
tropics . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •. 209
Paying patients .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
Pear push . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7°
Pedestal-type W.C.’s .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 59(^)
Percentage of staff requiring accommodation .. .. .. .. .. 183
Perishable food . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . . 102
Pharmaceutical Department .. .. .. .. .. .. 165-168
Philip, Sir Robert .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 3
Physical characters of site .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 11
Physiotherapy Department .. .. .. .. .. .. 152-157
Picture hooks . . .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. ioi
Pictures .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 91,162
Pillows . . .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 94, 98
Pinewoods .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Pipes, steam .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 87, 99
vertical .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 88
water .. ~ .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 87
Pitting of floor surface .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 83
Plans, specifications and estimates .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 194
Plastic locker tops .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 99
Plate warming . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 102
Play rooms, children’s . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 172
Pleural aspirations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 169
Plumbers’shop .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •• 195 W
116


Paras.
Plumbing .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 55~60
Pneumoperitoneum inductions .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 169
Pocket flasks, sputum .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 122
Polishing apparatus . . .. .. ~ .. .. . . .. .. 7 1
Porches .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
Portable X-ray plant .. . . .. . . .. .. .. .. . . 7 1
Post mortem room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. HSW. *47
Post-operative treatment .. .. .. .. .. .. 140,141,152
Poultry .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. . . 18
Power plant . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19, 21
Powerpoints .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 71,132,166
Pre-operative physiotherapy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 152
Preparation rooms, food .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 13 1
pharmaceutical .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 166
Prevailing wind .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 19
Privacy 13. 43
Private entrance, secretary’s office ~ .. .. .. .. .. . . 188
Protection from X-ray exposure .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 148
of mattresses .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 96
Protective clothing, masks, etc. .. .. .. 104, 112, 113, 119, 138, 148
Psychology, tuberculous .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 158
Public diffusion service . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 69
Public entrance, mortuary .. .. . . .. .. .. . . . . 147
Public services .. . . .. . . .. .. .. .. .. . . 9
Pulmonary tuberculosis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 23, 173
Purchase of pharmaceutical supplies .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 168
Quarry tiles .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 86
Quiet room, patients’ .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 164
staff . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 178
Radiation, exposure to . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 148
heating 75. H 3
Radio 31, 69, 87, 108
Radiographic room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 149
Radium protection .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 148-151
Railway carriage type windows .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 44
Railways .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5. 9. 1 9
Rain, protection from .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 37. 38
tropics .. .. .. .. .. 200,201,203
Rainwater, tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 211
Reading lights .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 67
Receptacles for garbage . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 115
Reception desk .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . . 188
Reclining rooms (liegehalle) . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 47
Reconditioning . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 192
Records systems . . .. . . .. .. .. .. .. . . 192
Recovery room, refill clinic . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 169
Recreation Facilities .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 164,48
Recumbent patients . . . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 99
117


Paras.
Reference library .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ■■ l 4s if)
Refills—artificial pneumothorax, etc. .. . . .. .. .. . . 169
Refreshment buffet, staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 113
Refrigeration, garbage .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 116
mortuary .. .. . . .. .. . . . . .. 147
rooms—meat, fish .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 133
Refrigerator .. .. .. . . .. .. . . . . . . .. 102
Regional group sanatoria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 185,187
Rehabilitation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15 2
Reinforced concrete, tropics . . .. .. .. . . .. . . . . 210
Relatives, nurses’ .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . . .. 179
of dangerously ill patients .. .. . . . . . . . . . . 184
Removable duct covers .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 56
Rental (staff accommodation) .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 181
Repair materials .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9, 192-195
Repairs, furniture .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 194
Report of British X-Ray Committee .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 151
Reporting and viewing room. X-ray . . .. .. .. .. . . . . 149
Reproductions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 91,162
Research .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. . . ! 45 _1 46
Residential flats. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 77» 1 81
Responsibility of staff (independent sanatoria) .. .. .. .. .. 186
Rest treatment . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14°
Road repairs .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 193
Roads, main .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 5> 9
Roman Catholic services .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 190
Roof .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 48
Roof garden .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 48
Room sizes . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 55
Rounded joins or corners .. .. .. .. . . . . .. 114, 167
Rubber gloves, staff .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . . 1 1 9
Rubberised mattress cover .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 96
Rubber-tyres . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 87
Running costs .. . . .. . . .. .. .. . . . . .. 35
Running water . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 *66
tropics . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 206
Rural areas . . .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 8, 29
Salaries, gross .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 181
Sanatorium Administrative Block .. .. .. .. .. 185-188
method of treatment, beginnings .. . . .. .. .. 1
management committees .. .. .. .. . . .. 53
Sanatorium Site . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 5-22
Sanitary annexes . . .. .. .. . . . . .. .. . . 86
conditions, tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 200
facilities .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 5 2
Sanitary Fittings and Plumbing .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 55-60
towel disposal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 118
School age children .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 172
Schoolroom accommodation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 175


Paras.
Schools . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 19
Screening room .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 148
Screening, tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 211
window .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. 37
Sculleries, ward .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. 103
Secondary radiation .. .. .. . . .. .. . . . . .. 148
source of electricity .. .. .. . . .. . . 61
Second-hand materials .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195
Sectional partitions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 55
Self-contained flats, staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177,181
Suite, patients’ relatives .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 184
Semi-tropical climate .. .. .. . . .. . . .. .. 199-2 11
Service roads .. .. .. .. . . .. . . . . . . 10, 21, 166
Service-room, medical staff .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. 177
Services, chapel .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 189
Sewage, tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 208
works .. . . .. . . .. .. . . . . . . .. 193
Sewing machine, nurses’ .. .. . . . . . . .... .. 180
Shampoo rooms, nurses’ .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . . 180
Shaving, patients’ .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 58
Sheet linoleum .. . . .. . . .. . . .. .. .. .. 84
“ Shocked ” patients . . .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. 108
Shower-baths, staff .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 144, 198
tropics .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. 206
Sick staff . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 153, 156
Silent-closing doors .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 87
Single bedrooms .. .. .. .. .. 46, 54, 58, 70, 141, 175
Sinks 59(c), 87, 136, 156, 166, 195
Site .. . . .. .. . . .. . . .. . . .. .. 5-22
tropics .. . . .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 201
Sitting-room, staff .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 177
Size of baths .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 59 (d)
beds . . .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 93
houses and flats, staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177, 181
ophthalmology room .. . . .. .. . . . . .. .. 171
refill clinic .. .. . . .. .. . . . . . . .. 169
Size of Sanatorium .. .. . . .. .. .. . . . . .. 23-30
Sliding windows ~ .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 40, 46
glass doors .. .. . . . . .. .. .. . . .. 154
Slop sink .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. no
Sluice room .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. ..in, 124, 144
Small diet kitchen .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 13 1
sanatoria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 146,168
“ Smalls ” laundry .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
Smoke nuisance.. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 8, 19, 20
Soil .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. n
Soiled linen .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 137-138
Solid fuel .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 116, 130
Sound absorbers .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. . . 89, 90
Sound-proof doors .. .. . . .. .. . . .. . . . . 134
119


Paras.
Special worship .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 191
Specialist, visiting .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 176, 177
Specifications, plans and estimates .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 194
Splint and plaster room .. .. .. ~ ~ .. . . .. 144
Splints . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . ~ 106
Sports gear .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177
Sputum containers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 60, 117, 119-126
Sputum Disposal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 119-126
examinations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 145(a)
negative cases, children .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 175
positive cases, children .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 175
Staff: Accountant/Assistant Secretary .. .. .. .. .. 186, 188
Accounts staff .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 187
Administrative assistant .. .. .. . . . . . . . . 187
Almoner .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 185—188
Assistant matron’s office .. .. . . .. .. . . . . 188
Audit staff .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 188
Building supervisor .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . . 194
Building staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195(6)
Chaplain .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 189-191
Charge nurse or sister .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 49, 53
Chief administrative officer ~ .. .. . . .. .. .. 185
Chief physician .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 176
Clerical assistants .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 181
Clerk of works .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. 194
Domestic staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35, 112, 183
Engineer 183, 193, 194
Engineer’s staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195(a)
Hall porter .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 186-188
Head physiotherapist ~ .. .. . . . . .. .. . . 155
Junior accounts clerk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 186
Junior medical staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177
Junior shorthand-typist .. .. .. .. .. .. 186, 187
Maintenance staff .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 183
Matron .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 185, 188
Medical staff .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 9, 176, 177, 178
Medical staff secretary .. .. .. .. .. 186-188
Medical superintendent .. .. .. .. .. 23,24,176,185
Non-resident domestic staff .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 183
Nursing staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9,35,112,179-182
Physician-in-charge .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 23
Porter, in charge of sterilising .. .. .. .. .. .. 123
Portering staff .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 183
Receptionist telephonist .. .. .. .. .. 186-188
Records clerk . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 186, 187
Resident domestic staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 183
Secretary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 185-188
Senior accounts clerk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 186
Senior doctors .. . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 177
Senior nursing staff . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 179, 181


Paras.
Staff: Senior shorthand-typist . . .. .. .. .. .. 186, 187
Sister or charge nurse .. .. ~ .. . . .. .. 49, 53
Student nurses .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 179, 180
Technical staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 183
Technical storekeeper .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195
Wages clerk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 186
Staff Accommodation .. .. .. .. .. 176-183,185-188
facilities . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 112
length of stay .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 176
married members .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 176,177
receiving treatment .. . . . . ~ .. . . . . .. 169
refreshments .. . . .. . . .. . . . . . . .. 113
residential flats .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177, 181
rest rooms .. . . . . .. .. .. . . .. .. 113
salaries, gross .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 181
toilets .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . . . . .. 188
unmarried members . . .. .. .. .. .. 176, 177
Stainless steel sinks .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . . 59(c), 87
wash-hand basins .. .. . . .. . . .. .. 59(a)
Static electricity, grounding .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. 142
Statistical department .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 145 if)
Steam barrel . . .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 195
cooking .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 130
heating valve . . .. . . .. . . .. .. . . .. 108
sterilising .. ~ .. .. . . .. .. .. 77, 96
sterilisation of sputum containers .. .. .. 120,122-126
supply .. 193
Steel-frame buildings .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 31
Sterilisation of mattresses .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 96
Sterilisers, crockery .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 103,136
Sterilising laboratory . . .. . . .. . . .. ~ .. 166, 167
room, instruments .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 144, 169
room, refill clinic .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 169
sputum containers .. .. .. .. .. .. 120-126
Still-rooms .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 132
Stools .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 156, 157(6)
Stoneware .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195
Storage batteries .. . . ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 61
Storage of inflammable goods .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 166
rainwater .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 211
unused films .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 149
Store space, engineering and maintenance .. . . .. .. .. .. 194
for materials, occupational therapy .. .. .. .. ~ .. 163
rooms .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 86
Stores and Maintenance Departments .. .. .. .. .. 192-198,21
Storekeeper . . .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195
Stores issues .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 192,195
Storeys 10, 32-36, 45
Strains or sprains ~ .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 153
Streptomycin . . .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4


Paras.
Stretchers .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 156
Structure of the Building .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
Structural additions/alterations .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 192
maintenance .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 192, 194
Students’ gallery .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 142
Subsoil .. .. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 11
Suction facilities .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 144
Sullage, tropics .. .. . . .. .. .. .... .. . . 208
Sun, tropics . . .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. . . 200, 204
Sunlight.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..12,37
Supplies, consumable .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 9
delivery of .. .. . . .. .. .. . . .. 166
Surgeon’s changing room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 144
Surgery . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3, 140-141
Surgical beds .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . . . 66
block . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 141-144
sundries store .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 166
wards .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. 49, 150
wing .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 184
Surrounds, impermeable .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 60
tiled .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 57, 60
Surroundings of mortuary .. .. . . .. . . .. .. .. 147
Sweeping compound .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 114
Switzerland . . . . .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . . 2
Syringe service . . .. . . .. .. .. .. . . . . . . 165
Tables, bed and bedside .. .. .. .. . . .. .. ~ 99
Taps, high-waisted pillar .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 59(a)
Tea lounge .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. . . .. 48
service .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 102
Teaching facilities, children .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 172,174
institution .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 142, 145(c), 178
rooms . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 163
Teak 85
Teeth cleansing .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 60
Telephone .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 9, 70
Television room, patients’ . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 164
Temperature regulation .. . . .. .. .. .. 64(6), 74, 77
tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 202
Terrace system . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 45(A)
Terrazzo flooring .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 84, 142
tropics .. ~ .. .. ~ .. .. .. 210
Thermostatic trolleys .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 132
Thoracic unit .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 145(c)
surgery .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3, 140 141
Tiled surrounds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57
Tiles and slates .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 195
flooring .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 84, 86, 89
Toilet accommodation, mortuary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 147,
visitors’ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 188


Paras.
Toilet facilities, maintenance staff .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 198
staff .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . . 112
room, ward .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 100
Towns, distance from .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5,8, 9, 13, 19, 183
Transport .. .. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. . . 9
tropics .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. . . 209
vehicles, maintenance .. .. .. . . . . .. . . 193
beds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 42, 47
Traps, bends, etc. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 57, 59
Travel, interior .. .. . . . . .. . . . . .. . . 34-35
Trays . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 102
for sputum receptacles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 122
Trees .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 16
Trolleys .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 87, 106, in, 123, 128, 132, 169
Tropical climate .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 199—214
Tubes, vacuum cleaning .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 114
Tungsten lighting .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 64(a)
Twin doors, sterilising laboratory .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 167
theatres . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 144
Two-bedded rooms . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 50, 58
Typing of organisms .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 145(0)
Ultra light treatments .. .. .. . . .. . . .. . . 157(6)
Underblankets .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 96
Underlay, felt .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. 84
Underground ducts . . .. . . -.. .. .. . . . . .. 82
Under-pillow radio .. . . . . .. .. . . . . .. .. 69
Upholsterers’shop .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 195(6)
Urine testing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 105
Utility-room, medical staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177
Waiting room, dentistry .. . . .. .. .. . . .. . . 170
mortuary . . . . .. .. .. . . .. . . 147
Walking distances, staff . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 34, 35
Walking practice .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 155
Wall bell-push .. .. . . .. . . .. .. .. .. . . 70
fittings .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . 101
heating 143, 157(6)
Walls .. 55, 88, 89, 91, 142, 167
tropics . . .. .. . . .. .. . . . . .. . . 210
Walther, Dr. Otto .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 1
Wards .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 49, 50, 53, 58
Ward ancillaries, tropics .. .. .. .... .. . . .. 206
dressing cubicle .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 100
kitchen .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. . . 102
lighting 65
planning, tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 203
Ward Services .. .. ~ .. .. .. . . . . 102-113
toilet room .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 100
transport .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 106


Paras.
Ward Units 49~53> *7s
clinical room .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. . . 105
steriliser .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. 124
Wardrobes, built-in .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 99
Wash-hand-basins .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 58, 59(a), 144
nurses’ .. .. .. .. . . .. . . .. 179
tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 206
Washdown, vehicles . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 196
Washing of Dishes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 136
Washing and drying room, films .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 149
Washing, facilities, staff .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 112,113
patients .. .. .... .. .. .. .. . . 58
Washing-down walls .. .. .. .. . . .. . . .. 91, 167
Washing-up, children’s crockery, etc. .. .. .. .. .. .. 172
facilities (central) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 103
(wards).. .. .. .. .. . . . . . . 103
sculleries .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. 13 1
Waste pipes .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . . 56
Waste steam, generation of electricity .. .. .. . . .. .. 61
water, tropics .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 208
Water boiler .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 102
W.C.’s 59 (*)
Water-cooled ultra violet lamp .. .. .. .. .. .. • • *S7W
Water-heating, steam .. . . .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 77
tropics .. .. . . .. .. . . .. .. 207
Water softening plant .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 193
Water-still .. .. .. .. . . .. . . .. . . .. 167
Water supply 9, 17? *66, *93
Water-taps .. .. .. .. ~ ~ .. .. .. .. 3 1
Wax polish . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 83
Waxed cartons, sputum .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 120
“ Weir ” overflow .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59( a )
Wheel chairs 59 *s4* *5 6
Wind, protection from . . .. .. .. . . .. .. 154
Window frames . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 3^
Windows .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 37-44,12,78,154
tropics . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 204
Windowsills . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 37? 4 2 > 44
Wireless headphones . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66, 6g
Wiring, electrical .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. •. 62
Workshop, dentistry .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . • 1 7°
Workshops .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 19» 21, 195
occupational therapy .. . . .. .. .. .. . • 160
Work table, nurses’sewing .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 180
X-ray Department .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 148-151, 141, 146
X-ray output .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 148
plant .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. .. 7 1
rooms, tropics ~ .. .. .. . . . . .. .. .. 202
viewing boxes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 142,144


