

T HE STATE SAVINGS BANK OF VICTORIA
DESIGN BOOK
HOUSING LOAN CONDITIONS.
PRICE 3/-


THE STATE SAVINGS BANK
OF VICTORIA
COMMISSIONERS:
W. Warren Kerr, Esq., C.M.G., C.B.E. (Chairman)
Jas. C. Gates, Esq. (Deputy Chairman)
Jno. Kean, Esq.; Prof. D. B. Copland, C.M.G.; Hector T. McKenzie, Esq.
GENERAL MANAGER;
Norman R. Williams, 0.8. E., B.Com.
ASSISTANT GENERAL MANAGER:
N. S. White.
CHIEF ARCHITECT:
G. Burridge Leith, F.R.A.I.A.
• if
r(,
Book containing \ W . n .
Thirty Designs of Modern Dwellings LA—^
available for selection by applicants (X/3
Credit Foncier "Housing” Conditions
MARCH, 1941


DESIGNS FOR HOMES
Credit Foncier "Housing" Conditions
This Book of Designs, containing thirty illustrations, is published
with the object of assisting intending applicants in their choice of homes.
Each design has been carefully planned by the Bank’s Architect
not only from an economic point of view, but also to give a wide range
of selection.
These dwellings may be built in either Timber-framed, Brick or
Brick Veneer construction and each illustration shows an alternative
treatment of elevation for each class of construction. To give variation
in design, the aspect of plan has also been shown reversed, and slight
amendments—such as the position of fireplaces, size and disposition of
windows —have been introduced in the treatment of elevation shown for
Brick or Brick Veneer construction.
Applicants are advised first to select a plan which gives the requisite
accommodation, then to determine the aspect of plan most suitable to the
proposed building site, and finally to decide upon the type of construc-
tion and treatment of elevation required.
THE STATE SAVINGS BANK WILL FINANCE
YOUR HOME
Credit Fonder "Housing" Conditions
The Bank will advance up to £9OO to erect a Timber house, or
£l,OOO to erect a Brick or Brick Veneer house, provided that the advance
does not exceed 90% of the Bank’s valuation of house and land.
The loan is repayable by monthly instalments over a period of
approximately 28 years.
Applicants must not own a house nor receive an income of more
than £4OO per year.
The present rate of repayment —10/6 per month (including interest)
for each £lOO borrowed —is subject to review 10 years and 20 years after
the date of the Contract of Sale.


TYPE H 1


DESCRIPTION
This house, measuring opproimotely 3-4 feet across it s
greatest width, has been planned for an ollotment with a
a corner site.
The accommodation provides for three Bedroom, Lounge,
Kitchen and conveniences, with the addition of a Dining
recess opening from Lounge.
Alternative elevations show suggested treatment for
Timber and Brick construction.


TYPE H 2


DESCRIPTION
Planned to take full advantage of every angle of light this
house has useful accommodation comprising two Bedrooms,
Sleepout and a spacious Lounge with Dining alcove. Provision
is also made for a well lighted Meals alcove adjoining
the Kitchen.
Elevations show suggested treatment to suit either
Timber or Brick construction.


TYPE H 3


DESCRIPTION
Plannse to give entry to all rooms with the minimum
of passage space this house contains five generously
proportioned room and provision for a future
Alternative elevations show suggested treatment for
both Brick and Timber construction; in each case a
feature is made of the large bay window with full
length sashes giving access to Sun Terrace.
TYPE H 3


TYPE H 4


DESCRIPTION
This house contains six rooms and has been planned
in an "L" shape with a maximum width of 32'7" and would
be suitable for an allotment with a comparatively narrow
frontage.
The Lounge room is spacious and well lighted with corner
window each side of an open fireplace.
Alternative elevations show suggested treatment for
Timber and Brick construction.


TYPE H 5


DESCRIPTION
The plan of this house provides three Bedroom accommdation
with Lounge, Dining room and Kitvhen. The Bathroom is planned
with shower recess and internal lavatory.
Alternative elevations show suggested treatment to suit
either Timber or Bick construction.
The treotment for Brick or Brick veneer constuction
suggests the use of a band of ligth texture bricks with
similar bricks to window cills and door surround.
TYPE H 5


TYPE H 6


DESCRIPTION
Plnned on modern lines this house brovides a spacious well
lit Lounge with recessed Dining room, two Bedrooms, Sleepout
and a well planned Kitchen.
Altenrative elevations show suggedsted treatment to suit
either Timber or Brick constuction.
A feature of noth elevations is the larqe bay window
to Lounge.


TYPE H 7


DESCRIPTION
A compact four roomed house with spacious Lounqe,
two Bedrooms and a larqe Kitchen with recess for meals
and ample cupboard and working space.
Simple lines provide attractive elevations in the treatment
for limber and Brick constrution.


TYPE H 8


DISCRIPTION
This house contains five rooms and Sleepout planned on
compact lines with a minimun of passaqe space.
"English treatment" has been adoptes in the alternative
elevations suggested for Brick and Timber constructive.
The treatment suggested for Brick or Brick-veneer constuction
provides for use of brick facings groded from darhk to ligth
Color with similaly qraded brown tiles for roof coverring.
For Timber treatment the use of wide weatherboards and
full length multi-paned window creates a pleasing effect.


TYPE H 9


DESCRIPTION
This Type has been planned on simple lines to give the
maximum size to rooms and eliminate passage space.
The alternotive elecotions illustrated to suit Brick and Timber
construction are desiqned on simple lines, offect being obtaned
by the wide window, front Porch and Terrace.


T YPE H 10


DESCRIPTION
A small attic villa with flower box dormer windows and
Georginan doorway. This type is an sttractive home .
Alternative treatment of elevation for both Brick and Timber
The Brick treatment suggested is of light colored bricks
used in conjunction with white cemment entry.
The entrance treatment suggests shuttered windows,
wide entrance door and sidelights and entrance porch
with Timber Columns.


TYPE H 11


DESCRIPTION
The Plan of this type provides for a spscious loun ge with
direct entry scree ne d by a coats cupboard.
Pa ssage space has been reduced to a minimum and the
accommdation includes two Bedrooms with a modern
Bathroom fitted with shower recess and an internal
lavatory.
Alternative elevation show suggested treatment for
Brick and Timber construction.


TYPE H 12


DESCRIPTION
Plance d to suit a 50'0" fronta ge, th is house contains
five ro oms with a sepa rate entrance from rear porch
trffic through kitchen.
Altcrnative elevation ons show suggested treatment
to suit either Brick or Timber construction.
Breaks gr acted in color from dark to night are
us ed to give effect to brick treament.


TYPE H 13


DESCRIPTION
This Type provides three Bedroom accommodation with
large intercommunicating Lounge and Dining room.
kitchen is Planned to take Breakfast table as well as other
Alternativ e elevation show suggested treatment
for Brick and Timber construction.
The use of cream texture bricks or stucco is suggested
above dark base to give effect to brick treatment.


TYPE H 14


DESCRIPTION
An attractive home with large Lounge and Dining room
with convenient com munication to a modern Ki tchen
and two B edroom accommodation.
Alternative elevation show sugge sted treatment
for either Brick or Timber constuction.
In each case a pl easing feature is made of the
curved porc h with its flankin g flower boxes.


TYPE H 15


DESCRIPTION
This Type provides five rooms with the addition of Meals
alcove off the Kitchen.
Alternative elevations show suggested treatment for
Brick and Timber construction.
I n the Timber chimney an impressive feature is the wide
column of front chimney stack linked with flower boxes to
the square brick entry Porch Liqht colored bircks above a
dark base are used effectively in the Brick treatment.


TYPE H 16


DESCRIPTION
Planned in modern style, a spacious room is obtained by
the combination of Lounqe and Dining annex.
The "U" shaped Kitchen is well equipped with working benches
and cupbards and is convenientty placcd for service.
the Bathroom, Kitchen, Laundry and Lavatory filtings
are suitably grouped to minimze semer costs.
Alternative elevations show sggested treatment for
either Brick or Timber construction.


TYPE H 17


DESCRIPTION
Compact planing has almst eliminated passage space
from this home containing five ample sized rooms well
liqhted by wide windows.
Alternative elevations show sggested sted treatment
for either Brick or Timber construction.
The elevations illustrated show the adaptanility of
this type of plan to widely differnt styles of
external desiqn.
TYPE H 18


TYPE H 19


DESCRIPTION
Designed to an "L" shaped plan this Type contains two
Bedrooms Lounge, Dining room and a modern "U" shaped
Kitchen filted with an abundance of working benches
and cupboard space.
The Bathroom has a separate shower recess and
an internal Lavatory is provided.
Alternative elevation show suggested treatment
for Brick and Timber construction.


TYPE H 20


DESCRIPTION
The maximum width of approximately 33 feet permits
the erection of this Yype on a comparatively narrow
allo tment. It would also be particularly suitable for
a corner site
Alterative elevations show sggested treatment
for Brick and Timber construction.
Vertical rebated boarding has been introduced
into the Timber treatment with pleasing effect.


TYPE H 21


DESCRIPTION
An Altic dwlling providing three Bedroom accom-
modation The main Bedroom and Bathroo with internal
lavatory are situated on the Ground floor. The Altic
floor contains two Bewdrooms and Lavatory provided
with a hand basin.
Alternative elevations show suggested treatment
for either Brick or Timber construction.
Full length shuttered windowms are a feature of the Brick desing.


TYPE H 22


DESCRIPTION
An altactive six roomed house measuring 43'6"
across it's greatest midth, this Type is planned to
Suit a wide allotment.
Alternative elevations show suggeted treatment
for Brick and Timber construction.
Rebated vertical boarding is used to advantage
in the Timber treatment, while wide steel framed
windows give a pleasing effect to the Brick desing.


TYPE H 23


DESCRIPTION
Planned for narrow frontage this Type provides
three Bedroom accommodation.
The Dining room is is fitted with a gas and the Louge
fireplace may be built either in the front or side wall.
Alternative elevationa show suggested treatment
for Brick or Timber construction.
The three single window of front bedroom and wide
chinmney stack are features of the Brick treatment.


TYPE H 24


DESCRIPTION
In this Type the Lounge and Dining room are combined
to form a large room extending across the full width
of the front portion of the house.
Three Bedroom accommodation is provided and the
Kitchen, Laundry, Bathroom and Lavatory are well
grouped to minimize the cost of sewerage.
Alternative slevations show suggested treatment
for either Brick or Timber construction.


TYPE H 25


DESCRIPTION
this Type provides two Bedrooms and a Sleepout, eacah with
built-in wardrobes. The Bathroom contains separtc shower recess
and Lavatory, which may be also entered from rear Porch.
A lternative elevotions be show suggested treatment for
Brick and Timber construction.
Co ntrasting brick bands, brick flower boxes and wide
steel framed windows are used to advantage in the
Brick treatment.


TYPE H 26


DESCRIPTION
Containing five Spacious rooms in addition to Breakfast
alcove, this Type provides an altractive home.
Alternotive elevotion show suggested treatment
for either Brick or Timber construction.
Alternative positions of the Louge fireplace are
illustrated in these elevations and wide corner
windows are a feature of both the Brick and
Tinber treatment.


TYPE H 27


DESCRIPTION
Compactly planned this Type provides sized
Lounge and Dining rooms, two Bedrooms and Kitchen
with Meals alcove.
The Bathroom is filted with separate shower recess
and storage cupboards are provided above the Linen
and Cooks cupboards.
Altrnative elevations show suggested treatment
for Brick and Timber construction.


TYPE H 28


DESCRIPTION
A 60'0' frontage is required for the erection of this
home, allowing for a car drive at one sidew.
Alternative elevations show suggested treatment for
either Brick or Timber construction.
The Bick treatment is finished in stucco and tapestry
bricks with color blend terra colta tile roof covering.
Plain gabled roofs with wide square chimney stack give
effective simplicity of design to the Timber treatment.


TYPE H 29


DESCRIPTION
Planned on simple lines this Type contains five ample
sized room well lighted by wide window.
Alternative elevations show suggested treatment
for either Brick or Timber construction.
The large hip roofed front Verandah with wide high
arches and wroughtiron grilles are attractive features
of the Brick treatment. The finish illustrated is of
cream stucco abore a dark brick base.


TYPE H 30


DESCRIPTION
Designed to suit a narrow frontaged allotment,
this Type has three Bedroom accommodation.
The Living room are conveniently situated for srevice,
while the Bedrooms are well grouped round the Bathroom.
The Laundryis detached. In the Brick treatment
a Sun terrace opens off the Dining room.
Alternative elevations show suggested treatment
fo r either Brick or Timber construction.
b. Woshington
