

NEW SOUTH WALES.
DIAMONDS:
D. C. McLACHLAN,
UNDER SECRETARY FOR MINES AND AGRICULTURE.
1899.
1 8 9 9.
DEPARTMENT OF MINES AND AGRICULTURE.
Their Occurrence in New South Wales
SYDNEY : WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




f (ZO~IO
NEW SOUTH WALES.
DEPARTMENT OF MINES AND AGRICULTURE.
DIAMONDS:
Their Occurrence in New South Wales
D. C. McLACHLAN,
UNDER SECRETARY FOR MINES AND AGRICULTURE.
1899.
SYDNEY : WILLIAxM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1899.




M Sivy
Department of Mines and Agriculture,
Sydney, 16 June, 1899.
As there is at the present time a distinct revival of the diamond-mining
industry in the Inverell and Biugara Districts, and much interest is being
shown in the development of these fields, it is thought desirable, for the
general information of the public, to issue, in pamphlet form, the following
brief statement dealing with the occurrence of diamonds in this Colony,
their characteristics, &c.
The reports upon South Wales diamonds, furnished by Messrs. T.
Davies, F.Gr.S., and E. Etheridge, junior, and by Mr. Lewis Atkinson, manager
for Messrs. Ford and Wright, of London, are also appended in full. These
were previously published in the Annual Eeport of the Department of Mines
and Agriculture for the year 1886.
D. C. McLACHLAN,
Under Secretary.


♦
♦
'
*


DIAMONDS :
Their Occurrence in New 'South Wales.
There can be no doubt that, sooner or later, as onr diamantiferous areas
become more thoroughly exploited and developed, and with the advent of
more favourable seasons, the diamond-mining industry in this Colony is
destined to become one of magnitude and importance.
The occurrence of diamonds in New South Wales was recorded by
Stutchbury (on the Turon Eiver), and by Hargraves (at Reedy Creek, near
Bathurst), as early as 1851. In 1859 the Rev. W. B. Clarke reported their
occurrence at Burrendong and at Pyramid Creek, while a year later he
stated them to have been found at Calabash and at Sutter s Bar, Macquarie
River. Since then diamonds, in single specimens, have been recorded in
many widely separated portions of New South Wales; they have likewise
been found in Victoria —chiefly Gippsland —while the late Dr. J. J,
reported their discovery at the Echunga diggings in South Australia.
In 1867 they were found to occur at the Cudgegong River (Mudgee), at
which place, during that year, between 3,000 and 4,000 diamonds were won
from the claims of the Australian Diamond Mining Co., Messrs. Scott and
Allen, and Messrs. Cooney and party. In 1872-73 a somewhat extensive
rush took place to Bingera, where a large number of mineral leases were
applied for, and it was anticipated that diamond-washing would become a
permanent and payable industry. Unfortunately, however, the stones being
small, and the Sydney jewellers declining to buy, there was no outlet, and the
work was suddenly abandoned. In 1881 the Bingera field was visited and
examined by Mr. Geological-Surveyor E. E. Pittman (now Government
Geologist), and the result of his investigations was furnished in a report by
him published in the Annual Report for that year. Folio-wing this report
renewed interest and attention seems to have been paid to that locality, and
since 1883 mining of a more or less desultory and spasmodic character has
been conducted there —the scarcity of -water experienced in the district
having greatly retarded operations both in that and later years. In 1883-84
diamonds were found in the Tingha Division, near the Big River, Auburn
Yale, and here also the industry has since been prosecuted in a small way.
Owing to the great difficulty experienced by miners in finding a ready
market for their diamonds, advantage was taken in 1886 of the exhibit of
New South Wales diamonds at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition (a
collection of which had been purchased by the Government, in 1885, for
that purpose) to obtain, through the Agent-General, some information con-
cerning the prospect of a market in London for the products of our mines.
The exhibit referred to having been carefully examined by Messrs. Thos.
Davies, F.G.S., and R. Etheridge, jun. (several of the gems having been cut
and polished by Messrs. Ford and Wright, of London), a lengthy and
interesting report was furnished by them. The following conclusions, among
others, were specially emphasised:—l. That the diamonds of New South
Wales in their physical characteristics are more nearly allied to those of
Brazil than any other country. 2. They have been largely sold in London as


such, 3. As regards colour, they differ practically hut little from those of
other fields. 4. The general absence of “cleavage” and “ macles” is a point
in their favour. And 5. That the greater hardness of the New South Wales
gems would probably raise the cost of cutting, but this would be compensated
for by their extra “ brilliancy.” Indeed, as a matter of fact, in brilliancy
and refractive power the New South Wales gems surpass the African, and
one of those cut in London, by the firm above alluded to, was stated to have
been as fine a brilliant as it was possible to obtain in any part of the world.
The principal diamautiferous deposits in this Colony occur in outliers of
Tertiary river drifts and cement representing old river accumulations, of
more than one geological age, lying at various distances from present river
channels, and once forming portions of widespread and continuous deposits
resting on the bedrock of the country. They also occur in the more recent
drifts derived from them.
There has been a great diversity of opinion as to their origin and true
matrix, and several theories have been advanced, but the question still remains
in abeyance. The late Mr. Norman Taylor believed them to have been
chemically formed in the older Tertiary drifts ; and, in support of this view,
adduced what at first sight might appear very cogent reasons. The late Mr.
C. S. Wilkinson held the same view at one time; but after an extended
examination of the various diamautiferous deposits in the Northern District,
he suggested that if the Tertiary drifts be not the original matrix of the
diamond, possibly its source may be in the metamorphosed Carboniferous or
Devonian beds, where they have been intruded by granite or porphyry.
Professor David came to the conclusion that the Cope’s Creek diamonds were
probably derived from the tourmaline granite. It is, however, now believed
that their source will ultimately be traced to volcanic “ pipes” analogous
lo those found in the celebrated Kimberley Field of South Africa. Whether
or not this solution will prove correct, time alone can determine —certainly
up to the present there is no evidence of any such “ pipe ” having yet been
found. But, as pointed out a few years ago by the present Government
Geologist, Mr. E. F. Pittman, even presuming the existence of such “pipes,”
the probabilities are, unfortunately for the prospector, that their ancient
surface outcrops lie effectually concealed beneath the basalt flows, which
to such a considerable extent, cover the diamautiferous areas.
In 1894, in consequence of statements which had been made to the effect
that such a volcanic “ pipe” had been discovered at Bingera, Mr. Geological-
Surveyor Stonier was instructed to make an inspection and Mr.
Stonier spent several months in examining the field, but found no evidence
to warrant the statements made. Again, so recently as June, 1897, in com-
pliance with a petition from the residents of Bingera for a specific report
upon a volcanic “ pipe” alleged to have been discovered in the Australian
Diamond Company’s Mine, Mr. Geological-Survey or J, B. Jaquet was deputed
to inspect and report upon the so-called “pipe.” Samples of the rock, stated
to be volcanic breccia, had previously been forwarded to the Department by
Mr. Wingate, the manager of the mine, and, upon examination, the Govern-
ment Geologist had pronounced them to be of sedimentary origin. The
result of Mr. Jaquet’s examination locally, was to completely bear out the
opinion which had been expressed by the Government Geologist, The so-
called breccia proved to be Carboniferous claystone, which is the prevailing
rock underlying the diamautiferous river drifts of Bingera.
The diamonds found in this Colony generally average from 5 to G to the
carat, although gems of 2-21 carats are occasionally found, and one of 5i
carats has been recorded. The number obtained per load varies very greatly ;


the Round Mount Co, (Cope’s Creek, Inverell) in 188 G washed 722 loads
for 2,685 carats—from 6 loads obtaining the exceptional yield of 1,080
diamonds, weighing 296 carats, which probably establishes a record so far as
our fields are concerned.
Very great difficulty is experienced in procuring accurate and reliable
information as to the quantity and value of the gems which, up to the
present, have been won, especially as regards the earlier years of the
industry.
It is a significant fact that, in spite of the severe drought, with its attendant
drawbacks, the output for last year—l 6,493 carats —is, in quantity though
not in value, the largest recorded since the opening of the industry. The
Boggy Camp Diamond and Tin Field yielded 14,920 carats of diamonds
during the year, valued at £5,625, the gems being associated with tin in
considerable quantities. This field has been considerably developed during
the year, but work was greatly hampered through the scarcity of water.
There are indications that this field will now be thoroughly tested, as capital
has been attracted to it. The next diamond field of importance is situated
about 6 miles from Bingera, This field has been practically idle during the
year, owing to the water difficulty, the only work being done by Capt. Rogers
in the “ Monte Christo ” Mine, from which 1,573 carats were won. As soon
as rain falls, work will be started by several large companies, and it is
expected to prove highly successful.
Considerable interest has lately been centred in these fields, and as some
indication of the progress of the Northern District, generally, a local
“ Mining Exchange ” has recently been opened at Inverell —the only one
established in any part of the Colony outside the capital, with the exception
of Broken Hill. Indeed, at the present moment there are not wanting signs
of a large and progressive development of the field.
Report on New South Wales Diamonds.
To Sir Saul Samuel, K.C.M.G., C. 8.,
Agent-General for New South Wales, —
Sir, London, 16 November, 1886.
In response to your request that we should examine and report to you
on the Collection of Diamonds in the New South Wales Court of "the
Colonial and Indian Exhibition, we have the honor to inform you that we
have carefully examined the 285 crystals comprising it, and have fully gone
into the literature bearing on the occurrence of the Diamond in New South
Wales, so far as known to us.
The mode of occurrence, physical characters, accompanying gems, and
the general history of the Diamond in New South Wales have been so ably
ti’eated by Messrs. Norman Taylor and the late Professor A. M. Thomson
{Trans. B. Soc. AT. S. Wales for 1870, p. 94), Mr. Norman Taylor ( Geological
Magazine , 1879, vol. vi., pp. 399 & 444), and Professor A. Liversidge {Trans.
B. Soc. AT. S. Wales for 1873 [1874], pp. 91 & 102; Quart. Journal Oeol.
Soc., 1875, xxxi, p. 489), and the equally full description of the deposits
yielding the gem, given by the same authors, and Mr. E. E. Pittman {Annual
Beport Dept, of Mines AT. S. Wales for 1881, p. 141), that it is quite super-
fluous for us to do more than briefly refer to these parts of the subject.


With regard to the crystallographic form, we have recognised all those
described by Messrs. Taylor and Thomson and Professor Liversidge. When
compared with those of South Africa, we find that the New South Wales forms
are more varied, i.e., the crystals partake more of the dodecahedral with its
numerous modifications, than of the octahedral habit, which is so marked a
feature in those from the Cape. In this respect the New South Wales stones
hear a remarkable resemblance to those from Brazil, and also differ from the
Indian gems. Another peculiarity of the Cape diamond is the large pro-
portion of cleaved stones, or “ cleavage,” which appear to be entirely absent
in the parcel submitted to us from the Crown Jewel Mine. Speaking of those
from Bingera generally, Professor Liversidge says, “ no fractured specimens
have been detected” ; whilst among those from Cudgegong, Mr. Taylor
remarks, “it is very rare to meet with fractured stones.” Again, amongst the
Cape diamonds a fairly large number of “macles,” or twinned-crystals, are
met with ; and these, as we have elsewhere pointed out, are found to present
difficulties in cutting through the planes of contact. Now, in the present
collection, these macles appear to be exceptional, but Mr. Taylor has described
twinned-crystals from the Cudgegong, although not obtained in any quantity.
Flattened octahedra, known in the trade as “ flats,” appear to be rare.
although we have noticed a few. They are converted into “ rose diamonds,”
a form of cutting formerly much practised in oriental countries, but only
used in the case of imperfect stones. It naturally follows that the com-
parative absence of stones with these crystallographic characters will tend
to reduce the cost of preparation, loss of material and necessity for the
production of a less saleable gem.
The black specks so frequently met with, not only in the Cape, but also in
Brazilian diamonds, appear in those from Inverell to be more or less con-
fined to the surface planes, not extending to any depth within the crystals,
and would doubtless be eliminated in the cutting without detracting to any
great extent from the value of the stones as gems. On the other hand,
speaking of the Cudgegong diamonds, Messrs. Taylor and Thomson say that
“ black °specks within the crystals are not uncommon,” and Professor
Liversidge remarks on those from Bingera,” it is rather common to find
them with .... internal black specks.” The above observers have
fully described the various colours characteristic of the New South Wales
diamond, but in the present parcel we have only noted the colourless, shades
of yellow, and a peculiar light yellowish brown, or light cinnamon colour. A
small number are so slightly tinged as to practically come within the term
“ byewaters,” whilst a very considerable proportion are of that straw-yellow
tint known as “ off-colours ;” but it is satisfactory to note that, as we have
elsewhere stated, these off-colour stones far eclipse, when seen by artificial
light, those regarded as of pure water.
On analysing the colour of 275 stones from Inverell, we find the following
proportions: —
Colourless ... ... ... ... ... 100
Straw-yellow (“ off-colours”) ... ... ... 126
Slightly tinted yellow (“ byewaters”) ... ... 39
Cinnamon-yellow ... ... ... ... ••• 0
Dirty grey hue (“rejections”) ... ... ... 4
Messrs. Taylor and Thomson, Mr. Taylor separately, and Professor
Liversidge make particular mention of shades of green as sometimes
occurring. Mr. Taylor speaks cf “ light or dark bottle green” stones, and


Professor Liversidge mentions “ light green” gems. We have no information
what proportion such colours occupy in comparison with the others just
enumerated, but we would point out that the commercial value of stones so
tinted is enormously augmented, if of any size, and we cannot impress too
strongly on those engaged in diamond mining the importance of this point.
We are likewise unfurnished with information as to the quantity of “boart”
yet obtained in the Colony; but considering the numerous uses to which this
variety of the diamond has been put of late years, more particularly as applied
to the diamond drill, and considering the important part this machine is now
playing in water borings throughout the Australian Continent, —we would
strongly recommend this variety to the attention of the mining community.
Several crystals of a dirty-grey hue, and known in diamond circles as
“ rejections,” are present in the collection, and these, with a few irregular
malformed crystals, may be taken as types of stones which could be success-
fully used for this purpose. “ One or two opaque black” diamonds are
mentioned by Mr. Taylor, and Professor Liversidge cites an example of
boart, which was exhibited in the IVew South Wales Court, and is said to
have been found at Mudgee.* It is described as black in colour, and with
graphitic lustre, of the size of a large pea, and with a few small crystallo-
graphic processes projecting from the surface, 7352 grains in weight, and
Sp. Qt. 3’56, at 70° P. This description strongly recalls to mind the true
Brazilian boart, which is in such request for diamond drills, and as dis-
tinguished from that of the Cape Liamond Pields. The latter consists
simply of badly crystallized and dark coloured stones, similar to those
previously referred to as of a dirty-grey hue from the Crown Jewel Mine.
The importance of these facts will be at once perceived when it is remem-
bered that the true or Brazilian boart consists of more or less spherical
aggregations of acicular crystals, radiating from a centre, and possessing an
external aspect with which Professor Liversidge’s description seems to
correspond. We have examined the stone in question, and beyond exhibiting
a smoother surface, it appears to us to fulfil these conditions. We need not
say more on this point than by reminding those interested that the true
boart is now worth 7s. 6d. per carat, and the Cape or false boart, 3s. 6d.
The lustre of the crystalline faces, which is not to be differentiated from
that of Brazilian stones, is chiefly adamantine, but at times somewhat dull;
but this in no way detracts from their beauty when cut, the exterior crystal
irregularities having little or no connection with the structure below the
surface. The dullness appears to be partly due, as pointed out by Mr.
Taylor and Professor Liversidge, to certain crystallographic irregularities,
and certainly is not owing, as suggested by some, to abrasion or attrition.
The rounding of the faces, visible on many of these crystals, is entirely due
to the well known peculiarities of diamond crystallization, and that it is not
due to attrition is evident by the sharply defined character of the edges
bounding these rounded faces.
The equally noticeable pitting of the surfaces of the crystal planes is
characteristic of the diamond in all hitherto known localities, and cannot
therefore be used as a means of comparison with those of one field as against
those of another. The pitting is very irregular, both in position and shape—
more so, in fact, than is generally seen in examples from other fields. The
colourless stones are not only pitted to a greater extent than the ye!low r , but
the crystal planes are more unequally developed, imparting to the crystals a
much more distorted appearance. The brilliancy of the white and yellow
*ln another place (Liversidge, The Minerals of Mew South Wales, 2nd Edition, p. 122), this is stated to
have come from Bathurst.


stones when the gems are good is about equal; and before cutting, this
feature is more pronounced the nearer they approach the octahedron in
form, a fact holding good both for the yellow and white stones, and one
quite in accord with theory.
Some of the colourless are very beautiful stones, and the quality quite
justifies the manner in which parcels have been brought into the London
market —a fact to be referred to hereafter.
Amongst the stones cut for you by Messrs. Ford & Wright is one of a
very peculiar and, so far as we know, original structure, to which our
attention was drawn by their manager, Mr. L. Atkinson. The prepared
facet exhibits triangular markings which appear to correspond with some of
the surface pittings. These markings, so far as we were able to judge, seem
to extend through the whole of the crystal, and unless removable by
polishing, stones of a similar structure to this, judging from a trade point
of view, would be of little value, but we are of opinion that this is an
isolated instance of a peculiar crystallographic growth.
Hardness is a physical feature upon which much stress is laid by lapidaries
and diamond-cutters, and it is stated by Messrs. Ford & Wright that the
New South Wales diamonds are much harder than those from the Cape,
judging by the time necessary for the preparation of the facets. But, as a
matter of fact, in other precious stones the relative hardness depends to a
great extent upon the direction in which a stone is cut with regard to its
crystalline form, and until many more careful observations are recorded, we
hesitate to pronounce any opinion as to the value of this. If proved, we
would call attention to the necessary increase in the cost of cutting the
diamonds from your Colony, but, as a set-off to this, the probable increase
in brilliancy. One thing is quite apparent, when cut, some of these stones
produce most exquisite gems.
Messrs, Taylor and Thomson, and Professor Liversidge also, have deter-
mined the specific gravity to vary between the limits of 3’42 (Bingera) and
344 (Mudgee), but with an average of 342. We find the mean of a series
of experiments with the Crown Jewel diamonds to be 346. The following
table of specific gravities gives a comparison with that of those from Brazil,
India, and Borneo, the data of the latter being taken from Mr. Harry
Emmanuel’s work, and that of MM. Jacob and Chatrain: —
India ..
Brazil
Cape ..
Borneo
N. S. Wales.
The analogy in density between the white Brazilian stones and those from
New South Wales, irrespective of colour, is at once apparent.
The average weight of the Mudgee stones was estimated at 0'23, or nearly
one carat grain each, by Messrs. Taylor and Thomson, and this has received
corroboration from Mr. C. S. Wilkinson in the case of diamonds from the
Bora Creek Tin-drifts {Mines and Min. Statistics, N. S. Wales, for 1874,
p. 79), On the other hand, those from Bingera are said by Professor


Liversidge to be “for the most part small in size.” We have made two
series of determinations of the weights of the Crown Jewel Mine diamonds,
with the following results :
20 Ist size stones (a) = 16£ + T g- carats Mean f + T V
m » (&)= 12 i + 4 + »4 + 4
20 medium stones (a) 10| + T 5 » 4 + eV
» )) (b)= $4 +To + fIT >) I+4+-h + oT
20 small stones («)= + 4 » 4+ tV
» » (&)= 24 + 4 + t$- + oV » 4 + tV
Mr. Harrie Wood, in the Annual Report of the Department of Mines for
1885 (p. 40), gives the total weight of this parcel as 10If carats. He states
that “ 280 ranged from i to 1 carat each in weight, and five from 1 to 14
carat.”
As a fair average of the diamonds found in the Cudgegong field, Messrs.
Taylor and Thomson give the following statistics:
106 diamonds weighed 744 carats, the largest If carats.
81 „ „ 19 „ „ 14 „
19 „ „ H
110 „ „ 264
16 ~ „ 6
700 ' „ „ 1514
Large diamonds appear to be quite the exception in New South Wales ;
at any rate, definite data are wanting on this branch of the subject. The
largest stones of which we have been able to find reliable record are the
following: —Messrs. Taylor and Thomson give the largest found at 5| carats,
a perfectly colourless octahedron, discovered in the Cudgegong River,
between the “ Two-mile-Flat ” and the “ Rocky Ridge ” ; another of 34-
carats at the former locality. Two very excellent stones were exhibited in
the New South Wales Court by Mr. R. H. D. White, weighing, respectively,
in the cut form 3 and 3i carats. Professor Liversidge states that at Bald
Hill, Hill End, one stone slightly over 3 carats, and another carat, were
obtained. On the other hand, Mr. C. S. Wilkinson records the discovery in
the stream-tin washings of the Bora Tin and Diamond Mining Company,
Bora Creek, of a diamond weighing 5 - 5 carats, and another 7 5 carats at
the Hengonover Mine, in the same creek. From the Crown Jewel Mine the
largest stones we noticed were the following :
1 large colourless stone = 14 + Vt I 1 large yellow stone = f 4- 4
>j j> » = S"t Vg- V 2 I » >» J> Si" Ta
As compared with the stones of other localities, the size is somewhat small,
although it is stated that Brazilian diamonds frequently take from 15 to 20
to weigh a carat. This smallness of size is compensated, however, by the
fact, as we are informed by an excellent trade authority, that medium-sized
diamonds are now more in request than large ones, for mounting in conjunc-
tion with other gems, such as rubies and sapphires. In form, size, and physical
character the New South Wales diamonds appear to agree better with those
of the country just mentioned than of any other ; but, of course, they cannot
vie in size or quantity with Cape stones. In brilliancy and fire, when cut,
they are, however, stone for stone, quite able to hold their own with those
from the latter Colony. In fact, it appears, from information gathered
through most reliable sources, that a large proportion of New South Wales


gems have found their way to the London market as Brazilian stones. Other-
wise we would ask what has become of the 12,000 which are officially returned
as found up to the end of 1.885, especially when it is distinctly stated by
Mr. E. F. Pittman, Chief Mining Surveyor for New South Wales, that in
1872-73 the Sydney jewellers declined to buy Bingera stones. We are quite
aware that some small parcels have reached certain eminent firms in London,
in a genuinely open manner, as New South Wales diamonds ; but we believe
that the other course has been more frequently adopted. If this be the case,
what more satisfactory certificate could be adduced in favour of the diamonds
yielded by the Tertiary drifts of New South Wales.
Whilst preparing the present Report we have been asked on several
occasions two very pertinent questions —questions which appear to us to have
a very important bearing on the future development and permanency of the
diamond industry in New South Wales. The first of these was—What is the
area of the diamantiferous ground, and the approximate thickness of the drift
in the several fields P The second, and equally important, question related to
the yield of stones. Unfortunately, beyond the general statement that 12,000
diamonds have been found, we are unacquainted with any official return
dealing with such details, and even until within the last two years this
subject does not appear as one of the items in your excellent “ Reports of
the Department of Mines ” ; and the same remarks may be applied to the
question of area. Many statements have appeared in the public press on-
the first of these points, but they are so utterly unreliable as to be quite
useless for statistical purposes.
With the view of pointing out how difficult it is for an estimate to be
formed, even within several degrees of accuracy, the following brief and
imperfect description of the diamantiferous deposits may not be out of
place, abstracted from the several excellent authorities we have before
referred to.
. The diamond in New South Wales occurs in outliers of drift and cement
representing old river accumulations of more than one geological age, lying
at various distances from the present river channels, and once forming
portions of widespread and continuous deposits, resting on the bed rock of
the country. The older drifts have been protected from total destruction by
cappings of basaltic rock, but the isolated condition of these clearly shows
the enormous amount of denudation which has gone on, and the quantity of
diamantiferous drift removed. The latter is usually loose and coarse, but
in places passes into a compact conglomerate. There are six of these drifts
at Mudgee, occupying different levels, resulting from the successive denuda-
tions of one another, and we believe all diamond-bearing. At Bingera, on
the other hand, the drift is described as a “small-grained siliceous brecciated
conglomerate, strongly agglutinated together by a ferruginous cement.”
The younger drifts have in every case been derived from the destruction by
fiuviatile agencies of the older. Mr. Taylor describes the older drift as a
“ coarse and heavy deposit —some boulders in it weighing several hundred-
weights—for the most part loose, but portions of it united into a compact
conglomerate. It varies greatly in thickness, from a few inches to 30 feet
. . . The newer drift derived from the aboA r e is composed of the same
contents as the older drift, with the addition of boulders of greenstone and
basalt . . . The newer drifts (upper and lower) comprising the present
river bed, and older and deeper channels, contain pebbles, boulders, and
shingle of the neighbouring sandstones, slates, &c.” Throughout these
drifts the diamonds are described as occurring in rich patches. The drift at
Bingera is said by Professor Liversidge to vary from 3 to 60 feet.


It will be readily understood from this, that without a detailed official
survey of all the likely diamond-bearing drifts it would be impossible to
give even an approximate idea of the areas capable of yielding the precious
stones ; but that such deposits are numerous throughout New South Wales
is itself evident to anyone who has perused the able geological reports of
Mr. C. S. Wilkinson and his assistants. It can naturally be roughly ascer-
tained from the geological maps prepared by these gentlemen, but we believe
it would greatly stimulate diamond-mining if a detailed report could be
prepared furnishing the information in question. As an indication to
parties interested, we can only refer to what has been done, and for this
purpose wo quote certain of the ascertained areas of the Cudgegong
(Mudgee) Diamond-field, as given by Messrs. Taylor and Thomson, thus —
Name of Claim.
Area in Acres. Thickness of Drift.
Two-mile Flat
Jordan’s Hill
Miller’s Claim
Junction of Reedy Creek with Cudgegong River
Rocky Ridge (older drift)
Horse-shoe Bend do
Hassall’s Hill do
? 12 to 30 feet.
Touching the second point —the number of diamonds found —the following
reliable data are extant: —
Claim.
Australian Diamond Mining Com- 1
pany (Mudgee).
Messrs. Scott & Allen (Mudgee) ...j
Messrs. Cooney and Party (Mudgee)
Diamonds. No. per Load. Carats. Authority. Date.
1,765
From 1 in 2 loads,
to 4 or 5 in I load.
8 to 12 or 15 loads.
1 to 15 to 1 load,
average 5.
1,000
Falk & Co. (Bingera)
Gwydir Diamond Company (Bingera)
Australian Diamond Mining Com-
From 100 loads
„ 34£ „
„ 418* „
1,193
pany (Bingera).
Craddock and Party (Bingera)
Australian Diamond Mining Com
pany (Bingera).
Crown Jewel Mine (Tingha)
»> i »>
» 87 u
1,134
* 5,000 tons of drift were raised.
1, and waiting to be washed.
Taylor ... 1867
j> ••• >»
» ••• »
Wood ... 1883
Liversidge 1873
„ 1884
Wood ... ~
„ ... 1885
» »
These, of course, represent but a small proportion of those found, and
numbers are only quoted as indicating the relative richness of average claims.
Had all the statements been accepted to which we have had access, doubtless
the total of 12,000, given in the New South Wales official catalogue, Colonial
and Indian Exhibition (p. 149), could be much exceeded.


The distribution of the diamond throughout New South Wales is wide-
spread. It has been recorded as occurring at the undermentioned places
Authority.
Turon River.
Reedy Creek, near Bathurst
Burrendong
Pyramid Creek
Calabash ...
Sutler’s Bar, Macquarie River
Cudgegong River (Mudgee)
Bingera
Bald Hill, Hill End
Bora and Bengonover Tin Mines
Trunkey Creek, Tuena
Brook’s .Creek, Gundaroo, near Goulburn
Lachlan River
Monkey Hill and Sally’s Flat
Big River, Auburn Valley, Tingha.
Berrima District
Crown Jewel Mine, Inverell
Stutchbury
Hargraves
Clarke
53 * **
Taylor and Thomson.
Liversidge
99
Wilkinson
Taylor ....
Liversidge
Wood
9 9
C.I.E.
We have seen it stated that certain claims at Bingera show “good wash
of the proper kind, and of the same sort as yields well in South Africa.”
Now a statement of this kind, if true, would naturally do more perhaps for
diamond-mining in New South Wales than any other fact which could be
adduced in its favour. On the other hand, if erroneous, a corresponding
amount of harm will be done by inducing investors to speculate in the hope
of obtaining similar gratifying results. We have neither seen or read of
any diamantiferous soil from New South Wales having even the faintest
resemblance to the peculiar rock forming the matrix of the diamond at
Kimberley and neighbouring mines, nor occurring in a like manner. We
presume the Kimberley deposit is referred to in such a paragraph as we have
quoted, and not the Vaal diggings, which are now comparatively worked out.
We cannot too strongly condemn such statements as having no foundation
in fact. We have already briefly described the diamond matrices in New
South Wales, which are drifts , widely distributed horizontally. In South
Africa, on the other hand, the diamantiferous rock has given rise to much
speculation, and is still a subject for discussion, although it probably results,
in a great measure, from a peculiar form of hydrothermal action. Instead
of a wide-spread distribution, it occupies restricted areas, having no
semblance to drift deposits at all, but is an agglomerate filling strange pipe-
like depressions, or elliptical cavities extending vertically to unknown depths,
the exact nature of which have yet to be explained. This is the celebrated
“ blue ” of the South African miners, and it is a “ distinct agglomerate, con-
sisting of fragments of all shapes and sizes of many rocks, which vary much
in mineral composition, enclosed in a base of serpentinised material, which
appears to have largely resulted from the alteration of enstatite and olivine.
The enclosed rocks, or some of their mineral constituents, have partaken, to
a considerable extent, of the same chemical alteration. The texture varies
very much, and depends upon the size and abundance of the enclosed frag-
ments ; sometimes it resembles a breccia, sometimes a conglomerate, and
sometimes partakes of the character of both. In some parts the blocks are
very much rounded, and present the aspect of water-worn pebbles. This is


especially the case in many of the doleritic rocks, though we have seen blocks
of mica-schist in it which it was difficult to believe were not true pebbles. In
others the fragments are more angular, but all that we have seen appear to
have their sharp edges more or less removed by some mode of attrition.”*
No such rock has ever been described, to our knowledge, from New South
Wales, diamautiferous or otherwise; and to say, therefore, that the conditions
are similar in the two countries is both misleading and erroneous. With
the view of showing the relations of the New South Wales diamond matrix,
we here append a list of some of the more frequent rocks and minerals con-
stituting those of Brazil, India, Borneo, and the Cape, from which the
resemblance it bears to the two former will be at once apparent.
Brazil. —Gold, lydian stone, quartz, red ironstone (siliceous), cassiterite,
topaz, spinel, garnet, lazulite, chrysoberyl, carbonado, tourmaline,
. andalusite, beryl, rutile, anatase, brookite, tantalite, haematite,
kyanite.
India. —Quartz, jaspers, hornblende, corundum.
Borneo. —Mostly red clay, which contains pebble of serpentine, diorite,
and quartz, interbedded with marl, containing fossils, magnetite,
platinum, black quartz.
Hew South Wales. —Quartz, quartzites, cassiterite, jasper, lydian stone,
topaz, sapphire, rubies, varieties of zircqn, spinel (varieties of),
gold, tourmaline, flinty slate, shale, sandstone, illmenite, magnetic
iron sand, brookite, rutile (Bald Hill), garnet, osmiridium (newer
drift of Mudgee).
Cape.— Garnets, green, ruby-red, and brown; smaragdite, bronzite,
enstatite, olivine, illmenite, zircon, vaalite, hornblende, zeolites,
calcite, opal, staurolite, iron pyrites, pegmatite, talc schist, mica
schist, augite rock, amphibolite, eclogite, serpentine, gneiss, perido-
tite, granite, dolerites, basalt, melaphyre (with agates) and others,
amounting to over eighty in number.
With regard to the source of the diamond in New South Wales we do not
see any other course than to unhesitatingly accept the explanations offered
by Mr. Norman Taylor, so far as the facts bearing on this branch of the
subject have been yet gathered. He believes that they were chemically
formed in the older Tertiary drifts, and in support of this view adduces the
following cogent reasons :
1. The older rocks of the various diamautiferous districts have not been
proved to be diamond-bearing.
2. The older Tertiary drifts or cements are derived from the denudation
of these, and contain diamonds.
3. The younger drifts are only diamautiferous when resulting from the
destruction of the latter, and similarly the recent alluvium again
from them.
4. The natural conclusion is, that the diamonds have been formed in the
drifts, and not derived from any pre-existing rocks.
Mr. Taylor was further of opinion that the “ fluctuating yield, small
average size of the gems, the expense in extracting the drift from beneath
the basalt, cartage to water, and washing effectually, are the drawbacks which
have hitherto stood in the way of the successful investment of capital in this
* Etheridge and Davies, Milling Journal, 1886, vol. h i., p. 880.


direction.” We imagine that some of these difficulties will in the future be
overcome by stricter attention to the details of at least two of these points.
For instance, we have it on record that in certain claims, when chiefly worked
for gold only, the lower portions of the drift, or that near the “ gutter,” was
removed, leaving what was perhaps the richest diamond-bearing portion
behind. Mr, Taylor distinctly states that the gems do not appear to occur
much on the bottom with the gold, and also from the fact, in the Cudgegong
field, at least, they appear to be found in “runs” or “veins,” at various
levels in the drift. It is not improbable, therefore, that in a number of the
Tertiary deposits which have been explored simply for gold, diamonds have
unconsciously been overlooked. We think that a remark of Messrs. Taylor
and Thomson’s to the effect that “ the mere fact of the not unfrequent
discovery of diamonds on the waste heaps round old shafts which were sunk
for gold, is enough to suggest that the diamonds may occur in the higher
portions of the deposit, since the bottom layer has been invariably carted to
the river for gold-washing,” to some extent proves this, and even opens up
the far wider question touched on in the preceding paragraph. The small
average size of the stones, as we have previously pointed out, ought not to
mitigate against a successful prosecution of the industry under present
circumstances. On the other hand, the expense of mining and question of
water supply are so entirely matters of local detail as to be quite out of place
in the present remarks.
Washing effectually ckn only be carried out by thoroughly good machinery,
and there is evidence to show that such is now being introduced. In all
probability the machine best suited to the diamond drifts of New South
Wales would be a slight modification of the “Washing Gear and Pulsator,”
as used by the Griqualand West Diamond Mining Company, Dutoit’s Pan,
in 1885, a model of which was exhibited at the late Exhibition,
In bringing our Eeport to a termination, we beg to emphasise the following
conclusions, which the foregoing remarks bear out: —
1. The diamonds of New South Wales in their physical characters are
more nearly allied to those of Brazil than any other country.
2. They have been very largely sold in London as such.
3. As regards colour, they differ practically but little from those of other
fields.
4. The general absence of “ cleavage” and “ macles” is a point much in
their favour.
5. Stones of the rarer colours assumed by the diamond should be par-
ticularly sought for.
6, The greater hardness of the New South Wales gems will probably
raise the cost of cuttiug, but this will be compensated for by their
extra “ brilliancy.”
7. “ Boart” should be eagerly sought for.
8. Detailed statistics of the area and thickness of drifts likely to prove
diamantiferous, and the number hitherto found so, should be pre-
pared officially.
9, All auriferous drifts should be prospected for diamonds.
10. The matrix of the diamond in New South Wales bears no resemblance
to that at the Cape.
We are, &c,,
THOS. DAVIES, E.G.S.
E. ETHEEIDGE, Jujtr.


A Report to the New South Wales Government
upon its Diamonds.
The four Australian diamonds selected by myself in the New South Wales
Court at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition, by the request of Sir Saul
Samuel, K.C.M.Gr., C. 8., to make a report upon after being cut and polished,
during which process I had thoroughly and closely investigated them, with
this result, that: —
No. 1 parcel contains one diamond which had the ordinary dodecahedron
crystallisation; the crust or coat of the stone was perfectly naturally
polished, with very few indentations, and no indication whatever of
triangular indentations or markings as so frequently found in the
African diamond. It was cut into the shape most suitable to show
to the greatest advantage, and on the polisher commencing to put
the first facet on it, called the table, it was found on careful
examination that there was a triangular formation which is generally
found on the outer coat or crust, but very rarely indeed right
inside the stone ; and it is so remarkable that, on the heads of the
Mineral Department of the British Museum hearing of it, and after
examining it, they expressed a strong desire to possess the stone,
as being of such a wonderful and interesting formation ; therefore
I thought it advisable to stop the polishing process of it, and submit
the stone for inspection in accordance with the desire of the Mineral
Department of the British Museum, South Kensington.
No. 2 parcel contains the diamonds which were most carefully selected
by myself out of the 286 Australian diamonds exhibited in the New
South Wales Court at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition, that
they might be as near a match as it is possible to get in every
respect, such as size, shape, colour, and appearance. One has been
cut and polished, and proves a brilliant of the finest water. The
other diamond is left in its natural rough shape, just as it was
found, so as to show at once the practical difference between the
two diamonds.
No. 3 parcel contains one diamond, which, in its rough state, weighed
1-*- carat, the crystallisation, a hexakis octahedron of a dull white
colour after being cut and polished. It now weights the fr rV
of a carat, and is about as fine a brilliant as it is possible to get, be
it from Grolconda, Borneo, Brazil, or Jaggersfontein.
The market price of the Australian diamonds in the rough state is liable,
like all other diamonds, to great fluctuations, and on the whole are generally
lower than the African diamond, for this important reason—that they are a
great deal harder to cut and polish ; as, if it were possible to pick out an
Australian and an African diamond exactly the same size, weight, shape, and
appearance, and given to one man to polish, the African stone would be
finished in six days, whilst the Australian stone would take eight days, with
this vastly important difference, that the Australian diamond would be of
greater brilliancy and refracting power than the African stone ; and I might
suggest that these cut stones might be handed over to some skilled gentleman
who would carefully test in everyway the refracting powers and polarization
of light in comparison with an African diamond.


There is always a good market open for Australian brilliants, as although
they are at present small in size in comparison to the African diamond, with
regard to colour in proportion to their production, Australia finds the most
white diamonds, and there is always a great demand for fine white stones,
and alw'ays will be, as being small they are the most suitable to set round all
other coloured gems and different kinds of ornaments and decorations con-
nected w r ith jewellery, more especially for the future, as China and Japan
are commencing to introduce diamond jewellery into their countries.
The market price at the present time for parcels of diamonds, containing
such stones as the one cut and polished in No. 2 and also No. 3 parcels,
varies from £8 to £9 per carat.
There is another very great market open for all inferior diamonds, especially
rounded stones, commonly called ball-boart, as it is used now T so universally
in large quantities for rock-drilling, mill-dressing, and for turning all hard
metals and stones, and the supply at the present time is not sufficient for the
demand, as the inferior diamonds from Africa rarely answer the purpose,
being of a softer nature than the Brazilian diamond, which on careful
examination, I have come to this most important conclusion, is the same in
every respect with the Australian diamond. Australia has a very important
market open for its diamonds that are too small to cut and polish, as natural
stones are largely used for glass-cutting and china-drilling, &c.
In examining the different collections showm in the New South Wales
Court at the Exhibition, I found one piece of carbon, wLich is the hardest
mineral known, and is greatly needed, and for which there is an immense
market. I believe that, on the diamond mines in Australia being thoroughly
and properly worked with the immensely improved machine that w r e have
now, there will be found paying quantities of this stone ; and I am also firmly
convinced that the deeper the mines are sunk, not only a larger quantity but
finer, and, most important of all, the diamonds will be found larger in size.
LEWIS ATKINSON,
33, Brook-street, Gfrosveuor Square, London, W.
Sydney : William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—lB99.




fUS>IO
H C&H




