

DIAMOND JUBILEE
1848-1908


ODDFELLOWS’ JUBILEE.
CELEBRATION ON MONDAY.
The Jubilee of the Grand United Order of
Oddfellows in New South Wales will be cele-
brated on Monday, in Sydney by a banquet
and In the suburban and country districts by
functions of various kinds.
I. The order was founded in New South Wales
In 1848 under authority of a dispensation
issued by the Grand Lodge in England. The
first lodge opened in Australia was the Travel-
lers’ Home, at Sydney, which lodge is still in
existence, and the Victoria Lodge, which met
at Canterbury. Then came the inauguration
of the first lodge of the order in Melbourne,
the Felix, which was the third opened in Aus-
tralia.
I The order, which has a constitution provid-
ing for committee of management district
and branches, at first consisted of one district
only—the Sydney district Then the Port
Philip district was established at Melbourne,
under the control ot the committee ot manage-
ment, Sydney. Later on branches were estab-
lished in Queensland, and in South Australia a
society, consisting ot 19 branches, and known
as the Australian Independent Order of Odd-
fellows, Joined the society in a body. Subse-
quently Victoria, Queensland, and South Aus-
tralia were granted dispensations to form com-
mittees of management to control their own
affairs.
. Notwithstanding these constant detections;
the society continued to flourish in the mother
State, and at present now consists of 200
branches, with a total numerical strength ot
nearly 20,000 and a capital of £162,000. The
whole of these branches are formed into dls- 1
Iricts, which comprise the Sydney, Brald-
fwood. Hunter River, Goulburn, Manning River
[Bathurst, Williams River, Bega, Southern, and
Und Willyama. A souvenir is being Issued
jby the committee of management free to each
(member in the State.
ODDFELLOWSHIP.
CENTENARY OF INDEPENDENT
ORDER.
A SPLENDID RECORD.
The Independent Order of Oddfellows will
be 100 years old next Saturday, having been.,
'established on April 26, 18X9, at Baltimore;
U.S.A.
t Brother G. T. Clarke, P.G.S., supplies the 1
'following interesting review:— *
' The founder. Mr. Thomas Wildey, an Eng-
lishman. who, on leaving his native land for
■the United States, took wjth him a charter
(to establish a lodge of Odd Fellows under the;
Auspices of an Order then established in Man-!
Chester; better known as the "Manchester)
Unity.” Under the energy of Wildey and
other no lees enthusiastic believers in fra-*
ternlty, the Order took root la North Ame-
rica and quickly spread to countries abroad, i
notably Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and]
to nations where foreign language Is spoken,]
notably Germany, (he Netherlands, Sweden,!
and Denmark. It is in the land of the Stara-j
and Stripes and the British Dominions where]
'the Order has flourished beyond the antlcipa-1
tions of its founders, they builded better than]
fhey knew. 1
Odd Fellowship began in the Seventeenth
century, but not until the very early yearaj
lot the nineteenth century did it take root as
h friendly society, properly constituted un- 1
der responsible government. About the j
middle of the eighteenth century, when the
workhouse was the only hospice for the help-,
less poor, the poor gathered together as clubs
and rendered such offices to each other that 1
jhas brought about probably the largest agency
itor human benefaction that the world knows
jin the friendly society movement to-day, es-
tablished as It is in every civilised' centre of
'
I" ImThe' course of srtew
Jship in North America became a separate and
body u. der the title of “Indepen-
jflent Order of Odd Fellows,” with a Sovereign
[Grand Lodge which meets annually, and is
[composed of representatives from subordinate
'grand bodies from nearly ail parts of the
world. Until the year 1830, eleven years
after the Order was Instituted, it would ap-
pear that no proper statistics had been kept,,
'but we. have it on reliable authority that dur-
ing a period of 88 years the 1.0.0. F. has initli-
Sated 4,602,492 persons into the Order, and
disbursed in relief £38,945,689. Thsj
latest figures showing the numerical and finan-
cial position of the Order as ft stands to-day)
ail over the world may be regarded as phe-i
nomecal. The membership is 2,230,231. Thai
.total relief paid in one year (1917) wa|
j£ 1,336,978, and the annual revenue is
,£<,099,268. expense for 1917 £2,306JP2, and
.accumulated invested funds £14,723318. The
G-L- of Australasia was instituted on the Ist
of July, 1878, by Brother John B. Harmon,
although the Order in the then colonies was
Jong in existence before Australasia took over
Supreme government. Its history can be
traced as far hack as the early thirties of
last centpry, when a supreme grand lodge
existed in Sydney. All traces of the very
(early history of the Order disappeared shortly
After the dlscoyery of gold. At that time
.there was an exodus from Sydney to the gold-
fields, also the disappearance of the records,
jetc. A lodge, however, the Duke of York
yNo. 1, vfts Instituted Jn Melbourne nu Novem-
per 18, 1846, which is the mother of lodges in
Australia and New Zealand, From the in-
stitution of the G.L. of Australasia to the end
Tgf /ear 1918, over £1,800,000 has been
distributed in funeral benefits and the relief;
Jpf sickness and distress. _ _jj


HEADQUARTERS OF THE SOCIETY IN N.S.W.
Sydney District Hall, 328 Castlereagh St.
“You go into these Societies to seek your own good through
the good of others.” — William Ewart Gladstone
Diamond Jubilee
Souvenir
(GRAND UNITED
ORDER OF ODDFELLOWS
FRIENDLY SOCIETY OF N.S.V.


Bro. R. H. WYNNE, P.G.M.,
Grand Director.
Bro. G. H. SANDS P.G.M.
Grand Director.
Bro. R. C. HUNTLEY,
Grand Director.
Bro. J. HANCOCK,
Grand Director.
Bro. H. HERRON, P.G.M.,
Grand secretary.
Bro. J. R. H. RIDLEY,
Deputy Grand Master.
Bro. A.A. EDWARDS,
Grand Master.
Bro. J.G. MOON, P.G.M.,
Grand Trust.
Bro. G. BROWN,
Grand Trust.
Bro. A. W. SOMMERVILLE, P.G.M.,
Grand Trust.


INTRODUCTORY
EVERT institution of any value to humanity has
certain halting places on its progressive course,
in which it takes its bearings, sums up its results,
and prepares for the future. It is as a traveller
J|K| <[V who, after steadily marching up the ascent of
I tut ly a long road, reaches the summit of the hill, and
/(OijT) looks around, from his vantage ground, on the
Ajy J surrounding country, choosing his path for the
cr future, and, in his choice, guided by the nature
of the country he has traversed, by the difficulties
he has encountered and overcome; cheered onward by a realisa-
tion of the growing strength and capacity for further effort
which has crowned his arduous toils. Such a vantage ground
has been reached at this period in the history of our Order.
In celebrating the Diamond Jubilee of the Order in New South
Wales, we are commemorating, not only our material progress
from the infant steps of the pioneers in the year 1848 and
onward, and endeavouring to commemorate the workers —some
of whom have passed “beyond the voices of men,” and some
happily with us still, —but we are measuring our strength for
a new period of effort in the future, by the test of our
experience in the past.
THE ORDER
FEW outside our own body realise how large a part is
played by’ the Friendly Societies in the great drama of our
complex national life to-day. The influence of such societies,
however, can be traced throughout the whole fabric of our
social structure. Those whose business it is to govern nations
have long been aware of the altruistic mission of the societies;
they have watched our growth—at first, with suspicion, then
with reluctant appreciation, and, finally, with enthusiastic
admiration. In our own State the Government so recognises
the worth and value of our splendid aims and organisation
that it proposes to use the perfectly-equipped machinery of the
societies to achieve certain objects of a humanitarian nature
which, while they have long occupied the attention of the
Friendly Societies, have but recently come within the purview
of Governmental action.
ORIGIN OF THE ORDER.
In passing on to the history of our Order in New South
Wales, we are not concerned in examining very minutely its
origin. Learned writers find it difficult to determine whether
the origin of our own and cognate bodies is traceable to Roman
or Teutonic influences. That there were societies known to
the Romans and Teutons, resembling the modern societies, has
been clearly established. Such, for example, were the Teutonic
Burial Clubs. But all writers agree that the picturesque and
interesting ceremonials are traceable to the mediaeval guilds.
In our own case, the Oddfellows are associated with a pic-
turesque legend, which ascribes our origin to the Jewish Legion
under the Roman Emperor Titus, and sets out that the first
charter, written on a golden tablet, was given to the Order by
that Emperor.


PROGRESS AGAINST DIFFICULTIES.
The modern record is traceable as far back as 1634. The
first legislative record was Sir George Rose’s Act in 1793, which
declared in the preamble that “it was advisable that encour-
agement should be afforded to persons desirous of making
provision for themselves or their families out of the fruits of
their own industry. ’ ’ Even at that stage of its history, the
modern principles of the Order were well understood, as may
be seen from the following legal definition of a society:—“An
institution whereby it is intended to provide by contribution
on the principle of mutual assurance, for the maintenance of
the contributors thereto, their wives and children, in sickness,
infancy, advanced age, widowhood, or any other natural state
or contingency, whereof the occurrence is susceptible of calcu-
lation by way of average. ’ ’
The element of good fellowship entered largely into the
early organisations. Speaking of the Oddfellows, a writer
describes their Order as “a social institution, having mystic
rites and ceremonies and various grades of honour. The objects
of the association are purely social and benevolent. Their
operations are confined to their own members, and secrecy is
enjoined as to their benevolent acts.” The idea was developed
along these lines, until to-day, the membership of the
Oddfellows’ Societies runs into many millions, diffused over
almost every civilised country on the globe, in the Northern and
Southern Hemispheres, in the East and in the West, in Britain
and Continental nations, in the United States, Canada, and in
the States of South America. The influence of all these world-
wide organisations upon the nations in which they exist is
incalculable. And everywhere they are legalised, recognised,
honoured, and encouraged.
THE BEGINNING IN N.S.W.
The beginnings of our Order in N.S.W. are picturesquely
connected with one of the greatest events of European history—
viz., the Battle of Waterloo. The founder of the Order in
N.S.W. was Mr. James Reid, a Waterloo hero. He had, in
that battle, received a sabre cut in the head, which necessitated
the trephining of his skull and the insertion of a silver plate.
Invalided home to England, he remained there until the year
1844, when he emigrated to Australia. Before he went on active
service in the Napoleonic wars he had been connected with
the Order, and no doubt he resumed his connection therewith
after the campaign which ended with Waterloo, for, when he
arrived in Sydney, he brought with him a dispensation from
the English Committee of Management to open a branch in
Australia. On his arrival, he got into touch with several
gentlemen, and consulted with them as to the formation of a
branch, in accordance with the powers with which he was
entrusted.
A LODGE FORMED.
The result of their consultation was that a lodge was
formed, called “The Travellers’ Home” Lodge, which met, it
is believed, at the Star Hotel, George-street, Sydney. This
historic hotel has long disappeared from George-street. It
stood on the site on which David Jones’ new shop now stands,
and almost opposite John Sands. A word here as to Mr. James
Reid. He was, as may be seen from his career as a soldier,
a remarkable man. In his childhood his family had been
intimately associated with the family of the late William
Ewart Gladstone. He held the office of Grand Master from
1849 to 1853, and on his retirement he fell into bad health,
and was unable to continue his avocation, whereupon the
Sydney District bestowed upon him a pension, which he
enjoyed until his death in 1872.


CEREMONIAL AT THIS DATE.
The ceremonies of those days differ somewhat from ours.
A short description of them will be of interest to the members
as showing the evolution of the ritual; and, besides, they are
valuable to the historian of the Order, as they show the
probable derivation of present-day ceremonial. The Lodge
was opened according to our present ritual. Each officer wore
a large cloak, the colours of the cloak differing, and each colour
being, emblematical of the office. There were four colours —
black, red, blue, and green, denoting the superior officers. Past
officers wore black, the presiding officer (Noble Grand) red,
the vice-grand blue, and the secretary green. Inferior officers
were also clothed in similarly coloured cloaks. They all wore
large Henry VIII. caps of the same colours as the cloaks.
THE INITIATION.
When the candidate appeared for initiation he was blind-
folded at the outer door, and, accompanied by two officers,
one on either side, he entered the lodge room. The outside
guardian also wore a cloak, and, in addition, wore a sword,
as guardian of the door of the lodge room.
Two of the officers stood in the centre of the room, with
drawn swords, which they held so as to form an arch. Upon
the entrance of the candidate, he advanced with his attendants
and walked under this arch of swords. At the moment when
he was beneath the arch a chain was dropped to the floor, and
the presiding officer delivered these words; —
Stay, thou presumptuous mortal, nor dare to enter
Within the precincts of this sacred temple.
At the close of the ceremony, after receiving the charges from
the different officers, the candidate was asked what he most
desired. To which he was prompted to answer “Light!” On
this the bandage was immediately removed from his eyes.
EARLY PROGRESS.
After the Travellers’ Home Lodge, the next to be estab-
lished was the Victoria Lodge, which met at Canterbury.
Then came the inauguration of the first lodge of the Order in
Melbourne. Mr. Threlfall, a prominent officer in the Order,
proceeded to Victoria, and opened the Felix Lodge, which was
the third lodge opened in Australia. Then followed the Prince
Albert and Royal Mariners ’ Rest Lodges. All the above were
opened in 1848. The first committee of management met in the
same year, and elected Mr. James Reid Grand Master. He
retired, as mentioned before, in 1853.
Then in the years immediately following came the Neptune
Lodge, Sydney, in 1849; the Sons of Friendship, 1850; the
Loyal United Brothers, at Bathurst, in 1851; the Sons of
Perseverance, South Head-road, in 1852; and the Loyal Ipswich,
at . Ipswich, Queensland, in 1852. The progress at this time is
shown by a comparison. In October, 1853, there were seven
lodges, with 392 members, and the funds were under £3OO. At
the same date in 1854 there were eight lodges and 461 members.
In 1854 the President Lodge, West Maitland, was opened,
the Loyal Love of Liberty, Redfern, and the City of Newcastle
Lodge. In 1855 the St. Leonards, North Sydney, and the
Southern Cross, Shoalhaven. In 1856 the Loyal Friendly
Brothers was opened at Braidwood. In 1861 the Miners’ Home
Lodge was opened by the Sydney District at Minmi, and in
1863 a dispensation was granted to open Lodge Star of Queens-
land at Brisbane. These were a few of the earliest lodges.
SOME EARLY (EVENTS.
On the 26th May, 1851, the anniversary of the Order was
celebrated by a procession of the members through the streets
of Sydney in full regalia, and a banquet in the evening. On
the 23rd of February of the same year Bro. W. J. Smith,
G.S., informed the Committee of Management, England, that


the Order walked in procession to the turning of the turf of
the first Australian railway.
In 1854, on Queen Victoria’s Birthday, the anniversary was
again celebrated. The procession, in full regalia, marched to
Government House, and presented the Governor with an
address. From thence they proceeded to the old Benevolent
Society, and left a substantial subscription. These incidents
will show that the Order were in the position of a well-known
and respected public institution at this time.
EARLY GRAND MASTERS.
Associated with the history of the early period were a
number of brethren, who occupied leading positions, and whose
administrative years constitute land-marks in our progress.
Following the retirement of Bro. Reid, Bro. Edward Wilson
was elected G.M. in 1853. Bro. Wilson, who was a member
of the Prince Albert Lodge, was one of the most prominent
of the leaders of the Order in his day.
In 1854 Bro. Patrick Murray was elected Grand Master,
and he occupied the office till 1856. During his term of office the
Loyal Love of Liberty Lodge, Sydney, and the City of Newcastle
Lodge, Newcastle, were opened. The Order had advanced to
11 lodges, with 623 members. The St. Leonards Lodge, North
Sydney, was also opened in Mr. Murray’s term.
In 1856 Bro. Peter Joseph Duffy became Grand Master. He
was a well-known Sydney timber merchant, who occupied a
strong position in the community. He was an able man, and
greatly respected. He retained office until 1857, and died in 1862.
During his term the first lodge on the Manning River was
opened—the Manning River Union Lodge—in March, 1857.
In 1858 Bro. Charles Forssberg became Grand Master. 'He
was prominent in the Order as Grand Secretary, and also
secretary of the Travellers’ Home Lodge for many years. He
was a German by birth, and he held a responsible position in
John Hill and Co.’s furniture establishment, in King-street,
the largest furniture shop in Sydney at the time. Mr.
Forssberg was highly respected in the business community, as
well as in the Order.
Then came Bro. William Tucker, who became G.M. during
1861, and he was followed by Bro. W. J. Monday, who
occupied the position till 1864. Bro. Monday was succeeded
by Bro. Alexander Milne, whose term was 1864-5. In the
latter year Bro. Joseph Moore was elected. He was a master
mason by profession, and held a good business position in
Sydney. He filled the Grand Mastership until 1868, and was
succeeded by Mr. Thomas Wigginton.
A PICTURESQUE PERSONALITY.
At this stage a picturesque personality occupied the Grand
Master’s chair in Bro. Thomas McNab. Among his contem-
poraries he possessed great influence. He was a master
stevedore, a splendid type of manhood, of commanding stature,
and fine presence. He was much respected in commercial as
well as in Oddfellows’ circles. In his later career he suffered
financial reverses, and eventually embarked in a pearl fishing
venture; and upon one occasion, while he was down in a
diver’s suit, a mishap occurred with the air valves, and he was
pulled up dead. He was greatly regretted by all classes of
the community.
From 1870 to 1877 Bro. William Crispin was Grand Master.
Bro. Crispin was in every sense a leader. He was a master
millwright, and one of the best known men of his day in
N.S.W. On many occasions his knowledge and ability have
been availed of by mill-owners in N.S.W., and even in Victoria.
He was a man of unblemished character. He also occupied a
high position in the Temperance cause. He joined the Order
in 1852, and was associated with it until his death, a few
years ago, at the ripe age of about 76.


JOHN ALEXANDER McCUBBBN.
Following Bro. Crispin came Bro. John Alexander McCubben
as Grand Master. He occupied the position from 1877 to 1882.
He was one of the most prominent of the leaders of the Order,
and impressed himself upon its history. He joined the Order
at Araluen, N.S.W. (Braidwood District). In 1882, while still
Grand Master, he was appointed to the position of Grand
Secretary. He held the office of Grand Secretary from 1882
until his death in 1899. While he occupied these two offices
the progress of the society was marked, it having gone from
57 branches, with 2,625 members, to 111 branches and 9,123
members. He had occupied the position of Grand Secretary
for seventeen years, and his work was greatly appreciated.
To mark this appreciation, and to perpetuate his memory, the
brethren of the Order raised a subscription, and erected a
marble monument over his grave in Eookwood Cemetery, and
also placed a commemorative tablet in the hall in Castlereagh-
street. When Bro. McCubben accepted the office of Grand
Secretary and vacated that of Grand Master Bro. John
McFadyen became Grand Master.
SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS,
The membership at the date of Bro. McFadyen’s election
had grown from the small acorn of Bro. Reid’s period in the
late forties to the stout oak of the late eighties. It stood at
5,628 in 1882, and the funds were £25,788. This was only a
mere suggestion of the enormous advances which are
shown in membership to-day. Bro. Geo. Brentnall followed
Bro. McFadyen, and the substantial progress continued, as,
although the lodges decreased by three, the funds went to
£41,304, Bro. IST. T. Collins followed Bro. Brentnall. Bro.
Collins had taken a foremost part in the affairs of the
Order. To prove this it is only necessary to mention
that for a period of 20 years he was
continually in office. For a great
part of this time he occupied a
position as director on the Board of
Management. Bro. Collins was the
first advocate of the now successful
Life Assurance Society in connection
with the Order, and he acted as its
general secretary for over five years.
Following Bro. Collins’ term came
Bro. G. Fitzpatrick, who occupied the
position until 1891. The Society
advanced to 8 districts, 119 lodges, a
membership of 10,030, and funds
£64,821. Bro. Fitzpatrick was then,
as he still is, one of the prominent
and active members of the Order;
Bro. G. FITZPATRICK, P.G.M.
Bro. N. T. COLLINS, P.G.M.
and for many years was (and still is) secretary of one of
the richest of its branches, the Loyal Balmain, a lodge
which at one time was the premier
lodge of the Order. He is also one
of the founders and present secretary
of the Balmain United Friendly
Society’s Dispensary and Medical
Institute.
THE ORDER'S VICISSITUDES.
He was succeeded by Bro. James
Hagan, who occupied the position
until 1893. During this period the
Order passed through certain vicissi-
tudes, from which, however, it
emerged happily. Some of the lodges
of the Hunter River District seceded,
and formed an Australian Oddfellows’


Bro. G. H. SANDS, P.G.M.
rate . oratorical powers, a practical man with a
good knowledge of Friendly Society bookkeeping. The
funds in the last year of Bro. Sands’
term rose to £81,988. He was suc-
ceeded by Bro. John Gibbs Moon,
who occupied the chair until 1899.
Bro. Moon is one of the best men in
the Order —a man most enthusiastic
in the cause of Oddfellowship. He
has held every office in the Order
with marked ability, with credit to
himself and benefit to the institution.
He is still in the Order, and is a
director of the Committee of Manage-
ment, as he has been for the last 20
years. In Bro. Moon’s time there
were 111 lodges, 9,123 members, and
funds amounting to £83,196.
Union. This will account for the
figures, showing a decrease for that
year to 117 lodges and a member-
ship of 9,528. Notwithstanding the
severance, the funds rose to £71,467.
This severance was only a temporary
one, as this Australian Oddfellows’
Union amalgamated with the Order
again in 1906.
Bro. George H. Sands was Grand
Master from 1893 to 1897. He is now
the general secretary of the Life
Assurance Department. For over 25
years he has occupied the position of
secretary of the Prince of Wales
Lodge. He is one of the leading
members of the Order, a man of first
Bro. J. G. MOON, P.G.M.
This brings us to Bro. Herron’s
terra as Grand Master —1899 to 1900.
During his term as G.M., Bro.
McGubben died.
THE SPLENDID RECENT
IMPULSE.
On Bro. McGubben’s death Bro.
Herron retired from the position of
G.M., and was elected Grand Secre-
tary. His period as Grand Secretary
brings us to to-day, when the Order
is taking stock, looking back upon
its history, and fixing its definite
points of progress —in short, when the Order is looking
at itself in the looking-glass of history.. When Bro.
Herron came into office as secretary the progress of the
Order was somewhat slow. It was in a transition period,
when new methods were required. Bro. Herron devoted him-
self to the task of perfecting the organisation. The result
was the great stride forward since he has held the office of
secretary. This splendid recent impulse may be measured by
stating that when he took office as Grand Master there were
111 branches, with 9,123 members, and funds amounting to
£83,196; while to-day there are 187 branches, a membership
of 18,582, and funds amounting to £160,849. The members
of the Order were so pleased with Bro. Herron Is work
that in 1905 they subscribed amongst themselves and the
lodges, and presented him with a tea and coffee service
and salver.
Bro. H. HERRON, P.G.M.


Bro. D. RITCHIE, P.G.M.
were of the greatest mhiiniiv lo the Order. During his
term of office the branches increased to 119, the mem-
bership to 12,327, and the funds to
£98,495.
Ho was succeeded by Bro. R. IT.
Wynne, during whose term, which,
after re-election, ended in 1903, the
branches increased to 145, member-
ship to 14,727, and funds to £109,082.
Bro. Wynne occupied the position
of secretary of the Captain Cook
Lodge. In private life he is a mem-
ber of the staff of the Postal De-
partment, and, was appointed to the
Appeal Board as a i eprevntative
of the staff, a position which he
still holds. An energetic worker for
Bro. David Ritchie* became Grand
.Master in succession to Bro. Herron
in 1001. He has been a prominent
leader in many public matters. He
was for a long while General Secre-
tary to the Illawarra Miners’ Associa-
tion, a position which ho relin-
quished to take up farming in
the Richmond River District, where
ho still remains. He was a
member of the Royal Commission to
inquire into the Mount Kombla
disaster, having been appointed to
that position by the Government of
the day. While Mr. Ritchie was in
i lie Gland Master’s chair his sound
cuiiimoii Muise and keen critical powers
Bro. R. H. WYNNE, P.G.M.
the Order, he still occupies a position
on the Committee of Management.
Daring his term of office a record
increase of membership took place.
In the year 1903-4 Bro. T. 0. Mus-
grave was Grand Master. He is the
only member of the Braidwood Dis-
trict who has of recent years occupied
the G.M. chair, and his address at the
end of his form was very favourably
commented upon by the Sydney
metropolitan press. Following him
came Bro. Robert Richardson in
1904-5. He was a member of the
Bro. W. J. CRANE, P.G.M.
Bro. R. RICHARDSON, P.G.M.
Hunter River District, residing at
Stockton. He was for many years secretary of the
Hope of Stockton Lodge. During his year the branches
were 1 (>4, membership 16,819, and
funds £129,774.
Then came Grand Master W. J.
Crane, of Bathurst —1900-6. Bro.
Crane lias been a prominent member
of Bathurst District, identified with
everything devised for the advance-
ment of the Order, lie is a dentist
by profession. lie was Deputy
Grand Master before being elected
Grand Master. In his term the
blanches increased to 173, the mem-
bership to 17,816, and the funds to
£140,203.


Bro. J. J. CLARKE, P.G.M.
is highly respected as a citizen, and is a deputy town
clerk of Balmain. During his term of office as Grand
Master he was deputed by the Com*
rnittee of Management to visit Broken
Hill for the purpose of forming a
district in the Sturt area. During
his sojourn there he impressed the
local members so much that upon
leaving on his return to Sydney he
was presented with a gold emblem.
He is still a member of the Manag-
ing Committee of the Order, and also
a trustee.
The present occupant, Bro. A. A.
Edwards, and last to date of a long
line of able officers, took office in
April last. He, like Mr, Wynne, is in
the Postal Department, at Yass. He
Bro. J. J. Clarke was the next
Grand Master, during the year 1906-7.
He was a prominent member of the
Lily of St. Leonards, and has been
its secretary for over 12 years, and
still holds the position. Up to last
year he had been on the Committee
of Management of the Order, when ho
retired. During his term the
branches went to 179, the funds rose
to £157,701.
Bro. A. W. Sommerville succeeded
to the office for the year 1907-8. He
has been a member of the Loyal
Balmain Lodge for many years, and
has held every office in his lodge. He
Bro. A. W. SOMMERVILLE, P.G.M.
is very energetic in the cause of the
Order, and his visitations to the
lodges in the Southern District are
highly appreciated by the members.
The lodge of which he is at present
secretary is one of the most progres-
sive in the Order.
ORGANISING THE OTHER STATES,
During Mr. Crispin’s years of office
the Queensland and Adelaide Districts
separated from New South Wales. This
reduced the districts to four. Long
before this the Oddfellows in Adelaide,
who were not then connected with the N.S.W. Order, sent over
to Sydney and asked the N.S.W. Order to send someone to
initiate them into that Order. Mr. P. J. Newland was then
appointed to go over and open a district in Adelaide, which
he did, as related in another place.
Mr. Francis Beattie, a prominent member of our Order,
went to reside in Brisbane. While there he sent over to Sydney
for a dispensation to open a lodge at, Ipswich. Mr. Beattie
was afterwards elected Mayor of Brisbane. He was a hard-
headed Scotchman, who was highly respected in both colonies.
It is necessary to recall here the fact that after the Order
started in N.S.W. extensions were made to Victoria, Queens-
land, and South Australia, Mr. Threlfall in Victoria, Mr.
Newland in South Australia, and Mr. Beattie in Queensland
were the delegates from N.S.W. Later on each of the States
received dispensations from the Committee of Management of the
Order in England to control their own lodges, funds, etc,, without
reference to N.S.W. Thus, after a period of N.S.W. Management,
each of the Orders in these States got their independence.
Bro. A. A. EDWARDS, G.M.




The
DISTRICTS
EXTENSION OF DISTRICT ORGANISATION.
HEN the Society was started in Sydney it only consisted of one District —the
Sydney District. Since that time ten Districts have been opened in New
South Wales —but two Districts amalgamated, leaving ten Districts at the
present day. A large number of Members, including Bros. J. W. Watkins, P.D.G.M. ;
G. F. Richardson, P. D. M. ; J. Quirk, P, D.M.; W. Kermond, P. D. M. ; W. M. Board-
man, P.D.M.; W. Dawson, P.D.M. ; and W. Beileiter, P.D.M., have rendered yeoman
service to the Society. Space will not permit the mention of all those entitled to
honor. The Members of the Order, however, are acquainted with the men and their
work, and it is gratifying to those who have rendered distinguished service to know
that it is neither unrecognised nor unhonored.


SYDNEY DISTRICT OFFICERS, 1908
Bro. OF HARBOR, SYDNEY.
r
WHEN the Order first started there was only one district -viz., Sydney -- the mother district.
Almost the whole of the members and those who have occupied the position of Grand Master
have, as it were, served their apprenticeship in the various grades of district officers. Some
have passed through the whole of these various grades of the district offices. Therefore, it is unnecessary
mov 1,0 i.icm.um; mom .mum uarucuuu'iv m mmee
Sydney District has sasily maintained the premier position, being the largest district in the Order.
The "breakaway, which on more than one occasion inns taken place, in consequence of the institution
of the (irder in Victoria., in Queensland, and in t.he various centres of X.S.W., but temporarily affected
its progress. Tomlay the Sydney District numbers ;16 lodges, with members numbering 7,091, and funds
amounting to £20,019 I,ls. ,‘>d. Some of those who have rendered valuable service to the district, and
to ilie Society as a whole, and who have not passed through the Grand, MasSxr’s (‘hair, deserve special
mention. Amongst their names is that of Bro. George Brown, present District Treasurer, who has
occupied that position for a period of ?>4 consecutive years, lie has been for over 50 .rears a member
of the Order. During this time he has rendered great ami valuable service to the Order, and on
one occasion was the recipient of a gold medal, with a suitable inscription, valued at £3O. Bro.
Phimp J. Xcwland has occupied the positions of Grand Secretary and Deputy Grand Master. In addition
Bro. H.E. SHAW, D.M.
Bro. A. BOOT, D.D.M.
Bro. THRNTON, D. Trust.
Bro. A. C. CANTOR, D. Trust.
Bro. G. BROWN, D. Treas.
Bro. S. M. STEENBHOM, D. Sec.


BATHURST DISTRICT OFFICERS, 1908
HARVESTING, BATHURST DISTRICT.
Haibur. 1- .». iv in i<u,i <c !m •mi . iS' \i r d * ’- > n i \ _ s ! i id ■- u i>
of Bros. John. Aiex. McCubben (Grand Master), Edward. Claridge (Deputy Grand Master), and ■ Alfred
Smith i«»i si 'n .in, i>n t i" n>r mi 1 il> nh ' I . i-i j«rv. ib»l, ttnu a mecu'g c i mi u-
tivcs fi >’ i (ii< ,d '. did > - >1 h d mi u i*i > - I l ' \ 1 Ini ursi, «n !Cm dc-tm-; .m i, ihe
sub-eon > i >*• non i m >.. p' I * l< > i’ o\i m t i m the Grand M,uim’. aid 0 G.
,1k Gi d -n't ~ \ I* i ' "Aid |ui >n d t!ie "i mi. i iremoip , ntn ■ s\lr>-l: ihe following
cimm 1 - > l l 1i i l 1 1 ~h l .11 i D - i>i i M i-e. Bro. J I A h >le; Di s', 1 >1?:. M,,-h r, Bro. J. J.
hi" ! iv'i 1 (i, > ''iii B i T C 0 > i i > a’ D- . Trea...i,ui. m... B. I',i-a irit. Tie- district was
p’ lil. h ii'nd. In h 1 i 1 1 M V r (b iD P > n h e I I 1 < i '’> ' ! » ‘
Bro. W. J. Crane was elected District Master, and, with the loyal assistance of Bro. Smith, set about
i’i 1 i in <t ’ I i-\(i h( ’ ! i * i s I i m Fll u i !.i \ n i I i Doi! >1 m \ n m i -
while Bro. Crane occupied the chair (a record), the distinct opened seven branches, and increased its
ftl Win 1 m‘ * i t in i mi i'i i i d 1 . ! i lu o i "il 1 l 1 U u] ( I i_ \ I '
Wilhuima District the Bathurst District surrendered seven branches, with about 700 members. The district
also paid £BlO clearance value. This again reduced, the district to 12 branches and 884 members. In
-.bunco \, i mis, uro. .iomi r. tvi.ma.ms, who naa oeen treasurer tor ll years, renreu from me position, at
prmrnr tie- district consists of 14 brandies, with nearly 900 financial members, and funds totalling £3,600.
Bro. W.H. COULDWELL, D.M.
Bro. A. BOYD, D.D.M.
Bro. W. EVANS. D. Trust.
Bro. J. RODHAM, D. Trust.
Bro. J. SMITH, D.Sec.
Bro. A. PEARSE, D. Treas.


BRAIDWOOD DISTRICT OFFICERS, 1908.
Bro. S. BOTTOM, D.D.M., Cooma.
Bro. ARTHUR CAMPBELL, D.Sec., Braidwood.
Bro. JAS. STUAHT, D.Trust.,
Major’s Creek.
IN 1864 the second district of tie Order was opened at Braidwood.
At that time tie lodges comprising it were: —1, the Loyal
Friendly Brothers; 2, the Rose of Australia (Major’s Creek);
3, the United Miners (at Araluen). The men, who were mainly
instrumental in establishing this district were: —Bros. Edward
Smith, W. A. Kershaw, R. Bruce, ,1. Thorman, P. Spicer, and J.
Thomas (all mow deceased), and Thomas Stewart and W. Benmore,
still happily among us, the former being over 80, and the latter 86
years of age. Mr. Benmore 'was for 25 years secretary of the Loyal
Friendly Brothers’ Lodge.
Prominent amongst the men from the Braidwood District were
Bros. J. A. MeCubben, James Styles (who lias held tie position of
treasurer of the district for many years), and T. C. Musgrave,
I’.G.M. It now has 15 branches, 1,020 members, and funds
amounting to £3,244 9s. 7d.
An interesting incident in connection, with the Braidwood
District was that it started with a debt of £l5. The a] i for
Bro. ALFRED LAZARUS, D.M.,
Queanbeyan.
Bro. GEO. FISHER, D. Treas.,
Braidwood.
permission to start housekeeping 1 on its own account was made to
the Sydney District, and the dispensation was granted. Prior,
however, to the whole matter being fixed up a member’s wife died,
and in those clays, there being no “clearance values,” the new
district, although it had not collected one penny from the branches,
was called upon to pay £l5 donation in connection with the death
of this member’s wife. The district had to borrow the amount to
pay the debt off.
A prominent feature of tie Bra id wood District was their
Widows and Ch S’und. It was established in 1870, and its
progress was so rat at the time of the registration under the
new Friendly f Act it had funds in hand amounting to
upwards of £B,O v
In eoiiiiorii.iii with Braidwood District, it may be mentioned that
the present .Minim >■ of Trade and Customs (the Hon. Austin Chapman,
M'.11.K.) is a member of the Order, and has for many years acted e,
auditor for the district.


MANNING RIVER DISTRICT OFFICERS, 1908
DAIRY HERD ON HANNING RIVER.
IN 1873, on the 3rd of March, the Manning Elver District was
formed, having its centre in an agricultural district of the Manning
Elver, at Taree. Bro. W, J. Smith, of that place, represented the
Committee of Management, and performed the opening ceremony. The
delegates present were: —Bro. A. Cunningham, M.E. Union; Bro. W. E.
Shoesmith, Kingston Lodge; Bro. W. Bell, Belmore Lodge; Bro. A. B.
Hansford, Tinonee Independent; Bro. 0. Boyce, Hastings Elver; Bro.
W. Brown, Wingham Union. The first officers elected were as follow:
Bro. W. J. Smith, Dist. Master; Bro. C. Boyce, Dep. Dist. Master; Bro.
W. E. Shoesmith, Dist. Treasurer; Bro. A. Cunningham, Dist. Secretary;
Bros. W. Brown and W. Bell, Dist. Trustees. The district of which
Bro. S, Whitbread is District Secretary now has 10 branches, 559
njembers, and funds amounting to £1,864 Is. lOd.
Bro. R. DOBSON, D.M.
Bro. D. MURRAY, D.D.M
Bro. C. McDOUGALL, D. Trust.
Bro. W. GODBOLT, D. Trust.
Bro. J. B. BICHAHOSON, D. Trust.
Bro. W. ARMSTRONG. D. Treas.
Bro. S. WHITBREAD, D. Sec.


GOULBURN DISTRICT OFFICERS, 1908
MUSTERING SHEEP GOULBURN DISTRICT.
TIM n 1! Ii ip restrict \ "i'PiMi i> b T't!! .t.iinr.ix, b\ Mm !-!|i- ts-aml
1 n Bu‘ John \ \l « M j«l. M ('oiMali'u ih'-Ulgh I\u oi('nlT,-iO
-h I.M Urn *Mm A \\ J i’i' iiml 1 1 < ■ -mo 1-n-. Wnhro ( . ItnT'l. If <-mapns>d
« o 'i v the 1 > iv 1 V• ' J». 'I ■ Sr.* rof HrmuittM;i i-m, :s ml Mm- S'n V »)!'
\ \v i b i 'I i s s t i I ii'im > ax - it.lhuv-: Urn. t*, HM(, !>i > r. Mmlm”:
5 k iI i. t h l! >v Pml '•!.'■ JmKm \\ ilihri's. [mm Tie.-;--; Ton. 'l'iiov
Mot> on n , I *<> I« *•> ~ ! ['ui-.fi - , ) , WThi-r (hrnnH, PiM. Sim.
■■: 1 ' H'hi « uin n „ to over X< * T* ,f K
\ * It u%\ " * [ ' the son s -T > bid fellows join with their mi:m o in a]‘pr« >* i uion
Is h 1 hi t t 11 be mentioned that Bro. Thos. Chapma < i*» < at ,mhl
.i » Ui.i « n m« . present D. 8., are sons of the members 1« * nr - she som.‘ nsi es
‘” v t f s ’ >i ! -o -1 of otheors t and filling the sMin.e offices t si at taoir faidmt» uifl
on t
" ill h .nr the District lias been achieved bo many of the members.
The-, nee i ._i *• ;erm of office in Ihe District (>u>ii-:I .i:•<> rhe following:
Bro. V - i i 1 1 i• ■ , i .om 1883 to lBol*. inclusive; Sts.., t'nns. 1 ill wood, 15 years;
Bro. 8 i < bm ...,rs; Bro. .b>|.n Villi:-ms, !(' vwirw lb.- Win. C. Daniel, 10
yea)- \i,no i i i’n i- who did g|i ! .'nilid uork for tiie 1 >Usic) :r.:i vbe mentioned
Bros 1 1 \i a .a 1 11 < Dray, Bob), \V. We-.i. Jas. Si nwi s ail!•■, ,-in.l A. A. Edwards,
ores i > • ti Ml ■ < !.
Bro. R. S. SMITH, D.M.
Bro. T. CHAPMAN, D. D. M.
Bro. J. SOMERVAILLE, D, Trust.
Bro. C. ELLWOON, D. Teust.
Bro. W. C. DANIEL, D. Sec.
Bro. J. RYAN, D. Treas.


WILLIAMS RIVER DISTRICT OFFICERS, 1908
RIVER SCENE, WILLIAMS RIVER.
• ' . ove district was opened on August 4, 1887, at Clarence Town, by Bros. J. JB
| iderson, director of the Committee of Management, and Geo. Buckle}
riet Secretary, Hunter River District. Four lodges were represented ii
strict —viz., Farmers’ Home, Commercial, Star of the Williams, and Hop
The first officers appointed were: — Bro. W. Bodkin, Dist. Master; Bro. f
Dep. Dist. Master; Bro. J. Robards, Dist. Treasurer; Bro, Tlios. Boytoi
tary; and Bros. Geo. Morris and H. Muddle, Dist. Trustees. At the aimue
e officers were all reappointed for 1888.
oyton held the position of' Dist. Secretary up to January 19, 1895, wit
imself and the district, when he retired, and Bro. Geo. King was electee
ition, which he still holds. The first lodge opened in the district wa
re Hunter, at Raymond Terrace, opened February 28, 1888, by Bro. M
strict Master, assisted by Bro. F. JB. Coote, Dep. Dist. Master, and Brc
Three other lodges have been opened, and two original lodges joined
li are now closed, with the exception of the Sunbeam. The district nor
six lodges, with a 'membership of 320, and funds to the amount of £B6
he present district officers were elected January 18, 1908, and are all o
ing in their various lodges. Bro. Geo. King, District Secretary, wa
i 1875. The last-named has held the position of secretary of his lodg
•s, and district secretary for almost 14 years.
Bro. C. KING, D. M.
Bro. A. J. FARLEY, D. D. M.
Bro. R. APPS, D. Trust.
Bro. W. CRICK, D. Trust.
Bro. C. N. BOOTS, D. Treas.
Bro. C. KING, D. Sec.
Bro. C. PALIN, D. Trust.


BEGA DISTRICT OFFICERS, 1908
MOUNTAIN SCENE, BEGA DISTRICT.
THE Bega District, which is an offshoot of the Braidwood District,
was formed in June, 1902, and consisted of the Evening Star, Rising
Star, and Star of Wolmnla Brandies, with a membership of 370, and
clearance values received from the Braidwood District, £350. Bro. J. M.
Lee was the first Dist. Master, Bro. S. M. Eodd being the District Secretary.
During the six years the district has been in operation good, solid work
lias been performed, and much credit is due to the first set of district
officers, who laid the ground work necessary for future successes. The
membership of the district now numbers 643, and its funds £2,005 11s. 7d.
New branches at Bemboka ""' 1 '’’"■‘■heart have been added, and the vigorous
lodge at Bombala, the Loy 3 Alfred, joined the district two years
ago. The district now cc six lodges, and promises a successful
future career. ■ ■
Bro. M. J. CONDON, D.M.
Bro. F. J. RYAN, D.D.M.
Bro. T. J. PRESTON, D. Trust.
Bro. F. KIKENNY, D.Trust.
Bro. J. M. LEE, D. Sec.
Bro. W. M. BOARDMAN, D.Trust.
Bro. G. M. RODD, D.Treas.


HUNTER RIVER DISTRICT OFFICERS, 1908
VIEW OF NOBBYS, NEWCASTLE.
TIIIO ,;M » i,-i vnm < l'p Mb >1 'n: MblOhni] M inn with ' m Mib iiX 0 Vf
Till 1 UNuii.iirii rn ?Orm :i IMfOn’ bbs»-r hisl mH cll 1 d n i l m ' i’\ c f
MOm 1 i.u Hit MM ,1111• i 1 M 7. :ui'l • ju' 1 = fi r ) M , til
i ’p»S. KI, fiM 1, } »171 in, n«l S«“>1 I . I> :M .•>{ W}lls 1 It.' !•*.*! r t 1-1 X 1 It 5 *i n o S .s
:r>] 1; F *'n" x'i 1 ■ ii t 1 ir* » i' t mm i 1 \ npm.nd a* «o ml j*l * a
ber- of the same Tear. 'From the Htv of Newcastle' Lodj?e the delegates wore Bros.
■ I ' i i i i I \ I I \ 1 1 t b r \ I 1. M I ! f. '’l >" hi i ! ! h \l
Taylor, Henry Sneesby, .J, H. Walker, and Jas. Falconer. Of these who met at the
H v ii'O >ll m i, i in v i n I F OOMr, end d. V b t i *
n n, «i |j ( is- t m i i < \\ x ia i n-Otni;-d by it < m t \n, sil
! {j iii* ( iii \ i i i b{t -v ,i 1 Mt, , , t ( i ■*«* \ \yi {< nb>n.a mi M i on o i»
is| is ( | i ( i i i, ,s 11 n n j 'i *» hmi ' -.il Ku- I cOm and O** V ui. s fM ! m
1 i i>>)n„ < t 1 O n m( o(» I«i i ! imi >' ami Ihdtuii M« « t |,i -0» h m
Alien was elected first district secretary.'
ll \, ' x| 1 "iv I*- I b >1 On 1 d s\ i 1 h Om H 1 1 i lb m !, (Oiui
An i i O'- | mm iiit i r , I , b 0 m 00m * ■<, lb. ■* d H
h On E ! ■ m i ( . i I i l , 11 -m, i‘J MO, bb , hn. '' b
(On I \\ i v A ' !i s i < \ mn' :■!!•> ili« I'l'mn ! Oo'e ' e m \
('on il , » v \ , n Ml • ir n r \l;umpo if 1 I n i« >m n
Bro. A. CURRY, D.M.
Bro. A. E. SNEESBY, D.D.M.
Bro. W. B. ERRINGTON, D.Trust.
Bro. F. W. LYLE, D.Trust.
Bro. H. S. WELLS, D.Trust.
Bro. J. PORTER, D.Treas.
Bro. J. HANCOOK, D.Sec.


WILLYAMA DISTRICT OFFICERS, 1908
VIEW OF MINES, WILLVAMA SDISTRICT.
Bro. W. BLOWS, D.M.
Bro. W. MAYGER, D.D.M.
# T" r HE Willyama District was opened in 1907 by the Grand Master
■** Bro. A. W. Sommerville, and is composed of branches
formerly belonging to the Bathurst District. Bro. J. Jcpson, District
Secretary of the Southern District, having taken up his residence
at Broken Hill, started the movement, and with the assistance of
Bros. Blows, Murphy, (J. Watson, E. h. Durnaresq, J. Gummow,
and others, formed this district, which now has six lodges, 1,008
members, and funis amounting to £9Ol 10s. 3d.
Bro. F. J. GUMMOW, D. Trust.
Bro. T. HALL, D.Trust.
Bro. J. JEPOSEN, D.Sec.
Bro. C. WATSON, D. Trust.
Bro. E. L. DUMARESQ, D.Treas.


SOUTHERN DISTRICT OFFICERS, 1908.
Bro. C. HEISE, D.D.M.,
Cootamundra.
Bro. J. L. GERRARD, Trust.,
Barmedman.
Bro. F. WOOD Trust.,
West Wyalong.
Bro. W. G.SMYTHE, D.Treas.,
Wya long.
T ra ™ ° i,e ” d iD 1S “' Tl "
Committee of Management, recognising that the
Order was poorly represented in the southern
portion of the State and the Goulburn District, agreed
that the Committee of Management should open the
new district. Branches were quickly established, the
Grand Secretary acting as District Secretary for the
Bro. W. BCRGESS. D.Trust.,
Temora.
Bro. F. RICHTER, D.M.,
Junee.
Bro. W. S. OSBORNE, D.S.,
West Wy along.
time being. At the close of 1905 the district consisted
of 11 branches. The membership, with few exceptions,
was new to the Order, but the fact that that district
now consists of 13 branches, a membership of 600,
and funds amounting to £793 7s. shows what a success
the move lias been.


BEO. GEORGE BROWN.
The writer of this necessarily brief history must acknowl-
edge his obligation to Bro. George Brown, Alderman and Mayor
of Ashfield, for much valuable material of a historical character.
Bro. Brown retains a vivid recollection of men and events as
far back as 1853, when he joined the Order, and has watched
the progress of the Order from its tentative infant steps up
to its sturdy strides to-day.
CONCLUSION.
In this small compass, then, the leading incidents in the
history of the Order have been given, with some account of the
men who have brought about the splendid results which make
the Order what it is to-day. The Jubilee is significant, not only
as a moment for summing up the past, but one for forecasting
the future. With increasing momentum the work will go on.
To-day the Friendly Societies are tackling new problems,
created by the complexities of their modern development.
Further tasks will be cast upon them by legislation which
has just been introduced in the State Parliament of N.S.W.
Chief among the domestic problems of the Order is the question
of centralising the Sickness Fund. Last year it was decided
that all new branches created must belong to the Central Sick
Fund, leaving it optional for the branches already belonging
to the Society to join the Fund if they so desire. The
movement has been a complete success, as the Sick Fund
already possesses about <5O branches.
Taking the rvonderful progress of the past, and adding
the bright outlook for the future; taking into consideration
the favourable position which the Order occupies, the members
may well, on this auspicious Jubilee, congratulate themselves on
their prosperous position, and may, confident of the cause and
of the men engaged in it, look forward to immeasurable results
in the future. No enthusiast at the time of the foundation
of the Order in 1848 could, in his most sanguine vaticinations,
have guessed the strides which would be made in the sixty
years period. Nor would it be possible to-day to forecast the
destiny of the Order in the next forty years till the time
when it comes to celebrate its Centenary. The progress which
we are now celebrating with enthusiasm has been made
during the lives of men still occupying high positions
in the Order; and many of the present members will
doubtless live to see the celebration of the Centenary, and
will -wonder at the still more marvellous development existing
then, as -we to-day marvel at the strides which have been made
during the Jubilee period of the G.U.0.0. of N.S.W. We
wish our readers every happiness and prosperity in the years
to come.


In
No.
1853 the Sydney District consisted of
Name.
the following branches:—•
Meeting Place.
Membership.
731
Travellers ’ Home
King Street . .
91
924
Prince Albert
George Street
43
925
Loyal Mariners’ Rest
George Street
73
927
Neptune , . '
George Street
20
985
Sons op Friendship
George Street
, . 40
986
Loyal United Brothers . .
Bathurst Street
54
1054
Sons of Perseverance
South Head Road
71
Loyal Ipswich
Ipswich (Queensland). .
Total membership . . 392
In 1851 the Port Phillip District, then
following branches: —
under control of the N.S.W. Committee of Management, was
made up
of the
No.
Name.
Meeting Place.
Membership.
923
Felix
St. John’s Tavern, Queen Street, Melbourne
60
926
Prince op Wales
Original Scottish Hotel, Great Bourke Street
Melbourne ' 60
932
Victoria
Rob Roy Hotel, Flinders Lane, Melbourne
30
Britannia . .
Devonshire Arms Hotel, Collingwood . .
29
933
President . .
Britain Hotel, Geelong
38
Earl Gray. .
Royal Oak Hotel, Geelong
10
Brighton Union
Brighton Hotel, Brighton • . .
14
Total membership
. . 241
SOME EARLY STATISTICS.
The Port Phillip District was established on sth September, 1849.
