







DIAEY
OF THE
VOYAGE OF THE “LOCH SLOT.”
ST. JOHN CAWS.
Sonfton:
EMPIRE PRINTING AND PUBLISHING COMPANY, LIMITED,
2 & 3, SALISBURY COURT, FLEET STREET.


LONDON
EMPIRE PRINTING AND PUBLISHING COMPANY, LIMITED,
AND 3, SALISBURY COURT, FLEET STREET.


INTEODUCTOEY.
This little volume is published at the suggestion of
several friends, who, feeling interested in the recital of
some of the incidents of a pleasant voyage from
Australia to the Old Country, were kind enough to
express a desire that the narrative should be given in
a more complete form. I trust the interest shown in
the brief extracts, given from my “ Diary of the
Voyage of the ‘ Loch Sloy,’ ” will not be diminished
now that the complete record appears in print.
ST. JOHN CAWS.
London, Sept. 1, 1886.




DIAEY OF THE VOYAGE
OF THE
“LOCH SLOY.”
JOHIT MASTEE.
Jan. 29.—Arrived on Board, about 7.30 a.m. Mr., Mrs.,
Miss, Ada, and Annie Harding drove in to see me off.
“How sad it is to say farewell!” On going into my cabin
found everything arranged by Miss Harding for my com-
fort. The time for saying “good-bye" having arrived, my
friends took their departure, the tears falling gently from
their eyes. (My emotion was strong). As they went away
in the tug “ Williams ’’ (Captain Richardson, an old friend
of mine, and a brother Mason,) pocket handkerchiefs were
waved, and—then went below. Amused myself with the
Pilot, Captain Mitchell, Captain Lehman, Mr. Birnie, aryl
Mr, Weir, the latter three being first, second, and third
officers of the ship. At 7.30 s.m. the "Williams’’returned
with Captain McLean and his wife; also, a further present
of a cockatoo, pipes, cigarettes, and other useful articles
from Mr. Harding. Entertained Captain Richardson, out
Skipper, and the Pilot to the best of my ability, and several
songs nautical were indulged in, too numerous to mention:
among which were “Our Jack’s come home to-day, r ’’ “Our
Crew,” “Nil Disperandum,” “ The Midshipmite,” “Nancy
Lee,” “Haulon the Bow-line,” “Larboard Watch,” “All’s


Well,” ‘‘Auld Lang Syne,” winding up with a sailor’s
hornpipe; the executants acquitting themselves remarkably
well. Turned into bed about 10.30 p.m.
Jan, 30.— Slept very soundly last night, probably due to
the excitement of yesterday. When I awoke this morning
found the vessel under weigh: this was about 6 a.m.
Captain Mitchell directed me to take a last look for the
present of Geelong. As I gazed upon the receding shores
many thoughts of those being left behind came up,
wondering if I should ever see them again. I began to
feel very “ qualmish ” at times, and tears frequently dazed
my eyes as I stood by the Pilot. He cheered me up with
his wit and humour, and made me promise that when I
returned to Australia to visit him and his wife at Williams-
town. He was delighted, he said, with my music, and
would cherish the friendship that had sprung out of our
acquaintanceship in Lodge. The “ Song,” etc., which
I made him a present of, “ would always remind him of
me.” Nous verrons! Which is to say in English, we shall
see. As we were going through the heads, every one was
more or less busy writing farewell or home letters. I was
too agitated, and tried several times to write, but could
not, so contented myself with a hurried scratch to Fresh-
water Creek, and to Mr. T. N. Whyte—the latter I got
Mr. Birnie to write for me; Captain McLean addressed the
letter to the Creek. When we were three miles outside
Port Phillip Heads the Pilot left the ship, taking with him
our letters, and, as he was stepping into the Pilot schooner’s
No. 2 boat, to take him on board the “Williams,” we gave
him three cheers, which were reciprocated by the schooner’s
and 1 ‘ Williams officers and crew. From this point or
hour, about noon, and with a fair westerly wind, our actual
voyage commenced. It was agreed by all hands that we
had made a capital start in being able to leave Geelong and
get through the Heads on one and the same day; and that


the passenger was no “Jonah.” This latter term I will en-
deavour to explain further on. I ought to mention, at the
commencement of this narrative, that we left Geelong with a
gale of wind from the west, with heavy squalls and rain,
which continued pretty well all day. We left the heads
with top-gallant sails over single reefs, and as we passed
Cape Schanck the squalls were pretty stiff. Cape Schanck
and Light are on the north side of the Bass Strait, and
80 miles N.W. by W. I W., from the extremity of Wilson’s
Promontory. From a valuable book lent me by Captain
McLean (and to which I shall have occasion to frequently
refer to during this voyage), I glean that the Schanck
Light is a bright fixed one, which is varied by a bright
flash every two minutes. It is a “first order light,” and,
being elevated 238 feet, is visible more than 25 miles off—
I may, perhaps, digress a little by verifying the above fact.
Have I not on my journey from Settavil seen the light ?
When I did 1 never lost myself; it was only when hazy,
cloudy weather prevented. In those travels the distance
of 25 miles has been fully verified, from a land point of
observation. It was about 4 p.m. when we sighted Cape
Patterson, and at 6.30 p.m. we came in view of Cape Lip-
trap, passing the Glennie and Answer Groups soon after.
We were off Wilson’s Promontory about 8 p.m. On Wil-
son’s Promontory there is a fixed light on its extreme
south, to mark the northern side of the Bass Strait, to
caution mariners that in the channel between the Kent
Group and this promontory there are several dangerous
rocks. This light is visible 24 miles from the sea. Eodondo
Island, which is situated to the right of Wilson’s Promon-
tory, was passed at 9.10 p.m., about 1 mile to leeward,
weather being thick and squally, with heavy rain, very
soon after we sighted West and East Moncoeur Islands and
the Hogan Group, distant 5 miles, our course being through
the channel between the Devil’s Tower and Hogan Island.
The barometer (marked three times every twenty-four


hours) showed 29-82, 29-80, 29'76, and the temperature,
86°, 84°, 90°.
Jan. 81, Sunday.— At 2.10 a.m. we were, off the Kent
Group, which bore 7 miles to the south. Deal, the eastern-
most of the Kent Group, is marked by an excellent and
conspicuous light-house (erected in 1846). The light is
880 feet above the level of the sea, revolves once a minute,
and has been seen 87 miles off; but, being so elevated, it
is frequently obscured by fogs. In fine weather, however,
it can be seen 10 or 12 leagues from the deck. To the
southward of the Kent Group is another channel, requiring
great watchfulness on the part of the navigator, as there
are between this group and the north end of Flinders,
or great island, two reefs. They are the Beagle reef, just
awash, 3 miles E. f S. from Endeavour Point, and in a
line with it and the Wright Bock. The latter is 2£ miles
from Wright Eock. These, and a sunken rock, about a
mile east of Craggy Island, constitute the chief dangers in
this channel. The extremes are marked to the north and
south by Wright Eock and Craggy Island, between which
ships should not pass, although there is a channel close to
the south side of the former. Wright Eock, 209 feet high,
is small and very conspicuous. Craggy Island is small
and cliffy, but free from danger. At daylight sighted East
and West Sister Island and Flinders Island, 8 miles south.
These islands are also known as the Furneant group. This
group was discovered in 1778, and was the last land seen
by any on board the “Loch Sloy.” In the evening we
had Divine service, the Captain officiating; every one
attended excepting the “ watch.” The proceedings were
devout, the crew behaving with great decorum ; Sankey
and Moody’s hymns (which I abominate) were used, and
the singing very good; altogether a very agreeable hour
was spent in this manner. The first albatross seen; it
reminded me of the “ Ancient Mariner.” During the day


the wind changed from west to north, 6 points west
(N. 6 W.), and we were sailing with royals close hauled
and at times top gallant sails over single reefs. The
weather showed generally detached clouds and blue sky,
varied in the afternoon with squalls and rain. The
barometer was 29-58, 29-60, 29-48; the temperature, 84°,
82°, 81°; the lat., 39° 45' 8.; long., 149° 13' E.; the
course N. 6J E. The distance 238 miles, and variation
used 9° E. This was our first day out.
Feb. 1, Monday.— No sleep last night; thinking of the
Creek. About 2 a.m., fierce squall, accompanied with
heavy thunder and lightning, making the ship tremble.
Later on a storm broke out, requiring two reefs in topsails;
eventually, towards noon, fair weather set in, and we were
enabled to pursue the even “tenor of our way” under
top-gallant sails over single reefs. Many albatrosses were
seen following in the wake of our ship. To-day I had no
appetite—presumably the sudden change from land to
water. The direction of the wind varied from N. 6W. to
N. and N. 4 W., the force has been given above, as well as
the state of the weather. The barometer showed 29-50,
29-52, 29-48. The temperature 78°, 74°, 72° {i.e., the
saloon temperature, not the deck). Our lat., 41° 0-5' S.;
long. 152° 38' E. The course S. 5f E. The distance
run 185 miles, and variation used 10° E.
Feb. 2, Tuesday.— Slept better last night, the “ qualm-
ish ” feeling wearing off. I eat an apple from our own
garden, and enjoyed it, also partook of an egg with some
whiskey in it, this did heaps of good enabling me to eat a
little dinner. Captain’s wife not very well. Saw a barque
in the distance, could not distinguish her. In the evening
I was initiated into the game of ship bagatelle. The game
is very amusing, and sufficiently exciting to while away
many a dull half hour. Before going to bed Captain


McLean, Mrs. McLean, and I, played dominoes. The
direction of the wind during the day until its close changed
from N. 4 W. to S. 6 W., the wind was “clean full,”
averaging from 3 to 6 knots per hour, the weather fine,
with occasional showers, the barometer 29-55, 29-55, 29-48;
temperature, 65°, 64°, 64°; the lat. 42° 29' S.; long., 155 “■
25' E. The distance run 150 miles, and variation used 10° E.
Feb. 8, Wednesday. —Morning broke fine, and got up
early and practised music for the first time. Pelt better
and more reconciled, and eat a good breakfast. After
dinner music and bagatelle. In the afternoon also, had a
hot salt water bath, which proved invigorating. I missed
Albert’s “ rubbing,” and wished I had him with me. The
steward most kindly offered to do it for me but I managed
to do without assistance, as one is not required to be
so particular as when on shore. Creek friends would
not know the “ Professor ” were they to see him
just now. Mr. Lehman, the chief officer (a gentle-
man I have a great regard for), taken unwell during
the night. He attributed it to the ship’s pork. Captain
McLean also had a touch of the same complaint, requiring
brandy and chlorodyne as a remedy. The night squalls
very heavy, making boxes, and all moveable goods, fly
about in all directions. Happily towards the bewitching
hour of night, 12 p.m., Boreas relented, and I turned in at
that hour, much better in health and spirits. Wind
S. SW. all day. We were sailing principally with royals
close hauled, and with the exception of the night squalls,
the weather has been fine. The barometer altered from
29’52 to 29-48, and 29-45 ; and the temperature was
66°, 68°, 62°; lat., 44-27 S.; long., 158° 39' E.; course
S. 4|- E.; distance run, 189 miles; and variation used, 11° E.
Feb. 4, Thursday. —Steward brought me a cup of hot'
coffee at 5 a.m., by request of the chief officer, and in


future I am to get one every morning ; the Dutch rusks
Mary made for me go well with early coffee. A
moderate gale with occasional squalls prevailed all day,
making life on deck anything but pleasant. The ship
going at the rate of 11£ knots. A barque in sight, supposed
to be bound for New Zealand from Europe. Practised
music more or less when opportunity offered. Captain
McLean continuing unwell. Played dominoes in the
evening after tea, doing anything else out of the question,
Eetired to bed about 9 p.m. I may here remark that my
health is improving, appetite famous, and refreshing sleep
the order of the day. State of the wind, from S. SW, to
S. 8 W., cloudy and showery weather; barometer, 29-42,
29 - 46, 29 48; temperature, 62°, 59°, 61°; lat., 47° 09' S.,
162° 40' E.; course, S. 4 E.; distance run, 283 miles;
variation used, 11° E.
Feb. 5, Fkiday. —Usual cup of coffee and rusks, turned
out at 6 a.m. and studied music, had a pipe on deck, at
eight bells partook of a delicious menu of ling. Our che:f
is an artist, yea, verily! One week at sea to-day and
1,280 miles from Australia, this does not include from
Geelong, to where the Pilot left us. lam writing this at
noon; I fancy I can hear the Creek folk talking about
me, and Mary saying to her mother, “He has been away
one week to-day.” Drank a glass of whiskey and lime
juice, and eat an apple in remembrance of those sincere
friends. May God bless them, and tide them over all
difficulties, as He has myself through all the dangers of the
mighty deep so far. Just now we are 60 miles to the north
of “ Lord Auckland Islands,” having passed the “ Snares ”
earlier in the morning, 57 miles bearing north-east
(12 a.m.). Dinner over, I resume. The weather, which up
to the present has been beautifully fine, show signs of a
change to usual squalls and rain, we are now under two
reefs in top-sails, so as to be prepared. A fire has been


lighted in the saloon for the first time. This makes
matters below more comfortable. After tea and towards
midnight the squalls came, but, as they usually do, they give
over and allow us to sail at night with royals “ close
hauled.” As I feel interested in all places we see or pass,
the following account of the “Snares” and “Lord Auck-
land ” islands may be acceptable to the reader. “ The
Snares” are a bold and moderately high group of islands,
destitute of vegetation, and covered by myriads of the
piutando or Cape pigeon; they lie 62 miles S.B.W. of
the S.W. end of Stewart Island, N.Z. coast, and extend 4J
miles in a N.E. by E., and S.W. by W. direction; they
are an excellent mark from the westward, and are recom-
mended to be made as a point of departure in passing south
of Stewart Island, where, as the name they bear, would
deter vessels from approaching them. The north-east,
or largest island, is little more than one mile in length,
by half a mile in breadth, rising on the south side per-
pendicularly to the height of 470 feet. The north-east
side is less precipitous, when the land rises gradually
from the sea. The island is composed of rough common
granite, covered with a choqplate coloured vegetable
mould of variable thickness, in which are numerous
bird burrows ; every available piece of soil being made
use of by them. This island is tolerably well
covered with vegetation consisting of a heavy scrub,
varying in height from 10 to 15 feet, and coarse high
broad-bladed grass on stems 2to 3 feet high. About the
centre of the north-east side of this island, there is a good
boat harbour, the shores of which are rocky ; the entrance
about 30 yards wide, with a depth of 8 fathoms in the
centre, decreasing gradually to 3 fathoms near the head of
the boat harbour, on the north side of which is the landing
place. This boat harbour is open to the no’rth-east, but safe
in all weathers for boats. About three-quarters of a cable,
in a south easterly direction from the entrance, lies a


sunken rock. The Snares are surrounded with deep
water, and there is no anchorage unless close under. To
the eastward of the north-east island, a steam vessel may
ride with a stream anchor in 40 fathoms during moderate
weather/ Fresh water is plentiful on north-east island,
but strongly impregnated with peat and guano. Eastward
of north-east island, lies a smaller island of much the
same character, there is a boat passage between them.
The western portion of the group consists of four islets
separated from the large island by a channel of 2 miles in
width. The largest of the four western islets is about a
quarter of a mile long, and the smallest about half that
size. These islets lie in a north and south direction, and
extend over a mile, forming a rugged ridge of almost
inaccessible rooks, the highest of which are 290 feet high.
No vegetation or water appears on any of the western
islets, and landing can only be effected in the finest
weather. The south-west island is in lat. 48° 6' 43"
S., long. 166° 28' 40" E., the tides about the group are
inconsiderable. .. . The Auckland Islands were dis-
covered by Captain Abraham Bristow, in the ship Ocean
during a whaling voyage August 16, 1806, this being his
third voyage round the world. They were named by him
Lord Auckland out of respect to that nobleman; who was a
friend of his (Captain Bristow’s) father. The islands are
situated in lat 50° 48' S., and long. 166° 42' E.
This captain visited the islands again in 1807 in the
Sarah, when he took formal possession of them for the
British Crown, and left some pigs there. The islands
remained untenanted during the subsequent years, being
visited occasionally by vessels in search of whales, and
seals, the former coming into the bays to calve during the
month of April and May. In the year 1840 they were
visited by the vessels of three nations. The English ships
“Erebus ” and “Terror,’’under Sir James Ross,and Captain
Crozier; the French corvettes, “L’Astrolabe,” and “La


2elec,” under Dumont D’Urville; and the United States
Exploring Expedition. The Auckland islands were
without permanent inhabitants, during all the periods of
the above visits; but subsequently, a body of New
2ealanders about seventy in number came over from
Chatham Islands in a whale ship, and were landed on the
north-east, or Enderby Island, so named after the Messrs.
Enderby, ship owners of England, and who had a whaling
station here, which has since been abandoned. The New
Zealanders, bringing with them their war-like spirit, soon
broke out with quarrels between themselves, resulting in
fighting and much loss of life. Of late, the group has
risen into considerable importance from the reported wreck
of several vessels, which, pursuing courses in high lati-
tudes in the Australian voyage, have encountered its
stormy shores. The formation of the Auckland islands,
according to Mr. McCormick, the naturalist to Sir James
Boss’s Antarctic Expedition is volcanic, and constituted
chiefly of basalt and green stone. Depots of provisions
have been established by the Colonial Government of New
Zealand for the benefit of shipwrecked people at various
places. H.M.S. “ Cossack ” and “ Blanche ” were here in
the year 1873. I could give more information about
these islands, but it would require too much space. I hope
to write further on upon subjects equally important. The
wind direction for the day has been S. 6 points
W.; the weather force has been already described; the
barometer, 29-54, 29-58, 29-60; the temperature, 58°, 56°,
54°; lat., 49° 42' S.; long., 166° 56' E.; course, S.
4 points E.; distance, 283 miles; variation, 12° E. Before
going to bed had a hot salt water bath and hot grog.
Feb. 6, Satueday.— l wonder if Jennie saw the ship’s
hens to-day, she would be better satisfied than she was on
Friday, 29th ult. At any rate, the hens seem contented
and eat their food cheerfully. As I suck an egg in whisky


and water, with lime juice and sugar added, I often think
of her. I am saving the remainder of the eggs I have
until we round Cape Horn, which we hope to accomplish
in about thirty or thirty-five days from Australia. Had
morning coffee and music practice as usual. It may
therefore be understood that in future I get my coffee, as I
shall not advert to it again in this record. Captain
McLean attempted to entice an albatross to a bated fish-
hook of fat pork, the bird declined the overture. We saw
some patches of seaweed floating on the ocean, chiefly
kelp. The day has been cloudy and misty, with light
wind, almost a calm, the ship scarcely averaging ?>i knots ;
barometer, 29-73, 29-88, 29-84; temperature, 56°, 58°, 58°;
lat., 49° 33' S.; long., 169° 40' E.; course, N. E.;
distance, 116 miles; variation, 30°E. Am pleased to say
that my sleep is excellent; no matter what noise occurs
on deck, I never hear it. This must be a sign of good
health.
Feb. 7, Sunday.— Observed as last Sunday; had a goose
for dinner, which was thoroughly enjoyed. The first part
of the day, regarding the weather, has been “ light and
unsteady breezes, with hazy atmosphere,” but towards
noon and evening, fine and clear. The direction of the
wind N. 6 E., N. 4E. The “ force,” clean full, averaging
from 2 to 4 knots per hour. Barometer showed 29-99,
30-00, 30-03; temperature, 58°, 57°, 54°; lat., 50° 54' S.;
long., 170° 51' E.; course, S. 30 E.; distance, 97 miles; and
variations used, 19° E.
Feb. 8, Monday. —Last evening, before going to bed, I
placed my hand upon the brass smoke pipe of the saloon
stove, which, to use Pepy’s quaint phraseology, “ did burn
me exceedingly.” Like the boy who handled the red hot
horseshoe, I took my hand away without being told. The
steward anointed the burnt parts with whitening and oil,


and I retired to my bunk a “ sadder, but wiser man.” We
are just now in the region of icebergs, and the weather
very cold; we are not anxious to come in contact with ice-
bergs, but would not object to see them at a safe distance.
I am told “ they look very beautiful when the sun lights
them up.” It is conjectured that the “ Loch Maree,”
“North American,” and many other missing “craft,”
have been lost in these waters. God grant that we may
be spared the like disaster, but His will be done. Latterly,
we have been somewhat off our course, but we are now
regaining it, and on the right track for dear Old England.
This makes us all the more cheerful. lam reminded by
an entry in my “ rough diary ” (from which I copy this
writing) that I omitted to mention that on Saturday we
indulged in revolver practice, just to see how far the “ fire-
iron ” would carry. We did not attempt to shoot at any
of the birds, because that would be to no purpose—we
could not bag them if we “ killed,” so it was voted to leave
our companions alone. If we can entice one on board that
would be a different matter, as it could be stuffed. All day
there has been a steady increasing breeze, with misty weather;
sea smooth, increasing our speed to about 7 knots, with
royals close hauled. Barometer, 80-08, 30-03 30-09; tem-
perature, 54°, 56°, 56°; lat., 51° 47' S.; long., 175° 05' E.;
course, 8. 73 E.; distance, 163 miles; variation used,
20° E. The day passed as usual.
Feb. 9, Tuesday.— Only fancy, in this short time, we
have got into weather registering such low temperature
after leaving Geelong in 120° in the shade. It is cold
and no mistake, but the change has been gradual, con-
sequently Ido not feel it; on the contrary, enjoy it. The
change to me is very beneficial, with meals at regular
intervals, an occasional toddy {“ can you hear that?” the
last sentence I mean) and mind free from the sayings of
“ know alls.” Last night went on deck about 9.30 p.m.,


the Captain called me, I was in bed, there was a ship on the
port quarter showing her light and steering south, we
could not make her out as it was misty. Our Captain
burnt a “flash light” as a caution, and the vessel
was lost sight of to leeward about 10.30 p.m. We
passed the Antipodes about 5 a.m. I will give below a
brief account of the Antipodes and why such a name is
given to the islands. We did not see them as they bore
eighty-five miles to' the north Antipodes Islands. From
the South Pacific Directory: —“This small and isolated group
is but an imperfect representative in the south of London
in the north hemisphere; from its geographical position the
name was given to it in 1800 by Captain Waterhouse (?), but
as it does not occupy the precise spot that this name would
indicate, it has been called sometimes Penantipodes Island.”
Its position was given thus; lat. 49° 82' 8., and its
longitude, according to Lieut. 0. H. Wilson, R.N. is 178°
42' E. The • islands were visited by Captain W. H.
Norman (a gentleman I had the pleasure of acquain-
tanship) in the Government steamer “ Victoria,” of
Melbourne, Australia, in November, 1865, on a fruitless
search for shipwrecked people. He described it as having
perpendicular cliffs all round, rising from heights varying
from 200 to 600 feet. On the north-west cape is an
immense cave, about 120 feet high ; there are also several
small islet from 150 feet to 200 feet high on the north,
north-east and east sides ; none of them are more than
a mile off the main land, and all of them appear to
be safe to approach or to pass between. The highest
part of the largest island is apparently about 1,100 feet
high. No landing place was seen, unless on the E.N.E.
corner, where some rocks jut out a few yards, but, at the
time he passed, the sea was running too high to make the
attempt. The only vegetation seen on this island was
some long grass and ferns, a scrub of a dark colour, on the
top and sides of the hills. Captain Parfitt, who was here


in the “ Hormesdale ” in 1865, says, “ there is a remark-
able high and large pillar-shaped rock off the west end.
We have had a brisk breeze with misty and cloudy weather
throughout the day, and ship continuing under close hauled
royals. Barometer varied 30-05, 30-00, 29 - 88; tempera-
ture, 58°, 55°, 54°; lat., 50° 55' S.; long., 179° 41' W.;
the course, N. 76 E.; direction of wind, N. 2 W., N. 3 W.,
N. 4 W.; distance, 202 miles; variation, 18° E. A
penguin was observed swimming in the water, and whale
birds were flying about; we also noticed floating about
tangles and trumpet weed.
Feb. 10, Wednesday. —To-day is observed as Antipodes
Day, known to mariners as a sort of “ dies non." The
reason is that in sailing from west to east, time is being
continually lost, and on arriving at 180° a ship is twelve
hours behind Greenwich time, so that, if the ship went on
sailing until the circle was completed, i.e., 360°, a whole
day would be lost. At the Antipodes navigators correct
the time. This Wednesday consists of forty-eight hours,
two days knocked into one, whereby we shall arrive in
London according to the almanack. During the first
twenty-four hours we had a fresh breeze, with cloudy but
fine weather, were under canvas same as yesterday, and
close hauled; the wind was N. 4 W., and N. 2 W.; the
barometer indicated 29-82, 29-69, 29-67; temperature,
57°, 59°, 56°; lat., 51° 0-5' S.; long., 173° 45' W. ;
course, S. 88° E.; distance, 224 miles; variation, 17° E.
The second portion of the forty-eight
hours was pretty much the same as the first. After coffee
in the morning, took a walk on deck between 5 and 6 a.m.,
feeling young (!) and vigorous, and the advantage of the
sea air. Had a hot salt-water bath in the forenoon, and
changed underclothing for something warmer. The pears
I brought on board have ripened, and are delicious to the
taste. Put the remainder of the eggs in salt, so as to


preserve them (thirty-one in number). Lat., 51° 05' S.;
long., 169° 6' W.; course, E.; distance, 174 miles ; varia-
tion, 17° E.; wind, N. 3 W., N. 1£ W.; force, clean full;
weather : first part fresh, middle part moderate, latter part
light breeze, and fine throughout; barometer, 29-71, 29-67,
29-83 ; and temperature, 60°, 59°, 56°.
Feb. 11, Thursday.—A vessel observed from the mast-
head, steering in the same direction as ourselves. Owing
to the dense fogs which have prevailed all day we have not
been able to see her from the deck. It is quite a calm, the
“ Loch Sloy ” only making steerage way, i.e., about a knot
per hour. Several pieces of sea-weed, a bucket, and old
rags observed in the water. The latter, including the
bucket, evidently belonging to a ship on our course, but
before us. Divine service held in the evening ; not being
aware of this, until the last moment did not attend, but
engaged in pleasant conversation with the officer of the
watch, which I found instructive and profitable. The sun
could not be obtained to-day. We are in the same latitude,
viz., 51° -05', as yesterday, the longitude being 167° 29'
W.; our course, E.; wind, N. 3 W., N. 4 W., variable;
force, clean full, to variable ; weather, clear and fine, with
light breeze first part, misty in the second part, ending
with fog. Barometer 29-87, 80-06, 80-20 ; temperature,
62°, 59°, 68°. Health capital.
Feb. 12, Friday. —Before going to bed last night saw a
large fish in the water, supposed to be a whale. “ Mother,
he has been away a fortnight to-day,” I fancy I can hear
the inhabitants of Eose Cottage say. Dear me. Tempus
fugit cito pede indeed. I shall never forget you dear
friends. I wonder how the horse born on my birthday,
and named St. John, is getting on ; I hope my horse Pet
is doing well. Last night I dreamt that Harry was
married, and that I played the wedding march ; well. I


trust to be able to do so yet. Another week and Ada will
be among the family. I wish just now' I was there to
have a peep, “just for the old love’s sake ” as the song
says. Two ships in company, but too far off to make
them out. Our progress very slow, in consequence of
continued calms and foggy weather, with light unsteady
breezes throughout the day. Lat., 51° 20' S.; long.,
166° 17' W.; course, 72 E.; distance, 48 miles; variation,
15° E.; wind, N.; force, as yesterday; barometer, 80-28,
30-40, 30-50; temperature, 60°, 60°, 57°. After 10 a small
breeze sprang up.
Feb. 13, Satuedav. —Three whales observed in the day-
time, at different periods, in all probability the large fish
seen yesterday was one of them, as in this part of the
Pacific Ocean, “ whales are expected to be met with.”
These fish, or animals (I don’t know which is the
correct term, as savants differ, were too far off to see
distinctly but I have just sketched them as they appeared
to me. This day has been observed on board as
Sunday so as to agree with the Australian date. To-
morrow will be observed as the English Sunday, and in
future every Australian Monday will be our Sunday. I
attended service in the evening. The captain is sincere,
fervent, and earnest in manner, but the more I hear of the
Sankey and Moody tunes introduced, the more irreverent
I feel, and my heart (like Pharoah’s) becomes hardened.
The tunes remind me so much of negro minstrelsy, that,
instead of paying attention to the word of God as my heart
desires, my mind is frustrated by these eccentric melodies, :
and visions of Ethiopian serenaders, silver bell jigs, occupy
my thoughts. Should any “goody goody” get hold of
this manuscript and read it, no doubt it will be said, the
devil tempts me. I emphatically say in such a fabulous
being according to orthodox creation, i.e., hoof, horns,
and tail, I do not believe, there is no such thing my


conscience dictates to me, therefore I have nothing to fear.
As I have read somewhere “ I would wish to be religious
in no extreme.” The more simple and pure religion is, I
trust the more acceptable to God. I find no particular
advantage arise to the heart from a constant attendance at
any one place of worship, and observance of its ceremonies
and duties, for I would wish my heart to be always filled
with such love and gratitude to God that it may act
independently of any form. The Church of England in
which I have been brought up appears to me to be the
simplest form, though others differ. I would not wish
to force my opinions on people not holding my views,
neither will I allow opposite views to mine to be
forced upon me. All creeds profess to worship the
same Geometrician of the Universe, which, I firmly
believe He accepts. Ido not interpret anything in
the Volume of Sacred Law, or the Gospels, contrary to
this conviction. In my humble opinion it is the bitter feuds
(or call it what you like) between professing Christians of
various denominations that give the Secularists so much
strength. Strict Sabbatarians (like the Pharisees of old)
are the most egotistical and selfish people on the globe.
That which they cannot enjoy , they will not permit others to
do if they can maintain their own way. I know nothing of
the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church, generally
speaking —certainly what I have heard about the wafer and
wine actually becoming the body and blood of our Lord, I
do not believe ; but, I do know something of its music, and
the beautiful heart-stirring words of some of its hymns and
psalms, when I hear them, make me feel the presence of
our Creator. In some extra religious families, where it has
been discovered that I attended the Roman Catholic Church,
or earned my bread and butter in teaching in Roman
Catholic families, I have been informed that my services
would (what I am, writing is a positive fact) require to be
dispensed with ; not from any fault in my method of


teaching, but it was feared “ I might instil into their
children’s minds Roman music to play on the ‘ Sawboath,’
which would be very undesirable.” Yet these Puritans are
continually singing Psalms and Hymns, to ancient Roman
Catholic tunes. I fear I have sadly digressed, and I must
finish my idea of religion. Ido not wish to parade and
make common that innermost chamber of my thoughts
devoted to God, by dragging my religion into every con-
versation or company, whether fitted for it or not. I desire
to worship God in spirit and in truth, not in vain show Or
form; neither to lower Him by familiarity, nor to act as if
no thought of him dwelt in my heart. W ith these few remarks
I conclude the subject regarding my views on the religious
question, and as to my absence from the services held onboard
on Thursday and Sunday evenings. It will be found, how-
ever, that I shall have attended one or the other. A sheep was
killed on Friday, so we had fresh mutton to-day for dinner,
having partaken of the liver with bacon for breakfast. In
the evening we had a baked half-head for supper, all of
which was very palatable. As I have already recorded,
our cook is an adept in cookery. 1 don’t think that a
native born Australian would, after being a fortnight at
sea on salt provisions, turn up his nose at liver or head,
neither would he cut off the fat of fresh meat; it is pleasant
to know that the apprentices of the “Loch Sloy” are
always on the look out for what comes from Dives’ table.
There is seldom anything left on our plates, what is goes
to the pigs; what is on the dishes the boys get. These
boys are a fine sturdy class of humanity, well behaved and
respectful; one is an English clergyman’s son, the other
three are natives* of the “brown heather.” Throughout
the day we have had light breezes with misty and cloudy
weather; our lat., 62° 47' S.; long., 163° 03' W.; our
course, 8. 53 E.; distance, 145 miles; variation, 14°
E.; wind, N. 1 E.; all day force clean, full; barometer,
30*47, 30 53, 30*52; thermometer, 58°, 59°, 54°.


Feb. 14. —To-day (Sunday), observed as English Sunday;
did not attend service on board but walked the deck with
Mr. Birnie and kept him company. I had a sort of head-
ache all day, which I put down to partaking of supper last
night. When Mr. Lehman came to relieve the second
officer at 8 p.m. I smoked a pipe with him; during the
afternoon we passed a dead shark, with numbers of alba-
trosses and other birds having a regular banquet. The
birds following our ship were “cooeed” to by their mates,
who accepted the invite and immediately left us alone.
Valentine’s day ! The weather has been in general fine,
the sky at times overcast. The wind very unsteady; in
force. Lat., 53°87'5.; long., 159° 28' W.; our course,
S. 76 E.; distance, 133 miles; variation used, 50° E.;
barometer, 30-52, 30-47, 30-43 ; temperature, 56°, 59°, 52° ;
wind, N. 1 W., N., N. 2 W.
Feb. 15. —The weather pretty much the same as yester-
day, and calms continue. There were whales seen again
this morning ; but I was not on deck, having preferred to
remain in my bunk, reading an interesting book, until
7.30. In the night I dreamt about Albert and I being
in the bush, and a big snake being killed by my
dear young friend. I woke up in a fright, the steward
(whose berth is near mine) singing out to know the reason
of my “ noise ; ” Mr. Lehman, who had charge of the mid-
night watch, also heard me. I presume I was thinking
about the sermon read by the captain on the day called
Australian Sunday, 13th inst., wherein reference was made
to the brazen serpent lifted up by Moses. I dreamed
again, and in my sleep saw Mr. Steane, of Burrabool Hills,
attending to a man who had just been bitten by a snake,
and was aroused from my slumbers by the steward with
the usual cup of coffee at 5 a.m. I would have liked to
have seen how Mr. Steane’s patient got on with his pre-
scription. “ Fishing ” for an albatross was the pastime


.after breakfast The captain was successful, and as it was
an understood thing that I am to have the first bird and
shark caught, the biped was handed over to me ; it
measures 9 feet 5 inches from the tip of each wing. This
will be a nice present to give to my dear sister, Lat.,
58° 39' S.; long., 156° 50' W.; course, S. 89 E.; distance
run, 93 miles ; variation used, 16° E. ; direction of the
wind, N. 2J A., N. ; barometer, 30-39, 30-30, 30-15, and
the temperature, 55°, 56°, 53°.
Feb. 16. —The boatswain has undertaken to see to' skin-
ning and preserving the albatross. Is it not singular that
I dreamt about Albert again last night ? Something very
similar to the previous evening, but I have not room to
write about it here. The weather is cold and misty, and,
if it continues, we shall soon be at freezing point. The
captain, who is all attention to my welfare and happiness,
presented me this morning with a pair of warm gloves “ to
keep the icy nature of the atmosphere from my fingers.”
I regret to continually record his health is far from good.
Just now it is an anxious time for him and the officers,
not omitting crew and passengers. We are very much off
our course, and may come in contact with ice at any
moment. May God in His mercy spare us this calamity.
It would not be so bad if the air was clear and a glimpse
of the sun obtained. For the latter, the words of my song
■“ Seeking Rest ” are not inappropriate:—
“Dark are the clouds, no friendly star I see,
No guiding lamp illumes, all is drear to me.”
But ’tis no use being morbid. “Be not afraid,” saith the
Master. We look forward to a change on the 18th, that
being full moon. It is sincerely to be hoped that “ the
moon will have raised her lamps above” {vide Opera
“ Lily of Killarney.”) Is it not astonishing the cold does
not affect me; all on board remark: my healthy "appearance.
I endeavour to make myself cheerful and agreeable, and


•can always find something to while away the time, and
during the intervals manage now and again a pipe on
deck, fortified with adulterated “ watter,” as the late Hugh
McColl, of “Cawnawl” fame would put it. Lat., 54° 39' S.;
long., 153° 21' W.; course, S. 64 E.; distance, 187 miles;
variation used, 17° E.; wind, N. J- E., N. 1 E.; force,
towards the end of day, improving from 6 knots to 7 as
weather varied to drizzling rain. The barometer stood at
8014, 30 - 01, 29-97 ; temperature, 54°, 52°, 50°, gradually
getting colder and colder every day it will be perceived.
Feb. 17, Wednesday.— Captain Lehman informed me
that at 4.30 a.m. he being in charge, the thermometer
suddenly fell from 40° to 36°, and at 5 a.m. it suddenly
rose to 40°. “We must have passed an iceberg at the
time,” I quote Mr. Lehman’s log, although we could
not see anything of it, the weather being very thick and
hazy, with drizzling rain interspersed. At the time I
wrote this, it was 7.30 a.m., and one could not see 20
yards forward. Fortunately, we are on our course again,
and the thermometer rose to 42°. One of our boys named
Cumberland lost the only pair of boots he had, this
way; he had placed them in the rigging to dry, but by
some means or Other the sea claimed them, and overboard
they went. This was a day or two ago ; I noticed the
lad pottering about the deck with other “ toilers of the
sea ’ ’ and remarked that only he was barefooted; it
seemed strange to me in this cold temperature, for one to
go about in this manner, and hearing that he would be
helping the steward presently, I waited in the saloon until
he appeared. I questioned him as to his going about with
naked feet, he then told me his tale, which was verified.
Knowing that I had four pairs on board, i.e., of boots, the
other pears having been eaten, I gave him the soundest
pair of shoes I had; those that were a little too large for
me. The poor lad seemed indeed grateful, his eyes


glistened. I am glad it was in my power to help him;
and it was indeed a pleasure to see him walk about after-
wards comfortably shod, same as the others. I asked him
if he had socks, he assured me he had. The day has been
spent in the usual manner, “ reading, smoking, and
writing.” Have had no music, in consequence of the
Captain’s continued illness; am very sorry Captain does
not seem to mend. It appears that “he never recovered
from the attack of fog fever he had when in Melbourne,”
as he told me. After tea, there was no abatement in the
foggy weather, or signs of a change. No sun was visible
to-day. Our position is computed, by dead reckoning, the
same as yesterday. Lat., 55° 01' 8.; long., 149° 23' W.;
course, S. 81 E.; distance run, 139 miles; variations,
170° E.; direction of the wind, N. 1 E., N. 1 W., N. 3 W.;
force, same as yesterday or very nearly; the barometer
gave 29 - 90, 29 - 84, 29’72; temperature, 52°, 49°, 47°.
Ebb. 18, Thursday.— While we are in this state of un-
certainty there is much time for reflection, and I often
think of the effect a sailor’s life would be to some of my
Australian friends, more especially in these trying regions.
What is called hard work by them is child’s play to that of
a seaman’s just now. The seaman has not the advantage of
a warm fire, warm food at will, or “hot comfort” after
sundown when work is finished. The seaman’s work
(properly speaking) is never ended until he reaches port.
All this week those before the mast have had pretty lively
times of it; more so at night time. Up and down the rigging
in dreary, cold, and tempestuous weather he must go at
the call of duty. Constitutions fed upon nothing but salt
beef or pork, with an occasional dish of pea soup for dinner
are not very inviting to work upon, no doubt you will say,
imagination will guess what the other meals are. I will,
however, at once admit the provisions on board the “Loch
Sloy” are excellent, and I have remarked the quality of


the beef as superior to anything I lately tasted in Geelong.
I am further informed that the crew are served with the
same quality. Now and again they get “boulli” and
“duff” and hot coffee during the night, but all this is not
anything at all equal to the comfort the “hardest working
son of toil” ashore obtains. This latter being can have a
Saint Monday if he chooses, the sailor cannot. On board the
“Loch Sloy” he cannot get a glass of grog, perhaps the
latter they are best without, but I really think that if a glass
of hot grog were served out to all hands at night time it
would not do much harm. My own experience teaches me
it is good. I either take hot coffee made royal, or whiskey
and water for a night cap. Very seldom drink intoxicants
in the daytime, I would take my beer, “drawed mild, and
brought regular” (as the immortal Mrs. Gamp preferred),
but I like to drink fair, and not by myself. As all are, or
supposed to be Teetotallers who take their meals in the
cabin, I follow their example, and am therefore saved the
expense. A pint bottle of beer is 9d. on board, quart
Is. 6d., just 6d. more than I paid coming out. Whisky
per bottle 3s. 6d. I don’t think the prices fair, because
ashore I could always get a bottle of English beer for lOd.
or 9d. per quart, and less by taking the dozen, i.e. if one
knew how to go about. It will be remembered I only paid
Messrs. Clark, of Eyrie Street, Geelong, 12s. per doz., and
this was the very best, when the brew was scarce in the
market. There was the usual weekly service in the eveniug
but I did not attend; it was fortunate I did not, as I was
enabled to watch particularly the movements of a whale
which was, by the way (according to Mr. Birnie and Wilson,
the man at the wheel) an excellent specimen. This whale
came across our stern and the port side of the ship about
7.30, and was scarcely 10 yards from us. It appeared
on the surface at intervals of two or three minutes,
making a noise between a snort and blow, and sent up a
volume of water which appeared something in form of


an expanded umbrella, he evidently as much pleased with
himself as were his spectators. I watched this inhabitant
of the deep intently, and noticed that he only appeared
three times, all within the space of a quarter of an hour,
and then he finally disappeared. The weather moderated
somewhat to-day, although we have had rain and mist.
Our lat., 55° 36' 8.; long., 144° 01' W.; course, N. 80 E.;
distance, 183 miles; variation used, 15° E.; wind, N. 4 W.,
8. 3 W., S. 2 E.; force, much the same; barometer, 29-68,
29-57, 29-65; temperature, 53°, 47°, 50°.
Feb. 19, Feiday.— This date completes the third week
since I came on board. As usual, my thoughts were
directed to absent friends. An imaginary submerged
telephonic message reached me, inquiring after my health.
“ Happily ” (was the reply), “I continue well, and that’s a
blessing.” “Mother, he’s been away three weeks to-day!”
Unfortunately, all hope of making a rapid passage home is
rudely dispelled, although we started so favourably. I
suppose that Ada has returned home, after her long
engagement with the Shaws —but what has this to do
with my journal? My frequent digressions must be
pardoned. Captain McLean is better; he is very anxious
as to my being comfortable. I tell him not to alarm him-
self, I could not be more so under existing circumstances.
He and his wife evidently enjoy the rusks I brought with
me; we sop them in our coffee morning and night. The
sweet ones are preferred. Captain McLean has instructed
his chief confectioner to prepare some samples from the
recipe furnished : over which there has been a pretty hot
argument between the steward, cook, myself, Captain and
Mrs. McLean, as to whether the sweet rusk was bread, or
cake. I said it was bread, the captain sided with me, the
others opposed. All doubts were set at rest afterwards,
when cook dipped a sweet rusk in the tea he was drinking,
he declared it to be bread. A fire took place in the saloon


about 3 p.m., in consequence of the brass piping becoming
over-heated, and which was attached to the stove. From
information received, it appears that Captain McLean and
Mr. Lehman were verifying their position on the chart,
when all of a sudden they noticed that the solder was
melting, and dropping on to a chair which, fortunately,
Mrs. McLean had just vacated: otherwise the consequences
might have been serious to her, had the molten liquid
fallen on her head, as it would have done had she remained.
Well, this naturally required {d la Milner) “ looking into,”
and they discovered the roof of the salon to be on fire.
The chief officer came rushing on deck, carrying with him
a vessel containing water, which he poured around the
smoke-pipe ; the carpenter was immediately notified that
his presence was required, and he very quickly appeared on
the scene of action, and succeeded, ere much damage was
done, in removing the smoke-pipe, so that copious buckets
of water (of which it is needless to state there was an
inexhaustible supply at command), could be poured on the
devouring element. Very soon the sparks of fire and
flames were subdued, and mutual congratulations the
result. It was all over before any one forward knew any-
thing about it. And now for another event. Before noon
I was busily engaged furnishing my newspaper book with
more cuttings. I was getting on remarkably well until I
came to this slip, or paragraph, from an old newspaper;—
Just So!
“Mr. Booth, of the Blue Eibbon Army, has taken a
small farm at Boural, where he is residing with his wife
and family.” —Evening News, Sydney. The Sydney Bulletin
comments on this fact as follows;
“ Blue-Ribbon Booth 1 Blue-Ribbon Booth !
Is this report we hear the truth ?
Have you, Sir, settled on your farm—
Excuse us, but we mean no harm—


Because there are, you understand,
No drunkards left now in the land ?
Or is it—let us pause and smile !
Because you've made your little pile ? ”
In shaping this paragraph to fit in the columns of my
book, the knife I was employed making use of slipped off
the cutting board on to my 2nd and 3rd fingers, taking a
complete half inch off the fleshy part of the 3rd and the
top of the first. I gathered the pieces together, and stuck
them on with mucilage, which was conveniently at hand
for sticking purposes. The steward opportunely arrived
and he got some lint and sticking plaster, and re-dressed
the wounds which were bleeding “pretty freely,” and
bound them up with surgical bandages until further
assistance arrived. Mr. Lehman (whose father had been a
doctor, and which profession he was originally intended
for) immediately made a complete diagnosis of the case,
and re-applied the bandages, forbidding me, at the same
time, “ any use of the injured hand (right) for a day or
two.” The lat. 56° 15- S. ; long. 140° 44' W. ; course,
N. 80 E.; distance, 115 miles ; variation used, 15° E. ;
direction of the wind, S. 4 E., S. 5 W., S. 5 W. ; force
averaging about 4 knots ; moderate breezes with misty
weather throughout the day; barometer, 29-63, 29-66,
29-68; temperature, 53°, 60°, 51°; 3,144 miles from
Australia.
Feb. 20, Saturday.— The water when the dead reckon-
ing was made yesterday proved to be three degrees colder
than the temperature ; it is, therefore, quite on the cards
that we are in the neighbourhood of ice, but, as we are
again on our direct course, we shall, it is to be hoped, not
transact any business with Messrs. Iceberg and Co., which
would only end in probable disaster to ourselves ; another
reason for “no business transactions” with the firm quoted
is that the South Pacific Islands or Lower Archipelago


is the only land near, and being inhabited mostly by
savages, it is by no means desirable to cultivate their
friendship or hospitabty. It will be remembered Captain
Cook, the famous navigator, lost his life in the “ South
Pacific,” and it has been recorded m the good books that
“stuffed and roasted missionary is very good,” and they
don’t object to a white heathen now and again. As
I, myself, am not prepared for visits of ceremony to
the sable brethren, I would, if asked to go on an embassy
of the kind, most energetically, emphatically, strongly, and
strenuously protest against being one of the party, but I’m
afraid if it were actually necessary to do so my feeble
remonstrance would not have much effect. The steward
was taken ill to-day with “pains in his stomach.” The
captain had a bad night, and was not at all the thing. He
complains much about his chest. He has applied mustard
plaister to it without success. Have recommended Jacobs
Oil as an external remedy, and to smoke Eucalyptus—This
latter he manages by pouring two or three drops of the oil on
his tobacco ; he thinks it relieves his cough. I had scarcely
finished writing this in my rough diary, and gone on the deck
to have a smoke, when the man on the look out reported,
“ Iceberg on the lee bow,” and sure enough there was.
As we neared the interesting stranger (keeping it, however,
at a respectable distance from us) she changed in form,
looking very much like a modern ironclad, or a laige head-
land, with a lighthouse in front. It was a grand sight, and
very impressive. We have every reason to be thankful we
did not meet with these strangers, or anything of the like
nature assuming such gigantic proportions, in the moist
and misty weather we are now not enjoying, more especially
at night. The first “ berg,” calculated at a distance of
six miles, measured 286 feet high ; its length and breadth
could not be ascertained. The following extract on ice
seen in these latitudes, and quoted from the “ South
Pacific Directory,” gives interesting information:—


In a paper read by Mr. J. T. Town son, so well known
as the projector of the modem Australian voyage, at
Liverpool, in November, 1857, he says ;
“ It may be inferred that the line of perpetual congela-
tion exists in a lower latitude in some parts of the
southern hemisphere than in others. The icy barrier
retreats several degrees to the south of the antarctic circle,
to the west of Cape Horn, while to the eastward it
advances to the northward of that line, which is, no
doubt, owing to the situation of the land. But the
limited experience of the navigators, who have pene-
trated to the land, would lead to the inference that the
line of the icy barrier itself does not change much in its
position. From the great quantities of ice drifting in all
parts of the ocean, in high southern latitudes, it is pro-
bable that the formation of ice islands is much more
rapid than is generally supposed. The manner of their
formation is easily explained. In the first place, the ice
seems to require a nucleus whereon the fogs, snow, and
rain may congeal and accumulate ; this, the land affords.
Accident then separates part of this mass from the land,
when its drifts off and is broken into many pieces, and
part of this may again join that which is in process of
formation. From the accumulation of snow, such a
mass speedily assumes a flat, or table-topped, shape,
gradually increasing in thickness and weight by the
congelation of rain, snow, and fogs, which last have no
small influence in contributing to the accumulation, as
may be supposed, when a few hours suffice to give the
rigging and spars of a ship a coating of ice a quarter of
an inch thick. Thus, masses of a thousand feet in thick-
ness might require but a few years to form
These icebergs afloat are from a quarter of a mile to
five miles in length ; but these appear insignificant when
compared with a body of ice in the South Atlantic Ocean,
reported to have been passed by twenty-one ships during


the five months of December, 1854, and January, Feb-
ruary, March, and April, 1855, floating from lat. 44° S.,
long. 28° W., to lat. 40° S., long. 20° W. Its elevation
in one case exceeded 300 feot, but its horizontal dimen-
sions were 60 miles by 40. It was of the form of a
hook —the longer shank of which was 60 miles, the
shorter 40 miles —and embayed between these mountains
of ice was a space of water, 40 miles across. The first
account of it was received from the ‘ Great Britain,’
which, in December, 1854, was reported to have steamed
50 miles along the outside of the longer shank. This
longest range of ice then bore north-east and south-west,
the bay before alluded to being opened to the north-east.
Whilst in this position, it exposed ships to but little
danger, since the bay could only be entered on the oppo-
site course to that of ships on their homeward passage
from Australia ; but during the next three months it
swung round 90° to the left, and drifted east-north-east
about 100 miles, which brought it very near to the route
of outward bound ships, with the bay open to their track.
One can scarcely imagine any mass of ice in an equally
dangerous form, and it is sad to record that one emigrant
ship—the ‘ Guiding Star ’—was embayed and lost on it,
with all hands.”
I make another extract from Mr. Townson’s paper upon
this Atlantic ice-field, given as an example of what it is
possible to encounter in the Pacific :
“ The chief result of the enquiry was to demonstrate
that the chief area in which the ice is met with in the
voyage round the Horn was to the eastward and north-
eastward of the Falklands, as high as lat. 40° on the
meridian of 20° W., an evidence of the north-easterly
set of antarctic currents before mentioned. The peculiar
distinction of the tabular berg of the southern hemi-
sphere and th( pinnacled and irregular bergs met with
in the Arctic ices is due to their origin. In the north


they are formed on a limited space of land, chiefly
Greenland, and here the land ice reaches the sea down
narrow fords, in the form of glaciers—literally, rivers of
ice—whose outlet into the sea is constantly disrupted;
and in the spring the masses drift southwards, in every
variety of size and figure, except the tabular. In the
south, on the contrary, the whole of the South Pole
appears to be encircled with land covered with this icy
mantle, without any inlet into its interior, as is the case
with the Arctic regions, unless there should be such in
the lands of Cape Horn, and thus there is no influx of
warmer water, which can penetrate into the rear of the
icy barrier (as is the case in Baffin’s Bay and around
Spitzbergen) to dissolve and drift it out in a similar way.
Therefore, the only feasible theory is that the whole
mass of ice is gradually protruding its margin into
warmer latitudes, and is disrupted when it loses its
equilibrium. When first separated they are all flat
topped and nearly level, from 100 to 200 feet above the
sea, and probably 800 or 1,000 feet beneath it. They
begin to dissolve at the base, generally irregularly, and
then become tilted or presenting a bluff end, with a
sloping face in the opposte direction. This is varied in
all conceivable manners. During their drift to the
northward, on reaching lower latitudes, and as their
distance from the land increases, they are found in all
stages of decay; some forming obelisks, others towers and
Gothic arches, and all more or less perforated, some
exhibit lofty columns, with a natural bridge resting on
them of a lightness and beauty inconceivable in any
other material. Some apparently retain their original
tabular form entire until they reach a lower latitude,
while others have entirely lost it, and have evidently
upset or overturned. The sight of one of these immense
masses upsetting is a truly grand but exceedingly
dangerous spectacle to witness. Captain Bolton, who


witnessed one overturning, says, that as soon as the
mist, occasioned by its fall, cleared away the enormous
body rose out of the water in a totally different shape, its
original appearance having been very high and square,
but was then fully twice its former length, besides being
low and smooth. The noise of the huge mass rending
it as loud as thunder or volleys of artillery
Generally drift ice is not to be found in the southern
oceans at a lower latitude than 58°, and in that region
only in the Austral winter months, from April to
September inclusive. In one region it has been found as
low as 55°, and in some cases brash ice has been reported
in lower latitudes. The ‘ Lightning ’ (since burnt in
Corio Bay, Geelong) on the 10th Sept., 1856 in lat.
55° 83' S., long. 140° W., sighted an iceberg 420
feet high. The ‘ General von Geen,’ Aug. 6th, 1840,
passed one 1,000 feet high. The ‘ Angnesa’ on the 23rd
March, 1855 passed an iceberg 960 feet high, in
lat. 53°, 14' S., long. 14°, 41' E. In Nov. 1854 the
‘ Great Britain ’ passed 280 icebergs in lat. 56° S.,
between the meridians of 112° W. and 92° W., in-
dependently of numerous icebergs in other localities.
The ‘ Golden Era ’ passed these meridians at the extra-
ordinary latitude of 63° S., and did not meet with any
icebergs, but at 72° W. she was surrounded with pack
ice, and narrowly escaped being wrecked. In the
southern hemisphere the greatest number of icebergs are
met with during November, December, January, Feb-
ruary, March, and April.”
It will therefore be seen that we have arrived almost on
the actual spot where previous vessels have passed these
dangers, but I will quote a little more from Mr. Town-
son’s paper to show that these dangers can be avoided if
attention is paid to the warnings of the thermometer: —
“ Captain McDonald, of the James Baines’s Black Ball
Liner, met with a considerable number of icebergs in his


late extraordinary passages, but he observes that these
stray icebergs do not considerably increase the risk with
a prudent and careful captain. He has only to notice
his thermometer to be forewarned of the approaching
danger. In one case he found that the thermometer fell
4° as he approached the ice, and 2° more as he got to
leeward of the berg. Captain Newland, in the log of the
‘ Champion of the Seas,’ proves that the thermometer
not only indicates the approach towards ice, but also the
amount of ice we may expect to meet with. In lat. 88°
30' S. he passed two icebergs, the temperature of the
water being 44°, and that of the air being 42°. Between
50° S. and 47° S. he passed thirty-nine icebergs, the
thermometer then fell to 35° in water and 36° in air.
In this instance, the temperature was 8° or 12° lower,
although the ship had sailed about 10° nearer to the
equator, at which point the mean temperature of neither
the air nor water was sensibly affected when an iceberg
was approached. It is probable that in this instance
some meteorological change might have counterbalanced
the effect of the proximity of ice. But, if otherwise,
this single exception cannot prove that the thermometer
may be neglected, but rather enforces the necessity of
keeping a most careful look out at all times. Mr Townson,
on an examination of 250 logs of Australian ships, found
104 contained reports of ice. A large portion of these
refer to the Southern Atlantic, in the dangerous region
before alluded to, to the north-east of Cape Horn and
the Falklands.”
I think I have fully explained what it is to be in these
latitudes, and having had experience, shall, when I put my
foot on shore again, often think of those “ who go down to
the sea in great ships,” particularly those under canvas
only. A steam ship can fight her way through, in fact,
those bound for Europe from Australia go via the Bed Sea,
and have no business this way, but the mariner who


depends solely upon the wind to give him a safe voyage
needs all the prayers of loving relations for his safety.
But why dilate upon the subject further. The Mighty
Euler of the ocean knows what is best, and in Him is our
implicit trust. We have had fresh and moderate breezes
with clear and misty weather alternately. The lat., 55° 45'
S.; long., 135° 24' W.; distance, 182 miles; variation used,
15° E.; wind, west; force, as yesterday; barometer, 29-68,
29-65, 29-63; temperature, 58°, 52°, 45°.
Feb. 21, Sunday.— Before going to bed, last night,
about 8-30 p.m. a heavy fog came over the horizon,
indicative of what to-day turned out. At 7 a.m. we passed
a piece of ship’s bulwark, with rail attached, about 16 feet
long !! I trust, this is not a bad omen. Attended evening
service. Sermon was somewhat shorter. So much the
better. Long sermons are not healthy, decidedly not
when the text has been well worn out, it was taken from
Eevelations. “Behold I stand at the door and knock.”
I have heard this text treated in a different manner, but
nevertheless pointing to the same goal. The singing was
hearty, more especially the last tune, which was of the
usual Ethiopian flavour. I had a great difficulty in pre-
serving my gravity, but like the good Saint Anthony kept
my eyes fixed firmly on the hymn book. I dared not lift
mine eyes off to look at any of the men. The lat., 56° 03'
S.; long., 132° 42' W.; course, S. 72 E.; distance, 92
miles; variation used, 15° E.; direction of the wind,
N. 4 W., N. 2 W., N. 2 E., but slight alteration in the
force; barometer, 29-63, 29 - 72, 29-78.; temperature, 51°,
50°, 50°. Sheep killed yesterday.
Feb. 22, Monday.— Wind very unsteady both in force
and direction, with heavy mist and fog at intervals. At
10.30 a.m. passed a portion of a ship’s boat, painted black
outside, and white inside, apparently not long in the water.


The weather continuing of a disheartening character, the
captain has elected to remain up, there being every
appearance of a nasty night. My fingers prevent me
using them to convenience, being wrapped up in bandages.
After indulging in a game of dominoes, turned in at 9 p.m.
Lat., 56° 58' S.; long., 181° 17' W.; course, S. 40 E.;
distance, 72 miles; variation, 15° E.; wind, N. 6 8.,
N. 4 E„ N. 2 E.; barometer, 29-79, 29-78, 29-70;
temperature, 50°, 49°, 50°.
Feb. 28, Tuesday. —All hand were called (after I retired
for the “pillow”) last night to shorten sail, the officers
keeping a vigilant look out, as it was discovered the water
was getting colder every quarter of an hour. It is the
opinion of the captain and his officers that an iceberg was
passed, the thermometer rising soon after. This morning
the weather at 6 a.m. (though “coldish” with clear sky
and the sun just showing himself) induced me to turn out
earlier than I have latterly done. Mr. Lehman got an
observation to-day at noon, after which a dense fog pre-
vailed ; this damped our spirits as we all had hoped for better
times. The prevailing north-easterly winds are driving us
so much to the southward, that great and deep anxiety is
pictured on the captain’s face; poor fellow his cough is very
bad and irritating. For myself I treat “matters” as
“conundrums,” feeling convinced that all is for the best.
Lat., 58° 00’ S.; long., 127° 53' W.; course, S. 69 E.;
distance, 136 miles; the variation used, 17° E.; wind, N.;
force, royals close hauled; moderate breeze at times;
barometer, 29-79, 29-68, and temperature, 51°, 53°, 52°.
Feb. 24.—The wind gradually increased to a moderate
gale at midnight, and sail was shortened to full top sail,
fore sail, fore and main topmast stay sails, and inner gib,
making it decidedly uncomfortable for those turned in.
The captain remained on deck until 2 a.m., I do not think


it wise on his part. He has very capable officers (which
he, himself, has admitted to me), and they naturally feel
for him as any right-minded men would. I am assumed
there is no violent necessity for him to remain up at night
time, “with his hacking cough.” Both first and second
officers have wives at home, whom they are most anxious to
he with, therefore, from this point of view, the ship’s
safety is their first, and just now, only consideration. To
relieve the monotony of the voyage, a black and white
porpoise has kept the ship company all day. We have
been unable to get the sun; when we don’t, dead reckon-
ing is resorted to, as already mentioned. Lat., 58° 59' S.;
long., 128° 52' W.; course, S. 64 E.; distance, 188 miles;
variation used; wind, northerly; barometer, 29-68, 29 , 60,
29-46; temperature, 51°, 60°, 50°. Heavy weather threaten-
ing.
Feb. 25, Thursday.— “ We had it” last night, and with-
out the slightest mistake ; from a fresh gale it rose to a
strong one, the “floating machine ” rolling about, as Sam
Weller, Junr. would say, “ like vun o’clock.” The sensations
derived by me, were something like a storm raging in my
stomach, but I could not vomit it out. the storm decided
to remain where it was until it exhausted itself of its own
free will. My head seemed as if it was filled with lead
when I got up in the morning ; and quite too heavy for any
body. I partook of very little breakfast, and with the
exception of coming out of my bunk at meal times (to con-
vince my'friends at table that I wished to be at peace with
them, and desired not to show any animosity by absenting
myself), remained there the major portion of the day
reading Charles Dickens’ “ Uncommercial Traveller.”
Lat., 60° 22'5.; long., 122° 11' W.; course, 8. 39 E.;
distance, 81 miles; variation used, 19° E.; wind, N.;
force, first part “from full top sails, &c., to close reefed
topsails and courses; the weather, overcast and hazy;


barometer, 29 - 41, 29 , 38, 29 - 24; temperature, 50°, 52°, 50°.
As usual, no sun. The Captain having tried a porus
plaister provided by the boatswain, “thinks he is obtaining
relief.” “Think” is a very good word in his case, as
it implies (I fancy) relief. He certainly does not bark so
much. “All’s well that ends well.”
Feb. 26.—Myself much better this morning. It was
only, after all, a “little shaking up” on the previous day.
I slept exceedingly well last night. .Before the morning
meal walked the deck with the first officer, and heard for
the first time remarks about that dreaded word “ pumps.”
The carpenter reported “No water in the well.” What a
pleasing difference from the time of my voyage to Australia.
After being 28 days out. Then (on the 28th day I mean)
we were at the “jerk instrument,” for it was nothing else,
as the poor passengers could not pull in any other way,
but with a jerk. (I will not dilate upon the horrid noise
it made, as any further reference here would be a digression
and out of place.) Yes, we had to jerk all the way to the
Cape of Good Hope, in order to save our lives and ship.
All this has been recorded in the history of maritime
accidents and casualties in the Cape Argus, September,
1864. We have resumed our usual slow sailing, only 41
miles having been accomplished since last reckoning.
“Misfortunes will happen,” it is written, “in the best
regulated families,” and those who reside for the present
in the state rooms of the “ Loch Sloy ” are no exception to
this rule. The wife of the worthy chieftain of this floating
castle managed to “ jam ” three of her fingers in the com-
partment, where hinges hang the door leading to her
boudoir. She made some remarks when she discovered
where her fingers had located themselves, but I was not
near enough to catch the exact words uttered, as they were
uttered in a language peculiarly her own, and quite foreign
to me. A messenger was sent to the steward, and as he


is hospital dispenser and dresser also,, remedial measures
in the shape of lint and bandages were quickly applied. I
have since been informed that the words Mrs. McLean
remarked did not rhyme with jam, and that I need not be
so curious. “ He’s been away a month to-day ? ” Well,
he hopes that those who are thinking of him are in good
health enjoying the warm sun, as we (don’t) the bitter
cold. Had a hot water bath—salt. Took a seidlitz
powder before doing so, and felt great relief to the nauseous
feeling in my head afterwards. We had no service last
evening, captain not being equal to the occasion, played
dominoes instead. The flesh, which was severed from my
right fingers, has united firmly, and the hand will soon be
sound. We are 3,794 miles from Australia. Lat.,
61° 05' S.; long., 121° 02' W.; course, S. 42 E.; distance
already stated, viz., 41 miles; variation used, 20° E.; wind,
N. 1 W.; calm, N. IE.; force, average 2£ knots ; barome-
ter, 29 - 82, 29-30, 29-42; temperature, 50°, 53°, 50°.
Feb. 27, Saturday.— l promised to explain the word
“ Jonah,” as mentioned previously in this Diary. If refer-
ence is made to the Ist chapter of Jonah, you will read that
“ Jonah paid his fare and started on a sea voyage,” that a
great storm arose, and the mariners were afraid. Where-
upon Jonah told them “ to cast him in the sea,” and then
there would be a calm; and it was so. Now had a storm
arisen on our departure from Australia, I being the only
passenger, would have been called a “ Jonah,” which, to a
sailor’s mind means ill-luck. But I brought a fair wind,
and it was ruled our ship had no “ Jonah ” on board.
Now, however, that we are drifting so much to the south-
ward owing to “ contrairy ” winds {vide Sairey Gamp’s
Memoirs), opinions in the cabin are beginning to differ,
but I am not willing to offer myself as a sacrifice to pro-
pitiate the gods, having recovered my wonted health which
in my mind ’twould be a pity to destroy. There is nothing


to write of interest re to-day, every thing (to use Gold-
smith’s words in the “ Traveller ”) is just now “ remote,
unfriended, melancholy, slow.” Lat., 60° 46'; long.,
119° 51' W.; course, N. 62 E.; distance, 39 miles; varia-
tion, 21° E.; wind, N. 1 E., N. 6 E., N. 5 E.; force, close
hauled; weather, squally ; temperature, 49°, 51°, 50° ; baro-
meter, 29-49, 29-40, 29-28.
Feb. 28, Sunday.— The day opened with “ moderate
breeze, changing to light winds and calms, with thick mist
and fog throughout the day.” Lat., 59° 56' S.; long., 120°
16' W. ; course, N., 28, W.; distance run, 54 miles;
direction of the wind, N. 5 E., N. 2 E.; force, pretty
well the same as yesterday; barometer, 29-98, 29 - 25,
29-27; temperature of saloon, 47°, 50°, 50°. The great
difference of the temperature on deck, some times as much
as nine degrees, makes (in this cold weather) a cosy saloon,
with coal fire, the most desirable place to locate oneself.
In the evening attended the Church Service, according to
the Presbyterian mode of worship. The psalms and hymns
were sung to Ecclesiastical tunes, which were gratifying
beyond measure to myself. There is nothing to my mind
to beat the psalmody of the much abused Church of
England, and I am glad to find in “ a book of tunes to be,
used in the Church of Scotland,” that the latter is beginning
to adopt much of the ritual of the former church, not,
however, without strong opposition of the antiquarian
party, who object to the “ kist-o’-whistles,” anthems,
music of any soul-stirring nature, and are firmly convinced
of the existence of a personal devil, clothed with hair,
hoofs, tail, and horns, as well as that the Great Architect
made the world in six days of 24 hours. The book I have
referred to is published in 1883 (to the best of my memory),
and contains our Te Dennis, Magnificats, &c., &c. The
sermon (of the usual Evangelical type) was read from a
Christian periodical, having for its subject Luke vm., v. 22 to


■2B, stress being particularly laid upon the words, “ I
beseech thee, torment me not.” It being the fourth
Sunday in the month I played in the morning music from
Signor Giorza’s Mass, the one he gave me.
March 1, Monday.— This being the anniversary of Wales’
patron saint (David) I played this morning, before break-
fast, a selection of Welsh music, including my own compo-
sition dedicated to the Cambrian Society of Victoria in
1881. The day reminded me of the many happy days I
have spent with the Welsh people during their annual
excursions to the different watering-places in Hobson’s
Bay, Melbourne, Victoria. I shall not easily forget my
friends, Messrs. Levi Powell, Ben James, B. Weir, E.
Rowlands, Thomas, Davis, and heaps of others. I sincerely
trust they have to-day—l mean the excursionists —much
finer weather than we are experiencing just now, which is
the reverse of pleasant, we being far too much to the
southward, with calms and heavy fog. It is to be hoped
that the end of the “ quotation ” I take from Captain
McLean’s daily card, containing the statement of our
latitude and longitude will soon prove true, and be quickly
verified. The following is the quotation referred to, and
was on yesterday’s card; —“ This is the day I predicted we
should be off the ‘ Horn,’ but, alas ! how vain of man to
build his hopes on anything earthly. ‘ Man proposes, but
God disposes.’ Let us therefore submit to his sovereign
will, and say, ‘ Thy will be done.’ It will perhaps be all
for the best eventually.” Lat., 59° 50' S. ; long., 119° 57'
W.; course, N. 60 E.; distance, 11 miles !!; variation,
21° E.; direction of the wind, N. 3W. ; calm, N. 1 W.;
barometer, 29 - 26, 29-23, 29 32; temperature, 52°, 53°,
54°; a little warmer than yesterday; weather disheartening.
March 2, Tuesday.— This morning I walked to the
.summit of Mount Misery, as the poop-deck is called. The


mountain has presented a very piteous spectacle the last
few days, the officers of the watch looking “wretched,’
“woe-begotten,” and “truly miserable.” No wonder,
yesterday’s “ distance ” was quite sufficient to try the
patience of that holy man Job, or, better still, make a
Saint swear and curse without the assistance of bell, book,
and candle. The discomfort of being perched on a wet
deck, in wet clothes, in a moist atmosphere, without any
sun (or daughter) to cheer one up, is best imagined, than
written down here. The officers tell me (the words they
have been saying to themselves are thoroughly consistent
with the times, and quite conscientious, for the ship, instead
of making headway is simply drifting into latitudes) ships
seldom come to trouble. For the past five days we have
been unable to get any observation; we are aware we are
close to the islands of Dogherty, and intend to verify its
position as laid down in the chart if possible. Torrents
of rain fell about 10 p.m. last night, and as there were
signs of the mist clearing up at daybreak, all hands were
called this morning at 4 o’clock to assist in setting all
plain sail. It was the hubbub that awoke me, and brought
me out of my dear old bunk so early in the morning to
see what was the matter ; and it was delightful to learn
that the weather had improved in manners, and that at-
noon our sailing caravan was once more (as you will have
noticed has been frequently said before), “We are again on
our course,” and spinning along at the rate of seven knots
an hour. According to an observation taken to-day, it
was found the “Loch Sloy” had drifted 48 miles to the
S.W., due entirely to the continuance of N.E. winds,
thereby turning the usual easterly current to South by
West. Lat., 60° 84' 8.; lon., 120° 04' W.; course, N. 13 E.;
distance, 54 miles; variation, 21° E. ; wind, N. 3 E.,
N. 4 E., N. 3 W.; weather, first and middle parts same
as yesterday, at 4 a.m. wind veered to N.W., the first-
change for the better we have had for the past two weeks.


Hurrah ! Barometer, 29'36, 29'26, 29‘26 ; temperature,
56°, 53°, 50° variable, very, and we shall not see Dogherty
Island after all.
March 8, Wednesday.— “ It is an ill wind that blows
nobody any good,” the proverb says, probably, the con-
trary winds which have delayed our progress, have been
beneficial to other craft. “Haul away” the sailors are
singing right merrily as they are laying hold of the main
sheet to pull it aft. I like to hear these sailors’ songs.
They are very jocose, some of them are interspersed with
extraordinary romances, all to do with their lady loves.
In one of these songs I discovered that the remedy “ to
do ” with a drunken sailor is to put him in the jolly
boat until he is sober—not a very great punishment,
I should think; but generally speaking, Jack is very
humane and considerate to his fellow man, decidedly
so if of the same profession as himself. I got a
slight touch of rheumatics yesterday, and, strange to
say, on the left shoulder. Like George Augustus Sala, I
dread rheumatics and colds of any description. It is well
known in Australia among my best friends colds and
rheumatics are not good for me. They wear me out,
and spoil my temper. The man at the wheel told me
this morning that “ those in the forecastle had serious
misgivings that somebody left shore without paying his
washerwoman, and that the men were seriously thinking
about casting lots as to who should be thrown overboard.”
Fortunately, their hands were stayed from resorting to
these cruel extremes. The sun peeped out from the clouds
at noon, permitted an observation to be taken, which
recorded the fact we had made 138 miles since noon yes-
terday. The wind and weather bade us also to be of good
cheer, that “ they had driven us purposely to the south,
so that we should avoid icebergs travelling to the north,
but in future they would see us on in direct course to Cape


Horn.” The latitude, as recorded by sextant, 59° 57' S. '
lon., 115° 32' W.; course, N. 64 E.; distance, 138 miles ;
variation used, 21° E.; wind direction, N. 4 W., N. 3 W.,
N. 2 W.; weather cloudy, with passing showers, clearing
to fine in the afternoon; barometer, 29-25, 29-20, 29-10;
temperature, 54° all day. Went to bed; shoulder very bad.
Maeoh 4. —I am indeed suffering a most horrible attack
of rheumatism all over my left shoulder, underneath its
blade, all down my spine and collar-bone, fixing my head
and neck on one side. The torture is something dreadful.
Last night the sea was very buoyant, and tossed our “ iron
barque ” about just as if it was a mere plaything, making
it bump and jump sufficient for all purposes. What with
the pain and shaking I was receiving, I believe I could at
that time have slain the first visitor having temerity
enough to enter my state apartment. Believing a drink
might induce me to sleep a little I struck a match, only
to discover my drinking glass was not in its accustomed
place. This was at 2 a.m. I wandered into the saloon,
and seized a teacup containing sugar. The sugar was
quickly emptied out on to a plate, some mountain dew
supplied in lieu, with aqua pur a. Just as I was about to
apply the refreshing beverage to my injured constitution,
the sea mocked me, tilted the “Ark” on one side, and
your obedient servant, with his remedies, on to the floor—
making him feel a very ill-used specimen of humanity.
He got up, and retired to blanket flat, a much wiser, but
injured, man. I would give anything for Albert to be
with me just now in this present state of affairs. lam
that bad, that I can hardly turn my head; never mind,
must bear it patiently, for it is always best, as the song
says, “to take things in a quiet sort of way.” The deck
won’t see me for the next two or three days. There are
plenty of books in the library, and have I not pens, ink,
and paper? We have made a good start again since


yesterday, our run being 180 miles. Lat., 57° 50' 8. '
long., 111° 38' W. ; course, N. 46 E.; variation used,
22° E. ; wind, N. 2 W., N. 7 W., N. 6 W. Force as
yesterday; weather, a pleasant breeze, and fine throughout
the .day. Barometer, 29-10, 29-19, 29-24; temperature,
54°, 48°, 52°. The boatswain caught a “ Molly Hawk,”
he wanted it to feed his magpie with. “ Molly” was not
allowed to live long consequently.
March 5, Friday.— Away from Australia five weeks ;
to-day ; the days seem but as hours to me, everything
carried out so methodically and regularly. As I am
sitting (with Charles Dickens’ book “Hard Times” in my
hands), close by the saloon stove, my thoughts revert to
what I have seen and heard during the past twenty-one
years of my lifetime in my adopted country. I naturally
think of the Creek, and in looking over my diary for last
year, corresponding period, find “ I had a sore foot, and
remained at the Creek all day in consequence of the rain.”
And that day is vividly brought back lo my memory, as
on the previous day I had been in the forest with dear
Albert. It appears that my foot got sore through walking
on Wednesday to town to give my lessons, which was to
no purpose, it being regatta day. I was walking home
again, when at the Highton road John Cantwell picked
me up. I wonder, as I see the two eats on board romping
about, how Binks and Toss get along, and if they have,
together with Jerry (the poor man) missed pie. My
cockatoo keeps well, but does not talk, and is not likely
to until I have handed him over to my sister, Mrs.
Wilson. Black and white porpoises were reported to be
in shoals outside, but I would not leave “ below ” —my
infirmity is quite bad enough for the present. I would
take a hot salt-water bath, but the “ ocean spray ” sea
is very heavy, making our “iron-girt home” roll as if
intoxicated, the spray constantly dashing over the bul-


warks ; but for all that, the weather is fine, and the
breeze is pleasant, and “ progress ” on our right course is
reported. The lat. being 56° 40' S.; lon., 108° 34 W.;
course, N. 51 E.; distance, 124 miles ; variation used,
22° E.; wind, N. 6 W., N. 5 W.; barometer, 29-43,
29 - 60, 29-76; temperature, 54°, 52°, 54°; 4,394 miles
from Australia.
March 6, Saturday. —High sea running, brisk breeze,
requiring good sea legs for those anxious to promenade
Mount Misery. As I possess no sea legs cannot avail
myself of the inducement to go on deck “ only for a look.”
Even if I had I would not go with the remains of the
rheumatic attack about me. My shoulder is somewhat
relieved of pain, but what remains is gravitating towards
the right side, and is very sensitive. My right hand is
useful, however. I am, therefore, enabled to give this
brief epitome of the week’s proceedings. Lat., 55° 43' S.;
long., 102° 59' W.; course, N. 75 E.; distance run, 196
miles; variation, 22° E.; wind, N. 6 E.; force, close
hauled; barometer, 29-80, 29-85, 29-96 ; temperature, 52°,
53°, 55°.
March 7, Sunday. —ln consequence of the state of the
elements and heavy sea running, the “Loch Sloy ” is under
lower topsails only. There is a fresh spanking breeze, and
Our clipper ploughs her way through the briny ocean in a
befitting manner. No service this evening, weather not
permitting. Much better to-day, and went on the poop
for a short while with the captain and first officer ; they
lashed me to the port side, as the ship was on that tack.
The huge waves as they came dashing over the sides
reminded me of Paul in “ Dombey and Son ” asking his
sister, “ What are the wild waves saying ?” and I felt
inclined to ask them the same question. I enjoyed the
ocean scenery immensely, and smoked my pipe in peace,
and returned to my lodgings soon after. During the night


a fresh gale sprang up with hard squalls, and at 11 p.m.—
according to Mr. Lehman, chief officer—we passed a mass
of something to the southward having every appearance of
a large iceberg. Lat., 55° 58' S. ; long., 95° 49' W. ;
course, S. 86 E.; distance, 241 miles ; variation; 23° E. ;
wind, N. 5 W.; barometer, 29-95, 29-88, 29-55 ; the
temperature 58°, 58°, 56°.
March 8, Monday.— Weather similar to yesterday, but
still on our course ; rheumatics getting better. Lat., 55°
33' S.; long., 89° 39' N. ; course, N. 86 E. ; distance,
208 miles ; variation used, 23° E.; wind, N. 6 W., West,
S. 6 W.; barometer, 29-40, 29-30, 29-32; temperature,
56°, 59°, 54°. A rather humorous incident occurred
to-day. The Captain of late has shown signs of amended
health, and writes short legends on the cards he now
presents me with the day’s reckoning, such as “Go it old
girl, &c.” On the one to-day appeared, “The smallest
donation thankfully received.” Well, I cannot truthfully
say the same in one respect, and for a very good reason;
to wit: After dinner a heavy sea washed in through the
fort-holes of the stern—it appears they had not been
properly secured—albeit a lot of my music was sent floating
about in the saloon ; which required to be sponged and
dried after the waters had receded to their own proper
sphere. Fortunately the damage done is very trifling, and
of not any consequence, as the copies can easily be re-
placed.
March 9, Tuesday.— Weather a little more moderate,
nevertheless, we have a strong breeze, but accompanied
with fine weather. The rheumatic pains I have lately been
favoured with are not nearly so troublesome—the fruits of
remaining in bed, and adulterated water (whisky?). We
made a capital run to-day, as follows: In lat. 55° 25' S.;
long., 82° 57' W.; course, S. 86 E.; distance, 231 miles ;


variation, 24° E.; wind, S. 5 W., 8. 4 W., S. 3 W.; force,
top gallant sails over single reefs ; barometer, 29-34, 29 , 31,
29-37; temperature, 60°, 54°, 59°. Have been employ-
ing myself to-day with adding newspaper cuttings to my
scrap book, and much amused reading the interview
between the Herald reporter and Dr. Beaney on the latter
gentleman’s arrival from Europe in December. It appears
the worthy Doctor could get nothing to eat on his voyage
home, so he is by no means in favour of French
cookery, as on board the “ Messageries Imperiales ” mail
boats. “He would have been satisfied if he could have
obtained a good potato and butter.” Evidently he was
badly used and half starved, but then he should remember
that he was a native of perfidious Albion and not of La
Belle Prance. He says the saloon berths were occupied by
Messrs, les Anglais, the second class by his Gallic brethren.
I should very much like to have had the opportunity of
visiting my friend Dr. Beaney, who has ever forwarded my
interests, before I started on this “England” trip. I had
made an appointment to that effect, which would have
been kept had not the agents of this ship altered so
suddenly the date of sailing. I was in Sydney when the
worthy Doctor arrived, but on hearing of his arrival was
anxious to see him, and called at his residence on my
return to Melbourne, only to find he had just gone out, he
waited a few minutes thinking I would call, according to
the letter he had received from me dated Sydney. I was
long after the appointed hour as our steamer was placed in
quarantine at the particular hour, so on two occasions I
have been disappointed. When in Sydney I went over the
“Messageries” boat, and found everything to appearance
sake grand; the officers courteous. I believe I preferred
the manner of the Frenchmen to my own countrymen on
boord the Chimborazo, it certainly seemed a trouble for
the latter to answer civil questions, but then it was holiday
time. Of the three services, however, I came to the con-


elusion that the P. and 0. were the best boats, and had I
not known our worthy skipper would certainly have
made the voyage to Europe in one of them. “All is not
gold that glitters.” Visitors to the “Loch Sloy” in port are
attracted with the brilliant display of bright dish covers,
&c., &e., about the saloon, and would imagine meals were
served up in a grand style with finger glasses, snowy white
table cloths, &c., &e. Nothing of the kind; our food is plain
and wholesome (if I except the butter, which is fit only to
grease waggons with, after what I have eaten on the Creek).
We have no luxuries in the shape of wine, beer, etc., for
the reason, I believe, already mentioned—the ship’s crew
are, officers and men, Teetotal, or at least supposed to be,
and only take “spirit” as medicine ; nevertheless, all (save
the Captain) appear to enjoy good health. Mine has
invariably been so, barring my constitutional complaint.
Yes, I miss the Creek, even if only for the nice appearance
of the tablecloth and cutlery at all times. Of course, I can,
if I choose, have beer, wine, etc., by ordering it, but it is
not convenient to pay the prices demanded, and I can-
not drink by myself. En passant. Last report of our
position at sea says we may expect to round the Horn on
Friday. This is indeed “ glad tidings.”
March 10.—The weather has been variable throughout
the day. Barometer very low, and still falling. Last
night the Captain was on deck, and remained until 3 a.m.
to-day. As the bo’sun facetiously put it, the crew had
plenty of drilling, making all snug for the expected storm,
which up to the present hour, 10 a.m., has not yet made its
appearance, although everything just now assumes a
threatening aspect. Just now a ship is standing to the
N.W. under full top and lower top-gallant sails and courses.
She was lost sight of about 10.30, having been in our
company since 7 a.m. Very soon after we saw a barque
going the same way as ourselves, and speculation has been


raised as to whether this is the same barque that we saw
on our port bow at the commencement of this voyage, and
mentioned in the early pages of this journal. Our lat. to-
day is 56° 03' S.; long., 78° 29' W.; course, S. 61 E. ;
distance, 158 miles ; variation used, 24° E.; wind, S. 4 W.,
W., S. 6 W.; force, royals close hauled; barometer, 29-40,
20-07, 28-93; temperature, 60°, 63°, 58°. Coming into
the tracks of vessels is a sign that we are not far off the
land —Mr. Lehman calculates we shall make Diego Ramirez
Islands Friday morning, about 3 a.m., if the present
weather continues.
March 11, Thursday. —As usual, whenever the captain
takes a long spell on deck, it knocks him up ; he has
required to keep to his bed all the morning. This must be
very annoying to him, and not well calculated to keep him
in a contented state of mind. But he appears to accept
the inevitable, and bears his indisposition like a man ; so
he ought, having a fond wife to nurse and see after him.
Captain says he has never been tormented with so much
“laying up" in all his knowledge of a sea life—he does not
use these words exactly, but in a literal sense they are cor*
rect. To a more pleasant topic. “ Gaily goes the ship
when the winds blow fair.” Yes, indeed. The log records
201 miles to-day. We have had, in the first and middle
parts, “ strong breezes, with drizzling rain, and towards-
the end strong gales, with occasional hard hail squalls.”
The latitude is 56° 25' S.; long., 72° 36' W.; the course,.
S. 75 E.; variation, 24° E.; wind, W., S. 6 W., W.; force,,
close-reefed topsails and courses; barometer, 28-88, 28’75,
28-66; temperature, 54°, 56°, 51°.
March 12, Friday.— At 2.30 a.m., Borland, an appren-
tice, called me, by request of the chief officer, to come on
deck and see the “ Ramirez ” Islands. The roaring of the
sea and wind was something terrific. “ The Diego Ramirez.


Islands were discovered by the Nodales in 1619, and so
named after their head pilot.” (I have been unable to
discover who the Nodales were, no one on board the ship
appearing to know, but I presume they were Portuguese or
Spanish navigators.) “ These islands are a cluster of
barren rocks, 18 leagues south-west from Cape Horn, and
extend north-west and south-east, four or five miles.
The channel between is entirely clear. There are three
principal isles, and many rocks above water. The centre
isle is the largest; it has tussec on it, but neither wood
nor water, and is frequented by various oceanic birds.
The second in size has a shingle beach, where a boat
may be. hauled up in safety, and there is enough good
water on the east side of the same island to supply
thirty men. A furious serf breaks on the west shore,
and sends a spray over the whole island.” (Captain
McLean tells me he has frequently witnessed this.) “ There
is no sheltered anchorage for a vessel. The western-
most rock is the highest, and is surrounded by several
small rocks, sufficiently elevated for birds and seals.
Around the rocks the water is bold within a cable’s length;
and in clear weather a ship may safely run for them in the
night by keeping a good look out. The highest point is
about 200 feet from the level of the sea. On the east side
is a depth of 30 fathoms, with a bottom of fine green sand.
The tide of flood here runs to the N.E., and apparently to
the Eastward among many of the main islands, the tops of
the hills showing above the water and broken through by
thesea.” Atnoon we passed Cape Horn. Our course is N. 87°
E.; distance, 187 miles; variation used, 24° E.; direction
of wind, S. 2 W., S 6 W.; barometer, 28 , 80, 28 , 84, 28-86;
temperature, 56°, 54°, 56°. Cape Horn is the southernmost
point of the south of the Hermit islands. There is nothing
very striking in the appearance of this promontory as seen
from a distance, but on passing near it, it is more remark-
able, showing high black cliffs towards the south, and is


about 500 feet above the level of the sea. Its summit is
in lat., 53° 58' 40" S.; long., 67° 16' 10" W. “ Cape Horn,
or more properly Hoorn was named by Le Maire, and
Schouten in 1616, in honour of the town of Horne, or Hoorn
in West Friesland, on the Zuyder Zee, near Amsterdam of
which the patron was a native,” Kroig Austral de la Maire.
“ Cape Horn was but little known till Captain Fitzroy’s
surveys.” Captain Cook said “In some charts
Cape Horn is laid down as belonging to a small island.
This was neither confirmed nor can it be contradicted by
us, for several breaks appeared on the coast both to the
east and west of it; and the hazy weather rendered
every object indistinct. The surveying expedition under
Captain P. P. King landed on the Cape on the 20th April,
1830, and erected a pile of stones eight feet high over a
memorial of their visits. Off the east point of Horn
Island are some rocks and breakers, and one njile to the
westward of Cape Horn there are thin rocks generally above
water, the sea always breaks on them. Between Horn
Island and Hermit Island is St. Francis Bay; it is clear of
obstruction and has no other dangers than those indicated
in the late surveys and marked on the charts. A strong
current sets at times along the outer coast of the Hermit
Islands, and through the bay of St. Francis; it varies from
half a knot to two knots an hour, according to the wind and
time of the tide, and in the bay changes its direction with
the change of tide.” .... I now leave Cape Horn
to its fate (whatever that may mean), being heartily glad
that “we have rounded the corner” as my excellent friend
Mr. Wier, the third officer, remarks. Much gratitude is
due to the “Owner of the ocean” for taking us into His
watchful care the past 42 days, and I pray most fervently
He will still vouchsafe His kindness and loving mercy
towards us to the remainder of the voyage. In Te Domine
Speravi. Preparations have begun regarding “cleansing
and painting” so as to have a smart appearance when we


reach home. It is six weeks, my friends of the Creek,
since I saw you last, being 5,806 miles from Australia.
The direct course is 5,500 miles but we were blown out of
it, you will perceive, 806 miles and more. lam quite well
in health but low in spirits, not having a drop left, finished
all I had in rounding “Cape Horn and all its terrors.” I
must raise some on St. Patrick’s day, 17th inst., it won’t
be long. To-morrow (Saturday) is the day for taking
supplies. So you see, dear friends, though you are out of
sight you are not out of mind. I trust all of you are well.
This time last year I walked to the Creek, having been to
Melbourne the previous day to see Mr. Charles Sykes and
Mr. Anderson, organ builder. It is recorded in last year’s
diary I stayed over night at my pupil’s (Mr. Marront) so
there. On Sunday next I shall open your large case of
fruit —not the “children’s present.” The first lot all
done. A mournful affair took place in the afternoon.
Mrs. McLean’s cockatoo, “ No Name,” died in the saloon
about 4 o’clock ; complaint, indigestion. As the bird had
not left any will, or means to bury him “ dacently,” and
being a professed atheist and scorner he was committed to
the deep without any religious ceremony being used
at his obsequies ; no doubt, by this time, he has found his
way into the maw of an albatross or other oceanic bird;
there may he “ Eequiescat in pace.” Writing about birds,
there was a wild duck flying over the ship about 12.30
to-day. I should not have noticed the fact, only it seemed
singular that only one appeared. We have all along the,
voyage been accompanied by albatrosses, petrels, molly
hawks, Cape Horn pigeons, when the weather has been
clear—l suppose they rest on the billows in fogs or stormy
weather —that it is scarcely worth while to record them
every day, more especially as this book is not written for
meteorological purposes. The captain was on deck during
the day, but in the evening he was taken bad again requir-
ing him to retire to his cabin for a while. He got better


latter on. Being completely worn out with the day, being
up early in the morning, I retired to bed at 9 p.m.
Maech 18, Saturday.— This morning Capt. McLean
entered my sleeping apartment before Steward brought my
early “pick-me-up.” “Staten Island” in view, he said,
and Cape St. John also, but too far off to make any reliable
sketch, so I did not turn out on deck, but peeped
through the port-hole. As the place is considered of
importance to navigators requiring shelter I abridge a
few remarks from Capt. McLean’s book, known as “ A
Directory for the Navigation of the South Pacific Ocean,”
by Alexander Geo. Findlay, F.R.G.S.: —“Staten Island
was so named by Schoaben, Jan. 25, 1616, in honour of
the States of Holland, and was surveyed by Lieutenant
Kendall in 1828, of H.M.S. ‘ Chanticleer.’ It is 38
miles in extent from Cape St. John to the E.N.E. and
Cape St. Bartholomew to the W.S.W. The island is
extremely mountainous and rugged, being composed of a
series of lofty and precipitous hills (2,000 ft. and 8,000 ft.
in height) clothed nearly to their snowy tops with forests
of evergreen beech trees, besides a host of minor plants.
The low ground is extremely swampy and boggy.” Lieut.
Kendall says that the cold of these regions is a fable, and
at variance with truth and nature. I may here remark
that I felt the cold, with few exceptions, so much as I
did in Australia, the extra warm clothing I brought with
me need not have been obtained. I have, at all events,
not availed myself of its use so much as I was led to
believe, but then I don’t go out on the deck on “cold
days,” and that makes all the difference, so Mr. Birnie, the
second officer remarks. To resume, “at Cape Horn in
Lat. 56° S., vegetation was in full vigour in May, or the
November of their year, and snow rarely lies upon the
low grounds. In fact, we have sufficient matter to eluci-
date the climate of the south, and to establish its


comparative mildness with the north, especially if America
be taken as the example. The summers of the south are
by no means warm or hot, nor winters cold; but to
compensate for this it is the region of wind, storms
and rain, perpetual gales, and eternal rains—never
24 hours without rain. It is the Court of Eolus.
The barometric pressure is low, the mean being 29 - 32
inches, the winds almost westerly, electric phe-
nomena extremely rare. The climate of Staten Island
is extremely humid, and very few days can be passed
there in the course of the year without rain, and it is
rather remarkable that however fine the weather may
have been in the course of the day some rain generally
falls at night. Rain, however, is frequent there in all
seasons of the year, and the sky is generally over-
cast. Thunder and lightning are scarcely known. The
temperature may be considered equally low, and varying
little throughout the year. Frost is not very severe, nor
very common in winter. The weather during the summer
is cool, but still humid; and, as a general characteristic,
may be considered boisterous, unsettled, wet and dull.
Vegetation lingers slowly in its summer’s blossom and is
not nipped by the severity of the winter’s frost. Easterly
winds are most prevalent in the winter months. . . .
Cape St. John is the easternmost part of Staten Island.
It is high and precipitous, and a heavy tide-rip extends
from it 5 or 6 miles to seaward, setting at the rate of
6 miles an hour to the N.N.E. with flood and S.S.E.
with the ebb, but the tide sets along-shore, both on the
north and south, from east to west from 3f or 4 to 2 or 2£
miles an hour. St. John’s Harbour lies within the pro-
montory of Cape St. John, on the west. It is free from
danger, surrounded by high land, and its general depths
are from 25 to 20 fathoms decreasing towards either shore.
From the entrance the harbour curves in a S.W. direction
to the extent of miles, but is little more than half a


mile broad. The hills of the promontory on its eastern
side are 800 or 900 feet high, and at its head on the south-
west is a remarkable elevation now known as Mount
Richardson. Wood and water are plentiful and easily
procured, celery and wild fowl may also be obtained, and
in the proper season, October, penguins’ eggs may be
ensured by having men in attendance at a rookery about a
mile to the eastward of the harbour’s mouth. The shores
of S,t. John’s Harbour are lined with kelp, which is an
excellent indication of its navigable part, the border of it
being almost invariably in 8 fathoms, and that close to the
shore, the depth rapidly increasing towards the centre
until near the head of the harbour where the depth
gradually decreases to the beach. To the southward of
Staten Island but little amount of tide is perceptible
there is, however, a remarkable undertone, which renders
it dangerous for boats to stretch across the mouths of the
deep bays, as it is difficult to close again with the land, for
which reason the sealers invariably follow the circuitous
route of the shores.” ... We are making for the
Falkland Islands, if possible, so as to avoid the ice drifts
and are just now (4 p.m.) in what may be termed shallow
water, the dark blue colour of the sea having changed to a
green. The depth is not greater than 60 fathoms. It was
close to here, “Burdwood’s bank,” that Captain John
Erskine in the “ Loch Shiel ” met with a mishap about 7
years ago. It appears that owing to the cargo of his ship
(wheat) having become shifted, a sudden gust of wind um
expectedly threw her on her beam ends, requiring all the
energy and tact of her skilful commander and officers to
get her righted. That their efforts were crowned with
success is evidence of much strategy. lam told the wind
is very treacherous in that quarter; sudden changes of fre-
quent occurrence. Penguins have been seen close to the
ship, and, just before the tea-bell rang, a grampus was
observed. lam finishing this writing at 11 p.m. We


have had our usual game of dominoes, and all is quiet and
at rest, excepting those whose duty it is to keep watch.
Lat., 54° 49' S.; long., 62° 29' W.; course, N. 67 E. ;
distance, 170 miles; variation, 20° E.; direction of the
wind, 8. 4 W., all day; force : first, close hauled ; second,
top-gallant sails over single reefs ; third, close hauled. The
weather has been moderate, strong, and hazy through-
out. Barometer, 28-88, 28-76, 28-68 ; temperature, 56°,
all day. The bell has just struck 11.30, and the watch
reported “All’s welland so I finish the day’s proceed-
ings by retiring to my very inviting bed, with its clean
clothes, after smoking a pipe of fragrant weed.
Makch 14, Sunday.—Off the Falkland Islands 28 miles,
Sea Lion Islands 82 miles, Beauclere Islands 12 miles,
Stanley Harbour 80 miles to leeward. They were very
indistinct, and impossible, owing to the haze, to sketch
them. Lat., 52° 59'; long., 58° 29' W.; course, N. 55 E.;
distance, 180 miles; variation, 19° E.; direction of the wind,
N. 3 W., N. 5 W., N. 4 W.; force as yesterday; barometer,
28-74, 28-77, 28-77; temperature, 56°, 68°, 54°. In con-
sequence of Captain being still unwell “Divine Service
not performed.” However, I read the Epistle and Gospel
for the Ist Sunday in Lent privately. Mason, a boy
working his passage home, taken bad with pains in leg.
Myself quite well.
Some Account of the Falkland Islands.
The Falkland Islands, situate between 51° and 52° 30'
south latitude and 57° 30' and 61° 81' west longitude,
consist of two principal islands, the East and West Falk-
land, with a considerable number of others of different
sizes, clustered around them and in the space between
them. The greatest length of East Falkland is about
95 miles, the greatest breadth about 53 miles. The West
Falkland is about 80 miles in length, and varies very


much in width, but 40 miles may be considered the
greatest. The other islands number 200, and vary con-
siderably, from 16 by 8 miles to mere islets of half a mile
in diameter. They were discovered on Aug. 14, 1592, by
John Davis, the prior claim of Americus Vespucius being
discredited. See page 272 “ South Atlantic Directory,”
1888. (Findlay.) Sir Richard Hawkins sailed along the
northern shores of these islands in 1594, and he,
ignorant of Davis’s discovery, named them Hawkins’s
Maiden Land. Strong sailed through and anchored in
the channel, which he named Falkland Sound. This was
in 1690. On Jan. 23, 1765, they were taken possession
for the British Crown by Commodore Byron, and Captain
Macßride, in H.M.S. “Jason,” began their colonisation
January, 1766, landing at Port Egmont. In 1770 the
colony was attacked by the Spaniards, and obliged to
surrender, but was soon after restored by the Spanish
Government. The colony was, however, forsaken in 1774,
but the signals of possession were left flying. The islands
then remained uninhabited and unclaimed until the month
of November, 1820, when Commodore Jewett, then com-
manding the “ Heroine ” frigate, took possession in the
name and by the authority of the United Provinces of
South America, otherwise Buenos Ayres. In 1828 Don
Louis Vernet obtained from this Government the fishery
and cattle on the eastern island, and land for a settlement.
In 1828 Vernet was granted the right of property in the
Falkland Islands and in Staten land, with entire and sole
right to all its soil, cattle, horses, hogs, &c., &c. The
total number of persons on the islands then consisted of
about one hundred, including twenty-five Guachos, hunters
of South America (famous for their horsemanship and for
the use of the lasso), and five Carruas Indians. There
were two Dutch families, three Englishmen, a German
family, and the remainder Spaniards and Portuguese. In
1829-Vernet warned off some North American sealers;


and in 1881, upon their repeating the sealing excursion,
of which he had complained, he detained them by force.
This drew upon him the hasty indignation of Capfain Silas
Duncan, of the United States corvette “ Lexington,” who,
on his own responsibility, surprised, assaulted, and made
prisoners of many unoffending people, besides destroying
their property and buildings. This created a discussion
between the United States and Buenos Ayres. In the
meantime Great Britain issued orders to the Commander-
in-Chief on the South American Station to re-assert her
sovereignty of the Palklands, which was accordingly done
by Commodore Onslow, in H.M.S. “ Clio,” hoisting the
Bristish flag at Port Louis, while at the same time H.M.S.
“ Tyne ” anchored in Port Egmont, on the western island.
Having proclaimed the Falklands as belonging to Britain,
they departed, leaving the charge of the flag to an Irish-
man who had been Vernet’s storekeeper. In March, 1883,
Captain Fitzroy (afterwards Admiral), in the “ Beagle,”
anchored in Berkeley Sound. He found the island in a
very disordered state, from the want of government. The
whole colony was a miserable ruin, caused by the
“ Lexington’s ” visit, and Captain Fitzroy left the islands
with dismal forebodings, from the disordered state of
society, and these were exceeded by the sad reality. Eight
Guachos and Indians of bad character, on Aug. 26, 1883,
attacked and brutally murdered Mr. Brisbane, who had
returned as the Agent for Mr. Vemet’s private affairs (the
latter being at the time in Buenos Ayres), and four other
principal persons; after which, they pillaged the houses
and plundered the place of whatever it contained, and
drove off all the cattle and horses up the country, laden
with their booty. Thirteen unarmed men, three women,
and two children remained in the town two days with the
murderers, and then escaped to one of the islands in the
bay, where, until relieved by the English sealer “Hopeful,”
they lived upon birds, eggs, and fish. The murderers were


subsequently taken, and sent to Buenos Ayres. On March
10, 1884, Captain Fitzroy again visited Berkeley Sound,
the settlement looked more gloomy than ever, and not far
from the house where he had lived they found, to their
horror, the feet of poor Brisbane protruding above ground.
So shallow was his grave that dogs had disturbed his mortal
remains, and had fed upon his corpse. This was the fate of
an industrious, honest, and most faithful man ... In
1834 Lieut. Henry Smith, E.N., was appointed Governor,
and Berkeley Sound was fixed upon as head-quarters. On
August 23, 1841, Lieut. E. C. Moody, E.N., was appointed
Lieut.-Governor, and arrived in Port Louis, January 15,
1842. He endeavoured to develop the resources of the
Falkland Islands by his energy with some success, and
removed the seat of government to Stanley Harbour. The
principal feature in the recent progress of the Falkland
Islands is the occupation of a portion of the East Falk-
lands by a commercial company, who purchased a Mr.
Samuel F. Lafone’s interest in 1851, for the sum of
£30,000, in order “ to turn the advantages of the islands
and their herds of wild cattle to greater account.” In
1874, the whole of the available land for grazing passed
into the hands of private individuals. The population of
the Falklands was in 1881 1,543, as compared with 950 in
1872, the .islands of any size now being all inhabited. The
whole of the Falkland Islands is deeply and variously in-
dented by sounds, bays, harbours, creeks, and inlets. This
formation diminishes the area considerably. The area of
East Falkland is computed at about 3,000 square miles ;
that of West Falkland at about 2,000 square miles, and
with the surrounding islands the whole group contains
6,000 square miles. These islands, by their geographical
position, are of the greatest importance to the mercantile
world. A small detachment of British troops, under the
command of an officer, is stationed in the settlement to
aid the Governor in its local administration, and it is the


duty of the admiral of the station to visit the colony
periodically for the protection of commerce, etc. The
principal harbour is at Stanley, where ships can be provided
much cheaper than at any of the ports in South America,
besides affording protection and opportunity for the repair-
ing of injuries sustained by shipping passing in the vicinity
of Cape Horn, where a large amount of annual injury is
done by severe weather than in any other locality. In
their general aspect these islands have few features of
interest to remark upon. The southern portions of the
East Falkland are so low that they are hardly perceptible
from the deck of a ship at five miles distance. The westerli
island is more marked, some of the hills being between
2,000 and B,oooft. above the level of the sea. There are
no trees upon these islands, and only two or three varieties
of shrubs from one to eight feet in height. What they term
the tea plant ( Myrtus nwmmuralia) is abundant, the leaves
being used to make a decoction somewhat similar to tea.
The berry of this shrub is of a rose colour, and the flavour
is appreciated. Celery (an excellent antiscorbutic) grows
in wild luxuriance, and European vegetables thrive well
wherever they have been tried. Cereals have been grown,
but do not ripen for want of sufficient sun. Peat exists of
good quality everywhere, and is used for fuel. Cattle and
sheep thrive remarkably well. In 1879, the value of the
wool exported was £56,440. There is a lighthouse at the
eastern extremity of the East Falkland, which makes the
splendid harbour of Stanley accessible by night or day.
These islands have no native inhabitants or wild animals
•of any kind. Water fowl of many sorts are abundant,
affording both amusement and good eating. Fish are very
abundant in the creeks, and fresh water is plentiful upon
the two large islands. The country in the northern part
of the East Island is rather mountainous. Nearly the
highest part, called St. Simon, 1,600 ft., is at no great
distance from the bottom of Berkeley Sound. Of rivers


there are but few in these islands, the largest one known
being the San Carlos. The highest peak in West Falkland
is Mount Adam, 2,315 ft. in the north-west part of the
island. One of the most remarkable of the plants that
grow on the Falklands is the tussac; it is a gigantic, sedgy
grass ; the average length of the blade is seven feet, and of
the stack four to six feet. The plants grow in bunches
close together, and as many as 260 roots spring up from
one bunch. It grows with great luxuriance on the coasts,
down to high water mark, and cattle and horses feed upon
it with the greatest avidity and speedily become fat. About
three or four inches of the roots are very agreeable to man,
being crisp and of a nutty flavour, and was the food of two
Americans who were upon the Western Islands for fourteen
months. The only approach to a tree is the Falkland
Islands box, a species of veronica, which grows to a height,
perhaps, three feet, and affords no protection to man or
beast. Regarding the climate, in a report/furnished by
Governor Robinson, 1868, he says:—“ The climate, though
disagreeable, on account of the high winds that usually
prevail, is exceedingly healthy. In summer the wind rises
in the morning, blows hard during the middle of the day,
and falls away in the afternoon. On a calm day the sun
has considerable power, but at other times the heat is
neutralized by the strong keen wind, and it is only here
and there in sheltered nooks that grain can be ripened, or
European flowers brought to any perfection. In winter
the wind is less boisterous than in summer; were this
not so, the cold from May to September would be unen-
durable.”
The lighthouse, already mentioned, is at Cape Pembroke,
and is an iron tower 60 feet high, painted in red and white
bands, which shows a fixed, bright light in all directions
seaward, at an elevation of 110 feet, visible 14 miles.
Stanley Harbour, the seat of Government, is on the
south side of Port William, from which place a mail leave's


every six weeks for England, vid Monte Video, arriving in
about forty days, so that vessels can report themselves,
and there is now the advantage of telegraphic com-
munication from Monte Video to England. Stanley is a
free port. Water, by ships’ boats from reservoir, 2s. 6d.
per ton; ditto, 12s 6d. per ton, delivered alongside in
harbour, under five tons 165.; ditto, delivered outside the
harbour, 20s. per ton. Ballast, free by ships’ boats, or
supplied at 7s. per ton. Vegetables, Id. to per lb.
Fresh mutton and beef, Id. per lb. Steam coals, 60s. per
ton. All kinds of ships’ chandlery are supplied on reason-
able terms by the Falklands Company, which also under-
takes shipping repairs, having a diving apparatus, means
for heaving down, and hulks to receive cargo, discharging
by steam if required.
The Seal Eocks lie about three-quarters of a mile north-
east from Cape Pembroke, and are clean on all sides. The
tide runs north and south about three knots between Cape
Pembroke and Seal Eocks, the flood setting to the north-
ward and the ebb to the southward.
The Beauchene Islands lie about 21 miles to the south-
ward of the East Falklands and are uninhabited; they were
discovered in 1699 by Beauchosne, a French navigator.
The Burdwood Bank is above 250 miles in length from
west to east, and extends on the parallel of Staten Islands
nearly to longitude 55° W. The least depth of water,
according to Captain Sir James Boss, is 24 fathoms, over a
narrow ridge of volcanic rock, lying nearly east and west,
the soundings rapidly increase in depth on either side of
the ridge, which consists of coarse sand, small stones, and
shells. The colour of the sea was observed to be of a deep
brown over the banks, some dark patches of seaweed (we
saw some also “Loch Sloy”) were seen as it was ap-
proached, and the line of the bank was marked by a rough
ripple on the surface. Ten miles to the northward the
depth was 80 fathoms on fine black sand, and 80 miles


farther to the north there was no bottom with 800
fathoms. —Sir James Boss, Yol. 1., pp. 281, 315.
March 15, Monday.— Poor “ Joker,” my cockatoo died
this morning. lam disappointed thereat, as I expected he
would have amused the children of my sister, Mrs. Wilson
—“ blessed are they that expect nothing, for they shall not
be disappointed.” The poor bird was lowered to his watery
grave when all was quiet, in fact, his proprietor knew not
of his decease until long after the funeral. For sanitary
reasons, I presume, he was shifted overboard without my
being consulted. I find also, that my ferns that I had
brought with me, for my old schoolmaster’s daughter, are
not thriving, in fact I believe are dead. lam sorry that I
did not undertake the seeing after them, and my bird
myself. It is time that 1 should adopt the plan “ when you
want a thing done do it yourself.” It does seem strange
that my “ Joker” and Mrs. McLean’s “No Name” should
depart this life, and others thrive ; but verb. sap. The
steward has been mad with toothache for some time past,
and all remedies tried of no avail. He came to me for a
clay pipe, and smoked tobacco, this pastime allayed the
pain for a while, but not effectually. There are no foreceps
on board!! This handy instrument would soon set matters
to rights. It is a great oversight, or neglect, call it what you
will on the part of the agents, or those in authority to allow
a vessel to “ clear out ” without a thorough inspection of
the medical stores, and surgical appliances. Is there no
government official to look after this I would ask? “Poor”
Gillispie, a lad on board the “ Avalanche ” the ship I went
to Australia in the year 1864, just one week before we
arrived in Hobson’s Bay, fell from the fore royal yard
across the starboard bow anchor, and broke both his legs.
There were no splints on board, the carpenter had to im-
provise the best way he could, but when Gillispie arrived
in the Melbourne Hospital, it was discovered the splints


were improperly made, bandages too tight, etc., and the
surgeons could do nothing for the patient. Some severe
strictures were passed by the medical officers and represen-
tations of their views were sent to the proper persons. Of
course Gillispie died, and the matter ended. Had the lad
been a son of anyone of notoriety, probably the “Black Ball
Bine” would have been mulcted in civil damages. As it
was each one who had any responsibility in the matter
endeavoured to shift the burden on to some one else’s
shoulders. General Gordon was quite at home in his views
of a certain set of officers he hated, viz.—Captains “ I told
him to do it,” “ I am going to do it,” “I thought you were
going to do it,” and a host of others. How applicable are
these views in many instances of our lives, and have we
not at times been faulty. “Never ask others to do for you
what you can easily do for yourself.” In nine cases out of ten
jou are bound to be disappointed. Ominous words the
following, are they not? A strong breeze, with heavy
weather throughout the day. Lat., 50° 22' S.; long., 54°
11' W.; course, N. 61 E.; distance, 281 miles; variation,
17° B.; wind, S. 5 W., N. 4 W., N. 2 W.; force, top-gallant
sails over single reef; barometer, 29-00, 29-13, 29-80;
temperature, 57°, 56° and 55°. Ship rolling very much.
March 16, Tuesday. —The ship to-day, owing to a head-
wind, off her course. This is the anniversary of Capt.
John McLean’s thirtieth birthday, and he was paid by the
officers and myself the usual compliment after a luxurious
dinner; to wit, roast goose (forestalled with giblet soup),
baked shoulder of mutton, red currant and raspberry tart,
blancmange, jellies, Freshwater Creek preserved gooseberry,
apples, Barcelona nuts, Geelong almonds, Creek walnuts,
cakes (plain and plum), liqueurs, cordials, and lemon
water. I proposed the health of the captain, as my drink
was stronger than any one else’s. Referring to Capt.
McLean, I hope to give some account of his bravery in the


Gulf of Mexico, whereby he gained the Royal Humane
Society's medal, further on. The high head sea, causing
the ship to plunge frequently and take in quantities of
water over the bows, prevents anything like writing more
than is necessary, the sudden lurchings upsetting every-
thing, and myself too. Cape hens, ice birds, Mother Carey’s
chickens, flying about. A whale reported 1 p.m., lat.,
49° 16' S. ; long., 51° 11' W.; course, N. 61 E.;
distance, 135 miles ; variation, 16° E.; wind, N. 2 W.,
N. 1 W., N. IE.; force, as yesterday; barometer, 29 - 81,
29 , 86, 29-22 ; temperature, 56°, 58°, 56°. On enquiry, the
boy Mason better from turpentine application.
Maech 17, Wednesday (St. Patrick's Day). —At 7 a.m.
played the immortal Saint’s ode as well as I could under
the circumstances. A hepd sea again, making the “Loch”
ship immense quantities of water. Had no sleep last
night, and to-day has been sent to the right about, so far
as my attempting to do much avec mes mains. Not having
much appetite had for breakfast fresh Creek eggs. I find
them preferable to those for ship’s use. Mrs. McLean
remarks “ they are beautiful.” Spent most of my time in
the bunk reading Thackeray’s “ Christmas Stories.” I
never read anything so truthful and approaching any
schoolboy’s days as his story of Dr. Birch. The log
report is—lat., 48° 31' S.; long., 50° 16' W.; course,
N. 40 E.; distance, 59 miles ; variation, 14 E.; wind,
N. 2 W., N. 3 W., N. 2 W.; force, three reefs in topsails,
first part, fresh breeze ; middle part, fresh gale and hard
squalls ; latter part, strong gales with very heavy squalls ;
barometer, 29-07, 28-97, 29-98 ; temperature, 58°, 59°, 56°,
Mason, on enquiry, says “ he is better.”
March 18, Thursday.— The horribly disagreeable swell
of the sea has kept me to my bunk almost all day. I
thought the “experience” recorded by me in this diary.


dated Feb. 26, was sufficient, but what we are getting just
now puts that quite into the shade. Cannot eat anything,
amuse myself with reading Oliver Goldsmith’s “Traveller.”
lam very fond of “Noll’s” writing. I seem to have the
same feeling as he must have had in his struggles with the
world. I managed to sleep for an hour in the afternoon,
and felt much better, so I perused an instructive account
of Capt. Toynbee’s researches among oceanic animalcules,
on a voyage from London to Calcutta, in the ship
“ Glorianna,” 1857. In it I found much that was interest-
ing, and shall endeavour to follow out the idea how to
improvise a telescope so as to be of service as a microscope
when we are in the tropics and among luminous seas.
Lat., 46° 57' S.; long., 47° 59' W.; course, N. 39 E.;
distance, 143 miles; variation, 13° E. ; wind, N. 1 W.,
N. 4 W., N. 5 W.; force, close reefed maintopsail and
reefed foresail; weather, first part, strong gale with terrific
squalls, attended with hail and rain; middle and latter part,
fresh gale and hard rain squalls—no Thursday “ Service of
Prayer ” in consequence—barometer, 28-87, 28-98, 29-20;
temperature, 56°, 54°, 64°. Mason, the boy, at work
again. Chamberlain taken bad ; he got pills to commfenee
with.
March 19, Friday.— Beautiful day. Had laot water bath
and fresh change, and much refreshed. Quite an agreeable
contrast from yesterday. Everybody on board the ship
appears to be busy washing and preparing for the
tropics. We hope to be in summer weather next week.
Nothing of any consequence occurred to-day. A whale was
seen by the second officer. Regarding the sick list,
Chamberlain better; steward recovered; boatswain com-
plained of pains in his stomach about 7.80 p.m., and was
prescribed 40 drops of laudanum then, and to be repeated
at 12 p.m. ; apprentice Hill told me he was “slightly sick,”
I recommended castor oil and a black draught, the poor


Doy was thankful but said he could manage without, so I
gave him some apples, and he smiled. Lat., 44° 17' S.;
long., 45° 14' W.; course, N. 36 E.; distance, 197 miles;
variation, 5° E.; wind, N. 5. W., N. 2 W., N. 1 W.; force,
three reefs in topsails, afterwards royals close hauled;
weather, generally fine; barometer, 29-50, 29-62, 29-77;
temperature, 56°, 58°, 56°. Seven weeks from Creek.
Hope all are quite well there.
March 20, Saturday.— The nomadic seas rose up again
after I retired to bed, and a rolling motion has lasted all
day, preventing anything like business transactions being
attempted by the officers and crew regarding commencing
work in scraping, cleaning, &c. I had a good overhaul of
my state room and removed many of the heavy boxes into
another room—the smell of fruit in a sleeping apartment on
board ship is not pleasant in hot weather, which just now
regarding temperature is mild, although we have been
favoured, with drizzling rain, overcast .sky, and strong
breezes at intervals. Lat., 43° 52' S.; long., 42° 15' N.;
course, 67 E.; variation, 2°E.; wind, N., N. 1 E., N. 3 W.;
force, close hauled; barometer, 29-73, 29-58, 29-25; tem-
perature, 58°, 63°, 59°; distance, 182 miles. Sick list:
Boatswain mending, to have a decoction of brandy and
chlorodyne; Hill recovered. Yesterday 6,921 miles from
Australia.
March 21, Sunday (Second Day in Lent). —My dear
little niece Marion, who wrote me such a pretty letter,
sending me a birthday present last year, is ten years of
age to-day. God bless her ! In honour of the occasion,
I am celebrating it on board with what material there
is available. The dinner was everything that could be
desired, and consisted of fresh meats, fish, and fowl,
including Freshwater Creek preserves, and an excellent
plum-pudding, flanked with almonds, raisins, nuts, apples,


with suitable liquids. In the morning I played the whole
of the Twelfth Mass and Schumann’s Birthday March.
Evening service was held after tea, but very few of the
crew were present. The discourse after prayer was appro-
priate to the “ condition of all men,” and illustrated how
a mutiny was quelled through the efficacy of a missionary
leaving tracts on board that particular vessel, the name of
which, however, did not transpire. The mutineers, before
putting their evil intentions into execution, got hold of
some of the good man’s literary effusions, by which means
they all became “new men” except the cook! Now on
board this ship our cook has an unfortunate habit of
stringing sanguinary adjectives and nouns to anything
that goes wrong in his culinary avocations—good fellow
that he is, nevertheless; and as all present were listening
with breathless anxiety as to the result of the mutiny the
captain was reading about, a certain smile was percept-
ible —very —as Mr. Jingle, in “ Pickwick,” would have
observed, when the finale concluded, “ All were saved
except the cook.” Then eyes were slily turned towards
our galley slave, as if he were the wretched being. I
could scarcely refrain from laughing outright, in conse-
quence of the emphasis the reader used upon those never-
to-be-forgotten words; it seemed so striking. lam told
our only lady attendant at the service was seen to smile;
suffice it to say, I will not voucn for the accuracy of the
act, as I did not lift my eyes from the prayer-book I was
using. It is to be hoped, nevertheless, that the mutinous
cook found grace in the hereafter. The weather has been
variable, with “ strong breezes and fine.” Lat., 40° 40' S.;
long., 38° 29' W.; course, N. 32 E. ; distance, 228 miles;
variation, 0°; wind, S. 4 W., S. 6 W.; force, close hauled ;
barometer, 29 - 42, 29 - 63, 29 - 64; temperature, 63°, 62°,
62°.
March 22, Monday. — We have had generally fine


weather all day, but the wind very unsteady both in force
and direction. Our lat., 87° 49' S.; long., 85° 48' W.;
course, N. 31 E.; distance, 213 miles; variation, 4-10°;
wind, south-westerly; barometer, 29-63, 29-80, 29-82;
temperature, 60° and 64°. There is a prevalence of “ Cape
Horn” fever about, Mr. Birnie, our second officer, re-
marked some few days ago. It continues to make its
appearance, scarcely a day passes but some of the crew
£ome aft to receive what medical aid can be afforded. Just
now two of the chief officer’s watch are in a horizontal
position in their bunks. No oceanic birds about, and the
perceptible swell of the sea, combined with warm atmos-
phere, makes one languid. Apprentice Hill lost overboard
the fishing line, and received a sea lecture for his cleverness.
The ship smells very much of tar, all available hands being
engaged in anointing the rigging with this useful com-
pound.
March 23, Tuesday. — l have neglected of late my usual
music practice, owing to the Captain’s illness ; he is now
almost as right as a “ trivet.” I have, therefore, made an
effort to commence again. The days pass away so quickly
that “ I scarcely know where I am,” to use an old saying.
’Tis a lovely day, and my heart rejoices at the prospect of
fine weather being continued. Can the leopard change his
skin ? No, but the white man can the colour of his—with
tar. To look at some of our crew you would imagine they
were of African descent. All they want, as cantankerous
old Spoopendyke would suggest, a barber to curl their
hair and anoint it with patent tar mixture. The healthy
perfume which exudes from the cold mixture used by our
A.B.’s, &c., is refreshing. Lat., 85° 42' S.; long., 34° 00'
W.; course, N. 34 E.; distance, 154 miles; variation,
6° W.; wind, S. 4 W.; force, from 6to 7 knots; weather,-
as already stated, with fine breeze; barometer, 29-88,
29-96, 30-00; temperature, 61°, 61°, 64°.


Maech 24, Wednesday. —Weather still continues favour-
able for ship cleaning. Fine weather, clothes of lighter
texture and head gear being worn for the first time. All
the men and boys (myself included) at work are barefooted,
with their legs much too far through their trowsers for
ordinary street attire, but we are on board ship, and there-
fore it does not signify. There is a fine display of calves, but
not for market purposes. The skysail yard has been sent
up by the apprentices, who aloft look like pigmies. I am
always glad when they come down, it “turns me” to look
at “em.” Another death to-day. The sailmaker and
undertaker lost his cockatoo—the cause of his leaving the
ship was that he pined for woods and groves. No funeral
service was said, as he hadn’t at the time of his decease a
feather to fly with. Lat., 84° 18' S.; long., 33° 00'W.;
course, N. 31 W.; distance, 98 miles; variation, 6° W.;
wind, S. 3 W., S. 4 E., E.; force, much the same as
yesterday, but off our direct line; weather, fine; barometer,
3004, 30 - 02, 30 - 00; temperature, 64°, 64°, 65°.
Maech 25, Thuesday.— Yet another death. Cape Horn
fever reaching, yea, verily, unto the birds of the air. The
steward lost a red cockatoo. As usual, not a feather to fly
with, and a watery grave; without a shroud, his fate. Last
evening we sighted a ship bound south, and a barque
steering same direction to-day as ourselves, but we are
leaving her very much behind. Mr. Rheumatics (I wish
he would die) intimated that he intended staying with me
for a few days, and accommodated himself in my right
shoulder leisurely, and without the slightest encourage-
ment, so I have to he down much against my grain, and
Albert comes to my recollection. All tarring operations
are concluded. During the first and middle parts of the
day weather has been fine, but the end was with a strong
breeze and hard rain squalls, this accounts for rheumatics.
1 told the Captain he was to expect a change, and it was


so. Lat., 31° 46' S.; long., 33° 10' W.; course, N. 3 W.;
distance, 153 miles; variation, 7° W.; wind, N. 7 E.,
N. 5 E., N. 6 E.; force, close hauled; barometer, 80-00,,
29-88, 29-70; temperature, 68°, 69°, 70°. Sheep killed.
March 26, Friday.— Nudis verbis novos amicos dum paras
veteres cole, which means in plain words, “whilst you seek
new friends take care to cultivate the old,” or, “do not
loose sight of old attachments for the sake of making new.”
How aptly these words apply to myself. Have I not the
dearest of all friends, my relatives, chief among them that
sacred name “Mother” in the Old World, to whom I am
returning after leaving for awhile many old attachments
formed in the New World? May the above quotation ever
be the guiding course of all that are true to themselves. I
have been away from the Creek two months to-day, and if
those in my adopted land are equally as healthy as myself
—barring rheumatics—then, .indeed, am I glad, more
especially those I have lately left, whom I trust God will
ever bless and reward. Flying-fish seen to-day, a sign we
are approaching to the south-east trade winds, which
introduces us to the tropics. My shoulder is easier, but I
am stretched out mostly on my back. The ship is rolling
on foaming billows, putting a stop to all work. I went on
deck early this morning to have a look, and got a jolly
good drenching from head to foot for my temerity. I had
to change everything, even my singlet, so I remained
below reading Thackerary’s adventures in Paris, and
Jeames de la Plush’s letters to London Punch. My friend,
Mr. Lehman hands me the following, with the latitude and
longitude, and distance supplied me by the Commander as
usual:—Lat., 31° 15' S.; long., 31° 52' W.; distance, 75
miles; course, N. 67 W.; variation, 8° W.; wind, N. 4 E.,
N. 3 E., N. 1 W.; force, three reefs in top sails; weather,
first and middle parts, moderate gale with hard rain squalls;,
latter part, fresh gale and clear, with a high confused sea.


causing the ship to labour heavily and ship quantities of
water.
March 27, Saturday. —We were, according to the course
of the “Loch Sloy,” 8,024 miles away from Melbourne
port yesterday. This morning we signalled an American
ship, bound east, but could not make out the flags to
ascertain her name. This was a disappointment, as any
news by way of sea is a relief to a monotonous voyage,
although, honestly speaking, I camiot call this voyage
monotonous, as a rule always something or other crops up.
The crew have been working all day scouring the poop
furniture, sails, hencoops, &c., preparatory to varnishing
the same, and did not avail themselves of the usual
Saturday half-holiday. The first part of the day we had a
fresh gale, but it moderated to fine and fresh breeze
towards the close. Lat., 29° 52' S.; long., 29° 18'W.;
course, N. 88 E.; distance, 163 miles; variation, 9° W.;
wind, from three reefs in topsails to royals close hauled;
barometer, 29-62, 29-73, 29-88; temperature, 76°, "74°,
75°. Yesterday’s barometer stood at 29-70 and 29-60;
temperature, 70°, 74°, 75°.
March 28, Third Sunday in Lent. —Long before sun-
rise I had the good fortune to discover that Mr. Rheumatics
had, (during a refreshing sleep) taken his departure out of
the port hole, which was left open for his convenience, and
it was therefore no longer necessary for me to lie in an
aboriginal position, i.e., “ curled up in blankets,” so I de-
clared off the sick-list, and walked the deck, and discovered
a ship on the port quarter evidently bound to the eastward.
After breakfast had a cold salt water bath and general
renovation, and as it was very warm, the first Sunday in
white was celebrated. All hands that appeared on deck
looked exceedingly tidy and clean, some wearing white
shirts, and trowsers; I donned white vestments, and


performed music from Haydn’s “ Imperial Mass ” and'the
“ Stabat Mater.” The day was calmly serene and beautiful,
and I thoroughly enjoyed it. In the forenoon an accident
occurred to poor Maggie, the boatswain’s Pet. Maggie could
crow equally as well as any chanticleer, and was remarkable
for its fluency of the English tongue. The bird came out
as usual with her owner, and hopped on the rail of the
port bulwarks, a sudden gust of wind blew the feathered
biped on to the water, an angry wave curled over the
shrieking bird, and all was ended. Everyone on board
Commiserated with the boatswain on his bereavement. It
was suggested that a mortuary notice should be placed over
Maggie’s resting place, and many were prepared to sub-
scribe paper half-crowns, but on it being pointed out that
the dead creature’s actual resting place would never be dis-
covered by mortal man, the project was abandoned. A
barque outward bound was sighted in early morning steer-
ing east, and soon lost to view. In the evening attended
service, which was more numerously attended by our fore-
castle friends. I was glad to see this, for I am sure there
is no one wishes more for the welfare of the crew and other
souls placed for the time being under his charge than the
Captain. Mrs. McLean being unwell was prevented from
being present. Anniversary of my father’s death, may his
soul find eternal rest, for it is written Be mortuis nil nisi
bonum. Of the dead speak nothing but what is good. In
memoriam, I played the Dead March in Saul. While
speaking of the dead I may as well speak of the living and
end this day’s record by relating “ Gallant Services at Sea,”
by the Captain of this ship, which are taken from newspapers
supplied to me. They are as follows—the original cuttings
are in my “ Newspaper Cuttings,” pages 116 and 117.
From the Penscuula Semi-Weekly Advance, United States,
Wednesday, October, 19th, 1881. Drowned and
partly devoured.
“ A sailor boy, said to be a stow-away on board the


British ship “ Forest Eights,” while bathing in the bay
last Sunday morning, was visited by cramps, and suddenly
disappeared in 18 feet of water. His situation, we are in-
formed, was known to several on board the above-named
vessel, but those lookers on, with a cold blooded indifference
seldom witnessed in the course of a life, remained idle
spectators, making not one solitary effort to save the un-
fortunate. Yet while these callous beings cast a stigma on
the human family, at the same time there was one noble-
hearted man who rushed to the rescue, and his unselfish
and daring efforts to save the poor boy seems to wipe away
the reproach. We refer to the first mate McLean, of the
ship “ Labrador,” which vessel occupied a berth in com-
pany with the “ Forest Eights,” at the end of the railroad
wharf. It seems almost incredible, but those conversant
with the sad catastrophe tell us that even after McLean
had leaped overboard, swum to the drowning boy, and laid
hands on him as he again floated to the surface, those on
board the “ Forest Eights ” never turned a hand or offered
assistance the very least by way of manning a boat or other-
wise. Finding himself struggling against fate as it were, and
fast becoming exhausted, McLean was compelled to turn
loose the body, in which life was not then extinct, and seek
a place of safety, which we are informed he only reached
after a severe trial. The boy as soon as released, sank to
the bottom, but oh the following Monday morning, in a
partly devoured state, his remains were seen drifting with
the tide near Jetferson-street Wharf, where the body was
caught and made fast to the stern of the barque Yarra
Yarra. Here he was permitted to remain floating in the
water for several hours, and the disgusting spectacle was
gazed upon by a multitude of people. The head, right
shoulder and arm and left leg were completely eaten away,
and what is more shocking to relate, this exposed and
mutilated corpse was suffered to remain so long uncared
for that twice ere it was lifted from the water did a


ravenous shark endeavour to devour it entirely. This
seems like a reflection upon our state authorities, who thus
carelessly ignored the claims of a dead body for such a
length of time. The remains were some time during the
day taken from their watery grave by Her Majesty’s Vice-
Consul 0. C. Howe, who yesterday had them properly in-
terred. No inquest was held —none being deemed neces-
sary. There are some things written in this article, which
for the sake of humanity we would prefer to see omitted,
yet on the other hand it affords us pleasure to record the
unselfish daring of the mate McLean, whose heroism
deserves to be blazoned in song and story. His was a
noble’act.”
From the Oeelong Tunes, Monday, July 7th, 1884,
“It is reported that the chief officer, John McLean, of the
ship “Loch Garry,” lying at the Port Melbourne railway
pier, was the means of saving a man from drowning on
Thursday night last. The man belonged to the steamer
‘ Westmeath,’ and was proceeding to his vessel, when he
fell over the pier. The chief officer noticing the occurence,
divested himself of his clothing, plunged into the water, and
dragged him from under the pier. Fastening a rope round
his body, he was dragged to the wharf.”
From the Age, Melbourne, Thursday, October 22nd, 1885.
“ A gallant rescue of a man from drowning was effected
one night last week by Captain John McLean, of the ship
“ Loch Sloy,” lying at the Port Melbourne railway pier. It
appears that shortly after midnight the Captain, awakened
by cries of distress, rushed on deck to ascertain the cause,
when he found a man struggling in the water. Captain
McLean at once jumped overboard, and got the man safe
to the pier, and from there to the ship.”
Such heroic deeds as these, in my opinion, call for hearty
recognition, which, I am happy to write, were duly ac-


•corded—in the first instance by the Royal Humane Society
of London. At a meeting held at the Society’s Offices, 4,
Trafalgar Square, April 21st, 1882, case 21,553, Mr. John
McLean, was submitted to the Committee, thus ;
“ On the 16th October, 1881, a man named McDonald
was bathing in the Harbour of Pensacola, coast of Florida.
Soon after entering the water he was seen struggling, and
apparently sinking. Mr. John McLean, chief officer of the
ship ‘Labrador,’ of Greenock, jumped off the wharf and
succeeded in seizing hold of the lad, who, however, pulled
him under water, and he was obliged to let go his hold to
save his own life. It is supposed that a shark had bitten
McDonald, as his mutilated body was discovered next day.”
It was resolved unanimously that John McLean is justly
entitled to the Honorary Silver Medal of this Society for
having on the 16th October, 1881, jumped into Pensacola
Harbour, to the rescue of a man who was seize 1 with cramp
whilst bathing, and whose life he at great personal risk
endeavoured to save.
Signed by The Duke op Argyll, as President.
Wm. Hawes, Chairman.
J. W. Home, Secretary.
As to the two latter cases Captain Payne, the secretary of
the Victorian branch of the Royal Humane Society, has placed
himself in communication with Captain McLean on the
subject; but the latter is evidently disinclined to fill up a
form of paper claiming a “recognition” as directed, he
thinking that he has done no more than his duty, in the
first place, and, secondly, disliking the delicate task of
“ begging a reward.” I understand, however, that if the
latter cases were submitted to the London office of the
Society Captain McLean would undoubtedly receive two
clasps to the medal he is already in possession of.
I have thus paid tribute to the deeds of a brave man, in
whom I have every confidence to sail round the world,


so that my readers may see for themselves what manner
of man is he who commands this ship. I hope also
to speak ere this diary closes of Mr. Charles Lehman,
the chief officer. He has also been presented with
“ valuable recognitions” by the Meteorological Society for
valuable services rendered. The weather towards night
became close, and it will not be strange if we have rain
to-morrow. Lat., 27° 42' S.; long., 28° 54' W.; distance,
112 miles; course, N. 38 E.; variation, 11° W.; direction
of the wind, N. 4 W., B.S. 5 E.; force, moderate;
barometer, 29 - 98, 29 96, 80-03 ; temperature, 76°, 75°, 77°.
Maeoh 29, Monday.— Rose early in the morning, and
found the chief officer and his merry men hard at it,
scrubbing away before eight bells, with every prospect of
a fine day. After breakfast was called on deck to see
dolphins sporting about. This meant Mr. Shark was not
far off, and sure enough he was seen. Mr. Birnie
hastened to get a hook and bait, which the captain threw
overboard, and to the satisfaction of all interested the
tempting bribe “took,” and the “sailors’ hatred” was
safely hauled on to the poop, from there to the forecastle,
where he was “ welcomed ” first with a knife thrust in his
side, and amputation of the tail afterwards. The shark
measured 6 feet 4 inches from snout to tail. The jawbone
and front {i.e., the whole of the mouth) was given to me,
and will be some kind of pastime for me in the cool of the
evening (these hot days) to whittle the flesh off as I sit on
the summit of the poop. We had shark cutlets for tea,
and I quite agree with the late Francis Buckland of the
2nd Life Guards, of which regiment he was surgeon, “that
the flesh of the shark is edible and fit for human consump-
tion.” I find the flavour delicate, not so strong as the
common plaice of English waters, and much nicer than
boneta. The real delicacy at sea, of course, is the flying
fish, but we have not had as yet the favour of their


company at dinner, but hope soon to. There was a most
beautiful sunset in the evening, throwing rich purple
colours on the sea, background, and sky, the foreground
being a mass of molten gold, and almost a lake of fire,
there being a slight ripple added much to the beauty of
the mise-en-seenc. Of course, we must expect to have
beautiful shies, &c., to make up for the monotony of the
doldrums. The weather has in general been throughout
the day fine and pleasant, with variable winds and rain
squalls, and thunder and lightning at night. The Lat.,
25° 31' S.; long., 28° 16' W.; course, N. SW. ; distance,
138 miles ; variation, 12° W.; wind, S. 5 E., E., N. 6E. ;
force, as yesterday ; barometer, 29’92, 29-96, 30 - 00 ; tem-
perature, 76°, 78°, 79°.
Maech 30, Tuesday. —Had a shark cutlet for breakfast,
and my former impression is confirmed. This may appear
to the reader as something repulsive, but it should be
borne in mind that no one with any right feelings of
propriety would partake of a “ man eater.” That is
always ascertained by the usual incision being made in the
abdomen, and I should also mention it is the tail and fin
part only that is eaten. The winds all day have been
variable and easterly, with rain squalls and heavy showers
and thunder and lightning at intervals. At night boobys
fly about the ship, and perch on the sails ; but as they are
infested with a species of “ Scotch Greys,” they are not
desirable birds to interfere with, although they are easily
caught. We are a little more than 206 miles from the
Martin Vasscocks and Trinidad Island. The Captain is
very much disappointed he has not made the equator in
the time he predicted, “ sixty days.” Had his words
“come true” we should have been on the line to-day—
looking at it through the telescope. Baths twice a day
just now the. order. Doldrums prevail, the wind gradually
falling off. Lat., 28° 57' S.; long., 28° 40' W.; course,


N. 10 W. ; distance, 104 miles; variation, 15° W.; force,
nothing to speak of; barometer, 29-94, 30-06, 30-09 ; tem-
perature, 79°, 76°, 79°.
March 31, Wednesday.— The weather hot; nothing for
me to do but to read and bathe. The winds are gentle, with
variable breezes and fine clear weather, making it delight-
fully pleasant for the mariner, because the more days the
more dollars. It would not do for me to harp on this
strain too much to some of our crew; for instance, our
steward is at times out of sorts when he learns that but
slow progress is being made. I tell him the latitude, and
that is quite enough to make him shake his head dismally.
We have an excellent remedy just now for the cure of
corns. The pitchy seams of the deck are beginning to
bubble; “all you have to do” is to place the corn over the
liquid boiling mass, and I warrant the heat will soon
penetrate (enough to make you dance a “ Highland fling,”
if you like), and when it has done so to your satisfaction,
and got a firm hold, “ all you have to do ” is to tear your
foot away, and out comes the corn. I have heard that one
experiment is sufficient for a week. The “sick list” is
now proclaimed to be convalescent. Castor oil, black
draughts, pills, and other decoctions having proved effi-
cacious. Cape Horn fever is a cold one, and requires much
warmth in its treatment. The lat. is 28° 36' 8.; long.,
27° 58' W. ; course, N. 14 E. ; distance, 61 miles;
barometer, 29-95 and 30-00; temperature, 82°, 79°, 83°.
In the doldrums.
April 1, All Fools’ Day. — l had the pleasure of in-
dulging in this innocent pastime — i.e., celebrating until
noon the feast of April Ist together with the captain and
crew. I scored six fools, got made one myself, this way—
“ Mr. C.,” said the steward, “ Mr. Lehman wishes you to
see the big shark they are going to catch.” I said, “ All


Fools’ Day.” “No, the captain’s just gone up, and it’s
quite true ; come on, Mr. C.” I heard them sing out (I
was in the saloon writing this diary at the time), and up I
went by the companion, ejaculating as I struck my foot
against one of the “risers” something not polite, for I
should mention in early morning I had struck my toe of
the left foot severely, making black and blue marks,
requiring the swelling to be eased of pain by immersing
the injured limb in a bucket of sea water. I hopped to
the stern of the vessel, only to discover that my journey
was for nothing. All had a jolly good laugh, and I did no
more writing for a while, but into a bucket of salt water
went my foot again. We had two barques in company
this morning, one of which overtook us, and so enabled us
to speak her. She proved to be the “ Centurion,” be-
longing to Aberdeen, bound from Sydney to London,
fifty-three days out. She rounded Cape Horn on the 18th
March. The “ Centurion ” has thus beaten us by nine
days. The pilot fish have been observed about the ship,
and also some white birds, which means Mr. Shark again,
who however did not disclose his whereabouts. At night-
fall a ship reported “ on the starboard bow,” but too far
ahead to speak her. Weather still continues hot, and as
yesterday. Lat. 22° 52' 8.; long., 27° 16' W.; course,
N. 38° E.; distance, 55 miles; variation used, 17° W. ;
winds, northerly; barometer, 30-10, 30-02, 30-00; tem-
perature, 83°, 79°, 82°. The first capital punishment took
place before sunrise. A cat having exhausted the patience
of every one in the saloon by her indecent behaviour, was
ordered overboard, and when all was quiet the executioner
performed his dreadful task. Poor pussy was a pet, but too
fond of sleeping apartments. She was a rative of the ship,
but, like her mother and brother, came to an untimely end.
Apart 2. —This morning before 6 a.m. we were suffi-
ciently close to the ship we saw she it appears


wished to speak to us, as a most interesting performance
had taken place on hoard only 36 hours before." Her name
“ Greta,” of Liverpool, Captain William D. Cassady, from
Port Sirie, Spencer’s Gulf, South Australia, with grains
for Falmouth for orders, 62 days out. She signalled for a
doctor, and wanted biscuit, we replied, “ No doctor, short
of provisions,” and asked “ if any one sick on board the
‘ Greta; ’ ” reply, “ Confinement.” We signalled to know
if Captain McLean’s wife should visit. Reply, “ I shall be
very glad and will send boat.” In due course it arrived
under charge of the 2nd officer, and Mrs. McLean, her
husband, and myself went on board the “ Greta,” where
we spent a very happy day. We took with us as presents
some Harding and Madden apples, and Freshwater Creek
Damson jam, which proved acceptable to Mrs. Cassady,
who had given birth to a daughter so short a time since,
and whom we were glad to find “going lively.” Mrs.
Cassady has another daughter on board, about five years
old or less, but she did not seem at all interested in her
mother’s affairs. I was permitted (being “no one ” and
“ not to be minded ”) to enter the place where the infant
was bom, and was right glad to see mother and child doing
so well. It was quite an event for me to go on a visit on
the South Atlantic, and find my “ brother ” there. Of
course when my opinion was asked about the child, I fancied
I saw her father’s nose here, her mother’s eyes there, and
that she had got his chin, and her mouth, that they only
required looking at. Here I must observe that as I pointed
out with a professional look these distinguishing traits, that
Captains Cassady and McLean, with their wives, were
looking at them seriously, the traits I mean—and when I
wound up that, “ She was the perfect image of both of
them, and, no doubt, in any doctor’s opinion/* the finest
baby ever born,’ ” they all agreed, and I was asked out,
and “ what was I going to have ” After having
(several times during the day), I discovered that Captain


Cassady was a Freemason, and we again cemented the
brotherly tie, to be tied stronger if possible in London.
Ah! me, it is only in such circumstances as the present
that one learns what little can create a kindness to one,
and pleasure to another. The fact of Mrs. McLean going
on board to help her sister in trouble, was at once soothing,
and as balm in Gilead, to the cheerful sufferer. During
the afternoon I had conversation with Mr. G. W. Garland,
the Chief Officer. He is a native of the Isle of Wight, and
gave me his address. We smoked pipes together, and
talked about our native land, at my request, and I was
much interested in what he told me. lam to call on his
people, as he expects from Falmouth the “ Greta ” will be
ordered to some foreign port. We returned to the “Loch
Sloy ” about 8 p.m. Speaking of the merits of the two
ships there is no comparison to be drawn, as to which I
prefer, that is the “Loch.” The “Greta” has not the
accommodation for passengers requisite. It would (unless
I knew the captain intimately) be one of the last I should
choose for a voyage, I wouldn’t mind so much if there were
no passengers, but certainly wouldn’t go in her with a
crowd. The “ Greta,” however, sails faster than the
“Loch Sloy”—she has beaten us, having come a much
longer distance in the same time, and I understand can do
so again. As I bade adieu to the “Greta” and her
officers, I brought away with me two heads of albatrosses,
and the skin of the foot of one made into a tobacco pouch ;
in return, I sent by the second officer some books. The
“ good-night ” flag was hoisted as the second officer and
his boat returned, and we joined our men on the forecastle
in giving them and their ship three hearty cheers, which
were reciprocated in a most hearty fashion. Still in the
doldrums, and same weather as yesterday, wind variable
and southerly. The Lat., 21° 26' S.; long., 26° 41' W.;
course, N. 1 W.; distance, 74 miles ; variations, 17° W.;
wind variable, south and easterly; force, “very mild;”


barometer, 30-33, 80-16, 30-10; temperature, 79°, 79°,
83°.
Apbil 3, Satobday.— Since the departure of the cat for
unknown regions, my state room, smells fresh, and looks
clean, cosy, comfortable, and again inviting. We signalled
the “Greta” to ascertain how his wife and child were
progressing, but she, being too far astern (we supposed)
did not reply. We noticed, however, towards nightfall she
was “ making for us.” Our progress continues slow, the
Captain remarking that we have been a whole week doing
the work of two. I told this to our steward, he mournfully
shook his head. Yesterday completed nine weeks from
Australia, as I remembered the Freshwater Creek jam to
take on board to Mrs. Cassady, I naturally thought of those
from whom it came. lam sure they think we are nearer
to England than we are. Lat., 20° 81' S.; long., 26° 53'
W.; course, N. 14 W. ; distance, 47 miles; variation, 17°
W.; wind and weather same as yesterday; barometer
30-24, 30-10, 30-17. ; temperature 83°, 82°, 83°. We
were 8,721 miles from Australia on Friday. To-day we
are 110 East Martin Yass Eocks, so we shall not see them.
Apbil 4, Sunday, 4th in Lent.— This morning, the
weather still continuing oppressive, I decided to make it
Pajaina Day the first, and after the usual bath, and morn-
ing prayer, appeared on the deck dressed d la Chinois.- I
felt very comfortable in such light clothing, and wondered
why Europeans in Australia do not adopt such suitable
apparel for outdoor wear same as the Chinese do. The
“ Greta ” came close to us to-day, and the Captains of both
ships have been exchanging mutual courtesies, the chief of
which has been the state of Mrs. Cassady and child’s health.
Happy are we on board the “ Loch Sloy ” to learn both
are progressing favourably, although Mrs. Cassady feels
at times the want of sleep. Towards nightfall, just before


the Church bell rang we had the satisfaction in hearing
that the signal “sleeping” was flying from the “Greta,”
and after “good night” had been sent up and ensigns
dipped, the ordinary evening service was held. I did not
attend, preferring the cool deck to the heated saloon, more-
over I had a headache. Another thing I had read in early
morning (I always do) the Service of the Church of Eng-
land appropriate for the day. The lat. is 19° 07' S. ;
long., 28° 51' W. ; course, N. 34 W.; distance, 107 miles;
variation, 17° W. ; wind and weather, as usual; barometer,
30-33, 30-17, 30-10 ; temperature, 80°, 79°, 80°.
Apeil 5, Monday. —Weather still very close, and the ship
“ Greta ” still in company, the signals going all day, as
they are of a private nature I do not interest myself, only
feel very pleased to hear “ all doing well there,” up to the
present time, noon. We had flying fish for breakfast, and
I have preserved the wings and fins. For this pretty pre-
sent I am indebted to my dear young friend Mr. William
Weir, the third officer. Our lat., 17° 34' S.; long., 80° 00'
W.; course, hi. 30 W. ; distance, 98 miles ; variation used,
17° W.; direction of the wind, as yesterday ; force, nothing
to speak of; barometer, 30-00, 30-06, 30-07 ; temperature
80°, .79°, 81°. Still in the doldrums.
About 4.30 p.m. a signal flew from the “ Greta,” stating
that Mrs. Cassady, who had been doing so well all day,
“ had suddenly changed,” which eventually ended in her
death, but lam anticipating. At the time the signal was
flying a boat’s crew in charge of the first officer came off,
and Captain and Mrs. McLean immediately went to render
any assistance. Alas ! they were too late, the poor Captain
of the “ Greta,” as they boarded his vessel, “ uttering the
most heart rending lamentations, and quite beside himself.”
Captain McLean went below just in time to say a prayer,
the poor dear lady being in articulo mortis, i.e., in the act
of dying. When the prayer ended, the supreme moment


had arrived, one faint gasp, all was over. Let us hope she
has gone to her eternal rest, where there is no more sorrow,
nor death.
‘ Ah, for the time I sadly pray,
When all life’s care shall pass away.
Seeking my home in heaven blest,
Then shall I be at rest.”
These words are indeed appropriate to one about to leave
this world, more especially when in pain and trouble. They
are taken from my ballad “ Seeking Rest,” dedicated to my
revered friend the Rev. Canon Boomby, D.D., formerly
Head Master Church of England Grammar School, Mel-
bourne. Madame Anna Bishop, good dear soul, thought
very highly of the music, and sang it very frequently when
in Australia .... Pardon the digression, my dear
reader, but imagine what it must be to be called upon to
deliver up all earthly things in a situation as described.
Here out on the vast expanse of the South Atlantic Ocean,
away from all that is nearest and dearest to us, the dying
can receive only the consolation of strangers, generally
speaking; in this c&se it was different, but sufficiently sad I
should think to awaken the emotion of the strongest-minded
man, but I am informed that the steward of the ship (all
the while the poor departed was in extremis) “ continued
■his avocations in the pantry, making one incessant clatter
with his crockery as if there was nothing the matter, driv-
ing Captain Cassady to distraction, and even after grim
death had claimed his own, he proceeded about with all the
callous indifference imaginable.” Will it be believed, this
steward had once been a “preacher.” When I hear of
such things as men being able to perform Church devotions,
play harmoniums on the Sunday and the like, professing
much Christianity I am indeed shocked, (and so would any
one knowing what I do re this never-to-be-forgotten episode)
and come to the conclusion that he who flaunts his


Christianity as a precept to his fellow man, and acts not
thereon is a liar and a hypocrite. Yet, how many of these
sleek, oily-faced creatures there are in the world. I hate
those “ professing much Christianity.” I am quite sure
that had our steward behaved in this manner, which
heaven forbid, we shall have any occasion for, on board
this vessel, I don’t think Captain McLean would put up
with so much as Captain Cassady did. To conclude the
record of the day. As Captain and Mrs. McLean were
making so long a stay with our neighbour I concluded they
would stay all night and went to bed, not knowing what
had happened, only to be aroused later on by my Captain
that “ she who was once in this flesh was no more.” I
.draw a line here, and reserve the conclusion until after
the funeral, merely mentioning that the dear little “ South
Atlantic ” stranger, was now shipped as one of our
passengers.
April 6., Tuesday.— This morning, at 8 a.m., Captain
John McLean mentioned to me “that a boat would be
alongside at 8.80 a.m. to take him on board the ‘ Greta,’
to pay the last respect to the wife of the Captain, and that,
if I desired, I could go with him.” I mentioned the fact
that my duty as a Mason required me to be present, apart
from anything else on such an occasion. Our ship was
cleaned and dressed out in mourning, the men doing no
work after the funeral. As we boarded, we were received
by Captain Cassady and Mr. Garland, the former ushering
us into the death chamber, but he was so thoroughly over-
come that it made me feel very nervous and unhappy. I
have seen many a death chamber of departed, cherished
friends in misfortune, more especially the earlier portion of
my Australian friends (which, to relate here, would scarcely
be believed by my own relations, I feel sure, being so full
of real romance), well, I have sat beside the dying then
and later on, and in some instances have carried out ‘ 1 last


wishes,” but I do not remember being so much impressed
with what I witnessed, when I remembered the happy day
I had only recently spent in that cabin, when all was life
and gladdening, to see the form of the smiling, robust
father changed suddenly into a grief-stricken mourner in
three short days ; it made the heart throb, and I was glad
to retire to the saloon and let my tears give vent silently,
leaving the two Captains alone, until the funeral knell was
boomed from the forecastle bell, summoning the crew to
witness the “ last act.” Borne on a litter, covered over
with the colours of the Empire, “ the flag that’s braved a
thousand years the battle and the breeze ” (I mean the
ship’s ensign) were the remains of the Captain’s wife
enclosed in heavy canvas sacking, laden with iron, and )
as the selected portion of the Church of England service for
the burial of the dead, viz., “ For as much as it has pleased
Almighty God of His great mercy to take unto himself the
soul of our dear departed sister, we, therefore, commit her
body to the deep, to be turned into corruption, looking for
the resurrection of the body when the sea shall give up her
dead, and the life of the world to come, through our Lord
Jesus Christ; who at His coming shall change our vile
body, that it may be like His glorious body, according to
the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things
to himself,” was read, the body was reverentially lowered
into the mighty ocean of the South Atlantic, and quickly
sank out of sight. The other portions of the prayers used
were that of the Presbyterian Church, or some such com-
pilation, but I did not think them nearly so beautiful and.
comforting as those in my Prayer-book. I believe it has
been admitted by all learned men that the ritual of the
Service for the Dead, according to the Church of England,
is one of the grandest conceptions of religious men.
Captain McLean read the burial office, and at times was
much oppressed and appeared broken down. All the crew
were dressed in their best, and joined in the heartfelt


sorrow, and when the Benediction was pronounced retired
respectfully to their quarters. Previous to our leaving the
“ Greta ” we went below, and Captain McLean signed the
log-book of that vessel as having performed the service,
and also the name of the baby, which now is Maggie
Helen, the first being the name of the dead mother, the
second that of our Captain’s wife. Some albatrosses feet
made into pouches and also long wing bones, suitable for
pipe stems, were given to me, and in company with
Captains Cassady, McLean, Mr. G. W. Harwood, the
second officer of the “Greta,” we returned to our own
vessel in the life-boat of the “ Greta.” Every thing was
done to cheer the chief mourner of the day and make him
as comfortable ■as possible. I should mention that befofe
we left our ship for the “ Greta,” on this melancholy morn-
ing, I played the “Dead March” in memoriam. The
following address, prepared by me, was presented to
Captain Cassady on board the “ Greta ” :
“ South Atlantic Ocean,
“ Ship, ‘ Loch Sloy,’
“ April 6, 1886.
“ To Captain Wm. D. Cassady,
“ Ship, ‘ Greta.’
“ Dear Sir, and Brother,
“We whose names are attached below as Members of
the Fraternity of the Ancient Order of Free and Accepted
Masons, acting under the different constitutions ot the
Empire, have heard with profound sorrow of the heavy
affliction which it has pleased the Supreme Euler of all
things to call upon you to bear. We beg most respectfully
to offer to you our heartfelt sympathy in your sad bereave-
ment, and earnestly trust that the Great Geometrician of
the Universe will give you such strength (as He only can
give) to enable you to bear your trial with that fortitude
which marks a brother mason in distress, during the


remainder of your voyage. In conclusion, we wish you
and those under your command a speedy and safe arrival
in port.
“ We are, dear Sir and Brother,
“ Yours fraternally,
“ Signed Wm. St. John M. Caws, Past Pro., Grand 0rg.,416,
492, S. C. Australia.
Jas. Alex. Birnie, 44, ‘ Kilwinning,’ Scotland.
A. Bell, 44, ‘ Kilwinning,’ Scotland.
A. McKallar, ‘ Goberdale,’ Scotland.
D. H. Nelson, ‘ Eagle,’ Edinburgh.”
The address was very neatly written by Mr. C. Lehman,
who, in addition to his own accomplishments, is an
excellent caligraphist. Further on is some account of the'
esteem in which our chief officer is held by those placed in
“ high authority.” I will now draw a veil over this memo-
rable occasion, never to be forgotten by me, and I am sure
by all on board here, in these few lines :
0, let him whose sorrow
No relief can find,
Trust in God, and borrow
Belief for heart and mind.
Where the mourner weeping
Sheds the secret tear,
God His watch is keeping
Though none else be near.
God will never leave thee,
All thy wants he knows,
Feels the pain that grieves thee
Sees thy cares and woes.
Rise thine eyes to heaven
When thy spirit quail,
When by tempest driven
Heart and courage fail.


When in grief we languish
He will dry thy tear,
Who his children’s anguish
Soothes with succour near.
All our woe and sadness
In this world below,
Balance not our gladnesss
We in heaven shall know.
So MOTE IT BE.
Omnem crude diem, tibi dilu.cisse supremum (“ Be prepared
for death, knowing that it may overtake you at any time.”)
In the afternoon we had a man overboard; more sensation,
you will say. Happily, the circumstances were very
trivial, but might have been much worse. At 2 p.m. the
wind and sea increased, and it was considered advisable to
haul the “ Greta’s ” boat alongside for the purpose of
hoisting her out of the water ; but after the tackles had
been hooked on end, and the boat about three feet out of
the water, the ship gave a heavy roll, and one of the men
in the boat, who had hold of the main sheet at the ship’s
side, was suddenly pulled overboard. The rope being
slack he was pulled down to his neck (on two occasions),
but no further. He was immediately hauled on board by
those attending at the time, being apparently none the
worse for the unexpected salt water seasoning. All were
very glad to see him on the ship’s deck, and hearty con-
gratulations followed, for, as Horace says, “ Pale death
approaches with an equal step, and knocks indiscriminately
at the door of the cottage and the portals of the palace.”
Having had sufficient excitement for the day, and no sleep
last night, I availed myself when all was quiet to snatch
forty winks, which lam glad to say I obtained. Our lat.,
16°24' S.; 10ng.,30°59' W.; distance, 90 miles; course,N. 89
W.; variation, 18° W. ; N. 4 E., N. 6 E. force, close


hauled ; weather, fine; barometer, 30-08, 30-10, 30-06 ;
temperature, 80°, 79°, 80°.
April 7, Wednesday. —A barque and ship outward
bound was met with before breakfast; the latter showed
her numbers, but too far off to distinguish them. We sup-
pose it was “to report her.” The “Greta” was in
company with us, and nearer to the stranger ; in all pro-
bability she ascertained what was required. The Queen of
the Seas, Miss Maggie Helen Cassady, is doing well, and
takes her food willingly from her foster mother, Mrs.
McLean. I always “do my hair” when I seek audience
with the “ new woman ” (I humbly beg her Majesty’s
pardon, “new woman” was a slip of the tongue). Her
Majesty, with her attendant, sometimes condescends to visit
the saloon, at which we all rise, and offer her our respectful
salutations. At eventide she requires much attention,
which is most tenderly paid to her by her nurse. She
sang to the Captain in her sleep, “ Flow on thou shining
river,” “ By the waters,” and a host of rippling melodies,
and gave him a mark of her royal sign, no doubt saying,
In hoc signe mea spes (“ In this sign is my hope ”). But I
have no business to write any further about the secrets of
the Royal bedchamber. The day beautiful and clear ;
rather hot; men busy varnishing the teak portions of the
ship, which have been prepared for it. Bat., 13° 28' S.;
long., 31° 33' W. ; distance, 180 miles; course, N. 19 W. ;
variation, 18° W. ; wind and force as yesterday ; barometer,
29-90, 29-96, and 29-88 ; temperature, 81°, 79°, 80°.
April 8, Thursday.— “ Her Majesty ” required much
attention last night, but having had audience this morning
I think that there is nothing very much the matter, so far as
my experience can tell. All babies, royal or otherwise,
give nurses plenty to do. I promised when we got into
luminous seas to give some account thereof. At night


time the sea sparkles with phosphorescence. I am indebted
to Captain Cassady for a book he gave me on the subject by
William Acroyd, “ Notiluca Miliaris ”: —
“In the ineffectual attempt to strike a match in the dark,
probably every one has seen the faintly luminous track that
has been left wherever the match has been rubbed. It may
likewise have fallen within the experience of many of our
readers to see fish that have caused the housewife no small
amount of surprise by their shining appearance in the dark
pantry, and perhaps both phenomena will remind the sea-
faring man of a similar light he has seen in the wake of
his ship, as she has sped through the waters in the
darkness of night. The appearance in each case is a
phasing and a striking one, and our interest in it has been
increased by the song of the poet and the comment of the
philosopher. To the latter, indeed, it has been somewhat
of a puzzle, as presenting a kind of light differing from
that furnished by sun, moon, and stars, or the artificial light
sources that have been devised in these latter days, and he
has accordingly attempted to ascertain something more
about it than could 'be learnt by casual observation. A
sketch of what he has made out will probably be interest-
ing. A moment’s consideration of the first experiment
will teach us the meaning of the word phosphorescence.
A match, as we already know, is tipped with phosphorous,
an element whose name signifies that it bears or emits
light. It is a small trace of this substance, left where the
match has been rubbed, that glows in the dark. Hence
any body which shines faintly when taken into a dark
room is said to behave like phosphorous, in one word, to
‘ phosphoresce,’ and all such phenomena come under the
one general heading of ‘ phosphorescence.’ The house-
wife saw the phosphorescence of a fish, and the sailor
witnessed the phosphorescence of the sea. In 1810 it was
shown by M. Suriray that the phosphorescence of the sea in
the English Channel is owing to the presence of an


organism called Noctiluca miliaris, a minute rhizopod,
which requires a high magnifying power to get a good view
of it. This is an example of a living phosphorescent
animal. It is not, however, the only one found in the sea,
for Sir Joseph Banks found a phosphoric crab in the waters
of the South Atlantic. (No doubt, we being in the South
Atlantic at the present moment, the phosphoric crab is
what we see.—St. J. C.) Many soft-bodied animals, viz.,
molluscs, have been met with which are self luminous.
In answer to the question, What is the cause of the light
omitted by these animals ? nothing has yet been offered
but suppositions. In the case of the Notiluca, Ehrenherg
thought it might have been a number of light-emitting
organs, for upon submitting the animal to a magnifying
power of 140 diameters, he found the uniform luminosity
to disappear and become concentrated in a number of
brilliant points, just as the astronomer finds that the faint
luminous area stretching across the heavens, and known as
the milky way, is resolved by very powerful telescopes into
a number of brilliant points known as nebulae. What may
be taking place in one of the phosphorescent points of the
Notiluca is one of the many hidden mysteries that science
has yet to reveal. The bodies of most marine animals
shine after death. Dead fish, more especially the herring
and mackerel, are noted for their shining appearance when
they have been exposed to the air for some time ; but
beyond having noticed what favours and what disfavours
the phenomenon, we are very little better off in our know-
ledge of the subject than the ancients were. It appears to
have been made out that the phenomenon is not due to the
presence of animalcules, and from other observations it is
believed that the phosphorescence is the result of some
state which precedes putrefaction. From this it would
seem to follow that the phosphorescence in these cases
may be a physical one.”
Our Argosy still continues ploughing the South Atlantic


with moderate speed. One good thing, we are out of the
doldrums, and are now favoured with what is known as
the “ trade winds,” being 815 miles from the equator
yesterday. To day we have made 160 miles. Our lat.,
10° 54' S. ; long., 31° 14' W.; course, N. 5 E.; variation,
13° W.; wind, E. ; force, close hauled ; barometer, 29-80,
29-87, 29-96 ; temperature, 80°, 79°, 80°.
The “ Greta ” is astern of us, and evidently trying to
come up, as she evidently sails fast in a light wind. A
ship reported outward bound, but too far off for me to see
her. I have not the proud possession of sailors’ eyes, but
I have, no doubt, some of their “ sighs ”at times. Here
is some other interesting matter; certainly to myself.
Goethe, the poet, wrote, “ When merits exist do justice to
it without scruple.” When I read the following, and was
permitted to see the presents, I felt “ well done.” Captain
Charles Lehman of the barque “Mikado”—be it observed
that anything I hear to the good of the Captain of this
ship, and his officers, their praise will I always sing.
“ Palmam qui meruit ferat ” (“ Let him who has achieved
distinction have honours conferred on him.”)
No. 1.
Meteorological Office,
116, Victoria Street, London,
Jan. 10, 1884.
Dear Captain Lehman, —I am directed by the Meteoro-
logical Council to acknowledge the receipt of a Meteoro-
logical Log kept by you on board the barque “ Mikado ”
during the voyage to the Swan River, and Shanghai, and
home from those ports in 1883-4, containing excellent ob-
servations and remarks, and also synchronous observations
homewards, for which I am directed to return you their best
thanks. Hoping soon to have the pleasure of seeing you,—
I am, dear sir, yours truly,
Henry Toynbee, Marine Superintendent.


Meteorological Office,
116, Victoria Street,
Feb. 6, 1884.
My dear Sir, —It is again my pleasing duty to inform
you, that your log kept on board the “Mikado ” has been
submitted to the council by Captain Toynbee. As you
have already received the charts, it only remains for me to
express to you the most sincere thanks of the council for
your observations—
Yours very truly,
Egbert H. Scott,
Captain C. Lehman. Secretary.
The following valuable books to mariners were sent with
the official letters ;
First. A book of charts 2ft. by Ift. 9in., handsomely
bound in blue morocco, charts of meteorological data for
19° squares, from lat., 20° N. to 10° S.; long., 10° to 40° W.,
with the councils acknowledgment printed on the red label
in gilt letters, placed on the outside of the book thus :
“ Presented by the council of the Meteorological Office to
Captain C. Lehman, barque “Mikado,” as an acknow-
ledgment of the valuable meteorological observations
furnished by him to the office.
Second. A book “ Remarks to Accompany Monthly
Charts of Meteorological Data for 19° squares,” and
containing a suitable inscription.
Previous to the foregoing letters, Mr. Lehman, I should
observe had received several letters of thanks for past
services, and from the private letters which have passed
between Captain Henry Toynbee and Mr. Lehman, there
is no doubt these gentlemen are fast friends. My relatives
are acquainted with the marine superintendent of the
Meteorological Office, should ever I meet the latter, I shall
not forget to mention Mr. Lehman was first officer of the


“LochSloy.” Meanwhile the books have been placed at
my service to make any extract I like concerning phos-
phorescent diphydes, another species of mollusc, should
we come in contact with them after crossing the equator.
At night time the seas are now and again very luminous,
but not nearly like what I expected to see in the North
Atlantic.
April 9, Friday.— Ten weeks to-day at sea, and 9,413
miles from Australia. I sincerely trust all at the Creek are
as well as I am. The weather is hot, and I move about
barefooted, open linen shirt, and white pants, very often
with my tongue hanging out of my mouth, requiring lime-
juice and water with “ something ”in it. The ocean is
very blue and placid. The “ Greta ” still in company as
our rear guard. “Her Majesty” is well, and actually
smiled. She continues to require grand “displays of foun-
tains ” at night time, much to Captain McLean’s edification.
He is so pleased that we can sometimes hear the step of
the sailors’ hornpipe in the stillness of the night. Our
lat. is, 9° 26' S. ; long., 81° 11' W.; distance, 79 miles ;
wind, very light; weather, fine, with rain at intervals;
course, N. lE.; variations, 13° W.; barometer, 29-90.
29-88, 29-92 ; temperature, 82°, 80°, 82°.
April 10, Saturday. —There were a number of barques,
ships and steamers in sight during the day, from 12 to 16
in all. “ Greta ”in company, but cannot get near enough
to speak; “ Her Majesty” quite well, and appeared on deck.
At noon she performed “ Ocean Spray ” to the Captain as
he was dancing her about. Spoke the barque “Itata”
from Liverpool. Spoke the barque “ Zoe,” of Liverpool,
from the Tyne to Valparaiso. Both wished to be reported
“all well.” After dinner, a large French three-masted
screw steamer, with two funnels, showing the letters
J.K.S.P., we could not find her name in the “ Code.” We


wished her to report us in London, which she promised to
do. Just before tea, spoke a Norwegian barque, who
signalled in answer to our question “Where did you get
your trades ” ? “ Lat. 7°.” It was too dusk to ask or reply
to any more questions, so the ensigns were dipped. The
day broiling hot. Several flying fish seen. Lat., 8° 18' S.;
long., 31° 11' W.; distance, 80 miles; wind and weather,
as yesterday ; course, N.; variation, 14° W.; barometer,
29-90, 29-92, 29-80; temperature, 82°, 79°, 83°. Having
complained of fleas and flies tormenting me, the steward, I
find, has aired my bedding and provided fresh bedclothes,
so I expect to sleep well during the night
Apeil 11, Sunday, sth in Lent and 2nd Pyjama Day.—
Had a refreshing sleep last night on the whole. The first
part I dreamed I was in a state of catalepsy, and taken for
dead. I dreamed “ they ” had put me in a coffin and I
knowing it all the time. I dreamed “ they ” were about
to place the lid over me, when by some strong impulse I
resisted, struck my knee against the side of the “ cold meat
box,” and awoke, finding I had indeed wounded my leg
against the side of my bunk. I felt glad, turned over the
other side and slept comfortably until 6 a.m. ; got up, had a
bath, and read service for the day to myself. Mr. Birnie
said there was a vessel in sight, but I did not see it. We
talked about Geelong and our mutual friends.’ “ Her
Majesty ” is well, and will require no more bulletins to be
published. At noon I played the “Dead March” in
memoriam, of poor Mrs. Cassady. In the afternoon after
reading some interesting reports of the Church of England
to the Falklands and Patagonia, fell asleep until 4.30 p.m.
Had tea, and remained on deck enjoying the cool breeze ;
did not attend “service.” The saloon is too heated for me
when the crew are assembled therein. lam informed the
Captain adverted in his discourse to the uncertainty of life,
and the past events of the week. I turned in at 9.30 feeling


remarkably well, considering the heat. A vessel out-
ward bound reported from the masthead. Our lat., 5° 45 '
S.; long., 80° 05' W.; course, N. 29 E. ; variation, 14° W.;
distance, 167 miles ; barometer, 29-86, 29-88, 29-90 ; tem-
perature, 84°, 82°, 83° ; wind and weather, as usual.
April 12, Monday. —A ship and barque in sight. Mr.
Lehman says the former had no lights, and in early morn-
ing we were very nearly on to her, but the stranger
apparently aware of her error, showed a flash light as we
were nearing her, and all passed well. Both vessels are
steering N. A shark seen to-day, and a tempting morsel
offered him or her, but declined. There are numbers of
Mother Carey’s chickens about. I should very much like
to see the old lady herself. The wind has fallen to a dead
calm. The steward looking thoroughly miserable. We
expect to cross the line some time this week; my dirty
linen has all been washed, and are soaking in a tub, waiting
for an apportunity to dry them in lat. 0, where the line is
drawn from E. to W., but, if the present weather and calms
continue we may have to wait much longer “ for the good
time coming.” Our lat. to day is 4° 04' S.; long., 29° 30'
W.; distance, 106 miles; course, N. 19 E. ; variation,
15° W. ; wind and weather, calm ; barometer, 29-80, 29-75,
29-80; temperature, 83°, 80°, 80°. We are five miles
south, and 160 east of Fernando Norhona Island, and did
not see it. “ The Queen of the Seas ” is in excellent
health, and so is your most humble and obedient servant,
the narrator of this prolix communication.
April 13, Tuesday. —We have again a touch of the dol-
drums, and very slow progress towards home. A ship reported
on the port quarter. We have entirely lost sight of the
“ Greta.” Little Maggie continues in health, happily. Her
papa, I should imagine, is curious to know how his little
darling is. The weather naturally in this latitude is very


hot, so we have decided to dispense with the mid-day meal,
and take a slight repast in lieu. A shark seen, but too idle
to allow us any sport. My young friend Mr. Weir, the third
officer, is laid up with bad eye-sight. It is supposed he must
have got some paint therein in wiping the sweat off his
brow, all hands being busy with paint-pot and brush; I
hope the injury will be only of a temporary nature, as Mr.
Weir is a gentleman I sincerely like and admire. At night
time we saw a steamer showing her lights, evidently bound
northwards. Another shark showed himself before dusk,
but did not accept our invitations. We managed to make
an extraordinary run of 77 miles up to noon, but certainly
shall not accomplish any thing like this by noon to-morrow.
However, there is nothing like good humour over matters
of this sort. Our lat., 2° 53' S ; long., 29° 50' W. ; course,
N. 16 W.; variation, 15° W.; barometer, 29-80, 29-84,
29-80; temperature, 80°, 79°, 83°. It is now 8.30, good night.
April 14, Wednesday.— l had turned in until 10 p.m.
last night, and was soundly sleeping, when apprentice
Boland woke me to see the Devil-fish enjoying himself
about our ship, no doubt trusting some one would just
kindly step his way. It was an immense animal, certainly
not less than 16ft. from tip to tip of his fore fins, or what-
ever they are called. It was moonlight, and therefore
obtained a good view ; it kept swimming round the ship,
notwithstanding several ineffectual attempts to harpoon
him, although he was occasionally struck on the back, but
the skin or bone being almost as impregnable as armour, it
took a little skill and patience to discover a weak point in
the enemy ; all of a sudden, “ haul in ” was the cry, but,
alas, the harpoon, although sent with an unerring aim into
the animal’s flesh, was unsuccessful in its hold, and Mr.
Lehman could not therefore score a win. The harpoon
was bent with the force of the blow, and the “cetacea”
quickly hied below to the cock-pit of his “ ship ” to be


doctored, as he did not show any disposition, after the
severe wound he must have received, to visit us again.
Poor Mr. Weir is still confined to his heated cabin. Igo
in to cheer him up now and again with my company and
with tales of my Australian experiences. Miss Cassady
continues excellent. A ship reported in company from the
masthead. The heat is broiling, requiring an awning to be
fixed up. I wondered why one was not up before, but was
told “ couldn’t be while the men were busy painting about.”
I enjoy the cool shades of the awning (in these doldrums)
with my afternoon pipe; and, idleness ! I view our pro-
gress through the waters with stoic indifference, what does
it matter to me when the ship arrives in port, I feel. Very
selfish, no doubt; but, then, is it not better to view matters
like this with indifference when you can’t help it ? I dare-
say you have frequently noticed the wavy appearance of
this “ quill driving.” I have intended referring to it
before. It is owing to the unsteady motion of the ship;
sometimes I cannot write for days with anything like satis-
faction, and ruling the lines, as I commenced to do, gives so
much extra work, that I treated ruling lines as a conun-
drum. Only when I require to write very distinctly, it will
be noticed line ruling has been observed. Thinking so
much about the equatorial line, has brought to my recollec-
tion that some apology is due for indistinct ink wasting,
and curved cahgraphy. But let us “revenons a nos
moutons.” I have lately mislaid my tobacco knife, and a
few other articles such as pens, matches, etc. When any-
thing is missed it is put down to the “Liverpool man,”
about as mysterious a being as Mrs. Harris—no one ever
saw either individual. One day the third officer’s break-
fast (which had been placed in the galley to keep warm)
suddenly vanished, it could not be found anywhere ; the
“ Liverpool man ” must have had it. Another tale about
this wonderful man. “ One day a fine roasted leg of
mutton was prepared for dinner, and in the hurry of the


steward to get it to the saloon, the ship lurched, and on to
the deck went the joint. Steward went to the pantry to
get a fork or something to pick up the juicy meat, to his
dismay, on his return to the place where the capsize took
place, the mutton had vanished and could not be found.
It was put down to the ‘ Liverpool man ’ as a matter of
course. Some days afterwards, it was learnt that some
sailors at work aloft (just under where the sheep accident
occurred), seeing so fine a dainty, they, without much-a-do,
sent down a line, and hooked the savoury meat, hauling, it
up to where they were without discovery. It is perfectly
understood the rascals made a good dinner off the coveted
prize. Their names were never divulged. Besides that
would be useless, it’s no use crying over ‘ spilled meat.’ ”
Our lat., 2° 24' S.; long., 29° 20' W.; distance, 32 miles ;
variation, N. 23° E., 18° W.; wind and weather, none,
perfect calm; barometer, 29-80, 29-80, 29-90; thermo-
meter, 84°, 81°, 84°.
April 15, Thursday.— Very wet morning, and some
hopes that we would move on a little faster, but the
sequel was disappointment, as will be seen. Mr. Weir
remains in his bunk, but somewhat better, the “ latest
addition of humanity ” to our ship thrives, and all is peace
and quietness. Painting operations suspended, owing to
the rain showers. Luxury of the bath, order of the day.
Our lat., 2° 24' S. ; long., 29° 20' N.; course, N. 58 E.;
variation, 19° W.; wind and weather, as yesterday ; small
birds only our companions ; barometer, 29-89, 29-85, 29-90 ;
thermometer, 87°, 83°, 82. I laid me down to sleep at
7 p.m. Distance, 25 miles.
April 16, Friday.— Eleven weeks from Australia to-day,
and number of miles voyaged are 9,926. We have not
crossed the line; steward is of opinion we shall “never.”
He is excited about the provisions running short. Well


I’ve no doubt it is very tantalizing to the skipper and those
concerned in navigation, but I do not permit my temper
to get ruffled about it. Our juvenile passenger is crying
just now for her foster parents, one has to play a mouth
pipe, while the other feeds her, and the dear little thing is
soon quieted. A barque is m sight, I believe our Captain
will question her, if our signals will unfold themselves, we
are pretty much in the same position as yesterday.
Apprentice Hill reports “ two ships in company ; ” he has
just come from the main mast head (7.45 a.m.) In another
week it will be Annie’s birthday. lam keeping the last of
the jam and eggs for the celebration thereof. Eggs, are
eggs now ; there have been none belonging to the ship for
the past month. It appears, according to Captain McLean,
that Matthews cooked the meat account, and sent seven
dozen eggs short of the quantity charged for. He will, on his
return voyage to Geelong, require to “see into it.” Last
night, sitting under the awning before going to bed, Captain
McLean and I were talking about Freshwater Creek, and
his tramp to Mr. Lugg’s. We had not the slighest doubt
you thought of this ship, and count the days out. lam
sure you think we are a long way over the line, but we are
not. I wonder whether the French steamer we spoke last
week has reported us at Cape de Yerd ; probably not, but
no doubt when she does in London, the news will be flashed
to Australia as our being spoken of in such and such
latitude and longitude, 71 days out!! We have just
spoken the barque seen this morning—4 p.m. She is the
“ Ophelia ” of Liverpool, 1,184 tons, from Sydney to London,
66 days out. She has thus beaten us by 11 days. A small
breeze sprang up at 3.30 p.m., but has died away again;
there was also a rain squall, with every probability of a wet
afternoon during the remainder of the day. Our lat.., 2° 05'
S. ; long., 29° 10' W.; distance, 26 miles; course, N. 33
E.; variation, 20° W. ; weather, as usual; barometer,
29-83, 29-87, 29-81 ; thermometer, 82°, 81°, 82°.


April 17, Saturday.— As I expected the rain squalls
continued, bringing with them refreshing change of air,
and a wind to move us further on to the equator, which we
expect to cross some time to-morrow, as the ship is doing,
at the time I write 8.80 a.m., knots per hour, and has
been going at this rate for the last sor 6 hours. I was on
deck from 3 a.m. till 4. The “ Ophelia ” was still in com-
pany and is now. Apprentice Borland has been appointed
page in ordinary to “ Her Majesty ” and custodian of the
feeding bottle. Of course I am “ Capel Meister ” —I
regaled “Her Majesty” this morning with the drum march
and polka. When the Queen is sufficiently able to com-
prehend, she will then be informed that I am related to
her; for this reason, her father being my brother, it
naturally follows lam her uncle. No doubt I shall get a
dukedom some of these fine days. My knife turned up
yesterday also my favourite pen. When it has been noised
about sufficiently that the “Liverpool man” must be
somewhere, missing articles, that cannot be digested,generally
make their appearance. Albercore have been seen, and
flying fish also; some attempt to make a catch, but the
rain prevents, and the speed of the ship greatly operates
against anything like success. The steward was seen to
smile this morning several times, and remarked (as he
passed me this morning) “ this is the breeze to take us
home.” I replied I hoped so, but he must remember that
there are doldrums on the other side of the line. “ Ah!
Yes! I forgot that,” was his rejoinder, and he moved
away towards his cuddy wearing a “painful countenance.”
I have been reading my friend Mr. George Gordon McCrae’s
poem on the “ Man with the Iron Mask ” again, during
leisure moments, and also Marcus Clarke’s brochure on
a certain Bohemian Club, which formerly existed in
Melbourne some 15 years ago, or perhaps less, and of
which I was a member. It was held at the Imperial Hotel,
and kept by Mr. Wm. Edouin, a theatrical artist of some


repute in those days; both of the above gentlemen were
members of that celebrated club, and reading their effusions
of “ pobte literature ” brings back the “merry days of old.”
I remember my father, (when I was a schoolboy) being
fond of the air and the words of the song, “ The merrie
days of old, when hawk and hound, etc.” I cannot call
to mind ever having heard it in Australia. I should
mention the Imperial Hotel is at the top of Bourke Street,
opposite corner to the White Hart, and facing the Parlia-
ment buildings. It was at the “Imperial” my revered
friend whom I cannot ever forget (the late Mr. Horsley)
founded the Victorian Musical Association, of which I was
the first secretary. This celebrated society has worthily
sustained the honour and position prognosticated for it by
its founder, by being the only real professional musical
body of gentlemen who feel it a real pleasure to meet
once a month all the year round, and discourse sweet
music of their choice, and not “ pander ” to vulgar popular
taste. By doing this they have held their own, and a
stranger to get an invite to these displays of vocal and
executive skill may thank his stars “he knows a member,”
■otherwise he would not be admitted. It is well-known
throughout Australia, that a diploma or certificate of the
Victorian Musical Association, is sufficient evidence that
the holder is a musician, theoretically and practically;
“ Shades of the departed” how ye rise up at times, and
tempt me with happy reminiscences of bye-gone days, and
throw me off my course, the same as this excellent speci-
men of marine architecture (in whose saloon I am con-
•cocting all sorts of fancies), very frequently is. Some day,
when I have to join the great majority, I hope to be in
your fellowship. “The rain u deluge showers,” at this
hour, 10 a.m., and the atmosphere smells “briny,”
probably thunder is not far off; note we axe in the right
place for a storm, should one have occasion to visit us, let
us hope not; but it is not for man to dictate against the


Sovereign will if he thinks fit. I have, however, made
everything in my state room comfortable, such as closing
the port, securing boxes and loose material. One thing I
hope, that the rain will be found when it has ceased, to
have washed away all the fleas, flies, cock-roaches, beetles,
and the myriads of insects which torment. Man is a
suffering animal, and when Tom, the cat, commences
“scratching,” “not any if you please,” I remark. Ap-
prentice McAlman has also been appointed an extra page
in attendance upon “ Her Majesty,” and this morning at
11-30 “kissed hands” on receiving this special
favour. Nothing further of interest has taken place this
day, excepting that the fifth sheep intended for our table,
took it into his head, (very sheepy no doubt) to have a fit
and expired under the experiment, thereby depriving our-
selves of the delicacy of his flesh. The lat., 0° 46' S.; long.,
29° 07' W.; course, N. 4 E.; distance, 79 miles ; varia-
tion, 17° W. : wind, variable ; force, nothing to speak of ;
barometer, 29-86, 29-92, 29-86; temperature, 82°, 82°, 79A
Apeil 18, Palm Sunday.— Opened with a wet, miserable
sort of day. Our “precious charge,” the Eoyal infant,
continues well, and Messrs. Borland and McAlman are
assiduous in their respective duties, relieving each other
at appointed intervals day and night. In che morning I
read privately the Church of England Service for the day,
and after dinner went on deck and marked (with chalk)
thereon several lines, so that anyone moving backwards, or
forwards, was bound to cross them. At 2.15 p.m. the long-
desired-for wish to bid adieu to the South Atlantic took
place ; Apprentice Hill went aloft to scan the horizon from
the main mast head, and reported two vessels in company
besides the “ Ophelia.” Mutual congratulations took place
between Mr. Lehman, the officer of the watch, and myself,
and it was discovered that the “main brace” required
splicing, so we did it in true sailor fashion, leaving a part


for Mr. Birnie to make all perfect. We expected to see
Father Neptune, but ascertained from a pilot fish that the
old patriarch was bad with rheumatics. I was glad to get
this information —and that Aquarius was in attendance
with others in keeping him posted up with adulterated
water. Many things went across the line, for instance, I
sent a “ dead marine ” with compliments to the watery god,
and among other things I discovered across the line were
many articles of useful clothing—some, belonging to your
devoted servant, which the steward had placed there. All
last night I suffered extremely from a bilious attack. I
had partaken freely of salt pork on Saturday, with haricot
beansp the latter of which lam particularly fond of. The
Captain suggested some patent fruit bitters, they did me no
good; I felt really “ wretched ”as Mr. Gillet would remark.
I tried seidlitz powder, no relief; some whiskey, no better ;
lying down, an enigma, for no sooner did I do so, I had to
get up, the bunk being so close. I tried in vain to, “Oh
my,” but couldn’t, and at last determined to change the
remedial measures altogether, and deaden the senses with
Geneva, compound of Juniper berries. In this, 1 somewhat
succeeded, and am glad, otherwise the last resort would
have been laudanum, or chloral. I managed to eat at
6 p.m. some chicken, but took it sparingly and went to bed
immediately after “ evening service,” which it was impos-
sible for me to be present at. I lolled in an arm-chair on
the poop dozing at intervals. Our lat., 00° 05' S. ; long.,
29° 08' W. ; course, N. 8 E. ; variation, 17° W. ;
distance, 41 miles; wind and weather as usual provok-
ing ; barometer, 29-77, 29-90, 29-95 ; thermometer, 79°,
79°, 78°.
April 19, Monday. —This morning I was enabled to
“ throw up ” Saturday and Sunday’s diet at 6.30. The
horrible taste of the salt brine, mixed with fruit bitters,
lime-juice, whisky, chicken, and Geneva, as it rushed out


of my mouth, I cannot describe. I really felt, and am
sure “ I looked,” as if “ I could not help it,” and therefore
did as I pleased. So I took some more “Schnapps” and
went off quickly to sleep, waking up at 8-30 very much
refreshed. I continued the physic, and found by dinner
time I had greatly improved in health and appearance. I
took great care, however, to eat nothing for breakfast, or
in the mid-day tiffin, excepting some spare rusks I dis-
covered I had by me. I also partook of an apple. About
3 o’clock p.m. we were abreast of St. Paul’s Rocks, we were
only a quarter of a mile off. The chief excitement of the
day was shark fishing. There were hundreds swarming
around the stern of our vessel of various species—viz., the
shovel-nosed, tiger, and ordinary. We saw some of the
former that must have been fully 20ft. long. One of them
attacked the cut-water of the “Loch Sloy.” Unfortunately,
we had not hooks strong enough to catch these enormous
monsters, and were compelled to confine our attention to
those averaging from 3ft. to 10ft., the smaller ones, for the
purpose of food, and real dainties they are I can tell you,
for the crew prepared several for their evening meal, and
others for drying, so as to serve them as a wholesome
change now and again in lieu of salt provisions. The larger
ones were taken purposely for their back-bones and jaws,
as presents to our friends. I got one catch, and could have
had many more if I desired, but the exertion in lending a.
hand in “hauling up ” was too much for me; besides, I
enjoyed the fun much better in witnessing proceedings fore
and aft. We caught in all about thirty. Messrs. McLean,
Lehman, Birnie, and Weir being the principal piscators..
The sharks were very savage and troublesome when
landed. One, as he was being hauled over the stern rails,
gave the “ man at the wheel ” (Apprentice Hill) a slap with
his tail that nearly sent him flying over the weather
quarter ; fortunately, he held on to the wheel. Another,,
about Bft. long, after being disembowelled, was taken for


dead; all of a sudden he made a sudden movement and
cleared very quickly the onlookers. Tom, the cat, was
present investigating a piece of the tyrant’s liver, but
when this particular movement was performed by his
serene deepness, Tom jumped to an extraordinary altitude,
on to the quarters of the second officer —Tom, according to
one eye-witness, actually flew. The carpenter and boat-
swain then appeared on the scene, and after giving the
marine inhabitant some special marks with hatchet and
sledge-hammer, he was lifted over the side ; but, strange to
say, the shark commenced to swim away unconcernedly
until attacked by his cannibalistic brethren, who, seeing he
was injured, immediately commenced operations on him.
Again, another monster was hauled up. After receiving
from Captain McLean six revolver bullets, he was taken
forward to be dissected, as I wanted one of the pieces of
lead as a memento, but none could be found; the shot
holes were there, but the missiles went right through.
Well, after all this cutting up—the head severed, &c., the
fish was so tenacious of life that the parts kept moving
about, the tail flopping here, the belly there. I myself had
the heart in my hand, and the nerve power was existing
after I threw it overboard, and I am convinced I held it
fully ten minutes. It was, indeed, a “ dance of death ;” to
witness the sailors grinding their knives and cutting up
(with what I might term fiendish delight) their mortal
enemy, will never be effaced from my memory. “ Here
comes another; go for him, Bill!” and other terms, some
of which were indeed remarkable, and not polite for my
readers. But I quite agreed, and as each animal had been
divested of his tail, interior belongings, and head, they in
turn were cast into the sea to become a prey for their
former companions. I am told that life remains in the
shark similar to snakes, eels, &c., until sundown. As a
trophy, I was presented with a backbone 7ft. long, and the
jaws of its former owner. When alive this shark measured


over 9ft. from tip of tail to snout. We noticed that the
“ Ophelia” and another barque, whose name we did not
ask for, were busily engaged at the same sport long after
we had left the scene of warfare, and evidently meeting
with the same success as we did, and perhaps greater, if
they possessed larger hooks. It is something awful to
contemplate the fate of a “ man overboard ” in that region.
I had for dinner shark cutlets. I confirm my previous
opinions as to edible shark more fully as to the small ones
which we had on the table. They tasted like veal. An
epidemic has certainly spread among our live stock. The
steward (whose face beams with happiness, I should
observe, now that we have crossed the line) lost his second
grey parrot—it fell overboard and was drowned. This
makes four birds he has lost. lam pleased to say that my
ferns begin to show signs of vitality, as fresh vegetation is
springing from the roots. Our lat., 0° 52' N. ; long.,
29° 19' W.; course, N. 10 W.; variation, 15° W.; distance,
51 miles ; wind, as before ; weather very hot for the tem-
perature, 80°, 78°, 80°; barometer, 29-93, 29-94, 29-88.
The St. Paul’s islets consist of a cluster of five steep,
craggy rocks, covered with birds’ manure and without
verdure, and having no place for anchoring, or convenience
for landing. They are about a quarter of a mile in extent
each way, and the highest part is about 100 ft. above the
sea. With a line of 100 fathoms, no bottom was found
within two miles of the islets. Captain Delano, in the
American Ship “Perseverance,” from Boston towards Cape
Horn, 23rd December, 1799, seems to have been the first
mariner to have noticed them. He hoisted the small boat
out and went on shore, where he found the aspect most
dreary, the sea roaring and surging on all sides. The
rocks extended from N.N.E. to S.S.W. Two smaller
rooks were lying off to the S.S.W. of the large ones, and
one very small one to the N.E. He discovered no dangers
but what showed themselves above water. He appears to


•have had a lively time of it with the sharks, he says
‘ ‘ Sharks were numerous about the ship, but in attempting
to take them a number of hooks and lines were lost, and
several pairs of grains lost. The ‘ Tellichery,’ East Indiaman,
passed ‘ St. Paul’s ’ in sight in 1802, and found that the
appearance between N. 80° W. and N. 87° W. 6 or 7
miles distant was that of a heap of rugged rocks, with low
gaps between some of them, etc.” The French frigate,
“ Hermoine ” in 1825 (Commodore Brow) also reported the
islets, but the account is not interesting. The most
authentic accounts probably are those supplied by Admiral
Fitzroy (Fitzroy, vol. ii., p. 56) and Sir James Boss, who
visited them with the “Erebus ” and “Terror ” on November
28, 1839. Admiral Fitzroy says : “ The rocks appeared
extremely small at about eight miles distant; from his
observations he places the summit of the Penedo in
lat. 0° 55' 35", long. 29° 22'. He sent two boats to land
upon and examine them, his ship, the Beagle, sailed round 1
sounding and taking angles. He concludes from the
soundings taken in the boats, as well as on board the ship,
that St. Paul’s islets are unconnected with any shoal, the
highest point being merely the summit of a steep sided
mountain rising from the bottom of the ocean ”
Sir James Ross reports, “We found the steep north-
eastern side of the cove the most practicable point for
landing, and near it obtained our observations. The
remarkable rocks which lie in lat. 0° 56' N., long. 29° 20'
W., and more than 500 miles distant from any continent,
appear to have been missed by volcanic agency, and not in
any part exceeding 70ft. above the surface, present the
form of an oblong crater, the larger axis lying in a N.E.
and S.W. direction.” Dr. McCormick, who accompanied
the Antarctic expedition as surgeon and naturalist, gives
the following remarks : “ They consist of a group of rocks,
scarcely extending half a mile in circumference. The four
largest form a kind of bay, on the N.W. side, in which there


is a considerable swell. The highest rock is on the N.E.
side of the bay, rather sharply peaked, 70ft. above the sea.
The next in height, and the most remarkable from its
uniform white colour, is 61ft., and is on the S.W. or
opposite side. This rock is a very hard kind of horn stone,
covered with a thin layer of calcarious matter, evidently
formed by the excrement of birds. Variation, Nov. 28,
1889 13° 20' W.; in 1872, 15° 50' W. ; dip, 27° 8' N.”
We are again in the doldrums regarding the meaning of
this uncouth term for the equatorial calms and varying
winds, it is perhaps a corruption of the Spanish doloroso,
or old Portguese doloris, “ tormenting.” If so, then it has
been fully exemplified in the officers’ faces of this ship—for
frequently have their looks tormented me, and I have said
in my heart to them, “ I beseech thee torment me not.”
To sailors these embarrassing calms must be to their insides
like a “ legion of devils.” Altogether the effect on the
health and spirits, its enervating influences and the
oppressive and damp heat of the doldrums, makes the
equatorial region one of the most unpleasant parts of the
globe. Attention to personal cleanliness is very important
during the detention caused by these calms. Dampier
gives a quaint account of the ill effects of his men not dry-
ing their clothes, and lying down on their hammocks while
wet, which caused all to become offensive and open to
attack of disease. Captain Maury says: “The emigrant
ships from Europe to Australia have to cross it. They are
often baffled in it for two or three weeks ; then the
children and passengers who are delicate in health suffer
most. It is a frightful graveyard on the wayside to that
golden land.” Captain McLean’s opinion of the doldrums
is : “It is enough to make a fellow get up and sit down,
and that we must have got into the centre of gravity.” Our
lat., 00° 52' N. ; long., 29° 19' W. ; distance run, 51 miles ;
course, N. 10 W.; variation, 15° W. ; wind, variable ;
barometer, 29 - 93, 29-94, 29 - 88; temperature, 88°, 78°, 80°.


April 20, Tuesday.— ln consequence of the decks being
oiled, am confined to the saloon, or the main deck. Every
one is putting out his exterior apparel, in consequence of
the damp heat. There are several ships in company, but
we do not trouble them as they are mostly homeward
bound. At nigh time we sighted a steamer outward bound,
too dark to signal. There is no news worth speaking
about, the “ Empress of the Loch ” continues in good
health. Mine is pretty good; had boiled shark for dinner,
and roast cutlet for midday lunch, very nice and acceptable ;
it will be a long time before I touch any more salt brine.
There are some squalls at intervals, and always come on
when I require to smoke a pipe, driving me to cover, at
which I explode a few anathemas. I was up and about all
night until 12 p.m. ; the tomcat woke me up by springing
on to my breast after a rat. Agreeable, wasn’t it. Our
lat., 1° 13' N.; long., 29° 41' W.; distance run, 31 miles ;
variation, 13° W. ; wind, variable ; weather, as before;
barometer, 29-78, 29-77, 29-82 ; temperature, 82°, 80°, 84°.
It is to be hoped that we are not to have a continuance of
doldrums, as on the other side of the equator. Steward
afraid provisions won’t last!
April 21, Wednesday.— Went on deck at 3 a.m. this
morning, had a look round and smoked a pipe. The rain
squalls pursued me, so that I had to go to a heated bunk.
The port could not be opened unless I wished to have my
room flooded with water. A ship “Lilian” of St. John,
New Brunswick, signalled to us, but the rain prevented our
sending replies ; this was at 7 a.m. I would not go on deck
until 3 p.m., so unpacked the pictures, etc., to see if every
thing was right. The damp heat of the tropics has some-
what made the testimonial illumination tarnished, but will
soon dry ; one of the glasses to the Avalanche water colour
was smashed. This is but a trivial accident easily replaced.
Everything else all right. I had expected to find my Gran d


Lodge Certificate, and other Masonic parchments packed
up with them, but I suppose they with other things have
been forwarded by post direct to London. Our lat., 2° 29'
N.; long., 80° 27' W.; distance run, 99 miles ; variation,
13° W.; course, hi. 29 W; weather and wind, as above;
barometer, 29-78,29-84, 29-78.; thermometer, 82°, 82°, 81°.
I am indebted to Mr. Birnie, second officer, for apprentice
Mackalman’s assistance in helping me to unpack the
pictures, etc. I have made an error in describing appren-
tice Hill as a clergyman’s son, it is Mackalman (notice
change of name) who has that honour. He is a willing
agreeable lad; in fact all are, but he and apprentice Tait I
don’t know so much about as the other two, the latter
being in the first officer’s watch, I am more frequently with
them. “ Her Majesty ”is excellent.
April 22, Thursday.— Another bird died to-day from
the effects of sunstroke, belonging to the Captain ; it was a.
“ Joey,” Eosella. It began to whistle “ There is nae luck ”
admirably. This was the last bird, &c., belonging to the
skipper. Mrs. McLean has two, one for herself and one for
her mother, but the Captain wants one of these for a
Liverpool friend, but there does not seem to be any likeli-
hood that his wishes will be complied with. I tell him
“ If he don’t want no words,
He will touch not those birds.”
We have got into the north-east trade at last, and going
along at the rate of seven knots per hour. The steward has
increased in weight and does not look the same man. I
suppose I shall be walking the streets of London this time
next month. Our lat., 4°25' N.; 10ng.,33° 02' W.; distance,
147 miles ; course N. 37 W.; variation, 13° W.; barometer,
29-78,29-76,29-80; temperature, 82°, 80 q , 82°.; wind,N.4E,
April 23, Good Friday, and St. Georoe’s Day, also
my beloved pupil and Australian sister’s birthday, Annie


Lucie Harding. In my Churchman’s birthday book the
following is the writing, selected from the work of Thomas
a Kempis :—“ Fight like a good soldier, and if sometimes
thou fall through frailty, rise up again with greater strength
than before, trusting in My more abundant grace.” I trust
Annie ever will. I had saved fresh Creek eggs, preserves,
and apples sufficient to celebrate this day, which is the end
of the twelfth week since I came on board. We at dinner
table drank Annie’s health, and also that of her parents,
brothers and sisters, all of us being in the happiest of
sobriety. Captain McLean killed a sheep—so we had soup,
fish, flesh and fowl, ale, porter, sherry, lime water, and
aerated waters, flanked with almonds, raisins, prunes, etc.
Apprentice Stanley Hill (whose father is Goods Manager at
the Railway Station Bridgewater, England), by kind per-
mission of Mr. Lehman, the chief officer to whose watch
on deck he belongs, was my companion this morning, and
materially assisted me in a very fair interpretation of the
“ Stabat Mater,” and other musical performances, by turn-
ing over the leaves, attending to the fortes, by raising and
closing the top lid of the piano. This allowed the music
to continue without cessation at places it would be impos-
sible to observe had the performer no help. I played a
great deal of Church of England music, and the anthem
was “ Behold how good and joyful,” to the setting ofmusic
by Adam Clarke, who was formerly conductor of a Church
choir in South Melbourne. Hill is the most suitable of
the four lads for my purpose, he is member of the Church
of England, and understands what I require to be done.
Moreover, his saint’s day, St. George, is ours, he is the son
of an Englishman, of which there are very few on board,
and is a native of West Drayton, Middlesex, and born close
to the Rectory Grammar School, Hillingdon, near Ux-
bridge, where I went to school; he has been enabled to tell
me of many things connected with the place I was so
familiar with 10 years compulsorily in my life time, where


Drs. Swishtail and Laurelstick administered to mj early
education. Hill is to my mind a fearless sort of lad, lias
gentlemanly instinct (easily noticed by any one) has excel-
lent ideas of painting and drawing, which should be very
useful to him in after life, more especially if he continues
the sea as his profession, which I’ve no doubt he will. The
only great stumbling block to all young minds is contami-
nation, and this lad will do well to keep from the forecastle
talk as much as possible if he wishes to reach the summit
of his ambition. lam glad to know that his officers have
a good opinion of him; of course the lad smokes, and
enjoys a glass of beer, there are very few sailors who don’t.
Had Stanley Hill been a pupil of mine at the Church of
England Grammar School, I could have turned him out to
my satisfaction if he had the same musical taste as he has
in drawing. All the men ceased from toiling this day any
more than was requisite. In the afternoon I played some
English airs, including “ Nil Desperandum,” “ The Maids
of Merry England,” “ John Barleycorn,” “ The English-
man,” “ Britons Strike Home,” “ The Girl I left behind
me,” “Our Jack’s come Home,” “Quaker’s Wife,” “Death
of Nelson,” “ Stand to Your Guns,” “ Hearts of Oak,”
“ Nancy Lee,” and others, including “ Rule Britannia,”
and “ God Save the Queen,” confusion to her enemies,
republicans or otherwise. There was evening service at
7, but I kept the remainder or the day after 12 noon accord-
ing to the manners and customs of “ ye Englishhe people,
and did make merry.” We had an American ship in
company, but took no notice of her, she being too far away.
We have had a pleasant day throughout, with a brisk breeze.
Lat., 7° 08' N. ; long., 35° 11'W.; course, N. 29 W.;
distance, 178 miles ; variation, 14° W.; wind, N. 4 E.;
force, close hauled; barometer, 29 - 70, 29 - 76 ; temperature,
83°. 80°, 82°. The “ young protegee ” continues remark-
ably well, and is growing amazingly. Ten thousand five
hundred and fifty miles from Australia.


April 24, Saturday.— During service last night I noticed
the intense luminosity of the sea. The “ Loch Sloy ” was
rushing through the waters too quickly to enable us to be
successful to catch any of the diphydes, had we lowered a
net. Here is the method to be employed; first, an
improvised telescope, secondly, the net, all that we want is
a fair opportunity and no favour. Lieut. Maury of the
United States Navy, says, according to the wife of Captain
H. Toynbee, that a simple contrivance (if a microscope be
not at hand) to view these minute creatures, and other
wonders of the deep is to “ take the eye-piece, or first joint
of an ordinary telescope. i.o use it for the transparent
objects which the minute inhabitants of the surface waters
generally consist of, place them in a drop of water on a
piece of glass, held or fixed horizontally a few inches above
a sheet of white paper or a looking-glass, and the telescope
joint held by the lower .part at from a quarter to half an
inch above the surface above this glass. This will make
an excellent microscopic tube of great power sufficient to
show many of the singular forms and great beauties of the
animalcules, which cart be easily collected in vast numbers.
The best or readiest way of obtaining them is to tow a
small net consisting of a hoop, one, two, or three feet in
diameter, on which is strained a piece of bunting or fine
gauze, and this being drained occasionally into a vessel
will afford an abundant harvest.” A ship crossed our
bows to the leeward, showing a flash light at intervals
during the night. The “ little stranger ” continues well.
The day the same as yesterday. Lat., 10° 02' N. ; long.,
36° 43' W. ; course, N. 22 W. ; distance, 221 miles;
variation, 15° W. ; wind, bi. 5 E., force, close-hauled;,
weather fine ; barometer, 29 - 70, 29 - 72, 29 - 80 ; temperature,
81°, 80°, 82°.
April, 25, Sunday. Easter, and 3rd Pyjama Day.—
This morning I played the whole of the 12th Mass, the


Easter Hymns, and processional march as played at St.
Peter’s at Eome, including a Te Deum of the English
Church, and the Hallelujah of Handel. Apprentice John
Borland assisted in a similar manner, as Hill did on Holy
Friday. Borland is an intelligent lad, manners very
pleasing, has a bright smile, enters enthusiastically into
anything he undertakes, and could hold his own I should
think against anyone interfering with the liberty of the
subject in which he was interested. I am told he will
make a fine navigator, showing much promise, if he does
not allow himself to be tainted with forecastle slang. I
suppose the good old custom, (like many others which are
falling into disuse,) of the midshipman-apprentices being
invited in turns to the Captain’s table on a Sunday,
has fallen into disuse, as I have never seen or heard
of one being at the “ Loch Sloy’s ” during the home-
ward voyage, or, perhaps it is not usual in the
Glasgow Shipping Co’s, employ for them to be seen in
the saloon. In days gone by in the Dunbar line,
Blackwall liners, relatives and friends of mine who have
gone in them on voyages were when learning their pro-
fession, invited to the captain’s table on the first day in the
week, and their navigation studies assisted. Until the
disaster to the ship I went to Australia in 22 years ago,
always one of the apprentices was at ‘ ‘ table ’ ’ on Sunday.
They were not a patch upon Borland or Hill. I am of
opinion that encouragement of this sort tends to teach a
lad to look with confidence to the time when he can claim
by riaht his entry into the saloon, and I cannot help but
thinking that it would tend to eradicate that propensity which
the young sailor has for the “men’s” talk, where he learns
only that his officers don’t care for him, that they are
tyrants, and the thousand and one bad habits which even-
tually destroy a bright future, and which become a lasting
disgrace upon their grief-stricken parent or parents. It
may be said by some holding a command, “ I never was


allowed this and that,” and “had to fight my way.” I
would answer that is their misfortune, and it does not
necessarily follow that those coming after are to be treated
in the same manner, because they were unfortunate. There
is no very great effort required to fight one’s way to the poop
deck; diligence and perseverance, the same as in everything
else, must eventually succeed under proper tuition, and the
hoy who is to be trained as an officer can never hope to
succeed unless he gets kindly treatment combined with
firm discipline from his officer, and kept by all manner of
restrictions from being with the men when off duty. On
hoard this ship I notice the boys are very humanely treated,
this no doubt is the reason they look so well and cheerful.
If they don’t get into the saloon on a Sunday they gene-
rally get what can be spared from there. For my own part I
can conscientiously say that I have never given to the saloon
table a present of preserves, fruit, &c., but what I always
sent some into the boys, remembering how much I have had
to be grateful for in my later days when boys became men.
My last enjoyable holiday at Sydney was with one who was
a boy under my control. Does not my album show portraits
of boys who have become men of distinction ? Then help
the boys ; do all I can for them is my motto. ’Tis Easter,
the festival, I hope, of bright future times for all of you on
the Creek as well as my other friends in Australia, besides
myself and relatives. I feel particularly happy and well
this Easter Sunday, and should, if an opportunity offered,
heartily join in a hearty game of cricket or other friendly
game of dear old England. Now that we are nearing the
shores of the “White Cliffs,” I am thinking of the light
and sunshine there is in store for me on the Sunday
afternoon, with bands playing, cricket, parties of happy
excursionists out for a trip on the briny, or across to the
Continent, or to their country friends, which a wise
English Parliament has provided for her own pecflble. How
pleased shall I be to see the museums, public galleries, and


other places of intellectual resort thrown open to the
public. When I know that such learned, conscientious,
men as the late Archbishop of Canterbury, a Scotchman
by-the-bye, the present Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, the new Bishop of Manchester, that great and good
man Dr. Moorhouse, and the flower of the English Clergy
are all in favour of innocent recreation for the people on
Sunday afternoons by countenancing it with their admirable-
speeches. Away then with the religious fanatic, who says:.
“ I am wiser, holier, better than thou ; and inasmuch as
thou art unwilling to conform to my principles and practice-
I demand that the law should compel thee to do so,”
This is the motive power of the Sabbatarian movement of
Victoria, (it does not exist in New South Wales) and it not
only provokes an angry feeling of resistance from those
which it endeavours to dragoon into habits of sobriety
according to their peculiar wishes, but it alieniates from the
cause of temperance and religion numbers of persons who.
sincerely desire the moral amelioration of their fellow men.
I drop this subject with the following extract from my
scrap book, written by the celebrated Angles of the Austra-
lasian, why don’t you “practise what you preach ” a short
sermon. The driver of a coach set down at an inn a
Wesleyan minister who kept a lady out of the best seat in
the coach on that wet motning. As the horses were being
changed, breakfast was provided, and the usual hungry
rush was made by the passengers but the Eev. gentleman(?)
sternly reproached them for neglecting grace before meat.
He asked a prolonged blessing, and as soon as the covers
were off he was the first to criticise the viands in no mea-
sured terms. “ One could never ”he said, “ get a decent
meal at these wayside inns.” “Well,” jerked out the coach-
man, in a voice like the crack of a whip, “ why don’t you prac-
tise what you preach ? Hav’nt you just now blessed these
ere victuals and prayed God to make you thankful for em.”
Yes, Albert, you know as well as I do, when the Sunday


comes those who are opposed to our driving out on the
Sunday, and would torce their Puritanical notions down
our throats, and be even more bigoted than the Romish
Inquisitors, if they had their power, never practise what
they preach. Growling and grumbling all the week about
one thing or another —about the hardness of times, or
endeavouring to best their neighbour, finding fault with
this and that, pointing the finger of scorn on his fellow
man, making himself appear holier than them, and “hold-
ing forth ” at night at some “ religious service,” or
whatever it is called, calling these same people his dear
friends. Or perhaps on a Sunday is driven down from a
livery stable, where his preciousness is safely conveyed to
the little Bethel, in a country district where he may have,
or generally has, tradesman business with many of the
inhabitants. In his Sunday’s discourse he is fierce in his
denunciations of Sabbath breakers he meets out for a drive,
forgetting that the contributions of his listeners have to go
towards paying for his buggy hire, and that many of the
few present are there because they have no other “ amuse-
ment ’’—not being up to a spring cart, or the like. Again,
has it not been known in our little district for the County
Court officer to be out serving some poor unfortunate
with a process, at the suit of the actual man who only a
few Sundays preached in that very chapel on the charity of
being merciful to the poor and needy. No, my dear boy,
they never “ practise what they preach.” It is generally
some ignorant fool of a fanatic, who dislikes to see his
neighbour without the miserable face he assumes. Happily,
on board this ship I am free from “ pious bigoted people,”
and shall soon be among my own kith and kin, where a
Geelong Sunday is not known. While all is quiet I am
thinking of the Creek, and writing this for amusement and
profit. The sea looks beautiful, our noble vessel is close
hauled, and we are making good distances, which you will
observe. The last of the eggs (but one, which lam saving


to eat all by myself in English waters), the jam, preserves,
and fruit from the Creek were served out to the saloon and
boys to-day, and I invited the officers to “ celebrate ’’privately
the day of rejoicing, now that Christ is risen from the
tomb. We passed a ship supposed to be foreign in the
middle night watch. “ Her Highness ”is well. Our lati-
tude is 12° 48' N.; long., 87° 43' W.; distance, 158 miles ;
course, N. 17 W.; variation, 18° W.; wind, N. 5 E. ;
force, close hauled ; weather, beautifully fine ; barometer,
29-78, 29-88, 29-80; temperature, 78°, 83°, 80°.
April 26, Monday in Easter Week.-— I was up at 5.30
this morning and busy with one thing and another. There
was quite a field night for the cat “ Tom.” He was
scampering about the saloon and the state rooms as wild
and as eccentric as he could be with his prey. He caught
four full-grown species of the rat race. I could not make
out what the noise was about, but soon ascertained. lam
quite well, and shall be very busy this week compiling my
Australian correspondent’s letter to the Geelong press.
The sea continues very luminous, and the North Star is
visible. It is a curious thing to a non-professional eye
that this star is always the same distance above the horizon
as the latitude of the ship is from the equator. As we are
approaching the northern latitudes we are leaving the sun
behind us; perhaps the following reason may be interest-
ing, and as brief and concise as possible. To understand
this it is necessary to know that the sun’s limit in the
northern and southern hemispheres are 23° 28' each side of
the equator. These two parallels are called the tropics,
the one N. being called Cancer, and the one 8. is called
Capricorn. Now, the sun travels backwards and forwards
every six months between these two parallels, and is now
on its way north, and happens to be to-day perpendicular
over the latitude that we are in, and as we are passing to
the northward of that latitude we are leaving the sun to


the southward, or behind us. The sun is also travelling
north, but we are sailing faster, consequently we are
leaving the sun behind us. There are shoals of flying fish
about, but we have not managed to obtain any, which is
vexatious, as I would like to get some more specimens in
addition to the only one I have. Our Royal infant pro-
gresses remarkably well, and has appointed Apprentice
Stanley Hill to be an extra page in waiting, for which he
has paid the usual homage. We have parted company
with the ships and left them astern, so that we are all by
ourselves. The day has been a glorious one, and the “Loch
Sloy” begins to look like a summer bird, now that the
painting and cleaning is rapidly approaching completion.
We shall look superb as we enter the port of London. I
can find nothing more to dilate upon, further than saying
my health is of the best. Our lat. is 15° 14' N.; long.,
39° 81' W. ; course, N. 25 W.; variation, 13° W.; distance,
171 miles; ship on starboard tack and close hauled;
barometer, 29 - 84, 29-90, 29-90; thermometer, 79°, 78°, 80°.
It is 10 p.m., therefore require my night-cap ; good night.
A pain 27, Tuesday.— After a most refreshing sleep, undis-
turbed by dreams of any kind, I awoke at 5.30 a.m., and
imihediately took to the bath, which my good friend and
brother Mr. Birnie had already prepared for me ; it was a
great treat and luxury. As the sea was not of a disturbing
nature, I immediately applied myself to writing memoranda
for my correspondent’s letter, and perused the items of
this journal, which I think will be of interest to the public
reader; and got through a good two hours’ labour before
breakfast. The time slips away rapidly, and I am much
afraid I shall not get half through what I contemplate
doing. I made three sketches of the “ Iceberg ” for my
Captain, as he desires to send them with some matter he
is compiling to the Shipping and Mercantile Gazette, and
Lloyd’s agent. All the morning I have been employed


•with the subject of Neptune and the crossing the line. I
sketch them first in the book I have for that purpose, and
when I get days like we have at present, draw them in my
diary. The sun being very warm, I took a siesta after
lunch, and slept until 3 p.m., and spent the remainder of
the afternoon in drawing. After tea-dinner played some
music of a maritime character, and also enjoyed a pipe of
the fragrant weed. I always enjoy a smoke at sea, more
especially when in conversation with the officers. We
generally discourse about something refined and intellectual,
the stars, sea, and remembrances of our friends in both
hemispheres. The dear little baby complains not, only
when she wants the “bottle.” I have never had the
■courage to sample the contents of the mysterious compound
placed therein, and therefore know not whether there is
“ anything in it,” but I have no doubt but that Ada would
very soon tell me. I wish she were here. When I ask
questions of the nurse, all I get for my seeking after useful
knowledge is, “Never you mind.” Our latitude is 17° 18'
N.; long., 41° 07' W.; course, N. 30, 5 W.; variation,
14° W. ; wind and weather grand, and the force as yester-
day ; distance, 159 miles ; barometer, 29-86, 29-96, 29-92 ;
thermometer, 80°, 78°, 80°. Again a lot of flying fish in
shoals seen, but none caught; it is conjectured we are
going too fast. We have tried to secure a dolphin, or
bonite, or even an albercore, but all in vain.
April 28, Wednesday. — Up at 5.30 a.m., and usual
splash in the water. I revel in it, and feel so light and
fresh after coming out. Our floating hotel sailing on
majestically, the sensation is as if one was on a yacht, for a
pleasure excursion, weather being delightful. I cannot
conceive why the Australians do not take more to the sea
than they do. A voyage to some of them would open their
eyes a bit, were thej to make the venture. The cost is a
mere bagatelle to any one fond of adventure, yet how many


thousands there are in the world well able to afford it, who
live in it with their eyes oblivious to anything but the neigh-
bourhood in which they are located. I have been employed
as usual making things straight. The “ wee thing ” quite
well and happy. I fed her to-day at one of her meals, and
got a reward in a similar manner she bestows her favours
upon others. I am quite satisfied with what was given
me, and have no desire to receive an appointment in her
■establishment, being otherwise engaged. Our lat., 19° 23'
N. ; long., 41° 80' W.; distance, 113 miles; course,
N. ; variation, 14° W.; wind and weather as yesterday;
barometer says, 29-93, 30-04, 80-04; and thermometer at
noon, 80°, 78°, 80°. As I retired to bed the wind was
dropping to a dead calm, but then we are in a latitude,
where this must be expected.
April 29, Thursday.— To-day has been nothing but very
calm weather, bright and sunny. We made our first
experiment in the afternoon, catching animalcules, and
were successful in several instances ; what we obtained
were similar to what I have already described, and I shall look
forward with interest to other specimens. Large masses of
a particular kind of sea-weed which grows in the Gulf of
Mexico were floating about the sea in all directions, there
are many varieties—very pretty; some of the leaves are
marked like ferns, and on the stalks are numerous berries.
I have secured some in clear bottles to take home ; the
plants die if exposed to the air, and turn black. I
regret this exceedingly, as it would be a curiosity to send
some to Freshwater Creek for the album, if the original
■colour could be maintained. We hope to secure fresh
samples as we proceed, and, being in the tropics, lots of
interesting matter is continually floating about. My young
friend, Stanley Hill, lost his cockatoo yesterday. I am
indeed very sorry that after he had kept his pet so long
and so nearly home, his bird should fly into the sea, he


seemed very grieved as well he might he, and was-
restrained from jumping into the sea with difficulty. We
also spoke yesterday the Norwegian barque, “ Taurus,” bound
from the Eiver Plate to Hamburg, 33 days out. We were so
close to her that the conversation mostly was by mouth. We
learnt that the wife and family of the captain were on
board. Our lat., 20° 00' W.; long., 41° 26' W.; distance, 40
miles; course, N. 40 E. ; variation, 15° W. ; barometer,
30-04, 30-06, 30-03; thermometer, 80°, 77°, 810°.
Apeil 30th, Peiday.— Thirteen weeks from Geelong to-
day. All’s well on board the “ Loch Sloy ; ” some of the
men have boils, but that is a usual ship complaint. The
decorative artists, Messrs. Lehman and Hill, have com-
menced their duties in lettering and gilding the life buoy,
buckets, boats, etc., and their skill and industry are rewarded
by the excellent appearance of their completed exercises.
We have very little wind ; almost a calm. One of the men
told me to-day the voyage wasn’t long enough for him, as
he would have very little money to take when we arrived in
port. I would not mind another three months at sea,
with a few alterations. I suppose the Creek people have
finished their Easter festivities, and assumed their usual
avocations. “ St. John,” the pony, should by this time
be proving what he is likely to turn out. The other
animals, I presume, are just the same as ever. The ship’s
cat, Tom, must be very fond of music, he sleeps on the top
of the piano, and it is astonishing with what rapidity he
rushes into the saloon when he hears the sound of the notes.
Having satisfied himself that it is all right, he places
himself into a convenient position and commences washing
his face and legs, having previously, to my sorrow, made me
a present of his spare fleas, but I don’t mind them now.
Tom never goes away, as a rule, while the music is
continuous, but when it ceases he goes sniffing all round,
inspecting the pedals, no doubt to see if they are digestible.


and finally jumps on to the top for his afternoon nap.
Another cockatoo reported on the sick list, John Borland’s,
I got him some castor oil, he came to tell me. Let us
hope his bird will be spared. I like these lads very much,
and am always glad to do anything I can for them. They
have a nice manner, thoroughly British in speaking of
home ; there is a true ring in their merry voices. Their
appreciation of Australian acquaintances, they proved by
the care and attention they bestowed upon their pet birds,
which warm-hearted Mends had presented to them, and
the annoyance (of not being enabled to keep them until
the end of the voyage, so as to take them to their parents
or other home friends), to affectionate minds, such as is
undoubtedly evidenced by the manner and conversation of
the lads I have mentioned, will be well understood by my
reader. When I gave a description of the shark killing,
I omitted to state that one of our crew met with an
adventure at the scene of action, Mr. Shark no doubt
cautions strangers “ to beware how you handle his tail,”
similarly as that curious animal the “ British Lion ”
advises persons “ to beware how you tread on his tail,”
or even “ Paddy,” who ironically invites you to tread on
the tail of his “ illigant coat.” This is why the deep
gashes are given by the sailors to that portion of that
which forms the shark’s tail. Our lat., 20° 28' N.; long.,
42° 36' W.; distance, 60 miles ; course, 48 W.; variation,
14° W.; weather and wind, fine, calm, and variable;
barometer, 80-04, 30-06, 30-07; thermometer, 82°,
76°; 80°. Eleven thousand four hundred and seventy-four
miles from Australia.
May i.—This diary has swelled like Trotty Yeeks’ last
week’s newspaper full of information of my life on board.
I trust as we are nearing the end of the voyage my reader
will have found what I have written equally as interestingly
as it has been for me to jot down “ our ” every day’s pro-


ceedings that I have thought proper to record. The
weather continues very calm, the sails flap lazily about,
wanting wind to fill them. There are several vessels in
company. I suppose the Captains of each are “whistling
for wind,” same as we are. I commenced my newspaper
correspondence, and have made a fair start, and by way of
change am making copies of our shark adventures for
friends on board. I have not mentioned the past two or
three days anything about our latest passenger, she is well,
and getting on famously. Could her father see her now,
he would indeed be proud. We wonder where the “Greta”
is. Our commander intends speaking one of the home-,
ward bound ships on the same course as we are if oppor-
tunity arises, in order to ascertain if anything can be heard.
We have been fishing, but in vain. Our lat., 21° 37' N.;
long., 43° 41' W.; course, N. 35 W.; variation, 13° W.;
distance, 66 miles ; barometer, 30-07, 30-07, 30-10 ; ther-
mometer, 76°, 75°, 77°.
May 2, Low Sunday. —A very appropriate name. Cap-
tain seems down-hearted at the continued calms. More
ships in sight and in the same predicament. I counted
eight before 11 a.m. Did not play any music, my young
assistants being “ turned in ; ” it was their early watch,
from 4 a.m. to 8 a.m. One of them offered to come to me,
but I could not be so hard-hearted as to deprive any one of
a well-earned sleep. Another thing, my press correspon-
dence required all my spare time. Consider that I have to
wade all through this narrative. So I had a good day, as
all was quiet, at quill driving, resting only when the bell
tolled for service. Our lat., 22° 39' N. ; long., 44° 11' W.;
course, N. 24 W. ; variation, 13° W.; distance, 65
miles; barometer, 30-04, 30-07, 30-12; thermometer,
75°, 74°, 79°.
May 3. —Continued calms. This day there were ten


vessels in company and one outward bound. Spoke barque
■ Loch Cree, ” from Hawkes Bay, New Zealand, for Lon-
don, 80 days out ; all well. She enquired how “ Miss
Cassady ” was. .We were glad to reply “ remarkably well.”
In answer to enquiries, we learnt that the Captain of the
■“Greta” was on board the “Loch Cree” on the 16th
April, and that he was well, and dying to see his little
child. It is therefore quite possible we shall meet with
Captain Cassady before long. We signalled to the “ out-
ward bound,” but either she could not see our signals, or
did not care to. We distinguished the “ Taurus ” among
the many vessels in company. This evening I was pre-
sented by my dear young friend Stanley Hill with an
artistic oil painting of the “Loch Sloy,” correct every
detail; both Captain and chief officer commend the work.
lam delighted beyond measure. Ido indeed highly prize
it from so young a genius. I am not aware that I have
done anything to deserve so graceful a souvenir, any more
than what I have mentioned in these pages. The painting
is really so well done as to be worthy of a gold frame of
the best design, which it shall not fail to have. Albert,
you would like Stanley H. Hill, and John M. Borland, they
have both the same kind and willing temperament of your-
self. We crossed the tropic of Cancer this morning at
11.80 a.m. I looked about to see if there were any of his
namesake (crabs) floating about, but not one —no, not one.
A crab well-served would be a delicacy for the table just
now. lam still spending all my spare time for the Geelong
press. Our lat., 23° 29' N.; long., 44° 14' W.; distance,
50 miles ; course, N. BE. ; variation, 13° W.; barometer,
30-09, 30-11, 30-14 ; thermometer, 80°, 79°,. 79°.
May 4, Tuesday.— As yesterday, calm, calm, calm.
Captain slightly ill; his wife agrees with me, it is the
worry. lam truly sorry the “ Loch Sloy "is so delayed,
it being our skipper’s first command. I shall be very much


surprised if we are in London Docks before the 20th inst.
Just now speculations are taking place as to the actual date
of arrival. Boatswain says “ I gave her to the 20th May
when she left Geelong.” Carpenter said, “He knew what
the ship could do, and gave her to the 17th May.” Sail-
maker says he “gave her to the middle of May.” Our
petty officers’ prognostications are very close upon one
another. On the 22nd April I wrote in this journal, “ I
suppose this day month I shall be walking the streets of
London. So lam close on them, but really lamin no
hurry, my life is so happy with Continued health, that when
I land I shall miss my old berth. The glorious sunsets
every night are magnificent. Several ships in company.
“ Cannot remember seeing so many here,” say the officers.
You may depend upon I never did. Writing correspon-
dence as usual. Our lat., 24° 42' N.; long., 43° 53' W.;
distance, 74 miles ; course, N. 17 E.; variation, 13° W.;
no use speaking about the wind; barometer, 30-09, 30-10,
30-16.; thermometer, 78°, 74°, 79°.
May 5, Wednesday.— Calm, as told you before, and I
write it once more. There is actually nothing more for me
to say. Ido not know if you ever noticed the figures on
the willow pattern plate, with the two human beings
changed into doves, and the three men or women going
over the bridge, &c., &c. Well, if you look at this pattern
every day in your life you will find no changes ; they are
always there. Yes, though sometimes a fly might be there,
or dust, or other matter by way of a change. Then the
aspect as I tread the deck every morning this week has
been the same. We see the ships we saw yesterday; there
might be an extra one come to join in the picture, but
they don’t seem to move any more than ourselves. I
would give anything to hear the remarkable words that are
either said to themselves, or at least thought of by the
officers, I knowing by the look of their faces there is some-


thing up. We would be grateful to “ Father Antonio ”if
he would “ gi’e ” us a whiff of his wind force. Lat.,
25° 22' N.; long., 43° 52' W.; distance run, 44 miles ;
wind and weather, variable; barometer, 30-14, 30-ll»
30-13; thermometer,_ 77°, 74°, 76°; course, N. 17 W.;
variation, 14° W. Three whales seen of the sperm species;
father, mother, and calf. They did not spout, which I
regret, as I desired to notice the difference of the habits of
the cetaceae of the South Pacific from the North Atlantic.
My knee tells me a change of weather is about to take
place.
May 6, Thuesday.— We counted eight steamers and
sailing vessels early this morning, mostly homeward bound.
Father Antonio has removed the calms and given us a
strong head wind. As nightfall approached other ships
and barques joined in the crowd. We spoke the barque
“ Golden Sunshine,” of Newport, from Conception, South
America, to Bolt Head for orders, 71 days out; also a new
ship, showing letters J. W. S. N., from San Francisco to
Cork for orders, 98 days out. We recognised our old
friend the “ Greta,” in the afternoon, and when both ships
recognised each other, hearty congratulations followed.
We signalled, before the “ Greta ” had time to ask, “ The
baby is remarkably well.” This gave the bereaved parent
much joy, and on our asking him to come on board to
dinner at 6 p.m., “ He regretted he could not,” but would,
wind and weather permitting, board us on Friday. I met
with a slight mishap to-day. The ship was rolling and on
the starboard tack, I managed to lose my footing and fell
on my right side, grazing.my arm and spraining my wrist.
The acting medical drawer bound the wrist up. It has not
prevented the use of my fingers for writing and drawing,
but I cannot button on a collar, or fasten shirt sleeves, so
my young friend Hill sees to that for me. In reference to
this lad’s oil paintings once more. He does them all with


the left hand, hence they are the more valuable. We
caught a dolphin, and had it for tea. The flesh was very
appetiting. I did not find such a great distinction of
flavour from that of a young shark, but then I am not a
“gourmand.” Edible fish of any description is always
welcome to my net. Our course, N. 46 W.; variations,
15° W.; lat., 26° 00' N. ; long., 42° 53' W.; distance, 75
miles ; wind and weather fine and variable; barometer,
80-09, 80-11, 80-16 ; and thermometer, 76°, 74°, 73°. The
beautiful colours of the fish, as they change through each
death throe, cannot be pictured, suffice it to say, it showed
pretty well all the colours of the rainbow. I have not
written any “ strophe ” on the poor dolphin fish, “Laying
dead in a dish.” It would require a Mrs. Leo. Hunter, of
“Expiring Frog” celebrity ( vide the Pickwick papers).
“ Blow breezes, blow.” Ah ! yes, I have got three or four
songs the sailors sing. John M. Borland and Mr. William
Weir supplied them to me. How often Mr. Weir reminds
me of my friend the late Town Clerk of Geelong; to the
latter name hangs a tale I shall not forget, simply because
it is true. It being short and sweet, ! record it; Sometime
before Mr. Weir’s death, he attended a meeting at the
Mechanics, Geelong, which had for its object the promotion
of temperance, and the doing away with drink, etc. As
usual, the speakers who got up the meeting, got very
intemperate over their water drinks; and pictured the
unhappiness of the few miserable wretches who are obliged
to abstain, because they cannot control their vicious habits
or choleric temper when excited by it, and which does not
say much for their stamina. The non-abstainers were
abused right and left, the blue ribbon was the “ only means
of grace ” ; it wouldn’t be a proper meeting unless religion
was dusted over the article (similar to Sandy asking his
apprentice if he had dusted the sugar, before he read the
prayers). One hoary-headed old gentleman “had found
grace.” “Look at me,” he says, “here am I, 80 years of age.


and attribute it to being an abstainer for the past 50 years,
before then, I was ” . . . . here he seemed to glory in
informing the audience of his lust and previous life. He
was saved thanks to that, pointing to a glass of cold water
standing on the Bible. “ Yes, my friends, to that,” and in
his excitement (for he wore a most demoniacal face), he, in
his eagerness to “ let the people understand what saved
him,” accidentally knocked the glass of water on to the
volume of Sacred Law, some of it splashing into the Hon.
James Murray’s face, the latter not looking particularly
pleased. The Bible was of course saturated
After a pause Mr. William Weir here rose ; in the course
of his remarks, he explained why he was there, because it
was known that, although he was a non-abstainer, he had
ever the welfare of Geelong at heart. He had attended,
hoping to hear something of a more temperate character
than the speakers before him, and regretted that he had
heard no “fresh ” reasons that would induce him to change
his course of life, which to him had been a happy one for
the past 81 years, and he had no reason to regret any
portion of it. They were aware he was the first and oldest
Town Clerk in the colony, that office alone, more especially
in the earlier history of Geelong, required the utmost tact
to please the ratepayers, as well to assist in the dispensa-
tion of hospitality. He had no interesting particulars to
give of his early life 50 years ago, it was the same then as
now, regarding his habits. He therefore could point to
having lived in the world one year longer than his aged
friend who had just spoken, if he would allow him to call
him so, and as they were both on the threshold of the
grave, he was much inclined to think that a glass of good
wholesome beverage had prolonged his life when taken as
nature required. He had only until recently experienced
illness, owing to advanced age, but they should remember
he had of late done a good deal of travelling, and that he
was still in office . . . . It is a singular thing, that


the old gentleman who abstained died very soon after the
meeting. Dear old friend and brother mason, William
Weir, dying three years after.
May 7, Friday.— Fourteen weeks at sea to-day, and
not near the Western Islands yet, but if the wind instead
of being a head wind, was all in our favour we should soon
be off them. To do a certain distance we require to back
about so much, which is loss of time and patience to those
concerned. After breakfast the “ Greta ” came almost
within speaking distance, but as there was a nasty sea
running, Captain Cassady cannoi come on board for two or
three hours yet. From the time of writing (10 a.m.) my
wrist is painful, so I got the sail maker to bandage it up
scientifically, with some silk Mrs. McLean was so good as
to give me. The ocean is dotted all over with ships, we
passed the “Taurus” again this morning before 7 a.m.,
Captain Cassady with his second officer and the apprentices
boarded the “ Loch Sloy ” in the afternoon, and had
lunch and dinner. We were very glad to see them, and
learnt many strange and diverting stories of their doings,
since we had the pleasure of their visits before. The day was
kept as semi-holiday, and you may depend upon it I helped
to make the time go pleasantly. Captain Cassady looked
in good health. Their visit was quite a relief to the
monotony of the calms and head winds. They <Jid not
return to their ship until late, promising, however, to return
on the morrow, and bring the little girl, Captain Cassady’s
eldest daughter, to see her sister, and uncle John as ,1 am
called. Poor Dennis, the pig, was killed, he took the affair
very quietly, a few struggles and all was over. There are
numbers of the Nautilus floating about, significant of con-
tinued calms. Our lat., 27° 27' N.; long., 44° 06' W.;
distance, 101 miles; course, 41 W.; variations 15°; wind,
N. 5 E.; force, close hauled ; a pleasant breeze betokened
the weather; barometer, 30-14,30-18,30-16; temperature,


72°, 71°, 70°; 11,849 miles from Australia. I trust all
are well there.
May 8, Satubday. —The weather same as yesterday.
Captain Cassady came on board before noon, and brought
his daughter. He also brought me a present of navy
tobacco from Mr. Harwood, as I had run short, for what is
on board is bad and worthless, and never imitated. The
■“ Greta ” speaking us has been very opportune, as many
little things we had run short of can now be replenished by
mutual exchange of stores. The day has been spent very
merrily, the corks frequently flying about; I determined to
make the day one of special greeting, more especially as
the captain, officers, and apprentices who came with the
“ Greta’s ” boat were invited by our skipper to stay all
night over Sunday, by request, every one treated alike, as
a pig is not killed every day. I had never an opportunity
before this to show my appreciation of some of those for —
and more especially to those who are always doing some-
thing or other for me. Therefore some samples of Barclay
and Perkins, were forwarded to the cook’s galley, and there
■served out. The apprentices were entertained by me
through Stanley Hill and John Borland, as I made them a
present of a “ bag of something,” and got steward to give
me a large share of plum pudding and other delicacies boys
like. In the saloon everything was quite comfortable, and
I liked the appearance of happy faces enjoying a grateful
dish of fresh roast pork washed down with an English
glass of porter. We had music, mirth, and song, and
it was late before we went to our nocturnal slumbers.
There are still several ships in company. Our lat.,
29° 32' N.; long., 44° 52' W.; course, N. 18 W. ;
distance, 125 miles; variation used, 15° W.; wind,
N. 6 E.; force, as yesterday; weather, as yesterday
barometer, SOTS, 30 23, 3016; temperature, 70°, 66
69°.


May 9, Sunday, Second after Easter. — l walked the
poop early this morning with Captain Cassady, and we
talked of each other’s experience, Continental and otherwise.
I mentioned the warm friends I had left behind me at
Geelong, and particularly referred to those on the Creek.
After breakfast played to him as he sat on my left, (Stanley
Hill on the right acting as our organist). The music was
by request, Mozart No. 12, The Funeral March, “Saul,”
Chopin’s, Funeral March, a Te Deum of Handel’s “Eejoice
0 King,” woundup with the Night Watch, and Hallelujah.
The perspiration rolled down me fearfully, as the atmos-
pheric changes, even in this mild temperature, became
suddenly humid and oppressive. Captain McLean was
also in attendance. After lunch I had a siesta, and at-
tended service in the evening. The day passed very quietly,
because a dead calm, causing many surmises as to when
the “ Loch Sloy ” and “ Greta ” would reach their destina-
tion. Captain Cassady, who is full of anecdote, adventure,
and reminiscenses, related an instance of a captain he knew
but 32 years of age being becalmed on the equator for 42
days. The captain he mentioned took the detention so
much to heart that his hair turned quite white, and that
on his arrival home in England, many of his friends knew
him not, the change was so remarkable. Now, I notice
that the captain of the “ Loch Sloy” does not look himself,
and there is a vast alteration in the officers’ countenances
also. This is owing to the anxiety of forced detention by
calms. There is nothing more to speak of but to record
the lat. as, 30° 49' N. ; long., 45° 12' W.; distance run, 86
miles ; course, N. 2 W.; variations, 17° W.; wind and
weather, dead calm; barometer, 80-06, 80-21, 30-20
temperature, 69°, 67°, 70°.
May 10, Monday. —Dead calm. Captain Cassady again
came on board, bringing tobacco for ship’s use and other
needful stores. He also brought me a pound of Navy


tobacco in half-pound plugs for my own use, and as &
present. It was after breakfast when he arrived, but we
soon set to work to renew “pleasurable acquaintance.’
He asked me to play “ Aida ’’ waltz ; he is very fond of it,
he says. He had it in his head all day yesterday (Sunday),,
and was wanting to hear it again. I played several times
to him when the heat of the day chilled a bit. There are
the same ships in company; very annoying to all con-
cerned. If weather is like this to-morrow lam to spend
the day with Captain McLean on board the “Greta.”
There is positively nothing to write about, besides, I cannot
sit down and leave Captain Cassady alone, when he
expects my company, or when the Captain of this ship has
occasion to leave him. I can say no more, but when you
see my newspaper scrap-book you will read extracts from
Port Pirie papers, in which port he was treated like a lion
—“feted,” “banquetted,” and “presented.” He had
much to do with Masonry ; in fact, I should imagine the
Port Pireans must be dull when the “ Greta ” and her
commander are away. Our lat., 31° 08'N.; long., 45 °46' W.;
distance, 32 miles ; course, N. 48 W. ; variation, 18° W.
wind and weather, miserable; barometer, 30-15, 30-15,
30-10; thermometer, 69°, 67°, 70°.
May 11, Tuesday.— This morning Captain Cassady came
with high spirits to fetch Captain McLean and myself to
the “ Greta,” after he had stayed with us a short while. I
enjoyed myself exceedingly. I must here make a reminder
that I have not sailed all the voyage to Europe in one ship,
for this reason, I have been on board the “ Greta” three
times, and as we have always been travelling, it is evident
that some part of the journey has been with t’other vessel.
Captain Cassady, therefore, says, that he claims having
given a “ distinguished visitor ” (?) a passage part of the
way. I was most hospitably entertained by him and his
officers, and brought back to the “ Loch Sloy ” some books.


photographs, &c., &c., as reminiscences of good fellowship,
which latter ship we returned to before dusk, as the wind
was rising, and there was every prospect of a change in
the weather. I told the first officer I felt there was likely
to be a change, as I was walking very lame—a sure sign.
I felt glad for more than one reason. Our Captain frets a
good deal when his ship makes slow progress. “ Now it is
a great misfortune to have a fretful disposition. It takes the
fragrance out of one’s life, and leaves only weeds where a
cheerful disposition would cause flowers to bloom. The habit
of fretting is one that grows rapidly unless it be sternly re-
pressed ; and the best way to overcome it is to try always
to look on the cheerful side of things. Not only is kindness
due to every one, but a special kindness is due to every
one. Kindness is not kindness unless it be special. It is
in its fitness, reasonableness, and individual application
that its charm consists. By our fault-finding we always
hurt ourselves more than those about us. Men or women
with a habitual scowl or cross word are more to be pitied
than those about them. Its ugliness recoils on their
own heads, while it glances from all others against whom
it may be directed. Our troubles are mostly of our own
making, and the more we brood over them the more for-
midable they grow to us.” I could write a good deal on
“ men and manners ” from my own way of thinking, which
might not be viewed in accordance with my thoughts by
others, but I check myself when I remember what I
copied in my scrap-book, and which should always be
found among thoughtful minds. It is this—
‘ ‘ If you your lips would keep from slips
Five things observe with care—
To whom you speak,
Of whom you speak,
And how, and when, and where.”
As I have written something on the opposite side approach-


ing a sermon, I give the “ lastly” to it, as my text, taken
from Matt. vii. v. 12, in a short paraphrase—
“ Be you to others kind and true,
As you’d have others be to you ;
And neither say, nor do to men,
What e’er you would not take again.”
Therefore, away with fretful dispositions. We have several
ships in company, but too busy to “ signalize ” them. I
have put inverted commas between to and them to mark
the nautical phrase of signalling an object. On land we
say signal to that or this, or it signalled to us, or sent up a
signal. I like the nautical way best, but it may be con-
sidered egotistical on my part, and aping nautical manners
and terms; but it must be borne in mind that I am
descended from a race of Norsemen and Vikings, and have
I not had a brother, and relatives who gloried in Britannia
being the pride of the ocean ? and I am fondly in hopes of
seeing in the Isle of Wight those bearing my name whose
vocation is not on dry land. lam fond of the sea, and
all belonging to it, hence my attachment to the lads I
have so frequently mentioned in previous pages, and my
humble apology for making use of nautical terms. Before
going to bed, the night being clear, we dipped our ensign
to the “ Greta.” Our lat., 31° 44' N. ; long., 45° 26' W.
distance, 35 miles ; course, N. 28 E. ; variation, 18° W.;
wind, S. 5 E., freshening ; barometer, 80-10, 80-04; ther-
mometer, 70°, 68°, 70° ; distance, already stated.
Note. : —Her Majesty is well, and her papa was quite de-
lighted at her healthy appearance, and thanks all concerned.
May 12, Wednesday. —A beautiful change ; ship getting
up steam again. All the day has been spent “signalising”
between the “ Greta ” and “ Loch Sloy.” The last mes-
sage before the ensign was dipped for the day from the
former was, “ Report me at Lloyds.” We saw two ships


outward bound, and several new ships have joined com-
pany, all bound for Europe. I heard “ Johnny Bowker ”
■sung for the first time to day; a most mysterious indi-
vidual or article. It took me a long time to discover
whether he was a man, boy, or anything good to eat; but
I shall speak of the sailors’ songs before I close the history
of this eventful voyage. The men at work are painting all
that is required, and are coming to dress out the saloon
to-morrow, so I am compelled to burn the midnight oil;
in fact, have done so very much of late, though I get up at
5.30 a.m. But I must keep pace with the times, and not
trust to memory. My press correspondence has to be
worked up since I left off, owing to Captain Cassady’s
visit. Oar lat., 83° 48' N. ; long., 43° 41' W.; distance,
142 miles; variation, 19° W.; course, N. 38 E.; barometer
30 07, 30-15, 30-18; thermometer, 70°, 66°, 68°.
May 13.—This morning up at usual hour, and found the
painters had taken possession of the saloon; but I did not
mind them. I worked all day, with only an interval for
breakfast and a ten minutes’ tiffin, until 5.45 p.m., making
copies of sketches for the officers and apprentices. We
spoKe the ship “ Wellington ” from New Zealand, sixty-
six days out for London! I believe when I learnt this
that my hair would have curled tight, only there is none to
curl, it having been cut off as close as possible two days
ago by a Danish professor. She has beaten us by nearly
thirty days, as near as possible. We had baffling weather
from the Horn, she has had rattling winds. She passed us
at noon, and at this hour, 10 p.m., is far ahead of us. I
did not go on deck to learn any requests on either side, but
I’ve no doubt “ Beport me in London; all well,” which-
ever ship arrives there first. We also saw (but did not
speak her) the American ship “ John A. Porter.” The
name permits of a pleasantry, thusly —it is very suggestive
of my being in a pleasant country inn, and telling the


"waiter, who is always called John, to bring a porter, thus,
“ John, a porter.” There is quite a fleet of ships in com-
pany. We saw only two outward bound—one a steamer,
the other under sail, both too far to speak to- them. We
could just manage to say “ Good night” to the “Greta.”
She is behind us, both having the “Bull driver” on.
Probably the Captains have arranged for a race. A bull
driver is an extra sail placed somewhere near the boughs
when the wind is favourable. Our Lat., 36° 20' N. ; long.,
41° 26' W.; distance, 179 miles; course, N. 42 E.; varia-
tion, 20° W.; weather, fine, and capital breeze ; barometer
marks as follows, 30-21, 30-23, 30-81 ; indication of
thermometer, 68°, 65°, 67°. There is some talk of our
reaching London in ten days. So much the better.
May 14, Friday.— Fifteen weeks from the Creek and
the miles distant that we have voyaged are 12,640. I
trust all my Australian friends continue as well as I do. I
will just give you the words of the song “Away, haul
away.” It commences and ends with a lamentation from
Jack, who could only find relief to his sorrows by “hauling
away.” Just listen to his troubles. He in the first line
informs us:
“ Once he was a farmer’s boy,
A digging turf and praties,
But now he is a sea boy,
A hauling lifts and braces.
Away, haul away, Oh, haul away,
‘ Choo.’
Here all his listeners give a hearty tug at the rope they
are holding on to. Well, the reader will say : “No great
hardship in this,” but read the following dismal episode of
his amours :
“ Oh ! once I lov’d an Irish girl,
But she was fat and lazy.
Away, haul away, etc.


And then I lov’d a Scottish girl,
But she was tall and crazy.
Away, haul away, etc.
Isn’t this provoking enough, to have so much love all
over your head, and half way down your back, to discover
such faults in the young damsels he mentions. I should
think so, and would require a great many “ hauling aways ”
on my part, to relieve “ injured feelings.” But this is not,
all our Jack suffered;
“ And then I lov’d a girl named Nell,
And the Devil, he knows what else, sir,
Away, haul away, etc.
But her mother she came to me to tell,
Her girl was too good for a sailor.
Away, haul away, etc,
Thereby adding insult to injury, and so the lamentation
concludes ; and Jack has to roam over the ocean to search
for a “ dove of a love ” to get himself properly spliced.
The tune must be sung lively to make it go as the sailors
sing it on board the “ Loch Sloy; ” but, if sung slowly, it
makes a fine penitential time for a “ miserable sinner,”
which Ido not in any way feel, and never did. All the
original music of the old fathers’ sea songs, and of this
tune is to be found in Sir Arthur Sullivan’s famous comic
opera “ Pinafore,” just after the scene where the religious
canting hypocrite of a Captain vows he never said a great
big “D” in his life, when questioned, “ hardly ever.” I
am glad of this, that great authors introduce these tunes
into their works, in order to shame those pirates who turn
their compositions into dismal woe-begotten tunes, to suit
their heated fancies of a nameless place. This is why I
get so annoyed when I hear introduced into service so
many nigger tunes (or, vice versa, beautiful love songs and
those melodies requiring much pathos), twisted and twirled
about, to fit ill-suited religious words.- a favourite hymn


tune on board here is almost note for note that of the
“ Blue Alsatian Mountains.” I ask Sankey and Moody is
this honest to crib (steal I call it) a man’s thought expressed
in music, for purposes the author never intended. But
there it is no use arguing the subject with fanatics. Sir
Arthur Sullivan has written grand religious works in music,
and surely this distinguished musician ought to know what
he thinks proper to dedicate to God, and must feel ashamed
and annoyed when thieves steal his music for the pretence
they do, and for which he has no sympathy. It may suit
Thackeray’s “ Converted Washerwoman.” The “ Chad-
bands,” the “ Alarmed Sailor,” the “ Destitute Orange
Girl,” and other poor and pointless anecdotes of the Tract
Society. It is written, “As ye do, so shall it be done to
you ; as ye give, so shall ye receive.” Sincerely do I hope
this writing on the wall will be fulfilled. There are other
songs I would like to speak about, viz., “ Whiskey for my
Johnnie,” “ Homeward bound,” etc., but time is so short,
and the voyage nearly over. We spoke the steamer
“Architect.” outward bound; on comparing longitudes
with the stranger both agreed. Our lat., 88° 04' N.;
long., 38° 00' W.; course, N. 59 E.; distance, 192 miles ;
variation, 21° W.; wind, S. 3 E.; force, fresh breeze and
fine weather throughout; barometer, 30-18, 30 - 17, 30-20 ;
temperature, 67°, 65°, 66°.
May 15. —Saturday opened with same weather as yester-
day, and “ signalising ” the “ Greta,” but I am too much
occupied paying any attention to what is going on, as
matters are mostly private, and concerning our dear young
passenger. Painting operations continue in the saloon
and everything the same as usual. Our lat., 39° 07' N.;
long., 34° 37' W.; course, N. 72 B.; distance, 183 miles ;
variation, 22° W.; wind, S. 1 E.; barometer, 30-18, 30-16,
80-20 ; temperature, 67°, 65°, 66. We expect to sight the
Azores to-morrow sometimes.


May 16, Thibd Sunday aftee Eastee. — I could get no
sleep all the past night, although feeling very well in health,
so got up at 3 a.m. and walked the deck with the chief
officer. At 4.30 saw the Islands Flores and Corvos. At
7 a.m. we were close enough to enable me to make a sketch.
The land was obscured by clouds. Corvos is the northern-
most of the Azores, and is formed by a single volcanic
mountain 3£ miles long north and south, and 2J east and
west, or 9f miles in circuit. The extinct crater of this
mountain is called the Caldeira, and occupies all the
north-west part of it, and is 3J miles in circumference.
The highest part of the ridge surrounding the Caldeira is
on the south-west side, and is 2,540 ft. in height. The east
and west margins are lower in some places, not exceeding
1,434 ft. Its bottom is occupied by two small lagoons, the
surface of which is 1,273 ft. above the sea, and 1,275 below
the highest peak. The bottom is cultivated and used for
pasturage, as indeed, the greater part of the island is. The
summit, even in summer, is so frequently capped with
clouds that rills of water were running down the mountain
in the month of August. The lower land of the south-
west end of the island, has all the appearance of being
added to the original portion, by an eruption of lava, and
is diligently cultivated. The only inhabitants on the
island are comprised in the village of Corvo. Standing on
the east side of the south point on a rising ground, close to
the coast, and containing one hundred and sixty or one
hundred and seventy thatched stone houses. They are
dirty, and have an uncomfortable appearance, separated
from each other by filthy lanes. At the south end of the
village stands the church, a small stone building with a
square tower and short spire, which being kept well white-
washed, is a good sea mark. About 250 yards south-west
by west from it there is a rocky hill surrounded by an
antique horizontal mill. The population in 1843 was
about 784 persons, 383 males, 401 females. The book I


quote this from, published in 1880, gives no evidence of
any other census being taken. The church is in lat.
39° 40' 9" N.; long., 31° 7' 16” W.; variation, 27° W. It
is high water full and change, at 12 hours 25 minutes,
and the rise of the tide 3ft. 6in. We passed Corvo bearing
south 13 miles. Floies contains about 7,000 inhabitants.
It has two towns both on the eastern side of Santa Cruz
and Lagens, and four villages. Its chief productions are
yams, wheat, cattle, sheep, and hogs. The island is very
mountainous, but much more so to the south than the
north. The fort of the town of Santa Cruz is in lat.
390 27', and long. 31° 8' 37" ; and to the west of it in the
interior of the island is a remarkable peak, the Morro
Grande, 3,687 ft. high. We left the “ Greta ” astern, with
heavy sea running, and passed a schooner outward bound.
Our lat., 40° 11'N.; long., 300 10'W.; distance, 213 miles;
course, N 73 E,; variation, 20° W.; barometer, 30-20,
30-16, 30-19; temperature, 68°, 64°, 66°.
May 17. —The voyage is now drawing to a close, many
think we shall be in London on Sunday, I do not and
have promised to play the National Anthem on this day week
at 9 a.m. on board this ship Notts verrons. The men are
still painting the saloon, and I have shifted to other ac-
commodation at my own request as it was optional on my
part whether my cabin was to be pamted or not. At 7 p.m.
saw a whale blowing to windward of us, immediately after-
wards I saw a large thrasher leap out of the water and fall
on the windpipe of the whale. This was repeated five
times in succession. There must have been a sword-fish
driving the whale up for the thrasher’s attack, as a whale,
so lam informed, seldom comes to the surface more than
three times to spout, altogether it was a most exciting
scene and certainly a deadly combat. We are sailing with
a strong breeze and squally weather. Our lat., 41° 18' N.;
long., 25° 27' W.; course, N. 65 E.: distance, 233 miles ;


variations, 23° W. ; wind, 8. 2 W., N. 6 W. N. ; barometer,
30-08, 29-97, 30-02 ; thermometer, 66°, 64°, 60. During
a very hard squall the fore-top-gallant sail split to ribbons,
it was unbent and replaced. We saw the “ Greta ” ahead.
May 18. —Opened with a strong breeze, with very-
frequent squalls, attended with hail and rain. It was
impossible to do anything with brush, pen, or pencil. We
saw a large fish with a sort of horn sticking out of its back.
Captain McLean first directed attention to it. The size
was immense, and fully 12 feet in diameter. We also
passed a large spar covered with barnacles. In the fore-
noon we passed a steamer outward bound and noticed that
the “ Greta ” had blown away her main top gallant sail.
Our lat., 43° 07' ; long., 20° 34'; course, N. 63 E.;
distance, 242 miles ; variation. 25° W.; wind, N. ; under
reefed topsails; barometer, 80-01, 30-03, 80-09; tempera-
ture, 61°, 57°, 58°.
May 19, Wednesday. —We are struggling with a strong
head wind, with hail and rain. An idle day for me. The
“ Greta ” has again bidden us good-bye. Baby continues
well, and so am I and all on board. Our lat., 44° 48';
long.. 16° 42' W-", course, N. 57 E.; distance, 194 miles ;
variation, 26° W.; wind, N.; force, as yesterday; baro-
meter, 29-93, 30-12, 29-79 ; thermometer, 57°, 56°, 56°. It
strikes very cold, we are making for the Bay of Biscay.
May 20, Thursday. —We again saw the “ Greta,” and
later on the “ Loch Cree. Two swallows came on board
this morning, I got very close to one, and could have
caught it had I the proverbial salt. The weather very
unsteady, with squalls and rain all day. I played a little
and did not forget the “ Bay of Biscay,” Bag of Biscuits,
one of the crew calls it. I crossed the Bay on my outward
voyage, I do not notice any change ; the sea was rough as


it is now. Men cannot get on with the saloon work. It
is very cold. Lat., 46° 00' N. ; long., 13° 26' W.; course,
N. 61 E.; distance, 159 miles; variation used, 27° W. ;
wind, N. and variable ; force, close hauled; barometer,
29-70,29-78,29-86; thermometer, 56°, 56°, 58°.
May 21, Friday.— “l suppose he is in England now,”
the Creek people are thinking, but he isn’t, he is on board
the ship in the Bay of Biscay, oh ! and 16 weeks from
Australia, and has sailed 13,984 miles, therefrom. I trust
all are well there. To day was the anniversary of John
Borland’s birthday; he is 17 years. The usual English
custom was observed by me, and I invited him, the officers,
Stanley, and others to my quarters to splice the main
brace over such an important event. I made him a small
present, and got the cook to build a cake out of what rude
material there was at command. Happy, merry John
Borland, may God prosper him ; I shall not easily forget
him. In the afternoon saw a very large whale, Captain
McLean calculated it to be 60 feet in length. This morn-
ing at 3 a.m I was on deck, and saw a brigantine outward
hound, there was a steamer also. We have had fine
weather throughout, with moderate breezes. Our lat.,
48° 52' N.; long., 10° 12' W. ; course, S. 81 E.; distance,
120 miles; variations 26° W.; wind, N. 4 E., N. 1 E., N.
4 E.; Barometer, 29-91, 29-96, 80-10; thermometer, 68°,
55°, 56°.
May 22, Saturday. —Saw a steamer at 5 a.m., we hoisted
our colours, and asked to be reported, she sent up the
answering pennant “ yes,” and stood on her homeward
course. We saw a barque and other vessels during the
day, which has been hazy, overcast, with drizzling rain.
The rolling of the ship preventing any work being done,
there being a head wind. As our captain has never been
in the “ Bay of Biscay ” frequent consultation of the chart


is resorted to, to shape our course for Ushant, and thence
to the Start. But suppose the wind steps in and says,
“ You shan’t get a point to the Start.” Then it will be an
ill-wind that blows nobody any good. The sailmaker,
Mr. John Fletcher, very kindly sent me, as a souvenir a
covering for my cedar, portable box, and Mr. William
Brown, the carpenter, has also sent me a handsome teak
wood frame for the picture of the “ Greta’s ” poop, with the
portrait of the captain, poor Mrs. Cassady, Netty, the
officers and apprentices, &e., which the chief officer, Mr.
G. W. Garland, was so good as to present to me. Both
petty officers received my thanks, and we partook of some-
thing with water on the top of it. I have returned to my
quarters I originally occupied and am at rest again in mine
own, for the time being. Our lat., 45° 81' N ; long., 7°
31' W.; course, N. 71 E.; distance, 120 miles; variation,
25° W.: wind, variable; force, as yesterday; barometer,
30-09, 30-12, 30-07; thermometer, 68°, 58°, 58°.
May 23, Sunday, 4th after Easier.— Up at 4 a.m. ; saw
a steamer outward bound. I wonder if this is really to be
the last Sunday at sea. We expect to make Ushant to-
day, but at the time of writing (7.30) we are only going
three knots. When once we are in the English Channel
then this voyage is over, and the journal closes. We saw
our friend the “ Greta ” again, and all the morning has
been spent in exchanges. I, however, pressed on with
writing up matters, and at 11 o’clock played my usual
service, including “ God Save tbe Queen.” Spoke the
steamer “Wembdon,” of Cardiff, homeward bound, asked
her to report us all well. After Church service, retired to
bed at 8.30 p.m., there being a dead calm. Lac., 47° 11'
N.; long., 6° 59' W. ; course, ; distance, 103 miles.
May 24, Monday.— Her Majesty’s birthday. Up at 4
a.m., and at 5 a.m. played the National Anthem. We have
not made 12 miles since turning in, a dead calm prevails.


and the “ Greta ” and several ships are about in the same
predicament as ourselves. We are still in the Bay of
Biscay; 10 a.m., a breeze sprang up, and at noon we are
fairlj in tne English Channel. A P. and 0. steamer
(three masts) passed us at 1 p.m. The weather is truly
Queen’s, and all on board feel very loyal, and glad to think
that the “ Loch 81oy ”is in British waters. The “ Queen of
the Ocean is asleep and well, and no doubt will greet her
royal sister off the Isle of Wight if possible. In the even-
ing I played a lot of English melodies, and invited the
officers and midshipmen to drink the health of the Queen.
It is beautiful weather. Our lat., 48° 33' N.; long., 5°
47' W. ; distance, 114 miles. There will be no occasion
to write anything about wind, etc., etc. Before I went to
bed I received most graceful letters from the captain, chief
officer, officers and lads, welcoming me to dear old Eng-
land. My heart is too full to express my thanks. I thank
Almighty God for taking so much care of me, being in
excellent health.
May 25, Tuesday.— Up at 5 a.m., and busy preparing
for the shore, settling accounts and the like. At 10 a.m.
I had the first glimpse of English land after my long
exile; my feelings cannot be described as I viewed the land
of my birth. All reminiscences of the past life swept
vividly before my mind. I thought of early errors and
indiscretions of early youth, my romantic life in Australia,
of those dead and gone. Indeed, I may well ask where are
the friends of my youth ? I ask myself shall I be
welcomed home, as I would welcome anyone to my bush
home. Thanks to the Great Architect of the Universe, I
can conscientiously say, I have not been a selfish man, and
when it pleases him to gather me to my fathers, whether
in England or Australia, His will be done. My voyage is
over; my life on board the “ Loch Sloy ” has been most
refreshing. I am thoroughly regenerated; my prayers


have been answered. My sincere and heartfelt thanks are
due to Captain John McLean and his dear wife; to Mr.
Charles Lehman, chief officer; to Mr. James Alexander
Birnie, second officer ; to Mr. William Weir, third officer ;
to the petty officers, Mr. A. Bell, boatswain; Mr. John
Fletcher, the sailmaker ; Mr. Wm. Brown, carpenter; the
steward, Mr. John Kennedy ; and John Tait, John McCal-
man, John M. Borland, and my countryman Stanley Harry
Hill (the latter two midshipmen apprentices especially), and
to every man jack of the crew for their kindness in
doing everything to make my life on board worth living for,
and this is
Goon Bye.
Good bye, it has a mournful sound,
When uttered by a friend,
It tells of happy days gone by,
Of pleasures at an end.
It tells of lonesome days to come,
And though the years may fly,
True-hearted friends will ne’er forget
That last, that sad good bye.
Good bye, it has a heavenly sound,
When spoken from the heart,
A fervent prayer for blessings on
The friends from whom we part.
We wish them well where e’er they dwell,
Or be it far or nigh,
For God be with you is the thought
Of every true good bye.


The following correspondence passed between the author
and Captain and Mrs. McLean and the officers and
apprentices of the “ Loch Sloy ” :
“Loch Sloy,” English Channel,
May 26, 1886,
Dear Mb. Caws,
On behalf of Mrs. McLean and self I beg to
thank you for your kind letter and well wishes. Your
•conduct throughout the voyage, your kindness and courtesy
to my wife, and I may say all on board, have been exemplary,
gentlemanly, and decorous. I may also add, that your
natural flow of wit and humour has tended greatly to
relieve the monotony of the voyage, and any endeavours on
■our part to make you comfortable have been amply
rewarded on our learning from your own pen that they
have been crowned with success. I may tell you, sir, I
shall never forget your kindness to my wife.
And now, after a long absence, that you are returning to
your native land, to your dear mother, sisters, and relatives,
we sincerely hope that there will be a hearty welcome wait-
ing you, as there will be on your return to Australia. Your
musical abilities, which have been so much appreciated
there, have been none the less so by us on board. Often
when “jammed” down south, or baffled in the doldrums
with my spirits below zero, have the lively strains of your
sweet music acted on me, as David’s harp to King Saul,
and on the Sunday mornings the beautiful music of your
own church, including the selections from the Masses of


Beethoven, Haydn, Mozart, and other masterly works, have
stirred up within me solemn feelings of reverence and
awe.
That the Almighty may bless you spiritually; that he
may bless you with favourable winds through the voyage
of life, and pilot you safe to the Haven of Rest which you
are seeking, are the prayers of your sincere friends.
John McLean, Master.
Mes. McLean.
Reply.
Dear Captain and Mes. McLean,
I beg to thank you most sincerely for the
enconiums you have been pleased to pay to my humble
services, and kindly wishes. I shall ever remember with
pleasure my voyage, and though we part now, it is only for
a while.
With best regards,
Yours faithfully,
St. John Caws.
“Loch Sloy,”
May 26, 1886.
English Channel,
May 26, 1886.
Dear Me. Caws,
Now that you are near your native land, we can-
not allow this opportunity to pass without recognising your
great kindness and gentlemanly mien towards us during
the long voyage of the “Loch Sloy,” from the Port of


Geelong, Australia, to London. We thank you heartily
or the beautiful strains of your music on all occasions; to
us it has been a grand treat. We are aware of your
Australian reputation, and the esteem in which you are
held there, and glad were we to know you were to be our
passenger. You managed to play opportunely in our most
dreary hours. It has cheered us in the hour of danger, it
has enlivened us in the stillness of our watches on deck
and impressed us on the Sunday morning hour of prayer.
You at the same time, most thoughtfully considering the
watch below. We feel sure you will carry with you the
good wishes of all the petty officers, apprentices, and crew
of this ship wherever you go, and we asssure you that your
happy face will be missed on our next voyage. You have
ever been ready to assist us in any matter you could be of
assistance. Your readiness, willingness, good feeling, and
manners have won for you the admiration of all. You
have been a subject of much thought, how you, a lonely
passenger, would while away a monotonous voyage; but your
jeu d’esprit and bans mot very soon displayed your charac-
ter as not being of a morbid and melancholy disposition,
thereby establishing your genius, and making you a general
favourite, the boys especially being very fond of you. We
trust you will publish your exhaustive narrative of the
voyage, so full of interest, which you have kindly allowed
us to read. Most journals of the like nature, being merely
romances, have no weight with sailors. On the contrary,
you have written and sketched what has actually taken
place, and in after years will, no doubt, be to you pleasing
reminiscences of the past, as it will be to us.
In conclusion, we wish you a pleasant holiday after


your long absence of 22 years from your native land. We
feel sure your dear mother, brothers, sisters, relatives, and
friends will receive you with true heartfelt rejoicing.
We remain, yours very sincerely,
C. Lehman, First Mate.
J. A. Biknie, Second Mate.
William E. Weir, Third Mate.
St. John Caws, Esq.
Reply.
“Loch Sloy,”
May 29, 1886.
Dear Charles Lehman, J. A. Birnib, and Wm. E. Weir,
The thought and sentiment contained in your
letter fill me with delight. I am glad my humble efforts
have pleased you; true friends are always missed, and I
shall greatly miss the happy hours with you; but, then, we
shall meet again.
Yours faithfully,
St. John Caws.
Ship “Loch Sloy,”
English Channel,
May 26ih, 1886.
Dear Mr. Caws,
Our voyage is almost over now, and we desire
to wish you good bye before you leave the “ Loch Sloy.”
We sincerely and heartily thank you for your many kind-
nesses towards us during the long four months which have


elapsed since we fished our “ mud hook ” out of the blue
waters of Corvo Bay. The music, sketches, and eatables,
which you have from time to time presented to us, have
greatly helped to make this passage by far the most
pleasant any of us have yet experienced during our
apprenticeship. We think ourselves especially fortunate
in having such a talented musician on board, and we
cannot express how much we have enjoyed the beautiful
music which we have often heard you playing on the
saloon piano. With best wishes for your health, success
and happiness, and trusting you will greatly enjoy your
holiday in England after your long absence.
We remain,
Yours most sincerely,
John McCalman,
John M. Borland,
Stanley H.' Hill,
John J. Tait.
St. John Caws, Esq,
Eeply.
Loch Sloy,” May 26th, 1886.
To John McCalman, John M. Bobland, Stanley H.
Hill, and John J. Tait.
My Deae Young- Friends,
I cannot find words sufficiently to thank you
for the very feeling sentences you have written to me. My
heart beat with emotion, I can assure you, when I received
yours. I was indeed gratified. You know lam very much


attached to you, and that I would willingly do all in my
power for your advantage. Yes, my dear lads, I have had
to do with many boys in the course of a life’s experience,
and I can truthfully say I never came across four so united.
I promise you that should my absence from Australia be
prolonged until the return of your ship, I will go hack with
you. I love auld acquaintance. Wishing you all promo-
tion as you advance in the knowledge of your profession,
and that God will bless your efforts to improve, and give
you a safe and speedy return to port, is my prayer. With
all my heart.
I am, yours ever sincerely,
St. John Caws.


