





FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.
DIARY
OF THE
Exploring Expedition
LED BY MR. W. J. O’DONNELL,
ON BEHALF OF THE
Cambridge Downs Pastoral Association
MELBOURNE.
From Port Darwin to Cambridge Gulf, North
Kimberley District, Western Australia,
and back.
1ST JANUARY, 1884.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.




DIARY.
The following is the report by Mr. W. J.
O’Donnell of his recent exploration trip in
Western Australia. Mr. O’Donnell was the
leader of a party sent out by a syndicate in
Melbourne for the purpose of examining the
country in the Kimberley district, north-east of
the King Leopold Ranges, which country had
been, so far, unexplored. Besides Mr. O’Don-
nell, the party consisted of Mr. W. J. Carr-
Boyd, second in command; Mr. A. J. Wells,
surveyor; and Messrs. O’Malley, Linacre, and
Wall. The report is dated <k Melbourne, De-
cember, 1883”: —
Arrived at Palmerston by s.s. u Catterihun,”
January 18, 1883, the vessel lying at anchor
about a quarter of a mile from the shore. Not
wishing to submit to the exorbitant charge of
£1 per head lighterage, I elected to swim the
horses, two at a time, behind the small boats.
Landed all safely, and then put them in the
police paddock, waiting for the arrival of the
“ Meath,” on board of which our plant was.
This caused a delay of a fortnight. In the
meantime, from unexplained causes, four of
these horses died before making a start.
On the Ist February, travelling along the
telegraph line, we started for Southport, which
we reached on the fifth day. By this time I
found that the number of horses we had was not
nearly sufficient for the journey, consequently
wired to Melbourne for funds to purchase addi-
tional horses.
This, together with very heavy rains which
set in, caused a delay of another fortnight.
On the 19th February we got away from
Southport, and still travelling along the line of
telegraph, reached the Katherine on the 15th
March—a distance of about 2CO miles. Owing
to the bad state of the roads, and low condition
of horses, and an occasional day’s spell on good
feed, we only made an average of 10 miles a
day. At this time I thought it necessary that
the horses should have a good spell, as some of
them had fallen off considerably in condition.
Here I exchanged four of the weakest for
four strong ones from Mr, Giles, of Sprlngvalo
station.
On the 25th we again started for the Dela-
mere station, the furthest out station in the
territory, a distance of about 80 miles, which
we reached by easy stages in seven days. We
had another delay here of a week. In the |
meantime we got a bullock in, and the meat
jerked in the sun and smoked. This gave us
350 lb. of dried meat for the whole of the trip.
As there was no possibility of getting provisions
after this date, I thought it necessary to put
the party on rations. These consisted of 5 lb. of
flour, 4 lb. of beef, 1£ lb. of sugar, and 4 oz. of tea
per man per week. MaVing a final start on the
Bth April, and steering in a southerly direction,
after 14 miles travelling, camped on a creek
called George's Creek, We here marked the
first tree, O.D. 1. Next day, still travelling
southerly, we reached the head of Gregory’s
Creek in about 14 miles. The whole of the
country passed over since leaving Delamere
was exceptionally good, being composed of rich
flats, open forest, and downs country, well
grassed with Mitchell, rye, Landsborough, and
a variety of other grasses. Mark* d tree 0. D. 2.
April 10.—Following Gregory’s Creek down
in a general S.W. by S. course for 13 miles, we
formed camp, O. D. 3.
April 11. —Leaving Gregory’s Creek, and
steering a S. by W, course, we travelled 15
miles, and then camped on a creek trending
towards the Victoria River. Marked tree
O.D. 4.
April 12.—Owing to unavoidable causes, wo
only made two miles, in & southerly direction,
and camped on a creek similar to the last one.
April 13. —Still keeping south, over low table-
land, and cutting the course of several creeks
trending towards the Victoria, we camped on a
large sandy creek coming from the east, after
travelling 10 miles. Marked tree O. D. 6.
April 14. Proceeding on our way, wo
travelled on a general S. by W. course over
some very stony country, and in 19 miles
camped on a large stony creek. Marked treo
O.D. 7.
April 15- —Keeping southerly again to-day,
and crossing the course of numerous creeks,
all trending westerly, we camped on another
large creek, after travelling 16 miles. Marked
tree O.D. 8.
April 16. Continuing our journey, and
shaping a general S. VV. by S. course, in 10
miles struck the Victoria River. Not being
able to cross it here, wo travelled along its bed
for a mile and a half before effecting a passage
through the tall reeds and long grasses which
line its banks. This is a noble river, and is
heavily timbered with such trees as giant gum,
box, bauhinia, swamp cedar, wild fig, curryjohn,
melaleuca, and numerous others. The entire
country passed over since leaving Delamere


station proved to be of first-class description,
is well grassed, and watered by numerous
creeks coming from the east and flowing to-
wards the Victoria, in many of which were
good springs.
The geological formation of the country
passed over to here was limestone, chert, and
sandstone, while close to the Victoria trap-rock
appeared. Marked tree O.D. 9. Lat. 16 deg.
41 min. 30 sec., long. 131 deg. 18 min.
April 17. —As it was necessary to shoe some
of the horses here, and seeing the necessity
of giving them a day’s spell, camped here all
day.
April 18. —Following the course of the Vic-
toria River up, and passing over some grand
pastoral country, camped on a billahong close
to the Victoria River, having made 10 miles
in a general S. by E. course. Marked tree
O.D. 10.
April 19.—Still following course of river,
passing over same description of country as
yesterday, in a S.S.W. course for 14 miles,
we camped on a large waterhole. The pre-
vailing rocks to-day near the river were trap,
while limestone and sandstone occurred at the
back country. Marked tree O.D. 11.
April 20.—Ten miles south-westerly to-day,
following the course of the river, when we
struck the course of a large creek coming from
the west, which we ran up for a mile and a half,
and camped on a good-sized waterhole. The
country passed over to-day was for the most
part well grassed, with occasional patches of
triodia, the formation being limestone, with
jasper and chert appearing occasionally.
Marked tree O.D. 12.
April 21.—As the horses appeared to be
getting weak, we remained here all day to
spell them.
April 22. —As the Victoria from this point
trends too much to the south, I determined to
leave it, and shaping a general W. by S. course
for 21 miles, we passed over some of the best
pastoral country met with by us, composed of
immense open plains and downs as far as the
©ye could reach. Daring the fore part of the
day we crossed over numerous creeks con-
taining water, but failed to reach water on our
course before dark. I, however, having gone
ahead of the party, found plenty, but too late
for the party to get to it that night,
April 23. —Making an early start this morn-
ing, and travelling north-easterly for four miles,
reached the water found by me last night.
Marked tree O.D. 14; lat. 17 deg. Bmin. Being
anxious to explore country ahead before shifting
party, I took a fresh horse, and steering a
S.VV, course, in 11 miles discovered a very
large watercourse coming from the west, which
I named Stevens’ Creek, after Mr. H. W, H.
Stevens, Port Darwin, the manager of Messrs.
Fisher and Lyons’ property in the Northern
Territory. I then returned to the camp where
I left party.
April 24.—Starting with the party this morn-
ing, and following on my yesterday’s tracks, we
camped on Stevens’ Creek. We passed over
to-day some splendidly-grassed land, rich, and
various descriptions. Judging from the size of
this creek, it must have a long course, and its
banks were lined with fine timber, suitable for
building and fencing purposes. The geological
formation of the country here is basaltic, with
low hills of jasper and iron, and limestone
pebbles strewing the plains. Marked tree O.D,
16, Lat. 17 deg. 15 min., long. 130 deg. 46 min,
April 25.—An early start this morning, and
following up Stevens’Creek for 11 miles in a
W. by N direction, we camped on a nice water-
hole. The last few miles of our journey were
over rough ironstone country, the ironstone
being very rich, and cropping out in large
boulders. As this creek keeps too much to the
north for us, we intend leaving it here. Marked
tree O.D. 16.
April 26.—Judging from Gregory’s journal, I
believe the country lying between here and
Stirling Creek, a distance of 45 miles, to be
very dry; so I think it better to remain on
these waters till midday, then giving tbe horses
a final drink, hope to reach Stirling Creek the
following night, unless I should in the mean-
time discover other waters on our course.
At half-past 12, allowing the horses a good
drink, we started on a south-west course. I
fortunately found sufficient water for party after
travelling 12 miles, at which we camped. The
country passed over to here was principally
sandstone tableland and open forest, well
grassed, with triodia intervening. Marked tree
O.D. 17. Lat. 17 deg, 20 min.
April 27, —Our horses having strayed from
here last night, gave them a good drink at 8
o'clock, and shaping an S.W. course I was again
most fortunate in striking the course of a good-
sized creek in 13 miles, in the billabongs of
which I found several nice waterholes, on which
we camped. The country passed over was open
forest country, poor, sandy soil, covered with
iron and limestone pebbles, coarse grasses, and
triodia. Marked tree O.D. 18.
April 28.—Starting early this morning, and
steering \V.S.W. over similar country to that
crossed yesterday for 10 miles, we then entered
a better description of country, and in six miles
further came to where the tableland ended
abruptly in steep cliffs to a deep valley below.
After some delay we succeeded in finding a
passage down its sides, and in two miles further
we entered some very fine, well-grassed country,
with several creeks and billabongs crossing the
plains. In two miles further we reached the
Stirling Creek, at a point where numerous
springs occurred, showing permanent water, on
which we camped. Marked tree O.D. 19. Lat.
17 deg. 34 min.
April 29.—Last night experienced the coldest
weather we have yet had, the thermometer
being down to 40 deg. I am sorry that we were
not provided with a boiling-point thermometer,
as with it we could have ascertained the height
of this part of the country above the sea level.
Judging by the number of grass blankets left
here by the natives, I think this country is much
colder at times. The natives are numerous here,


as we can see their signal fires all around. As
Gregory in his journal states that there is no
water for 12 miles down this creek, I will remain
until noon, then water the horses and start. At
1 p.m. we resumed our journey, and followed the
creek down on a general N.W. course for 13
miles, and finding a good waterhole, camped for
the night. Marked tree O.D. 20.
April 30. —Starting early, and still following
the course of Stirling Creek in an N.W. direc-
tion for 12 miles, passed on our way several good
waterholes, also found creek to be running a
strong stream. A short time before camping
came on to the banks of a large running creek
coming from the southward, which I called
Murray’s Creek, after Mr. R. M. Murray, of the
Katherine Telegraph Station, he having shown
us the greatest kindness and hospitality during
our stay there. Not being able to cross this
creek, we were compelled to retrace our steps
half a mile before finding a ford across Stirling
Creek. The country passed over for the last
two days was of the very roughest description.
The bed of the creek is confined between high,
precipitous, and rugged hills of limestone, while
the narrow valley between is strewed with huge
and rough limestone boulders. Our horses
suffered terribly in coming through this rough
gorge, having had the shoes torn off them, and
in many places leaving traces of blood on the
stones. This I have called the Devil’s Gorge.
Owing to the hills approaching closely and
descending abruptly into the deep water, our
further progress in this direction was stopped;
we consequently had to camp.
May 1. —As I do not wish to retrace my steps
through the rough gorge, we will endeavour to
make a road up the side of the hill, by clearing
dead timber and stones, and in an hour and a
half we succeeded in getting the horses safely
to the top, which proved to be rough tableland.
From here we shaped an S.W. by W, course for
two miles, when we got into well-grassed forest
country and low stony rises, the formation of
the country being chert and limestone for the
next seven miles. We were here running
parallel to the Stirling, when we struck the
course of a good-sized creek, with springs, com-
ing from the southward and wending towards
the Stirling, its banks being lined with palms
and water pandanus. Camped here, and marked
tree O.D. 22. Lat, 17 deg. 22 min.
May 2.—As some high hills appeared in our
course we steered for an opening which we
observed to the W., and in two miles we reached
the top of one, from which we observed that
there were several rough ranges on our course.
Steering a general W. by N. course for 11 miles
further, we struck the junction of two large
creeks, one coming from the south, the other ;
from S.S.E., and wending towards the Stirling,
which is about six miles off. We camped here
for the day, and marked tree O.D, 23,
The formation of these ranges is of sandstone,
and although very well grassed, proved to be
exceedingly rough, cutting our horses up very
much, some of them toward the end of the
curney showing signs o knocking up.
May 3.—Proceeding on our journey, and
travelling on a W. by N. course for 14 miles,
and steering towards a very conspicuous and
high isolated hill, which I named Mount Panton,
struck the course of a creek coming from the
S.E., and trending north-westerly. When we
struck it the bed was dry, but, judging from the
numerous blacks* fires, there must be plenty of
water lower down.
Accompanied by Mr. Wells, I started on ahead
of the party to find water, and in six miles
succeeded in finding some, but too late for the
party to reach. Mr. Wells* mare having knocked
up in the meantime, it was late before we reached
the party, when we found them camped without
water, three miles back. The country traversed
to-day was composed of low sloping ridges and
lightly-wooded country, all well-grassed, and
the travelling fairly good.
May 4.—We watched the horses last night,
consequently had a daylight start, and following
course of creek down westerly, reached water in
three miles, and owing to the reduced condition
of the horses, remained here all day. As one of
our horses (Nelson) was completely done up, we
left him here, and called this Nelson’s Creek.
Marked tree O.D, 25, The country adjacent is
very good and well-grassed, its formation being
sandstone and limestone.
May 6.—Following the course of this creek
down westerly for a mile and a-half, we came on
to the banks of a running river, coming from
the south, which proved to be the Negri, named
by Forrest. This river, judging from the flood-
marks and driftwood, must drain an immense
scope of country, is very broad, and its banks
lined with very heavy timber. We here crossed
on to the left bank of this river, and following it
down in a north by west coarse for 10 miles,
camped on a long and broad reach of water.
Marked tree O.D, 26.
I noticed here that there is plenty of timber
for fencing and other purposes, the country
being exceptionally good. Opposite our camp
we observed a large stream of running water
joining this river, which I take to be the Stirling.
Owing to the rough nature of the country lately
traversed, and wishing to find a good stock
route, I have come considerably more north
than I intended, and as the travelling on this
river is very good and open, I have determined
to follow its course to where it junctions with
the Ord River, Lat. of this camp, 17 deg, 11
min.
May 6. — Eji route this morning 7.30. and
following the course of the river in a N.W. by
N. direction for 10 miles. Owing to the deep
ravines which we were constantly meeting, we
were obliged to keep about a mile from its
banks. After getting this far, the river turned
more to the westward, and the travelling being
exceedingly good, got six miles further before
camping. The geological formation of the
country passed over during the last two days is
isolated limestone ridges, with hills of red sand-
stone capped with ironstone, and slate occa-
sionally cropping out. In a pastoral light the
country is as good as anything yet passed over.


and suitable for any description of stock.
Marked tree O.D, 27.
May 7, —As the Ord must now be close to
us, we leave the Negri here, and steer S. W. by
S. to cut its course. Travelling over a Mitchell
grass plain, in three miles we struck the Ord,
coming from S.S.W, and trending K.N.B.
Owing to the absence of trees along its banks,
we did not perceive it until we were within a
few yards of it. It was here about 20 chains
wide, with sandy and rocky bottom, and as the
water was running a strong stream both above
and below, it must have an under-current here.
Also noticed a strong spring of salt water and a
lot of good white salt encrusting the dry por-
tion of the river bed. We camped here, and
marked a tree O.D. 28; lat. 17 deg. 5 min. SO
sec., long, about 129 deg.
May B.—Most of the horses being now very
lame and tired, we determined to remain here
some time before proceeding to the west to
examine the country held by the C.D.P.A. In
the meantime I rode up the river to observe the
character of the country in that direction. A
mile and a half from the camp found tree
marked “A.F. 157, Ist Aug., ’79.” Also ob-
served that there were extensive high ranges to
the west. The country for miles around here is
of the same character as that passed over
the last few miles—good pastoral lands, well
watered.
May 9, —Spelling. Party went fishing, caught
a large supply of bream and catfish, which were
very acceptable, our rations being entirely in-
adequate to our appetites.
May 10-—Owing to the horses being weak and
footsore, I will be compelled to remain here
nearly three weeks before attempting to cross
the ranges which lie in our course to the west-
ward. As Ido not wish to remain idle all this
time, I have determined to trace the course of
the Ord to wlure it runs into the Cambridge
Gulf, for which purpose I take four of the
strongest horses. This being an unsuitable
camp, I will take the party back to-day to the
Negri, close to our former camp, and about a
mile above its junction with the Ord. Starting
at 11 o’clock, we found a capital place to make a
depOt camp; water and grass good, plenty of
firewood, and plenty of timber to build a
stockade.
May 11.—Party busy cutting timber for stock-
ade, which I mean to build of stakes and sap-
lings. It is necessary that this should be done,
as after my departure for the Gulf the party
will be reduced to three, and the blacks are very
numerous here.
May 12.—Finished stockade to-day; party
catching fish and ducks, of which there are
plenty just here.
May 13.—Being Sunday I will not make a start
to-day, but get everything ready for a start in
the morning.
May 14. —Accompanied by Messrs. Linacre
and Wall, and taking supplies for 12 days, with
a riding horse each and one packhorse, we
started. As the map supplied to me showed a
distance from here to the Gulf of some 80 odd
miles, I expect to bo able to get there and back
in that time.
The travelling on the east side of the Ord
being too rough for our horses’ feet, we crossed
on to the left bank, and here saw a tree marked
24D, also old horse tracks, which I took to be
Durack’s.
After travelling in a general N.W. by W.
direction for 15 miles, we camped on the river;
there was a strong stream of water running here.
In consequence of the ranges coming close to
the river, the travelling was very bad for the
first 10 miles. The formation was steep sand-
stone hills, then hills of soft slate and granite,
with numerous lodes and veins of quartz
running through them, also ironstone.
May 15, —Still following the course of river in
a general northerly direction for 24 miles, we
made camp. On our way to-day crossed
numerous tributaries coming from both east and
west.
The country is much more open here, and the
travelling improved. Soil, red loamy sand, and
its formation principally ironstone, which is of
rich quality, quartz also occurring here.
At this point the hills recede from the river,
and open downs and lightly-timbered plains take
their place on the left bank, while the ranges on
the right bank are still close to the river.
To the west of our course, and about 12 milea
off, we observe a tier of blue ranges I have
called the Carr-Boyd Ranges, after my second
in command.
May 16. —Continuing our journey down the
river in a general N. by W. course for four
miles, we struck the course of a large water-
course coming from the S.S.W.; rode across its
mouth, and found that the water was running
underneath a huge bank of sand, which
formed a sort of bar at its junction with the
Ord, As this is nearly as large as the Ord,
and must drain a great scope of country, I
have taken the liberty to call it the Frazer River,
after Malcolm Frazer, of Western Australia.
Still following course of river in a general nor-
therly direction for 12 miles, we formed camp.
On our way to-day again crossed numerous
tributaries of the Ord. The country passed
over was of a first-class description —nice open
plains and lightly timbered forest country.
The hills on the east have now receded con-
siderably, while the Carr-Boyd Ranges approach
much nearer to the river.
The soil here is a rich brown loam, covered
with round sandstone and ironstone gravel.
This evening we surprised a large mob of blacks,
who rushed away in great fear at our approach.
As they were joined by another large party a
little further on, they allowed us to approach
and parley with them. As they seemed very
much excited at our nearer approach, I deemed
it advisable to leave them there, and went two
miles further on to camp.
May 17.—Made an early start this morning,,
and travelling about a mile from the river in a
geueral N. by F, course for 21 miles, camped on
the right bank of the Ord. As before, we saw
numerous branches joining the river on either


€ide. The country travelled over was somewhat
similar to yesterday, richly carpeted with grass
on a loose brown loam. Noticed a different
variety of large and well-grown timber, suitable
for fencing and other purposes.
Near the end of our day’s journey, the ranges
again approached the river on both banks, their
formation being white sandstone and quartz.
They are here very high and precipitous,
descending abruptly into the plain below, in
some places closing in to within a few hundred
yards of the river, while in other places they
form a semicircular fence, enclosing valleys to
the extent of several thousand acres, and mak-
ing natural paddocks of them. After following
the windings of the river for miles we were at
length completely blocked, owing to the ranges
descending abruptly into a very large and deep
waterhole.
May 18 and 19.—Owing to the extremely
rough character of the ranges (being the highest
met with yet, and in many places 1500 feet
high), we were occupied during these two days
(most of the time on foot) in trying to find a
passage through them, and finding it utterly
impossible, we were forced to return to our
starting point. I here climbed one of the highest
in the vicinity, and noticed the river trending
north-westerly through another gorge similar to
the one in which we were blocked. Beyond that
range succeeded range, very high, rough, and
rugged, while to the north-east and east I could
get a more extended view, and by the aid of a
powerful field-glass observed that the hills are
more detached, while plains extend a long way
in that direction.
May 20, —Having failed to effect a passage
on the left bank of the Ord, I will now try the
right bank; but in order to avoid the ranges in
the vicinity of the river I will make for the open
country which I saw to the N-E., and after-
wards strike a course to cut the river again.
Making for a gap in the hills to the N.E , I
reached it in four miles, and was glad to find
that what had seemed impracticable turned out
to be a good road. By following the windings
of a few gorges got into open country in about
two miles on a general northerly course. A
capital dray road can be made through here.
We here cut the head of a creek trending
toward the Ord, which we followed northerly for
three and then north-westerly for three
miles, when it junctioned with the Ord. We
were again blocked by another precipitous
gorge, so had to retrace our stops three miles
south-easterly, where we camped.
The country passed over to-day, although very
rough, is fairly grassed, some of the valleys be-
tween the ranges being very good. The geo-
logical formation of this part is fine-grained
white sandstone. From the top of a high hill,
which I scaled, observed the river running more
to the north-east. Owing to the ranges being
still. rough to the north, we must work a little
round to the east before trying to cut its course
again.
May 21.—Skirting the hills for 11 miles on a
general E. by N. course, bad very good travel-
ling, then 11 miles further on a general N.N. El
course, and we camped near the head of a good-
sized creek.
The country passed over to-day was granitic
in formation, also quartz cropping out in huge
lodes, with broken quartz and slate strewed all
over the surface. Country poorly grassed, with
triodia intervening.
May 22.—Following down the creek in a
northerly direction for five miles and a half, it
suddenly turned to the W.N. W,; we followed
it down another five miles. From here observed
(from top of high hill) the timber of the Ord, and
tindby calculation that itishere running through
Northern Territory country, about two miles
off and trending north-westerly, and still skirt-
ing the ranges which lie to our left; and leaving
the creek, which ran through the ranges, to join
the Ord, steered N.W. about 10 miles, and
camped on some fresh-water lagoons. The old
grass having been recently burnt by the natives,
the young grass had sprung up very thickly,
which will do our horses good. From here ob-
served that the river again turned into Western
Australia, so to- morrow we will steer westerly
to cut its course again.
The formation of the country here is isolated
hills of sandstone and limestone, of most pecu-
liar form, standing out with perpendicular sides
to a great height, showing layers of different
strata—first sandstone, then cement with quartz
pebbles, then slate, sandstone, and cement
again to near base, when limestone cropped out;
the soil red loam here, and much firmer. We
here observed trees of great size and variety.
May 23.—Our packhorse is now showing
symptoms of knocking up. We have travelled
to here over 140 miles, nearly double the dis-
tance I had expected, and by calculation we
must still be over 60 miles from the Gulf. As
1 am, however, for obvious reasons, anxious to
trace the course of the Ord right to the Gulf, I
will not now turn back. Our rations are nearly
done ; we consequently have to reduce them to
2 lb. of flour and 2 lb. of beef per week; no salt,
and very little tea and sugar. Should we meet
with the yacht “Cushie Doo” in the Gulf, hope
to get from her some provisions ; if not, we will
have to kill the packhorse for food. Steering a
westerly course this morning, and passing over
some good country, in 15 miles we reached the
banks of the Ord, the river here running north-
erly. As there was plenty of green feed on the
burnt ground we camped for the day. The
ranges about here have receded considerably
from the river, and the country is much more
open.
_ May 24.—Following the river in a northerly
direction for four miles, we found it turn to tji©
west, so steered W.N.W. to avoid some low
ridges, and after riding about seven miles,
crossed a running creek, coming from the north-
ward, on which we spelled the horses for a few
hours. Continued the same direction for another
mile, then turned S.W, by W. for sixmiles, and
again struck the Ord, followed it down for a
short distance north-westerly, and then camped.
May 25. —Continuing down the river in a


general W.S.W. course for 10 miles, I then
thought it necessary to camp. The country
passed over the last two days is of limestone
formation, with occasional ridges of slate and
quartz. We observe in the distance, N.W. from
here, a large isolated hill, shaped on top like the
roof of a house, which I take to be Houseroof-
hill, laid down on the chart. As we cannot now
be far from the salt water, I will cross the river
to-morrow, and follow down its left bank.
May 26.—Steered on a general N.W. course,
and after following the river for seven miles,
turned in to river to water the horses, when
I perceived that a strong tide was running in
here. I then had to retrace my steps up the
river for some two miles to where the fresh and
salt water met, where I spelled the horses for a
few hours, a bar of rocks dividing the fresh
from the salt water.
It is my opinion that shipping of large ton-
nage can come within half a mile of this point,
the river here being over half a mile wide, and
apparently of considerable depth, even at low
water, its banks being very high, and in many
places 1(0 ft. above the level of the water, and
have noticed from marks that there must be a
rise and fall of at least 12 ft.
Observing that the vegetation on the river was
very dense some few miles lower down, we left
it here, and steered south-westerly to a good-
sized creek, on which we camped for the night.
May 27, —Some delay was caused this morning
among a network of creeks and fresh-water
lagoons. Owing to the boggy nature of their
banks, we were unable to find a crossing, so had
to retrace our steps to where we crossed the
creek in the morning, near our last night’s
camp. To avoid these lagoons we steered south
for a mile, and after travelling on a general
W.N. W. course for 11 miles, camped on some
lagoons near Mount Bastion.
May 28.—Accompanied by Linacre, started
for Quoin-hill, which is about 11 miles N. by E.
from our camp, from the top of which I had a
good view of the Gulf stretching away to the
north. East of here the river is about three
miles in width.
Leaving Linacre here, I travelled four miles
further, along the foot of Quoin-hill, when I
again scaled its highest point, for the purpose of
seeing if I could get any sight of the {( Cushie
Doo.” Had a good look round by Adolphus
Island, but failed to see anything of her. Also
observed from here another arm of the sea
running southerly. I then retraced my steps to
Linacre, and we both started back for the fresh-
water lagoons, on which Wall was camped,
reaching there two hours after dark.
May 29.—From here we will travel as near
south-east as the character of the country will
admit of, and prove thereby what the country is
like in the direction of our depot camp. Start-
ing from our camp on these lagoons, and making
towards some ranges to the south, in which I see
an opening, and after cutting the course of
several creeks, we camped in the ranges, after
travelling 18 miles in a general S. by W. direc-
tion. The country travelled over to-day is of
sandstone formation. Saw several blacks during
the day, who showed great fear at onr approach.
May 30.—Steering W.S.W. for three miles,
we cut the course of a large creek trending
northerly. Continued in the same direction for
three miles further, making towards the point
of Mount Cockburn; turned the horses out for
a spell on another good creek (a tributary of the
last). The country around here being very
mountainous, and observing that the ranges
were lower towards the E.S.E. we made a fresh
start in that direction, and after travel'ingabout
nine miles camped on the large creek we had
crossed in the morning. This is a very fine
creek, with splendid long reaches of water, and
has its banks lined with large, well-grown trees.
I have called it Parry’s Creek, after Mr. Parry,
of Melbourne.
May 31.—The country here being very rough
and stony, has reduced our horses considerably
in condition, and having lost most of their shoes
in the ranges are all very lame. Our packhorse,
I fear, will not go much further, as he is con-
stantly falling down, we having to lift him on his
feet again. Our own rations are now further
reduced to 3 oz. of flour and 2 oz. of meat, our
tea and sugar being all finished.
Should we have much more of this rough
country our supplies will be entirely run out,
and we will bo compelled to kill Roaney, if he
does not die before.
Running up the valley of Parry’s Creek in a
general S.S.E. course for 14 miles {the travelling
being very good), we found that it turned too
much to the west for us, so were obliged to
leave it, and shaping an E.S.E. course towards
an opening in the ranges, w© camped after
travelling six miles, having found a rocky water-
hole here.
June 1-6. —Daring these six days we made
but little headway, having only made 17 miles
in an S.E. direction from our camp of May 31.
Owing to the exceedingly rough nature of the
country traversed (the drainage here being from
all points of the compass), our course was very
circuitous, and we had frequently to return
miles on our tracks, as it was impossible to get
our horses up the steep sides of the mountains.
Although so exceedingly rough, this country
is well adapted for sheep, the hills in most places
being well grassed, while the whole of the
country is thoroughly well watered, as ©very
day we crossed numerous running creeks and
springs.
I have no doubt that with fresh horses, well
shod, and with plenty of spare time, I would
have discovered a good track through these
ranges to the Gulf.
During these six days we were compelled to
walk nearly the whole time, leading and driving
our horses.
June 7-10.—Making for the point of the Carr-
Boyd Ranges, in a general S. E. by S. direction,
early on the fourth morning we struck the Ord,
having made 26 miles. Then travelling up tho
river for 3 miles we camped near the junction of
the Frazer River,
The country from our camp of the 6th,


although stony, is of a first-class description,
most suitable for sheep, the Carr-Boyd Ranges
having long slopes on the western side, which
are thickly carpeted with rich and various
grasses.
This stretch of country is also well watered,
having numerous running creeks and springs
in every direction, all of which flow towards the
Ord.
Some 8 or 9 miles before reaching the river
Linacre’s riding horse knocked up, and we were
obliged to leave him.
The formation of the country passed over
during these days was, in the higher hills, sand-
stone, while the lower hills were composed of
limestone, quartz, and slate. The soil in the
valleys is of a rich, chocolate-coloured descrip-
tion, sparkling with scales of white and yellow
mica; also, occasionally, crystals of selenite,
with hills of ironstone frequently cropping out.
June 11. —Two of the remaining horses were
now very weak, and Linacre and Wall were not
in a condition to walk to the depdt, as they
were very much reduced from insufficiency of
food, we having lived on a kangaroo for the last
nine days. As one of the horses was fresher
than the others, I decided to leave Linacre and
Wall on the Ord, and push on to the dej: fit to send
them relief as soon as possible. In the mean-
time they could exist on fish, as they had plenty
of hooks, and fi>h were very plentiful in the
river. Making an early start in the morning,
the mare only carried me 20 miles, when she
knocked up, refusing to carry me any further.
I then had to lead her 10 miles further on foot,
when I camped for the night.
June 12. —Started this morning before day-
light, but finding the mare still unable to carry
me, and not wishing to abandon her. dragged
her the remaining distance (10 miles) to the
depfit, reaching there at a quarter-past 3 p.m.
Having had nothing to eat since yesterday
morning, I naturally felt rather hungry on
arrival. X then asked Messrs. Carr-Boyd and
O’Malley to catch fresh horses and proceed down
the river with rations for Linacre and Wall.
They started rather late, and reached them on
the morning of the second day, getting safely
back to the depfit on the 17th. Another horse
(Roaney) had died after I left them. We will
miss these very much, as they were tfto of our
best.
June 18 and 19.—Making preparations for an
immediate start to the west, to inspect the
country belonging to the C.D.P.A. On the
evening of the 19th we dug holes and eddied
some provisions and other articles not imme-
diately required by us.
During my absence the latitude of the depfit
camp was ascertained to be 17 deg. 3 min. 45
sec. as the result of numerous observations.
The party at the depfit said that although
numerous blacks’ fires had been seen in every
direction, they were never troubled by them
during my four weeks’ absence.
With the exception of three or four, the
horses had picked up considerably, and are now
nice and fresh. I determined to leave six of the
worst behind, including the two that had re-
turned from the Gulf, which were in a very weak
state.
June 20.—T0 avoid the rough ranges west of
this I have determined to follow the course of
the Ord down for 30 or 40 miles, thence make
westward, and get on to the syndicate country
by the N.E. corner. Starting at 11 a.m,, we
made about 10 miles in a W.N.W. direction
before camping for the night. Latitude of this
camp, 17 deg. 0 min, 30 sec.
June 21.—Still following the course of the
Ord, we camped on the left bank, about 18
miles due north of last night’s camp, Lat, 16
deg. 45 min.
June 22. —Travelled a mile and a half further
down the river, to a point where the ranges
receded, and travelling in a W. by S. course for
7i miles over stony but first-class downs country,
camped on a small creek a quarter of a mile
from the Frazer River. The formation of the
country passed over to-day was entirely lime-
stone, the downs being strewed with large slabs
of this stone, which were very rough on the
horses’ feet. Soil of a rich chocolate nature.
Lat. 16 deg. 45 min.
June 23.—Being anxious to recover the horse
Jack, which was left behind on our return from
the Gulf, I started with Wall to find him.
Crossing the Frazer close to here, which by mea-
surement I found to be much larger than the
Ord (being 500 yards wide), and running a strong
stream a little below where I crossed it, the
water appearing to come from a large bank of
sand occupying the centre of the river, and
flowing over a rocky bed below. Steering north-
westerly for the point of a large bluff range
about 4 miles off, and which I named Mount
Pitt (after William Pitt, Esq., Melbourne), still
proceeding N.W. to avoid the rough end of the
Carr-Boyd Ranges, After 8 miles went nor-
therly, and thence N.N.E. for 7 miles to Jack’s
Creek. It being too late to look for horse
tracks, camped here for the night. A short
time previous to reaching this creek, and close
to the mountain, I heard a most frightful
yelling, which proceeded from a very largo
number of men, women, and children. Not
caring to go near them in their excited state, we
proceeded on to camp. The country passed
over to-day was first-class, being Mitchell grass
downs on rich chocolate soil, and low well-
grassed ridges. Their formation was granitic,
with slate and quartz in all shapes, showing
large reefs of quartz cropping out from the
ridges, also broken fragments of granite, slate,
and quartz strewing the ground. This country,
I think, will prove to be auriferous, and am
sorry I have no time at my disposal to prospect
it.
Juno 24. —Before daylight this morning heard
the blacks cooeying and answering each other,
the calls extending on to a plain close to our,
camp. We saddled up, and passing near them
without being seen, observed they were burying
some dead. We judged this as the women were
weeping loudly, and not wishing to disturb
them, we rode on to pick up the tracks of the


missing horse. At length succeeded in doing so,
and traced them back to a place where we per-
ceived he had been killed by the blacks.
We then set out for the main camp, but dark-
ness setting in we were obliged to camp 6 or 8
miles from it.
June 25. —Got into camp early, and again
started with the party after lunch. Travelling
up the right bank of the Frazer in a S.S.W,
direction for 6J miles, we camped in its bed,
which at this point is choked up with coarse
sand.
The country passed over this afternoon is very
good, although stony, being downs, with nice
flats between the low limestone ridges. Lat.
16 deg. 49 min.
June 26. —Travelled up the Frazer in a
general westerly direction for 13 miles before
camping.
On our way up the river to-day observed the
tracks and droppings of horses, which I imagine
to be Durack’s,
During the day we cut the course of several
tributaries of the Frazer. The country for the
most part was extremely good sheep country.
We are now about to enter some rough country,
granitic in formation. Lat. 16 deg. 50 min.
June 27.—Still running up the Frazer, we
made 15 miles in a general W.N.W. direction,
the travelling to-day being very rough. A few
miles before camping observed a large water-
course coming from the north-west, which is
apparently the main branch of the Frazer.
On account of the rugged nature of the high
and precipitous granite hills, which came close
in to the valley of the river, we could not make
a straight course, but were compelled to follow
the windings of the river, which at this point
is much smaller. A short time previous to
camping we surprised a large camp of blacks,
who clambered up the sides of the hills in great
fright, leaving everything behind in their hurry
of departure. Being anxious to make friends
with the natives in this part, I invariably left in
their camps presents of coloured handkerchiefs
and other articles. Lat. of camp. 16 deg. 44
min.
June 28.—Still running up the Frazer in a
S.W. by S. direction for 7 miles, through
country even rougher than yesterday ; we only
made a short stage, as one of our horses had
evidently been bitten by a snake, and lying
down, could not be induced to move. Took
water back to her in the evening, and, cutt'ng
some grass, allowed her to remain till morning,
in hopes of being able to get her along then. I
will be sorry if we should lose this mare, as she
is one of the fattest and best of the lot. Lat.
16 deg. 48 min.
June 29.—Finding that the mare had lost all
use of her hind quarters, we were compelled to
shoot her. Travelling in a southerly direction
for 12 miles, we made our first camp on the
syndicate country. Our camp was on a large
sandy creek coming from the southward, and a
little lower down flowing towards the east. The
formation of the country is still granitic. The
flats of this creek are richly grassed, while the j
hills are covered with triodia. As some of the
horses showed symptoms of knocking up yester-
day, I have decided to remain here a day, and
as several of them have lost shoes, and are very
footsore, they will require to be re-shod.
June 30.—Spelled here to-day. Lat. 16 deg.
58 min.; marked tree 0.D., 37. While the
horses were being shod I rode out to endeavour
to find a passage to the westward, but owing
to the rough and precipitous nature of the
country, I fear we will have to go still further
south before doing so, the ranges here trending
in tiers from N. to S. From O.D. 37 to 40, —
During these days made many attempts to get
to the westward, but without success, losing
many shoes, and cutting our horses’ feet about
in the effort. The whole of the country here is
of the same character as that recently described.
From the top of a very high hill near O.D. 40,
we observed to the eastward a long and very
high table range trending N. and S., which I
called the Linacre range (after Mr. Linacre,
Melbourne). .
July 3.—Seeing that the country to the south-
ward was much lower and more level, we decided
to proceed in that direction to-morrow. We
are now close to the eastern boundary of the
C.D.P.A. country.
July 4.—Starting early, and steering east of
south for six miles, we came on to a good spring,
in a creek which we had run down for two miles.
The creek from here turns easterly, but as the
ranges to the west and south are still very rough,
although well grassed, I will follow the creek
for a little way, hoping to discover a better road
towards the low ranges to the south. After
followingthe creek for two miles east, it turned
N.E. by N., so we were obliged to follow it, as
it was impossible to take any other course.
Five miles further we camped. The country
passed over to-day showed great improvement,
the hills and flats being well grassed. Lat. 17
deg.7min. O.D. 41, At this camp another large
creek (coming from the S.S.E.) joins the one we
have followed down all day, and both trend
northerly from here, so we have determined to
run up the second creek to-morrow, hoping to
get through that way.
July s.—Started to run up creek to the S.S.E.
this morning, and travelled four miles in a
straight line, but found the creek very erratic in
its course and'the travelling rough. We spelled
the horses here at a beautiful spring, showing a
large stream of running water. The country
travelled over this morning was very well grassed
on the downs and low ridges ; the higher hills
were also covered with grass to their summits.
The formation to-day was granite, slate, and
quartz ridges. Being blocked here by a water-
fall, we were compelled to face the hills, to the
top of which we got without accident. Then
travelling on a S. by W. course for four miles,
we descended a very rugged and precipitous
granite hill, covered with large boulders, and
camped in the bed of a sandy creek which ran
at the foot of it.
July 6.—Steering a S. by W. course to-day
for six miles, over loyv well-grassed hills ana


sloping ridges, and then wishing to camp, as
several of the horses were very footsore, we
turned easterly, to cut a creek, the timber of
which we could see a little way off, and in one
mile came on to some beautiful springs. I here
had the good luck to shoot a beautiful turkey,
which was very acceptable. O.D. 43. Lat. 17
deg. 18 min. We are now about three miles
from the Linacre range, and observe from here
that a large creek is running on this side of
the range in a southerly direction.
July 7.—As some horses require to be shod,
we did not leave here till midday. Steering a
general S.W. by S. course for eight miles, we
then camped on a good-sized creek with fine
springs in it. We are now just on the border
of the syndicate’s property. The formation of
the country to here is granitic, with quartz
occasionally cropping out, and it is similarly
grassed to that over which we rode yesterday,
Lat, 17 deg. 24 min. O.D. 44.
July B.—Steering a general S.S.W. course to-
day, following down the creek on which we were
camped yesterday, passing numerous springs
and waterholes, after six miles cut the course of
a large and heavily timbered watercourse,
having several channels, and being about a
quarter of a mile in width, and, judging from the
cUbris , must at times carry down a large body of
water. It was coming from the W.N. W,,and
trending E.S.E. From its size and position I
take it to be the head of the Ord River. Fol-
lowing it up for five miles we camped in its bed.
i.at. 17 deg. 28 min. O.D, 45.
July 9.—To-day we followed up a large branch
coming from the W.N.W., the main branch of
the river coming from the W.S.W. After
travelling 2J miles we came on a number of
beautiful running springs, and decided to spell
the horses for the day, the grass being quite
green. In the meantime I got a fresh horse,
and rode out south-westerly to a large hill,
distant about six miles from the camp, for the
purpose of observing the surrounding country.
From near the 44 camp to here, and for miles
around, the country is of a first-class description,
and composed of low sloping limestone ridges,
downs, and lightly timbered, plain country. In
many of the creeks (tributaries of the one we
are camped on) I noticed numerous springs of
permanent water. The whole of this country is
splendidly grassed with the Mitchell, Lands-
borough, barley, and other grasses of a fattening
description. We also noticed that the creeks
are densely lined with large-sized trees, such as
the Leichardt pine, gum, bloodwood, box, swamp
cedar, curryjohn, &c,, many of which are most
suitable for fencing and other purposes. The
geological formation of this part of the country
is granite, with occasional sandstone ridges ;
also quartz and slate showing in many of the
hills. Lat. 17 deg. 27 min. O.D. 46.
July 10. —The last few nights have been
intensely cold, the thermometer down to 32
deg,, producing ice in waterbags and buckets.
The days are everything that could be desired,
being sufficiently warm to be pleasant. Run-
ning up the creek on which we are camped,
before long we got into a rough strip of granite
country, about two miles in width ; but soon
getting through it came out on to good forest
country. In many places we found this creek
running a strong stream. Eight miles \V. by S.
from O.D. 46 we struck a creek coming from the
northward, up which we travelled for three miles
and a half. On either side and close in were
rugged granite hills. Here we camped for the
night, there being plenty of grass and herbage
for the horses in the valley of the creek.
July 11.—Leaving this creek, and steering
north-westerly over some low sandstone ridges,
we soon came to another good-sized creek, with
springs and permanent waterholes. Crossing
this, and still keeping our former course, after
two or three miles, changed our bearing, and
went northerly, when we cut the course of a
large creek coming from that direction, the
valleys of which being good travelling, we fol-
lowed up for 10 miles, and then camped. Lat.
17 deg. 15 min. O.D. 48.
The country passed over to-day, although
stony, is admirably adapted for sheep, being
well grassed and abundantly watered through-
out. The soil is red loam, while the hills
change from granite to sandstone, and occasional
slate ridges.
July 12.—Thermometer down to 32 deg. again
last night. Running the creek up to its head
for four miles in a northerly direction, gradually
ascending, we came on to some level tableland.
Continuing the same course, we soon struck the
head of another creek running northerly, and
which rapidly increased in size, containing per-
manent water. We followed it for eight miles
before camping. The tableland extended for
several miles on each side of us, was well grassed,
open forest country and plains, the timber
being eucalypti, coolebar, bloodwood, ti-tee, and
pines. Hardly a stone to be seen to-day, except
where quartz cropped up, one lode showing 20
ft. high. Lat.T7 deg. 5 min, O.D. 49.
July 13.—Found it necessary to remain here
to-day, as several of the horses required shoe-
ing. During the day I rode out in a N.E.
direction, and found the country similar to that
passed over yesterday, while the creek had
become very much enlarged by receiving tribu-
taries on both sides, and now contains some
very fine waterholes. I have called it Wall’s
Creek, after H. Wall, a member of my party,
July 14.—The surrounding country has every
appearance of beiug auriferous. I only wish 1
had time to prospect it. Freezing last night
again; but the days make up for the unpleasant
coldness of the nights. We have had more or
less of this weather since the beginningof May.
Owing to many horses being footsore, and
reduced in condition, I can plainly see that it
will take much longer than I expected to
examine this country, so it will be necessary to
still further reduce our rations to 4 lb. fiour, 1
lb. rice, lb. dried beef; sugar, 1 lb.; and tea,
4 oz. Starting early this morning, and steering
westward towards the ranges, which are not far
off, we struck a creek, which we followed up
between the hills to its head, and without much


difficulty got over the ranges and struck a creek
on the other side, trending north-westerly
(which I named Budd’s Creek, after Mr. Budd,
hon. secretary of the East Melbourne Cricket
Club). This creek contains some very fine per-
manent waterholes, and following it in a N.W.
by N. course for six miles and a half, struck a
large river coming from the S.S.W., and camped
here. The country passed over to-day was com-
posed of low stony ridges and downs, richly
clothed with a carpet of grass, and ail the high
hills being thickly grassed to their summits.
Lat. 16 deg. 59 min. O.D. 50.
July 15.—The grass and water being excep-
tionally good here, and wishing to spell the
horses (several of which required shoeing), I
decided to remain here all day. Accompanied
by Mr. Carr-Boyd, and being anxious to get a
good view to the westward, we followed up the
river for a distance of 10 miles in a S.W. by S.
direction, and then turned westerly towards a
very high peak in a long range about three
miles distant. This range is much higher than
the surrounding country, and is trending from
S.S.W. to N. N.E. As it is evidently a dividing
range, I called it the Howitt Ranges (after Mr.
A. W. Howitt, of Sale, under whom I had the
honour to serve in the Burke and Wills expedi-
tion), Having ascended the high peak (which I
called Mt. Lush, after Mr. C. G. Lush, Mel-
bourne) we obtained an extensive view of the
country in every direction. The country to the
west and south-west is apparently very similar
in its character to the country passed over
lately, being composed of low sloping ridges,
undulating downs, and lightly-timbered plains,
richly and variously grassed. I can confidently
state that in all my experience in Queensland 1
have never seen better grassed country than that
over which I have ridden to-day, being equal to
the best of the Barcoo and Thompson country,
and is watered throughout by numerous tribu-
taries of the Wilson, in most of which are run-
ning springs and largo waterholes. The Howitt
Range, although very precipitous on the eastern
side, so much so as to be almost impassable for
stock, declines gradually to the west, where low
sloping ridges and downs occur. In a valley
some six miles to the west I observed the timber
of a large watercourse trending northerly. The
range is of sandstone formation. Having satis-
fied ourselves as to the nature of the surrounding
country, wo returned to camp. At the foot of
Mt. Lush wo observed a forest of pines, which
will prove most serviceable for building and
other purposes. I also notice that the timber on
the river is of immense size, the trees being
giant gum, bloodwood, curryjohn, banhinim,
swamp cedar, and other useful limber for fencing
purposes.
July 16.—The river we are camped on I have
named the Wilson (after Mr. John Wilson,
of New South Wales, and chairman of our
syndicate). Wishing to prove what the country
to the northward is like, we followed the course
of the Wilson down in a north-easterly course
for 12 miles, and camped on a splendid reach of
water. The country passed over to-day was
similar to that described yesterday. During the
day noticed that numerous branches joined the
river on either side. Marked tree 0. D. 51. Lat.
16 deg. 51 min. 30 sec. This camp is about a
mile and a half north of the boundary of the
C.D.P.A. property.
July 17. —Accompanied by Mr. O’Malley, I
started down the river fer the purpose of in-
specting the country still further to the north.
We made 15 miles in a general N.E.E. course
before camping. Near here we ascended a high
hill, and observed the river going through some
high ranges about 10 miles distant, a little W.
of N. The formation of the country was for
the first three miles of sandstone, and then of
granite and ironstone. Having now satisfied
ourselves about the course of the river and the
nature of the country, we will return to the
main party to morrow. During the day the
Wilson was joined by several very large branches,
both on the left and right banks.
July 18.—Returned to O.D. 51,
July 19. —During my absence Mr. Carr-Boyd
made an excursion to the west, and informed me
that the country in that direction was first-
class. He also discovered some salt-water
springs. The others of the party had succeeded
in obtaining a large supply of fish, also a large
kangaroo, which was a valuable addition to our
larder. Some horses having to be shod, we did
not start till midday, and travelling back up
the Wilson, camped a mile above O.D. 50,
Marked tree O.D. 52.
July 20. —Several of our horses being now
very weak and footsore, it is utterly impossible
that I can take them all in my trip to the west,
so I have determined to move a few miles up
the river, and there leave Linacro and Wall with
most of the horses and plant, and, accompanied
by Messrs. Carr-Boyd, O’Malley, and Wells,
and equipped as lightly as possible, proceed at
once to examine the remainder of the country.
Shifted two miles further up the river, and reach-
ing a very large sheet of water, with plenty of
green grass, formed camp. This is a most suit-
able place for the party spelling to remain at,
as game is plentiful, and the river is full of fish,
O.D. 53.
July 21.—Started early this morning with
four riding-horses and two packhorses, and
the following scale of rations : —4lb. flour, lib.
sugar, 4 oz. tea, 1 lb. rice, 1 lb. preserved
potatoes, and 2j lb. dried meat per man per
week. Made for the Howitt Range, with the
intention of crossing if possible, and in four
miles westerly reached the foot of the range,
hut found that, owing to the high and precipitous
character of it, we could not effect a passage
here, so skirted the range in a S.S.W, direction
for 12 miles before camping on the Wilson,
which was much nearer the ranges here. O.D,
54. Lat. 17 deg. 10 min.
July 22.—Still travelling along the foot of
the range in a S.W. by S. direction for2o miles,
we camped on a fine creek coming from the
west, and containing numerous running springs.
During the day we crossed numerous creeks
containing springs, which were all trending


easterly. The country passed over the last
two days is of a grand pastoral description,
suitable for any kind of stock—open plains
and downs on a rich chocolate soil, and
lightly timbered forest country, the trees on
which are principally pine. About six miles
before camping we passed a very high and
promirent hill, which I named Mount King,
after Mr. E. King, Melbourne.
July 23.—During the night, for the first time
on the trip, some of our horses strayed away.
One of the party went out to look fer them, but
returned in the afternoon, having failed to find
them. I then caught a horse and rode out
to cut their tracks, which I succeeded in doing,
and then followed them till darkness set in, and
not being far from our camp, returned there for
the night.
July 24, 23, 26.—1 t took these three days to
get the horses together again, as they had
scattered all over the country, two of them
having travelled nearly to O.D. 53, where I had
left Linacre and Wall, a distance of about SO
miles. While away after these horses I dis-
covered seme very tine creeks to the N.E. of
O.D. 65. Two of the largest of these I called
Pine Creek and Palm Creek; in both of them
were numerous springs and waterholes. Palm
Creek rises in some low ranges over 20 miles
N.E. of O.D. 55. The whole of this part of the
country is of a very fine description, being com-
posed of well-grassed downs and plains, and low
isolated hills. . The soil is of a rich brown and
chocolate loam. Tbe formation of this country
is entirely of sandstone.
July 27. Got back with the horses early this
morning. A short distance west of our camp is
a very high and conspicuous hill, which 1 named
Mount Luke (after Mr. Thomas Luke, Mel-
bourne). Eor tbe purpose of viewing tbe
country around I scaled this mountain, and
from it observed an opening in tbe hills to tbe
west; also that the country to the S. and S.W.
was similar in character to that passed over by
us recently, being low ridges and undulating
downs country, while to the N.W., as far as the
eye can reach, it is apparently the same. I can
trace numerous creeks from here. Returned to
camp, and started in a north-westerly course.
In three miles came to a narrow pass about 50
yards wide, by means of which we got through
the ranges without any difficulty. This gap offers
a capital track for drays and stock to the
country west of here. The country between
here and our 155 camp forms a natural paddock,
having a valley between the hills averaging one
mile and a quarter in width by a length of three
miles, having a creek of running water trending
through it. The ranges all round show a bold
precipitous front, and are several hundred feet
above tbe valley, offering an effectual barrier to
every description of stock. The creek flowing
from the narrow gap mentioned will, I think,
prove to be the head waters of tbe Margaret
River. Passing through the gap, we cut the
course of another creek running north-westerly,
which wo followed down for five miles. As it
then turned to tbe N.E, we decided to leave it.
Up to this point the creek is permanently
watered by springs, and its banks lined with
water-pandanas. I have called it O’Malley’s-
Creek (after Mr. J. O’Malley, a member of our
party). Turning now westerly, in seven miles
struck the head of another creek trending to
the south, and, following it down for a short
distance, camped. O.D. 56. Lat. 17 deg, 20
min. Since leaving O’Malley’s Creek we have
been running along the foot of a table range of
considerable height, which rises abruptly from
tbe valley. The country passed over to-day is
still good, principally composed of open forest
country and of sandstone formation.
July 28, —The table range, taking a sudden
turn near here, now runs N. and S. Steering
westerly, we reached the foot of it, and observ-
ing a sloping spur, we with much difficulty
reached the top. One of our horses (Littlejohn)
falling some distance down the hill, we were
obliged to unpack him before we could get him
to the summit. Steering a'general N.W. course
from here, in three miles and a half struck a
good-sized creek, in which were several fine
springs. We here turned the horses out for
a spell. The last three miles and a half this
morning, although exceedingly rough, is very
fair sheep country, being composed of patches
of grass and triodia, alternating with each
other. After an hour’s spell we made a fresh
start, and after making II miles in a general
westerly direction, running parallel to th&
creek, at which we had lunch, camped on it,.
Marked tree O.D. 57. Lat. 17 deg. 18 min*
The creek is here trending about south-easterly,
and being as nearly as possible on the western
boundary of the C.D.P.A. country, I have
called it Boundary Creek. The country passed
over since lunch is a great improvement on that
we rode over this morning, being well-grassed
open downs and open forest country.
July 29. —As some of our horses are now get-
ting footsore we will spell here to-day. In the-
meantime I will follow the creek down and
examine the country to the south. Running the
creek down forabout six miles in ageneral S.S.E.
direction, through some rather rough tableland
country, I descended into the valley of a large
watercourse ; then travelling south for two miles
came on to a very large and heavily-timbered
creek, and observe that numerous branches join
it about here. It is now trending south-
westerly. The formation of this valley is of
limestone and slate, and it is exceedingly well
grassed throughout. I now returned to camp,
well satisfied with my day’s ride, but will endea-
vour later on to trace this river and prove its
course.
July 30. —Messrs. Carr-Boyd and Wells started
for a three days’ trip to examine the country
north of here, and east and west of the western
boundary. On their return they spoke in
favourable terms of the country passed over,
being for the most part well grassed and abun-
dance of water.
July 31.—Last night was extremely cold,
large icicles appearing on the waterbags this
morning. Leaving the two packhorses here on


some green feed, and planting saddles, &c., I,
accompanied by Mr. O’Malley, proceeded to
inspect the country west of here. Crossed the
creek and proceeded in a general W.N.W.
direction for 21 miles, cutting the course of
numerous creeks. At last struck a very large
one, which I called the Serpentine, on account
of its very winding course. At this point the
creek flows close to and round the point of a
table range, which I called Mount Downey
(after Mr. Downey, Melbourne). Ascended to
the top of the mountain, from which I had a
good view of the surrounding country. Observed
some high ranges about 25 miles off to the west-
ward. A conspicuous mountain about 20 miles
W.S. W. from here I named Mount Forrest (after
Mr. John Forrest, Surveyor-General of Western
Australia).
August I.—Returned by a course more to the
north than our outward track to O.D. 57. On
reaching the camp found the others had already
arrived.
August 2.—Starting early this morning, and
steering south-easterly for six miles, thence
S.S. westerly 4J miles, brought us to the large
watercourse discovered by me four days ago.
Close to this point is a high and very peculiar
isolated hill, which I called Mount Wells (after
Mr. A, J. Wells, the surveyor of our party).
This is a good landmark, and can be seen for a
long distance. Following the creek down for
six miles in a general W.S,W. course, camped
on a fine waterhole. Marked tree O.D. 58.
Lat. 17 deg. 27 min. 30 sec. Anxious to
see which way this large creek is trending, I
rode down some two miles farther, and then
climbed to the top of a very high hill, from
which I could trace its course running between
two table ranges in a westerly direction for
about 20 miles. From here observed what I
take to be the Serpentine Creek joining this one
close by. Numerous other tributaries have also
joined it on both banks during the last few
miles, and consequently it has become much
larger in size, having large reaches of water
in its bed. On account of the size and direc-
tion of this river, flowing as it does straight
for Mount Leake in the Leopold Ranges (near
which point Forrest left the Fitzroy), I believe
this to be the head waters of that river. Having
shot a nice kangaroo here, I returned to camp.
August 3. —Returning up the river to-day with
the intention of reaching Mount Luke as early
as possible, we made 11 miles in a general
north-easterly direction, although we actually
travelled much further. Camped on a fine large
waterhole very deep. The country passed over
to-day is of the very best description, being high
and undulating downs, thickly carpeted with
Mitchell and other grasses on a rich chocolate
soil, the formation being principa ! Jy limestone.
Soon after starting this morning marked a tree
O.D. 63, Ist August, ’B3, this being close to
the S.W, corner of the C D.P.A. country.
August 4.—Steering a general easterly course
to-day for 21 miles, we camped at night on
O’Malley’s Creek, about four miles from Mount
Luke.
August 5. —Making an early start, we reached
Mount Luke in time for breakfast. Previous to
starting out west I had left instructions with
Mr. Linacre to bring all the horses and plant to
Mount Luke on a certain date. He did so, and
we found them there on our return. The horses
which have been spelling have freshened con-
siderably, so hope to get along all right from
now.
August 6.—Leaving Mount Luke thisnaorning,
and steering a general southerly course over
well-grassed downs and lightly-timbered plains,
after travelling four miles we got off the
syndicate’s country, and in two miles further
cut the course of Palm Creek. From the position
and size of this creek here, we believe it to be
the head waters of the Margaret River. Still
proceeding southerly, this creek was soon joined
by Kangaroo Creek, which comes from Mount
Luke. In these creeks I noticed that there are
plenty of permanent springs. From tbis point
observed ranges trending N.E. and 8.W.,
through a gap in which the creek seems to flow.
About four miles N.E. from here noticed that
the ranges slope into extensive and well-grassed
downs. After travelling a little further in a
southerly direction, we entered a gorge through
which the creek flowed, and after following it
for two miles and a half further, turned the
horses out for their customary spell on some
nice grassy flats. After spelling for an hour, we
again started down the creek, and, after one
mile we came to a point where the hills closing
in made a narrow gorge, with rugged and
perpendicular sides, and the bed of the creek
being filled with a long deep reach of water, we
were compelled to climb a steep hill so as to cut
the course of creek lower down, and reached the
top in safety. From the highest point of the
hill observed that the country to the E., N.E.,
and S.E. is very open, principally downs, and
apparently well-grassed. Noticed two large
creeks coming through valleys on either side to
join the one we are now on. We now descended
into the valley of the creek again, and soon
came on a stretch of open, well-grassed country.
In a mile and a half further noticed another
large creek joining this from the west. This
watercourse having now considerably increased
in size, and containing some Very large deep
waterholes, I am convinced that it is the
Margaret River. A short distance further we
camped, having made about 12 miles in a S. by
E. direction. The country for the last few
miles has been of first class description—grasses
rich and various, and well suited for any stock.
The formation of this country is of sandstone,
with occasional ridges of slate and quartz, good
reefs of the latter cropping out frequently.
The soil on the downs is a brown loam, while on
the flats it is rich and black. O.D. 62.
August 7. —Weather very cloudy this morn-
ing, with a few drops of rain, the first we have
had since leaving Delamere. The want of rain
here will not trouble the future settlers much,
as the grass is green even as late in the season
as this. Close to last night’s camp noticed
another large creek from the west, in which are


several fine reaches of water. To-day succeeded
in making 17 miles in a general S. by W, direc-
tion, For the first six miles the sandstone
ranges come close in to the creek, being high
and precipitous on the east side, while on the
west side they gradually slope, and are approach-
able for stock. At this point the country is much
more open, and the high cliffs entirely dis-
appear, leaving isolated round-topped hills, the
sloping sides of which are well-grassed, with
nicely wooded flats between. For the remaining
distance we followed the course of the river;
numerous tributaries, containing natural water-
holes and springs, joining it on either side. The
formation to-day was entirely of sandstone, and
the soil on the plains rich and loamy. O.D. 63.
Lat. 17 deg. 48 min. During the afternoon Mr.
Wells and I surprised two natives who were
sleeping on the banks of the river. They did
not perceive us until we were almost on top of
them, and suddenly springing up, they yelled
with terror, and jumped into the water. As,
however, they left a large bundle of spears
behind, we induced one of them to return, with
whom I held a parley, and made him a present
of a handkerchief.
August 8 —Still following down the river we
made about 13 miles in a S. by W, direction
before camping for the night. The formation
of the country for the first five miles was of
sandstone. After this point it entirely dis-
appeared, and was replaced by high and rounded
hills of slate, also limestone appearing, during
the remainder of the day. The grass and soil
were similar to that passed over yesterday, with
the addition of some hiHs of triodia. About
three miles before camping we came on old
horse tracks, and judged that they belonged to
Saunders and Johns, who had been prospecting
here some two years back. The river had to-
day also been joined by numerous branches on
either side, while the grasses were good and the
soil a rich loam. This country will some day
become very valuable as a sheep run, being best
adapted for that description of stock. A little
below our camp the river runs through a deep
and impassable gorge, with high sandstone hills
on both sides. 1 have come much further south
than I had intended, being anxious to find the
best road for drays and stock from the Margaret
easterly to Start’s Creek, and thence by Stirling
Creek to Roe Downs, on the Victoria River.
From calculation and observation we must now
be close to Forrest’s 144 camp, near which he
saw the last of the Margaret coming through a
gorge north of him.
August 9.—During last night we had several
heavy showers of rain, which obliged us to put
up both tents. This delayed our departure till
the afternoon. Following the valley of a small
creek, which joined the Margaret near here, we
steered easterly, and soon reached the foot of
some rough sandstone ridges, covered with buck
spinifex. The travelling here was extremely
rough, and as many of our horses were now
getting footsore, we could only get on slowly.
On ascending to the top of these ridges, we
observed to the east some low level country with
a large heavily-timbered watercourse in the
distance, for which we made, and soon reached.
The last two miles was nice open and well-
grassed forest country. On arriving at the
creek, we found it to be coming from the N.N.E.,
having here a very wide and sandy bed, over
200 yards. Judging from fioodraarks, a large
volume of water must at times flow through this
channel. Following it down for a mile S.S.W.,
we found water at the junction of another creek
which joined it from the south-east, and camped.
This creek is, I am certain, a tributary of the
Margaret, and is trending S. W. round the point
of a high sandstone hill close to here. Observed
a high bill about a mile and a half S.E. from
here, and hoping to get a good view from it, I
walked there. Observed in the distance several
watercourses coming from the N.E., also a con-
tinuous and high range to the S. \V. From N.
to E. low and broken ranges, with good valleys
between. From E. to S. open plains and lightly
wooded flat country. From S. to S.W., low
broken ranges. The formation of the country
changes here from sandstone to granite, of which
there are low isolated hills, with grassy flats
between. O.D. 65. Lat, 18 deg.
August 10. —As we had only 4 3b. of flour left,
last night we baked our last damper. Our
other rations being almost finished, we are
reduced to 1J lb. beef, half of a pannikin of rice,
and a small pannikin of preserved potatoes,
this allowance having to be divided among the
whole party daily. Some of the weakest horses
being now very low in condition our progress is
necessarily slow. This morning Mr. Carr-Boyd
(wishing to return by Perth) informed me that
he would leave the party and run tho Margaret
down to its junction with the Fitzroy, thence to
the settlements on that river and round to Roe-
buck Bay. I supplied him with his share of
rations, which was very small, also a spare horse,
saddle and bridle, and the only blackboy we bad.
He then started down this tributary of the
Margaret. Wishing to ascertain whether this
large creek joined the Margaret, I, accompanied
by Wall, started down for that purpose. In
the meantime I instructed the party to travel
two or three miles up the creek to the S.E.,
and then, having got round the point of tho
ranges, to steer E.N.E. till they cut the course
of the creek on which Forrest’s 145 camp was,
and camp there, while I expected to overtake
them that evening. Following the course of the
large for five miles in a general W.S.W.
direction, I found that it was there joined by
the Margaret where it came through a deep
gorge in tho ranges. From the top of a high
hill near here I observed that the river trends
southerly for a short distance, and then westerly
towards the point of a high bluff range, about
four miles off in a S.W. by S. direction. Being
satisfied about this creek, we started back to
overtake the party. The character of the
country passed over this morning was high
sandstone ranges running parallel to this creek,
and contracting its valley to about a mile in
width, which is fairly well grassed, while the
ridges are covered with spinifex. Soil, a mixture


of rich loam and white holding clay, and in
places very stony. Haying travelled a few
miles, the horse that Wall was riding knocked
up, so we returned to the last water and camped
for the night,
August 11,— Making an early start this morn-
ing soon picked up the tracks of the party, and
followed them. On our way, seeing a smoke
from some blacks' fires close by, I rode into the
camp, and saw a large number of natives, and
although they showed great surprise, did not
run away, as all others had previously done, but
remained to parley with us. Having given them
some presents we then left them, and proceeding
on our way in 13 miles came on the party
camped on a small pool of water left by recent
rains, O.D. 6(5; lat. 17 deg. 59 min. The
country passed over to-day was in the eirly
part rather poor, being principally spinifex
on a white sandy soil. In the latter part of the
journey the country improved much, showing
open plains andundulating Mitchell grass downs
country. This country is granitic in formation.
Passed over numerous watercourses, but all of a
dry and sandy nature. I observed that these
creeks, although trending southerly from here,
soon turn to the east. I was glad to find on my
return that Mr. Liaacre had shot a fine turkey,
which was most acceptable to us in our reduced
condition. The gizard of this turkey when
opened was found to contain a full-grown lark,
which had been swallowed, feathers and all.
We all thought this to be a most remarkable
occurrence,
August 12. —The weather this morningis very
cloudy and extremely cold. Starting early and
steering a general N.E. by E. course for 16
miles, in five miles came to the end of this grand
downs country, which extends three miles to the
north and about six to the south. These downs
are then succeeded by open forest country, which
stretches about eight miles further to the south.
Finding ourselves unable to proceed in an
easterly direction, owing to the stony character
of the country and the condition of our horses’
feet, we are compelled to abandon the Sturt’s
Creek route, as our provisions are now all but
finished, and we will accordingly make for the
Ord River, where there is a better chance of
getting game and fish, also to get the rations
c&ched at the depdt camp, and the horses left
behind there. Just after coming to the end of
the downs country we struck a good-sized creek
coming from the north, but soon after turning
E.N.E. As the travelling along its valley was
good, we determined to follow it, which we did
for 11 miles before camping. We observed
numerous branches joining it on both sides, in
one of which was a running spring. The country
from the head of this creek is composed of
rather poor forest land on a white sandy soil,
the formation being low isolated hills of granite
and limestone, with ground strewed with quartz,
sandstone, and limestone pebbles. O.D. 67.
August 13.—We are now fairly in rough
granite ranges, which are covered with spinifex,
and the travelling having become very bad, the
valley being strewn with blocks and boulders
of granite, we only succeeded in making about
nine miles in a general easterly direction before
camping, although we had travelled twice that
distance following the windings of the creek.
Soon after starting we observed a fine tributary
coming from the S.W, I now feel convinced
that this creek will prove to be one of the heads
of the Ord, and that Forrest was wrong in sup-
posing that the creeks he crossed running
southerly were branches of the Sturt. O.D.
6S. Lat. 17 deg. 53 min.
August 14, 15.—During these two days we
only made 12 miles in an E. by N. direction,
the creek twisting about to all points of the
compass, and the travelling for the most part
being very rough. Many of the horses show
symptoms of knocking-up, and most of us
were compelled to walk a good deal. This was
rather rough on us, as our boots were nearly all
worn out and we were almost barefooted. The
country on this watercourse is of a rather poor
description, the hills and ridges being covered
with spinifex, with occasional patches of grass
intervening. The flats are fairly well grassed,
and on a rich loamy soil. The formation of the
country is principally slate, high hills of which
come close in to the creek along the greater
part of its course, the bed of which is occupied
by huge boulders of slate, which made the
travelling very difficult. Slate occurs here in all
shades of colour, and is both of a hard and soft
description. On the 14th we were obliged to
abandon the horse Littlejohn, as he was com-
pletely knocked up. On the same day we saw
old horse tracks, which we again believe to
belong to the prospecting party (Sanders and
Johns). The last three days this creek has
been joined by many large tributaries, and is
now an immense size, having some very large
and wide sheets of water, with numerous large
mobs of ducks, some of which we were fortunate
enough to shoot. This watercourse I have
named the Panton River (after Mr. J. A. Panton,
P.M., of Melbourne), this gentleman having a
large interest in West Australia. At our camp
of the 15th was a large and very deep water-
hole teeming with fish. Several were caught for
lunch. We are now entirely dependent on what
we may catch, all our provisions being done, and
we have no chance of replenishing them until
we reach the dep6t camp, from which we are-
still nearly 80 miles distant, A mile or two
back from this camp a large branch came in
from the SW. At the junction we siw a camp
of blacks, who cleared out on our approach. The
formation of the country has now changed to
sandstone, having occasional ridges of limestone,
covered with spinifex. In the afternoon a large
haul of fish was obtained, many being of large
size. We are now, unfortunately, out of salt,
so are uuable to cure any of them to keep, and
must use them at once, and let to-morrow
provide for itself.
August 16. —To-day made 13£ miles in a
general N.E. by E. direction, and camped on a
large waterhole. After travelling about two
miles, the river ran through large and extensive
plains and downs country, splendidly grassed.


extending to tbe foot of some low ranges in the
distance, and from here we observed numerous
•creeks all flowing towards the Panton. While
riding along the banks, we suddenly came on a
large camp of natives, who were in the bed of
the river. As soon as they saw us they rushed
into the water, and swam across, screaming with
terror all the time, and did not think themselves
safe until they had placed a considerable
distance between us and them. Being desirous
to show them that we had no intention of
injuring them, I left several presents in their
camp. This will probably be tbe means of
making them friendly with future settlers. Our
provisions to-day consisted of the remainder of
the fish we caught yesterday and two ducks.
Haw numerous kangaroos during the day, but
too shy to be approached, O.D. 71. Bat, 17
deg. 45 min.
August 17. —Very cold again last night.
Nothing to eat this morning, so went out to try
and catch some fish. By 11 o’clock we succeeded
in getting one apiece, and then breakfasted.
As almost all the horses were unable to travel,
I decided to spell them here and proceed with
Mr. Linacre to the depfit for the spare horses
and provisions cdched there. Previous to start-
ing we managed to catch three fish, which must
do us until we reach camp this evening.
August 17,18, 19.- Starting with Mr. Linacre
about 2 o’clock, with a riding-horse each and
one packhorse, we reached the dep6t on the
afternoon of the 19th. During the whole time
we only succeeded in catching three or four
small fish, consequently were very weak and
exhausted when we arrived. Found everything
safe, and it did not take us long to unearth the
provisions, and we soon had a good meal
prepared, which we enjoyed immensely. The
yard which had been made being partly broken
down, I immediately set about repairing it,
Linacre being busy in getting everything packed
up preparatory to starting in the morning. The
whole of the country passed over has been of a
first-class pastoral description, composed of
extensive open plains, undulating downs, and
lightly timbered forest country, with occasional
sloping ridges, the entire of which were covered
with such grasses as the Mitchell, Landsborough,
kangaroo, rye, and other rich grasses peculiar
to Western Australia, some of which our horses
seemed very fond of. The soil is principally a
rich chocolate and brown loam on the plains
and downs, while that on the forest country is
more of a sandy nature. We crossed the course
of many large tributaries (on which we noticed
fine timber for building and fencing purposes),
several of which were running. One very large
running creek from the south 1 have named the
Forrest River (after Mr. Alex. Forrest, of Perth,
W.A.), he being the discoverer of the Ord,
which I had omitted to say joined the Panton
four or five miles below O.D. 71. At the junc-
tion it was running a strong stream, and was
about the same size as the Panton. Two other
large branches I have named after Mr,
Nicholson, Melbourne, and Mr, D. A. Linacre,
who is a member of our party. The large sand-
stone ranges to the west of the depfit I have
called the Osmand Ranges (after Mr. Osmand, a
large landholder in the Kimberley district).
Tbe formation of the whole of this country is of
sandstone and limestone ridges, with occasional
high hills of red sandstone, capped with iron-
stone Saw numerous blacks during these days,
who all showed great fear.
August 20, 21, 22. —Having caught the
freshest of our horses, I proceeded to look for
the tracks of the horses which had been left
here; found them without difficulty, and
followed them up; soon came across three of
them, which I ran into the yard. Catching one
of them, I started after the other three, and
found them about five miles from here. Bring-
ing them back, we packed them at once, having
no difficulty whatever with them, although they
were very fresh, and in first rate condition.
Starting immediately for O.D. 71, we reached
there on the evening of the 2’2nd. The party
not expecting me till next day, were agreeably
surprised at our arrival. Having brought a nice
damper with us it was soon attacked and
demolished. To my intense surprise I found
Mr. Carr-Boyd had during my absence again
joined the party after an absence of eight days.
He explained that on account of feeling very
weak, and fearing that his provisions would not
last him to the settlements on the Fitzroy, he had
thought better to abandon the idea, so had
followed the tracks of the party until he had
overtaken us. The remainder of the party,
although well, were in a very weak state, as they
had caught but very few fish and only shot two
or three ducks, while I had been away, having
only four cartridges when I started. This was
the more annoying as there were always
hundreds of ducks close to the camp. They
had principally subsisted on a few wild figs
which the blackboy had gathered. One
peculiarity I noticed in all of them, which was
that they had almost entirely lost their voices,
also their sense of hearing, caused from excessive
weakness.
August 23. —Remained here all day to recruit,
and send back for the horse Astronomer, which
we had been obliged to leave about 10 miles
back,
August 24. —To-day shifted down to the
junction of the Ord and Panton, as there was
some nice green grass there. We will spend a
few days hero to give the weak horses a chance,
and to get them all shod, as far as possible,
before starting back for Delamere. This neces-
sitated tbe making of a large number of horse-
shoe nails from copper rivets, of which we
fortunately had a good supply. It was fortunate
for us that Mr. O’Malley had the ingenuity to
invent this way of making nails, otherwise we
should have lost a great number of our horses,
most of which were unable to travel if not well
shod. These nails answered admirably, although
rather more brittle than the ordinary ones,
O.D. 72. Lat. 17 deg. 42 min,
August 25.—Having been obliged to leave
two horses about eight miles down the river
from here (while returning from the depOt),


Mr, Wells and I started this morning to re-
cover them. Found them dose to where they
had been left, and returned with them to camp
0.D., 72. On our way back we were followed
some miles by several natives, who kept calling
out as if they wished to speak to us, but
remained about half a mile behind. If, how-
ever, we rode towards them, they ran away ; so,
finding we could not get near them, we con-
tinued our journey.
August 26, 27, 28.—Remained here these
three days. While some of the party were em-
ployed shoeing the horses, the others went out
fishing and shooting, not for the amusement of
the thing, but out of sheer necessity, as we had
only seventeen days’ short rations now remaining,
and it was necessary to save them as much as
possible by obtaining what game we could. We
were fairly successful during this time.
On the 27th, from early morning till about 6
p.m.,we were puzzled to account for reports,
apparently in a N.W. direction, which we heard
at frequent intervals throughout the day. These
being exactly like shots fired from a gun at no
great distance, we fired off several cartridges,
thinking there must be some white men close by.
Mr. Carr-Boyd rode down the river to see if
such were the case, while I rode up. Finding no
traces of any one, we came to the conclusion
that the reports were caused by volcanic agency.
August 29, £O. 31. —Everything being ready
for a start this morning, and having determined
to leave the Ord at this point and steer for
Mount Panton, near the Negri, which lies about
E.N.E. from here, we pocked up, and crossing to
the right bank of the river, mustered sufficient
energy to give a feeble cheer as a farewell to this
noble watercourse, which we were, however,
heartily glad to turn our backs on. Should our
weaker horses hold out, we hope to reach
Delamere within three weeks.
Steering a general E.N.E, course, we reached
the Negri on the evening of the 31st. having
travelled nearly 50 miles in that direction, and
crossed the large creeks previously mentioned as
joining the Ord. For the first 80 miles we had
grand travelling; hardly a stone on the track,
and the country similar to that on frontage of
Ord from O.D, 71 to dep6t. After this we got
into very rough limestone country, on the whole
of which were strewed broken and sharp-pointed
slabs of that stone. The consequence was that
several of the horses had their shoes torn off
and their feet cut about in a terrible manner.
About two miles N.E. of our 74 camp was a
peculiar isolated hill, of very rugged formation.
We called this Mount Cotton (after Mr. Cotton,
Melbourne), Having got fairly into this table-
land, we decided to keep on our course, as the
quickest way of getting out of it. Sighted
Mount Panton on the afternoon of the 31st, and
also saw the timber of the Negri about five miles
off. Shortly afterwards arrived at the edge of the
tableland, and found that its formation here
changed from limestone to sandstone and iron-
stone. At this point there is a very abrupt
descent into the valley of the Negri, the table-
land her© showing for miles an almost perpen-
dicular front, being very rugged and precipitous.
After much trouble in making a road, we
managed to arrive without accident at the
bottom, and following down the valley of a
small creek, we were obliged to camp without
reaching the river, as it became too dark to
travel. The country for the last 20 miles,
although of the very roughest description, is for
the most part fairly well grassed, with triodia
intervening, and abundance of water through-
out, consisting of waterholes and springs. After
descending into the valley the travelling was
much improved, the rich loamy soil being
thickly covered with grass. Late this afternoon
we observed that the country a few miles to the
northward was open forest country, the table-
land not extending beyond it, and I am now
certain that a good road for drays and cattle
can be made five or six miles north of our track
to near O.D. 44, in a direct line from O.D. 26,
near the junction of Nelson’s Creek with the
Negri.
September I.—The nights are still very cold,
while during the day the weather is much
warmer than it has been for months past.
Starling early, and travelling over well-grassed
flats, soon struck the Negri, which is still run-
ning a strong stream. Followed it down for
three or four miles to near O.D. 25, and camped
for the day on a large sheet of water, and were
successful here' in catching a good supply of
fish, while with the guns we obtained a few
ducks, and some cockatoos, so were able to save
a day’s rations.
September 2, 6. —During these days we tra-
velled from the Negri to O.D. 19 (head of Stir-
ling Creek) on the old tracks to O.D, 22, and
thence almost in a straight line to O.D, 19,
On this track we found capital travelling, the
country being all well-grassed, lightly-timbered
forest country, open plains, and downs; the for-
mation is of limestone and sandstone, with
plenty of water in creeks, caused from perma-
nent springs. By this time several of our
horses showed signs of knocking up. One mare
was completely done, and as we were now much
reduced for want of proper food, I decided to
kill her here and jerk the flesh in the sun. We
accordingly shot her and were obliged to remain
here for the purpose of curing the meat and
giving ourselves and horses a spell.
September 7,8, 9. —Remained in camp feast-
ing on the horseflesh, which had an uncommonly
rough time.
September 10.—The greater part of the meat
being jerked, we were ready for a start. Steered
for O.D. 18, and camped for the night without
water, as the lagoons there were now dried up.
I, however, having gone on ahead, found that
water could be obtained by sinking in the bed of
the creek some four miles from here ; but it
was too late to get there to-night,
September 11,—Mr, O’Malley and I started
ahead of the party, and by the time they
arrived we had, by aid of a shovel and tin dish,
obtained sufficient water to camp on, which we
did for the day. The water ran strongly into
the hole made by us, the horses being unable to


■exhaust it. Most of them being in a very weak
state we have to b© very careful of them.
September 12.—Making an early start, we
followed this creek down in a general N E.
by E. direction for some 14 miles, and then
camped on some splendid running springs of
permanent water. 1 have named this Giles’
Creek (after Mr. A. Giles, of Springvale sta-
tion, N.T,, he having extended to us the greatest
hospitality during our stay there). The forma-
tion of the country passed over to-day is iron-
stone ridges, .also sandstone and limestone.
September 13.—Followed down the creek for
a short distance when we were obliged to
leave it, owing to the valley being much nar-
rowed, and the whole extent across it occupied
with boggy springs. Steered northerly for two
or three miles, then turned east, and after a few
miles of rough travelling, struck a stony creek,
and gave the horses an hour’s spell. Started
again, and almost immediately struck Stevens’
Creek, coming from N.N’.W., and running
S.S.E., and afterwards easterly. Running it
down for five miles, wo came to a point where
Giles’ Creek joined it, both creeks here run-
ning strong, and being of considerable width,
densely lined with palms and water paudana?.
We camped here for the night. Up to here the
travelling has been very rough, and is not a
suitable stock route. I would advise any parties
bringing stock out to this country to leave the
Victoria at O.D. I’2, then strike Stevens’ Creek
at O.D. 15, thence W.S.W. to Giles’ Creek (the
whole of this track being first rate travelling),
affer which there is no difficulty.
September 14.—After travelling one mile to-
day another mare knocked up. Being unable to
rise from the ground, and being again almost
out of provisions, we were obliged to shoot her,
necessitating our remaining here to-day and to-
morrow.
September 15.—Camped to-day; employed in
dressing the meat.
September 16.—Made 12 miles in a general
N.E. direction before camping. Shortly before
reaching camp this creek ran into the Victoria.
September 17-24.—During these days we
travelled down the Victoria by easy stages, and
this magnificent river having been traversed and
well described by Gregory, it is quite unneces-
sary that I should say anything about it. In
this time we had a day’s spell, and left some
spare gear planted, so as to lighten the horses’
packs. W e were also compelled to leave
behind another mare, which could not possibly
travel. On the 23rd another horse knocked up,
and having eaten nearly all of the last one, we
shot and dressed him. I have determined that
this is the last horse to be killed, so must make
it last out till wo reach Delamere. Most of the
party are in a very weak condition, and hardly
able to walk, as there is no nourishment in the
flesh of poor and knockcd-up horses. Oa the
24th we arrived at a point opposite Mount
Sandiraan, lat. 16 deg. 5 min., where, at the end
of a very largo waterhole, a rocky ford occurs.
As this is no doubt the samo place where
Gregory crossed the river many years ago, I
have named it Gregory’s Ford, after that
eminent explorer. As there are high rough
ranges a few miles down the river, which come
close in, and make an almost impassable gorge
fur many miles, we have decided to steer E.N. E.
to-morrow to get round them, and afterwards
more northerly to cut our old tracks.
September 25, 26.—Steered a general N.E.
course till near Gregory’s Creek, on a large
branch of which we camped on the 26th, having
had the greatest difficulty in getting several of
our horses along, they being very footsore and
lame.
September 27.—Having serious fears about
some members of the party, and finding the
weaker horses a great dras 1 on us, I decided to
leave several of them here, bury saddles and
other things, and taking the freshest horses push
on for Delamere, which we hope to reach to-
morrow. As we are now on our outward tracks,
and know the country, we will not have the
slightest difficulty should the horses keep up.
Being desirous of preparing some food for the
remainder of the party, I will push on ahead,
and try to arrive at the station to-night, taking
the black boy with me. The distance proving
too far for our tired horses, we were still 10
miles from the station when darkness came on
us, the night proving very cloudy, and setting
in wet. Having neither moon nor stars to guide
me, and being unable to .travel by compass in
the dark, I trusted to the black boy, who was
born and bred on this station, and was supposed
to know every inch of the ground. He proved
unworthy of this trust, for although we passed
within less than a mile of the house he failed to
recognise the place, and, after travelling a long
time, not knowing in what direction, I resolved
to camp, his horse having knocked up in the
meantime. Throwing myself on the ground,
thoroughly tired, I was soon fast asleep.
September 28. —Up again at daylight, and
having a good look round failed to recognise
the country, as I had never been there
before. I therefore asked the boy if he
knew where the station was. He pointed
N.E., and said that way, although I thought
different, but as he seemed quite positive we
started in that direction. After proceeding a
short distance his horse gave in. I then had to
drive both him and horse in front of me. Still
being doubtful as to whether we wore going
right I again asked him, and he pointed in the
same direction. Our trivelling was now very
slow, hardly a mile an hour. After about four
miles I could see by the boy’s manner that he
had no idea where be was, and as we bad no
water since late yesterday, and the day being
hot, we felt very thirsty. I hero decided to let
him shift for himself, so wont ahead to look for
water, and in two miles succeeded in finding
some, at which I camped. In two hours’ time
the boy came up. During the evening I saw
some blacks’ fires, and heard them calling out.
September 29. —Having thought over the
situation, 1 determined to steer a coarse in the
direction in which I thought Delamere lay, and
leaving the boy to do as he pleased. I made the


station in four hours, when I found that tho
party bad arrived safely last evening, the boy
arriving two days later. We were here very
hospitably received by Mrs. H. Gosse, her hus-
band being from home. The party very soon
regained their usual health and spirits. Re-
mained here three days to recruit, when most cf
the party pushed on for the Katherine telegram h
station, being anxious to send news of our safe
arrival as soon as possible, as we learnt by the
papers that we were almost given up as lost.
Two of the party remained behind to bring in the
horses and plant. They were out much longer
than I expected. As there was nothing to
detain Messrs. Carr-Boyd and O’Malley, they
shortly started for Melbourne, 1 and the other
members remaining behind till the horses and
plant were disposed of. We then came on to
Melbourne, arriving hero 21st December, having
been away 12 months.
Having now come to the end of my diary, I
only trust that my explorations may prove of
some benefit to that colony. I have, beyond
doubt, proved that a vast area of magnificent
pastoral lands exists in the hitherto unexploj ed
portions of the Kimberley district, and as I
have had considerable experience in Queens-
land, I can safely say that these lands will com-
pare favourably with the best parts of that
colony. It is suitable for any description of
stock—horses, cattle, or sheep. I have never
seen anything to approach it with regard to its
waters, as we daily met with several water-
courses, many of large size, and nearly all
contained running springs, the whole of the
country being made available thereby. With
respect to the timber, I found it most suitable
for all purposes, and everywhere plentiful. I
made it my particular duty to look carefully for
the presence of poison plant, but failed to find
any. I also noticed that there were no injurious
grass seeds. The animals which inhabit this
country are not numerous, being chiefly kanga-
roos and very few wallaby. Native dogs are
also very scarce, as we saw and heard very few
during the trip. Owing to these facts, com-
bined with the delightfully cool climate which
we enjoyed, I am convinced that before long
this will become a great wool-growing district.
It is well known that Cambridge Gulf is a
splendid harbour, and affords secure anchor-
age, with plenty of room to work the largest
ships afloat, and tho open sea outside the gulf
is free from reefs and coral patches between
here and Port Darwin, which is distant on 1 y
24 hours’ steam. A very good landing-place
for stock can be found a few miles up the
Ord Hirer, a strong tide running in about 20
miles from Adolphus Island, and the banks
of the river being very high and sound, with
abundance of grass and fresh water in the
vicinity, A good market for cattle might be
opened with tho Dutch settlements, also China
and Japan, which are all within a few days’ sail,
and Australian beef would bo much superior to
their miserable island cattle. The voyage from
here to India is shorter by 3000 miles than from
Sydney or Melbourne. It will, therefore, be
plkinly seen that Cambridge Gulf will be the
port of North-eastern Kimberley, as it will not
only command the trade of the Ord and all .its
tributaries, but also that largo tract of country
drained by Sturt Creek and the Victoria River.
From the telegraph line (Northern Territory) we
Lave proved that a good stock route can be
made to the Ord River. 'ihe natives with
whom we came in contact proved perfectly
harmless, showing more fear than hostility.
They will no doubt become \ery useful to future
settlers. I have no doubt that as settlement
advances a largo portion of this country will be
found to be auriferous, more particularly in the
slate ranges on the Panton River, lat, about 17
deg. 50 min. Before concluding, I must return
my sincere thanks to the members of my party
for the support they gave me on every occasion.
Although suffering great privations during por-,
tions of the trip, they all, with one exception,
did their level best to carry out my instructions,
and to assist in bringing the expedition to a
successful issue. Also, I would tender my best
thanks to Mr. John Wilson, the chairman of
the association, for the warm interest and will-
ing assistance he rendered in the matter of
equipment and purchasing the horses; to Mr.
Charles G. Lush, honorary secretary, for the
uniform courtesy he has invariably shown in all
matters affecting the interests of the Associa-
tion; to Mr. Eileiy, Astronomer-General, for
his very kind assistance in the selection of the
scientific equipment.
W. J. O’Donnell, Leader.
A. J. Wells, Surveyor.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, 51 & 53 Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.




