

DUET
A TRIP ROUND THE WORLD.
BY OXE WHO HAS BEEX THERE.
Tunbridge Wells :
PRINTED AT H. S. COLBRAN’S PRINTING WORKS,
9, Calverley Road.




DIARY
A TRIP ROOND THE WORLD.
BY ONE WHO HAS BEEN THEBE.
Tunbridge Wells ;
PRINTED AT H. S. COLBRAN’S PRINTING WORKS,
9, Calverley Road.




NOVEMBER 15th, 1879.
JHarp nl| a Hrip ramth lljjj
After much consultation, they at last said, well, perhaps he
had better go. They were the parents of the traveller. So he
started on the above date after a few tearful leavetakings from his
“ cousins, and his sisters, and his aunts.”
In the hurry and confusion of starting a big ship on a long
voyage, one scarcely has any individual feelings, he rather just
merges them into the mass. I suppose this must have been my
case, for I hardly realized the fact that I had indeed left England
for Australia. The usual experiences of a trip from London to
Gravesend about describes our passage down river to that town,
where we laid all night. They do all things connected with a big
ship in a very deliberate way; so, we very deliberately started on
Sunday morning down river, about ten or twelve miles, and then
brought up and anchored—fog-bound. At about this time, 10, a.m.
we breakfasted, having previously frozen and thawed a few times in
the bitter morning. The saloon of a ship can be made a very warm,
snug spot, without any fireplace, even on a cold day, but the
resources of ours were all inadequate on this occasion, and several
hundred teeth chattered, in the intervals of hard walking during
the whole day. On such occasions it is well to be a friend of
the first mate, whose snug little cabin is always warm. Oh ! none
can tell how much Polly and I appreciated the friendship of that
estimable officer, and the comforts of his cabin also, the latter in a


very secondary degree, of course. We wore the day out in eating,
chatting, and keeping ourselves warm.
Monday rose bright and much milder. The tug again took us
in tow, and we passed out to sea. Deal and Folkestone looked very
pretty from the water by night. I think Dover was not on the map
that day, but we might have passed it while dining at about half-
past six, the proper time being four o’clock, but the cook had taken
an over-dose of whisky (by mistake) hence, the delay. Shortly
after we retired, to find in the morning the tug leaving us to our
own devices ; the wind just serving, we kept slowly down channel,
missing a few of our passengers at dinner, and more at tea. The
tables were very bare at breakfast next morning, but the fact of our
nearing Plymouth somewhat inspired even the invalids, and we
swept through the romantic, rock besprinkled scenery with full
decks, anchoring at Plymouth Sound at about 1, p.m. Many were
the boats that would have taken us on shore, but from advice given
by Mr. Brown we chose one particular dingy, to the intense disgust
of all the rest, expressed in the usual sailor style, i.e. “ with a
glittering streak of profanity” (as Mark Twain says) running
through it. Very picturesque as Plymouth is from a distance, the
extreme reverse is the case on landing at the quay. The sight of
fish, the sound of fish, and the smell of fish, is all pervading, or
nearly so ; here and there a fragrant cabbage boiling, and here and
there a decaying one is the only variation, and the delicate nose
protests, and hurries to sweeter regions higher up in the town. I
had taken a bag with me and notes of intended purchases—such a
medley—but with Polly’s help, they were got through; and as we had
previously arranged, were back at the quay and its fragrance with
our purchases at a quarter to four, supposing that the ship would
start same night. That, however, proved to be a little fiction of
the captain’s. Still I think we were well repaid for the delay by
the beautiful sight of Plymouth by night, (beautiful always from a
distance) and the going out early in the morning into the fine open
sea, with the inspiriting breeze right after us. It was truly gorgeous,
knowing too that we were fairly on a long ocean voyage. The big
blue rollers ran after us, and we got away from them as fast as


possible. Oh! it was high times, and not a qualm ! What
rare fun too at dinner —how the glasses and plates slipped about,
and we all kept tune by swaying. A brisk little squall while
we were at tea, gave us a good jolt and spun us along at the
unusual rate of miles an hour by the patent log, no mistake of
course.
W.G.B. (C.M.)
The above are the initials of the chief officer, who has learned to
do them in his watch below, and is a very intelligent and industrious
youth. I often take marked notice of him myself, as he is really
most deserving, and has whiskers coming plainly. A most jovial
Irishman, Cusack by name, sits at our table. His eminently
Irish face and merry eyes have only to be seen to be laughed at;
and he has a funny tongue too, and keeps it wagging without
cessation. I had almost said that smoking was one of his weak-
nesses, quite the contrary is however the fact, it is his very strong
point—he beats me hollow. My friends can judge of his capabilities.
We are now fairly in blue waters skirting the Bay of Biscay, light
breezes have been the characteristic of the day. Cusack gave to a
small and particularly select party a reading from Sir Walter
Scott’s poems in his (Cusack’s) own inimitable style. Just now
cards, writing, and music are all going on, and “ We think of thee
dear Home, far on the Deep Blue Sea,” just given by Mr. Silchrist,
has induced such pathetic feelings that I close the journal for to-
night with just a tinge of home sickness. The lovely moonlight
induces me to go on deck again and metaphorically shake myself.
It was mild and balmy, and I stayed up until twelve to enjoy it.
This day has been one of events, not large, but numerous. A most
gorgeous roll on the ship was so attractive to many of the passengers
that they even preferred it to those on the table, good as they are.
There has been but little walking the deck, except by those who
have one long and one short leg, and their name is not legion by
any means. I, in the exercise of that amiability which I trust will
continue, read some extracts to the lady passengers this morning in
the dove cot. A shoal of porpoises passed during the afternoon,
and “ alas,” for our prospects of Pork, a foolish grunter jumped


over-board out of the frying pan into the fire—a possible feast for
Father Neptune and the mermaids on Christmas day. We can but
feel that we have scarcely saved our bacon.
What a marvellous aptitude for general accomplishments does a
voyage beget. I have to-day, with much labour, and more diligence
than is is common with me, let a gusset into my waistcoat. Time
dims what might have happened more on that day.
Sunday for the first time on shipboard. We are unusually well
off for clergy, and service was performed by the Eev. G-. It was to
me very impressive, divested of all the stereotyped style of the
ordinary Church, but it paled to insignificance (in respect of heart
worship) when compared with the Hymns of all descriptions which
we sang on deck in the lovely moonlight evening with the tempera-
ture at 60°.
The Eev. C. is a tall and very thin specimen of humanity, of the
milk and water type, although he does not join very merrily in any
of our table demonstrations—at least he throws no cold water on
them—and if the should have his due, how much more a
Eeverend ? By the way, we have seen a whale to-day, and a shoal of
porpoises ; lively young beggars are the porpoises, but they wont
bite, and this is sad for Mr. G-.who fishes all ways, and fishes only.
This has been an exceptionally brilliant day, and graceful lounging
was the order of it. The evening on deck in the beautiful moon-
light, and the balmy air, was just perfection. All the invalids were
out and sang choruses, glees, and songs of every sort and description.
Much must be left to the imagination, more especially the two
songs which I sang myself. At mid-day we were about opposite
“ Oporto,” with, say, two hundred miles of Westing.
On rising we (that is Mr. P. and myself) found that it
was much colder, and necessary to shut the port, not only for the
temperature, but that the sea was rising fast. It proved no
misnomer, for shortly after breakfast seas began to break on board,
and got stronger and stronger till luncheon, when amid other table
eccentricities one gentleman shot neatly out of his seat and
disappeared under the table to the very great amusement of the
rest.


Stronger and stronger it blows, and clad throughout in oilskins
I go with Cusack to observe the beauty of the ship as she crashes
through the water at 13 miles an hour; and such water, the
beautifully pale, partially green, and partially blue color that just
permeates without destroying the individuality of the milk white
froth is beyond description, it must be seen to be understood.
I would be sorry to be responsible for the milliner’s bill contracted
by any ball-going young lady who had seen it. Now as I write the
wind has somewhat abated, but still the barometer falls for more,
and they are hanging on to small sail very carefully, yet at half-
past eight p.m. it had fallen to a light breeze. From the same
quarter the indications are still for more, or possibly Southerly and
foul for us. It is now very warm, and the ship is just rolling off
one wave into a trough, and up another, and again sea-sickness is
the prevailing recreation. About 300 miles to the Eastward is
Gibraltar, and 400 to the South is Madeira. The bunk looks very
inviting just now, “ thank you,” “ I think I will.” Good night!
After the above was written, a skylark flew on board, probably
driven off the shores of Lisbon by the wind, and finding only the
Rodney to rest his weary foot and wing upon, after circling round
a few times, like Noah’s dove, returned, and was soon caught and
caged. If (which is very improbable) he should live, he will be
presented to a young lady in Adelaide, by Mr. Brown, the present
proprietor. “We think of thee, dear Home, far on the Deep
Blue Sea,” has recurred to my slightly perturbed mind on several
occasions to-day, and, I think, to many others. There has been
much silence and thoughtfulness on the part of all the company,
probably on that account.
It would, perhaps, be more polite to attempt to describe the ladies
first, but I must just waive that, and go on as best suits my
opportunities. Father O’D ,it is perhaps needless to say, is an
Irishman, with a becoming pride of his nationality. As he is my
vis a vis at dinner, I have many opportunities of observing and
appreciating his gentle good humour, merry jokes, and able conver-
sation ; no subject seems unknown to him, from the brewing of
whisky toddy, and general deviltry, to logarithms and high


theology. How his eyes twinkled, and his whole body was convulsed
at the little joke we played on Mr. Gr. Thus it was, as I have
before stated, Mr. Gr. constantly fishes and leaves the line towing
behind ship, when going slowly. While at luncheon to-day, some
one attached to the hook a soda water bottle and a highly-dried
herring, the resistance of the bottle induced him to believe that now
he had really got a fish. After a prodigious deal of hauling, he at
last landed one and a soda water bottle, somewhat to his chagrin,
but to the intense amusement of every one else, none more than
Father O’D .
Temperature 68<> this day, now raining hard, and the prospect of
a rough night. The prospect referred to above was realized, and
my ribs are even now somewhat sore from the rolling about which
I got in my bunk. A tremendous swell has been running all this
day, and convalescence proceeds somewhat slowly in the case of the
invalids. Phillipines have caused much amusement, and I have
just managed to land Cusack for a bottle of Bass for to-morrow’s
luncheon, by a coup de etat.
The skylark caught yesterday is still well and hearty, and bids
fairer than yesterday not to “ shuffle off this mortal coil.” If lam
unduly profuse in admiration of the lovely blue of these waters, it
is certainly a fault that any appreciative person might fall into.
I have been out on the jib boom, and it is grand to see the ship
gently (to-day) pushing through the gorgeous ultramarine, a deeper,
lovelier blue than I ever saw imitated, either in or out of nature. In
it, this morning, we saw a big fin, the dorsal, one of a large shark,
just rolling along, and quite at his ease : he did not follow the ship,
or possibly our diet might have been this day varied by shark cut-
lets, or boiled, fried, devilled, or what not, according to the
gospel by Saint Rowley. Appended is our bill of fare for this day,
which shews the excellency of the Commissary department:—
Soup.
JOINTS.
Eoast Leg Mutton. Boiled Shoulder Mutton.
POULTRY.
Eoast Ducks. Boiled Fowls.


ENTREES.
Beef Steak Pudding. Haricot Chops. Mountain Pecker.
ENTREMETS.
Damson Tart. Easpberry Tart. Blanc Manges. Marlborough Pudding.
Bread and Butter Pudding. Apple Comfits. Apple Souffle.
Dessert and Coffee.
We passed Madeira at about one o’clock, but not sufficiently near
to see. I believe within about eighty miles. All the youth of the
ship engaged in a game of French and English this afternoon, and
Beauty looked on, and was amused. It was a very tough battle,
resulting, however, in a victory to the French. There goes eight
bells, first watch, and immediately following it, from each end of the
ship, comes the sonorous “ All’s well,” repeated at half-hourly
intervals during the night.
I guess it would be useless to pretend that life on board ship was
more or less than uneventful, so I may as well acquire a character
for candour by mentioning it here, since the ghastly fact must
sooner or later out, still, in the warm, balmy days of these beauti-
ful latitudes one can do nothing and enjoy it—thoroughly enjoy it
too. We are not however, reduced to quite this yet, as we read
much, and there are plenty of books of all sorts on board. To-
morrow the captain promises quoits for the deck, and we have also
thought of skipping ropes —going back you see to infancy and first
principles. The moon is exactly over head to-night, and lam just
off on deck to enjoy it, and a pipe.
Just a perfect night it was, never a lovelier in my experience—
balmy rather than warm. If anything can surpass a lovely day at
sea, it is a lovely night. Unwillingly I came down for a drink with
our own particular, and select party. Captain L was shewing
some of the ladies tricks with cards—very well he did them too.
Various puzzling things were propounded, and many clever ones
said and done previous to our retirement at 11 p.m.
Where each succeeding day surpasses the previous one in beauty,
description, all too tame to chronicle such splendour, naturally
ceases, in consequence of which the ferocious reader may conclude
that when not mentioned to the contrary, the weather has been in
the normal state of these lovely latitudes.


The natural indisposition to exertion, which I so eminently pos-
sess, was to-day heightened by a spiteful headache, thus the morn-
ing passed in sloth, but I was not alone. Oh, no ! The only things
that have taken any exercise to-day are the chairs, and they have
been most industrious.
A young man of wars-man, belonging to the crew, has been shew-
ing us something in fencing with the singlesticks, and punctuating
his directions on our hides. Thus do we live and learn. After din-
ner a fine intellectual repast awaited us in the shape of the dead
horse. It being a month to-day since the sailors received their
advance notes, and probably a month to-morrow since they spent
the last cent of it, they have been working the metaphorical dead
horse until now—in other words, working for money already spent!
Now they commence anew, and the effigy of the dead horse, with
more animation than could reasonably be expected of him, prome-
naded the decks to the tune of “ Poor old Man,” ascended to the
poop, and was sold by auction. He fetched a pound, which on
being raised by subscription came to £1 4s. 9d, the balance to be
retained by the chief officer till a more convenient season, Jack’s
nature being prodigal when in funds. The deceased equine was now
hauled to the main yard, with a man on his back, to the tune of
“ Blow the man down”—lowered again to low music from the
orchestra, (an accordion) —set fire to, and cast into the depths of
the sea ! Three cheers from the lusty throats of the sailors, ably
responded to from our division, completed the ceremony.
Late in the evening, say 11 p.ra. captain L gave Cusack and
myself a considerably able lecture on Astronomy, lasting perhaps an
hour, which brought us round in the most natural manner to coffee
with Mr. Brown, who had kindly promised to call us at dawn to see
the beauties of sunrise. He accordingly did, and we much enjoyed
the prospect (through our ports.) The fact of his showering many
hard-hearted cabbages exactly over the spot where I laid, had no
effect in the way of awakening me. Only a board divides my nose
from the contact of many a rough-heeled boot, and one gets used
to these little peculiarities. Divine Service at half-past ten. At the
finish of the Te Deum Cusack responded “ Glory to, &c.,” and went


through with it, which nearly upset the gravity of all the congrega-
tion. One lady was obliged to leave altogether. A gentlemanly
convocation met in the afternoon in Mr. Brown’s cabin, and sad
to relate, drank champagne there.
There is some talk of a newspaper being started, and to-day the
joint efforts of Mr. Cusack and myself have produced a notice to
the effect that the “ Sea Mew, and Nautical Magpie ” will be issued
next Thursday, with special columns for advertisements, fashions,
editorials, poetry, &c., &c. To-day, for the first time, we have been
obliged to lay off our course somewhat, but expect to pick up trade
winds to-morrow, which will carry us to the vicinity of the equator;
temperature to-night 75°, getting warmer, you observe. I, as sub-
editor, have been working very hard, getting all things in readiness
for the advent of our Journal, which bids fair to be a success. I
have written the article on Fashion and Folly. There seems to my
untutored mind, more of the latter than the former in it.
Another grand tug of war we had to-day, four sailors against
five passengers, resulting in the victory for the passengers; they
were, however, not so successful when on even terms, viz. four
against four. Cusack and myself could either of us pull their best
man over the mark. It is evidently more on account of their being
so well able to pull in unison that they could beat us at even
numbers, than that they were really stronger. We are beginning
to take to lighter clothes now.
The temperature of the water to-day was 70 and 71°. So much
time has been occupied in writing for, and classifying the Sea Mew,
that my entries in this my diary have necessarily been smaller. I
trust the quality will not correspondingly depreciate. The Sea Mew
has proved, I think I may say, a success. There is now a notice up
saying that the single copy will be sold by auction on Wednesday
next. lam at present undecided whether to write any of the arti-
cles in this book, or to save them in rough draft.
A shark has been seen this morning, and there is now a baited
hook hanging over ready for his inspection—he does not seem
inclined to inspect—evidently, curiosity is not one of his small
vices, and we naturally infer from this, that it is a male shark. The


ladies, who are sitting around me, however, do not concur in this,
so that perhaps it should be taken with a grain of salt. Eleven
a.m. It has now fallen to a dead calm, and is about hot enough to
cook a beef-steak in the sun. Shoals of porpoises are seen in the
distance, but none come near enough to be harpooned.
If stewed first class passengers would be considered a good dish—
hero is a chance for an epicure—and he should come quickly lest
they be stewed to rags. Eight p.m. We have been looking over the
side, and have seen what appeared like vast congereels, alive with
phosphorescence, about two feet under water ; they shine about as
brightly as an opal globe with gas inside, and are very picturesque.
Indications of the North East trade winds are observable. I am
going 1o sleep on deck to-night for the first time. Owing to the
heavy rolling of the ship I did not make so good a sleep as I expected.
Standing on ones head in sleep is not an exhilerating recreation,
and there was no relief from this, except standing on the other end,
so that I was not as refreshed as usual when half-past five o’clock
and bath time arrived The bath pulled me together though and
enabled mo better to enjoy the gorgeous sunrise that immediately
followed it. The sun in these latitudes just pops up like Jack in
the box, and no longer about it; the dawn lasts much longer than
the twilight, there is certainly not more than ten minutes of the
latter.
It is a strange mid-winter that we are experiencing, lolling about
decks in the lightest possible attire—every one has professedly
some occupation, but I think it mostly finishes at profession. A
fine swam of flying fish have just passed, they are pretty little
creatures and appear to be made of filagree silver, except that the
silver would suffer by the comparison. I have been practising
upon Cusack in the capacity of barber to-day, and was very success-
ful until I cut a small piece out of his ear, which bled profusely.
Strange to say he quite objected to this. I find however, that he
has shaved my head about as high as to the tops of my ears, afford-
ing a striking contrast to my sunburnt neck.
Sunday, 7th December. On all the earth there is no such
favoured spot ns this that we are now passing through ; always a


mild six or seven knot breeze tempering the brilliant sun ; calm,
clear water, shoals of flying fish and bonitas, (two of which we caught
and ate, weighing about nine or ten pounds each. They are very
fleshy fish—somewhat resembling a mackerel, but thicker) occasional
sharks and petrels, and frequent Sunday services. This pretty
programme never alters summer or winter, except in an almost in-
appreciable degree. The nearest land is Buona Yista, Capital of
the Cape de Verde Islands, and we are about 200 miles south of
that.
Service was conducted on deck to-day, the saloon being nearly un-
bearable, yet it is extremely pleasant in the air. After dinner we
had a sort of game at spelling, which as one gentleman with remark-
able penetration observed, was both instructive and amusing. It
can only be understood by illustration, so that I will not attempt to
describe it. At half-past eleven I smoked the final pipe with W.
G. 8., and then proceeded to sling my hammock under a ladder,
and get into it. Before the impetus which getting in had given it
had subsided, I was asleep, and was awakened for bath at half-past
five, more refreshed than with any rest I have yet had.
Much excitement has been afloat to-day: such an event as was the
cause of it has not happened since we have been afloat —not to come
without due preparation—on a fact of such proportions. I must also
premise that the excitement was felt not only by the gentlemen passen-
gers, but by the ladies, and crew. The captain also was imbued with
the general infection, and the veriest cabin boy, “Friday,” was
not exempt. The cause of all this, rose, bright and early, en dis-
habille as became the weather, and marched airily on to the poop,
to receive the congratulations, and the “ many happy returns of the
day,” which awaited him there. The universal heart went out to
him ; and even ladies were to be found, who volunteered to kiss
him. This favoured individual bore the name of Brown-—he is in
fact the first officer, and it was his thirtieth birthday. Staggering
under this load of good wishes, it was with difficulty that he sup-
ported the trying ordeal of breakfast—lunch existed to him only in
name—but at dinner, he re-appeared, like a giant refreshed with
wine; and his dazzling appearance at that meal, in a black coat, of


truly elegant proportions, loose, negligent tie, and his glossy, curly
hair—well watered—can, by those who have been honored with his
acquaintance, better be imagined than described. Mr. S , and
some other gentlemen, who knew and respected him, wished to
drink his health in champagne, which was done, and honored with a
musical chorus. And then came that burst of eloquence, from which
the “ Rodney” has not yet recovered, and with which the world will
shortly ring. It touched on those reasonably well frequented topics
—his own unworthiness —the kindness of his well-wishers —and the
happiest moment of his life, &c. And with pleasure I record it, not
in the old stereotyped style, but with a briskness, and peculiarity
which only he possesses. His labours by no means ended here, for
ho afterwards entertained many friends in his cabin, regaling them
with birthday cake, claret cup, and varieties. I, as his factotum, or
rather butler, pro tem. prepared the feast, and I believe lent a good
helping hand to consume it. We kicked up a jolly row generally,
until about 10 p.m. when we retired to our respective hammocks
and bunks.
December 10th, being your birthday, father, my thoughts
naturally go to you, England, and business, though I am glad
to say, very little of the latter. Circumstances of course, preclude
the possibility of my writing as profusely on yours, as the
one previously recorded. Still, I did myself the pleasure to wish
you “ many happy returns,” and drank it in Champagne too, not
exactly boiling wine, but nearly so. The temperature of the sea is
this day 83°, and of course the champagne is no cooler, nor is any
one thing on board, as we have no ice—a great omission, and one
which we feel tremendously. There is most likely a striking
contrast to this with you at home, but we are now getting used to
it. I helped to carry out poor C. who has been very, very ill since
he came on board ; even now he can only speak in a whisper, and
looks as if he had no blood in him. His malady is hemhorrage,
but the bright weather seems doing him much good already. Some
immense porpoises were jumping around the ship last night. I
should think they were six feet long, and made tremendous splashes,
but were too sharp to be harpooned. The Rev. G , was requested


to keep them in his eye, while Mr. Brown went for the harpoon ;
but his eye evidently lacked the capacity to accomodate fifty or
sixty such fish, for they had got away when the harpoon arrived.
The very successful issue of the Sea Mew to-day, comprises every
thing under the sun, and I really think gives very general satisfac-
tion. The last number fetched five shillings, which fact it now
occurs to me, I have mentioned before. This history is not unlike
all others, in the respect that it repeats itself.
It has somewhat troubled me that I did not write a farewell letter
to Maggie, and I mention it here, that she may know that it is
only one of her brothers many eccentricities that he should have for-
gotten that model of housewifery, and her bonny Bairns, with whom
he would just now be delighted to have a romp, and look forward
to a snug little evening at Brampton Rise, with hot supper, baga-
telle, and whisky punch ; and a quiet reflective walk across the
common home, in the brisk frosty moonlight of your English win-
ter. Even that long, dreary ride home from Westfield, that mother
so much detests, would be a welcome break for to-night. Och,
Ohne ! a tinge of home sickness again. And now to dinner, with
that appetite ye may.
Yesterday, a Barque, the Maitre Pierre, which had been near us
for some ten or twelve days, caught us up in the light winds that
have been prevailing during the last week. The captain gave us
the use of a boat, an officer, and four seamen ; and a representation
of the young blood of this ship started off to her. The courteous
captain of the Barque received us in true French style—introduced
us to his wife, a spanking great specimen of the vivacious Parisienne.
He also tickled our unusally appreciative palates with some good
sound Bordeaux ad lib. The fiery hot sun, and the novelty of the
situation, induced us to do full justice to his hospitality. And well
for us we did, for the row back on a plain, unfortified constitution,
would have been likely to be fatal. Two eternal hours in that bla-
zing sun (and each man working about as hard as two robust
navvies) before we reached the ship. The reason of this was, prin-
cipally, that the breeze had slightly freshened while we were paying
our morning call, and the Rodney was gradually creeping away..


In the end, the captain had to bring the ship to, that we might
overhaul her. Some ill-advised youths bared their arms for rowing,
and they were beautifully blistered. Prickly heat is very prevalent
in the ship : lam so fortunate as to have none, but my personal
beauty has been somewhat enhanced lately by a few red spots on
the face. Half-past six a.m., Saturday. A month out from port
to-day. It has been a hot night. How people would naturally
suppose that the primitive costume of Adam in the dead of night
and open air would not be oppressive, such was nevertheless the
case; and how those who kept below, managed, none can tell. They
all look very inane this morning. Mrs. W , a Colonial, says,
it has been the hottest night she has ever experienced. The tem-
perature of the water cannot rise above 84^° —after that, it evapo-
rates. It is this morning—another degree, and we might possi-
bly walk to Adelaide.
For those restless and perturbed spirits, to whom constant
excitement is as the breath of life, no place is like ship board.
Scarcely have we got through one event, when another is just
ready to take place. In most of these, that element of danger,
without which an Englishman scorns sport, is not wanting. In the
one I am about to relate, a large shark, with a hungry eye, was swim-
ming around the ship. A stout line and hook were duly prepared,
and baited with a piece of pork in the usual manner. Many of the
most intrepid passengers crowded around that part of the ship near-
est the line in the usual manner. Mr. Shark smelled the bait a few
times, and had it thoroughly examined by his seven-pilot fish, and
then retreating, say, one hundred yards distance, came plunging
along furiously through the blue water, the pilot fish still keeping
quite close to him—his immense jaws were perfectly visible, as—
turning on his heel the moment the harpoon struck him, he fled
the scene, in the usual manner, dear friends. This being about
representative shark fishing, I shall in future only describe it, in
case of the laugh being on side of the fishers.
Mr. and Mrs. , captain of the little barque, were to have
lunched with us to-day, but he has just signalled himself ill. When
asked (by the flags) of what nature was his illness, he replied


distemper. It occurred to some of the more jocose of the passengers
to enquire if had already had the mange. Both these diseases (as
we know them) being peculiar to dogs.
The extreme heat of the weather to-day precludes the possibility
of the usual service, so we make shift with a short one, and even
that is hard work to Rev. G . As is usual in this part of the
world, we had thunder and lightning, and a smart shower, accom-
panied by an eight-knot breeze, for about an hour. This has made
it a trifle cooler, and a trifle clammier, a questionable advantage, if
any. Three ships were in sight to-day, one a homeward
bounder. She hoisted the British Ensign in reply to ours, but we
fear she has not taken our number and consequently will not be able
to report us. They take very little trouble about this (as it seems
to me) on any of the ships, ours among the number. Father de la
H has been indelibly marked obliquely across each cheek by
some ruffian with a red hot poker. Perhaps, I should say, it appears
so. Some people on the contrary, consider the marks to be hair ;
however it may be, the assumption is certainly in favour of the
poker theory. He plays draughts well, and although the slightest
motion of the vessel induces his hasty retirement, I think in calm
times he will develop to an interesting and amusing passenger.
So much has been said and sung of the beauty and glory of the
“ Southern Cross” that my description of it will, I fear, be very pro-
saic. It is a rather badly-formed Cross of Stars, as I saw them,
(half-past three in the morning) of about the second magnitude,
and at present is a constellation, that requires carefully looking for
in the heavens. It is the exact opposite of the Great Bear of our
northern hemisphere—one of the stars being a centre, around which
all the others revolve. lam led to suppose it will be finer as we
get farther South. This is the best I can say for the “ Southern
Cross,” without lying.
Bent, one of the sailors, says he is a teetotaller—all men are liars !
Bent is no exception. I sent him some rum (he having hurt his
back) which he joyfully accepts. This is not the first time Bent has
transgressed his professed principles, consequently we class him in
that large species—the humbugs. I hear, by the way, that we have a


number on board the ship that dont hum. Either tropical showers
are very much exaggerated, or I am very inappreciative, or the only
other alternative, we have not yet had a good one up to the present.
I have certainly seen it rain harder in England,
Sharks are here in plenty, but the larger ones are shy. One
would think that in this wild waste of waters, where perhaps they
have never known a snare, they would be sufficiently confiding to bite
without reserve. But nature has evidently furnished them with a
wholesome dread of the universal enemy, for they always look sus-
piciously at anything attached to a line. Yesterday, in a little
squall, we split the thing they use instead of a foresail. We started
with good sails, and good curtains to the cabins, but all this has
been altered, and we now have sail cloth curtains, and muslin sails.
Myself, and all the other ducks, had a good bath yesterday in the
rain water, and much we enjoyed it—it seemed to put our feathers
straight again after all our salt water dips, and thoroughly to cool
us for the night, at least it did me.
It seems impossible that to-day week can be Christmas Day! The
real old Christmas Day, as I have known it these thirty years, it
certainly is not, but entirely a new arrangement in another hem-
isphere I trust: but these dreadfully light winds might be for ever,
in driving us the 300 miles that would put us in Southern latitudes.
We are now about a week behind the time that we might reasonably
expect to cross it. A half-crown sweepstake has been started, each
person draws a card with three stated hours on it, say, from three
to six, p.m. Now if the ship crosses it during that time, the holder
of the card wins the stake —£2 first prize ; there is also a second
and third prize of 10s. each for the three hours previous, and the
three subsequent to the winning time.
The temperature 81° and 82° in the shade, has now become
quite cool and pleasant. All attention is being concentrated upon
Christmas Day. Cards will be posted in the general Post Office, in
all probability, to every one on the ship. The manufacture of
misletoe and holly, under the auspices of Mr. Brown, is also rapidly
proceeding—plum puddings are being manufactured in the galley—
geese are marked out for speedy dissolution—practice for the


Christmas concert is at the present moment going forward in the
saloon—and all things are making ready for a Christmas tide, that
we hope will be only 20 or 80 degrees less jolly than the Home one.
I am utterly at a loss to account for the following :—To the best
of my knowledge, I have only dreamed three times since coming on
board, and each time it has been of Billy, and Billy only. It is
not that I think of him especially, for I am surprised after that I
do so, so little, but there it is as a fact, and one from which I can
make no deduction.
December 20th. The first weekly meeting of passengers con-
vened to discuss general business. A permanent chairman was
elected, Mr. B , and more than sufficient committees to conduct
the business of the Nation from now to doomsday ! After much
discussion, one of these committees—in this instance of five—were
duly appointed to deal with any money forfeits which may have
accrued, or will accrue from various things on board the ship.
There is 2s. 2d. in hand, and the same probability of adding to it
that there is of catching a shark ! The teetotal element, of which
there is a rather large representation, are not remarkable for con-
sistency of purpose : in the same breath, that they deny the possi-
bility of a passenger requiring chandigatf, they purpose to refresh
the crew from general funds with rum, whiskey, and other intoxi-
cants on Christmas day ! Such abilities as I possess are all
inadequate to perceive the subtle distinction these clear-headed
enthusiasts evidently have in view.
At the auction sale I was so fortunate as to secure last week’s
copy of the “ Sea Mew ” for 6s. 6d. as a specimen. At the other end
of this Journal I shall occasionally copy some extracts from future
issues.
Sunday, December 81. The shortest day ! Well, we have had some
long ones lately. Any one who can picture to him or herself a
gigantic pool of oil, waveless, aye, even rippleless, with a long undu-
lating motion, about such as could be got by placing a canting board
across the seat of a swing—get on one end of the board yourself,
and friend on the other—and then take both motions, and you have
the nearest estimate I can give of our late experiences, the barome-


ter varying betwern 84 0 and 88° in the shade, meanwhile “ Loud
roars the dreadful thunder, the rain a deluge showers,” and better
than all, the wind is getting up, possibly only for half an hour, but
we are full of hope. It is a merciful dispensation of Providence
that it (hope) springs eternal in the human breast, otherwise we
must all have been bankrupt long ago !
It now appears that there is some reason for belief that these are
the blessed ! blessed ! ! blessed trade winds !! ! No one can
realize how welcome they are until they have experienced ten or
twelve days in this blazing solitude. By the evening yesterday
was a steady, permanent breeze which so raised our spirits, that going
down after the lights were out, we could not refrain from having a
lark with Rowley, the chief steward. As his is usual habit, he had
brought out his varous trappings for a sleep in the saloon, to wit, a
blanket, pillow, and counterpane. Unwisely, he went outside, pro-
bably to complete his arrangements, and we immediately had a
game of football with his pillows, &c., ending by sending them all
through the door of the cabin occupied by the catholic priests, some-
what to their astonishment, although it is not unusual for them to
have a large dog dropped through the skylight on to their couch.
The laughing and talking over this little incident brought us to the
usual coffee time for the middle watch. Although a late hour
for passengers to be about, we did not regret it on this occasion, for
we were just in time to witness the most sublime electrical display
that it was ever my fortune to see : —Sheet lightning, forked light-
ning, chain lightning, not in one or two parts of the heavens, but
just everywhere, down the masts, and around the rigging and stays
in such blinding flashes as I never saw in my life, or even anything
approaching it—no thunder !
To-day, probably from the storm, we have had a good ten-knot
breeze, and are spanking along merrily. Everyone is so much ex-
hilirated by the fresh air and fine prospects, that even the invalids
are full of fun. The fine prospect however, had no fulfilment, for
the wind died away again about twelve o’clock, a dead calm enliven-
ing the rest of the day. In the cool of the evening, 80° we had a
few games, such as being introduced to “TheQueen,” —“The


hole in the Wall”—“ Bobology”—“ Dumb Rhyming”—and “ Imi-
tation,” and, there may possibly have been an etc, but I am not
sure. Early this morning, (half-past three) I was called up to see
what is a very rare sight, even to sailors, “ The Corpuscent Lights.”
They are due to some peculiar vagary of electricity, and appear to
be balls of fire, about the size of a very large star on the tops of
each mast; and when an unusually grand display, as on the present
occasion, even at the yard arms, it is very peculiar, seeming as
though several brilliant stars were swaying about in the heavens, at
their own sweet will. But it is very transient, and I did not see
the best of it. To-day has also brought us a rather unusual sight, a
Sunfish, about as large as a small dining room, very flat, and the
ugliest fish I ever saw, the Octopus excepted. Unfortunately we had
lost the grane, and with it the harpoon staff, or we might have
landed leviathan on board.
Our representative committee for general purposes has this day
proven itself worthy of the old women, of which it is composed.
Four able-bodied creatures, wearing trousers, composed this august
body, and waited on the captain to obtain redress for some grievan-
ces which themselves most especially fancied existed. They were,
three-fourths of them, professedly against the use of alcohol, the
other fourth, had his (her, I should say) own private stores of liquor
on board, so it is not surprising that after the captain had (with that
urbanity and diplomacy which is a very distinguishing characteristic
of his) induced them to take a glass of sherry, they came out, pleased
with the success of their mission—the said success, when reduced
to words, being three rules, very prohibitory to those who criminally
dare to take intoxicants : and one other, prescribing the hour for
retirement ; much liberty of conscience is however allowed the
passengers in the matter of nursemaids, those who are old enough,
being allowed to put themselves to bed ; and these dear old imbeciles
—(out goes the light)—are as gratified as if they had not been
utterly bamboozled by the captain, and had not sold the rights of
the free citizens, whose representatives on board the “ Rodney ” they
were.


With my usual preference for female society I have to-day entirely
devoted the whole of my stupendous genius for amusement to their
service—notably this afternoon, when I held a tea-party to all the
ladies in the ship, young and old. I managed to get several brews
of tea through, or principally through the influence of the cook.
Miss E’s preserve, (by the way, a mystery) spread on bread,
cut in small pieces, and handed round on a knife, served to represent
the solids. My tea, I believe to be one of the very best investments
I made, not even excepting six dozen oranges which I bought at
Plymouth. I (in very large letters) put the cabin to rights, made
it very tidy indeed previous to the arrival of the company. I
mention this that it may be seen how much my habits have improved
during the voyage. Also to shew Mother, as I told her, when she
lamented my inability to take care of myself, I should certainly rise
to the occasion.
Christmas Eve was a less eventful time than I had expected, but
probably for the reason that all the energies of passengers, officers,
and crew were centred on the celebration of crossing the line, which
rather curiously fell, (as I had once hoped) on Christmas Day.
After dinner on Christnas Eve, that we should not entirely miss
the celebration of our grand festival, the captain sent up some
rockets, very good ones too, and burned port fires, which colored
and enhanced the gorgeous beauty of an equatorial moonlight. The
glassy sea (for it was in one of its glassiest moods) reflected and
reflected all the colors of a prism, from the tip of the jib boom to
the extreme point of the stern, with a vividness and peculiarity
quite inexplainable. The shouts of commendation from the passen-
gers had barely subsided, when a hail was heard from the fore-deck,
and being duly answered by the chief mate from the poop, it proved
to be Father Neptune, who, as is his wont, came to enquire if there
were any on board who had not previously been in his dominions ?
All these enquiries were made in a stentorian voice, and about treble-
bass, by the party whose photograph is here appended. There were
several attendant satellites, bnt not of sufficiently interesting
appearance to merit more than ordinary mention in this (as I never
miss the opportunity of saying) veracious chronicle.


I had accepted the invitation of father O’D to attend mass,
in the stern cabin (a large one) at midnight, and betook myself to
an extemporized couch, at 10, p.m., to be better fitted for a critical
observance of the same, more especially as in all probability a like
experience might never again occur to me. I should think few
protestant professing Christians have had such. Observe the strange-
ness of the circumstance, and judge if a coincidence of such event
would be likely to again occur. To be on the equator is a reason-
ably unusual event, in the experience of a landsman ; but to be
there on Christmas Day is still more unusual. To attend a Eoman
Catholic mass on the equator, on such a sacred day, is certainly
even more extraordinary experience ; but, the remarkableness of the
whole thing culminates in the peculiarity of the position one is in,
when he, a professing Protestant, helps to celebrate Roman Catholic
mass in a ship’s cabin, on Christmas Day, on the equator ; actually
on it! not nearly.
Hark, the herald angels sing;
Glory to the new-horn King.”
And so came in Christmas Day—the verses were only felt, not sung,
or even recited. No Christmas Day was ever ushered in with such
impressiveness, and the feeling of it was with me all the day.
Although there is neither rhyme or reason for it, such was the case.
As quickly as breakfast could be cleared away by that old
curmudgeon Rowley, we proceeded to Service. There was a thin
attendance, yet strange as it may seem, I was there, and again
apostrophised the “Herald Angels.” Immediately following the
short service, came the regular business of crossing the line. Father
Neptune, in all his gorgeous paraphernalia, but drier on the outside,
than might have reasonably been expected (considering his recent
arrival on board, from his watery home) on a car with Amphitrite,
drawn by two bears, the relevancy of which I am at a loss to under-
stand, nevertheless they were very like bears. Some constables
whose onorous duty was to fetch into the presence of the august
father those unfortunates who were destined to be shaved, and
generally to keep a clear course, whip up the bears, and (although


possibly in excess of their duty) to push behind the car. The pro-
cession thus composed promenaded the ship, and finally came to
anchor on the main deck, the scene of the shaving operations. Here
Father Neptune retired from active duty and left affairs in the hands
of the barber, who summoned the several candidates for initiation
by name—if not immediately forthcoming, constables were
despatched, who quickly brought them. They were then placed
upon a rail, and to fortify themselves for the ordeal, through which
they had to pass, the bland, persuasive barber invited them to use
a smelling bottle, which I imagine had a pin concealed in it, for a
bloody nose was the usual result of a sniff. On the reply to the
question—What is your name ? being given, a dough pill, about
the size of a horse chestnut, was inserted in the half-opened mouth
of the initiate. Any other answer that could by any means be
wound out of him was the signal for the insertion of a whitewash
brush, covered with some stickiness, into his mouth. After being
well lathered, he was roughly scraped, and tumbled head over heels
backwards into a sail filled with water, in which were the bears.
Being delivered to the tender mercies of these two worthies, was
getting out of frying pan into the fire, for they gave him such a
ducking as he never had before in his life and discharged him over
the other side to make room for a fresh candidate.
Among the multitude of amusements for this most exciting and
eventful day, I had almost forgotten one which took a very leading
part nevertheless. We had issued a notice in the previous week’s paper
that a box would be ready for the reception of letters on Christmas
Eve. On opening it next morning it was found to contain about
300, which were duly delivered while we were at breakfast
by a curly-headed apprentice, dressed in an outrageous representa-
tion of a black postman—very well he looked, and much fun was
occasioned as he delivered the various missives. It occupied all the
time we were eating. Many pretty cards and good wishes were
floating around, some of which may perhaps eventually adorn this
diary. At 11 30 commenced the sports. High jump, long jump,
races two, three, and four legged, sack racing, boxing, climbing to
the main truck, and down again in least time, &c. But the pro-


gramme is at the other end, which I had forgotten. Then came a
very fair representation of “ Punch and Judy,” in which Mr. Brown
figured as showman in a very high, and very old hat, with several
clay pipes stuck around, a black face, and a dudheen, wherein the
merit lay between its shortness and its dirtiness. An immense
drum, which he thumped upon (with a vigour better suited to a
colder day) in the intervals between his shouting the character of
his show, and his continual cry to—“ Throw out yer mouldy
coppers.” This concluded the afternoon performances, with the
exception of three shies a penn? at “ Old Aunt Sally ! ” vociferously
shouted by the third officer, and successfully played by the ladies.
I mean successfully for the showman. A greasy pole with a silk-
lined sou-wester on the top provoked no competition, the sailors
all thinking there was no chance of getting it. A peculiarly enter-
prising spirit, one Cusack, essayed the task with but little success
though, in spite of waggon-loads of sand, which he piled all over
him, having first wet his clothes with salt water. This, the sand,
and the grease from the pole, made him a very entertaining party
to look at. Several buckets of water subsequently cleansed him,
and he appeared at dinner in evening dress, a costume in which he
was singularly singular.
“ The dinner comes, who shall describe
The jollity ihat’s there ?
carves tie joints with right good will,
In slices laige and rare,”
as a nameless but gifted poet remarks. Mine comprised roast
goose and Christmas pudding in the matter of solids. I made a
hole in a bottle champagne in which I drank (to myself) “Absent
Friends,” and thought of then as toasting me at the same time,
according to our arrangement before starting. On looking up and
down the table I could see no sign of anyone apparently thinking
of Home. I looked often too, for I was curious to :know if none
did. After a few appropriate masts we all adjourned to deck for
air, and to allow of arrangements for the Concert, which was to
follow. An interval of half-au-hour, and it did follow. The pro-
gramme is at the other end, and describes itself. To wind-up Mr.


Brown gave a stump speech in character, in which he touched on
the matter of committees, saying, if any thing goes wrong on any
subject under the sun, have a committee —nothing like a committee
ladies and gentlemen.” This appeared much to the taste of the
captain, whose feelings on this subject were somewhat decided.
But although this day was in every respect the most eventful one
we have yet passed on board, I have never felt more depressed,
strange as it appears even to me. Something may be due to my
ankle having been rather troublesome again. I dont think I men-
tioned having sprained it slightly while playing at “ Fly the Garter,”
about a month since.
I think some time ago I mentioned something about the thrice
blessed South East Trades. On that occasion they were a fraud
and a deceit, but now we have the reality, and under their genial
influence all are fast recovering from the listlessness, begotten of a
fervid equatorial sun, and plenty of it.
Hey, for the sunny South is now the word, and gaily bounds our
good ship responsively to the inspiring breezes. Once at least each
day I go over the fore and under the jibboom, and there watch the
sparkling blue water, its clear depths allowing me to see under the
reel,—fore-foot, technically speaking. This spot has the advantage
of being very cool owing to the shade produced by the overhanging
boom, and gives the most correct notion of motion to be obtained
anywhere on board.
A very sudden death, occurred yesterday.
THE COMMITTEE, whose birth and noble works I
have before recorded, suddenly ceased to exist. Some
real or fancied abuse of the Captain brought that digni-
tary down on it, armed with book of regulations and
penalties, with such effect, that it gave up the Ghost
almost without a struggle. The Barber survived longest,
but died at last, clean-shaved!
Thus is it with committees. —Go thou, and do likewise!
“Carrambo”—This ejaculation seems most appropriate being
nearer the coast of Brazil than elsewhere, but not particularly near
anywhere. The chart shews the ocean to be 3,200 fathoms deep


here so we are not likely to run aground at present. But to go
back to “ Carrambo.” I was about to say, with this expression to
preface it, that there was nothing to record to-day, still, being in a
rambling mood, I just casually mention that it is Sunday—the latitude
is 4to 5o south, and the longitude 24 to 9° West. These things I
learned this morning when I should have been attending divine
service, and was clever enough myself to spot out the position of
the ship within a mile. An electro-plated tintinabulation warns
me that the dinner hour approaches, and I, who have not all the
advantages of Adonis, must perforce close these remarks, and pro-
ceed to clothe my limbs in garments befitting the approaching feast.
Ta, ta, I feel inclined to be funny, and regret I cannot write more.
“ Adois,” this again comes of being near Brazil.
“ And the tropical moon lighted home the two that were not of
Mr. Baliols’ household.” Any sceptic can convince him or herself
by reference that these are the last words in a book called the “ Old
Helmet,” in which a Reverend Mr. Rhys, and a certain spooney
Eleanor consummated their mutual bliss. In fact, if I remember
rightly, this was the way chosen by the authoress to express the
fact that they, then and there started on their honeymoon. Doubt-
less it was the same old orb that shone on “ye youthful lovers”
last evening, and may yet perchance light them home on a similar
mission. It was a night, productive of all the sentiment or feeling
(I have to-day learned there is a difference between them) that
might be lying dormant in the breasts of any one, old or young.
Its potency may be better estimated by the fact that I nearly felt
that way myself. Any very lovely scene always brings to my mind
that one superb sunset at the head of “ Loch Katrine,” for which
see, Diary of “ A Trip in Scotland.”
Miss P has just been telling of a Scotch super belief I
mean, that when a bride comes home to her house, the one that she
and her husband are to occupy, a broom or brush is placed in the
doorway. Should the bride pick it up and put it aside, it is of
course regarded as an omen of her future tidiness, and vice versa.
Miss P did not say so, but doubtless it is the husband’s friends
who try the broom dodge. We have not yet come to wearing great


coats, although we certainly feel the cold sometimes of an evening,
and no wonder, for the thermometer stands at only 80° in the shade.
This is rather a shock for us after 87 and 88°, although it would
probably roast you, my friends, in England.
Two lovely emblems of purity, about the size of Aylesbury ducks,
but much whiter, were seen yesterday, but at rather too great a
distance to be properly appreciated. They have very long tails,
and are called “ Bo’sun Birds,” though what resemblance they bear
to a Bo’sun, I know not, certainly it is not in the matter of purity.
Still, compared to some, ours is a perfect mirror, possibly for
that very reason I feel disposed to cast reflections on him. I
am just otf to bed, but hardly expect to get any rest after that joke.
Nevertheless, the cool bracing air, after our long lassitude, did make
me sleep like a top ; and I awoke refreshed and lively, considering
the lateness of the hour at which I retired—for on going on deck
I found several, in fact, nearly all the passengers were intending to
see the New Year in. The Scotch element had taken the initiative,
it being their big day—the others looked on, and awaited the devel-
opment of events. These were—at twelve o’clock everyone appeared
with something in hand, in most cases a bottle, out of which you
were requested to partake. The refusals were not numerous, and
the meeting assumed a convivial tone by the time that the sailors,
many of them Scotch, came dressed for the occasion, beating drums,
pans, kettles, and every available thing, led by a concertina with
one tune, and bossed by the able-bodied chips —then commenced
the Pandemonium, some of the passengers assisting. A light
refreshment of whisky and water completed the entertainment at
2.30, so, it is not to be wondered that I slept well.
January the Ist., 1880.
The New Year commenced with a boil on its neck—no, that is
not quite right, it was I who commenced the new year with a boil
on my neck—would it had been otherwise, but the fates having so
decreed it, I bow my head to the yoke, or boil, whichever you please.
Mrs C , who is very kind, sent for me early (she not having been
up at the festivities last night) and wished me a happy new year ;
she also gave me a cake (Scotch of course) and a glass of something,


of which I unquestioning!? took a, large mouthful, and nearly choked
myself, it being neat brandy: this, in the beautiful language of the
sea, served to freshen “ the nip.” After dinner the prizes won by
the sailors on Christmas Day were given away by Mrs. S as usual
to a musical accompaniment, Bosun with an unusually clean face
touched up with rouge, beating Ihe drum—carpenter, adorned in a
similar manner, with his everlasting concertina. It went off very
jollily though, and we found much amusement in it. Small things
interest people who are unused to classical entertainments, and are
also determined to find fun in anything. In the evening we had
what in England would be termed “ Popular Readings.” I read a
pathetic little poem, entitled “Fallen by the Way.” There was
also some singing, principally b/ the ladies, not being much male
talent in that line on board. It vas considered (by outsiders) quite
a success. The boil here became very troublesome.
January 7th. A weary interval of pain, during which time the
boil developed to something very like a carbuncle—sleepless nights,
and restless days, and a disposition to absent myself from the
society of my kind were the chief characteristics of the rise,
lancing, and partial decline, of this unpleasant arrangement. ISTow,
in my convalescence, I again attempt my task of keeping pace with
events, that is in the matter of chronicling them. A homeward-
bound ship passed one day, and it was. thought by those competent
to judge, that we might possibl} get near enough to send letters,
but even such scant courtesy as hauling about four points off their
course cannot be expected from these ocean pigs, they shewed the
British Ensign too.
We are now about in the latitude of the “ Cape of Good Hope,”
but somewhat to the westward, md it appears that we have lost the
South East Trades. We expert two days comparative calm, and
then the fine winds that blow us on to Adelaide.
I thought about celebrating tie anniversary of your wedding-day,
my dear parents, on the 6th, bit my physical organization could
make no other effort than to think of you, and drink to your suc-
cess and happiness in that highly stimulating beverage, tea ! I
dreamed last night that I had lost my dog, “ Billy”—hope I have


not. Last evening, at about eight o’clock, occurred the most beau-
tiful sunset, I should think, that ever was seen. Even the sailors
and officers acknowledged they had never seen it surpassed. It was
rather what we should call a wild sunset in England, but with far
more light —the clouds, the sky, and the water “ bathed” of course
in a flood of light, of such brilliancy as to completely dazzle, gazing
on it in a spell-bound attitude, so we stood ; when a theatre-going
party remarked, “ Three cheers for the Artist.” Hoorah ! call the
Artist, —call the Artist. Och, Cusack !to which Cusack open-
mouthed, and with greater imbecility than usual—Who's “ the
Artist ?” Whatever impiety others may see, there was none to
these innocents.
A grand, and very good Commedietta is rapidly proceeding
under the auspices of the able and irrepressible Mr. Brown. Rehear-
sals, stage effects, properties, supers, etc. are now more familiar to
us than “ Household Words,” and I personally feel to have been
identified with actors and theatres during most part of my life !
Last evening captain L gave a reading, “ Enoch Arden.” He
wisely had it interspersed with music, and altogether, it went off
well. Most of us were more interested than we had expected to be.
It lasted until ten o’clock, when all went on deck, and sang and
chatted for half-an-hour, the bulk of the good folks then retired,
leaving only myself and Curnick. We went forward after a time,
and there witnessed the finest phosphorescent display we had yet
seen, waves of bright fire broke off from the bows, and as the pace
was considerable, flowed away some fifteen or twenty yards from
the ship before dying out.
An accident occurred this morning which missed very little of
being a fatal one. Five or six men were pulling at one of the
braces, when the wire binding the block to the ship gave way, and
the block, of course, came very violently out, striking a young
fellow named Gace, just above the eye, and wounding him pretty
severely. I saw the accident, and held him while the doctor was
called. Strange to say, it did not stun him.
Since nine o’clock last night, we have been going along with a
fine spanking breeze to the southward, and are looking out for big


birds, Albatross and the like. We are now experiencing the greatest
change in the temperature since starting —13° less in one day—from
78 to 650. Everyone feels it, I perhaps, more than most, my recent
confinement having made me rather of the hothouse-plant descrip-
tion. Later on in the day some Albatross and Cape Pigeon were
seen hovering around. Every living thing on or in the ocean seems
to follow the ship —of course, the lines are got ready, and duly
hung over for their temptation (“ declined, with thanks”) was how-
ever, as usual, the only response. One gentleman, Mr. S could
not refrain having a shot, and cruel as it seems, I must say it, was
very tempting, these grand fellows circling gently around the ship,
close enough almost to be reached with a stick, every feather of
their magnificent plumage distinctly visible ; and perhaps he, Mr.
S had promised a skin to his sweetheart, who knows ? Let us
then be charitable, and not too harshly condemn the shot that,
without a flutter, brought down with one long graceful sweep, one
of these beauties to the water to die, no doubt at the hands, or beak
rather of his brother, who stayed behind apparently for that pur-
pose. After presumably pecking out his eyes (their usual habit) he
again followed us, but could not be induced to take the bait. Some
say he did not see it, but my belief is that he did, and through it too !
C ’s fortnight probation (teetotal) was up at 6, p.m. He
immediately commenced an orgie, which lasted well into the next
morning. One of the sprees generated of it was the putting a
string round Mr. Goldy’s arm while asleep in his bunk, the end
through the port and up on deck, where they pulled their line, bnt
eventually broke it, or Goldy must have come up. Rowley, chief
steward, of course came in for a share of notice, and eventually got
his bunk lamp smashed—this made him complain to the mate, in
speech more hurried than clear, but he was ultimately silenced by
a constant repetition of the questions.—“ Do you accuse me, sir ? ”
“ How dare you accuse me, sir ! ” Mr. B ’s chair, the strongest
(as it had need to be) on the ship, built of iron, was carried up,
and lashed to the mizen top. The effect of this joke however failed,
as it had unaccountably come down by the morning. Sunday came
calm and clear, and feeling to us about as a bright May day in


England would do, and there is Mr. Brown singing, “ Blow away
for finer weather,” even as I write. Where can contentment be
found. One of the sailors, Mathers, he of diary-fame, was spin-
ning us a long yarn to-day about a ship he was in, where the steward,
after vainly attempting to poison all hands, passengers included—
on the eve of detection, went into the captain’s cabin, armed with
bludgeon and revolver, killed the captain with the bludgeon, and
shot the first mate’s ear off, who, hearing a noise, ran to the rescue ;
disabled Bo’sun, and finally came out with five chambers of his
revolver, ready to empty on any one who opposed him,, but was
eventually secured and built up by the carpenter in a wooden box
with no room to move hands, or scarcely head, and so conveyed to
Sidney. The narration of these events occupied about an hour and
a half, with the embellishments considered necessary by the worthy,
but prolix Mathers. He, and the Bo’sun of that ship, one Sunday
made a very good haul, by surreptitiously exhibiting it to a mor-
bidly curious public, and when found out by the captain, they
decided to give him a small third of the earnings. The way of
arriving at the small third was to share Mather’s 10s., Bo’sun’
10s., captain 35., round and round, until the money was out.
Primitive you see, but with still a careful eye to number one..
Attended evening service, at which we sang Moody and Sankeys’
hymns.
All luck, except the worst, seems to have deserted this unfortu-
nate ship, always light winds, the trades mostly a failure, and now,
200 miles south of the “ Cape of Good Hope,” where the winds
should be strong and favourable, we are lying absolutely becalmed,
or at most only going two or three knots an hour. There is now no
doubt whatever that we have a “ Jonah” on board—the only thing
is to find him, and throw him over. We have just seen a whale
in the distance, from which we conclude that the proper moment
has arrived. Popular opinion points to one of the clerical gentle-
men, but the difficulty is to decide which of the six is to be the
sacrifice ! The whale, following his natural instincts, and the ship
is still awaiting the ultimatum of the tribunal who sit in judgment..
A dreadful wail is heard from aft, dying away into something which


might perhaps be a tune. No doubt Father De la H is now
struggling with the waves ! Gurgle, gurgle, gurgle, surely those
are his death struggles ? I, hide my ears in my hands to shut out
the dreadful sounds, when clear and distinct comes the voice of the
elder C shouting—“ Good, good,”—“another verse, please.”
And after all, it is only Mr S playing the cornet, though no one
who had heard that dismal sound, would wonder at the mistake !
Calm, calm, continued calm —not that I so much mind it, except
for the fact that friends must grow uneasy at the unusual delay in the
arrival of the fast clipper ship “ Rodney,” for it is now an absolute
certainty that we cannot get to Adelaide much, if any, under ninety
days. I hear them talking of it now, at dinner, and opinions seem
to vary between ninety and ninety-five. I seldom take more than
two meals a day now. If lunch, no dinner—if dinner, no lunch—
ample too, considering the exercise we all take, which is simply nil.
The weather, although unfavourable for progression, was very favor-
able for the Dramatic representation, advertised for Thursday. So
for that reason it was hurried forward, and duly came off last night,
and the universal verdict was very, very good. Mr. Crawfer, as
captain, had many natural advantages—his tall figure looked un-
usually commanding in the extemporized, but first-rate dress he
wore, complete, even to the sword and cocked hat; and he acted
his part sufficiently well to silence even critics ! Miss P , the
heroine, and on whom devolved perhaps the most arduous duties of
the piece, was nature personified—indeed, some ill-natured folks did
say that one part was not acting at all. But that, of course—don’t
you see ? —is absurd ! No more can be said for Mr. Brown, than
that he was as good as ever. Our young doctor, whom we all like
as a man, we could have loved as Betsy the Bunboat-woman, so
completely feminized had he become; and I doubt if a woman could
have acted the part even so well. The Bo’sun bold found an able
representation in that fine young son of the sea, Mr. Norman Beau-
mont, third officer. His deep basso profundo that we so much ad-
mire when he thunders a reply, to the man on the main Royal yard,
was equally appreciated, when with swinging arms and legs, he


gave us “The Englishman.” And, when to “Britannia,” —he
“ Begs her pardon, mar’m,
For speaking up so warm.”
The midshipmite, Miss C in a quaint sort of cap, giving her
just a smack of the style of the sea, was very effective, but words
were not her lay. Mr. S looked lumps, but as with the mid-
shipmite, said nothing. But for Mrs. S was reserved that
tribute (from a disinterested party) that in its absolute sincerity
overwhelmed all other style of approbation. This morning the
original Britannia came on board, and stated her inflexible determi-
nation to resign, after having been so completely outdone by Mrs.
S ’s impersonification, she begged her acceptance of the crown
and trident; and for herself, would quietly retire to a coral cave
and die ! In furtherance of this idea, she immediately stepped over
the side and disappeared. Any one can test the truth of this by
applying to Mrs. S , who still retains the crown and trident—
trophies indeed !
While we lay at Plymouth, one of Money Wigram’s ships, the
«Devon,” bound for Adelaide with Emigrants, was also in the
Sound, and left the day following. We have just now spoken her
in latitude 2° South. She crossed the line same day as our-
selves, and we are now running along side each other near enough
to exchange cheers, and see the waving of handkerchiefs. Some of
our priests have part of their flock on board, so we have an unusual
interest in her. Opinions of course differ as to which is the fastest
ship, but the betting at present seems in favor of the “ Rodney,”
more especially as the “ Devon ” has made two ineffectual attempts
to pass under our bows. Every nerve will now be strained to the
utmost, to decide the superiority of one or the other.
I have heard (in the early part of my life) of green fields, and
hedgerows, trees and such things—they must be very beautiful if
they are finer than a close view of a ship (a large one) after sixty
days of unrelieved water. Yesterday, Pills, the young doctor,
caught a “ Cape Hen” with a long line and hook, baited with pork.
With the exception of the baby-shark, this is the first fruits of
sport. It is a pretty little bird (bud, the Scotch folk say) with a


beautifully white breast, something resembling eider-down. I think
it is to be stuffed. Engines’s lecture is to come off shortly. He
was on board the “ Pandora,” one of the ships in the Arctic expedi-
tion. He was last night interviewed in the first officer’s cabin, with
the intention of putting into a shapely form the crude facts, of which
he had any amount. The whole story is bristling with adven-
ture, and strange thrilling incidents ! The style of the narrator
makes it impossible to believe that it is anything short of, or more
than the truth ! His is a face on which is plainly marked the
round, and unvarnished. Plentiful beams of good humour shine
through all. Much excitement has been caused to-day by
catching some big birds with an ugly name. Mr. S , who
caught an exceptionally large one, has stuffed the head, and is, I
think, better done than by any Naturalist whose works I have ever
seen, and will make a fine ornament. “Blue against the bluer
heavens, stood the mountain calm and bright.” So dawned on the
senses, through the ports of the respective cabins of the passengers
of the “Eodney,” the first sight of land, after seeing only
water for more than two months. After such an interval, an ocean
island with its startlingly clear outline, must always be a welcome
sight. I felt it so, and longed to go ashore, if only to have a
run. “ Gough Island ” 'is its name, and it is believed to be unin-
habited. Some parts are cloud-capped, and it has an altitude
of about three or four thousand feet, judging by the eye ; and the
usual height of clouds in these latitudes. Like all islands in this
part of the world, it is probably monopolized by sea birds, one
species of which have been settling on the end of of the jiboom, and
whilst writing I have a little rifle by me, and am in hopes of
getting a shot at them. Other ships appear to be in a like pre-
dicament with ourselves, there being at this moment no less than
nine visible to the naked eye, a very unusual sight, as we are decidedly
out of the ordinary course of Australian bound ships. I can’t let
“ Gough Island” go without further mention. It has been such a
pretty sight all day, that it is with regret I see its outline becoming
dimmer and dimmer, and
“ Fainter and fainter grows the distant land,
As far behind we leave this Southern strand."


Although probably a rough, wild, and exceedingly unattractive
place, it will always be associated in my mind with all that is beau-
tiful. Perhaps it is better I did not go ashore, and be disillu-
sioned. At least now I’ll have pleasant reminiscences, and those,
with anticipations, go to make up the sum of this life’s happiness,
so at least, say those, who are reputed to be wise.
I see, dear “ Flo,” that I must inevitably go overboard, but feel-
ing that you would wish me picked up again, I shall, with God’s
help, defer the execution of the alternative you have allowed
me, until we lie at anchor in Port Adelaide. You would pre-
fer it otherwise if you had the opportunity of judging, for the other
condition would be just to your taste.
This “ Devon,” that I have before mentioned, seems to have both
the inclination and the ability to beat us. The captain however
means fight, and has now boomed out both the main and foresail,
and with this little spur, which cannot be seen from the “ Devon,”
we are decidedly overhauling her. There is no doubt that
the “ Podney ” will sail in her best trim henceforward, for it is cer-
tainly a problem at present whether she is, or not able to beat the
“ Devon.” I fancy the sailors do not participate in that emulation
we all feel, their language being somewhat streaky the other day
when they had to haul aft a great part of the anchor cable to lighten
ship forward. To-day we are again, English time, past the prime
meridian, at eight, or half-past eight this morning we have a fine
breeze, and at present are going through the blue sea at the rate of
thirteen knots, which means fifteen miles at least. The barometer
falls, most likely for more wind, and every preparation is going for-
ward for the heavy weather. The covers for the hatches are ready
and fitted, and indications point to their possible use during the
day. That confounded boil gives forth suppressed mutterings—its
shape and habits bear a very close resemblance to a volcano, and
whether (like that safety valve to mother earth) it will content itself
with an exhibition of its dormant power, or, to continue
the simile, it will break forth into a grand eruption, is a question
in which I feel more interested than any man in the ship.


Last night, at half-past eleven, I came forward, and with the aid
of our (joint-stock bogie,) brewed some coffee for the chief
mate while he lay peacefully sleeping in his little bed. I had also
become unaccountably possessed of some bread, bacon, cheese,
butter, &c., wherewith I prepared for his awakening a nice hot
supper. From their actions, I have every reason to believe he and
the third officer, who scented it from aft, thoroughly enjoyed this.
I modestly partook myself, and generally prepared to keep awake
until dawn, expecting a fine sight. The combined effects of a sup-
per, cigar, and a recumbent posture however, superinduced sleep
at about 2, a.m. in the dove cot, when the extra encouragement of
a ’possum rug, thoughtfully placed over me by W. G. B. aforesaid,
made me pretty cosy until 3.30., when he roused me to see the
dawn as arranged. It was not a thing to describe, being only one
of our own dull grey affairs, so, after taking the respective positions
of the “ Devon ” (slightly gaining), and the French man-of-war
(slightly losing), I retired for my watch below, and overslept it an
hour, which obliged my breakfasting, solus, the first time
during the voyage. We have this day made our finest run, for
about twenty hours the average rate being thirteen knots, but un-
fortunately the last four were much slower, making the twenty-four
hours total to be 25G, this is by dead reckoning. It has probably
been, if actual observation had been taken, 270, but the weather
was too thick. The tw r o anecdotes I am about to relate are the
actual truth. —Father de la H , the Eev. gentleman whose
otherwise handsome visage has been to some extent marred by the
application of a hot poker, as I before recorded, has a large element
of curiosity among his other peculiarities, and this induced him to
ask Mr. L to be allowed to look at his golden toothpick which
was appended to some other trinkets. After carefully examining it
with much apparent interest, and while Mr. L was otherwise
engaged, he coolly commenced picking his teeth with it. On being
assured that this was not precisely elegant manners, and that he
could if he wished be accommodated with some quills for his own
exclusive use, he smilingly handed it back, but did not omit duly
to apply to Mr. L for the fulfilment of his promise and got it.


He has since been giving himself much airs with these same quills.
When passing “ Gough Island,” he said to the first mate —
“ Tell me now, is the island inhabited ? ” No, replied Mr. B ,
there is no one on it, nothing but sea birds. “Well, come then,
tell me now, is there any part of it under cultivation ?” —and this
in all seriousness. Would it be believed that such men, well
informed on most subjects, and well able to conduct any argument
on religious topics, could by any possibility be such blundering
muffs. I could believe anything of Irishmen now. No saying
recorded of them, however wild, or apparently improbable, need be
discredited. 'There are well-authenticated stories of Irish emigrants
on board this ship that would make one’s hair stand on end if the
cold weather did not make heavy head gear a necessity.
We are in characteristic southerly weather now, and no mistake,
and sad to relate, the “Devon” ten miles ahead. Nevertheless,
a steadily falling barometer for two days gives probability to the
prognostications of a gale, when with reduced canvass we may beat
her ! One of many feeds, we had last night in Cusack’s cabin—
mutton chops, kidneys, and bacon —“ All hot! ” I get much credit
as cook, and am allowed on all hands, to contrast favourably with
that functionary, at the “Criterion” and elsewhere.
To continue the description of passengers and people on board
generally —Norman Beaumont, third officer, boasts among his many
attractions a highly aristocratic style. His manner of even smoking a
pipe, handicapped with the additional disadvantage of a Sou Wester,
is the very acme of gentility ; and his graceful lounge, not only
stamps him with that peculiarity (always noticeable in blue blood)
but draws towards him all the feminine hearts, between sixteen and
thirty, and sometimes, a trifle over ! There are times however when
he looks to better advantage than he feels, and one of these is, when
in command of the “ Rodney” on squally nights. Then some of
that self-possession which is apparently inseparable from his normal
state, is wanting, sad to relate, he is reputed to betake himself to
the disgracefully plebian occupation of making buttons ! Thus the
most lordly at times bring themselves down to a level with the
rest of creation, and by their own act and deed, as in this case.


We are now running under topsail and courses, and according to
some of the sailors and officers, are experiencing a stiff breeze. But
the captain and I, with some others, call it a gale. It is however
the fashion (as with unpatriotic Britons) to decry the present and
laud the past, and for that reason only, in my estimation, do they
say it is a stiff breeze. The captain is hanging on sail with a ven-
geance, being determined not to be beaten, if possible, by the ‘Devon/
which ship, we fancy we have just seen running under nearly bare
poles, away on our port quarter. Those poor unfortunates, the
emigrants, on board of her, are now battened down under the
hatches, doubtless, (as I just heard the two under mates say) pray-
ing away their hardest, and not without reason, for it is an awesome
sight. I must attempt to give a poor description.
On coming on deck this morning we were going along with all
sail (except the fore and mizen Royals) set, and at the almost un-
precedented rate of sixteen knots at times. To say the water around
her was a seething mass, is true, but gives no idea equal to the
actual thing. A mighty mass of snow, surging, heaving, and
changing shape much faster than the eye can follow it, and beneath
a volcano—it is not a very likely case—but strikes me as being a
representative, and a fair one.
After breakfast the wind and sea freshened, and soon the harness
casks, containing Jack Tar’s salt beef, were on the move. The
chief officer might have been seen with an ox tongue in each hand,
(rescued by him from a watery grave) flipping up passengers, stew-
ards, and sailors indiscriminately. One big sea knocked seven bells
out of the cook’s galley, starting on missions for which they were
never intended, saucepans, baking tins, plates, and dishes, and
putting out the fire. In spite of all this, we had a very good hot
dinner at six p.m., (to which hour I had forgotten to say, we had
altered our meal of the day). Miss P ,the only lady who has had
the courage to come on deck for any length of time, has been
occasionally persuaded to adapt herself to a horizontal position,
and once in company with myself, bore a very fair share of a wave,
that came aboard without invitation; this necessitated her changing
tier —but here description really fails, and although I do sometimes


describe subjects I know as little of, still I feel the line must be
drawn somewhere, and I draw it here. A last incident, a good lump
of water, danced aboard with a thud, and part of it came through
the skylight and into the saloon, necessitating the immediate re-
moval of all the carpets, and startling all those who were down
stairs. But! When we get a gale all this will be altered. Although
well propped up against the deck, that broad streak on the other
side, is the effect of one of our good ship’s plunges. I had thought
of rubbing it out, but shall let it stand as evidence of the stiff
breeze. What would have been the mate’s coffee, under preparation
for his awakening, and now in the lee corner of his cabin, also
bears out any idea of its stiffness. Saturday found us in smoother
water, but the ship’s rolls, make the baker’s office a sinecure.
Many and magnificent are the Albatross that are swooping around
us, but as usual, “in vain is the line laid in sight of any of
them.”
I may have mentioned it before, but in such a cause, I feel that
the feminine gender as a body as well as individually will unflinch-
ingly hear its repetition. In making a big digression in parenthesis,
I always experience great difficulty in getting back to the subject.
At present I have utterly lost the run of it, but believe that I must
have intended to say, that the time-honored custom on board ship is
to toast, “ sweethearts and wives ” on Saturday night, and that the
observance of it with proper eclat invariably necessitates the imbibing
two glasses of whisky punch ! Any other toast can be, and is
usually honored with one. As I propose only to record the
more remarkable events of our voyage, it is unnecessary to say that
I attended divine Service in the evening. At this Moody and Sankeys’
hymns are sung, and hence, my preference. The midnight coffee
proved sufficiently strong to keep me awake all night, and in com-
pany with baby C , I witnessed the softest dawn imaginable,
(I feel I need not dilate on the advantages of softness in a dawn)
and immediately proceeded to shoot whale birds, properly feeling
that we could not better establish a claim to the proud title of
Englishmen, than by endeavouring to kill something.


The chief officer, although he escaped amputation, yet got his leg
into a very awkward place. It is now under the care of a lady,
and from her experience and friendly feelings towards him, there
can be little doubt that it is doing as well as could possibly be ex-
pected, but it still looks very red, and is much torn about where the
garter should be.*
Yesterday brought us the strongest breeze we have yet experienced,
(no one talks of gales at sea, they are only mentioned on shore)
much water coming on board, we dined at an angle of 45°, —those to
leewai’d took most of the soup, although usually their behaviour is
excellent. A few kept their cabins, or reclined miserably in the
saloon. It is very strange that w r e can catch no birds. Tradition
says, there are always several dozens caught each voyage, but al-
though we are now in the very thick of them, and have plenty of
lines, &c. we cannot possibly get any. Cusack has just
looked through the window, and after a few desultory inquiries, ex-
pressed his sorrow that he was such a fool as to get up (having
lain in bed for two days, and just dressed in time for dinner.)
After borrowing books enough to last him three days more, he is
going back again to stay for that time—high class ennui this. It
is however the worst case on board. Although I should be glad to
get to our destination, yet I am very happy and comfortable, and
do not find the time hang heavy. The usual form is about as
below, varied of course by any little incidents, jokes, sights, &c.
that may happen to disturb the very even tenour of it. Perhaps (in
large letters) a quarter of an hour before breakfast, of walking on the
poop, and perhaps not (in very small ones) a light, but ample
breakfast, always comprising among other items, marmalade, then
a pipe, and a brisk walk for an hour, or gentle stroll for two minu-
tes, according to the state of the weather—another pipe, read or
chat, most commonly the latter. By this lime the sun is over the
foreyard—this, although apparently an insignificant event enough, is
the signal for a rite much honored in the observance, (and there
* Mr. Brown, to return a garter found on the poop, stuffed an old red stock-
ing full of hay, and placed said garter round it in the cabin occupied by the
lady to whom he supposed the garter to belong.


be few breaches). It is the hour for beer, and is usually partaken of
by W. Gr. B, and self with much unction—another pipe might per-
haps follow this, but there is no certainty. Take sights, work up
the calculations, supervise the dead reckoning ! Lunch time, one
p.m. At this meal lam usually conspicuous by my absence, and
perhaps in uneventful times, take that opportunity to write this
diary. Afterwards play piquet, or ecarte with monsieur P (who
has taught me,) and beat him as a general thing. By this time,
four p.m. that benefactor of his race, Jack the cook, has prepared
good strong tea, ostensibly for the mates only, but a few favored
mortals generally come in for a share, which necessitates the smok-
ing of a cigar each—dress for dinner, (not evening dress.) Dining
generally occupies an hour and a quarter. Promenade all,
write diary, smoke ad libitum, and scratch supper. This is a
thing to be described, but not here. One more cigar, and turn in.
While between luncheon and dinner, and likewise between sleeping
and waking, occurred one of those incidents that I mentioned as
disturbing the even tenour of our usual life. Some one probably
dreamed there were Albatross, astern, and roused sufficiently to look
over the side, where he beheld its realization. It w T as a perfect
calm, and the birds appeared just ravenous. Lines were soon out,
and one especial beauty was singled out by all the fishers as his
own particular prey. Soon Mr. S hauled on board a fine grey
one, amid much advice, and some quacking, the latter was soon put
an end to, by a little prussic acid, administered internally. I had
by this time arranged a small piece of string with a fish hook at
one end, to the great amusement of those who had stronger lines.
In spite of this le grande Albatross perceiving my modest little bit
of pork, naturally concluded, there could be but little harm in so
small a piece, and immediately gobbled it, I hauled him tenderly
up the ship’s side, and sent for some one to go down to the water
on a rope, and haul him aboard, being afraid to trust my small
hook. Mr. Brown arrived after some minutes, and prepared a bow
line on which to descend and fetch him in. Ten seconds, he would
be aboard, but, alas ! the poor little hook could stand it no longer,
and broke short off, giving me ocular demonstration, how much


better is “ a bird in the hand than two in the water.” He was
soon after tempted to try Mr. Crawford’s line, and that being
fitted with a shark hook, brought him on board. After dinner he
was sold by auction, and fetched 255. 6d. He his now disem-
bowelled, and every piece of meat taken out of him ready for
stuffing. Mr. K , the purchaser, refuses £3 3s. for his skin,
and would do the same if offered £5 ss. It is considered by the
captain, and all who have seen many before, to be the finest possible
specimen—much of his plumage would do honor to a duchess.
There were five caught, and taxidermy has been going forward all
day. I had a wing given me, out of which I took the bones, and
gave the plumage to a lady on board. It will, I think, make a
beautiful collarette. I omitted to say that the bird Iso nearly
caught is six feet in measurement from his toes to his beak. I
believe the Albatross is the largest bird that flies.
London fogs have a world-wide notoriety, and deserve it, but the
fogs in this region have a claim too. We are now suffering under
one which came down on us like a rainbow, but of a dull grey
peculiar it seemed first hovering on the horizon in a
bank, and looking exactly like land at a distance, then gradually
shaping itself, came down, and very thoroughly wet us in about five
minutes, leaving us again becalmed.
This is a really out and out abnormal passage, not only in the
matter of length, but there are so many unusual sights. Last night
there was one of the most remarkable “ Cock’s Eyes,” as the sailors
call them, round the moon. It was exactly like a gigantic archery
target, painted with particularly brilliant colors, and due to a pecu-
liar state of the atmosphere, but has no significance with respect to
the weather. Also a lunar rainbow, and a bow on the crests of big
waves, is a very common sight. All classes of this article are, in
fact, at a discount. Belles, on the other hand, are of course, at a
premium !
After a very fine run since yesterday at twelve o’clock, 286 miles
by log or dead reckoning, and in all probability over 300, if
an observation could have been taken. The weather has become
very thick, and we are so far South that icebergs are awkward


possibilities. In view of meeting with any of these unpleasant
customers, the captain remained on deck all last night, a luxury
he is reported to indulge in but seldom. I have no doubt he will
do so again to-night, as it (the haze) is thicker.
Such thumping lumps of water keep crashing over my head while
I write, and I am just expecting Mr. Brown from the saloon, where
he is employed in his usual avocations. If he manages to reach
here without a ducking, he will be lucky ; and now I think of it,
how shall I get away again without the same risk ? Another good
run of 287 miles—a few more such will bring us to our destination,
and our expectant friends, who will be looking for us with some
anxiety.
To get rid of a little superfluous energy (an abnormal excres-
cence) I essayed a good run from the saloon to the fore deck, thirty
yards, but that skittish young vixen, the “ Rodney,” with a lurch,
brought me up on my beam ends, all aback, I fear with sufficient
force to damage some of my timbers, for I notice a big swell coming
up on my starboard quarter, and shall in all probability remain,
hove to for some days in consequence. Although somewhat bruised,
that fall seems to have let me off more lightly than I had supposed.
Last night we had a gale, and a pretty good one too ; and all to-day
the ship has been rolling to such an extent, that at meals (in spite
of the fiddles) the crockery, knives and forks, and every moveable
object, have kicked up such a confounded clatter, that nothing else
could be heard. Father O’D and I, as principals, with some
ladies joining in occasionally, have been discussing Theology
generally, and Faith in particular ! He believes that men have existed
who have been perfectly sinless all their lives, and quotes Enoch,
Jeremiah, and John the Baptist as examples. Amid much swaying
and more rising, and being seated is prescribed, by the orthodox
Church of England, Divine service was performed by the Rev. G—,
and it will not be deemed surprising that some tittering was heard
when in the middle of the Te Deum, the congregation suddenly and
violently became seated. The mangled remains of that Te Deum
were, I fear, hardly a fit offering of praise.


Hurrah ! hurrah ! God save the Queen ! This is the preface to
almost all ship matters, and in chronicling the appended event I use
them, to be nautical. The sailors have refused duty, and mutiny
rides rampant on the high seas. Some painting was required to be
done aloft. It is, I believe, unusual to paint those parts in these
latitudes, the weather being so cold that the men, with some show
of reason, complain that they would be unable to hold on, and
several flatly refused to attempt it. But the judicious chief officer
hauled them before the diplomatic captain, and they are now, by
hook or by crook, coerced grumblingly into compliance with orders.
This is the coldest day we have yet had, thermometer at 500, and a
slight hailstorm towards evening.
In view of the approaching fast of Lent, I, last evening, gave to
our select party a little entertainment. The edibles comprised ham
and bread ; the fluids were rum, Hollands, or square gin, (as it is here
called) and beer, cigars followed, and were greatly appreciated.
The meal was partaken of in the usual way, and amid an almost
funeral silence, but when over, the “ real jam ” of the occasion came.
At the opening toast of “ the Queen,” all present (Bartlett excepted,
there being no seat for him he was lying in the under bunk) rose to
their feet as one man, and sang with much enthusiasm, the National
Anthem. This it was understood was to be the only occasion for
which any gentleman need rise. I, in the post of honor, was seated
on the orgie box, one foot square; old man, Carnick (as invalid) was
perched on the only trunk in the cabin; while “ baby,” his brother,
reclined on a carpet bag, and Cusack on an appended travelling case,
completed the festive quorum ! “The Ladies,” proposed by Cusack,
was the next toast in order, and would that I could transcribe one
half of the eulogiums, he lavishly heaped on them, but, perhaps,
“ what is, is best.” Then a speech to “ that Prince of Caterers,”
my noble self. Here modestly stays my pencil. But the oration
of the evening came from the ready tongue and slightly inflamed
visage of “the baby.” “William three strokes ” was the subject
of it, and his minutest personal experiences were recounted with a
fluency that left nothing to be wished for, perhaps excepting proofs
of their accuracy.


Mr. P to-day won a pair of Binoculars for me, and I have
exchanged them for a fine Sea Bird, caught this morning, and have
been engaged all day in getting off his skin, &c., a very delicate
operation, the slightest stain spoiling the whole thing ; and I am
anxious to land at least, one muff in Tunbridge Wells. Dreamed
again that “ Billy ” was killed.
Februrary 12th. The animal below was being cut out this morn-
ing, when Mr. Brown with that remarkable penetration which
amounts almost to second sight, instantly devined its object and
probable destination; (I should have said, that this is the 13fch of
February) the idea was, prima facie, so plausible, that it struck me
I would put it here to convince him of the fallacy of his opinion.
Also as a work of art, ahem !
There has been royal fun to-day with the valentines. As no
one expected to be on board, no ready-made ones were to hand,
but talent, and the want of something novel to do, or to
laugh at, produced several capital caricatures, and a few useful
presents were heard of. My particular valentine was “ Billy,” in
woolwork, standing on his hind legs—the portrait of course from
imagination : his name was however beneath in large woollen letters,
to prevent mistakes. I will fix him in the other end of the book,
and save further description.
I have often heard how tame animals get on ship board, but
could hardly have realized that sheep, not one or two, but all,
would allow, and like their heads rubbed, and come to the bars for
biscuits, caring for human beings no more than dogs ordinarily do.
One fellow especially shakes hands, and I have no doubt that if
allowed to run about, would be able to do many such tricks.
Sunday, and our last one on board, we confidently hope. We are
now in the longitude of Western Australia, Cape Lewen, going at
good speed, ten and eleven knots, but hardly able to lie our course.
The whole of the passengers of the port side of the ship, went to bed
elevated last night—it must not be inferred from this that they were
the worse for liquor—it was only that the ship had a big list to
starboard, which raised the port side some feet, and gave them and
us a most hearty rocking. Things have by no means improved


to-day : we have a stiff head sea, in which, though labouring hea-
vily, she only makes seven and a half knots. Just now the upper
topsail sheet carried away with a bang ! and I every minute expect
to see the main follow suit. The cro-jack tack went this
morning, but the preventer saved any serious consequences, more
especially, to a solar lunar stellar, and generally complicated arrange-
ment, better hated than understood, called “ The Captain’s Baby,”
on the dove cot. The cro-jack, has especial designs on that infant,
and has made one other rather effectual attempt at its annihilation.
The sail maker has been without his dinner, repairing some damage
done to one of the sails. All these accidents point to the heavy
weather we are having, and the glass is now very unsteady, and so
am I. It is just impossible to keep one’s feet anywhere, or any-
how. All the bad weather seems reserved for the latter end of the
passage. Last night we had a hurricane, it blew nearly enough to
carry the hair off your head ! and the ship was quivering like an
electric battery. After three hour’s hard work for all hands, the
main sail was stowed, which somewhat eased her. The sea has now
gone down, and we are able to hold our course. Father O’D ,
Messrs. Pearson, Brown, Beaumont, and self, have been having a
little orgie on a bottle of wine (not ships) that Mr. Pearson received
as a valentine. It was an inestimable treasure ! We very rarely
drink wine, and it was with much gusto and appreciation that we
now responded to the invites of each member of the party, to toast
as follows; —
Mr. Brown proposed Father O’D .
Mr. Beaumont ‘ The Girl I left behind me.
Mr. Pearson ‘ Australia.
Mr. White * The Friends we left behind.
&c. &c. &c.
Beaumont’s face burned with perspiration and heroism when he said
the five words which began his speech, but in spite of several hints,
he got no further. The blank was filled in with laughter from the
audience !
After so much blue, it was very cheerful this morning to find
that the sea had changed to a bright green, perhaps on account of
our proximity (relatively) to Australia, the distance being about 400
miles.


The chief officer was victimised. Strange as this must sound in
the ears of those who know him, yet such was the case. This was
the way of it. He had made an appointment with, of course, the
nicest girl on the ship, to play at cribbage in the remainder of the
dog-watch after dinner ; and this fact having come to the knowledge
of some of the noisy passengers, they, finding him on deck smoking,
asked as a favour, would he teach them to play ? Very presistent
they were, until being anxious to change the subject and keep his
appointment, he suggested that they should immediately commence
the captain’s testimonial. Oh yes, they would, and with his enforced
assistance as chairman, immediately convened a meeting, and duly
held it, until the expiration of the watch, when he found the lady in
no humour to keep her part of the engagement; and on his explain-
ing to her, and some tittering eaves-droppers, that he had just been
attending a meeting relative to the captain’s testimonial, which he
had now left unfinished, she advised him to go back and give it the
whole of his attention, and she would endeavour to do without it
“ for one night only.” Shouts of applause from the eaves-droppers !
Exit. Brown, nonplussed. Finale. Curtain
Examined, and found correct, in the presence of chief officer,
Baby Careick.
Februrary 20th. This will most likely be the last night we shall
spend on board the “ Rodney,” and we have obtained the captain’s
permission to cook a few chops in the old style. C ’s cabin has
been laid out with unusual splendour, much of the dirt being thereby
hidden ; and the indefatigable Evans, second steward, is now on
the track of every luxury in the ship. We have “that perfect trust
that a Christian has in four aces,” in Evans—long experience prov-
ing that he will infalliably bring down the game, whatever it may
be. I may here remark, that he is just a prodigy in the matter of
pleasing everyone, the chief steward being his exact opposite.
February 21st. Sighted land this morning at half-past seven :
it did not look so blue, or so pretty generally as “ Gough Island,”
but it was a welcome sight, the wind soon failing us, we had
perfect calm until about four o’clock, when a fine breeze came off
the land, and did not leave us again till it brought us within


twenty-five or thirty miles of Adelaide, where we now are, on a hot
Sunday morning, looking at, and longing for land.
Four days have elapsed since that last entry, and it is now Thurs-
day, nine a.m., actually in Australia ! While we were looking at
and longing so for land, our friends were equally looking, and we
flatter ourselves, longing too for us. At last from “ Glenelg Jetty,” a
sail appeared, too small they thought for the “ Rodney,” but as she
stretched her magnificent length, broadside on to them, there could be
no mistake, and they made for the railway, taking a little
sailing boat on their arrival at the Semaphore, we were soon shaking
the hands of our friends and relations with a heartiness better
imagined than described. A few anxious enquiries after the health
of absent ones, and a few pieces of startling news, and then convivi-
ality, and general extraordinary good temper, are the only
remarkable characteristics of the meeting, that convened itself, in
the cabin of W. G. Brown, chief officer. The time is up, the chat
is over, and the bottle is empty, so we jump into the little craft
that has been waiting along side, and at last plant our {ray rather)
weary feet on shore.
The Semaphore is not characteristic South Australia, it is merely
a sandy waste, slightly enlivened by houses of a long, low r , remark-
able build, and a few gums —Trees in this instance, and all others,
unless mentioned to the contrary. We soon arrived at the railway
station, and seated ourselves on the cane seats which the heat of
the climate makes a necessity. A few miles ride brought us to
Adelaide proper. At this town people are in the habit of refreshing
themselves, and as in Rome, we do as the Romans do, etc. etc. Still
another ride by rail to Glenelg, the summer residence of our friends.
The way runs through the principal street, without any enclo-
sure. The carriages are built in the American style, open right
through, one being reserved for smokers, and another for ladies
only. At last (not long, except to my impatience) we arrived at our
destination, and met a hearty welcome from my much esteemed
friends, Mr. and Mrs. Brown and family. After giving them a con-
densed account of our doings on board the “ Rodney,” we all retired,
but I could not make a sleep of it anyhow. Strange to say, the


very fact of all things around me being still, made me feel the rock-
ing of the ship so much, that I was obliged to get up, and try to
dispel the illusion. All efforts in that line were absolutely futile,
for I could scarcely keep on my legs, every thing seemed to roll so.
At about seven, Mr. Brown, the old gentleman, awakened us to go
for a bath, which is observed almost as religiously as breakfast.
Fine baths are here, stretched well out to the sea on piles, with every
accommodation and precaution that the climate renders necessary
or luxurious. Kb precaution, however, can keep out the little
transparent jelly fish, which sting you, as you swim along. They were
not very bad though, that morning. After breakfast, we, brother
Tom and I, went to town, (Adelaide) did all our business, and
generally looked around, occasionally meeting some of the “ Rodney”
passengers, and surprising them by our truly Colonial appearance,
none but myself, seem to have adopted the style of the country, i. e.
a white helmet, and silk coat.
In Australia one never has to think when planning an excursion,
Will the weather be fine ? This is what w r e were told, and it of course
follows, this is what we implicitly believed. It was with much sur-
prise then, that after chartering a trap, for a drive to the foot of the
hills, and duly provisioning with sausage rolls and tarts, for the
feminine element, we observed what at first appeared a mist, but
gradually developed into real, prosaic, old English rain, which fell
then, and at subsequent intervals during the morning, not however,
to such an extent as to mar our enjoyment, the trap being covered,
and having screens, which were drawn down during the showers.
By the way we picked wild almonds, that were hanging in pro-
fusion along the divisions of the fields, (answering with a few posts
and rails to the hedges of the old country.) We also tried prickly
pears, but with less success. The almonds are about the same size and
flavour as our Kentish cobs. The roads, in many places, are so bad
and rocky, that I thought as the driver crashed heedlessly through
everything, the frail carriage must inevitably come to pieces.
As we have only to think what pleasure we shall next take, we
decided on the following day to go to the Botanical Gardens, and
meeting Mr. and Miss P ,we made a party, and adjourned


thither. It has all the appearance of a tropical country wherever
you go. Strange birds and plants, and everywhere giant cactus
with their prickly fruit, red, golden, and inviting looking, but very
repellent to the inquiring mind. Kangaroos in large play grounds,
and tigers in cages, in fact, somewhat of a menagerie, or zoological
garden, occupies one part. One especial plant is always a centre
of attraction, the “ Victoria Kegina,” unfortunately not in bloom at
present. I hear that the flower, when full, is about the size of a
large punch bowl, and perfectly white ; the leaves warrant that size,
they lie on the water flat, except for an upturned edge, and have all
the appearance of a very large round green tea tray. The South
Australian Horticultural Show was held on Thursday. In almost
all cases the fruit surpassed ours considerably, but I have seen finer
grapes to look at in the Crystal Palace Show. Those here are all
grown in the open air. The carriages were very good, and much
lighter than in England. The vegetables and corn just mar-
vellous to my eyes.
After the show, we took a drive to “ Glen Osmond,” another part
of the hills ; from here the most beautiful view I have yet seen was
before us. With our backs to the hills the glittering gulf spread
away to the left. Immediately in front were the pretty suburbs,
the distance bringing the gum trees closer together, and making the
scenery appear more green than is actually the case ; while far off is
Adelaide, with its two towers, and cathedral spire, just standing out
of the general mass of buildings, and the hills curling around on the
right, as if saying, “ Take my arm.” These hills, by the way, are
somewhat like those around Folkestone and Dover, but covered
with scrub and small trees ; even now brown as they are, they are
very beautiful. lam greatly surprised and pleased at Australian
scenery. I had certainly not heard an exaggerated account of it,
rather the reverse. I am now at “ Horncliffe” in Adelaide, the town
residence of Mr. Brown, and at eleven p.m, am seated in a snug
little (bridal chamber) I call it, on account of the gauze curtains which
envelope the bed. Of course, lam not aware whether bridal cham-
ber do possess that peculiarity, but am always constitutionally unable
to separate filagree work and feminine gender, hence my opinion.


But the real reason for the curtains is, I am led to believe, to keep
away the mosquitoes, which very perseveringly bite, new chums
especially. Baby Garrick presents the appearance of a rich
plum pudding, through their agency, and has now gone away fifty
miles North, in the hope of escaping them, but with small chances
of success according to the best opinions.
On Sunday last, I was one item in a party of ladies and gentle-
men, who drove to “ Waterfall Gully ” —staying at the “ Eagle” on
the hill to refresh ourselves, and stable our horses. This refreshing
occupied about an hour and a half, during which time we devoured
much beef, mutton, and claret, then proceeded by the marrowbone
stage to “The Gully,” after following the course of the very small
stream for about two miles, and passing some surprisingly lovely
spots. Little pools at the foot of small waterfalls, embowered in
gigantic ferns, with perhaps a fallen gum tree lying stark and white,
felled by nature’s hand, one big claw grasping the opposite rock ;
another driven deep down into the heart, or bosom, of the little
pool, whichever you please, for here you can take your choice, with-
out paying your money. Soon we struck an evidently well-used
track, and upon inquiring of some boys, found that a lady and gen-
tleman had lately passed. To enable us to identify the said lady
and gentleman, we put a few questions as to their personal appear-
ance, but could get nothing farther from them than that the lady
was pretty ! What but an eye for beauty could be expected from
boys, who would walk miles, as these had, to see nature’s loveliness 1
The waterfall is a small stream, not more than two feet wide, which
tumbles over a sheer precipice of about 120 feet. There is a little
pool below, and the fall of the water into it, is a most refreshing
sound, and perhaps, rather an unusual one in Australia, for that is
the one failing of this country. Given that, even in the smallest
quantities, and you have vegetation prodigal.
The return, up about 1500 feet on a rough track, with the glass
possibly at 100° in the shade, was calculated to make even an un-
observant person, frequently turn round, and breathe hard with
admiration. The drive home also had its advantages, four or five
miles of absolute down hill, and the scenery just primeval forest, as


far as the eye could reach on all sides, with occasionally a dot of a
vineyard, brilliantly green, and last, but not least, a beautiful cool-
ness—delicious, after the hot day !
March Ist. Mr. Brown and I took a walk to see the tree on
which was first placed the proclamation of the founding of the
Colony. It is a fine Old Man*—gum, denuded of all its natural
glories, but maintaining an undying fame, from its associations, and
a bran new board, nailed to it, explaining the founding and first
festive anniversary of the same. It has one peculiarity of other
old men, which is, that its head is bowed, in this case, even to the
ground. Near it are some gardens, cultivated by Chinese. These
very industrious and ingenious fellows have everything more
fruitful, and fresh looking, than Europeans. Much of their success
is due to a constant use of the watering pot, which dispenses
liquid sewage ; they might, in fact, with much reason, hang out a
sign of a dirty Aquarius, as their trade mark. The gentleman who
works the pump would be a fitting portrait, for, from a close
examination, we found that he must inevitably, pump the sewage
over his own legs.
Afterwards, Tom and I took ourselves to “ Henley Beach,” passing
on our road thither some fine crops of lucerne, looking beautifully
green and fresh. From Henley, we thought we would walk along
the sand to Glenelg, about four and a half miles, which we accord-
ingly did, breaking the journey by an hour and a half’s sleep on the
sand, with small danger of catching cold.
It is very difficult to hire saddle horses in Adelaide. A strange
fact that, in a land of horses. The reason seems to be, that sailors
and other wild folk, when they want a particular out and out spree,
have been in the habit of hiring horses, and riding them until their
tails drop off! But having convinced one Jewel thal such was not our
intention, we got a couple of reasonably decent nags to go to
“ Mount Lofty,” and cantered away thitherward at twelve o’clock
on Tuesday. Our acquaintance with the “ Devil’s Elbow” is, I
trust, greater than his with ours. We swept round it, with ease and
grace on our impetuous steeds en route for “ Mount Lofty,” and
Anything large, is here called Old Man.


“ Aldgate Pump.” Passing “ The Eagle” on the hill, the scene of
onr late excursion, we came upon some lovely glimpses of Adelaide
plains, with “ The Gulf” beyond, and even saw, upon that highest
eminence, the top of “ Mount Lofty,” a part of Yorke’s Peninsu-
lar, although thirty-four miles of sea and fifteen of land,
stretches between. There is a little round building erected on the
very summit, and in the shade of that, we sat and sung, “ Let me
like a Soldier fall,” and enjoyed the glorious panorama before us to
the full.
We dined at Crafer’s hotel, and were waited on by an Irish
maiden of great stature, and uncouth tongue, but a kindly heart
withal. The laugh of the laughing Jack Ass is a very laughable
affair. Civilization has turned it against himself of late, by driving
him farther inland, so he now “ Laughs on the wrong side of his face.”
We both saw and heard him, also the “Australian Eedbreast.” He
is a more gaudy bird, than his northern compatriot, unless a chronic
blush at his own temerity, might explain his enhanced hue.
Mr. Henry Brown, late of the firm of English and Brown, took
us for a beautiful drive into the hills, to his stone quarry, fourteen
miles, behind the best little horse I have yet seen in Adelaide—free
as the wind, and strong as a steam engine ! We shot the steep
places, rutty, and full of loose stones, in a way calculated to startle
a Briton ! Yesterday, Clara gave us her treat. We drove in a
buggy and pair to “ Oaklands,” appropriately so named, for real
oak trees line the drive up to, and around the house, the acorns
on which are, I think, quite twice the size of those at home, although
the trees are not large. This place, from a distant view, more
nearly resembled English scenery than anything I have yet seen in
the Colonies ; but on a closer inspection, it was more widely differ-
ent, I plucked in those gardens, fruits of almost every description.
Grapes in the most extravagant profusion ; oranges hanging on, and
lying under the trees ; figs, citrons, pears, apples, palms, pome-
granites, dates, almonds, lemons, plums, peaches, apricots, necta-
rines, and a profusion of other fine fruits too numerous to mention.
These are temperate and tropical productions combined. Every
good thing seems to grow on this spot, and yet it is not called


Paradise ! After a stay of about two hours, the owner kindly drove
us on to a Mr. Tenants, a wealthy squatter, at whose splendid house
we dined sumptuously, and spent a most pleasant evening with that
genial and unostentatious gentleman.
March 6th. Steadily we trotted away on our road to Willunga,
in a four-horse coach; Mr. Brown, Frank Gattey, Tom, and I, occu-
pying the highest seat, and considerably swaying the coach with the
unusual weight; but with four fresh horses on the next stage, our
pace was considerably increased, in fact, it was such as I have never
experienced behind horses. Four fiery thorough-breds, going at
their very fastest gallop ! We did seven miles in about twenty-four
or twenty-five minutes, and every step of the way, either up or down
steep hills ! Except for the consistency of his behaviour, I should
have thought the driver insane. Willunga is a pretty little place,
of perhaps 250 inhabitants, in the actual township, but as many
more in the outlying farms, gardens, runs, &c. On the outskirts,
we were met by that fine specimen of a Bushman, and our particu-
lar friend and host, George Atkinson, who immediately conducted
us to a most substantial tea, to which we did as ample justice, as could
be expected of four such hungry stomachs, sharpened by a drive of
thirty-six miles through the bracing air of the hills. Much talking
on the events to which we were looking forward, occupied the
evening,
Brightly, and cheerfully, we awoke next morning with a dim idea
of a great pleasure in store. After an ample breakfast, drove round
about to see the plains, the thorough-breds, and Mr, Atkinson, M.P.
After dining, and plentifully wining, we rode through “ The Scrub”
to get a kangaroo dog. “ The Scrub” must not be construed by the
uninitiated as a small place, since it occupies the principal part of
Australia, and is, in its grandest aspect, just a sublime spectacle.
The part through which we then rode was one of the finest. Ima-
gine, if you can, a primeval forest, never touched by the hand of
man—mighty trees on all sides—and smaller ones a little larger than
what is known in England as underwood, filling up the spaces be-
neath these forest giants ! Then, enlivening with a brighter green
the sombreness of the forest, are the grass trees with large tufts of


very long-leaved grass, about three feet in length, out of the centre
of which rises a tall reed, surmounted with a bullrush-head, very
tropical-looking, and nowhere, twenty square yards, without a
large dead, fallen gum, bleached and guant, over which our horses
jumped, and dodged, in a way truly remarkable.
I believe I successfully endeavoured, not to show the surprise I
felt, when told this was our kangaroo hunting ground. Small
chance of catching, or rather of being up with the dogs, in such a
place, thought I. But on the next day, we started game in a spot
thicker, rougher, and in every way worse, and added to all these
drawbacks, on the side of a very steep hill, paved with loose rough
boulders, varying from the size of a potatoe to a gallon measure !
Away went the dogs, and away went the bushmen. I hesitated, set
my teeth hard, and went too. Very thankful I felt on arriving at
the foot in safety; and there was Mr, Brown, not ten yards behind me.
I should have thought mine a remarkable feat, but am less conceited
of it since a man of seventy could do the same. I believe that any
foxhunter in England, -would have hesitated to take that hill, even
with the hounds in full cry.
We had many runs after this, but only runs—the very thick
scrub obstructing the view of the dogs, which hunt by sight. One
returned in a very sanguinary condition, after a run ; from which
the experienced ones concluded he had killed, we could not find the
game, though we searched fully half an hour. In all we sighted,
and ran eleven kangaroos, but the result of our sport in tails, was
simply nil, yet withal there was something very novel and exciting,
riding up and down these wild places, and the balsamic odours of
the peppermint, and other shrubs, shedding their fragrance at every
step. Poor Frank Gattey endured much toward the latter end of
the day. It was painful to see how gingerly he sat upon the saddle,
that had since the morning, become all too hard for a comfortable
seat. We finished about ten miles from home, with a grand burst
over a hill side, at a furious pace, viewing the chase all the way, a
fine old man, but he was lost at last, in the dense scrub, and so we
alternately walked, and cantered home in the cool of the evening,
after about fifty miles, my little horse “ Pat,” trying his best to


bolt with me on several occasions, and thereby considerably impro-
ving my opinion of the endurance, and general ability of Australian
horses. The unwonted exercise had so tired us all, that we were glad
to go to rest at about nine o’clock, from which time we slept soundly
until nearly eight next morning. Most of our time, until one
o’clock, was spent in Mrs. Atkinson’s garden, eating fruit, and
smoking, under the shade of a grand old mulberry tree, growing by
a pretty little ever-running stream, (creek, they call it,) and after
dinner, started for “ Port Victor.”
The same free and easy style that characterises most things in
the Colony, extends itself to the government mails, or at least, to
the conveyance of passengers by them. For our convenience, we
had managed to defer the mail, from Monday to Tuesday, thereby
keeping one passenger at the Bush Inn for a day, and putting off a
lady, who had intended taking her seat at the regular time. It was
not surprising, therefore, when a telegram came, asking George
Atkinson to bring on the passengers half way ; where the man
driving the regular mail would meet them ; neither was it surprising
that he did not meet them as arranged. We were there waiting,
perhaps, an hour, at an encampment of Government Surveyors.
A very snug little spot they have, with their wives and children,
man cook, and every luxury, more than you could suppose possible,
under three canvass tents. We took tea with them, and finding the
sun going down, and no mail coming, George Atkinson decided to
drive us to “ Port Victor ” himself. A struggle of about two miles
through deep sand, brought us to a better part of the road, where
the tardy Jehu, whom we had so long looked for, met us. No word
of apology escaped his lips, nor any mention of his delay (but that
is Australian). We changed into his wagon, and assisted the lady
by carrying her baby, for which, and our further attentions to her,
she seemed truly thankful. A long, steep descent of about three
miles, down which we rattled furiously, the scenery rendered more
beautiful by a splendid sunset, the brightest part glimmering rosily
through the trees, on a rocky knob of hill, about 1500 feet high !
Hitching on another horse at the foot of it, we arrived at “ Port
Victor” soon after dark, and at once took the only three sofas, and


one bed, that were vacant. After tea, we strolled on the pier,
toward “ Granite Island,” where was but little to be seen, as the
Town is not yet lighted. I was rather surprised at this, but more
so in the morning, to find it a place scarcely larger than “ Saint
Margaret’s Bay.” “ Granite Island ”is a solid block, rising out of
the sea. It is now the scene of Government works of some extent.
Fifteen tons of powder, gun cotton, and dynamite were exploded to
blow a part of it into the sea, with reasonable success. One of
the fragments cast up, weighs, by measurement 2000 tons —the
three noughts are perfectly correct, as I have been at some trouble
to ascertain. With these stones a break-water is being formed,
and when finished, a very fine harbour will be the result; nature
having already done much toward it.
Well! that is the practical side of the island. On the other,
huge boulders, stretch well out into the soft southern ocean, and get
severely polished by the contact. There are other cases of the kind,
even in animate nature, that have come under my notice since I
have been in Australia. “ Port Victor” is also noted for its fine
seaweed, several collections of which helped to adorn the hotel where
we stayed. A tramcar runs from here to “ Port Elliott,” another
granite-bound spot, noted for schnapper, crayfish, eggs, and Abori-
ginals. The only one of these latter that I spoke to, answered in
better English than I ever heard a foreigner speak before. He was
a bushy-bearded old veteran, of about thirty-five.
Once more on the tram, en route for Adelaide. The way is
through twenty-eight miles of almost uninterrupted scrub. At one
part they were felling and clearing a space, about ten yards wide,
round a large section of country much infested by rabbits. When
completely isolated, it was to be fired simultaneously in all parts,
and poor bunny would burn by thousands : rather horrible to think
of, but a necessity of the times I suppose. The township of
“ Strathalbyn” is a pretty little village with a good meat pudding,
I meant hotel, but confused them, being hungry : to which we did
ample justice—Do you understand ? Once more the coach, thirty-
six miles to Adelaide, and through most charming scenery, forests,
gullies, and everlasting hills, and finally, Home again, after our
five days trip !


Once more to cross the weary waste of waters, started the good
ship “ Torrens,” and Tom, Clara, and I to give them a hearty send
off. Always interesting, as a link joining us all here with home,
it was still more so for Tom, who knew and liked the officers.
Clara and I taking infection from his enthusiasm, dined with, and
drank their champagne, with a heartiness that could scarcely have
been exceeded, had we known them all our lives. Took Tiffin on the
“ Rodney,” and soliloquised over the little bunk, in which I had had
so many strange experiences. Much party going, and evening outing
with Clara’s very numerous friends, comprise the events of the next
few days. On the 18th March, my birthday, an evening party was
given at Horncliffe, in my honor, and a very jolly affair it was;
dancing as usual, was part of the amusements. Bobology created
some fun, being practised successfully on all the innocents.
At seven on Saturday morning, we again took the coach to Wil-
lunga —this time, with the intention of going from there on to
Goolwa, and the Coorong, to shoot wild birds. The place we are
told abounds with ducks, teal, swans, pelicans, and various others.
Bad luck overtook us on our way, and kept with us throughout.
When about half-way, it began to rain, and continued intermittently
until we arrived. “ But whenever you choose to plan an excursion
in Australia, you may always rely on the weather !” It is perhaps
unnecessary to state, that in consequence, we were wet through. The
rain to the contrary notwithstanding, we did a little kangaroo hunt-
ing in the afternoon, with the usual luck. Sunday dawned on a
steady and most effectual downpour, so effectual, that a little creek,
two feet wide, was swollen to such an extent, that it carried away a
large stone bridge near where we were staying ; took twenty sacks
of potatoes out of a garden, and distributed them to the poor and
needy, in various districts, two or three miles away ; besides break-
ing fences, and otherwise variously distinguishing itself. A slight
improvement in the afternoon induced us to start for a ride to the
beach, six miles distant, and a very interesting spot, as we subse-
quently found out, but it came on to rain again, and we had to
return.


Hearing from Gr. A. that one of my fellow-passengers was on a
■surveyor’s camp, about ten or twelve miles away, near the “ Hun-
gry Swamp,” we took a ride over to see him, providing ourselves
with some “ tucker,” and “ a billy” to make tea in. After some
difficulty, we found the camp, and the man ; and soon joined in a
game of cricket with the whole force of the settlement, three men !
They kindly invited us to stay dinner, and spread a very substantial
repast —good cold mutton, mashed potatoes, and stony-hearted
cakes, with grapes and apples ad libitum ! Tea, or water, was the
beverage, and the style rough and ready. Petit was pleased to see
us, and we smoked and chatted, he telling us of the many wonders
he had seen there; among which figured very conspicuously Alliga-
tors." The other fellows had been cramming him with this, and had
shewn him an Iguana, as a baby-specimen. They are by no means
unlike them, and he knows no better to this day !
We thought we would make a nearer cut home, but like most near
cuts, it proved much farther, and eventually landed us, after much
riding, on the wrong side of the swamp. We essayed to cross it,
and fortunately did. Tom went first, and got safely over, I waited,
in case of accident, to be able to help him, then crossed over myself.
Our proceedings were watched with much interest by a man at a
distance, whom we saw again on the road, when he told us, that he
had lived there many years, but had never seen a horseman cross it
before, adding, by way of explanation, there are many holes,
full of mud, deep enough to drown you, horses and all ! We gal-
loped along a few miles, tied up the nags, and proceeded to cook
some tea. First-rate water being the great necessity, we stayed by
a square hole, dug out of the clay that had been filled up by the
recent rains, and from this yellow pool we dipped enough to make
a quart of tea, and sat by the fire to drink it, as it was growing
chilly. As the sun went down, we speculated on the various occu-
pations of our friends in England at that time—it would be about
half-past eight, a.m. ! With such musings, and smoking, we wiled
away an hour, and then made tracks for home, i.e. Willunga.
It is almost incredible what the horses can stand in the way of fatigue
in this country ; for the next morning we started before nine a.m., I


on the same little horse I had ridden each day (a three-year old,
standing about fourteen hands two) for Myponga, twelve miles
distant, ten of them through the “ Scrub.” Picking up various
friends on the way we were ten mounted men on our arrival on the
scene of action. A motley crew they were too—hats of every descrip-
tion of hideousness—here and there a collar—here and there a coat,
but only in one thing was there any unanimity of appearance, and
that was in the knee pads on the saddles, and they \yere of the uni-
form size of a pumpkin, and a smart sized pumpkin at that.
We struck into the bush, and soon started three particularly lively
kangaroos, the pace was furious ! I was crossing the track of one
that Tom was after, and saw his horse go plump in between two
stout mallee sticks, that brought her up with a jerk, Tom fortu-
nately escaping without much damage. All the eventualities of the
day seemed reserved for him. His good, but hot-tempered mare, in
jumping over a little creek, managed to slip, so as to throw him quite
under her neck, where he hung suspended a few seconds, but
righted again without damage. And
“ As daylight slowly vanished.
And the evening mists drew nigh,”—
we tried the greyhounds to catch a hare or two, that we might not
go home quite without some spoil of the chase, but as usual, the old
result. I fear I must possess the banning power, and have an
involuntary disposition to use it, as “no sport” is the invariable
result whenever I go.
When quite dark, we started for home, twelve miles, nearly all
through scrub ; but it was a lovely moonlight night, and ourselves
refreshed with a glass of milk, the first bite, or sup, we had had since
early breakfast, we sang songs as we paced along through the
shadowy forest, looking to my unpractised eye, as though it were all
fallen timber. But the horses know better, and never make mistakes,
as they walk at about five, or sometimes six miles an hour. We
arrived home at twenty minutes past nine, p.m.. Out of the twelve
hours and a half we were away, we had not been out of the saddle
one hour, and the horses had never had a morsel of anything to eat
whatever. Except one, a colt, and tenderfooted, could certainly


have done twenty miles more ! The riders were however famished,
and did ample justice to the substantial fare that was in readiness
for them. So ended the tallest day I ever had on horseback.
The nonconformist element preponderates in Adelaide in religious
matters, consequently Good Friday is not observed with as much
seriousness as in England. Mr. English had a most pleasant little
family picnic, to which Tom, Clara, and I were invited, and a
jolly, cosy tiiqe we had in his grounds, on “ Peveril Peak,” where
he intends building a house to retire to, during the hot weather.—
But Alice P is to be married to-day, and the preparations con-
sequent thereon are not conducive to the composition of diaries, so
I close for the present to make wreaths, and decorate for the proper
observance of that solemnization, or festivity.
Interval of four hours. Solemn quiet reigns around, all having
betaken themselves to “ Siesta,” and I resume my writing, to tell of
our wondrous trip on the “ Coorong,” a very curious formation of
land and sea. A deep gulf of about 100 miles, perhaps more, is only
separated from the Southern ocean by a neck of land, in many
places no more than 300 yards wide. The gulf is also connected
with two or three fine lakes, and is sometimes salt, sometimes fresh,
sometimes brackish ; and frequently in spots of alternate fresh and
salt. It abounds with fish of every size and description. All kinds
of wild fowl, kangaroos, wallabys, wombats, wild pigs, emu’s, and
opossums are to be found on its banks. The scenery is most
beautiful, even sand attains a picturesqueness here, that I had
never heard of, or expected to see. One huge billow, 300 feet high,
shone amid the surrounding foliage, nearly opposite our camp, and
a peninsular of vivid green, interspersed with grey rocks, stands
far out into the water on our left, and is a first-rate place for shoot-
ing wild swans (black) as they fly over on moonlight nights, on
their way to the various feeding grounds. I have jumped there in
a bound from Adelaide, but hard roads and unstable waters, are not
passed so easily, except in fancy; 86 miles of this description,
separated our camping ground from town, and two full days were
spent in accomplishing the distance. Duly provided with guns,
rugs, and suitable clothing for a stay in a spot, where the chances


would be against seeing a white man in a month, we started
for “ Goolwa,” by two fearfully over-crowded coaches, myself and
the baggage in one, Tom in the next, the rush for seats, leaving
him out in the cold, after handing me up the baggage. Eight
hours travelling (excepting a quarter of an hour for tea) landed us
at our destination for the night. When as quickly as things could
be got ready, we started next morning in the boat for the camping
ground. A dead beat all the way up the “ Murray,” brought us
at the mouth, at about half-past two. “Mundoo Island,” exactly
opposite it, contains a signalling station, for the boats that ply from
“ Port Victor,” to any part of the river ; and on this Island lives a
man, his wife, and three or four children.
I am not in a position to state with absolute certainty, that they
wear shoes and stockings, but Mrs. Tim told me they always did
when they went to town (“ Goolwa.”) Neither Mr. Mrs. nor any
of the kids, indulged in those luxuries, during our visit, some five
hours, the wind having fallen altogether. They pressed us to stay
to tea. We said yes, and about an hour after, were regaling ourselves
with a leg of mutton, hot scones, (no bread on the Island) and tea.
Mrs. Tim not being able to induce a servant to share the solitary
beauties of their isolated home, had all the work to do herself, and
her (I could hardly say little) feet pattered quickly in and out, as
she bustlingly arranged our refection. I felt shocked at the trouble
we were giving, and politely told her so, a cordial welcome shone
out of her pretty eyes, as she denied all trouble in the matter, and
even overwhelmed us with apologies, that she had nothing better to
set before us. After tea, the same feet accommodated themselves
to the pedals of an American organ, which she played for our
amusement, as well as to show that although bare armed and
legged, some feminine accomplishments lay beneath her consciously
rough exterior. Tim joined in by singing with a powerful and not
unmusical bass.
All this time our boat, full of provisions, spirits, beer, guns, and
various valuable articles, lay on the beach close by an encampment
of thirty or forty blacks, and no danger was apprehended of their
helping themselves. I could not believe in such honesty, with my


experience of civilized beings. But everything was as perfectly safe'
as though in a strong room. I have since heard as tonishing tales of
them in this respect.
About ten o’clock a fisherman from a neighbouring island, came
to borrow Tim’s net. We took off our boots and socks, and went
to see him work. Each haul of the net (ten minutes’ work) brought
in about 2001bs. of fish of all sorts. Tim invited us to take what
we liked. As we were just about to start, a light breeze having sprung
up, we availed ourselves of his permission, to the extent of one each
of all sorts —malloway, teralgy, bream, and mullet—average weight
about 4lbs. “ With tears in our eyes,” we then borrowed his camp
oven, and started once more for the rendezvous. At half-past
two in the morning, we found ourselves stuck fast on a mud bank,
and after vainly heaving out all ballast, Mike, our boatman, took
off his clothes, and prospected for deeper water. By dint of much
pushing, lifting, and keeping her on her beam, we at last sur-
mounted this difficulty, and with a fresh, and fair breeze, streaked
gallantly along, when lo ! a light right a head. Tom and I con-
tended it was a beacon, but Mr. Spencer, the landlord of the “ Gool-
wa hotel,” whom I omitted to say had joined us, said it was the
“ Morning Star,” which proved right. It had three distinct colors,
blue, green, and red, and appeared about the size of the top of a
large breakfast cup. I have never seen any planet nearly so beau-
tiful, or so large before. Roused by the rush of our boat through
the water, thousands of swans, pelicans, &c. rose from the shores,
with a sound like rumbling thunder. I thought it was that myself,
but as daylight quickly broke upon us, they were to be seen in
myriads, as far as the eye could reach. A more novel, and weirdly,
lovely sight, it would be impossible to look upon. And so we glided
up to our “ Happy hunting grounds.” The tent was put ashore
and we prepared a breakfast of fish, cooked on the embers, and
supplemented with cold boiled beef. How delicious it was, and
what ravenous appetites we had. The coffee made a little stronger
than usual served to awaken us thoroughly. Leaving Spencer to
sleep, and Mike to put up the tent, Tom and I started with the two
dogs kangarooing. I shouldered the musket, and Tom held the-


dogs in slips. About a mile walk, in rather a hot sun, when Hi!
away go two jumpers, and away go the dogs, urged to their utmost
by our yells. The chase describes a large circle, or rather, a section
of it. A quick run enables us to see from a mound the finish—a
little bit shocking ! They have such large “ pleading” (no other
than this hackneyed word expresses it) eyes, and use them with as
much effect as some women. They have long nails too —I mean the
kangaroos, that they can also use with effect, as one of our dogs know.
Half an hour’s rest under a tea tree, and another good run, and kill,
we wended our way back to camp, where a dinner of stewed
duck was preparing. Very fine it was, with beautiful potatoes, and
damper. After a hearty feed, we adjourned to a large tea
tree near, with a rug, and laid us down to smoke our pipe of peace.
Soon we slept—awakening to hear the sound of wheels. A pair-horse
buggy drew up, containing most strangely, Mr. Brown, who had
been staying with Mr. , the proprietor of the ground we were
on. They had been picnicing at “ Lovely Bay,” and seeing the
smoke of our camp fire, had driven this way to see what was going
on. Introduction followed, and Mrs. B gave us a fine water
melon, and a sweet one !—real jam for us, as we had no fruit.
After tea, we laid about, and had a few shots at the ducks and teal.
The water being unusually low, we were unable to get very near
them. But in the calm evening, we could hear the blacks, practising
for a grand Corrobboree, and determined next night to go and see it.
A nobbier of whisky for a nightcap, and spreading, or rather folding
my coat upon a piece of rock for a pillow, I soundly slept until
eight next morning, and then fortifying the inner man with sundry
blocks of beef, and large potations of coffee, we started in full force
for another turn at the kangaroos. My colleagues were rather lazy
hunters, and after killing five or six, laid them down, (ostensibly to
rest the dogs, who had had several severe runs ;) but the soporific
effect of tobacco and whisky, lulled them into a deep sleep, during
which time, I took my gun, and one dog, and had the great event of
the day, killing the kangaroo, after a long run, within ten yards of
the place from which he started, I standing quietly on a knob, and
viewing the whole chase. By far the largest game we had got that


day it proved. As we quietly sauntered back to camp, I shot two
more, one at a very long distance, certainly seventy yards, and I
fancy the dogs killed another cr two, but am not quite sure. We had
plenty of tails to carry home, and were well satisfied with the sport.
In the evening, we had arranged to visit “ Pelican Point,” to see
the grand Corrobboree. It coming on to blow with considerable
vigour, we took the precaution to double bank our tent, and place
some large rocks on the bottom of it. The staysail of the boat,
served for a breakwind to the doorway. These preparations com-
pleted, and duly fortifying ourselves with a nip of whisky, as well
as carrying a flask, we started to walk. Dark as pitch it was,
especially the first mile or so, and over country where there was no
track whatever. After going, perhaps, five miles, our guide can-
didly, and cheerfully confessed, that he really had missed his way, and
must have passed the Point. Spencer suggested that we had lost
the “ Coorong ” altogether, (our only guide) but that, perhaps, the
water to which we had now arrived was one of the lakes. Such it
turned out to be, and was most likely, “ Lovely Bay ” (visited by
the Duke of Edinburgh, when here.) The two then held council,
and decided after much controversy, that the camp must be in such
a direction, so giving up all idea of witnessing the Corrobboree, we
started on our endeavour to find our way back. The weather which
had gradually been getting worse, all the way, now culminated in a
burst of unusual fury ; we were fain to shelter ouiselves fiom the
force of it, under a thick scrub of tea tree. While standing there, a
pair of mountain ducks flew over, and I think Mike must have
aimed at the noise they made, for unless he had the eyes of a cat,
he could’nt have seen them ; however down came one —a very fine
bird, weighing about eight pounds. Soon the tea trees would no
longer shelter us, and we had to be trudging again. Fortunately,
we had decided on the right direction, and at last reached camp at
something past eleven, when we changed our clothes, had a good
supper, and turned in, very tired indeed. But it might have been
much worse—to be lost in the Australian Bush is quite the reverse
of a joke—and we thought ourselves very lucky, that we found our
tent standing, after the gale we had passed through : indeed we


scarcely expected it, and ruminated dolefully on our prospects in
the event of such a catastrophe. A very fresh morning, the wind
blowing with but slightly abated force, induced three-fourths of our
party to continue their sleep till long after daybreak, so that im-
mediately after breakfast, we had to prepare for departure. With a
fair wind, and a strong one, we streaked away down at a spanking
rate, until off “ Pelican Point,” where the shoal water is, even then
our sails drew us through the mud and water, stirring up the
bottom all the way. At last being fairly aground, we were obliged
to heave out much of the large quantity of ballast, that the high
wind had made necessary, and with much pushing and heaving, we
were just getting off the bar, when a large fin appeared above water. I
thought it a shark, but the experienced ones knew better. Mike,
taking a crooked stick, walked gently along in the water, about up
to his knees, and we saw from the boat, that he raised the stick
up with both hands, and made a vigorous plunge—missed, by jove !
thought I—but no, there he was, splashing like a hippopotamus,
transfixed through the gills, and into the sand. Mike stuck to him
bravely, and soon had Spencer to his assistance, and together they
brought him on board, A hundred weight and a half of sand
in a bag, served to keep his tail from lashing about, and we got
under weigh with our trophy.
After some tacking, and always carrying so much sail that the
boat's side was constantly going under water, even with three of us
seated quite out on the weather bulwarks, we reached “ Goolwa ” at
4, p.m., and so ended the wildest, and consequently, most enjoyable
trip I ever had. Only that we required to be in Adelaide on
Thursday, for a Ball at Mr. Syme’s, another of Clara’s friends, did
we leave this favoured spot so soon.
What a shock it was to the system, so sudden a jump, from a
simple, and very ragged pair of trousers, and woollen shirt, to the
full dress of Society. How irksome were the white gloves, stiff
collar, and tight boots ? A metamorphosis, worthy the work of
the fairies. Fair girls—light fantastic toe—bright eyes—sparkling
wines—and the delightful commingling of many perfumes, and so
on ! Frank and I lost our way, while smoking a cigar, and pro-
menading in front of the house.


Then Alice’s wedding next day, at eight o’clock in the evening,
and in the house, that was a novelty for (me; and although lacking
the grand surroundings of the Church, it was a solemn, and very
impressive ceremony. The bride and bridegroom stayed with us,
to enjoy the fun, until eleven o’clock, and then quietly retired to
their little nest, already prepared, and distant about three miles.
That is the way I would be married, if ever I have the chance. On
Sunday, we went to the Presbyterian Kirk of Scotland, with Mr.
Brown. It was Sacrament Sunday, and the Church was much
dressed in white, the gentlemen also wearing white ties. I had never
heard of this style of observance, but think it appropriate and nice.
We have decided to go again to the “ Coorong,” where we so much
enjoyed ourselves before, and are busy endeavouring to get a friend
or two, if possible to make a party of it. Half-promises are how-
ever, the order of the day, and so on Thursday morning only George
Stone turns up to start with us, at half-past six, on a beautiful, and
slightly autumnal morning, as it would be called in England.
Twelve miles against collar, brings us and our five sweating steeds
nearly to the summit of the hills, and quite to breakfast—mutton
chops and rump steak, which we punished severely. With a fresh
team of horses, we went merrily along again. Now down the hills
through Macclesfield and Echunga, at each of which places we
changed horses.
Notwithstanding he has five horses to manage, on a difficult road,
the driver, Johnny Alexander, finds time, not only to do all his
business, which is multifarious, but crack jokes with those fortunate
passengers, who are honored with a seat near him.
In the scramble for best places, Tom and I are not usually far
behind. On this occasion we occupied the two next seats to Johnny,
who was very entertaining ; and having kindly consented to drink
(moderately) with us, we felt ourselves almost on an equality with
this autocrat of the road. The delivery of papers is accomplished
without stopping the coach. Neatly folded, they skims through the
air to their destination, with remarkable accuracy when properly
thrown, and Johnny is an adept! At about forty yards, he took a
man’s hat oft as neatly as possible, without even touching his head.


Again, a lady looking out of a second-floor window, at a corner of a
street, was to have received hers right into her arms, but the wind
coming quickly round the corner just at the wrong moment, carried
the paper on to the roof, where in all probability the lady had to go
for it! Johnny had done his best, and his tranquility was quite
undisturbed, by the trouble the lady might have been put to.
The inevitable meat pudding at Strathalben, was, on this occasion,
a leg of mutton, and no time was lost in eating it—that means vol-
umes in Australia. We were very agreeably surprised on reaching
“Currency Creek,” to find waiting for us, Mr. Spencer, and Captain
Webster, with a buggy and pair, to fetch us on to Goolwa. We
thus saved much time, and got a good start away up river,
before the tramcar arrived.
When fairly on our journey, we found we had forgotten a
keg for water, so we called in at “ Jim’s,” the signalman, before-
mentioned, to borrow of him again his camp oven, and a five gallon
bottle. The tent pitched, and a fire lighted, we were about to pre-
pare the evening meal, when, “ Oh, horror !” plates, knives, forks, and
meat, were all missing, these articles having been packed in one box,
and that left behind ! Fortunately, w 7 e had a piece of bacon, and on
that we regaled ourselves. Jim joined us after, in a panikin of
grog, and a smoke, and when mellow, he promised us, that his mis-
sus should cook us a leg of mutton, that he had in the house. Early
in the morning he brought it down, with some fresh fish, which
we had for breakfast, starting away immediately after, it being im-
perative that we should shoot some game, both for food for oursel-
ves, and the dogs. However, the wind being dead a head, it took
us until dark, to reach our first camping ground. Soon all hands
were busily employed, in the various arrangements for food, and
sleeping accommodation. When about ready, George Stone with a face
considerably elongated from its normal chubbiness, inquired whether
the leg of mutton was all right, as he had just seen one of the
kangaroo dogs, going off with something in paper ? The said mut-
ton could not be found, and we hunted the dogs up, and realized
our worst fears, for there were the pair regaling themselves on our
boiled leg ! We immediately supplied them with the material


for caper sauce, administered with many a gentle admonition.
We were now fain to return to our fish, fried this time with baked
potatoes —a meal not to be sneezed at under the circumstances. The
evening passed in mutual condolences for the loss of our mutton.
Having a cold, I suggested hot grog, as the beverage best calculated
to drown our sorrows. The suggestion meeting the views of all
the assembly, was immediately adopted. Six a.m., found us again
breakfasting from the useful fish, but a slight tendency to decompo-
sition observable in the remainder, warned us, that we could no
longer depend on this, our staple, commodity, so leaving Mike to
make domestic arrangements, we three, made for the kangaroo
grounds, and soon returned with plenty of good fresh food, for both
man and dogs. George however, could not be persuaded to make a
dinner from it, notwithstanding it was nicely cooked, with bacon
and onions. Tom and I enjoyed it first rate. Afterwards we sailed
across the Coorong, and walked over the peninsular, through a black’s
graveyard (a bone found in which, I preserve as a memento) on to
the sea shore.
Immense billows, rolling one over another, about six deep, and
as far as the eye can reach, is the characteristic of this beach, wild
and desolate it looks, and is. But the object of our search was
cockles, of which we found an abundance, filling a large bag in
about fifteen minutes. Divested of shoes and socks, you walk
about twenty yards into the slowly shelving water, keeping a sharp
look-out for unusually large seas the while, working your foot about
in the sand, each time of doing this, brings about a double
handfull of cockles. We anticipated a great treat of these for tea,
but misfortune again awaited us, this time it came is the shape of
sand, a small quantity was retained in each shell, in such a way,
that those who ate most cockles, must necessarily also eat the most
sand. I endeavoured to convince George and Tom that sand was
an excellent thing for the constitution, when taken in proper
quantities, pointing out to them how necessary it is to fowls, and
although less generally known, to horses and various other animals.
But they were unconvinced, and the cockles uneaten. Fortunately,
we could fall back on baked potatoes, and the butter held out well,
so that our diet, although good, was almost entirely vegetable.


Next day we shifted camp much further up the river (not really
river though, being quite salt here) and on the other side. This
encampment being only intended to be temporary, we did not get
the tent ashore, but constructed a breakwind of bushes, that with
a good fire in front, served to keep us very warm. In fact, I think
we slept even better than in the tent. My cold was worse, and
feeling decidedly unwell, I placed myself in the middle of a large
bunch of rushes, and stared contentedly at the bright warm fire.
Tom took great pains to make me a soft and comfortable bed
of feathers (Bushman’s, i. e. leaves and rushes) the invadid’s diet of
tea and toast was my fare, while the others feasted on teal, kangaroo,
and baked potatoes. I felt much better in the morning, and paid
my very hearty respects to the hot buttered rolls, and coffee, which
comprised our breakfast. Then we again started on our pilgrimage
to the Sucks.
First filling our bottle at a good well, with a mineral water,
bearing a very close resemblance to “ Appollonaris ; ” aerated ; I
think it would equal, and perhaps surpass it. We shot several swans
as we went along, and could now find that we were getting among
the larger game. Myriads of swans, geese, mountain ducks, and
teal were to be seen, also some pelicans, and a very pretty kind of
snipe, called “a cobbler,” some of which we shot, and found them
excessively good eating.
To have first rate sport, it is necessary that there should be a
moon, from three-quarters to full. The way of getting this sport is as
follows. Each morning and night the birds fly from their various
feeding places to where the fresh water soaks from the hills, hence,
probably, the “ Sucks ”to drink. By a little observation of the ways
of a few stragglers, which may be about during the day, one can see
over which point, or promontory, they can best be got at, as they
may be depended on for not leaving the water for many yards. Next
choose a nice clump of bushes, in which to esconce yourself, a good
central fire, plenty of No. 1 cartridges, and the best battue
shooting, is tame compared to it. Each bird has its distinctive cry,
so that, although you see only black shadows go by, you may say
with certainty, what has been hit, and in the event of it being teal,


be after them quickly, or all the wounded birds will gain the water,
when you may wish them good bye, with a certain assurance of the leave
taking being final. We have brought home several swan’s breasts,
I mean the skins of them, and now very much regret that I did not
shoot many other strange birds for the same purpose. Good bye,
dear old “ Coorong,” princely spot for sport! I wonder, if I shall
ever see you again ?
My cold got decidedly worse on getting back to Goolwa, and was
by no means improved, when on reaching Macclesfield, the long
threatening rain came down in a deluge. Although having the
front seats by the driver, and consequent use of the apron, I was
(in common, I suppose, with all the rest) wet through, in about five
minutes, and two steaming glasses of whisky to the contrary not-
withstanding, I arrived home, just about really ill, and have since
been employed, doctoring it with physic, Turkish baths, &c. with
but little more success, than “Mark Twain’s” various methods
resulted in!
April 20th, 1880. The Diary is getting a plague to me. Why ?
Is life less eventful ? no. Has the ability to clothe my thoughts in
words left me ? no. Am Iso busily engaged with other matters ?
no. Am I too confoundedly lazy ? yes, that’s what the matter, so
inspiriting myself as in childhood’s hour, by saying or singing
“ Begone dull sloth,” and feeling better for it, I now endeavour to
relate, a charmingly intellectual little evening at Professor D ’s.
In ironing a shirt or a chim —pocket-handkerchief, I should say,
it is absolutely conditional to a first-rate appearance, that the article
in question should be slightly damped, previously to the application
of the iron. We were anticipating in this evening a polishing and
general refining of our persons and wits, and therefore, discreetly
damped ourselves with a falling shower, and duly presented us
at the door of our hospitable entertainer. I have been at some
trouble to explain this arrangement, lest vulgar minds, should such
peruse this, (which the saints forfend) might imagine we merely got
wet in the ordinary way. The Professor thinking us but partially
done, insisted on our further moistening ourselves with a mixture of
■water and brandy, after his own recipe, and unique in its way.


With this preface, md an introduction to some literary ladies, Mrs.
D among their, we proceeded to a dinner, brilliant in appoint-
ment, and conversation. After the retirement of the ladies, the
Professor gave ns some opinions on abstruse subjects, and was un-
usually entertaining. In the drawing room the ladies treated us
to music on the guitar, as well as pianoforte. And many brilliant
things were said, ere we took our departure, at about ten p.m. afte
a most enjoyable tine.
We are now thinling of leaving Adelaide, and our kind friends
are devising all kinds of farewells for us. Tom Brown takes a final
holiday to go with rs to Montacute Gardens, and Gold Diggings.
We drove a very stylish turn out, and a couple of most fiery steeds.
Passing through tie “ Black Hill,” by a road, traversing a fine
gorge, we ascended a spur by a tolerably steep ascent of
about three miles. The gardens below, looked lovely from this alti-
tude, and in fact, frem any other. The descent is called the “ Cork-
screw,” and is the steepest thing in hills that I am acquainted with.
Notwithstanding the very powerful break, with which all Australian
vehicles are fitted, it was the utmost our cobs could do, to keep the trap
back. On the right hand of the road, the whole way down is nearly
a sheer precipice, arid quite innocent of fences of any kind. The
Gardens, at which we at last arrived, bear fruit of every sort in
such prodigal luxuriance, that I feel I should hardly be believed
were Ito tell the truth about them. One instance only. A very fine
apple tree, had borne fruit to such an extent, that it had assumed
the appearance of a weeping willow, every branch having bent over,
until it rested a gmt part of its golden burden on the ground. The
oranges were nearly as prolific, a few exceptional trees, having ripe
ones on. I ate sufficient to make myself uncomfortable during our
walk to the “Gold Washing Creek,” where I bought a small speci-
men, and witnessed the interesting process. There would be many
goto this place to dg, and wash, but for one drawback, viz. it costs
twenty-five shillings to get a pound’s worth. That is the only thing
that keeps away raary a honest fellow.
The two Toms distinguished themselves in the cool of the
evening, by going up the hill side, a short cut to the top—and glory.
I rode to steady the horses.


Let me relate one other mild, but pleasant little pleasure trip. At
the invitation of Miss Reid, we went the other morning, early, to
“Kensington,” en route for “Waterfall Gully,” in which we in-
tended to Picnic. Mr. George Reid, Tom, and myself, were the
stronger ; and Miss Reid, Mrs. Goldsmith, (widow, and young a
little while ago) Isabel Reid, and Clara Brown, represented the
weaker vessels. Clara only joined us at the “ Gully ” being rather
fearful of leaving her mother with their new, and rather unpromising
servant, whose cheek was so completely out of proportion to her
abilities, that it had been determined she should go that day.
Although at Eleven o’clock it came on to rain furiously, yet with
the help of a German cottager, we were enabled to eat our sand-
wiches, boil our tea, and defy the weather. It however cleared up
at about 1, p.m., when we went to see the “ Waterfall,” and gathered
large bundles of “Maiden-hair Perns,” that grow in profusion
around the stream. We lifted the ladies over the swollen creek, and
in very slippery places, put our arms round their waists to prevent
their falling, and generally behaved as they are reputed to do in
Arcadia.
With daybreak on Saturday, came a feeling that something was
about to happen, and in a few moments, I was fully alive to the
consciousness, that this was our last day in Adelaide, where we had
spent such pleasant times. The Colony shed a few tears as this
(to us) eventful morning was ushered in, and they continued to fall
until about twelve o’clock, when it became smiling again, and we
(that is, Tom, myself, and a few friends, to whom we were to say, good
bye, that evening) started off in a buggy and pair, to see the “Aul-
dana Vineyards,” kept by one Pat Auld, a queer fish, whose wines
we tasted and appreciated. A bottle of olives, and his quaint
remarks, giving an unusual zest to the libations. We, thought them,
(the wines) and I have since heard, they are considered, the finest in
South Australia. We spent a rather subdued evening, and all
joined hands, hearts, and voices, in singing, “ Auld Lang Syne.”
Hand, heart, and voice were especially prominent in the case of the
old gentleman, as we familiarly call Mr. Brown. He, Clara, Frank,
and Tom B , came on board the Peninsular and Oriental


Company’s boat “ Malwa,” to see us off—Mrs. Brown’s health not
permitting. I never said “ good bye ” more regretfully than on that
occasion, am sure my feelings were abundantly reciprocated by those
we left behind.
“ Roll a boat ! roll a boat !—where does boat stand ? ” and a
mournful “ nowhere,” would have been the response from the poor
passengers. Many who had come the whole voyage, were very ill,
and almost all the Adelaide section. Tom was quite upset, and
could not keep his meals in the receptacle nature has provided for
them, in consequence of which, has since been weak, and queer
generally. Kind nature however, more bountiful in my case, in
respect of the size of—ahem ! to say nothing of its elasticity, en-
abled me to duly retain the first-rate fare provided by the P. and 0.
Company. Much of my time was spent in consuming it while on
board, in fact, that and sleeping were our only occupations.
Fortunately, it only lasted two days, or my slight indigestion might
have been aggravated into a serious attack.
Early on the morning of Tuesday, the 4th of May, we arrived in
“ Hobson’s Bay,” William’s Town, a suburb of Melbourne, and a
very pretty bay it is, just now especially, the grass is so delightfully
green, and everything looks smiling. We have the cards of Mr.
and Mrs. L , passengers by the “ Malwa,” and a pressing invite
to call on them : we have also made a friend of a very nice young
fellow, Clare, by name, chief officer in a steamer, trading between
Calcutta and Hong Kong, and away for six months’ holiday—a very
necessary thing for those that live in that great heat. Although a
sailor, he is almost like a hot-house flower, in the matter of
temperature.
This Melbourne is certainly a very fine city. Except for a few
things, and those are principally accustomed to my eyes now, one
might well think he was in London —splendid shops —fine streets—
a big stream of water running down each gutter, and bridged over
about every twenty or thirty yards. Like Adelaide, the streets are
all at right angles. The public buildings are very good. The
Museum, University, various Hospitals, Public Baths, and last, but
by no means least, the Library, as it is called. It comprises a


fair Picture Gallery, containing one which we very much
admired, called “ Anguish,” representing an “ Ewe standing over her
dead lamb, and keeping at bay about a hundred crows, that were
patiently waiting an opportunity to feed on her deceased offspring,
her head being raised in the act of giving forth a wailing bleat; ”
much after the style of the “ Stricken Deer.” The naturalness
of the whole picture appeals deeply to the sympathies of those, who
have any. The library proper, is a fine long gallery, with chairs,
and reading tables everywhere, and an immense quantity of books,
on every subject under and over the sun. It is quite free, and from
the number of students, appears to be much appreciated. All the
other buildings are also free !
This morning we took a boat, and rowed up the “ Yarra,” a
delightfully pretty river, the banks entirely overhung with
weeping willows, of fine growth. The Botanical Gardens are im-
mediately adjacent, so we made our boat fast to a tree, and went in
to see them. Strange to say, the Victorians, as well as the Austra-
lians, think them decidedly inferior to those in Adelaide. It is the
only thing that I have ever heard Victorians acknowledge to be
worse than any other place possesses (they being given, to use a
phrase they usually apply to others) to blowing. We, on the other
hand, consider them not only superior, but greatly so, the advan-
tages of good and plentiful water, which is lacking in Adelaide, con-
tributing much to enhance the general effect, not to mention the
fir trees, and the natural beauty of the site. Government House
is situate on one side of the grounds, facing Melbourne, and is a
handsome building, magnificently furnished by the Colony. The
Governor had only to step into it, and find everything ready, even
to the smallest detail.
On Saturday Afternoon, we went with Charlie Jones to see Foot-
ball Matches. There were five going on at one time, in separate
and enclosed spaces. The Government greatly encourages this
sport, and cricket. Each of these grounds, Government gifts, have
their grand stand (a permanent building) which is used for cricket
in summer, and football in winter. We spent the evening with
Charlie, and Mrs. , walking home at about half-past ten, a


distance of three and a half miles, through 3-£ inches of mud, the
very frequent and unusual rains having made the roads (or what
does duty for them in the suburbs) nearly impassible. Monday,
being again wet, our exertions were confined principally to billiards.
In an interval of fair weather, we called on Mr. Langridge, and Mr.
Wadsworth, to whom we had introductions from Tunbridge Wells,
but unfortunately found them both out, “ Lunching,” as is the
habit of Melbournians; and although we left our cards, we were
playing cross purposes all day, in our endeavours to find each other.
On Tuesday, 11 th May, we left for Sidney. Opposition boats are
running, the fares are low, and the pace fast. We, in the “ South
Australian,” left the mouth of the “ Yarra” about a mile behind the
“ Leura,” Mail boat. We are now some ten, or twelve, possibly
more miles, ahead of her, although both have been doing their
utmost. We signal every telegraph station, as there are heavy bets
on the result of the race. I think there is no doubt of coming
in first, bar accidents. Now in smooth water, a few convalescents
are appearing, the great bulk of the passengers having been below,
at their devotions, during the last twenty-four hours, and the rough-
ness of the weather has quite warranted it, in all but very mature
sailors.
After writing last night, I went forward to see the thirty China-
men passengers we have on board. The Company conveys them at
£1 per head, good food included : the distance is about 560 miles.
This competition of the boats suits “ John,” who is not allowed to>
smoke opium, but while the man who looks after them, is stopping
it at one place, another manages to get a few whiffs. I closely
watched two of them, and felt the results after. It is a wretched
sight to see, and the effect is to make them look when sleeping after-
wards, like partially decomposed corpses, their naturally sallow
complexion, considerably improving the idea. These fellows are
truly celestial in the matter of temper, (perhaps the opium deadens
it) for I was very intrusive in their quarters, as well as in my remarks
upon them, and their habits. I am certain my disgust was very
apparent. It provoked this remark from one—No likee Englishman,
very well ; much likee Chinaman, allee same.


We are now passing some fine bold rocky scenery, about forty
miles from Sidney. Igo on deck to enjoy it, and a pipe, with my
criticism of “ John,” slightly sticking in my throat. Sidney, north
and south heads, are black frowning rocks, standing on either side
of the entrance to the harbour, and are popularly supposed to be
300 feet high. I think 100 a large estimate for them. Of the
beauty of this gigantic natural harbour, it is impossible to say too
much. Every turn of the vessel, brings into view pretty islets, and
deeply indented bays, with sandy beaches for the most part, but
sometimes rock-bound. In the latter case, the rocks are entirely
covered with oysters, having the appearance of white moss from a
little distance. Everywhere the now green hills rise abruptly from
the shore ; patches of small gum trees, and rocks intermingled, help
to beautify this charming scene. The water is clear, and
generally calm, with numberless small steamers, launches, sailing,
rowing boats, wherries, and even canoes, not to mention men of
war, French and English, and such large ships as the “Aconcagua,”
“ City of Sidney,” and many others, are lying about at anchor,
hidden, until the passing another point brings them into view.
Sidney town, is composed almost entirely of Points—Pott’s Point.
Miller’s Point, Dawe’s Point, Glebe Point, and several more; the
sketch beneath, would give a very reasonable idea of the geography
of this curious place. The semi-tropical climate, and wonderful
natural advantages, give the Botanical Gardens, many palms over
both Melbourne, and Adelaide. “Norfolk Island” pine trees, (not
fruit-bearing) and Eijiean figs are the great shade trees. The pines
are immense, both in height and girth. The Museum is like those
in the other Colonies, with slight exceptions. “ The Flying Phal-
anger Fox,” was to us a novelty. It resembles a large squirrel,
with soft yellow fur, deepening into dark grey, on its back. A sort of
flap, of light fur-covered skin, extends from the back of the fore, to
the front of the hind foot, on either side ; with this distended, it is
enabled to swoop, after its spring, some distance. There were also
some immense eggs, about as large as ten emu’s eggs, lain by a
native bird of Madagascar, called “ .ZEprironis.” Several stuffed
“ Platipus,” remarkable things, which I think I have described
before.


Mr. Patten, to whom we had letters of introduction from Mr.
Henry Brown of Adelaide, took us for a drive along the Harbour, to
the South Head. Tom, in the rear, talked Kent, to Mr. P ’s
aunt, who had lived, and I think was born in Rochester. Her
father was once Mayor. I, like the sailor’s parrot, said little,
but thought the more, the beauty of the scenery kept one well
occupied. On our return, we spent a pleasant evening with Mr.
P . His peculiarity we only found out the next day, when
talking on religious subjects. We did the very antiquated (com-
paratively) Cathedral on Sunday. It has stained glass windows,
and a collection at every service. Most churches here have the lat-
ter, but the former, is considered a luxury, nevertheless, the service
was conducted on good Church of England principles, and we con-
sidered it worth the money, the total cost being Is. 3d.
That “ the blue mountains glow in the sun’s golden light,” was
until now, to my mind, a pretty poetical conceit. But I have seen
the living, glowing, blue reality. We went over these well-named
blue mountains yesterday, by train. The gradient is lin 36. We
began the ascent at ten minutes to eleven, and averaged about
fifteen miles per hour, until twenty minutes past two, when we
reached “ Mount Victoria,” the highest point, where we ravenously
devoured a bucket of hot soup. The rail is worked on the zig-zag,
and is considered a very fine piece of engineering. Every few
minutes we opened up fresh mountain gorges, about 1,000 feet
deep, with jutting capes, promonotories, and bold headlands of
alternate rock and verdure. Very little imagination was needed,
to make one appear to be crossing a grand river, with towering
banks on either side, the blueness incredible until seen, considerably
helping the illusion. In one place, heaps of rocks massed together,
had exactly the appearance of a fine city, ruined by an earthquake.
Lithgow, our destination, has fine Iron Works, Coal Mines, and
Potteries, also a Meat Preserving Establishment, for supplying
Sidney. The old man who shewed us over the place, finding we
were from Kent, asked —did we know Canterbury ? Oh yes, well.
But just then, he had a choking sensation in his throat, he said,
and was afterwards disinclined to talk on that subject. He was well


informed, and had evidently seen better days. The place was very
complete, and peculiarly suitable to the purpose, the fine cold air
of the mountains, being, as the old fellow learnedly remarked, a
“ sine quit non.” Having an engagement in Sidney, we were obliged
to leave by the night mail, arriving there at twenty-past seven. We
reposed all the way, excepting at those times, (and the cold air
made them frequent) when we were imbibing the whisky and water,
that we had thoughtfully provided. Tom as financr, did not shew
any remarkable ability though, in running us so short, that he was
minus sixpence to pay the return fares. Unusually, but fortunately,
I had half-a-crown in my pocket, Is. 9d. of which we spent in soup
and coffee, at “ Mount Victoria,” and arrived home with threepence,
a rather close shave, but we hear that there are worse misfortunes
at sea. With Mr. Patten we had a fine view of the city from the
top of the Town Hall, and vainly waited ten minutes to hear the
clock strike. Sidney labourers, would not have kept us so long with-
out striking.
With some difficulty we managed to get into the Exhibition
Buildings. There was much to see even now, and from the Tower
was a beautiful look out over the Harbour, an almost fairy-like
scene. An obelisk, shewing the size of the aggregate amount of
gold obtained in Australia since the settlement of Europeans, is a
novel object—weight some tons—value £374 millions ! Tom say»
its 274 , but I stand out for the other million. After paying
our exorbitant hotel bill, (Petty’s Hotel, for the information of
future travellers :) it is possible though, the enhanced rate was on
account of the halo of romance encircling the fair proprietress, she
being placed in her present position by a Mr. Gander, (hence pro-
bably the large bill) to whom now she is engaged to be married.
We w T ere occasionally inadvertant witnesses of a conversational tet&
a tet6 under the verandah, the gentleman always looking as lan-
guishing, and love-lorn, as even the most exacting damsel could
possibly wish.
Returning to our narration—we purchased a few things we were
likely to require on the voyage, and went on board the “ City of
Sidney,” bound for San Francisco, via Auckland New Zealand, and


Honolulu Sandwich Islands, at one p.m. She was advertised to
start at three, which ■she did punctually, amid the usual cheers and
tears from those who had friends aboard. I know the question that
will naturally rise to the lips of my friends who read this—How
lonely you must have felt, entirely among strangers ? that how-
ever was not the case. Even with all our pleasant Australian
associations, I think we neither felt any regret at leaving, there
being a season for all things. We (perhaps I should only speak for
myself,) I fancied the time had come, when I was glad to start
again on the Homeivard journey. There is more in that word, than
untravelled folks think. Still, we waved a parting kiss to the land,
in which there was more reality than is sometimes the case, when
given to a more orthodox recipient.
It is a magnificently appointed ship, this “City of Sidney.” Every
inch of her is as bright and clean as a new pin. An enormous
gang of Chinamen do all the work, supervised by two American
stewards, whose most endearing epithet to them is, you dash,
dashed, heathen convict. But when they would censure the unhappy
Mongolian, they use harsh language to him, and threaten to cut off
his yard and a half (no exaggeration) of pigtail, without which,
John has no hope of heaven—this last threat fetches him, when all
else fails. To wait at table, he is all that can be desired ; and a
little more, as he perspires a faint odour of opium, less agreeable
to the English, than the Chinese nose. At the eleventh hour, we
were so fonunate as to exchange our cabin, for one called the
bridal chamfer. It is very roomy, and as might be expected, is
rich in muslin decorations, curtains, &c., one large and one small
bed, and is probably, with the exception of the captain’s, the best
in the ship. Each day at 11, a.m. comes that worthy round to
inspect things generally, and the cabins in particular. Seeing me
writing, he looked, and said “ For publication ?” I bowed assent,
(a regretable lie.) Next, I proposed that we should have a hook
and staple affixed to our door, to which he, in his turn assented.
Subsequently, we have obtained the regulation of our port, an un-
usual privilege—evidently he wants honorable mention, in the im-
pending publication ! Convalescents, chiefly feminine, are appearing,


and occupy a large share of the deck when promenading. The fair
creatures tack hither and thither, as though the wind was dead
ahead. From the little we have seen of them, we shall be sorry
when they exchange their present, for their sea legs.
Sunday, May 23rd. Inadvertently seating myself near the
parson, (exofficio doctor) I found the duties of clerk devolved on me,
but declined the honor of reading the lessons. There was a large
attendance, but the responses were very feeble, and the whole thing
lasted about twenty minutes.
Our passengers are from, not only the ends of the earth, but from
its sides, and remotest corners.—England, Ireland, Scotland, Ger-
man v, India, Japan, Queensland, and the other Colonies of Austra-
lia, New Zealand, and East, West, North, and South America. The
Yankeee drawl is, perhaps, the most prominent, and their “ Blow,”
though less apparent than I had been led to expect, is still, not
sufficiently infrequent, to call for special remark. Several
singers and actors, I believe of both sexes, promise to make our
voyage a lively one. lam just now writing in the Social Hall, a large
room on the hurricane deck ; below this is the spar deck, containing
another large room, several cabins, baths, barber’s shop, second
class passengers’ quarters, and a variety of other things. Still
lower, that is, within a few feet of the water, is the dining hall, very
large, and several cabins. Three other decks are below this. The
length of the ship is about 130 yards, and her registered tonage
3400. We are experiencing an unusually smooth passage, between
Australia and Auckland —may it continue so. All day the coast of
New Zealand has been in view. It has a greener appearance, having
more rain than Australia, closely resembling it in other respects,
except for an occasional volcanic mountain. Many pretty islands
are on our left, in fact we have all day been passing through a per-
fect Archipelago. At 12.30 on a lovely moonlight night, we steamed
into Auckland Harbour, firing a nine-pounder (brass) to announce
our arrival. Being the Queen’s birthday, the British contingent
sang a thundering “ God save the Queen,” that lady’s health was
pretty frequently drank too, at dinner; hence a more than usual
festiveness was observable throughout the evening.


All unknown to us, our good ship had quietly knocked the pier
down during the night, and we awoke to find ourselves in mid-harbour.
Those who wished to go ashore, took small boats, of which there
appeared an insufficient supply. We augured from this, the New
Zealanders were not in immediate want of money, or were too lazy
to earn it. Got ashore eventually, rather late though, as the ladies
were politely allowed to be first. Auckland is a picturesque town,
and can be entirely seen from the top of a hill, where the cemetery
stands. The frequent rain prevented our going to the top of “ Mount
Eden,” an extinct Crater, and that is the only thing remarkable to
be seen. Around it are several hot springs, and peculiar formations
of lava, with many varieties of fern, so at least says the Guide Book,
and the photographs bear witness to the truth of it. England and
Home never seemed so near, as now we were farthest from it, nearly
as far as is possible to get, just the whole earth between us, dear
friends.
Numberless, and most varied, were the good things once promised
me, when two Sundays came in a week, that (at that time much to
be desired consummation) is now nearly fulfilled, for we have two
Thursdays in this one. We crossed the 180th degree at about half-
past eight a.m., and consequently gained a day, a rather novel
experience, making 367 days in the year for us !
Compared with the “ Rodney,” there seems a lack of joviality
here, despite the number of passengers (ninety I think). Tom and I
seem to get on very well with all departments. I have just been
taking afternoon tea with some ladies, about the finest thing to do
now, as the weather is getting very rapidly warmer. I seem to have
a well-developed faculty for dropping into these sort of enter-
tainments. Again it is Thursday, the 27th May, and a very wet
one at that, no possibility of getting outside, and the closeness is
almost unbearable within. Towards night, and on the borders of
the tropics, the rain came down as though it had never done so
before, or expected to again. Judge what it was like when we, sit-
ting below, thought it was seas breaking aboard, so great a volume
of water was pouring off the decks. All night it blew hard, and a
good sea to-day, disagrees with the weak stomachs, chiefly in the


possession of ladies. I have recommended several infallible cures,
but they don’t seem to see it in that light. Ah ! Won, our Chinese
waiter, affords us some amusement at meals. We ask him strange
questions respecting the various dishes, and usually get even stran-
ger answers. After much questioning, he last night suddenly dis-
appeared, in a state of evident madness. Mild idiocy being his
normal state, we concluded we must have roused him considerably.
We fancied he had thrown himself overboard, the Chinese tempera-
ment being unquestionably suicidal! But he has turned up again
to-day, smiling, and placid as usual.
Tropical land was sighted early this morning, Sunday, May 30th.
A group of islands, called the “Navigators,” lying about 12« South
latitude. No doubt it is a warm spot to live in, as the inhabitants
wear no clothes whatever. The sea was hardly so smooth as usual,
or we should probably have seen them off in their canoes. But the
land ! the Emerald Isle, must fade into insignificance, when compared
to the prodigal loveliness of this, and probably of all other tropical
lands. Giant cocoa palms were over-topping these billows of
beauty, for the land is all in fine large rounded curves, nearly
mountains. But I must leave a word for “ Honolulu,” and not
exhaust my readers with tropical magnificence, until after seeing
that.
We are watched over during our dreams, both night and day ,
(there are plenty of the latter) by two divinities, the sable Goddess
taking the night watch. She—just rotund of outline both in figure
and (dare I say it) cheek, relinquishes her care “ when morn’s first
beams,” &c. to Aurora, her fair, and much more fragile sister, to
whom we pay our adoration until the going down of the sun. It
seems almost unnecessary to add, that these two atoms ofloveliness,
occupy the opposite cabin, and are known in the flesh, as the Misses
C , and are able when occasion requires, or caprice dictates, to
make it hot for any man.
In the matter of amusements, after many, and stormy general
meetings, things are going forward with some spirit. A paper has
been published this day, in which occurred an ingenious article on
“the Corruption of juvenile Morality,” wherein is humourously


related, how one Parker, a man of about six feet by four, adminis-
tered a dose of tea, with brandy in it, to Dorothy , aged three,
or perhaps, rather less. The outcome of this is, that Parker
institutes action for libel—case coming off to-night, and already
affording much amusement. A total disregard of the ninth com-
mandment, seems to be one of the principle features of this case,
witnesses having been found to swear, that black is white, and
white, no color at all. Fearful are the invectives hurled against
the infamous, scandalous, and (as one would think) unhappy Parker,
by the opposing counsel. But calm and serene sat that worthy,
his expansive waistcoat, broad back, and ever smiling rubicund face,
seeming equally impervious to the praise, or censure, of opposing
counsel, court, or audience. Cross examination, elicited some
humorous replies from the “Sam Weller” of the case; evidence, of
course, remaining unshaken. Finally, the jury appeared with their
verdict, which not being able to agree on in the usual way, had
been decided by tossing. I should also mention the speech by
defendant’s counsel, which was really a fine oration, and evidently
struck terror into the hearts of the prosecution. The judge’s sum-
ming up was marked with some ability, and possibly a little expe-
rience in that line.
At last! here we are at Honolulu, Sandwich Islands. Now, there
doesn’t appear to be much in that small sentence, when taken in
the abstract, but it conveys to ray mind, more than I can ever ex-
pect to impart to others, even could I write a doubly-able description
of it. If it is not the most beautiful little spot on the earth, it is,
so nearly so, that for all practical purposes one might say, it is The
best.
Where to begin, and when to leave off, are the next considera-
tions, and they are so complicated, that I see no other course open
to me, than to take a glass of whisky and water in the privacy of
the bridal , my cabin, I mean, and endeavour to put a head,
and a tail, and generally to correct the delightfully disjointed ideas
that at present have me in possession—drinks, and resolves his
chaotic Oahuian ideas into what follows.
First, a phantom, or rather many phantoms of horses and car-
riages, flit noiselessly by us, as we walk on the road to The Hotel.


The is a peculiarly useful article in this place, where, as in hotels,
there is but one specimen. The reason of the phantasmal appear-
ance of the carriages and horses in the dark is, that the horses are
unshod, the driver black, and the roads of velvet—not best silk, but
a good useful article, at the price. As we, gently, (the weather so
directing) walked along, all things seemed to wear a jubilee appear-
ance, and in the remote distance, the rolling of drums, and braying
of trumpets, indicated the whereabouts of the hotel, unusually fes-
tive on account of our advent! Moistened by an occasional shower,
and brandy cocktail, we stood, smoked, chatted, sat, and en-
joyed through all, the music, which would have been a credit to
many a regiment with more profession, and less, far less, perfor-
mance.
The native dance, or Hula ! Hula ! is of course performed prin-
cipally by ladies. Every lady in the island, at least, walks like a
queen. But I know of no other point in which the resem-
blance is remarkable. The youth of the ship, among which I was
courteously included, desired to see the said native dance, so com-
municating our ideas to a sort of half-guide, half Jehu, he took us
in several carriages, to the house of one Dandy Jim, (not from
Caroline) who could for a consideration (for even in this Elisyum,
the fragrant air is poisoned by the pernicious effect of the almighty
dollar) shew us a good specimen performance. We sordid sons of
clay, meanly haggled with Jim, and finally reduced him to the
acceptance of half the first price. Then began one of the most
remarkable performances that my experience has any memory of; but
here, strange to say, my descriptive powers entirely give out, and I
fear I cannot describe it with accuracy, until after I have seen it again.
Having in our minds the time-honored proverb, “ that many hands
make light suppers,” we thoughtfully, that is, fifteen of us, ordered
a high class supper, and twenty-six bottles of beer, fifteen of them
on the first occasion, and eleven more when our numbers were
accelerated by the arrival of the captain, his two friends, and four
other passengers, not included in the first list. The bland and
amiable proprietor, no doubt congratulated himself that he put a
rather high figure per head, on the price of his accommodation, for


we made considerable havoc among his provisions, our usually
decent appetites being doubly-whetted by exercise and novelty. The
chairman proposed, and was honored and replied to, the following,
“ The Captain,” “ President of the United States,” “ Governor of
Honolulu,” (present, and one of the captain's friends) and “ King
Kamehameha.” “ The Rhine wine,” and various other songs were
sung. The landlord driven mad, and then this rejuvenated herd of
schoolboys were persuaded to go home to their ship, at one a.m.
Being cautioned by the landlord not to make a noise (the police being
no respecter of persons) their lusty voices were raised to serenade the
Oahuians, and defy the police. These latter wisely kept out of the
way. “ God save the Queen,” at the ship’s side, terminated pro-
ceedings for that day.
All through the night the shouting of Kanaka Stevedores, as they
loaded sugar in bags, and Banana’s in bunches, made night hideous,
I slept the sleep of the just, nevertheless, and only had that last
piece of information from hearsay, a lady, of course. The mornings
always break softly here, and as I looked abroad over the bay, at
six, a.m., feeling that the rest I had taken, had been all too little, the
soft influence extended itself even to me, and induced me to smoke
a meditative cigar, and watch the curiously-built boats in which
John Kanaka paddles himself about on business or pleasure—there
is not much distinction between it. After a bath and cup of coffee,
(two I think, in deference to last night’s dissipation) I was ready
to start with our party exploring at about seven. The thing to do
is to go to the “ Pali.” The more active among us decided to ride,
leaving the sloths and the ladies for a pair horse drag. With some
little difficulty we procured suitable steeds—mine, though not
actually the steed “ Oahu,” had his peculiarities. He could kick,
with both the force, and precision, of a steam hammer, and had the
wickedest eye I ever saw, but he carried me well; and as everyone
gave us a wide berth, he arrived home, without swelling the list of
casualties, by any act of his. He looked disappointed as the ostler
led him away, when I dismounted. I called him a good little horse.
He said, he was a Broncho , and could kick the eye out of a
mosquito, to which I replied, good morning, fair sir, and so we parted.


I have been somewhat led away from the thread of my discourse,
by this animal. But to resume. After a breakfast, so light, that the
most airy description, must give too solid an idea of, it was just
the next thing to breakfasting on imagination, we went for our
horses, (they don’t send them) and came careering through
the streets, and up to the hotel, in true Kanaka fashion. Forming
ourselves under the captaincy of T. White, we made escort for the
drag, and so proceeded through roads, lined with all sorts of strange
plants, shrubs, trees, creepers, and tropical foliage. Quaintly-built
Chinese pagodas, exaggerated dolls’ houses, and every light and airy
conceit, in the shape of house building, was on our right and left.
Of course, we raised our hats to every lady we passed. They are
easily distinguishable afoot; but as they ride, (no exception) just
as the men do, the distinction is not so easy, when on horseback.
So much has been said of the luxuriance of tropical vegetation,
that I need say no more than, that this island possesses a mar-
vellously rich soil, and about out Herods, Herod ! Two miles’
riding brought us into a valley, on both sides of which, rise bold
and craggy, volcano-begotten hills, about 2,000 feet high, nearly
abrupt from the bottom. Our English early spring tinge, is the
prevailing color, but there are occasional patches of more sombre
hues, the extreme pinnacles being usually black basaltic rock.
Coming suddenly round a curve of this, we opened out a lovely
vale, stretching away on the left, where were tier after tier of volcanic
ranges, growing bluer as the distance increased, and a small bay
shut in by them, full of little islands, or rather rocks, at last
bounded the view. The sea was of that opaline hue, that I have
sometimes seen in pictures, but never before in reality. The valley
might have been the garden of Eden, smiling freshly, after a long
repose. All this is open to the criticism, that “ distance lends
enchantment to the view, and robes the mountains in its azure hue.”
We were certainly 1,500, and possibly 2,000 feet above it, a zig-zag
trail led to the bottom. I could not help thinking as I stood there
how —“ The devil took Him up to the top of an exceeding high
mountain.”


Returning, we picked ferns and flowers by the way, which we
strewed before a cavalcade of animated rainbows—hearing they were
a wedding party. The ladies acknowledged with their laughing eyes,
the gentlemen raised their somberero’s to the compliment. As we
neared the town, we formed into good line, and gaily charged along
before the evidently amused population, and I might add, good
humoured also, for we rather rudely forced the equestrians into the
gutter, in order to avoid us.
I dined on lambs-tongues and lobster salad, carefully eliminating
the raw potatoe slices that figured rather conspicuously in it, and
then prepared to leave Honolulu, and Oh! how regretfully. We
purchased a few pine apples and limes, and went solemnly on board,
where we saw the King, a descendant of that fine old fellow, who
drove some thousands of his enemies over the Pali, where we were
this morning, and variously distinguished himself besides. All the
ladies had necklets of flowers, and of course, looked very pretty, or,
perhaps, I should say, their beauty was much enhanced thereby.—
“ How we chatted, how we laughed, how the brothers and the sisters
chaffed,” when the very varied experiences were recounted, in fact,
animation reached its ultimatum in all our beaming faces, and
nimble tongues. Then, as the band played various national anthems,
and little copper-colored limbs, splashed in the sparkling waters,
diving for money, we gently steamed over the bar, and looked our
last, for the present, on beautiful Ohau.
Certainly not overdrawn—W. A. DONALD.
About thirty more passengers came aboard at Honolulu, among
them a Mr. Thompson, aged about eight or nine. This gentleman is
dressed entirely in velvet, and is an extraordinary party in many res-
pects. He is probably the most magnificent young fibber ever
exported from the Sandwich Islands. Bashfulness is not one of the
characteristics of the inhabitants of Honolulu, but this youngter’s
cheek and assurance, is something truly remarkable. He argues it
out, with the head waiter, and orders the Chinamen about, as though
the ship belonged to him.
Quite a different thing in Kanakas, is Kakite Koa, a gentleman,
reporting for the native paper, a dark-skinned, robust, good looking


fellow, speaking as correct English as anyone on board, and with more
intelligence than an average white man. His home is in the island of
Manna Loa, where is the great extinct Crater, thirty miles in cir-
cumference. He has given Donald and myself, a cordial invitation
to pay him a visit there, and a promise to introduce us to the won-
ders of the island.
Instead of attending Divine Service to-day, I heard a long
account from one of the proprietors, of what theoretically, appears a
very successful speculation. By the end of this year, he will have
22,000 acres of sugar cane under cultivation, which, by many in-
genious schemes, for the saving of labour (fully explained to me)
will enable him to produce the article on the spot, at about fib. !
The irrigation is on the same principle as the Tunbridge Wells
sewage farm, and is considered novel here. Now that we are near-
ing it, the great American Continent, is so much “ blown” about,
and puffed up, that I should hardly be surprised to see it coming
out to sea to meet us! It will certainly crowd Europe, Asia, and
Africa out of the map shortly, if it increases in size and importance,
at the same rate it has been doing these last few days !
At last, here we are, in the happy hunting grounds, not that
heaven of the Pawness and Sioux, of which we have read so much,
but a far more modern style of Elysium. The palace hotel, San
Francisco, is indeed a palatial marvel, and must, I think, surpass
any in the world, (they say so here.) There are some hundreds of
suites of apartments in it, every one containing at the least, a bed,
sitting, and bath room, fitted with all necessary and unnecessary
appliances. Suspended above my head, is a very handsome chande-
lier with four lights ; on the mantel are two others, as well as a
patent opaline arrangement, which diffuses a soft ray for reading or
writing by. In the bath room are three more jets, this with five in
the bed-room, is all the light that can be thrown on our apartments,
if we except the fifteen, which being directly opposite us on the
corridor, shine in from there, and a moderate gleam from the two
electric lamps hanging in the court yard. This court yard is of
white marble, rather inferior to English, with many tropical and
semi-tropical plants in it. “ I weaken,” when I attempt to give


any idea of the numerous breakfast rooms, dining rooms, restaurants,
bar, writing, smoking, billiard, lavatory, and goodness knows what
beside, and I feel sure that I am within the mark, in averring that
on the Bill of Fare, there is not less than a hundred things to choose
from. Niggers and Negresses are here in abundance, and of every
shade of color, “high-toned” too, “you bet.” They are not so
smart—l mean active (that was an unconscious Americanism) as
English waiters. Then the drinks, are perfect marvels, here are a
few mostly palatable to the English taste —Mint julep, sherry
cobbler, John Collins, cocktails, whisky punches, eye-openers, phlegm
cutters, stone fence, corpse reviver, gin sling, egg nog, brandy
smash, Santa Cruz-sour, gin fizz. The gentleman in charge, or
bar tender, is a rather greater man, than the boss of the hotel, and
treats with a lofty disdain, any suggestion that you will take rather
less sugar in yours, being apparently conscious, that he knows far
better than you are ever likely to, the capabilities of your constitu-
tion.
Of what religion are the Franciscans ? Well, they worship
the Almighty dollar ! and that’s about all. Sleeping or waking,
their minds are always full up with this piety, and they never seem
to get too much of it either. Sunday is the great day for all kinds
of feasting, junketing, horse racing, and theatre going. Blasphemy
is only moderately popular, being considered vulgar ; but burles-
quing Biblical stories, seems to be appreciated by men and women
alike. Beautiful young girls sit, and simper over the story of
“ Paradise Lostand loudly laugh, while a fat fool, paraphrases
“ God’s dialogue with Adam.” A little painted Hell, in a corner of
one of God’s grandest pictures, and a good place for a lukewarm
Christian to come to. It would soon decide him—kill or cure, be
saved, or be damned ! I think I want a bath.
Reviewing this, I fancy I have been getting outside some severe
remarks respecting San Franciscans, but it is not undeserved.
Another fact concerning this hotel. It is nearly half-a-mile
round it, and the pavement entirely of white marble, belongs not to
the town, but the proprietors.


At nine a.m. on Saturday, we left Frisco for New York, 3,344
miles. A very fine steamer carries us over to Oakland, on the main
land, and going at slow pace for about four hours, we reach Sacre-
mento, the capital of California. The last six or eight miles of that,
being entirely through snow water, which had come down from the
mountains, an unusually high flood. Tom came to me, and point-
ing out the mountains, asked how far distant I thought them.
Knowing how deceiving is distance, in this very clear atmosphere, I
said thirty miles, subsequently we found them to be 150 at least 1
A very good dinner at Sacremento, put us in better opinion of
ourselves, but it was very hot indeed, not the dinner, but the weather.
Now a gradual rise brings us to the foothills of the Sierras, lovely
spots, of an almost perfectly even temperature all the year round.
Every kind of fruit can be, and is raised here, and the scenery—in-
describably beautiful. Still we ascend, past “ Dutch Flat, the most
beautifully-situated village I ever saw. Now “ Cape Horn,” one of
the grandest bits of scenery on the route, is beneath us, three or four
thousand feet. Wildly magnificent appears the great stretch of
ravine, additionally beatified by the setting sun! once seen, and
never forgotten. But we are off again, and I must perforce, leave
writing for awhile. Fifteen minutes for refreshments, and to
enter up this diary, is all the time allowed by the C. P. R.
Company. One thing, I in my hurry omitted to mention, that from
San Jose to Benicia (of boy notoriety) the whole train was run
aboard a steamboat, that had sufficient accommodation for four
such, and so crossed over two or three miles of water ! We smoked
our evening pipes, enwrapped in rugs, the snow lying all around us.
The altitude was 7000 odd feet. Just here the engine broke loose,
and being on a steep grade, the carriages ran back, attaining
a pretty good speed before the brakesman could stop them. Except
that there was a break on each carriage, it could not have been stop-
ped at all. This occurred in a snow shed, (there are about forty
miles of them.)
Soon after this we turned in, and made a very good sleep of it.
All to-day we have been travelling through an Alkai desert, wear-
ing veils, to keep the soda out of our eyes. It is beginning to get


uninteresting, notwithstanding we have beautiful, though barren
mountains all around, mostly covered with snow. We dined in a
curious wooden shanty, at “Battle Mountain,” waited on by
Chinamen, dressed in white robes, all very rough in appearance, but
clean and good withal.
Desert, desert, desert 1 nothing but alkali dust, and sage bush,
through which we have been travelling all day, and half last night.
All this is at a height of 4,200 feet above the level of the sea ! To-
morrow morning (bar accidents) will find us in Ogden, near to
“ Salt Lake City.”
By the borders of the great “American Dead Sea,” which lies, calm,
blue, and unruffled, in the lap of the snow-topped mountains, and
all the way bordered by fertile ranches, crowding themselves into
the hill, nearly to the snow line ; lies the railroad to the City of
the Polygamists, at one place, it actually touches the lake—here the
sound of the coming train, is the breakfast, lunch, or dinner bell,
to the inhabitants of this swampy spot. Their bill of fare is either
Morman, or Gentile, with an occasional dash of copper-color, or
black. I shouldn’t wonder though, if the blacks supplied the sauce.
We always find they have plenty, and so perhaps do the mosquitoes,,
for they partake of them only sparingly. At half-past eleven, we
arrived, and taking a tram-car, pulled by four mules, rode up
the pretty, but dusty streets, to the Continental Hotel, where we
immediately proceeded to wash our necks, (our most vulnerable part.).
After an early luncheon, we proceeded to the “ Tabernacle,” which is
very worthily considered one of the sights. It has a span roof,
stretching 150 feet, is 2:50 long, and capable of accommodating
13,000 persons. The rocf is profusely festooned with evergreen shrubs-
and everlasting flowers, which adds greatly to its beauty. The
organ, one of the finest I have ever seen, is made almost entirely of
native produce, and was constructed within the building. The acoustic
properties of the Hall are quite wonderful, the lightest whisper being
distinctly audible from one end to the other, therein far surpassing
the dome of St. Paul’s. A well informed old party, who had lately
lost his second wife (first still living) shewed us around, and slightly
touched on the doctrines he professed, giving reasons for some of


the more unorthodox points of his faith. The shops are very good
and appear rather more reasonable than in other places far west.
In the Crystal Grotto, we had some good ice creams, and then went
in for the almost forgotten luxury of a bath.
A conversation with a very intelligent Mormon, elicited among
other things, that the season was very backward, the crops smaller
than common, except in Utah’s best crop, viz. babies ! there had
been no falling off in that. For himself he had been peculiarly
fortunate this year, true, he had more wives, but the season had
much to do with it. After a capital dinner, we started off for a
stroll, and to see the theatre, opened after some years, for the first
time that day. The performance of “ The Lancashire Lass,” was
only good enough to send me to sleep, so I trudged off hotelwards,
smoking my last cigarette in the beautiful moonlight, and moral-
izing on things in general, and Mormons in particular.
We rose with the lark, and a slight head ache, partook of a good
breakfast, at six o’clock, previously to starting again for Ogden,
where we arrived at nine a.m., and soon commenced to ascend the
rocky mountains. At Evanston, 6,500 feet above level of the sea,
with appetites much sharper than the electro-plated knives they
always provide one with in America, we dined principally off
mountain trout, fine large fish, which are to be had in any
quantity. Soon after this we obtained the highest elevation we
have yet reached, 7,500 feet ! The snow has been lying in patches
around us all day, although it has been very hot, even in this rare-
fied atmosphere.
Among the strange sights, has been an Antelope, some Prairie
Dogs, a Beaver, and many bleached bones of cattle along the old emi-
grant trail. “ Black Fork Creek,” has been all day in view, sometimes
coming quite close to us, and then, as though suddenly frightened,
flying off at a tangent almost out of sight, only to come up, and
curiously peep at us again, and so ad infinitum. It’s a pretty river,
though, (as our vandal remarked) it does go five miles, to get one
forward.
On the great “Laramie Plains,” 100 miles long, by 100 broad,
and still on the top of the mountains. England might be dropped


down on the summit of these, and one would require to know the
district well, to find it. All kinds of game are here, quantities
of Antelopes, and Prairie Hens, all very tame, fine sport for rifle,
fowling piece, or rod. The whitening bones of thousands of cattle
lie around on either hand, and the festering bodies of those more
newly dead, help to temper the fine bracing air of the mountains.
“ Lake Como,” The only possible resemblance, is the color of
the water, for around it is only sage grass and bush, of a dull leaden
hue, quite the reverse of its beautiful compeer in Italy. It
would be nearly true to say, that I have not seen a tree within the
last thousand miles, but as it would not be quite so, I refrain from
entering it in this truthful, &c.
While playing at whist this morning, we passed through some
snow sheds ; inside them it is almost as dark as a tunnel. The old
gentleman who was dealing, thought he could manage to do so
without light. I could not refrain (especially as the game was
going against us) from shifting the cards in the dark. It was just
real pleasure after, to see, as the game proceeded, how small my
hand became. At last I played my only card, the others having
three or four each. Took some of the conceit out of the old party,
I guess, who has less reliance on his abilities now, than formerly.
Antelope steak at Cheyenne although minus fat, was an agreeable
change in our diet—it is very tender, and rather dark in the flesh.
We are now descending the “ Eockies.” On the highest point we
stayed ten minutes. Prowling around, I picked up a piece of granite
with small gold in it ; rather a rarity—B,344 feet is the elevation
at which it was found Our rapid descent makes us note a conse-
quent improvement in the rate of speed. Still on this immense
tableland, it seems to be entirely limitless ! The country gradually
improves. We lately passed some immense rocks, or rather boulders,
heaped on each other, all the rocks I have ever seen, would be a
pigmy heap, if thrown together, compared with some of these
collossal collections.
A Flume, is a sort of wooden waterway, on trestle work, for the
transit of lumber (wood) from the mountains to the plains. It has
a steep gradient, and is well supplied with water from the mountain


streams. The wood is cut into lengths, and deposited within it..
The rate the water travels at down the incline, carries along the
sawn wood, about thirty, and even sixty miles an hour ! Some
experimentalists tried a ride on it once, but allow, that while sane,
they wont do it again. Not the least attractive scene on the jour-
ney, was a lightning storm, very vivid, and spread over a large
surface of the sky, immediately behind some huge rocks and boul-
ders, which it lit up in a wierd, fantastic way. We stayed up long
after our usual hour for retiring, admiring it. One doesn’t see a
storm in the rocky mountains every day.
We have now been descending for about eighteen hours, and are
nearly on “ the Plains,” in fact, on “ the Prairies.” “ The grand
Savannahs of the great American Continent,” they are not
Fennemore Cooper’s orthodox prairies, covered with buffalo grass,
and huge herds of bison thundering along, and making the earth trem-
ble ’neath the mighty living mass. These no longer exist in the
numbers we once read of, or are driven to remoter regions, where
the prosaic and pushing Yankee has not yet penetrated in sufficient
numbers, to oust him from his hereditary possessions. Nothing of
this kind is to be seen from the railway ; all around that, as far as
the eye can reach, are clover fields, indian corn, and small grain, with
an occasional ranch, about the size of an egg box, and possibly as
closely packed.
At Long Island we were told we should get the best meal we had
yet had—of course it was the worst. Our informant judged from
an American standpoint, we from an English.
Cousin Tom, whom we had written from Frisco, met us at Omaha.,
He had telegraphed, care of ticket agent, and before I could open
the telegram, I saw him standing watching me. Of course, I had
altered very considerably, but he knew me through a comparitively
recent photograph, and was waiting my recognition. I suppose it
perceptibly flashed over my face, for he said he saw it at once. W©
had three hours to wait before our departure for Atchison, 150
miles south, down the “ Missouri ” valley. The river of that name
is an intensely muddy stream, with treacherous whirlpools, currents,
and so on. At half-past one, a.m. we arrived, somewhat sleepy,.


and rather faint, for want of nourishment. Mrs. was awaiting
ns, and after fortifying ourselves with crackers, cheese, and lager,
we chatted for a short time, and retired.
Early next morning, we were up, and after breakfast, Tom put
his horse and buggy at our disposal, and with his son and heir for
guide, we started to explore the town, (City though, I believe.) It
is prettily situate on the banks of the river, the business portion in
the valley, between two hills, on which are built the residences of
those who labor below. Tom’s pretty little Swiss Chalet, is on the
northern, and nicest one. From there we drove all around the hills,
and the town, getting both a general and detailed view.
The bulk of the male public of Atchison, are the most marvellous
chawists we have yet met, as their advertisements help to shew.
“Chew Matchless Woodtag Plug,” “Chew Jackson’s Best,” &c.
Over the bar of the best drinking saloon is this—“ In God we trust,
Everybody else cash !”
In two hours yesterday afternoon, I saw more Pork than in all
my life before. This was at the “ Anglo American Pork Packing
Co.” They kill and preserve 2,000 largs hogs every day now—in
the winter, about 3,000 ! Each pig goes through 500 hands, pairs
of hands rather, from the sanguinary party, whose duty is only to
stab each pig in the neck as it passes by him, suspended by one
of his hind legs, and almost invariably, silent with astonishment,
to those whose work it is, to sew dissected piggy, into sections of
canvass for export. Ice rooms, that strike terror into your marrow
bones, are used for most of the later processes, and the whole thing
is on as complete a scale, as it is possible to conceive.
We spent two pleasant evenings, one at Tom’s house, and one
with his neighbour and tenant, next door, Mr. Day. We had only
to be natural, to occasion them much fun. Very strongly were we
pressed by Tom and Polly to stay longer, but we had already left
ourselves scarcely time to get through our projected programme, so
on Sunday afternoon, we regretfully left. Last night we supped on
board the “ Cars,” and a very complete and well-served meal we had.
The dining car, as it is called, is attached, about at the usual meal
hours, and continues with train until all, who wish, have breakfasted,
dined, or supped, which are the only meals here.


Bookseller’s Agents are in every train, and have been all the way
from Frisco : very importunate are they for you to buy of them, and
they leave two or three volumes for examination, doubtless hoping
you will get fairly interested in a story, and buy the book. Much
experience of these dodges, makes us as artful as foxes ; a feigned
listlessness, at the right moment, often procuring the use of any
volume, long enough to extract its best parts, We were, however,
beguiled to-day, by a very persistent youth, who after much trouble,
at length said, “Well, if you’ll just give me a dollar for that, I’ll
be much obliged to you.” I said, my friend ! give me your hand,
will you indeed, will you really be obliged ? Now don’t answer
without serious reflection, for if you will, we shall unhesitatingly
buy it. Opportunities to lay a man under an obligation in America,
are too rare to be missed. He said he would close with our offer,
we gave him a dollar, and deprived him of his self-respect for ever.
The ordinary American is by no means such a grumbler as the aver-
age Briton —he quietly puts up with things, inconveniences mostly,
that would make a Britisher, get up and tare around considerably.
In fact, wherever I have travelled, it has been the British who did
all the growling, others put up with, and try to pacify irate “John
Bull.” I could mention many instances, but wont. This only—
The coach tickets from Strathalbyn to Adelaide, set forth, that by a
slight additional payment over the ordinary fare, the box seat may
be secured. J. B. cash in hand, demands the seat in question.
“We can’t book for that,” says the clerk. Oh, but here, your
ticket says, &c. “ Well, no matter, we never do it.” “ Then, what
the devil do you say so here for ?” responds our countryman, grow-
ing rather red in the face, and pointing spitefully at his ticket.
The colonists endeavour to pacify him, by excusing the company
in all possible ways. To-day, there is no dining car on the train.
The Americans quietly suffer, the others growl, and are happy. So
it is always, in all things.
About fifteen trucks, containing each forty or fifty pigs, have just
passed, going to another factory in Chicago, working with the one
at Atchison. CHICAGO is the metropolis of the West. It is built
entirely of building material, and things, and occupies several


streets. There are numerous manufactories, in which they make,
and mar things. These necessitate the employment of many hands,
there is therefore a good market for labour. “ From information I
received,” I am led to believe this is a pretty correct representation,
considering it is entirely “ on chance,” for we know nothing more
of it, than what we saw from the carriage window in passing.
Anyone doubting, is quite at liberty to go and see for him, or herself,
and may always rely on my good wishes, towards paying their fare
there.
On Tuesday morning, we were in Canada, in the neighbourhood
of the Great American Wonder, the “Falls of Niagara.” Just
time to take a substantial breakfast, on the cars, and here we are,
on the suspension bridge, in view of the Falls. At the station we
took a carriage and pair (one horse could not have drawn us that
morning) and drove around to see it all—we went under the Falls—
over the Falls—into the river—alongside the rapids—and drank at
the “ Sulphur Spring.” But these Falls—are they not written in
books, whose name is legion ? You know they are my friends,
therefore, read at your leisure, from any, or all of them. My idea
is sufficiently simple to be told in a few words—lt was more than I
was prepared for
After the fearful plunge ! the water goes to the bed of the river,
varying from 180 feet deep, to no one knows what, and only re-
appears at the surface, after two miles, which distance it accomplishes
in three minutes, and makes things both lively, and picturesque,
in the immediate vicinity of its reappearance. The sulphur spring
is to be seen in a darkened room, it gives off so much sulphurated
hydrogen, that the application of fire to the water, produces beauti-
ful flames, the glasses out of which we drank, burned for two or
three minutes, when the flame was applied. We were told, that the
estimated quantity of water passing over the Falls in each hour, was
one hundred million tons. This we were able to swallow by the
stream itself, as it can be washed down with comparative ease, but,
it may be different at a distance. Most of the land scenery around,
resembles Scotland, and especially that part of it near “
Katrine.” Little streams, children of the great parent river, bi
in their little rocky cradles, and grow in strength and beauty,


mortal children, as they progress on their course, until at last they
make the great plunge, (matrimony) then go beneath the surface,
and are little heard of for a time, springing further on into a new
life. Another fuss is made again here, then they flow soberly on to
the end, the sea, and at that, I believe, the simile ends too.
Lightened in heart and pocket, by our pleasant experience, we
again resumed our journey eastwards, towards “Albany,” to strike
the Hudson river boats. On this journey, we picked up a very
entertaining fellow, who lived at Onieda ; he gave us several bits
of information concerning America. Near his home, reside some of
the peculiar people. They call themselves “ United Conventionists,”
and profess to aim at the physical perfection of mankind in future
generations. Strange to say, enlightened England supplies most of
the initiates for both this, and the Mormon persuasion.
At “ Syracuse ” we stayed twenty minutes for supper, and had a
good steak, the first in America. I shall ever remember Syracuse
with kindly feelings, for that same. Salt manufacturing is the
principal industry. We have, at various times during the day,
passed three of the large lakes—“ Ontario,” “Michigan,” and
“ Erie.” Many vessels, of about from two, to five hundred tons, do
business in these great waters, and very good white fish are caught
therein, which pleasantly vary our breakfast menu.
Animated discussions, on the relative merits of the various nomi-
nees for the Presidency, are constantly going on, and we have been
much edified in listening. It appears that Mr. English is a nob
skewer man, and that seems about the worst that can be brought
forward against him. The rival candidate for nomination seems to
be happy, in the possession of all the vices a man could possibly
crowd under one hat. At half-past one a.m. we arrived in Albany,
even at this early hour, we were met by rival hotel runners. We
claimed, to patronize the nearest, and in a few minutes were in our
bed rooms, having left word to be called at half-past six. Sleep
however visited our wearied bodies but fitfully, and we arose to per-
sue our last journey in America, rather unrefreshed. The Hudson
Eiver steam boats are fine ships, and make a high rate of speed, are


well patronized, and deserve it. And now we have started, and
experience the reality of that we have so often heard sung—
“ By the mighty Hudson’s banks I roam,
Through her giant forests stray,”
and I don’t know that we didn’t
“ Breathe a sigh for our native home,
And those joys so far away.”
Very little of this is true though, of the present day, for compara-
tively, the Hudson is not a mighty river, its average breadth is, I
think, a little less than the Thames, and its depth decidedly so,
judging from the circuitous route we took, to avoid shallow water,
especially at the first part of the journey. Her forests are not giant
in respect of the size of the trees, which are very small indeed. Then
as regards the sighs, except in the poetic imaginings of some brain,
(to whom such imaginings are bread and cheese) they scarcely exist
in this prosaic nineteenth century, and this ultra matter of fact land,
America ! For the rest, if distance is measured by time, and that
perhaps is the most correct way, why then, we are close at home,
it seemed so to us, at this eleventh hour of our journey.
But if the words of the song do not now apply, it (the river) is
probably more the less beautiful than then. Now pretty villas adorn
its banks in many places, while in its grandest parts, where it rises
1,500 feet, verdant, beautiful, and nearly sheer from the water’s
edge, it is certainly very impressive. There are many parts vastly
like the Isle of Wight, northern shore. New York resembles London,
both in itself, and its approaches; there appears to be nearly as
many craft in the river as in the Thames ; but it is very noticeable
that these are of much less burden, than those that frequent the old
river.
Dodd’s Express (an off-shoot of the Great American Baggage
Check System) having undertaken the charge of our luggage,
and recommended us to an Hotel, “ The Astor House,” we
proceeded thither on foot, to see “ New York,” and air our legs
(limbs in prudish America). We were (all but our noses) much
gratified at the abominable smell, and disgusting appearance of the
streets through which we passed. After what we had heard of this


magnificent city, it was quite a relief, to find it the counterpart of
a second-rate English town.
Having secured our room at the hotel, and duly fortified the
inner man, we sallied forth to see the “ Broadway.” Mark Twain
should have carried his satire on the “ Street ” that is called
“ straight,” into his own country, and have just touched up with
that caustic pen of his, the way that is called broad. It is called
broad, and so is a particular sort of bean, but the bean best deserves
the title. There is room for two tram-cars to pass, and a carriage
on each side, and nothing to spare, the paving is bad in the back
streets, and not good in any, yet these Americans who have not
been there, consider it equal to London in every respect, and in
some things superior. We can but admire many things, in which
they shew much adaptability, ingenious, and inexpensive make
shifts, a sort of parody on our solid institutions—this they patent,
and then paper the town, and paint the rocky mountains, in adver-
tising it—that’s Yankee smartness !
As pleasure takers, I should certainly concede them the palm.
“ Coney Island,” a favourite resort, is reached by road, rail, or
water, and at night time, when I saw it, is certainly very pretty.
There are four sections in it—“ West End,” “Brighton,”
“ Manhattan Beach,” and “ Eockaway,” all brilliantly illuminated
with gas and electricity, bands, good ones too, fireworks, or other
attractions, first-rate restaurants, which we patronized and appreci-
ated, after having fasted twelve hours ; returning home with our
good friend, Mr. Nikels, at about twelve o’clock.
The following day, he drove us through “ Central Park,” “ St.
Nichold’s Avenue,” and to the “ High Bridge,” across which comes, I
think, the entire water supply of “New York.” Near there we
dined, and in the cool of the evening, drove home through the gay
“ Boulevards,” by the side of the Hudson’s river. Then we diffused
our patronage over most of the entertainments of New York, and
strolled quietly back, at about two in the morning, seeing by the
way the fac simile, and section of the actual figure, that is to bear
the torch of liberty, on “ Bedloe’s Island,” New York Harbour;
also the Dry Goods Establishment of A. Stuart, probably the


largest thing of the kind in the world ! Then, the printing of the
“New York Herald,” occupied a share of our attention, so large a
share in fact, that we are now ready to conduct any Newspaper
Printing Machinery, if a sufficient salary is offered, £IO,OOO a year
would he accepted to start with. Only papers bearing a good
reputation, need apply.
On board the middling ship, “ Egypt,” bound from New York to
Liverpool, at half-past one, p.m., on the 3rd of July, 1880, might
have been seen two men, one apparently about twenty-eight years
of age, dressed in a suit of travelling serge, frank in appearance,
and five feet nine inches in height. The other had apparently seen
some ten more summers, his acquaintance with razors had been less
cultivated than was the case with the former, and from the admix-
ture of “Silver threads among the Gold,” it was evident, that
carking care had not been totally unknown to him, his rather thick-
set form, and meeting eyebrows, betokened the sort of man, whom
it is advisable to agree with, or let alone; most people seemed
to adopt the latter course, which so sorted with his humour, that
he presently withdrew himself to a more retired corner of the ship,
and meditated. The two, were the parties known in this narrative
of events, latterly under the comprehensive title of we, and were in
fact, at that time, the family heroes. It is usual to introduce and
describe the characters in a narrative at the opening, but this not
claiming any orthodoxy, makes no apology for introducing them at
the finish, and then only, that those who have waded through its
pages, may have an opportunity of comparing the estimates they
have probably formed with facts.
Among the fog banks of Newfoundland is our first day’s experience,
the fog whistle and bell going at intervals during the day—now an
hour of brilliant sunshine, now an hour of fog. As far as I am con-
cerned, the attendance on board this ship at meals, is simply nohow.
After waiting ten minutes in vain for a steward, I took a soup plate
that happened to be on the table, and assisted myself to a cold pork
chop; the gravy was partially set, around a small pyramid of mashed
potatoes, and on this I banqueted. Our particular steward has
since brought me biscuits, cheese, and a bottle of stout.


Until now, this diary has had to record only life in its various
phases, with incidents, generally humourous, but occasionally senti-
mental. Now !it has to record—Death. “ From battle, murder,
and sudden death, Good Lord deliver us.” Thus the cabin passengers
pleaded on Sunday, probably never thinking of their brother in the
forward stoke hole, veritably earning his bread and passage, by the
sweat of his brow ; and as it ultimately proved, paying a premium
with his life. An hour ago a strong man, looking hopefully forward
to a return to his native land, (he had been ouLWest, and un-
successful.) His return, will be only to the “ dust from whence he
came.” The heat in the engine room is very great, some say 1600,
and he perhaps not used to it. There are three doctors on board,
who did their best; water and ice were applied, and blood taken
from him : but it was not to be—so he died. In a short service
this morning, at eleven o’clock we committed the body of our
brother to the deep, sewn in canvas, laid on two boards nailed
together, and covered with a flag. The end holding his feet was
hoisted on to the taffrail, when at the words quoted above, the other
end was raised, and the corpse, feet downwards, slipped into the
ocean !
Four hours later, and at the cry of “ Man overboard,” the engines
were reversed, and the ship brought to a standstill; and with greater
despatch than I should have given them credit for, the crew were
away in the boat after him. A life buoy had been thrown, but after
half-an-hour they returned with the life buoy, but without the man.
He is believed to have been insane, and about seventy years of age.
His widow is comparatively disconsolate. This stopping of the ship
detracts from the amount of the day’s run,"and keeps us longer away,
from the Home we are now so anxious to reach. Only 304 miles
to-day, ten miles we lost in looking for the man who committed
suicide yesterday, and several miles in the night, being obliged to
heave to, on account of the dense fog. Kind nature draws a merci-
ful veil over this Horrible ship, and she needs it. In one thing we
are happy, viz., our cabin —it is the purser’s, and has every con-
venience ; writing desk, book shelves, (furnished) a very nice lamp,
and many other advantages, prominent among which are “ smoke


when you please, and put your lamp out when you are ready.” Our
cabin steward too, is fortunately, as far removed in quality, from our
table one, as vice from virtue, or light from darkness ; the one is
quick, ready, and extremely obliging, the other was probably a born
idiot, and has evidently been steadily losing intellect ever since.
For the vessel herself, she has the reputation of being very steady :
and I believe is ; although on this sea of glass through which we
have been travelling, since leaving America, it would be purely im-
possible to be otherwise—it has been such as I have never before
known, for smoothness. And this is the turbulent Atlantic. The very
quietest time on that twenty-eight days’ trip from Sidney to Frisco,
was a hurricane compared to it; and that was the (surely ill-named)
Pacific. It seems impossible, but many have been sea-sick! one
lady came to dinner to-day, her first meal at the saloon table.
Heigho ! how the weary days drag out their listless length,
neither they, nor the ship, hurrying themselves one whit, for our
impatience. If I only had command of those engines, I’d give her
tough old ribs such a shaking, as she never yet experienced, either
in storm, or sunshine, but not having that power, I merely sit and
fret instead. Its not for lack of events I pine, for they are as fre-
quent here, as pitfalls in New York roads. To-night, we had a
small excitement in the smoking room. A big burly fellow, whose
criticisms were more frequent than deserved, so inflamed a
youngster by his persistence in calling him “ Septimus,” (said
youngster being peculiar, in ideas and appearance) that he retaliated
by telling him, he was a dashed mean hound, and he would have no
more of it. The bully rose up to go for him, but an ominous click,
from the region of the hip of Septimus, seemed to arrest his pro-
gress, and the muzzle of a revolver, within about six inches of his
head, induced a very abrupt halt on the part of the bully, and a
smart disappearance under the seats, and to cover generally, of the
rest of the company ! Oh, if your going to come that, says the
big man, I’ve done, and the company creep out of their hiding
places. An immensely fat old Judge from the far West, feels
peculiarly insulted, and gets him outside with marvellous celerity,
remarking, that he always feels in the way, when any shooting is


going on. Subsequently, the captain interviewed Septimus, and
required him to deliver up the pistol, which he rather unwillingly
did, getting in its stead, this piece of information —“ My young
friend, dont you draw that weapon while you’re under the British
flag, or you’ll find yourself dangling at the end of a piece of string,
sometime within a month for certain ! you can depend on it !
that’s so ! ”
Now, my dear friends, I trust you will have found half as much
pleasure in reading this voluminous record of unimportant events,
as I have had in writing them,—if not, in mercy spare your yawns,
until you are out of my sight, and remember, that you asked me
to do this. I, at least, in years to come (if I retain health
and sense to do so) know the perusal will bring green memories
of my pleasant excursion around the world, and like “Old Heroes,”
I shall fight all my battles over again.
ADIEU.
ERINTED BV HENRT S. COLBBAN, NEAR THE TOWN HALL, TUNBRIDGE WELLS,




