

DYASON BROS’. JAMS.
DYASON BROS’. JAMS.
DIARY
OF A
THREE MONTHS’ TRIP
TO THE
OUTLYING DISTRICTS
OF THE
NORTH AND NORTH-WEST OF QUEENSLAND,
DURING THE PEROID OF THE LATE DISASTROUS
FLOODS,
BY
A COMMERCIAL TRAVELLER.
BRISBANE:
WOODOCK & POWERLL, PRINTERS, CHARLOTTE STREET.
MDCCCLXXVII.


IJyba)B aw Cp®.,
EXPOET I JLCa?TJiaEI2.S OP 1
tQfens, Hffamms md Childrens §oots S §how, JflJppers, Sc
LEATHER MERCHANTS AND GOVERNMENT CONTRACTORS,
MANUFACTORY : NORTHAMPTON.
Blanches —
LONDON, PARIS, HAMBURG, SYDNEY, AND NEW ZEALAND.
QUEENSLAND W AEEHOUS E—
ALBERT BUILDINGS, ALBERT STREET, BRISBANE.
WHEBE .A. LABGE OPEN STOCK IS KEIPT.
REPRESENTATIVE —MR* H. T. FIELD.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
INTRODUCTORY EMARK.
In undertaking the publication of this J oumal, I have
been actuated by a knowledge that the remote districts
and townships that have come under my personal obser-
vation, are, to many of the residents of Southern
Queensland a term incognita —visited only in imagination,
and judgment further biassed by distorted reports.
Until better instructed by personal experience, I ranked
in the same category of illusionists; but reality has
satisfied me that if my idea of the “ beautiful ” was too
bright, my ideal of the dreadful was no less exaggerated.
In my “ plain, unvarnished tale ” —embracing a three
months’ experience of flood and mountain—in which
steamship, rail, coach and horseback have sometimes not
agreeably alternated, I have attempted in the narrative
of simple language to convey my ideas of the country,
towns, and people that I met with on my trip, and
“neither to extenuate nor to set down aught in
malice.”
C. T.


ORIENTAL MILLS.
ROBERT HARPER & 00.,
182, Queen Street, Brisbane,
AND AT MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE.
-IMPORTERS OF
CHINA H* J{| INDIAN
COFFEE, RICE, AND EASTERN PRODUCE.
MANUFACTURERS OF THE
Unrivalled 41 SMkH n Brand,
COFFEE, OATMEAL, PEPPER, SPICES,
RICE, COCOA, CHICORY, MUSTARD, PEARL BARLEY,
Brosemeal, Maizemeal, Wheatmeal,
EBLAXaiXTIE, &C.
SOLE WHOLESALE AGENTS FOR
Empire Co/s Pure Packet Teas,


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’TRIP.
December IB| 1886.—Steamship City of Melbourne.
Passing over the familiar casting-olf from the wharf of a
coasting steamer, I need but remark that owing to a
very heavy sea running, Captain Thompson anchored
for the night off the Pilot Station. After adopting the
precaution of securely lashing everything portable on
deck, we got under way at 5.30 a.m., the sea still running
high. The involuntary contributions to Father Neptune
were on a most liberal scale, nor was your humble
servant remiss in his share of the customary tribute.
December 19. —Waking up this morning I was glad to
find the wind off the land, and the sea comparatively
smooth. Passengers, apparently unmindful of the past
forty-eight hours’ experience, Hocked to the breakfast
table, intent on business, and resolved to make repara-
tion for previous derelictions. Going on deck, I was
glad to find that we were well inside the Great Barrier
lieef, which extends latitudinally for 1000 miles, and a
distance from the shore which varies from 20 to 70
miles. The sea here is as smooth as a mill pond, and
the exhilarating effect produced on the mind by the
lovely islands of this northern archipelago, after the
experience of a monotonous and tempestuous sea, baffles
my poor powers of description. But it occurred to me,


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Parity.
Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
although the idea may seem premature, that there is a
splendid opening for some enterprising hotelkeeper to
start business on one of these verdant spots, and thus
establish the nucleus of what, in the lapse of years, I
venture to predict will become a much frequented and
fashionable watering place. After breakfast the captain
cast anchor for an hour or two off one of these islands,
and two boats, filled with passengers who availed them-
selves of the chance of landing, put off to shore. After
some time spent in gathering shells and wild flowers,
we came across the remains of a wreck which report says
has been lying high and dry for at least forty years.
Captain Thompson had a portion of her brought on
hoard as a curio. And should the relic he deemed worthy
of such distinction it may probably find a resting place
in the Brisbane Museum. The tide being low we found
abundance of oysters, and we all set to work at them.
A congenial party of friends could camp here for a
fortnight without fearing the terrible bugbear of ennui ,
and, I doubt not, for a much longer period; but the party
should be a strong one, as the blacks are not to be
trusted. We are once again steaming ahead, and as I
now write we are passing GHouster Island, which lies off
Bowen. I may remark en passant that if ever travelling
this coast again I should commend myself, if possible,
to the safe keeping of Captain Thompson, our present
skipper. He is an extremely careful navigator, and
studies the comfort of his passengers in many various
6
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
ways. On his last trip he had to call at Cooktown, and
there discovered the cairn that was erected by Captain
Cook. He left the carpenter with a well-armed party
in charge of the boat while he and a few of his crew
ascended the range, where they discovered this most
interesting relic of Queensland’s earliest history. He
cut down a tree that was growing over it, and since
then the Government has resumed the land whereon
it lies.
Monday,‘December 20.—We anchored last night three
miles off Townsville. At 7 o’clock a small steam tug
came alongside and landed the mails and passengers. I
am staying at the Queen’s Hotel —one of the finest for
comfort along the coast. The mail train, by which I
proceed, leaves at 8 a.m. to-morrow. In the interim I
will endeavour to convey my impressions of Townsville,
as formed from cursory observation of a hasty character.
Eegarding the town from the steamer, it and its
surroundings present everything in the way of scenery
to pourtray it to the best advantage, hut in proof of the
truth of the line that “ distance lends enchantment to
the view,” the illusion is dispelled on arriving ashore.
The chief part of the town lies to the south of a high
hill, which entirely screens it from the sea breeze. The
lightest description of clothing is the fashion here, such
as drill and white flannel trousers—coats and vests are
seldom worn during the day. Flinders-street, the chief
thoroughfare, appears quite a busy locality, and is the
7
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros*. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
j Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
business street of the toWn. No time for further
observation.
Tuesday, December 21.—The departure of the train from
Townsville is regarded as a most momentous matter —
at least, judging by the fuss attending it. The warning
bell is rung four times, amid the rushing and bawling of
officials, and the vacant stare of a crowd of onlookers,
whose monotonous unoccupied day has just begun.
After all this fuss we managed at last to get away with
only one carriage attached to the engine. This one
carriage was most adroitly divided into five compart-
ments—one for luggage, first and second class for
gentlemen, and ditto for ladies. As there were only
nine passengers, however, the accommodation was
ample. I had only one companion in my compartment,
and on starting we were much amused at seeing a dog
in chase of the train; it seems it belonged to a
passenger, and after holding its own very well for a few
miles, at length dropped away “ dead beat.” Where I
now write we are 1500 feet above the sea. The climate
is much more genial than that of the coast. To the end
of the present extension of this line is 173 miles from
Townsville, and our average speed (exclusive of stop-
pages) 20 miles an hour.
Wednesday, December 22.—After a tedious journey,
from 8 o’clock a.m. till 6.30 p.m., we arrived last evening
at Torrens’ Creek. There was very little to be noticed of
interest on our way to Charters Towers—just similar
8
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros'. Jams for Purity.
Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jam.
country as is to be seen on the Sandgate line. When
within 50 miles of the Towers, we take on an extra
engine, as the gradient assumes a much steeper acclivity.
It is taken off on arrival. Forty-five minutes allowed
for dinner at the Towers. The central portion of the
town is about a mile from the station. Like all digging
townships the Towers presents a naked and chaotic
aspect. It has its many big crushing machines stamping
away, surrounded by immense piles of stone, each
indicating the proximity of an auriferous reef. I
resumed my journey by rail at 1.45, and remained
“ alone in my glory ”to its end. We stopped at some
obscure place for about fifteen minutes. A great
number of blacks were congregated here, and as I had
my ‘ oelestina ’ in the carriage, I thought I would prac-
tically test the truth of Shakespeare’s oft quoted line—
“ Music hath charms to soothe the savage breast.” At
the first concord of sweet sounds the general impulse
seemed in favour of flight, as a hasty retrograde move-
ment was commenced. Reassured, however, by one of
my most encouraging smiles that the agreeable surprise
was in no way connected with revolvers or infernal
machines, they took heart and approached again by
degrees. Whatever emotion may have ruled in their
minds under the celestial influence, deponent knoweth
not, but from the general facial expression fixed on me,
so immobile, so apathetic, and so utterly destitute of
even curiosity, I could only endorse Shakespeare’s
9
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams■
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
sentiment by remembering that at the period he wrote
both the Australian savage and the land of his birth
were alike unknown to the lands of civilization. Re-
suming our journey we shortly passed a big camp of
these blacks, all gaily decorated with red caps, which, if
not imposing in appearance, certainly brightened up the
scene, contrasting well with the sable shiny hue of their
complexions. One fine looking blackfellow was seated
on a log with his piccaninni in his lap, quite near the
line. I saluted him with a feu-de-joie from my ‘ celes-
tina.’ The result, however, was on my part quite
unintended and unanticipated. Bounding from his
rural seat, and clasping his infant in his arms, he fled
to the camp, and mingling with his tribe was at once
lost to view. As I remarked, we arrived here (Torrens’
Creek) at 6.30 p.m., and after seeing to my luggage I
sat down to my solitary tea. My impressions of this
place were far from favourable. The township consists
of two hotels, a butcher’s shop, and a general store.
The rest of the buildings are iron and bark humpies.
There are a great many teams here, familiarly known as
“ ships of the west.” They are all of the strongest ma-
terial and make, as the nature of the roads require. There
are two large sheds erected near the railway, owned by
Wright, Heaton & Co., and Allen & Sons, carriers. At
present there are many bullock teams loading for various
points, some as far distant as 500 miles. They fre-
quently take from four to five months on the journey
10
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


miles.
From Torrens Creek to Hughenden ...
60
Thence to Richmond Downs ...
80
ditto
Cloncurry
... 200
ditto
Boulia
... 240
ditto
Win ton
.. 220
ditto
Muttaburra
... 100
ditto
Aramac
80
ditto
Barcaldine
54
ditto
Blackall
80
ditto
Tatnbo
75
ditto
Alpha
... 110
Total
... 1299
Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’, First Prize Jams.
I have just arranged the programme for the continu-
ance of my journey which, according to published dis-
tances, will cover a total of 1299 miles by coach and
pack-horse:—
And from Alpha to Clermont and Eockhampton by
rail. I had a long chat with a teamster this morning,
who is familiar with the foregoing lines of coaching.
He tells me that there are now many good accommo-
dation houses along the entire route, and that Cobb’s
coaches, with the mails, traverse all the roads arranged
in my programme. That the blacks are not troublesome
now, &c. The wet season setting in may delay me
occasionally on the road, but at present the country looks
like one vast wheat field, and the cattle are rolling fat.
The coach starts for Hughenden at 5 o’clock in the
morning. I have just paid £4 165., charge for excess
11
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon dams.
of luggage. The way in which they manage about
luggage is :—A passenger has to send over every article
with which he travels, and then, after weighing and
allowing 211h5., the balance is charged for at the rate of
4d. per lb., which has to be paid for in advance. My
fare was £2.
Hughenden, Friday, December 24.—We started from
Torrens’ (Jreek at 6 o’clock yesterday morning, an hour
later than appointed time. I rose at 4.15, and going
out on the verandah was surprised to see a passenger
quietly at rest in an easy chair waiting for the coach to
drive up ; he was sadly disconcerted when some faceti-
ous individual informed him it was to have started at
4 o’clock. I then went over to the office, and it was
then my turn to be disconcerted when I was informed
that I could only take on 501 b. of my luggage, and
that the balance (3381b5.) would follow by next coach,
if possible. Early morning in these small inland settle-
ments has, to a stranger, a sad and even depressing
effect; the only light visible is the glimmer in the lamp
stuck over the hotel door, and the only audible sound
the occasional clang of the working bullocks’ bells, all of
which sounded to me as if they were cracked. Well,
after stowing 13 bags of mail matter, and as much
luggage as could well be accommodated, we started with
four passengers —two on the box seat and two behind.
We were attached to five horses in splendid condition,
and piloted by the reputed best “ whip ”on the road. A
12
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’- Jams for Parity.
great deal of rain has fallen throughout the district
during the past fortnight, which has so saturated the
soil as to make it a most difficult matter to travel in this
flat country ; when the roads are good, the Prairie, 28
miles distant, is reached at 10 o’clock. We did not get
there till 1.30 o’clock. The latter part of this stage was
a terror for the poor horses; it is black soil, and clogs to
the wheels, fully four inches on to the tire. As for us
passengers, our greatest grief was the want of provender,
as we had started fasting. The flies also proved a ter-
rible nuisance—a small kind which swarmed in thou-
sands in and around the coach. I was tempted to alight
at a spot where the ground seemed firm enough, but had
not gone far when I gladly resumed ray seat with about
lOlbs. of black mud clinging to each boot. As illustra-
tive of the condition of the roads, we shortly encountered
a teamster whose misfortune had fairly blockaded the
road; he was properly bogged, the fore-wheels being
embedded in a deep rut; he was alone, and his team
was loaded with two tons weight, including a heavy
case of galvanised iron; he did not appear much dis-
composed at his disaster, but quietly remarked that he
would have to wait till the weather cleared and the
roads got firm. All things considered, he appeared to
me to be in a very bad plight, although I doubt not
that long experience—including many such misadven-
tures—had developed him into a philosopher, at least
in his avocation, and rendered him equal to either
13
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’ . Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
fortune, good or bad. After cutting down a few sap-
lings for the purpose of improvising a “ corduroy ”
road, the driver deployed into the hush, and rapidly
shot ahead of him. The Prairie is only a temporary
township, formed for the accommodation of the men
working on the railway. After alighting, up to our
ankles in mud, we entered the accommodation house and
enjoyed a hearty meal. This very muddy township
consists of a hotel, two stores, and about twenty-four
iron houses, which can he taken down and erected
elsewhere. There were about fifteen men down with
the bog fever when we arrived; the navvies are very
subject to it when working on this black soil. We
started again with two lady passengers; at first the
driver objected to take them on, hut was finally per-
suaded to consent. We made a most unpropitious
start; one of the shaft horses jibbed, and notwithstand-
ing energetic persuasion by way of the whip and subse-
quently with a big spare chain, he still remained master
of the situation; we finally had to get out and walk;
the horses, thus relieved of much of their load, plunged
forward, and the driver maintained them at their
utmost speed for about a mile, when the vehicle was
planted on firmer ground. We had hut a sorry time
of it while travelling through this heavy soil; at
times the coach rolled and pitched like a row-boat in
a troubled sea; one of our passengers, a governess,
was really surprised and not a little unnerved at the
14
DIAEY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
Dyason Bros. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
peculiar pell-mell manner in which we were repeatedly
jostled together; it was certainly not in conformity with
drawing-room etiquette. About fifteen miles further on
we arrived at the next stage for changing horses; it was,
in fact, a general change, for the country at once opened
out into lovely pastimes, and the roads being changed
much for the better; they were now gravelly, and to
our great relief we were clear of the black soil. We were
all charmed at the appearance of this Downs country,
which in many parts is studded with verdant hills, most
of which appeared well wooded; and then, for miles
and miles, the district levels down into beautiful pasture
meadows ; hut, sad to say, the only cattle we saw were
working bullocks belonging to the teamsters. Twelve
months ago these parts were like a desert, and the cattle
nearly all perished. Water was then sold at Is. a
bucket, and that of the consistency of ship’s pea-soup.
But now the scene has changed. After changing horses
at the Valley for the last time, and twelve miles from
Hughenden, we there took in two more passengers —a
man and a woman. I had my left leg out on the step
of the coach as I sat inside ; the man, on entering, made
a good impression on my big toe as he sprang to get
inside. “ I breathed a prayer for him, a prayer he could
not hear,” for his colossal proportions and determined
air admonished me that —“ Silence is prudence.” The
lady passenger, who accompanied him, entered the coach
sobbing and crying as if broken-hearted; she had just
15
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
parted from her friends, and although perhaps it may
seem to have been both unsympathetic and irrelevant, we
were all, with the exception of her chaperon, the big
man, compelled to indulge in suppressed laughter, which
we sought further to conceal by earnestly gazing from
the windows. In fact, we did not want to fall out with
the big hushman, although, it must he confessed, that
the hysterical hursts of hoo-hoo-hoo-ing to which the
brown kid gloves, the white handkerchief, and the
swaying of the body played splendid accompaniment,
would have excited a sense of the ludicrous even in
the most lymphatic. As evening advanced there was
every evidence of a coming storm, hut we hoped it
would pass over. But we were disappointed; just as
darkness set in it hurst upon us; we closed all the blinds
in hare time. Ten minutes before and the country was
pretty dry, and in twenty minutes after we were
slushing along as if through melted butter; it con-
tinued like this till we reached Hughenden, about
10 p.m. Before arrival, we had a very nasty creek to
cross; as we descended the hank we could hear the
perturbed waters surging and dashing along; the
horses plunged into it at full tear, the water was
above their bellies; I was prepared to jump should
the worst happen, hut we fortunately got through
without accident. We then speeled away through slush
and mud, the driver sounded his bugle, and in a few
minutes we arrived in Hughenden, 10 o’clock. There
16
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
was quite a crowd waiting about at the coach office
to see us come in. After alighting once more in the
mud, I found myself almost immediately recognised:
t‘ Hulloa, Jackson! Is this you ? What’s biinging
you up to this part of the world ?” It proved to be
Scowen; his father had the School of Arts Hotel,
Queen-street, on the site now occupied by the London
Chartered Bank. I was right glad to see him, and I
believe the satisfaction was mutual. I can do no busi-
ness till my samples arrive. I have just heard that
a navvy, in attempting to cross the creek this morning
that we came over last night, got drowned ; the current
swept him off his feet; he was rescued, however
apparently inanimate, and the doctor is now employing
the usual means for the resuscitation of the drowned.
The hotel where I am now staying is called the
Great Western—J. Williams, proprietor—and is a well-
conducted hostelry. I have just had a view of the town
from the verandah ; it has only one street, with shops,
hotels, hanks, &c., the usual buildings in these towns.
Boxing Day, December 27.—Diary writing here, just
now, has to he done under difficulties, owing to an influx of
hushmen, who are having their Christmas spree out; my
room adjoins the little parlour, where card playing has
been going on all day and yesterday also (Sunday),
until 2 or 3 o’clock in the morning; the excitement,
noise, and hush swearing carried on by them is, at times,
something terrible. Christmas Eve passed away with
B
17
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
the business folks here very quietly ; there seemed to be
very little doing in any of the stores; in fact, the
picture seemed one of general gloom; it was difficult
to traverse the town owing to the mud. On Christmas
Day the rain kept off, and the atmosphere clearing,
Hughenden presented quite a picturesque appearance.
The town is situated on a table land, and from it you
can see the country sloping away for at least twenty
miles ; the view is really charming from here ; in many
places, extensive areas appear covered with white lillies,
variegated by a beautiful yellow flower, which my
limited knowledge of Botany disables me from classifying.
On Christmas Day about forty of us sat down to dinner;
the table was laid out second to none in Brisbane —a
huge Christmas cake, about thirty inches high, serving
as a centre ornament. Towards night the rain again
came down, and till bed time we seated ourselves on the
wide verandah, all smoking, some chatting, and others
communing with their own thoughts. Yesterday
(Sunday, 26th), passed off quietly; after breakfast I
strolled along the bank of the Flinders, as the town
extends that way; teams in motion were plentiful—
some going, others coming ; there were a few huts here
and there, but the reconnaissance proving neither
important nor interesting, and the flies being very
bad, I was soon glad to retrace my steps. The races
(the bushman’s great carnival) are advertised for to-day,
but owing to the late heavy rains, it is doubtful if the
requisite sporting quorum will show up.
18
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Parity.
Tuesday, December 28. —Boxing Day was kept up
yesterday, and malgri the late rains there was a good
muster of bushmen at the races; the course is about
2 J miles from the town ; in default of procuring a horse
I was compelled to walk there; however, the walk
proved very pleasant, the temperature agreeable, and
the country itself arrayed in holiday attire. I noticed
a number of birds, very similar in appearance to the
English lark, but here the comparison ceases ; no high,
aspiring flight like the latter, and with a song which
some author has likened to “ the music of the spheres;”
but rather the undignified flutter of the sparrow, and
with a note about equal to its “chip, chip, chirrup.”
They have a splendid racecourse here, and there was
great apparent interest taken by all present; many of
the fair sex graced the scene with their presence, some
mounted on fine-looking animals, and as the spirit
moved them they would start on a good spin around
the course. I was tempted to invest a trifle on some of
the “ events ” of the day, but as I was an outsider to
the fraternity called “ knowing ones,” I did not succeed
in naming the winner. I noticed that about half the
folks on the course seemed to have suffered from bad
eyes ; some few, I observed, had their peepers partially
closed and surrounded by a rainbow-like halo; these
latter, I was informed, had been beautified by personal
and hostile contact, and were not to be classed with the
sufferers from the epidemic. I turned in about 11
B 2
19
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
o’clock, but sleep was impossible, owing to the uproar of
the pandemonium in the next room—intensified, pro-
bably, by a settlement of turfing debts, and excited
discussions concerning the events of the day. After
restlessly tossing in bed till 4 o’clock, as a last resource
“ I took up my bed and walked ” to the verandah, where
I made a shake down. If not shown to another room
to-night, more remote from the scene of these bacchana-
lian orgies, I shall seek other lodgings.
Wednesday, December 29.—1 attended last night at
an Amateur Minstrels’ performance; they acquitted
themselves very well indeed, and elicited much applause;
the elite occupying the front seats and the “ gods,” as
usual, crowded into the grand eminence at the hack of
the hall, issuing their fiat of praise or censure according
to their idea of the merits of the performers. Hughen-
den is frightfully pestered, at this season of the year,
with big flying ants, and clocks or beetles, which a lighted
candle never fails to attract in large numbers. It is
hardly pleasant to feel a monstrous sotmthing creeping
on your neck in the darkened bedroom —perhaps a
scorpion, centipede, or tarantula, you know not what,
until you manage to brush it off you, and rise perhaps
many times a night to hunt for cause of your annoy-
ance. I had arranged to sleep in the billiard-room last
night, but I concluded to go to my own room ; I was
really “ used up ” for want of sleep; the gambling, &0.,
went on as usual, hut I was very shortly oblivious to all
20
DIARY OP A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros' . Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
surroundings, and, I trust, “ sleeping the sleep of the
just.” Having had a good night’s rest, a good break-
fast, and a good bath, I am now in good “ fettle ” for
the transaction of any business that may offer to-day,
Thursday, December 30.—The race ball came off last
night at the Divisional Hall, and as there is a good
muster of country people in town, many of them
attended; there were some splendid dancers present,
although I had expected the reverse ; they have organ-
ised a “ dancing assembly ” for the winter months, and
the novice has every opportunity of learning; I strolled
down to the hall, through the unlighted town, and
was surprised to see how the men were “ fixed up
kid gloves, in every case, and black dress suits in
many; one squatter wore a dress suit of white duck,
which I could not but regard as a most sensible
anomaly; I was the only one who differed conspicuously
from the rest as I wore my silk coatbut, however, the
novelty was forgotten as the ball opened, which broke
up at 4 o’clock, after a programme of twenty-four dances
had been gone through. The great drawback to enjoy-
ment was the presence of multitudes of the flying
insects already referred to ; they were attracted by the
brilliance of the lighted hall, and ’ere long the floor was
strewn with them, both dead and alive ; crickets would
crawl up your leg, and beetles down your back, thereby
increasing the grace and agility of the dancers in a most
amazing degree. Some of the ladies present would have
21
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
eclipsed the fair dancers of Brisbane in the costliness of
their hall dresses; they had evidently had no regard to
the £ s. d. in their get up.
Friday, December 31.—1 slept this morning, as long
as the heat would permit, under a galvanised-iron
roof; the effect is most enervating, and it is time that
the material of iron for roofing purposes should be con-
demned in favour of a substitute less' prejudicial to
human health and life. My samples arrived, at last,
about 9 o’clock this morning, so I shall he able to make
a start in business to-morrow ; my stay here for want of
samples will not be entirely lost, as I have had an eye to
business. Yesterday afternoon I went out for a drive
with one of the leading storekeepers and his family;
the people of Hughenden are most friendly and sociable.
The heat, as I now write, is 100 degrees in the shade.
But few coats are worn here. The manager of the
Q. N. Bank sports pyjamas, which is about the right
thing in the right place. I am invited to spend the
evening with a Mr. Geary, and he requests me to bring
the ‘ celestinal believe I have a customer for it.
You meet with strange folks in these inland bush
towns; an elderly bushman, clad in moleskins and
Crimean shirt, sat down to the piano and astonished us
all by the brilliancy of his performances; he was also
au fait at cards, and all things considered may be
regarded as an accomplished bushman. My kind host,
Mr. G., informed me that he was only the type of many
22
DIAEY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros'. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
such to be met with in Northern Queensland. In this
somewhat extended notice of Hughenden, I have
endeavoured to give a correct idea of an inland bush
town during the festive season of Christmas.
Monday, January 3, 1887.—The holidays are over
now, nor am I sorry, as I can address myself to busi-
ness. On New Year’s Day, the sports of the season
were brought to a close on the racecourse; I went in for
three races, and, as previously, was simply out of them.
The fun, of which I have had my share, is now over, and
having thus enjoyed the sweets, I must now prepare for
the hardships of hush travel, which I am assured, lay
before me. Yesterday (Sunday) passed off quietly, and
in the evening I attended the Church of England, a
cosy, attractive little structure, but commodious enough
for the requirements of the town.
Wednesday, January s.—Since Monday I have been
hard at business, and up to the present have done
well. While waiting an appointment with another
customer, who has arranged to see me, I hastily add to
my diary. Thermometer to-day, 99 degrees in shade;
it was over 100 degrees every day last week; I can
stand it well though, as it is a dry heat, and not so
oppressive as 90 degrees on the coast. I had to purchase
a veil yesterday, owing to the flies, and as I now write
lam wearing it thrown.over the helmet; all the com-
munity suffer equally with myself, for these pests are
no respecters of persons; I have likewise, acting on
23
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
advice, purchased a gossamer veil and a mosquito net
for my journey, so I am fairly armed against the
onslaughts of insects. I got the ‘ celestina ’ raffled last
night by a Mr. Gordon, in the drapery department of
Tolamo and Goldring’s store ; it was raffled by sixteen
members at £1 each ; I arranged for fifteen members
only, myself to receive £l2, and Mr. G. the balance;
hut he added himself to the number, won it, and handed
me £l3. I rejoice that we have parted company, for
that same ‘ celestina ’ occasioned me far more trouble
and anxiety than all my money. I hope to leave here
for Cloncurry on Friday.
Monday, a.m., January 10.—I left Hughenden at 5
o’clock on Friday morning, and arrived at Richmond
Downs at 7.30 p.m.—a distance of 80 miles. Before
leaving Hughenden, I wired to Mr. A. S. L. to know if
I should buy a trap and horses, in order to avoid any
further difficulty in the transport of samples, as I could
not take half of them on by coach; I was somewhat
disappointed when I received a reply to do the best I
could by public conveyance. I write this in a small
wayside public house, 200 miles from Hughenden. I
am now glad that I took the coach; a turn out would
have been right enough if it were not for the creeks
and billy bongs (overflow from the big rivers). When
I arrived at Richmond Downs I opened up my samples,
at 9.30 am., and did about £3OO worth by 12.30.
After packing up samples, and carrying them to the
24
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams•
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
coach office, I turned in early, as the coach started at
3.30 next morning, nor was it due in Cloncurry until
10 o’clock same night. We had two very boggy creeks
to cross, the banks of which were very steep for coach
travel. We all had to get out and wade across; the
horses, then, by a spasmodic effort, were just able
to drag the coach over. The mud was of the consistency
of putty. We travelled during the day along vast
plains; only occasionally a few trees would break the
monotonous view between coach and horizon. The
time passed as pleasantly as we could make it. We
had as fellow passengers, Dr. Fisher and his wife and
child; he was on his way to take charge of the Cloncurry
Hospital; they were only three months out from home,
and he was therefore gaining Colonial experience
without loss of time; he was from Belfast—excellent
company, and made himself useful with the horses when
the coach was bailed up by creek or swamp. After
navigating another very ugly creek, we emerged again
on to the plains. We shortly arrived at a tent with
a solitary occupant, much in need of medical attendance.
Dr. F. alighted in order to see him. It seems he was
recovering from an attack of fever, and in addition had
sustained a severe injury to his leg; he had been a week
all alone to manage the best he could; now and again
the boundary rider would bring him medicine from the
station, 20 miles off; he was taken into the coach, and
rode with us 40 miles; he was placed next to me, and
25
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
Dyason Bros. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
passing over some of the rough places, I had to hold
him as a baby.
Oloncurry, January 10.—We arrived here last night
at 12 o’clock; we started from Hiddington Station at
7 o’clock ; it proved a long and tedious drive —90 miles
in 17 hours. The sick man wanted to go on with us,
but the doctor would not allow him ; it would simply
have killed him. Shortly after starting we got bogged
in a creek; the doctor had to carry his wife out, not a
very easy job to carry 13st. through mud and slush
nearly up to your knees ; I could not assist, as I had to
hold one of the horses. It was, at the outset, nearly a
case of topple-over. In the meantime, the groom had
brought down two fine grey horses from the changing
station, about a mile distant. The two leaders were at
once taken out, and the fresh greys substituted, but their
best efforts seemed ineffectual; the groom started for a
third fresh horse. I left the horses’ head and went to
the rear of the coach ; I managed to partially free the
bogged hind wheel, and the horses making a frantic
plunge simultaneously, all obstacle was removed, and our
journey was continued. We soon overtook the Dr.
with his wife and child, who had gone on in advance to
the “ changing” humpy ; the doctor, carryinghis infant
through the high grass, after having played nurse to his
wife knee deep in mud, was fairly exhausted, and glad
enough to avail himself of the coach again. Arriving
at this wayside habitation, we were refreshed with an
26
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams■
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
excellent tea, and being a grass hut it was, by contrast,
beautifully cool. I had water given me in a tin dish to
wash my feet which, having been exposed to the sun,
was that hot that I could hardly bear my feet in it. I
felt quite at home there ; a Dublin couple looked after
the place. When we started yesterday morning, what
with passengers and mail bags, we were most uncom-
fortably crowded. We took on another passenger,
which addition, added to an unusually heavy mail, com-
pelled us to sit back to back and to hold on as best we
could, with our legs dangling over the mail bags. In
the middle of the day we crossed an extensive plain,
which was computed at from 10 to 12 miles in extent.
I was glad when we changed horses for the last time,
some 20 miles’from Cloncurry; the last nine miles of
this stage is rendered almost impassable, for huge rough
stones and boulders. One might imagine that instead of
travelling on a Government highway, “ chaos had come
againthe brake also became useless, which contri-
buted to make it extremely lively for all of us ; but we
were favoured with a full moon, which lightened up the
approach to Cloncurry. The coach was expected in at
8 o’clock, and a good many people had assembled to see
it drive up to the Imperial Hotel. After supper I
retired, and after resting well, took a bath and felt none
the worse for my previous day’s shaking. Heat very
oppressive to-day—loB degrees in shade. I visited all
my customers to-day, and expect to do a good busi-
ness here.
27
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
Dyason Bros. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Wednesday, January 12.—This, I have already dis-
covered, is a great place for “ playing larks ” —not a
harmless and innocent amusement, which the term would
seem to imply, hut rather the development of the
innate spirit of larrikinism which unhappily is so
characteristic of the Australian youth throughout the
land. On the first night of my arrival here, the young
man who shared my bedroom warned me to be on the
look-out, as he expected that a bucket of water would be
thrown through the window when all was quiet. I told
him they had better not try such games on with me as
I was a stranger. In reality, however, my nerves were
so unstrung by the frightful jolting I had that day
sustained, that I believe a bucket of water scientifically
distributed over the bed would have settled me out-
right. About 1 o’clock, sure enough, I heard a bucket
fall, the contents of which had evidently been deposited
on some bed in an adjoining room, for I heard some one
jump up and anathematise the unknown delinquent;
this was answered by uproarious laughter from other
quarters, thereby proving the aggressor to have been
in league with oollusionists. The boys, as they call
themselves, enter the town for a spell, and by similar
practical jokes, and various acts of vandalism, become a
terror to all well-disposed persons.
Thursday, January 13.—1 resume my record with the
thermometer at 108 degrees ; my sample cards are all
curling upwards, owing to the excessive heat; water
28
DIAEY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’ First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
bags (canvas) are much in vogue; they keep the water
refreshingly cool. I was conversing with the manager
of a station, who has just come into town; he informs
me that the black troopers are now out on his run —
busily egaged in hunting up and shooting down hlaek-
fellows and their gins and children ; it is no uncommon
thing, the whites often assisting in the “ dispersion.” It
is generally the act of reprisal for cattle spearing.
Saturday, January 15.—1 find myself the victim of the
“ fly plague,” which I have before often referred to ;
when out for a ride this morning, I got stung by one of
these dreaded pests, and I am now writing with one eye
completely “ bunged up ;” hut lam proud to say that
it is not encircled by the rainhow-hued aureola, which is
generally the distinguishing badge here of the “ horsey ”
fraternity ; and I am thankful to say that I have still
an eye left to business. The sensation is not painful,
although most uncomfortable, and the effect far, very
far, from ornamental; apart from this little contretemps,
my general health is excellent. I visited the Cloncurry
copper mine this morning, and found its richness
to report; in many eases you can see the pure metal
sticking up out of the ground ; I am supplied with a
few fine specimens to take with me. Everything yon
buy here is Is. at the lowest; in fact, sixpences are so
scarce, that it is a common saying that the sight of one
is “ good for sore eyes.” If this really he so, a few
thousands of them remitted to the local banks here, with
29
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
the view of general circulation, would doubtless prove a
valuable specific in the case, of the present prevalent
opthalmia. The loaf of bread (supposed to weigh 2 lbs.),
Is.; stout, large bottles, 55., small ditto, 3s. It is a
common spectacle here to see the black gins riding
astraddle into town full tilt.
Saturday, January 22. —I left Cloncurry on the 18th,
after a week’s stay, and right glad was I to get on the
road again. Cloncurry is rather a nondescript place ;
there is neither priest nor minister about, nor has there
been for a long time. On our way from Hughenden,
we met a priest returning ; he had travelled a portion
of the road to Cloncurry, hut his partial experience of
the journey admonished him “ to the right aboutthe
legal fraternity are alike unrepresented. On Wednes-
day last, after packing my samples and bidding adieu
to Dr. Fisher, who came with me to the coach, also to a
few business people, the buggy, which was to serve as
coach, drove round to the hotel. I was not very favour-
ably impressed at the appearance of the “ turn out
we were to depend on it for 120 miles. Part of the
felloe of the off hind wheel was broken, and the tire
flattened down ; I gave it a shake and uttered a protest,
hut of no use ; I had to chance it, so away we speeled
at 2.30 p.m., against a very pleasant breeze. The
country for miles around Cloncurry is highly ferrugin-
ous; it is said that a high hill, situated about three
miles from the town, is almost a solid mass of iron ;
30
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
such unmistakable indications must, soon or late, result
in the opening up of new industries. Our first stopping
place was at a shanty nine miles from town ; a couple
of miles further on, through small creeks and stony
country, and we reach a plain with the gorge in the
distance. As we neared this latter, the scenery was
simply magnificent; the sun was on the eve of setting,
and his last rays falling upon the copper-tinted faces of
the rugged hills —rich in some places with vegetation,
and in others with parti-coloured flowers, the scene
formed a gorgeous illusion which was at once dispelled
hy the sun’s disappearance. We entered the gorge, or
mountain pass, at 6.30 o’clock. It is about three-
quarters of a mile through this chain of mountains, and
in some places their over-hanging summits seemed to
meet; the effect on the mind in threading this tortuous
and narrow pass, is that of loneliness and desolation; as
we reached the exit a huge rock stands out—grim,
ominous, alone, and threatening ; it is about the size of
the larger of the “ Glass Mountains,” visible from Sand,
gate, and its overhanging hrow scowled down upon us
in the dusk of evening, as if intent on our destruction.
We reached the Main Camp Hotel (if worthy of the
name) at 7 o’clock, and after getting out our horses and
hobbling them, we got into conversation with Nicholls,
the landlord ; he had been drinking for the last three
months, and looked like a mad man—an impression
strengthened by the appearance of his sliirt hanging
31
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
loose from his moleskins, and his right shoulder out of
joint and in a sling, the result of a recent fight. After
tea, Charley (the driver) and self, started for the water-
hole, about 500 yards distant, for a swim; hut as we
took the wrong track (it was pitch dark), Nicholls sung
out, “ This way, chaps, I’ll show yon !” As we groped
our way along he fell about a dozen times, and at last
exclaimed “Here’s the place, chaps!” He had hardly
spoken when he stumbled, and then he tumbled head
foremost into the spacious lagoon ; after splashing about
for a few seconds he roared out that he was drowning;
but he soon got into shallow water, and thence to
terra firma —considerably more frightened than hurt.
The water was lukewarm ; we disported ourselves for
fully half-an-hour, and got back to the hotel very much
refreshed. We turned in about 10 o’clock, and Charley
camped out by the buggy. I now regretted that I had
not brought a revolver ■with me, as I had been enter-
tained on several occasions, since leaving
with terrible stories of the dangers of this rangy part of
the country, and of those who had been waylaid and
murdered. About 2 o’clock in the morning I was
awakened by the throwing of bricks and big stones at
the side of the house, and Nicholls uttering frightful
imprecations ; he got up, it seems, at the hour
named and because his cattle dog would not follow
him, he almost killed it. His wife is a very
agreeable woman, and they have five small children.
32
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
As the nearest school is twenty miles distant, they have
a governess engaged for the instruction of the three
elder, who were in school when we left, and the other
two amusing themselves on the red clay floor, with a
hig gin bottle. We started away soon after breakfast,
and crossed several steep creeks, hut they were all dry.
In more than one instance we had to take the horses
out, and land the buggy ourselves, clear of the creek.
We shortly after entered upon some plains—the grass
on either side rising as high as the buggy; the hills (the
fastnesses of the hostile, cattle-spearing blacks), were
about thirty miles distant, and as later on we neared
them, I kept my eyes about me, but saw nothing of
them. We completed our next stage on arrival at the
Middle Camp Hotel, kept by an Italian named Fred,
who in appearance is as “ mild a mannered man as ever
scuttled ship or cut a throat.” His hotel is situated on
the bank of the Marran River; he is the solitary
occupant of the M.C. Hotel, and frequently the only
face he will see for a week is the mailman ; the most
noticeable article of furniture in his bar room is a gun
suspended behind the counter. After a hearty meal and
an hour’s spell, we again took to the road, and after a
four miles drive arrived at the Bridgewater station at
3 o’clock. After delivering the mails there was the
usual rush for the Queenslander and the Town and
Country Journal. I seated myself under the verandah,
closed in with bushes and roofed with grass. In this
c
33
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Parity.
cool retreat I recruited my mental and physical energies,
by a perusal of late Brisbane journals and the half of a
splendid water melon, which fruit grows here in abun-
dance. I was soon joined by several others—passengers
and residents of the district. The conversation turning
on blacks, I was able to glean the following details
regarding the summary law of “aggression and reprisal”
in vogue here for the protection of property. It seems
that lately a great number of cattle had been speared by
the blacks on the surrounding stations ; valuable brood
mares had been killed, and their foals left alive by their
side as if in mockery. The Inspector and the black
troopers are then sent for ; when they arrive at a station
where a white man has been killed or cattle speared,
they ascertain the probable whereabouts of the marau-
ders. If they succeed in gathering a mob together,
they surround and drive them towards the station as
prisoners ! The Inspector and the station owner canter
on before —leaving the troopers in irresponsible charge ;
when they arrive at the station an hour or two after-
wards, hut minus the prisoners, the Inspector naturally
enquires, “Well, where are the wild blackfellows ?”
The answer is both lucid and concise : —“ They been
try to run away, and me been shoot ’em.” I was thus
enlightened as to the standard definition of that most
ambiguous word—“ dispersion.” Sometimes they spare
the women and children. The troopers are from differ-
ent tribes, and nothing delights them more than these
34
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros'. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
murderous raids upon a tribe to whom they all are
strangers; sometimes, when only a few are shot, they
hury the bodies; but when the slaughter is on a whole-
sale scale, they gather the remains in a vast heap and
hum them. Many a lone white man journeying these
parts has met his death at the hands of the hostile
blacks. The half civilized among them are always the
most dangerous. About five o’clock we reached Devon-
court station, and I was glad to alight from the trap,
for we had all been so promiscuously mixed up and
wedged, that our limbs had become partially crippled.
After taking out the horses, the driver and I visited the
lagoon and had a refreshing hath. It contained equal
parts of mud and water, hut was not a bad apology for
the “ Simon pure.” We had an inferior tea. A quan-
tity of smoked meat is used on the station, and when
served up in an old tin dish, and tea without milk, and
sugar from which the molasses has not been drained, the
only incentive to appeasing even ravenous appetite is the
unalterable law that “Nature abhors a vacuum.”
Quite lately a big half civilized hlackfellow, named
Sandy, induced a very useful and well-disposed black to
clear from the station with him and take to the moun-
tains ; having thus decoyed him, he killed him, out off
his head, and roasted the body, with which he regaled
himself till it was consumed. This fellow is a perfect
terror to all the blacks. He has been known to take a
baby from its mother’s arms, and to kill and eat it on
c 2
35
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyasov Bros’. Jams for Parity.
the spot. A white man on the station has this mis-
creant “ spotted,” and has determined that he shall be
also “ pottedhe only waits a favouring opportunity
to send him following in the wake of his victims. I
need not fill this journal with details of frightful cruelty,
which so frequently occur in these remote districts. All
past history attests the fact that the inferior races of the
earth must vanish away before advancing civilization,
and this result must be soonest consummated in the case
of a people who cannot be civilised! We started next
morning at 8 o’clock, passing through the usual kind of
country. The grass in many places overtopped the
buggy as we wended our way through an almost indis-
tinguishable track ; the ever-recurring creek crossed our
path at short intervals—some very stony, others with
heavy, dry, sandy bottoms, and very steep banks. This
is a portion of the country traversed by the ill-fated
Burke and Wills’ expedition, and one of the adjacent
rivers is named the Wills River. We passed within
20 miles of a remarkably-shaped mountain, called the
“ Monastery.” It is so called from its resemblance to
one. At 3 o’clock we camped at a lagoon in order to
spell the horses. We took a bath, and then boiled the
“ billy ” and dined al fresco. Resuming our journey,
we arrived at the dam about 4 o’clock; it is a splendid
sheet of water, and a great boon in dry seasons. There
were two tents pitched on its banks, for the accommoda-
tion of three men who were engaged in making some
36
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
repairs; we had to camp here, and sleep out—for the
first time, in my case. I took the gun, and went round
the dam in hopes of a shot, and Charlie went in search
of two horses he had lost there previously. I had one
unsuccessful shot; I thought I would alter my tactics,
so I stripped, and laved in the tepid waters of the dam.
While swimming about, a covey of plovers alighted on
the water, close by. I made all haste for the gun, and
after wiping my shoulder, to prevent the butt-end from
slipping, I blazed away. Result —nil! The sight of a
white man banging away, completely attired in puris
naturalibus, must indeed have formed a most picturesque
feature in this otherwise silent and solitary landscape,
and I doubt not that such an unwonted apparition would
have had a more deterrent effect upon a whole tribe
of the murdering, superstitious blacks, than would a
platoon of well-armed hushmen, arrayed in evening
costume. I returned to finish my bath, and then re-
traced my steps to camp. We took our tea “ sitting on
a rail,” which was elevated by supports at each end.
After tea, we sat by the huge fire, and the conversation
turned on the Cloncurry diggings. One man present
had three camels, and was on his way to Oloneurry;
they are ugl lT -looking brutes, hut splendid beasts of
burden, and will cany five hundredweight twenty-five
miles a day with perfect ease. One man can lead
twenty of them, as a string is passed through the nose
of the leader, and the rest follow. A great many are
37
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’ . Jams for Purity .
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
used to convey goods to BirdsviUe —a township on the
Queensland border. Sometimes they arrive fifty in a
mob, and can carry goods at lower rates than the team-
sters. Before turning in, I got out my flute, and of
course played a few of my best tunes. After this, we
bid good-night, and “ every one turned to his own
way,” for it was a case of general camping-out.
Charlie and I camped beside the buggy. After making
a shake down of long, dry grass, and arranging our
mosquito nets by means of two uprights sunk in the
ground, we crawled in and drew the blankets over us_
Charley was soon off, but in vain I sued the drowsy
god. What with the hooting of owls, the screeching
of white cockatoos, the jeerings of the laughing jackass,
the wind blowing my mosquito net horizontally, and
the big frogs leaping around me with as palpable as a
human footstep, I worked myself into such a state of
nervousness as to forbid sleep—a feeling not allayed by
remembering to have heard that at times the blacks had
proved highly dangerous at this lagoon—having mur-
dered and eaten many a one—especially Chinamen; but
it must be borne in mind that this was my first experi-
ence of camping out. A great many of the blacks about
here have been frightened of late by the incursions of
the black troopers, and the inevitable consequences.
They never attack during the night, but wait for
daylight, and then pounce on you when you are after
your horses. I was glad when we got to “ The Eocky ”
38
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
(27 miles journey), at 11.30 o’clock the next day. I
was fairly knocked up ; however, after a cup of tea, 0.
Taylor, the two drivers and self, went down to the Burke
Elver and had a fine bogy. This place is half way,
and we change drivers. There being only one tent hero ;
it was again a general camping out case. 0. Taylor
has the contract for the mails, and owns about fifty
head of horses ; he was formerly in the police force, and
is a thorough bushman. On one occasion he went in
search of a defaulting blaekfellow. He was absent for
three weeks, with only a tomahawk and a gun; he
tracked the fellow and brought him in, but he got away.
He again gave chase and again arrested him, and again
the blaekfellow escaped. The third he went, but he
returned alone. He did not want to bring him back
alive ! After leaving Devoncourt station we came to no
house until we reached Homside Station —80 miles
distant. It was here we camped. It was blowing
pretty stiffly, and I had not lowered the mosquito net.
I had been star gazing sleeplessly for about a couple of
hours, when a passing cloud distilled a few rain drops ;
the wind then dropped, and the mosquito plague began.
I hastily adjusted the net, but could not sleep. The
blacks’ dogs were running about and barking all the
live-long night. The blacks’ camp was within
a few yards of us. Their method of erecting
their gunyahs is far more substantial than
anything of the kind I have seen in New South
39
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Parity.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Wales. They are properly built in a framework of
saplings, then hark is laid on, and .above that a thick
layer of grass and clay, thus rendering them weather-
proof. In shape, they are long and narrow. Their
fires are kept lighted night and day, in front of their
gunyahs. They are extremely wakeful, and when I
would startle, under various influences, I would see
either the gin or her blackfellow standing at their
castle entrance, and smoking furiously. After a fine
breakfast, next morning, we prepared for the road.
Taylor really does his level best to make things com-
fortable. He put in two fine-looking fresh horses )
and away we sped, with a new driver, fof' the other
half of the road. Travelling through this part of the
country is wearyingly monotonous; the same unending
round of dry or swollen creeks, intersecting plains
covered with a growth of rank, luxuriant grass, and
seldom a solitary tree, even, to vary the scene. We
soon came to the junction of the Burke River and Ivor’s
Creek. The crossing-place is wide, and tried the horses
with a long and arduous pull. I noticed a quantity
of stone, which to me wore an appearance of opal;
but was informed that it was the residt of volcanic
action on the quartz in ages past.
At 11.30 we reached Nomside station; the horses
were nearly winded, and for the last two miles could
but just drag along. We could see the station fully
two miles before arriving there. The first thing I
40
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams,
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
noticed were some half-dozen blacks’ camps ; the driver
pointed out the track these blacks took when hound on
a hunting expedition ; the wild blacks of the mountains
are called myalls, as many of them have never seen a
white man. In the dry season, when they can’t get
water on the hills, they follow the cattle tracks down to
the water, carrying their coolemans (a piece of tree
rudely gouged out for the purpose of holding water);
they then wait until the cattle are returning, and go
ahead of them in order that their footprints may he
obliterated by the heavier tread of the stock. When
the trap stopped I took my small bag and made for the
house, with the presentiment that it would prove my
shelter for the night. The manager of Nomside is an
elderly gentleman named Buckley, and I had often
heard him spoken of on the road as “ a really good
sort.” I found him at home, and after a few words he
invited me in. I here found myself at once at home.
I thought at first he was Scotch, and was surprised to
learn that he was a French gentleman from Cork. The
Chinaman soon came in and laid the table for dinner;
it was quite a treat to see everything laid out so tempt-
ingly. Nornside is supplied with a well of splendid
pure water, which makes excellent tea. The only men
employed on this station are two stockmen, a “ rouse-
about ” or generally useful man, and the Chinaman
cook. When mustering cattle they are assisted by
stockmen from neighbouring stations, and Buckley, in
41
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
return, renders the obligation mutual. After writing as
much as I could of this diary—chatting with my host
at the same time—evening crept on. The gins then
commenced to water the garden in front of the house ;
they carry the water-buckets on their heads ; they make
themselves useful in many ways, and seem perfectly
content on the station. Not so the hlaekfellows ; it is no
uncommon thing for them to take “ French leave ” and
clear out for a month together; during these periods
they visit their wild haunts for a change ; hut, however,
their presence on the stations cannot he relied on, and
they are liable to desert during the busiest time. After
tea, all hands congregated on the verandah, when I got
out my flute and discoursed a few tunes; we then
retired. This is about the worst place I have seen for
big spiders; they run about the wall just like cock-
roaches. I could count a couple of dozen at a time.
They are speckled all over with red and brown spots.
As I was informed that they were harmless, I settled
myself to sleep composedly, but still they look anything
but inviting as they run round the side of your bed. I
had a welcome spell here until three the next day
(Sunday), when we harnessed up and started away. I
was strongly tempted to remain at Nornside for a week,
and then take the next coach onward, but on second
thought I determined to push on. We arrived at
William at 5 o’clock. The stockman, Chinaman, and a
young fellow were all taking their ease, and reading
42
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Uyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
under the verandah. After taking out the horses, I
entered the hut where we had to camp for the night.
The walls of it are well lined with pictures from the
Illustrated London News and Graphic, &c., which had
the effect of detracting from the general nakedness of
the room. After tea, the usual lamp in vogue in
these wayside shanties was brought into requisition.
It consists of a jam or fish tin filled with fat, and a
thick wick of cotton is inserted. It emits both a
stinking and a smoky light. I tried writing by it, hut
in vain, as it flickered so as to dazzle and pain my
eyes. Before tea, I went with the stockman to visit
the gunyahs’, or blacks’ camp. They are described to
me as being a most lazy lot, their highest aim and
ambition being the gratification of their natural
appetites. I have often encountered blacks about
stations and towns —both in Queensland and New
South Wales —but have never met them in so wild a
state as they are here. They were all squatted down
by their fires. One of the gins was busily engaged
in grinding between two flat boards a variety of grass
seed, which is thus reduced to the consistency of
flour. The seeds are first moistened in a trough or
cooleman, which is close at hand. They were all a
most hideous looking lot of cannibals. One of the gins
was busy making pituri. This pituri is a bush which
the natives chop up into small pieces and then chew.
They then take a small green bush, called “ gee gee,”
43
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
and after burning it to ashes, which are placed in a
hollowed out piece of wood, the pituri is removed from
the mouth, and rolled in these ashes. This disgust-
ing compound is then rolled into the shape of a cigar.
The cannibal chief, or chief cannibal, sticks it behind
his ear, and when a general chew is agreed on, he
sets the example, and it is passed around until it
returns to the custodian. The effect of indulgence in
this bush delicacy is simply to render its votaries half
stupefied. Eats are very abundant in this part of the
country. The blacks eat them after roasting them,
without even removing the hair. Snakes and iguanas
they regard as luxuries, and with them are as rare as
pork and veal are in a common Brisbane boarding-
house. Their mode of cooking beef is to collect a lot
of good-sized stones, which they thoroughly heat by
placing them in a hollow in the ground and lighting a
strong fire over them; the ashes are then cleared off,
and the meat placed upon the stones; over all is placed
a thick layer of clay, which keeps the heat in and
excludes the air. Eats and wallabies are polished off>
hair and all, in a semi-raw state. After I had turned
in on a stretcher made of cowhide, I was kept awake by
the noise from the blacks’ camp; they were having a
“ corrobboree ” and kept excellent time with their
boomerangs as they clicked them together. They seem,
in their own way, to be happy enough, and to enjoy
their simple savage lives and habits without aspiration
44
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams,
or care. As I before remarked, this river (the Wills) is
named after the explorer, and some of the trees, higher
up, are marked hy the ill-fated expedition. When I
rose next morning the only one about was the China-
man—the rest being fast asleep and camped outside.
After breakfast, a blackboy brought up the horses, and
after taking in provisions (as we had a 40 miles drive to
Boulia, and to take dinner on the road), we started
away at 7.30. About noon, we arrived at a big creek
which empties into the Wills (12 o’clock); after turning
the horses out, we enjoyed a bath, a billy of tea, and a
snack. During our stay here, I wrote part of my
journal under a tree, but also under difficulties, as a hot
wind was blowing pretty stiffly across the plains. We
had only 15 miles to get to Boulia, and sighted the town
three miles before arrival. It is situated on the Burke
River, and is built on an extensive plain. We arrived
at 4.30 o’clock, and after my customary refreshment
(bath and tea) I felt none the worse for my 240 miles
staging.
The township of Boulia is situated 693 miles north-
west of Townsville, and 1700 miles from Brisbane. As
yet it is in its infancy, and after this fluctuating period
of its growth and prosperity, will, I doubt not, rise to
wealth and importance. There are three hotels here.
The principal one (at which I stay), is The Australian.
The landlord is a most accommodating man, and leaves
nothing undone to ensure your comfort. There are
45
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams •
three stores here, Post and Telegraph Office combined,
with blacksmith’s shop, court-house and boarding-house,
but its present population is only about fifty whites.
There are a few Chinamen to be added. Billiards are
2s. fid. a game here, Horrocks’ A is Is., and holland
from 2s. fid. to 3s. per yard ; print, 25.; jam, 2s. per tin ;
bunch of vegetables, Is.; 21b. tin of fruit, 45.; flour, Bd.
lb.; potatoes, from 2s. fid. to 3s. per stone ; white sugar,
Bd. lb.; rice, 14d. lb.; 21b. loaf, 25.; 11b. do., Is.; etc.,
etc. Boulia is 240 miles from the nearest township.
They have to pay here freight on goods either 500 miles
from Normanton, or 450 miles from Torrens Creek,
and sometimes it takes 10 months for the teams to
arrive. The goods in most instances are paid for before
delivery. So is business conducted in the rising town-
ship of Boulia. The freight used to be, after passing
all charges, £6O per ton from Normanton, so it will be
readily understood that it is not all champagne and
billiards with the business people here. Camel hawkers
are now opening up a trade. One man came into town
recently with a string of fifty camels, laden with general
merchandise, and offering very reasonably. He dis-
posed of the greater bulk of his goods. There is neither
priest, minister, lawyer, nor any such kindred humanized
luxuries in Boulia, neither doctor nor chemist, so they
manage as best they can. Many have perished from
thirst around this district, having had to travel fifty or
sixty miles without water. The Government are now,
46
DIAEY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
Dyason Bros’. Pare Lemon and Melon Jams.
however, erecting dams along these dry stages. The
following are the men of note in the place:—E. B.
Eggleton, P.M.; J. E. Jones, storekeeper; Symmon,
post and telegraph master; J. Allan (half-caste), Her
Majesty’s representative in running the mails to
Winton ; Gr. J. Brooks, Tattersalls Hotel—(a good all
round man, fond of sports, &c.); Gr. Woods, of the
Royal Hotel, and a photographer (small cartes, 30s. a
dozen) ; Sergeant Green and three constables; one
black trooper, and others, not forgetting W. Walker,
driver of the Cloncurry mail.
On Sunday morning, January 30th, at 9 o’clock, I
had my samples packed on the trap for Winton. The
“ turn out ” is a very light vehicle to travel with.
There are laths of hickory wood laid from one axle-tree
to another, in the centre of which is placed the seat. My
samples were packed on the hack of the trap. The only
apprehension on my part was owing to the absence of
any kind of brake. The trap itself is light enough for
a hoy to run with easily. All being ready, we dashed
along over the plain. Nothing of noteworthy inte-
rest occurred for the first five miles, when I observed
what seemed to me a black cloud, almost touching the
horizon, hut the driver informed me it was Mount
Hudson. The mirage has the same effect on this
as on timbered level lands, as at one time you would
only see the upper half, the lower presenting the
appearance of water. This mountain is a great land
47
DIARY OP A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams■
mark for fifty miles round the country. We arrived at
Allan Creek at 4 o’clock, a f ter doing 33 miles. We
changed horses here. The contractor of the mail is a
Queensland native, black, and a fair scholar—having
been brought up with a good family in Brisbane. His
gin, or wife, lives at the camp with all the blackfellows,
and has three fine children. The blacks, with the
exception of this woman, have to do the best they can
for food. I had a survey of them as they were seated
in their gunyahs; one litle fellow, some 12 months old,
lay fast asleep in a cooleman—a utensil before described;
another chubby, healthy-looking little shaver sat very
quietly eating pig-weed ; I went to the buggy and got
them some sugar, of which they are very fond. After
our tea we were joined by a Mr. Blair, who had stopped
to camp for the night; he proved excellent company.
When about to turn in we heard one of the gins crying
out at the camp; we had noticed two strange-looking
blackfellows who had arrived at the camp late in the
day. Mr. Blair was curious to know the cause of the
commotion, and as we started up we saw an object about
300 yards distant which proved to he a black ; he held
a big fire stick, which he was waving vigorously. We
lost no time in confronting him, as we thought he was
either signalling as an incentive to mischief, in which
we might he disagreeably involved, or otherwise, that
the abduction of a gin was contemplated. When asked
what was the noise in camp, he said : —“ Rain fellow
48
DIAEY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
come up—me keep ’em backnot satisfied with his
answer, we made threatening gestures to elicit, •if
possible, a more candid avowal; but he stuck to what
he had said. We then marched him back to the camp,
and there found that the old fellow was regarded by
them as a man of note and of wonderful virtues, one of
which was to dispel rain clouds by the waving of a fire-
stick and muttered incantations. It appeared that the
gin we had heard yelling, was recalling one of the dogs
that was following after the high priest of the mystic
and occult sciences. Having thus failed to establish even
a prima facie ease against our prisoner, we released
him—evidently to his own great satisfaction. Some
half-dozen blacks were sitting by the fire ; the others in
various attitudes lay sleeping here and there—their
slumbers undisturbed by any vision of care or prospect
of dishonoured promissory notes. The blacks, here,
make a great many spears, which they barter with other
blacks for “ pituri.”
We started next morning for Lucknow Station—
-45 miles distant—passing through much rangy country.
We reached the station at 5 o’clock, with the same two
horses. They were about to kill a bullock as we drove
up, and going to the stockyard I saw Mr. Eggleton, the
manager of the station, drop him with a bullet; he was
a fine-looking beast, and turned the scale at 12 cwt. We
turned in early, as we had 50 miles to do on the morrow,
but owing to delay in trying to catch the horses we did
D
49
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
not get away until 8 o’clock. The distance by the
usual road to J. Horn’s camp, is 60 miles ; but we took
the new track and thus cut off 10 miles ; some 20 miles
this side Horn’s, we had repeated showers, which made
the roads heavy, and proved severe on the horses, and we
frequently had to alight and free the wheels of the
tenacious mud by means of a tomahawk. As we drove
into the storm the rain fell with the force of a shower-
bath, and our two horses were gradually getting “ used
up” ; it took us three hours to make the last three miles,
and this was only accomplished by both of us alighting
{minus our boots, as the sticky mud adhering to them
would have impeded our efforts), and assisting the horses
by pushing the buggy from behind. At last we came
to the creek ; it was only 1J miles further to Horn’s ;
it was still raining; the driver went in advance to
reconnoitre and shortly returned ; his teeth were chat-
tering, and he was shivering like one palsied. He said
we should have to camp there all night. I took off my
coat, which was completely saturated with rain ; it kept
me warm, however, while on, and on removing it I also
took a chill, and could hardly “ yahber ” to the driver
intelligibly. After we had taken out and hobbled ou r
horses, I made up my mind that I would rather swim
the mile and half than suffer the punishment and the
risk of camping out in the rain. I asked Jack, the
driver, if he could swim, and he said “ a littlel
divested myself of my wet clothing ; it was very dark
50
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dijason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dvason Bros. Pure Lemon and, Melon Jams.
■ j> 2
now, and the stream was running pretty swiftly; I
went in, and at the second step was breast high ; after
a few paces and a few strokes the stream shallowed, and
I got over easily; I then returned for the clothes, and
Jack and I again faced the creek; I kept close to him
for fear he should slip, hut, however, we crossed without
mishap. I did not resume my wet clothes, as we had
two more creeks to cross, hut only small ones. Jack
was arrayed in his shirt. We crossed the two creeks
with ease, and when we reached the contractor’s hut at
12 o’clock (the coach was due at 8 o’clock), they were
all asleep hut a hig dog, which came trotting down to us,
and growling in a most ominous manner. We could
not meet with a stone, even, to defend ourselves, so we
bethought ourselves of the “ blarney-stone,” and
addressed him by all the endearing and complimentary
terms and epithets which the hollowness of human
friendship could suggest; the ruse succeeded to per-
fection. We roused the mailman up, and after getting
a change of everything, we camped on the floor of the
tent; mosquitoes ad infinitum, hut we were too much
knocked up to feel annoyance even from them, and fell
soundly to sleep almost immediately. When taking
breakfast next morning, conversation turned upon the
Darling River, and they recollected having met me there
years before. They showed me the girl who was then a
baby and to whom I gave a marked 3d. hit, which coin
they have yet. What very unexpected meetings fre-
51
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyasoa Bros’. Jams for Parity.
quently transpire in the history of a lifetime! Mrs.
Horn is a very homely woman, has five children, and,
from necessity, has to educate them herself. There was
no time to lose. Mr. Horn had to get the mail men
away. This being half way, we changed drivers. I had
also to see about getting my samples from the buggy.
The creek was gradually rising, and we had to make
several trips to the buggy in transferring my luggage.
Horn is a man of about six feet in height, hut was sorely
exercised in carrying over one of my bundles of samples;
its weight and the treacherous nature of his footing caused
frequent slips and flounderings, hut he cleverly contrived
to keep my samples above water until he made higher and
firmer ground. I swam by his side. My portmanteau
was the next to follow, and I was of opinion that he should
bring that over too; but Mr. Horn “didn’t seem to see it,”
so, therefore, the only alternative was for me to take it
myself ; so placing it on my head, I started for “the other
side of Jordan,” and after performing a series of acrobatic
gyrations and grand salaams—highly suggestive of a
cross between helpless intoxication and the vagaries of the
skating rink—l crossed the troubled creek in safety with a
dry portmanteau. I regret to say, however, that many of
my samples got wet through the rain.
After all my luggage had been packed upon two
pack-horses, I was supplied with a fine one for my own
use, and off we started on a 35 miles stage. When
about two miles from Horn’s, we came to a creek that
52
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jeans.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity,
was running strong; I went in and found it up to my
breast. The mailman returned to Horn to know what
was to he done, who replied, curtly, that “He must go
on with the mails.” We had to chance it, therefore; he
entered first, leading a pack-horse, and crossed safely—
the water, however, covering the saddles. I followed
after, leading my packhorse, and after the usual amount
of snorting and floundering, joined the driver on the
opposite hank. We left Horn’s at 9 o’clock, and
arrived at Ada Station at 8 p.m. It is very tiresome
jogging along with pack-horses for so many hours. I
retired shortly after tea, and it was again pouring down
in torrents. We intended an early start in the morn-
ing, but could not cross Oaddell Creek, which was a
“ hanker.” I entered it for a swim before breakfast, hut
could hardly stand against the current; after dinner
(12 o’clock) it went down considerably, and we crossed
easily. We met ■with no intervening creeks of import-
ance between this last and the stockman’s hut on the
Diamantina River. We arrived there at 9 o’clock, after
a ride of 37 miles ; it was very dark, and I was glad
to dismount. The stockman and a Chinaman were the
only two to greet us; the rest had turned in. My
bedding consisted of a flour bag, my mosquito net, and
waterproof coat for a cover ; overwearied and oppressed
with intense heat, it was past 1 o’clock before I slept.
We had the horses in early, and got away next morning
at 6.30 o’clock to do a5O miles jaunt; arriving at the
53
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Pyason Bros*. Jams for Purity .
Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and, Melon Jams.
Diamantiria we found it was on the rise, and running
pretty strongly, but still crossable ; we at once faced it;
its width at this point is 1J miles, hut it runs in three
channels ; it was a great relief to me when I got safely
over. I was far from well, and filled with strange,
nervous fancies ; for instance, supposing the river were
to rise and encompass us on all sides, would death by
starvation or drowning be the end of us ? &c., &o. We
reached Eldersley Station about 9 o’clock ; it is a fine
station, with good substantial stone houses on it; in
fact, it presented the appearance of a small town. We
only waited long enough to get the mail bag, and then
started for Collingwood; it is a small place, situated on
the Western River, which we had to cross after dinner;
and it was about time, for it was rising fast. We had
then 20 miles to do before arriving at a stockman’s hut
on the same station; it rained hard for two hours
before arrival, 12 miles from Winton; after taking tea
and changing horses, off we slogged in the rain and
slush. I made sure the rainy season had set in, as in
some places we had to feel our way through sheets of
water a half mile wide. The road to Winton winds
along the Western River. When we arrived at any of
the inlets or billyhongs, caused by its overflow, the
mailman would gallop ahead to take soundings, before
attempting a general crossing; arriving within two
miles of Winton, the mailman started ahead to prospect
the condition of the Yarraman Creek ; he soon returned
54
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
and reported it to be a “ swimmerwe took off the
saddles and laid them on the top of the fence, and the
mails and samples we lodged in the fork of a tree ; we
then, after hobbling out the horses, prepared to swim
over. The stream was running very swiftly, hut with
our best efforts we managed to make the crossing on the
opposite side. I felt much inclined for a quiet rest after
my uncommon exertion ; hut no, we had to walk two
wearying miles to town, through mud and water, where
we at length arrived at 11 o’clock. I got some tea and
at once tinned in, thoroughly wearied out. Next
morning the mailman went round the head of the creek,
and when he had arrived at the tree where mails and
samples were deposited, found the water more than a
foot deep all around the place. He had to return with
the horses by the same way. A great many of my
samples got wet and others damp. On opening the
bundles I found, also, two samples of the Winton
c entipede, which had been driven by stress of weather
to amalgamate with my samples. I was surprised to
meet with P. Davis here. I knew him many years ago ;
he was at one time at Rockhampton; I spent yesterday
afternoon with him; he lives in a comfortable iron
cottage, and has plenty of poultry and pigeons around
him. He takes a great interest in the amusements of the
town, and seems to be as good a Tim Flaherty as ever.
He has, however, married and settled down, and his
family include wife and two children.
55
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


ason Bros’, jams for Purity •
Dyason Bros’. Pare Lemon and Melon Jams.
Winton, like other towns in this region, has seen its
best days for some time to come. The storekeepers who
have been there for the last seven or eight years have all
done well. There has been much improvement made
during that time—such as fencing, dam-making, &c.
There are a number of men about the town “ waiting
for something to turn up,” but I’m afraid it is but a
poor look out. There are six hotels and three stores,
with a population of about 200. D. Oorfield and
Fitzmaurice are the principal storekeepers. They left
Townsville in 1878 with teams loaded with goods ; they
forthwith, on arrival, commenced building a store. On
their arrival there was only one public-house marking
the site now occupied by Winton. It was a bold enter-
prise for these men to thus venture a journey of over
300 miles, after having invested their hard-earned cash
in a doubtful speculation; both men were teamsters
before storekeepers, and good fortune has smiled upon
both. Mr. T. Synett started in a similar way, and has
also been fortunate ; but the tide of opposition is now
reaching the district from the coast, which draws away a
deal of the money that used to he left in Winton. It is
a great sporting town, and when a few squatters are in
town they can get up races in a couple of hours time ;
the course is only half-a-mile from the town. A public
school was opened for the first time in May last. I paid
a visit there one morning; it is about the size of a four-
roomed cottage. The schoolmaster, Mr. Carmody, has
56
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros'• Pure Lemon and, Melon Jams.
advanced the little ones well, so far; he informed me
that he had much up-hill work at first owing to the very
unsophisticated element he had to contend with. One
morning a new pupil entered the school-house, aged 14
years; he was ignorant of the alphabet; the master told
him to take his hat off, which he did by throwing it on
the floor, hut he soon picked it up and replaced it on his
head —manifestating, at the same time, a strong dis-
position to holt. After his hat was again removed and
hung up, he was told to sit behind one of the desks,
upon which he placed one hand on it, and gracefully
vaulted over. With such virgin soil as this to operate
upon, and with no heresies to eradicate, Mr. Carmody
will be able “to teach the young idea how to shoot ”
straight. Winton is situated on a plain; there are no
places to be visited for a day’s pleasuring, unless to the
bank of the Western Eiver to do battle with the
mosquitoes. I must now pack up for to-morrow’s
journey.
I started away on Sunday, at 1 o’clock, by Cobb and
Co.’s coach for Muttaburra. I was the only passenger,
and we arrived at the dam (35 miles) at 10 o’clock.
Towards the latter part of the stage it was very dark,
and on two or three occasions we got off the road, but
soon found it again. We started again next morning at
6 o’clock, and arrived at Muttaburra (75 miles) at
8 p.m. It was a long but a pleasant drive. There was
little of interest to note upon the journey. We passed
57
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
through the usual open country till within ten miles
of the town, when it becomes well timbered. Kangaroos
are very numerous hereabouts. Within a few miles of
the town we reached the summit of a hill, from which a
good view of the country may he had. Muttaburra has
now a splendid dam. During the drought water was a
scarce luxury to the townspeople; they were solely
dependent upon the muddy holes in the district. The
Government have conferred a great boon to all in this
region of country. The tanks along the various stages
(otherwise dry), have an average capacity of 25,000
square yards ; they are all fenced in, and a man placed
in charge of each one; posted up, is a list of charges
made for all beasts that are watered. They are not much
used at present, as there is plenty of water about the
country. Muttaburra is a well-laid out town —all the
streets are at right angles and wide. Looking down
the principal street, five wool laden teams are in view—
some carrying 36 hales and others 45; the wool is
raised to a height which imparts to the teams, when
viewed from afar, the appearance of houses ; some were
drawn by from 14 to 18 horses, and others by the same
number of bullocks; they gave quite an animated
appearance to the town as they stopped in the main
street, and had as camp followers some 40 or 50 goats.
These animals are of great service in supplying milk and
fresh meat on the road. A hooded cart generally
follows each team with provisions, and often carries the
58
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams,
Dyason Bros’ • Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
teamster’s family. These teamsters appear quite jovial
and content, although they sometimes have to rough it
fearfully. The women and children get accustomed to
it, and many of them lead this nomadic, hahitationless
life till they attain to years of maturity. In fact, there
have been instances in which birth, marriage, maternity,
and death have completed the history of many females
bom on the road, and destined to live and die there;
the women and children, old enough, are quite expert in
harnessing up and in tracking stray horses and
bullocks. Muttaburra boasts of two stores, five hotels,
and a branch of the Q,. N. Bank, a lock-up, but
neither church nor chapel. A minister entered the
hotel during my stay there; he was dressed in mole
riding pants, coloured shirt, helmet hat, and fly veil,
and was enjoying a good cigar; he had just entered
the town. Empson’s travelling theatrical troupe were
staying with me at the Royal; the company consists
of Mr. and Mrs. E. and two actors; they have a
coach and horses, and travel from town to town—
sometimes doing very well when races and kindred
amusements are on.
I only stayed two days in Muttaburra, and then
booked for Aramac in the opposition line of coaches,
which are run by H. Chaffield. We left at 8 o’clock ;
it was a beautifully clear morning, and we anticipated
a pleasant trip, but when we had gone about 500 yards
the near hind wheel sunk into one of the deep wheel
59
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’■ Jams for Purity.
tracks, and in endeavouring to free it the wheel smashed.
I was seated in front, and did not feel much of the shock,
as the body of the buggy was almost touching the
ground. In about an hour’s time we were supplied
with a new wheel, and reached Sardine all right, and
started from there with four horses. There was no hrak e
on the trap, and it took a skilful whip to pace them
along; the offside leader was an accomplished kicker,
and would occasionally kick himself over the traces;
these lively little episodes, on his part, did much in
varying an otherwise monotonous journey. We arrived
at Stainborough at 8 o’clock, expecting to go on to
Aramao the same day, hut the driver remained there all
night. I was content, for Ido not admire travelling in
the darkness over deeply-rutted roads, dotted with a
liberal sprinkling of stumps, and with four fresh horses
in hand. After we had partaken of tea (including some
nice fish that had been caught in the creek), we went
about a half-mile to see a “ oorrohoree.” There were
about 60 blackfellows present—some with their bodies
fantastically painted with broad white circles, and others
with their faces similarly embellished; they were sur-
rounded by large fires, and went through their perform-
ance as if under the immediate inspiration of their great
prototype —the devil himself ! They were all hungry,
and had met together the day before to go to Aramao—
-14 miles distant. Their usual tucker (snakes and
opossums) fail them entirely in this district. They
60
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Di/ason Bros’. First Prize Jams■
brought their “ corrohoree ” to a close shortly after our
arrival, saying they were “ too much hungry.” We
had to camp out at this stage, and the mosquitoes, as
usual, were by far too familiar. Upon starting next
morning, we overtook several mobs of the blacks on
their hungry way to Aramac ; the gin, as usual, bearing
the big load, and her warlike lord strutting in front,
armed with a few spears, waddies, and
These blacks are very fond of their dogs ; I noticed one
gin cheerfully carrying, in addition to her big load, an
over-grown mangy mongrel. By some perverted
instinct they will sometimes suckle these young curs,
and leave their own offspring to perish through neglect.
Some of these “ warriors ” are big strapping fellows, and
as straight as a rush. They are decreasing in numbers
rapidly. In this part of the country they are all harm,
jess. We passed the “ Murdering Dam ” —a bushman
from Aramac camped there and was murdered while
sleeping by a man who knew he had money. The black
trackers traced the murderer to Bowen Downs Station,
where he was captured, and shortly after suffered the
extreme penalty of the law. We reached Aramac about
10 o’clock. One of our passengers, a grand comet player,
sounded a military call as we neared the town, which
livened some of the folks up. You pass the hospital
about a quarter mile before reaching town, and situated
on rising ground. The burial ground is on one side of
the town, and the racecourse on the other side. Aramac
61
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Parity
is a well laid out town. At one time there was a deal of
business done here; it is dull at present, but things will
improve at the close of the shearing season. The
country, all round, looks in splendid condition, and the
grass is very high. We started from here at 8 o’clock
next morning, and after doing 25 miles we had the
mid-day meal and changed horses. We boiled our own
billy, and cooked the steak on a piece of fencing wire—
twisted in such a manner as to answer the purpose of a
gridiron. After dinner we harnessed up four spanking
grey horses and arrived at Barcaldine, 25 miles distant,
in three and a quarter hours.
This is the present terminus of the Rockhampton
railway line, and is 358 miles from the coast. I was
glad to see the iron steed once more. I have to this,
done 1033 miles by coaching since leaving Torrens’
Creek, a period of eight weeks and four days. On
Saturday nights, Barcaldine is a lively place. There
are a great many navvies about, and they assist, in a
great measure, in the usual Saturday night’s social
promenade. In the main thoroughfare the stores and
hotels [are located (13 of the latter); I entered one—
especially dedicated to carriers and general bushmen ;
as you enter, a large semi-circular bar faces the door.
There is a large room at the back, with plenty of forms
around the wall, which were lined with bushmen. A
piano stood in one corner. There were a few fair
singers present, and some capital dancers, and all
62
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Di/ason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams■
evidently enjoyed themselves “ according to their
lights.” I started from here by the 5 o’clock a.m.
coach for Blackall, with a team of splendid hay horses—
Cohb and Co.’s line. The Gee Gee tree was exhaling
its very doubtful perfume, which in ray case proved
most sickening. We had a motley group of passengers.
Constable with prisoner for cattle-stealing; Mr. Arnold,
a Yankee (a perfect cure); a barmaid, a lady passenger,
a squatter, and your humble servant. We arrived at
Blackall at 4.30 p.m., after an agreeable drive of 65
miles. About two miles off the town we reached
Markwell’s selection. It has quite an attractive appear-
ance, the house being well situated, and painted white.
A fine stack of hay stands beside it.
Blackall presents a prepossessing appearance, and
may he ranked as one of the pretty towns of Queens-
land. The streets are wide, and at right angles. A
church, a chapel, four stores, and seven hotels ; popu-
lation, 700. It is the largest inland town west of
Rockhampton. A brick Masonic Hall and a Town
Hall are in course of erection. They are boring for
water in the town, and have already gone down 1100
feet. Up to the present they have broached no water
to signify. When they strike rock, the manager of the
drill is very sanguine that a good yield will he secured.
The town can also boast of Agricultural Show Grounds.
There has been no show for the last few years, owing to
the late prolonged drought, hut they anticipate having
63
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
JDyason Bros’. Jams for Parity.
one in about twelve months’ time, when they look for-
ward to a creditable display of cattle, horses, sheep, and
wool. I had a chat with W. C. Leader, recent proprie-
tor of the Barcoo Hotel, where I am now staying.
Three weeks ago he discharged the contents of a five-
chambered “ bull-dog ” revolver into his head ; two
shots glanced off his forehead, two entered immediately
over the right ear, and the other he discharged into the
roof of his mouth. The doctor extracted one of the
bullets which had entered over the ear, and wonderful
to be said —he now walks about, apparently all right,
and plays a dangerous game of billiards with a couple
of bullets rolling about in his brain. The previous
afternoon he had made all arrangements to get married,
and at daybreak the suicidal attempt was made. There
must be some curious mystery connected with the case.
Business, at present, with the storekeepers here, is very
quiet. As I should have to wait a week for Cobb’s next
coach to Tambo, I have arranged with Mr. Blagdon to
take me on this morning for £5. This will prove far
more economical than remaining here when no business
is doing. It has been raining off and on here for the
last 24 hours, and I anticipate that the roads will prove
very heavy, as black soil abounds here. We left here
(Blackall) at 10.30 o’clock in a light American waggon.
We had three horses in, and the vehicle ran very
lightly. About eight miles from Blackall, we overtook
the black boy riding one horse, and leading the other
64
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
laden with my samples. We reached Northampton
Downs Station at about 6 o’clock (30 miles) ; the shear-
ing-shed is about 1| miles off the road ; it looks as large
as the Brisbane Exhibition building. Shearing time
was just approaching, and as we looked around for a
favourable camping spot, we came across a number of
shearers who were camped and waiting for the shearing
to commence. We Were informed that about 200
would he employed at the shed. The blazing fires on
the river hank, the number of tents standing out in
hold relief from the gloomy hack-ground, the hawkers’
waggons, and human figures flitting hither and thither,
imparted to the scene a weird-looking appearance, far,
however, from disagreeable, After cutting four saplings
as a frame for our mosquito curtains, and arranging our
camp, we went down to the river, and after a good wash
we filled the water-hag and hilly and returned to camp ;
it was quite dark when we got hack. We seated our-
selves around the fire, and enjoyed our supper of salt
meat, bread, and tea. The driver met with his hlack-hoy
when he was in the Gulf country. Mr. Blagdon has
had him for about 18 months, and he is now about 13
years of age. After tea, we visited an adjacent camp
and had a yam. We crawled under our mosquito nets
about 10 o’clock —the black boy sleeping under the
buggy; before “ turning in ” he made a fire of cow’s
ordure, which effectually kept the mosquitoes at bay.
After a good night’s rest, I was awakened by the black
E
65
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize, Jams.
Dyason Bros. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
boy singing out “ daylight!” The first grey dawning
was just visible in the east, and he shortly after started
for the horses; they had kept close to camp, and he soon
brought them up. The fire was lighted, and after
another wash in the river, we had breakfast and started
for Tambo at about 7 o’clock. The black-hoy led on one
of the horses, with the other in tow. The journey to
Tambo (40 miles) proved tedious, as many parts were
very heavy from late rains. We passed a number of
Bathurst burr cutters; they stack it as they cut it, and
when dry enough they bum it. Within eight miles of
Tambo we arrived at the summit of a ridge, which com-
mands a splendid view of the surrounding country;
long mountain ranges and fertile well-grassed undulating
lands lay mapped “ out ” in all directions, and ahead,
in the far distance, was to be seen Tambo, but we lost
sight of it again when we reached the flat. We arrived
there at about 7.30 o’clock, the latter part of our trip
being rendered very wearying owing to late rains
having saturated the black soil. There seems to be
more stir here than in Blackall. As usual, dancing was
going on in one of the hotels; and also, in a public hall
the boxing gloves were being vigorously exercised by
lovers of “ the noble art,” and at Is. admission a goodly
crowd had assembled to witness the “ slogging.” I soon
tumedin, and was almost as soon asleep. Tambo contains
three stores, a Catholic chapel (Father Hanley officiates
here); public school (90 children attend), M. P. M‘Grurk,
66
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Purity.
teacher; and hospital, Dr. M‘Nicol in charge. A fine dam
has been constructed at the end of the main street, with
a capacity of 30,000 square yards. The men of note
here are :—H. Hide, P.M.; Dr. M'Nieol; H. Gibhs,
manager Q. N. Bank; M. Solomon, manager for Mrs.
Walsh, and a resident of 23 years’ standing ; P. M'Grurk,
teacher; E. Corrie, H. C. Groffage, P. M‘Dowell, J.
Brennan, telegraph master. Mrs. Walsh has the Com-
mercial Hotel, and an extensive store. £3OOO has been
voted for a court house and lock-up, which will he
shortly erected. The town is on high ground and flood
proof, and as further evidence of its advancing civili-
zation, a Presbyterian Church is in prospect of erection.
Tamho is on the main road for drovers hound to Sydney
and Melbourne with cattle. The District Court meets
twice a year, and Judge Miller presides. I have just
been introduced to old Alf. Dunhrills, the contractor for
all the principal buildings in Tamho ; like many more
of the early pioneers, he succeeded in making more
friends than money, and cannot therefore boast of a big
banking account. At the present, many ups and downs
and fluctuations occur in these inland towns, and old
Alf. may again play the trump card.
I was detained in Tamho for ten days, owing to floods.
We started for Alpha on a Wednesday at 4 o’clock, and
after a stage of 18 miles we camped at Wyndeyer Creek.
We met with a teamster and his family there, so we had
their company. There are the remains of an old accom-
67
DIARY OP A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dijason Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dijason Bros'. Jams for Purity
modation house here ; the sides are all out, hut the roof
remains intact, and forms a good shelter in the event of
rain. Next morning while Mr. Taylor, the owner of the
trap, was looking for the horses, I was much interested
in watching the teamster and his family as they pre-
pared for the day’s labour. The covered waggon that
accompanied the team was used as a hed-ehamher for as
many as it would accommodate; the others slept under
the dray. At daylight the wife was up—kindling the
fire and preparing breakfast, while the husband and his
eldest daughter were rounding up the bullocks. One of
them proved very obstreperous, and far from inclined to
resign the sweets of liberty and excellent pasturage for
the too familiar daily drudgery. He rushed into the
bush with lowered head and horizontal tail. The
daughter mounted went in pursuit at full tear. Her
best efforts proving futile, the cattle dog was let loose,
and in a short time restored the unruly brute to a due
sense of his allegiance. When once brought up, they
are docile enough, and quietly submit to be
yoked and chained. I was pleased to notice the kindli-
ness and affection which evidently subsisted between the
several members of the teamster’s family. Theirs,
being a life of hardship, and isolated as they are for the
most part from other human associations, it is, perhaps,
hut natural that their affections should he intensified by
their dependence upon each other in the face of difficulty
and danger, as also for social communion and sympathy
68
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams •
when their little circle is assembled at the camp fire at
the close of the day’s journey. Yerily there is truth
in the words:—“ ’Tis home wher e’er the heart is.”
After breakfast we started, 8 o’clock, morning beauti-
fully clear, and the various bush birds sounding their
several notes, which medley, it must be confessed, proved
decidedly discordant to the musical .ear. We met the
mailman, who had started a fortnight before for Alpha.
He had indeed encountered a perilous experience on his
journey down. He was encompassed by the flood, and
had to desert his coach after detaching the horses. He
was joined by a drover, who was travelling with 500
head of cattle, which he had to abandon, as it was a
case of suave qui pent ! They both finally took refuge in
a tree, and for the following seventy-two hours of that
fearful time, had only a little raw flour and a few pre-
served apples to sustain life. The conch came to
irreparable grief. The fore wheels and shafts had
parted from the vehicle, which was swept away by the
torrent, and subsequently found suspended from the
limb of a tree, overhanging a creek. We fully expected
to reach Stewart’s by 3 o’clock, but did not arrive till 7
o’clock. The roads for miles proved most dangerous
travelling. The wheel ruts made by the teamsters
were converted into wide and deep gullies by the late
rush of waters, so we were compelled to deploy into the
bush and to explore for a new track. It was pitiable
for the poor horses in many places. What would
F
69
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’, Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyasov Bros’. Jams for Parity.
appear as terra Hrina would prove but a superficial dry
crust, and they would sink and flounder belly deep in
mud. Under these difficulties it would take a good
hour’s work to dig the coach out; then, after cutting a
few saplings to make a good foothold for the horses,
they were attached to a chain-fitted on to the end of the
pole, and so managed to drag the benighted coach
free from present dilemma. The range proved the
most difficult part of the road to travel; it tried the
best ability of the driver to steer clear of dangers and
impediments, or even to get along at all, owing to the
dangerous gullies that the flood waters had made
down the track, which was in many places so thick
with scrub that we had to use the axe to clear a
passage. Arriving at length at the foot of the range,
we soon reached Stewart’s. He holds a very large
selection, and has a grown-up family—all of whom
assist on the homestead. His accommodation house
is a very snug concern, although only built of bark
and saplings. Himself and wife are a homely sort,
and made us all quite comfortable. He had, like
many others out this way, great privations and hard-
ships to undergo during the long season of drought;
he had to cart water (such as it was) from a distance
of 13 miles, and this for continuous months. We
started away at 8 o’clock, and reached Alpha station
at 4 p.m. For the last 15 miles the roads were in a
frightful state. Having got bogged, as customary,
70
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros'• Pure ijemon and Melon Jams,
we had to camp, and that under no adventitious
circumstances. We drove up to the stockyard and
found the ground both hard and lumpy, owing to
having been cut up by the action of cattle during
recent rains, and subsequently dried in that condition.
However, we made the best we could of the situation.
We lit our fire, and recruited ourselves with tea, salt
beef, and bread. We then turned in, but it was hard
for us to sleep ; there were two wild bulls in this same
stockyard, and their furious bellowings throughout the
night were strongly suggestive of the “ bugle call ” to
“ charge,” and worked us up to a state of nervous
anticipation of a visit from uninvited and unwelcome
company. There are several blacks at this station, and
some of them made themselves useful in getting up the
horses. Before we started they shot one of these bulls ;
they were evidently savage brutes, and ill-brooked the
narrow limits of their confinement; they would paw up
the ground to the accompaniment of a low, ominous
bellow, and suddenly charge at the rails of the yard in
the absence of an animate enemy. However, a ball
from a Snider rifle, dexterously delivered by a “ jacka-
roo ” (a young man from home gaining colonial experi-
ence), effectually released him from his disquietude and
rage. The manager of the station kindly lent us a fresh
horse, but we had great difficulty in getting away.
Taylor, however, who is a grand whip, was not to be
thwarted in his efforts to redeem the bogging of the
71
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


tfyasoti Bros’. Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
Dyason Bros’. Jams for Parity.
previous night, and we at length started with 25 miles
between us and Alpha. We found it very heavy, and
in some instances not very safe travelling; all the
teamsters we passed complained bitterly of the state of
the roads, and all they could do was to wait patiently
till they recovered firmness. We could only do 13 miles
that day, and camped at “ Shepperd’s Team,” which
was at one time covered with water. He was away,
and around the waggon lay a quantity of groceries, &c.,
which had heen spread out to dry; it will prove a
serious loss to him. The rains had proved that violent
that the country was flooded for miles in 48 hours. As
we had run out of flour, we managed to replenish our
stock at the team. The rain had dealt gently with the
flour; the surface, next to the bags, was caked to the
thickness of an inch or so; the remaining contents were
uninjured. After supper, we amused ourselves by
setting fire to detached portions of hay-stacks which had
been washed down hy the flood-waters a fortnight pre-
viously, and arrested, in progress, hy intervening trees .
it was a boyish pastime, but a break in the ordinary
monotony of hundreds of miles of difficult and danger-
ous travel, no matter of how trifling a character, is by
comparison, healthy recreation after discouraging toil;
the flames, catching the hay (now quite dried), shot
yards upward and attacked the foliage of the huge
eucalypti. As the sap flows at this season, and as long
continuous rains had further assisted in saturating the
72
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros’. Jams for Parity.
Dyason Bros’. First Prize Jams.
trees, these patriarchs of the forest escaped destruction,
the flames subsiding harmlessly for want of fuel. Had
the season of drought prevailed, we should most likely
have left behind us a long enduring monument of the
innocent pranks of childhood, in the shape of a burning
forest.
We got away next morning immediately after break-
fast, and reached Alpha at 11 o’clock p.m. It took us
four hours to accomplish the last six miles. Mr.,
Williams, one of the passengers, rode the horse that
was leading through the timber in order to pilot us on a
new track, as it was impossible to keep the road, owing
to dangerous ruts and gullies. On our journey we
caught a flying squirrel—a pretty little animal, and not
unlike the Australian opossum ; it derives its familiar
name from its ability to spring from tree to tree with
precision; in this, it is greatly assisted by an elastic
membrane extending from each fore-leg to the hinder,
which not only renders the animal more buoyant in its
serial flights, hut likewise adds to its muscular energy.
The last few miles proved a most dangerous part of our
journey, and the good people of Alpha were astonished.
at our arrival, owing to the dense prevailing darkness,
and their knowledge of the dangerous state of the roads_
Alpha was literally submerged; the women and children
had all been conveyed to the elevated railway tanks, and
there covered with tarpaulins. I only stayed here one
night, and left next morning at 8 o’clock for Hock-
73
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.


Dyason Bros First Prize Jams.
Dyason Bros, Pure Lemon and Melon Jams.
hampton ; thence by Eurimbla, Captain Selmes, direct
for Brisbane, where we arrived the following evening,
December 19, after a propitious and uneventful
passage.
[?]
CONCLUDING REMARKS.
It will thus be seen that during my three months’
absence, I travelled overland some 1500 miles. The
main part of this has been accomplished by means of
coach. That the trip would have proved far more
pleasant had the weather so ordered, there can be no
doubt, nor is it likely that either my employers or
myself would have advised the journey could we have
foreseen the drawbacks to comfort and success in store
for me. But as far as this journal is concerned, the
very novelty of the difficulties and discomforts entailed
by this most severe succession of floods certainly did
much to quicken my faculty of observation, and so
enable me to offer to the reader a diary sufficiently
connected and concise to prove, I trust, a medium of
new and interesting information. I thus launch this
humble literary effort upon the tide of public opinion—
trusting that it will meet with popular favour, and so
encourage its author to further effort when, in the course
of his avocation, fresh opportunity may arise. “ Give
us your hand, my darling public I”
COMMERCIAL TRAVELLER.
74
DIARY OF A THREE MONTHS’ TRIP.
