

yer h- p*v
DIARY
MR. HENRI TOMLINSON,
(Late Secretary to the Labour League, at Laoeby,)
on HIS
VOYAGE OUT TO
NEW ZEALAND,
WITH ACCOUNT OF RECEPTION,
EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS,
GENERAL REMARKS
NEW ZEALAND EMIGRATION,
EDITED BY
JOHN H. WHITE,
EMIGRATION AGENT, LACEBY, NEAR GRIMSBY.
FREE PASSAGES ARB GRANTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OP NEW ZEALAND
TO MARRIED, AND SINGLE AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS.
SHEPHERDS, DOMESTIC SERVANTS, &c.
FOR TERMS AND CONDITIONS APPLY AS ABOVE.
PBICE T'W'O-'PIEItTCIEL
H WATSON, PUBLISHER, LACEBY, NEAR GRIMSBY.
(entered at stationer’s hale.)


EDITOR’S NOTE.
The diary with other contents of this pamphlet are published to
afford Authentic Information to agricultural labourers, and all in-
tending emigrants. For its publication the Editor is .solely re-
sponsible.
T uller information as to the Colony of New Zealand its climate,
soil, productions, industries, wages, position, and prospects, may
be had from W. M. Burton, Esq, of Taranaki, New Zealand, who
has spent 22 years in the colony and is now especially commissioned
by the Provinical Government to select suitable emigrants. Mrs.
Burton, who accompanies her husband can offer free passages to
Dairy women and Domestic Servants, and answer all enquiries, ad-
dress both at Laceby, near Grimsby.
Mrs. Burton, will also gladly, show to those who wish splendid
photographic views of mountains, rivers, and forest scenery, also
New Zealand towns, settlers houses, &c &c.
Parties from North Lincolnshire are going April 7th, again in
May, and so long as the free passage system continues.
Applications for Lectures and Public Meetings on the subject
may be made to the Editor.
EMIGRATION OFFICE LACEBY, NEAR GRIMSBY,
March 10th, 1875.


AN EMIGRANT FARM LABOURER’S
ON HIS PASSAGE OUT TO NEW ZEALAND.
(The ship “GERALDINE PAGET,” was owned by the New
Zealand Shipping Company, and the passage was a Free One, for the
emigrant, and his family, granted hy the New Zealand Government.)
September. 18, 1875.
Dear Parents, and the Public,
It bas been my intention ever since I left Laceby, to keep a
diary, from the very moment we started from Gravesend.
After a great confusion and anxiety at Grimsby station, we
went on a little easier, until we got to Kings-Gross station, when
a large confusion commenced, by getting us into the busses, the
luggage on the vans, then after the drive of from 6 to 7 miles
through the massive streets of London, we arrived at the Emi-
gration Depot; then after the storage of luggage into the ware-
house, we sat down to a tumultuous dinner of beef &c. Having a
late dinner it brought tea on very shortly; afterwards Mr. White
took a trip to Gravesend to see the ship, but did not arrive soon
enough that night, to give us the descriptions of her. At the hour
of 9 we were then thickly housed into our beds, got a little sleep,
rose next morning a little refreshed, then with an anxious waiting
to see the face of Mr. White, we at last gathered round to hear of
the beauty of the vessel we were about to sail in. After breakfast
he then took his farewell departure from us, to his home again;
not an easy parting I can tell you We then commenced taking
the luggage again, to put into the boats; when we got loaded, the
single men on the boat with the luggage, the married families with
the single women on the other packet, away we started for Graves-
end, receiving hearty cheers from the company that had gathered
round to see us off, a brass hand also playing, then with a continued


■enewal of cheers from the boats that passed us, we run merrily
lown the Thames, a beautiful sail we had, soon reaching sight
if our splendid ship that laid at Gravesend. A few more knots
sail, then we are busily engaged by getting luggage on board, also
placing us in our sleeping departments ; when time permits we
take a walk round the vessel, to sight the large joints of meat,
:,lso sheep, pigs, fowls, ducks, and vegetables, &o„ also the strong,
vnd skilful workmanship of the vessel; and when we heard of her
iharaoter of what she could do, we considered ourselves in a pretty
safe position, with the help and guidance of our Maker.
Sept. 18, 1874—Making ready for the Government Inspec-
tor, to see whether all is right or not, the gun fired, the fire engine
tried &0., all was right. He now leaves us, the tug to
us, the pilot in charge, ten minutes to two, off we start giving
three cheers, receiving the renewal from the inhabitants of Graves-
end, the bells ringing, then receiving cheers from the boats that
we passed, all faces looked pleasant and comfortable.
I have no doubt all are more settled than they were a fortnight
ago. With a nice ripple on the water, off we go about six knots
an hour, as night comes in we catch sight of Margate lights, a
splendid sight. A beautiful night, with a clear atmosphere.
Sep. 19, —Rise to witness a beautiful morning, the boat is draw-
ing us along against a head wind, we think if you were to see the
hearts of the children, skipping and playing, also the growm up
people, with their sewing and reading before dinner, the butcher
slashing up the great joints of meat, we think you would rather
covet our present position. Afternoon we get into the English-
Channel, still a head wind, she is pitching a little, a few turning-
sickly, not so merry as in the morning especially among the child-
ren ; my wife a little dizzy, but revived again, all right myself,
with my children. Have passed some splendid snow like rocks,
water as blue as a bell, still a head wind.
Sep. 20, —No restriction in getting up, but at the same time ad"
vising every one to get up, if they meant a comfortable bi eakfast
to get up at six, have time then, to sit down to plenty, but not so
nice as we have it on land, that we cannot expect, to put the voy-
age into consideration; after breakfast it is a rule to turn all beds,
up and occasionally to take all upon deck to air, and clean and
scour the deck every morning, jsweep out the bunks. The wind
changed in the night, a fair wind, now going much faster, a beau-
tiful day, with the sun shining nicely upon us, very few sick,
and a few beautiful birds, on the water, just left the prayer meet-
ing, was led by a young man, who read a chapter in the Bible,


half a dozen going to prayer; afterwards music and singing all ove
the ship, music of almost every description, not many sick tonighl
have been looking at a beautiful sight, thousands fishes dasl -
ing on the water. I compare them to the stars shooting from tl e
beautiful heavens, leaving after them a silvery streak as they
swim on the water. Bed time, but no restriction, does not need
any, always ready for a nap at the close of the day.
Sept. 21.—Most of us well, the pilot just leaving us ; a heavy
shower of rain, at the same time bringing a strong favorable
breeze, which is taking us along, much quicker, she is pitching :
little, many are turning dizzy, a man fell with some flour, got up
again with a white dridge upon him. On the edge of the Bay ot
Biscay, leaving it to the left, rather rough, spreading out both
hands to save ourselves from falling; Tins, Raisins, Hour, Pre-
serves, Coffee, Tea, Pepper, Sugar, and several other articles tossec.
across the lower deck; a great many sick, my wife one of them.
Sept. 22,—After a jolly good shake in the night, only a few rise
this morning. With an unfavorable wind, we keep sailing slowh
along; a very delicate infant died this morning. Pour o’clock
the wind abated, can now sit still on our seats, a great many sick,
feel dizzy myself, my wife better, infants all well, does not affect
them so much.
Sep. 23, —A beautiful morning, the burial service commenced
at half past seven, read over by the superintendent, when some
gathered round the body of the child, while others appeared to take
very little notice of what was going on, or show any sympathy
whatever ; the child was slided down the plank into the water, and
seen no more. We have now a fair wind, but no more than will
carry us along above one or two knots in the hour, water like a
sheet of ice ; seen some black sea birds, and sea pigs. Merry
hearts to night, the sick ones revived again, music and singing
with the drum all over the ship, a splendid night.
Sep. 24, —A fair wind all night, a shower of rain this morning,
a change to a corner wind, another pull for Canterbury, and away
we go blessed with a fine day, nine knots an hour the whole of the
day, a beautiful night with a clear atmosphere; music and singing
going on, all seem to be happy.
Sep. 25, —A beautiful morning, scarce of wind, going [very
slowly, Mr. Ogilvie, (the captain) says if we had a good and
fair wind, our vessel is qualified to take us across in two months,
we have already passed odd ships, leaving them a long way be-
hind ; have seen a shark to day offered him a lump of pork on a
hook, but he did not come near it, looked to be about fourteen feet


long. A few yet sick, not many, the rest of us well, a foggy
night, no wind.
Sep. 26, —The air still thick with no wind; noon, now catching
a good breeze fair behind ns, going much faster, hundreds of por-
poise pigs around, we have also some little birds as passengers
flying about the ship, have caught a French Sparrow, killed a pig,
to-day, a sheep the other day. A beautiful night.
Sep. 27,- —I am glad to tell you that Sunday is noticed on sea,
as well as on land, it is a beautiful morning after a night’s rain,
have just left church service, we have had good singing, in the
way of chants, one of the passengers reading over prayers, also
preached a short sermon, we have had another sermon tonight, all
appears well.
Sep. 28, —Well done Geraldine Paget, she breasts the waters
bravely, a dull stormy morning, with a head wind ; a few more
patients for the doctor, towards night the wind abated, faces cheer-
ful, a sailor harpooned a sea pig, but lost his hold, away he goes
the others after him, ready to devour him when he dies. Our cap-,
tain has kept us out of the Bay, left it to the left nine knots in the
hour, half a point out of her course, we see odd ships and pass
them all, now a song from the sailors, that would make you smile,
with a pull for Canterbury, hoping to have a pleasant night.
Sep. 29, —A dull morning with occasional showers, head wind,
a rough sea; Noon, a fair wind, now going nicely, Charley has
had a cold, the rest of us well; less patients for the doctor, who
is a very nice man, and attends to his patients twice a day. The
Day School commenced this morning, to continue twice a day
during the voyage. We have a weekly paper called the “Paget
Herald”, the steward is the editor, We have a grand concert
tonight, about 300 in attendance, which is to be held weekly du-
ring the voyage. A fine night.
Sep. 30,—A little beyond the equator. A fresh renewal of sick-
ness. Calmer towards night.
Oct. 1, —A more favourable wind. One case or two of measles,
running 10 knots an hour; passed a ship to-day bound for London
from New Zealand. No chance of getting a letter off with her. A
beautiful night.
Oct. 2, —We had a beautiful sail to-day, Friday is our busy
day, we have been looking after our weekly provisions, we have
others served out daily ; have just had a good laugh caused by the
sailors lashing 2 men in the rigging; the schoolmaster one of them,
They would not pay their footing for attempting to go up to the


top, they were half way up when caught; had to yield or stay tied
there all night; we had a hearty laugh I can tell you; I have no
doubt the sailors have had their eye on us ever since we started.
I suppose it is a rule.
Oct. 3, —A. fair wind but scarce, going very slow, passed another
ship to-day, two or three more cases of measles in the hospital,
James Biokell one of them, we have only 3 cabin passengers, over
420 altogether, the largest part of them Scotch and English ; only
a few Irish. We have almost every trade onboard that can be
mentioned, 3 cooks and 1 baker continually employed cooking
our food, washing going on'daily, our drinking water is filtered
out of the sea by an engine. Trade winds now commencing. A
beautiful night.
Oct. 4, —Fine morning. Half past ten, now ringing for church,
catch a good breeze, towards night we sight Madeira Island, it
appears like a large [clump of trees rising to a tremendous height.
A fine night.
Oct. 5, —All up in good time to see the Island which we pass
about 4 miles to the left of us, can see the fresh lighted fires of
their houses smoking, also a building like a church, supposed to
be a nunnery, can see the inhabitants gathering in the harvest of
fruit, the clouds hanging on the mountain peaks; a most beautiful
sight. In five days they will know in London we have passed this
Island. The Coast-guards wanted to bring us some fruit; but
our Captain thought we had better lose no time, we are going so
nicely. Scarce of wind to-night.
Oct. 6, —A splendid morning dawning on us, we catch the breeze
again; begins to be very warm ; just left the Concert, giving
three cheers to the Captain for his kindness.
Oct. 7, —Bathing operations going on this morning; the females
have a covered-in bath-room, and water hosed in upon them. The
boys are running under another hose on top deck; it is fun to see
them running under; I took Charlie under this morning ; have
seen some flying fish to-day, they are about the size of a sprat with
wing accordingly; they fly out of the water by hundreds for a
short distance, then in again. A fine night.
Oct. B—Several bathing again; steady wind today.
Oct. 9—We have had a nigger’s concert tonight, 14 of the crew
with blackened faces, 2 banjos, a tambourine, and other instru-
ments, Captain in the chair.|;. As fine an amusement as I have
witnessed. Now in the tropics,[heat causes us to wish for wind.
Oct. 10, —Splendid morning. Another case or two of measles,


children suffering principally of diarrhoea; seen some monstrous
fish to-day, some supposed to weigh a ton.
Oct. 11,—Very still morning, almost becalmed. W. Rowson
went into’ the hospital this morning suffering from bronchitis,
died about five, buried at half past seven, a sudden shook to us all.
Oct. 12, —A still morning, hotter every day, towards night a
breeze arising.
Oct. 13, —Gaily goes the ship when the wind blows fair; had a
good breeze all night, still blowing a good corner wind, makes it
much pleasanter; going about twelve knots in the hour, causing
a white foam in the front of us. We have a phrenologist on
board, Mr. Cox, he has just been examining a man’s bumps.
Oct. 14.,—G00d breeze continues, passed an island three miles to
our left; a splendid sight to see the rocky cliffs, the clouds rest-
ing on them. Another infant dead. The island has taken the wind
from us. by being too near. The flying fishes are flying out ofthe
water, in front of the ship by hundreds. A fine night.
Oct. 16,—We have caught the wind again, going ten knots in
the hour Some more fun for us to-night, the crew commenced a
month to-day, so now is the time for their pay; they are going
to fire the dead horse: they, have got the imitation of a horse on
four wheels, with a jockey on his back, the rest ofthe crew (with
the passengers), draw him round the deck, singing three or four
of their songs, drawing him up to the Caboose, the horse is sold,
and then taken to the mainmast; here with a rope fixed to the
mainyard end, they then draw the horse with the man on his back,
right over the deep waters, then setting fire to the horse, at the
same time cutting a string, away goes the horse into the water,
leaving the man with a fiery torch in his hand; now for three
cheers which closes the affair.
Oct. 16,—A good freeze still continues, going at ten knots an
hour, flying fishes we still see in numerous quantities ; sea pigs,
we have also seen to-day, harpooned one, but he got away leaving
a streak of blood after him.
Oct. 17, —No wind, but some very heavy showers of rain with
thunder and lightening.
Oct. 18, —Very hot-to day, we have still no wind which makes
the heat more oppressive, can see the masts [ of some vessels.
Another storm threatening to-night.
Oct. 20, Had a good breeze all day yesterday and last night
weather more settled, have got the South East Trades, Charles not


very well, suffering from diarrhoea.
Oct. 21,—We have passed several ships, another infant died.
Oct. 22, —A good stiff breeze, but not fully in our favour, send-
ing us too much west, Charley a little bettei,
Oct. 23,—The children are still suffering from diarrhoea the hot
weather being so much agaiust them, two more dead, this morning
Charley much the same.
Oct 24,—We are still favored with a good wind, which makes
it much pleasanter for us, and better for the suffering ones; cross’d
the line to day.
Oct. 25,—Twelve knots an hoar, the children are better upon
the whole, Charley as well.
"6ct. 26,—Passed three more ships, and spoke one of them, a very
large bird called the booby visited us to day.
Oct. 27, —Our vessel is still causing the white foam to rise up
in front other, the young women daily amuse themselves by swing-
ing- Charley not so well.
Oct. 28,—We are now sailing about forty miles from the long
coast of Pernambuco in South America, that will give you an
idea that we are going a long way round; we have their fisher-
men around ns with three or four rafts nailed together with a
little sail, the men are supposed to slaves and have a keeper
with them, the name of the thing is a Catamaran.
Oct. 29,— We are now leaving the heat very fast, being thirteen
degrees south of the line. Charley gets weaker, another child died,
Oct. 31, —Lost the wind which was good all yesterday and it is
now very wet. Charley took a change to-day and is gone into
the hospital.
Nov. 2, Charley died about half past throe this morning, and
buried at eight, had a very easy death, his teeth being the cause
of his illness, he has gradually been sinking ever since we started,
he had water on the brain and the frog very bad; just before he
died, he left off taking notice of his mother as he used to, and clove
to me ; it is hard to lose him, but we must give him up for he is
far better off, the rest of us are well, and have been all along.
Nov. 3, —We are now catching the North East Trades, but not
very strong yet.
Nov. 4, —A beautiful morning, but colder than it was, a prayer
meeting to-night, held twice every week. We miss poor little
Charley very much.
Nov. 5, —A case of brandy was stolen in the night by some of


the crew. Towar-ds evening a whirlwind passed us which drove
the water up to a height of from ten to fifteen feet; the captain
turned the ship about six points off her course, or it would have
caught us.
Nov. 6, —Had a strong wind all night. Harriet has the thrush;
some of the passengers are ironing their white stiffened shirts to-
day, and we are supposed to have little convenience on board this
ship which is not a proper one for emigrants. I was up at five
this morning fetching yeast and laid the flour in sponge before my
wife got up, before noon we had some beautiful light paste, in fact
the women have so little to do I am afraid that some of them will
forget their domestic duties before we arrive, my wife actually
asked me this noon how much suet she was to put in a pudding.
Nov. 7, —Twelve knots in the hour, have travelled 250 miles
since yesterday at noon —24 hours. A few of the passengers have
the toothache, hut the dentist that we have on board (as an emi-
grant,) keeps drawing them; we have also a watchmaker with us;
in short, all trades.
Nov. 8, —A strong breeze still continues, we are about breasting
the Cape, it is now much colder, and we have the albatross with
us every day, measuring from eight to sixteen feet from the tip of
one wing to the tip of the other, also the Cape pigeon ; eight o’ clock
and it is daylight.
Nov. 9, —The report to day is that we have travelled 222 miles,
the Captain gives it out daily, he is a very nice man and gives us
every privilege so as to make us comfortable, we have still a strong
wind.
Nov. 10, —-The ship is still laying to the heavy waters, no sick-
ness now. Distance 216 miles.
Nov. 11, —Killed a sheep to-day, and some one stole the liver,
so the baker lifted up the pie-crust to find the thief, but in vain.
Distance 213 miles.
Nov. 12, —Harriet better. Distance 131 miles.
Nov. 13, —'Scarcely any wind, what there is, is ahead of us,
sailed 92 miles of yesterday’s work over again ; one of the crew
accidentally fell overboard, but being a good swimmer we had no
trouble to save him.
Nov. 14,—Arose to witness a spring-like morning, have now got
amongst the whales, at night the wind changes fair. (62 miles.)
Nov. 15, —Passed a very large whale {dead) with hundreds of
birds on his back, several albatrosses were perched on with their


heads under their wings, as though they had got their fill, and
were resting. I give you the whole of our daily report this time,
that you may get some idea, by tracing the map where we were at
this date. Latitude 35 degrees south; Longitude o. Distance gone
206 miles .
Nov. 16, The baker was scalded very [severely. Going 14
knots, a good report to-day, 256 miles.
Nov. 17, —A splendid morning, but a heavy sea with a stiff
breeze, just the weather that suits us, for we dont care for thejtoss-
ing now; the cabin passengers shooting seabirds, a still better re-
port to-day (290 miles.)
Nov. 18, —A calmer sea, another child died to-day.
Nov. 19, —Fine morning with less wind.
Nov. 20, —A strong breeze spinning up in the night taking us
along at 12 knots an hour, we are now breasting the Cape of Good
Hope. (115 miles.)
Nov. 21, —A thick hazy morning with a strong wind, going 14
knots, passed a Glasgow trader bound for Bombay, 72 days from
Liverpool; our captain has been very ill but is better than he was.
Nov. 22, —Some one stole my bread and tin to-day out of the
bakehouse, captain been on deck, better.
Nov. 28, —-We are still making good headway, a splendid sight
to see the moon rise to-night, not a cloud to be seen, (263 miles.)
Nov. 24, —Weather much colder, 260 miles.
Nov. 25, —A very sudden change, like a summer’s [day, scarcely
moving, all very busy washing, and catching birds with a hook
and line.
Nov. 26, —A fine morning, killed another sheep to-day, only one
left now, and two pigs. Making preparations for landing as re-
gards fitting up boat, to fetch the inspectors on board; the hos-
pitals are empty of patients, and the children in their play, like to
imitate the sailors in pulling ropes and singing their songs &c.
(165 miles.)
Nov. 27,—Du1l morning, the doctor shooting birds.
Nov. 29, —Weather much the same, saw 3 very large whales,
had an excellent sermon from Mr. Cox, to-night.
Nov. 30 —At noon to-day the weather brightened up, and we are
now catching a westerly wind.
Dec. 1, —A splendid day, but cold.
Dec. 3, —A keen sharp morning, must be severehere in winter,


Dec. 4th, sth, & 6th, —Weather varying dull and rainy.
Deo. 7,—Damp day. Another child died.
Dec. 8, —Fine morning, with fair wind, killed the last sheep
to-day.
Deo. 9, —A strong wind is still driving us along,with a heavy
sea behind.
Dec. 10, —A heavy sea and a strong wind.
Deo. 11, —More pleasant day, warmer, but we are not making
so much headway, saw another whale.
Dec. 12, —A dull morning with a head wind, the baker got to
work again.
Dec. 13, —A strong wind still ahead of ns, and we are pitching
very much.
Dec. 14th and 15th, —Wet and misty.
Dec. 16. —Making no headway, merely passing to and fro op-
posite the Snares, where there are dangerous rocks before we come
to Stewarts Island. Caught two Molly Hawks measuring over 7
feet from tip to tip, also an albatross 10 feet.
Dec. 17, —The wind still unfavorable and we are losing ground
if anything.
Dec. 19,- —Going very nicely to-day, and caught 3 more alba-
trosses, one measuring 15 feet, a splendid night; great confusion
and excitement after some had gone to bed, by a fatal accident to
a young Scotchman, he was doing a trick of bravado by passing
over-handed on a rope hanging over the water, when being ex-
hausted he fell in, he was a good swimmer, but his strength
being gone he could not help himself; in a few seconds two life
buoys were thrown to him and a boat was lowered, but all in vain,
for though the moon shone brightly, the boat returned without him
Deo. 20, —Rose to witness a bright summer’s morning on the
coast of New Zealand, on sounding there was a depth of 62 fathoms
of water, the lead bringing up sand and shell.
Dec. 21, —Up in good time anxiously looking for land.
Dec. 22, —Now for the first sight of land on the coast of Otago,
it appears to be a mass ot timber and is a magnificent sight; a very
I in* re shark v .dtsd us to ,1 ay, we g.-ve him both a ballet and a har-
poon, but lost him.
Dec. 23, —Splendid sailing, but slow progress having to run hun-
dreds of miles to gain one; now sighting Dunedin.


Dec. 24, —It is a splendid sight to see the yellow corn fields wav-
ing and the beautiful houses, also the mountainous land so many
feet high. The hospitals are all clear now for all are well; at noon
an extra allowance of flour &c, is given to make the spice cake
and plum puddings with, for Christmas ; at night we enjoy our-
selves in proper style with singing andmusic, then some ot us close
our eyes for a little, while others spent most of the night in amuse-
ment.
Deo. 25, —The “waits singers” commenced at midnight to go
round the ship with drum and other instruments besides singing,
not much sleep for us ; after rising we catch sight of the snow-
capped mountains of Canterbury, a splendid sight in midsummer;
we are getting views of the coast as we go along, came near enough
to a boat from Dunedin to receive the compliments of season and
give them a suitable answer, at noon a bottle of porter is allowed
to every two adults through the ship, the women with children
haying had one every other day through the voyage.
Dec. 26, —Still a head, harbour in sight.
Dec. 27, —Pilot on board. Alter along but very pleasant voyage
we are safely anchored in the harbour, giving due praise to the
captain, and also to the doctor for the very patient manner in
which they have so manfullylulfilled their offices; for 1 can with
confidence say and the rest of the passengers will agree with me
that they have done all in their power to make us comfortable right
through the voyage and may God bless them.
Soon after we arrived, up comes a boat with plenty of beef, mut-
ton, potatoes, flowers, strawberries &c ; then comes the inspection,
which passed off very pleasantly, and also gave great satisfaction.
Dec. 28, —A splendid morning, shall be on our road to Christ-
church. where there are situations awaiting, for some of our com-
pany have already work to go to. In the alternoon we arrived at
Addington barracks which are very comfortable with a house to our-
selves, and food in abundance, such as beef and mutton, new po-
tatoes &0., all found us free of charge till we get employ ; and lam
glad to tell you that we are not sent into the country any how 7, for
there is every protection in that respect, a man being stationed
here to see that a reasonable and fair bargain is made betwixt the
employer and the employed,- —and I may just say here, that some
of the employers are not allowed in, not even their applications.
On the 30th, I take a walk down to Chr ~,-enure!: if rrniesdis-
tant, where 1 find, a city 1 may term it, more man a rown, lar ex-
ceeding the beauty of the market towns in Jhngiana, ana ns future


more provided for. 1 must confess the beauty is far beyond my
expectations, for splendid houses and large establishments of every
business, and the manner in which they are set out is most beauti-
ful, and where does the beauty spring from ? Chiefly, from God
our Maker, and, secondly, it depends on the people it is populated
with; well, I can speak highly of them, for I have taken a walk
down to Christchurch every day since 1 have been here, and al-
though it has been Christmas, and New-year’s-day is just come in
which is kept as a general holiday throughout, I am glad to tell
you that there are more beautiful flowing fountains of spring water
than public-houses, and at the houses they have thought of the
dumb animal as well as the man, for in front of the “publics,”
there is a flowing spring filling into, and emptying out of, a trough,
besides the large stone fountains at almost every corner of the
corss-roads in town.
The Good Templars are very strong here, and breweries are very
scarce from what I can find out for I have only seen one; water
can be got with 14 feet bore, without digging. We have had 24
hours nice steady rain—it is beautiful weather, —it is also a treat
to us to see fruit and other things with nature’s blossom on their
stem, and the little lambs bleating, the sparrows chirping their
summer’s song, the large hares skipping, also the beautiful pheasant
We can see as we walk along, the large and well-planned park
in short, —all appear to enjoy the pleasant country in an indus-
trious manner. Well, but is there anything to say about the
prices of the produce ? I think you will ask ; yes, I can tell you
a little, although I have not been long here ;as far as I can esti-
mate, to take a year throughout, clothing and provisions will
amount to about the same as in England, under if anythiug; rent
is high in consequence of such a flood of emigrants, but all find
harbour and employ, yes, and if there were as many more.
I would also advise you to bring as little luggage as can be
avoided, as you can get many things here as cheap as in England,
such as clothing, beds and bedding and boots and shoes ; my wife
has got a beautiful pair of kid boots for 10s, 6d. The things that
are dear, are pots, also glass, and millinery. Now, clothing for the
voyage depends on the time of the year you come; if you come in
autumn, you need no more than you wear in summer, except some
warm top cover when you get past the tropics and a large shelter-
ing hat when in the tropics; as to other seasons I cannot say but
an autumn voyage for me if it be a long one, in winter, of course,
you can make a quicker one.


The rate of wages is the same money as in England and a house,
fuel, plenty of mutton, beef, fye., good and fresh; injshort all found
beside the wage.
Well now, if any think of coming, yon must expect to rough it
on the voyage, but never mind as long as the sugar loaf is to bo
found.
I will now give yon a list of extra comforts for the stomach.
To married couples, flour 5 stones, biscuits not very good —pota-
toes | peck,—onions ditto —baking powder 11b, —-nutmegs loz, —
—tea lib, loaf sugar 21b, soap 41b. Married couples with families,
double quantity, single men and women accordingly.
I also found Mr. Watson’s “Cholera Mixture” one of the most
useful things on board, I wish I had brought more, his pills also
were beneficial. No passenger should come out, without the things
above mentioned, which we found very needful; all these should
be packed into a box such as when emptied, is useful to fill up again
with utensils and other articles when you leave the ship.
I forgot to mention irons for clothes, I would advise every one
to bring some .with them as iron is dear, but the time is not far dis-
tant, when such things will be cheaper, for I suppose they are open-
ing mines of coal and iron &c.
Through the summer thousands of emigrants have flocked week-
ly from other countries, and the colonists who have made their
wealth are now spending it. I have not seen above half a dozen
natives yet and they appear to be very civil.
Well, I think I have given you all the principal information I
can at present, but I have no doubt I shall be able to give you
more next time I write. Love to all, hoping you are well. This
leaves us all enjoying first-class health,
From your loving son
HENRY TOMLINSON,
Emigration Barracks,
Addington,
Christchurch,
Canterbury,
NEW ZEALAND.
Erratum, on page 1, for 1875, read 1874.


EXTRACTS FROM LETTERS,&c.
The u Lyttleton Times ,” a New Zealand newspaper says in its report of arrival
of the ” Geraldine Paget ” a large portion of the emigrants were selected by
Mr. A. Duncan, from Lincolnshire, and they reflect great credit on his judgment.
The scene when Mr. Duncan, went on board was very exciting. The emi-
grants are under the charge of Mr. Harry Tomlinson, secretary of the Amalgam-
ated Labourer’s League, for the Laceby District.—The great number are from
Great Grimsby to Caistor.”
Mrs. Hill , from Lacehy , writes , —‘‘The greatest part of our people let them-
selves at good wages. George is to have £75., a house and a cow, that is more
than we could get in England, our house is close to the masters, but we dont live
upstairs, George only wishes he had come ten years ago. There is no starving
for them that will work here. The living is of the best quality. Prime mutton
2sd. per pound, beef 3d to 4d, There is no want of places of worship. Tell Mr.
Watson his pills have been very useful far better than the Doctors prescriptions.
Thank Mr. White for his kindness in writing to the Wesleyan minister. He en-
quired for us at the Barracks, invited us to his church. Also we were to tea with
some Good Templars. Tell Mr. White to give our love to the Lodge.*’
Mrs. Fow, of the family of 12 from Riby, writes. —‘’Dear Bister, I did wish
I had you with us for we had a round of beef to dinner to-day,—we have eaten
more beef since we came here than we did all our lives in England.”
James Rickell says, —“Emma and me have got £70., a yeai'and
Betsy has got £20., My master was in the Lincoln Bank at Grimsby. I had
no trouble to get a place. I had chance of two more but thought this would suit
me best. He knows nearly all the farmers round Grimsby that went to the Bank.
James Allenby has got £60., a year and all found. Tell Mr. White, that woman
that told him she would come back with him in London, is very glad she did not,
for she likes the looks of the country, she would think no more of taking another
trip of 16,000 miles than going to bed. It is a bad job you did not come out
with us and bring your sewing machine.”
Betsy Rickell, virites, —“I have got more wages than I should have got if I
had stopped in England 20 years. Mother has a pony to ride out on, for every
one rides here, and I have got one, they call it ‘Dobbin, ’it is ablack one. Where
I am living is a very pretty place, they are very nice people.”
In fact all send good news, —none wish to return, —and many
advise their friends to follow them. Emigrants are entirely free
on arrival, and the foregoing sufficiently proves the care and fore-
thought of the New Zealand Government in its well organized and
responsibly conducted scheme.
A letter has also been received by Mr. White from the Eev
James Buller, of Christ-church now President of the New Zealand
Wesleyan Conference, in which he says,
“It is my custom, to visit the Barracks on the arrival of every ship, and hold


service with the people, I did so last week.—l saw Mr. & Mrs. Tomlinson, Mrs.
Hill, and others. They seem upon the whole, a good lot of people, and would
get immediate employment ,
Agricultural Labourers, Ploughmen, Shepherds, Carpenters, Smiths, Tailors,
Shoemakers, and the like may be sure to do well, if they be steady and upright
people, so also female servants who are always in great demand, at from £20,,
to £45. per annum.
If I can in any way guide you, or others, as to the expediency of emigrating
to us, I shall be very happy to do so. Methodism has a good hold here, —Excuse
a hurried note, and believe me, ”
Yours very truly,
JAMES BULLER.
Extract of a letter from Michael Gooik, late of Aylesby, nr Grimsby.
Wiahi Bush , Canterbury , New Zealand.
Where we live is level—a new township, rising up, 13 months ago, only one
house, and now this last three months about fifteen houses have been built, and
all the town-ship land is bought up.
“One thing I can say is that in England I never could sit down in my own
house, but thank Giod I have a good house and two good sleeping-rooms; each
holds two beds, and I have one acre of land, and no one can give me my dis-
charge, or put me out, and the land will soon be worth a deal of money to build
on : it is better land than any in Aylesby—never been cropped. It is grass and
no wood on it, about 12 inches of it, free black soil, and then about 20 inches of
yellow clay, and then gravel. I gave £2O for the land, Government gives £lO
worth of sawn timber, and we are close to the saw-mills. We are close to 1300
acres of wood —trees green all year round. Our houses are covered with zinc;
never wet through. I built my house. Some people thought I was a carpenter,
one man sent for me and wanted a carpenter ; he bid me 255. a week, and all
my meat, but I had not done my own, and I think I cau do better. I have now
done my own. A man came and sold me some fencing near home, so that I can
fence my own.l have set potatoes, sown cabbage, carrots and all such vegeta-
tables. Some things are very dear. Beer is Is. a pint. Tins and pots very
dear. Tea is 3s. per pound. We live about twelve miles from some moun-
tains 13,000 feet high : snow on thejtop 'allthe year round, and some wild pigs
seven miles from us, but I have not had time yet to go shoot any.
Such a girl as Sarah gets £2O or £25 wages. It was a good thing we was on
the Government when Ellen was confined, for they find you a doctor and food
until you get work, and it happened four days before I had done my own (house)
Labourer’s wages are from 7s. to 9s. a day, hours from 8 to 5. They let most
of the work. No foxes in this country. No sparrows to harm fruit trees. I have
not seen a crow yet. This is a true account of what I have seen.
We will only add an extract, from “Recollections of my own life and Times,”
by Rev. Thomas Jackson, Wesleyan Minister, (twice President of the English
Wesleyan Conference,) he writes on page 8, “When the labour market is over-
stocked so that the wages of the working classes, are insufficient to support them


and their families, Emigration becomes both a privilege and a duty. Mill,
ions of unoccupied acres await tillers to toil in—and the voice of nature, and of
Providence, addressed to men of bodily strength, and vigour, is ‘‘Replenish those
distant wastes, and subdue them.” When the people in ancient times were
unwilling to remove from their native haunts, the Almighty compelled them to
disperse, by confounding their language."
The following is an extract from '‘The Pioneer Missionary .” Life
of the Rev. Nathaniel Turner, Missionary in New Zealand, Tonga
and Australia, hy his Son, published at the Wesleyan Conference
Office.
“There is every probability that New Zealand will speedily rise
to eminence among the favored homes of the Anglo-Saxon race.
Claiming as I do its colonization as an indirect fro.it of missionary
enterprise, it may not be considered much out of place if I glance
at its climate, resources, and institutions,—important features in
any land inviting' emmigration.
The climate is excellent, affording an agreeable variety between
the parallels of 34J0 and 47|0 south latitude. In the north snow
is never seen, and frost very seldom. In the extreme south both
are common, and in some places severe. The English fruits grow
to perfection in the southern island; and tropical productions
flourish in the northern. But there are no extremes. Protracted
droughts and extensive floods are unknown. It is drier in the
south than in the north. The mean annual temperature of the
latter is 570, while that of the former is 520. The nights are
about twelve degrees colder than the days. The mildness of the
temperature at Nelson and Canterbury in the Middle Island may
be known by the fact of sheep lambing in winter with no greater
loss than five or ten per cent. More rain falls in New Zealand
than in London, but less than is known on the west coast of Eng-
land. The weather is everywhere subject to sudden changes, but
nothing can exceed the purity of a clear New Zealand sky. It is
certified that the military stationed there enjoyed better health
than anywhere else in Her Majesty’s dominions.”
K. WATSON, STEAM PRINTER, LAOEBY, NEAR GRIMSBY.


JOHN H. WHITE,
DRAPER, AND OUT-FITTER,
LACEBY, NEAR GRIMSBY,
CONDUCTS HIS BUSINESS ON THE
Ready Money System Only,
Making an allowance of 6d., in the Pound ,
GOODS MARKED IN PLAIN FIGURES,
CALICOES, FLANNELS, HOLLANDS, AND
ALL HEAVY GOODS,
‘Qf JuRfST pLAjSjs Quality J>ow Price,
Dress Goods Fancy Articles & Millinery,
HATS, CAPS, SCARFS, & TIES,
Blankets, Sheetings, Bed Rugs, Carpets, Oil Baizes,
JACKETS, SHAWLS, SKIRTS. &c„ &c„
READY MADS GRtTSiKS
Good materials, gives satisfaction, Trousers, Vests, Suits, Can-
toon Jackets, Pilot Reefers, Top Coats, Shirts, Drab & White
Jackets. Give Mr. White, a trial only once, and you are almost
certain to become a regular customer.
OUTFITS OF CLOTHING FOR THE
VOYAGE TO NEW ZEALAND! ! I
Everything necessary, & everything suitable, and for an
exceedingly low figure.
ggg”May-day servants can fit out most easily, and reasonably
at this establishment.
John H. White, Draper, & Outfitter, Laceby
{PARCELS OVEE £l,, CARRIAGE PAID.)


WATSON’S FAMILY PILLS.
EPILEPTIC FITS, TEMPORARY DELIRIUM, &c.
The following Testimonial has been received from Mr. J. W, ORAM, Traveller to Day and
Martin, the celebrated Slacking Manufacturers, London i
“Mb. Watson. “Maida Hill West, London, November 16.
“ Hear Sir, —You will doubtless bear in mind that some four months ago,
when I called upon you at Laceby, it was your pleasure to give me a box or two
of your Pills for my own use. However, not requiring medicine through my
journey, I fortunately took them to town. Immediately upon my arrival I
suggested to my Father (who for many years has been afflicted with grievous
attacks of EPILEPSY), the propriety of giving them a trial. He at once com-
menced by taking two every other night, and, miraculous although it be, the
Fits, which before were of so violent a character as to leave him in a deplorably
exhausted condition, and so enervated that sleep for three or four nights entirely
left him, thereby causing TEMPORARY DELIRIUM, have now become less
in number, and their virulence abated in an extraordinary degree ; nor has he
since been delirious. My engagements will not admit of time to say more than
to express my deep sense of gratitude to Him whose wisdom hath so mercifully
connected the ends with the means ; and to conclude with the earnest hope that
others suffering from the same distressing ailments may be led to adopt the use
of so truly an Invaluable Medicine. Begging you will accept my warmest
thanks and best wishes, I am, my dear sir, faithfully yours,
“ J. W. ORAM.”
Important Testimonial from Messrs. D, CUSSONS, dr SON, Booksellers, Horncastle
Me. Watson. December 15th, 1858.
Sir, —Mrs. Crockford, of this town, has called to inform us of the Extra-
ordinary Benefit her husband, John Crockford, has derived from the use of
Watson’s Family Pills. He had the misfortune to have one of his legs badly
crushed, and had the best medical advice he could procure, but of no avail. It
continued to get worse, until his “ medical attendant recommended him to go
into our Hospital, that his life might be saved.” He heard of the wonderful
cures from Watson’s Family Pills, which induced him to send for a box, and
after persevering, they have, to the wonder of himself and neighbours, effected
a perfect cure.—We are, sir, yours faithfully, D. CUSSONS& SON.
CURE OF DROPSY, GRAVEL, &c.
Communicated by Mr. T. HARRISON, Chemist, 54, Bridge-street, Leeds,
Mrs. Ann Holmes, No. 9, Aire-street, (near the Shakespeare Inn, Meadow
Lane), Leeds, testifies to the very great benefit derived by her from the use of
WATSON’S FAMILY PILLS, having suffered from Gravel and Swellings in
the Body for a number of years, for which she tried every remedy recommended
by the Faculty and others, in vain. Hearing of your celebrated Pills, she was
induced to try them, and after taking one box she was considerably'relieved,
and by continuing their use for a short time, was “ Quite Cured.” She now
states she would not be without them, as a Family Medicine, for any money.
Yours, &c., T. HARRISON.
Sold in Boxes, at 74d., Is. lid., and 2s. 9d. each,
By all respectable Medicine Vendors ; or should any difficulty occur, by enclos-
ing 8, 14, or 33 Stamps, according to the size of the box required, to
H. WATSON, Pharmaceutical Chemist, Laceby, Grimsby, they will be sent
Free by return of post to any part of the United Kingdom.
