

r
tyiary*
_U LL
KEPT BY I
S- —• • s
f Xitut s.€.■€. Kelli/, f
I f
Price X/
II Vv*Nw T. Dimmock, la j , Printers, Maitland. / j\




DIARY
KEPT BY
LIEUT. G. E. E. KELLY,
During the voyage from Sydney to Egypt as a Member
of the Australian Expeditionary Forces.
Revised by D. J. RYAN.
The diary of Lieut. Kelly must be of interest to
those who knew the man, and knowing him appre-
ciated him at his worth. To those who did not know
him, and to those who misunderstood him, the diary
may be of interest. It is a record of the days that
passed from the departure from Sydney until the
troops had settled at Mena Camp in the land of the
Pharoahs. Much that was written has been elim-
inated in this little brochure, because of the inexor-
able rules laid down by the Censor.
Of Kelly himself it may be said that in the voyage
home, on the training fields of Egypt, and in the last
tragic scene on the coast of Gallipoli, when the end
came to him and others of our gallant Australians,
and they “gave up the years to be of work and joy,
and that unhoped serene that men call age, ’ ’ for the
sake of liberty, he was the same unselfish Kelly who
worked without ostentation during the dreary night
hours of a Maitland flood, whose services were always
at the disposal of charity, who helped the aged and
the poor, whose last thought always was of self.
Were it possible to consult his wishes respecting the
publication of his diary it is probable that he would
endorse the action of those who issue it in brochure
form in the hope that some idea might be given to
the public of the way our gallant troops responded
to the call of duty.


The Rev, Arnold Conolly, Rector of St. Paul's,
West Maitland, at a memorial service held on May
9, 1915, paid the following tribute to the gallant
officer’s memory:—
“Those who knew the late soldier,” he said,
“knew well that in private life, in public move-
ments, in charitable causes, for the hospital, the
Nurses’ Home, the Orphanage, and the churches he
had shown that he was possessed of a kind spirit
that desired to help where help was most needed.
There was no boastfulness; much that he did was
done without the right hand knowing what the left
had done. He always remembered, and helped those
whom others were likely to forget. This spirit of
unselfish devotion, which made his presence a social
unit of great value, showed itself when the call of the
nation to her sons came. As he offered and served in
South Africa, so he was ready to serve again in the
present crisis, and going forth he proved himself a
hero in unselfish devotion to his country. We honor
him to-night in this service, in this place that he
loved, and where we received many expressions of
his kindly nature. His cheerful disposition was al-
ways in evidence. He was ever ready—no matter
under what conditions he found himself or his
friends—to display a convivial spirit, a spirit that
was born of cheer that helps when it is most wanted.
Those who were present at the send-off in the Town
Hall, and also through the long hours of waiting on
the railway station before entraining, know that the
spirit of cheerfulness displayed by the late soldier
kept many a heart from breaking, and eased the
strain when the pull was hardest. A son of the par-
sonage, he learned early in life the value of those
characteristics which found such definite expressions
in his life.”


-oTHE DIARY.o-
October 18. Reveille, 5 a.m. Came by tram to
Darlinghurst. Then marched down Bourke Street to
the troopship, “Suffolk.” Dear old Cavalier came
down from Maitland and marched from Oxford
Street to the wharf in our ranks. He brought me a
box of cigars. The “Suffolk” left the wharf almost
at once, and was in the stream till about 4 p.m., when
she steamed out of the harbour. Many of the officers
and men were sick as the sea was rough. The troop-
ship, “Afric,” passed us .in the night. Stewart
tossed for bunks as there were three of us on the
cabin. I lost, and had to sleep on the settee, which
is very narrow. Major Gordon is our O.C.
October 19. Men sick everywhere. Major Scobie
sick all day. We did 180 knots up to noon. Sighted
four-funnel war-boat off Gabo. It was going out to
sea. The “Afric” nearly out of sight at 4.30 p.m,
Rup. Craddock, Gordon Chant, and L. Foster very
sick. B. Company is the only one without sick
officers.
October 20. Passed Wilson’s Promontory at 8
a.m. Saw some sea-lions. Lost sight of Australia at
noon, but picked up Cape Otway at 4 p.m. Sea very
calm. No sign of sea-sickness to-day. Squad drill
for officers. Boxing and concert at night. Major
Scobie well again. Officers are making an infernal
row trying to sing choruses.
October 21. Saw whales passing. Drill for men
and officers. Typhoid inoculation for men who were
not done before. Lecture for officers. Boxing and
concert. Lecture by Captain Coneannon. One of
the men broke his ankle. 293 knots to-day.
October 22. Crossing Great Australian Bight. Sea
calm. It must be a joke about the Bight being rough,
as this is my third experience of calm seas here.
Visited men in hospital: all getting well. Edgar
accidentally shot in thigh. Took some books to men
in hospital. 292 knots to-day.


October 23. Major Gordon and I orderly officers,
Stewart, guard. Quoits on deck, no gambling al-
lowed. Instruction for officers. Rain. 281 knots
to-day.
October 24. The other transports are closing in.
Four are in sight. The “Afric” is in front of us.
She has turned around twice, and the crow’s nest is
seen to slide down the mast. A boat is at the stern,
so there must be a man overboard. Life-belt drill
to-day. 296 knots.
October 25. Anchored in King George’s Sound at
5.30 a.m. There are 15 transports here now, and we
have to wait for the New Zealanders’ 10 and 17
others, 42 in all. We shifted to the wharf while the
Colonel conducted service. We have to get 300 tons
of water, as we have used seven gallons per man per
day, and the proper ration is l 1 gallons. Did some
fishing. Albany is about two miles away, and is a
very pretty place. A lady and a gentleman here
must have been given over 100 telegrams to send. I
sent one to D. J. Ryan, “Herald” Office, saying good-
bye to all at dear old Maitland.
October 26. H.M.A.S. Melbourne came into the
Sound and went out again. Captain Concannon lec-
tured on “Patriotism.” His lectures always good.
“Cock Robin” chorus, Stewart leading. You could
strop a razor on his voice.
October 27. Full-dress drill. Campbell gave lec-
ture on scouting, H.M.A.S. Melbourne anchored
outside. New Company Drill Books introduced.
Alter a lot of things. Said to be French and German
style. Mock-trial to-day among the men. Jury de-
cided that culprit was mentally unfitted to be a
soldier, and was only fit to be an officer.
October 28. On shore at Albany. Took 105
minutes to write out telegrams from the boys to
friends, and posted about 150 letters. Sent biscuits
to Bill Tipper and Arch McDonald. Albany is a very
pretty place, and the girls are prettier. Had over
100 purchases to make for the boys. I got all the
stuff down to the wharf, but a puppy of a naval




i
$
$
*a
y
k V*
■V-
* 0 (
O A \
V-
H
> c
'A
\ .
* *
* *
S Q
a 1
0
h
2 v 1 .
v- *.
* f, -
♦ v
)
* *•
* £
*» 0
t V
f $
t.
V V
V*.
N •”'
*■ *.
t
i ‘
* $
V*-
6 * .
V. %
•
■v
*5
\
\ V
5 >
I
b
?
Is
ty f .,
V i "X>
J /
*0
i
$
£
'T
, to
0
5 £
<
11
SoN
| *
"§
k°
5
* *
*
<9-
\
1° /
i /
5t
$ V
«o v
*
*
<1
f %
1
<0
•i
Jj


officer, a local lieutenant, would not let me bring it
off, so I had to leave it with the storekeepers. The
New Zealanders and four warships lame in to-day.
We visited about 20 transports. Saw the Kerr boys
and Scott, who used to be with Jack Fletcher.
Others called out, but I did not know them. Lectures
by Bourke and Concannon. All letters and tele-
grams censored.
October 29. Lectures by Wallack and Bourke.
October 30. The other New Zealand transports
came to-day, also the flagship of the China Naval
Station and a Japanese cruiser, also two other war-
ships. Went to Albany on a tug-boat. Major Grif-
fith on board; he was my junior in the Boer War.
October 31. I hired a launch and brought the
things I bought for the troops on board.
November 1. We left King George’s Sound this
morning. A glorious sight—one I may never see
again. All of the troopships except two West Aus-
tralian ships, came out in single file, attended by 5
war vessels. They say the escort will comprise 4
Japanese, 4 French, 4 British, and 2 Australian war-
ships. It was fairly rough round Cape Leeuwin.
Everywhere one looks there are troopships—a most
impressive sight. Colonel Braund gave an address
on Theosophy.
November 2. The fleet rounded Cape Leeuwin at
3.45 a.m. All hands instructed to sleep with lifebelts
at heads.
November 3. Two sentries have been sentenced to
21 days for sleeping on duty. A good thing this
happened, because it impresses the boys with the
seriousness of the offence. On active service the
penalty would be death.
November 4. Beginning to feel the heat. Awnings
out everywhere. A bath has been rigged near the
front of the ship and companies take it in turn to
bathe. If a man won’t bathe he is thrown in clothes
and all.
November 5. Heat oppressive. H.M.S. Minataur
took a run round the fleet this morning and everyone


admired her cutting through the deep blue water. A
beautiful sunset, with the sun setting behind a great
warship silhouetted against the crimson blaze on the
horizon, while the sheen on the water was a sight
never to be forgotten. The Orient liner, ‘‘ Osterley, ’’
overhauled us at 5,15 p.m. We could see people
crowding the decks and rigging.
November 6. Nothing of moment to-day.
November 7. Heat very oppressive. White shirts
and pants in evidence.
November 8. H.M.A.S. Melbourne passed us at
close quarters. Old Stewart swears he heard shots
during the night.
November 9. Great excitement this morning. A
Japanese cruiser came round our starboard to port
at full speed. Some of our officers said she was
firing, but my glasses, the best on board, showed the
firing was from one of our cruisers. At 3.5 p.m. a
wireless from the “Orvieto” told us that the terror
of the merchant service, the “Emden,” had been
sighted, engaged, and beached to save her from sink-
ing. The “Sydney” settled her. You should have
heard the cheering. Our fellows went mad. It must
have been on Cocos Island she was beached, as there
are no other islands near. All parades declared off.
We toasted the “King” and the “Sydney and her
crew” in lime-juice cordial. We toasted Australia’s
first naval battle and her first win.
November 10. Message from H.M.S. Minotaur
wishing us good-bye and good luck. Hope she is off
to wipe out the five German warboats that beat ours
near the South American coast. The H.M.A.S. Mel-
bourne is now in charge of our convoy. We now
know that the Emden passed within 20 miles of us on
Sunday night. The convoy was so darkened that she
could have passed within five miles without seeing
us. There was a burial from the “Medic” to-day.
November 11. Message received this morning that
H.M.A.S. Sydney will rejoin us after she takes off
the German prisoners. The fight took place at Cocos
Islands. Another death on the “Medic” to-day.


November 12. H.M.A.S. Melbourne and a Japanese
cruiser together. A boat from the Melbourne visited
the Japanese boat, and now we learn that the Mel-
bourne has gone on other service. Heavy rain but
heat oppressive. King Neptune came on board at
7 p.m. and read his proclamation from the boat-deck.
Several were named as unclean, that is, had never
“crossed the line” before, and I was one of the first.
King Neptune then inspected the ship and announced
that the cleansing would take place at 2 p.m. to-
morrow. The Colonel declared all parades off.
November 13. We crossed the line at 7.30 a.m.
amid heavy rain. A small land bird came on board
in an exhausted condition, and as Ceylon is the
nearest land, it must have come 400 miles at least.
King Neptune had a great day. All officers and men
and crew, whether they had crossed the line before
or not, except the Colonel, Lieut. Heugh, and the
Sergeant-Major, were ducked before the ceremony
began. At 2 p.m. Neptune and his staff got to work
on Captain Wallack. I was next. I was carried
down and examined by the “doctor,” Major Gordon.
I was then lathered with paste, shaved, and tipped
into a sail filled with water. Some of the officers got
a rough time. We all got certificates from Neptune.
November 14. Some of the ship cooks went on
strike because they were ducked yesterday, and as a
result the Sergeants’ mess had no breakfast.
November 15. A long low coastline appears on the
horizon at dawn. It is Ceylon. Later we could see
the beach and dense forest with high mountains in
the background. Adams’ Peak stands out very
clearly. It was here that Buddha first landed, and
where great ceremonies are still held by his fol-
lowers. Along the coast we see queer looking sailing
craft, called catamarans. They are just wide enough
to sit in, and have an outrigger to support them.
The natives use them for fishing craft, and they get
along at a great pace. We dropped anchor at 2 p.m.
in the roadstead, and spent most of our time looking
through our glasses at Colombo. We could see rick-
shaws, motors, and other vehicles racing about. All


the people were in white. The buildings appear to
be very fine. In the centre we can see the dome of a
Buddhist temple. We see inside the breakwater a
mass of shipping, with British, Japanese and Russian
warships. A five-funnel Russian cruiser flying a
white ensign is anchored near us. A warm breeze is
sweeping a delightful odour from the land. Com-
plaints about food. Captain Kane objected to cock-
roaches in his soup, and I offered to supply him with
scorpions from mine, Campbell would like to know
if the porridge could be run through a strainer, as
when the lumps were removed nothing remained.
Tarrant complained that the menu card showed a
different name every meal for the same pudding.
November 16. H.M.S. Yarmouth entered port at
9.15 a.m. The chief officer said she had a shot
through her second funnel. She also had some
newly-painted plates showing she had been in action.
A boxing tournament starts to-night.
November 17. At noon we moved out into our
place in the line, and passed between a Russian and
a British cruiser. The Russians stood to attention,
and we cheered as we moved along. The British
cruiser dipped her ensign. We had some oranges.
They do not get yellow when ripe, remain green, and
are sweet, but not up to our Australian oranges. We
bade good-bye to Ceylon.
November 18. An ordinary day.
November 19. A non-commissioned officer was
degraded to-day for insubordination. The stripes
were cut off his sleeve. It is a sad sight to see a man
degraded, but it must be done for discipline sake,
and non-commissioned officers should set the example.
November 20. Nothing doing.
November 21. Two men reported overboard from
troopship “Shropshire” about daylight. During the
rescue the “Shropshire” and “Ascanius” collided,
but no damage done. News received that a Russian
has damaged the “Goeben” and “Breslau,” Report
of men overboard not correct.
November 22. Sunday services.


November 23. Sighted the island of Socotra, off
Africa, at 9 a.m. Very barren, with high peaks and
ravines running down. Said to be fertile on the
other side.
November 24. Orders received to call at Aden,
November 25. First sight of Arabia. Aden sighted
at noon. Dropped anchor at 4,15 p.m, Aden is a
barren mass of sharp granite peaks and rugged
rocks with roads and tracks here and there leading
up to forts on the peaks. We were told that regi-
ments in disgrace are sent here on garrison duty.
In the background is the low-lying desert of Arabia
infested with lions. Several native villages are in
sight, I don’t know what they live on, except fish,
which is plentiful. A searchlight playing from shore
to-night.
November 26. Sailed at 6.30 a.m. in the same
order as we left Albany. Sighted many native settle-
ments along the shore which appeared very barren.
Passed the island of Perim at 4.30 p.m. It is a long
low-lying island, with a long narrow harbour pro-
tected by a breakwater. The town is small, but
there seems to be a lot of shipping. This is the Red
Sea entrance and is only 14 miles wide. The African
shore shows up plainly with rugged peaks and table
top mountains. The lights in the Red Sea mostly
belong to the Turks, who have extinguished them.
An Indian troopship is passing. It is just sunset.
November 27. Passed two more Indian troopships
at 6 a.m. There must be a lot of troopships, as one
of these was No. 103. Passed some high barren
islands, one with a lighthouse on its summit.
November 28. More Indian troopships passing.
Orders received that we go to Cairo,
November 29. Death of a fireman. Body covered
with Australian naval ensign and buried in the sea.
Poor fellow was going home after five years absence
with the crew. Going home. It makes one think of
home —dear old Maitland, all our friends and those
who were not our friends because they did not know
us. One wonders will they ever see us again.


November 31. Arrived at Suez at 1 a.m. What a
scene. Natives in native boats crowding around, but
the Colonel will allow none of them near us. They
make all sorts of excuse. No avail. At 5 p.m. the
sunset—and what a glory in colour. The sandhills
and desert turned into a violet hue. Someone else
can describe it; I can only gaze at the glory of it
through the tiny clouds of a fine cigar.
December 1, A convoy of 15 ships with black and
white troops on the way from India to England
escorted by a French cruiser. We gave them three
Australian cheers. Ten more Indian troopships have
arrived, escorted by armed merchantmen.
December 3. We are moving on. At the entrance
to the Canal is a town called Steampoint—a very
pretty place with fine buildings. Entered the Canal
at 9 a.m. Saw a number of Beluchis on the bank,
sturdy fellows looking well in Khaki. All along the
Canal there are British and Indian troops construct-
ing forts and detached posts with barbed wire en-
tanglements. In some they already have field guns
and maxims. We entered the first of the Bitter
Lakes at 11 a.m. The guard is armed and a reserve
of ammunition is kept in the guardroom. This is a
precaution, as the Turks may attack at any moment.
We heard at Suez of a German pilot who had just
returned from a holiday in Germany when the war
started. He had a big ship to pilot through the
Canal, but on the journey one of the officers being
suspicious examined his baggage and found strong
explosives ready to blow up the ship and block the
Canal, which in some places is not wide enough for
two ships to pass. We met torpedo-boats patrolling
the Canal. An aeroplane is passing overhead. Ar-
rived at Ismalia at 3.15 p.m. A lake here. Ships and
warboats about. This has been a day of sights.
Some of them would cause Mr. Gale, Maitland’s
Police Magistrate, to fine rather heavily. Arabs ap-
pear to be strangers to modesty, at least along here.
Reached Port Said at 10.30 p.m. Coaling operations
here were very interesting. The natives race up the
inclined planks like flies and carry 561bs. buckets of
coal on their shoulders.


December 4. Left Port Said at 9.30 a.m. Passed
several warboats. The bands played the National
Anthem passing British warboats and the Marsellaise
passing French boats. We got dates, Turkish de-
light, cards and views of Port Said. I was glad to
hear an Egyptian rebuke one of our officers who
asked for indecent post-cards by replying “Respect-
able people do not deal in that filth.” Aeroplanes
flew over us as we left Port Said and caused excite-
ment.
December 5. Arrived at Alexandria at .1 a.m., and
anchored in the outer harbour. Some troops landed
to-day. Very interesting to see the natives diving
after coin.
December 6. Church parade. All our lads eager
to disembark.
December 7. At the wharf. The railway skirts the
wharf. Major Gordon and I with 30 men went on
town picket in the poorer part of the town. Our
duty was to capture anyone who had no pass and
take them back to the ships. The streets in the low
quarter are narrow affairs, some only three feet wide
and the houses in them are dens of open immorality
where women and girls of every nation lure men.
It is a city of awful immorality where men are never
safe. Natives sell whisky in Dewar’s and other
firms’ bottles. They bore a hole in the bottom of the
bottle and refill with methylated spirits and burnt
sugar. “Whisky” to be sure. We are to disembark
to-morrow for Mena. The A,, C., D., and E. Com-
panies go first, and 8., F., G. and H. later in the day.
December 8. Left Alexandria at about 4 p.m. by
train for Cairo. There was delay en route, and as
darkness set in we could not see the country tra-
versed. Old Teddar, who was second-lieutenant when
I was a first-lieutenant in the Boer War, was on our
train. He is a Major now. We reached Cairo at
midnight, and had hot cocoa, French rolls and cheese
provided by the citizens. Then on the trams for
Mena Camp. When we reached Mena we could see
the Pyramids appearing through the gloom. We are
out on the desert now with loose sand around. Men


are swearing, donkeys braying, and camels making
their own awful row. We were perishing with cold,
but had to grin and bear it. I walked about till
morning.
December 9. We are camped under the big Pyra-
mid. Busy fixing up camp. The only tree near is an
Australian gum. In the distance we can see a date
plantation, and far aAvay in the distance the minarets
and domes of the mosques of Cairo. Close about,
however, we see only hills and valleys of sand.
December 10. Parades.
December 11. Drill. A man fell from the Great
Pyramid. Badly injured and not expected to live.
Mena House is now a fine hospital. Young Dilley, of
Maitland, is a patient there and he took me through
it.
December 12. Went to Cairo by motor-car along
Pryamids’ Avenue: a fine broad road running along
a high embankment. They say Ishmail Pasha, made
it in 30 days for the Empress Eugenie to travel over
to the Pyramids. The trees meet overhead, and the
effect is pretty. The land about is closely cropped
with sugar-cane, maize, lucerne, broad beans, chillies,
tomatoes, egg plant, turnips, etc., as well as fruit
trees. It is all irrigated by canals and drains and
raises three crops annually. It is worth £3OO per
acre. The water is drawn from a big dam up the
river. It was a scheme of Kitchener’s, whose aim
was to give each native five acres to cultivate, but
not dispose of. The old primitive days of the Bible
are still here. Villages are scattered through the
farms, with a date plantation about each village.
The houses are flat-topped, and appear to be covered
with rubbish, but swarming with people. Beautiful
palaces along the road to Cairo. In the modern part
of Cairo there are splendid buildings, but the natives’
quarter is in ruin and desolation. Five minutes in
it would drive our aldermen and sanitary inspector
mad. Saw the Citadel, a great fort and barracks,
built of sandstone. Cairo’s most beautiful mosque
is here, the mosque of Mahomet Ali. The minarets
are the highest and most beautiful in Cairo. The


fIaMF J *
JB o
<
CQ
co
ll
i, •: LU
M 2
-%•;» <
C; v „, o
• 2
o
o
'♦ • .
X* <
£4 °
■B o
ijBB i-
JHH
V Lu
IBM


Jmmk
Jr jiu ' ‘I
' * .
. ..
. \' ’ " 4
>
Jldiyl
L
b i
Wj&M v ' jffB
JMf B£[
► • •
K* |H ■JisiN : jjwgB,-
Sri' ■ iR i V k /
"M.-. -]BMt Sct fI rf *: w Ji fLJB* ww~~9i -*wl
g'j. ■ >|-l®!t 1 [-
«»*iiW V Vf 1 11 tir~ V C m
wrlttwUdHB
RwMlMns- *a& ~* S/jj
~r%Tl' Sr*
< *5T
A DONKEY RIDE.
LIEUT. KELLY THIRD FROM RIGHT.


Chamber of a Thousand Lights is in this mosque.
The architecture is marvellous, and the arrangement
of the lights is glorious. The Persian carpets are
said to be worth thousands of pounds. I won’t
describe this wonderful place. It would take a
Byron, a Ruskin, or our Joe Enright to do that. We
next went through the bazaar and saw all sorts of
things, a medley of relics, curios, etc. I saw a sword
of the Crusaders ’ time, valued at £4O. The streets of
the town are crowded with pedlars who want to sell
you something, and boys who wish to clean your
boots for half a piastre, in our cash. We saw
the Casino, not an edifying sight, and then motored
to camp. A good day’s outing.
December 13. Church parade with Colonel Talbot,
Dean of Sydney. Went to the Pyramids and had
our photos taken there.
December 14. Parades two miles out on the sands.
Awful.
December 15. In Cairo on duty for the quarter-
master.
December 16. Parades and pay-day.
December 17. Parades.
December 18. British occupation of Egypt to-day.
Sultan Hussein ascended the throne, A lot of Aus-
tralian troops took part, but we did not see it. In
Cairo in the evening. Most of the people pleased
with the new Sultan, but some are not. The poorer
people do not care who reigns so long as they get
enough to eat. This is the only country in the world
where fashion does not alter. Every conquering
power adopts the custom and fashion of the country.
December 19. Drill on the desert sands.
December 20. Church parade. Went to the Zoo,
and saw a great collection of animals and a beautiful
garden with paths worked in mosaic with pebbles.
Lantana, prickly pear and water hyacinth are culti-
vated here, also bag-pipes by a native band from the
Boys’ Benevolent Home. They make just as horrible
a noise as Scotchmen do —the noise Jack McDonald
is so fond of.


December 21. Parades. Heard that all the letters
we wrote on the voyage were brought on here and
posted. Rather rough.
December 22. Parades.
December 23. Pay-day.
December 24. Route march at 8.30 a.m. through
farms and villages. The natives in different coloured
garbs were picturesque, but the homes are ruins and
rubbish everywhere. You see camels and drains
everywhere as you march along. The water is driven
through them by a system of pumping worked by
wooden cogwheels driven by oxen, camels, or even
natives. The water is raised in buckets on the wheels
and emptied at the head of a drain. It then flows
from drain to drain. The natives suffer from some
eye disease and they are pitted with smallpox. The
natives have crowds of donkeys which carry enor-
mous loads of lucerne, sugar-cane, or cornstalks, and
you can only see the lower part of the donkeys’ legs.
We returned to camp by the Cairo road after a march
of 13 miles.
December 25. Christmas Day. Church parade.
To sing “Peace on Earth,” etc., seems rather a farce
with the nation in the deadly grip of war. Went to
Cairo. Trams, lorries and cars were crowded. Went
through the Museum, consisting of a marvellous col-
lection of Egyptian relies, pictures of ancient rulers
of ages ago. The mummies are wonderful. Queer to
look on the face of a man who lived thousands of
years ago; perfect faces, though dry and black. The
stone carvings are wonderful and baffle description.
It is Christmas night, and we wonder what they are
doing in Maitland. We wonder how it is all going to
end, and whether we will ever see the dear old place,
the well-remeraberd faces in Maitland. Will we ever
return ?
December 26. Went out to observe an attack on
the trenches. Heard that we are to have new forma-
tions and platoon drill.
December 27. Church parade with the Bishop of
Jerusalem as preacher.


December 28. Went through the native bazaar.
An education. Brasswork unique. Saw a piece of
carpet, sft. x 3ft., a picture of Constantinople, valued
at £soo—too dear for me.
December 29. Drill on the sands.
December 30. Paraded under Generals Birdwood
and Bridges. Sir George Reid, accompanied by
General Maxwell, arrived, and made a wonderful
speech, but missed the chance of his life by not
addressing the soldiers of the baby nation of the
world, Australia, from the Pyramid. What a recep-
tion he received.
December 31. Sir George Reid addressed the
other half of the Division at Mena. I saw the old
year out in Cairo, and wondered where I would see
the next one swing into eternity—perhaps in eternity
itself. How sentimental these holidays make us all.
January 1, 1915. Commenced platoon system.
Army order issued that we are now considered on
active service. Box of chocolates issued to each of
us by the Australian War Contingent, London. Gor-
don, Stewart, and I gave the men of old B. Company
sweets, fruit, etc., which should have been here for
Xmas Day.
January 2. Marched out on the desert for platoon
drill in the morning. Paraded at 2.30 p.m. and
marched round the Pyramids and Sphinx.
January 3. Church parade and inspection of lines.
Large clasp knives and tin-openers supplied.
January 4. Platoon drill all day.
January 5. Platoon and company drill. Rumours
of a large force of Turks nearing the Canal. We
have hopes of finishing with toy soldiering.
January 6, Drill as usual. Very trying day. Dust
storms awful; could hardly see our way back.
January 7. 11l to-day. Like fever and ague. Off
ill and unfit for duty till January 14.
January 15. Mr. Cook’s wife and Major Scobie’s
sister, both nurses, arrived to-day.
January 16. At Valley of Despair rifle range.


January 17. Church parade. Visited the native
quarter to see for myself. No one can conceive the
awful depraved standard of morality. A living hell.
January 18, Mobilization parade to-day. Three
months since we left home —seems an age. We are
all nearly full up of life here. General leave for
soldiers to-day.
January 19. Route march. Left camp at 9 a.m.
along Cairo road, then through cultivation to road of
last route march on December 24.
From January 20 to January 31 routine business.
February 1 to February 20. Practically engaged
in platoon drill, trench work, musketry at ranges,
route marches, and so on.
April 5. Good-bye; we are off to the Dardanelles.
In a letter from Gallipoli, Private Peter Bowling,
of Millthorpe, writes:—
“A boatload of the 11th landed not a hundred
yards from a machine gun, and the lot were wiped
out —forty of them. They landed a mile further
down from us, and it was impossible to reach them.
They were still there a week later, on the beach in a
heap, a few of them in the boat just as they were
sitting. When we got to the top of the hill we
rushed into a deserted Turkish trench; but the bul-
lets came thicker than ever. Major Gordon then
stood up, and with his sword in the air, yelled to us
to ‘come on.’ They were his last words. A bullet
caught him, and he toppled over, and lay still. We
charged with the bayonet; but the Turks would not
wait to discuss the situation with us. We managed
to get to another Turkish trench, flere I lost another
of my best friends, Lieutenant G. E. E. Kelly (son of
the Rev. H. Kelly, of Millthorpe), who was shot
through the chest, and lived only three hours. We
were outnumbered 10 to 1, but gave the Turks just
a taste of what the Kangaroos can do. When the
roll was called on the beach, out of an entire bat-
talion of 1036 officers and men all told seven officers
and 480 men remained; so you can form an idea of
what brand of inferno we were up against.”
T. Dimmock, Ltd., Print., Maitland.
