

REPORT
OF THE
Caledon Bay Prospecting Party,
NORTHERN TERRITORY. MAY—SEPTEMBER, 1911.
BULLETIN
OF THE
NORTHERN
TERRITORY
Bulletin No. 3.
May, 1912.


PLAN SHOWING PRINCIPAL AREAS
HELD IN THE
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA.


DIARY
OF THE
Caledon Bay Prospecting Party.
BULLETIN No. 3.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF
THE MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS,
HONOURABLE JOSIAH THOMAS, M.P.,
MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA, MAY, 1912.
By Authority: McCARRON, BIRD & CO., Printers and Publishers, Collins Street, Melbourne.




CALEDON BAY PROSPECTING PARTY.
To His Honour Mr. JUSTICE MITCHELL,
Acting Administrator of the Northern Territory of Australia.
Sir, —Subject to an agreement entered into on the ist day of May, 1911, between
you as the Acting Administrator of the Northern Territory and certain persons whose
names are mentioned herein and who afterwards formed the Caledon Bay Prospecting
Party, we here have the honour to state that having journeyed to the localities set out
to be prospected, and reported upon, and having made a careful and reliable survey of
the country traversed, now hereby hand to you our report of the expedition, together
with a diary kept by Mr. W. F. Murphy, which is recognised as the official diary of the
party, also plans, &c.
THE EXPEDITION.
The party, which was formed on ist May, left Darwin for Pine Creek on 2nd
May, and included the following members:—
W. J. McCAW, Stockman, Pine Creek.
F. CHAS. McCAW, Stockman, Pine Creek.
R. A. JONES, Miner, Pine Creek.
H. F. SHADFORTH, Stockman, Roper River.
W. F. MURPHY. Mining Engineer. Darwin.
W. J. McCaw was subsequently elected leader of the party.
The party arrived at Pine Creek on 2nd May, where provisions for the initial stages
of the journey to the Roper River were obtained, the general stores to cover the
expedition having been forwarded to that destination from Darwin by steamer. On
3rd May the party travelled by vehicle to Horseshoe Creek, where the first portion of
the plant was collected, consisting of nineteen horses, with necessary pack and riding
saddles, &c. Here repairs to harness and generally putting the plant in order delayed
the party until the 9th May, when the party started for the Roper River settlement
at Urapunga, which was duly reached on 26th May, where our plant was further
strengthened by the inclusion of thirteen more horses and further packs. The packing
of stores, shoeing of horses, and perfecting of the plant were here completed, and on
29th May our party, now consisting of fiye white men, two black boys, thirty-two


orses (fourteen of whtch were packed), crossed the Roper River at Leichhardt’s Bar
to make into the Caledon Bay country. We made the Wilton River, and followed
1 same for twelve miles, and crossing the river on the following day, we took a
cmsT S °™ ew at north east - eventually making the Rose River on sth 5 th June, and
crossing the same at a distance of about 66 miles due west from the coast. The same
night we camped on a strong running stream, a right-hand branch of the Heart
River, making the mam branch of the Heart on the following day.
On Bth June, the Walker River was reached, and we crossed the river at its
June ion wit the Strawbridge. Following a course now principally north, we on
June crossed a mam watercourse running to the south-east. This is called by
the natives the Marura River, and it would undoubtedly be a western extension of
wiat is shown on the present departmental plans as the Laurie. The same evening
we camped upon another unknown river, the Malta Murta (native name), which is a
south-western branch of a much more important river, the Koolatong, previously dis-
vere y r. tewart Love, who was through this country last year. The river
of TT' ° n 1 1! 11 Une 15 ° f mUCh ma ? nitude > and wou| d empty into north end
of Blue Mud Bay, at about twenty-five miles to the south-east of our crossing, and
Tard 5,7 \ 7 t affeCted by tldal influe " ce to the Point where we crossed, on a
hard slatey bar. This river may be navigable to our crossing point. After passing
through much swampy country and locating some strong running creeks, shown on
p ns, we on 14th June established a general camp at a spot forty miles due
west of Caledon Bay, where we spelled our horses and obtained a fresh beef supply
and leaving here on 19th June, we made south-east and encountered the head of a
o7twe„tv We . 7 ardS ran . d ° Wn in “ east-south-easterly direction for a distance
into the 7 "I'! 15 118 " Ver ‘ S ° alled by the natives the Wyonga; it eventually empties
into the north-east corner of Blue Mud Bay. Leaving the river and striking due east,
26th P T aSSmg ‘ roUgh many miles of ver - v swampy country, we made Caledon Bay on
26th June, at a point one and a-half miles to the north of Mount Caledon This
country, supposed to be stanniferous, is mostly composed of a hard blue metamorphic
granite. We prospected in the vicinity of Caledon Bay for fourteen days, locating
one mam dyke that passes on a north and south course through the coastal hills for
a distance of about two miles. No traces of any mineral of value could be found
lerefore. as the area of granite country was small, and apparently valueless, we on
sth July made back towards our last camp some forty miles to our west, keeping a
. tie to the north of our outward track. On loth July we camped in some swampy
country, from which the Wyonga River takes its rise, and on the r 4 th of the same
mon we made due west and cut a range of mountains supposed to be mineral
earing on 15th July, In these ranges for twenty days we prospected, covering a
distance north and south along the same of thirty-six miles, leaving on 3rd August
without having located any payable mineral, and taking a course due west to the
Coyder River, upon which we camped at the Rock Hole crossing after having


travelled many miles through the swampy Goyder Valley country. On 9th August we
from here ran the Goyder up some eighty miles, and on 17th August we camped at
what we take to be its head, and at a spot at which within a radius of four
miles the Heart and Rose Rivers take their rise to the south-east. Taking a course to
the west and covering a distance of about twenty-five miles, we made the Wilton River
in the vicinity of Mount Cat, and after running the river up the north-west for some
fifteen miles, and inspecting the Mount Maroomba silver-lead fields, on 24th August we
left our camp at the Bullman Waterhole and ran the Wilton River down
to its junction with the Roper River, travelling a distance of about eighty miles, and
reaching the same on 31st August at our previous crossing-point at Leichhardt’s Bar,
it being ninety-four days since we left here, and having travelled 704 miles in com-
pleting this circuit.
From here it was decided to return to Pine Creek. We prospected for a few days
along the Roper River, and left on our homeward journey on 7th September, and
duly made Pine Creek on 29th September, ending the expedition in Darwin on 30th
September, the party having been away twenty-one weeks and six days, and having
covered a distance of approximately 1580 miles from the time of leaving Darwin until
our return.
It is not the intention of the party in this brief report to set out the general
details covering the whole of our operations. A very comprehensive diary has been kept
by Mr. W. F. Murphy, which will be duly presented to your Honour.
We might, however, briefly state that in our opinion the country to the east of
the Wilton and Goyder Rivers is in no way favourable for immediate prospecting.
The areas of mineral country are very limited, and so far as the efforts of the party
are concerned they proved to be very poor, as although we on all occasions worked
diligently in our own interests, with the exception of what we believe to be antimony,
which was found in small quantity in the ranges, between Caledon Bay and the Goyder
River, no other mineral of consequence was found. The country for miles is composed
of horizontally stratified sandstones, silicious slates, limestones, in nearly all cases
covered with a heavy layer of ferruginous conglomerate and cements. The country in
the vicinity of Caledon Bay is granite, but the area is only small, and the rock is a
hard blue unkind class of granite in which payable minerals could hardly be expected
to exist. Our efforts in prospecting this locality were thoroughly fruitless. Our further
prospecting in the ranges some fifty miles west of Caledon Bay, although in country
of a much kinder aspect, was also very unsuccessful. We here undoubtedly disclosed
many promising looking quartz formations, but beyond finding what Mr. Murphy
believes to be a very poor and irregular deposit of antimony no other mineral of a
commercial value was found.
In the matter of agricultural lands it is our opinion that much of the country
through which we have passed could be made amenable to cultivation. We would more


the Koolatong RiVer^whUe^th!; 0 ar' "I 11 Walker R ' Ver ’ and Probably along
travelled after leaving the Wyonga **
farming country. These lands arp ft eC ° n Bay shoilld make excellent
abundantly watered fresh water et T * * * deep Wack loam a «d are
is quite easy o, ac e I fIT he tk Zt ? ‘ ‘° T ° f Ca,ed °" which
back west to the Goyder River cou d l“f W ° f from Ca >edon Bay
their position would for the present lealT ’ “ Uth ° f the ba ‘
Along the swampy valley of the Govder for all practical purposes,
an area of about 000 soul i f "** Wh °' e °* the lands comprised in
probably no better existing in Austllil ' PlanUt ' on and agricultural country,
with l ;: 11 " : f f r : eaving the wiit °-a nd g oi ng
to the Rose River, we practically did t '° n C ““"T extendln g from Diorite Creek
good pastoral lands until we were within tlTnTy IhL Tl 1 terme<l
River. W e passed through much lands that- •. , 6 lead of tlle G °yder
tainly not good, from the head of the r 1 dassed as inferi or. but cer-
Taking in the Wilton anf thesite thf ol f *** ”«“•
Wilton River to its junction with the Roper r”“ the T d ° W " the
serving of much attention in pastoral interests. *'* undoubted ly de-
Pine^esrwXi e thl h t e here R ° Per River and
more qualified to give authentic opinions of the coultryThS 06 ™"
might state fhat outsidHillfsed '’ll thr ° Ugh which we have travelled, we
we had every reason at times to know that C ° me COntaCt With the blacks;
only in small numbers. We saw no naf TrT ' n ° Ur immediate vicinity, but
tracks were seen on the beach and their fires lould alth ° Ugh their recent
sometimes on the mainland, but more nfte at a dlstance bom us.
leaving Caledon Bay we came closer to m f ° n I' 6 ,s ands off the coast. After
have named the Mitchell Ranges (taklVlh *ll na '‘ VeS rang:es that we
Honour), but although they burnt the whole of the col t *° " ame them after your
one or two occasions disturbed a small camn nf fh ° Ut ° n US ’ and we on
appear to be very timid, and quickly made ff S3W them ; they
this report to describe the country aS free f ° Ur We do wish by
nor do we wish to underrate the fact that th° m natlVeS, think quite otherw ise;
by others going into these parts. We are herehf f ° Und h ° Stile
Party, but we would at all times advise nr mer stating the experience of our
quently found camps where large lumbers lad b 7 ° therS f ° llowing us > as fre-
durmg the last wet season. We are quite of th b 6“ ° amped ’ more on the inland
are qu.te of the op.mon that the native to the east


of the Goyder River is of the Myall class, and has come but little in contact with the
white race.
In our opinion, the statements made, that there are large numbers of wild cattle
in the country through which the expedition travelled, are quite erroneous; there
appeared to be a few isolated small herds to the north of the Walker River, also along
the Wilton. We were often short of beef, being unable to come across a beast to
kill; the tracks of cattle through the country are not numerous.
In concluding this brief report, and thanking your Honour for your kindness in
allowing us the subsidy that enabled us to carry out our expedition, we beg to assure
you that our party has at all times been animated by a spirit of good fellowship
among its members. We have at times had to face hardship, but it was always cheer-
fully undertaken and successfully overcome. It has been our desire to do what we
could in the best interests of the country as well as ourselves, and if our efforts have
not met with all the success that we desired, we at least feel that our work was faith-
fully carried out.
On behalf of the Party,
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient servant,
(Sgd.) W. J, McCAW, Leader of Party.


CALEDON BAY PROSPECTING PARTY.
MARK OF THE PARTY


DIARY OF THE CALEDON BAY PROSPECTING PARTY
Kept by W. F. MURPHY, M.E.
The party was formed of the following members: —
W. J. McCAW, Stockman (Leader), Pine Creek.
F. CHAS. McCAW, Stockman, Pine Creek.
R. A. JONES, Miner, Pine Creek.
H. F. SHADFORTH, Stockman, Roper River.
W. F. MURPHY, Mining Engineer, Melbourne.
ist May, 1911. —The operations of the party start from to-day, the necessary
agreements covering our engagement were signed and portion of the party’s equip-
ment obtained.
2nd May, Tuesday, —Four members of the party, Messrs. W. J. McCaw, R. A.
Jones, Shadforth, and Murphy, left Darwin for Pine Creek, and duly arrived there the
same evening.
3rd May, Wednesday. —Certain stores were obtained to carry the party on to the
Roper River, and in the afternoon a start was made by vehicle for Horseshoe Creek.
The Cullen River was reached about 8 p.m., where we camped for the night.
4th May. —We arrived at Horseshoe Creek about midday and made camp about
half a mile from the township. Here the first portion of the plant belonging to the
McCaw Brothers will be collected, and the harness and general camping outfit put in
order.
sth, 6th, 7th, Bth May.— These days were spent at Horseshoe Creek in getting
together the horses, shoeing same, repairing harness, and making ready for our
journey to the Roper River.
9th May. —Provisions sufficient to carry the party over six months have already
been forwarded by steamer (s.s. “ Nelson”) from Darwin to Roper River, so carrying
sufficient tucker to carry us that far we this morning left Horseshoe Creek, our party
being now as follows: —W. J. McCaw, F. C. McCaw, R. A. Jones, H. F. Shadforth,
W. F. Murphy, with nineteen horses, seven being packed. We made Mount Todd at
11 a.m., and were here compelled to wait for bread, so we made it our dinner camp.


“y f° Unt T ° dd G ° ld * Mines - showed ‘he over the bat-
a ,„!l l h dd a ‘ ' p m -’ making StOW Cr «k at a p. m . and The Edith
ar 3-30 p.m., where we camped for the night. •
ioth May, Wednesday. We left camp at 8 a.m., and making no halt for dinner
we arnved at the Katherine River Telegraph Station about 3 p.m. Here Mr W T
McCaw receded a telegram from Mr. Bell, confirming Mr. H. F. Shadforth’s appoint-.
another man 'at r i' not f ° rm °" e ° f ‘ tS ° riginal nlenlbers but replaced
er man. McCaw also wired the Acting Administrator, informing him of Shad-
orth s appointment. We camped for the night on a creek about two miles south of
after!Lo„ enne ' C “ Bt,bl “ VaUgh *° n a " d Rdd a ‘ ‘amp in the
day 'alid rami ’~ WC ° amP at 7 ' 3 ° a ' m ’ and n,ade M aud Creek about mid-
MO om a d ° r " ner ,2 - 3 ° P - m - tWO mi,eS fUrther <“!« ‘eft our dinner camp
ma< * a P ° lnt ° n Masters Creek about seven miles from Maud Creek at
3 , We dedded ‘° CamP ’ 35 WC Matt Connors who was
towards D™win° ne H° ° Ur WaS n ° W travellin S with some 200 head of cattle
towards Darwin. He would have willingly abandoned the cattle to have come with
son DownTC- t n'T *° tak * bis ‘° b ’ b « had left
the na i tation before the letter informing him that he had been appointed one of
urn dT f m ’ and being bOUnd tocco m Pete his contract he had to go on but
Arafura
n , P P y> Messrs. \ anghton and Reid, were camoed here
Connors shot a bullock about c n m mn r , camped nere-
, , , OLK aDout 5 P-m. The police and our party cut it uo and d,*«
:: e tat;:::'he Con r b,e Vaughton goes ° ut to take ° f **
ponce station, and he will accompany us from here.
Mounted ? ly af!u W ' left OUr camp aboUt 8 a - m - We P arted from Connors and
, , Constable Reid about 7.45 a.m. Mounted Constable Vaughton, with his plant
an, ‘r n ' g | erS ’ n ° W aCCOmpan y us t 0 the E°per River. We made Easters Well 930
a.m., Beacon Swamp 10.30 a.m., and came upon the overland telegraph line at 1040
ami., eventually making King’s Creek ir.3o a.m., where we camped for dinner- some
of our horses here got away from us for some time, and there was a delay in finding
atTpm° “"a ?°° n '‘T WaS kept baCk Until 2 ' 43 P- m - We mossed Roper Creek
o«r d.„T.er cam m p a " ,g UP ° n R ° Pef a ‘ 3 sp °‘ ab ° Ut *»"
ti mblr h “tsT„Vst Ugh to ' day W3S m ° St,y ° f 3 PO ° r OTder ' R “"‘ ai "' d - b
The King Creek is a spot that strikes me as being a likely spot for prospecting-
Cree:° U Th r e y :,r S h t 0 ° f reCent Sandst ° ne than is met with from Pine
Creek, ihe place has a kind appearance. It is reported that tin has been discovered


on this creek. The large amount of coarse granite sand that is in the bed of the stream
would lead me to the opinion of the occurrence of good stanniferous country up stream.
13th May, Saturday.— We broke camp at 8 a.m., making Providence Knoll 10.30
a.m. We then made Gumm’s Creek 11.30 a.m., where we camped for dinner until 2
p.m. We made the turn off from the overland telegraph line at Wire Hill, and camped
at a spot on Roper Creek about six miles from the turn off at 4.30 p.m., our journey
for the day being twenty-four miles.
Most of the country was fairly well timbered, but otherwise of a poor order.
14th May, Sunday. —Leaving camp at 8 a.m., we arrived at the Duck Holes 11.30
a.m., where we camped for dinner. We left our dinner camp at 2 p.m., making Bitter
Springs, the head of the Roper River at 3 p.m., and made it our night camp, journeying
for the day twenty-two miles.
The Bitter Springs are the head waters of the Roper River, and from here the river
may practically be said to flow. They are situated in an extensive belt of limestone,
which is probably a continuation of the limestones that occur at the Katherine River
township; the water, which is exceedingly mineralised, oozes up in volume from large
cavities in the rock. These springs seem to cover a distance of about one mile along
the course of the river, and are numerous.
15th May, Monday. —We left camp at 8 a.m. and made Salt Creek at 11 a.m., and
camped for dinner at the Queensland crossing on the creek at 11.30 a.m. Again leaving
our dinner camp at 2 p.m., we came up to the Elsie station at Mac Minne Bar on the
Roper River at 4.30 p.m., having travelled eighteen miles for the day.
We passed mostly through limestone country, in places somewhat massive and
terrace-like. The river water here is very brackish, .and would contain magnesia,
sodium, chlorides, calcium and much iron. We (from J. W. McGregor, the manager
of Mr. Lawrie’s station, upon which we are now camped) to-day obtained the loan of
two horses and saddles. We will therefore to-morrow be able to mount our nigger,
Kimberley Jack, who Mr. Fred. McCaw obtained on the 14th inst. from a lineman on
the overland telegraph line. We are now in splendid pastoral country, that has the
name of being excellent horsebreeding lands.
16th May, Tuesday.— We made a start away at 8 a.m., passing the Elsie home-
stand, and made the Red Lillie Lagoon—six miles—lo.3o a.m. As it is a matter of some
nine miles from here to the next waters, it was decided to camp here for dinner. At
2 p.m. we left our dinner camp (delay in finding our horses). We made Daken-
hardt’s yard for our night camp 5-30 Day s journey, sixteen mileo.
Our leader, W. McCaw, to-day decided to take the track through to Hodgson
Downs, instead of along the Roper as previously intended; this change has been made
necessary by the inclusion of Mr. Shadforth to our party, he having to journey to the
Nutwood Downs Station to obtain some of his horses, and the fact that W. McCaw


contemplated buying more horses at the station. This will delay our arrival at the
Roper River settlement by some two days.
The weather since the commencement of the trip has been perfect; as we come
away south the nights get somewhat cold, but the days are warm and sunny. We are
still in well-grassed pastoral country, I should say valuable lands from a stocking
standpoint.
We passed to-day bars of silicious sandstone. Mr. McCaw showed me some
coloured quartz that they here call opal; it bears some resemblance to potch opal.
The Red Lillie Lagoon impressed me very much from the beautiful red lilies
growing in it. These flowers are large, and a very fine pink shade in colour, while
the leaves have a diameter of some twenty-five inches.
17th May, Wednesday.— We broke our camp at 8.30 a.m., and leaving our boy to
collect five horses that could not be found passed the Sandridge lagoon at 9.45 a.m.
and made the Strangways River at 10.45 a.m., making our dinner camp on the Patter-
son 11.30 a.m. Here Kimberley Jack overtook us with the missing horses; leaving our
dinner camp 1.45 p.m., we ran the Patterson River up for about four miles, and made
our night camp at Campbell Springs 4.45 p.m. It was here that an unfortunate station
manager, Campbell, many years back was murdered by his black boy. Day’s journey,
twenty-five miles.
The country is much of the same order as we passed through yesterday.
18*h May, Thursday.— Leaving our camp at 7.30 a.m. and passing around Campbell
Springs, we came upon the Mary Springs at 8.45 a.m., and making the Mary Creek and
following up the same for four miles, after which we picked up Davidson’s Creek 10.30
a.m., and passed through sandstone rouge containing some well-grassed flats, and
camped for dinner at Davidson’s Gorge 11.30 a.m.; left dinner camp 1 p.m., followed
up the Davidson Creek three miles and came out upon plain country; made the Little
Red Lillie Lagoon 3.30 p.m., and made Hodgson Downs Station 4 p.m., and camped
about half a mile along a watercourse from the same.
Travelling to-day has been mostly through low sandstone ranges, the elevation of
which would probably not be above 300 feet above the surrounding country. The
country does not seem in any way to be mineral-bearing.
19th May, Friday. We left our camp at 8.30 a.m. Prior to our start we had to
pack and get bred McCaw and Shadforth away, who are now going south about 100
miles to Nutwood Downs Station for additional plant. They will join us again at the
Roper River Bar in about seven days. We made the road at a point about two miles
from the station, a»d passed through well-grassed country. The west of Sheppard’s
Range, near Hamilton Lagoon (twelve miles) we met a half-caste stockman with pack-
horses for Elsie Station. He informed us that the steamer “ Nelson” duly arrived at
the Roper Bar and landed our party’s stores on the 16th inst. We camped at Hamil


ton's Lagoon for dinner 11,30 a.m.; left camp at 2.45 P-m- and made Dalglist’s Lagoon
3.30, made Blackwaters 5.30 p.m., and Mount Hann 6.30 p.m., travellmg for the day
twenty-six miles. TT j
The country continues to contain good pastoral areas, and carries Hodgson Dow
cattle.
20th May, Saturday.— After making away from our camp at 1.15 a.m. and passing
through long grassy plains, we rounded Gordon’s Bluff about eight miles from our camp
and came up to Jim Muir’s Creek at 10.30 a.m.. We camped for dinner, as there is no
water for nine miles further. We left camp at I o’clock, and made the Roper River
police station at 6.30 p.m., meeting one George Stevens, manager Hodgson Downs
Station about four miles out from the same with a load of station provisions.
21st May, Sunday. —We are now in camp at Urapunga, where we will be for some
days, as we have here to obtain further horses, pack provisions, and generally fit out
the expediton for the Never Never country ahead of us. Fred McCaw and arry
Shadforth returned to camp to-day. They had not to go as far as Nutwood Downs as
they met Farrar, the station owner, bringing Shadforth’s horses in for him to t
Roper River. We dined at the police station to-day with Mounted Constables Vaug
ton and Johns.
22nd May, Monday. —We purchased a bullock to-day, which was shot and duly
salted down. The police took half the beast. Mr. Farrar and h.s two sons from the
Nutwood Downs Station arrived at the police station to-day with packhorses an
waggon. The plant is generally being overhauled.
23rd May, Tuesday. —Stores brought up by the “ Nelson” were opened and checked.
I to-day wrote to the Acting Administrator, reporting progress. As we have no photo o
the party it was decided to send for Mr. Joynt. of the Mission Station some twenty
miles down the river, who had a camera, asking him to take a photo of the party,
nigger was despatched with the necessary letter. Frank Conway, a stockman, who with
another white man is mustering wild cattle some too miles to the north of here.
arrived to-day.
24th May, Wednesday—Day was spent in repairing harness, recounterlimng and
restuffing pack saddles. This is a most important item, as hard saddles pac e w
heavy load' would mean sore backs to the horses, and once we leave here going into
unknown country our horses are all-that we have to depend upon m country such as
this; where horses have to work in a hot climate they chafe badly if not well looked
after. *
25th May, Thursday. —Mounted Constable Johns (Big Bill Johnson as he is fami-
liarly known here, and a good fellow) has been speaking to me of a large depos. o
iron’ore that is some few miles up the river, so accompanied by M. C. \ aughton, we


rode across the Roper and followed up its opposite bank for about three miles. Passing
over a small patch of granite country a most 'remarkable deposit of iron ore is en-
countered; it generally seems to trend N. & S., and would be about a mile long and
a quarter of a mile wide where exposed, outcropping at the surface. The most peculiar
feature to me is its remarkable purity. In places the deposit frequently approaches a
state of being metallic iron, being perfectly bright, brittle and metallic in its lustre,
while the whole of the ore in this remarkably valuable formation must be of a very high
grade. T do not think that the existence of this deposit is generally known, and being
alongside of such a splendid navigable river as the Roper it should undoubtedly be a
future asset to the country.
26th May, Friday. Everything is now fairly complete for our starting. Horses are
being shod to-day, so after packing stores to-morrow it is just possible that we will
start out on Sunday morning.
27th May, Saturday.— Provisions were packed sufficient to carry us over four
months, while a month s provisions were left here for our return, or to be sent for if
required before our return.
Mr. Joynt, from the Mission Station, arrived at the police station, and photos of the
party were taken.
I wrote the Acting Administrator again to-day, informing him that we were
now starting out.
28th May, Sunday.— Although we are by no means six-days-a-week men, and
Sunday to us becomes as much a working day as any other, we nevertheless decided to
spell to-day. Mr. Joynt, of the Roper River Mission, held a service in the forenoon,
and out of courtesy perhaps more than from religious inclinations, we all attended.
29th May, Monday. —We started from the police station 10 a.m., after bidding good-
bye to M.C. s V aughton and Johns, by whom we have been very kindly treated during
our stay. We crossed the Roper River on Leichhardt’s Bar, then cut across to Wilton
River some four miles down stream, making Paddy’s Lagoon, the settlement of Mr.
Rodgers, at 11.30 a.m. We then pushed on and followed up the right-hand bank of
the Wilton for four miles. We decided to only travel a short stage to-day, so at this
spot we made our night camp.
As we started away to-day our party now consisted of W. J. McCaw, leader; F. C.
McCaw, R. A. Jones, H. F. Shadforth, W. F. Murphy; black boys—Kimberley
Jack, Jimmy Ah Cup.
The plant consisted of thirty-two horses, fourteen of which were packed. Frank
Conway, the cattle musterer, who is working his plant away to the north of the Walker
River, now comes up with us about 140 miles north-east. Frank is a fine fellow—a
tiue type of an Australian bushman. I do not believe that the country is yet on the


map that this man would fail to get through. He has with him thirteen horses and one
black boy.
30th May, Tuesday.— Leaving our camp at 8.30 this morning, and taking a northerly
course, we followed up the Wilton for four miles and then crossed the stream. The
river is a large one, but was now running low. After crossing we took a course
through some scrubby plains of N. 60 deg. E. for a distance of two miles, then north-
east for one mile, N. 80 deg. E. for two miles. We kept a low range of lancewood
ridges on our right, and a rather strong range of mountains some, miles to our left.
We made our dinner camp on the lost course at 11.45 P- m -> leaving our dinner camp
at 2 p.m. and taking a course of N. 45 deg. E., and having rounded some lancewood
ridges on our right, still keeping the mountain on our left we travelled for about four
miles in this direction, when we crossed a small creek and altered our course to
N. 30 deg. E. for four miles, this bringing us upon a well-grassed diorite plain. A
strong range is now showing on our right, towards which we are gradually making,
receding from the mountain that we have carried to our left. We made Turkey
Lagoon 4 p.m., then crossing it we went due east about one mile, and camped upon
a small creek for the night, 5.10 p.m. We travelled eighteen miles to-day. This, as
the tracks are now heavy, the country trackless and rough, is not a bad day’s work.
The country is fair pastoral lands. The small belt of diorite is, of course, good stock
country.
31st May, Wednesday. —We struck our camp and got away at 8.30 a.m., and made
north half a mile up to the mountain on our right. A creek here blocked us, having
vertical banks. We crossed about half a mile back west. We made up to the foot of
the range half a mile distant north, and rounding a bluff of horizontally stratified
slates, we entered a gorge in the range following up a small creek. The gorge would
be probably twenty chains wide, and is precipitous, being very picturesque in appear-
ance. At a short distance up the gorge the country rock altered to flat sandstone,
and the course we kept in ascending the same would be north for six miles. The
passage was very rough and stony, and in places the scrub almost dragged one from
the saddle. Reaching a small branch creek, we altered our course 15 deg. to the
east, and came out on the top of the range in about one and a-half miles. I should
say that we had ascended about 350 ft. to the top of the gorge when we crossed
this portion of the range, and taking a course of N.E. we made down a gentle decline
of the reverse slope for three miles, through rough, scrubby, stony country containing
many lancewood ridges, which are always difficult to get through; the sharp pio-
jecting spikes from the trees, which grow close together, tear to ribbons anything
brought against them. At this point we came to a small dry creek. We here altered
Our course to north, intending to round a small range on our right. We, however,
came upon a well-grassed box spur, and finding a small spring up a little gorge near
the same, we decided to camp for the night after travelling two and a-half miles. The


country passed through, although interesting from a spectacular point of view, was
rough and barren, composed mostly of massiye sandstone and cjuartzite, certainly most
unlikely country for mineral. In these rough parts there are a few small herds of
wild cattle running. We came upon their fresh track occasionally to-day.
ist June, Thursday. To-day it was decided to remain in camp, and to, if pos-
sible, track up a small herd of wild cattle, kill and get beef. Fred McCaw and the
Kimberley Jack both mounted, and with a packhorse left camp at 8.30 a.ni.
As some of our horses are missing this morning, W. McCaw and Frank Conway went
in search of them. About 1 p.m. W. McCaw and Conway returned, bringing back the
missing horses. About 5 p.m. four blacks came up to the camp. They belong to
this country, but are quite civilised, and are known to most of the party. They were
a good stamp of men. Fred McCaw and Kimberley Jack did not put in an appear-
ance at the camp until 9 o’clock at night, when they returned with 100 lb. of fresh
beef, McCaw having shot a young steer out of a mob of eight cattle. He had been
on their track all day, covering many miles before finding them.
2nd June, Friday.— To-day we were all packed ready to start out at 8 a.m., but
when our horses were mustered it was found that five were missing. It was 11.30
a.m. before these could be found and brought back to camp. We therefore had dinner,
and left camp at 12.15 P- m - We climbed through a stony gap under which we were
camped, then taking a course N. 10 deg. E. for three miles we crossed stony, broken
country, very scrubby, and struck a creek supposed to be Costello Creek, flowing away
to the south, where it, turning again to the east, I am informed empties into the
Rose River. We followed up the right-hand bank of the creek for a distance of two
miles north, then taking a course of N. 5 deg. W. we rounded a ridge making away in
a north-easterly direction; then passing through a well-grassed valley we camped on a
string of waterholes, three miles from our last turning point, or eight miles distant
from last night’s camp.
The country in the vicinity of last night’s camp was of a poor order, and in
to-days journey it continued to be so until we crossed the supposed Costello Creek,
then the country opened out into pastoral lands, long stretches of well-grassed plains
containing box-timber, ironwood, and small patches of Cyprus pine. Most of the
timber is stunted. At our starting point the country was the same hard silicious sand-
stone, flat bedded as previously described, standing up in places in massive walls
forming a low range, presenting rather a rugged and bold landscape, but where we
crossed the Costello Creek I noticed that the country rock had changed to a soft
micaceous slate, somewhat short and horizontally stratified. This country is con-
tinuous to our present camp, with the exception of a small belt of diorite over which
we passed. We camped at 3.30 p.m.
3rd June, Saturday. Ihe horses were mustered, and we broke camp at 9.30 a.m.
\\ e are now on well-grassed plains, with a range bearing away to the south, on our


right hand. We for the first two miles took a course of north, then shifted our course
to north-east, which course we followed all the rest of the day. When three miles
from the camp we encountered a creek flowing to the north-east. This is probably
the same creek that we camped upon last night, where it was only a string of water-
holes. Following down the creek for two miles, we entered a gap in a range that ran
north and south, and followed the creek through the gap for a distance of two miles. The
pass through the gap is very rough, being composed of heavy round diorite boulders. On
this account we called this creek Diorite Creek, and the gap The Diorite Gap.
Emerging on the other side of the gap, we entered upon another well-grassed valley
with a precipitous looking range of mountains running north and south away on our
direct front. Following down the creek for another mile we camped for dinner, mid-
day. After 2 o’clock we continued to follow down along the course of Diorite Creek,
still keeping the north-east course, and on attaining a distance of five miles further,
traversing splendid pastoral country, we more closely approach the precipitous range
seen from the gap, and it presents a most interesting and weird picture. The great
horizontal sandstones, of which it is composed, stand up in pinnacles above the crest
of the range. These pinnacles vary in shape and size, but are mostly flat-topped. They
present the appearance in a most marked degree of the ruins of an ancient city, and to
a few white men, who some years back tried to form a station here, this spot is known
as the Ruined City. We camped at 4.45 p.m. on Diorite Creek, in the heart of
splendid grassed pastoral lands, timbered mostly with box, currajong, ironwood. We
have to-day made a journey of thirteen miles, following down Diorite Creek eleven
miles. The country rock is still horizontal slates (soft slates). The country is, how-
ever, covered for many miles by basaltic loam and diorite.
4th June, Sunday, —Leaving camp this morning at 8.45, and for four miles keeping
on the course of yesterday, north-east, still running down Diorite Creek to this point,
we leave it, making away more to the east, where it junctions with the Rose River about
twelve miles to the west of Evelyn Ponds. Both Fred McCaw and Conway have mus-
tered cattle all over these parts, and know this creek well. From this point we alter
our course to N. 30 deg. E., and enter upon some very poor sandy country, messmate
plains, somewhat scrubby. Three miles on this course we cross a creek with an
extensive washaway. This we named Washaway Creek. Continuing on the same direc-
tion carrying a range some distance away on our right, we at a point of five miles
further encounter a low rock ridge, through which we pass, then altering our course to
the north in a further distance of four miles we cross a creek and work around the
end of a range and make our night camp on a small deep creek about one mile from
the Rose River. The country is generally poor.
Note. —On the Ist inst. I plotted approximately on the departmental plan the tra-
verse of our journey to that point, I to-day connected up with the Rose River, which is
just one mile ahead of us. At least three of my companions are quite acquainted with


the directions of our present location, and I find that my delineation is quite consistent
with their idea of our present situation. When we cut the Rose River to-morrow we
should be about sixty-six miles due west from the coast.
sth June, Monday. —We camped last night in the vicinity of a native sepulchre
which is in a cave in a cliff just opposite our camp. Its weird hieroglyphics and
paintings on the walls of the cave are exceedingly interesting. The bones of the de-
parted are deposited in dilly bags made from fibres of pandanus leaves along the ledges
of the cave and on raised platforms built from the bush timber. It is customary with
the natives in these parts to exhume the body of the dead some time after death, when
all the bones are scraped quite clean; then the disjointed frame is placed in the dilly
bag, which in turn is wrapped up in a layer of paperbark securely tied with string
mostly made from human hair, and then placed in this sepulchre, or as they may be
frequently seen in the bush, they are jammed into the fork of a tree.
We got a start at 8.40 a.m., and going due north for one mile we reached the Rose
River after negotiating a difficult deep creek running into the Rose; we named it Deep
Creek. The banks of the Rose River where we encountered it are almost vertical for
some 40 ft. down to the stream. It was rather a bad place to cross, but as there was
nothing else for it we had to tackle it. We managed to slide the horses down at a
place where the incline was terribly steep, and although the task was a dangerous and
a difficult one, we got through all right, and were all safely landed on the opposite bank
by 9.45 a.m. The Rose River itself here is only a small stream running to the south-
east with a high sandstone bluff skirting its left bank. We went north, following up
the river for one mile after crossing along the edge of some swampy river flats. We
then got around the end of the sandstone bluff, and bringing our direction around to
N. 20 deg. E. for two miles, we made an early dinner camp, 10.50 a.m., on a lagoon
known as Gillan Lagoon. At 12.45 we again moved on, now shaping N. 10 deg. E.
for seven miles, passing through some sandy well-timbered country, with quartzite out-
crops on a north and south course, and following up a low ridge of sandstone on our
left we altered our course to N. 35 deg. E. for four miles, passing through some paper-
bark, tea-tree swampy country. We at this point made what is known to be the right-
hand branch of the Heart River, and following it down for one mile we made our
night camp at 5 p.m. on the river. (There is no Government Departmental record of this
river.)
We to-day, at a distance of some six miles from Gillan Lagoon, crossed Stewart
Love’s track on a small watercourse. Love was then travelling in an easterly direc-
tion, out towards the coast.
There are some rich flats along the Rose River, but they are very swampy, and
in the wet season would be flooded. The country is otherwise poor. The timber is
probably the best class that I have seen so far on the trip. There are several belts of
Cyprus pine of good size. The other timbers would be messmate, ironwood, paper-


bark (narrow leaf), and a class of white gum they call Woollybutt. The course of the
river we are now camped on is marked higher up by a range of high hills.
•
6th June, Tuesday. —l thought it as well that at this stage we should start to leave
a prominent mark at the various stations, on a blazed tree, so before leaving camp this
morning we placed the following mark on a tree near our camp:—
A
We crossed the river and took a course east along the opposite bank for one mile.
We then made off to the north-east for seven miles, where we struck the main Heart
River, and followed it down to cross for one mile, unpacking to have dinner on its
opposite bank. Another tree was here marked at the crossing:—
A
We left our dinner camp at 2.40 p.m., going east one mile, N. 60 deg. E. four miles,
and one mile east all day, and have travelled about fifteen miles.
The Heart River is not yet shown on the plans of this part. It is a sound per-
manent stream, and heads to W.N.W. We are now camped on a lagoon called Kelly’s
Lagoon. The country has mostly been very haggy to-day, and for all purposes no
good.
After leaving the right-hand branch of the Heart River we crossed a belt of
mineral country. It was narrow, about half a mile wide. The country rock is a soft
sandstone and tertiary slates. The belt would run N.S. There are several strong
quartz lodes running through the belt; they look somewhat tricky in appearance.
Other parts of the belt have, however, a much better appearance, and I should have
liked to have prospected here, but as we have a big journey before us it is better that
we should keep going to reach Caledon Bay.
7th June, Wednesday. —Heft camp at 9 a.m. When leaving the weather was very
threatening, but about 11 a.m. it cleared up and became quite fine. We crossed
Kelly’s Lagoon (named Kelly’s Lagoon, as Mounted Constable Kelly, with the police
party that went out to investigate the reported massacre of Love’s party by the natives,
formed a camp here last year). We made north for three and a-half miles now, keeping
on the track of the police party. We then altered our course N.E. and followed it for
four and a-half miles, and made our midday camp at Zamia Creek. We named this
Zamia Creek as there is a thick growth of the zamia palm along its banks. We will not
move further to-day, as we will make the Walker River in one stage to-morrow.
Besides, a few of our horses are a little chafed, and we think it well to spell them.
We are still in swampy paperbark tea-tree country. We have now travelled over
many miles of country that is covered by a heavy layer of ferruginous conglomerate.


This country is mostly swampy, and in the deep loam very haggy. It is generally
scrubby and closely covered by a growth of isago palm, zamia palm, &c. From a
stocking point of view, it is all of a very inferior order.
•
Bth June, Thursday. —We broke camp at 9 a.m. Fred McCaw, with a boy, re-
mained behind to pick up some missing horses, which he brought up to the mob again
about 2.30 p.m. We made to the north, keeping about 20 deg. to the east, still passing
through swampy country for eight miles. As we were then getting into some rough
stony country which was hard on the horses’ feet, we came around another 30 deg. to
the east for three miles; then going north for two miles we made a deep gorge which
led down into a creek, a right-handed watercourse of the Walker River. Descending
into the creek, we got into dense scrub, and had to force a difficult passage for some
few miles to the east along the same, and eventually came out on the Walker about
three miles above its junction with the Strawbridge. We named the deep creek which
led down to the river Conway’s Creek out of compliment to Frank Conway, who has
acted as our guide this far. We followed the river down half a mile and camped.
We are still passing through useless country from a stocking standpoint, mostly
messmate country, which is usually poor. There is a quantity of fair timber about here,
including patches of Cyprus pine of good size, also paperbark and woollybutt. We have
travelled twenty miles to-day, and crossed the divide (a tableland) between the Heart
and Walker Rivers. After getting away from the swamp the country becomes sandy,
and is covered with coarse spinifex.
There is quartz and pebbly wash in Conway’s Creek, but it does not seem to be
auriferous. Walker, the man who the river is named after, was prospecting away at
the head of the stream when he was speared by the blacks many years back. One of
his mates, One-eyed Charlie, was afterwards supposed to have found gold on the head
of the Walker. He fell ill, however, and was carried on a stretcher between two horses
for some hundreds of miles to a hospital, where he died on arrival. As the country
seems to get more broken and mountainous towards the Upper Walker, it is possible
that gold was found there.
Friday, gth June. —We left camp and crossed the Walker River at 9 a.m. The
Walker here is not now a big stream, the water running away to the south-east in two
narrow channels, with extensive sloping grassy banks. Crossing the river, we followed
it down for a distance of about two and a-half miles, when we made its junction with
the Strawbridge River, which seems to come down south into the parent river. Cross-
ing the Strawbridge at its junction with the Walker, we camped upon the opposite
bank, and marked a tree, a large bloodwood, situated about some 300 yards to the N.E.
of the junction, with the party’s mark (which is a triangle with a horizontal line under-
neath and a line starting from the centre of the base of the triangle, and extending
upwards, but not quite reaching the apex).


The streams are here full of fish, and some fine bream (a variety of fresh-water
black bream) were caught, which made a welcome change for dinner. Crocodiles were
also seen in these streams. We continued on our journey at 2 p.m., now taking a course
of N. 10 deg. E., again passing through sandy spinifex country, and though it contains
some fair-sized timber, it is all of an inferior quality. Cyprus pine here is scrubby and
worthless. Travelling five miles from our lunch camp, we crossed a small creek above
a waterfall on our right. From this the country drops away into a deep gorge, evidently
the course of some important waterway. This gorge seems to extend away to the
E.N.E. At a mile further ranges become plainly discernible on our east, and they
appear to run in a N.W. and S.E. direction. These ranges are prominent, and may be
the coastal range at Blue Mud Bay. We travelled ten miles from our dinner camp, and
made our night camp upon a small creek at 6 p.m.
Throughout the day we passed a couple of deserted native camps that have not
been occupied since last wet.
Where the rock becomes exposed through its conglomerate capping it seems to be
mostly horizontally bedded silicious sandstones. Quartzite outcrops in places, and
some lime country, mostly dolomite, was passed. We discovered a most interesting
fossil forming a section of a pine tree. This fossil was remarkably complete, and would
be about 18 in. long by 7 in. in diameter. We would have brought the fossil back to
Darwin, but as it weighed something between 60 and 80 lbs., and as most of our horses
are now carrying over 150 lbs. a pack, we had to leave it behind.
10th June, Saturday. —At 8.45 this morning we left camp, following on the same
course as yesterday —N. 10 deg. E.—for a distance of eight miles. When three miles
out we came upon a strong stream flowing away to the south. This river is called
the Marura River by the natives. I am inclined to think, but cannot say until I see
further into the country, that it would be a head water of what is shown on the plan as
the Lawrie. We journeyed through some country that shows some improvement on
what we have been passing. It might be used for pastoral country, but would be
inferior; but with development would probably be made good lands. We made our
dinner camp on a small creek—Bully Creek. We left the dinner camp at 2 p.m., taking
a course the same as this morning for three miles, when we came around to N. 35 deg. E.,
and after travelling this course for five miles we camped upon the bank of another
river (unknown) after crossing the same. I am informed that by the natives this
river is known as the Matta Murta. The river where we crossed it is in well-grassed
country, with low sloping banks. The channel of the river is wide, but its present
watercourse is small, running east.
nth June, Sunday. —l marked a tree on the left bank of the Matta Murta with the
party’s mark
A


a large paperbark tree about 50 yards up from the stream. We left camp 9 a.m., and for
a distance of eight miles we kept a course 6f N. 30 deg. E., and what we took to be the
Koolatong River, previously discovered by Stewart Love last year. We followed the
same down for half a mile, then crossed it, and found the water to be running to the
north, and it at once became evident to us that it was not the Koolatong, but that we
were again crossing the Matta Murta, which we have been running down all the morn-
ing, it having swerved around to the north, and it junctions with the Koolatong about
one mile down stream from here. Following a rather difficult passage around the bank of
the river for two miles, we made the junction, then crossed the Koolatong River at the
spot where Stewart Love crossed it, the river here running to the east. We camped
upon the bank, and marked a pine tree I 1 , Vl vi,j j^j!
iL
The magnitude of the Koolatong River surprises me; although running low now,
in the wet season it must undoubtedly be a big water. It is, I should think, the main
watercourse draining the whole of the country to the north-east of us back to the ranges
some thirty miles to the west and south of the divide into the northern waters, which
should now be about forty miles to the north of us. The Koolatong where we crossed
it on some hard flat slates, forming a bar, is about the size of the Katherine River in
the vicinity of the township, and its high banks much resemble the same. It grows
paperbark trees along its course of giant dimensions, and it is evident from the debris
clinging in the upper limits of the same that in time of flood it must be some hundreds
of yards wide. Below the bar upon which we crossed the river opens out into a fine reach
of wide and deep water. It had the appearance of being to here affected by tidal
influence, as we should be not more than twenty-eight miles from the north end of
Blue Mud Bay, into which this river empties. Stewart Love having run it down last
year. It is quite probable that this is the case. Below the bar the river takes a more
southerly course.
As we are not running this river down, I cannot offer a definite opinion as to its
resources. The country here is poor for stocking, but I am of opinion that good farm-
ing lands would be found lower down the river, where the country seems to make more
into low flats. The flat slates forming the bank of the river are hard and silicious, and
are interstratified with a shaly sandstone, and is all overlain by iron cement and coarse
conglomerate. It shows no sign of being mineral bearing.
/
12th June, Monday. —Leaving the Koolatong at 8 a.m., we followed down the river
for a while, keeping east one mile. The river then bore away to the south, and was at
this point a fine large stream containing much deep water. We at this point set our
direction to N.E., but when we had gone one mile we came upon some swamp that
compelled us to make to the south-east to get around it, after which we had to keep a


fairly eastern course for about seven miles, where we came upon the Pandanus Creek,
mentioned by Love in his report of last year. We followed the creek down east for
three miles further, where we got a crossing. The crossing was a bad one, as the creek,
although narrow, was fast running and full of deep holes. We had to unpack the
horses to get them across, the niggers carrying the packs across after. When the
plant was safely across we made our dinner camp. Leaving our camp at 2.30 p.m., and
going to the south-east for half a mile, we made the second Pandanus Creek. We
had not much difficulty in getting across this. We followed down this branch for one
mile east, and for the rest of our journey to our night camp we kept a course of
N. 25 deg. E., crossing and camping upon another strong running creek that we named
Shadforth’s Creek, after one of our party, Harry Shadforth, who for the past twenty-
two years has been pioneering the eastern parts of the Northern Territory. It is indeed
hard to meet a finer fellow than Harry, and if the laws of Providence were not so
conservative, and a man was rewarded according to the energy and grit displayed by
him, to-day Harry should be as prosperous as any in the Territory,
The Pandanus Creeks are both fast running, permanent streams, that empty into
the Koolatong some six or seven miles below where we crossed them.
13th June, Tuesday.—We left camp this morning at 7.40 a.m., and
followed up the left bank of Shadforth Creek 30 deg. to the east of north. We only
got one mile when we started to bog in the swampy ground, so for two miles we made
to the N.E. to get into the higher country and round a difficult watery flat. At the end
of the two miles the country still continued to be boggy, so we turned north, and went
right through it for another two miles, and then made back two miles N.W. The
horses were often down to their hocks in the mire, which caused them to plunge a
good deal. One of our party was badly thrown, but, fortunately, not injured. After
travelling eight miles we again come upon Shadforth Creek, running from the N.E. We
here crossed the creek at another difificul crossing, and taking a course N.E., we
followed the stream up for about one mile. Then, taking a course direct north for
another mile, we crossed more watery flats, then cut around to the N.E. for one mile,
again made Shadforth Creek, on the scrubby banks of which we camped for dinner mid-
day. Leaving our dinner camp at 2.15, we took a course N.W. along the bank of the
creek for one and a-half miles, then N. for one mile and N.W. half a mile, and again
camped on Shadforth Creek for the night, 3.30 p.m.
To make direct to Caledon Bay we should here cross the creek, and make off east
direct, but as our supply of beef is getting low, and we can obtain a beast at Conway’s
and Moore’s camp, which is now to our N.W., we decided to go there for a day or so.
This may be the last chance that we will have of getting a killer.
Whatever may be the merits of the country through which we have for some days
past been travelling, the country we are now in has little to recommend it for any
purpose. It is merely a stretch of marsh and swamp, covered with wire grass and


scrub, zamia palms, sago palms, and pandanus. It is from these swamps away to the
north-west that the Koolatong would be raised, to be subsequently fed by the waters of
Shadforth and the Pandanus Creeks. For the past two days we have travelled
through a stretch of practically worthless country.
There is some good Cyprus pine scattered through the country here. It is very
large in size, and apparently sound, but it would be difficult to get it out.
Trees were marked at last night’s camp, also at our dinner camp.
14th June, Wednesday.—We left our camp at 8.20, made away N, 35 deg. W., and,
after travelling seven miles, made Moore and Conway’s camp at 11.40 a.m. We have
expected to meet Conway’s mate, W. Moore, who had been left with a few blacks to
await Conway’s return, who a month before had gone to the Roper River for supplies;
but in the meantime Moore, growing lonely, and being almost unprotected against the
bush blacks, had abandoned the camp, leaving a message cut in a tree and a letter nailed
to same, asking Conway to hurry on his tracks, as he was almost out of tucker, and had
no ammunition. Conway went after Moore immediately, and at lunch time a nigger
came to the camp with the news that Moore hid been overtaken, and in the evening
Billy Moore turned up at the camp himself. He had only gone on about five miles,
and coming across cattle (clean skins), he stopped to muster them. Moore left the camp
on the 7th inst., and as we did not come here until the 14th, he was seven days gone.
The country is still poor, but could be improved a lot if cleared, and would make
good farming lands.
15th June, Thursday.—We are to remain in camp here for about three days. Our
destination, Caledon Bay, should not, according to my reckoning, be more than forty
miles to the east of us. Our horses, although in splendid condition, are a little sore
from the heavy packs, so we will spell them while we get a fresh supply of beef.
Frank Conway, with Moore and Conway’s plant, arrived at camp about 10 a.m.
to-day. In the afternoon a bullock was shot, cut up, salted down, and we will pack
about 2 cwt. of it. Moore and Conway have been here cattle mustering about three
months, it being generally supposed that there were large herds of wild cattle running
in here. Their experience, however, does not bear this out, as they have been here for
the past three months, and it is quite evident that they have worked hard, and have not
yet mustered forty head. The few cattle that are in here are very wild and hard to
muster. These men deserve better luck, as they take considerable risk in these parts,
being a long way into the Never Never.
W. McCaw and H. Shadforth are, as usual when a stop is made, hard at it repair-
ing harness. This spell gives me an opportunity to bring my books and plot our
traverse up to date. Other members of the party get plenty to do looking after the
horses and cooking.
There are in this camp seven white men and six blacks, two lubras. This is
possibly the largest party of white men that was ever in here.


A tree has been marked with the party's mark (a box), and adjoining tree is
inscribed as follows :
THE CALEDON
BAY
PROSPECTING PARTY,
JUNE 16th, 1911.
16th June, Friday. —We are to-day in camp. We have named the creek upon which
we are camped Saddler’s Creek. We will start for Caledon Bay on Sunday. We are
making this a depot, as on return from Caledon Bay going west, we would be sure of
getting good feed for our horses here, as by then the country would be very dry.
When the sun was due north to-day my watch was 11.40 a.m. We have not yet come
across the bush native. We have passed quite a number of deserted camps, but the
blacks have made towards the coast, as during the colder season of the year they are
not subjected to the ravages of the mosquitoes. It is also the opinion of our boys that
there is a big fellow corrobboree taking place out towards Blue Mud Bay, at which the
whole of the tribes would muster.
17th June, Saturday. —Travelling with a big plant through heavy scrubby country
keeps one continually busy during any stop repairing harness, packing saddles, &c.,
and the condition of our plant reflects the greatest credit on our leader (W. McCaw)
and Harry Shadforth, • upon whom all this class of work falls.
In these parts there seems to be a singular absence of bird life, and practically no
game. Hawks and crows are, of course, as in most parts, plentiful, while brolga
(native companions) is seen at times about the swamps. I noticed the blue mountain
parrot on a couple of occasions about the pine, but they are scarce. Since leaving the
Roper River a few wallabies have been seen, also a few wild turkey. Dingoes are quite
common, and howl all night, but they are not seen much about during the day. The
small bird life common to all Australian bush is, of course, seen about, but not in any
quantity. The gohannas, small in size, are plentiful.
18th June, Sunday.— We have made this the proverbial day of rest, performing camp
duties only. I might herein enter that we are all in good health, contented and happy.
We made a big mistake in omitting to bring a camera, as we could have had some
fine pictures on this trip.
19th June, Monday.— We were all packed at 9.20 a.m., and bidding Moore and
Conway good-bye, we left Saddler’s Creek, taking a course 25 deg. to the south of east
for two miles. We here crossed a small creek, and altered our course another 10 deg.
to the south. Travelling two miles, we made a deep waterhole, known as Moore’s
Waterhole. We here camped for dinner at 11 a.m. Conway sent his black,, Pompey,
with us to this spot. We left our dinner camp at 1.30 p.m., and sending Pompey back


to his party, we set out to pick up south-easterly water that should not be many miles
rom here. We took a course south-east for about two and a-half miles, and then went
north for a short distance, then direct east, endeavouring to pick up the head water
of a jungle creek that Love described in his report. Travelling three miles, we
encountered swamp, and made a detour N. one mile to get around it, then went N.W.
for one mile, and striking a strong, permanent-looking watercourse, we followed it
down for one mile, and camped for the night at 4.45 p.m. at a spot where the horses
could get in the water.
The country here is practically useless. It is scrub country, growing in profusion
sago and zamia palms. It is all iron conglomerate country.
20th June, Tuesday. We left perhaps the worst camp that we have had yet at
9" 10 a - m *’ and mossing the river, we took a course E. 30 deg. S. for a distance of
about one mile. We then came back to the east, still following the river, and for the
second time to-day we picked up the track of the police party returning from their
search after Love’s party. We kept this course for one mile, then straightened up our
direction to N. 70 deg. E. for three miles to our dinner camp. This was at a scrubby
spot on the river, where the water fell away in rapids over a terrace of flat sandstones
6 left our dmner camp at 2.10 p.m., and followed the river east for a mile, then
' 4O deg- E * for another mile - The country then became very difficult; the scrub being
very dense. We came out on a small creek, upon which there was a good night’s feed-
ing for the horses, and as we may get none for some distance ahead, we decided to
camp here for the night. We selected a good open camping ground. This is a necessary
precaution when amongst myall (i.e., bush) natives, although as a matter of fact
blacks will seldom attack you at night; that is, providing they take the fit into their
heads to do so, they generally try and sneak on you about daylight.
I am inclined to believe that the water we are following is not the jungle creek
that Love describes. I have a tracing with me that shows the jungle creek to be more
of a south-east water running into Blue Mud Bay. The river we are following seems
to be making more to the north of east, and where we are camped here it is some two
chains wide, wider than the Roper at Leichhardt Bar, and apparently very deep From
here it continues east for at least four miles, W. McCaw, with the black boy, havin-
run it down that far to ascertain the state of the country ahead. We therefore have run
t e river east for at least twelve miles, while Love does not show more than a couple
of miles of an eastern water to his jungle creek. Should this river continue on this
course, it must undoubtedly make into Caledon Bay. We have had much difficulty in
orcmg a passage through the thick jungly scrub through which we have come to-day
It is very rough on both ourselves and the horses. There is an immense amount of
scrubby undergrowth, staghorns, &c., and sago and zamia palm, pandanus, and I to-day
noticed another form of palm that so far I have not seen before. It much resembles the
banana tree with a broad leaf.


There is evidence of there being small mobs of cattle in here, as their tracks are
frequent along the river. Mr. W. McCaw saw three head this morning along the river,
and we disturbed a small mob at our dinner camp.
There is some large Cyprus pine, much of which could be commercially used,
rrowing in here, but it would be difficult to get to.
21st June, Wednesday.— Leaving camp at 9 a.m., we took a course of N.E. for one
mile. We are still following the river, but have gone north to avoid the dense jungle
on its banks. We altered our course to N. 80 deg, E. for six miles, and made our
dinner camp on a small creek running south to the river. At a point four miles from
our start this morning we crossed a creek; a mile further we crossed another, both
making into the river. We have battled through much scrub, tea-tree, staghorn palm,
&c. There is no grass worth mentioning growing here. We left our dinner camp at
2.15 p.m., and took an easterly course, which brought us out into messmate sandy scrub
country, with patches of very heavy scrub. After travelling five miles, we found that
we had got away from the river, and that the country had all the aspect of being very
dry on ahead. As we seemed to be on rising ground, we therefore turned south to
again pick up the fall of the river. We had to force our way through heavy messmate
scrub for three miles; then as we found no trace of the river we came to the conclusion
that it had suddenly turned and gone away south. Night was now on us, so there was
nothing to do but unpack and send the nigger on with'a bag to try and get water. From
the tree tops to-day we can see a range of mountains out on our south-east. I am
inclined to think that this would be the Mount Caledon country, that is, the more
southerly portion of it towards Cape Grey. Kimberley Jack returned to camp without
finding water, so we put up in our mosquito nets for a dry night. We saw what we
believe to be the fires of blacks to-day away to our south-west.
22nd June, Thursday.— We sent the niggers out at daylight this morning to get the
horses. As we have had no water since mid-day yesterday, we would probably be
thirsty before we would get back to the river. We got packed, and started off back west
at 8.10 a.m., keeping a little to the north. After we had gone three miles we found a
small creek, and ran it down to the river, and at 10.20 a.m. camped. As there is some
doubt about the country ahead of us, we sent -the nigger Kimberley Jack to run the
river down for a bit to see if it makes again to the east, and as he did not turn up
until late at night we did not again move on to-day. His absence of seven hours
caused a little anxiety. Although armed with a rifle, and a most trustworthy boy, it was
quite possible for him to have met with trouble if he fell in with a mob of natives.
On his return he reported the river running south.
23rd June, Friday.— Having decided to follow the river for some distance, we packed
and started out at 8.40 a.m., taking a course to the south-east for two miles. The river
then took a turn to the south, and we altered our course east 70 deg. south, following
the said direction for two miles, then coming full around to the south for a short distance


only. We crossed a creek, and again came upon the river, again running it down S.E.
for about one mile. We camped for dinner on its bank at mid-day. The river here is
a shallow, wide, and fast-running stream, and a big improvement has taken place in the
country, it here being open and well grassed. Leaving our dinner camp at 2 p.m., still
following down the stream S.E., we came upon a belt of ironbark timbered country, with
well-grassed sloping plains. Through this we took a course of east, leaving the river
away on our right. Continuing through these ironbark plains for a distance of three
miles, and crossing a creek, we again encountered swamp. We kept along the edge of
the swamp for one mile east, and camped for the night at 4.40 p.m. on a small creek.
At the spot where we left the river we came upon an old camp. We were at first
inclined to think that this must have been Love’s old camp, but after a more careful
examination we became satisfied that it was the camp of the police party. Speaking to
the police at the Roper River bar, they explained having struck a river hereabouts,
and that they ran it down to the salt water. There is no doubt but this would be the
river. From their description of their trip, it seems that they came upon the river many
miles lower down towards the sea, and ran the river into the Blue Mud Bay, not, as they
supposed, into Caledon Bay. Their native guide ran away somewhere about Blue
Mud Bay, but the black police picked up the tracks of Love’s party making north, and
they made up along the coast into another small bay, where a revolver belonging to one
of Love’s party and some of their stolen camp gear were found, I believe, in a deserted
camp. In the swamp and jungly country here the police surprised a big camp of natives,
some of whom were found in possession of other articles stolen from Love. Certain
natives we arrested (who were subsequently shot in trying to escape at the Koolatong
River), and the police in getting around the swampy country made north-west, again
coming upon the river, I should say at the spot where we found their camp to-day.
They evidently then followed the river to the north-west and west for some distance
before crossing. I make this reference here, as I hardly think that the police party
could have got into Caledon Bay, as according to my present reckoning we would have
to work up a little to the north of east to reach it. Love’s party were supposed to
have been murdered somewhere about here. The ironbark timber mentioned to-day is
the best of its class that I have yet seen in the Territory. The trees are numerous, but
on the average not large. There are many that would have a girth of, say, 4 ft., but
none above 40 ft. high.
We again saw the fresh track of wild cattle to-day, and in the afternoon we saw a
young bull. Of course, there is no doubt now that this is the jungly creek described
by Love that .we followed down, but I find it hard to reconcile its head water with Love’s
plan. When Love called it a creek he must have struck a narrow portion of it, as
generally the water is of some magnitude.
I have seen nothing in any of the country that we have passed through lately that
would indicate the existence of mineral value. The country is overlain everywhere by
the same ferruginous conglomerate.


24th June, Saturday—We made our breakfast on boiled wild turkey, an agreeable
change from salt beef, and getting a start at 8.15 a.m„ we followed the eastern course
of yesterday, keeping about 6 deg. to the north. We crossed a number of stony ridges,
sparsely timbered with Moreton Bay ash. After travelling about five miles, we came
upon extensive swamp, and had to alter our course to the N.W. for one mile, then
make back direct west about half a mile, after which we were able to make a.course of
N E and got around the head of the swamp, and camped for dinner at mid-day ha
a mile on the opposite side. On a bit of high ground this morning we climbed a tree,
and ranges are now seen on our direct east. They are not very prominent and die out
towards the south. There is one high rohnd peak in the range. 'I his is probably Mount
Caledon. We have now much swampy country to get through before we make t e
range We left our dinner camp at 2 p.m., and took a course due east across some rising
country, making straight towards the range, but we had only gone a mile when swamp
again forced us to alter our course to the north for a short distance, and then back
west for about one mile. We here got across with much bogging to the horses, t en
came round on to a north-east course, but were blocked again half a mile on, and had to
turn right around west and go back. In about half a mile’s travelling we managed to
flounder through the bog. and came around once again to the N.E but w-e «nabl to
force our way more than half a mile, so we turned to the north. From this on for two
hours we were short coursing in every direction in endeavouring to pick our way to
the east. At last we struck a very boggy creek. We had an anxious time in getting
across it, but when safely over we camped for the night. We have travelled about ten
miles since leaving our dinner camp, and gained about two towards our destination east.
These are the swamps described by Love in his report. To the west of Mount Caledon
they are certainly extensive. The higher portions of them should make excellent arm-
ing and dairying lands, while a system of drainage would make even the lower swampy
ground valuable.
25th June, Sunday.— Left camp 8.15 a.m., and being now in better country we
continued to go east, crossing well-grassed rolling country. At two agam
came in and we went north, and in about one mile got around it, and kept to the N.E.
for a mile further, still fringing heavy country, after which we were able to make two
miles due east by making small detours to get around other wet patches We even y
came upon a creek of blue clear water that was running south very fast was
splendid creek, with deep banks, and from the appearance of the water w
were inclined to think it salt, but it proved to be quite fiesh. A htt
above where we cut it the creek divided into two
to the north and one to the north-west. In getting a crossing we ran the N.W branch
up about one mile. I asked the party to name the creek, and as this is just about t
period of the coronation festivities in London, in honour of the event we named .
The Coronation Creek. We crossed the creek, and had dinner on the opposite bank at
II 30 ara The country hereabouts is all excellent agricultural and farming lands. We


made another start at 1.30 p.m., but half a mile stood us up against more swamp. By
going north one mile we got around it. We then.came around east 30 deg. to the south,
and made two and a-half miles. In getting around another patch we went east, south-
east, and east again. This put us into better ground, and we bore away to the S.S.E.,
after travelling in which direction for two miles we broke out upon a sharp decline in
the country, from the edge .of which we can now plainly see the coastal range on our
direct east. Kimberley Jack climbed a tree at this spot, and reported that salt water (the
sea) was now showing on our north-east, and another day’s travel will probably bring
us to it. (Hurrah!) We descended the decline and camped for the night at about half
a mile from same at 4.50 p.m. on a small watercourse on a splendidly-grassed plain. The
country here is much above the average; the plains seem to be extensive, are well
grassed with sweet feed, mostly Kangaroo grass. The country is open, timbered only
with low bloodwood and box and a little paperbark. These lands would carry stock,
and should be good breeding country; at any rate it would be ideal dairying lands.
After crossing the north-west branch of Coronation Creek we should have crossed
the branch making to the north; as we did not do so I take it that it does not
extend far up.
26th June, Monday.—We left our camp this morning, going east to the range at
8 a.m., crossing the plain on which we camped, the country continuing to be of good
quality. When three miles on we first came upon the granite which started to show up
above the concreteary iron gravel. At four miles we encountered the first spurs of the
coastal range. Here discontinuing, I, with the others of the party, climbed to the top
of a spur, and looking out to north-east, the sea is now showing'plainly at a distance
of about six miles. We altered our course to N. 20 deg. E. to follow up a break
through the granite range, passing through well-grassed rolling country for three
miles. This brought us out on an extensive marsh, which proved to be the boundary
between the fresh and salt water, and on this we camped for dinner at 11 a.m. Some
members of the party here again climbed an adjacent hill, from which the whole bay
was plainly seen. At 1.40 p.m. we got on our way again, keeping to the south of east
to get around the coastal range. About one mile on we crossed a creek, upon which
we subsequently camped later on in the day, and travelling a mile further, following
down a small watercourse, we made the seashore and stood upon the sands of Caledon
Bay at 2.40 p.m. An hour or so after we returned to the creek and camped.
Most of the horses being bred in the back country, also our dogs, had never seen
the open sea before, and showed a very decided disinclination to get too near to it.
Jimmy Ah Cup, a half-caste Chinese aborigine, a remarkably small boy, had likewise
never seen salt water. Jimmy was more than amazed; with his mouth open he stared
blankly to sea, drawing our attention to the white foam breaking on some far-out
reefs which he called cockatoos. On the sea washing up close to him, he was inclined
to break a record in getting on to high land.


I will to-morrow, with such instruments as I have in my possession, climb one of
the high coastal hills, and define our position as accurately as possible.
All this country right to the seashore is good farming country; there is plenty of
fresh water here. This opinion is shared by all my companions.
27th June, Tuesday —After breakfast, with our leader, W. McCaw, and blaclcboy, Kim-
berley Jack, I set out to find Mount Caledon, which I believed to be near at hand. We
rode to the coast, and went to the south for about i l / 2 miles, when we came upon a
rugged elevation of probably four hundred feet (as described by Geologist H. Y. L.
Brown in his report upon this bay), we ascended the south-eastern face of same. From
the summit of the mountain the principal topographical features of Caledon Bay are
easily recognised. I made certain observations to define the position of the mountain from
the principal points of the bay, and in all cases found them identical with the position as
shown on the maps in my possession. I then located our position of making the bay,
and found that we had come out 1 ]/ 2 miles to the north of Mount Caledon. This would
be somewhere about the spot where Love touched it last year. W’e returned to camp mid-
day. After lunch most of the party took tools and made up towards the head of the creek,
upon which we are camped and commenced prospecting. I made up our journey from
our camp at Saddlers’ Creek, where we parted from Moore and Conway. I find since
leaving that we have travelled over 78 miles; our course, however, has been very irregular
and difficult to keep, therefore allowing all necessary deductions for deviations, detours,
and the ins and outs of travelling, I should say that we had not come more than 43
miles direct east from our starting point.
Although it is rather premature to offer an opinion as to the mineral bearing aspect
of this country, I cannot help saying that I am anything but impressed with the general
appearance of this locality. The country may be stanniferous, but I should not think so,
and if it is the occurrence of tin is only due to metasomatic impregnation, in which case
in limited quantities the tin oxides would form one of the constituents of the rock itself,
and would be emitted into the sands during periods of denudation; this occurrence is not
uncommon, but usually unpayable. The rock itself is a hard blue metamorphic granite
and outcrops as is usual with this class of formation in heavy round boulders. There is, so
far as I have at present seen, no indication of quartz schists or dykes that would lend
the country a mineral-bearing appearance.
In other respects, the country continues to be worthy of much consideration; there
is much good farming land here; it would also be good stock breeding, though hardly
good fattening country. There is a fair depth of healthy-looking black soil everywhere,
in fact, right through, taking the general surface aspect of the country, it might be
classed good all-round farming lands.
28th June, Wednesday. —My companion having located a better camping ground, we
decided to move up to it this morning; we therefore shifted up to the N.W. side of
Mount Caledon, and camped right up under it; after establishing camp all members of


the party, with the exception of two who act as guards, put in the rest of the day pro-
specting in the vicinity of the mount, where Love is supposed to have discovered the tin;
much titanic iron is disseminated throughout the creeks, but certainly no visible tin, nor
is even the existence of garnets proved by to-day’s operations, though I heard, and do
not for one moment doubt, that garnets have been found here. Having arrived at our
destination, I decided to legibly mark a tree to place the possibilities of any dispute be-
yond question. On a large bloodwood tree, situated about 100 yards from the foot of the
mount at our camp on its N.W. side and about a half-a-mile back from the beach, near
where the thick jungle prevents one from following around the foot of the mount, and on
a blaze 3 feet long by 2 feet wide, the following inscription is very regularly and legibly
cut. (See illustration on opposite page.)
28th June (continued). Before we left Darwin I had occasion with one of my mates
to see Dr. Strangman to get him to put up a medical chest for the trip. The Doctor in-
quired our proposed destination, and when informed that it was Caledon Bay, very well,
said he, you will want plenty of eye drops there, for the flies are bad. I wish herein to
enter the party’s most hearty endorsement of Dr. Strangman’s opinion, and though we
have not yet had to requisition the eyedrops, it certainly has not been on account of any
consideration shown by the flies.
29th June, Thursday.—The day has been spent in further exploiting the mineral possi-
bilities of the locality; one party have been out on the heads of the gullies to our west,
and we gave the country a turn over more to our north this morning. In the afternoon
Fred. McCaw, Jones and myself rode some 5 miles north, to where sandstone cliffs are
seen, I thinking it possible that some sort of a contact formation might be found at the
junction of the country rocks; in this I was disappointed, as the sandstones are merely a
recent formation (Tertiary sandstones), and merely overlay the parent granite rock,
which again outcrops some 20 miles to the north. These sandstones are horizon-
tally bedded, containing seams of marine deposit, principally shell. I noticed a thin seam
of shale near the top of the cliff containing much iron. It is of no consequence. Making a
keen examination, and being satisfied that nothing could be reasonably looked for in this
quarter, we returned to camp, and will confine our operations around Mt. Caledon and
to its south.
The detail sketch will give some idea of the geological position as it appears to me.
30th June, Friday, bred. McCaw and R. Jones take charge of the camp to-day, and
will prospect in its vicinity. W. McCaw and H. Shadforth and myself took horses and
went through the country towards Cape Gray. We followed around the range to the
south-east, examining all the gorges in the range and washing out the crevices in the
gullies, and towards midday Shadforth and myself located a quartz seam on a small table
land near the top of one of the peaks of the range; the rest of the day was spent in open-
ing up upon it, but it being only a little gash vein it soon gave out. It contained no value;


GEOLOGICAL SECTION, from Caledon Bay to Melville Bay.
SCALE —Horizontal, 4 miles to 1 inch; Vertical, 400 feet to 1 inch.
Section of Marked Tree at Caledon Bay.


Detail Sketch showing the probable occurrence of the Mineral Belt in the Mitchell Ranges.
SCALE— 8 miles to 1 inch.


Detail Sketch showing approximately the Granite Area at Caledon Bay, and Route Travelled by Party from Saddlers Creek.
SCALE — 8 miles to 1 inch.


we searched the same locality for other veins, but being unsuccessful in finding one, we
returned to camp in the evening; prospecting all around to-day is quite barren of result.
The country towards Cape Grey continues to be good farming lands. We came upon
a large marshy plain, and to here we intend to shift our camp to-morrow, there being a
hill in its vicinity having a kinder appearance than those about here.
So far we have not been in any way troubled with the natives. They have been here
quite recently, and their fires can be seen now burning away out towards Cape Grey, and
on the islands at the entrance to the Bay. Their fresh tracks are met with on the beach,
where a number have passed along probably the day before we came here, as the night
when we camped upon the plain after first sighting Caledon Bay, the reflection of their
fires could be seen flaring up in answer to our fire —their customary way of signalling by
night all around this quarter. As we are not troubled by day with them, we set no watch
at night. We turn in with a loaded rifle and revolver handy in case of emergency, and
we leave the rest to our two dogs—Nipper and Mique—a good dog being the best watch
you can have.
Turtles seem to be numerous here. We found the shells of many large ones, where
the natives had cooked them. Kangaroos are plentiful in the hills here. There is quite an
amount of native fruit and berries grow in one or two places, but they are not palatable.
ist July, Saturday.—The first thing this morning moved our camp 3 miles to the
south-west of Mount Caledon on to the well grassed flats found yesterday. After making
camp three members tried around the southern slopes of Mount Caledon from the camp
to the sea, encountering only the same hard blue granite, and from here inland the
country becomes covered with sand hummocks for a considerable distance extending
south towards Cape Grey. We had an early dinner, and W. McCaw, Jones and myself
went back a mile or so west to the inner coa tal range, where the hills show slight change
of country rock; we found these hills to be still composed of granite, but somewhat
more denuded, the granite being now more red in colour. This country certainly had
a kinder appearance, and we were not long in locating a number of quartz veins running
north and south through a small valley in the ranges. The vein met with contained a num-
ber of quartz stringers in dyke like form, but some yards further on the outcropof a well-
defined seam of quartz some 3to 4 feet wide was found. This seam, although not yet
followed, can be seen running for a considerable distance into the ranges, while there are
indications of further outcrops in the same vicinity. We have evidently located a belt of
mineral country that may yet prove of value, but so far as we tried to-day nothing was
found. We, however, intend to delve into this line on Monday.
2nd July, Sunday.—We have again decided to keep the Sabbath by abstaining from
work, we having kept ourselves hard at it of late. Most members of the party are fish-
ing out on the rocks in the Bay. I strolled across and had a look over the quartz belt
we found yesterday. I should define the occurrence to be a large granite dyke trending
on a north and south course, and cutting through the line of ranges probably for some


distance. The dyke in the main is composed of a friable ferruginous granite, inter-
cepted by numerous silicious seams, varying in thickness from a mere thread to some
feet; the slicious matter varies in quality from a hard red Jasper to a kind looking
sugary quartz, carrying vugs of iron oxides, the quartz generally being stained green
with sulphates of iron. In some places the stone has an inviting appearance, and lam
hopeful that it might contain values in either tin or gold, though from its general
appearance I am of the opinion that it is more 1 like a gold proposition.
3rd July, Monday.—We got to work early this morning to prospect along the dyke.
Fred. McCaw and myself undertook the principal work of prospecting. W. McCaw and
a boy went away south towards Cape Grey to further exploit the country in that direc-
tion. I made a careful examination of the dyke, and from our point of first encountering
it I found it to be exposed on the surface for a distance of about 1 mile to the south. Fol-
lowing up a small valley in the ranges, evidently caused by the more rapid denudation
of the soft dyke like formation, the surrounding granite being considerably harder,
numerous creeks fall away from this valley into the principal watercourses, drawing this
portion of the range, and should the dyke carry any payable mineral it would be a reason-
able supposition that traces of it should be found in them; we therefore first turned over
some of these creeks, while the capping of the outcrop was carefully napped over, and
the loam in the vicinity of the dyke carefully washed. I carried out a
system of loaming along the low side of the formation, but though we worked
hard and late into the evening we were unable to raise a trace of anything payable
to-day. At its furthest point south the formation, although some 3 chains in width,
was apparently quite barren of value. Here it splits up into hard jasper stringers and
seems to disappear. On getting back to the camp I carefully roasted, dollied and ground
the best-looking of the quartz we found to-day, but it seemed worthless. W. McCaw
icports that just to our south the country again becomes overlain by conglomerate ex-
tending almost to Cape Grey, to which place we rode.
The rough sketch will give some idea of the positions at Caledon Bay, as ex-
plained. The red lines denote our traverse, our camps being shown in the circle.
4th July, Tuesday.—Prospecting was continued on the dyke to-day. W. McCaw,
Shadforth and myself following on from where I left ofif yesterday and going north, the'
same system of prospecting was carried out; we crushed stone and washed it ofif all day,
and vigorously loamed and washed the gravels from the gullies, but outside of iron noth-
ing shows up. The dyke at the north end becomes poor, and is eventually covered by
the iron conglomerate. lam afraid this formation is no good; could we only raise a
trace of tin or gold it is reasonable that we would expend further efiforts in prospecting
it, but I hardly think it worth wasting any further time on. Other members of the
party have sunk holes in some of the principal creeks here, but all without result. As the
iron cement comes into our immediate south, it would be useless to further prospect in
that direction. Four miles to the north barren sandstone comes in, while sor 6 miles to


the west the country is again covered by conglomerate, therefore there is not an area of
50 square miles to prospect over, and we have been well through most of this, which, to
say the best of it, is not by any means likely-looking mineral country. Therefore my
companions favour the idea of making back to the ranges some 50 miles inland, where it
is expected to find more favourable country, and personally I think that this is the best
thing that can be done. It is therefore probable that we will make a start to-morrow.
About 2 p.m. to-day we had a sharp coastal shower of rain lasting about half-an-hour.
This is the first rain that we have had since we commenced the trip.
A BRIEF SUMMARY ON CALEDON BAY.
In leaving Caledon Bay we do so with much regret, as not a spot could be more
ideal in which to live; however, our mission is to discover payable mineral, and as it
apparently does not exist here, we are reluctantly compelled to move further. However,
quite apart from its mineral resources, this locality has much to recommend it; it has
areas of valuable farming lands extending from the shores of the beach back some 20
miles into the country. The country is abundantly watered, fresh water existing right
up to the sea coast. It has large grassy swampy plains that would contain green grass
throughout the dry season, while the easy accessible slopes of the range and the hills
around the locality appear to be always well grassed, and would carry small herds
throughout the wet. Back a few miles from the coast there is much deep black loam
apparently rich soil, that would all be suitable for ordinary cultivation. The country
is quite open and free from scrub and easy of access; in fact, one may walk off a well-
grassed plain right on to the sands of the beach.
Whatever may be the nautical aspect of Caledon Bay, its general appearance from
the shore is that of a well-formed Bay containing many miles of beautiful sandy beach,
with Mount Caledon and the Coastal Ranges as a back ground. The entrance seems in
the main to be sheltered by two islands, and the waters seem always calm from a sea-
side resort point of view; no place could be more desirable or enjoyable.
sth July, Wednesday. —As proposed yesterday, we packed up and left camp at 8.30
a.m. to make back west to the ranges. We went N.W., and at a distance of about 4
miles from our camp we picked up our old tracks and followed the same to Coronation
Creek. We made this our night camp. We will from this on endeavour to keep to the
north of our track outwards,
6th July, Thursday. —We left camp this morning and took a course S.W. for 2 miles,
when we picked up our track of June 25th and followed on the same until reaching our
night camp of 23rd June. We made the same about 11 a.m. We are just about out of
meat, so must camp here and look about for a beast to kill. There are tracks about, but
they are, I am afraid, a bit too old to follow on.


7th July, Friday. —Having- failed to find beef yesterday, we pushed on this morning,
started at 8.30 a.m., and took a general course, due west for about 3 miles. We are now
cutting across to our night camp of June 23nd. When we had gone 2 miles we came up
against a thick jungly creek running in a south-easterly direction; we crossed this, and
short distance further on, again came on the same creek, which I take it had turned back
to the south its waters now running to the N.E. We followed it south for a half mile,
then crossed it. lam now satisfied that this is the creek that Love crossed on his return
from Caledon Bay, and took to be the head water of what he described as Jungly Creek,
whereas as a matter of fact this is only a branch water of the same. What he crossed in
the first place some miles to the south was the same river that we ran east in coming
in here. This creek empties into it a little to our S.W\ On crossing the creek we con-
tinued on a course of west 30 deg. N. for a distance of i>4 miles. We crossed our pre-
vious tracks of June 21st, when we were then journeying to the south, and at 4 p.m. we
camped at our old camp of June 22nd, where a tree (Pine) bears the mark of the party.
made no regular dinner camp to-day; we merely boiled the billy, taking the water
from our bags; making only a short stay we pushed on again. We skirted the south
fringe of the divide. The country was dry, and all of a very poor order.
Bth July, Saturday. —Owing to the camp being a poor one for feed, a number of
horses could not be mustered for an early start to-day, so it was 9.30 a.m. before we
got away. We went W. 20 deg. N. for miles, when we came upon a swampy creek.
We went p 2 mile north along it, and here had considerable difficulty in crossing it,
some of our horses getting down in the bog; going 10 deg. more to the north we made
another 4 miles, and got another bad crossing, but had to flounder our horses through it,
after which we picked up our tracks of June 20th, and followed on the same for one mile,
and crossing a creek, we camped for dinner on its bank. moved away from our
dinner camp at 2.30 p.m., and, following up our old pad for a mile, we came upon some
good grass in the vicinity of a number of small lagoons. As our horses are hungry, and,
having only poor food for the past three days, we decided to give them the advantage of
this patch, so we made this our night camp at 3 p.m.
We burnt off much of the swampy country on our road into Caledon Bay, if it so
happened that we were returning a few weeks later we would get young grass in many
places, but as it is only now commencing to spring we have to be careful in selecting
camps.
9th July, Sunday. —We got the horses packed, and left the camp at 8.45 a.m., taking
a direction of 10 deg. to the north of west. We crossed through some desert country,
exposing some hard flat sandstones, and in places encountered paper-bark swamp; 4
miles on we crossed the creek, upon which lower down we had camped on June 20th, and
getting back into iron cement country we passed through scrubby messmate and poor
pine. We kept this course generally all the morning, moving in and out more or less
to avoid rough country or bog, and camped at 12.45 P-m. at head of a swamp after cover-


ing a distance of n miles. We did not get away after dinner until 3.5 p.m. Following
on the morning course of W. 10 deg. N, for a couple of miles, we were again in the
swamps; then we made away to the N.W. for half-a-mile, then turned back west for
miles, just keeping along the edge of the wet ground; we found a place here where the
horses could get in to drink without getting stuck, so we made it our camp 5 p.m. We
are now on the swamps, from which the river we followed down on our way to the coast
takes its rise.
(I have been subsequently informed that the native name for the river referred to
here is the Wyonga River.)
10th July, Monday. —After leaving at 8.45 a.m., we rounded the swamp, upon which
we had been camped, and made out west for 5 miles; we then came upon a big area of
swampy country, upon which a beautiful crop of young green grass was growing—with
hungry horses this would be impossible to pass—so we unpacked and camped; at any
rate, we could not travel far, as we have one horse dead lame and fast knocking up. It
is probable that he will have to be shot or abandoned, and as constant plunging
through mud often over the horses’ hocks, they sojuetimes being bogged to their
bellies, has considerably wearied them, we are going to give them a day or two
on this good feed—they certainly have had little since leaving Caledon Bay —nor are
the horses the only ones that are a bit on the hungry side, our meat supply is now
old and rank, and we must try and find cattle here, so Fred McCaw and the nigger
Kimberley Jack left to search for them. We doctored up the old horse, the near
hind fetlock being swollen and inflamed. I would be sorry to see the old chap shot,
as he was for a great part of the journey my charger, and his having a martial
bearing, we called him “ The War Horse.”
Our position now should be about 2 miles north of our camp at Saddler’s Creek,
from this swampy ground it should take its rise. Stewart Love, according to plan,
crossed some 3 miles to the north of present position; it should be from 16 to 18
miles to the ranges on our west.
nth July, Tuesday. —ln camp all day. We again doctored up the lame horse;
he is very bad, the leg being now swollen above the hock. We were unsuccessful
in finding cattle yesterday, so another attempt is being made to-day. Riding out
to-day to the north-west, mountains can be seen just about west of us, and a good
day’s travel should put us close to them.
1 2th July, Wednesday. —l marked a big paper-bark tree to-day with the party’s
mark. I rode away to the W.S.W. to-day. Messrs. W. McCaw and Shadforth
made a general survey of the country to the west and N.W., their object being to try
and pick up a bit better country to travel along without getting up on the tableland
and away from the water. The tableland forming the divide of the northern from
the southern waters is only a few miles to our north, if we get too far up on it we


would be in dry country; however when they returned, it was decided to make a
short stage to-morrow to water 8 to 10 miles .on, and with full water bags, on the fol-
lowing day, cross the divide and make the range on its northern fall.
These lands here, although swampy, are all excellent farming lands, they could be
easily drained.
I 3 t^l July, Thursday. —We were to have moved out this morning, but as there is
a chance of getting beef to-day and our lame horse is still bad, we will give him the
benefit of one more day.
The grass growing here is young and quite green; this spot was burnt off by
Conway and Moore some months back. Going to the south-west along this swamp
there is miles of green grass.
x 4th July, Friday. —We packed up and left our camp this morning at 8.30 a.m,,
crossing the swampy flat, on which for the past few days we have been camped. We
kept W. 30 deg. N., and passed through 6 miles of Messmate scrubby desert plain, and
were on swamp again. We got across and then found that we were too high up to
get water, we therefore came round to the west for about a half-mile, and going south
for another mile brought us to water; the swampy plain here is covered with rank
high grass.
rsth July, Saturday. —Started out at 7.45 a.m., and went due west for one mile,
then coming upon rising ground, we altered our course 10 deg. to the north, and travelled
5 miles across desert country, mostly scrubby rank spinifex lands timbered with
messmate, coming upon a small round lagoon we bore down to it and passed across
its north side through some spear grass. Getting back on to our course again we
continued on for three miles through more scrubby desert country, and then the
northern fall of the divide was unexpectedly reached from the edge of it. We can now
plainly see the mountains on our west. We descended the fall a little and came upon
a large lagoon; looks to be a couple of -miles long, by about a half-mile across. As it
is surrounded with Woolybutt trees I named it the Woolybutt Lagoon, and put the
party s mark on a Woolybutt tree on the south-east end of the lagoon, about 50 yards
from the water. We camped here for dinner at about 11 a.m. We left again 1.30
p.m. following in the same course as this morning. We located another deep
lagoon to the south of our track, and endeavoured to shoot some pigmy geese swarm-
ing on it, but having only rifles, we were unsuccessful. We travelled 5 miles before
reaching the first spurs of the range, now mostly through swampy Zamia and
Messmate country. At 3 p.m., leaving the pack horses behind, we pushed on up the
range, and when in about 2 -miles, rising probably 350 feet, we returned to our plant
after spending some two hours in having a preliminary look around.
These hills here seemed to be composed of somewhat irregular short soft schisty
sandstone, running at all angles throughout the country, with numerous small quartz


veins erratically distributed throughout them. An intrusive granite bar crosses the
hills on a north and south course and outcrops high above the ground; it is only a
matter of about-8 feet wide. From the highest point ascended we can see a promin-
ent line of elevation extending away to the N.E. It, however, seems to be table-
topped and looks like a break on to a higher tableland.
From the look of the number of fires that are burning in the ranges, it became evi-
dent that there are natives here. Kimberley Jack saw blacks hunting a kangaroo when
after a horse this afternoon. We returned from the mountains on our track, and
making a waterhole, we camped for the night.
16th July, Sunday. —We shifted our camp into the ranges this morning, looking
for a camp to settle on for a few days while we prospect here. We went up a gap
into the mountain for a mile, then making north, we followed down a break in the hills
along a small gully for about 2 miles, and coming upon a good waterhole, we un-
packed and camped. The party taking picks and dishes, then split up and went out
into the hills in different directions. Our leader, W. McCaw, with a boy, went away
to the north to ascertain the condition of the country ahead. Shadforth and Jones
prospected handy to the camp. Fred McCaw and myself made a wide sweep through
the hills from the south-east along a range on our east to the N.E., but returned at
nightfall without locating anything promising.
W. McCaw returned at nightfall having picked up a strong belt of granite country
to our north.
From the high peaks to the south of our camp, we to-day got a good general view
of the surrounding country. Away on our direct west the high table-top range marks
a prominent sky line, its direction being more north and south than it at first appeared
to take. This table-topped range would be about 4 miles to our due west, and would
run north towards the west side of Buckingham Bay. There is a break in the range to-
wards the north-east, and the intervening country is composed of a series of low ranges
probably sandstone. On our direct north some 5 miles away, a round sugar loaf
mountain stands out by itself. The whole of the country here is the same short
sandstone as described yesterday. The surface is covered with quartz shed from the
numerous silicious veins throughout it, but the quartz is of a white hard nature that
could hardly be described as kind-looking from a mineral-bearing standpoint. In
some places it contains a mineral that appears to me to be Antimony Sulphide (stib-
nite), it, however, is in small particles throughout the stone, and as it scratches awfully
like iron, it may be a pure form of that mineral (certainly not Iron Pyrites). The
country is well worth prospecting.
Heavy fires are burning for miles all round us, the blacks are evidently firing
out the country. In one place the fire is within a mile of our camp.
7th July, Monday. —Jones and Shadforth having located a schist formation yester-
day in a little gully close and east of the camp, Shadforth, W. McCaw and myself took
the tools up and opened out a little upon it. We defined its two walls and found it


to be about 5 feet wide, the formation trending north and south. We costeened
across it in the bed of the gully and it was, to all outward appearance very favourable
for gold, being a nice soft schisty slate formation on a western underlay, carrying three
defined quartz seams and being rubbly throughout; we, however, could not raise a
colour of gold. We dollied much stone and generally dished off the rubble from all
parts of the formation, but all without success. We followed up its outcrop for a
distance of some half-a-mile, I washed fully 50 loams from along the same and napped
over and dollied the stone from its cap, but in no instance found indications of mineral
value.
We came across another trenching N.E. and S.W., it was a quartz seam about 2 feet
wide but hard and unkind-looking, and as after napping over along its outcrop for. some
distance, showed nothing, we left it. Further to the east again we found a futher
schist formation, but neither the creek crossing it nor the outcrop itself carried value.
Fred McCaw returned in the evening after prospecting out west of the camp. He
brought with him a sample of stone showing more freely a mineral that I now feel
fairly satisfied is Antimony. To-morrow I will go out and have a look at the hills from
which he obtained it, as, antimony being usually associated with gold, we may find
an antimonial gold proposition. He also reported coming across a few natives in camp
but on hearing him approach they hurriedly made off, one nigger’s strides measuring
fully 8 feet going up a small gully, he taking everything in his stride before him. They
left behind at the camp a number of stone spear heads, besides their dilly bags, coola-
mans, etc.
The days here are warm, but the nights are cold and frosty.
rSth July, Tuesday. All hands were away after breakfast this morning prospect-
ing. W. McCaw and Jones went east along the low ridges. Fred McCaw and myself
went west to where he found the antimony yesterday, which is situated in a belt of
slaty schist country or rather schisty slate country about a quarter of a mile wide,
which strikes north and south. Throughout this belt much antimonial stone was dis-
tributed, An examination of the principal quartz seams settles all doubt in my mind
as to its being Antimony Sulphide. In the larger particles now showing throughout
the stone it is more easily recognised and also by its oxides. I should say that the
mineral is disseminated throughout its gangue in a proportion of about 3 per cent.;
almost any piece of quartz picked up on the surface shows traces of it. In much
of the stone here I noticed arsenical pyrites, also traces of iron pyrites.
Shadforth and myself also tried some prospects from the south of the formation
upon which we opened up yesterday, but found nothing.
Three members of our party, mounting after dinner, went away to the high ranges
on our west; they returned without discovering anything of consequence. They report
that the range, as we previously anticipated, is a high tableland.
We will shift camp further into the mountains to-morrow.


Although we have not as yet actually encountered natives, it is more than evident
that there are plenty around us, as they are firing the country in every direction, and
we often come upon their camps just as they are deserted by the natives, who see us
coming up.
19th July, Wednesday. —We packed and moved our camp at 9 a.m., and went about
3 miles further into the range, following a course of N. 20 degrees W. for 2 miles, and
N.E. about 1 mile. Following up a creek, we camped at 10 a.m., and marked a tree
as follows (pine tree at our camp).
We had an early dinner, and two parties started out in different directions to ex-
plore the country to our north and north-west, W. MoCaw and Shadforth went north,
F. McCaw and myself went N.W., Jones stayed to guard the camp. The journey of
W. McCaw and Shadforth proved nothing, the country over which they travelled being
mostly barren.
We were, however, more successful in locating a belt of really promising-looking
mineral country, carrying a very strong quartz lode, the outcrop of which stands up
boldly and runs north and south, forming the ridge of a small hill. It is apparently
some 100 feet wide and underlays about 15 degrees from the vertical to the east. The
stone itself has a kind appearance, and is enclosed in a schistose and slaty rock. A
vigorous prospecting along this line will probably disclose some gold value. I like
the look of the lode.
The country here is well watered and contains patches of fair feed along the creeks,
but the blacks have burnt off all the higher lands.
20th July, Thursday. —We packed up and moved our plant across some 3 miles
about 15 degrees to the west of north to the large quartz outcrop discovered by McCaw
and myself yesterday. We camped on the spot about 9.30 a.m., and at once com-
menced prospecting by sinking in the creek alongside the lode; several holes were sunk,
but in the clearing up and washing off the bottom of them nothing was found. An-
other party loamed around the bottom of the hills, but the loam around the bottom of
the hills was barren. In such stone as we napped and crushed to-day nothing was
found. Of course this may be only a barren lode, but the stone is by no means
hungry-looking.
In camp we are all getting on well. We are awfully short of meat and reduced
to one tin of bully a day between seven men. We are now glad to get hold of a bandy-
coot or any animal that can be eaten. There are kangaroos here, but they are awfully
wild; we cannot get near enough to get a shot at them.
21st July, Friday.— We continued prospecting along the big outcrop. It was
napped over where exposed along the surface for a distance of 1 mile. All hands were
at work on it but neither the stone or the loam in its vicinity could be made to show
up a colour of gold, nor could any indication of any mineral other than iron manganese
and possibly the oxides of antimony be found. Half a mile to the north the lode


disappeared, seemed to drop away under the country. W. McCaw and a black-boy,
Kimberley Jack, went away to the north again to-day, but shortly after leaving camp,
got out of the mineral belt and up on the desert country, having passed through the
range.
As the country to our east is now quartzite and a blank-looking sandstone, it is
possible that we will move further north to-morrow.
The tracks of the blacks were seen quite close to the camp this evening, where they
had been following up our tracks.
22nd July, Saturday. —Up at daylight, we breakfasted and moved out of camp at
8.15 a.m. We followed a course away from the camp of N. 15 degrees W., passing
through low terraces of flat sandstone for 4 miles. We then came upon the head
waters of a small creek flowing to the east, and we ran it down for one mile, then
crossed it and went N. 10 degrees E. for 2 miles, when we camped for dinner. As
the country we were then on was a tableland composed of horizontal desert sand-
stones, and being some 5 miles across what appeared to be the mineral belt, we de-
cided to go no further north, but to make out east again and cut the mineral countrv
and follow it down if possible towards the head of the Koolatong River where we
noticed some rough ranges on our way up to Caledon Bay. Therefore leaving our din-
ner camp at 12.15 P- m -> we took a course east, and after travelling mostly through
desert country for 2 miles, we came upon a boggy creek and went 1 mile south to cross
it, then for 2 miles more went east, and here again encountered the mineral belt. The
lands here are flat and barren and the outcrops of quartz and quartzite stand up mas-
sively and now trend to the north-east. The stone here assumes a most hungry aspect,
showing no traces of mineral, being merely a hard white tricky quartz, the accompany-
ing rock being hard sandstone and quartzite. This country looks too unpromising to
prospect. W e followed for a mile across the belt, and coming upon water, we camped.
The mountain country has quite died out here and it looks as if the tableland we are
now on extends right to the coast on our north, therefore it seems as if the range
headed from here and extended away to the south-south-west.
Our lame horse is still very poor and only travels with difficulty. lam afraid he
is a candidate for a bullet. Another horse went lame on us to-day, a big grey gelding
got staked in the fetlock; we got the splinters out.
This country is no good; there is no feed for our horses here to-night.
23rd July, Sunday. — i his particular day of the year is my birthday, and lam to
celebrate it with 3 meals of damper and jam, now being without meat, with the ex-
ception of a few tins of bully that have to be carefully guarded. At 8.15 a.m. we left
the camp. It was decided to once more return to the swamp at the head of Saddler’s
Creek that we left on the 13th inst., and to make a big effort to obtain beef. There are a
few cattle running on the swamps but they are very hard to find, but as we are all meat
hungry we will give it another go. We therefore shaped south-east and passed out


of the sandstone quartz belt at about 2 miles, the ferruginous conglomerate and cement
again coming in. Following the same course at about 3 miles further on, we came upon
a strong watercourse with much jungle on its banks. Judging our position to be now
not more than 28 miles to the south of Buckingham Bay, I quite expected to meet this
water, as on one of the maps I have, a small river is shown running to the south by a
little west. Running this river down a little and feeling quite satisfied that this would
be a head water of the same stream, I named it the Buckingham River after the name
of the Bay. This river takes its rise from the big lagoon I named the Woollybutt
Lagoon, where we camped for dinner on the 15th inst., and is subsequently fed by the
creek that comes through the ranges on which we camped on the 19th inst. A narrow
belt of limestone follows up the river for some distance, and a number of springs occur
along its banks. Leaving this river we gradually work up on to the Divide, and fol-
lowing a course 30 degrees to the east of south for 11 miles through dry desert country,
we made the swamps upon which we camped on the 14th inst. It should be a matter
of some 6 miles from here to our old camp, therefore without waiting to unpack for
dinner, we continued on our journey, but after travelling along our old pad for 4 miles
we turned to the south, picking up an old track used by Moore and Conway. We
followed it down for 2 miles and camped on a continuation of the swamp upon which
we had previously put in a few days doctoring the lame horse.
There are tracks of cattle about here and our hopes, are high that a fresh supply of
beef is at hand.
We find that our lame horse is missing this evening, evidently knocked up and got
behind the mob.
We are now, of course, on the fall of southern and south-eastern waters, and what-
ever the aspect of the drier parts might be, these extensive areas of swampy lead-land
flats must be classed as very fair lands from an agricultural and farming standpoint.
The climatic conditions of this country, in which you have a given wet and dry season,
would probably not make these parts so adaptable to farming as we know the industry
in our more southern States, still one cannot help being impressed with the fact that it
is all good country. These lands that only a month ago were burnt bare are now
springing an abundant crop of young grass. In the more populated centres of the old
world, acres, not miles, of this class of country would mean an independence for many.
Still one could not reasonably hold out a hope that these parts would be productive
until the Territory is densely populated.
It has been very warm. We remained in camp all day. Fred McCaw and
black-boy Kimberley Jack left after breakfast to track up and get a killer if possible.
Fresh cattle tracks were seen here this morning, so there is a good chance of their being
successful. We discussed our future movements to-day, and it is decided that we
spell the horses here a day or so, then make back along the mountains to the south.
We will, therefore, take a course due west from here into the range and follow down
through the same, and endeavour to make the heads of the Walker and Koolatong Rivers.


About 3 p.m., Fred McCaw returned to camp after riding hard through the day. He
tracked up two young cows with a calf; he sfyot one cow and came back for a pack horse,
with which he and Jones left. They returned with about 80 lb. of beef later in the
evening.
The cow shot was in very low condition and the meat is very poor, but it is more
than welcome to us.
•t
25th July, Tuesday. —We got our nigger away after breakfast to bring up the lame
horse that got left behind, or if unable to travel to shoot him, otherwise the wild dogs,
finding him disabled, would worry him to death. We salted down our beef supply; it
certainly is not much, but it will carry us over a few weeks with care. In making
up our late travelling through the ranges I am inclined to place their position a little fur-
ther west than shown on the tracing of Mr. Stewart Love, that was given to me by Mr.
Playford, the government surveyor, before leaving Darwin. Did these ranges extend
to the coast, I should say that they would fall into the south-west of Buckingham Bay.
However, it is clearly proved that they terminate some 25 miles to the south of the Bay
in a high tableland from which some 10 or 12 miles distant more broken rangy country
is seen making away to the east-south-east, towards Arhems Bay.
Towards evening our boy returned with the horse which he put on grass about 2
miles from the camp.
26th July, Wednesday.— Our meat being now dried and the pack readjusted, we will
start away to-morrow morning. We had a general look around for some miles to the
south from here, but find the country all much the same swampy ground.
27th July, Thursday. —We mustered horses at 8 a.m., packed up and left 8.30 a.m.,
taking a.course south along the swamp to pick up a horse or two. We came upon the
lame horse at half a mile, a little further on finding the other. We veered around to
the west, passing over a small creek that I take to be Saddler’s Creek. A short dis-
tance from here we passed out of the swampy ground, and still following a western
course, we passed through some low bloodwood and box timbered flats, well grassed
for about 4 miles; we then again got into the scrubby country, and again made more
swamp; and at a distance of 8 miles we came upon a large round lagoon. We here found
a dingo bitch with a litter of four pups, camped in a hollowed-out ant bed, so we called
this waterhole the Dingo Lagoon. We examined the happy dog family and contrary
to usual custom, we passed on without injuring them. We camped for dinner 12.45
p.m. on a swamp, making 12 miles this morning, the latter of which was through Mess-
mate and Pine country. Leaving our dinner camp at 3 p.m. we followed on the course
of the morning for a distance of about 4 miles, and as we were then making up to the
mountain country, we altered our course to N.W. to get around the head of
a small creek for about 1 mile; we then followed the head of the creek


west for about i l / 2 miles, but were here blocked by the country rising in precipitous
walls over which we could not get the horse; we therefore turned back about half a mile
on our tracks, and, crossing the creek, camped at 5.15 p.m., being distant about 5 miles
from our dinner camp. We are now camped in quartzite and sandstone country, having
passed over a granite bar some mile and a half back; this would probably be the same
bar as we first encountered in these ranges some miles to the north of our present pos-
ition. The country over which we came to-day, although inferior from a pastoral
standpoint, would nevertheless maintain small herds of cattle or horses.
28th July, Friday.—As there is no horse feed about here we had difficulty in muster-
ing our horses this morning, only 16 could be brought to camp, and it was 2 p.m. before
they were all found. During the morning the two McCaws and Shadforth went into
the ranges to find a camp, but returned at 1 p.m. reporting the country to be all burnt
out, so it is impossible to remain here. At 2 p.m. we started to travel the plant into
the ranges, and for a distance of 3 miles we made a course of south-west. We crossed
a granite belt about 2 miles after starting, and a mile further on we came upon a creek
and followed it down for about 3 miles. Keeping a course generally about 25 degrees to
the west of south we found ourselves then right in the heart of the ranges, but were
unable to proceed further through them as the creek we were following closed in, the
banks became precipitous and afforded no further passage,- we therefore had to alter our
course east and climb a ridge some 350 feet high. We followed along the top of the
ridge south for about half a mile, but as the country then became quite inhospitable
and somewhat stony and dangerous, we had again to turn east, and climbing another
ridge for half a mile we made the top of an adjoining spur. From here we could see
down into the ranges for miles ahead of us, they were burnt out quite black and fires
were still burning away to our south. This left us no other alternative but to turn back
and again make the flat country, so we descended east down the eastern fall of the range
for 2 miles, and making south-east for 4 miles further we reached a running creek upon
which some poor feed was growing, and here we camped.
As far as mineral is concerned these ranges seem to alter for the worse as they come
south; they are now composed of hard sandstones with small views of what one might
call stringers of quartz, sparsely distributed through them. At the best it is only
what could be called sandstone dyke country, and although certainly it has not the
appearance of being auriferous, even if it were so, from my experience in mining in
similar country I should say that any gold or mineral deposit would be squibby and
short-lived. We crossed two granite bars on our way into the ranges. They are
composed of a hard red motley granite, possibly felspathic; they run on a north and
south course, but are not very wide. There are many massive outcrops of quartzite
that in places stand up like sloping walls and run for miles. These outcrops reach a
height of about 40 feet and are quite flat along the top. The creek we followed seemed
to be the only water in the hills, and the country was burnt quite black by the natives.


2gth July, Saturday. —Up early, we tried the creek upon which we are camped and
which drains a good portion of these ranges, by sinking in it, but found nothing. At
ii a.m. the McCaw brothers and myself saddled our horses and made again into the
ranges in a south-west direction, our intention being to cross the range, examining the
country more to our south. After travelling about 8 miles we reached the western ex-
tremity of the range. The country from there on towards the Goyder River seemed here
to be composed of low scrubby hills, while the country to our south-east had the appear-
ance of being more mountainous and rugged. In this direction we therefore turned our
horses’ heads, but were disappointed when we again encountered the eastern slopes of
the range, to find that it was composed of the same class of low rocky hills. We
descended to the flat country and took a course of north home to our camp.
In to-day’s travel we probably gained a point 10 miles to our direct south, and
travelled about 28 miles during the ride. From the eastern decline of the hills as far
as the eye could reach one sees nothing but the same flat plains, over which for weeks
past we have been travelling. I am afraid it would be more than useless, even if
circumstances permitted of our doing so, to bother about prospecting the ranges in this
locality, as the country seems to be quite barren of mineral value, and the constituent
rocks could hardly be classed as favourable to such occurrences. The hills here are
mostly composed of hard, irregularly bedded sandstones of a primary age; they are
frequently silicious, and closely approach quartzite. Along the main watercourses
massive bars of quartzite occur at regular intervals, and seem to form the crown of prin-
cipal elevations, and run on a straight course from north to south. It is possible to
ride along the bottom of these quartzite bars for miles, when they have the appearance
of massive sloping walls, being perfectly level along the top. We did not again to-day
encounter the granite that we passed over yesterday, from which I take it that it has cut
out. The country is everywhere burnt bare, and there is no water to speak of, so the
question of feeding our horses leaves it impossible for use to go further south along this
range. We therefore have decided to go north again.
30th July, Sunday. —We packed up and got away from camp at 9.20 a.m., and took
a course north along the level country skirting the range, and followed up the same for
six miles, when we came upon.a strong running stream that, according to our position,
should be a head water of the Koolatong River. We camped on it for dinner at 11.20
a.m., again leaving our dinner camp at 1.40 p.m., still following up the same course
north at two miles from our dinner camp, and four miles further on we picked up our
track of the 15th inst., and made our old camping spot at the ant bed at the foot of
the ranges. We called this the Antbed Camp. As it threatened rain, we built a wet-
weather camp up against a big antbed. It is 15 days since we were here, and from the
tracks of the blacks on the ground the place has been pretty frequently visited since
we left. The country skirting the range along which we travelled is poor and swampy,
but contains some good Cyprus pine.


31st July, Monday. —lt is now 5 p.m., and our nigger, Kimberley Jack, has been away
this morning, looking for 10 of our horses that, although hobbled, strayed away during
the night, to probably where we camped on the green grass some week past, this
causes us a little uneasiness, as under ordinary circumstances he should be back by
now. He was not armed, although he usually takes a rifle. Of course, we are aware
that the blacks have for some time past been following us up, and, were they to get
this boy by himself unarmed, they would not hesitate to spear him. It is now too
late to go after him to-day, as in another hour it would be dark.
Our leader, W. McCaw, Shadforth, and myself, to-day, taking our horses, went into
the ranges, and went through the same prospecting. The formation is similar to that
we prospected a little to our north some two weeks back, only the granite rock is here
more prevalent and outcrops in massive boulders on the surface; the quartz is the same
quality as previously met with, but at one spot we came across a lode slaty in appear-
ance, charged with arsenical pyrites and oxide of antimony, but neither the free stone
nor the sulphide concentrates subjected to a roasting and grinding process showed any
trace of value. lam afraid that, owing to the difficulty of keeping our horses together,
we will have to abandon further prospecting in these ranges. There is really nothing
here on which to feed a horse.
Ist August, Tuesday. —Our boy Kimberley Jack.turned up at camp about 8 p.m. last
night. He had ridden over 40 miles, and only returned with two horses, leaving eight
still away. The horses had scattered and gone in different directions, so early this
morning Fred McCaw and the two black boys made away to track them up and bring
them up to camp. Fred McCaw and blackboy Jimmy Ah Cup has just returned (entry
made 6 p.m.), but without horses, they (the horses) having made back to the east.
Kimberley Jack has gone out in that direction, and it is probable that he will pick them
up some time this evening.
I have to-day marked a tree at this camp with the following mark: —
A
The cross underneath being to distinguish from other marks along the eastern fall of
the ranges, as our point of first making the mountains on our direct track from Caledon
Bay, and it will also be the point from which we continue our journey west across the
range.
2nd August, Wednesday.— Kimberley Jack did not put in an appearance at all last
night, as the horses were not found until too late to admit of his returning. He
turned up to-day about midday, still leaving one horse behind. We are prospecting
around in the meantime, but our luck s right out, we can find nothing.
It is most unfortunate that our horses are playing up, as a better team for this class
of work it would be hard to obtain in the Territory. The horses are owned by the


McCaw Bros, and Harry Shadforth, and are excellent campers, even on poor feed.
This is really the first difficulty of any kind that we have so far had with them, but
when one comes to consider that a grass-fed horse is always hungry and the feed here
is poor and that we only get them on a patch of good feed now and then, one cannot
blame them for making back to the better pastures where we had them camped a
week ago. A horse, although short hobbled, can easily travel 20 miles in a night.
• I made up a summary of our travel to-day. Since leaving Pine Creek I find that
we have been 94 days out. We travelled 51 days, and covered a distance of 735 miles,
with an average of 14.41 T miles a day.
3rd August, Thursday.— When the horses were mustered this morning there was
another scatter amongst them, but most of them were found by 12 a.m., and finally
Kimberley Jack and Fred McCaw turned up about 7.50 p.m. with the remainder of the
mob. He had brought them up from the head of Saddler’s Creek. As we are deter-
mined to get away to-morrow, we intend to tail and keep a watch on them
to-night. During the time we have had to stand by and wait for the horses we have
made a fairly complete prospect of this place, but all without result.
4th August, Friday. —After our scatter, by the time we had got everything together
to-day, it was 12.30 p.m. At this hour we left camp, and took a course west into the
mountains for about half a mile, coming upon a recently deserted native camp, in which
the spears, coolamans, and dilly bags were still left. We took a course through the
mountains, N.W. for four miles, and coming out on their opposite fall, we altered
the same to west for two miles, and camped for the night on a small creek that runs
east through the range to the Buckingham River. The country on this side of the
range is still somewhat swampy, well grassed and an improvement on its eastern side.
From here we will have a good clear track to-morrow, and should reach the valley of
Goyder River.
Note.— For all the purposes of this expedition and for all future references to
same, we have this day decided to call the range through which we have just passed
The Mitchell Ranges, out of compliment to his Honour Mr. Justice Mitchell, the pre-
sent Acting Administrator of the Northern Territory, to whom we are indebted for
the opportunities afforded us by the Government of prospecting and exploring these
parts. We hope that this name will be generally adopted.
sth August, Saturday.— We got a good start away this morning at 9 a.m., and went
west from our camp, following the creek up for about one mile and passing through
marshy country for about three miles. This brought us upon another range of low
sandstone hills, through which ran another granite bar. We then crossed a stretch of
purple-coloured sandstone that trended to the north, and were headed on an underlay
or dip of about 25deg. from the vertical to the east. Five miles from our camp brought
us upon a strong running stream that the natives call the Woolen River, and that


empties into Costbreach Bay, near to the direct south of Banyan Island. This has
previously been mistaken for the mouth of the Goyder River, but the Goyder River after
passing through a number of swamps empties itself into the Clyde Inlet, and the river
shown on the map as the Glyder being actually the Goyder. We continued on the
same course now through desert country for another four miles, when we came upon
another watercourse, where we camped for dinner at midday. Leaving our dinner camp
at 1.30 p.m., we took a course west across rough sandstone outcrop country for one
mile, following the course of the creek upon which we had dinner; from this for two
miles on we went N.W., still following up the creek, which then was flowing to the
NVN.E. We came around thenjto the west i2deg. N., and four miles upon this course
brought us to the edge of the tableland beyond which an extensive valley is showing.
This is the valley of the Goyder River, and from the high ground, looking down into
it with the sunset before us, it presents a truly striking and beautiful picture. We
descended into the valley and came upon a shallow sandy creek, with high paperbark
trees growing along its bank. The creek was running to the west. I named it the
Cooellar Creek (native name meaning running west). We followed down the creek
for four miles, then camped upon its banks at 6 p.m.
This valley is many miles wide, splendidly grassed and timbered with a specie of
Blue Gum, Woolybut, Currajong, Messmate, etc. Up to the Goyder valley from the
range the country is mostly desert.
6th August, Sunday.—We had a very heavy fog this morning, but we got away
at 8.15 a.m., taking the course of the creek west and crossing a small creek at its
junction with the same. We kept a western course for about two miles, then altered to
the N.W. for half a mile, and here crossed the creek, which was now making to the
south-west; we from here took a course of W. 3odeg. south, towards some low sand-
stone hills, and after going through the same at about one mile from the crossing
we altered our course to south-west, and followed it for four miles, passing around two
small ranges of hills running from east to west through long grassy flats, upon many
of which the young grass was now springing. We here also passed over a series of
old red sandstone, probably permocarboniferous measures; travelling eight miles on
the given course, we again came upon Cooellar Creek; then we made to the east for
one mile. Camped upon a long billabong, a backwater of the Goyder River, at 11.50
a.m. After dinner we shifted our camp west along the billabong for half a mile, while
we made a survey of the surrounding country.
7th August, Monday.—We left camp at 8.20 a.m., and took a course west
through swampy country newly grassed and beautifully green, many of the swamps
being now practically dry. It was, however, with difficulty that we were enabled to
continue this course for four miles, having at times to unpack and pull our horses out
of bogs. At last encountering a formidable watery stretch that defied all our efforts to
cross it, we were compelled to go back south for half a mile, where on a patch of good


green country we camped for dinner at 11.30 a.m. There is evidently much game in
these parts, as all the morning we have b ( een putting up waterfowl from the swamps,
ibis, duck, geese, etc., and plenty kangaroos. The pads and tracks of the natives are
plentiful here.
We decided to make this our night camp, so after dinner three members of the
party and myself made away to search out what is known as Blacks Lagoon, and after
riding some three miles to the west we came upon it. From a high hill at east end I
took an observation of the surrounding country. Mount Delight is situated N. 2odeg.
W., while Point Lindsay is N. to W. A tableland some 20 miles to our west stretches
away, seemingly to the south, and the whole of the intervening country is swampy as
far as the eye can reach. This is the point where the Goyder River emerges from its
defined channel into a huge delta of marsh and swamp, which eventually takes its outlet
at the Clyde Inlet. I named the hill off which I took the observation Mount Mul-
pinji (native name for the Goyder).
Bth August, Tuesday.—Before breakfast this morning our boy Kimberley Jack
noticed a strange nigger squatting near the camp. This turned out to be a lubra, the
blacks having sent her up to reconnoitre the camp. It is customary with the niggers of
this part whenever in doubt about white men to send to the camp usually an old gin,
as in case of danger they know that the whites will not injure the woman, and on her
feminine astuteness they rely for the information as to whether it is safe for the bucks
to venture up or not. To Kimberley Jack we entrusted the honours of escorting the
lady to the camp, but when she firmly declined to come any closer we sent her away
to bring the bucks, and at 11 a.m. she returned, accompanied by two men, both
physically fine stamps of niggers. They came, as is usual, with the myall when
friendly inclined, unarmed. They could speak a little English, and it was only on being
supplied with tobacco and assured that they were quite safe with us that they con-
sented to stay and act as guides for us, so at 12.20 p.m. we left our camp, and followed
a course south-west away from the same to make the Mulpinji, the native name for the
Goyder River. We travelled through swamp in a semi-circle direction, and at 10
minutes past 4 we pulled up for our night camp at a point about four miles due west of
the camp that we had just left, coming in all about nine miles to reach here, having
several difficult waterholes and swampy patches to cross. Towards night the blacks
who acted as our guides left us, promising to return and bring up the others of their
tribe.
We are now camped on a large flat, formerly used as a camping ground by a big
tribe of natives. Their mosquito proof camps still standing here.
Although it is a fact not generally known, blacks suffer as much from the mos-
quitoes as the average white man; they are certainly in no way immune from their
attacks, and the mosquito-proof house they build here is put together with much in-
genuity. Selecting a number of long, straight, flexible sticks, they bury the large end
in the ground, forming a circle with the sticks, the diameter of which might be any-


thing from five to 25 feet; then taking the small ends (the sticks being placed about two
feet apart), they bend them all down and tie them at the centre common to the circle,
thereby forming the frame of a cone-shaped bee-hive-like building. Cross ribs are now
tied horizontally around these vertical ribs, and the frame is covered by two layers of
paperbark, the second layer covering every joint made by the first. Small holes are
left in the bottom, into which a man can with difficulty crawl, another small hole being
left at the top of the cone. A smoky fire is started burning in the centre of the hut, and
into this the blacks all crawl; when the hut is full the side halves are all closed, and the
place rapidly fills with smoke. The hole at the top then acts as a ventilator and a
chimney. Of course, there is a good deal of discomfort in the matter of smoke and
heat to be put up with, but this seems to be preferable to the mosquito.
Mount Mulpinji now stands about 1y 2 miles north 3odeg. east of us.
9th August, Wednesday.—The myall niggers who left our camp last night returned
this morning, bringing only three lubras. At 7.45 a.m. we therefore made a start, they
acting at guides. We took a course of south-west away from the camp, but at half a
mile distance we altered it to south for miles, and then went west for six miles,
when we came to the Goyder River at a point where for one mile it runs east and west;
we followed it up for this distance, then turning with the river more to the south we
surprised some natives that were camped upon its banks. They did not wait to
make our acquaintance, but they scampered off, leaving their spears, dilly bags and
tucker behind them, nor could any entreaties of our guides persuade them to return.
We novf followed a course to the south, and three miles further on we came upon a
stony crossing in the river, and I place this to be where Stewart Love crossed it last
year. As this crossing was hardly a safe one to put our plant across, we went three
miles still further south, which was reached 'and the river duly crossed about 3 p.m.
We then went one mile north-west to some lagoons known as the Rock holes, where
we settled for the day at 3.20 p.m.
We are now back in the country that is known to most of our party, as our leader,
Bill McCaw, was head stockman in the Arafura, which is situated all along the Goyder
River, when owned by the East African Cold Storage Company; and Fred McCaw was
five years mustering cattle all over these parts; and Harry Shadforth some 20 years
back brought strayed cattle back from here at a time when a man took his life in his
hand in coming in these parts.
In the whole of our journey we have passed through no country so favourable in
appearance from general plantation and agricultural aspect as the lands contained in
the swampy valley of the Goyder River. In years to come long after these lines are
written, this valley must hum with a busy, enterprising and successful people. The long
stretches of swampy flats and plains well grassed and watered by numerous deep
lagoons give the place indeed a picturesque appearance, while the Goyder River at the
point where we first encountered it is a splendid wide deep stream. A deep channel
could be dredged through the 30 miles of swamp, that would then probably make this


portion of the river navigable to the sea, while it would also reclaim many thousand
acres of valuable land. The loam is generally deep, black and rich. The country
should be examined by competent agricultural experts. Tropical vegetation grows here
in abundance, while the timber resources of the valley, with the exception of Pine, are
unlimited. Huge paperbark trees, both broad and narrow leaf (a splendid building
timber), grow along the damper portions, while the more dry lands carry much box
and most other timbers common to the Northern Territory. I marked a tree with the
party’s mark at the Rock Hole Lagoon.
The country rock where exposed appears to be terrace sandstone, and the loam
generally varies from a rich black to a healthy-looking dark grey soil, containing much
body.
10th August, Thursday.— Our myall niggers that acted as guides left at daylight.
Another mob of blacks came up in the vicinity of our camp last night, but would not
cross the river.
We left camp at 7.50 a.m., and made south-east back to the river, which we are
now following up to its head, from whence it is our intention to cross to the Victor
River, following up the course of the river south, through some sandstone
country watered by long billabongs, reaching back from the river. At a distance of
about six miles up stream there are low falls, the river coming down in rapids over
flat terrace sandstones. We camped for dinner at a point 10 miles up stream at 12 a.m.
We left our dinner camp at 1.30 p.m., which is now working a little to the west. At
3.30 p.m. we camped at McNeil’s crossing for the night. Country poor; day’s jour-
ney 16 miles.
nth August, Friday. —We left our camp at 8.20 a.m., and continued to follow up the
course of the river, and three miles further up came upon its junction with the Annie’s
River; 9.20 a.m. we crossed the left hand branch of the Annie, and a short distance
further crossed the other branch. We then followed a course south, and camped at
10.20 a.m. upon the upper Goyder River, where it is a wide, shallow water, running
slow. Before reaching the Annie I noticed one or two belts of limestone, and also
some at the crossing, but after crossing the Annie one emerges upon Box and Blood-
wood plains, well grassed, but dry. Three miles brings you to the T.H. Lagoon, a
former camping place of the Arafura and Florida station people, and about here a
large tor rock of sandstone, a remarkable outcrop shaped like a house, stands up for
some 30 feet high. From this on south shaly sandstones make their appearance, and
are in a short distance replaced by flat slates, which show up in wonderful uniformity
in a small creek. These slates are here quite horizontally bedded, somewhat short
jointed, but perfect, even in stratification and composition. The slates neatly split into
fine laminations, and would make excellent roofing slates, and probably after a little
depth is attained would make good flagging slates.


The principal waters of the Goyder River seem to be supplied by the Annie River,
or, as the Government Surveyor has more recently designated it, Budhourie Creek.
12th August, Saturday.—We left camp at 8 a.m., still following up the river to the
south by a few degrees west and passing through poor scrubby tee tree country, being
still in the slate. At a distance of four miles a bar of diorite was met with, but it
made no difference in the surface aspect. At six miles we made Nolan’s Camp, then
altered our course east again to pick up the river, which we had left some miles back.
Before going far we changed our course to 3odeg. to the south of east, and in three
miles again made the river, being still in poor country—now sandstone. We followed
up the course of the river for three miles S. 25 deg. W., and camped for dinner upon a
small creek running east into the river, at midday leaving the river some half a mile to
our east. We were ready to start after dinner, but one of our boys, Jimmy Ah Cup,
with two horses was missing. He remained behind this morning to bring up the lame
horse, and had probably got off our tracks. Fred McCaw went back to find him, and
returned later with Jimmy and only one horse (the lame one). We therefore sent
back the other boy, Kimberley Jack, to find the other. He returned at nightfall with
the horse.
We are now and have been for some time very much reduced in provisions, and
are without beef and have only one tin of bully left; as fish do not take a bait here
readily, we catch very few. In the matter of game we have come down to cockatoos
and have a couple stewing for the morning.
There is kangaroo and wallaby here, but they are very wild; it is impossible to get
within rifle shot of them. The country is scrubby and poor.
13th August, Sunday.—We left camp at 8.30 a.m., taking a course E. 3odeg. S, for
half a mile, to again catch up the river, and on making the same we followed it south
for one mile, then crossed and made away along its east bank to the south-east. After
we had followed it for half a mile, the river left us and went away to the south,
where it formed a junction with a short western branch. We followed the south-east
direction for miles, then straightened up our course to direct south for a good mile,
when we again came upon the river, and recrossed it, and, following up its western
bank to the S.S.E., we came upon a big lagoon at two miles from the crossing, and
going around the head of same we camped for dinner 11.30 a.m. After crossing the
river the second time to-day, we came upon a deserted native camp, where a very big
mob of blacks must have been camped during the early part of the year, and about half
a mile further on we met three lubras with picaninnies camped at the lagoon. There
were no bucks, they having cleared out on seeing us. The lubras could not be made
to understand English, so we left them. These women seemed to be myall type, and
were physically of a poor order.
We were packed and starting away from the camp when one of the boys said he
saw white men coming up on the other side of the lagoon. We rode across and found


it to be some Pine Creek people, who were presumably making out on our tracks to
Caledon Bay. We all knew one another, so the meeting in this isolated part was quite
agreeable.
The other party consisted of Jack Barry, of Pine Creek, Arthur Love, of Brocks
Creek, Maurice Bruteon, of Brocks Creek, and another man named McKay. They had
picked up our tracks lower down the Goyder and followed them up. From them we
heard a little news of the outside world, and we all spent the evening together at our
camp.
14th August, Monday.—We bid the Barry-Love-Bruteon party good-bye this morn-
ing at their camp. lam sorry that we could not give them a good report of our ex-
periences out at Caledon Bay way, and, as we leave them it is quite probable that some
if not all of them will turn back for Pine Creek. This party came from Pine Creek
via the head of the Alligator River. A
We went back half a mile east to the river, then followed it up south-west for half
a mile, then E. lodeg. S. for one mile, then S. lodeg. E. for half a mile, then south
to our dinner camp, miles, travelling through poor, hungry spinifex and scrubby
country, now mostly all burnt black. We camped at 1.30 p.m. on a billabong just off
the river. We did not unpack the horses; we boiled the billy, had a quick dinner, and
went on again at 2.10 p.m., taking a course S.E. back to the river and following the
same up south for five miles further. We crossed it here, and ran up the opposite side
on the same course for an additional miles, still passing through hungry country,
and at 5 p.m. we camped on a small patch of box country containing a good patch of
horse feed.
The river is very low here, being merely a string of waterholes. The country rock
along the course of the river has been mostly flat slates, with occasional sandstone
bars fringing the same. We came upon large outcrops of quartzite this afternoon in
sandstone country, which has now replaced the slate.
We are expecting to find cattle at the head of this creek. We will be in a bad way
if we fail, as we are hard-pushed for tucker now.
15th August, Tuesday.—We got away from camp at 9.45 a.m., and took a course of
south 30 deg. E. fpr about 1 mile, following up the river, then making direct south, we
crossed a creek that runs north into the river, and camped for dinner 12.15 P- m - Leaving
our dinner camp at 2.10 p.m., we now made back west to the river just a short dis-
tance; the river now takes a turn towards the west, and in following it up through
poor sandy spinifex country we made 3 miles on a course W.S.W., again altering to
the S.W. we made another 2 miles ; here we crossed a billabong, and a little further on
the river, and for half-a-mile went west 25 deg. south, then west for 1 mile, and again
crossed the river, and followed it due south up to our camping point 3 miles from the
last crossing, where a considerable change in the country was noticeable, the sandy


spinifex country being now replaced by well-grassed box timbered lands. We travelled 16
miles to-day and camped at 6 p.m.
This is the locality in which we expected to find the cattle; their tracks are frequently
met with, but they appear to be some weeks old.
16th August, Wednesday. —We started at 8.50 a.m., and kept to the south-west for
two miles, south for 1 mile, and south 20 deg. east for 1 mile, and as we came upon a
mob of cattle we camped for the day, about 10 a.m. We were right out of anything in
the line of meat, having finished up our last bit of bacon some time back; but when out
some 3 miles F. McCaw was heard cooeeing away on our left, and shortly afterwards he
emerged from the scrub with about 10 head of cattle in full race in front of him and
coming towards us. Rifles and revolvers were quickly unbuckled; but fired., getting
his brother’s rifle, raced them into the scrub, where he shot a young cow in good condi-
tion, which was cut up and brought into the camp and duly salted down, so there are
now full stomachs and joy in the camp.
We are now in good box pastoral country, about 7 miles from here should bring us
to the head of the river.
17th August, Thursday. —In an expedition such as this, when one has to depend
upon the country through which you travel to provide much of your daily-orations and
we have to depend on it in no small way for our meat supply the failure to get killing
cattle or eatable (or even uneatable) game inflicts much discomfort, if not to say hard-
ship on us. The statement made about the enormous number of cattle that were run-
ning wild in these parts has, so far as the experience of this party is concerned, cer-
tainly not been verified, and at times my companions have not been looking too full in
the face, one tin of 1 lb. bully meat has often had to make a stew for seven of us, this,
with damper, being our daily rations; but when a beast is killed, and such a one as
Fred, shot yesterday, there is much compensation for your previous sufferings. The
hardships of yesterday are forgotten in the plenitude of to-day, and when one has
dined on such dainty titbits as the sweetbreads, tongue, brains, not to speak of the
liver and the steak and kidney stews that are made, confidence is restored and spirits
are high.
We did not leave camp until late to-day, giving the salt meat time to set, and get-
ting our washing done, so at 1.15 p.m. we continued to follow up the course of the
river S. 20 deg. W. for 2 miles, then mile south, then 2 miles S.W., when we crossed
the river, and E. 7a deg. S. 1 mile, and re-crossed the stream, and coming south for >4
mile, we camped upon a waterhole at the head of the river. We travelled 7 miles to-
day.
This is the locality of the divide of four waters, and four important streams from
here take their rise. The Goyder River may practically be said to flow from here,
about 4 miles to the east the two branches of the Heart Rivers take their rise, while
two miles to the south-east the Rose commences to flow.


The waters from the south, south-west and west, at a distance of 4 miles from here,
make their way to the Wilton River.
We are now in good pastoral country, and to-day passed over much diorite.
•
18th August, Friday.—We left camp at 8.55 a.m., crossed the creek, and took a
course west for 4 miles, which brought us to the western edge of the Divide, the
waters from here falling to the Wilton River; we passed through splendid grassed
diorite slate and shaly sandstone plains openly timbered with low box, and extending
away in long reaches towards the north. From the divide looking away to the north-
west, a range of mountains is discernible. Leaving the divide we altered our course
a round to W.S.W., still passing through the same fine pastoral country now rolling
in low rises, and made 4 miles; coming upon a low diorite ridge here we rounded the
same, going about 1 mile north to do so, and a short distance further on we went
around the opposite end of a similar ridge, then altering our course to S.W. for 4 miles,
we came upon a number of shallow waterholes in a small creek and camped for dinner
1.30 p.m.
We left our dinner camp at 3.30 p.m., following the south-west course, when we
made Jupiter Creek, running west; we followed it down in this direction for 2 miles,
it then made N.W., and with a little deviation from this course here and there, we at
a further 2]/ 2 miles made our night camp on a small lagoon a little to the north of the
creek.
This is splendid stock country indeed ; hard to find better, and it should continue
so for many miles now; we seem to be quite out of the poor lands. There is much
mimosa bush here, and the lands are mostly basaltic.
19th August, Saturday.—Two natives came up to the camp this morning. They
were Bullman men and known to the McCaw’s. We obtained a little news from them,
and gave them tobacco. We followed up the N.W. course of Jupiter Creek for a short
distance, only Jupiter Creek went away to the south, and we altered our course some
20 deg. to the west for 2 miles, when we made west 1 mile, and crossed a deep
creek. We made 2 miles further west 20 deg. south, still passing through good
stock country; we came upon some low lancewood ridges, and at 1 mile further we
forced our way through a patch of close scrub. Coming out upon more well-grassed
plains, we took a course of N.W. to make up to the Wilton River, and 4 miles from
the scrub we made the main branch of it, following it for 3 miles W. 25 deg. N., when
we struck a track that led up to where the old station settlement at Bullman used to be,
and a mile further on we camped at the salt trough near the site of the old homestead,
2.15 p.m.
From my approximate plotting of to-day of our journey from the head of the
Goyder River to here, it appears that we are now about 25 miles due west from where
we camped at the head of that stream, but we have come around about 32 miles to get
this position.


The country rock here, as indeed in most places that we have been in, is still hori-
zontal sandstones; they are thin bedded, and are marked by a very defined vertical
cleavage, that runs from the N.E. to the S.W., and occurs at regular intervals. There
is a large amount of flat shingly sandstone lying about the surface.
The waterhole on which we are camped is a billabong off the river; it is a good,
permanent hole, and would now contain about 5 million gallons of water.
The Bullman waterhole is about Y* mile to our west; it forms a long, deep lagoon
in the channel of the river, being about 7 miles long, and some 200 yards wide near
our camp; apparently it is deep.
It is the opinion of my companions that the police have been here lately, as the
country has been recently burnt off; there are tracks of shod horses here.
The distance travelled up to-day would be about 894 miles, not including from
Darwin to Pine Creek,
20th August, Sunday.—To-day being Sunday, we endeavoured to keep it in the
orthodox manner, so far as work was concerned. I do not know that in the way of
religious observance we did much; the fishing members of our party put the day in at
the river, as the result of whose labours we have dined this evening sumptuously on
fish; the niggers have been well supplied with turtles, they being easily caught here.
21st August, Monday. —This morning we dealt with our clothes requiring wash-
ing; in the afternoon Shadforth and myself took our horses and made out to Mount
Cat, some miles to our south, as I wished, if possible, to connect it up with my survey.
We travelled S. 20 deg. E. along the river for a distance of 2 miles, and crossed the
Wilton, making south from the opposite bank, and carrying an anabranch of the
river on our west for about 2 miles, until our bearing from the mountain was east 20
deg. south; we then crossed the river, made up to the mountain 1 mile distant, and
ascended the same.
The mountain is merely a sugarloaf or pyramid elevation, rising for about a quar-
ter of a mile long to a height of, say, 400 to 450 feet; it is composed of red sandstone,
craggy and pinnacled at the top from the summit of the hill a splendid panoramic
view of the surrounding country is obtained on all sides for a distance of 30 miles. I
endeavoured to link up the principal topographical features, and from the Bullman
waterhole I find that our position would be miles distant S. 10 deg. W.; there are
three round connected hills—the Three Sisters, about 7 miles distant N. 70 deg. E. ;
Mount Mooramba, which is just discernible on our N. 8 deg. W., should be about 14
miles distant to the west; there is a long chain of hills, which I should say marked the
fringe of another tableland; two prominent flat topped elevations show up above the
rest on our W. S. W.; there is a gap in the distant range, and it is the opinion of my
companions that through this gap flows the Mincaroo Creek, probably as good an area
of horse-breeding land as there is in the Territory is situated along this creek. The


whole of the country as far as the eye can reach in all directions is rolling box downs;
splendid pastoral country, well watered. «
After descending the mountain we took a course direct east to link up the position
of the two branches of the river, with the position of the mountain. Travelling one
mile we crossed the western branch, and a good 2 miles further we made what
appears to be the main river for two miles, we followed to N. for 1 mile; we made the
junction of the two streams, and crossed the west branch about a of a mile down the
same. We followed the main river up a bit, and crossed on the south end of the Bull-
man waterhole, and returned to camp.
At about the spot where we are now camped, many years back a grim tragedy
occurred; a man named Spellcoy was camped here with cattle, and with him was
another white man, known as Hammer and Gads, and a Chinaman; a disturbance took
place amongst the men, which resulted in Spellcoy and the Chinaman being shot dead.
Hammer and Gads was arrested for the crime, and admitted killing Spellcoy, but said
that he had shot him in self defence after he (Spellcoy) had shot the Chinaman. A
pocketbook that was found on the body of the murdered white man, however, accused
Hammer and Gads of the double murder. Hammer and Gads was convicted, and
sentenced to 15 years imprisonment; he eventually went mad, and is now in a lunatic
asylum.
22nd August, Tuesday.—lt was arranged that I should have an opportunity of
examining the Mount Mooramba silver-lead field of some fame about a year ago, so at
8.30 a.m., with Fred. McCaw and Jones, rode out to the locality. Leaving camp, we fol-
lowed up the Wilton River N.W. for some 5 miles along an old track formerly used
by the miners in coming from the Roper River here; at the 5-mile point we left the
road, and, making west, we crossed a stony ridge, from which the Mooramba hills are
quite discernible to our W.N.W. We continued west for 2 miles, then changed our
course to W. 25 deg. N. 2 miles, and crossed the Wilton River, which we followed up
for 3 miles further, and camped upon the site of the former settlement. It consisted
of a number of rough bush shelters thatched with grass and boughs; many of these
places are already eaten down by white ants, but finding one shelter in good order we
had dinner there. There was a lot of camping and mining material lying about that
had been abandoned on the failure of the field; after dinner we went across to the
mines, situated about a mile to the west of the deserted settlement. On some low
ndges, trending about 30 deg. to the east of north, and rising away from well-grassed
plains, the principal workings of Brown and Bradstreet are situated. These hills have
a superficial aspect, and seem to overlay an extensive belt of diorite. They are com-
posed principally of limestone (Dolomite), and a composite ferruginous gossan; these
deposits are horizontally stratified—the gossan, which carried the values in silver and
lead, being mterstratified between the dolomite layers; the mineral, principally galena,
occurs in small flat deposits, and from its appearance much of it is undoubtedly rich,
hree shallow shafts were sunk upon what seemed to be the main formation, but the


surface was hardly left, when the ore was gone through in all cases. This was con-
sidered to be sufficient to condemn the field, which was then abandoned, at any
rate, in my estimation it required no critical survey to arrive at these conclusions, the
whole deposit is purely of a superficial character common to limestone country. I gene-
rally examined the field, and it is my opinion that although this place would not carry
speculative capital, it nevertheless might be worked with some profit by individual enter-
prise. There is a large amount of high-grade ore scattered over a big area of country
here, which if carefully picked over and sent away should return a good profit. Aftei
leaving the mines we went across Mount Mooramba, some 5 miles to our east,
crossed the river 2 miles from the field and passed through high diorite plains well
grassed. This mountain is of a peculiar formation, being about 350 feet high; its base
is formed for the first hundred feet by a low flat topped elevation of diorite, out of
which the dome-like cone of the principal mountain rises for an additional 250 feet, the
incline being abrupt at its south-west end, and more tapering towards its north-east
extremity; the top of the diorite elevation is a perfectly flat tableland, surrounding on
all sides the cone of the mountain, which would not be more than the third of a mile
in diameter, and is composed of a hard jasperoid quartz and limestone; on making the
summit I checked my observations from Mount Cat, which lies from here N. 8 deg. E.;
the Three Sisters would be about 10 miles S.E., or more correctly N. 140 deg., and back
to mines N. 258 deg. I could not locate the position of the Bullman waterhole, as
there were too many fires burning.
Leaving Mount Mooramba, we returned to camp at 8.30 p.m. by a somewhat cir-
cuitous route.
The whole of the country over which we passed to-day is fine stock lands.
23rd August, Wednesday. —When we returned last night it was fixed up that we
should make a start on our downward track to-day, so at 9 a.m. everything being
packed, we left camp, making out by the track to Mount Cat for 4 miles, and following
a well-defined pad. When abreast of Mount Cat, about i l / 2 miles to the east of same,
we were making south, and we continued on that course for at least 1 mile further. We
then altered our course to S.S.W. for 2 miles, passing through well-grassed diorite
plains; we then came back to S.S.E. for 1 mile, then south for 1 mile, then crossed
the main branch of the Wilton River, flowing west, where it forms a junction with the
anabranch; from this we followed a somewhat broken course for 3 miles, S.S.W. 1
mile, S.W. 1 mile, and S. 1 mile, and after crossing another small anabranch of the
river, we camped on the Jupiter waterhole, about 1 mile below the junction of the two
branches. This is all pastoral country.
24th August, Thursday.—We moved away from Jupiter waterhole at 8.45 a.m.;
some of our horses could not be found at our start, so boy Kimberley Jack went in
search of them. We crossed the Wilton River a short distance below where we
camped, and made a course of S.S.E. for 1 mile; we then straightened up our course


to the south for i mile, crossing an Oak Creek, a western water of the Wilton; then
making south-west for 3 miles, passing over ttvo low hills, from the last of which we
can discern to our south-west high red bluff country; from here we went south to our
dinner camp, where we remained for the rest of the day. We are camped at Sweeney’s
Grove.
Sweeney was the ill-fated drover who died at this spot in August, 1893, from
dysentery, after many days suffering, during which time he and his party were practically
starving. He subsisted for some 14 days on the roots of lilies growing in the water-
holes here.
We are in box timbered country, valuable pastoral lands; the river is now 2 miles
to our East.
25th August, Friday.—Left camp at 8.25 a.m., course S.S.E, for 2 miles, when we
crossed Mmcaroo Creek, which headed up towards the west, and junctioned with the
Wilton 5 miles to the east of us; continuing on the said course for 1 mile further, we
then made around to S.E. heading to cut through a sandstone range on our south,- we
followed on this course through mostly tee tree country for 2 miles, which brought us
up against the foot of the mountain, and we then went west along the same 1 mile,
and coming upon a small creek, we crossed through the first spurs of the range to the
south; then worked around to the south-west and crossed the Buffalo Creek, and
rounding the edge of a range on our right, we came upon the Wilton River, and fol-
lowed it through the mountains to our dinner camp 2 miles.
The country is good stock country. These ranges are composed of horizontal red
sandstones.
We left our dinner camp at 1.30 p.m., following a course S.E., and ascending over
some spurs of the range we made 3 miles. We then made back 20 deg. to the south
and descended a gentle slope of red shingly country, scrubby and poor; at 5 miles we
crossed a creek, and at 6 miles from our dinner camp we made a lagoon known as
Joe s Hole, and camped for the night. Since dinner we have carried the river miles
to our right.
We are in good pastoral country to-day.
26th August, Saturday —We left camp this morning at 8.30 a.m., and took a some-
what irregular course, averaging about S. 10 deg. E. for 3 miles, passing through a
range of hills, and after passing over a low spur, a range of mountains with at least
two prominent peaks shows up on our south-west. I took the bearing of the most
prominent peak in the range which was due south, while a peak to our left was south
30 deg. east. This point I believe to be identical with Mount Ferner, shown on the
map; from here we altered our course to S. 35 deg. E., passing through the ranges for
4 more miles; this brought us again on the bank of the river, and we followed it south
for 1 mile, and for the rest of our journey to Joyce’s Lagoon, 3 miles, we went south-
west. The river is now barely a mile to our east. The nigger Walk About Paddy came


into the camp to-day. As our horses are fairly light packed, we are now averaging
about 4 miles an hour.
As we again want beef, we are camped here looking for cattle.
27th August, Sunday. —There being no cattle here, we pushed on this morning to
Ah Cup’s station, some six miles further, leaving camp at 9 a.m.; we followed down the
Billabong, upon which we were camped for a short distance, and rounding its south
end we went S.S.E. for y 2 mile, approaching some distant hills we altered the course to
S. 10 deg. W. for 3 miles, passing around the east end of a range and keeping the river
just to our left, and carrying another range some few miles away on the same side. We
from this made away south for a short distance, then made S. 10 deg. W. for 1y 2 miles,
and crossed a deep creek (Ah Cup’s Creek) ;we then emerged upon the plains of Ah Cup’s
station, which is now deserted, but was formerly a selection held by a Chinaman.
We made from here S. 30 deg. E. to our camp on a lagoon about 2 miles on; we
are now camped in a large valley, with ranges on all sides, good stock lands—we are
approaching a somewhat prominent mountain to our S.E. This I take to be Mount
Bagster, on the opposite bank of the river.
These lands here form the nucleus of a splendid station property.
Fred. McCaw, with two niggers, Walk About Paddy and Kimberley Jack went out
in search of cattle, and returned at 4 p.m. with a fresh supply of meat, he having
found a small mob of cattle and killed a fat cow.
28th August, Monday. —We did not shift out of camp to-day, giving our salt meat
time to set, and rendering down fat, etc., while some members had a general look
around. I marked a big bloodwood tree on the end of the lagoon with the party’s
mark; I also initialled and dated the same.
A
The flies have been very bad during the past month, it being hardly possible to
remain quiet during the greater part of the day; all my entries in the diary have to be
made under a mosquito curtain.
From here we will to-morrow make Lake Ellen, and we expect to reach the Roper
River bar by the 31st.
There is a small herd of cattle here; they came close up to the camp at night.
29th August, Tuesday. —The horses being mustered and packed, we left at 9.20 a.m.
by a course S.E. for the greater part of 1 mile, and rounding more ridges on our right
we made a course south for 3 miles through hilly country, ascending a low spur, from the
opposite edge of which we can see a long flat topped hill to our E.S.E., about 5 miles
away. We made a course of E.S.E. back to the river 1 mile, and after following the
same east for >4 mile it turned to the S.S.E., and we kept along its banks to our dinner
camp some 2 miles lower down. We left our dinner camp at 1.30 p.m., and turning


around a hill we made through a gorge S.W. i mile, carrying a bluff on our right-
hand side; we then made west y 2 a mile, anc( the flat-topped hill I observed in the
morning was south i mile away; we brought our direction around to S.S.W., and made
another mile, still following up the gorge, we then turned around and came back on the
opposite side by courses N.E. and E, i mile; the flat-topped hill is on the
opposite bank of the river, and we have now rounded it, its position being now N. no
deg. E.; distance % of a mile. From this on, we made i mile S.E., and here picked up
the river again, and followed it S.S.E. to a small spur, from which the two precipitous
bluffs forming the Elsie pass can be seen. Taking the bearing of the western bluff, it
was due south. We then took a course generally south up to the western bluff, and
at 8 miles from our dinner camp we came to what is known as the Jump Down, which
is a steep decline of some 300 feet in the range opposite the Elsie pass. We descended
the same to the east, then going S.'S.W. for 2 miles, we camped at 3.30 at Lake Ellen.
Since leaving Ah Cups station we have travelled through very moun-
tainous country, composed of rough flat sandstone ranges, mostly trending east and
west. The country rock here is ferruginous, containing much iron, which in deposits
of titaniferous iron is spread in shallow layers all over the surface. The country here
is again poor, very scrubby, growing mostly spinifex. After we camped I ascended a
high mountain on our north; approaching the same, which has an elevation of from
700 feet to 800 feet from the valley, some low cherty slate spurs are encountered,
covered at the base of the range with diorite; ascending the main mountain the lower
measures exposed are horizontal grey slates irregular in formation; these would extend
vertically to a height of some 300 feet, after which the range is composed of soft sand-
stones, narrow bedded, and in places very free, being ground down and used by the
native as muck-rapigment, that is used to paint their bodies.
Looking from the highest point of the mountain, the country to the south is shown
to be an extensive pastoral valley, through which the Wilton flows. The arms of the
range stretch out to the E.S.E. and S.W. There is a very prominent bluff S. 30 deg.
W. some 5 miles away. This I would take to be Mt. Favene.
0
30th August, Wednesday.—Owing to an exceptionally heavy fog, all our salt meat,
which is generally put out of the bags of a night, was all saturated this morning, our
bedding being also wet through it; it became a matter of delay until midday, when
the good warm sun put things right. Fred. McCaw left the camp this morning for
Paddy’s Lagoon, and the rest of the party got away at 12.45 p.m.; we made down
along the billabong south for about 1 mile, then altered our course to S.W., and made
up to the bluff, that I take to be Mt. Favene, and after travelling about 5 miles we
were abreast of it, it being a mile distant on our west; passing between the bluff and
some low diorite hills, and keeping the same course, we crossed through some long
grass plains, and at 3.30 we camped 8 miles from Leichhardt’s Bar on Roper River
amongst a nest of low hills.


The country here is patchy, being in places scrubby with spinifex flats, while the
diorite, of which there is much, is always well grassed.
The hills in the vicinity of our camp are composed of short brittle slates.
31st August, Thursday. —Camping 8 miles from the Roper Bar last night, we
moved up to the river this morning; leaving our camp at 8.25 a.m., we took a course
S.S.E., and followed on it for about 3 miles, passing through low sandstone hills; from
here we altered our direction to the south-east, and a high tableland range is now on
our right, and Mt. McMinn shows up to 14 miles to our S.W. We eventually brought
our course around to S.S.W., and then south, and at 10.30 a.m. we camped on the north
side of the Roper River, opposite the Leichhardt Bar.
Ist September, Friday.—ln computing the distance we have travelled since leaving
Pine Creek, I find that so far we have travelled 974 miles. We visited the Roper Bar
police station at Urapunga last night, and met Mounted-constable Vaughton, who
came out here with us four months back; we will camp here and examine the mineral
country in the vicinity of this and the Hodson River.
We got papers to-day bearing news of the outside world, and are sorry to see
therein that some little adverse comment has been made upon our expedition by the
Federal authorities in Melbourne, and a threat made that we would not be paid. The
members of the expedition attach but little importance to the matter, as we have signed
agreements, and intend to carry out our contract. Something like £4OO worth of plant
that belonged to members of the party has been risked in this expedition. We have
all worked hard, as much from a national as from a point of self-interest, and if keen
observation and honesty of purpose go for anything, then we certainly feel that we have
done our part.
Our primary object in making the Roper River is to pick up stores left here by
us last May.
Harry Shadforth, a member of the party with 22 years’ experience in these parts,
discovered what he believed to be a copper deposit to the east of the Roper River
Police Station. He with another old settler opened out on it and sent samples to
Government Assayer. This was some years back, and, as the Assayer was of the
opinion that it was arsenical iron, he did not bother further. Shadforth’s desired that
I should have a look at it, so we fixed up a little party to go down the river and examine
same. The party consisted of Shadforth, Jones, Fred McCaw, and myself. W. McCaw
stayed behind to shift the plant across the river to the Police Station, where our rations
are. We obtained a loan of the Police Station boat, and, taking sufficient provisions
for three days, we left the bar at 10 a.m., and rowed down stream for 13 miles and
landed and camped under Alligator Bluff, on the north bank of the river.
From the Police Station at Urapunga (Leichhardt Bar) down to the mouth of the
river is 90 miles, and the river is affected this distance by the tide having a rise and


fall of four feet at the Roper Bar. It is navigable to within four miles of the Police
Station to steamers of fairly deep draught. This is probably the longest navigable
river from the sea in Australia. On our journey down stream we at four miles from
our start passed the junction of the Wilton River, and at two miles from our present
camp, the Hodson River empties into the Roper.
3rd September, Sunday.—Up early this morning we cooked tucker and made neces-
sary preparations for a day’s prospecting through the country. We boarded the boat
7 a.m., pulled across the stream, and landed about one mile lower down; on account of
the thick growth of tropical jungle growing on the banks of the river, we had diffi-
culty in getting ashore. After which we made off in a south-easterly direction across
stony spinifex ridgy country, the country rock being sandstone intercepted with lime-
stone bars and ferruginous gossany outcrops. We had travelled in this direction three
miles when we came upon Shadforth’s discovery, which is situated in a narrow gorge
formed by two low hills running east and west. On the side of the southern hill
and situated in a belt of hard quartzose sandstone there is a long defined schistose
formation trending north and south, and is continuous as far as surface indications go
for half a mile. It dips to the east, and, judging from the surface shed, I should say
that the formation was of considerable width. This formation contains in a somewhat
spongy and porous form a mineral to some extent resembling green and blue carbonates
of copper, and in places more closely resembles sulphates of copper. However,
neither the mode of occurrence nor the shade of colour of the mineral is consistent
with the usual form of Azurite or Malachite, i.e., (copper carbonates). I should be
more inclined to think it a dense sulphate of iron. The lode had been opened on by a
little costeening, and, as this deposit could possibly be a low grade nickel proposition,
though it is unlikely that it is so, I brought away samples that will be submitted for
analysis later on.
Towards evening we examined a spot also previously located by Shadforth that was
supposed to be the centre of some past volcanic activity. It consisted of a low series
of ridges of quartzite hills, in which the old crater is showing. Shadforth could not
find this crater to-day, however. Although the evidence of volcanic action is not very
distinct, I have no doubt that this spot has been the scene of some primary deep-seated
disturbance, as the country is somewhat upturned and distorted. From here we
returned to our boat over some poor diorite plains.
During last night a large alligator waited at a watering place in the river opposite
our camp, and on a kangaroo making its appearance to drink, it was promptly seized
and dragged under.
4th September, Monday. —We decided to return to the Roper River Bar to-day, so
after packing up and loading the boat we made an unprovised sail out of bedding,
and with a light and intermittent wind we made back up the Roper, arriving at the
Police Station at midday, after sailing four hours.


Generally speaking, I am much impressed with the country that I have seen along
the Roper. The river itself is undoubtedly one of the finest in Australia, and must
be seen to be appreciated. It presents much imposing scenery, and from a point of
utility, it being a fine wide, deep navigable stream, it is beyond all question a valuable
asset to the country. The surrounding lands, although mountainous, comprise some
with pasture country in the shape of extensive flats that stretch away among the
mountains, and to me it is quite apparent that much of the land along the river could be
cultivated.
From the gardens of the few white settlers here vegetables equal to anything
o-rown in the other parts of Australia are produced, and without great effort. A system
of irrigation, a matter of no engineering difficulty here, would greatly improve the pro-
ducing capacity of the lands, and for this matter the water could be brought down from
the higher levels up stream by a system of gravitation. This undertaking should be
neither difficult nor expensive. In fact, in summing this part of the country up, without
any desire to over-rate it, I would say this, “That nature has placed here to hand all
that is intended to make a land and its people great. Energy, enterprise, and courage
is all that is now wanting.
On our return to the Police Station, we met Mounted Constable Collins, just
appointed. The police here are very good fellows. They are stationed here mostly to
keep the natives in check. At times they have difficult and dangerous missions into
unfrequented parts of territory; but when you meet them at their quarters, while you
like to stay you are their guest, and can be always sure of a happy and a good time
with them.
s th September, Tuesday.— We spent the day in unpacking and overhauling provi-
sions and getting ready for another start. lam sorry to enter herein that Fred McCaw
has decided to leave the party here and return to Queensland.
6th September, Wednesday.— As Fred McCaw is leaving our party we had to split
up our provisions to enable him to get his share, and at midday Fred, taking five
horses and two pack saddles, left camp and went to Paddy’s Lagoon. Our leader,
W. McCaw, instructs me to enter that Fred’s connection with the party ceases from to-
day. , ,
We are now repacked and ready for another start to-morrow, I am sorry that the
intention of the party to explore the country to the north of the Roper and towards
the head of the Katherine River is now to be abandoned, and that it is our intention
now to return to Pine Creek direct by the Roper, ending our expedition a month sooner
than necessary. Personally, I see no necessity for this course, as I believe that goo
work could still be done to the north of the river. As, however, throughout the whole
trip we have been animated by the greatest unionism and harmony, I certainly would
not at this stage let what may be a selfish desire of mine interfere with the happy com-
pletion of the trip.


Fred McCaw returned in the evening, and we all bid him good-bye and wished him
God speed. Fred was a fine fellow, and a capital horseman, and to him fell the duty
of running and killing our meat supply. Being now called away to his home, he
undertakes over a thousand miles of a journey overland by horse through dry country.
yth September, Thursday.—After dinner, 2 p.m., we got a start away from the
Police Station. As we are leaving some of our horses behind, we were engaged
throughout the morning in drafting them out.
Our party now consists of W. J. McCaw (leader), H. F. Shadforth, R. A. Jones,
and myself, blackboys Kimberley Jack and Jimmy Ah Cup, with 20 horses. We bid
good-bye to the police, and, keeping about 2odeg. to the north of west, we passed
Hell s Gates, six miles from the station, on the old road, by which the material for the
construction of the overland telegraph line was carried from the Roper River.
Hell’s Gates is merely a gorge in a tableland of foliated sandstones. Considerable
denudation has taken place on the face of the gorge, and huge masses of red sandstone
rock stand up along its surface in a weird and fantastic manner that lends the place a
somewhat grotesque appearance, from which it takes its name. Leaving Hell’s Gates
we approached the Eastern fall of Mount McMinn, and camped on the river at a point
about one mile to the north of the mountain.
We are camped on the spot where formerly the first Police Station in these parts
stood. This spot has quite recently been used as a camping ground by a party of
gentlemen forming a scientific expedition from the Southern States, who lately jour-
neyed through here.
Bth September, Friday.—When down the Roper River from Alligator Bluff, I made
a rough survey of the country to Mt, McMinn, so from the summit of Mt. McMinn I
to-day checked my observations back to Alligator Bluff. The mountain has an eleva-
tion of about 700 feet above the plain. It is of the tabletopped variety common to
these parts, and runs east and west, being about half a mile long at its base, and rises
precipitously on all sides, being vertical for 200 feet from the top. It is composed of
old red sandstone horizontally stratified, with large intrusive quartzite bars, ferru-
ginous country, sandstone, and ironstone. The sandstones are tin bedded, and in places
foliated. A low trig has been erected at the top near the north-eastern corner of the
mount.
The country surrounding the mountain is all well grassed, rolling pastoral plains
through which the Roper River flows to the north-west, fringed on all sides with table-
land ranges, and a sugar loaf form of hill stands away to our direct north about three
miles. We returned to camp, and dined on wild turkey, roasted in a native oven—that
is on hot stones placed in a hollow scooped out in the ground; these stones being
made very hot, all fire is removed from the hollow ; the bird is placed upon the stones
and then covered with paper bark, and, the whole being heaped over with dirt, all air


being thereby excluded, the bird cooks by a natural process of steaming. Cooked this
way they are sweet.
We left our camp at n a.m., following a course W. Isdeg. N., and keeping along a
valley fringed by two steep ranges on either side for about nine miles; we then took
a course S.W. through Hearts Range for about one mile, then making one mile west,
we made Hearts Range Lagoon 4-25 P- m -> and camped for the day.
gth September, Saturday.— Left camp at 8 a.m., and the river being one mile to our
est, we made a course of S.W, and generally followed on the same until 11.20 a.m,
when at a small waterhole we met Drover Duggon, with about 50 head of heifers, mak-
ing through Mr. Rogers’ station at Paddy’s Lagoon. On meeting Duggon we
camped for dinner, and he informed us that there is a bad time ahead of us, as the
country is very dry, there being no feed and very little water. We left Duggon at 1.30
p.m, and pushed on again, keeping a course of from west to south-west for six miles
along the track that extends from the Roper River Police Station to the telegraph line.
At this distance there was a range of mountains to our south. We altered our course
south, and one mile on passed through these. Coming back due west, we made two miles
beyond the ranges, and finding some young grass upon the banks of the Roper River
we camped for the night at 4.15 p.m.
About 5 p.m. the black trackers from the Police Station came into the camp; they
had been sent out some time before to capture a native who escaped from custody at
Darwin. They effected the capture, and have the prisoner with them now. Travelled
about 18 miles to-day. This is all good pastoral country, being all box plains and
basaltic lands.
10th September, Sunday.— At 8 a.m. we commenced to follow up the river S.W,
and after travelling six miles we altered our course south, then chopped around
quickly to the N.W, then went north, short coursing at the latter course, rounding
some lagoons and passing through hilly country. We were now about eight miles
from our start, and we came around to the south for a short distance of about hal a
mile, then miles we made due west, terminating at a short sandstone range that we
have followed around for the greater part of the day, we came upon water and
camped. The country crossed is similar to that of yesterday, being dionte and sand-
stone plains, good stock country, but now nearly burnt off. It is plentifully watered by
the Roper and the adjacent billabongs.
We camped along the river at midday, and this being Sunday and having a bad
feed stage before us, we will not move again. We have only come nine miles to-day.
nth September, Monday— We left our camp at 8.35 a.m. One of our horses got
bogged in the lagoon upon which we camped, and we had some difficulty in releasing


him before starting'. We took a course west away, and veering a little to the south, we
made a distance of 10 miles before reaching the river Strangways at a point iy 2 miles
from its junction with the Roper. Crossing the Strangways, we followed on west for
about two miles, and made Crescent Lagoon. We camped for dinner 12.40 p.m., after
travelling 12 miles.
As I wish to have a look at the river at this spot, where it is shown to be a large
swampy area; we will not move camp from here to-day. We passed Mob Hill, which
is about three miles to our east now. All the country between here and the Roper River
Bar is good stocklands, being mostly open Box plains, red sandstone and diorite
country, grassed with Mitchell and Blue Grass. Most of the country is now burnt off,
and is, of course, black and bare; but when the storms come along in the course of a
month or so there will be an abundance of young green feed. It is certainly a pity
that so much of the country gets burnt out every year, as, if some of it were preserved,
there would be always good healthy dry feed on the road for travellers. At 6 p.m., I
went across to the river to-day. The channel of the same is quite defined.
Some 16 years back two Chinamen were murderously attacked here by natives.
One succumbed to his injuries, and the other, probably mortally wounded, escaped to
the bush, and was never afterwards heard of. In time a native was apprehended as
being one of the murderers, and was brought down to Darwin (then Palmerston),
tried, found guilty, and sentenced to be hung at or near the scene of the tragedy.
Accordingly, in 1895 (so I am informed) the native was brought to this spot by the
proper authorities for execution. On a small creek on the eastern end of this lagoon
a gallows was erected, and the local police mustered all the blacks that could be found
in the district to the place of execution, the intention being, of course, to impress them
with the enormity of the crime, and the retribution that must surely follow. In this
respect, however, the incident was an awful failure, as the native, usually of a boyish,
good-humoured turn of mind, considered the proceedings as a considerably good joke,
and to such an extent did they appreciate this big fellow white corroborree, that after
the unfortunate man was despatched, they readily brought forth another nigger, that the
hanging might again be repeated. Harry Shadforth was on the scene at the time,
though not actually present at the execution.
12th September, Tuesday. —A couple of our horses strayed away through the night,
so we were late in getting a start. At 9.35 a.m. we left camp, and made west through
open plains for five miles, where we came upon a huge outcrop ridge of quartzite
running N.W. and S.E., probably a mile long and about 80 feet high. This ridge
resembled a masonry wall, being so even in its structure, its face being almost per-
pendicular. We rounded its N.W. end, and, taking a course west again, we came upon
another range of high hills, alongside of which we found a spring of good water, also
good horse feed, and we camped for dinner. Leaving our dinner camp at 2.30 p.m.,
we followed the route in a N.W. direction for about one mile. We rounded it going
S.W. one mile, then taking a course west across an extensive black soil plain, and


leaving to our south-east a long low mountain known as Little’s Bluff, which I should
say is identical with the Mount Sir James shown in the present maps. We made four
miles on this course, and a short distance further on we made what is known as the
Waggon Holes Lagoon, where we camped for the night.
We carried one channel of the river just on our east to-day. The river here splits
up and runs through some marshy country in a number of channels.
13th September, Wednesday.— Leaving camp this morning at 7.45 a.m., we took a
course S.W., to make the old Red Lily Homestead. About 12 miles distant we
crossed through all open plains growing a poor class of Box, and the native Gutta
Percha tree, but good pastoral lands. The country is very dry, and is now cracked and
open. Six miles on our journey we came up with low round hills on our immediate
south, and were then approaching a long range of hills on our N.W., which we subse-
quently passed around, and then came upon the Red Lily Lagoon, on which we had
previously camped on May 15th, travelling 13 miles to here. We had dinner here,
then decided to push on to McMinn’s where there is good feed, so leaving camp
at 3 p.m. and following up a good main road through limestone country, we came upon
the Elsie Station at the Bar, where we met Mr. George Stevens, the manager. We
camped about one mile further up the river, making a journey for to-day of about 20
miles.
We spent the evening at the homestead.
14th September, Thursday .-We camped all day We obtained some green hide
from the Elsie Station to make bottles; did our washing, and had a general clean up.
15th September, Friday. —We were to move on to-day, but Mr. Stevens sent word
that he would be killing a bullock in the evening, so we decided to stay and give him a
hand to kill, and obtain fresh supply of beef. At 5 p.m. we killed and took 30 lb. of
meat.
16th September, Saturday.— Bidding Mr. Stevens good-bye, we left McMinn’s Bar
at 9.30 a.m., now following up a fairly good road, and seven miles on we made Elsie
Creek, and crossed it at the Queensland crossing; then turned south for one mile off
the road, and camped for dinner on another small creek, the water from which was
awfully brackish. We left our dinner camp at 2.30 p.m., and again made the road,
eventually coming up on an old camp at Cove Creek crossing on the Roper River.
We here camped for the night, 445 P- m - 5 distance travelled, about 14 miles. This
country forms part of the Elsie Station, and is excellent horse-breeding country,
mostly composed of limestone.
17th September, Sunday.— We camped all day at the Cove Creek crossing, and
made greenhide bottles for the horses. Owing to having to drink much mineral water,
I have suffered much of late with dysentery, so am too unwell to travel to-day.


iBth September, Monday.— We left Cove Creek crossing at 8.20 a.m., and, picking
up the road, we made up towards Bitter Springs, picking up the Daly Waters road
about 10 a.m., at the old Elsie Station out-yard. We followed the road for about two
miles, and having now passed the springs from which the Roper River takes its rise,
we crossed Roper Creek, and made our dinner camp at 11 a.m, on a waterhole along-
side of which is growing some cotton bush.
'1
I might herein enter that cotton grows prolifically almost anywhere here. These
bushes here were introduced many years ago by an early settler at Abraham’s Billa-
bong, a few miles from here. The seed has been scattered about, perhaps by birds, and
the bush grows wild now everywhere. The cotton is of the Sea Island variety, and
without any cultivation it is remarkable how well it grows. The pods were all open,
and I collected a sample of cotton to bring back with me. This is an industry that
could be surely fostered in the Territory. We left our dinner camp at 2 p.m., and
made Abraham’s Billabong at 3.30 p.m., five miles, and camped for the night.
19th September, Tuesday. —We left camp at 1.40 a.m., and made up Roper River
to the Stirling crossing, where we camped for dinner at 11 a.m. The waterhole here
was very muddy; in fact, after we passed Bitter Springs, there has been very little feed
and very bad water, and this time of the year we quite expect to be very hard pushed
in the matter of getting feed for our horses, and prepared for very dry stages. Another
traveller, Mr. W. Lawrie, put into the waterhole, followed shortly after by the Daly
Waters mailman. Mr. Lawrie is one of the owners of the Hodgson Downs and Elsie
Stations, and is going out on a visit of inspection. We had shot a young turkey,
which have been very plentiful all along the Roper River, we sometimes getting three
in one day. As we had the bird cooked, Mr. Lawrie and the mailman dined with us.
We were informed that other parties, consisting of mostly Government officials, are
coming up along the road. As, however, we intend to take the track up the Beswick
Creek, upon which we are camped, it is probable that we will not see them. Lawrie
and mailman left camp at 2 p.m., and a little later we were on our way up the Beswick
Creek, where six miles up along the same, we camped for the night on a waterhole. We
came this way looking for feed, but the country, being recently burnt off, is very bare.
20th September, Wednesday.— We were on the move again at 8 a.m., following up
the Beswick to the north, and at 11 a.m. we camped upon a waterhole about 10 miles
from our starting point. We moved on again at 2 p.m., and made west back to the
main road, reaching the Gums Waterhole by 5 p.m., making about six miles from our
dinner camp. We here met Mr. Francis, the newly-appointed Railway Superinten-
dent, who is journeying out Daly Waters way. There is just a little feed here.
21st September, Thursday, —Mr. Francis, who was camped here last night, got away
early this morning, and we were not long in following, and made the Overland Tele-


graph line at 8.30 a.m., coming two miles from our camp. Following down the line we
then began to make some tests of the pace at which we were travelling; taking
measured distances along the line of and one mile, we found that the average
pace was 3 / 2 miles per hour. This exactly coincides with our previous reckonings;
that is to say, that when we made the line we were satisfied that we were travelling
at that pace before any tests were made. There have been times during our journey
when we have not been travelling more than 2>4 miles per hour, but, altoget er we
would average over three miles per hour, as coming down the Wilton River with the
horses light packed and being in good condition and on good feed, one had to ride
hard all day to keep up with them; we were then doing over four miles per hour.
We made Leeches Lagoon at 12.30 p.m., and there being a little grass around the
water we will put our horses on it for the rest of the day. Our horses are now leg-
weary, having travelled constantly for five months, covering something like 1300 miles
from camp to camp, not to speak of the many hundreds of miles that some of them
have been ridden in exploring in different localities away from our camp. Being now
almost without feed, we cannot possibly force them too far in a day.
22nd September, Friday.— Leaving camp at 7.30 a.m., we started out to make Maud
Creek. We made track on to the O.T. line at King’s Creek, after the crossing of which
we followed up the line for some miles, which we came up to about 10.30 a.m. We
here made a stay for dinner, boiling the water from the well to make tea. The water
was quite soft, and apparently free from mineral, but badly stained from the Pine with
which it is timbered. During our dinner stay, two newly-appointed aboriginal inspec-
tors drove up in a backboard,, followed by a mob of pack horses in charge of a white
man. They had a drink of tea with us, and after an hour’s stay, we moved on again,
and, passing through the old township site at Maud Creek, we camped at the old yards,
about two miles further on. We travelled 22 miles to-day. There had been a shower
of rain here yesterday, and the waterhole-? were full.
A telegraph linesman was in camp here.
23rd September, Saturday.— We left camp at 8 a.m., and following down the road
made the two-mile creek, where we camped on our way out. About 10.15 a.m. we left
the road here, and turned down to the Katherine River, and came upon the same in
about one mile. We here camped. We expected to find grass here, but were dis-
appointed, as it is quite dry and bare. After dinner the two boys took the horses
across the river. We all went up to the Post Office, about a mile and a half down
stream. McCaw wired W. C. P. Bell, of Darwin, that the party was returning to
Darwin. We called upon the police with our weighbill, after which we crossed the river
below the township, and, picking up the restof the plant about seven miles along the road,
we camped at some springs about one mile from the road, and to the right of the tele-
graph line.


24th September, Sunday.—At 7.45 a.m. we moved away from camp, and made the
road, which we followed up some 8 miles, We then crossed over to the old road, and
followed along the Telegraph line to the Edith River, where at 2 p.m. we camped,
having travelled 21 miles. The Edith is not now running above the ground, though
all the holes along its course are full of water. One notices some good-looking mineral
country coming along the old road. Some day, when vigorous prospecting is pushed
here, valuable discoveries may be made. The place is really worth much attention.
25th September, Monday.—We moved out again along the telegraph line at 7,30,
and made the Mount Todd township about 8.30 a.m. The battery here belonging to The
Foot Gold Mining Company was now hung up, and the township seemed deserted. A
few Chinese were working some shallow ground for tin near the same. We made
Horseshoe Creek a few miles further on. The battery (a primitive affair) was work-
ing here; but the place was otherwise quiet. We made the Driffield six miles further on,
and camped for the day about 2 p.m. The Driffield is dry, and the country is bare.
26th September, Tuesday.— We left camp at 8 a.m. and crossed the Fergusson four
miles on, and made the Cullen at 12 a.m.; distance, 13 miles. We camped at a billa-
bong about one mile up stream, and made ready for our return to Pine Creek to-
morrow.
27th September, Wednesday.— We left camp at 8 a.m., and made Pine Creek about
11 ami., 12 miles. Here Mr. R. A. Jones left the party. We called at Bell’s store,
obtained further stores, and moved out to a camp at Bonning paddock, five miles away
and settled for the night.
28th September, Thursday. —lt was our intention to put the horses on grass and
disband here. This course, however, becomes impossible, as there is no grass, so we are
moving on to Burrundie, where it is reported that there is a good feed. We accord-
ingly left camp at 7.30 a.m., and made over to the railway line, and followed down the
same by the Union and Lady Alice, and camped for the night 20 miles on, near the
Bomberra railway siding.
29th September, Thursday.— We confined to-day to follow down the line, and
made Burrundie, once a town of much mining activity, but now deserted. Leaving the
line here, we made west to Price’s Springs for dinner, 14 miles. We here met the man
McKay, whom we met with the Love-Barry party at the head of the Goyder River.
It was our intention to camp here, but, as the springs are dry and the grass very poor,
we made on further to Yam Creek, and camped about two miles above the Yam Creek
Railway Station, on the Bullock’s Hole, about 4.30 p.m.; distance travelled for the day
20 miles. J
30th September, Saturday.— lt now became my lot this morning to part company
with the camp, as I was to return to Darwin, to be followed by my companions, W.


J. McCaw and H. Shadforth, on Saturday next. I accordingly packed up, shifted my
kit over to the Railway Station, and returned to Darwin. The expedition terminates
to-day.
This is by far not my first experience in this class of work, but it certainly will be
amongst the happiest that I may be ever given to speak of. Probably in no other part of
the world would the climatic conditions make travelling so easy as it does here, as the
days are always bright and sunny, and the nights clear, calm and cool, and for five months
the only covering that stood between us and heaven has been our mosquito nets. In
this expedition, as in all such ventures, going into isolated and unknown parts, there
have been times when we have stood up against formidable difficulties, but experi-
ence in bushcraft and good horseflesh has enabled us to overcome all obstacles.
To our leader, W. J. McCaw, the thanks of the party are due for the careful, manly
way in which he conducted the operations of the party throughout the whole trip; while
to all my companions my thanks are hereby offered for the assistance they at all times
rendered me in my efforts to compile this humble diary.
(Signed) W. F. MURPHY,
Mining Engineer.
Darwin, 30th September, 1911.


•
Days
Travelling
Distance
Travelled.
Left Pine Creek, 3rd May ..
Made Roper River Bar, 20th May
12
Miles.
83
,, Roper River Bar, 29th May
,, Walker River, 8th June
10
,, Walker River, gth June
,, Saddlers Creek, 14th June
6
77
,, Saddlers Creek, 19th June
,, Caledon Bay, 26th June
7
78
,, Caledon Bay, 5th July
,, No. 2 Camp, Saddlers Creek, 10th July ..
6
63
,, No. 2 Camp, Saddlers Creek, 14th July ..
,, No. 3 Camp, Saddlers Creek, 23rd July ..
7
54
,, No. 3 Camp, Saddlers Creek, 27th July
,, Ant-bed Camp, Mitchell Range, 4th Aug.
,, Ant-bed Camp, Mitchell Range, 30th July
3
43
,, Blacks’ Lagoon. Goyder River, 7th Aug.
4
39
,, Blacks’ Lagoon, Goyder River, 8th Aug.
,, Rock Hole Crossing, Goyder River, 10th Aug.
,, Rock Hole Crossing, Goyder Ri ver, 9th Aug.
2
2 5i
,, Head of Goyder River, 17th Aug.
8
83^
,, Head of Goyder River, 18th Aug.
,, Bullman Wilton River, 19th Aug.
2
314
,, Bullman Wilton River, 23rd Aug.
,, Roper River Bar, 31st Aug.
8
7 6 i
,, Roper River Bar, 2nd Sept.
Returned to Roper River Bar, 4th Sept.
Made McMinn’s Bar, 13th Sept.
3
24
,, Roper River Bar, 7th Sept.
7
94
,, McMinn's Bar, 16th Sept.
,, Pine Creek, 27th Sept. ..
11
177
Total
96
1,286
STATEMENT OF DISTANCE TRAVELLED FROM PINE CREEK.
Miles travelled per day, average 13.406.
This is a Statement of travel from Pine Creek to Pine Creek which extended over a period
of 150 days.
THE EXPEDITION LEFT DARWIN on 2nd May and returned on 30th September,
1911, and to the appended figures would be added 294 miles of railway journey to and
from Pine Creek. The total mileage travelled would therefore be :
By Railway ... ~ ... 294 miles
By Horse ... ... ... 1,286 „
Total ... 1,580 miles
The party was out ... ... 154 days
Days travelling ... ... 98 ~
Days not travelling ... ... 36 ~
(Signed) W. F. MURPHY,
Mining Engineer to the Party.
By Authority : McCarron, Bird & Co., Printers and Publishers. 479 Collins Street, Melbourne.
