

DIARY
f§P of the
Worlds
: GREAT
WAR
(Illustrated)
Book I.
Containing Maps showing Military Positions in Flanders and
France upon various dates.
PRICE - - ONE SHILLING
TURNER 81 SONS, Publishers, Sydney & Melbourne






Map 6 —Position when the Allies crossed the Marne, and the German retreat degenerated into a rout.


DIARY OF THE
WAR
(ILLUSTRATED)
WITH MAPS SHOWING MILITARY
POSITIONS OCCUPIED BY THE
ALLIES AND THE ENEMY FROM
THE BATTLE OF MONS AND ON
VARIOUS OTHER IMPORTANT
DATES.
Price, One Shilling


INTRODUCTION
THE Publishers do not claim for this book aosolute correct-
ness regarding the dates given upon which the events re-
corded took place. As the only source of information has
been the files of the daily Press, which, again, are dependent
upon the cables coming from various places, it is evident that
the exact date upon which certain events happened can only be
given approximately. Even at the best there is always a varia-
tion of time between Australia and London sufficient to upset
any calculation for exactness, and render accuracy practically
impossible. All that can be claimed is that the events herein
given have actually occurred, and that the date mentioned is as
near as calculations of time and distance will allow.
Nor can any claim be made for originality, since several
Sydney newspapers have been publishing a similar diary at con-
venient intervals. But the Publishers do claim that this book
is the first to give the particulars in a handy form for future
reference, and the first to publish the series of maps given with
this issue, showing the military positions of the Allied Armies
and the Enemy upon certain fixed dates, and at those critical
moments which history will be certain to deal with in a more
copious manner during the coming years.
It is intended that this book shall be the first of a series,
to be followed by others at intervals of about six months so
long as the war continues. Each book will contain sets of maps
similar to those now given, and these will enable readers to
follow the vicissitudes of the war in each of the spheres of
action.
TURNER & SONS,
9 Bligh-street,
Sydney.


DIARY
OF THE WAR
(Illustrated)
1914
June 28.—Assassination of the Archduke, Francis Ferdinand, the
heir to the Austrian throne, and his wife, the Duchess of
Hohenberg, by a Servian student named Prinzip, aged 20,
at Sarajevo, the capital city of the newly-annexed province
of Bosnia.
July 1. —Martial law proclaimed in Bosnia and Herzogovina.
Prinzip and Cabrinovie confess to having shot at the Duke
and Duchess. 300 arrests made in Sarajevo. Excesses com-
mitted against Serbs in streets of Capital. Servian Govern-
ment issues statement expressing keen indignation and re-
gret at crime.
July 3- —Plots against Archduke discovered to be so considerably
wide-spread that it was considered impossible for him to es-
cape alive from the province.
July 6. —Anti-Servian riots in Vienna. Servian flag burned.
Funeral of victims.
July 9. —Austrian troops concentrating on Servian frontier.
July 10. —Servian Club in Berlin raided by police and papers
seized.
July 11. —Inspired articles appear in Berlin newspapers, stating
that if responsibility of crime brought home to subjects of
Servia every step taken by Austria will receive support of
Germany.
July 16.—Hungarian Premier demands reparation from Servia
under threat of war.
July 21. —Balkan stock falling heavily on the Berlin Stock Ex-
change, London and Paris.
July 22. —Servia places orders for £250,000 worth of ammuni-
tion. Austria demands removal of whole group of Officers
from Servian Army.
July 24. —Austria sends Note to Servia couched in sharp terms,
demanding immediate prosecution of Servian subjects com-
promised in the assassination, and suppression of Pan-Ser-
vian organisations now agitating against Monarchy. Note
demands reply within 24 hours and goes far beyond Inter-
national usage, threatening military reprisals unless complied
with. Several army corps moved to Semlig near Servian
frontier.


July 26. —Russian Charge-d’-Affaires called at Austrian Foreign
Office in Vienna and asked for extension of time for reply
to ultimatum, but refused. Servian reply was delivered to
Austrian Embassy and Austrian Minister immediately left
Belgrade. Servian King, Government and Archives remove
from Belgrade to Kragujevaes. Order to mobilise army is-
sued. Servia rejects demand but offers a measure of repara-
tion. Britain suggests . a conference to include Germany,
Russia, France and Italy. Kaiser returned to Berlin. All
divisions of German fleet ordered to concentrate at pre-ar-
ranged places on Norwegian coast. Procession of 20,000
Germans marched down Unter Den Linden singing Austrian
National Anthem, and groaning and hooting outside Servian
and Russian Embassies. Socialists in Berlin denounce war,
but are roughly handled by crowd. Germany issued paper
approving Austria’s Note to Servia and states: “Labour
troubles in Russia, revelations regarding army in France, and
Ulster question in Britain would prevent interference in fav-
our of Servia.” Servian Minister left Vienna. 22 Austrian
warships assemble in Bay of Cattaro. Ultimatum regarded
as direct challenge to Russia. 5 Russian army corps mobi-
lised. Austrians arrest General Putnik, Chief of Servian
General Staff, and four companions, in train while returning
to Belgrade. Tone of Austrian Note to Servia caused amaze-
ment in Italy where it is stated to be the most terrible and
humiliating ever inflicted on any State. British consols fall
2\ per cent, in London. Balkan stocks fall heavily in Paris
and Berlin.
July 27. —Austrian troops on steamer on Danube exchanged shots
with Servian troops, and important engagement ensued.
Britain suggests conference. British Admiralty orders First
Fleet not to disperse, Second Fleet to remain in Home ports.
The Landsturm in Austria called up. Russia informs Aus-
tria that it was impossible for her to remain indifferent if
Servia is invaded. Servian army mobilised. Germany de-
clares that if Russia attacks Austria she will do her duty to-
wards her ally.
j u ly 28. —Germany begins mobilisation. Russia begins mobilisa-
tion. Servian troops exchange shots with Austrian troops
and an important engagement ensued. Austria declares war
against Servia. Partial mobilisation of Austrian Army
against Russia. British Admiralty orders fleet not to dis-
perse. Plans completed for mobilisation of Belgian Army.
Austrians continue military preparations.
July 29. —Germany rejects Sir Edward Gray’s proposal for con-
ference. Italy strongly urges Germany to accept. Austria
mobilises 21 divisions against Servia. Russia orders partial
mobilisation. France stops leave of officers. Belgrade bom-
barded by Austrian troops. Germany threatens a European
conflagration if Russia attacks Austria. Germany attempts
to bargain for Britain’s neutrality. Sir Edward Gray stated
in Parliament that, France and Italy had accepted proposed


conference. Germany stated she had no objection to other
Powers meeting, but as Austria’s ally she cannot interfere
with Austria’s freedom of action. Berlin people enthusiastic
over war. Mass meetings in streets. Procession passing
British Embassy cheered and cried “Hoch England.” Ger-
man Fleet ordered to return to Kiel. Servians blew up a
bridge over the Danube.
July 30. —Belgrade bombarded. British Fleet sailed for unknown
destination. British War Office states that no steps have
been taken in the nature of mobilisation and all orders were
purely of defensive character. Naval measures are precau-
tionary. Germany’s mobilisation complete.
July 31. —Russia mobilises the whole of her Army. Germany
demands explanation from Russia as to reasons for mobili-
sation, demanding reply within 24 hours. Canada offers
30,000 troops to Britain. London Stock Exchange closed.
Martial law proclaimed in Germany. At 7.30 p.m. the Ger-
man Ambassador at St. Petersburg, Count Pourtales handed
declaration of war to M. Sazonoff, Minister for Foreign Af-
fairs, leaving St. Petersburg immediately after. Kaiser made
dramatic speech to people from his window, stating: “We
will show our adversaries what it means to attack Germany.”
August 1. —German troops violate Luxemburg in preparation for
war with France. Italy declares, that actions of Austria
against Servia, and Germany against Russia, has been offen-
sive and not defensive and she will, therefore, remain neu-
tral. Australia offers Fleet to Empire and 20,000 men.
German Ambassador in France asked the Prime Minister
whether, in the event of war between Germany and Russia,
France will remain neutral. Reply demanded in 24 hours.
French troops withdraw slightly from frontier in order to
prevent collision with German troops. French Army mobi-
lises. Railways cut on Franco-German frontier. French,
Belgian and Swiss mobilisations begin.
August 2. —Britain warns Germany against violating Belgium’s
neutrality. German advance towards Liege begins. Ger-
many demands that Belgium shall facilitate the movement of
her troops. Germans invade France at Cirey, 33 miles east
of Nancy. British Government inquires whether Germany is
prepared to respect Belgium’s neutrality. Germany replies:
“Unable to answer.” German Army reaches Longwy, in
France, where there is a strong French garrison. Russians
invade Germany through East Prussia. Russian forces at-
tack Warthe River railway bridge, but were repulsed. Three
columns cross front at Schwidden. Cossacks advance on
Johannesburg, north-east corner of Prussia.
August 3. —Germany demands permission from Belgium to use
her territory. Belgium refused. Sir Edward Grey stated
in Parliament that if German Fleet entered the Channel or
North Sea to undertake hostile operations against France we
should give France all assistance in our power. Heavy
fighting in Servia.


August 4. —Belgium invaded. Britain declares war on Germany.
British Army mobilises, hirst shot in Commonwealth, fired
from Queenscliff, when the German cargo steamer, Pfalz,
refused to stop, when called upon. Germany declares war
on France. United States declares neutrality. Lord Kit-
chener placed in supreme command of Army Administra-
tion. Liege forts attacked. Koningen-Louise sunk off Har-
wich while mine-laying. (Note. —The sinking of the
Koningen-Louise was the first of many blows given to the
Kaiser and keenly felt by him, as the ex-liner proudly
flaunted the name of his favorite child, his daughter. It was
sunk 40 miles from Antwerp by one of our destroyers, which
gave chase for 30 miles before overtaking the German ship
of destruction. Only four shots were fired, the first blow-
ing the bridge away, the second striking the bow, while the
third tore away the propeller. It was one of the shots fired
that sank the mine-layer. We had no casualties, but 28
wounded men from the Koningen-Louise were brought to
Harwich.)
August 5. —Japan intimates her full adhesion to terms of Alli-
ance.
August 6.—British ship, “Amphion,” struck a mine and foundered
over 100 men being killed. Twenty German prisoners from
the “Koningen-Louise” were killed in addition. Belgium of-
fers unexpected resistance to German troops along the Meuse
Valley. German losses reported to be severe. Canada offers
Army Corps and presents Britain with two submarines.
August 7. —British Government asks Parliament for an addi-
tional 500,000 men. French invade Alsace.
August B.—Germans enter Liege, but forts still hold out.
August 9. —British cruiser “Birmingham” sinks German subma-
rine Ul5. British fleet got into touch with German High
Sea Fleet, south of Dogger Bank and, after an engagement,
chased German ships towards Holland.
August 10. —Australian squadron passes under direct Admiralty
control. Montenegro attacks Austria.
August 11. —German advance guard fighting on Luxemberg fron-
tier. German cruisers, “Goeben” and “Breslau,” take shelter
in Dardanelles. Servian mobilisation completed, yielding
army of 450,000. Norwegian-Australian liner, “Tisla,”
struck mine off Dutch coast and sunk. Three passengers
and three stokers drowned.
August 12. —Austria and France at war. Both Ambassadors re-
called. Britain declares war with Austria. Canadian pro-
vince of Alberta offers Britain 500,000 bushels of Alberta
oats. Admiralty declares Atlantic trade routes safe. “Goe-
ben” and “Breslau” cruisers purchased by Turkey.
August 13. —Russian army invades Austria.
August 14. —Sir John French, commanding British Expeditionary
Force, reaches Paris.
August 15.—Junction of French and Belgian armies complete.
Austrians defeated on Servian frontier. Severe German de-
feat at Dinant. Czar promises freedom to Poland.


August 16.—French surprise force of Germans at Namur and
capture several guns. Austria sends large reinforcements to
Germany’s left wing. 400,000 Austrians attack the whole of
the Servian frontiers.
August 17. Belgian Government moves from Brussels to Ant-
werp. Dutch army moves to frontier. French Mediter-
ranean Fleet in Adriatic.
August 18. Japan sends ultimatum to Germany requesting eva-
cuation of Kiau-Chau and to remove all her ships from the
China Seas. Proclamation from Czar of Russia, stating
that it is intended to restore Poland’s integrity. Desultory
fighting between British Patrol Squadron and the German
reconnoitring cruisers. First Australian contingent em-
barks.
August 19. Official cable states that the British Expeditionary
Force has completed landing in France.
August 20. Germans occupy Brussels. Swiss Army guards
frontier.
August 22. —First great battle begins west of Namur. German
cavalry near Ghent and Ostend. Russians enter Bukovina
in Austria-Hungary.
August 23. —Japan formally declares war on Germany. Turkey
assures British Ambassador she will remain neutral. Namur
in Belgium, falls. Battle of Mons begins. Germany army
in great force, but Allies hold their ground.
August 24. —German troops occupy Ghent without resistance.
War contribution of £8,000,000 imposed on Brussels and
£2,000,000 on Liege. Enormous forces of Germans at Mons.
French Commander-in-Chief withdraws troops to original
line of defence. Japanese commenced bombardment of Kiao-
Chau. Austrian invasion of Servia abandoned. Germans
occupied Luneville. Belgians made sally from Antwerp, and
threw back three German divisions to Vladore.
August 25. —Germans attacked French near Nancy, but were re-
pulsed. Belgians repulsed Germans at Malines. Austria
mobilises on Italian frontier. Germans in force attacked
French southern frontier, but were repulsed.
August 26.—Kitchener congratulated British troops on result of
four days’ battle. British losses set down at between 5,000
and 7,000 men. German losses enormous. French War Of-
fice ordered abandonment of occupied territory in Alsace-
Lorraine; Mulhausen evacuated. Belgian protest against
German outrages published in London. German Govern-
ment called up boys between ages of 16 and 19. Stated that
six distinct attacks made against British; all repulsed. Great
battle at Cambrai. British troops successfully hold position
until relieved by French. All German attacks repulsed.
August 27. —Battle raged between Maubeuge and Denain, on ex-
treme left of Allied line. German columns marched on Val-
enciennes and Cambrai, and were cut up. Great German at-
tack at a standstill. Russians occupied Nederburg and
Bishofsburg, East Prussia.


August 28.—Fierce battle at Mechlin between Belgians and Ger-
mans. Town destroyed. Germans lose heavily. Belgians
evacuated Mechlin after splendid two days’ defence. Ger-
mans expelled 60,000 people from the town. United States
citizens volunteering to join Canadian Expeditionary Force.
Address of sympathy and appreciation to King Albert, of
Belgium, moved in British House of Commons. French
Ministry resigned and a Cabinet of National Defence formed.
German Togoland in West Africa surrenders unconditionally.
British First Light Squadron sunk German cruiser, “Mainz,”
another cruiser and two destroyers. A third cruiser caught
fire and vanished in a mist.
August 29. —Forces of British marines arrive at Ostend. British
cruiser, “High Flyer,” sunk armed German merchantman,
“Kaiser Wilhelm Der Grosse.” German cruiser, “Magde-
burg,” went ashore in a fog in the Gulf of Finland. Russia
completes mobilisation of 8,000,000 men, divided into four
armies of 2,000,000 each. Russia occupies Tilsit in German
Prussia. French armies gain solid success over three Ger-
man Army Corps near Guise. Louvain burnt and 45,000 in_
habitants driven out, with many atrocities. Inhabitants of
East Prussia fleeing to Berlin and causing consternation in
Germany. British Fleet in North Sea attacked German
squadron, destroying five ships without loss to itself.
August 30. —Estimated German losses to date, 200,000 men.
German Reservists being placed in ranks. British and
French forces occupying strong defensive position.
August 31. —German Samoa occupied by British without resist-
ance. Germans retire from Ghent and other parts of Bel-
gium. New battle started on the French and English left
flank.
September 1. —Second day of the new battle in France. Prussian
guard driven back to Guise. Allies’ left wing gave ground,
and Germans occupied region of La Fere, 70 miles from
Paris. Russian army steadily advancing. Lemberg, capital
of Galicia, half encircled. Details of fighting at Mons shows
that the British troops resisted the German advance from
August 23rd to August 26th inclusivs and saved the position
for the French army. German attack near Compiegne re-
pulsed by British, and 10 guns captured. British army take
up position south of river Marne with French forces on
right and left.
September 2.—Third day of great battle before La Fere, round
St. Quentin, Ham, and Peronne. Germans have some suc-
cesses, but Allies’ lines not broken through.
September 3. —Left wing of Allies falls back. Fierce fighting
continues on French frontier. Russians inflict severe defeat
on Austrians in Galicia. Amiens falls. Allies still give way.


Map 1 —The Retreat from Mons. August 22nd to September 1 st


French Cabinet decide to remove seat of Government from
Paris to Bordeaux. German patrols within 12 miles of
Paris.
September 4. —Lemberg falls to the Russians. Autsrian army de •
dared to be almost put out of action. Russians took 200
guns and 70,000 prisoners. Paris being rapidly put in a
condition to stand a siege. Russians suffer reverse at Os-
tergoe, in East Prussia. Japan occupies seven islands around
Kiao Chao. Germans drop bombs on Antwerp.
September 5. —German Cavalry patrols reach Senlis, 12 miles
from Paris, but were defeated and thrown back to Creil.
German forces repulsed at Termonde. Allies defending
Paris come in contact with German troops. Mr. Asquith
declares that Great Britain must persevere till the end. Ger-
mans commence south-easterly move from Paris.
September 6. —Germans at Coulommiers district, east of Paris,
forced to retreat. General Pau announces great victory at
Precy-sur-Oyse, 15 miles south of Paris. Centre of German
forces hurled back and left wing retired, while Sir John
French succeeded in crushing enemy’s right. Germans re-
pulsed at Capellen, near Antwerp, losing 3,000 men. After
being engaged 5 hours Germans captured Melle, 10 milet>
south of Ghent. Russian strong advance against enemy and
hurl back centre, when left wing falls back.
September 7. —Admiralty announces that two German cruisers
and four destroyers have sunk fifteen British fishing boats in
the North Sea, taking the crews prisoners. Officially re-
ported that seven German destroyers and torpedo boats have
arrived at Kiel in a damaged condition and that others were
sunk in the vicinity of Canal. German troops deviate from
advance on Paris, continuing movements to south-east, leav-
ing Paris on their right. Fierce fighting at Malines and
Termonde between Germans and Belgians. Germans cut
dykes between Termonde and Antwerp.
September B.—General action along 90 miles of front. German
calculations upset by success of combined army. Large Ger-
man forces retreat out of Belgium. Russians capture Nico-
laieff, a fortress in Galicia. British drive enemy back 10
miles at Ourcq and the Petit Morin. Heavy fighting along
whole of front near Marne. Enemy driven across river.
September 9. -Action rolls away from Paris. Allies gain ground
rapidly. Russian advance continues unchecked. German
forces thought to be intending to make a stand at Posen,
Nearly 2,000,000 troops computed to be engaged in battle


along line from Paris to Verdun. Fierce fighting continues,
the enemy being driven back. Three Montenegrin columns
reach Focha to assist Servians.
September io. —Enemy retreating all along line. British cross
Marne in pursuit. Poland reported clear of Austrians and
Germans. Vienna placed in a state of defence. Consterna-
tion in Germany over Russian advance. Southern division
of German army in France caught between two fires. Stra-
tegical position of the Allies vastly improved.
September 11. —Retreat of enemy continuing. Large number of
prisoners taken by Allies, also many guns. Violent fighting
at La Fere, Goucher, Esternay and Montmirail. Army of
General Kluck and von Bulow falling back. British cross
the Ourcq and continue pursuit of enemy. French Third
Army captured all the artillery of one corp. Allies’ cavalry
between Soissons and Fismes pursuing. Enemy retreating
north of Vitry. Defeat of the German right wing in France
admitted in Berlin. End of great battle in East 1 russia by
Germans being completely defeated at Lublin.
September 12.—Whole German line in France gives way. Great
rout of part of the invading army. Allies captured 6,000
men and 15 guns.
September 13. —Germans in difficulty with their transportation
and commissariat. Belgians re-occupy Ghent and cut up
German army at Cortenberg. Russian victory over combined
Austrian and German army in Russian Poland.
September 14.—Officially reported that German rout in France
is complete. Invading forces driven back 62 miles. General
von Kluck’s army in difficulties. Austrians lost 98,000 men,
800 officers, and 4 00 guns. News of German disaster per-
colates into Berlin. British auxiliary cruiser, Uarmania,
went into action with German armed cruiser, supposed to
be the “Cap Trafalgar” or “Berlin,” mounting eight 4-inch
guns and pom-poms. Action lasted 1 hour 45 minutes, when
the German ship capsized and sank. Russian troops arrive a\
Przemsyl. Belgians report defeat of Germans between Lou-
vain and Brussels. Rout of Germans in France deepening
into complete disaster. Germans abandon defences prepared
between Compiegne and Soissons. Still retreating. Troops
in Argonne rtreat northward, and regions of Nancy and
Vosges completely evacuated. Enemy stubbornly disputed
passage of Aisne, but everywhere driven back. Crown
Prince moves his headquarters from St. Mennehold to Mont-
faucon.


September 15. —German cruiser. “Hela,” sunk by British subma-
rine. Enemy still occupying strong positions to north of
Aisne. Fighting proceeding along whole line. Crown
Prince’s army driven back on line of Varrennes, Consanvoye
and Armes. Many prisoners and guns taken by Allies. Bri-
tish army concentrating on the River Aisne. Germany short
of money. America refuses a loan. Of an internal loan of
£50,000,000 asked by the German Government, the people
only subscribed £10,000,000.
September 16.—Germans preparing to make a stand on the Aisne.
Heavy fighting commences. Enemy still counter attack
across the Aisne, all were repulsed. Enemy again retreat.
Austrian army completely defeated by Russians. German
troops try to save it but fail, losing 36 pieces of heavy artil-
lery and much siege artillery.
September 17. —Enemy commences entrenching at Montfaucon.
Fighting along whole line continues. “Fisgard II.” train-
ing ship for boy artificers, at Portmouth, foundered in gale.
Twenty-one of crew lost. Several attacks delivered by the
enemy repulsed. Von Kluck escaped at Soissons by the ar-
rival of siege guns destined for Paris. Allies’ new army
from the West encircled the German’s right wing.
September 18.—Battle of the Aisne proceeding. Allies repulsed
all counter attacks. Germans sending back their first line
troops from East Prussia to France. Kitchener says there
are good grounds for confidence, but the struggle is bound to
be a long one. Battles continue along the whole of the
Oise and the Meuse. Enemy fortifying positions. Armies
still at the Aisne. German attacks repulsed.
September 19. —Great battle proceeding between Germans and
Allied armies in France. Allies repulsed day and night at-
tacks. Austrian cruiser and six torpedo boats attempt to de-
stroy wireless station at Antivari. Warships captured Aus-
trian steamer flying the Greek flag, laden with arms and
ammunition, destined for Albania. Fighting along the Aisne
continues. German attacks fail to break Allies lines. Russia
continues successful against Germany. Austrians and Ger-
mans retreat at several points in East Prussia. H.M.S. “Pe-
gasus” attacked by “Konigsberg” while at anchor in Zanzi-
bar Harbour cleaning her boilers and repairing her machines.
Being outranged and unable to reply was completely dis-
abled and lost 25 killed and 80 wounded. German cruiser
“Emden” appears suddenly in Bay of Bengal, between Sep-
tember loth and 14th, and captured six British ships, the


“Indus,” “Lova,” “Killing,” “Diplomat,” “Trabbock” and
“Katanga,” of which she sunk five and sent the sixth into
Calcutta with crews.
September 21.—Servians defeated 20,000 Austrians near Novi-
bazar. Fierce battle raging east of Peronne, between Roissel
and St. Quentin. Germany declares army can hold Aisne
position for three months. All attempts to break Allies line
defeated. Enemy make night attacks during tremendous rain
storm. British bayonet put issue beyond doubt and enemy
retreated in great disorder. Reported loss of Australian sub-
marine AEi. Reports from America states: “Germany pre-
pared discuss terms of peace.” Battle of Aisne still com
tinues. Russian advance against Posen. Austrians pressed
hard in Galicia. Pacific cable cut at Fanning Island by Ger-
man cruiser “Nurnberg.”
September 22. —Fighting continued. German army entrenches.
September 23. —Allies continue to gain ground. Belgian victory
at Malines. Germans bomb Rheims, injuring Cathedral.
“Emden” sank British steamer, “Clan Matheson,” in Bay of
Bengal. All attempts by the Germans at Aisne repulsed.
Enemy renewed assaults at Passing, west of Noyon to east
of Oise and north of Aisne. Violent bayonet charges made
in region of Craonne, but enemy repulsed everywhere.
September 24. —Three British cruisers, “Aboukir,” “Cressy” and
“Hogue” sunk by submarines in North Sea. Two of the
submarines were destroyed. Germans claim that retreat
from Paris was part of their plans. Russia continues ad-
vance on Cracow. Fighting still continues on Aisne. Allies
left wing still continues to progress and has reached Las-
signey, 10 miles west of Noyon. H.M.S. “Berwick” cap-
tured German Hamburg-American liner, “Speedwald,” fitted
as armed merchant cruiser. German New Guinea cap-
tured.
September 25. —Allies continues hard fighting. Germans detach
portion of their forces to meet Russia.
September 26. —Russia defeats Austrians and Germans, and oc-
cupies Soldau, in East Prussia. Austrian destroyer sunk.
Successes of Servians reported. British forces land at Tao-
Shan Bay to co-operate with Japan at Tsing-Tao. Two tor-
pedo boats attached to Austrian High Sea Fleet and a de-
stroyer struck mines off Dalmatia and sank. Kmden
cruiser bombards Madras, firing nine shots. Two oil tanks
were ignited, and the telegraph office, the Seamen’s Club
House, and some goods trucks were hit. No other damage


done. General battle in France still raging. Allies press
forward. Greatest success achieved on left flank. British
airmen drop bombs on Zeppelin airship sheds near Cologne
and Dusseldorf. Battle of Aisne continued. Fierce fighting
along whole line. Russians defeat German army and cap-
ture Soldau, East Prussia, about 68 miles from Thorn.
September 28.—German troops again assume offensive in France,
but everywhere driven back. Russians occupy part of town
of Przemysl.
September 29. —Battle of Aisne continued with unabated fury.
General von Kluck being forced to retire inch by inch. All
attacks beaten back with heavy loss to the enemy. Russians
invade Hungary. Japan attacks Tsing-Tao. Fierce battle
between Belgians and Germans at Termonde. Russia in-
vades Hungary.
September 30. —Violent attacks on Allies’ centre in France suc-
cessfully repulsed. Germans active in Belgium where con-
tinued fighting is taking place. Russians completely isolate
Przemsyl.
October 1. —Peronne and St. Mihiel re-attacked by Allies, and
battle continuing. Fierce fighting between Russians and
Germans in Poland. Cruiser “Emden” reported in Indian
Ocean, capturing British steamers, “Tumeric,” “Kinglud,”
“Riberia” and “Foyle.”
October 2. —Germans delivered vigorous attacks at Tracy-le-
Mont, but repulsed from Rheims to the Meuse. Warships
captured nine German merchant ships. Gun-boat, “Seden,”
captured from Germans. Antwerp garrison sorties and blew
up German outposts.
October 3. —Russians repulsed attacks at Suwalki. British
steamer “Selby” sunk in North Sea by mine. Battle in
France continues.
October 5. —German cruisers “Scharnhorst” and “Gneisenau”
bombed Pappeete, capital of Tahiti, and sunk small French
gun-boat. Official despatches state: “No ground been lost
in France, but some gained.” British progress north of the
Somme. Violent fighting in Roye district, and enemy de-
feated. Austria prepares to remove capital from Vienna to
Prague.
October 6.—Antwerp attacked by Germany. Germans routed at
Augustowo by Russians. Allies resume offensive in France
and all positions well maintained. German Emperor offers
to decorate first German aeronaut dropping explosives on
London.


Map 2 Retreat continued. From Compiegne to new position south of Meaux. September 3rd and 4th
1%


October 7.—Battle at Arras continued. Progress made in Sois-
sons region. Trenches of enemy taken. Further advance
north of Soissons. Battle front extending. Germans at
Lille. Enemy’s attack on Lassigny repulsed. Japanese Blue
Jackets sieze Jaluit, headquarters of Germany in Marshall
Island. In Namaqualand, South Africa, two squadrons of
mounted infantry surrender to Germans after determined re-
sistance. Germany sends large number of big guns to Tur-
key and 1,000 tons of ammunition.
October 9. —Germany reinforced in Belgium. Belgian Govern-
ment removes to Ostend. British submarine sinks a German
destroyer and damages another. Japanese cruisers sink
third-class German cruiser and two gunboats at Kiao-Chao.
Allied action extends almost to Belgian frontier. Germans
vigorously attack Antwerp. British submarine in North Sea
sunk a German destroyer and damaged another. Austrians
lost four torpedo boats and two destroyers by their own
mines.
October 10. —Antwerp bombarded. Action at northerly end of
great battle line in France still developing and enemy’s cav-
alry driven as far north as coast. Russians besieged Prz-
emysl and captured an outpost fortification. King Albert
leaves Antwerp. Antwerp falls, after terrible bombardment,
lasting 40 hours. Belgian army effect retreat, but 2,000 Bri-
tish Naval Brigade forced to cross Dutch frontier. Battle
in north-east of France continues in Allies’ favour. Fierce
cavalry engagement reported near Lille. Allies secure ad-
vantage north of the Oise. Russians drive Germans from
Suwalki and capture Lyck, in East Prussia. China demands
withdrawal of Japanese from Tse-Nan-Fu. King of Rou-
mania dies. (King of Roumania was a staunch sympathiser
with Austria and Germany.)
October 13. —Germans fined Antwerp £20,000,000. Germans
north of Arras driven back 13 miles and lost 12,000 men killed
and wounded.
October 14. —German retreat on right wing. Russian cruiser
torpedoed by German submarine. German extreme right re-
treating. Battle of Aisne ended. Enemy retreated to irre-
gular line farther north.
October 15. —Germans occupy Lille in north-east France. Heavy
fighting continues in Belgium in connection with movement
by Germans towards Ostend. Belgian Government trans-
ferred from Ostend to Havre. Two German submarines
sunk by Russian cruiser in Baltic. Battle commences in
EB


South Poland between Austria and German armies and Rus-
sians. In South Africa Colonel Maritz’ rebels joins Ger-
many. Martial law proclaimed throughout the Union.
October 16.—French troops occupy Ypres. Germany's right
wing try to make dash for Calais but driven back over Bel-
gian frontier. Battle front in Poland extending over 200
miles. Austrians mass great army on Servian frontier.
October 17. —Victory gained by Russians over Germans and Aus-
trians near Warsaw. Russians also defeat Austrians near
Przemysl. Allies still forcing German armies back in France.
Turkey informs Germany that lack of money compels her
to demobilise. British warship sunk Hamburg-American
steamer “Markomannia,” near Sumatra, and captured an-
other steamer operating with the “Emden.” General Botha
takes field against Colonel Maritz. German Government
steamer, “Komet,” captured at New Guinea. German sub-
marine sunk second-class cruiser "Hawke/’ 7>35° tons, in the
North Sea. Cruiser “Undaunted,” and destroyers “Lance,”
“Lennox,” “Legion” and “Loyal,” engaged four German de-
stroyers off Dutch coast and sunk them all. Four million
troops engaged in Polish battle. Germans occupy Ostend,
but Allies’ left wing continues to make progress. Turkey re-
affirms neutrality. Heavy fighting at Ypres, Courkal and
Nieuport.
October 20. —Germans driven back in West Belgium. Rein-
forcements hurry across Belgium to German right. Allies
still making good progress in France.
October 21. —Japanese cruiser sunk by mine in Kiao-Chao Bay.
Russians claim partial success in Galicia. Siege of Przemsyl
continuing. Italian fleet mobilises. Turkey refuses to dis-
charge German sailors from cruisers “Goeben” and “Bres-
lau.” Germany requests the United States Ambassador in
Belgium to induce the United States Government to recog-
nise German Emperor as ruler of Belgium.
October 22. —Portugal reported offers 90,000 men to Allies. Al-
lies’ left wing continues to progress in Belgium. All attacks
on Allies’ front repulsed. Germans re-fortifying Namur and
other Belgium strongholds. Germans driven back in Poland.
Allies expel 5,000 Germans from Bruges.
October 23. —Germans dislodged from forts north and east of
Rheims. Monitors of light draught used against Germans
on Belgian coast. Allies occupy Courtrai.
October 24. —Allies succeed in defeating German troops, both in
France and East Prussia. British submarine E 3 lost. Ger-


mans make desperate efforts to break through without suc-
cess. Russian success reported in Galicia. German subma-
rine rammed and sunk by British destroyer “Badger.” Gen-
eral French reports that Germany requested an armistice to
bury the dead and gather wounded, but refusal was given.
Germans concentrate for attack on Dixmude. Violent fight-
ing continues in France. Allies’ lines unbroken.
October 27. —Two great battles on Franco-Belgian frontier and
in Poland continue. Germans cross the Ypres after terrific
fighting around Dixmude and a violent action is proceeding
in north-west of Belgium. Attempts to turn the Russians’
left south of Przemsyl was a failure. Austrians lost heavily.
Germans evacuate Lodz in Poland.
October 28.—Indian troops reinforce British in France. Colonel
Maritz, in South Africa, defeated and wounded. Allies
maintain their front in Belgium between Nieport and Dix-
mude. Indian troops distinguish themselves in recent fight-
ing on Allies’ left wing. Germans claim that a heavy attack
by French north of Arras broke down. Austrians fighting
in Poland completely turned. Violent night attacks
by Germans on Nieuport-Dixmude frontier repulsed
with severe losses. The Belgians lost 10,000 dead and
wounded in nine days fighting along the Yser. General
Falkenhayn appointed to succeed Count von Moltke as Ger-
man Commander-in-Chief. Prinzip, the Servian student,
who shot Archduke Ferdinand and his wife, found guilty
with others. Sentence postponed.
October 29. —Struggle in Belgium continues fiercely. Allies
make progress between Ypres and Roulers on southern wing.
Germans driven over Alsace-Lorraine frontier at certain
points. Heavy fighting continues in Poland. More rebel-
lion in South Africa. Generals Christian de Wet and Beyers
join rebels.
October 30. —Germany admits defeat of her army in Poland.
October 31. —Turkey declares war with Russia. British battle-
ship bombarded enemy’s positions on Belgian coast. Situa-
tion on Nieuport-Dixmude unchanged, but further south Al-
lies progress at several points. Austro-Germans cross River
Vistula in full retreat. The Turkish warship “Breslau”
bombarded Russian town of Theodosia, on the Black Sea.
General De Wet, in South Africa, proclaimed an Indepen-
dent Republic in Northern Orangia. General Botha reports
that General Beyers’ commandoes are scattered and unlikely
to re-unite. General Beyers fled.


November i.—Admiral Craddock’s Squadron, consisting of crui-
sers “Good Hope,” “Monmouth,” “Glasgow,” and “Otranto,”
got into action with German Squadron, consisting of
“Scharnhorst,” “Gneisenau,” “Nurnberg” and “Liepzig.”
Although the German Squadron was superior in the range of
guns, the British Squadron fought desperately. Early in ac-
tion “Monmouth” and “Good Hope” took fire, but fought on
until nearly dark, when a terrible explosion occurred on
“Good Hope,” which foundered. “Monmouth” hauled off at
dark, making water badly, and unable to steam away. Enemy
then attacked and “Monmouth” sunk. The “Glasgow” and
“Otranto” managed to escape.
November 2. —Lille re-occupied by Allies. British cruiser
“Hermes,” torpedoed and sunk. Turkey’s reply to Entente
regarding action of “Breslau,” and general support of Ger-
many regarded unsatisfactory and Ambassadors demand pass-
ports. All Turkish subjects ordered to leave Russia. Fur-
ther fighting and progress made by Allies in Belgium. Rus-
sia reports victory in East Prussia and continued advance in
Poland.
November 3. —Recent fighting in Belgium reported as being ex-
tremely severe and losses huge on both sides. Allies pro-
gress north and south of Ypres, and German attacks else-
where repulsed. Germans said to be entrenching around
Brussels. Ambassadors at Constaninople receive their pass-
ports. Terrible attack made on Allies’ lines. Great slaugh-
ter of German troops and complete defeat.
November 4. —All German attacks in France fail. Allies’ fleet
enters the Dardanelles and blow up fort. Heavy fighting in
Belgium continues. Russians gain victory in East Prussia
and continue advancing. Allies progress south of Dixmude.
Influx of wounded Germans into Brussels described as ter-
rible.
November 5. —All German attacks fail in France and Belgium,
and Allies gain ground. Retreat of Austrians and Germans
developing into rout, in Poland. Thousands of prisoners be-
ing taken. German squadron fired on British gunboat near
Calais and retreated, sowing mines. The British submarine
D 5 struck mine and blew up. Forts on Cape Helles bom-
barded by Allied fleet. Germany scattered mines along main
trade route from America to Liverpool and peaceful mer-
chant ships have been blown up. The mines were laid by a
merchant vessel flying a neutral flag. German warships ap-
proached Yarmouth flying the White Ensign, when chal-


lenged replied with hailstorm of shells. Germans bombard
Rheims. Servia breaks off all diplomatic relations with Tur-
key. Britain proclaims martial law in Egypt.
November 6.—Germans in Belgium fall back on right bank of
Yser and Allies make progress. Severe fighting reported at
Ypres and Roulers. German cruiser “Yorck” sunk by mine
in Jade Bay, in North Sea. Russians repulsed the Turks and
crosses the frontier into Turkish territory.
November 7. —Violent fighting continues on Franco-Belgian battle
line and further progress reported. Great Britain declares
war on Turkey and annexes Cyprus. All Austrian and Ger-
man residents in Canada interned.
November 9. —Kaiser orders another effort to be made against
Calais. Violent attacks on Allies’ line in Belgium and north-
ern France continue. Russians’ advance in East Prussia and
Poland. Tsing-Tao surrenders. Russians capture Turkish
stronghold commanding road to Erzeroum in Turkish Ar-
menia. German cruiser “Emden” defeated by H.M.A.S.
“Sydney,” and wrecked on Cocos Island. (The “Sydney”
was acting as convoy to transports from Australia when
the message was received that a strange warship was off the
entrance to Keeling Island, and was ordered to investigate.
At 9.20, the “Emden” was sighted, and at 9.40 the fight com-
menced. The guns of the “Sydney” appear to have almost
immediately taken effect, and by 11.40 the order was given
to cease firing. Losses on board the “Sydney” were 4 killed
and 12 wounded, but the “Emden” lost 7 officers and 108
men killed, with a much larger number wounded.) Germans
claim to have defeated the Russian army in South Prussia.
Russians occupy Goldap, in East Prussia, and also Soldau on
south front. All German attacks in Belgium repulsed, but
Allies progress reported slow, owing to strength of enemy’s
prepared defences.
November 10. —Allies resume offensive in Belgium and progress
made at many points and on western front.
November 12. —Russians drive enemy back in East Prussia, and
advance further in the province of Posen. Severe fighting
in Belgium without decisive result. Turks and Russians
have severe engagement on the road to Erzeroum. Germans
offer Russia peace, but it is refused.
November 13. —Earl Roberts died in France. German submarine
sinks British torpedo boat “Niger” close to the Kentish coast.
Fierce fighting continues in Belgium between Nieuport and
Lys. Germans reported to have taken Dixmude. Japanese


Map 3— Commencement of the Battle of the Marne. September 6th


capture a German destroyer, two gunboats and five trans-
ports at Tsing-Tao.
November 14. —Violent fighting continues on Allies’ left wing
along a front through Nieuport, extending south into France
to a point east of Armentierres. Allies make slight progress
around Berry-au-Buc on the Aisne. Russian armies attack-
ing in East Prussia and are within sight of Cracow. General
Botha defeated De Wet’s forces in South Africa.
November 16.—Two German submarines captured in English
Channel and destroyed. German attacks in Belgium re-
pulsed and Allies take offensive, capturing several positions.
Investment of Cracow by Russian armies. Allies re-take
Dixmude. Russians capture Tarnow, in Galicia.
November 17. —Russian advance on Cracow continues. Germans
in Belgium defeated and thrown back across Yser.
November 18. —German attacks in Belgium repulsed and Allies
take offensive, capturing several positions. Investment of
Cracow by Russian armies.
November 19. —German attacks east and south of Ypres repulsed.
Big battle proceeding in Poland. General De Wet wounded.
November 20. —Germans claim victory over Russian armies ad-
vancing towards Thorn. Heavy cannonading on Belgian
frontier. German warships bombard Libau, in Baltic. Rus-
sian Black Sea Fleet bombarded forts and barracks in Trebi-
zond. Earl Roberts buried in St. Paul’s Cathedral, London.
November 21. —Desperate battles in progress in Russian Poland.
British forces at Shat-el-Arab, on Persian Gulf, routed 5,000
Turks.
November 23. —Bad weather in Belgium hampering operations.
Austro-German offensive near Cracow repulsed with heavy
losses. Russian warships bombard Turkish town of Chopa,
in Black Sea, doing considerable damage.
November 24. —Snow and frost reported in Northern France and
Belgium. Fierce fighting south of Ypres. Three crack
Prussian regiments reported annihilated. Russia reported
gaining partial success on Czenstochowa-Cracow frontier.
General De Wet hotly pursued, capture imminent.
November 25. —German submarine rammed and sunk off west of
Scotland. Russian successes continue.
November 26. —Germans on Belgian coast attacked by a naval
squadron acting in conjunction with the land forces. Two
German batteries silenced. British warships bombard Zee-
brugge doing great damage. Germans repulsed in Poland.
Turks defeated near Erzeroum. The “Admiral GauteaumeA


a French merchant ship carrying passengers torpedoed by
German submarine.
November 27. —Germans facing Allies on extreme left in Flanders
retreating towards Bruges. British air raid on Zeppelin
sheds at Friedrichshafen completely successful. H.M.S.
Bulwark” blown up in Sheerness Harbour by explosion in
magazine when loading ammunition.
November 28.—German attacks on Aisne complete failure. Big
battle in progress between Servians and Austrians at Pozar-
cvatz.
December 1. —German levy on Belgium fixed at £15,000,000.
December 2. —German attack on defensive in Belgium. Rus-
sians capture several Austrian positions in the Carpathians.
King George visits France and headquarters of British Army.
Allies capture German trenches at Arras. Great battle rag-
ing between Yser and Lys.
December 3. —Battle of Yser continues with intense violence. Re-
cent battle in Flanders announced as the greatest in history.
Germans alone lost 200,000 men. Germans reported as hav-
ing broken through Russian lines after three days’ fighting
at Lodz. Bombardment of Rheims continues. All the fac-
tories have been destroyed and textile industry ruined. Re-
bels repulsed in South Africa.
December 4.—Boer Rebel, General De Wet, captured at Water-
burg. Position of Allies west of Dixmude violently bom-
barded. Allies captured Aspach in Alsace, and also made
progress in the Argonne. Austrians occupied Belgrade.
December 5. —Fierce fighting reported on Belgian battle line with
lively artillery fire at Nieuport and south of Ypres. Rus-
sians capture town of Bartfeld, in Carpathians. King George
meets King Albert, of Belgium, President Poincare, Earl
Kitchener, General Joifre and Field-Marshal Sir John
French, at Ypres, and reviews troops.
December 7. —Allies in Belgium progress north of River Lys,
gaining 500 metres. Germans retired two kilometres along
Yser. Despite heavy German reinforcements Russians con-
tinue to hold ground in Poland.
December B.—Lodz bombarded by Germans. Allies report slight
progress at certain points in Northern France, and Germans
admit having evacuated Vermelles. Two Swedish steamers
sunk by mine off Finland coast.
December 9. —Heavy artillery firing in Champagne, decimating
German trenches. Germans claim decisive success north-
west and south-west of Lodz.


December io.—Berlin celebrates capture of Lodz. Germans
claim they are pursuing retreating Russians. The brilliant
capture of Vermelles between Lens and Bethune, give French
important positions on Western frontier. Fierce struggle
continues in the Argonne. General Beyers drowned while
crossing Vaal River. French Government returns from
Bordeaux to Paris.
December n.—German cruisers, “Scharnhorst,” “Gneisenau,”
“Leipzig,” “Dresden” and “Nurnberg,” encountered British
Squadron off Falkland Islands, in South Atlantic. The
“Scharnhorst,” “Gneisenau” and “Leipzig” were sunk.
“Dresden” and “Nurnberg” escaped, and are being pursued.
Allied progress on Franco-Belgian frontier. Russians admit
having evacuated Lodz. Rebellion ended in South Africa.
All rebels were captured. Germans cremating their dead
in glass factories, in Belgium.
December 12. —German cruiser “Nurnberg” sunk. German sub-
marines attempted to enter Dover Flarbour, but were re-
pulsed. Germans lose trenches on Franco-Belgian frontier
and Allies’ artillery again proves superior along the Aisne
and in Champagne district. Austrians driven back in Servia
with heavy losses. Australian troops encamped in Egypt.
December 14. —British naval victory off Falkland Islands com-
pleted, the cruiser, “Dresden,” being stranded on Argentine
coast. Italy making heavy purchase of horses and wheat in
United States. French captured Moss and Biesel, in Upper
Alsace.
December 15. —Allies progress in Flanders. German attacks on
Franco-Belgian frontier repulsed with heavy losses. Rus-
sians capture Mlava, in Northern Poland. Desperate at-
tacks by Germans in Lowicz district continue. British sub-
marine Bn entered Dardanelles and sunk Turkish warship
Messoudieh. Russians defeat Turks at Pyrousk.
December 16.—Allies announce progress on Western front. Ser-
vians re-enter Belgrade after desperate battle against Aus-
trians. Fighting recommences in Northern France. Allies
make combined attack from Hollebeke to Wyteschaete, and
captured several trenches and number of prisoners.
December 17. —German warships shelled unfortified towns of
Scarborough, Whitby and Hartlepool. Allies advance 500
metres south of Ypres, and also make progress in Argonne.
Russians advance in North Poland. Austrians admit evacu-
ating Belgrade.


December 18.—British warships bombard Westende, doing great
damage. Berlin beflagged and bells rung in honour of raid
on unfortified British sea-port towns.
December 21. —Rout of Austria-Hungarians in Servia. Losses
put down at 60,000 killed and wounded and 35,000 prisoners.
Russians drive enemy further back. Germany fears Britain
intends landing troops at Zeebrugge. Britain selects Prince
Hussein, the late Khedive’s uncle, as Sultan of Egypt.
December 22. —Allies make further progress in Flanders and
France, and on north-east side of Arras. German lines sus-
tained a heavy blow. Allies bombarded inner forts of the
Dardanelles. Pro-war demonstration in Rome in favour of
Allies.
December 23. —Allies advance towards Roulers-Menin railway,
threatening German communications. Germans evacuate
Middelkerke, in Belgium.
December 25. —Allies’ progress in France and Flanders main-
tained.
December 26.—Enemy’s aeroplanes drop bombs on Dover, but
only small damage results. Fighting continues in Northern
Poland. Austro-Germans reports re-capture of Mlava.
December 28.—British airmen drop bombs on Ostend, Bruges,
and Ghent, and flew over Brussels. Estimated that German
casualties number 2,000,000 since the war began, and Aus-
trian losses 1,500,000. Desperate fighting in Galicia favour-
able to Russia.
December 29. —Seven British hydro-aeroplanes with British light
cruisers, supported by destroyers and submarines, raided
Cuxhaven, near the mouth of the Elbe, dropping numerous
bombs. Damage believed to be great. Austrians driven
back in Galicia. Increasing discontent between German and
Turkish officers reported in Turkey.
December 31. —Austrians reported driven across Carpathians.
French invest Steinbach, in Alsace, after a violent action.
Heavy rainstorms reported in France, flooding trenches.
1915
January i.—Four German aeroplanes drop bombs on Dunkirk.
Allies make marked progress on Western front and also at
Nieuport. Russians victorious in Western Galicia, and Aus-
trians dislodged from strong position in Carpathians, and
put to flight. Bouganville, the largest of the Solomon Is-
lands occupied by the Australian troops.


January 2. —Russian offensive in Galicia continues successful.
Heavy fighting near Lombaszdye, on western frontier. Ger-
mans at Westende caught between two fires and suffered
great losses. French capture trenches on the Menil-les-
Hurlers frontier.
January 4. —H.M.S. “Formidable/” 15,000 tons, sunk in the Eng-
lish Channel, nearly 600 men lost. Russians near Plock
preparing to cross the Vistula, threatening German line of
communication. Austrian retreat from Bukovina developing
into rout. Turkish troops, under Enver Pasha, defeated by
Russians. Artillery duels continue on western front. Heavy
rains in France and Belgium interfere with operations. Aus-
trian retreat continues.
January 6. —Enemy captures Steinbach, in Alsace, after a sensa-
tional struggle. Entire battalion, of Austrians captured at
the Uszok Pass. Russians continue to advance. London
Stock Exchange re-opened. Russians capture 9th Turkish
Army Corps at Sary Karmish. Russians continue harrying
retreat of Austrians. Allies continued progress on western
front, also in Alsace between Thann and Cernay. Bad weather
continues. Pope’s proposition for belligerents to exchange
disabled prisoners agreed to.
January B.—Earl Kitchener stated in House of Lords that, de-
spite unfair weather, noteworthy progress has been made
near Rheims and in Alsace. Russians report success in
Mlava district, Northern Poland. Cardinal Mercier arrested
in Brussels by Germany.
January 9. —Violent German attacks on western frontier repulsed.
Reported concentration of 60,000 Germans at Sarajevo
against Servia. Five forts in the Dardanelles silenced by
fleet. French aviators dropped bombs on Gercourt, Don-
drieu, Rampoel and St. Hilaire.
January 11. —Allies capture Perthes-les-Hurlers and advance 500
metres. Soupir and three lines of German trenches cap-
tured by British. Russian troops reached mountain range
dividing Bukovina from Hungary. Fierce fighting takes
place in Poland on left bank of Vistula.
January 12. —German armies still attempt to reach Calais, but all
attacks repulsed. Fierce fighting near Cernay, in Alsace.
Soissons bombarded by Germans and cathedral damaged be-
yond repair. Thaw set in in Poland.
January 13. —Germans take vigorous offensive near Warsaw, but
are repulsed. Turkish expedition against Egypt fails. Gen-
eral von Kluck admits that in Belgium he gave orders to


Map 4 —First advance towards the line of the Grand Morin


destroy and burn entire towns. Violent artillery firing from
the sea to the Oise, and very lively fighting around Soissons,
from which Germans were recently driven. German attacks
on Consevoye and Leboughot Woods, on the Meuse, repulsed.
Snow storms continue in Vosges and in Alsace.
January 14. —Enemy concentrate large forces east of Verdun, and
120,000 Germans massed at Metz. Violent fighting continues
around Soissons, which German troops tried to re-capture.
Massacre of Armenians reported. Turks occupy Tabriz in
North-West Persia.
January 15. —German submarines attack Dover, but were driven
off. Aircraft which accompanied them flew away. Severe
fighting, with artillery duels, continues at Soissons. Russia
reports progress south-east of Mlava. Rout of Turks’ rear-
guard at Oltz, west-north-west of Sarykamish. Terrific
earthquake in Italy with great loss of life.
January 16.—German attack north of Soissons checked, but a
partial German success in that region admitted. Germans
begin heavy bombardment of Russian frontier and Poland.
British capture important strategic point at La Bassee.
January 18.—Fighting continues at Soissons. Enemy’s forces
driven across the Aisne with heavy losses. Germans at-
tempt to cross south bank, but checked. Much damage to
Soissons by German shells. At other points on western
frontier Allies gain ground. Frost impedes operations in
the Carpathians. French troops occupy Saelin, 5 miles south
of Lille.
January 19. —Allies make further progress on Belgian coast, near
Nieuport. Russians storm a pass in the Carpathians.
Battle of Karaugan ended in complete Russian victory,
Turkish rear-guard being annihilated. Turkish army or-
dered to invade Egypt.
January 20. —Allies make progress at Bois-le-Pretre, near Lor-
raine frontier. Russians holding enemy in Poland and Ga-
licia, with further success over the Turks in the Caucasus.
January 21. —Zeppelin raid on unfortified English towns. Bombs
dropped on Yarmouth, Sandringham and other places in
Norfolk. French capture trenches at Boise-le-Pretre. Dutch
motor-war-sloop blown up by mine in the Scheldt.
January 22. —Fresh concentrations against Servia by combined
Austrian and German forces said to number 400,00, well
provided with ammunition and artillery. Severe German at-
tacks cm west frontier fail, while Allies gain ground south-
east of Verdun.


January 23. —Al) German attacks to break Allies’ line towards
Calais are repulsed. Russians’ continued progress in Buko-
vina.
January 25. —Dutch fishermen report that they saw a Zeppelin
founder at sea. Allied airmen drop bombs at Bruges and
Zeebrugge. Allies report progress on Belgian coast near
Nieuport. Heavy fighting in the Argonne and Alsace.
H.M.A.S. “Australia” sinks an enemy supply ship.
January 26.—Great naval action in North Sea. German Squad-
ron attempts another raid on English towns, but is surprised
by British Squadron. German cruisers, “Blucher,” 15,55°
tons, and “Kolberg,” 4,281 tons, sunk while two battleship
cruisers, the “Derfflinger” and “Seydlitz,” were set on fire,
and damaged beyond repair. The enemy ran away directly
the British cruisers were in sight, and attempted to escape
without fighting. A running fight ensued, and the German
cruisers were only saved by entering a mined area near
Kiel.
January 27. —Allies make progress east of Nieuport. British
armed merchant ship, “Viknor,” wrecked off the coast of
Ireland. Austrian cruiser sunk by mine near Trieste.
January 28. —Russian submarines in Baltic torpedo German crui-
ser. Zeppelin shot down at Libau, on Baltic. Vigorous
German attacks near La Bassee drive British back, but all
ground re-taken later. Allies also regain lost ground west
of Craonne and Argonne.
January 29. —Outpost skirmishes on east side of Suez Canal.
Fighting at La Bassee in favour of Allies. Russians again
offensive in East Prussia. Germans driven back 12 miles in
direction of Tilsit.
January 30. —Austro-German forces attempt to relieve Przemsyl.
Germans make special efforts in Northern France to cele-
brate Kaisers’ birthday, but all attacks repulsed. Battle west
of La Bassee reported as biggest in which the British engaged
for some time. Both sides lost heavily, but British not only
re-established former positions, but won fresh ground. New
form of greeting announced in Germany. “Gott Strafe Eng-
land.” (God punish English.).
February 1. —Turkish attack near Suez Canal repulsed, but out-
posts approach within 10 miles. Russians advance in East
Prussia, north-east of Gumbinnen, and destroy railway sta-
tion, north of Tilsit. Fighting in Northern Persia resulted
in Russians driving back Turkish forces. French trenches
put back 200 metres in Argonne, after a stubborn fight. Re-


ported success of French near the frontier, east of St. Mihiel,
at Bois-le-Pretre. British progress north of Nieuport. Ger-
man submarine sunk three steamers in Irish Sea. Carefully-
worded articles appear in several German papers on subject
of peace.
February 2. —German submarine off Havre torpedoed and sunk
the Tokomaru from New Zealand. French denounce sink-
ing of merchant vessels without notice as a breach of Inter-
national Law. German activity at La Bassee continues.
Enemy heavily shelled British positions. British recapture
all trenches temporarily lost at La Bassee.
February 3. —French continue steady progress in Alsace. Ger-
mans evacuate Cernay west of La Bassee, and in Argonne,
German attacks repulsed. Russians report decisive success
over Turkish troops, who escaped from Sarykamish and
Karaugan. German press considers England’s food supply
threatened by activity of hostile submarines.
February 4. —Turkish advance guard in Egypt reached an oasis
about 70 miles from Suez. German efforts in Poland west-
south-west of Warsaw resulted in heavy losses. German
Admiralty announces its intention to prevent shipments of
troops and material from Britain to the Continent, and warns
peaceful ships against approaching north and west coast of
France. Russian submarine reported having sunk a Ger-
man gunboat in Baltic. British capture trenches at Givinchy,
near La Bassee.
February 5. —Turkish attacks on Suez repulsed at Kantara and
Tousoun. Heavy losses inflicted by Russians on enemy in
Carpathians. Germans make violent efforts to recover Lom-
baertzyde. Cabrinovic, Janovic, and Illic, the accomplices
of Prinzip, who assassinated the Archduke Ferdinand and
his Duchess have been executed by the Austrians at Sara-
jevo. Allies’ artillery repulsed strong attack at Notre-Dame-
de-Lorette and destroyed several block houses in the Albert
region.
February 6.—German Admiralty announces its intention of de-
stroying British merchantmen in waters around England
and Ireland, and in English Channel. Australians and New
Zealanders under fire during Turkish attack on Suez Canal,
and their conduct has been well spoken of. Austrians ad-
mit evacuation of Tarnow, in Galicia. Owing to Russian
bombardment Germans evacuated Angola, in Portuguese
South-West Africa.


.February B.—Supreme efforts made by Germans on the Rawka,
in Poland. Enemy driven across river. Reported they at-
tempted to advance 16 deep in an overwhelming attack
against the Russians. They were christened “Divisions of
Death.” The losses were reported as “frightful, unceasing
slaughter.” Servians announce that 400,000 Austro-Ger-
mans are massing for a third invasion of the country. If
successful they will march on to the Aegean and junction
with the Turks.
February 9. —Conflict in Poland along the Vistula and Rawka
described as titanic. Soldiers fell in thousands and bodies
were piled three feet high. Russians shatter the enemy’s
resistance at three fortified positions in the Carpathians.
172 officers and 10,000 men, 13 guns and 22 machine guns
were captured. Franco-Belgians force a passage west of
the great dune at Lombaertzyde and sent a damaging fire
against the enemy’s extreme right at Westende. General
De Wet ordered to be tried for treason.
February 10. —Casualties in the British Expeditionary Force up
to February 4th total 104,000. Russians state fighting be-
comes more desperate at Serpica, 18 miles west-north-west of
Plock. Neutral nations are exchanging pourparlers con-
cerning Germany’s blockade threat.
February 11. —Indications that Bulgaria has entered into a finan-
cial arrangement with Germany. Field Mashal von Hind-
enberg’s massed attacks along the river Bzura, in Poland,
resulted in appalling carnage. 11,000 Austrians were killed
at Gumine in two days. Zeppelin falls in North Sea and
lost, crew drowned.
February 12. —Austrians make terrific onslaught against Russian
line in the Carpathians. Thousands fell, but Russian trenches
were captured. Russians captured 23 officers and 1,500 men
in Duka, Zupkow and Uszok Passes. House of Commons
passed vote providing for 3,000,000 men. British forces cap-
ture another brickfield at La Bassee.
February 13. —Big attack by Germans in East Poland in direc-
tion of Wilkowiszk and Lyck. Russian troops falling back
from Mazurin Lakes. Bulgaria again declares she will
maintain strict neutrality.
February 15. —Thirty-four British aeroplanes and seaplanes at-
tack Bruges, Zeebrugge and Ostend, doing great damage.
Enemy’s attack’s in Poland, near Lyck, repulsed. Italian
Minister for Marines ordered formation of a squadron of
five Dreadnoughts. Leader of Russian Liberals states that


Allies have agreed that at the end of the war Russia shall
hold Constantinople. Night fighting reported in Egypt, near
Canal. Enemy repulsed. German Emperor orders another
effort to take Warsaw.
February 16. —Three Russian attacks in Bukovina shattered Aus-
tro-German lines in three places. Belgium endeavours to
raise an army of 200,000. Turks lost 4,000 in killed and
wounded near Suez Canal.
February 18. —Forty British aeroplanes dropped bombs on heavy
batteries at Ostend, and on guns posted at Middelkerke.
Cotton and jute mills in Germany closed owing to lack of
material. Trial of General E)e Wet begins in South Africa,
February 19. —Allies’ artillery destroys many bivouacs and am-
munition convoys between the sea and the Oise, and in-
flicted heavv losses on enemy north of Arras and near
Perthes. Belgian Commission declares that nearly 2,000
men, women and children were massacred in Province of
Namur. British collier and a French steamer sunk by Ger-
man submarines.
February 20. —Germany decides to continue blockade of England
by its submarine activity. Russians beat off all German
forces in Bukovina district. Austrian Embassy in Rome at-
tacked by Italian mob, but troops dispersed people.
February 22. —Several vessels torpedoed by German submarines
as result of the new naval warfare Germany has decided
on. Danish and Swedish crews of vessels refuse to sail for
English ports. Combined'attack by British and French made
in Dardanelles. Forts extensively damaged. Scarcity of
food announced in Germany.
February 23.—United States steamer “Evelyn,” laden with cot-
ton, mined and sunk off Borkum Island, north-west coast of
Prussia. United States Secretary calls for details. Armed
merchantman, Kron-Prinz-W ilhelm, sunk three steamers in
Atlantic. Three bombs dropped by German aeroplanes on
Braintree, in Essex. Marked progress in Northern France
announced.
February 24. —Zeppelin appears above Calais and drops bombs.
Five people killed. Turks retreating from Suez towards Da-
mascus. Afore pro-war demonstrations in Italy. Crowd on
the Piazza, in Venice, burn Austrian flag. British blow up
trench at Givenchy. Rheims shelled.
February 25. —Russians capture many prisoners in Carpathians.
Norwegian steamer, “Regin,” blown up and sunk at Dover.
1,500 shells fired at Rheims. Allies decide to pool their re-
sources.


Map s —September B th. Battle of the Marne, where important captures were made by the British.


February 26.—German submarine torpedoed three British
steamers. United States steamer “Carib” struck mine and
sunk. Heavy fighting continues at Ypres. At Comines Ca-
nal trenches were found heaped with German dead. Bread
riots reported in German cities. More British vessels re-
ported torpedoed.
February 27. —German officers declare another great effort is to
be made for Calais. Fierce fighting proceeding in Carpa-
thians, also in East Galicia. Austrian troops everywhere de-
feated. Bombardment of Dardanelles resumed. All forts
at entrance being reduced. Great progress by Allies in the
Champagne district.
March 1. —Dardanelles Straits swept for four miles by Allied
'warships, including Queen Elizabeth, and after reduction of
outer forts enemy was shelled from inside Straits. Par-
ties subsequently landed and forts demolished. Britain de-
clares blockade of coast of German East Africa. Fighting
on a tremendous scale taking place between the Russians and
Germans. Russians claim great victory at Prasnyz, near
Polish frontier. In a fight on the Ypres-Menin road, which
lasted three days, Germans had 4 00 killed and 600 wounded,
while French losses were 50 killed and 80 wounded. Mr.
Lloyd George announced that Britain will shortly have
million men assembled. Further riotous scenes in Italy in
connection with the war. French cruisers captured steamer
“Dacia,” bound from United States for Germany with cot-
ton.
March 2. —Allied fleet resumes bombardment of Dardanelles forts.
Germans in full retreat west of Narew. A feature of the
fighting in Northern Poland was a motor-car battle, in which
70 cars took part. Russians assume offensive north of
Grodno. Germans admit defeat at Prasnyz. In Vienna
150 bakers shops out of 700 are closed, owing to inability to
obtain flour. King George returns to London, after visiting
the Grand Fleet. Germans again bombard Rheims, 30 shells
striking the cathedral and inflicting great damage. Refer-
ring to Clyde strike of engineers, Mr. Lloyd George said:
“Time is victory. It is intolerable that the lives of British
soldiers should be imperilled for the sake of a farthing an
hour.” Berlin municipal taxes increased by 125 per cent.
March 3. —Mr. Asquith informed the House of Commons that
the entire expenditure on the army per day was £1,500,000.
Also stated that “Allies would never sheath the sword until
Belgium is safe and Prussian Militarism is wholly destroyed.”


Two German army corps thrown back in Poland. Austrians
suffer enormous losses in the Carpathians. French Artillery
inflict immense destruction at Souain-Perthes-Beausejour
front, in Northern France.
March 4. —Engineers on Clyde resume work. A Zeppelin, while
flying over Cologne destroyed by storm. Sir John French
states: “Enemy’s activity in Ypres region checked. A furi-
ous battle in Carpathians resulted in defeat of Austrians.
Russian troops reported within 20 miles of Czernowitz. Al-
lies resume bombardment of Dardanelles forts.
March 5. —First detachment of Military Expeditionary Forces to
operate on land arrived off the Dardanelles. Turkish army
of 100,000 is stationed on the Isthmus of Gallipoli under Es-
sad Pasha. Allies make progress in the Champagne district.
Five Austrian warships bombard port and town of Antivari
doing considerable damage.
March 6. —Russian progress in Northern Poland continues.
Kerjek, 21 miles north-east of Prasnysz, being captured. In
East Galicia Russians reported capture of over 3,000 pri-
soners. On western front enemy captured a trench at Notre
Dame de Lorette. Allies’ artillery demolished German
trenches on the sand dunes in Belgium. Bombardment of
Dardanelles continues. Destroyer sunk German submarine
UB, and took prisoners officers and crew.
March 8. —Austrians evacuate Czernowitz, the capital of Buko-
vina. Russians offensive in East Galicia continues. Ger-
man casualties in Northern Poland estimated at 250,000.
French estimate puts total losses of Germany at 3,000,000
since the beginning of the war. Allies more than regain
lost ground at Notre Dame de Lorette. Allies bombard de-
fences of Smyrna. Bombardment of Dardanelles continued.
Austro-Hungarian army in Bukovina in full retreat.
March 9. —Great battle developing near Pilica, in Poland. Ger-
man reinforcements arrive at western frontier, and Germans
boast that they will reach Calais this time. Alarm in Con-
stantinople increasing, owing to the bombardment of the
Dardanelles. Greek Ministry resigns, owing to King dis-
agreeing with policy of intervention in favour of Allies.
March 10. —Russian offensive in Suwalki district develops. Ger-
mans within 12 miles of East Prussian frontier. Allied op-
erations against Dardanelles defences continues and three
forts reported on fire. Austrians massing in force on Mon-
tenegrin frontier. Snow storms interfere with operations in
Champagne district. Allies claim progress at certain points


in Northern France, but admit loss of some ground west of
Perthes-les-Hurlers. Crisis in Sofia (Bulgaria) Ministry
overthrown, because of action urged against Turkey and
the occupation of Adrianople.
March n. —Three British steamers torpedoed without warning in
English coastal waters. Desperate fighting reported in Po-
land on all fronts. Austrians continue offensive, notwith-
standing crushing losses. Allies gain more ground on west-
ern front. Destroyer “Ariel” rammed and sunk German
submarine U2O. Fleet bombards Rumili, in Dardanelles.
March 12. —British score important success in North-East France,
eastward of road from Estaires to La Bassee. Supported by
French artillery they captured village of Neuve Chapelle and
took 1,000 prisoners. Enemy violently bombard Nieuport.
Artillery engagements proceed in North Poland. Austrians
driven back in Carpathians. Fog checked Allies’ operations
in Dardanelles.
March 13. —Great victory by Allies reported in Alsace. French
capture Reichackerohf Hills. Rioting reported in Constan-
tinople. Turkish artillery weakening daily and two big
cruisers passed the night in Dardanelles for first time. Bri-
tish and Indian troops advance three-quarters of a mile on
front of 4,000 yards, driving Germans victoriously before
them.
March 15. —British auxiliary cruiser “Bayano” torpedoed in Irish
Sea—l 94 men reported missing. Further British gains re-
ported near Neuve Chapelle, while the French made pro-
gress in Champagne and Alsace. Sir John French states
that Neuve Chapelle victory has materially altered position
at Armentieres and La Bassee. Belgian progress in Flanders
near the Yser. Germans concentrating towards Ypres and
La Bassee and open strong attack south of Dixmude. Allies
bombardment of Dardanelles continues. A Zeppelin brought
down in Belgium. 20 of crew killed.
March 16. —Allies firmly established newly-won ground in Cham-
pagne. After desperate fighting, lasting seven days, French
captured plateau and half the villages of Vanquois, 23 miles
west-north-west of Verdun. British repulsed heavy German
counter-attacks. Fighting at Reichackeroff reported as be-
ing the most sanguinary in Alsace. Russians report success
in Galicia. Violent duel in progress between Allied cruisers
and Dardanelles forts.
March 17. —German cruiser “Dresden” sunk off Juan Fernandez
by cruisers “Glasgow,” “Kent” and armed merchantman


“Orama.” Germans reported lost 5,000 killed and 13,000
wounded at battle at Neuve Chapelle. French capture re-
mainder of village of Vanquois. Germans capture St. Eloi,
south of Ypres, but all ground was re-taken.
March 18. —President Wilson stated that a vigorous protest is
to be made by the United States against the British embargo
on German trade. Further progress reported on western
front and German attacks at certain points repulsed. Bel-
gians cross Yser between Dixmude and St. Georges. British
cruiser risked the mines and went up the narrow portion of
the Dardanelles. She was damaged by shells. Ministerial
crisis in Bulgaria. Strict neutrality decided on.
March 19. —Allies captured important points north of Mesnil-les-
Hurlus in the Champagne. Belgians also made further pro-
gress and repulsed counter-attacks. Germans bombard
Nieuport with heavy siege guns. German submarine sunk
two British vessels. Allied operations in Dardanelles con-
fined to mine-sweeping.
March 20. —Zeppelin drops bombs on Calais, seven men killed.
German aeroplane dropped 11 bombs at Poperinghe, in
Flanders, a woman and three children killed. British
steamer, “Glenartney,” torpedoed in English Channel.
French report marked gains in the Champagne, north-east
of Mesnil, and in Alsace. Belgians also make progress.
March 22. —H.M.S. “Irresistible,” “Ocean” and the French battle-
ship, “Bouvet,” sunk by mines in the Dardanelles. “Inflex-
ible” and “Gaulois” damaged and put out of action, while
other vessels were hit several times by shells. Turkish forts
on both sides of entrance to Narrows were bombarded.
When night fell Fort Chanak was in flames. Further pro-
gress made in Western France.
March 23. —Russians claim important success in Carpathians,
taking 2,400 prisoners. French lost Great and Little Reich-
ackerohf, in Alsace, but re-took the former, and are fighting
to re-take latter. Paris raided by Zeppelins. A Zeppelin,
returning from Paris, was destroyed at Liege. Przemsyl
falls. Twenty submarines added to Italian Fleet, and 300
aeroplanes and 20 dirigibles.
March 24. —Germans drive Russians out of Memel. Germany
suffers two severe reverses near Bagatelle, in the Argonne.
March 25. —Nine Generals and 117,000 men captured by Rus-
sians when Przemysl fell, also 700 big guns and a large
amount of booty. Austrians claim success in the Carpa-
thians. Allies wrecked six forts in Dardanelles, but forts


at Chanak-Hamidieh and Kilid Bahr still able to resist.
Forces of 1,000 Turks discovered near Suez and were at-
tacked and routed.
March 26. —Great battle in Carpathians still proceeding. Ger-
man battle ship in Baltic fired on coast north of Menel.
British aeronauts drop bombs on submarines near Antwerp.
March 27. —French officially reported to have 2,500,000 men at
the front. Another German submarine reported sunk. Bad
weather in Dardanelles enabling Turks to repair their forts.
General Joffre declares that Germany has lost 1,000,000 of
her best soldiers and most of the German officers. Russians
continue advancing in Carpathians and have penetrated into
Hungary. Steamer “Delmira” torpedoed by German sub-
marine, but the submarine was subsequently run down by
steamer “Lizzie” and sunk. Bombardment of Dardanelles
resumed. Italy on verge of war. Rev. Doctor Edward
Lyttelton, head master of Eton College, preaches sermon:
“Don’t Humiliate Germany,” and is greatly censured by
press.
March 30. —Russians capture line of heights in Carpathians. Bri-
tish steamer “Brussels” rammed German submarine off the
Maas lighthouse.
March 31. —Steamer “Falaba” torpedoed by German submarine
without notice, and 100 lives lost. Steamer “Aquilas” sunk
by submarine U2B, and 26 missing. Germans fire on crew
while launching their boat. Russians bombard Bosphorous.
April 1. —Russians still progress in Carpathians. Strong German
forces invade Russia from Bukovina. French compel Ger-
mans to evacuate position north-east of St. Mihiel. Fierce
fighting in xA.rgonne. Operations in Dardanelles confined to
mine-sweeping. German submarine U2B torpedoed another
British steamer. French light cruiser chased German sub-
marine and sunk her. British casualties on western front
stated to be 20,000. British steamers “Crown of Castle”
and “Flaminian” torpedoed by U2B.
April 3. —Russians report important success on Niemen front.
Austrian battalion which invaded Russia from Bukovina
partially exterminated. British warships bombard Zee-
brugge. French and British steamers torpedoed without
warning off Beachy Head. United States demands indemn-
ity from Germany for sinking of the “William Frye” by a
merchant cruiser. Allied airmen bombard and damage rail-
way between Ghent and Dixmude.


Map 7 September 10 th. Bnd of Battle of the Marne. The Germans were driven over the Ourcq, and retreated to the Aisne.


April 5. —Band of Bulgarian Irregulars cross Servian frontier
and engage Servian troops. Russian offensive in North-East
Poland favourable. Russians also progress in Carpathians.
More British and French steamers sunk by German subma-
rines.
April 6.—French gain position within four miles of German lines
of communication between Metz and St. Mihiel. Fighting
in North Eastern Poland in favour of Russians. Turkish
cruiser “Medjidieh” sunk by mine in Black Sea. Russian
barque and British steamer sunk by German submarine.
April 7. —French make progress towards German line. Fierce
fighting between Russians and Austro-Germans in Carpa-
thians.
April B.—Russians report capture of large number of prisoners
and guns in Carpathians On Western front French make
great progress east of Verdun. Bulgarian Government at-
tribute recent attack on Servia to Turkish refugees. Insur-
rection said to be increasing. British steamer “Northlands”
torpedoed. British trawler “Acanthe,” laden with fish, sunk
by gunfire from German submarine UlO in North Sea, and
crew killed.
April 9. —French make important advance at Les Eperges, in
Woevre district. Allies take offensive in Flanders. Heavy
artillery duels taking place. Germans losing heavily. Rus-
sians pouring into Hungary through the Rostok Pass. Bel-
gians completely expelled Germans from western side of the
Yser.
April 10. —French inflict heavy losses on Germans in Woevre
district and hold captured positions despite strong counter-
attacks. Germans in Argonne pumped blazing liquid into
French trenches. Russian success continues in Hungary.
Steamer “Theseus” chased by German submarine, but es-
caped.
April 12. —Further advances at Les Eparges and on the plateau
of the Woevre made by Allies. Germans again cross Yser
at Driegrachten, capturing Belgian trench. Russians cap-
ture two lines of trenches in North East Poland. Offensive
in Carpathians continued. Belgian Relief Committee’s
steamer “Harpalyse” torpedoed by German submarine, and
26 lives lost. Exodus of Germans from Italy continue.
April 13. —Reports of naval action in North Sea. Russians ad-
vance in Carpathians, repulsing all Austrian attacks with
enormous losses. Allies on Western front capture trenches


in the Argonne and Woevre districts. Germans re-take
Hartmann’s Weilerkopf, in Alsace. More pro-war demon-
strations take place in Italy.
April 14. —Violent battle developing in the Uszok Pass. Rus-
sians advance on 80 miles front. Germans attempt to re-
take Beausejour (Champagne) repulsed with heavy losses.
April 15. —Enemy has 1,250,000 troops opposing the Russians in
the Carpathians. German attacks in North East Poland re-
pulsed. French destroyers steamed a record distance up
Dardanelles and escaped being hit. H.M.S. “Triumph” put
a Turkish battleship out of action.
April 16.—Zeppelins raid Northumberland coast, dropping bombs
on several places. No lives lost. Turks threaten separate
peace unless Germany sends army to invade Servia.
April 17. —Zeppelin raid on England. Bombs were dropped on
coastal towns in Suffolk and Essex. On Western frontier
French report brilliant gain at Notre Dame de Lorette. Bri-
tish steamer “Ptarmigan” torpedoed by German submarine,,
eight lives lost.
April 19. —Desperate fighting in Carpathians in favour of Rus-
sians. On Western front further progress in Alsace, but
Germans claim to have stormed a group of fortifications in
Champagne district. Turkish torpedo boat destroyed by
British warship. Greek steamer torpedoed by Germans in
North Sea. Dutch steamer “Katwijk” torpedoed by Ger-
man submarine and Dutch people extremely excited and
bitter.
April 20. —British submarine El 5 ran aground in Dardanelles.
Turks rescued and made prisoners 24 of the crew. British
blew up a German position south-east of Ypres. In Carpa-
thians Russians, during 18 days’ fighting, took 70,000 pri-
soners. A French dirigible dropped bombs on Strasburg.
Italy prepares to enter war.
April 21. —British gain an important success in Flanders, captur-
ing enemy’s position near Ypres. Further south French have
repulsed attacks on Woevre. British trawler torpedoed and
sunk in North Sea. Admiralty states that killing of fisher-
men for no military purpose will not escape attention. Italy
makes demand on Austria and requests immediate reply.
British warships bombard trenches at Middelkerke and Qs-
tend. Italy calls up her 1891 class. Two Turkish de-
stroyers blown up.
April 22. —Desperate struggle still in progress in Carpathians.
Pathan tribesmen attack British posts in Khiber Pass, but


are repulsed. Enemy’s aeroplanes damage Lille. Explosion
occurs at Woolwich Arsenal. Three persons injured.
April 23. —Violent attacks by Germans at “Hill 60,” near Ypres.
Germans repulsed and lost heavily. General Sir lan Ham-
ilton appointed Commander-in-Chief of Dardanelles Expedi-
tionary Force.
April 24. —British land troops at Enos, in Gulf of Saros. French
report further gain east of St. Mihiel. All German attacks
in Flanders repulsed by British. Enemy bombard Ypres.
Austrian night attacks at Telepoich, in Carpathians, re-
pulsed. German submarine torpedoed another trawler in
North Sea.
April 25. —Expeditionary Forces effect triumphant landing at
Dardanelles at Gaba Tepe. Despite enemy’s armed en-
trenchments and a large Turkish army occupying all posi-
tions of advantage the soldiers landed and gallantly charged
the enemy. By night fall they had entrenched themselves in
an impregnable position along the coast.
April 26. —Germans make determined efforts to break through
in the neighbourhood of Ypres. French driven back in the
Ypres bv enemy using asphyxiating gases, but recover part
of lost ground. British troops heavily engaged. Use of
gas causes retirement of the Allied troops and terrible loss
to the Canadians and British, but later the ground was re-
taken, together with many of the guns, and the lines made
impregnable. The main assault took place between Ypres
and Dixmude, the town of Calais being the objective. In
the counter-attacks the German troops lost heavily.
April 27. —All British positions held despite desperate German
attacks on Yser front with renewed use of gas. Canadians
played leading part in driving enemy back across Yser.
H.M.S. “Triumph” bombarded trenches at western end of
Gallipoli Peninsula. Bombardment of Dardanelles vigor-
ously resumed, the forts replying.
April 28.—Germans capture St. Julian, using gas, and violent re-
sistance bv Canadians. Allies make marked progress north
of Ypres. Further landing of troops at Gallipoli combining
a general attack on the Dardanelles’ forts on both sides of
the Straits. Allies make great progress at Ypres. Enemy
driven out of Lizerne.
April 30. —Forces on Gallipoli Peninsula steadily advancing.
French cruiser “Leon Gambetta” sunk by Austrian submarine
in Adriatic, only 136 saved out of 728. Germans display
intense activity in North-Eastern Poland.


May i.—Dardanelles bombarded. Allies regain two-thirds of
ground lost in German onslaught near Ypres when gases
were used. Zeppelin drops bombs on Harwich and Bury
St. Edmonds.
May 3. —Allies capture the entire end of Gallipoli Peninsula.
Trains with heavy Austrian artillery arrive on Italian fron-
tier. Dunkirk shelled by enemy long-distance guns, sta-
tioned as far away as Nieuport. British airmen drop 14
bombs on German guns bombarding Dunkirk.
May 4. —British destroyer “Recruit” sunk by German subma-
rine in North Sea. Four destroyers encountered two Ger-
man torpedo boats, which they chased and sunk. United
States steamer “Gulflight” torpedoed by German submarine.
French bombard German defences on south side of Metz.
Two trawlers sunk in North Sea, and both crews drowned.
German aeroplane arrived over Dover, but was driven off.
May 5. —Germans claim important success in West Galicia.
Germans prepare another great effort for Calais. British
make satisfactory progress west of Lille. German submarine
sunk three more trawlers, two Swedish vessels and three
Norwegians. America demands explanation of sinking of
the “Gulflight.” Allies’ fleet continues bombardment of
Dardanelles.
May 6. —Vigorous Turkish attacks against Allies in Gallipoli
Peninsula repulsed with enormous losses. Riga is menaced
by German army. Use of poisonous gases continues. Ja-
pan sends Ultimatum to China. Stubborn fighting reported
in Galicia and Carpathians, where Germans brought up strong
reinforcements. Germans make another attack on “Hill 60,”
near Ypres, still using gases.
May 7. —The “Lusitania,” the mammoth Cunard liner, 30,396
tons, torpedoed by German submarine off Irish coast. i,399
passengers and crew perished. Vessel was struck by two
torpedoes.
May B.—Austro-Germans claim great victory over Russians in
Western Galicia and Carpathians. Russians stated to be in
full retreat, after losing 50,000 prisoners. Allies regain
ground on Western front at “Hill 60” and Boys d’ Ailly.
May 10. —Germany announces capture of Libau, on Baltic. Ger-
man destroyer struck mine off Libau and sunk. Germans
continue to claim great victory over Russians, who are stated
to be in full retreat. French make appreciable progress in
Alsace. British destroyer “Maori” sunk by mine off coast of
Belgium. Japan and China amicably settled their difficulty.


May ii.—Allies capture several heights dominating Kilid Bahr,
in the Dardanelles. Italy mobilises first line of troops. Al-
lies report considerable progress near La Bassee. Use of
gases enables enemy to capture ground at “Hill 60.” Ger-
mans claim success near Ypres. Russians reported to be re-
ti eating owing to lack of ammunition.
May 12. —Allies on Western front make great efforts against
Germans in La Bassee region. Heavy artillery duels pro-
ceed. Allied forces press on. Desperate fighting in West-
ern Galicia. Austro-Germans cross the Wisloka. Fighting
on the Gallipoli Peninsula continues far inland from Gaba
Tepe. Allies’ warships bombard forts in Narrows and Mai-
dos burning.
Maj f 13. —Desperate fighting in North-Eastern France and
Flanders. North of Arras French report material gain..
German attacks all repulsed. Russians still falling back in
Galicia. Germany’s Note to United States justifies subma-
rine warfare on the ground that Britain is threatening to.
starve civilians in Germany. AE2 submarine reported sunk
at entrance to Sea of Marmora and crew taken prisoners..
All Turkish attacks repulsed, and Allied forces gain several
lines of trenches near Krithia.
May 14. —Fighting continues north of Arras with extreme viol-
ence. French make brilliant advance, gaining two or three
miles. British also make great attacks on German lines, and
advance near Ypres. On Gallipoli Peninsula Allies converg-
ing from Saros, Seddul Bahr and Gaba Tepe. Dardanelles
forts heavily bombarded. United States forwards Note to
Germany demanding a guarantee against repetition of such
acts as the torpedoing of the “Lusitania.”
May 15. —Reported that British attacks against La Bassee and
towards Lille failed for want of munitions. Fighting con-
tinues north of Arras, where French make great advance,,
capturing Bois-le-Pretre, east-north-east of St. Mihiel. Aus-
tro-Germans reported within 17 miles of Przemysl. British-
in complete possession of German South-West Africa. Ita-
lian Government resolved on war. British warship “Go-
liath” sunk in Dardanelles, losing 500 lives. British sub-
marine El 4 sunk two Turkish gunboats and several trans-
ports.
May 17. —Further gains by French north of Arras. Violent pro-
war demonstrations in Milan. King refuses to exercise his
prerogative, and decision rests with Italian Parliament.


Map B —Showing the Germans headlong retreat to entrenched positions beyond the Aisne


Turks dislodged from heights of Krithia. Heavy fighting
continues behind Maidos and Kilid Bahr.
May 18.—British broke German lines north-west of La Bassee
and gained considerable ground. Germans lose heavily.
Austro-German advance in Galicia. Zeppelin drops bombs
on Ramsgate, on Kentish coast.
May 19. —British further successes near La Bassee. Detach-
ment of 700 Germans caught between British machine-gun
fire and German artillery and exterminated to last man.
Hand to hand fight was waged with desperate vindictiveness
on both sides. Germans evacuate all positions west of Yser
Canal. General Bridges, Commander-in-Chief of Australian
Forces seriously w r ounded. Zeppelin which dropped bombs
on Calais brought down and 40 prisoners taken.
May 20. —Allies decide to employ gases against Germans. Ger-
mans in retreat along whole line in France. British Cabinet
to be reconstructed.
May 21. —Russians make progress on western front of Northern
Bukovina. Enemy claim Russians driven back in Galicia-
Bad weather hinders operations in Flanders. Belgians pro-
gress on east bank of Yser Canal, north of Dixmude, cap-
turing German trenches. Steady progress in Dardanelles..
Allies capture Kilid Bahr. Colonel Legge appointed Com-
mander-in-Chief in place of General Bridges.
May 22. —Italian Parliament decides in favour of war by 407 to
74 votes. General Bridges dead.
May 24. —State of war declared on frontier and Adriatic, pro-
vince of Italy. King decrees general mobilisation of Army
and Navy. Senate by 263 to 2 accept War Bill. Austrian
authorities stop all communication with Italy and tear up
rails crossing frontier. Germans reported to be sending
troops to Italy.
May 25. —Italy declares war on Austria-Hungary, commencing
May 24th. Turks make violent attacks at Gaba Tepe, but
were repulsed.
May 26.—Austrian artillery fired on Italian outposts on River
Adige. Italy siezes all Austro-German vessels in Italian
ports. Reported that Roumania is negotiating with Allies.
British and French success reported on Western front.
German and Austrian Ambassadors leave Rome.
May 27. —Italian troops cross Austrian frontier and capture Ca-
porella Heights. French report further important progress
north of Arras, near Souchez. Russians repulse enemy in
Southern Poland with heavy losses. Further progress in
Gallipoli by French and British.


May 28.—H.M.S. “Triumph” sunk by submarine in Gulf of Sa-
ros. Russian retreat from Western Galicia confirmed. Fur-
ther success gained by French north of Arras, and British
advance east of Festubert. Zeppelin raided Southend doing
little damage.
May 29.—Auxiliary cruiser “Princess Irene” blown up by ex-
plosion on board, with great loss of lives. H.M.S. “Majes-
tic toipedoed off Gallipoli. Nearly all crew were saved.
British submarine En sunk two enemy ships, penetrated to
Constantinople, and exploded torpedo alongside arsenal.
Stubborn battle raging north of Przemysl. Italians report
further advance with heavy loss to the enemy.
May 3 1 - Italian destroyer “Turbine” sunk in action with Aus-
trian warships in Adriatic. Enemy’s ships damaged by Ita-
lian squadron and Austrian submarine sunk. Italians occu-
pied Alo, in South Trentino. French occupy Ablain, north
of Arras, and Allies make further progress. Turkish losses
at Dardanelles total 60,000.
June I.—Germany’s reply to United States declares “Lusitania”
was armed with concealed guns, and also had on board Cana-
dian troops and war munitions. Enemy concentrate 60,000
troops on Italian front. Italian troops continue to advance.
Slight further progress by Allies on Western front north of
Arras and in Flanders. At Gaba Tepe Allies capture front
of two kilometres and repulse Turkish counter-attacks.
June 2.—Zeppelin raid near London reported. Battle of San, in
Poland, developing in favour of Russia. French progress
north of Arras. Enemy reported to be losing ground pre-
viously won by use of gases. Italian heavy guns reduce
several Austrian forts to powder. Turks severely defeated
on Gallipoli Peninsula. Deep disappointment in America
over German Note on “Lusitania” and a prompt reply being
prepared, pointing out that the Note ignores the United
States demands.
June 3.—Austro-Germans attacked outposts of Przemysl, but
were repulsed with enormous losses. Germans claim to have
captured forts 10, n, 12, part of the fortifications. At Boys-
le-I reti e Germans regain part of the trenches previously lost
but Allies again progress north of Arras. British submarine
sunk two transports in Sea of Marmora. United States de-
mands to know from Germany if the fundamental principle
of International Law is to be disregarded, and threatens to
sever diplomatic relations. Germany claims that in Galicia
they have captured 300,000 Russians during month of May.


Allies on north of Arras still gain ground, though progress
slow. Italians also progress. Dardanelles report declares
that Turks lost 100,000 and that 250,000 Turks are securely
entrenched. Przemysl reported re-taken by Austro-Ger-
mans.
June 5. —Russian victory on Lower San reported 4>°o° prisoners
taken and three Tyrolian regiments almost annihilated.
Russians cut Libau off from the south and Germans can
leave only by way of the sea. Germans attempt advance on
the Yser, but were beaten back. Allies’ lines regarded as
impregnable. United States reply to Germany s Rote, stat-
ing “Lusitania” was on a peaceful voyage, unarmed and un-
registered as an auxiliary cruiser. All other points raised
by Germany are irrelevant. Two Welsh trawlers sunk by
submarine without warning. Many lives lost.
j une 7—Combined general assaults on Turkish positions com-
menced. Austrians, fighting in Galicia, claim to have reached
village east of Przemysl, and made progress on Stryi front.
French make progress north of Arras. Italian advance on
Eastern front. American subjects in Germany warned to
be in readiness to leave as relations with United States might
be broken within 48 hours. Aberdeen fishing vessel Strath-
ban” sunk without warning by German submarine. Hostile
airships visit east and south-east coast of England doing
small damage.
June B.—Allied attacks along whole front in Gallipoli and effected
advance. Russians in South Poland inflicted heavy loss on
enemy. First important battle on Isonzo frontier progress-
ing in favour of Italians. German counter-attacks repulsed
in France north of Arras.
June —French progress north of Arras maintained and fresh
attacks south of Arras and north-west of Compiegne success-
ful. German counter attacks north of Aisne and at La
Bassee repulsed. In Galicia Austro-German forces cross
River Dniester and within 40 miles of Lemberg. Zeppelin
destroyed in fight with British and French airmen, at Ghent,
all crew being killed. Another Zeppelin raid on east coast of
England. House of Commons meet new Ministry.
June 10. —Further small gains on Western frontier north of Ar-
ras. Italian cavalry cross Isonzo. Another United States
Note sent to Germany, and Mr. Bryan, Secretary of State,,
resigned. German submarine sunk.
June 11. —Italians capture Monfalcone, on the Isonzo front.
Austro-Germans claim to have taken Stanislau, in South-


East Galicia. German offensive in Flanders started with
furious attacks south of Ypres. French successful between
Oise and Aisne—2s,ooo prisoners captured and 2,000 killed.
Another German submarine sunk. All the crew of Austra-
lian submarine AE2, lost in Sea of Marmora, are safe.
June 12. —German attacks north of Arras repulsed and recent
French gains maintained. Italians within 17 miles of Trieste.
Enemy in Galicia checked with heavy losses. Two British
torpedo boats sunk by German submarines, and loss of two
steamers, a schooner and several trawlers reported. Allies
make vigorous advance at Gallipoli.
June 14. —Austro-German advance in Galicia checked. Russians
drive enemy across Dniester with terrible loss. Fierce fight-
ing at Dixmude, on Yser, half the town being held by Ger-
mans and half by Allies. Germans using gases, capture
three Belgian trenches, but were driven back across river by
reinforcements. French report further progress south of
Arras. They captured much ammunition at Neuville. Ita-
lians capture Volais Pass.
June 15. —Austro-Germans cross Dniester, near Bukovina. Heavy
fighting reported in Central and Northern Poland. On
Western front Belgians drove Germans back near coast,
while fair progress reported elsewhere. Italians occupied
Gradisca and are now attacking Gorizia. German submarine
U 35, by shell fire, sunk “Crown of India.” Other trawlers
sunk in North Sea.
June 16.—Italians capture Durino, 11 miles north-west of Trieste.
Belgians cross Yser, south of Dixmude. French report pro-
gress on Western front. Russians admit enemy gained
ground east of San, in Galicia. Allies steadily improve their
positions in Dardanelles.
June 17. —Great battle in progress in Flanders. French gain
ground near Dixmude. Squadron of French airmen crossed
Rhine and bombarded Karlsruhe, and all but two returned
safely. Heavy fighting in Galicia and enemy announces cap-
ture of Mosciska. Italians engaged in fierce battle on Isonzo,
north-west of Gorizia. Fighting on Gallipoli Peninsula de-
veloping into trench warfare. The inquiry of the Board of
Trade on loss of “Lusitania” opened. Trawler “Argyle”
torpedoed off the English coast without warning.
June 18. —British capture German trenches in Flanders and west
of La Bassee. French report important progress in Vosges.
Italians on Isonzo front engage enemy. Battle east of San
continues. Enemy in great strength. British steamer


“Strathnairne” torpedoed off South Bishops. Germany has
decorated Captain Hersing “In recognition of his gallant act
in torpedoing the ‘Lusitania.’ ”
June 19— Allies capture ground north of Arras. Further fight-
ing resulted in heavy casualties, but French maintained pro-
gress. In Vosges French continue to advance and have cap-
tured Steinebruck and a suburb of Metzeral. Italians make
progress in the Trentino. British submarine penetrated the
Dardanelles and sunk three Turkish transports while an-
other submarine reached Constantinople and attacked ship-
ping in Golden Horn.
June 21. —French advance on both banks of Fecht, in Alsace,,
and Germans have evacuated Metzeral. Germans suffer ter-
rible loss. British report slight progress west of La Bassee.
Austrians occupy Turnograd, across Russian frontier. Aus-
trians who invaded Bessarabia driven back in Bukovina.
June 22.—Austro-Germans claim complete victory, and Russian
troops retreating towards Lemberg. French, north of Arras,,
advance in direction of Souchez.
June 23. —Russians retire on Lemberg. French, north-west of
Souchez and in Alsace Lorraine, have made further pro-
gress. Violent German attacks in Argonne with use of as-
phyxiating gases bent French lines, but counter-attacks re-
gained almost whole of ground. British reinforcements ar-
rive at Gallipoli. German submarine pursued liner “Camer-
onia,” bound for Liverpool, with many American passengers
on board. By quick manoeuvres steamer attempted to ram
submarine which submerged and retreated. De Wet, in
South Africa, sentenced to six years’ imprisonment and fined
£ 2,000.
June 24.—French capture trenches at Gallipoli along almost their
whole front. Fighting proceeding north-west of Lemberg,,
on western frontier. Belgians captured German trenches
near Nieuport, and in Alsace Lorraine. French further ad-
vance.
June 25. —Lemberg re-taken by Austrians and Russians reported
in retreat. Russia reports success on Dniester. French re-
pulsed counter-attacks north of Arras.
June 26.—Desperate battle on Dniester develops in favour of
Russians.
June 28.—Desperate battle in progress near Prasnysz, Northern
Poland. Germans take offensive. Gorizia, on Isonzo, falls
to Italians.


Map 9 —September 13 and 14. Passage of the Aisne, where bridges were constructed under great difficulties.


June 29. —Russians retreating along entire line. Austrians us-
ing asphyxiating shells against Italians. Roumanian Par-
liament passes resolution in favour of Roumania joining the
Entente. Allied airmen destroy railway viaduct at Togols-
heim, between Altkirch and Mulhausen (Alsace) severing
communications.
June 30. —Russians report stubborn battle proceeding in the
Ozaroff district on western frontier, and artillery duels in
progress north of Souchez to Neuville.
July 1. —Fierce fighting continues in Galicia. Germans claim to
have repulsed Russians to 34 miles south-east of Lemberg.
Montenegrins capture Skutari, the capital of Albania. Mr.
Asquith stated to city men, in the Guild Hall, London: “It
has to be decided whether right or force shall dominate hu-
manity. We will fight to the last farthing, the last ounce of
our strength and the last drop of our blood.” Fighting con-
tinues at Gallipoli. The enemy have entrenched themselves
upon the hills.
July 2. —A German coast guard warship, four light cruisers and
several torpedo boats bombarded Windau, in Baltic, and en-
deavoured to effect a landing, but were repulsed. Violent
cannonading and some infantry engagements took place
north of Arras. Steamer “Arminian” torpedoed in English
Channel by German submarine. Several American lives on
board lost.
July 3. —Austro-German offensive against Russia continues and
appears to be successful. Severe fighting continues on
Lower Isonzo front. German attacks in the Argonne and
Metzeral are proceeding. Both attacks have been checked.
Excitement has been roused in America over loss of “Ar-
minian” and loss of American lives. Zeppelin explodes
while leaving sheds at Brussels.
July 5. —Russian cruiser encountered two enemy cruisers and
torpedo boats in fog at East Gothland, and gave battle. The
Gerynan mine-layer “Albatross” was chased, and 21 killed and
27 wounded on board, before she was run ashore to avoid
capture. 400,000 German troops are concentrating in Libau
district.
July 6. —Desperate fighting in South Poland and Russian patrols
have fallen back. Russians retreating. Dardanelles opera-
tions have improved. All positions captured by Turks at
Achi Baba seriously threatened.
July 7. —After stubborn fighting Austro-Germans advance on
frontier between Krasnik and the Vieprol. Russians retreat-
ing northwards.


July B.—German officers in Brussels declare that Calais must be
taken at all costs, and further attacks are expected.
July 9. —Austro-Germans pursue Russians, suffering terrible
losses in rear-guard actions. Germans, after most violent
bombardment south-east of St. Mihiel, took offensive along
a wide frontier. Turks make violent attacks in Dardanelles,
but French artillery decimates the enemy.
July 10. —Russians progress on Urzendow front, 28 miles south-
west of Lublin. Germans attack trenches which British cap-
tured on 6th inst, south-west of Pilken, and were repulsed
with heavy losses. Intense bombardment of Dardanelles
continues. Entire German forces in German South-West
Africa surrenedered to General Botha. Italian armed crui-
ser “Amalfi,” 9,560 tons, was torpedoed in Upper Adriatic.
July 12. —Germany’s reply to United States Note refuses any
guarantee against submarine warfare.
July 13. —Austrians being relentlessly hunted out of trenches on
Lower Isonzo. Unusual activity of Germans in Flanders,
Bridges being strengthened to allow passage of heavy guns.
Allies advance 200 yards in Dardanelles, after severe battle.
July 14. —Austria offers Roumania Bukovina and extension on
Danube, including Bessarabia, in return for neutrality.
Heavy fighting reported in Dardanelles. Allies’ lines swing
forward five furlongs. Despite asphyxiating cannonading
Allies counter-attacked at Souchez and Carency, and re-
gained portion of trenches previously abandoned. German
cruiser “Konigsberg” attacked by monitors in Rufigi River,
German East Africa, and completely wrecked. Aeroplanes
bombard Venice. The Doges Palace narrowly escaped.
July 15. —German Emperor informs deputation of bankers that
war would end in October. Bankers state if war is pro-
longed Germany will become bankrupt. Germans continue
to concentrate at Thorn. Squadron of Italian aeroplanes
bombard large enemy camp near Gorizia. Conspiracy dis-
covered in America to destroy freight steamers clearing at
American ports for England and France. British War Loan
of £585,000,000 fully subscribed.
July 16.—Russians reported taking 22,000 prisoners on Wisnica
front. Italian advance reported. Austria calls United
States attention to large supplies of munitions being sent to
Britain. French aeroplanes busy on Western front. Allies,
after four attacks, captured two hills covering Krithia.
Gaba Tepe again bombarded.


July 17. —Russia announces a magnificent harvest. Austro-
Germans capture several trenches at Pissa, and claim to
have recaptured Prasnysz. Two German attacks at Haute-
Chevauche and Boureville repulsed. Sir lan Hamilton re-
ports heavy fighting in Dardanelles. French succeeded in
carrying two strongholds and strong fortified lines of Turk-
ish trenches. South Wales miners struck. Russians sank
German submarine U5l in Black Sea.
July 19. —Germans occupy right bank of River Windawa and
Wenia, Baltic provinces, and continue advancing. German
submarine attempted to sink liner “Orduna,” 15,499 tons.
Captain put on full speed and escaped both torpedo and shells.
General Botha proclaims martial law over whole of territory
known as German South-West Africa. South Wales miners
still out on strike.
July 20. —Prince George of Greece, son of King Constantine, ar-
rived in Rome, to confer with King Victor Emmanuel. Rus-
sia reports retreat of Austro-Germans on Vistula and Bug.
Germans occupy both banks of Watercourse, north-east of
Warsaw. Allies attack along whole line in Gallipoli. War-
ships co-operating. Germany guarantees Turkey that Eng-
land shall pay her an indemnity of £200,000,000. South
Wales miners still out on strike.
July 21. —Battle between Vistula and Bug continues with unabated
violence. Germans report Russians retreating. Kaiser
cables Queen of Greece that he has paralized Russia for
six months and was about to deliver a crushing blow in the
West which would make all Europe tremble. Italian armed
cruiser “Garibaldi” torpedoed by submarine in Adriatic.
July 22. —Austrians occupy Radom, 60 miles south of Warsaw.
Italian offensive continues along Isonzo front. House of
Commons passed credit vote of £150,000,000, which made a
total of £1,012,000,000, since the outbreak of the war. South
Wales strike settled. United States Cabinet considers reply
to German Note. Situation regarded as very serious.
July 23. —Austrians claim to have penetrated Russian line at sev-
eral points. Italians report Gorizia hemmed in and on point
of capitulating. United States Government decides to in-
form Germany that further loss of American lives through
submarines in contravention of International Law will be re-
garded as an unfriendly act. Allies gain ground in Dar-
danelles.
July 24. —Germans claim to be investing Ivangorod. Italian
turning movement sweeps all before it. Sunday, July 25th,
appointed day of National Prayer in England.


July 26. —Desperate battle reported in Poland.
July 27. —Austro-Germans delivered series of desperate attacks
along River Pissa, but all were repulsed. In Vosges Allies
captured powerful defensive works. 836 prisoners were ta-
ken. German submarine U4O and her crew captured by Ita-
lians.
July 28. —Battle between Vistula and Bug continues. Enemy
claims another advance. Submarine sunk United States
steamer “Leelanaw.” Public opinion in America greatly
shocked. British attack and capture enemy’s positions on
Euphrates.
July 29. —Russians stubbornly resist enemy on Narew front and
around Warsaw. Intense fighting by Germans in Souchez
sector.
July 30. —Russians assume offensive near the Bug. Australia
Day, in Australia, collecting for Red Cross Fund. Over
00 collected in New South Wales.
July 31. —Russians report unable to continue contest, owing to
lack of munitions. Warsaw practically undefended.
August 1. —Germans cross Vistula. Russians retire and take up
new positions. Lublin captured by Austrians. French air
raids on Western front. Sir lan Hamilton sends letter to
Lord Derby saying “Get more drafts sent out to reinforce
one of the finest divisions it has ever been my good fortune
to meet.’’
August 2. —Germans cross Vistula, 40 miles south of Warsaw.
Russians take up new positions. Lublin occupied by Aus-
trians. Most extensive French air raids since war started
carried out on Western front. Austrian civilians are aban-
doning Trieste. Bulgarian Prime Minister declares country
will remain neutral for present, but may fight later, on behalf
of her national interests. Germany getting ready three army
corps for operations against Servia.
August 3. —New German submarine wrecked while on trial trip
near Kiel. German attack on Western front and sustained
considerable losses. Airmen at Gallipoli report large Turk-
ish reinforcements and attack imminent. Ghastly details of
Armenian massacres received.
August 4. —Desperate and sanguinary battle near Warsaw. Rus-
sians resist violently. Retirement in Poland declared to be
only temporary. British submarine sunk German transport
in Baltic. Another British submarine sunk German de-
stroyer.


August 5. —Desperate battle still raging near Warsaw. Russians
declare that enemy make every advance at cost of enormous
loss of life. Crown Prince renews efforts to reach Verdun-
Chalons railway. All attacks repulsed, despite free use of
asphyxiating gases and burning liquid. Heavy fighting on
Ypres front. Australians and New Zealanders gain crest of
a ridge in Gaba Tepe region.
August 6.—Russians fight stubborn battle and retreat to new
front. Large forces of enemy attempt to break Russian
front between Cholm and Vlodava. Russian counter-attacks
most successful. Patriotic demonstrations being held all over
United Kingdom. Mr. Balfour, First Lord of Admiralty,
said that the decision of the British Government on August
4th, 1914, saved civilisation. Warsaw captured by Austro-
Germans.
August 7.—Russians rear-guard oppose every advance, but
enemy’s forces too strong. Austro-Germans suffer terrible
losses. All towns in East Prussia reported full of wounded.
Russians evacuate Visluen and blow up the bridge.
August 9. —Desperate action between Vistula and Bug. Ger-
mans admit Russians firmly hold Praga, a suburb of War-
saw. Germans repulsed in Baltic provinces. Germans in
Argonne, under Crown Prince, throw 20,000 shells in a single
hour without destroying the French trenches. Tension be-
tween Italy and Turkey increasing. German Emperor
makes offer of peace to Russia. Russia replies: “There can
be no question of peace at present.”
August 10. —Russians near Riga defeated Austro-Germans.
Austrians claim to have captured Lubartzow, 18 miles north
of Lublin. Italians bombard Rovereto doing much damage.
Germans reported as having a machine-gun every 25 yards
from the sea to Swiss frontier.
August 11.—Nine German battleships, 12 cruisers and a large
number of destroyers attacked the entrance to Gulf of Riga.
All attacks were repulsed, three German ships being dam-
aged by mines. Turkish battleship “Kheyr-ed-Din-Barbar-
ossa,” 9,901 tons, sunk by submarine in Sea of Marmora.
Desperate German attacks at Kovno, Baltic province, re-
pulsed with enormous losses. French front reported quiet.
Squadron of 32 French aeroplanes dropped bombs on Saar-
bruck, in Alsace.
August 12. —German airships visit east coast of England and
drop incendiary bombs. One Zeppelin was eventually de-
stroyed. British destroyer “Lynx” struck mine in North


Sea and sunk. Desperate fighting continues on Narew
front. Sir lan Hamilton reports severe fighting in progress
at several points in Dardanelles. Substantial progress made
by Allies. Landing effected at Karachat, near Enos and
Bulair lines. Mr. Lloyd George declared that output of
shells during August will be one hundredfold greater than
in September, 1914.
August 13. —Turkish cruiser “Goeben” reported torpedoed and
aground in Bosphorous. Russians, who had been reinforced,
drove Germans back on Upper Bug. Sir lan Hamilton re-
ports that “through the gallantry and dash of Australians
and New Zealanders have trebled area held.” Austrians
claim to have repulsed strong Italian attacks on Doberdo
Plateau.
August 14. —Germany again declares peace will come in October.
Violent Turkish attacks on Ari-Burmu. Auxiliary cruiser
“India” torpedoed in North Sea. British submarine torpe-
doed Turkish gunboat “Berk-i-Satvel” in Dardanelles. Rus-
sians report Germans attempt to overwhelm outposts in Riga
defeated. Germans also repulsed with heavy losses between
Vieprz and the Bug. Enemy claim to occupy Lukow, 65
miles south-east of Warsaw. Two Zeppelins raided east
coast of England and dropped a number of bombs.
August 16. —Further progress at Gaba Tepe and in region of
Suvla Bay. Troops gain footing on slopes of Sara Bahr.
Operations are developing. French cruiser bombarded Jaffa,
and destroyed several German factories. German advance
on East front checked. New battle developing north of
Niemen and before Kovno. Germans active in building
more submarines at Hoboken, near Antwerp. Austrian sub-
marine U 3 sunk by French destroyer in Adriatic. Rou-
mania mobilises army. Belgrade again bombarded.
August 17. —Italian air raid on Trieste reported, completely de-
stroying military docks and Governor’s palace. Artillery
duels occur at Souchez and Beau-Sejour. United States
Note to Austria was couched in a friendly tone, making
clear that she would not prohibit export of munitions. Bri-
tain and France declare cotton contraband.
August 18. —Prime Minister of Greece resigned. King sum-
mons M. Venizelos. Russians report evacuation of Riga.
Kovno bombarded. Austrian seaplane dropped bombs on
four coastal forts at Venice. Submarine shelled Parton,
Harrington, and Whitehaven, in Cumberland. Transport
“Royal Edward” sunk in Aegean Sea by German submarine
—750 lives lost out of 1,400.


August 19. —M. Venizelos invited to form a Ministry in Greece.
Austro-German advance in Riga district defeated. All Ger-
man attacks repulsed. Desperate fighting raging at Kovno.
German submarines attempt to leave Zeebrugge, but driven
back by British destroyers. Turks defeated in Caucasus.
Sir lan Hamilton reports right flank of Australians and New
Zealanders repulsed enemy’s attacks at Suvla.
August 20. —Kovno falls to Austro-Germans after desperate
fighting in Courland. Russians continue to drive Austro-
Germans back. Zeppelin raids east counties of England.
Turks defending Smyrna with long-range cannons brought
from Constantinople.
August 21. —Sir lan Hamilton reports enemy’s reinforcements
brought to a standstill. Advance of Allied troops at Suvla.
Heavy casualties on both sides at Anzac and Suvla. White
Star liner “Arabic” torpedoed off Fastnet Islands without
warning. Six pasengers and 27 crew missing. Five other
vessels also sunk by German submarines. Desperate battles
raging from Ossowiecsz to Brest-Litorsk. Germans admit
French success between Angres and Souchez, also a tem-
porary success at Lingakopf. White Star liner “Bovic”
torpedoed. Germans capture Novo Georgievsh, 26 miles
north-west of Warsaw.
August 23. —dtaly declares war on Turkey. Big naval battle
in Gulf of Riga. German loss reported heavy. British sub-
marine torpedoed German cruiser in Sea of Marmora, and
British seaplane bombarded and sunk Turkish transport,
filled with troops. United States Ambassador, in Berlip, is
instructed to ask for explanation regarding sinking of “Ara-
bic.” British submarine El 3 grounded on Island of Salt-
holm, in Danish territory. Two German destroyers ap-
proached from south and attacked her without warning, fir-
ing first a torpedo and then shelled her. While men were
in the water they were fired on by machine-guns and shrap-
nel. A Danish torpedo boat then stood in between the
drowning men, and the Germans then went away. This
cold-blooded murder of 14 of the helpless crew has stirred
Denmark to great depths. A public funeral for the victims
is being arranged. Russians announce calling up of her
resources of 8,000,000 men.
August 24. —Officially announced that in Riga action German
battle-cruiser “Moltke,” 22,640 tons, three cruisers and seven
torpedo boats were destroyed. British troops landed at
Suvla and advance six miles. Junction effected with troops


at Anzac, resulting in continuation of battle front for 12
miles. Turks counter-attacks threatened. Turks lost 27,-
000 men. Russian forces remain firm at Riga.
August 25. —British fleet bombarded Zeebrugge, much damage
being done. Russian sunk or put out of action two German
cruisers and eight torpedo boats, losing only a small gun-
boat, the “Irvoutch.”
August 26.—Allies advance at Dardanelles. Sir lan Hamilton
says that the Australians and New Zealanders cannot be
praised too highly for their magnificent night march. Rus-
sians hold enemy offensive between Kovno and Vilna. In-
cessant fighting reported in Argonne. Italians captured up-
wards of 3,000 square miles of the Fruili, Cadore and Tren-
tino districts. Germany asked United States to wait full
particulars regarding sinking of “Arabic.” United States
agrees to postpone decision.
August 27. —Two cruisers reported penetrated Dardanelles as far
as Kastanea and bombarded batteries. British front in
France extended and replaced French at many points. New
offensive against Servia planned by Austria and Germany.
Bulgaria informed that she shall meet with Belgium’s fate
if she moves, but if she agrees will be given carte blanche
against Servia.
August 28. —Brest-Litorsk falls. Russians retreating in good
order. French aeroplanes flew over Dallingen. They
shelled Saar and dropped over 150 bombs, doing great dam-
age. Bombs were dropped near Ostend, destroying German
submarines. German fleet leaves Gulf of Riga and Libau,
owing to disaster and go to Danzig. Germany informs
United States that orders have been given to submarines not
to attack merchantmen without warning.
August 30. —Four German aeroplanes attempted attack on Paris,
but were driven off. One German machine brought down in
flames. Russia calls up untrained reserves between 19 and
37 years of age. Story of the great fight at Lonesome Pine
states that the deeds of bravery were so enormous, impos-
sible to recount them.
August 31. —Austrians and Germans try to cause war between
Bulgaria and Servia. German invasion of Servia expected
to begin. Roumania officers recalled from leave of absence.
September 1. —Russian army continues retreat along the Middle
Niemen and River Pripet. Violent artillery struggle in Ar-
gonne. No fighting reported on British front in France.


September 2. —Russians claim to have repulsed enemy’s attempts
to cross Dwina. In Galicia Russians defeated Austro-Ger-
man forces, capturing 30 guns, 24 machine-guns and 3,000
prisoners. Allied aeroplanes destroyed large hangar at
Ghent. Austrian submarine U 3 sunk by French destroyer
“Bisson.” German Ambassador admits that a submarine tor-
pedoed White Star liner “Arabic,” and that it failed to re-
turn. Germany apologises to America for incident. Ger-
mans in America reported to be drilling preparatory to an
invasion of Canada.
September 3. —Sir lan Hamilton reports severe fighting in Dar-
danelles, resulting in appreciable gain on ground occupied
by Australians and New Zealanders. Heavy Turkish losses.
An important feature was the capture of a position com-
manding Buyuk-Unafarta Valley. Russians claim taking
70,000 prisoners in Galicia, but Germans claim capturing a
total of over 100,000 prisoners during August. German at-
tack near Grodno repulsed by Russians. Violent cannonad-
ing in Argonne. Roumania refuses transit of war material
to Turkey through her territory. British submarine torpe-
doed four Turkish transports.
September 4. —Russians state Germans repulsed at Friedrichstadt
in Riga province, and also repulsed several attacks near
Oramy. Austro-Germans captured Lutsk. Austrians eva-
cuate Rovereto. Submarine which sunk “Arabic” reported
captured by British, and crew prisoners. General Bridges
buried at Canberra.
September 6.—Czar of Russia left Petrograd for front. Rus-
sians cross Dwina and drive Germans from river, but enemy
reinforced and Russians retire. Peace proposals placed be-
fore President Wilson, believed to emanate from Germany.
President states that United States will not participate in
peace proposals unless belligerents welcome her efforts.
September 7. —Two Russian destroyers in Black Sea damaged
cruiser “Hamidieh,” 3,800 tons, and two torpedo destroyers.
Allan liner “Hesperian,” 10,920 tons, torpedoed off Fastnet
Rocks, on Irish coast, while bound from Liverpool to Mon-
treal, no warning being given. Turks make night attack on
sector held by Australians, but were repulsed with heavy
losses. Italians make combined assault and seized a pass in
Carnac Alps which Austrians held.
September B.—Allies’ submarine torpedoed Turkish destroyer
“Yar Plissar,” in Sea of Marmora. Fighting continues on
Niemen, where Germans attempt an offensive. Forty


French aeroplanes drop bombs on railway station, factory
and military establishments in Saarbruck, in East Prussia.
Austrians suffer heavy losses in attacks on Rovereto and
compelled to retreat. Trades Union at Bristol Congress
unanimously carried resolution against conscription.
September 9. —Forty British warships bombarded Belgian coast,
near Batteries at Westende also bombarded. Ger-
man airmen drop bombs on east counties of England.
September 10. —Big Russian victory at Tarnapol, in Galicia.
Grand Duke Nicholas appointed Viceroy of the Caucasus.
September 11. —Stubborn fighting in Baltic provinces. Russia
reports important success south-west of Trembowla. Ar-
rangements made with Servia, Roumania, Bulgaria and
Greece for a Balkan Conference, to meet at Salonika.
United States demands recall of Doctor C. Domba, Austrian
Ambassador, for endeavouring to cause strikes in American
munition factories. Another air raid on English towns.
116 people killed.
September 13.—German attack against Servia imminent. Great
artillery activity on Western front in Artois region. Russian
success at Tarnapol followed by another victory further
south. German Note to United States regarding “Arabic”
considered most unsatisfactory in Washington.
September 14. —Owing to British submarines Turks announce all
navigation in Sea of Marmora has ceased. Servia believed
to be ready to discuss situation with Bulgaria. Hostile air-
craft again visit east coast of England.
September 15. —Berlin advised Turkish army cannot continue be-
yond September 25. —Russians make progress in Galicia.
Germans retiring northward.
September 16. —Russians report taking 40,000 Austro-German
prisoners since August 30. German submarine sank by
French destroyer. Another Zeppelin raid on east coast of
England. British troops again took over more ground in
France. Mr. Asquith asked for credit vote of £250,000,000,
and stated that 3,000.000 men had enlisted since beginning of
war.
September 17. —Lord Kitchener reviewed position of Allies and
stated: “Russian army is to-day intact.” In Galicia, Rus-
sians after desperate fighting, took 552 prisoners north-west
of Tarnapol and 1,500 on Strypa. British submarine E 7
sunk in Dardanelles.
September 18.—Desperate fighting on Strypa. Severe cannon-
ading on whole French front. Conscription rumored in
England.


September 20. —Great battle developing on eastern front. Aus-
tro-German forces have already suffered great losses. Aus-
trians retreating with Russians in pursuit. General Sir lan
Hamilton issued special order, thanking Australian and New
Zealand Corps for their gallant capture of the almost im-
pregnable Lone Pine trenches. Russian torpedo boat sunk
fleet of Turkish sailing ships laden with munitions. Ques-
tion of conscription causing great excitement in England.
Japan decides to establish 1,200 munition factories giving
employment to 100,000 workmen.
September 21. —Germans claim to have captured Vilna. Leader
of Opposition in Bulgaria told King Ferdinand it was fatal
to adopt a neutral attitude. At Dardanelles knoll 60 cap-
tured and 400 acres of ground added to Anzac position.
Memorial service for fallen Australians held at Town Hall,.
Sydney.
September 22. —Russians took 70,000 prisoners last days of
August. Austro-Germans claim to have made successful at-
tacks on Servians. Russians sunk a German submarine in
Black Sea.
September 23. —British Government increases taxation and Cus-
tom duties, and take half the war profits made by com-
panies or private firms. Total war taxation estimated to
produce £30,500,000 in six months, and net profits on Post
Office £2,500,000. Allies gain footing on right bank of
Aisne-Marne Canal, and repulse counter-attacks. General
mobilisation ordered in Bulgaria and in Greece.
September 24. —Bulgarian Premier announces signature to Con-
vention with Turkey for maintenance of Bulgarian armed
neutrality. Squadron of Allied aeroplanes drop 30 bombs on
Royal Palace at Stuttgart. Enemy violently bombarded
Servian positions.
September 25. —Russians took offensive north-west of Dubno,
and occupied Volnitza. In Dardanelles our troops bom-
barded Anafarta positions. Allied airmen drop bombs on
Bruges Harbour. Greece mobilises owing to Bulgaria’s ac-
tion.




TURNER’S
HANDY REFERENCE
MAPS
SHOWING THE MILITARY POSITIONS AND BATTLE
LINE IN EACH OF THE SPHERES
OF ACTION
1— France and Flanders
2
3 Salonica
4 Italy
5 Turkey in Asia and Egypt
6 Germany and Austria
These maps have been specially drawn to show the various
battle lines of the Allies and the Enemy in each of the
countries near the frontiers of Germany and Austria.
By uniting these maps together, a clear conception of the
great battle-fields of Europe can be obtained, as they show
the pressure the Allies are exercising upon the enemy,
and the cordon being drawn around the two countries of
Germany and Austria, and which will be gradually tightened
as the war progresses.
6 MAPS IN CASE FOR
1/6
Head Office:
TURNER & SONS, Publishers
9 BLIGH STREET. SYDNEY
And at 418 Chancery Lane, Melbourne, and
19 Pirie Street, Adelaide


Pte. J. W. McGENAN.
Pte C. J. HACCHE.
Pte. A. E. PALIN.
Pte. R. J. I. REDPATH.
1st LIGHT HORSE.
Pte. J. E. WILLIAMS, acci-
cpi. a. j. McDonald, 1st f.
Company Engineers.
L.-Cpl. N. W T ALKER (South
Pte. D. d. McPherson.
Pte. N. A. D. HALES.
Pte. B. J. BLACKWELL.
dentally killed.
Pte. D. WILLIAMSON, 7th
Africa).
Pte. C. E. Bass (Mosman).
13th BATTALION.
Pte. J. HARTNETT.
Pte. R, L. DICKSON.
A.S.C.
Pte. P. H. WATMAN, 7th
Pte. T. E. GOODALL.
Pte. E. S. O’DONNELL (Fle-
Major W. W. ELLIS.
Lieut. N. F. VINE HALL.
Pte. H. H. JONES.
Pte. F. H. GIRLING.
A. A.S.C.
Pt. J. P. BIRMINGHAM.
Pte. F. SELLERS.
Pte. C. GEILVOLT.
Pte. A. H. McMASTER.
mington, Vic.).
Pte. E. P. MAHONY (Armi-
Pte. F. S. ANDERSON.
Cpl. T. H. NELSON.
Pte. H. A. FARRELL.
PteTM. LAWSON.
dale).
Pte. V. C. WILLIAMS
Pte. E. ANSTEE.
Pte. M. N. CROWLEY.
Pte. W. MANUEL.
Pte. E. D. GRIFFEN.
Pte. A. STINSON.
Lieut, s. a. McWilliams,
(Cook’s Hill).
Pte. H. L. BAKER (New-
Pte. G. J. DAVIS.
Pte. H. W. GEORGE.
Pte. F. MARTIN.
9th Light Horse.
Gnr. W. HOLLINS, 1st F.A.
Brig. Am. Col.
L.-Cpl. S. L. NAIL.
town) .
Pte. W. KANE (Darlinghurst)
Pte. E. FAHY.
Pte. J. P. MOSELEY.
Pte. T. WILLOUGHBY (Myr-
Pte. E. FRANCIS.
Pte. A. LAMMOND.
Pte. A. E. FLETCHER.
tleford, Vic.).
WOUNDED
Lieut.-Col. G. A. MARSHALL,
1st Div. Headqtrs.
1st BATTALION.
Pte. A. T. HALLIDAY.
pte. w. s. mcpherson.
pte. R. n. McDonald.
Pte. L. PERRIN.
Pte G. H. ADAMS.
p ie . W. H. CAMERON.
Pte. J. B. CASEY.
Pte. F. CHASE.
Pte. A. G. WRIGHT.
Pte. W. J. HARFORD.
Pte. W. H. HECKER.
Pte. L. J. IRYING.
Pte. V. E. JONES.
Capt. H. G. CARTER.
Lieut. H. WELLS.
Major G. A. ROBERTS.
Lieut. E. Y. KING.
Capt. A. G. CHRISTIAN.
Capt. P. G. P. HILL.
Pte. A. R. HAWKINS.
Pte. R. KILLICK.
Pte. S. J. SAMSEN.
Pte. L. H. ALLEN.
Pte. M. BROUGHTON.
Set. J. BRISSETT.
Pte E. A. GOLDSMITH.
L.-Cpl. G. F. HAMILTON.
Pte. C. HONEYMAN.
Sgt. A. E. JACKSON.
Pte. 0. MADSEN.
Sgt.-Major J. W. MORRIS.
L.-Cpl. H. OAKES.
Pte. H. M. REEYE.
Pte. R. ELI-13.
Pte A. I. SALWAY.
Pte. J. GANNON.
Bugler H. G. HOPPINS.
Pte L. Yv r . HUDSON.
Pte. T. J. WILLIAMSON.
Pte. G. H. ADAMS.
Pte. W. K. RIDLEY.
Pte. H. J. SHARMAN.
Pte. A. G. SAUNDERS.
Pte. E. K. STEWART.
Pte. L. H. C. SMOUT.
Pte’. H. McAULEY.
L.-Cpi. McDonald.
Pte. V. McG. BANCE.
Pte. V. BREDGER.
Pte. R. H. W. BETHKE.
Pte. M. BROWN.
Pte. A. J. CRLISE.
Pte. M. MACLEOD.
Pte. E. NEWTON.
Pte. G. W. D. PALMER.
Pte. H. J. COGLE.
Pte. W. E. HALL.
Pte. J. H. REID.
Pte. J. THORBURN.
pte. —. BERTRAM.


Pte. L. F. BOLTON.
Pte. W. J. ACKROYD.
Cpl. F. FERGUS.
Pte. F. BAILEY.
L.-Cpl. B. A. HUBBARD.
Pte. A. G. GORDON.
Pte. W. HARMAN.
Pte. G. HUCKLE.
Pte. S. MeCALLUM.
Pte. W. L. MURRAY.
Lee.-Cpl. F. L. WOOLLETT,
Pte. J. BOURKE,
Pte. A. BARRETT,
Q.M.-Sgt. J. A. CONNELLAN,
Pte.
Pte.
Pte.
Pte.
Pte.
T. G. J. RYAN.
J. S. SHERWIN.
L. K. SMILES.
C. SUTHERLAND.
J. TAYLOR.
Pte. L. MURPHY.
Pte. P. C. NORRISH.
Pte. C. DEMPSEY,
Pte.
C. A. TATE.
Pte. W. W. PHILLIPS.
Pte. J. SPARKS.
Pte. F. C. VICTOR.
Pte. R. A. CARMICHAEL.
Pte. W. H. MANSFIELD.
Pte. J. ROUTLEDGE.
Pte. W. A. E. SMITH.
Pte. R. TATLER.
Pte. G. F. DAVIES,
Pte. G. F. GURNEY,
Pte. W. A. LYNE,
Pte.
Pte.
Cpl.
Pte.
Pte.
S. WILSON.”
H. WHALAN.
C. WILLIAMS.
J. T. W'RIGHT.
W. THOMPSON.
Pte. G. COOK.
Pte. A. A. WILSON.
Pte. M. MENYWEATHER,
Bugler H. HYDE.
Pte. F. KAYE.
Pte. J. H. L. NORMAN.
Pte. F. B. HOSFORD.
L.-Cpl. H. M. LANSER.
Pte. A. L. E. MAKINSON.
Lee.-Cpl. P. J. REILLY,
Pte. C. TRAVERS,
Pte.
Pte.
F. G. WOODFIELD.
R. D. YEARDDEN.
Pte. J. F. JENSEN.
Pte. G. J. PARR.
Pte. P. YOUNG.
Pte. F. H. TOYNBLEE.
Pte. G. ANGUS,
Pte.
Pte.
T. R. FLEMING.
H. H. AKERS.
Pte. J. SANDERSON.
Sgt. J. McG. TAYLOR.
Pte. G. H. SUTHERLAND.
Pte. C. H. SPRECKLEY.
2nd BATTALION.
Pte.
Cpl.
P. N. BLACK.
W. V. BROWN.
Pte. J. E. J. WITHERS.
Pte. T. ROWE.
Capt. A. B. STEVENS
Pte.
A. BARNETT.
Pte. A. B. MORLEY.
Pte. G. PATON.
Lieut. H. TAYLOR,
L.-Cpl. G. J. BURNS.
Pte. R. J. HICKS.
Pte. J. GRANT.
Lieut. R. A. FLEMMING.
Pte.
T. S. BETHEL.
Pte. P. A. KENNEDY.
Pte. G. DAND.
Lieut. C. A. WHYTE.
Pte.
T. BOND.
Pte. S. B. MATHEWS.
Cpl. R. L. DICK.
2nd-Lieut. H. A. JONES.
Pte.
J. COOLING.
Pte. J. H. READING.
Pte. T. BAER.
Sgt. R. COSKERY.
L.-Cpl. A. G. COUGHLAN,
Pte. A. R. BAILEY.
Pte. J. W. ADAMS.
Sgt. H. HEYDEN.
L.-Cpl. P. H. CLAPIN.
Pte. W. M. ATTENBOROUGH
Pte. J. ANGUS.
Sgt. B. W. NEWSON.
Pte.
C. C. CONN.
Pte. A. F. BOLTON.
Pte. W T . H. CARSWELL.
Pte. McKIERNAN.
Pte.
W. R. COSTELLO.
Pte. W. J. MARTIN.
Pte. D. W. CARTER.
Pte. E. A. McKIMM.
Pte.
G. L. CAUSER.
Pte. G. R. LOMAS.
Pte. R. A. CARROLL.
Pte. J. MACGILP.
Sgt. R. COSKERY.
L.-Cpl. W. BEELCHAMERS.
Pte. S. C. CRUMMER.
Pte. J. McMASTER.
Pte.
J. J. DUNN.
Pte. C. H. CLARKE.
Pte. T. DOUGLAS.
Sgt, B. W. NEWSOM.
Pte.
T. EDGAR,
Pte. J. CLARK.
Pte. F. DUNN.
Pte. M. NEWELL.
Pte.
R. H. FARRAN.
Pte. L. CARDILINI.
Cpl. W. EGAN.
Pte. M. PATTERSON.
Pte.
R. GLYNN.
Bugler L. L. COHEN.
Pte. H. G. FOSSE.
Pte. F. A. O’MALLEY.
Pte. F. W. GIBSON.
Pte. J. FRENCH.
Pte. W. B. GOSLETT.
Cpl. H. PEDEN.
Pte.
J. A. HUTCHINSON.
Pte. E. GLASS.
Pte. N. G. GRANT.
Pte. T. B. PARDOE.
Set.
H. HEYDEN.
Pte. F. T. GIBSON.
Pte. J. HONAN.
Pte. A. F. PEARCE.
L.-Cpl. G. HOBART.


Pte. 0. W. HOPKINS.
Pte. J. LARKINS.
L.-Cpl. J. M. DABBS.
Sgt. G. W. FLOWER.
Pte. B. P. JAY.
Pte. R. LEWRY.
Sgt. A. A. DAEN.
Pte. H. HUDSON.
Pte. C. Y. LOVE.
Pte. S. E. LUCAS.
Pte. W. A. GARDNER.
Sgt. G. LEADER.
Pte. J. LARKINS.
Pte. N. MURRAY.
Pte. J. S. HAYDON.
Pte. W. H. EVANS.
Pte! R. LEWRY.
Cpl. C. K. MILLAR.
Sgt. J. HARVEY.
Pte. R. B. MITCHELL.
Pte. S. E. LUCAS.
Pte. L. J. MALONEY.
Pte. H. LEVETT.
Pte. W. LINDSAY.
Pte. N. MURRAY.
Pte. E. B. MILLS.
Pte. B. LITTLE.
Sgt. E. DIMMONCK.
Cpl! C. K. MILLAR.
Pte. L. J. MALONEY.
Pte. J. H. MOODIE.
Pte. J. A. MOFFIT.
Pte. F. MITTOLL.
Pte. 0. J. MOORE.
L.-Cpl. A. F. CAEBEL.
Pte. P. M. LONGWORTH.
Pte. E. B. MILLS.
Pte. McKIERNAN.
Pte. F. T. McCORMACK.
pte. a. d. McDonald.
Pte. J. H. MOODIE.
Pte. E. A. McKIMM.
pte. p. McDonald.
Pte. J. PENNY.
Pte! J. A. MOFFITT.
Pte. J. MACGLIP.
Pte. W. H. THOMPSON.
Pte. I. KEENAN.
Pte. H. R. GALL.
Pte. J. McMASTER.
Pte. R. G. TURNER.
Pte. E. R. TURNER.
Pte. T. R. FLEMING.
Pte. M. NEWELL.
Pte. T. THORPE.
L.-Cpl. M. E. VANSE.
Pte. H. H. AKERS.
Cpl. D. STEWART.
Pte. G. S. WILKINSON.
Pte. T. G. WOODS.
Pte. P. N. BLACK.
Pte. S. SUTTON.
Pte. G. TAYLOR.
Sgt. H. E. SOUTHAM.
Cpl. W. V. BROWN.
Pte. A. BARNETT.
Pte. L. MOORE.
Pte. E. C. TAYT.
Pte. A. JAMIESON.
Pte. G. BLACKLOCK.
Pte. G. WENTWORTH.
Pte. C. REILLY.
L.-Cpl. G. J. BURNS.
Pte. T. S. BETHEL.
Cpl. C. F. KENNEDY.
Pte. P. QUINERT.
Pte. S. D. WYE.
Pte. D. DELANEY.
Pte. R. ANDREWS.
Pte. H. H. THOROUGHGOOD
Pte. T. BOND.
Pte. H. BROTT.
Cpl. A. F. NOAD.
Pte. 0. S. OLSSON.
Pte J. COOLING.
Pte. F. B. BARKER.
Pte. H. E. PAYNE.
Pte. J. F. OWENS.
L.-Cpl. A. G. COUGHLAN.
L.-Cpl. P. H. CLAPIN.
Pte. C. C. CONN.
Pte. J. H. F. GOODMAN.
Sgt. J. B. POWELL.
Pte. W. H. ROLFE.
Pte. T. PAULIN.
Pte. G. J. SULLIVAN.
Pte. S. P. McGUINESS.
Pte. E. QUINTAL.
Pte. W. H. ROBERTSON.
Pte. E. WHITEHOUSE.
Pte. W. R. COSTELLO.
Pte. F. R. SHEERMAN.
Pte. R. STEEL.
Pte. F. WEST.
Pte. G. L. CAUSER.
Pte. S. 0. STAFFORD.
Pte. P. THROSBY.
Pte. G. WICKLER.
Pte. J. J. DUNN.
Pte. 0. A. THOMAS.
Pte. H. H. TARRANT.
Pte. S. R. CLARK.
Pte. T. EDGAR.
Pte. H. G. WELLS.
Pte. R. THOMSON.
Sgt. C. ALYWIN.
Pte. R. H. FARRAN.
Pte. H. ASHTON.
Pte. T. WHITTAKER.
Pte. J. BISHOP.
Pte. R. GLYNN.
Pte. J. A. ASHLEY.
Pte. H. C. WICKING.
Pte. R. BATES.
Pte. F. W. GIBSON.
Pte. F. BORRY.
Pte. W. J. WATSON.
Pte. W. HARKWAY.
Pte! J.' A. HUTCHINSON.
Pte. A. BARTLETT.
Pte. F. ROCKE.
Pte. A. W. BLACKMAN.
L.-Cpl. G. HOBART.
Pte. 0. W. HOPKINS.
Pte. W. P. BERG.
Pte. J. AMER,
Pte. B. H. DOOHAN.
Pte. J. BUTLER,
Pte. J. T. BOURKE.
Pte. A. L. J. DOWCRA.
Pte. B. P. JAY.
Sgt. P. M. BOWLING.
Pte. J. COLL.
Pte. F. W. EDWARDS.
Pte! C.’ V. LOVE.
Sgt. G. L. CHANT.
Pte. D. EVANS.
Sgt. A. FINNEY.
