



DIARY
ALEXANDER MERCER
Selkirk, Scotland.
1777 - 1861.
Alexander Mercer King’, Printer, S 3-37 Lydiard Street, Ballarat,
Victoria, Australia.


r\ 1-20 b
NOTES CONCERNING DIARY.
This print of Alexander Mercer’s Diary is taken
from a copy made by R. Renwick on 9th April, 1861—
roughly three weeks after the death of Alexander
Mercer.
The copy made by R. Renwick was forwarded to
Alexander Mercer, who was born on 16th March, 1828,
and who migrated to Australia in May, 1854, he being
the grandson of the diarist, and only son of Andrew
Mercer who was born in 1804 and sailed for Boston
on sth April, 1849.
R. Renwick was probably a relative of James Robert-
son Renwick, who inscribed the paragraph concerning
the death of Alexander Mercer on 15th March, 1861.
It is not known in Australia where the original
Diary is. It was presumably, and rightly, held by the
Renwick family, the eldest daughter (Elizabeth) of
Alexander Mercer having married Francis Renwick.
The above notes were written on 13th March, 1934,
by Charles John Cerutty, C.M.G., Auditor-General for
the Commonwealth of Australia, who, in 1894, married
Wilhelmina, youngest daughter of Alexander Mercer,
lorn at Newcastle-on-Tyne in 1828.




DIARY
ALEXANDER MERCER
Who was born on 17th September, 1777.
26th May, 1841.
Our good, great and worthy Dr. Lawson died in
February, 1820, aged 71 years. He was ordained at
Selkirk in the First United Presbyterian Church in
the year 1770, and continued to his death, being 50
years, and of these years he was Professor of Divinity
33 years, being appointed to that great work by the
Synod in the year 1787.
It is my earnest wish that this work should be pre-
sented and taken care of, and whosoever hands of my
descendants it may fall into, I request them to follow
the plan I have begun in writing down the names of
their wife and their children, their occupation, and
where they reside, and any other thing they may think
worth writing about. If this system is carried on and
handed down from father to son for one or two
hundred years it will be very entertaining for those
who may see this book in seeing the charges for auc-
tioneering, etc., and also the prices of provision, firing,
clothing, horses, cows, calves, and the value of property
about Selkirk at the time this wrote.


Mark Pringle. Esq., of Clifton, resided for the most
part at Naming, and at his death he left two sons—
John and Robert, and one daughter whose name is
Margaret. John, being the eldest son, he fell heir to
the Clifton and Naming. Robert got for his part the
estate of Fairnilie, and Margaret got money for her
share. The oldest son, John Pringle, now Esquire,
of Clifton, was one day in the month of May, 1831,
taking a ride in his gig and on his way home, within
200 yards of the gate leading into the stable yard, the
horse ran off with him and the gig struck against the
side of the gate and he was thrown out of his gig and,
I may say, that he was killed upon the spot; he lived
for a very few days, but he was not sensible that he
was in the world. On his funeral day most part of the
inhabitants of Selkirk put on mourning and accom-
panied his remains for half a mile on their way to the
place of internment, in Morebattle Churchyard. His
brother Robert then became heir to Clifton and Nam-
ing.
The Reverend Andrew Lawson was placed Ist June,
1824, Minister of the first United Associate Congrega-
tion of Selkirk. Died in his own house at Selkirk on
the 28th October, 1836, and was buried on the 2nd
November. He was held in very great estimation by
his congregation and highly respected by all who was
acquainted with him. The (congregation called his
Elder Brother, the Reverend George, from Kilmarnock
and ordained him on the 31st May, 1837. The pulpit
he now fills was occupied by his grandfather, his own
father, who was Professor of Divinity in Selkirk, his
brother Andrew, now by himself.
Andrew Mercer was the name of ray father; he was
shoemaker to his trade when he died, and long before
his death he was Laird of 8 acres of land about Sel-
kirk and some houses in the Back Row, which was all
divided amongst his children. I do not know what


year he first married, but the name of his first wife
was Christina Aitchson; by her he had 3 children,
Janet, George, and Isabella Mercer. His wife died a
short time after Isabella was born. He married again,
but in what year I do not know, Janet Thompson; by
her he had two sons, Andrew and Alexander Mercer.
Alexander the youngest gives this account of our his-
tory, as I have said above, his property was all divided
amongst his children at his death. It was the custom at
the time of his death to leave the oldest son fully a dou-
ble portion and, of course, I being the youngest of the 5
children, a very small part came to my shore. I think
this a very bad practice and ought not be followed. My
father died on the 25th July, 1806, at the advanced
age of 75. He was on his way to Lauder Fair, about
a mile from Selkirk, when he felt a severe pain within
him; he turned home again, and when he came to the
door I helped him off his horse. We got him to bed,
and in the space of two hours he was no more. He
had not had a sore head for 40 years before his death.
My mother lived 5 years after my father’s death. She
died of the Jaundice on the 11th May, 1811, in my
house. My brother Andrew was born in May, 1775.
It was thought by my father and mother to train him up
for the Ministry. He accordingly got all the requisite
education for that purpose. He had finished his
studies under the Reverend Dr. Lawson, Professor of
Theology, in Selkirk, and when almost ready to re-
ceive his license for a preacher he gave it up all at
once, to the great grief of his parents and all his
friends. In his younger years, he had a great liking
for drawing, so he applied himself to the trade, and
might have made a good deal of money if he had been
as careless about company and whisky as he was about
preaching. He resided for a great number of years,
and is still residing, at Dunfermline, and during his
stay there he wrote two or three books (very small


indeed). One, I think, is called “Dunfermline Abbey’’
and another is “Summer Months among the Moun-
tains.” Putting his trade and books altogether, he has
made a very poor maintenance. However, he has
brought none to poverty but himself, for he had never
a Wife nor Bairn all his life, and I, Alexander, was
born on the 14th September, 1777. I was brought up
to no business, and I drove my father's horse and cart
till I was upwards of 22 years of age. I married on
the 28th August, 1801, Margaret Robertson, at the
age of 20. She was a Selkirk woman or res-
pectable parents. She has been a good wife to me.
We have had 13 children, eight of them died very
young, and the remaining five is the following:
Elizabeth Mercer, born on the 11th November, 1802;
Andrew Mercer, born 11th August, 1804; James Mer-
cer, born 15th September, 1806; William Mercer, born
4th August, 1812; Janet Mercer, born 19th June, 1814.
I think it now right to give an account of my own fam-
ily as far as they have now gone up to Whitsunday,
1841. E. Mercer was married, I think, in the year 1825
to F. Renwick, clerk to Mr. Roger, Town Clerk of Sel-
kirk. He and his wife left Selkirk a short time after
their marriage and went to St. Clements Wells, near
Musselburgh, as head clerk to Mr. Aitchison, Distiller.
He remained there and acted P for upwards of
15 years, and during that time they had nine children,
which are all alive except one who died young. The
following are the names of their children: —Margaret
Renwick, Isabella Renwick, Elizabeth Renwick, Mercer
Renwick, Francis Renwick, Georgina Renwick, and
James Robertson Renwick. The above children are all
alive and in good health. Their Father has left Mr.
Aitchison and begun in partnership with a Mr. Living-
stone, as wholesale Spirit Dealers in Musselburgh.
Andrew Mercer was married one week before his
sister Elizabeth, in 1825, to Janet Reid, a woman in


Hawick. They have had only two children. One of
them died very young, the oldest is still living, his
name is Alexander Mercer. He is just now an appren-
tice at Hawick, learning to be a Skinner and Tanner.
Andrew, his father, is a Baker to his business; but was
very unfortunate. I set him up at Peebles for him-
self, but in a short time he was obliged to give up as
it was a losing concern. I then set him up at Selkirk,
and still things went against him. I had paid all his
debts at Peebles, so I made up my mind to pay all his
debts at Selkirk also. So he returned to work as a
journeyman, and at this time he is working at Mont-
rose.
James Mercer was a Baker to trade. He wrought
as a Journeyman for some time here. He then went
to America at Whitsunday, 1828. For some years
after he got there we received a few letters from him,
but it appeared to me he had not conducted himself
in the way he ought to have done. I think it was in
the year 1831 or 1832 that we got the last letter from
him and, in my opinion, it was very carelessly written
indeed. Since that time we have heard nothing of
him, but that he is still living; but not from himself,
s.o whether he is still living or not we cannot say. I
have heard from the best of authority that James is
dead long ago.
William Mercer is a Gardener to his business. He
learned his trade at Naining, and after working some
years there as a Journeyman, he went to Carleton Hall,
a Gentleman’s place, near Penrith, England. He re-
mained there 3 years, then returned home. He wrought
a short time at Naining, and in that short time his
Master, William Great, whom he learned with, died.
Mr. Pringle, the Laird of Naining, spoke to me on the
subject of making William his head Gardener, which
he willingly offered, and William as willingly accepted
He entered his new office as Gardener in the year


1835, and was married to his wife, Eizabeth Ferguson,
of respectable parents in the neighborhood of Selkirk.
They have had but three children which are at present
all living and in good health. The following are their
names: Andrew Mercer, Mary Ann Mercer, and
Alexander Mercer.
Janet Mercer, the youngest of our children, is still
living with us, endeavoring to make us, her parents,
as happy as possible, and we have very great reason
to be thankful and to Bless God for all his goodness
towards us, for we are both of us in good health,
although I am in my 64th year of my age, and my
wife is in her 60th.
It is now time for me to say something about myself,
since I was married in the year 1801. At that time
I had two old horses and two old carts; but after the
wedding was over and all paid we had not £5. How-
ever, I drove on for years, always making a little every
year, until the year 1809 or 1810, when I began to build
the House, Stable and Barn on the South side of the
Back Row. This was not a good job, for although I got
in 1806 what my Father left, two acres of land and two
old Houses, where the new building is erected. This put
no cash into my hands, but I was Laird of the two
acres of land, and the money I had made since 1801
to 1810. With borrowing some money, I was able to
finish the whole concern. The houses answered very
well as long as I kept horses and carts, but when I
gave up keeping horses and had the houses to let, I
then felt the job of ever building them, for I never
could get the half of the interest in the way of rent,
they cost me in building. In the year 1819 I bought
that house on the side of this street near the West
Port of Selkirk, commonly called William Nicols, for
the sum of £2OO. I entered it in Whitsunday, 1819,
and kept it as a public house, selling spirits and ales,
for the space of 21 years between the year 1819 and


1830( ?.. I bought that house at the back of the new
one for the sum of £7O, and in the year 1835 I sold
the two houses for the sum of £400; taking a tact of
them for 5 years at the rent of £22 yearly. In the
year 1840 my tact was out, so I left off the public
house-keeping and took the upper flat of that house
on the North side of Selkirk prison on the new road,
which belonged to Simon Little Canter. And now at
the Whitsunday of 1841. I will give a just account
of the expenses of one year’s living for my Wife
Janet and self. For provisions, soap and candles,
£25/8/6; for coals, 78 cwt. at I/, £3/18/-; for dry
sticks for kindling the fire, 3/-; for house rent, £7.
Altogether £36/9/6. The above is a just statement.
The following is the price of provisions at Whit-
sunday, 1841:—Oatmeal, per boll, 36/-; barley, per
do., 28/-; peas, per do., 28/-; three-quarter loaf, 9d.;
2nd do., Bd.; Beef, per lb., 6d.; Mutton, 6d.; Fresh
Butter, 10^d.; Salt Butter, lid.; Eggs, per doz., 7d.;
Candles, 7d. per b.; Snuff and Tobacco, per oz., 3d.;
Tea, per lb., 5/4; Loaf Sugar, 1/-; Brown Sugar, Bd.
Enclosed land near the town, per acre, £7O; not en-
closed, nearly £6O. A good young cow, four or five
years old, £l5; a good young Horse, £2B to £3O. A
new calved calf, from 35/- to 22/-; a Sow, 13/-; a
good Black Suit, £4; a good Hat, 21/-; a Pair of
Shoes, 9/6; To Let Land about the town will give
£2/15/- to £3 per acre. A carter with two good horses
and carts gets, per day, 9/-; a Laborer gets, per day,
1/8 to if.
It may be thought by some of my descendants that I
had a very idle life all the time I kept the Public House;
but whoever may think so, they are wrong, for I kept on
my horses and carts till the 1825, when I sold all off,
and let my land and houses. I had the auctioneering
to attend to and a number of years before I gave up
keeping horses. I accepted of being treasurer to the


Mason Lodge of Selkirk, which office as treasurer,
Master and Assistant Manager, I held to the year
1840, except two or three years about the year 1824.
I accepted of being treasurer to the Associate Congre-
gation of Selkirk, which office I held as treasurer for
7 years. About the same time I was treasurer and
manager for some years, till it was given up, in watch-
ing the churchyard, as it was supposed at the time that
the dead was taken from their resting place. In the
year 1835 I accepted of being Dean of Guild in the
borough of Selkirk, which office I held for 4 years.
Having performed these offices without fee or reward,
and as the year 1840 was now approaching, when I was
to give up Public-house keeping, I thought it proper
to give up every office and enter to my new lodging,
having nothing to do except the auctioneering. Having
now said all that I think proper about my Father, myself
and my family up to Whitsunday, 1841, I now conclude
for the present, and if it please God to spare me a
little longer, if anything occur worth about, I shall not
fail to write it down. —Signed, Alexander Mercer,
Selkirk, 10th June, 1842.
This day my youngest daughter was married to
William Cowan, a respectable man in the place, both
of them the same age, born in 1814. He has not been
learned to any trade. He is at present, and has been
for some years, back foreman in preparing the cloth for
dressing in Messrs. Brown’s Manufacturing House, at
the head of Dunsdealhaugh.
William Mercer, my youngest son, Gardener at
Naming, got an addition to his family of a daughter
on the Ist August, 1842, and on the 4th September she
was baptised Margaret. I now hear from a man who
has come from New York that James Mercer is dead,
and has left no family.


This day, the 10th November, 1842, Andrew Lang,
Esq., Sheriff clerk of Selkirk, died. For 26 years he
and I have been most intimately acquainted, and during
all that time I have been doing business less or more
with him, and I can honorably declare I never saw a
frown on his face, nor heard an angry word come out
of his mouth. About two years ago he had a shock of
palsy, which confined him mostly to his room, and often
to his bed; and this morning he took a second, which
cut him off in the course of two hours. I will revere
his memory as long as I live, and I wish my offspring
to his offspring for the fathers' sake.
This day, Thursday, 15th December, 1842, N.
Pringle, Esq., of Clifton, died at Naming at 2 o’clock
a.m. His remanis were taken from Naining to the
place of interment in Morebattle Churchyard, the fam-
ily burying ground, on Tuesday, the 20th. The hearse,
and those invited to the funeral, left Naining at 8 a.m.
The Magistrates and Town Council of Selkirk, along
with a great number of inhabitants of Selkirk, met the
funeral at the West End of the town, and accompanied
it on its way for half a mile and then returned home
in good order, every man to his own home. Mrs.
Douglas and her daughter, Miss Douglas, is heir to all.
Selkirk, Ist March, 1843.
Since the year 1842, and even before that time, our
town of Selkirk has been very much frequented with
beggars passing and re-passing through the country,
seeking their meat. About the beginning of the year
1843 all the respectable inhabitants of the town thought
of putting a stop to the begging in the following way:
There was a public meeting called by the Magistrates
and that it was agreed to make a high Asylum. Four-
teen of the respectable householders, consisting of
Bailies, Ministers, Doctors and Lawyers, were appoint-
ed as a committee to carry the plan into effect. The


committee met. A house was taken, a man and his wife
were engaged to keep the house clean and make the beg-
gars porridge night and morning. They also appointed
a clerk and treasurer. The treasurer I accepted of
and two others as sub-committee to manage the whole
in as quiet and cheap a way as possible. The town
was divided into five districts and two of the committee
were appointed to each district to call upon the house-
holders in order to raise money, and in two days I had
put into my hand £2B. We allow 6 ozs. oatmeal for
each supper and each breakfast. The fitting up of the
house for the Asylum in beds and blankets and other
small things cost between £8 and £9. It is now a month
since it began, and is likely to answer the end of stop-
ping begging to our full expectation.
About two years ago it was thought by a number of
the inhabitants of the town of Selkirk that a consider-
able number of the poorer classes were neglecting the
education of their children, which was believed for
want of ability and not carelessness. A public meet-
ing was called in order to take the case into consider-
ation. It was then agreed to erect a charity school
There were 9 directors appointed, of which I was one.
These directors were to try and raise money by sub-
scription, take a school-house, engage a schoolmaster,
and judge who is worthy of receiving the benefit of the
teacher. We allowed the teacher the sum of £36 per
year, and the chance of night school for young men
who may be inclined to pay him for that instruction.
The number allowed to attend the day school
was 66. The parents who may wish one, two or three
(at the most) of their children to be admitted applied
to me or more of the directors. When a number of
applications were made, that director calls a meeting
of the whole, the applicants’ case is considered and it
is very seldom the applicant is refused unless there are
strong reasons for so doing. There are at present at-


tending the school, and has been since it began, 34
boys and 34 girls. The girls receive one hour each
day instruction from a woman teaching them sewing,
for which we pay her £4. The good this school is
doing is beyond all calculation.
This day, the 20th March, 1843, I have accepted the
office of treasurer once more to the Mason Lodge. I
gave it up more than two years ago, intending at that
time not to have any more to do with Lodge affairs,
but the person who followed me in this treasurership
having died, I was much pressed by the Brethren to
take the books at least for a short time, it being neither
troublesome nor difficult to me to keep things. There
is a small fund in Selkirk of money, and has been for
a number of years past, called the Cholera fund. It
was collected when the Cholera was so very severe in
the country around, although it did not enter into Sel-
kirk. There was a soup kitchen erected, and for some
months soup was given to the poor of the place. When
the Cholera left the country around us, the soup kitchen
was given up and the money that was left was appoint-
ed to help of any very poor family in distress. There
was a treasurer and two assistants appointed. The ap-
plicant went to one of the assistants, and told his need.
If he was worthy, he got an order for a small sum, he
then went to the other. He also signed the order, then
he went to the treasurer, presented his or her order,
and received what was allowed. I fulfilled the office of
assistant for 6 years, and at the end of that time our
treasurer left Selkirk, in July, 1842. I took the book
and the remainder of the cash and is still carrying on
the same system, until the money be all given out.
So at present I hold the Night Asylum Book, the
Cholera Book and the Mason Lodge Book, and putting
all together they are very little trouble to any person
who wishes to be serviceable to his fellow-men.
(Signed) A. Mercer.


This day, the 12th April, 1843, my youngest daughter
Janet, who was married on the 10th June, 1842, to
William Cowan, as before mentioned, had a daughter
about S o’clock in the afternoon, and in proper time
she was baptised as Margaret.
Selkirk, 26th May, 1843.
Another year of my life is past. I left Simon
Little’s house at the Whitsunday, 1842, and came to
Robert Hope’s house on the Hawick Road. The ex-
penses for the last year for my wife and myself are
nearly the same as last year.
There has been a very great confusion for these two
years past in the Church of Scotland between the in-
trusion party and the non-intrusion party. The non-
intrusion have had many meetings in Edinburgh in
order to arrange matters how they should proceed, and
after much thought and consideration they came to
the resolution of appointing a committee of their num-
ber to meet in London and await upon Sir Robert Peel,
who was Prime Minister, and inform him of their
grievances, and what he thought they ought to do in
order that they may remain ministers of the church
with a good conscience. Accordingly, Dr. Chalmers
and Cardies and several others went to London, got a
conversation with Sir R. Peel, but he and his colleagues
were deaf to all that could be said on the subject. So
they returned home and met their party and resolved to
lay their case before the House of Parliament. The
Hon. Fox. Maitle. Member for Perth, took in hand to
bring a bill that the church should have no connection
with the State. After many nights discussion, Sir R.
Peel and his party threw out the Bill by a large major-
ity ; the non-intrusion, to the number of more than 400,
who had signed their names to leave the church, if the
Bill was thrown out, all assembled at Edinborgh on the
18th May, 1843, that day being the day appointed. The


General Assembly do meet, and after a very short con-
versation the whole of the non-intrusion Ministers left
the Assembly, with Dr. Chalmers at the headj and went
to a place they had appoined to assemble, after forming
themselves into a church which they called the Free
Presbyterian Church. They also appointed Dr. Chal-
mers their Moderator, and after a few speeches from
some of the oldest of them, they parted, highly pleased
with what they had done. Every person who knows
anything about the transaction must allow these Non-
intrusion Ministers great credit for what they have
done. They have thrown up their Manses, their
Glebes and their stipends for conscience sake and left
themselves, their wives and families to the goodwill of
the people for their support.
Ist January, 1844.
This last year, 1843, is now gone by, and although
I can say with truth I do not murmur or repine at the
works and ways of God; yet may say it has been a
trying year for my wife and self. Our beloved
daughter, Mrs. Renwick, was in her ordinary health
on Saturday, the 23rd day of September, at 1 o’clock
mid-day, and on Sabbath morning at 10 o’clock she
departed life amidst her bereaved family. She left
eight children, whose names are all mentioned a few
leaves back in this book. What made the dispensation
of God more heavy, Mr. Renwick, her husband, was
from home when the melancholy death happened. I
was there when he arrived. Honest man; but I wish
I may never see such a meeting again in my life.
William Mercer, his wife and four children, along with
his oldest brother, Andrew, left Selkirk on the 16th
November, 1843, for Montrose, to start the baker trade,
no place being likely to cast up for him as a gardener,
his old master being dead, the establishment being all
laid aside at Naining.


27th May, 1844.
Since Whitsunday, 1843. to 1844, the expense of
living: Provision, soap and candles, £2l/3/6; for
coals, £2/13/-; for kindling, 5/2 —£24/2/-. For the
three years past I have paid for Poor Ministers' Sti-
pends, Road Money, Society, clothes when wanted, etc.
etc., and at an average per year £25. I have neglected
to mention the house rent, which is £4.
I should have said, before writing the above state-
ment, that I have left Robert Hopes house on the road
leading to Hawick, which I have been in for the last
two years, and came to the Northern rooms of the 2nd
flat of that house in the flesh market close or wind,
which formerly belonged to late Andrew Gray Wright
in Selkirk.
24th September, 1844.
There is now one year gone by since our beloved
daughter, Mrs. Renwick, died, and it is this day as
fresh in our memory as it was the day it happened.
It is also one year on the 16th November, 1844, since
William Mercer, my youngest son, who was Gardener
at Naming, but lost his situation on account of the
death of his master, Mr. Pringle, of Clifton, went
to Montrose and began the Bakery business in the hope
of providing for his family and bettering his circum-
stances, But how short is the way some men see
before them. Before 9 short mouths went around there
was a dead loss of £9O, which ruined him and cost me
something very considerable. He returned home to
Selkirk with his wife and family at the end of August,
and is just now working for Mr. Robert’s Manufactur-
ing Cloth Mill at Selkirk. Millaugh, for the support of
his wife and family. From what has befallen him I
would not advise any person to begin any business,
when he knows nothing about it.


19th November, 1845.
1 have said, in a former part of this book, “if any-
thing should happen worth recording, I would write it
down for the information of those hands this book may
fall into.” The Summer and Harvest, 1845, has been
a very soft and rainy season, with the exception of a
day now and then of sunshine. We had rain every
day, less or more. It required the greatest attention
and diligence on the part of the farmer to get the crop
cut down and brought home to the Barn Yard in safety,
and although the quality is not so good as in some
former years, the quantity is not so far short. The
greatest loss the workman will sustain is the failure of
the potato crop. There is not a field in this place and
all around the country but is affected less or more with
the disease. In many fields that I have seen myself
the 4th part of the crop was not free of the disease,
and in consequence of this, few or, they say, none of
the working people durst lay up potatoes for the winter.
This being the case, it will require a very considerable
quantity more of both Bread and Oatmeal. This day
is only the 19th November, so at present I will say
nothing of what the market may be through the Winter
and Spring, but if I live to that time, I will then take
notice what the price of provisions have been. At
present Oatmeal is 2/4 per stone, Barley Meal 1/6,
Flour 2/4.
26th March, 1846.
Up to this date we have had a very open winter, no
snow to speak of at all. The sowing of Oats has begun
almost everywhere. Every person who is willing to
work is fully employed, whether he is tradesman or
labourer, at an advance of wages. I believe the cause
of the rise is the high wages given to men who are
employed in carrying on the railway from Edinburgh
to Hawick. These wages are from 18/- to 22/- per


week. It might have been expected that Meal, Barley
and Flour would have been higher on account of the
want of potatoes, for I am very certain that few fam-
ilies in the town has got any benefit from them through
the Winter on account of the disease which they were
affected with. The markets are much the same as they
were the last November;—Oatmeal, per st., 2/2; Bar-
ley, 1/6; Flour, 2/4. A labouring man with us got
from 2/- per day to 2/6. The four-quarter loaf, 9d.;
2nd do., Bd.; Coals have been very dear this Winter,
not less per cwt. than 1/3. Fresh Butter, per lb., lOd.;
Salt, 1/-; Eggs, 6d. per doz; Candles, per lb., 6d.;
Raw Sugar, per lb., 7d.; Loaf do., 9d.; Tea, Tobacco
and Snuff the same as last. Seed Oats, per boll, 24/-;
Seed Barley, 25/-. Town debt, for which they have to
pay interest at per cent., £14,222.
16th November, 1846.
It is now one year this day since William Mercer,
my youngest son’s wife, left Selkirk with her whole
family to meet with her husband, he being more than a
year in Glasgow before endeavoring to get such a situ-
ation as would enable him to bring up his family in a
lawful and honorable way. When the family went to
Glasgow there were five children, whose names are as
follows: —Andrew, Mary Ann, Alexander, Margaret,
Elizabeth.
Ist January, 1847.
This has been, and is likely to be, a very hard Winter
for the working people. The failure of the potato crop
is very severely felt, not one family in the town having
a single potato that I can hear of. The market since
Christmas to the New Year has been as follows: —
Oatmeal, per stone, 2/6; Barley, 1/10; Pearl Barley,
2/2; Flour, 2/2; Peas Meal, 2/-; Pork and Ham, per
lb., Bd.; Beef and Mutton, 6d.; Eggs, 1/-; Raw Sugar,
7 d.; Tea, per oz., 3fd.; Coals, per cwt., 1/5 ; Snuff and
Tobacco, 3d.; Loaf Sugar, per lb., 9d.


13th January, 1847.
This day the Oatmeal is selling at £3 per load, which
is 20 stones. January 14th, Oatmeal, per stone, 3/2;
four-quarter loaf, lOd.; 2nd do., 9d. There has been
this same week a subscription through this town and
neighbourhood on behalf of the poor starving High-
landers. I myself was one of the collectors, and not-
withstanding the smallness of the place, and not many
rich among us, the sum collected amounted to £9O.
January 20th: the Oatmeal, per boll, £3/3/6; Barley,
£2/2/-.
19th October, 1847.
There are very few potatoes in this part of the coun-
try. At this time any that have been sold through the
harvest have been very dear. The price has been gen-
erally not less than Bd. per capful, which takes seven
capfuls to make a bushel. At the above date the Oat-
meal is 2/- per stone; Barley Meal and Peas, 1/6;
American Flour, 2/6; Loaf, Bd., second, 7d.
3rd January, 1848.
There are very few potatoes among the common
people, which is a great loss to them, and if it was not
that bread and meal is very reasonable, many would be
very ill off. There are a great number can get only
half work, and a good many can get no work at all.
Prices of provisions are as follows:—Loaf, 7d.;
Oatmeal, per stone, 1/11; Barley, 1/3; Potatoes, per
capful, Bd.; Carrots, per stone, Bd.; American Flour,
2/6; Coals, per cwt, 1/1; Best Sugar, 6^d.; Second,
S^d.; Beef, 7d.; Mutton, 6d.; Tea, Tobacco and Snuff
the same as last year. Interest on borrowed money is
high everywhere.
27th April, 1848.
Extraordinary alterations have taken place within
these few years past respecting my family. Andrew,


my oldest son, is still working as a journeyman Baker
when he can get work, never been able as yet to begin
for himself again. Francis Renwick, my good son who
lost his good wife, my oldest daughter, is still at Mus-
selburgh carrying on a great business along with a Mr.
Livingstone in the wine and spirit trade.; and although
his wife, my daughter, is for ever gone from our sight
in this world, yet he is kindness and attention to his
eight children, whose names are recorded in this book,
which is highly honorable to himself and gratifying to
all his connections. And I will say of him that his
kindness to us and all our friends is far beyond what we
could have expected. I say here, he is a good, kind son
to us all. I could say far more about him, but for the
present I will stop with one single sentence. I know
that he is a man with the fear of God in his heart, and
that is enough for me.
William Mercer, my second, son alive, is still at
Glasgow, and by looking back you will see he went to
Montrose in 1843 to begin the baking trade which
turned out to be a very bad job. He went to Glasgow
in June, 1845, and his wife and family went to him in
1846. Since he went to Glasgow there has been two
born, one, a son, who died soon after he was born,
the other, a daughter, is to be named Helen. His
work at Glasgow has been, for a long time back. Clerk
to the Union Canal, but new arrangements taking place,
his work was no more needed. His wife has been keep-
ing a grocer’s shop for two years back, which cost her
very much labour. Janet Mercer, my youngest daugh-
ter, who was married on the 10th June, is now going to
leave Selkirk. A short time after she was married,
her husband, William Cowan, lost his health and was
unable to do the work he was accustomed to do. I,
therefore, thought it the most provident plan, in order
that he might be able of himself to do for himself,
wife and family, if he should have any children, to set


him agoing as a grocer. This being doneHn 1842, he
did pretty well as long as people were able to pay for
what they got, but when the year 1847-1848 came, and
the want of work, with the scarcity of money, the
people were no longer able to pay him for what they
got. This was a death blow to good and honest Wm.
Cowan. He then saw, and I saw, that some other
thing must be done for the support of the family, and
gave up shop-keeping altogether. He accordingly went
to Edinburgh to see if anything could be got to do,
so the next day he fell in with one of his old mer-
chants whom he had dealt with in Selkirk, who engaged
him to be his shop-keeper, for which I never can be
thankful enough to the giver of all our blessings for
such a seasonable employment. His wife and five chil-
dren are to join him on Whitsunday first, whose nomes
are as follows: —Margaret, Samuel, Elizabeth, Jessie
and Helen, the twins.
Now the consequences of all these great changes to
us, their parents, in a worldly point of view, is very
trying. lam at this time in my 71st year of my age,
and my wife, their mother, is in her 67th year; two
frail old people, and not one of our near and dear
friends near us to give us the least assistance in a day
of trouble; but there is no help for it. We hope it
will be for their good, and therefore we submit the
more willingly to our own inconvenience.
3rd May, 1848.
The prices of provisions in Selkirk just now are as
follows:—Oatmeal, per stone, 1/11; Barley, 1/4; Peas,
1/6; Pearl Barley, 1/10; Butcher Meat: Beef, per lb„
7d.; Mutton, 6d.; Pork, 6d. Potatoes, per bushel, 3/6;
by the capful, 7d.; Carrots, per stone, Bd.; Coals, per
cwt, 1/2; when taken by the cart load, 1/-. Tea, per
oz., 3|d.; Coffee, IJ.; Eggs, 6d.; Salt Butter, per
lb., 1/-; Fresh, lOd.; Salt Herrings, each 1/-; Sugar,
per lb., 6J,d.; Rice, per lb., 3d.; Beef and Ham, per
lb., Bd.


26th September, 1848.
William Cowan, his wife, Janet Mercer, and their
family are still residing in Edinburgh. They have
been keeping their health all very well, which is a
matter of very great thankfulness to God for such a
very great blessing. In the year 1832 that alarming
disease called Cholera broke out in Edinburgh and
towns and villages around, and very many were carried
off by it, not only in and about Edinburgh and the
places around it, but in many other places in Scotland,
which continued for a very lone time, and now this
year, 1848, it has, in the end of September or the be-
ginning of October,- has broke out in Edinburgh, and
Leith and Newhaven. Since it began, up to this day,
the 31st October, there has been considerable numbers
carried off by it. I earnestly hope and pray that God
may keep it from spreading.
15th October, 1848.
The Cholera is still continuing, and around Edin-
burgh there has been a considerable number of deaths
and cases, most of them alarming. Some of them in
good health in the morning and in their graves before
6 o’clock p.m. In a place called Cranhead, in the
neighborhood of Dalkeith, it has been, and is, very
alarming. One day there were no less than seven
funerals.
25th December, 1848.
The cholera is now spreading both far and wide.
It is now in elso, Jedburgh, Coldstream, Musselburgh,
Prestonpanns, Glasgow. In all these places there have
been many deaths.
12th January, 1849.
This day the Cholera made its first appearance at
the Dunsdealhaugh, and on the day following there was


the first death. It is agreed that the committee of the
Parochial Board met every day in the town hall at 1
o’clock to hear the report of the doctor, and this day,
Monday, the 15th, they meet accordingly, and the
report was 6 cases at Dunsdealhaugh, but as yet none
in the town. 17th: Still no deaths, the cases are re-
ported favorable. No new cases are reported to-day.
18th: One new case, and one of the cases at Dunsdeal-
haugh took a very unfavorable turn. It being the
fourth day since he, Walter Cowan, seized. He died
on Friday morning at three o’clock. The one new
case reported to be in the town yesterday has proved
fatal. She died some time on Friday morning and
was buried at 10 o’clock the same day. Friday, the
19th and 20th, no new cases. To-day, as far as I have
heard, no deaths, since Friday morning. It is now
Saturday night, at 10 o’clock, Monday, the 22nd, there
has been one Cholera funeral from Dunsdealhaugh,
and two new cases. 22nd: There has been one death
and several new cases. 24th: There has been two
funerals and some new cases. 25th: There has been
five new cases and one funeral, a young man. Friday,
the 26th: There has been two funerals. One of them
washed the clothes of one who had Cholera. She took
the disease and very soon died. 27th: There has been
three cases reported to-day, all of them somewhere
about Dunsdealhaugh. 28th: There has been one fun-
eral from Selkirk Mills. 29th; No new cases; no
funeral. 30th: No new cases; no funeral. 31st: No
new cases; no funeral. Ist February: No new cases;
no funeral. 2nd: There has been a considerable num-
ber complaining of severe bowel complaint. For many
days many of them has severe vomiting and purging,
and two new cases. 3rd : No new cases, and no funeral
since Sabbath, 28th January. We have now great rea-
son to hope that the disease is now on the decline. May
God grant it be so. Monday, sth: No new cases to-day


nor yesterday. 6th Nov.: No new cases as far as I
have heard. 7th Nov.; Cases to-day reported, but the
bowel complaint is still very prevalent. The Bth: The
allarum is much abated now, I have heard nothing to-
day. 9th Nov.: No new cases. It is hoped we will
soon be free altogether. 10th : Still no new cases worth
taking notice of. 12th; I have heard of no new cases
to-day nor yesterday.
12th February , 1849.
As the town is now almost declared free of Cholera,
I may here mention that it first broke out at the Duns-
dealhaugh on the 12th January, 1849, and since it
began there has been fifty cases, and of these cases
there has been thirteen deaths altogether. At the first
it appeared to be very alarming, so it was thought
proper to send to Edinburgh for a doctor to assist our
own doctor at no less pay than 30/- daily, or £lO/10/-
per week. He remained in the town for four weeks
and then returned to his home with £42 in his pocket.
I cannot close this account of Cholera without giving
my cordial approbation of the conduct of Dr. Anderson
and his son, Dr. Henry, for their attention and their zeal
and anxiety for the preservation of health and the re-
covery of those who were seized with Cholera. The
different committee deserve the highest praise for their
attention in discharging their duties each of them were
appointed to perform. I will here also mention that
William Park, who is Inspector of the Poor, made
himself very useful in looking after those who were
seized with Cholera, respecting their worldly circum-
stances. His conduct in this matter pleased the inhabi-
tants so well that they have made him a present of the
sum of £B/7/-. which was made up by subscription in
a few hours, and presented to him in the presence of
a large meeting of inhabitants of the town.


18th February, 1849.
And now that the alarming disease is over, we cer-
tainly have great reason of thankfulness to God in his
kindness in not only removing the Cholera, but also
regarding the reasonableness of the necessaries and
comforts of life. Our coals, which formerly cost
1/- to 1/5 per cwt. can be got for Bd. or 9d. per cwt.
The cause of this cheapness is that they are brought
from Galashiels, by railway, which took place on the
Bth February, 1849. The following is the price of
provisons just now: —Oatmeal, per stone, 1/5; Barley
Meal, 1 /2; Pot Barley, 1/8; Peas Meal, 1 /4; Beef,
per lb., 6d.; Beef Ham, Bd.; Pork Ham, 7d.; Brown
Sugar, sjd.; Loaf, 5-,d.; Carrots, per stone, 7d.; Pota-
toes, per bushel, 2/-; Tea, per oz., 3^d.; Coffee, 1/4;
Eggs, per doz., Bd.; Salt Butter, per lb., lOd.; Tobac-
co, per oz., 3d.; Seed Oats, per boll, 6 bushels, 14/6;
Seed Barley, per boll, il; Seed Peas, per boll, 24/-.
30th March, 1849.
This day our oldest son, Andrew, left our houses and
our County for America. He sailed by Greenock on
sth April. He landed at New York in good health
in twenty-seven days, having a very good passage
through the mighty ocean. He went to Boston in two
days afterwards, and next day he got employment at
his own trade, being a Baker. Received his first letter
from him 31st May.
7th July. 1849.
This day, my youngest son, William Mercer, and his
wife, Betty Ferguson, and his six children, all of them
sailed on the above day at 2 o’clock in the morning
from Broomalaw, for Boston. The names and births
of his children are as follows:—Andrew Mercer, born
23rd June, 1835; Mary Ann Mercer, 22nd December,
1839; Alexander Mercer, 18th October, 1840; Mar-
garet Mercer, Ist August, 1843; Elizabeth Mercer, 2nd


August, 1845; Helen N. Mercer, 28th March, 1848.
A son born in America, called William; a daughter
born in America, called Magdaline, 25th October, 1852,
the ninth child was born on the 9th June, 1854, and
called Janet.
The names and births of all Francis Renwick and
Betty Mercer’s children are as follows:—Margaret
Renwick, born 16th October, 1824; Isabella Renwick,
born 10th November, 1826; Thos. Renwick, born 29th
March, 1828; Elizabeth Renwick, Ist January, 1830;
Alexander Mercer Renwick, Bth October, 1832; Fran-
cis Renwick, 12th June, 1835; Georgina Mill Renwick,
22nd February, 1838; James Robertson Renwick, 10th
October, 1840.
As I have put down on the foregoing pages, William
Mercer and his wife, Betty Ferguson, Francis Renwick
and his wife, Betty Mercer, all the names of their
children and when bom,l think it proper to put down
the names, and when they were born, of the children
belonging to William Cowan and Janet Mercer his
wife up to this date.
Margaret Cowan, born the 12th April, 1843; S.
Cowan, born 30th October, 1844; Elizabeth Cowan,
4th May, 1846; Jessie and Helen Cowan, 30th Novem-
ber, 1847. A son born, named Alexander, 20th No-
vember, 1849, but died on 23rd April, 1851, aged 1
year and 5 months, born at Dumfries on the 27th July,
1852, Walter Cowan.
My son William went to America on the 7th July,
1849, and I got his first letter from Boston on the 19th
September, 1849; I wrote him back on the 26th Sep-
tember.
Our beloved minister, the Rev. Geo. Lawson, died
this morning in his own house at 7 o’clock in the morn-
ing. He died very suddenly and unexpectedly, he died
in a moment. He was very much respected by his
congregation, the whole town indeed, and everyone of


the Presbytery. His funeral took place on Wednes-
day, the 19th; it was a very large funeral, and very
solemn indeed.
19th March, 1850.
The prices of provisions at the above date is as
follows:—Oatmeal, per stone. 1/2; Barley, lOd.; Peas,
1/2; Flour, 1/4; Best Pot Barley, 2/-; Beef, per lb.,
5d.; Mutton, 4Jd.; Loaf, Sd. The other smaller arti-
cles are much the same as last.
7th April, 1850.
Dr. Anderson, my oldest acquaintance in Selkirk,
who I have been intimately acquainted with for 50
years, died in his house on Sabbath morning, aged 63
years. He was very much respected in town and
country all around.
25th September, 1850.
The first Presbytery that the session church had was
in the Autumn of 1733, when the Rev. Ebenezer
Erskine was appointed Moderator. In 1746, Mr.
Mathew was settled in Midholm, a place a few miles
south-east of Selkirk, when the seceders in Etrict,
Yarrow, Selkirk and Lishkirk were all included in his
congregation. Mr. Moor, Mr. John Lawson’s great-
grandfather, was placed in Selkirk congregation in the
year 1758. He was 12 years their minister. Dr.
Lawson, Mr. Moor’s son-in-law, was placed in the
same congregation in the year 1770. He was their
minister for 49 years. Mr. A. Lawson, son of Dr.
Lawson, was placed in the year 1834. He was twelve
years their minister. His brother, Mr. G. Lawson,
was placed in the year 1832. He was twelve years
their minister. Mr. John Lawson, son of Mr. A.
Lawson, was placed in the same congregation on the
25th September, 1850.


28th May, 1850.
On account of the yearly expense of keeping my
house in provision, coals, rents, since the year 1840
to the year 1850, being just 10 years.
From May, 1840, to May, 1841 .. £25 8 0
From May, 1842, to May, 1843 .. 20 2 0
From May, 1844, to May, 1845 .. 18 12 0
From May, 1840, to May, 1847 .. 19 9 0
From May, 1848, to May, 1849 .. 22 0 0
Five Years’ Keeping £lO5 11 0
From May, 1841," to May, 1842 .. £25 5 0
From May, 1843, to May, 1844 .. 21 5 0
From May, 1845, to May, 1846 .. 19 18 0
From May, 1847, to May, 1848 .. 19 18 0
From May, 1849, to May, 1850 .. 18 IS 0
Five Years’ Keeping £lO5 1 0
Four years’ rent at £7 yearly, £2B; Six years’ rent
at £4, £24; ten years’ coal at 80 cwt. per year, at 1/-
per Cwt., £4O. There are public burdens, expenses for
a few clothes, etc., which I do not think it necessary
to mention, as some years they are less or more.
6th June, 1850.
I am very much afraid there is something going on
in our congregation amongst the Elders and Managers
which, I fear, may turn out not for the advantage of
the whole body, but I will watch their conduct, and
see who is to blame.
18th July, 1850.
As I have said before, our minister, the Rev. G.
Lawson, died on the 15th December, 1849. After his
death the congregation was supplied with young preach-


ers; but after six months the congregation took it into
their heads they would have a fixed Pastor. So they
agreed to apply to the Presbytery for a Moderation to
call a young preacher for their minister. The moder-
ation was granted and fixed for the 19th June, 1850.
When that day arrived, the Moderation took place, but
before that day arrived, the congregation differed in
opinion who should be their minister to be named.
The one half wished to have the one they liked, and
nearly the other half wished to have the one they liked,
and so when the time came, the minister who conducted
the business called for the names of the candidates.
Mr. J. Lawson was proposed and seconded, the first
vote for Mr. Lawson. He had 282 votes. The con-
duct of the Russel-ites is, and was, very unchristian.
In place of falling in with the majority and signing
the call, as they ought to have done, they went in a
body to a large room in the town and joined together
not to take their seats in the meeting-house, and to do
everything in their power to prevent the call being
sustained. The private meeting, that of four Elders
and the Russel-ites had, both before and after the
moderation, is beyond my description. Almost every
night they have meetings, forming plans some way or
other to defeat the sustaining of the call. Our Sacra-
ment was on the Sabbath after the Moderation, and
very few of he Russel-ites attended, and the next
Sabbath, being the second Sabbath after the Moder-
ation, what did they do ? Can it be believed ? In plate
of going to the meeting-house, their ordinary place of
worship, they went to the Mason Lodge, old and young,
and the Elders gave an explanation of the Scriptures;
and this is not all they have done showing their ill-will.
They even would not allow children of theirs to attend
Sabbath night school, which has been kept in the meet-
ing-house for many years. There is something the
Russel-ites offered to be guilty of is very unprecedent-


ed. They proposed to divide the congregation into
different districts and appoint one to each district to
get the members to sign their names to vote for Mr.
Russel, but this becoming known, the plan was given
up on account of the shamefulness of such conduct.
On the Isth day of July, the day before the Presbytery
met, four of the Elders were all Russel-ites, and whose
names are Turnbull, Chisholm, Tait and Johnstone,
demanded a meeting of Session and produced a petition
signed by all they could get by means I consider very
unlawful praying the Presbytery not to sustain
the call for Mr. J. Lawson. The Presbytery
met on the 16th July, and one of the com-
missioners, Mr. James Kennedy, presented the call
signed by 331 members and along with an adherent
paper signed by 50 at and above 13 years of age.
Mr. Russel’s commissioners presented their paper
against sustaining the call signed by 331 members and
adherent paper signed 60 adherents of not above 10
years of age. Mr. Kennedy was then permitted to
give his reasons in support of the call, which he did
in a most powerful and elegant speech which made the
Russel-ites change their mind and fall from saying a
single word in opposition to Mr. J. Lawson’s call, and,
of course, the call was sustained. But what did the
four Elders do? They presented a paper praying the
Presbytery to grant them a dejunction, which was ac-
cordingly done. The Presbytery also appointed one
of their number to go to Selkirk the next Sabbath to
constitute them as the 2 congregations of Selkirk.
28h September, 1850.
The dissenters, or them who left the first congre-
gation of Selkirk because they could not get their will,
has called the object of their choice. Mr. Russel has
also accepted the call and will be placed some time
about the end of November. The managers of the


new congregation are doing what they can to get their
new house ready for the placing. -
30th September, 1850.
Mr. Andrew Lawson was inducted to the first con-
gregation of Selkirk on the Ist June, 1824. His first
sermon was preached from Malachi 2 and 7. Mr. G.
Lawson was inducted on the 31st May, 1837. His first
sermon was from Romans 1 and 15. Mr. J. Lawson
was placed on the 25th September, 1850; his first
sermon was from Romans IS and 30.
As I have said, Mr. J. Lawson was placed in our
congregation on the 25th September, 1850. Mr. Gun-
ion, of Hawick, preached the sermon, and Mr. William-
son, of Melrose, put the questions of the formula in a
very serious and solemn manner, which was answered
by Mr. Lawson in the same solemn way. The same
way was gone through with Mr. William Lawrence,
who was ordained a missionary for Jamaica. Mr.
Williamson addressed Mr. Lawrence, and Mr. Somer-
ville, from Edinburgh, addressed Mr. Lawrence, both
of them in a very feeling and affectionate manner
during the whole service. There could not be fewer
than 1100 or 1200 present all the time. After the ser-
vice was over, the Presbytery and a number of the con-
gregation, along with a number of respectable gentlemen
of the town and neighborhood, sat down to dinner in the
head inn. The number that sat down to dinner was
60, when full expression was given to the affectionate
sympathy and cordial welcome with which Mr. Lawson
was received by all classes in his native town, of his
being ordained to occupy the pulpit of his distinguished
ancestors. There was a service in the evening at
which no less than 1200 attended. The people were
highly entertained with the addresses of the Ministers.
In the intervals between the addresses, pieces of music
were sung by a select band with very superior taste,


which added largely to the enjoyment of the evening.
Before the meeting separated, Mr. Lawson was present-
ed with a splendid Pulpit Gown, and his address after-
wards was highly gratifying to everyone who heard
him.
25th October, 1850.
This day, the 25th October, 1850, A. Mercer, born
the 16th March, 1828, only son of A. Mercer, my
oldest son, was married at Hawick to a very respect-
able young woman and of very respectable connections.
Her name is Catherine Laidlaw. Alex, served his time
at Hawick as a skinner and tanner, but not meeting
with employment in that line as he expected, he turned
his attention to the wool-picking trade and has wrought
at tha business for 18 months with Mr. Laidlaw, Man-
ufacturer, Hawick, who is full uncle to Alex’s wife.
30th December, 1851.
This day our congregation is free of debt of any
kind. Our beloved Minister is paid forward to Whit-
sunday, 1852, and our meeting-house is in the best of
repair, and no one can claim a farthing upon it.
12th November, 1850.
The Presbytery meet at Melrose this day, Tuesday.
Mr. Russel appeared and passed his trials, and the
Presbytery has fixed the 19th December for his ordin-
ation.
20th December, 1850.
The Presbytery met on the 19th as agreed upon and
witnessed ordination on Mr. Russel. He was ordained
in the Free Church. Mr. Law, minister of Innesbith-
en, conducted the business, the new going slowly on
and is not expected to be ready sooner than the month
of April or May, 1851. It is said that the new meet-
ing house will cost upwards of £BOO, and it is to hold
500 people.


15 th January, 1851.
Having a short description of the placing of
the Rev. J. Lawson, I shall now give a trust statement
of the debts our congregation was in when the Russel-
ites left our body. The Sacrament before they ran
from us, the books were obtained, and was found that
the debt amounted to no less than £360, and not a
single shilling to pay it with. The congregation then
saw plainly how they stood, with a stipend upon the
heads of £l6O yearly to our beloved young minister
with £lB interest. This being a true statement of our
affairs, the congregation came to the determination of
paying the debt or at least the greater part of it, so a
congregational meeting was called, and that meeting
appointed 24 collectors to call upon the members of the
congregation who lived in their neighborhood to receive
their subscriptions, and in the course of two weeks the
whole, or nearly the whole, was subscribed for. Our
worthy and good minister, Mr. J. Lawson, was the first
to subscribe, and he very handsomely subscribed £5O.
His good mother and his three sisters subscribed
£6/10/-, which sums were immediately paid at the
above date. I can say with truth that there is paid
already no less than £l6O, and in a few months the
whole will be paid off.
25th February, 1851.
It is three years, come the month of July, 1851,
since I was under the necessity of giving up the auction-
eering, in consequence of a very serious giddiness in
my head. Since it began it has rather increased than
decreased, and at this date I feel it is a great deal
worse. Whatever may be the result of this giddiness
I cannot say, but at present I am impressed with the
thought it will be the cause of my death. Whoever of
my friends may read this, however near or however
distant in relationship, however young or however


prosperous in the world, I advise them to remember
that they must meet with death, and after death the
j udgment.
26th February, 1851.
As I have mentioned the year that the Rev. A. Moir,
Dr. Lawson, Rev. A. Lawson, and the Rev. J. Lawson
were placed in the Selkirk congregation, I will also
mention the texts each of them took for their first
sermon, on the first Sabbath day. The Rev. A. Moir’s
text was Jeremiah, chapter 42, verses 4, S, 6. Dr.
Lawsons text was Romans 15 and 30th verse. Rev.
A. Lawson’s text was Malachi 2nd, and 7th verse.
Rev. G. Lawson’s text was Romans 15, and 30th verse.
Ist March, 1851.
It is now a year this month since I wrote down the
prices of provisions, which are as follows this year:—
Oatmeal, per stone, 1/4; Barley Meal, lid.; Peas Meal
1/-; Flour Meal, 1/6; Pearl Barley, 2/-; Beef, per lb.,
7d.; Mutton, 5d.; Loaf, 5d.; S. Butter, lOd. per lb.;
Sugar, lO^d,; Eggs, 7d.; Tea, per oz., 3^d.: Coals,
when taken by the cart load, per cwt, 9|d.; Carrots,
per stone, 7d.; Potatoes, per bushel, 1/6; Turnips used
for cows, 6d. per cwt.; Seed Oats, per boll, 13/9; Bar-
ley, 17/10; Peas, 23/-; Wheat, 30/-; Tobacco, per
oz.; Wages, per day, 1/6; two or three years land
about town, £4O per acre. In the year 1833 I sold a
house for £4OO, and this year I can buy it so low as
£l9O. Laboring here is ruined with the Irish, there
are so many of them.
6th March, 1851.
The first Wednesday of March has been the day
appointed a long time back for the hireing of Hinds
for the coming year, and this year there has been a
greater turn out of hinds than has been for some years


past. Many of them went home without being able to
find a place. Those who have not found a footing as
a hind must look after some other thing to do. A hind
with us, and every other place, must be master of three
qualifications, first a good plowman, second a good
sower, third, a good builder of corn. Those who can
take in hand to do those three qualifications, their
wages are generally as follows:—He has a house to
live in, and a small garden. In some case his wife,
or bondage if he keeps one, has to share in the harvest
for the house rent. He gets 65 stones of oatmeal
yearly. He gets one cow’s meat, he gets three cart-
loads of coal for driving his master’s horse, but he
has to pay for them at the hill. He gets three or four
hens and a sow, and 14 or 15 lbs. of potatoes. Of
course, but different countries have different ways of
paying these hinds.
sth April, 1851.
Our March Fair Day, always held on the sth April,
except that day be the Sabbath, it is the head hiring
day for single men and women for the summer half
year, and the last day of October has always been the
day held for the same purpose for the Winter half.
The fair day holds to-day. There is a great turn out
of young men and women. An active young man is
getting to-day £5/15/-. A stout young woman who
takes in hand to work out is getting £5/5/-.
9th April, 1851.
Time and Tide will no man bide. If I, Alex. Mer-
cer, and my beloved wife, Margaret Robertson, live to
the 28th day of August, we will on that day be married
50 years, our wedding being on that day, 1801, and I
can say, without the fear of contradiction, that we have
lived together all that long time in a very happy and
comfortable connection as man and wife. There is no


doubt we have had many trials and many difficulties to
encounter during our long married life. But when man
and wife agree together, see eye to eye, and use every
economy that is in their power, it is altogether wonder-
ful what they can accomplish. We have had no fewer
than 13 children, eight of them died in infancy, and the
other five all arrived to man and woman years, whose
names are as follows; Elizabeth, Andrew, James, Wil-
liam, and Janet. James was the first who broke up the
family. He went to America in 1828, and died there.
Elizabeth was married in the year 1825, to F. Renwick,
and a good, kind husband he was to her; she died on the
24th September, 1843, aged nearly 41 years. She had
eleven children, three of them died almost at their
birth. Andrew sailed for America on the sth April,
1849, and his brother sailed for the same place, with
his wife and six children, in July, 1849. Andrew’s
son is now married. Janet is the only one now left to
us whom we can look to for that comfort which parents
look for from their children, but the circumstances in
which she is now placed puts it now out of her power
to bestow that care and attention to her parents that
her love and respect has always been manifested by her.
She was married in the year 1842, to William Cowan,
a very respectable man, and in the year 1848 she and
her husband and all the family went to Edinburgh, rnd
if they are spared it is intended, at Whitsunday, 1851,
one and all of them to leave Edinburgh and go to
Dumfries to manage a new shop taken there, which
Mr. Gordon, his present master, has taken. This be-
ing the way Janet is placed, it is completely out of her
power to pay that care to her old and beloved parents
that her heart would incline her to do for them. Now
it may be thought by some of our descendants that by
the dispersion of our family we will be in a
very melancholy situation, but we are not so, and if
any of our descendants will take my advice, I will


mention two particular things which in all likelihood
will prevent despondency, and first, let everyone who
reads the above, endeavor to improve their time in
the days of their youth by laying up in their hearts and
minds a religious knowledge of the love of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that which is laid up in our hearts and
minds in our younger years will be of great service
to us in our old age, and if properly improved will
have a great effect in keeping away melancholy from
us; and in the second place, let every one who wishes
to enjoy comfort in their declining years, use every
lawful means in their power to provide and lay up what
they can spare in their younger days for old age, for I
cay say with truth and experience that it does not take
little to support old and frail people in their declining
years. If the second particular is strictly attended to,
it is of much service to keep away discontent and mel-
ancholy. Having now finished all that I intended to do
on the above subject, and if it shall please God to
bless the reading of these two particulars that I have
advised my descendants to follow and improve, I shall
think my trouble very well rewarded.
23rd April, 1851.
William Cowan left Selkirk in the month of Feb-
ruary, 1848, entered to Mr. Gordon. This day my
daughter Janet lost her youngest son, whose name was
Alex. Mercer Cowan. He, along with the rest of the
children, took the measles and for the last week of his
life was very sick indeed. He died, as I have said,
about the 23rd April, 1851, aged 1 year and 5 months.
2nd June, 1851.
Last being Whitsunday, William Cowan, his wife
and children left Edinburgh for Dumfries. Wm. Gor-
don, his master, having taken a shop there, wished
William Cowan to go and take the management. This


certainly shows what confidence his master puts in him,
and that he has behaved himself to the satisfaction of
Mr. Gordon for the three years he was with him in
Edinburgh.
28 th August, 1851.
This day 50 years, I, Alex Mercer, and Margaret
Robertson, my wife, were married together. Our wed-
ding day was on the 28th August, 1801. There is no
doubt that during that long period of time we have had
differences of opinion, but these differences never went
so far as commonly called an outcast. I think I may
say without the fear of contradiction that peace, love,
and good agreement between man and wife is one of
the greatest blessings they can receive, except the par-
don of all their sins.
7th January, 1852.
When our congregation agreed to pay the debt of the
congregation, it was resolved to have a soiree, so as I
have said the whole debt being paid off on the 30th
December, 1851, the soiree was to take place on the
6th January, 1852, so on that evening there was up-
wards of 900 tickets sold. There were six ministers
present. The Rev. J. Lawson was chairman, and the
best chairman I ever saw or heard.
14th September, 1852.
I am this day out gone 75 years of age. I have
very great reason to be thankful to God for his many
mercies toward me. My health is as good as it ever
was. I have no compaint as yet, except the giddiness
in the head, and it I do not ever expect to get altogether
free of.


20th September, 1852.
This day, Margaret Renwick, my grand-daughter,
was married in her father’s house in Musselburgh to a
young man the name of David Fraser. His home was
Glenurquhart, within 4 miles of Inverness. He is res-
pectable himself, and is respectably connected. His
Father is postmaster at Glenurquhart.
15th October, 1852.
This day, Thos. Renwick, my grandson, left his
father’s house in Musselburgh, with his fathers con-
sent, and sailed at Leith for Australia. May every-
thing that is good attend him, honest lad. Some time
after, his intended wife went to him and was married
to him in Australia.
28th August, 1853.
This day L Alex Mercer and Margaret Mercer, my
wife, has lived together in a happy and comfortable
state of no less than 52 years, being joined together
on the 28th August, 1801.
14th September, 1853.
I am this day out gone 76 years of age, being born
on the 14th September, 1777. I have certainly every
great reason to be thankful to God for his many mer-
cies towards me and my partner in life for such a long
period of years, and for the most part always comfort-
able and in good health.
27th October, 1853.
This harvest has been the most untoward and back-
ward that I remember for a long time back. The
harvest began about the middle of September, and for
two weeks it was very fine weather, as good as any
one could wish for, but on the first week of October
the rain began, and during the remainder of the month


■we had rain every day except two, to the great hurt
and damage to the crop. This is the 27th of the month
and here are thousands of stocks still in the fields,
quite unfit for the barnyard. 28th.—This is a remark-
ably soft day, rain and fog, and not a single air of
wind. This backward weather is the cause of pro-
visions. The loaf, through the Summer, rose from sd.
to 9d., which is the selling price this day. This is
now the 15th November. I think I may say that the
harvest is almost got over and I am very sorry to say
that the corn is very much damaged with great rains.
The price of provisions: Oatmeal, per stone, 2/4;
Barley, 1/10; Pot Barley, 2/4; Mutton, per lb., 7d.;
Sugar, Sd.; Coffee, 1/8; Butter, 1/-; Tea, per oz.,
3-|d.; Eggs, 10d.; Potatoes, per bushel, 2/6; Carrots,
per stone, Bd.; Beef Ham, 1/-; Pork Ham, Bd.; Flour,
per stone, 3/4. This day, 9th November, the quarter
loaf is now 9d. This day, the 17th January, the quar-
ter loaf is up to 9£d.
29th October, 1853.
By looking, it will be seen that our beloved Minister,
the Rev. Mr. J. Lawson, was placed in ohr First United
Presbyterian Church at Selkirk on the 2Sth September,
1850. He was then in good health, and continued to
be until the beginning of the year 1853. About that
time it was thought by his doctor that a little change
of air would do him good, so it was resolved that he
should go to Rothesay for a little time. He continued
there for four or five weeks and returned home much
improved in health and strength. But alack, his weak-
ness returned again and his doctor, along with others,
wished him to go to a place in the Highlands called
Oban, where the air would be far better for his weak-
ness, so he went to Oban and remained there for three
weeks. He then returned home pretty well for a time,
but on the end of September he was seized with a


throwing of blood, which not only alarmed himself,
but also his doctor and all his friends. It was then
agreed upon to go Edinburgh and have a consultation
with the principal doctors there. And so he and his
new doctor went to Edinburgh and met with three of
the most skilful doctors, and they all agreed with one
opinion that the only means they knew of for the res-
toration of his health was to go without delay to the
South of England, being the most proper place for him.
This being done, he left Selkirk on the 27th October,
1853, and arrived safe in Edinburgh the same day.
On Wednesday, the 2nd November, he left Edinburgh
and landed safely in Manchester the same evening.
He left Manchester and arrived safely in Cheltenham,
where he remained two days, and then set off for Tot-
ness, near Plymouth, in the County of Devonshire,
where he intended to remain for a while to see what the
mild air had for the restoration of his health. I hear
from the best authority that our beloved Minister has
left Totness and gone to the Isle of Wight to see if
he air will prove beneficial to his health. He returned
home on the end of May, 1854, but me leaving Selkirk
a few days before, I had not the happiness of seeing
him, and anything I hear about him is from report
and is not to be depended upon.
26th November, 1853.
This day, Saturday, Alex Renwick left his father’s
home in Musselburgh for Paris, in order to get some
more instruction as a doctor. If he keeps his health,
he is to remain for six months, and then return home
Dr. of Medicine.
16th February, 1854.
Janet Reid, wife of Andrew Mercer, my oldest son,
died at Hawick on Sabbath night, the 12th February,
1854, aged 54 years.


19th May, 1854.
I have to record on this page the greatest trial I
ever met with in this worldi the death of my beloved
wife. She died this day, aged 73 years and 3 months.
We had been married 52 years and 9 months. All
that time I can say with truth we never had a serious
outcast. She was all her life lovely and kind to me,
and now that she is removed from me by death, I will
respect her memory as long as I live. Signed, Alex-
ander Mercer.
Dumfries, 9th November, 1854.
I have been neairly six months here staying with
William Cowan and his wife, Janet Mercer, my
daughter. I will say with great truth that I have met
with great kindness and attention from the both, which
has been the means of making me far happier than I
ever expected to be. But O, how grieved we have been
this day by a letter we have received informing us of
the sudden and unexpected death of my excellent friend
and beloved son-in-law, Francis Renwick. He died
as it were in a moment on Tuesday, the 7th November,
1854, in the 52nd year of his life. He was a kind
husband, a loving father, and a warm friend to all
that was good and honorable. At his death he had
been nearly twenty years an Elder of the First U.P.
Congregation of Musselburgh, and the last year of his
life he was one of the present Bailies of the Borough.
If any look to page back, they will see the names of
all his children and their ages when their father and
mother died.
30th April, 1855.
This day, the 30th, Isabella Renwick, my grand-
daughter, was married at Musselburgh to a Dr. Charles
Cowan, a most respectable young man who had a good
practice in Path Head, about seven miles distant from
Musselburgh. The above was the marriage day of
Isabella Renwick


2nd February, 1856.
This day I had a visit of F. Renwick, my grandson,
in order to see me before he left his native country for
America. He sailed at Broomalee on Saturday, 23rd
February, 1856. He is a remarkably fine lad, he is
pious and of an excellent temper. I hope and trust
that he will do well where he goes. He intends to
land at Boston in order to see his Uncle William who
has been there for more than six years. F. Renwick
landed at New York just three weeks after leaving, all
safe and sound.
15th March, 1856.
I see in another memorandum book which I keep
that Alex Mercer, son of Andrew Mercer, my eldest
son, was born in Newcastle, on the 16th March, 1828.
His mother’s name was Janet Reid, she died at Hawick
some years ago, but I have forgotten what year.
15th September, 1856.
The above Alex Mercer chose for his trade a skinner,
so learned that business at Hawick. He took for his
wife a respectable young woman named Catherine Laid-
law. They lived together in Hawick for some time,
but both of them thought that if they were at Australia
they might be far more comfortable than remain in
Hawick. So in 1854 he, Alex, set off for Australia
and if he did not like it he would return home again,
but it so turned out that he liked the place and sent for
his wife and child to lose no time in going out to him,
so she made up her mind to go to him without delay.
Got all ready for so long a sea journey and sailed from
Liverpool on the Sth July, 1856.
25th November, 1856.
This day, Elizabeth Renwick was married at Lauder,
in her sister’s house, to a Mr. Bell, a druggist in Jed-


burgh. By all appearance he was a respectable looking
man, and according to all accounts he was a young
man of good character.
26th May, 1856.
This day I have been two years in Dumfries, and
it has pleased God to have spared me in giving me time
for preparation for my last and great change, and I
pray that I may be able to improve my time for the
Glory of God and the good of eternal soul.
. 26 th May, 1857.
There has been another year added to my life, and
I earnestly pray that God will enable me to improve.
I have many privileges and opportunities for improving
my time, and woe be to me if I neglect to do my duty.
November, 1857.
Francis Renwick left Scotland some time and went
to Boston, N. America; he had fallen in love with a
young lady in Musselburgh. He and Miss Reid, for
that is the lady’s name, had promised each other to
become man and wife, so when Francis thought he was
able to keep her in a respectable way, he wrote to her
to come to him in Boston. So she got all in readiness
and sailed at Liverpool and landed at Boston in IS
days, safe and sound, and was married in the ordinary
way. This certainly shows the great love they had for
one another. I see from a Boston newspaper they
were married at Boston on the 28th October, 1857.
Alexander Mercer was born on the 16th March,
1828. When he was of age he learned the business of
skinner at Hawick. He then married a young woman
of respectable character, whose name is Catherine
Laidlaw. But the business he learned, not turning out
as well as he expected, he made up his mind to go to


Australia. If things turned out as he wished he would
send for his good wife to come to him, but if things
were not as good as he wished, he would then return
home again, so he left Hawick in the month of May,
1854. And after considering everything he sent for
his good wife to come to him, so on the sth July, 1856,
she left Hawick and sailed at Liverpool to be with
her beloved husband, Alexander Mercer.
27th February, 1858.
Georgina Renwick was joined in marriage with Mr.
Robert Burns on the 25th February, 1858. Mr. Burns
is a young man of respectable character and was well
known to his young wife for many years past. He is
carrying on the business of a draper in Edinburgh.
The marriage took place in her brother Alexander’s
house, who is a Doctor at present in Alloa. She was
delivered of her first-born son on the Bth January,
1859. His name is James Renwick Burns.
16th March, 1858.
By a letter and handbill which I have received from
the Rev. J. Lawson, Presbyterian Minister in Selkirk,
informing me that on the 14th March, 1858 the con-
gregation had completed their hundred years standing.
There was a soiree on the Monday evening in com-
memoration of its long standing, which was attended
by many of the Ministers round about Selkirk, and a
great concourse of people. It is rather strange that
the hundred years standing of the Selkirk Congrega-
tion was all the time supplied with Ministers of very
near connection. The first was the Rev. Mr. Moir,
great grandfather to the present Rev. John Lawson.
The next was Professor Lawson, who was grandfather
to the present Rev. John Lawson. The third was his
own father, the Rev. Andrew Lawson; the fourth, his
uncle, George Lawson. The four (4) occupied the
pulpit of Selkirk with himself for the last 100 years.


24th August, 1858.
This day, Tuesday, my grand-son, Dr. Alexander
M. Renwick, was married to a young lady in Alloa,
where he has been practising for the last four years.
Her name is Miss Knox. She is a very respectable
young lady herself,and is come of very respectable
connections. They both of them paid me a visit at
Dumfries on the Saturday after, and remained with us
till the Monday after, and then set off for their own
home.
October, 1858.
The Comet which the astronomers have said so much
about for a year past, was seen in Britain about the
beginning of September. It was clearly seen at Dum-
fries with the naked eye. It who write it has seen it
many a time without any aid but my own eyes. The
tail of the Comet appeared to the eye to be 8 or 10
yards long, of a milky or dark white color. It was
very splendid to behold and shows the great power of
God in his works of Creation. The newspapers said
about the middle of October that the tail of the Comet
is no less than 16,000,000 of miles, this is certainly
most wonderful.
23rd November, 1858.
James Renwick, my grand-son, made me a visit at
Dumfries and remained with me two days. He intends
going in the month of February to America to his
brother Francis.
2nd January, 1860.
This day I have received a letter informing me of
the melancholy and sudden death of my beloved grand-
son, Dr. Alexander M. Renwick. The nail of his great
toe had grown down into the flesh and he made up his
mind to have it cut away. He therefore spoke to a


neighboring doctor to perform the operation, so it was
thought proper to use chloroform to ease the pain, but
before the operation was half performed my good
grand-son breathed his last breath. He was a first-
rate young man, 27 years of age.
Signed, ALEXANDER MERCER.
Alexander Mercer, my grandfather, died at Dum-
fries on Friday evening, at half past 11 o’clock p.m.,
in his daughter’s house. He was interred in Selkirk
Churchyard on Thursday, 21st March, 1861, at half-
past two, by his own wish, as his dearly beloved wife
was buried there. I went through to Dumfries on
the Wednesday morning along with William Cowan,
his son-in-law, and Samuel, his grand-son, following
his remains to Selkirk, leaving Dumfries at 12 o’clock
p.m., arriving at Moffat at 4 a.m., leaving Moffat at
6 a.m., where we met John Johnson, his nephew, ar-
riving at Gordon’s Inn at 10 a.m, where we all break-
fasted and washed ourselves, leaving Gordon’s Inn at
12 am., arriving at the bridge of Selkirk at a quarter
past 2 p.m., where we met Frank, Dr. Cowan and the
rest who were going to follow his remains to their last
resting place, aged 84 years.
J. ROBERTSON RENWICK.
