

dft-f
DICKENS
By WALTER DEXTER,
Editor of “ The Dickensian.”
Published hy The Dickens Fellowship at
The Dickens House,
48 Doughty Street, London, W.C.i.
PRICE ONE SHILLING NETs


THE ENGLAND
OF DICKENS
WALTER DEXTER
Demy Bvo. 26 illustrations.
15 s. net.
$5.00
“To those whose attic trunks of memory contain unfaded
impressions of David Copperfield, delightful Mr. Pickwick and
hosts of their contemporaries who coached through such a
mellow world, this book should be a true source of pleasure.
A sound, highly entertaining work.”-— New York Sun.
•‘Astonishingly thorough.” —New York World.
“An eminently worthy book.”— New York Herald-Tribune.
“A valuable contribution to Dickensian Literature.” —Toronto
Evening Telegram.
Ponton:
CECIL PALMER, 49 Chandos Street, W.C.2
J. B. LIPPINCOTT Co.
Other Works of Walter Dexter also published
by Cecil Palmer are :
THE LONDON OF DICKENS
Second Edition. Crown Bvo. 6s. net.
THE KENT OF DICKENS
With Frontispiece. Crown Bvo. 6s. net.
DICKENS IN HERTFORDSHIRE
Demy Bvo. is. net.
SOME ROGUES AND VAGABONDS
OF DICKENS
Illustrated. Demy Bvo. 15s. net.


F what do you almost instinctively think at the mere mention
of Dickens’s name?
Is it of the man’s personality, is it of his spectacular
career, is it of his books, is it of some outstanding character-
istic of his art or of the aspect from which he projects his
views of life ?
In other words, does the name “Dickens ” conjure up before
you the lonely boy in London’s millions rising to the pinnacle of
fame ; or the books themselves in their opulent entirety ; or the
supreme drollery, the grotesquerie, the elvish vivacity of his creations
—the men and women and slums and sunsets and door-knockers ?
Or do you visualise that fierce anger of his against all oppression,
that swell of the heart towards all human kindliness, that Titanic
benevolence which laughs through tears and warms misery to the
happiness of a virile life ?
Perhaps it is this last divine power that is the secret of his fame
because it pervades all other characteristics and influences every phase
of his genius. Should this be so, an appeal for help to anyone with
Dickens in his thoughts must perforce meet with a response. To
seek help for suffering humanity from a true “ Dickensian ’ ’ must surely
be as certain in effect as the sowing of seed in good ground.
So the blind confidently ask for your assistance. You must know
that they sorely need it, for who can better understand all that loss of
sight means than a lover of Dickens—the man with eyes which
could see men and women and things in sucA truth of detail, with
such infinite comprehension !
The National Institute for the Blind is the largest institution of its
kind in the world. One branch of its work is the publication of
embossed books, and the majority of Dickens’s works —as loved by
the blind as by you all —are in Braille. This fellow —feeling alone
should induce you to become an annual subscriber to the Institute’s
funds and to take an active interest in its work.
All donations should be addressed to Captain Sir BEACHCROFT TOWSE,
V.C., K.C.V.0., C.8.E., National Institute for the Blind (Registered under the
Blind Persons Act, 1920), 224-8 Great Portland Street, London, W.l, who will
be pleased to send Annual Report, Balance Sheet, Forms of Bequests, etc., on
request.


MAGGS
BROTHERS
34 & 35 CONDUIT ST.,
NEW BOND STREET,
LONDON, ENGLAND
AND
130 Boulevard Haussmann,
Paris, VHP
Carry one of the Largest and
Choicest Stocks in England of
Fine and Rare
BOOKS : PRINTS
AND
AUTOGRAPHS
Illustrated Catalogues in each
department regularly issued.
These Catalogues appeal
especially to the Connoisseur,
Collector and Antiquary.
Customers’ “ Desiderata ”
searched for and reported free
of charge. Items of rarity
and interest always gladly
purchased. Shipments to
America every week.
PHOTOGRAPHS
THE INTERIOR
THE
DICKENS
HOUSE
SET OF SIX
1/2 Post Free
Apply The Hon, Secretary,
THE DICKENS HOUSE,
48 Doughty Street, London, W.C.I
BOOKS
NEW AND
SECOND HAND
DICKENSIANA
Please state wants. Enquiries
made for any book free of charge.
New books on any subject supplied.
All communications receive prompt
attention.
L. H. DAVIS
7 DOWNTON AVENUE,
LONDON, 5.W.2
’Phone STREATHAM 5885


! By Appointment «
I C. W. FAULKNER & CO. LTD. j
1 £be Xeatnna art flMibliebers, i
| DAILY TEAR-OFF BLOCK CALENDARS FOR 1928 |
jl No. 1857
? “The Old Curiosity Shop **
f Reproduced in colour.
- I IMp! IWWIBBIiM
} » * hB : |y ■
f C.W. F. »c? S
( No. 1858
i “ D vid Copperfield
- and Mr. Micawber.”
j Picture in colour.
f.w.V s, o’ l". r-
No. 1862 j
Q I T C C _ J 2
Coaching Scene, hy J. S. Sanderson J
Wells. Printed in colour. f
Oliver Twist.** T
Picture in colour. f
| To be obtained from all Stationers, Stores, etc., etc. }
j also t
[ GREAT THOUGHTS, DIVINE THOUGHTS, SHAKESPEARE, 1
j WITTY THOUGHTS. 2s. and 2s. 6d. i
i TENNYSON, BURNS, FLOWERS OF THOUGHT. Is. 6d. and 2s. t
{ SHAKESPEARE. SACRED THOUGHTS, POETS. Is. and is.6d. f
L. —.—— —..—


New Mezzotint Engraving
CHARLES DICKENS
J. BLACKBURN HART
After the famous painting by
W. P. FRITH, R.A.
Limited to 125 Signed Artist’s Proofs
for Great Britain
This reproduction is fo give an idea of the composition only.
The beautiful colours of this hand-produced Mezzotint cannot
be reproduced by any mechanical process.
CHAS. J. SAWYER, LTD.
12 & 13 Grafton St., New Bond St.
LONDON, W.l
Rare Books, Autographs and Manuscripts, Libraries Purchased.
I
ss<
K<
f
1


DICKENS
The Story of the
Life of
The World’s Favourite Author
WALTER DEXTER
Author of “ The England of Dickens,” etc.
Editor of “ The Dickensian ”
PUBLISHED BY
THE DICKENS FELLOWSHIP
The Dickens House,
48 Doughty Street, London, W.C.I


Charles Dickens in 1859
From a painting hy W. P. Frith, R.A.
Exhibited at the Royal Academy iB6O
Now in the Forster Collection at South Kensington


The Story
of the Life
of Dickens
Boyhood
mo the majority of readers Charles Dickens is known simply as a
story-teller and creator of such characters as Little Nell, Pickwick,
Micawber and Tiny Tim. But Dickens holds his place to-day, fifty-
seven years after his death, not on account of his stories alone, but
Commercial
Birthplace
Road,
Portsmouth,
7 February,
Charles
Dickens
because he had a deeper message, which he endeavoured to inculcate
through his writings.
“To leave one’s hand lastingly upon time,” he wrote, “ with one
tender touch for the mass of toiling people that nothing can obliterate,
would be to lift oneself above the dust of all the doges in their graves
and stand upon a giant’s staircase that Samson could not overthrow.”


Dickens did not merely create humbugs for the world to laugh at;
nor did he invent impostors to excite its derision :he had a far deeper
mission than that. When he commenced to write close on ninety
years ago, he found the poor neglected, forgotten and over-ridden ;
and he set out by means of his Bumble and the rest, to awaken the
conscience of the country to the pressing needs of reform. Alike in
his novels and in his anonymous contributions to the press, he per-
sistently pursued the same course.
This book is a simple outline of Dickens’s life, and a closer
study of his writings will leave the reader to judge of his title of
reformer, and of his right to be regarded as a great teacher and a
great preacher.
It was on the seventh of February, 1812, that Dickens first saw
the light of day, and
Commercial Road,
the property of the
housed in it an in-
Museum.
He was one of eight
where Wealth was an
Plenty rarely sat at
In such a household
young Charles had the
pathos of childhood ;
than he how real and
sorrows; none entered
into its ways.
Again and again he
to the scenes and
hood, and places him-
child in the position
ii Ordnance Terrace,
Chatham
his birthplace in the
Portsmouth, is now
Corporation, who have
teresting Dickens
children in a family
unfamiliar visitor, and
the board.
there is no doubt that
keenest feelings of the
few understood better
overwhelming were its
more sympathetically
reverts in his books
incidents of his child-
self or some imaginary
he once occupied ; and
if this short story of his life deals somewhat more fully with his child-
hood than it does with his later and successful life, it is because his
childhood forms the true index to his character and his teaching.
Emerson said that Dickens was writing London tracts, and this is a
truism that we must ever keep before us ; tracts served up to the
public, often as the lightest of fiction ; and his early days were the
days when the seeds of these tracts were sown.
Although Portsmouth was his birthplace, it did not claim him for
long ; for at two years of age he was brought up to London, and then
shortly afterwards his father was moved to the Dockyard at Chatham,
and the family came to live at Chatham at a house in Ordnance Terrace,
since marked with a tablet.
And now we come to the great fascination which this part of the
country had for him, and which was with him until his death. No
town, save perhaps London itself, was more often written about by
Dickens than Rochester, the town adjacent to Chatham, and there was
no place he loved more than the quaint house at Gads Hill, just out of
Rochester, on the London Road. This house attracted his attention
4
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


Rochester Castle
Gads Hill Place, near Rochester
Dickens’s Home, 1858-1870
Photos hy Walter Dexter


before he was five years of age. At the age of
forty-four he purchased it; and he died there
on June 9th, 1870. His daughter Mamie thus
speaks of her father’s love for Gads Hill Place :
“As a little fellow he had a wonderful liking
and admiration for the house, and it was, to
him, like no other house he had ever seen. He
would walk up and down before it with his
father, gazing at it with delight, and the latter
would tell him that perhaps, if he worked hard,
was industrious, and grew up to be a good
man, he might some day come to live in that
very house. His love for this place went
through his whole life, and was with him until
his death.”
Old Cheeseman The books of his childhood were the “ Vicar of j om pj nc h
Wakefield,” “ Robinson Crusoe,” “ The Arabian
Nights,” “ Don Quixote,” “ Roderick Random ” and “ Peregrine
Pickle.” He read those books so carefully that at times he imagined
himself to be the heroes of them. “ I have been Tom Jones for a week
together,” he says. “ I have sustained my own idea of Roderick
Random for a month at a stretch, I verily believe.” He continues to
tell how, while the boys were playing in the churchyard, he would
be sitting “on the bed reading as if for life. Every barn in the
neighbourhood, every foot of the churchyard, had some association of
its own, and, in my mind, was connected with these books, and stood
for some locality made famous in them. I have seen Tom Pipes go
climbing up the church steeple. I have watched Strap, with the knap-
sack on his back, stopping to rest himself on the wicket gate ; and I
know that Commodore Trunnion had held that club with Mr. Pickle in
the parlour of the little village ale-house.”
Being such a reader, such a realist, and such a romancer, is it at
all wonderful that at a very early age we should find young Charles
writing stories for the benefit of his youthful companions ?
Thus, as a boy, Dickens used to invest the dull things of life with a
real and living interest, and connect the buildings about him with the
characters and doings in the books he used to read. When he came to
High Street, Rochester
Bull Hotel, Rochester
Jasper’s Gate House
Rochester
6
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


write books later on, he again invested these very buildings with a
life that was so real that thousands of people visit Rochester and the
surrounding country, not to see its fine Cathedral, consecrated by
Saint Augustine, and a striking example of Norman work, not to see
its historic Castle, the keep here shown being one of the finest specimens
of Norman military architecture in England, not to see any of these
real antiquities of the city, but to see the places introduced by Dickens
into his works : to see Eastgate House, the Ladies’ Seminary of
Edwin Brood , where Rosa Bud went to school,
to see the house of the eccentric Miss Havisham
and the objectionable Uncle Pumblechook,
both of Great Expectations, to see the Town
Hall, where Pip was “bound prentice” to his
brother ; to see the house of the “ Seven Poor
Travellers,” and many other places which have
an association with Dickens and his works.
No inn in the kingdom enjoys such a curious
literary popularity as the Bull at Rochester.
Many people will point out an inn or a house
where some great person has resided, but here
we have an inn in which only a fictitious
character stayed on one or two occasions, and
that fact has made it world-famous. So great
a personage as Queen Victoria stopped one
night at the Bull, but the Bull is not famed for
that, and, although the room in which she
Corn Exchange,
Rochester
actually did sleep is shown to the visitors, those who pass that way
ask to see the room occupied by Mr. Pickwick, and those in which
Mr. Winkle and Mr. Tupman slept, and, strange to say, they are
shown to them ! If you should wander that way you will find that
Mr. Pickwick slept in No. 11, Mr. Winkle in No. 19, and Mr. Tupman in
No. 13, this being the room occupied by Queen Victoria some time later.
Here, then, at Chatham and Rochester, which, although really two
towns, are in fact one, for as Dickens says in one of his Christmas
stories, “ If anybody knows to a nicety where Rochester begins and
Chatham ends it is more than I do ” —here, then, at the early age of
from four to nine years he began “ to peep about with interest and
wonder,” storing up the knowledge he thus obtained for future use.
Here he exercised his keen powers of observation, keener then than at
any other period of his life, with the result that we find these glimpses
of his childhood permeating his books, from his earliest sketches,
7
BOYHOOD


through the immortal Pickwick to his very last book,
Edwin Brood , the book he left unfinished one bright
June day, when his pen was laid aside for ever.
In one of his “ uncommercial ” travels we find him
rambling about the scenes among which his earliest
days were spent.
“ Of course the town had shrunk fearfully since I
was a child there. I had entertained the impression
that the High Street was at least as wide as Regent
Street, London, or the Italian Boulevard at Paris. I
found it little better than a lane. There was a public
clock in it, which I had supposed to be the finest clock
in the world; whereas it now turned out to be as
inexpressive, moon-faced, and weak a clock as ever I
saw. It belonged to a Town Hall. .. . The edifice had
Paul Dombey appeared to me in those days so glorious a structure
( that I had set it up in my mind as the model on which
the Genie of the Lamp built the palace of Aladdin. A mean little
brick heap, with a few yawning persons in leather gaiters, and in the
last extremity for something to do, lounging at the door with their
hands in their pockets, and calling themselves a Corn Exchange ! ”
So were many of his boyish dreams shattered, but we read in con-
clusion : Ah, wdio was I that I should quarrel with the town for
being changed to me when I had come back so changed to it ? ”
Dickens s earliest teaching, like that of David Copperfield’s, was
received at his mother’s knee.
I faintly remember her teaching me the alphabet; and when I
look upon the fat black letters in the primer, the puzzling novelty of
their shapes and the easy good
nature of 0 and S always seem to
present themselves before me as
they used to do.”
Dickens’s biographer writes that
Dickens himself told him of this five
years before the words were put into
the mouth of David Copperfield.
Later, together with his sister
Fanny, he went to school in Rome
Lane, close by his home, and all his
school-fellows and playmates were
one by one put into the sketches
which he wrote in later years under
the pen name of “ Boz.”
Here he used to amuse his friends
with recitations at Christmas-time :
he even wrote a play and acted in
it himself. When Charles was nine
the family moved into a smaller
house in Chatham, next to a chapel,
8
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


and William Giles, son
became his school-
affection sprang up
which extended into
It was in December,
then not 11 years of
and came to London,
coach. “ Through all
since passed,” he
lost the smell of the
I was packed —like
carriage paid, to the
Street, Cheapside,
no other inside pas-
sumed my sandwiches
ness, and it rained
I thought life sloppier
to find it.”
16 Bayham Street,
Camden Town
of the minister there,
master, and a strong
between the two,
later years.
1822, that Dickens —
age —left Chatham
travelling in a stage
the years that have
writes, “ have I ever
damp straw in which
game —and forwarded,
Cross Keys, Wood
London ? There was
senger, and I con-
in solitude and dreari-
hard all the way, and
than I had expected
His acquaintance with the metropolis was somewhat one-sided. His
father was in financial difficulties and could only afford to rent one of
the small six-roomed houses then being built in Camden Town, on the
outskirts of London. This was No. 16 Bayham Street, later known
as No. 141, and demolished a few years ago.
“ That he took from the very beginning of this Bayham Street life,”
writes Forster, “ his first impression of that struggling poverty which
is nowhere more vividly shown than in the commoner streets of the
ordinary London suburb and which enriched his earliest writings with
a freshness of original humour, there cannot be a doubt.”
The straightened circumstances of his father, which he had just
begun to understand, and the loss of his Chatham playmates, and of
his much respected schoolmaster, made him regard the outlook as
even blacker than it really was. “As I thought in the little back
garret in Bayham Street of all I had lost in losing Chatham,” he
wrote, <£ what would I have given, if I had had anything to give,
to have been sent back to any other school, to have been taught
something, anywhere ”...
“ I knew my father to be as kind-hearted and generous a man as
ever lived . . . but ... in the straitness of his means, he appeared
to have utterly lost at this time the idea of educating me at all, and
to have utterly put from him the notion that I had any claim upon
him, in that regard, whatever. So I degenerated into cleaning his
boots of a morning, and my own ; and making myself useful in the
work of the little house ; and looking after my younger brothers and
sisters (we were six in all), and going on such poor errands as arose
out of our poor way of living.”
But here he was receiving that natural education of life which he
turned to such good account in later years : here his great love for
London was first awakened. From the end of the street he could see
the dome of St. Paul’s looming through the clouds.
9
BOYHOOD


A Dickens Reverie
By J. I!. Brown


To be taken out for a walk into Covent Garden or the Strand was
to him indeed a joy, and if he could only induce somebody to take
him to Seven Dials, he was supremely happy.
The tenancy of 141 Bayham Street was not a long one, for towards
the end of the year 1823 they removed to No. 4 Gower Street North,
now demolished for Messrs. Maple’s premises.
Here Mrs. Dickens
to be affixed to
“ Mrs. Dickens’s Es
nobody ever came
recollect that any
to come, or that the
made for anybody.”
This finds a parallel
Micawber’s Boarding
Young Ladies,” as
Copperfield.
Now came the
family and for young
was nearly cleared
gone to the pawn- w
elder Dickens was jy[ r- Micawber and David
Marshalsea for debt.
caused a brass plate
the door announcing
tablishment.” “Yet
to school, nor do I
body ever proposed
least preparation was
in the case of “ Mrs.
Establishment for
narrated in David
hardest time for the
Charles. The house
out : everything had
brokers, and the
imprisoned in the
Before the father
took leave of his son he gave him the wholesome advice which was put
into Mr. Micawber’s mouth some years later—the elder Dickens was
undoubtedly the prototype of Micawber. “ And he told me, I remem-
ber, to take warning by the Marshalsea, and to observe that if a man
had £2O a year and spent £l9 19s. 6d. he would be happy; but that
a shilling spent the other way would make him wretched.”
At about this time a cousin had become manager of a blacking
business at Hungerford Stairs, and, to use Dickens’s own words : “In
an evil hour for me . . . seeing how I was employed from day to day,
and knowing what our domestic circumstances then were, proposed
that I should go into the blacking warehouse, to be as useful as I could,
at a salary, I think, of six shillings a week.”
The period of his life we have now to deal with is fraught with the
deepest misery to the young boy. In later life he reviewed those
early days only in secret, and magnified the intensity of his hopelessness
and degradation. It was not until after his death that the real facts
became known through the discovery of certain autobiographical
chapters which he had written, and which he had utilised as fiction
in the pages of David Copperfield, where the hero is described as
working in a bottle warehouse.
“ My work,” he tells us, “ was to cover the pots of paste blacking,
first with a piece of white paper and then with a piece of blue paper ;
to tie them round with a string, and then to clip the paper close and
neat all round, until it looked as smart as a pot of ointment from an
apothecary’s shop.”
Here he was neglected and hopeless, working at a poor business
11
BOYHOOD


quite unbefitting Ms intellect and station. “No words can express
the secret agony of my soul as I sank into this companionship,” he
says. “ The deep remembrance of the sense I had of being utterly
without hope now, of the shame I felt in my position, of the misery it
was to my young heart to believe that day by day what I had learned
and thought and delighted in and raised my fancy and my emulation
up by, was passing away from me little by little, never to be brought
back any more, cannot be written. My whole nature was so penetrated
with the grief and humiliation of such considerations that even now —
famous —caressed and happy—l often forget in my dreams that I have
a dear wife and children —even that I am a man, and wander desolately
back to that time of my life . . .
The boy
Dickens
Blacking
Warehouse,
in the
“ I know that I worked from morning to night with common men and
boys, a shabby child ; I know that I tried, but ineffectually, not to
anticipate my money, and make it last through the week ; I know I
have lounged through the streets insufficiently clothed and unsatis-
factorily fed. I know that but for the mercy of God I might easily
have been, for any care that was taken of me, a little robber or a little
vagabond.”
This chapter of autobiography reveals Dickens as such a very Human
Boy. “In going to Hungerford Stairs of a morning,” he tells us, “ I
could not resist the stale pastry put out at half price on trays at the
confectioners in the Tottenham Court Road, and I often spent in that
the money I should have kept for my dinner.
He then goes on to tell how he divided his fancy and finances between
two pudding shops, one at the back of St. Martin’s Church, where the
1824
12
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


pudding was good, and little, the other in the Strand, where Lowther
Arcade used to he, where was served a stout, hearty pudding, with
great raisins in it, stuck in whole at great distances apart.
On Saturday nights he would go to his lodgings by way of Blackfriars,
past the Golden Dog licking a golden pot, a landmark still standing, and
was often lured into a show-van at the corner, to see the Wild Indian,
the Fat Pig and the Little Lady.
His wage of six shillings was increased
a little later to seven shillings, but he
had to support himself on that money,
buying his own meals at the lodging.
“ I suppose the lodging was paid for
by my father ; I certainly did not pay
for it myself, and I certainly had no
other assistance whatever —the making
of my clothes I think, excepted . . . .
no advice, no counsel, no encourage-
ment, no consolation, no support from
anyone, that I can call to mind, so help
me God ... I felt keenly, however, the
being so cut of! from my parents, my
brothers and sisters ; and when my
day’s work was done going home to
such a miserable blank One
Sunday night I remonstrated with my
father. ... It was the first remons-
Early morning in the streets
By Cruikshank
trance I had ever made about my lot A back attic was found
for me at the house of an Insolvent-court agent, who lived in Lant
Street in the Borough, where Bob Sawyer lodged many years after-
wards. A bed and bedding w T ere sent over for me and made up on the
floor. The little window had a pleasant prospect of a timber yard ; and
when I took possession of my new abode, I thought it was a paradise.”
Here he was a little better off financially, for he breakfasted and
took his supper with his people in the Marshalsea. They had no want
of bodily comforts there, Forster says, as the father’s income was still
going on ; and adds Forster :“ I have heard him say the family lived
more comfortably in prison than they had ever done, for a long while.
out of it.”
Soon the scene of his work was changed to Chandos Street, off the
Strand, at the corner where the Civil Service Stores now stand. In
Dickens’s own words, we are told : “ Next to the shop at the corner
of Bedford Street, in Chandos Street, are two rather old-fashioned
houses and shops adjoining one another. They were one then, or
thrown into one, for the blacking business ; and had been a butter
shop. Opposite to them was, and is, a public-house, where I got my
ale, under these new circumstances. The stones in the street may be
smoothed by my small feet going across to it at dinner-time, and back
again. The establishment was larger now, and we had one or two
new boys. Bob Fagin and I had attained to great dexterity in tying
13
BOYHOOD


up the pots. I forget how many we could do in five
minutes. We worked, for the light’s sake, near the second
window as you come from Bedford Street; and we were so
brisk at it that the people used to stop and look in.
Sometimes there would be quite a little crowd there. I
saw my father coming in at the door one day when we
were very busy, and I wondered how he could bear it.”
This must have happened after the 28th May, the
date on which his father was released from the Mar-
shalsea, and yet no effort was made by the father to relieve
his son from a labour to which he was so unsuited. “ I
had the same wanderings about the streets as I used to
have, and was just as solitary and self-dependent as before ;
but I had not the same difficulty in merely living. I
never, however, heard a word of being taken away, or of
Captain Cuttle being otherwise than quite provided for.”
The family, on leaving the Marshalsea, went to lodge in
Camden Town, but Charles continued his work at the blacking ware-
house and went to and from the Chandos Street establishment daily,
. sometimes carrying with him his dinner, “ some cold hotch-
\ potch in a small basin tied up in a handkerchief.” “At last,
\ JppT one day, my father, and the relative so often mentioned,
quarrelled ; quarrelled by letter, for I took the letter from
my father to Hm which caused the explosion, but quarrelled
very fiercely. It was about me. It may have had some
backward reference, in part, for anything I know, to my
employment at the window.”
The cousin was very angry at the letter, and young
H W Charles was sent home ; his mother, however, was for
11 T\ sending him back, and went to smooth over the quarrel
JJ V\ with the cousin, but: “My father said I should go back no
more, and should go to school. Ido not write resentfully
Major Bagstock or angrily, for I know how all these things have worked
together to make me what I am ; but I never afterwards
forgot, I never shall forget, I never can forget, that my mother was
warm for my being sent back.”
How great an impression this incident had on the mind of
Dickens may be gathered from the following : “ Until old
Hungerford Market was pulled down, until old Hungerford
Stairs were destroyed, and the very nature of the ground
changed, I never had the courage to go back to the place
where my servitude began. I never saw it. I could not
endure to go near it. For many years, when I came near to
Robert Warren’s in the Strand, I crossed over to the opposite
side of the way to avoid a certain smell of the cement they
put upon the blacking-corks, which reminded me of what
I was once. It was a very long time before I liked to go
up Chandos Street. My old way home by the Borough
made me cry, after my eldest child could speak. In my
Mr. Micawber
14
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


err*' o/F a.
a „*? £a*t*
yuy
C/ v. o e^lxyu
cp*y-
£ J o^Muhk,
yx&£yy -a &, ***'.
<*a&£c -/Cove‘S/* £#*lc, LaA>
Where Dickens went to School in the Hampstead Road, London,
and a letter written by him to a schoolfellow


walks at night
there often,
by degrees I
write this.”
These hard
boyhood had
Dickens in
here it was that
sternest reali-
the seamy side
he so strongly
make brighter
Wall of the Marshalsea with
Tablet to Dickens
I have walked
since then, and
have come to
experiences of
their effect on
later years;
he learnt the
ties that beset
of life, which
endeavoured to
for others, and,
as Mr. G. K. Chesterton says in one of his critical essays on Dickens,
“ If he learnt to whitewash the universe, it was in a blacking factory
that he learnt it.”
3 tenancy of the hoi
• -J T Johnson Street, Ca
served as a David <
children. The fat
i mnrmrnrl no wr q c: a
13 Johnson Street,
Camden Town
The ending of this nightmare doubtless
coincided with the commencement of the
tenancy of the house at 29 (now No. 13)
Johnson Street, Camden Town, now pre-
served as a David Copperfield Library for
children. The father’s position having
improved, he was able to get his discharge
from the debtors’ prison and to send
Charles to a school in the Hampstead
Road, Wellington House Academy, or
Mr. Jones’s “ Classical and Commercial
Academy,” as it was called at that time.
The fragment of autobiography to
which reference has already been made
supplies us with the following interesting
particulars : —“ There was a school in the
Hampstead Road kept by Mr.
Jones, a Welshman, to which my
father despatched me to ask for a mP *
card of terms. The boys were at
dinner, and Mr. Jones was carving
for them, with a pair of holland
sleeves on, when I acquitted my-
Montague
Tigg
self of this commission. He came out, and gave me what
I wanted ; and hoped I should become a pupil. I did. At
seven o’clock one morning, very soon afterwards, I went as
a day scholar to Mr. Jones’s establishment, which was in
Mornington Place, and had its school-room sliced away by the
Birmingham railway, when that change came about. The
school-room, however, was not threatened by directors or
civil engineers then, and there was a board over the door
graced with the words ‘ Wellington House Academy.’ ”
The House, a school no longer, is still standing at No.
247 Hampstead Road, and bears a tablet affixed by the
16
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


Dickens Fellowship to connect the house with the
great novelist.
A few of Dickens’s schoolfellows have left on record
the following account of Dickens as a schoolboy. Says
one : “My recollection of Dickens whilst at school
is that of a healthy-looking boy, small but well-built,
with a more than usual flow of spirits, inducing to
harmless fun, seldom or never, I think, to mischief, to
which so many lads at that age are prone. I cannot
recall anything that then indicated he would hereafter
become a literary celebrity ; but perhaps he was too
young then. He usually held his head more erect
than lads ordinarily do, and there was a general
smartness about him. His week-day dress of jacket
and trousers, I can clearly remember, was what is
ctliLL uiUlibcibj -L vdill blvdilj ivliLClllUci j Wdb W lidU lb Pip
called pepper-and-salt; and instead of the frill that
most boys of his age wore then, he had a turn-down collar, so that he
looked less youthful in consequence. He invented what
we termed a ‘ lingo,’ produced by the addition of a few
letters of the same sound to every word; and it was
our ambition, walking and talking thus along the street,
to be considered foreigners. As an alternate amusement
the present writer well remembers extemporising tales
of some sort, and reciting them offhand, with Dickens and
Danson or Tobin walking on either side of him.
“ I quite remember Dickens on one occasion heading
us in Drummond Street in pretending to be poor boys,
and asking the passers-by for charity—especially old
ladies, one of whom told us she £ had no money for beggar
boys.’ On these adventures, when the old ladies were
quite staggered by the impudence of the demand, Dickens
David
would explode with laughter and take to his heels.
“ I met him one Sunday morning shortly after he left the school,
and we very piously attended the morning service at
Seymour Street Chapel. lam sorry to say Master Dickens
did not attend in the slightest degree to the service, but
incited me to laughter by declaring his dinner was ready
and the potatoes would be spoiled ; and, in fact, behaved
in such a manner that it was lucky for us we were not
ejected from the chapel.
“ I heard of him some time after from Tobin, whom
I met carrying a foaming pot of London particular in
Lincoln’s Inn Fields, and I then understood that Dickens
was in the same or some neighbouring office.
“ Many years elapsed after this before I became aware
from accidentally reading ‘ Our School ’ that the brilliant
and now famous Dickens was my old schoolfellow. I
didn’t like to intrude myself upon him, and it was not
until three or four years ago, when he presided at the
Toots
17
BOYHOOD


University College Dinner
made a most brilliant and
him a congratulatory note
fellowship. To this he sent
and which I value very
“ I do not remember that
self in any way, or carried
another schoolfellow. “My
learn Greek or Latin there,
there is no allusion to
writings. He was a hand-
of animation and animal
connected with every mis-
school. I do not think he
Jones’s scourging propen-
myself, he was only a day-
at Willis’s Rooms, and
effective speech, that I sent
reminding him of our former
me a kind note in reply,
much.”
Dickens distinguished him-
off any prizes,” writes
belief is that he did not
and you will remember
the classics in any of his
some, curly-headed lad, full
spirits, and probably was
chievous prank in the
came in for any of Mr.
sity; in fact, together with
pupil, and with these there
Mr. Pip
was a wholesome fear of tales being carried home to the parents. His
personal appearance at that time is vividly brought home to me in
the portrait of him taken a few years later by Mr. Lawrence
” Depend on it, he was quite a self-made man, and his wonderful
knowledge and command of the English language must have been
acquired by long and patient study after leaving his last school
” At about that time Penny and Saturday Magazines were published
weekly, and were greedily read by us. We kept bees, white mice and
other living things clandestinely in our desks, and the mechanical arts
were a good deal cultivated, in the shape of coach-buildings and making
pumps and boats, the motive power of which was the white mice.
" I think at that time Dickens took to writing small tales, and we
had a sort of club for lending and circulating them. Dickens was also
very strong in using a sort of lingo, which made us quite unintelligible
to bystanders. We were very strong, too, in theatricals. We mounted
small theatres, and got up very gorgeous scenery to illustrate the
' Miller and his Men,’ and ‘ Cherry and Fair Star.’ I remember the
present Mr. Beverley, the scene painter, assisted us in this. Dickens
was always a leader at these plays, which were occasionally presented
with much solemnity before an audience of boys and in the presence
of the ushers. My brother, assisted by Dickens, got up the ‘ Miller and
his Men ’ in a very
constructed the
could tumble to
of crackers. At
in the last scene,
destruction of the
real that the police
knocked violently
Dickens’s after
ricals, to which
made later on,
had its origin in
gorgeous form. Master Beverley
mill for us in such a vay that it
pieces with the assstance of
one representation tin fireworks
ending with the
mill, wen so very
interfeied and
at the doors.”
taste fir theat-
rrS?! special nference is
might veil have
these snail affairs.
18
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


i Raymond Buildings,
Gray’s Inn
ON leaving school
just before his
fifteenth birthday,
Dickens went for a few
months into the office
of a solicitor named
Molloy, in Symond’s
Inn —where in later
years he located Mr.
Vholes in Bleak House.
His employment there
was only of short dura-
tion ; a few months
5 Bell Yard,
Doctors’ Commons
later he entered the office of Ellis and Blackmore, solicitors, of 1
Holborn Court, Gray’s Inn, who later moved to 1 Eaymond Buildings,
Gray’s Inn. His wages were at first 10s. a week, then rose to 13. 6d.,
and for the last three months were 15s. On his first day at the
office he wore a blue jacket, and a military-looking cap, which had a
strap under the chin, and we are told “ he carried it rather jauntily
on the side of his head.” His employer, Mr. Blackmore, an acquaint-
ance of the family, described him as “ exceedingly good looking and
clever,” with prepossessing manners. “He came to me in May,
1827,” says Mr. Blackmore, “ and continued until November, 1828.
Why he left I do not remember, but fancy he disliked the drudgery
of the office, and felt, perhaps, equal to better occupation.”
The desk at which he sat is now a prominent exhibit in the Dickens
House, London.
It was while in this office that he learned much of the ways of lawyers,
which knowledge served him in later life for the characters of Dodson
and Fogg, Mr. Perker, Sampson Brass, Mr. Tulkinghorn, and others of
that long list.
Meanwhile his father had secured a position as a reporter on one
of the London papers, and later joined the staff of “ The Mirror of
Parliament,”
brother-in-law,
a barrister of
This fact
prompted
to fit himself
fession of a
therefore set
celestial or dia-
to acquire “ a
tire command
started by his
John Barrow,
Gray’s Inn.
doubtless
young Charles
for the pro-
reporter. He
out “ with a
bolical energy”
perfect and en-
of the mystery
P. J. T. House, Staple Inn
19


c/ f", // *
IpPPcJ - / <Tj L/C /P~ •
-cjs+yAj J
, (p
n't-. - — |
9~
Pyt-
SoLStsi/z / a^.
cMy & _ \ "
- PC&OU> P’&Xy/e/iS eP%wCLJ p0/-'tS ' „ gP' v
/<r£
l/up£*sc*s , , s3 {P
3P£y P&y&sv' -yypP z?
( ♦ * ' y
y s
JPuxuy jf P&.
£/ yy » r -P
J£. £PPc<y — y& P^ e
y & /iy y cup/ , / „
jfvop*-e/t/ - / 2P^
1 P <y O&ePctiL ' ✓
£cr&<3i -c*t/ *3/ oCa -m+*tJZy '> y? y
<■" j£ / cP //
Facsimile page of Petty Cash book kept by Dickens
in 1828 at the office of Ellis & Blackmore, Grays Inn


of shorthand writing and reading,” and soon found himself, as David
Copperfield did subsequently, “ plunged into a sea of perplexity ” that
brought him in a few weeks to “ the confines of despair.” Not only
did he master shorthand, but the day after he had reached eighteen,
the requisite age for admission, he applied for a reader’s ticket at
the British Museum. Here he studied to gain that knowledge of
which he had been deprived in earlier years, and his name appears on
the books of the Museum for the next three years. During this time
he was employed as a reporter in the Courts of Doctors’ Commons,
and as one of the judgments in his handwriting of a case heard in
November, 1830, preserved in St. Bartholomew’s Church, contains the
address of Dickens as 5 Bell Yard, Doctors’ Commons, it would
appear that he was working on his own account. This was a bold
step for a young man, but it gave him time to study in his hours of
leisure in the day time, and left him free in the evening to visit the
theatres, to study especially the light comedy of Mathews, the
celebrated actor of Covent Garden. He did not, as yet, however,
think seriously of the stage as a profession.
It was at about this time that he became acquainted with Henry
Kolle, and this association led to his introduction to a young lady,
Maria Beadnell, who thenceforward was destined to have a dominating
influence in his life. Kolle, a clerk in a bank, probably Smith, Payne
and Smith’s, at No. 1 Lombard Street, where Maria’s father held an
important position, was engaged to another daughter, Anne. Young
Dickens promptly fell in love with the youngest daughter, Maria, who
coquetted with him for a long time.
As a newspaper reporter Dickens had no status at all in the eyes
of the respectable banker’s family, and what correspondence passed
between the two lovers was done through the intermediary of Henry
Kolle. It was then to improve his position that Dickens made an
application to the manager at Covent Garden Theatre, but a severe
cold prevented him from keeping the appointment, and, what is more
important, from adopting the stage as a profession.
The influence of Maria Beadnell on the susceptible
youth can hardly be exaggerated. Nearly twenty-
five years after he had parted from her Dickens
again corresponded with her, and in one of these
letters he confessed that “ Whatever of fancy,
romance, energy, passion, aspiration, and deter-
mination belong to me, I never have separated
and never shall separate from the hard-hearted j|
little woman —you —whom it is nothing to say /jm
I would have died for with the greatest alacrity. Jail
It is a matter of perfect certainty to me
that I began to fight my way out of poverty
and obscurity with one perpetual idea of
you.”
It is thought that a clandestine engage-
ment existed for about three years, during
Flora
21
EARLY WORK


which time Dickens used every endeavour to improve his
position. A certain advancement did result, but not
sufficient to satisfy him, and to entitle him to claim Maria :
correspondence passed between them, and to an avowal
of his attachment to her she answered him coldly—and
he went away.
This correspondence of a young man of twenty-two
(printed privately) is one of the romances of literature,
and once again demonstrates the great force of love.
With one perpetual idea ” of his Maria, Dickens fought
his way. Having served his apprenticeship in the Courts,
he obtained a position on the parliamentary reporting staff
of the “ Mirror of Parliament,” and on the “ True Sun,”
where he met his lifelong friend and subsequent biographer,
John Forster, the dramatic critic of the paper. Forster
noted him as having a “ keen animation of look ” at the
time of his first introduction, which was the occasion of a
strike among the reporters, when Dickens acted as their
spokesman and carried their case to a successful issue.
At the age of twenty-two Dickens obtained a position
on the staff of the “ Morning Chronicle ” at a salary of
five guineas weekly, and a new sphere of adventure opened
to him. His paper was an important one, and on its
behalf young Dickens was sent to Edinburgh, Exeter,
Bristol, Bath, Ipswich, and elsewhere, to report the
speeches of the members of the government. To be near
the office of the paper (332 Strand), he took rooms in Cecil
Street, Strand, but as Dickens wrote in a letter to Kobe
they “ put too much water in their hashes, lost a nutmeg
grater, attended on me most miserably, etc., etc., and so
detesting petty miseries, I gave them warning.” His
next apartments were at 15 Buckingham Street, Strand,
where later David Copperfield was to lodge with Mrs.
Crupp in a set of rooms with a view of the river, consisting
of “a little half-blind entry where you could hardly see
anything, a little stone-blind pantry where you could see
nothing at all, and a sitting-room and a bedroom.”
By the end of 1834 he had installed himself in a “ three
pair back ” at 13 Furnival’s Inn.
Charles Mackay, the assistant sub-editor of the
“ Chronicle,” described Dickens at this period as “afresh,
handsome, genial young man, with a profusion of brown
hair, a bright eye and a hearty manner, rather inclined to
what was once called ‘ dandyism ’ in his attire.” He
was one of the twelve parliamentary reporters of the
“ Chronicle,” and “ had the reputation of being the most
rapid, the most accurate, and the most trustworthy re-
porter then engaged on the London press.”
Speaking at a dinner of the Newspaper Press Fund in
22
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


LONDON: CHAPMAN & HALL, 186, STRAND.
MDCCCXXXVI.
Cover of the first monthly part of The Pickwick Papers, 1836. Part
of the series presented by Dickens to his sister-in-law, Mary Hogarth


1865, he gave a summary of these reporting days. “jI have pursued
the calling of a reporter under circumstances of whiclh my brethren
here can have no adequate conception. I have often transcribed
for the printer from my shorthand notes, important piublic speeches,
writing on the palm of my hand, by the light of a dark lantern, in a
post chaise and four, galloping through a wild country, and through
the dead of the night, at the then surprising rate of 15 miles an
hour. I have worn my knees by writing on them in the old back
row of the old gallery of the old House of Commons ; and I have
worn my feet by standing to write in a preposterons pen in the old
House of Lords, where we used to be huddled together like so many
sheep. I have been in my time belated on miry by-roads, towards
the small hours, forty or fifty miles from London, in a wheel-less
carriage, with exhausted horses and drunken post boys, and have
got back in time for
ceived with never-to-be-
by my editor.”
“ To the wholesome
paper work,” he told
“ when I was a very
stantly refer my first
In. the midst of all
ties Dickens wrote his
fiction, a story in the
entitled “Mr. Minns and
tells us he “ dropped
at twilight, with fear
dark letter-box, in a
court in Fleet Street,”
“ in all the glory of
to Westminster Hall
publication, to be re-
forgotten compliments
training of severe news-
the New York editors,
young man, I con-
successes.”
these reporting activi-
first contribution to
“ Monthly Magazine ”
His Cousin,” which he
stealthily one evening
and trembling, into a
dark office, up a dark
and when it appeared
print ” he walked down
and turned into it for
half an hour, because his eyes were “ so dimmed with joy and pride,
that they could not bear the street, and were not fit to be seen there.”
These sketches appeared fairly regularly throughout 1834, and for
the first two months of 1835 ; they were not paid for, and when the
“ Evening Chronicle ” was started early in that year as an offshoot
of the morning paper on which Dickens was engaged, the young reporter
was asked to write some stories for it similar to those which were
appearing in the “ Monthly Magazines.” He seized the opportunity
thus afforded him, and asked for an increase in salary as recompense,
and received two guineas additional weekly. The new work appeared
weekly under the general title of “ Sketches of London,” and were
signed “ Boz.” Of this name, Dickens tells us in his preface to The
Pickwick Pajwrs that it was “ the nickname of a pet child, a younger
brother, whom I dubbed Moses, in honour of the ‘ Vicar of Wakefield,’
which, being facetiously pronounced through the nose, became
Boses, and, being shortened, became Boz. Boz was a very familiar
household word to me, long before I was an author, and so I came to
adopt it.”
24
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


Photo by~\
[T. W. Tyrrell


In the autumn of
tributed a series
Characters,” signed
Life in London ” ;
of this nom de plume
first of these sketches
specially drawn by
were collected and
volumes, priced at a
1836. These Sketches
first published
The name of Dick-
was becoming well
the world of letters,
public also; and a
prising firm of pub-
man and Hall waited
1835 Dickens con-
of “ Scenes and
“ Tibbs,” to “ Bell’s
but no explanation
is forthcoming. The
with illustrations
George CTuikshank
published in two
guinea, in February,
hy Boz formed the
volume by Dickens,
ens, or rather “Boz,”
known, not only to
but to the general
member of an enter-
lishers named Chap-
on the young author
Mr. Pickwick
at his chambers in Furnival’s Inn to propose “ a something that
should be published monthly in shilling numbers.”
“ The idea propounded to me was that the monthly something
should be a vehicle for certain plates to be executed by Mr. Seymour ;
and there was a notion either on the part of that admirable humorous
artist, or of my visitor, that a ‘ Nimrod Club,’ the members of which
were to go out shooting, fishing, and so forth, and getting themselves
into difficulties through their want of dexterity, would be the best
means of introducing these.”
Dickens objected to writing up to pictures, but was willing that
the pictures should be done to illustrate his story. Finally Dickens
had his way, and the first part of The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick
Club appeared in April, 1836. Dickens was to receive £l4 for each
part, and he seemed to be very well satisfied with the arrangement, for
he wrote concerning it to his intended wife : “ My dearest Kate, the
work will be no joke, but the emolument is too tempting to resist.”
It is really extraordinary and remarkable that a book written under
such circumstances should turn out to be one of the world’s classics,
a book without a rival.
On the publication of the first part Dickens married Kate, the
daughter of George Hogarth, also engaged on the “ Chronicle ” news-
paper, and the honeymoon was spent at Chalk, near Gravesend, in a
little cottage now marked with a tablet.
It was in the splendid spirit of humour that Dickens described
his hero in the very first lines of the book as “ the immortal Pickwick ” ;
but never was prophecy so warranted. The Club held its first recorded
26
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


Dickens in 1837
A portrait by Samuel Laurence
The Pond on which Mr. Pickwick skated


meeting on May 12th, 1827, and the Pickwickians
set out on their memorable journey to Rochester the
day following. Exactly one hundred years later this
event was celebrated by The Dickens Fellowship ;
the old Commodore coach again ran to Rochester
with its load of mirth-provoking immortals ; a unique
celebration of the centenary of a man who never
lived going on a purely fictitious journey.
Alive as The Pickwick Papers is to us, it was just as much alive to
his creator, for we find the following appearing in the letters of Dickens
at this time. “lam so engaged with my respectable friend Pickwick,
on whom I have only just commenced, that I cannot get out this
week have at this moment got Pickwick and his friends in
the Rochester coach and they are going on swimmingly. ... I want
to get them from the Ball to the Inn before I go to bed, and I think
that will take me until one or two o’clock at the earliest.”
The book was an immense success, and became the chief topic of
conversation. Shop windows were filled with Pickwick cigars, hats,
canes, coats, and Weller corduroys. Pickwick Clubs (of a convivial
character) were started. Booksellers displayed such publications as
the “ Pickwick Comic Almanac,” “ Pickwick Treasury of Wit,”
“ Pickwickian Songster,” “ Sam Weller’s Pickwickian Jest Book,”
and “ Sam Weller’s Favourite Song Book.” Even to-day we have
Pickwick Biscuits, Pickwick Peas, Pickwick Parchment, Pickwick
Pens and Pickwick Cigars. It was played at the theatre before the
final parts were issued, and has been translated into nearly every
language, including Russian, Dutch, Bohemian, Danish. It also
appears in Braille and Shorthand, and a large number of books have
been written on Pickwick including an encyclopaedia.
An amusing story was told by Carlyle of a solemn clergyman who
had been administering spiritual consolation to a sick person; having
finished, satisfactorily as he thought, and got out of the room, he
heard the sick person exclaim, “ Well, thank God, 4 Pickwick ’ will
be out in ten days, anyway.”
The Village of Pickwick, near Bath
28
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


The original Mr. Pickwick, as outlined by Seymour in his first sketch,
was a tall thin man. It was Chapman of the publishing firm, Chapman
and Hall, who suggested the portly figure we know so well, and to
assist the artist he described a friend of his who lived at Richmond,
a certain John Foster, “ a fat old beau who would wear, in spite of the
ladies’ protests, drab tights and black gaiters.”
Before the second number of The Pickwick Papers appeared, Seymour
shot himself ; Dickens had his first and only interview with him but
forty-eight hours before. A new artist had to be found for the third
number, and choice fell upon R. W. Buss, who was then very well
known. His work, however, did not suit the style of the publication,
so he was accordingly replaced in number four by Hablot K. Browne,
better known as “ Phiz,” who proved so successful that he continued
to illustrate Dickens’s works almost without interruption for the next
twenty years.
It is interesting to note that W. M. Thackeray, at that time quite
unknown, was attempting drawing as a profession, and hearing that
Dickens was on the look-out for an artist to illustrate Pickwick, applied
for the position. “ I recollect walking up to his chambers in Furnival s
Inn,” he said at one of the Royal Academy banquets, with two or
three drawings in my hand which, strange to say, he did not find
suitable.”
The first few numbers of The Pickwick Papers hung fire ; indeed,
it is said that the circulation was only about five hundred ; but with
the appearance of Sam Weller in the fifth number, success was assured,
and reprints of the earlier numbers to the extent of tens of thousands
were called for. Seymour and Buss’s plates had consequently to be
re-drawn by Phiz, and the existence of original Seymour and Buss
plates is proof of a genuine first edition, which commands a price
between fifteen hundred and two thousand pounds for the nineteen
green-covered parts.
The first anniversary of the publication of the first number of The
Pickwick Papers was celebrated by Dickens inviting his friends and
the publishers to a dinner, and henceforth it became
customary with Dickens to celebrate
in a similar manner all such anni-
versaries of his works.
Mr. Pickwick
Dickens was much sought after as
a result of the remarkable success of
this work, and his first publisher, yA/
Macrone, who held the copyright of
Sketches by Boz, conceived the idea
of re-publishing them in monthly
parts and reaping a rich harvest by
imitating the method of publication.
It cost Dickens and his new pub-
lishers no less than two thousand
pounds to buy back the copyright,
and so protect their own interests.
Sam Weller
29
EARLY WORK


Charles Dickens in 1839
From the ‘painting hy Daniel Macline, R.A.
Exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1840 ; and now in
the National Portrait Gallery


111.
DICKENS’S twenty-fifth
birthday found him a
famous man. The Pickwick
Papers had been running
nearly a year. Everybody
was reading the now familiar
green-covered monthly, talk-
ing about the adventures of Mr. Pickwick and his friends, and
captivated by the fresh humour of Sam Weller. In addition to this
work he had supplied the libretto for two comic operas performed at
the St. James’s Theatre, had written a little volume, Sunday Under
Three Heads , advocating a saner observance of the Sabbath (such
has since come to pass), and had accepted the editorship of a new
monthly magazine, “ Bentley’s Miscellany,” for which he promised
to write a series of articles (later published as The Mudfog Papers),
and a new story, Oliver Twist , which commenced in the issue of
February, 1837.
Just prior to this, the first son had been born to the young couple,
and the restrictions of chambers at Furnival’s Inn, to say nothing of
the author’s growing fame, made a move imperative ; and the tenancy
of No. 48 Doughty Street commenced in March, 1837. This was the
first house of Dickens’s married life, and is now, thanks to the Dickens
Fellowship, a Library and Museum vested in Trustees. It contains
the finest library of Dickensiana in the world, and a large number of
interesting items, many personally associated with Dickens, to which
additions are being constantly made.
While still writing the monthly portions of The Pickwick Papers
and Oliver Twist, and editing the “ Miscellany,” Dickens found time
to edit the Memoirs of Grimaldi, in which his father helped as
amanuensis, to write
Gentlemen, and to
lication in monthly
stories to follow both
and Oliver Twist.
With all these
his attention, relaxa-
gotten; his letters
horse-riding, on the
with his friend
was a trip to Bel-
and Phiz, followed
at Broadstairs, the
sequent visits almost
must have worked
Sketches of Y oung
arrange for the pub-
numbers of other
The Pickwick Papers
matters to occupy
tion was not for-
tell of plenty of
outskirts of London,
Forster, and there
gium, with his wife
by a summer holiday
first of thirteen sub-
yearly. Dickens
at great pressure in
31


A page of the manuscript of Oliver Twist


those days ; he was never able to advance his work even by a single
number, but always wrote the next part ready for almost immediate
publication. Thus side by side were written the various instalments
of The Pickwick Papers and Oliver Twist; the one so full of light-
hearted boisterous fun, turned out with a spontaneity seldom after-
wards attained ; the other a serious story of the criminal and the
outcast, a vigorous onslaught on the Poor Law system, reform in
which owes so much to this work ; and in spite of the fact that the
story deals mostly with the seamy side of life, there is nothing in it
Oliver Twist asks for more
that is repellent, nothing coarse or vulgar. It is truly a triumph of
literary art.
Dickens had already promised the publishers of The Pickwick Papers
to provide a successor to that publication, and was now troubled by
his promise to Bentley of a story of the Gordon Riots to follow Oliver
Twist. The pressure of all these undertakings weighed heavily on
him, and his friend John Forster, valued counsellor until the very end,
and biographer afterwards, was called in to help him out of the diffi-
culty, with the result that an agreement was made with Bentley whereby
the editorship of the Miscellany was handed over to Harrison Ainsworth,
and the copyright of Oliver Twist repurchased at a cost exceeding
two thousand pounds.
33
NOVELIST


Photo by]
[ T. W. Tyrrell
Mr. Shaw’s Academy at Bowes. The original of Dotheboys Hall
_ _
BS IS. SHAW, & ABLE ASSISTANTS,
stt Botoeg fltatfemg.
NEAH GRETA BRIDGE, YOHKSHXHE.
YOUTH are carefully instructed in the English., Latin, and Greek Languages,,;
Writing, Common and Decimal Arithmetic; Book-keeping,'Mensuration, Surveying,,
Geometry, Geography, and Navigation, with the most useful Branches of tiro Mothe- , ‘
and are provided with Board, Clothes, and every necessary, at TWENTY , ,
GUINEAS per Annum each. No extra charges whatever. Doctor’s hills excepted. , ;
No vacations, except hy the parents’ desire. 1
N.B. The French Language Two Guineas per Annum extra. ,
Further. Particulars may be known on application to Mr. W. LaKksheak, Surgeon, '
Tottenham Court, New Road; Mrs. YouNG,Plough Yard, Crown Street, Soho; Mr. y
Walker, 37, Dr dry Lane; Mr. Towkley, Chief Office of Excise, Broad Street; Mr,
Hamfson, 52, Long Lane, Southfield ; Mr. Gardiner, 80, Tottenham Court Road ; Mr.
Pitt, 22, Crown Court, Soho; and Mr. Wigginton, 42, Museum Street, Bloomsbury.
MR. SEATON, AGENT, 10, FREDERICK PEACE,
GasweU Street Hoad,
Will give the most respectable References to the Parents of others at theaboye Seminary,
as well as to those who have completed their Education with Mr. Shaw. ::
ALL LETTERS MUST BE POST PAIX>.
One of the Business Cards of the Original of Squeers in Nicholas Nickleby


This step, in which he was assisted by Chapman and Hall, enabled
Dickens to return to his original publishers, and to make headway
with the new story, Nicholas Nickleby.
As an example of the value which his work had attained in a period
of two years, whereas the payment for The Pickwick Papers was four-
teen pounds per monthly part, the agreement for Nicholas Nickleby
stipulated a monthly payment of £l5O, with copyright reverting to
Dickens after five years. Such was the enormous success of this story
that on its completion his publishers made him the handsome gift of
£l5OO. In addition to this they presented to him the portrait painted
by Daniel Maclise, which formed the frontispiece to the volume. This
portrait now hangs in the National Portrait Gallery, London.
It should also be stated here that in respect to The Pickwick Papers,
the publishers presented Dickens with a cheque for £5OO on the
publication of the
that the voluntary
the author amounted
is said that the pub-
made a profit of
publication of The
parts alone.
Just as in Oliver
attacked the Poor
other question of
special attention in
Nicholas Nickleby.
deplorable system of
Yorkshire had at-
him. “ I cannot call
twelfth part, and
payments made to
in all, to £3OOO. It
lishers themselves
£14,000 from the
Pickwick Papers in
Twist Dickens had
Law system, so an-
reform occupied his
writing the story of
For some years the
boarding schools in
tracted and repelled
to mind, now,” he
said in his Preface to the book, “ how I
came to hear about
Yorkshire schools
when I was a not very robust child, sitting in bye-places near
Eochester Castle, with a head full of Partridge, Strap, Tom Pipes and
Sancho Panza ; but I know that my first impressions of them were
picked up at that time, and that they were somehow or other con-
nected with a suppurated abscess that some boy had come home with,
in consequence of his Yorkshire guide, philosopher, and friend, having
ripped it open with an inky pen-knife. The impression made upon
me, however made, never left me. I was always curious about
Yorkshire schools —fell, long afterwards and at sundry times, into
the way of hearing more about them —at last, having an audience,
resolved to write about them.”
However, to make sure of his facts, he resolved to pay a visit to
Yorkshire before commencing the book, and accordingly, in the com-
pany of “ Phiz,” made the journey by coach in the winter of 1838, in
just such inclement, snowy weather as he pictured in the book.
Squeers was drawn from life ; William Shaw, of Bowes Academy,
was the original. In Dickens’s diary for 1838, among the very few
entries it contains is this significant one, under the date of February
35
NOVELIST


&u?"
■■&&, s*&£-£&& ‘kisi/toa* lsc£> \4h*. -*
h' ft c teskzsf
u**&U i
f\sjt, ftH f OsU-3 c*trt-ta*-£. c^J2—>
’ JL*. {x~*-c& , (X- t^ - o^li
fJl s * u /f
*& *c
A. faskjljiL
m^kkuJjk.
XjL <*M.d Xxr sl*j c£L^
ki fany r, • /u^3
UI , c'fatejh Z,
%A “>■**-> X^.
tL UA-,. Jck>u /*
_ ~^£,_
■'lL £o < L*svt*ks Jteyfco~y£<r #tZte? f* fo\~
. *9.j^
&U*j*AstxL.
A Page of the Original Manuscript of Nicholas Nichlehy


2 ; “ Shaw the schoolmaster we saw to-day is the man in whose school
several boys went blind some time since from gross neglect. The
case was tried, and the verdict went against him. It must have been
between 1823 and 1826. Look this up in the newspapers.”
In a letter to Mrs. S. C. Hall, he explained how he went in an assumed
name, taking a plausible letter to an old Yorkshire attorney in town,
telling him how a friend had been left a widow and wanted to place
her boys at a Yorkshire school, in hopes of thawing the frozen com-
passion of her relations. “ The man of business,” he continues, gave
me an introduction to one or two schools, but at night he came down
to the inn where I was stopping, and after much hesitation and con-
fusion—he was a large-headed, flat-nosed, red-faced, old fellow —said
with a degree of feeling one would not have given him credit for, that
the matters had been upon his mind all day —that they were sad places
for mothers to send their orphan boys to —that he hoped I would not
give him up as my adviser —but that she had better do anything with
them—let them hold horses, run errands—fling them in any way upon
the mercy of the World —rather than trust them there. This was an
attorney, a well-fed man of business, and a rough Yorkshireman.”
Not far from the notorious school kept by Shaw is the church yard,
in which Shaw and his son lie buried. Nearby is a stone to the memory
of George Ashton Taylor, aged 19, “ who died suddenly at Mr. William
Shaw’s Academy 1822.”
This was the grave visited by Dickens, as he tells us in the above-
mentioned letter.
“ The country for miles round was covered, when I was there, with
deep snow. There is an old church near the school, and the first
grave-stone I stumbled on that dreary winter afternoon was placed
above the grave of a boy, eighteen long years old, who had died —
suddenly the inscription said ; I suppose his heart broke —the camel
falls down ‘ suddenly ’ when they heap the last load upon his back —
died at that wretched place. I think his ghost put Smike into my
head, upon the spot.”
The strength of this mute appeal to Dickens’s sense of justice was
very great, for the letter states further : —Depend upon it that the
rascalities of those Yorkshire schoolmasters cannot easily be exagger-
ated, and that I have kept down the strong truth and thrown as much
comicality over it as I could, rather than disgust and weary the reader
with its fouler aspects. The identical scoundrel you speak of I saw —
curiously enough. His name is Shaw ; the action was tried (I believe)
eight or ten years since, and if I am not much mistaken another action
was brought against him by the parents of a miserable child, a cancer
37
NOVELIST


in whose head he opened with an inky penknife, and so caused his
death.”
Immediately on his return, on the eve of his twenty-sixth birthday,
Dickens commenced the first chapter. “ I wrote four slips last night,”
he wrote to Forster, “so you see the beginning is made. And what is
more, I can go on.”
This new work brought Dickens many fresh admirers. Sidney
Smith, who had previously expressed his doubts of Dickens’s genius,
was compelled to admit, “ Nickleby is very good. I stood out against
Mr. Dickens as long as I could, but he has conquered me.”
Barnaby Budge was already well on the way when increasing fame
and family made it necessary for Dickens to leave Doughty Street
for a larger house. This he found in No. 1 Devonshire Terrace, facing
Regent’s Park, which he occupied for the next twelve years (1839-
52). It was fated, however, that Barnaby Budge was not to be his
next publication. The previous method of issuing stories in monthly
parts had led to a series of aggravating plagiarisms, and had also
the disadvantage of thirty days’ interval between the appearance
of each part. Desiring to get into closer touch with his readers,
who had assured him by their numerous letters of their affectionate
regard, Dickens conceived the idea of a weekly publication wholly
from his pen, which should not only contain a new long story, but
should “ take advantage of all passing events, and vary the form
of the papers by throwing them into sketches, essays, tales,
adventures, letters from imaginary correspondents, and so forth,
so as to diversify the contents as much as possible.” Such
was the brief outline of his plan contained in a letter written to
Forster.
The outcome of this was
“ Master Humphrey’s Clock,”
the name and the idea of a
clock being taken from a shop
of one Humphrey, a clock-
maker at Barnard Castle
whom Dickens had visited
when in Yorkshire on the
Dotheboys Hall investiga-
tions.
Meanwhile a visit to see
Walter Savage Landor at
Bath was productive of the
character of Little Nell, who
may well be said to have had
her birthplace at Landor’s
house there, No. 35 St.
James’s Square, and The Old
Curiosity Shop appeared week
by week in this new periodi-
cal.
Little Nell and her Grandfather
38
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


In Little Nell was enshrined all the love he felt for the memory
of his wife’s sister, Mary Hogarth, whose death still continued to affect
him greatly, particularly as the anniversary came round. Such
was the hold that this sweet character in fiction had over the minds
of thousands of people, that Dickens received urgent requests from
all quarters not to let her die. O’Connell, the great Irish agitator,
was so overcome by the pathetic chapter describing her death that
he said, with tears in his eyes, “He should not have killed her. She
was too good,” and Lord Jeffrey and Macready, capable critics both,
confessed themselves deeply affected by the great power and beauty
of this episode.
Dickens himself, not unnaturally under the circumstances, was
more than ever a part of his character and a sharer of its sorrows.
“ I am breaking my heart over this story, and cannot bear to finish
it,” he wrote to George Cattermole, the artist who was illustrating it.
“ Dear Mary died yesterday when I think of this story,” he said in
another letter; and again, “ When I first began to keep my thoughts
upon this ending of the tale, I resolved to try and do something which
might be read by people about whom Death had been, with a softened
feeling, and with consolation. . . . After you left last night, I took
my desk upstairs ; and writing until four o’clock this morning, finished
the old story. It makes me very melancholy to think that all these
people are lost to me for ever, and I feel as if I never could become
attached to any new set of characters.”
It was The Old Curiosity Shop that fixed Dickens in the heart
of the English-speaking race. It was only Dickens who could endow
a shop with life ; every shop was to him the door of romance. Mr.
Chesterton, in his
presses the wonder
had so many schemes
times for the estab-
journal, never
“ The Street,” and
“ He could have
romance called the
another the ‘ Oil
pany with the ‘ Old
Some incomparable
and forgot ; some
oilman is lost to us
geous chemist might
£ Old Curiosity Shop’
its tale he did happen
book on Dickens, ex-
why Dickens, who
on hand at different
lishment of a weekly
started one called
divided it into shops,
written an exquisite
‘Baker’s Shop,’
Shop,’ to keep com-
Curiosity Shop.’
baker he invented
more than mortal
for ever ; some gor-
have been ; but the
he did linger by;
to tell,” and it is
our loving memory of Little Nell and her grandfather that makes us
linger outside a certain, so-called “ Old Curiosity Shop ” in a street
just off Lincoln’s Inn Fields, and picture it as the home of the faithful
little soul. Yet the house claiming to be “ The Old Curiosity Shop ”
has no association whatever either with the novelist or with the
book.
39
NOVELIST


Dolly Varden
A sketch by Halbot K. Browne (Phiz)


Barnaby Budge was the next story in “ Master Humphrey’s Clock,”
the publication of which terminated on its conclusion.
In 1841 Dickens and his wife visited Edinburgh, where was given
the first public dinner in honour of the young Englishman of twenty-
nine, a signal tribute from the land that has produced such immortals
as Burns and Scott. Professor Wilson (Christopher North) was in
the chair, and a great gathering of three hundred gave him welcome.
The subsequent social engagements, including the Freedom of the City,
the dinners, suppers, parties and theatres “ beat all natur,” as he
expressed it in a letter, so that even for one who loved the admiration
of his fellow man there was a surfeit of it. He yearned for his old
friends and his own fireside. “ I sigh for Devonshire Terrace and
Broadstairs, for Battledore and Shuttlecock ; I want to dine in a
blouse with you (Forster) and Mac (Macready). ’
However, before actually returning to London, he tasted the beauties
of the Highlands, and the grandeur of the Pass of Glencoe, which
latter impressed him tremendously.
On his return he entered into an agreement for a new work in parts,
'f' : 1 > -tJUfW
at £2OO monthly ; but this was not to commence for a year, so as
to allow an interval for the American trip, which he took at the urgent
solicitation of Washington Irving. To cross the Atlantic had been
under consideration for a long time ; “to set my foot upon the soil
I have trodden in my day dreams many a time, and whose sons (and
daughters) I yearn to be among.”
The departure of Dickens and his wife from Liverpool in the Boston
steamer took place on January 4th, 1842, the children being left behind
in the care of Macready, the famous actor, and his wife. The passage
occupied eighteen days, and was a very stormy one. “ Only a dream
can call it up again,” he wrote, “ in all its fury, rage and passion. . . .
I never expected to see the day again, and resigned myself to God
as well as I could.”
The reception at Boston was tumultuous. People crowded in and
out of the hotel in an endeavour to obtain a glimpse of the creator of
Little Nell and Mr. Pickwick.
“ I can do nothing that I want to do, go nowhere where I want to
go, and see nothing that I want to see, he wrote. If I turn into
the street, I am followed by a multitude. If I stay at home, the
house becomes, with callers, like a fair. If I visit a public institution
with only one friend, the directors come down, incontinently waylay
me in the yard, and address me in a long speech. Igo to a party
41
NOVELIST


in the evening, and am so enclosed and hemmed
about by people, stand where I will, that I am
exhausted for want of air. I dine out, and have to
talk about everything to everybody. Igo to church
for quiet, and there is a violent rush to neighbouring
pews, and the clergyman preaches at me. I take my
seat in a railroad car, and the very conductor won’t
leave me alone. ... I have no rest or peace, and am
in a perpetual worry.”
Invitations arrived to visit almost every city in
the Union, and the tribute he received from the New
World was, in Forster’s words, due to “ the hearty,
cordial and human side of his genius,” which
* completely fascinated the American people, for
Dickens “ was almost universally regarded by them
Mr. Scadder as a kind of embodied protest against what was
believed to be worst in the institutions of England.”
On his return to England, Dickens set about writing a record of his
American visit, which was published in two volumes under the title
of American Notes. The task was a difficult one, but as he wrote
to Longfellow, he endeavoured to speak both honestly and fairly.
I know that those in America for whom I care will like me better
for the book. A great many people will like me infinitely the worse,
and make a devil of me straight away.” And so it was ; the more
cultured and thoughtful citizens of the United States regarded the
book with approval. Emerson considered the lesson it taught “ not
quite lost ” in that it “ held bad manners up so that churls could
see the deformed. Longfellow spoke of it as “ jovial and good
natured, and at times severe,” to be “ read with delight and, for the
most part, approbation. But on the other hand, among certain
sections, and by probably the majority, it was received with resent-
ment and scorn, and the author soundly rated for his lack of courtesy
in writing such a book after such open-hearted
hospitality and princely welcome. They failed to
understand the spirit in which the Notes were
penned, in spite of the clear and unmistakable
dedication : —“ To those friends of mine in America
who, giving me a welcome, I must ever gratefully
and proudly remember, left my judgment free ; and
who, loving their country, can bear the truth when it
is told good-humouredly, and in a kind spirit.”
The adverse feeling that was expressed was not
mollified by the American incidents in his next book,
Martin Chuzzlewit (1843), in spite of the fact that
Dickens criticised adversely only what he judged
to be blameworthy, holding always the highest
opinion of what was best in America, and the same
contempt for what was worst. Dickens had attacked
in precisely similar way the different social evils in his
Mark Tajley and
Martin Chizzlewit
42
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


own country ; so the
hers of the American
gan to realise that
animus in what he>
was that when he
States some twenty-
reception was prodi-
American people will
place in their admira-
The sale of Martin
monthly parts proved
ment to Dickens. He
too sanguinely, for
His household and
more thinking mem-
people at length be-
lie had no personal
wrote. The result
again visited the
five years later, his
gious, and to-day the
accept no second
tion of his genius.
Chuzzlewit in
a great disappoint-
had hoped, perhaps
much better results,
personal expenses
were increasing rapidly at the time,
and on a hint from the publishers that
they would probably be availing themselves of a clause in the agreement
to withhold £5O of the £2OO agreed monthly payment, Dickens entered
into an agreement with the printing firm of Bradbury and Evans
that, in consideration of them advancing to him a sum of £2BOO,
which would clear off all his liabilities, he would assign to them a
fourth share of whatever he wrote during the ensuing eight years.
Concurrently with Martin Chuzzlewit, A Christinas Carol was
written. It was published a few days before Christmas, 1843, and
carried its message of love and goodwill to thousands of homes. This
was the beginning of the famous series of Christmas books, The Chimes,
The Cricket on the Hearth,
The Battle of Life and The
Haunted Man and when in
later years the price of
these annuals was reduced
from five shillings to four-
pence it was no uncommon
thing to sell a quarter of a
million in the first week of
publication. When pre-
senting a copy to his
American friend, Professor
Felton, Dickens wrote
A Christmas Carol
in prose; being a short
story of Christmas by
Charles Dickens. Over
which Christmas Carol
Charles Dickens wept and
laughed and wept again,
and excited himself in a
most extraordinary manner
in the composition; and
Sairey Gamp and Betsey Prig
43
NOVELIST


thinking whereof he walked about the black streets of London, fifteen
and twenty miles many a night when all the sober folks had gone to
bed Its success is most prodigious. And by every post all
manner of strangers write all
manner of letters to him about
their homes and hearths, and
how this same Carol is read aloud
there, and kept on a little shelf
by itself. Indeed, it is the
greatest success, as I am told,
that this ruffian and rascal has
ever achieved.”
“To keep the Chuzzlewit
going, and do this little book,
the Carol, in the odd times
between two parts of it, was, as
you may suppose, pretty tight
work,” he also explained in the
same letter. “ But when it was
done I broke out like a madman.
And if you could have seen me at
a children’s party at Macready’s
the other night, going down a
country dance with Mrs. M., you
would have thought I was a
country gentleman of indepen-
dent property, residing on a
tiptop farm, with the wind blow-
ing straight in my face every
day ”
In 1844 Dickens went to Italy
for a complete rest and change
of scene, and here he stayed a
year, in comparative idleness,
if such a thing were possible
with Dickens !
Here he wrote The Chimes
and made a special hurried visit
to London in order to read it
to a select circle of friends on
December 2nd, just before pub-
lication. The circle included
Carlyle, Fox, Douglas Jerrold,
Maclise and Forster. The read-
ing took place in Forster’s house in Lincoln’s Inn Fields. The house
was immortalised later in Bleak House as the house of Mr. Tulkinghorn.
His Christmas story for 1845 was The Cricket on the Hearth, the
sale of which doubled that of its predecessors. The autumn of that
year witnessed the commencement of a long course of amateur play
44
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


15 : ■ a ! fi
acting, with Mark Lemon, the Editor of Punch, John Leech, Douglas
Jerrold, Frank Stone and other distinguished literary and artistic men,
for the benefit of charity, of which special mention is made elsewhere.
In the following January Dickens started the Daily News, of which
he was the first editor ; but he was temperamentally unfitted for such
a post, and finding it uncongenial, he was succeeded after three weeks
only by his friend, John Forster.
His next long story was Dombey and Son (1846), to write which he
again went abroad, spending a whole year in Lausanne, Genoa and
Paris, “ to forget everything else if I can, and by living in Switzerland
for the summer and in Italy and France for the winter, I shall be
saving money while I write.”
Although a desire for a constant change of scene, air and surroundings
seemed now to be an essential part of his strenuous life he was not yet
thirty-five years of age —he experienced difficulty in settling down to
write in new surroundings, and until his pens and ink and the little
bronze figures, which always stood upon his desk, arrived in their
special box from London, he was not able to make a beginning with
his more important work. In these sojourns in the quietude of Genoa
or Lausanne, he missed the varied panorama of the London streets,
and the long night walks he had always been accustomed to take while
in the throes of a new composition. This, he explained, produced an
extraordinary nervousness it was hardly possible to describe .. .
For a week or a fortnight I can write prodigiously in a retired place
(as at Broadstairs), and a day in London sets me up again and starts
me. But the toil and labour of writing day after day, without the
magic lantern, is immense I!
Once the difficulties of his new surroundings were overcome, he was
able to settle down with all his old enthusiasm. Invention, thank
God,” he wuote on one occasion, “ seems the easiest thing in the wmrld ,
and I seem to have such a preposterous idea of the ridiculous as to be
constantly requiring to restrain myself from launching into extrava-
gancies in the height of my enjoyment.
" Again a Christmas book, The Battle of Life, was written cheek and
45
NOVELIST


jowl with a long story, but the strain
was very great. “ I made a tremendous
day’s work of it yesterday,” he says
in one of his letters, “ and was horribly
excited —so am going to rush out, as
fast as I can ; being a little used up,
and sick.”
There had been no long story from
Dickens for two years, and the re-
appearance of the monthly green pub-
lication received an enormous welcome.
The sale of Dombey and Son broke all
previous records, and there was no sign
of any lessening in the powers of the
writer of The Pickwick Papers or of
The Old Curiosity Shop.
The death of Paul Dombey in the
Paul Dombey and his sister
fifth part had just such another effect on the author and on the
public as the death of Little Nell had had a few years before. He
wrote the account in Paris, and wandered the streets the night through,
sad and disconsolate. To quote the special preface, written some ten
years later : “ When I am reminded by any chance of what it was the
waves were saying, I wander in my fancy for a whole winter night
about the streets of Paris —as I really did, with a heavy heart, on the
night when my little friend and I parted company for ever.”
Dickens had the highest possible opinion of Dombey and Son. " I
am not sorry I cannot bring
myself to care much for what
opinions people may form,”
he wrote to Forster ; “ and I
have a strong belief that, if
any of my books are read
years hence, Dombey will be
remembered as among the
best of them.”
Thackeray was delighted
with Dombey and Son, and
often spoke of it in the most
glowing terms. When he read
the affecting account of the
child’s death, he seemed
electrified at the thought that
there was one man living wdio
could exercise so complete a
control over him. Cramming
Part 5 of the book into his
pocket, he rushed round to the
printing office of “ Punch,”
and, entering the editor’s
Edith Dombey and Mr. Dombey
46
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


Mr. Micawber makes Punch
By Fred Barnard
Photo by]
[Walter Dexter
Blundeston Rectory
The original of Blunderstone Rookery,
where David Copperfield was born.


room, lie dashed it on the table and exclaimed : “ There’s no writing
against such power as this, one has no chance ! Read that chapter
describing young Paul’s death ; it is unsurpassed, it is stupendous ! ”
Dornhey and Son was not entirely written abroad. The early summer
of 1847 was spent at Brighton—where Little Paul had died a few
months before —and the occasion of his being in England enabled him
to gather together again his company of amateur actors to act in
London, Manchester and Liverpool for the purpose of augmenting a
fund to assist Leigh Hunt and John Poole. Then followed meetings-
in Leeds and Glasgow to support Men’s Institutions, at each of which
he presided and delivered —as he had done on other similar occasions—
inspiring addresses on the subject of the betterment of the working
classes, which have since been published in a volume of Speeches.
The Haunted Man was written at Broadstairs in the autumn of 1848,
more plays having been acted in the meanwhile in various provincial
towns for the endowment of Shakespeare’s birthplace—and then,
came David Copperfield (1849), written—for a change, and at the
suggestion of his friend Forster —in the first person. Forster little
thought then how much of the early part of the story, at least, was-
actually autobiographical. h
To get “ local colour,” a journey was made into Norfolk to visit
Yarmouth. The name of Blundeston he saw upon a signpost —
so he informed a friend —and took it “ for the sound of its name ”
for David’s birthplace, altering it to Blunderstone—which was far
more expressive.
Of all my books, I like this the best. It will easily be believed
that I am a fond parent
of every child of my
fancy, and no one can
ever love that family as.
dearly as I love them.
But, like many fond
parents, I have in my
heart of hearts a favourite
child, and his name is
David Copperfield.”
There is no doubt
that David Copperfield
brought Dickens to the
height of his fame. Its
appeal to readers lies in
the personal elements
which go to the making
of the story. “ I seem
to be sending some part
of myself into the
shadowy world,” he
wrote to Forster at the
time, although the public
David and Little Em’ly
48
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


then were not even suspicious of it. But apart from
this, it is a great and a lovable book.
During the summer at Bonchurch, in the Isle of Wight,
the old notion of a periodical, which had been agitating
Dickens’s mind for a long time, took definite form. The
first title selected for it was “ The Shadow,” then came
“ The Robin,” “ Mankind,” “ The Household Voice,” and
finally, “ Household Words.” The first number appeared
on the 30th March, 1850. Dickens gathered round him a
brilliant circle of contributors, Mrs. Gaskell being of their
number ; W. H. Wills was the assistant editor, and the
periodical continued until 1858, when, owing to an un-
fortunate breach with his publishers, it was replaced by a
similar publication entitled “All the Year Round,” which
appeared until his death.
Dickens’s contributions to “ Household Words ” included
A Child's History of England, and, in conjunction with
Wilkie Collins, The Lazy Tour of Two Idle Apprentices;
but only one of his shorter novels appeared in this pub-
lication. This was Hard Times, in 1854. A feature of
the new journal was the Christmas Number, issued each
December, containing a special story, the main portion of
which was by Dickens ; the rest by other writers.
On the conclusion of David Copperfield, Dickens threw
himself into further theatrical adventures ; first at Lord
Lytton’s seat at Knebworth, then at Rockingham Castle,
the home of his friends the Watsons, whom he had met in
Switzerland. Following these came the series in aid of
the Guild of Literature and Art, which had such a mag-
nificent send off at Devonshire House before Queen Victoria
and the Prince Consort. In the midst of all this hard work
and revelry came great domestic anxieties. Both Mrs.
Dickens and the youngest daughter, Dora, were seriously
ill, and the mother was ordered away to the purer air of
Malvern ; between here and London Dickens was con-
stantly travelling. His father died at the end of March,
and shortly afterwards Dickens had to fulfil a promise
made some time before to take the chair at a dinner in aid
of the General Theatrical Fund, which greatly needed help,
and was relying on the popularity and engaging oratory of
Dickens to make the necessary appeal. He came to town
specially from Malvern, and played with his little daughter,
much better as was thought, just before he left for the
dinner. His speech was a very powerful appeal for help
in grateful recognition of the art of the actor, who “ has
sometimes to come from scenes of sickness, of suffering,
ay, of death itself, to play his part before us.” And he
added “ all of us, in our spheres, have as often to do
violence to our feelings, and to hide our hearts in
49
NOVELIST


Dickens at his desk


fighting this great battle of life, and in discharging our duties and
responsibilities.”
He spoke from his heart, little thinking that even then a messenger
was waiting in the hall, kept back by Forster until the speech had
ended, to inform him that his little girl had died in convulsions a few
hours after he had parted from her.
A growing family—he now had six sons and two daughters —again
made a large house imperative, and accordingly in 1851 he purchased
from his friend, Frank Stone, A.R.A., Tavistock House in Tavistock
Square, which was his home for the next eight years. Here he com-
menced on his new story, Bleak House, in which he assailed the pro-
digious waste of money caused by the law’s delays in the Chancery
Court, the case of Jarndyce v. Jarndyce becoming much more famous
than the actual Jennens suit which had suggested it. Great as had
been the success of the two previous stories, the sale of Bleak House
was half as large again as David Copperfield.
Dean Ramsay’s opinion of Bleak House is shared by most readers
of that book. “ What a triumph is Jo’. Uncultured nature is there
indeed ; the intimations of true heart feeling, the glimmerings of
higher feeling . . . nothing in the field of fiction is to be found in English
literature surpassing the death of Jo.”
Dickens was now in his fortieth year, and with his theatrical
activities, his “ Household Words ” duties and a new story, was
undoubtedly attempting too *
much. A severe inflamma
tion of the side, a malady
dating back to childhood it
may be said, was causing
him much suffering. This, ,/
coupled with the mental
strain of his work, made him
consider the advisability of M
seeking rest in a foreign
country once more; but ‘‘JffiS
instead of an immediate
move abroad, he spent three
months at Dover (1852), and
then in the late autumn
went to Boulogne, where he
also passed the summers of
the next two years, and of
1856.
During the next few years
a greater restlessness than
usual came over Dickens,
which even the excitement
of so varied a life as he . -
was living failed to dispel. '
To those activities already Lady Dedlock and Poor Jo
51
NOVELIST


mentioned were added public readings from his works for the benefit
of charities, and the construction of a miniature theatre in the drawing
room of Tavistock House. Part of the time was spent in Folkestone,
part in Paris, part in Boulogne. During 1855 and 1856 was written
and published Little Dorrit, containing a satire on Government
Departments, termed “ Circumlocution,” and the science of How
not to do it.” Again in this book we find many personal associations
in the chapters dealing with the Marshalsea Prison, and with the
character of Arthur Clennam, which is David Copperfield at forty.
Little Dorrit in her Marshalsea garret
An example of how Dickens shaped his stories as he went along and
seldom started them with definitely fixed ideas is shown by the following
extract from a letter to Forster while he was at work on this book :
“ I am just getting to work on Number three ; sometimes enthusiastic,
more often dull enough. There is an enormous outlay in the Father
of the Marshalsea chapter, in the way of getting a great lot of matter
into a small space. lam not quite resolved, but I have a great idea
of overwhelming that family with wealth. Their condition would be
very curious ; I can make Dorrit very strong in the story, I hope. '
In March, 1856, he purchased the house of his dreams, Gads Hill
52
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


T**"- r ->' n Place, near Rochester, and the repairs and
M improvements to the house, before he was able
.}■& 1 improvements to the house, before he was able
! f 0 occupy it permanently, engaged his attention
53
NOVELIST


Dickens as
an Actor
Dickens as “ Bobadil ” in
“ Every Man in His Humour ”
SHtftoAtt SlirAtvfonls.
STAGE MANAGER. MR. CHARLES DICKENS
ON SATURDAY EVENING, APRIL 27, 1833.
A> Se tn e elect prtcitrfy Tie airfortneSKU wnß c.iaeneaar .
AN tHTRODnCTOay PaOLOGHE;
Ma EDWARD BACIU-W MB MILTON MB. CHARLES DICKENS. Ifl S 3 AUG T|»
lISB DICKENS,
IMMEDrATCtV AFTER WHICH WILL BE PBESENTED THE OPERA OF
CI.ARI.
?"*■* ffUte FW<6 ... MR BRaMWELU
N-U;mo.« Farmer.{ FdlAm m (fan) MR C OICKEN*
' * yaU ‘ “ DlUt) M R H AUSTIN
Ocro*« .• . . MR E BARROW
t V.mpetta «• . MB R. AUSTIN.
.... MAST EBB V OICKENB • A DICBENS
Onn ' MISS DICKENB.
FUolfho (A» Mother) MISS L DICK ENR.
f'espina . . . . MISS AUSTIN,
ffutem ... . MISS OPPENRgIM
C&S&aCTSM O? TEL* CP7BO9ZZ.
TSj ANitona» . . . KR HENRY KOLLP.
a Farm* . .. , MR. JOHN DICKENS.
*V* 1/ .... MI3B URQUHART
«V* 1/ .... M 133 URQUHART.
iaode . MISS OPPENHEIM
The Married Baelielor.
Sir Christ CoHrtaO ■ . MR. C. DICKENS
Sharp ... MR. JOHN L RQu’HAJST.
Lodi CotenaU MISS L. DICKENS.
Oroet ..... MISS DICKENS
TO CONCLUDE «TTB THE PARCS-DF
Amateurs & Actors,
Z)oruf Elderierry, (• miraf Morm/ac-
P . Beetle, and allotted ts end netcrin tmocenM&Ued wuA
* and 6F*e Mary Her* Theatncalt) . MA I DICKENS,
u/'l ..... UR R, AUSTIN. TWAirw. lEUettemye Factotum) MR R. AUSTIN
~ e m. (• *•—< ■
k;afs?tr. tn* engage* to nfierm. eant at Bnefiy. Loda.no t MR E BARROW
t-w» P«WJ» TWnco*) MR HR AM WELL, “ R E BARROW
(Pine, {a pom Comtry deem) MB C OIOKENI JP eH s/Elderberry, MISS DICKENS,
«'■ Mary Oonsml. to Strolling
Berry, {on Sam fm tAf Kemry Tragedy Actrose, end . magZ
Btumtese, .UA BOSTON evd to Isr hne*a»d\ MISS OPPENHFIJ*
Ti» Sewn OJ u««m s AwUa. Bitto#. H (Cell#, Amnuu TU B-jU rkicß «01 to ku*re** to*
coapUL#. «o4«r ihe dtremoß oi M - E P»rro».
From a Sketch hy
D. Maclise, Ji. A.
Playbill of Early Theatricals in his
Father’s House
T T is not generally known that the theatre held a wonderful
fascination for Dickens. It was with him from his earliest days,
and there was a period of about ten years of his middle life, prior to
the series of reading tours, when he gathered round him a company
of well-known and talented amateurs and acted in London and other
parts of the country for the benefit of various charities.
We have a fair amount of evidence of Dickens’s early predilection
for theatrical display. Mary Weller, his nurse at Chatham, has put
it on record that he was a “ terrible boy to read,” fond of reciting
and singing comic songs, and performing plays “ with such action
and such attitudes.”
His elder sister, Fanny, was his accompanist, and doubtless, as.
Dickens has said, he rapidly became —as children will—‘ f a horrible-
little nuisance to many unoffending grown-up people who were called
upon to admire him.”
His first attempts at authorship were entirely directed towards.
54


the stage, and were productive of certain tragedies “ achieved at the
mature age of eight or ten, and represented with great applause to
overflowing nurseries,” as he himself once put it.
Misnar, the Sultan of India , was the title of one such play, no doubt
very freely adapted from one of his favourite books, Tales of the Genii,
but only the name has survived.
Another early play was The Stratagems of Rozanza, probably written
at the age of nineteen. The work is not in his own handwriting,
but was copied out by his mother ; the name of the author is given
as C. J. H. Dickens (his full initials, never used on any other occasion).
It appears to be rather a free adaptation of one of Goldoni’s plays,
and we can well understand the desire of Dickens, in later life, that
such effusions should be destroyed. He was, not unnaturally, ex-
tremely anxious that none of this early “ rubbish,” as he called it,
should get into the hands of the public.
It was this passion for the stage that not only led him to write
plays at an early age, and to act in them, but to take a keen interest
in all things theatrical throughout his whole life. Indeed, it might
be said that it was of the theatre that Dickens’s great creations were
born ; that he saw life somewhat through the haze of the footlights.
That Dickens created his characters first as an actor is supported by
what he tells us in prefaces to several of the books, notably in David
Copperfield, where he writes of having dismissed into the shadowy
world a part of himself in concluding “ a two years’ imaginative
task. ’ The theatre was undoubtedly the abiding passion of Dickens’s
life ;he was certainly one of the most brilliant amateur actors who
ever trod the boards, and to the end of his life his day-dream was
to be the manager of a great theatre. It is fortunate for us, however,
that his talents were diverted to the written, rather than to the spoken
word ; but this was entirely due to an accident.
During the dull round of his early reporting days—when time
often hung heavily on his hands—he confesses to have been to a
theatre every night, with a very few exceptions, for quite three years,
displaying a keen
discrimination in
the choice of
choosing
the pieces where
the acting was
best, and never
missing a play 1
in which that ex-«
cellent comedian
Mathews ap-
peared. On him
he modelled him-
self. “ I practised
immensely,” he
says, “ even such
55
AS AN ACTOR


things as walking in and out, and sitting down in a chair ; often four,
five, six hours a day : shut up in my own room, or walking about in
the fields.’' In this way he learned a great number of parts. When he
was about twenty, and knew most of Mathews’s “ At Home ” by heart,
he wrote to the stage manager at Covent Garden offering himself for a
part, stating how he believed he had a “ strong perception of character
<7 • S S &Mr-
f ftcuyf* Of Qo^Y*.<**.cyCy/
ClcA / 2
vf-feMl Zu. <rf
% -*_/^. /
/.w «u^fe/ ft*-v v / ,
t\r luyt'ecu- UrahKu-/ a u- Auun*
f\cS _ tv'avuuut
f* Hrtrz. zfiuk £
X. tfix*- OurUe,- , 0 ,
ffic uj y
jfLJ* u '&■ </ C " / t^ /W
h>x<Jr — a^>u *y
•G L \j:.. w
•f/c .r«.£c' p ■ r/ /
( fau't.* :*«*/ *• “* °* w ‘ e
ti IMuT CTMuc-u) 4 uA&mcju
ivlc-i eau.' <i*u- to* jui*.
'X 'LcC_y y* ' d
Facsimile of page of manuscript of a travesty, “O’Thello ”
written by Dickens at the age of twenty-one for private
performance in his own family ; authenticated by his father
and oddity,” and a natural power of reproducing in his own person
what he observed in others. The result of this was that he received an
appointment to appear before Charles Kemble and do any scene of
Mathews’s he pleased. But when the day came he was “ laid up
with a terrible bad cold and an inflammation of the face ” ; the
opportunity was lost, and English literature was the gainer thereby.
Although he was given the opportunity of a further hearing at a later
date, he did not avail himself of it, as he shortly afterwards obtained
56
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


advancement in the journalistic world, and began to write stories and
achieve a success in them which turned his thoughts away from the
stage for a while.
In 1833 he wrote a travesty entitled O'Thello; a few pages of one of
the parts are still in existence signed, by John Dickens (the father)
in June, 1842, as “ an unpublished travestie written by Mr. Charles
Dickens for private performance in his own family (1833), and is in
his own handwriting.” (See facsimile on p. 56.)
The play was a burlesque, with music, and doubtless particularly
suited to the comic singing capabilities of the author. The part referred
to that of “ The Great Unpaid,” was taken by John Dickens himself.
Pickwick had not been appearing for more than six months when
Dickens wrote “ a comic
burletta ” for John Pritt . U-v
Harley. It was called
The Strange Gentleman,
and was produced at
the St. James’s Theatre.
It ran until December,
when it was replaced by
an “ operatic burletta,”
also by Dickens, entitled
The Village Coquettes , for
which John Hullah, a
popular composer of the
day, wrote the music.
Although Dickens had
a very poor opinion of
these two works, they met with a fair measure of success. The next
comic burletta ’ to be produced at the same theatre was also by
Dickens, Is She His Wife ? or Something Singular, and at the same
time The Strange Gentleman was revived, which certainly points to its
success.
The great success of Pickwick introduced Dickens to a large number
of people, including Macready, with whom sprang up a long and lasting
friendship. Early in their acquaintanceship Dickens wrote a play
specially for him entitled The Lamplighter, but it was never produced,
bo did the lure of the theatre hold Dickens in the first years of his
great success as an author : but it slackened just a little at about
this time (Dickens was only 26) owing to the increasing demands on
his time ; at any rate, his writing was henceforward confined to stories.
Four years later, on his way back from his very successful visit to
the United States, he was prevailed upon to act with the officers of
the Coldstream Guards in Montreal for the benefit of a charity ; and
not only did he act, but he took the whole responsibility of the pro-
duction on his own shoulders—as the following letter to a friend
clearly indicates.
" I would give something if you could only stumble into that very
dark and dusty theatre in the daytime (at any minute between twelve
57
AS AN ACTOR


Portrait of Dickens, painted in Paris by Ary Scheffer, 1856
Now in the National Portrait Gallery, London


and three), and see me with my coat off, the stage
manager and universal director, urging impracticable
ladies and impossible gentlemen on to the very confines
of insanity, shouting and driving about, in my own
person, to an extent which would justify any philan-
thropic stranger in clapping me into a strait-waistcoat
without further inquiry, endeavouring to goad H. into
some dim and faint understanding of a prompter’s
duties, and struggling in such a vortex of noise, dirt,
bustle, confusion, and inextricable entanglement of
speech and action as you would grow giddy in contem-
plating. . . . This kind of voluntary hard labour used to
be my great delight. The ftiror has come strong upon
me again, and I begin to be once more of opinion that nature intended
me for the lessee of a national theatre, and that pen, ink, and paper
have spoiled a manager.”
There was a hint in the correspondence at the time that a repetition
of the plays would be given in London ; but the idea seems to have
slumbered for a couple of years, work and other matters intervening.
In 1844 Dickens spent practically the whole year in Italy; but
made a hurried visit to London to read his new Christmas book,
The Chimes, to a select circle of his friends. The evening before he
had read it to his friend, the great actor Macready. Writing to his
wife, he said —and with what pride he must have written it ! “If
you had seen Macready last night, undisguisedly sobbing and crying
on the sofa as I read, you would have felt, as I did, what a thing it is
to have power.”
Here, then, was the germ of that larger appeal by public reading
that Dickens was to embark upon some dozen years later ; but in
the meantime the impression made upon his friends, especially on
such a subject as Macready, and on Carlyle and Stanfield, fanned the
flame that was destined to burn brightly on the amateur theatrical
stage for the next ten years and more.
The year 1845 saw the first of the long series of plays which Dickens
produced first for the amusement of himself and his friends, and
then for charity. This was Ben Jonson’s “ Every Man in his Humour,”
played at the old Royalty Theatre, with Dickens as the
swaggering Captain Bobadil, and Mark Lemon, Douglas
Jerrold, John Leech, Frank Stone, John Forster and other
distinguished men in the cast.
“ He was the life and soul of the entire affair,” wrote his
biographer, Forster. “ I never seemed till then to have
known his business capabilities. He took everything on
himself, and did the whole of it without an effort. He
was stage-director, very often stage-carpenter, scene-
arranger, property-man, prompter, and band-master.
Without offending anyone he kept every one in order.
For all he had useful suggestions, and the dullest of clays
under his potter’s hand were transformed into little bits
59
AS AN ACTOR


Dickens as Captain Bobadil in “ Every Man in His Humour ”
From a painting by C. 11. Leslie, K.A
of porcelain. He adjusted scenes, assisted carpenters invented
costumes, devised play-bills, wrote out calls, and enforced as well as
exhibited in his proper person everything of which he urged the
necessity on others.”
The performance was strictly private, but such a notable gathering
was not to be ignored, and before long the demand arose for a per-
formance in aid of charity, which was accordingly given.
Performances followed in Manchester and Liverpool for the benefit
of Leigh Hunt and John Poole.
A year or so later, Dickens organised a fresh series of plays to assist
the fund for the purchase of Shakespeare’s Birthplace, adding “ The
Merry Wives of Windsor ” to the plays already produced. In this
he played Shallow, and at the Haymarket Theatre the play was honoured
with the presence of Queen Victoria and Prince Consort.
Manchester, Liverpool, Birmingham, Edinburgh and Glasgow
were visited by these “ Splendid Strollers,” as they were called,
nearly three thousand pounds being raised in this way. Amateur
theatricals followed in the fine baronial hall of Rockingham Castle
(the original of Chesney Wold in Bleak House) for his friends the
Hon. Richard and Mrs. Watson, and these were repeated at Lord
Lytton’s seat, Knebworth, and led to the series of performances for
the Guild of Literature and Art which Lytton, in conjunction with
Dickens, had established to assist the needy in those two professions.
60
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


Dickens as Captain Coldstream in “ Used Up ”
From a painting hy Augustus Egg, R.A.
Now in The Dickens House
For this purpose Lytton —the most popular playwright of the day—
wrote a special play, “ Not So Bad As We Seem,” the production of
which was in Dickens’s hands. This had a remarkable send off at
Devonshire House on May 16th, 1851, in the presence of Queen
Victoria and Prince Albert, the sum of a thousand pounds being
realised from the first performance. Visits were subsequently paid
to several provincial towns with equally successful results.
The passion for the theatre was further exemplified by the
construction of a little theatre in the drawing room of his house in
Tavistock Square, where Twelfth Night plays were specially done for
the family, augmented by the families of Mark Lemon, Frank Stone
and others. The exacting note which characterised Dickens’s life
is shown by the play bills which were specially printed for these
plays. To fairy plays such as “ Tom Thumb ” and “ Fortum'o ”
were added “ The Lighthouse ” and “ The Frozen Deep,” both by
Wilkie Collins. For the former Clarkson Stanfield, R.A., painted
a special drop scene representing the exterior of a lighthouse, which
after Dickens’s death sold for a thousand guineas. “ The Frozen
Deep ” was played in several towns for the benefit of the fund for
61
AS AN ACTOR


the widow of Douglas Jerrold, and in this way two thousand pounds
was realised. Queen Victoria, who had a great admiration for
Dickens, both as a writer and an actor, being unable to attend any
of the public performances, a private representation was arranged
for her specially at the Hanover Square Rooms.
This play marked Dickens’s last appearance as an actor. From
1858 onwards public readings from his own works gave him wider
scope for more intimate appearance before his vast appreciative
public, and utilising the great talents of mimicry of which he was
so abundantly possessed.
Dickens giving a reading of his own works
62
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


Dickens as
a Reader
TAICKENS’S popularity as a
writer was considerably
enhanced by his success as a
reader of his own works. At
first these readings were given
for charity and hundreds of
pounds were thus realised for benevolent objects in different parts of
the country. They originated in this manner.
In the January of 1853 Dickens, who was always in great demand
as an after-dinner speaker, was invited to attend a “ Banquet in
honour of Literature and Art ” in Birmingham, at which he replied to
the toast of “ The Literature of England.” Later in the evening he
proposed the toast “ The Educational Institutions of Birmingham.”
Prior to the Banquet, Dickens was the recipient, at the rooms of the
Society of Arts, of a salver, and a diamond ring, “ asa sincere testimony
of their appreciation of his varied literary acquirements, and of the
genial philosophy and high moral teaching which characterise his
writings.”
After the banquet he made the offer to give his first public reading
in aid of the funds for the building of the Birmingham and Midland
Institute.
In a letter confirming this offer he wrote : “ There would be some
novelty in the thing, as I have never done it in public, though I have
in private, and (if I may say so) with a great effect on the hearers.”
Accordingly, the following December Dickens read in the Town
Hall A Christmas Carol on the 27th, and The Cricket on the Hearth
on the 29th. The enthusiasm was great, and he consented to read
the Carol a second time, on the 30th, “ if
seats were reserved for working men at
prices within their means.”
To a correspondent he wrote of this
occasion : “I was heartily pleased with
the Birmingham audience, which was a
very fine one. I never saw, nor do I
suppose anybody ever did, such an in-
teresting sight as the working people’s
night. There were two thousand five
hundred of them there, and a more
delicately observant audience it is im-
possible to imagine. They lost nothing,
misinterpreted nothing, followed every-
thing closely, laughed and cried with
most delightful correctness, and animated
Pecksniff
The Artful Dodger


me to that extent that I felt as if we were all bodily going up into the
clouds together.” The result of these readings was an addition of
between four and five hundred pounds to the funds for the establish-
ment of the new Institute ; and a prettily worked flower-basket in
silver, presented to Mrs. Dickens, commemorated these first public
readings “ to nearly six thousand people.”
Other readings on behalf of Mechanics’ and Literary Institutions in
Reading, Sherborne, Bradford, Folkestone, Sheffield, Peterborough, Man-
In the Dickens Fellowship Cot at Alton
Hospital for Crippled Children
chester, Coventry, Bristol,
Edinburgh and Chatham,
followed at various inter-
vals throughout the next
four years, during which
time he was also acting in
old English comedies with
his friends of the Guild of
Literature and Art.
All this time there had
been a growing desire on
the part of Dickens to see
more of the public, who
were testifying in various
ways their appreciation of
his writings, and to appear
before them as a public
reader for his own pecu-
niary gain, and his final
decision was made after a
most successful reading of
A Christmas Carol in Lon-
don. This was in 1858.
Dickens accepted an in-
vitation to take the chair
at a public dinner in aid
of the funds of the Chil-
dren’s Hospital in Great Ormond Street, which had been doing a deal
of useful work, over 50,000 children having been attended to in four or
five years, and of these no less than 30,000 were under five years of age.
Dickens threw himself heart and soul into the service, and his address
from the chair had a startling effect upon the audience. “Many a
poor child sick and neglected I have seen in London ; many have I
also seen most affectionately tended, in unwholesome houses and hard
circumstances where recovery was impossible : and the child has
always addressed his dumb wonder to me what it meant, and why, in
the name of a gracious God, such things should be ! . . , But, ladies
and gentlemen,” Dickens added, “ such things need not be, and will
not be, if this company, which is a drop of the life-blood of the great
compassionate public heart, will only accept the means of rescue and
prevention, which it is mine to offer.”
64
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


He then went on to describe the family mansion
which had been turned into a hospital for sick
children. ”On the walls of these rooms are graceful,
pleasant, bright, childish pictures. At the beds’
heads hang representations of the Figure which is
the universal embodiment of all mercy and com-
passion, the figure of Him who was once a child
Himself, and a poor one. But, alas ! reckoning up
the number of beds that are there, the visitor to the
child’s hospital will find himself perforce obliged to
stop at very little over thirty ; and will learn, with
sorrow and surprise, that even that small number,
so forlornly, so miserably diminutive compared with
this vast London, cannot possibly be maintained
unless the hospital be made better known. I content
myself with saying better known, because I will not
David and Mr. Peggotty
believe that in a Christian community of fathers, mothers, brothers
and sisters, it can fail being better known to be
well and richly endowed.”
It was a brave and true prediction. That
night alone added more than three thousand
pounds to its funds, and shortly afterwards
Dickens put the crown to his good work by
reading, on its behalf, A Christmas Carol. The
sum then realised, and the urgent demand that
followed for a repetition, made Dickens decide to
give such readings for his own benefit, and for
several years afterwards he toured England,
Scotland, Ireland and the United States, reading
from his own works. This added fresh laurels to
his crown ; but, alas ! it was the wear and tear of
these readings that eventually cost him his life.
As an example of contemporary opinion on
Mrs. Gamp
Dickens’s readings we quote the following entry from the diary of
Sir Frederick Pollock : —■“ To reading by Dickens at
St. James’s Hall. He gave ‘ Boots at the Holly Tree,’
the scene between Bill Sikes and Nancy, and a bit of
Mrs. Gamp. What an actor he would have made !
What a success he must have had if he had gone to
the bar ! His power of reproducing a scene and
bringing to the very eyes of his audience its exact
features and the relative bearings of its composing
parts has never been equalled. This would have
been an invaluable quality in many cases at the bar.
He could always at a glance take in the contents and
furniture of a room, and in this way was able to
astonish his friends by performing some of the feats
made famous by Houdin the conjurer. In the scene
on the steps of London Bridge from Oliver Twist, the
Mr. & Mrs. Dombey
65
AS A READER


(HUES DKKHS
WILL READ AT THE
FESTIVAL CONCERT ROOM,
YORK,
MONDAY EVENING,
OCTOBEIB
25th, at 8 o’Clock,
THE POOR
TRAVELLER,
BOOTS HOLLY TREE INN,
MRS. CAMP
PLACES EOR THE UEAUINHi-
Four Shillings.
Two Shillings.
One Shilling.
Stalls, (numbered and reserved)
Gallery, -
Back Seats,
Tickets to be had of Mr. HENRY BANKS, Music Warehouse, Stunegate, York,
Where a Plan of the Reserved Scat* may be teen.
On only one occasion, within Mr. Dickins’s experience, some ladies and gentlemen in the Stalls caused great
•inconvenience and confusion (no doubt, unintentionally), by leaving their places during the last quarter of an hour of the Reading,
when the general attention could least bear to be disturbed. This elicited a strong disposition in other parts of the Hall towards
ait angry but not unreasonable protest.
In case any portion of the company should be under the necessity of leaving before the close of the Reading in the
apprehension of losing railway trains, they are respectfully intreated, as an act of consideration and courtesy towards the remainder,
to avail themselves of the opportunity afforded by the interval between the parts when Mr. Dickins retires for five minutes.
THE READING WILL LAST TWO HOURS.
Tnm,- to, Sc Ua*
Copy of Poster announcing a reading by Dickens


whole arrangement of the locality, and the positions of the speakers
and listeners, stood out in a kind of reality when accentuated by
the voice and gestures of Dickens.”
Carlyle gave his opinion of Dickens as a reader in these words : —-
“ Dickens does do it capitally, such as it is : acts better than any
Macready in the world ; a whole tragic, comic, heroic theatre visible
performing under a hat, and keeping us laughing the whole night.”
From Dickens’s own letters we obtain a full account of the great
personal affection with which the popular writer was greeted by
the public. “ The run upon the tickets here is so immense,” he
wrote from Sheffield, “ that Arthur (his manager) is obliged to get
bills out, signifying that no more can be sold. It will be by no
means easy to get into the place the numbers who have already paid.
It is the hall we acted in, crammed to the roof and the passages.”
“ The Hull people (not generally considered excitable, even on their
own showing) were so enthusiastic, that we were obliged to promise
to go back there for two readings. Arthur told you, I suppose, that
he had his shirt front and waistcoat torn off last night ? He was
perfectly enraptured in consequence. Our men got so knocked about
that he gave them five shillings a piece on the spot. John passed
several minutes upside dowm against a wall, with his head amongst
the people’s boots. He came out of the difficulty in an exceedingly
tousled condition, and with his face much flushed. For all this, and
their being packed as you may conceive they would be packed, they
settled down the instant I went in, and never wavered in the closest
attention for an instant.”
“ The readings have made an immense effect in this place (New-
castle), and it is remarkable that, although the people are individually
rough, collectively they are an unusually tender and sympathetic
audience ; while their comic perception is quite up to the high London
standard.”
From Brighton he wrote : —“ I had a most charming audience
for Copperfield, with a delicacy of perception that really made the
work delightful. It is very pretty to see the girls and women generally,
in the matter of Dora ; and everywhere I have found that peculiar
personal relation between my audience and myself on which I counted
most when I entered on this enterprise.”
‘‘ The reception at Cambridge was something to be proud of in such
a place. The colleges mustered in full force, from the biggest guns
to the smallest; and went beyond even Manchester in the roars of
welcome and rounds of cheers. The place was crammed, and all
67
AS A READER


through the reading everything was taken with the utmost heartiness
of enjoyment.”
Of another visit to the same city he wrote : —“ We had a splendid
rush last night. . . . They were a far finer audience than the previous
night. I think the finest I have ever read to. They took every word
of the Dombey in quite an amazing manner, and after the child’s
death, paused a little, then set up a shout that it did one good to hear.
Mrs. Gamp then set in with a roar, which lasted till I had done. I
think everybody for the time forgot everything but the matter in
hand. It was as fine an instance of thorough absorption in a fiction
as any of us are likely to see ever again.”
The readings were not without their adventures, and what came
near being a terrible catastrophe was averted by Dickens’s coolness
and presence of mind. It was at Newcastle, and the incident was
recorded by Dickens in these words : —“ The room was tremendously
crowded and my gas-apparatus fell down. There was a terrible wave
among the people for an instant, and God knows what destruction
of life a rush to the stairs would have caused. Fortunately a lady
in the front of the stalls ran out towards me, exactly in a place
where I knew that the whole hall could see her. So I addressed
her, laughing, and half-asked and half-ordered her to sit down again ;
and, in a moment, it was all over. But the men in attendance
had such a fearful sense of what might have happened (besides the
real danger of fire) that they positively shook the boards I stood
on, with their trembling, when they came up to put things right.
I am proud to record that the gas-man’s sentiment, as delivered
afterwards, was, ‘ The more you want of the master, the more
you’ll find in him.’ With which complimentary homage, and with
the wind blowing so that can I hardly hear myself write, I conclude.”
An accident of an entirely different, and happier character, was
that which Dickens referred to as follows :—“ We had a tremendous
hall at Birmingham last night, £230 odd, 2100 people ; and I made
a most ridiculous mistake. Had Nickleby on my list to finish
with, instead of Trial. Read Nickleby with great go, and the
people remained. Went back again at 10 o’clock, and explained the
accident; but said if they liked I would give them the Trial. They
did like ; —and I had another half hour of it in that enormous place.”
One or two other incidents are worth recording to show the close
attachment, between author and public that were the result of these
readings.
The following has reference to a reading at Leamington : —“ There
68
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


was one gentleman at the Little Dombey yesterday who exhibited —
or rather concealed—the profoundest grief. After crying a good deal
without hiding it, he covered his face with both his hands and laid
it down on the back of the seat before him, and really shook with
emotion. He was not in mourning, but I supposed him to have lost
some child in old time. .. . There was a remarkably good fellow, too,
of thirty or
something so
in Toots that
compose him-
laughed until
his eyes with
chief; and
felt Toots
he began to
wipe his eyes
when Toots
more, he gave
as if it were
for him. It
monly droll,
me laugh
A tour in
States result-
man i f e s t a-
home,and can
quately dealt
rate article.
A visit to
1858 was pro-
so, who found
very ludicrous
he could not
self at all, but
he sat wiping
his handker-
whenever he
coming again,
laugh and
afresh; and
came once
a kind of cry,
too much
was uncom-
an d made
heartily.”
the United
ed in the same
tio n s as at
only be ade-
with in a sej>a-
Ireland i n
ductive of al-
Paul Dombey
most unusual scenes. “In Dublin there was almost a riot. People
broke the pay box and freely offered £5 for a stall. In Belfast he had
enormous audiences, being compelled, he said, to turn half the town
away. The reading over, the people ran after him to look. ‘Do me
the honour,’ said one, ‘to shake hands, Misther Dickens, and God
bless you, sir, not ounly for the light you’ve been to me this night,
but for the light you’ve been in ma house, sir (and God love your
face !), this many a year.’ Men cried undisguisedly. And on the
other hand, he wrote in a letter home, ‘as to the “ Boots ” and
“ Mrs. Gamp ” it was just one roar with me and them. For they
made me laugh so that sometime I could not compose my face to gb
on.’ ”
On another occasion, after a reading, he was accosted in the street
with “ Mr. Dickens, will you let me touch the hand that has filled my
house with many friends'? ”
How many hundreds of thousands of us have been so served ; how
many hundreds of thousands of houses has he filled with his many
friends.
69
AS A READER


The Last Years
IN 1860 Dickens took up
permanent residence at
Gads Hill Place, near
Rochester, which for the past
two years had been a summer
residence only. This new life
as the master of a country
estate appealed to him immensely. If ever there was a House of
Dreams, that house was Gads Hill Place. When a boy at Chatham,
this house was, to use his own words, “ literally a dream of my child-
hood.”
" When I was a small boy down in these parts,” he wrote to his
French friend, de Cerjat, “ I thought it the most beautiful house
ever seen. And my poor father used to bring me to look at it and
used to say that if ever I grew up to be a clever man perhaps I might
own that house ... in remembrance of which I have always in passing
looked to see if it was to be sold or let, and it has never been to me
like any other house, and it has never changed at all.”
Dickens made many additions and alterations to the house, and
improvements were constantly engaging his attention during the
remainder of his life. He had a great liking for anything that was
bright and cheerful, and had the drawing room hung with mirrors
to reflect the light from all possible angles : his last addition was a
conservatory connecting the drawing room with the dining room.
Gads Hill Place is now a school for girls, but few, if any, alterations
have been made in the house itself. The library, with the dummy
bookcase covering the inside of the door, is still as it was. Some of
the book titles are most amusing, such as “ Lady Godiva on the
Horse,” “ Noah’s Architecture,” “ Cats’ Lives ” (in nine volumes),
” The History of a Short Chancery Suit ” (21 volumes).
On the opposite side of the road to the house is a shrubbery called
the Wilderness. Dick-
by means of an under-
accessible from the main
ted the Swiss Chalet
mas time, a gift from his
the members of his house
for many hours fitting the
“ It will really be a
“ and in summer the
charming study.” Later
room is up among the
and the birds, and the
out, and the green
ens purchased this, and
ground passage made it
grounds. Here he erec-
which arrived one Christ-
actor friend Fechter, and
party busied themselves
various pieces together,
pretty thing,” he wrote,
upper room will make a
on he again wrote: “My
branches of the trees,
butterflies fly in and
branches shoot in at the
The Chalet
70


open windows, and the lights and the shadows of the clouds come and go
with the rest of the company. The scent of the flowers, and, indeed,
of everything that is growing for miles and miles, is most delicious.”
As we should imagine, many a happy Christmas did Dickens spend
at Gads Hill surrounded by his large family. He was famous for
games of all sorts, especially Proverbs and Dumb Crambo, the latter
giving him full scope for his imitative ability. At dinner the lighted
pudding with sprig of holly was never absent, and
the invariable toast was “ Here’s to us all. God bless
us.” Those around him were not forgotten, the
villagers on more than one occasion being called in
to be the audience at Charades in which the whole
family took part.
Then there were the sports, regularly held by
“ Squire ” Dickens; and according to a letter which
he found time to write one Christmas Day : “ Foot
races for the villagers come off in my field to-morrow.
We have been all hard at work all day building a
course and making countless flags, and I don’t know
what else. Layard is chief commissioner of the domestic police. The
country police predict an immense crowd.”
One of the first great happenings at Gads Hill was the wndding of
his second daughter, Kate, to Charles Collins, brother of Wilkie Collins,
the novelist. Of the rest of the family, to quote from a letter which
Dickens wrote at this time to a friend abroad :
“ My eldest daughter has not yet started any conveyance on the
road to matrimony (that I know of) ; but it is likely enough that
she will, as she is very agreeable and intelligent. They are both
very pretty. My eldest boy, Charley, has been in Barings’ house for
three or four years, and is now going to Hong Kong, strongly backed
up by Barings, to buy tea on his own account, as a means of forming
a connection and seeing more of the practical part of a merchant’s
calling, before starting in London for himself.
His brother Frank (Jeffrey’s godson) I have
just recalled from France and Germany,
to come and learn business, and qualify
k himself to join his brother on his return
from the Celestial Empire. The next
\ boy, Sydney Smith, is designed for the
Mk navy, and is in training at Portsmouth,
awaiting his nomination. He is about
Wmne three foot high, with the biggest eyes ever
mSssf* seen, and is known in the Portsmouth
Ajf 1 !!* P arts as " r ° un " Dickens, who can do
everything.”
“ Another boy is at school in France;
the youngest of all has a private tutor
tifj, a t home. 1 have forgotten the second in
Dick Swiveller and Fred Trent order, who is in India. He went out as
71
THE LAST YEARS


Dickens reading to his daughters
in the grounds of Gads Hill


an ensign of a non-existent native regiment, got attached to the 42nd
Highlanders, one of the finest regiments on the Queen’s service ; has
remained with them ever since, and got made a lieutenant by the
chances of the rebellious campaign before he was eighteen. Miss
Hogarth, always Miss Hogarth, is the guide, philosopher, and friend
of all the party, and a very close affection exists between her and
the girls. I doubt if she will ever marry. I don’t know whether to
be glad of it or sorry for it.”
Two of the children still survive, Kate, the daughter, who was
married from Gads Hill —now Mrs. Perugini, and Sir Henry Fielding
Dickens, Common Serjeant of the City of London, to whom Dickens
wrote some years later wheu his son was
an undergraduate at Cambridge ;
“ I am very glad to hear of the success
of your reading, and still more glad that
you went at it with downright earnest. I
should never have made my success in life
if I had been shy of taking pains, or if I
had not bestowed upon the least thing I
have ever undertaken exactly the same
attention and care that I have bestowed
upon the greatest. Do everything at your
best. It was but this last year that I set to
and learned every word of my readings;
and from ten years ago to last night I have
never read to an audience but I have
watched for an opportunity of striking out
something better somewhere. Look at such
Arthur Clennam
of my manuscripts as are in the library at Gads, and think of the
patient hours devoted year after year to single lines.
“You know how hard I work for what I get, and I think you know
that I never had money help from any human creature after I was
a child.
” You know that you are one of many charges on me, and that
I trust to your so exercising your abilities and improving the advan-
tages of your past expensive education, as soon to diminish this
charge. I say no more on that head.
” Whatever you do, above all things keep out of debt and confide
in me. If you ever find yourself on the verge of any perplexity or
difficulty, come to me. You will never find me hard with you while
you are manly and truthful.
“ As your brothers have gone away one by one, I have written to
each of them what lam now going to write to you. You know that
you have never been hampered with religious forms of restraint,
and with mere unmeaning forms I have no sympathy. But I most
strongly and affectionately impress upon you the priceless value
of the New Testament, and the study of that book as the one un-
failing guide in life. Deeply respecting it, and bowing down before
the character of our Saviour, as separated from the vain construe-
73
THE LAST YEARS


Minor Canon Row,
Rochester
“ And so God bless you
tions and inventions of men, you cannot
go very wrong, and will always preserve
at heart a true spirit of veneration and
humility. Similarly I impress upon you
the habit of saying a Christian prayer
every night and morning. These things
have stood by me all through my life,
and remember that I tried to render the
New Testament intelligible to you and lov-
able by you when you were a mere baby.
“Ever your affectionate Father.”
In the interval between the first reading tour, which ended in
October, 1859, and the commencement of the second tour in April
1861, Dickens was busy on a new story, Great Expectations , in which
he returned to the style of narrative adopted in David Copper field.
There are many other similarities between the two books, especially
in the early chapters devoted to the childhood of the hero, Philip
Pirrip, otherwise Pip. The principal scene of this story was placed
in Rochester and the surrounding marsh country of the River
Thames.
The readings in different parts of the country curtailed his literary
output to a certain extent, but the Christmas Stories were regularly
forthcoming as extra numbers of “ All the Year Round,” and amongst
them must not be forgotten Mrs. Lirriper’s Lodgings (1863), Mrs.
Lirriper’s Legacy (1864), Doctor Marigold’s Prescriptions (1865),
Mughy Junction (1866), and No Thoroughfare (1867).
Then also during this period he played the part of an Uncommercial
Traveller “ in the fancy goods line ” in many parts of London, writing
his experiences in his weekly magazine and publishing them in volume
form in 1861.
After the second series of readings in 1861-2 Dickens resumed the
publication of a story in monthly parts, abandoned after Little Dorrit,
by writing Our Mutual Friend. It was while this was in progress
and Mr. and Mrs. Boffin were “in their manuscript dress,” that
Dickens came very near to losing his life. It was on June 9th, 1865
(the very day of his death five years later), that he was a passenger
by the French boat train which met with a disastrous accident at
Staplehurst, a few miles south of Maidstone, in which several people
were killed.
The only carriage which did not fall
over the bridge into the stream was the
one in which Dickens was travelling.
He was able to extricate himself and
render valuable aid to the injured, but
the shock to his already overstrained
system was so great that he never fully
recovered from the ordeal. There is a
reference to this in the Postscript to
Restoration House, Rochester
74
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


Our Mutual Friend, dated
September, 1865, in which
he says “ I remember with
devout thankfulness that I
can never be much nearer
parting company with my
readers for ever, than I was
then, until there shall be
written against my life the
two words with which I have
this day closed this book—
The End.”
In 1867-8 Dickens paid a second visit to America, and gave readings
in the principal towns.
In Boston his reception was beyond all expectations. In New York
the speculators assembled the night before the reading in long lines
to wait the opening of the doors at nine the next morning for the
issue of the tickets. They continued to come all night, and at five
o’clock in the morning there were two lines of 800 each, whilst at
eight there were 5000. At nine o’clock each of the two lines reached
more than three-quarters of a mile in length ; members of families
were relieving each other, waiters from neighbouring restaurants
were serving breakfasts in the open December air, and excited appli-
cants for tickets were offering five or ten dollars for the mere permission
to exchange places with other persons standing nearer the head of the
line. Thus it will be seen that whatever ill-feeling had existed for a
short time after his previous visits, consequent upon the publication
of American Notes and Martin Chuzzlewit, it had now entirely vanished,
and Dickens may well be regarded as one of the finest links in the
brotherhood that exists between this country and the United States
of America.
At the farewell dinner given to him in New York in 1868 by over
200 Press representatives, he spoke of the wonderful changes he had
found in every thing around him, and added : ‘‘ I have resolved
. . . . on my return to England, in my own person .... to bear for
the behoof of my countrymen, such testimony to the gigantic changes
in this country as I have hinted at to-night. . , . This testimony,
so long as I live, and so long as my
descendants have any legal right
to my books, I shall cause to be
republished as an appendix to
every copy of those two books of
mine in which I have referred to
America.”
He concluded his address with
“ Points of difference there probably
will be between the two great people;
but broadcast in England is sown
the sentiment that these two people
75
THE LAST YEARS


are essentially one, and that it rests with the majority
to uphold the great Anglo-Saxon race. It would he
better for this globe to be ridden by an earthquake,
fired by a comet, overrun by an iceberg;- and
abandoned to the Arctic fox and bear than that it
should present the spectacle of those two great
nations, each of whom has in its own way and hour,
striven so hard and successfully for freedom, ever
again being arrayed against one another.”
Tumultous applause greeted this peroration, the
whole of the company rising to its feet.
The financial result of this American tour was a no
less remarkable achievement, £19,000 remaining after
the payment of all expenses. But success was not
attained without the great sacrifice of his health ; and
although only fifty-six at the time, he looked a much
Tiny Tim and older man. Yet, the great attraction these readings
Bob Cratchit offered him —to say nothing of the pecuniary benefit
—made him resolve on a farewell tour of one hundred
readings in London and the Provinces for which he was to receive the
sum of £BOOO clear of all expenses. They commenced in October, 1868,
and occupied a certain number of days in each month, and covered
Ireland and Scotland as well as England. Even more wonderful
receptions awaited him on these farewell readings than had been
witnessed previously, and in some of the larger cities dinners were
arranged in his honour by the literary lights of the country.
The tour was not a continuous one from town to town, but oc-
cupied a certain number of days each month, thus permitting him to
pay periodical visits to London. This necessitated much travelling,
which had a serious effect on his health. In addition to this Dickens
had for some time been suffering severely from a malady which was
in fact a partial paralysis of the left side, with the result that in April,
1869, at Preston, the reading had to be cancelled, and the
tour closed, by the orders of his medical attendant.
Dickens retired to the restful repose of Gads Hill, and
gave himself up to entertaining there several of his American
friends. This proved so beneficial that in the early part
of 1870 he was permitted by his Doctor to give a dozen
more readings in London.
The final reading was on the 15th March at the St.
James’s Hall, Piccadilly, where over two thousand people
(representing a money value of £422) were present. The
items were A Christmas Carol, and the Trial Scene from
Pickwick, at the conclusion of which, with profound
emotion Dickens said a few simple words of farewell,
concluding with “ Ladies and Gentlemen, in two short
weeks from this time I hope that you may enter, in your
own homes, on a new series of readings at which my
assistance will be indispensable ; but from these garish
David and
Ham
76
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


lights, I vanish for evermore with a heartfelt, grateful, respectful, and
affectionate farewell.”
Within a very few weeks of that date he had indeed taken the
longest farewell of all.
His new book, referred to at the farewell meeting, The Mystery
of Edwin Brood, was to have been in twelve monthly parts ; six
only were published ; and then the mystery was left unsolved, for the
pen of the only one who knew the secret was laid aside for ever.
On the last page was this beautiful passage : -c A brilliant morning
shines in the old city. Its antiquities and ruins are surprisingly beau-
tiful with a lusty ivy gleaming in the sun, and the rich trees waving
The Empty Chair
By Sir Luke Fildes, R.A.
in the balmy air. Changes of glorious light from moving boughs,
songs of birds, scents from gardens, woods and fields —or rather from
the one great garden of the whole cultivated island in its yielding
time —penetrate into the Cathedral, subdue its earthly odour, and
preach the Resurrection and the Life. The cold stone tombs of
centuries ago grow warm, and the flecks of brightness dart into the
sternest marble corners of the building fluttering there like wings.”
“ A brilliant morning shines in the old city.” It was June, and the
city Rochester. He wrote these words in the Swiss Chalet, at Gads
Hill. Here he worked at the story of Edwin Brood on the Bth June,
1870. At dinner that evening he was seized with a sudden stroke.
Twenty-four hours later the news of his death stirred the heart, not
only of England, but of all countries beyond the seas. In England
it was as though a personal loss had befallen everyone. Queen Victoria
telegraphed from Balmoral her deepest regret, and all classes shared
this sentiment.
77
THE LAST YEARS


There was not one English journal that did not refer to the loss
in a touching manner ; and The Times took the lead in suggesting
Westminster Abbey as the only fit resting place for a man so dear
to the heart of the nation.
Dickens himself would have preferred to lie in the little churchyard
of Shorne, near Gads Hill, or in the graveyard under Rochester Castle,
where indeed a grave was already being made, when the request of
The Grave, Westminster Abbey
By Sir Luke, Fildes, B.A.
the Dean of Westminster
was received that the
body should lie in the
Abbey.
By Dickens’s own
desire the funeral was
private ; only those tak-
ing part in it were sup-
plied with details ; by
mid-day of the Tuesday
following the death, all
was done. Then later
in the day and ull the
day following a great
concourse came to the
Abbey to pay their last
respects to the departed
author. So great was.
the crowd that the grave
was kept open till Thurs-
day, but even then the
mourners did not cease
to come, and many were
the flowers strewn on
the spot by unknown
hands ; many were the
tears shed by unknown
eyes.
On the following Sun-
day, Dean Stanley de-
livered an impressive
discourse in the Abbey,
and pointing to the flowers that had been freshly thrown upon the*
grave —as they are even now annually deposited there —said: “ The
spot would thenceforward be a sacred one, with both the New World
and the Old, as that of the representative of the literature, not of this,
island only, but of all who speak our English tongue.”
So there in the hallowed Poet’s Corner, Charles Dickens lies ; and
near by are the monuments erected to Chaucer, Shakespeare and
Dryden, the three immortals who (in the words of John Forster) " did
most to create and settle the language to which Charles Dickens,
has given another undying name.”
78
THE LIFE OF DICKENS


JOHN DICKENS m. ELIZABETH BARROW
h. about 1786
d. Sept., 1863
d. 31 March, 1851
i . *
i 1 1
Frances Elizabeth CHARLES JOHN HUFFHAM Alfred
1 1 1 1
Letitia Mary Harriet Ellen Frederick William Alfred Lamert
Augustus
b. 1810
b. 7 Feb.,
1812 b. 1813
b. 1816 • b. 1819 b. 1820 b. 1822
b. 1827
d. 1848
d. 9 June, 1870 d. in
d. 1874, d. in d. 1868 d. 1860
d. (before 1872
m. 2 April, 1836 childhood
childhood
Catherine Thomson Hogarth
d. Nov.,
1879
1
Charles
1 1 1
Mary Angela Kate Walter
1
Francis
1 -1 1 I
Alfred Sydney Henry Dora Annie
, 1
CULLIFORD
b. 1838 Macready Landor
J EFFERY
Tennyson Smith Fielding b. 1850
Bulwer
Boz
d. 1896 b. 1839 b. 1841
b. 1844
b. 1845 Haldimand b. 1849 d. 1851
Lytton
b. 1837
Now Mrs. d. 1863 (in
d. 1886 (in
d. 1912 (in b. 1847 Now Sir Henry
b. 1852
d. 1896
Perugini India)
U.S.A.)
U.S.A.) d. 1872 Fielding Dickens
d. 1902 (in
(at sea)
N.S. Wales)
THE DICKENS FAMILY
(Compiled by A. E.
BROOKES CROSS)


Two Views of the Charles Dickens Convalescent Home
for the Blind at St. Leonards
Purchased by The Dickens Fellowship during the war,
and now managed by the National Institute for the Blind


A List
of the
Principal
Works of
Dickens
SKETCHES BY “ BOZ.” In “ The Monthly Magazine,” 1833, 1834,
1835; “The Evening Chronicle,” 1835, 1836; “Bell’s Life of
London,” 1835, 1836. In volume form : First Series, 2 volumes.
Price 21s. 1836 ; Second Series, 1 volume. Price 15s. 1837.
In monthly parts, Is. each. November, 1837, to June, 1839.
SUNDAY UNDER THREE HEADS. By Timothy Spares, In
Paper Covers. Price 2s. 1836.
THE POSTHUMOUS PAPERS OF THE PICKWICK CLUB. In
monthly parts at Is. each. April, 1836, to November, 1837,
excluding June, 1837.
THE STRANGE GENTLEMAN. A comic burletta. 1836.
THE VILLAGE COQUETTES. A comic opera. 1837.
OLIVER TWIST. Serially in “ Bentley’s Miscellany,” Februarv,
1837, to March, 1839, excluding June, 1837. Published in volume
form, 3 volumes. Price 255. September, 1838. Published 10
monthly parts, Is. each, January to October, 1846.
BENTLEY’S MISCELLANY. Edited. Monthly. January, 1837, to
February, 1839.
NICHOLAS NICKLEBY. In monthly parts, Is. each, April, 1838, to
October, 1839.
MEMOIRS OF GRIMALDI. Edited. 2 volumes. 1838. Price 21s
SKETCHES OF YOUNG GENTLEMEN. 1838. Price 3s.
SKETCHES OP YOUNG COUPLES. 1840. Price 3s.
MASTER HUMPHRY’S CLOCK. In 88 weekly (3d. each) and 20
monthly parts, 4th April, 1840, to November 27th, 1841. In 3
volumes : September, 1840 ;
THE OLD CURIOSITY SHOP.
March, 1841 ; November, 1841.
In above publication, from April
25th, 1840, to January, 1841.
BARNABY RUDGE. In above
publication from 13th February to
November 27th, 1841.
THE PICNIC PAPERS. Edited
3 volumes. 1841. Price 21s.


AMERICAN NOTES. Two volumes, 1842. Price 21s.
MARTIN CHUZZLEWIT. In monthly parts. Is. each, January, 1843,
to July, 1844.
A CHRISTMAS CAROL. 1843. Price 5s
THE CHIMES 1844. Price ss.
THE CRICKET ON THE HEARTH. 1845. Price ss.
“ The Daily News.” Edited. January 21st to February 9th, 1846.
PICTURES FROM ITALY. In “The Daily News*’ from January,
1846. In volume form, 1846. Price 6s.
THE BATTLE OF LIFE. 1846. Price ss.
DOMBEY AND SON. In monthly parts, Is. each, October, 1846, to
April, 1848.
THE HAUNTED MAN. 1847. Price ss.
DAVID COPPERFIELD. In monthly parts, Is. each, May, 1849, to
November, 1850.
HOUSEHOLD WORDS. Edited. From 30th March, 1850, to
28th May, 1859.
A CHILD’S HISTORY OF ENGLAND. In the above from 1851-53.
In volume form, one volume each year. Price 3s. 6d. 1852-3-4.
BLEAK HOUSE. In monthly parts, Is. each, March, 1852, to Sep-
tember, 1853.
HARD TIMES. Serially in “ Household Words,” Ist April to 12th
August, 1854. In one volume, 1854. Price ss.
LITTLE DORRITT. In monthly parts, Is. each, December, 1855, to
June, 1857.
ALL THE YEAR ROUND. Edited. 2d. weekly. From April 30th,
1859, until death. .
THE LAZY TOUR OF TWO IDLE APPRENTICES. Serially m
“ Household Words,” 1857.
A TALE OF TWO CITIES. Serially in above from April 30th, to
November 26th, 1859. In monthly parts, Is. each, June to
December, 1859.
HUNTED DOWN. In “New York Ledger,” 1859. One volume,
1870. Price 6d.
THE UNCOMMERCIAL TRAVELLER. In “ All the Year Round,”
28 Jan. to 13 Aug., 1860. In one volume, 1861. Price 6s. Additional
papers appeared in “ All the Year Round ” in 1863, 1868 and 1869.
GREAT EXPECTA-
TIONS. In “All
the Year Round,”
Dec. 1, 1860, to
Aug. 3, 1861. In
3 volumes, June,
1861. Price 31/6
OUR MUTUAL
FRIEND. In
monthly parts, Is.
each. "May, 1864,
to Nov., 1865.
THE MYSTERY OF
EDWIN DROOD.
In monthly parts,
Is. each, April to
September, 1870.
82
THE WORKS OF DICKENS


A Group of Dickens’s Children, 1842
Charley, Mamie, Katey and Wally
with Grip, the Raven
From a Painting by Daniel Maclise, E.A.


still in print : not including
out of print books obtain-
able second-hand only.
BIOGRAPHY
The Life of Charles Dickens. John Forster. (Chapman & Hall.) ss. 6d.
The Life of Charles Dickens. John Forster. Everyman’s Library.
2 Vols. (Dent.) 1927. 2s. each.
Forster’s LPe of Dickens. George Gissing. Abridged and Revised.
(Chapman and Hall.) 7s. 6d.
The Dickens Circle. J. W. T. Ley. (Chapman and Hall.) 1919. 21s.
The Dickens House, 48 Doughty Street. (The Dickens Fellowship.) Is.
Charles Dickens, Shorthand Writer. W. J. Carlton. (Palmer.) 1926. ss.
CRITICISM
Charles Dickens G K. Chesterton. (Methuen.) 1906. 2s. and
3s. 6d.
Charles Dickens and other Victorians. Sir A. Quieter Couch. (Cam-
bridge University Press.) 1925. 10s. 6d.
The Secret of Dickens. W. W. Crotch. (Chapman and Hall.) 1919.
7s. 6d.
The Soul of Dickens. W. W. Crotch. (Chapman and Hall.) 1916. 6s.
The Touchstone of Dickens. W. W. Crotch (Chapman and Hall.)
1920. 6s.
Charles Dickens : A Critical Study. George Gissing. (Blackie.)
1926. 2s. 6d.
The Immortal Dickens. George Gissing. (Palmer.) 1925. 7s. 6d.
Dickens, “ English Men of Letters .” Adolphus William Ward.
(Macmillan.) 3s. 6d.
Some Dickens Women. Edwin Charles. (AYerner Laurie.) 1926. 16s.
TOPOGRAPHY
Rambles in Dickens-Land. Robert Allbut. (Chapman and Hall.) ss.
The England of Dickens. Walter Dexter. (Palmer.) 1925. 15s.
The Kent of Dickens. Walter Dexter (Palmer.) 1924. 6s.
The London of Dickens. Walter Dexter. (Palmer.) 1923. 6s.
The London of Charles Dickens. E. Beresford Chancellor. (Grant
Richards.) 1924. 15s.
With Dickens in Yorkshire. T. P. Cooper. (Ben Johnson, 92 Fleet
Street.) 1923. 2s. 6d.
Mr. Pickwick's Pilgrimages. Walter Dexter. (Chapman and Hall.)
1926. 18s.
The Dickens Country. Frederic G. Kitton. (Black.) 1925. ss.
Dickensian Inns and Taverns. B. W. Matz. (Palmer.) 1923.
10s. 6d.
The Inns and Taverns of Pickwick. B. W. Matz. (Palmer.) 1922.
10s. 6d.


READINGS, RECITATIONS AND PLAYS
Readings from the Works of Charles Dickens as Arranged by Himself •
(Chapman and Hall.) 3s. 6d.
Recitations from Dickens. Mrs. Laurence Clay. (Routledge.) 6s.
Recitations from Dickens. Mrs. Alice Hasluck. (Methuen.) 4s.
Scenes from Dickens for Drawing-Room and Platform Acting. Guy
and Ernest Pertwee. (Routledge.) ss.
Scenes from Dickens. J. E. Jones. (Palmer.) 7s. 6d.
Short Plays from Dickens. H. B. Browne. (Chapman and Hall.)
3s. 6d.
REFERENCE
The Dickens Encyclopaedia. Arthur L. Hayward. (Routledge.)
1924. 15s.
Synopses of Dickens's Novels. J. Walker McSpadden. (Chapman
and Hall.) 2s. 6d.
The Dickens Dictionary. G. A. Pierce and W. A. Wheeler. (Chap-
man and Hall.) 7s. 6d.
MISCELLANEOUS
The Days of Dickens. Arthur L. Hayward. (Routledge.) 1926. 15s.
The Actor in Dickens. J. B. Amerongen. (Palmer.) 1926. 7s. 6d.
Vincent Crummies, his Theatre and his Times. F. J. Harvy Darton.
(Wells Gardner Darton.) 1926. 425.
Letters of Dickens to Mark Lemon. With introduction and notes by
Walter Dexter. (Halton and Truscott Smith.) 1927. 425.
Some Rogues and Vagabonds of Dickens. Walter Dexter. (Palmer.)
1927. 15s.
Children's Stories from Dickens. Mary Angela Dickens. Illustrated
trated by Harold Copping. (Tuck.) 1924. 15s.
Character Sketches from Dickens. Compiled by B. M . Matz. Illus-
trated by Harold Copping. (Tuck.) 15s.
The Complete Mystery of Edwin Drood. J. Cuming Walters. (Chap-
man and Hall.) 1912. 7s. 6d.
The Murder of Edwin Drood. Percy T. Carden. (Palmer.) 1920. 6s.
David C opper field’s Library. J. Brett Lang staff. (Allen & Unwin.)
1924. 6s.
The Children of Dickens. By Samuel McChord Crothers. Illus-
trated. (Scribners). 10s. 6d.
83
BOOKS ON DICKENS


ALL LOVERS OF DICKENS SHOULD FILL UP
THE FORM OPPOSITE AND JOIN
TLbc SHcbens
FOUNDED OCT. 6th, 1902.
Ifife prfstints:
Sir HENRY F. DICKENS K.C.
Mrs. KATE PERUGINI.
I92Y-29.
COL. and ALD. SIR CHARLES C. WAKEFIELD, BL, C.B.E.
past prEs:it£jtts :
Percy Fitz Gerald, m.a., f.s.a. B. W. Matz.
Arthur Waugh.
Gilbert K. Chesterton.
Sir Frederick Macmillan,
Sir Luke Fildes, k.a.
J. Cuming Walters, m.a,
Sir Walter Lawrence, Bt., g.c.i.e., g.c.v.0., c.b.
W. Pett Ridge. Sir Ernest Wild, k.c.
Hke-prmiiTnts:
The Rt. Hon. the Earl of Rosebery, k.g.
The Viscount Burnham, C.H., ll.d.
Lady Dickens. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. Sir Arthur Pinero.
Mrs. R. C. Shuckburgh. JohnC. Eckel (Philadelphia) Edwin Pugh.
(Miss Olive Dickens) John Galsworthy.
Mrs. A. Waley. Robert Hichens.
(Miss Elaine Dickens) W. W. Jacobs.
Miss Mary Angela Dickens. Coulson Kernahan.
Dame Ellen Terry. J. W. T. Ley.
Mrs. A. K. Newcomer (N.Y.) W. J. Locke.
Sir J. M. Barrie, Bt. E. V. Lucas.
Francesco Berger. Sir J. Martin-Harvey.
Sir James Bruton. William Miles.
A. S. Comyns Carr, K.c. Arthur Morrison.
Sir Alfred Robbins.
M. H. Spielmann.
A.E.S. Smythe (Toronto).
J. C. Squire.
Sir George Sutton, Bt.
Horace Annesley Yachell.
The Rt. Rev. Bishop
Russell Wakefield.
H. G. Wells.
Bransby Williams.
W. L. Courtney, ll.d. Rt. Hon. Sir Gilbert Parker, H. Saxe Wyndham.
Ridgwell Cullum. Bt.
fercutiirk Committee ;
Mrs. A. W. Edwards, Mrs. Philpott, Miss W. Matz, Miss Ruth Whittaker,
Messrs. J. D. Billington, W. Dexter, A. W. Edwards, W. J. Fisher, W. Laurence Gadd,
W. H. Halls, F. S. Johnson, W. H. Lowry, W. Miller, W. J. Roffey, S. J. Rust,
F. J. Staff, W. B. Warren, Major-General H. S. Neville White, C. 8., M.v.o.
The Council. — The Council comprises nine members of the Executive
Committee and the Hon. Secretary of each branch in addition.
Don. J^ecrMarir: Don. ®r£aaurrr ;
A. W. Edwards. W. J. Fisher.
Dun. (Biiitor of “Hdj t Sickcnsian Walter Dexter.
The Dickens Fellowship is open to all.
In London, the Headquarters arranges an attractive programme of
Lectures, Recitals, Exhibitions and Dinners during the winter months,
and Pilgrimages to places connected with Dickens during the summer.
The subscription for Fellows attached to Headquarters is half-a-
guinea per annum, including The Dickensian post free ; for second
and subsequent members of the same family living in the same house
the Annual Subscription is seven shillings and sixpence, but does not
include a copy of the magazine. Life Subscription : Five guineas.
Branches fix their own subscriptions. A List of Branches is printed
on page 3 of the cover.
An application form for Membership will be found overleaf.
Dra&iiiiarfEra:
THE DICKENS HOUSE
48 DOUGHTY STREET, LONDON, W.C.I
Telephone. Museum 9363


FLeASE fill up this form.
To The Hon. Sec. The Dickens Fellowship.
48 Doughty Street , Dondon , W.C.l.
I desire to become a Member of The Dickens Fellowship and enclose herewith
remittance for 10s. 6d.,* Subscription for the current year.
Name
(State whether Mr., Mrs. or Miss, give title or rank.)
Address
To
Cheques, etc., should be crossed and made payable to “The Dickens Fellowship.’’
* The Subscription of 10s. 6d. includes The Dickensian post free. For second and subsequent members
of the same family living in the same house the subscription is 7s. 6d., without the Magazine.
If it is desired to join one of the Branches (for full list see third page of cover) application should first be
made to the Branch Secretary, as subscriptions to Branches vary.
It would facilitate the collection of Subscriptions if Members would pay by Bankers’ Orders, in which case
please fill up the following : —■
BANKERS’ ORDER.
On 1st October, 1927, and each succeeding year on that date until further notice, please pay to the credit of
the Account of the Dickens Fellowship at the Westminster Bank, Limited, Gray’s Inn Branch, W.C.l, the
Sum of and charge same to mv account.
Signature


Dickens in 1841
From a Drawing ly Count D’Orsay


THE DICKENSIAN
QUARTERLY
MAGAZINE
EDITED
FOR
WALTER
DICKENS
DEXTER.
LOVERS.
The Dickensian is now completing its
twenty-third year of Publication.
It is published quarterly from The Dickens House,
48 Doughty Street, London, price 1/-, or is posted
free for 4/6 per annum.
The Dickensian is full of illustrations and articles
of interest to all readers of Dickens, and keeps you in
touch with all that is going on in the Dickens World.
Among its recent contributors are :
E. BERESFORD CHANCELLOR
A. E. BROOKES CROSS.
Sir JOHN MARTIN-HARVEY
Prof. JOSEPH NOLIN.
W. FORBES GRAY.
A. A. HOPKINS.
J. CUMING WALTERS.
ARTHUR WAUGH.
Sir ERNEST WILD, K.C.
The Dickens Fellowship in London and several
of the Branches include in their subscription a copy
of the Magazine free to their members, but where
the inclusive subscription is not adopted, members
of The Dickens Fellowship, and other readers of
Dickens, are urged to become annual subscribers, by
sending their subscriptions direct to The Dickens
House, OR TO THEIR OWN BRANCH SECRETARY.


“ When we think of Dickens we turn inevitably to
Forster’s ‘ Life,’ and G. K. Chesterton’s brilliant analysis
of the novels and illuminating - appreciation of the man ”
•A Special Introduction by
g. k, Chesterton is contained in
the EVERYMAN Edition of
FORSTERS LIFE OF DICKENS
and in each of the 2 volumes in
the EVERYMAN DICKENS
Barnaby Rudge. Nicholas Nickleby. Hard Times.
A Tale of Two Cities. Christmas Books. Little Dorrit.
Old Curiosity Shop. Dombey and Son. Our Mutual Friend.
Oliver Twist. Martin Chuzzlewit. Christmas Stories.
Great Expectations. David Copperfield. The Uncommercial
Pickwick Papers. American Notes. Traveller.
Bleak House Child’s History Edwin Drood.
Sketches by Boz. of England. Reprinted Pieces.
Forster’s Life of Dickens
Cloth, 2s. net. Library Binding, 3s. net Leather, 35. 6 d. net.
per volume
64 -page booklet describing 773 volumes in EVERYMAN’S LIBRARY, post free
J. M. DENT 6° SONS, LTD., ALDINE HOUSE, BEDFORD ST., W.C.2
Established 1816.
Telephone ; 7620 City.
Jones & Evans’ Bookshop, Ltd
77 Queen Street, Cheapside,
London, E.C.4
All modern editions of
Dickens and Dickensiana
kept in stock.
Vide “ The Dickensian ”


WALTER T. SPENCER,
27 New Oxford Street,
London, W.C.I
Established 1884.
Has by far the largest stock of
FIRST EDITIONS of the WORKS of CHARLES
DICKENS offered for sale in the World.
Including Presentation Copies, Manuscripts, Hundreds
of his Autograph Letters, many Personal Relics and a
number of Pieces of Furniture from Gads Hill, etc.
A Banker’s Cheque wholly filled in and signed by him,
sent post free on receipt of £l-10-0.
The Children of Dickens
By Samuel McChord Crothers
With 10 full-page colour pictures of Dickens’s famous
child characters by Jessie Willcox Smith.
10s. 6d. net
Dr. Crothers, the well-known author, has written a series of
fascinating chapters, depicting in simple language, interspersed
with Dickens’s own descriptions, the characteristics of the boys
and girls that are beloved the world over. Abounding in
whimsicality that rivals the humour of Dickens himself, these
portraits will make the work of this master even more admired
and more widely read.
“ Among the books for older children * The Children of Dickens ’
one of the most delightful.” —Yorkshire Post.
is quite
“ It is unusually well produced.”— Teachers' World.
“ Jessie Willcox Smith has done the pictures amazingly well.” —Sunday Times.
CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
7 BEAK STREET, LONDON, W. I


COMPLETE CATALOGUE POST FREE
ON APPLICATION
FORSTER’S LIFE OF DICKENS
With Annotations, Additions, and an
Introduction by
J. W. T. LEY
Royal Bvo. £ 2 2s. od. net. Cloth. Illustrated.
THE IMMORTAL DICKENS
Essays by GEORGE GISSING
Portraits of Dickens and Gissing
Crown Bvo. 6s. net.
THE ENGLAND OF DICKENS
By WALTER DEXTER
Demy Bvo. ijS. net. Illustrated.
CHARLES DICKENS:
SHORTHAND WRITER
By W. J. CARLTON
Crown Bvo. js. net. Ulus, from Old Prints.
CECIL PALMER
49 Ch andos Street, Covent Garden, W.C.2
LONDON


LIST OF BRANCHES WITH HON. SECRETARIES
HEADQUARTERS ; 48 DOUGHTY STREET, LONDON, W.C.I
Hon. Secretary: A. W. EDWARDS.
Telephone—Museum 9363.
LONDON AND DISTRICT
BALHAM.—W. Kent, 15 Rhodesia Road,
Stockwell, 5.W.9
EALING, St. John’s School.—C. M.Matthews,
St. John’s School.
HACKNEY AND STOKE NEWINGTON.—
Miss M. Catchpolb, 22 St. John’s Mansions,
Clapton Square, E. 5.
LEYTON AND DISTRICT.—E. W, Brown,
18 Adelaide Road, E.lO.
ST. PANCRAS.—Miss L. E. Parker, 106
Mansfield Road, N.W.3.
THE DICKENSIAN TABARD PLAYERS.—
Ross Barrington, 298 Waterloo Road, S.E.I
ENGLAND
BATH.—W, W. Bell, New Bond Street.
BEDFORD.—Miss R. A. Young, 41 Grafton
Road.
BIRMINGHAM. —Miss Annie Bennett and
Miss Bessie Dyer, 25 Kingsley Road, King’s
Norton.
BLACKPOOL.—AId. John Potter, 22 Birley
Street.
BRIGHTON.—Mrs. L. Withy, Haaeldene,
Silverdale Road, Hove.
BROMLEY.— Miss Stroud, 3 Ethelbert Road.
CANTERBURY. — Leonard Butcher, Royal
Museum, High Street.
CHELTENHAM.—A. G. Dye, Ivor Dene,
Kensington Avenue.
CINDERFORD. — J. Morrison, “ Fairmond.”
EASTBOURNE.—C. W. Mayo, la Terminus
Mansions.
GLOUCESTER. —E. Kendall Pearson, 128
Wotton Hill.
HATFIELD AND POTTER’S BAR.—W.
Day, The Haven, St. Alban’s Road.
HULL. —C. T. Ashbridcs, 14 Sidmouth St.
LIVERPOOL.— Geo. H. Booxhman, Sondown
Grange, Wavertree.
MANCHESTER.—Miss H. E. Phillips, The
Hamlet, May Road, Swinton, Manchester.
NOTTINGHAM — J. Cooper Sands, 20 New-
stead Grove.
PLYMOUTH.— Lieut. S. S. Hutchings, 92
Alexandra Road, Mutley.
PORTSMOUTH. — W. C. Harvev, Trematon,
The Thicket, Southsea.
REDDITCH.— C. Hollis, 104 Easemore Road.
ROCHESTER, —Louis Cobb, 49 St. Margaret
Street.
SHEFFIELD.— Frank Trout, 221 Highcliffe
Road, Eccleshall.
SHREWSBURY.—Mrs. Kingsman, 47 Belle
Vue Road.
SOUTHAMPTON.— Mrs. B. Hawkins, 53
Cromwell Road.
SOUTHEND AND DISTRICT.— Miss. L.
E. Bush, “Havelock House,” Tanker vi lie
Drive, Leigh-on-Sea.
STOCKPORT. — J. Ewart Tomlin, 60 Vienna
Road, Edgeley Park.
TEWKESBURY. —H. de Courcy Peach,
Midland Bank.
ENGLAND— continued.
WOODVILLE AND DISTRICT.—Miss H, G.
Chandler, “ Dalcais,” VVoodviile, near
Burton-on-Trent.
SCOTLAND.
EDINBURGH.— Mrs. Pearson Callum,
Rosebum Cliff, Murrayfield.
WALES*
BARRY.—D, Charles Jones, Holton Road.
AUSTRALIA.
BRISBANE.—Miss A. T. Woodward, Brisbane
Women’s Club, Albert Street.
MELBOURNE.—W. G. Southwell, 6 High
Street, Northcote.
SYDNEY (N.S.W.).— Miss K. M. O’Brien
8.A., Petersham and Apsley Gramma
School, Stanmore.
NEW ZEALAND.
AUCKLAND.— Rev. A. B. Chappell, 97a Graf-
ton Road.
AFRICA.
GOLD COAST.— A. W. E. Appiah, St. Nicholas
Grammar School, Cape Coast, Gold Coast.
CANADA.
EDMONTON.—R. W. Cooper, 11515 94th
Street.
MONTREAL.—J. Bruce Jordan, 66 Columbia
Avenue, Westmount.
NANAIMO (B.C.).—Mrs. T. Spencer, 326
Newcastle Avenue.
VANCOUVER (8.C.) Mrs. G. W. Edwards,
1442 Haro Street.
TORONTO.—Miss Cora Lee Hunt, 347
Ossington Avenue.
WINNIPEG.—C. W. Youell, 461 Balmoral St.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
BETHLEHEM, Pa. —Harcourt Lee, 39 Wall
Street.
BOSTON, Mass. — Mrs. A. Lincoln Bowles,
324 Washington Street.
CHESTER, Pa. — Miss Ida M. Haddock, 15 East
18th Street.
CHICAGO, 111.— Mrs. A. G. Huckin, 307 South
Second Avenue, Maywood, 111.
EAST BAY, Cal.— Miss Vera Wilson, 6229
Chabot Road, Oakland, Cal.
EVERETT, Wash.—Mrs. D, P. Deon, 3606
Hoyt Avenue.
LOS ANGELES, Cal.— Mrs. J. M. Moore,
6106 Del Valle Drive.
NAZARETH, Pa.— Mrs. C. D. Krkider, 326
West Center Street.
NEW YORK CITY, N.Y.— Miss Mary Wray,
1883 Vyse Avenue, New York City.
OLD TOWN-ORONO.— Mrs. C. B. Porter,
231 Center Street, Old Town, Maine.
PASADENA, Cal.— Mrs. E. T. Pierce, 186
Oakland Avenue.
PHILADELPHIA, Pa.— J. K. Thompson, 333
Sander’s Avenue.
PITTSBURGH, Pa.— Mrs. L. C. Edgar, 2022
Hampton Street, Swiss Vale.
SEATTLE, Wash.— Mrs. H. S. Hodgson, 3111
East Marion Street.
SIERRA MADRE, Cal.— Mrs. Nathan W.
Tarr, 274 Montecito.
Full particulars of the Fellowship
be obtained from any <
> and forms of Membership can
of the Secretaries.


THE DICKENS HOUSE,
LONDON
48 DOUGHTY STREET, W.C.I
Where Dickens lived, 1837-9, and wrote The Pickwick Papers,
Oliver Twist, Nicholas Nicldeby, and other works.
LIBRARY, MUSEUM, and PICTURE GALLERY OPEN DAILY,
11 to x and 2 to 5
hWTH II A. BROWN B SONS. LTD., MULL.
