

FOB
V
VICTORY
Digger
Humour




LEST WE FORGET
THEY SHALL NOT GROW OLD
AS WE THAT ARE LEFT GROW OLD,
AGE SHALL NOT WEARY THEM
OR THE YEARS CONDEMN;
AT THE GOING DOWN OF THE SUN
AND IN THE MORNING
WE WILL REMEMBER THEM.
Foreword
The sense of humour is the ability to see the funny
side of life. It is the source of that courage which refuses
to take the bludgeonings of fate lying down; it comes up
smiling every time and never takes the count. It is the
safety valve of existence which prevents disaster when disaster
seems imminent.
The Anzacs have a super-abundance of it. With them
the sense of humour is a gift. This is amply borne out in
the experiences of the A.I.F. Regiments during the Great War.
This book has been compiled by a returned soldier, and
by purchasing a copy you are assisting an Unemployed or
Disabled Digger.
Thinking You,
T. McMAHON.
Late A.I.F.


LITERATURE
A case of reading matter was dumped at our camp
recently, and was joyfully pounced on by the lads.
Result was disappointing. There were a couple of dozen
Thrilling Mystery’’ magazines, containing the most ghastly
collection of “horror” stuff ever put in print. We didn’t
mind a few murders, but even the toughest of us drew the
line at one yarn, where the villain’s hobby was skinning his
best girl alive. He skinned five before we tossed the books
into the incinerator.
After that we toyed with “Book of Sunday Reading,”
"Christian Secret of a Happy Life,” “Divine Plan of the
Ages, and a collection of other Sunday School prizes of
sixty years ago.
What do soldiers read, anyway?
Perhaps a wet canteen has its advantages after all.
* * *
PUZZLE
The drill instructor was barking his orders, and two
ret r uits were finding it very difficult to understand what
he said.
At the end of a long and rather involved order, one
whispered: “Ere, Bill, what did 'e say?”
“I dunno,” came the reply from Bill, “but we’ve got to
do it.”
TOO LOUD
A Welsh regimental choir was singing outside the offi-
cers’ mess after dinner.
The colonel, sitting over his port, called the unmusical
sergeant-major.
Look here, he said, “go and tell the choir to sing
‘Sweet and Low.’ ”
The sergeant-major went out and bawled to the leader:
If you blokes can’t make less noise the colonel says you've
got to clear off.”


ASK MOTHER
A youthful subaltern, acting as A.H.C. to his father, the
general, was instructed to communicate the following order
to a particularly short-tempered colonel:
“Please, sir, father says will you spread out your men
?nore to the right?”
The colonel gave him a fiery look, and with a snort,
bellowed: “Oh, does he? And what does mother say?”
SAME OLD STUFF
We had been talking of the new Digger, and wondering
if he was as casual as the 1914-18 edition.
Having a drink with another returned man in an hotel
in Perth, I noticed four Diggers of the new army, also put'
ting them down. As far as looks were concerned they took
me back 25 years or so. They were the real article.
A major'general, with lots of red braid, came into the
bar, and walked past the group. One of them, with his hat
on the back of his head, looked at the major'general as he
passed, and said quite casually: “How’re you doin’?”
The others took no notice, and the M.'G. passed by
without a word.
But we who were watching did a broad grin, and
remembered the good old days.
INCOGNITO
“Bluey” had an invitation to a junction in honour of a
new C.O. “Blue” was not impressed.
“Huh, so that’s the new C.O. ” said “Bluey” to the
lady at his side. “I don’t think much of him.”
“I beg your pardon. Ho you know who I am? the
lady replied, coldly.
"Well, I’m the new Commander’s wife,” she announced.
“Bluey” was silenced, but only momentarily.
"I’m sorry. Ho you know who I am?
“No.”
“Thank God,” said “Bluey” fervently.


"VICTORY"
Rally to the cause for British freedom;
Faster move our wheels of industry
Turning out the guns and ammunition
For our fighting overseas.
Banish thoughts of strikes and care and worry.
Shoulder burdens of excessive strain,
Till the war is finally decided
For the Dove of Peace to fly again!
Trust in Him, our Heavenly Creator,
Who alone controls our destiny,
March along in unity to battle,
With our sign of “V” for Victory!
A. W.
NOT TO BE CAUGHT
Old Digger was seeing the New Digger off.
“I suppose we'll he hearing of you in Italy soon, he said.
"‘Well, when you get there, be sure to keep a sharp look-out
for hidden Dagoes among the fields of spaghetti.
“You rant fool me!’ laughed the New Digger. Spaghetti
grows on trees.”
DISGUISE
A young officer, home on leave, had been entertained by
his friends, not wisely, but too well. When he arrived home
he was anxious to save his mother —who had always thought
he was a teetotaler—from seeing him in his present condition,
so he tried to find a place where he could hide without fear
of being discovered until the morning.
Finally he curled himself into a ball in a hip-bath and
somehow managed to balance another hip-bath on the top.
Later, however, his mother, not having heard her son
return home, proceeded to investigate, and at last came upon
the two hip-baths.
“Are you there, dear?” she gasped in astonishment.
“Sh h!” said a voice in an undertone, as a head peeped
through from between the two baths. “Not a word, I’m an
oyster.”


DISTINCTION
Private Brown, being shaved by the Army barber,
received a nasty gash on the cheek. Having much trouble
in stemming the blood, the barber finally put some tissue
paper over the cut. When Private Brown left the chair he
gave him a sixpenny tip.
“Thanks, chum,” said the surprised barber.
“That’s 0.K.,” grinned Brown. “It’s the first time I’ve
been shaved by an expert at three jobs.”
“Three, chum?”
“Yes. Barber, butcher, and paperhanger.”
KEEPING IT DARK
“Don’t they teach you to salute in your company?”
roared the major to Patrick Malone, who had passed him
without raising his hand.
“Yes, sir,” replied Pat.
“Then why didn’t you salute?”
“JVell, sir,” Pat replied, “I didn’t want to attract more
attention than necessary, because I’m not supposed to be out
without a pass.”
THEN THEY SHELLED THE NUTS
Some soldiers gave a dinner for two visitors at camp,
members of a famous Canadian regiment, who were home
on sick leave. The sergeant had been carefully coached about
giving the toast, but became flustered, and this is what he
made of it: “Here’s to the gallant Eighth, last on the field
and the first to leave it.”
Silence reigned, then the corporal came gallantly to the
rescue.
“Gentlemen,” he began, “you must excuse the sergeant;
he never could give a toast decently; he isn’t used to public
speaking. Now, I’ll give a toast: Here’s to the gallant
Eighth, equal to none.”


HIS BIG MOMENT
Went to the station the other day to see the troops off.
There were the usual wise-cracks, sobs, and tears from the
mothers, sisters, and others who had come to see them off.
I noticed one young fellow looking out of a carriage window.
There was no one to say good-bye to him, so I thought I
would speak to him.
However, just as I moved towards him the guard rang
the bell and shouted: “All seats, please.”
Just then the young fellow rushed out of the carriage
on to the platform, and, throwing his arms about a 16-stone
policeman, gave him a resounding kiss and, much to the
embarrassment of the “John,” rushed back to the train, which
was just moving out.
HAD A WAY
Gus certainly had a way with the girls. It wasn’t only
that he looked well in his airman’s uniform, hiit there was
something about him which always worked the trick. Here
is an example of the sort of stuff he puts over:
“Do you really love me, Gus?”
“Of course I do.’’
“And am I the only girl you’ve ever loved, dear?’’
“Well, not exactly, darling; but you see I’m much
harder to suit now than I used to be.’’
DRUMMED OUT
Helen Highnote had sung at the concert for the troops,
but her performance did not bring her encores. In fact, the
lads “handed the fruit.”
After the show, seething with indignation, she met the
conductor.
“Couldn't you have done something better with your
band?” she snapped. “Why, the drums almost drowned my
voice.”
“Well,” he replied, after deep thought, “we could
have had a couple more drums.”


MILKY WAY
Little m amselle at the billets of the Umpteenth Queens'
land had a pretty nice bloke in the ranks of her countrymen
fighting the Boche, and resisted all blandishments of the
boys.
"Tigerlily”—his name was Lillie, so the “Tiger” seemed
appropriate—was hanging around, but, until the episode
of the cow, he made no progress.
She had bought a new cow. First morning she tried
to milk it she had no success. It simply would not give
any milk.
“Tigerlily” strolled up. “What’s up?” he grinned.
“Ze vache—he weel not geeve ees milk,” she said.
“Tiger” pondered.
“Trouble with this here cow is she don’t like women,”
he said. “I’ve met ’em like that on the farm back home. A
man alius has to milk ’em.”
“She no like women?” said M’amselle. “But she ees
woman ’erself.”
“Ah, but she hate women,” went on “Tiger. 1
M’amselle tried hard to milk it, but could not.
"Zen what do we do?” she wailed. “We mus’ ’ave
meelk.”
"I can milk her,” announced “Tiger.”
"Zen you do so, vite!” The little lady stamped her
foot, but “Tiger” shook his head.
“You’ll have to go away, then. The cow will not give
milk while there is a woman about. But if I get the milk,
voulewous promenade avec moi ce soir?”
M’amselle smiled. “Oui, monsieur—eef you get ze milk.”
She left. Later on “Tiger” called her back. The milk
bucket was nearly full. She was so grateful that she made
no demur when “Tiger” kissed her heartily.
Next morning he told us he’d milked the cow previously
and had hidden the bucket of milk!
PARTICULAR
Private Jones had been in the Army a week, when the
sergeant asked: "What do you think of the Army so far?”
"I may like it after a while,” replied Jones, “but just
now I think there's too much drilling and fussing about
between meals ”


"DIGGERS"
Australians, all united, extend to you to-day
Our hand of admiration, and pray, while on your way
To fight for right and justice, truth, peace and liberty
That God will bless and guard you wherever you may be.
Away across the ocean, our Digger boys zvill share
The deeds of Fame and Glory on land, sea and air.
Australia’s Name is cherished by Britons o’er the sea.
And Allied neutral countries of true Democracy.
At home we wait to welcome, with Flag still flying high.
Our gallant Digger heroes as you go marching by.
’Tis true we are determined for your great victory;
Permit no Digger suffer who fought for Liberty!
A. W.
"STOUT" FELLA
One very hot day near a military camp in Melbourne, a
minister encountered a Digger and his wife walking to the
camp. It was a steady up-hill climb.
As the Digger was loaded with parcels and kit and the
wife was wheeling a pram., the minister graciously offered to
wheel the pram, up-hill for the woman.
On reaching the camp over the top of the hill the woman
thanked him profusely, and the Digger offered him a cigarette.
“It was a pleasure,” said the minister. “1 don’t want any
thanks, but I would like to kiss the wee mite."
“Oh,” said the Digger, “that is not a baby. It’s a dozen
of stout for the boys in camp.”
DIFFERENT
“Good Heavens!’’ yelled the drill instructor to the stout
Local Defence Volunteer. “Go sharper."
“I can’t go sharper. I’m tired."
“Tired? After ten minutes! Why, man, the Romans
used to do this sort of thing for a couple of hours."
“Dare say they did,’ groveled the perspiring volunteer.
“But I’m not a Roman — I'm a WcsLyau."


1
5^
il
It's easy to prove it!
You don't have to wear Akubras to see how smart they are. But you DO
have to wear one to learn how comfortable and "personal" it is. and
how economical is the long wear. "Look your best in Akubra' —you can
get just the shape and colour you like.
FOUR QUALITIES: BOOMERANG, 19/6; COOLYTA, 21/-;
HIGH. 25/-; SUPERFINE. 32/6.
Both High and Superfine Qualities are fitted with "DUNKEIR
PATENTED LEATHERS —Grease- and Sweat-resisting. An exclusive
Akubra Feature.
AKUBRA HATS
All Akubras are Pure Fur Felt


STIFF
“Worst moments? I’ll tell you about flamin’ worst
moments, roared Mike.
“I’ll never forget it. We was on a fatigue party bungin’
rations up the line, an’, as usual, I gets the stew. It was
m a flamm big container, an’ I had to carry it on me back.
It was as hot as hell, an’ burned me back through the tunic.
• j l t r W f S raimn ’’ Frit S was playin’ merry hell, an’ I was
tired. Me boots seemed to weigh a ton, an’ me tunic seemed
to be made of lead. To make matters worse it was as dark
as the inside of a blackfellow’s shirt down a coal mine If
1 found out the position of one shell hole, I found ’em all.
. r\^ en a close. I stumbled, an’ the flamin’
tin of hot stew cast the lid an’ emptied half the issue down
the neck of me tunic. I was in the line for a week with
n J°ff Chang f’ an . the end tFat time me tunic was as
stiff as a board. I needed all the soap in the world to smell
sweet again.
“Then,” he ended dismally, “I got leave an’ couldn’t
get a change of clothes. Now I know why goats a et so
damn peeved. Being’ ostracised makes ’em mad.”
QUITE SANE
Hitler was visiting a lunatic asylum. As he passed along
"U n>> °}„ lnmates > each the Nazi salute and cried,
tieil. All except one man at the extreme end of the line.
“Well, what about it?" said Hitler. “Aren't you going
to salute and cry Heil like the other men?"
“No, sir," was the reply. “I’m the doctor."
AWFUL!
The first Tommy was ruddy of countenance, with a
nuge beard of the hue politely known as sunburn.
The second was smootlvshaven.
‘T useter have a beard like that till I saw meself in the
glass. Then I cut it off.”
But the bearded man was not dismayed.
“Much better 'ave left it on, mate,” he returned gently
I useter have a face like yours till I saw it in the glass
Then I growed this beard.”


REGULATIONS
The sergeant was asking the recruits why walnut was
used for the butt of a rifle.
“Because it has more resistance, volunteered one man.
“IV rong!”
“Because it is more elastic.
“IV rong!’’
“Perhaps it’s because it looks nicer than any other kind,”
volunteered another, timidly.
“Don’t be an ass,” snapped the sergeant. “Simply because
it was laid down in Regulations.’
LOOKING FORWARD
He was a strikingly handsome figure in his uniform as
he started out upon his round of farewell calls.
‘"And you’ll think of me every single minute when
you’re in those stupid old trenches?” questioned the sweet
young thing upon whom he first called.
He nodded emphatically. “Every minute.
“And you’ll kiss my picture every night?”
“Twice a night,” he vowed, rashly, patting the pretty
head on his shoulder.
“And write me long, long letters? she insisted.
“Every spare minute I have, he reassured her, and
hurried away to the next name on his list.
There were ten in all who received his promises.
When it was over he sighed. I hope, he murmured,
wearily, “there won’t be much fighting to do. I m going to
be so tremendously busy.”
HE WAS SHOCK-PROOF
Pat and Alike were in a front-line trench which had
been under continuous bombardment fifteen hours. Suddenly
Mike jumped up, grabbed Pat and shouted above the shriek
of the bursting shells:
“For heaven’s sake, Pat, scare me! I’ve got the hiccoughs.


FRIENDLY?
Half-a-dozen times the keen-eyed and enthusiastic look-out
of a warship had reported the appearance of aircraft during
his watch. Each time the answer he received from the bridge
was: "The aircraft you reported was friendly.”
He became irritated.
1 awards the end of his watch he saw a torpedo speed
past the bows of the ship.
“Torpedo passing the bows of the ship, sir—a friendly
one,” he reported.
CRIMINAL
A batch recru^ts to the R.A.F. was being inspected
by a flight sergeant. After giving them a few appropriate
words of advice, he said: If any of you lads has any civil
conviction entered against you, now’s the time to speak "up
and it won’t be held against you.”
Nobody spoke. The sergeant gave them another chance.
. Now, then, you fellows, it 11 go hard with any of you
if it comes out afterwards. Any conviction, any fines any
prison sentences?”
After a pause, one youth nervously intimated that he
wished to speak.
If you please, sergeant, he said, “I’ve been fined once.”
“What for and how much?”
Sixpence, for keeping a library book over a month.”
WHAT DID HE MEAN?
A militiaman, on sentry duty, held up a car, saying to
the driver: “You can’t pass this way.”
"I’m the sergeant’’ bellowed a voice from the back of
the car.
Ihe sentry stood aside. Sorry, sir, I didn’t realise it
was you. I got orders to let no traffic through here because
the bridge ahead is rotten. But seeing it’s you, sir, it’s a
pleasure.”


“ST. JAMES” SPORTS TROUSERS
with the new Flexway waist band
42'-
Remove fhe label and you won f be able fo fell
them from English-made slacks selling at almost
double fhe price! Greys, fawns, blues, greens and
browns. Here are a few features that make them
such grand value: —
ln high-grade worsteds and pinpoints in 25 tonmgs.
+ Self-supporting, with new _ Flexway waist—the neatest
Idea yet to keep your shirt tidily in place.
+ Fittings for almost every Figure, waist 29 to 48 inches.
First Floor, both Men's Stores. 'Phone and Mail Orders.
David Jones’ 2 Men’s Stores
OVER A CENTURY OF SERVICE


LOST—AND FOUND
Soldiers on fatigue were cleaning the barrack square. The
sergeant’s small daughter came up and stopped at a drain.
My daddy dropped half a crown down there last week."
h or an hour the fatigue party, on its knees, worked hard.
“Are you sure this is the drain?" they asked when the
child returned.
“Yes, I saw him get it up."
STRATEGY
Pongo came back to camp with a few drinks aboard,
and, as soon as he poked his head inside the tent, he grunted
in annoyance. Everybody was sprawled all over the ship and
all the best possies were taken. Only place vacant was near
the tent'flap, and, as somebody else was due back from
town, this was no good to “Pongo,” who had no wish to
be a doormat, merry soldiers made use of.
So he stuck his head inside the tent, and yelled in a
voice that made even the S.M. envious:
“Wake up, blokes, there’s a snake in the tent!”
He was almost crushed by the mad exodus from the tent.
Then he picked himself up and entered, choosing the
best sleeping possie of all.
S ALL right, fellers,” he bellowed, happily, “it was
only me floggin' belt I saw, after all.”
“Yair?” grunted the boys, dubiously.
Then;
“What the hell’s the row?” bellowed the S.M. pinkly
from outside. “You men mad—or drunk?”
“He saw a snake, sir,” the mob explained.
Snake? There s no snakes here—no snakes were ever
here,” roared the S.M.
No, sir, came back “Pongo.” “That’s what I been
tryin’ to tell ’em. It’s blanky well crawled back into the
bottle.”


SYMPATHY
A recruit, who had been complaining to the quartermaster-
sergeant that his n&w battle-dress didn’t ft anywhere, walked,
unsatisfied, out of the stores straight into a very senior officer
without saluting.
The officer pulled him up.
‘‘Look at my uniform,” he said.
‘‘Yes, I know,” replied the recruit, ‘‘mine’s pretty awful,
too!”
CANAL PRANKS
Crews of the tug-boats working the Suez Canal must
have developed worried looks when the new A.I.F. began
to arrive in Egypt.
Practically all the skippers on that run during last war
turned grey long before their time, and many became cot-cases.
We didn’t really give them a “fair go.’’ A tug-boat
bridge made a beautiful diving platform, and any boat was
fair game to the troops.
A hundred or so Diggers, treading water in mid-canal,
and refusing to budge at his frantic whistling, would make
any decent captain reduce speed. Then the circus was on.
All hands would make a dash alongside, swarm up
over the low stern, and the ship was ours till she drifted
out of range, engines going dead slow.
Perhaps a few liners were delayed, waiting for a tow,
but what odds! The diving was worth it.
BIG NOISE
The conceited Colonel was complaining about his junior
officers.
‘Tt seems I’m obliged to do everything here to get things
right. I’m my own captain, my own lieutenant, even my
own sergeant-major.”
“Trumpeter, too!” whispered a new recruit to his pal .


E. ESDAILE & SONS
Spectacle Makers
We Specialise in All Classes of Optical Work
42 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY
ONLY A RUMOUR
“This warnin us about keepin’ things military a dark
secret reminds me of a joker from another unit I met last
week,” said “Chiller.”
“He an’ I have a few quick ones an’ get to talkin’. He
tells me some mighty tall yarns of where we’re finally gonna
Tat Germany’s roundin’ up all the cats an’ dogs
that Musso never changes his underwear all the
\ •
“ I grins.
“ “You’re a flamin’ liar,’ I says, right out.
“He gets pretty sore at this, an’ talks fight.
“ ‘Prove I’m a liar,’ he comes back, snappin’ like a
turtle, thinkin’ he’s got me there.
“ ‘Well,’ I tells him, ‘I know you’re a Hoggin’ liar ’cos
I started them furphies meself.’ ”
LOST ON THE DEEP
A?i amateur sailor was making his first trip across the
Atlantic, and was in the throes of rnal de mer when the ship’s
surgeon came across him.
0-o-h! was the only response as the young man rolled
H hat s the matterf was the doctor’s callous query,
over in agony.
(jome, get up, derided the surgeon, grinning unfeelingly.
I he ship s been torpedoed and will sink in teai minutes.”
len minutesf the sick man protested feebly. “Can’t
you make it any soonerf”


ICE CREAM
PURE AND DELICIOUS
MADE BY WELL KNOWN DIGGERS
PLEASE!
(tunboat was the hardest of the hard cases, and after
a few beers didn t care two hoots what he said to anyone,,
from the sergeant upwards.
(mme the day he was detailed for battalion runner.
Adjutant called for him three times before “Gunboat” lurched
into the office a?id solemnly ivagged an admonishing finger.
Look here, I can’t he running about all over the camp
for you—why don’t you get the blasted ’phone put inf”
SENSELESS
Musketry instructor was holding forth to a bunch of
recruits, explaining the mysteries of the service rifle. “Pongo”
was miles off the target when they started to shoot.
Don t PLLL the trigger like it was Hitlers mo, you
there! he roared. “Squeeze it, squeeze it, like you’d squeeze
a girl!”
“Pongo” snorted in disgust.
“How the hell can you get your arm through the trigger
guard?”


WRONG BLOKE
Fact that officers in this war wear the same battle dress
as private soldiers reminds me of an incident that might have
had serious consequences.
When it was realised that officers were being deliberately
picked off by the Huns, many discarded the Sam Brown
belts and wore ordinary tunics when up the line.
About forty of us infantrymen had been attached to
the Tunnellers and were later returned to our various units.
We had a particularly hard case named “Darky,” who was
a great practical joker.
One of his favourite tricks was to pour his pint of
beer in the pocket of one’s overcoat and move away before
it had time to soak through.
“Darky,” who belonged to an Auckland Batt., was tall
and had a heavy black moustache.
Later, our platoon was taken to the baths at Poperinghe,
where we met a lot of other Diggers waiting their turn.
My cobber spotted “Darky,” as he thought, and crept
round the back and gave him a hefty kick in the pants.
It wasn’t “Darky,” but a second lieutenant. Luckily,
he was a good sport and also happened to know “Darky.”
So apologies were accepted.
WITH MILK
In a Perth street was a truck on which was a high
wooden enclosure containing three cows. Driver went into
a shop, and was absent for some minutes. A crowd of
soldiers happened along, and three of them climbed over
the enclosure, and dropped in among the cows.
Glass beer mugs were passed in to them, and it was
soon evident they knew a bit about cows. They milked them,
passed out the full mugs, and kept on.
Then some bright spark produced a bottle of whisky,
and whisky and new milk had become popular when the
driver returned. He was a sport, tossed off a spot —nearly
half and half—and drove off with the remaining untapped
milk and cows.


ANGEL!
A soldier was leaving hospital to rejoin his unit. He
had been very ill, but the skill of the doctors, good nursing,
and the kindly matron had pulled him through.
As he was leaving he tried to thank the matron.
“I—er—l just wanted to say how much—” He coughed
nervously. Yes, I—you don’t know how much—”
Feeling his courage going he braced himself for a great
effort.
I wanted to —er —tell you— ’” Then, in desperation:—
"Lumme! If ever there was a fallen angel, you’re one.”
STOLEN FRUIT
Somebody spread a tale about a wonderful orange
orchard, lousy with fruit, somewhere across the desert from
Zeitoun.
Sure enough, one fine Sunday, a party of us found it,
and the sight was too much. Just in case there might have
been a few odd ones going to waste on the ground, we
swarmed over the low mud wall for a closer inspection.
Having once grown oranges myself, after one glance I
decided that I didn’t particularly want any, but the mob
tore off their shirts and stuffed them full of golden fruit.
We beat it for camp, with a mob of yelling Arabs in
pursuit. Safely back in the huts, the boys decided to sample
the loot. The averages of bites worked out at one a man,
before they made for the canteen to get something to take
the taste away.
The fruit which looked so tempting had been grown for
the jam factories, and was absolutely the most bitter variety
known, nearly as bitter as the names the mob called me later
for not letting on.
CHEEK
1 he sergeant popped his head round the Recreation Room
door, and shouted to a group of privates of the new Army: —
Hi! some of you, go and shift your cars. The Colonel
can’t find a place for his bike.”


Peters' Ice Cream
The Cream of the Commonwealth !
NO KEY
If a war comes, will it wait for a key?
A Western Australian home defence corps a few days ago
assembled for a big day's parade. All preparations had been
made, and the troops were awaiting issue of gear.
" Where’s Bill?”
But Bill was not, neither was the key of the storehouse.
He had gone into the country in his car for the day, taking
the key, and was “ungetatable. ’
So the enemy had to be telephoned to leave their attack
until another day. All the rifles, blank ammunition, machine-
guns, etc., were in the storehouse!
MASQUERADE
Medical examinations are an event in the lives of recruits,
and the keenness of some is productive of amusing incidents.
Two brothers in a North Island town enlisted for the
N.Z.E.F. One, who suffered from a slight physical disability,
was aware he would be unable to pass the doctor.
Local Staff-sergeant, who was in attendance, knew the
brothers casually. Bob reported, was examined and duly passed
as fit.
Shortly afterwards the sergeant saw him again stripped
off. “Hullo, Bob, what are you back for?”
“Bob be blowed, I’m Frank,” came the reply.
Both boys are now overseas.


DO YOUR SHOPPING THE EASY WAY—
*ith an
ARNOLD CASH ORDER
Call and see our Credit Manager about
our SPECIAL EASY TERMS
Edward Arnold Pty. Ltd.
Oxford Street, Sydney
GENERAL DRAPERS, CLOTHIERS AND FURNISHERS
'Phone: M 2121
SCOTCH AGAIN
Everything about the R.A.F. Headquarters was interest-
ing o the visitor, and he asked a never-ending string of
questions. y ‘
“Say,” he exclaimed, “how is it that you have so many
Scotsmen among your pilots?”
The guide, a bit fed up, snatched at the opportunity.
“Well sir,” he said, “since the Scots have learned that
every cloud has a silver lining, we cant keep ’em out.”
CLASSICAL CONVERSATION
The soldiers library had been enriched by the presen-
tation, donor unknown, of a volume based on the life of Nero.
JTasn t this bloke Nero the same as was always cold?’’
inquired Nobby Clarke of Spud Murphy.
No, that was Zero, another party altogetheranswered
Spud.


COULD SWING HIS LEGS
One of the best attempts at lead-swinging which came
to my knowledge as an A.A.M.O. man during last war
concerned a Digger who wanted a ticket home from Blighty.
After serving in France he was wounded in the legs and
gradually lost the use of them. At first the M.O. was puzzled,
as the wounds had apparently touched no nerve centre; but,
becoming suspicious, he decided to put the patient through
a series of tests. At unexpected times hairs were plucked
from the patient’s legs, the skin was pierced by needles and
lifted, and a burning acid was “accidentally” dropped on the
skin. 5 Not by word or sign did the lead-swinger reveal that
the tests were painful.
At last the M.O. appeared satisfied that the paralysis
was genuine. He told the patient that there was a slight
chance of cure if he would undergo an operation. When the
anaesthetic was applied the lead-swinger lost control of his
reactions, and it was proved that he had full use of his legs.
HIGHER UP
He hadn’t been in camp long before he’d got himself
mixed up in a fight. So. with four other recruits, he found
himself up before the C.O. to be questioned. After the
others had given their replies, the C.O. asked, And you
you were struck in the fracas?
Red with indignation, he blurted out:
“It‘s a lie! It was over the ear!”
ALL FOR ONE
Berty was on leave from Redbank (Q.) camp, and he
had been in town long enough to down a few pots. It
wasn’t long before a policeman took him by the arm and
offered to escort him to Central Station to see him safely on
the train back to camp. On the way to the station they ran
into a gang of the fellows on leave.
“Here, you fellows,” appealed Berty, I m in a fix. I
have an appointment with a nice little girl, but this cop says
I am drunk, and he won’t let me stay in town. Can’t you
chaps help me out?”
“Of course, we can,” said one of the blokes. Where
do we meet the girl?”


ONLY WAY
The young soldler was talking to a pal in the mess.
Ihe sergeant told me off proper,” said he. “Yelled at
7 you dof” iy CIW WCIS C ° Vered With under growth! What would
“Oh!” said his pal. "Just grin and bare it!”
TACTICS
Tw° blokes on our Headquarters are never stuck very
ong for some fresh avenue for income. ?/' a day being
insufficient for their requirements.
Business with the ”Wogs” in the sale of bones and
scraps having fallen off owing to the vigilance of the Q.M.
a , the firm was feeling the pinch between pay-days
when their prayers were answered in the form of a large
batch of reinforcements.
_ ,T he decided on a plan to ensure that the rookies
would not be left in the rush for cover in the night air
raids, and accordingly took up station outside the canteen
When the air raid alarm was sounded they commenced
to shout: Run like Hell. Never mind your beer'” With ■
the result that not only did they reap a harvest of uncon-
turned beer, but the empties are worth five mills each and
s7x°full ones Cante£n * DCt suffident to Purchase
On one occasion the 2 i/c on his rounds found the
firm outside the tent with the haul.
Get under cover!” was the order.
What about our bottles?” they inquired.
The 2 i/c, unaware of the new avenue of profit placed
was IC a q Xm°p Ver im P ression
NOT GUILTY
h ' tUnUh ' d f ° r someMn * h '
Certainly not. Private Smith!”
“Well, I haven’t cleaned my rifle.”


HOME TRUTH
In a certain New Zealand town two doctors arc next-door
neighbours. One of these, whom we will call Jackson, was
examining recruits for the N.Z.E.F. Listening to the heart
beats of one brawny lad from the country he asked: Who s
your family doctor.
“Aw, what’s ’is name . . .’’ the recruit faltered.
“Is it Dr. Brown?”
“No. It’s the bloke next to that ol cow, Jaikson.
SLIGHT MISTAKE
On Gallipoli a new reinforcement was going to Rest
Gully when he got away from his track and, a
soldier studying a paper, went up to him and said; Can
you tell me the way to my crowd?”
“Don’t know. You’d better go and ask the cook just
there.”
Instantly General Birdwood looked at him and re-
marked briskly;
“Oh, I beg your pardon,” answered the reinstoushmen t.
“I thought you were the cook,”
SICK PARADE
Sergeant had lined up the three men who had fallen
out for sick parade. “What’s your trouble?” he asked the
first man.
“I’ve got a bruised heel and cannot walk.
“Stand aside!”
“What’s the matter with you?” he asked the next man.
“I’ve got pains in the head and feel generally sick.
“All right, you stand aside!”
“Now, where are you sick?” he asked No. 3, who was
looking thoroughly dejected and miserable.
“Well, to tell you the truth, Sarge, I’m sick of the
w hole business,” said the miserable one.


SILENCE!
Efforts to prevent talking in the ranks were not entirely
successful, so when “Fitz’s” expressive monologue reached its
correct pitch a blood-curdling “Stop that talking!” came from
the O.C.
Without a second's hesitation “Fitz” casually continued
with: “Yes , I told them about that, too!"
UP TO HIS NECK
A couple of nights ago our company was on night
manoeuvres. It was not a particularly cold night, the rain
managed to hold off, but cloud obscured the moon all the
evening.
“Butch,” the company’s simpleton, was detailed to walk
across the valley until the Major called him to a halt. Away
he went at the double until he was almost out of sight, when,
without any command, he halted.
We could faintly see him. All commands from the Major
to carry on were ignored, so we were told to advance and find
the trouble.
On reaching “Butch” we found him in 'a creek with water
up to his neck. Plenty of advice was forthcoming, but no
help. “Butch” asked for a loan of some matches, and, after
a bit of arguing, someone tossed him a box.
He struck one, and, after a flicker of the light, he gasped:
“Gawd blimey, I’m up to me neck in water!”
TRICKS
Camp was a good way out of the city , and train fares
were stiff. So we had to think of something to pass the time.
Our company took up a collection and asked Scotty to get a
football on his next visit to town. Scotty was an economical
soul; instead of buying a new ball he went to a second-hand
shop. The dealer, a fellow with a hooked nose , brought out
a number of balls for Scotty s inspection. Alost of the7n were
basil.
“These are no good," said Scotty. ff hen I buy a foot-
ball I like to see some cow hide in it."
“Oi, oi," said the dealer , “you soldiers alvays vants tricks.


A LARGE AND APPRECIATIVE AUDIENCE
An Australian soldier met a swanking English officer,
whom, according to good Aussie custom, he did not salute.
The officer stopped him.
“Look here, my man,” he said, “don’t you know I’m
an officer? Why don't you salute?”
“Oh,” said the Aussie, “are you an officer?”
“Yes,” replied the officer, and then noticing for the
first time that the man was an Aussie, he added with
annoyance, “Oh, you’re an Aussie, aren’t you? Well, do
you know that you Aussies give us more trouble than the
whole rest of the English army put together?”
“Yes,” replied the Digger with a slow smile. “That’s
what the Nazis think, too.”
PARTNERS, PLEASE
“On the right . . . form platoon!’’ roared the sergeant.
The recruits carried out some kind of manoeuvre which left
him speechless. He looked at them for a moment two
moments. Then his voice returned.
“All right,’’ he said, in tones which no mere words can
possibly describe. “Now take your partners for the Lancers.”
HORRORS!
The officer of the day was going his rounds when he
saw that one of the sentries was a very raw recruit who
was having his first spell of guard duties. Determined to
find out whether the young fellow understood his duties, he
began to question him.
“If you saw a general approaching, what would you do?”
“Call out the guard,” the recruit answered.
“Very good! And if you saw a battlecruiser coming
across the parade ground, what would you do then?”
“Report to the hospital for mental inspection,” came
the prompt reply.


PARCEL
The first letter the family received from the pilot son
stationed in the Near East told them to look out for a parcel
which was on its way home.
There was great speculation in the house as to what
weird and wonderful examples of native craft the parcel
would contain.
Two days later it arrived. Its contents were seven
shirts and a dosemand'a-half socks, together with the brief
note, “Please wash and mend.”
SOME FACE
Private Smith was in trouble again. Called before the
commanding officer, he was accused of insulting the sergeant-
major.
“What’s your excuse this time?” he was asked.
“1 didn’t mean to insult him, sir,” replied Smith. “All
I said was that if looks could kill, he ought to be careful
with the mirror when he shaves himself.”
TOUJOURS LA POLITESSE
The young recruit, remembering his mother’s advice
always to be polite, displayed his best manners in the mess
by quietly asking: “Please pass the salt.”
Several times he repeated the request, until at last,
losing his patience, he bellowed:
"Hi! Ain’t none of you knock'kneed, hembrained
perishers got enough manners to pass the salt?”
“Oh, crumbs!” said a quiet voice. “Why on earth
couldn’t you have said that at first?. ’Ere —catch!”
ENOUGH
A sailor home on short leave consulted a doctor about a
sore throat that was troubling him.
After an inspection, the doctor said: “You had better
try gargling with salt and water.”
“What, again!” said the sailor. “I’ve been torpedoed
three times!”


SCOTT FELL SHIPPING PTY.
LTD.
19 BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY
‘Phone: B 652 I
BROUGHT HIM DOWN
“Butch” was considered the wittiest man in the
Battalion. He always had one coming, irrespective of
where he was. While in England, “Butch” courted and
married a fine type of Londoner. She worked in a soap
factory down Peckham way, as forewoman. Soon after
being “demobbed,” “Butch” and his wife pooled their bit
of cash and started a small factory in Annandale (N.S.W.).
All went well for a while, but finally the Digger and his
bride lost everything, and found themselves in the Bank-
ruptcy Court in Sydney. The Official Receiver was ques-
tioning the bankrupt: “So you lost your bit of money
making bath soap. Is that so?”
“Yes,” replied “Butch,” “bath soap has brought many
a good man down.”
TIGER LILY
Big Bill Lillie was a strict teetotaller. He didn’t even
drink his rum issue, a fact that made him very popular
with the boys of the Umpteenth Battalion. His tem-
perance and his name made his nickname of “Water” seem
so very appropriate. At first he kicked about it, but
finally was reconciled to the inevitable. The only thing
he would not stand was reference to “lilies of the field,”
or any cracks such as “attar of roses” and that ilk.
Then one day he tangled with a big artilleryman, who
passed an unfortunate remark when “Water” Lillie had
just come muddy and chatty out of the line.
“A Lillie by any other name would smell as sweet”
got right under Bill’s skin.
Two minutes later the artilleryman came round.
“Struth!” grunted “Bluey,” who had originated Bill’s
nickname. “We’ve been nursin’ a ‘tiger lily’ instead of
a pretty little ‘water lily.’ I reckon we’d better call him
‘Tiger’.”
So “Tiger” Lillie it was for the duration.


PROPAGANDA PROBLEM!
Do people in the world present such a problem to
propaganda experts as the Arabs? Their mental process is
■entirely different from that of any Western race. The Ger*
mans discovered this to their cost when they tried to turn
the Arabs against this country by distributing pictures among
them which depicted British soldiers firing live Moslems out
of their guns? The Arabs were certainly impressed —but
not in the way the Germans hoped.
“If that is the sort of thing the British do,” they said,
‘“we must be very careful to keep on the right side of them.”
DIDN'T WANT IT
An officious young N.C.0., fresh to his one stripe, was
.exercising his first section, mostly raw recruits, in squad drill.
After marching about for some time listening to his
incessant “Left, right, left, right! Pick it up! Pick it up,
there!” “Bluey,” an old hand from the last “stoush could
contain himself no longer. After a particularly emphatic
“Pick it up!” from the N.C.0., he shouted: “Pick it up
your blanky self! I don t want it.”
LOVE
The young soldier was about to leave his girl’s home
when he was confronted by the massive figure of his pros'
pective fatherdndaw.
The young man tried hard to evade him, but the girl’s
father grasped him by the shoulder.
Now then, my lad, ” he said, “you’ve been coming
here quite a lot. What do you want with my daughter?”
“Well, sir,” said the young man, a trifle nervously, “you
know best what you can afford.”
RE-NAMED
Our Red Cross ladies have been making thousands of
soldiers’ “housewives,” though they pronounce the word, “hus-
sifs." Local Press mentioned the item as follows: “Each
soldier will be provided with a housewife.” Our ladies were
horrified, and have re-named their gifts “Button kits.”


CAMEL'S NECK
A party of Camellers patrolling the desert on a hot, dry,
and dusty day, and in anything but good spirits, were much
amused by the Company dag, who approached the lieutenant'
imcharge with this inquiry:
“Say, Mr. do you know why a camel has such a
long neck?”
The lieutenant replied: “Well, he’s got long legs, he’d
want a long neck to get down to his tucker.”
“Oh, yes,” said the Dag, “but that has got nothing to
do with it.”
“Well,” said the lieutenant, “you seem to know all
about it; why has a camel got such a long neck?”
“Well, look for yourself,” said the Dag. “See how far
away his head is. A short neck would never reach that.”
HEARTLESS
It was their first pay parade and one young gunner dreiv
his full pay.
“Well, Gunner Xsaid the officer on duty, “I see you’re
married. Aren’t you going to make your wife an allotment?”
“No, sir; not a penny!” was the firm reply.
“But—”
“Look here, sir; I allow her £2,000 a year. She must
manage on that!”
PERILS OF WAR
A soldier was on sentry duty for the first time. A
dark form approached.
“Halt!” he cried in a threatening tone. “Who are you?”
“The Orderly Officer.”
“Advance!”
The orderly officer advanced, but before he had gone
halha'dozen yards the sentry again cried: “Halt!”
“This is the second time you have halted me,” observed
the officer. “What are you going to do next?”
“My orders are to call ‘Halt!’ three times and then
shoot!” was the reply.


EDUCATED
Blue, who had never been out of the district before
h enlistment, had learnt a thing or two in camp. Back on
home leave he was in the bar of the local pub when the
talk turned on city crooks. Hotelkeeper was one of those
knowalls who are always willing to brag about what they
V t l kC * man t 0 P ut one over m e,” he told
the mob when Blue excused himself and went out Ten
minutes later Blue” came back with a leg of mutton
wrapped in newspaper.
"Shove fhis in the ice chest till I’m ready to go home,”
he said Now, what were you fellows saying about taking
each other down? 5
“Tom, here, reckons nobody can do him in for any'
t mg, remarked one of the mob, indicating the publican
with a jerk of his thumb.
t u reckons that > eh? ” said “Blue.” Now, look here.
1 bet 111 put one over him before I leave the bar.”
Got a big opinion of yourself since you went into
camp. asked the publican. Well, I’ll take your bet—
drinks for all hands?”
Righpoh, said Blue, “let’s have the drinks now The
loser pays.
, a Blue” asked for his parcel, saying that
e had better be going home. As the publican handed it
over he suggested that “Blue” pay for the drinks.
"Not on your life,” said Blue, “you lost the bet.”
And he walked out.
Presently the publican’s missus came over from the
kitchen.
“Where did you put that leg of mutton?” she asked
after searching the ice chest.
What leg of mutton? asked the publican.
“Why, the one you sent ‘Blue’ for. He told me you
wanted to put it in the ice'chest.”
Then it dawned on the publican that he had been
caught twice.


ALIBI
Up before the C.O. at Redbank (Q.) charged with being
twenty-four hours A.W.L., the new laddie had his excuse
ready.
“Well, sir,” he began, “I was on my way to the railway
station at Bundaberg to catch the train back, when I heard a
band playing ‘God Save the King.’ Being a soldier, 1 had to
stand to attention.
“Yes, sir! Well, when the band had finished I started
to move on, but they began again, so I had to stop once more.
This happened half-a-dozen times, sir, and then I heard the
train leave. When the music stopped next time, I ducked in
to see what it was all -about.
“Would you believe it, sir, it was only band practice
night, and I’d done my train in for nothing, and it’ll cost me —”
“Fined fifteen shillings!” said the C.O.
R.I.P.
A German family put the customary notice in the paper
following the death of grandpa : “Pray for Ernst Muller,
called by God to a Better World'’ Next day they were arrested
for criticising the Nazi regime.
JUST LIKE THAT!
In the club they were discussing the doings of the R.A.F.
“I heard of one pilot who brought down three Germans
in one fight,” said the first.
“That’s nothing,” said the second. “I heard of one who
drove off twelve single-handed.”
The little man in the corner sniffed loudly.
“That’s nothing,” he said; “ a pilot I know once broke
a German plane in two in the air.”
“He must have riddled it with bullets.”
“Bullets nothing! He’d used up all his ammunition, so
he threw a spanner at it.”


GEO. E. NYE
Printing Service
la Percivaf Road
Petersham
N S.W.
LM 2730
