

DIGGERETTES
DIGGER JOKES & STORIES
Selected and Illustrated
BY CECIL L. HARTT
Late A.I.F.
Author of “Humorosities,” Etc.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia at Carter’s, 377 Sussex St., Sydney.


For the DIGGER
We want the Property Owner
to send us particulars of
GOOD
LAND
The Digger is asking us for
GRAZING WHEAT GROWING
DAIRYING BANANA
AND ALL CLASSES OF FARMING AREAS
We are Diggers ourselves, and we
want to give our mates the best,
Hurt & Johnston
(Late A.1.F.)
PROPERTY AGENTS,
B.M.A. BUILDINGS,
Telephone 32 Elizabeth Street,
City 10997 ' SYDNEY
y
i
T&fvissK






“THE DINKUM OIL”
The Great Australian Remedy
CURES
RHEUMATISM
LUMBAGO
STIFF JOINTS
"Rub in the Oil, Rub Out the Pain "
CURES
BACKACHE
AN EXCELLENT
EXTERNAL
REMEDY
./tv
RharniaTiMn.
Gout.
i Cold on me ChcM.j
Sore Throat[
Mairat&a.
\ StiffJoint'si
nr
NEURALGIA
COLD ON THE
CHEST
Price 1/6
\
All Chemists and Stores


DRINK . . .
RESCH’S
AUSTRALIAN
Dinner Ale
Lager
Stout
xxx Ale (Bulk)
BREWERY: REDEERN, - SYDNEY


YOU
made Real Estate a
Safe Investment
when you secured Australia's free-
dom on the battlefields
Why should you not share in the
prosperity you made possible? . .
Secure an allotment of
land or a cottage, now!
They are getting dearer every day
You can get the best that is offering
and a square deal into the bargain
From . . .
E. M. PERCIVAL
Auctioneer & Real Estate Agent
4 FALCON ST., CROWS NEST,
NORTH SYDNEY
TELEPHONES NORTH 220 and J 1739
I am in touch with Agents in all parts of
Australia


“Your future depends
upon yourself”
LOOK BEYOND YOUR
JOB!
WHAT WILL YOU BE AT
50?
At 25 Years 100 average men, healthy, mentally, and physically, may fol-
, low the average—
At 35 Years— i have died, 10 become wealthy, 10 in good circumstances,
40 with moderate resourses, 35 showing no improvement.
At 45 Years — 11 have died—total, 16 dead. 3 still retain wealth and good
circumstances. 60 are still self-supporting, 15 still working
but not earning enougjj for self-support. The rest are de-
pendent on others.
At 55 YearS l 1 4 more have died—total, 20 dead. 1 has become rich, 3in
good circumstances, 46 still working for a living. 30 are
more or less dependent upon their children, relatives, Or on
charity for support.
The INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS
(THE WORLD’S SCHOOLHOUSE)
London Scranton New York
183 PITT STREET, SYDNEY 79 SWANSTQN STREET. MELBOURNE
WHAT POSITION DO YOU WANT?
Ad-Writer.
Salesmanship.
Window-diressing. * '
Ticket-writing.
lllustrating.
Architecture.
Mechanical Drawing.
Mechanical Engineering.
Electrical Engineering.
Mathematics.
Motor Engineering.
Municipal Engineering.
Refrigeration.
Metal Mining.
’Structural Engineering.
Concrete Engineering
LANGUAGES.
French, Italian, German, Spanish,
with Phonograph Outfit.
Bookkeeping.
Secretarial.
Business Correspondence.
Business Efficiency.
Cost Accountancy.
Chemistry.
Fruit Growing.
Dairying and Livestock.
Poultry Farming.
Citrus Fruit Growing.
Ocean Navigation.
Civil Engineering.
lndustrial Designing.
Building Contracting.
Steam-electric Engineering.
Gas-electric Engineering.
Now is the, time to invest
for your future
NAME. . .
ADDRESS


DIGGERETTES
BY CECIL L. HARTT.
LATE A.I.F.
Author of Humorosities, etc.
TWENTIETH THOUSAND
A. C. *S AN D FOR D,
13 Castlereagh Street,
Sydney


Extract from a Letter from the
King’s Librarian:
Windsor Castle,
13th Feby., ’lB
Dear Mr. Hartt,
Many thanks for your “Humorosities,”
which is a welcome addition to our
literature. It shall certainly be pre-
served in the Royal Library.
Have you an original
sketch or two that you could let me
have for the King’s collection of draw-
ings ? Could you let me have some to
choose from, with prices marked ?
Yours very truly,
J. W. FORTESCUE.


Our thankful acknowledg-
ment is due to the Pro-
prietors of “Smith’s
Weekly ” for permission to
re-print these stories, and
also for the use of the
blocks.


DIGGERETTES.


Sentry: “Halt! Got your pass?”
Digger: “Yes, I’ve got me pass, me identity
disc, me paybook, me conduct sheet, me tin helmet,
me gas mask, me emergency ration, me tin of Kiwi,
and me inoculation certificate. Can the war now go
on?”
Sentry: “Pass, friend, and all’s well.”
First Digger .(laboriously writing a letter
home): “Hey, Dig! ’Ow do yer spell adder?”
Second Digger: “A-D-D-E-R.”
First Digger: No, not adder the snake. 1 mean
'adder good time.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


He was reckoned as being the best souvenir-hunter
in the A.l.F.—all reinforcements are afflicted that
way for a fortnight. Over his sector there was a ding-
dong aerial battle in progress. A lucky burst set
a Hun ’plane afire, and thousands of diggers stopped
to watch the blazing machine crash. Two thousand
feet from the ground a thrill ran through the spec-
tators as the pilot jumped out. Down he came, frog
fashion. The souvenir king got excited. A hun-
dred feet from the earth he bellowed to the poor
devil: “Turn on your back* you cow, or you’ll break
your wristlet watch!”
Nurse“ Did the orderly take your tempera
ture?”
Digger: “Blowed if I. know, but 1 shouldn’t
be surprised, I saw him take my mate’s tobacco.”
DIGGERETtfcS.


DIGGERETTES.


Scene; Regimental Orderly Room. Digger being
“told off” for talking too loud in the trenches.
Digger, in defence; “Well, sir, I ain’t got a voice
like a silkworm.”
General Monash urgently needed a German pris-
oner to verify his views as to certain country over
which his men were to advance. Orders were given
for one to be brought before him. Two stalwart
Diggers at length arrived with a weedy Teuton
between them. He was spectacled, and so diminu-
tive that Monash could not help observing: “What
a small soldier! Where did you get him?” The
Diggers shuffled uneasily, and one at length stam-
mered, “Speakin’ Gospel, sir. we bought him from
the Tommies for a bob.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


We were out for a spell, and from our billets could
see. the light railway crawling along laden with
whizz-bangs and Anzac wafers on its way to the big
Works. Bluey, engaged in rubbing the knees of
his strides with a brick (he hoped to get a new pair
from the Q.M. that way), paused to remark: “Blime
that thing always reminds me of the Queensland
railways.” There was a frigid silence, and Bluey
continued: “ ’Spose youse blokes wouldn’t believe
that the Queensland railways are mentioned in the
Bible?” No one “bit.” Bluey ruminated, “Yairs,
it’s dinkum, alright. Look up the Bible and you’ll
find that in the beginning the Lord created all
creeping things.”
Wowser (to Digger with a “perfect lydy”):
“Shame, comrade!”
Digger: “Who th’ ’ell are you to call me ‘Com-
rade?’ ”
Wowser: “A soldier of Heaven!”
Digger: “Well, y’r a blanky long way fr’m
y’r unit!”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


Disconsolate Damsel: “Is there a soldier named
Hardcase in this camp?”
Suspicious Digger: “There’s a lot of Hardcases
here.”
D.D.: “But this one’s called Bill.”
S.D. (doggedly): “More’n half of ’em’s called
Bill.”
• '
D.D.: “But this one’s red-headed.”
S.D. (“doin’ his block”); “They’re all blanky well
red-headed.”
The five-nine had passed, burst, and buried the
Digger. We dug him out, assisted him to breathe,
and asked him was he hurt.
“Hurt?” he drawled, and spat out three teeth
and a liberal helping of French landscape. “No, I
ain’t hurt, Dig. I used to help the old man milk
at home, and it was a fair cow in wet weather.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGER fcTtES.


The Digger, on four days leave in London, racked
his brains for a new excuse to secure an extension
of leave. All the old jokes about dying relatives,
etc., had been worked to death. With four hours to
go and a booze-inflated headpiece, the outlook was
“up to.” Presently an excited Digger hit a tele-
graph office, pushed a few civvies aside, and reached
for a telegraph form. This is what he wired:—
On the track of a rich widow; good prospects;
please wire 48 hours’ extension.”
His Company Commander read it out in the mess
the same day, and a vote was taken and Bill won
hands down. Bill’s wire still wall of the
Commandant’s office.
Heard at Salisbury Plain.
Sergeant-Major (drilling “raw” recruits): “When
I say ’alt I mean it to be a command. You miser-
able blighters seem to take it as a suggestion.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


The General’s daughter was well-known to the
Diggers. She used to visit them in hospital, and
tell them to make haste and get well, as “Daddy”
was anxious to see them back again in France. Al-
though this was well-intentioned, it was not quite
so much appreciated as an invitation to remain in
England indefinitely might have been. Her kind
enquiries were, in fact, regarded by the Diggers
in the light of a joke. “You must hurry up and
get well,” she said as usual to a wounded Billjim;
“Daddy will be glad to see you in France.” Dig-
ger sat up. “I can assure you,” he retorted, “that
the pleasure will be all his.”
An Australian officer, officially reported “killed
in action,” turned up next morning with a keen
appetite. His comrades broke to him gently the
news of his demise, and he was amazed. “Look
here,” he said in ala'rm. “does that mean that I
won’t be able to draw rations?”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


The battalion dag thought he was genuinely
crook, and fell in on sick parade. The M. 0., a man
of notoriety among leadswingers, had a look at the
dag, and commented cuttingly on his robust ap-
pearance.
“Don’t you ever dare to parade before me with
these imaginary ailments,’’ he roared, “or I’ll put
you under arrest. Why, what’d you do if you were
in civvy life and felt as you do now?”
“I’d see a doctor,” said the dag, and bolted
for the skyline.
Sergeant (calling roll): “Jackson,” “What O”;
“James,” “Yow”; “Jenkins,” “Ai-ewah”; “Jones,”
“My oath”; “Johnson.” “’Ere, Sir”—“Y’ flamin’
pommy! H’often have I had to tell yer to answer
yer name properly.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


Fritz was pushing like blazes, and an English
divvy was looking for the coast. Things were in
an awful tangle as the lonely Digger, just return-
ing from leave, trudged along, looking for his bat-
talion. A party of Tommies watched the wayfarer
approach. Ten miles in some direction there was
a war on, and the Digger wanted to join up his
“mob.” They were sure to be in it, so the Digger
halted. “Where’s the front line, Tommy?” he in-
quired.
“Stay where you are, choom,” he was told. “It’ll
be here directly.”
Reverend Gentleman (doing a trip through the
Holy Land); “Could you tell me where I can find
the Mount of Olives?”
Digger: “No, I can’t! I’ve been looking for a
pub all day, myself.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


In the early days of the war a young Oxen-
Conductor came from the far West to Charleville
(Q.) to enlist. The examining doctor found the
young man sound as a bell, but that he had flat
feet.
“I’m sorry,” said the Doctor, “but I’ll have
to turn you down. You’ye got flat feet.”
“No way for me to git in then?” he enquired
dejectedly.
“I’m afraid not. With those flat feet of yours
you wouldn’t be able to march even five miles.”
The youth thought a moment. Finally he said:
“That’s a fair cow. You see, I walked darn near
a hundred and twenty miles to git here, and now
I’ll have to carry me bally swag all the way back.”
Scene: Close of a performance at a picture show.
Band playing “God Save the King.” A Digger,
moving out while the orchestra was still playing,
was stopped by a Tommy, who said, “I say, choom,
they’re playing ‘God Save.’ ”
Digger: “Hang the King!”
Tommy: “Well, hang Ned Kelly!”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


It was visiting-day at Randwick Military Hos-
pital, and amongst the visitors was a Salvation Army
lass with a bundle of reading matter under her arm
for distribution amongst the soldiers. She passed
round the ward handing out pamphlets to the pa-
tients, until she came to a lonely-looking Digger
propped up in an invalid chair and covered with
rugs. After a few words and a smile she handed
him his literature and passed on. Before she had gone
a dozen yards there was a burst of hilarious laugh-
ter from the direction of the lonely Digger. "What’s
the matter, Ryan?” asked the nurse in charge.
"Slowed if she ain’t given me a track,” said Dig-
ger Ryan between laughs, "a track against dancing,
and here’s me with both bloomin’ legs cut off.”
First Digger, discussing with second Digger
the personal appearance of third Digger, who has
very protuberant ears: "By cripes! His ears do
stick out alright.”
Second Digger: "Not a word! ’E was the bat-
talion listening post.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


A quartermaster of one of the A.I.F. units, new-
ly arrived at Lark Hill, Salisbury, found it very
difficult to obtain some of the special supplies he
needed. Many units had arrived, and the demand
exceeded the supply. One very hot day his efforts
were particularly unsuccessful, and at last, in des-
peration, he sent his Q.M. Sergeant to the Camp
Q.M. with a message: “You appear to be out of
everything I have asked for. Please let me have
anything you have got which may be useful.” At
last he was successful, and the perspiring Sergeant
returned with a coal-scuttle and a shovel!
Digger, to Tommy sentry: “Say, Tommy,
where’s Lamp-Post Corner?”
Tommy, on guard at that particular spot:
“Don’t awsk me, ehoom, I only bin ’ere a month.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


When* pigeons were first introduced into the
Army for purpose of carrying messages, many were
the orders and instructions which had to be issued
before they really became a success. One of these
instructions was that a cock bird and a hen bird
should never be released together. If they were
they would probably loiter on the way, spending
their time in billing and' cooing, to the neglect of
the message. An officer, either from stupidity or
facetiousness, found the instructions full of difficul-
ties, and conducted a long- and tedious correspond-
ence with Headquarters on pigeons. The climax
arrived when he wrote: “Re Pigeons. The instruc-
tions contained in your A. 55/6/’l6 of 3rd inst. do
not state how and when the pigeons should be
milked.” The answer was short and to the point:
Your S/c 25/4/’l6 to hand. Pigeons are not
milked in Leap Year.”
Digger: “These blanky pants are no good.
They’re tighter than me skin.”
Q.M.S.: “How th’ blazes can they be tighter
than y’r skin?”
Digger: “Well, I can sit in me skin, but I’m
dashed if I can in these.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


They were resting in a village in France, and
just filling in time swapping experiences. “Havin’
any trouble with your French over here?” asked
“Bluey.” “No,” said “Nugget,” “but I notice th’
blanky French are.”
'Hie Digger was coughing furiously when the
Medical Officer, hearing him, remarked: “That’s a
bad cough, my lad.” The Digger, jerking his thumb
towards the cemetery, replied: “Well, any er those
blokes’d be glad of it.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


They had already marched twenty miles and
found there was still another 20 to do. The C.O.
had a heart. He commanded those who were un-
able to carry on to take two paces forward. The
whole company stepped forward, except one man.
The C.O. complimented him on his endurance, but
the Digger pulled him up with: “It’s not that, sir!
Fact is, I’m too flamin’ tired to take them two
steps.”
First Digger (dejectedly): “Strewth! It don’t
seem to be no use me writin’ home. I don’t believe
the blanky mail gets delivered ! ’ ’
Second Digger: “Where d’yer live?”
First Digger: “Tasmania.”
Second Digger: “No wonder, y’silly cow! Don’t
yer know the postman enlisted?”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


At times the construction of an order left its
actual intention open to doubt. Such an order was
issued in France, which ran: “Horses must not be
tied up to trees, otherwise they will bark and die.”
Another ran: “Men parading before Senior Officers
must be properly dressed, wearing at least a belt.”
Bill had been badly knocked, and on reaching
Base Hospital it was found necessary to amputate
his right leg at once. On coming to after the opera-
tion Bill loudly demanded of the kindly Surgeon:
“Where’s me flamin’ leg?” The Surgeon said: “It’s
all right, old man, we took it off; it was no good to
you. You’ll be all right soon; don’t worry about
it.” “Worry be damned,” shouted Bill, “there
was a quid in that bally boot.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


The subject was “Army rum,” and several
opinions had been given on the strength of S.K.D.
and how it is tested, when a Digger enlightened the
company with the “dinkum oil.”
“Don’t yer know ’ow they test it? Well, it’s
this way: They gets a new-born lamb, and with a
camel-hair brush they puts a drop o’ rum on his
tongue, and if he’ll fight a bulldog the rum is fight-
in’ strength.”
Doctor: “Did he take the medicine I prescribed
for him religiously?”
Nurse: “No, Doctor, he cursed and swore every
time.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


A Fritz spy, captured in the lines, and sentenced
to be shot, was being escorted by a Digger through
three miles of Flanders mud to have the sentence
carried out. Fritz (very fed-up) complained thus-
ly: “Vot for take me through mud to be shodt? Vy
nodt shoodt me and be with it done?”
Digger (also very fed-up): “You’ve got a lot
to complain of—you have. I’ve got to walk back
through it!”
A massive Digger was doing his best to have a.
wash, out of a two-by-three pannikin. General Bird-
wood happened to pass.
'‘That’s right, my man,” said the General,
“having a good wash?”
“Yes, sir,” said the Digger, “only I wish I was
a blinkin’ canary.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


A Digger who had for years been afflicted with
a deformed big toe, haying had a slight flesh-wound
on the same foot, set out to work to get back to
Australia.. One of the “quacks” happened to observe
that though he was an apparently helpless cripple
in daytime, he abandoned his crutches when retreat
sounded, and repaired to the adjoining town. Next
day the doctor had him up, and after much ques-
tioning was assured by the Digger that the toe had
no feeling in it. “What a pity,” said the doctor —
“Sergeant, get me my instrument-case, please. I
am sure,” he said, sympathetically to the Digger,
now showing signs of nervousness, “that you don’t
want to be burdened with that useless toe all your
life. I can remove it without the slightest pain.”
The Sergeant’s delay with the instrument-case was
part of the trap to catch the unsuspecting “lead-
swinger,” and after a while the doctor, having en-
joyed his patient’s plight, left the room in quest of
the Sergeant, His injunctions to the Digger to
“wait a minute” were, of course, not obeyed—as
soon as he had turned his back, the candidate for
a trip to Australia was off like a shot, forgetting in
his haste to take his crutches.
Officer (watching Digger shaving in a trench) :
“Get on with your shave —don’t let me interrupt.”
Digger: “All right, sir, but would you mind
standing out of my shaving-water?”
DIGGtRETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


Flies were awful pests to our chaps in Egypt,
but the “Gyppo” natives seemed to treat them more
like pets, and allowed them to crawl over their faces
unmolested.
A Digger stood watching a regiment of flies
camping on the optics of an Arab.
“Strewth!” he remarked. “Them flies must
’ave got a shock when we first chased ’em off!”
R.S.M.: “What silly cuckoo told y’ to dump*
that luggage right in front of H.Q.?”
Digger: “The Colonel.”
R.S.M.: “Well, see y’ leave it there—an’ be a
bit more careful, young feller, how y’ get callin’
the C.O. names.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


“Digger settled back on his pillow to answer the
numerous questions of his lady visitor, then winked
at his mate in the next bed. “Did I ever kill any
Germans?” he said as he twisted his face into a sar-
castic knot. “Say, Bill! D’yer ’member that day
when you and me was chargin’ the ’Uns and yer
said, ‘Shake yer bayonet, Jack,’ and the seven Ger-
mans fell off of it? Did I ever kill a German!
Strike me ” but the visitor had fled.
Red Tab.: “What service have you had,
Smith?”
Private Smith: “35,040 hours, sir.”
R.T.: “I want years, man.”
Smith: “I counted the hours mostly, sir.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


Pat and Mick were in the trench gazing up at
an aeroplane with shrapnel and other varieties of
ironmongery bursting round it. Presently Pat re-
marked: “Shure, I wouldn’t like to be up in the
air wid that thing.” “Well,” replied Mick, “I
wouldn’t like to be up there widout it!”
One winter night on the Somme an Australian
fatigue party was making heavy weather on a trip
with supplies for the front line. At last a Digger
fell into a shell-hole full of slime. Just as he
climbed out and was rubbing the half-frozen slush
out of his eyes a staff patrol arrived on the scene
and asked the fatigue party who they were. The
sodden Digger replied: “I’m U 29, you blighter.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


Medical Officer: “What’s wrong with you, my
lad?”
Digger: “Bad knock, sir. Hit in the stummick
with a dud shell.”
M. 0.: “What! Why, you’re mad, man!”
Digger: “Yessir. Put that down, too.”
“At any rate, there’s one advantage in having
a wooden leg,” said the Digger at Randwick Hospi-
tal.
“And what’s that?” asked the visitor.
“Well, you can keep your socks up with tacks
instead of having to buy suspenders.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


Bill had had a full issue and he wanted to be
sociable with everybody. He negotiated a perilous
crossing of the Strand safely, and fixed on a big
traffic policeman.
“Daysh, constable,” said Bill. “Yoush know
me, doncher?”
“No, I don’t know you, Digger.”
“But yoush musht know me.”
“No, I don’t.”
“I tell yer yoush musht know me.”
Once again the John Hop denied Bill’s acquain-
tance.
“Thash all rot, ’cos yoush do knowsh me. Tell
yer ’oo I am, conshtable. I’msh (hie) end of a per-
feck day.”
Sergeant-Major (sarcastically to little Jones,
who is continually out of step): “Company! Halt!
except Private Jones, change step! I really ain’t
got the ’eart to trouble ’im agin!”
DICGERETTES.


bIGGERETTES.


Yank: “Of course we won the war!”
Digger: “Maybe. But who did the blanky
fighting ? ’ ’
Barber: “Razor all right, Digger?”
Digger (from the trenches) : “Why, blime, if
you hadn’t mentioned it I should never have known
there was a razor on my face.”
Barber (beaming) : “Thanks, old chap.”
Diggei '• No, 1 thought you were bayoneting
the whiskers off.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


A company commander was awaiting an inspec-
tion by a rather fussy General. He was troubled
over one of his men, who was very drunk. The only
way to get rid of him was to put him on a stretcher
covered by a blanket. As he was being carried to
the rear they unexpectedly met the General.
“Dear, dear!” said the General, “What’s this?
A casualty, eh?”
Dead, sir! said one of the stretcher-bearers.
The General drew himself up to his full height,'“l
salute the honoured dead!”
Then the blanket was violently thrown back,
and a voice, said: ‘‘Say, what’s that blinkin’ old
geezer talkin’ about?”
Padre, addressing troops before going to Blighty
on leave: “My comrades, remember Hell is a fright-
ful place, and it’s filled with drink and loose wo-
men.”
Digger in the ranks: “Oh, Death, where is thy
sting?”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


The ‘ ‘ quack, ’ ’ notoriously ‘ ‘ hard, ’ ’ gave the Dig-
ger a good overhaul. Instinctively, the latter knew
there was no hope for another week in Blighty, but
he failed to see any humour in the doctor’s verdict:
“You’re ‘A3,’ lad. Your battalion got badly cut
up in the last stunt. They want men, so I’m going
to send you back.’’
The Digger slouched to the doorway, halted,
and caught the Quack’s eye. “Well, what’s wrong
now?” asked the M.O.
“Oh, nothing much,” replied the Digger. “Only
at the last C.C.S. that I passed through they were
mighty short of doctors. What about coming back
with me?”
“Yer call this Near Beer.”
“Yus.”
“Well, ther bloke wot made it was a rotten
judge of distance.”
DiGGERETTES.


DIGGEftETTES.


The Digger in hospital spoke often of his flea
farm; it seemed to be an obsession with him. At
length the Sister sent for the doctor to test his men-
tality. “What do you do with this flea farm of
yours?” asked the Quack in a gentle voice. “Oh,
we make beer out of the hops,” was the quick reply.
Just after we had left the lines a Digger was
industriously holding the usual “chat hunt,” when
a pal passing by remarked: “Hello, Bill, picking
’em out?”
Bill: “No, just taking ’em as they come.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


Burly One: “I jes’ bin dealin’ out stouch to a
bloke ’as talked a lot of rot about Billy Hughes.
Wot do YOU think about Billy Hughes?”
Fair Visitor (writing letter for wounded Dig-
ger) : “Anything else you wish to say?”
The Digger (reflectively) ; “No, that’s the lot”
—then added, “P.S.—Please excuse bad writing.”
DIGGERETTES.


DIGGERETTES.


First Digger (at Hughes’ reception) : “Can you
’ear wot ’e’s sayin’?”
Second Digger: “No, but it’s dinkum.”
An officer was standing with a corporal looking
out over the Sinai Desert, where the scenery con-
sists of a straight skyline. Indicating the dreary
stretch of sand, he said: “This country wouldn’t be
much use to us in Australia, Corporal!” “Blime,
wouldn’t it!” replied the Corporal. “They’d cut
it up into farms for Returned Soldiers!”
bIGGfeRETTES.


You enjoy “ Digger ettes"
and perhaps “’’
yowr gratification will not be
complete until you have eaten the
“ Figure-ettes" known as
“The Good Little Normey”
CONFECTIONERY
(Crystallised or chocolated)
Made of Australian sun-raysed Fruits
Spicy —* More=ish Palatable Satisfying
Produced under the Pays of the
Southern Sun.
Manufactured in the SUN-PA YSED
Districts
At ail Confectioners or from
C. J. De GARIS,
Director of Publicity
A.D.F.A.
MILDURA, Vic.


The Paper used in this Book
was supplied by
D. J. Wildey
Paper Merchants
131-135 Clarence St.
and
260-62 Kent Street
Sydney.
We can furnish a grade for
every purpose, and a grade for
every price.
Phone your enquiries
City - - 8937-8938


LET US SHOP FOR YOU
If you cannot come to Sydney
yourself, the next best thing is
having someone here who will take
a personal interest in your wants
—one who will exercise the same
care and judgment in making
your purchases as you would
yourself.
No extra cost whatever to you,
only a little confidence and good-
will are necessary.
Each order, however small,
receives our personal attention.
Send your enquiries for all classes
of goods to
EXPERT MAIL ORDER CO.
318 GEORGE ST. . . . SYDNEY


HIGH - ART • PRINTERS
Artistic Jobbing, Theatrical and Commercial Printing ’
executed promptly at reasonable rates.
Advertising Contractors Bookbinders and Paper
Rulers. ........
WE MAKE A SPECIALITY OF ATTRACTIVE LEAFLETS
AND CIRCULARS
377 SUSSEX STREET, SYDNEY
NEAR GOULBURN ST.
To AUTHORS—
KNOWN AND UNKNOWN.
M.SS read and publication ar-
ranged for by . . .
A.C. SANDFORD
Authors' Agent & Publisher
15 GASTLEREAGH STREET - - SYDNEY
Correspondence invited.
Employers wanting help should ring up the Repatriation
Department. Give preference to Returned Men.


n88888K888S888888888S8»A888S8888888KS!«88S8SSSS»K8S83SSS8S88S8S88SteSSSS88S0888S8S8S888888SKW8m
B
Try
-Me
AINSLIES
ROYAL
EDINBURGH
Ainslies
Choice Old |
SX S.Oki! W'-isK; j|
I-'iw tßm lu t-
l.i ITU s.cotlsr,d L
Whisky
As Supplied to
the Royal Navy
Dewhurst & Halloran Ltd.
Sole Agents
8
fOfg*0«0*0»0*0#0*0f0*0#0»0«o#0«0#0*Q#0#0«0f0tQf0f C •OSQtQ«O
•eoeoe-Deceoeoiosoeoioeoeoioeososoeoeci^eoeoeoeoeosoeoeoeoeoe


FURNITURE
If you require up-to-date
Furniture at factory prices
—inspect my show rooms
BUT First read the testimony of a satisfied
Digger and you all know what that means
Dear Mr. Monleith,
Just a few lines to let you know how surprised
and pleased I am with the value —both as regards price
and quality you have given me in the little home, my
fiancee and 1 selected from your stock. I reckon we
wasted a lot of time inspecting the show rooms of your
competitors in the furnishing line.
Yours truly,
R. J. MOXON,
(late corpl. A.f.F.)
'HE ADDRESS:
Robert Monteith
8 LIVERPOOL ST.
{ 11184


MR. CECIL HARTT.
FOUND DEAD NEAR
MORUYA.
POPULAR AUSTRALIAN ARTIST.
Mr. Cecil Hartt, the popular Australian black
and white artist and caricaturist, was found
dead near Moruya on the South Coast yes-
terday.
Mr. Hartt had been despondent and
happy for some weeks. He said that he “felt
run down,” and that he needed a long holi-
day “somewhere in the country where he could
rest and find inspiration.” He left his home
on Friday to “ramble around the bush,” and
the discovery of his car abandoned on the
Polomera Mountain road, about 3 miles from
Moruya, yesterday, led to a search. His body,
with a wound in the head and a shotgun
lying nearby, was found about 25 yards from
the car. Death had apparently occurred at
least a day previously. An inquest will be
opened at Moruya to-day.
Mr. Hartt was born in Melbourne in 1884.
The art of caricaturing was an natural gift,
but his early efforts to secure publication of
his work were filled with constant disappoint-
ments. At about the time of the commence-
ment of the war his work was beginning to
find favour in Sydney, and many of his draw-
ings were appearing in the Sydney “Bulletin.
He enlisted early in 1915, and embarked with
the original 18th Battalion. At Lone Pi ne
he was wounded twice, and was invalided home
to Australia By some mischance, however,
he was placed aboard a vessel bound for Eng-
land. After being discharged from hospital
he was not considered fit to engage in active
service again, but was attached to the A.l.r.
headquarters staff in London.. He continued
to draw, and his book of Digger sketches,
“Humorosities,” published in London, was ex-
tremely popular. He returned to Australia
in 1918, and later joined the staff of Smith s
Weekly/’
Mr. Hartt leaves a widow and a daughter,
three years of age.
