

With in [?]
For Private Circulation only.
Melanesian Mission.
DIARY
OF
ISLAND VOYAGE,
by
Rev. W.H. Edgell,
A Member of the
Missinary Staff






PARLIAMENT AT HOUGGO.


DIOCESE OF MELANESIA:
NEW HEBRIDES ISLANDS DISTRICT.
DIARY OF ISLAND VOYAGE
IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN.
BY THE
REV. WM. HY. EDGELL.
W. DREWETT & SONS,
Kingston-on-Thames, Eshhk and East Moeesey.
1889.




EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATIONS.
S. C. = “ Southern Cross,” The Bishop’s yacht.
N.H. =“ New Hebrides,” group of islands.
N.I. = Norfolk Island.
July 23rd , Saturday.—l.eft N.I. at 2.30 p.m. after a ven
dangerous shipment of passengers, and after a delay of 9 days
owing to a gale which made boating impossible. Passengers :
Rev. T. C. Cullwick, for Banks Islands, and Rev. W. H. Edgell,
or New Hebrides. 48 boys, 10 girls, 8 children —66, of which
6 were invalids, and 3 babies in arms. The N.H. contingent
consisted of Walter Gao, and his wife Rebeka Tebigi; Amy Huge
and her two children, Fanny and Christine; Jos. Tarikalo, Silas
Sipan and Ason, of Maewo, and Lewis Tarimena and Benj.
larilena, of Raga. Gale of wind, S.W., heavy sea, all sick.
July 24th, Sunday.—Gale still blowing, all sick, no services.
July 23th , St. James’ day.—'The same; but towards evening
wind dropped.
July 26th. —Began services in evening. I took both; Cull-
wick very weak.
July 2jili. —Calm, had to steam; usual routine.
July 28th. —Still steaming. Decided to put into Vila for 10
tons of coal, as not enough to bring ship south again if she goes
to New Georgia. Made Island of Sandwich about 7.30 p.m., first
land seen since N.L, and finally got into Vila harbour, and
dropped anchor in 17 fathoms at 11 p.m.; wrote to Home
people.
July 2gih. —Went ashore to order coal at 7 a.m., and returned
for breakfast. Harbour pretty, with high hills in distance; very
few houses, but a good store kept by agent of Australasian N.H.
Co., Mr. Tanner, and his assistant, Mr. Denvers. After break-
fast, took a boat load of boys, and with C., went to call on Mr.
Mackenzie of the Presbyterian Mission on Vila Island, off which
we lay. Stayed about one-and-a-half hours, and talked on
various subjects in connection with the two missions. He and
his wife nice pleasant people, have a fair house, and the native
village is clean and very well kept as a whole. Among other
things, Air. M. told me of Roman Mission on Raga, and where it
is situated. We had tea, and on leaving were given a bottle of


goat’s milk to take on board. Returned to ship, and took off Capt.
Huggett and a fresh load of boys, and pulled in to Vila, where
Mr. Tanner received us, and took us up to his house on the Coral
cliff above the store to show us his cricket ground; the ship
working coal from a lighter. At the house found Mr. Gled*
stanes, of Auckland, N.Z., the trader who was wrecked last year
at Torres, and whom I met on the “ Tauranga,” at Ora in June
last, to which ship he had been transferred from S. C. The
cricket ground is not much to look at, but is new and promises
soon to be pretty fair. It is in the middle of a large grove of
cocoanut palms, and any ordinary big hitter would get the ball
entangled in a palm tree every time. I find that the “ Mildura ”
is the ship on this station now, vice “ Tauranga.” I don’t think
I know any of her people. After inspecting the cricket ground
we went and sat on the verandah of Tanner’s house, and had a
smoke and a glass of Lager beer, and very good it was. Heard
of the murder of two whites at Santa Cruz. About 12.30 p.m.
went down to the store and posted letters, and I also bought a
box of cigars (Manilla) at 6s. per 100, pretty cheap considering
the state of affairs, I smoked one of the same brand before and
liked it I also bought a bottle of iodoform for 2s. 6d. (about
two thimblesfull, it is very expensive) and a bottle of laudanum,
which I had not got among my medicines, but which is im-
portant. Returned on board about 1.30, and got away by soon
after 2 p.m. A light breeze from S.E. favouring us, and the sea
being quite calm. I should not care to live long at Vila, I think,
as the place is very quiet and the people mostly French, and
generally at loggerheads with the English element, though at
present they are pretty peaceful. Passed Hat Island at tea
time, and just before that a labor cutter with probably some of
my parishioners on board her, she dipped her rag to us, which
we returned. Of course she was French. Hat Island is in
shape like a large straw hat with a high crown. Ran inro a
7-knot breeze, no sea.
July joih ., 6 a.m. off Dip Point, Ambrym.—After breakfast
made up Tom Korsal’s pay, and held a wolwol (sale) of tobacco
for the boys. About 10 a.m., off S. end of Raga, took boat in
with Cullwick, the ship standing on and off for us. Not much
sea on, so managed to get inside the reef easily and pulled up
to landing place (sandy beach) in front of the French R.C.
Mission Station. Nobody there, so left our names. Met by T.
K., gave him his things and went up to village, which is on the
shore in a fairly good position. The place is neat and clean,
and apparently well kept. The school seems fairly well at-
tended, and so far none have gone over to the R. C.’s. Tom,


who lived some years in Sydney, speaks very good English, which
is the more surprising as he seldom sees a white man. Stayed,
perhaps, an hour ashore. There are four boys willing to go to
N. 1., shall see about it when Igo back there. Went out to ship
by E. passage through reef. Afternoon, employed in selling
tobacco to ship’s company, and in making up pay of Raga
teachers. Anchored off Lamatana at 6 p.rn. for the night and
Sunday. After supper took a ship’s boat ashore and brought
off Tom Ulgan, Michael Tuni, Simon Moltar and J. Pantutun.
J. Man reported sick. Landed Tarimena and Tarilena at
Lamatana. My boat also came off in charge of Johnson
with several people aboard. Tom’s report is better than
I had hoped in some ways. The epidemic of dysentery
has stopped; and the threatened war has subsided a
gieat deal. The ringleader of the malcontents has had
his throat cut by a bullet, and, of course, his brother
is keeping up the strife, but no one else has been killed, and the
heathen now attacking are very few. Several teachers, however,
have died. Peter Viralilui was killed by the heathen, as I knew
already; Silas, of Pelagolaga, died of dysentery, as also did
Daniel, of Lamatana. Tom tells me also that Edwin Rono, of
Sanogaban, Maewo, had died of manigas on his legs, and his
place has been taken by Nicholas Tioni, pro tern. I had also
heard already of the death of Paul, second teacher at Tasmate
(Maewo). So that lam shorter than ever of teachers. On the
whole, however, the report for Raga is good, and I shall be able
to go on to Maewo and work the round twice in the same order
as I did last year. Wrote part of a letter to “D. N.” Took
Mota evensong, and tried three new chants, which the boys
picked up fairly well on the whole. Skipper got up two bottles
of Lager, and we had “ Sweethearts and Wives ” in the proper
style.
July 31st, Sunday.—Celebration on board S. C. at 7 a.m.,
about 20 present. After breakfast, went ashore, and up to
Pelagalaga for Matins, and preached. Advised them to defend
themselves, but not to attack. The war seems to have been
greatly exaggerated, the schools being all round the affected area
instead of the reverse, and the malcontents numbering less than
20 men. But in the smallness of their number lies the danger,
as they are harder to trace. There was plenty of proof that
the people are nervous about it, all young men were carrying
guns, and the old ones axes and clubs, even the children had
bows and arrows. There was a good congregation, perhaps 80
people. Jno. Pantutun took singing school first, and consider-
ing there is no harmonium they did very well. School followed
choir practice. There were four classes, the Baptism class num


bering 28. I heard them their Creed and Lord’s Prayer, which
were perfectly known, and they are also learning their
Catechism. Saw Jno. Mow, who is flourishing. Re-
turned on board about 1 p.m. Visitors coming and
going all day. Arranged with Tom that Leaka and her
children go to Mota now in the ship, and he follows to bring
them back next voyage. Preached to the crew in evening.
August Ist. —Got through a hard day’s work. I went ashore
at Lamatana and paid all the teachers in that district, while C.
went with a ship’s boat to Pelagalaga. We then up anchor and
ran down to Qellinga, and paid teachers there, and for the Uta
district (Lolvame) and Lonagobul. Then went across to S. end
of Maewo, but owing to heavy sea could not go ashore at Tanoge-
ban, so went round into the bay, where we paid Nicholas and
Stanley. A poor report, no life apparently. Stanley is faint-
hearted and wishes to go back to the N. end, but Nicholas
wishes still to stop and work up the school. I refused S. a
passage partly because he had to be carried down from the
vanua, being lame, and partly because we were in a hurry. I
also wish to see him at the place before he goes away. We next
made over to Opa, but there was too much sea to go ashore at
Lanana, therefore went round to Tavalavola and paid all tea-
chers for that and Lanana districts, the mate and I having made
up the parcels on the way over. Took Amy ashore, but Arthur
Huge being still at Walurigi we went on there and landed her.
A. was fairly well, and gave me a good report, though he had
heard nothing of Lanana affairs for some time. Things are
much as usual at Tavalavola, but all fighting is over now. Made
over to Maewo, and dropped anchor about 7.15 off watering
place. Up to 12 midnight, I was tearing up cloth for teachers.
August 2nd. —Boats began watering ship at 5 o’clock; but
C. and I made up pay. After breakfast I went with a boat’s
crew to pay teachers at Tasmate and Uta districts. Picked up
Arthur Amton and wife half way, and saw Samuel Eva for a few
minutes. Fairly good report; but David at Uta is lazy and does
not school (as also Oliver at Taurig). Paid teachers at Tasmate,
and had lunch there, Arthur’s report as usual somewhat pessi-
mistic. My boat’s crew about the worst I ever had. A hard
pull back against strong wind and tide, also heavy rain squalls
that wetted us through. But got back to ship about 2.30.
Found ship full of people, so got my gear off in boat
(plenty of it), and then paid teachers on board, and got
away from ship about 3-30. Got gear slung and started
about 4.30 for Taurig. Another hard day’s work,
and left me tired out. Had short evensong (no sermon)
and then Harry Aregi and Simon Duni dined with me


and gave me their report. Fairly good, but no catechumens, 5
in prospect, who will school while lam away. Very tired, so
turned in early.
August 3rd —Litany as usual, but no school, so as to allow
of people sorting their gear and getting houses to rights. After
breakfast paid my bearers. Settled that Walter Gao and wife
start for Uta to-morrow, Kate still to be head woman teacher.
There was a question of her being jealous of Rebeka, but latter
is not competent and does not deserve to take a senior place.
Wrote up diary and went to bathe afterwards. Preached at even-
song, and turned in early.
August 4th. —Heavy rain during the night and continued all
the morning; usual routine, went round the various classes in
school. Made up teachers list for next year. Got statistics for
Taurig and Udina from Harry and Simon Duni. Had a long talk
with latter about a boat’s crew. Rain cleared off about 2 p.m.,
but I did not go anywhere as it was very threatening, and all
the place was under water. Bought five women’s dresses (Tau-
rig district), thin strips of plaited grass, and two from the hill
district S. of Taurig (like very small mats), both types worn be-
fore Christianity came to the Island. Also bought a mat used
by women in dancing, thrown over the shoulder (left as a rule).
August sth. —Walked over to Uduna for Church and School.
There are 24 all told on the school register out of a population
of 29; the balance consisting of two babies, and three old
people who are past schooling. The school is very backward;
only two men besides the teachers reading from a book. Judg-
ing from the register and teacher’s report, however, the work
goes on steadily. Two men have come down from a heathen
district in the hills and are attending school regularly now.
Returned to Taurig for breakfast, having first looked at the
new site for the school house at Uduna, the present one being
outside the village, which has moved nearer Taurig. Rebeka
Sebigi is giving immense trouble, which has neces-
sitated the putting off of Walter’s departure for Uta until Tues-
day next. She has proved herself utterly unfit to teach so far.
About a dozen Uta men came over to help Walter with his
things, but only took one box back with them. A
beautiful day, so went for a walk with my gun, but saw
nothing worth shooting. The boys caught some crayfish, which
I had for supper, and which are very good eating.
August 6th. —Another glorious day. About 9.30 a lot of us
started off for the boat house, using the “ kerepei” road, as the
waterfall is rather dangerous yet. I gave the teachers leave to
haul out the boat and go fishing, while four small boys and I


stayed ashore and hunted birds, bathed, and otherwise amused
ourselves. I shot vilely. Six shots and only one bird to show
for it, a kind of brown dove with a long tail. Got back about 4
p.m., very tired, having walked a long way by new paths, some
overgrown, and some through water.
August yth , Sunday—Heavy rain during the night, but turned
out another good day. After the usual choir practice and
school, had Matins, at which I read the lessons and Harry was
reader, wearing a surplice, I believe for the first time in the Is-
lands. After the second lesson I baptised four infants, all boys,
and all very good during the service. The font was very prettily
decorated with flowers and pandanus leaves. I adopted what I
intend to be always my rule here, namely, the wearing at first
of a violet stole, and before consecration of the water changing
to a white one. We had a hymn after the second lesson, during
which I and the sponsors formed a little procession down the
church. During the afternoon some heathen came down from
the hills with an unintelligible letter for Harry. A small boy
from Uduna fell from an orange tree, and got a very nasty gash
in his calf which bled a lot at first, but at last was stopped by
cold water washing. I dressed and bandaged it as well as I
could with the materials I had at hand, but I fear it will be some
time healing. I preached in the evening on baptism of infants,
and explained the changing of stoles. Harry dined with me in
the evening after church. It seems that Rebeka is turning out
utterly bad, and is being aided by her father. Walter is to
start alone for Uta to-morrow.
August Bth. —After breakfast, went over to Naruru with stuff
to last a week, as I shall not be back in Taurig for that time, as
far as I know. They have rigged up a bed for me in the school
house next the church.
About 2.20 p.m., as I was standing talking to Patrick Tete,
while he was chopping firewood near his house, I experienced
my first earthquake. It only lasted a second, and began with a
low rumbling like distant thunder, and immediately after came
the “ shock,” the houses and ground in the vanna seemed to
heave like a lot of logs going over a groundswell, and the trees
shook, though there was no wind. I saw the things rising and
falling distinctly as the “wave” came towards me, then Imy
self seemed to rise and fall again, though when it reached me
there was a slight trembling sensation, just as when the bow of
a ship strikes the crest of a wave before she is quite ready for it.
I came straight in and wrote the above account so that time
should not make me exaggerate my impressions. P. says they
are common here. After evensong (read by Anthony, second


teacher), I took the four adult catechumens for about 20
minutes on the meaning of Holy Baptism, Patrick interpreting
for me. They were attentive, and seemed to grasp something
of what I said. They seem to be in real earnest about it. When
they and the two infants are Baptised, the whole population of
Naruru will be Christian, i.e., 34 souls. I wish each village was
like that!
August gth. —Usual routine in early morning. I inspected
the school, which was well attended, only two being absent out
of the whole lot The register also shows a fairiy regular
attendance. There are one or two bright spirits in the school,
but on the whole they are like the general run of school people
on this Island, not very bright, but plodding. Patrick Tete
evidently takes a, pride in his work, and is, I think, looked up to
by his people. His assistants seem to second his efforts well
About 11 a.m. I baptised the two infants. I had to choose
their names, so called one after Margie and the other I gave a
name that no one yet had here, by request (Ethel). A Taurig
contingent came over to assist at the later ceremony; which I
performed at 1.15. The Church was very full, and the services
so far have all been reverent, though I wish there was more
response among the younger part of the congregation. The
afternoon was given up to a big feast in honour of the newly
baptised. Baptismal fees, by the way, seem to be the rule here,
as yesterday I was presented with a chicken for baptising a
child on Sunday at Taurig. In the afternoon I went out with
my gun, but had no lurk until I got near the vanua again, when
I got two of the same kind of birds I shot at Taurig. W. Gao
turned up to-day when I thought he was at Uta. That brute
of a wife of his has made a terrible difference in him ; he is now
morose and blunt to a degree, and never the more or less com-
panionable man he was before. lam now very doubtful if he
will do any good at all at Uta, when before he was just the man
for the place. He is going with me to-morrow, however, so I
shall give him a year’s trial. I preached at evensong, bringing
a stiffish day’s work to an end, and Patrick had supper with me
afterwards.
August 10th. —Usual routine. After breakfast, started to
walk to Uta, about five miles, a fairly decent road, and with
glimpses of the sea now and then through the bush. Arrived
about 10.30 a.m. Had a long talk with Tom Aruloli, who in
a measure confirmed the previous reports I had heard. Many
children, and perhaps a dozen adults, still unbaptised. The
children we arranged should be schooled during the time I am
away now, and I will, D.V., baptise them when I come back in
October. Tom wishes his wife and the new-born child to go


to N. I. for the summer. I see no objection to that, especi-
ally as Tom is to try to get a home for them in Raga. During
the afternoon a large canoe that had been dug out in the bush
was dragged through the village with much shouting on its
way to the beach to be completed. Tom and W. Gao dined
with me, and we then sat outside and talked. The church is
badly in need of a new roof, and services are held pro tern, in
the school.
August nth. —Slept in school house. After Matins I in-
spected school. I found a much higher standard than I had
been led to expect, and the two upper classes (men and women),
read really well. Among the latter was Kate’s eldest child, not
more than nine at most, and nearly the best reader there. The
lower classes are not so well on, apparently, but that is the
fault of the teachers, they being on certain days a couple of
N. I. boys, who were returned as fools. Went out with half-
dozen boys with gun, and shot a flying fox, returned and had
a bathe. Preached at evensong, and urged re-roofing of
Church to be finished, before I return. Arranged for school
ing of small boys during my absence, and they are to be baptised
when I return.
August 12th. —Started for Isakuru, rain threatening all the
time. Arrived just in time, for it started off to rain hard and
kept if up all day. The sky was a dull gray, and looked as if it
was overcharged with water that would f ike some days to
empty; but it has been lovely ever since Sunday, so one must
not complain. Only I do want to leave Maewo next week if
possible.
The teachers from Taurig, Uduna, Uta and Naruru met here
to-day for school, so I preached to them in the morning. The
rest of the day was got through somehow. The village is in a
new place (Sinoa), having been moved 200 yards further south.
The bush is hardly cleared away yet, and stumps of trees are
scattered all over the open space. I’m afraid I can’t get to
Tasmate to-morrow if it is like this. Samuel Goa, and Samuel
Tanai dined with me.
August 13th. — A blustering stormy night, and a horribly wet
day, with no apparent chance of its stopping raining for several
weeks. At 9 o’clock I baptised three children, one about four
years old, the others small. The rain did lift before noon after
all, so we went down to the shore and waited till evening for the
boat; but she never turned up, so we had to go back again.
August 14th , Sunday.—l had an opportunity of hearing the
people at school, some of them read very well and seemed to
pay good attention to what they were taught. Sam Goa is so


bright and happy-looking and keen about it all that he inspires
respect and attention. I preached at Matins. Soon after we
again went down to the shore, where I found the boat waiting
for me. I had sent Harper Vira in the early morning to hurry
them up. We pulled down to Tasmate because there was no
wind. I took the boat round the point and up the Creek. The
entrance is very narrow, only just wide enough for the boat
itself, and as I did not know the place, it would have been risky
had it been rough, a nasty reef running almost across what
looks like a good wide entrance. I found things much as usual,
and in the evening preached, warning the people against slack-
ness in attending school and church. Arthur Arutan dined
with me in the evening.
August 15th. —Another busy day with, I hope, some good
work done. At Matins I baptised two infants, who followed
the rule at Tasmate and cried lustily. After breakfast, started
to walk to Tasmouri, and took my gun. I had three shots, and
Simon Duni one; but we both made a mess of it. It is a good
walk, about five miles each way; but the road is pretty, and well
shaded and there are no hills. I had a long talk with Caleb
Sinalau, the head teacher, who gave me his report. The
people, like their neighbours at Tasmate, want waking up, as
they are getting slack at going to church, though the school
register shows a good attendance. It is a small, but scattered
village, and the school and church are fairly well kept, though
the latter wants a new altar frontal badly. My house is all to
pieces, and at present affords shade and shelter to sundry pigs;
but it is to be repaired, and put in order for me against my re-
turn from Opa, when I hope to put in a day or two there. I
had to get back to Tasmate that night so as to allow of my leav-
ing for Taurig in the morning, so I could not stay for a service or
inspect the school. I walked down to the sea, and saw Mere-
lava in the distance. Although on the weather side of the
Island there was not much sea on, though the surf was getting
up. The vanua is quite close to the sea, like Tasmate. I
lunched with Caleb in his house. He told me that there was
some quarrel in re a saucepan, between Timothy Timiala and
Simon Barat; and on leaving, which we did soon after lunch, I
went on ahead with Timothy, who is second teacher at present,
and sifted the matter. He acknowledged that he was in the wrong
and promised to make it up with Simon that night. I thought
I might strike two birds with one stone, so I also asked him the
truth about his leaving Lobugoro, and coming back North. He
told me that the chief was away when he first went, and that the
people mostly were, and still are, keen for a school. But when
the chief came back he was not keen at all, and when Timothy


called on the people to help him with the school house, and they
were willing to come, the chief invented some excuse to get
them off, sending them away to other villages on errands, or
down the coast taking presents of food elsewhere. The food
also that was given him did not suit his wife and child, and so
after eight months he returned to Tasmouri in one of the
Lobugoro canoes, and that was all. Then, much to my surprise,
he volunteered to go again alone, leaving his family behind,
and try again for a school. After some talk, and probing him
a bit, 1 accepted his offer, and we agreed that he is to go up
there in our ship’s last voyage, and try to make a home for his
family, and start the school during the summer; if he succeeds
the ship is to take his wife and son to him on her return
from first voyage; but if he sees that he and they cannot live
in the place, after giving it a fair trial, he is to be allowed to
return to Tasmouri. This he promised me, and if he still
wishes it, I may take him in my boat when I go South again.
Returned to Tasmate for evensong.
August 16th. —The wind got up pretty strong during the
night, and I went and got the boat round from the creek to the
shore as the tide was ebbing fast, and there was a surf on. Wt
got out all right, but took a long time getting round. I took
Matins at Maewo for the first time, as Arthur was rather seedy.
While I was breakfasting, there was an alarm that the boat
which we had anchored off was on the rocks. Luckily she was
only lightly touching one with the stem, and a kid was sta-
tioned to keep her off. We got away as soon as possible, and
had a long stiff pull back to the kerei pei, landing passengers
for Sinoa on the way. Rounding the last point we had a very
nasty time of it, owing to the strong wind. Got back to Taurig
about 4 p.m. If it is as windy and threatening as it is now, I
shall not be able to start to-morrow, I’m afraid. One of my
boat’s crew, Patrick, has a swollen hand, which is a great nuis-
ance, as he is a strong man.
August lyth. —Got away about midday; but was late start-
ing, owing to the wind being rather strong. Boat’s crew as
follows: Patrick Tete, of Naruru (teacher), Jacob Takelai, of
Naruru (teacher), Philip Sike, of Ufa, Simon Barat, of Tas-
mouria, and Sargav, of Uduna. Wind not so bad as I expected;
but got up late in afternoon, so went ashore and camped out,
under the lee of a rock. Stones, though round, are not nice to
sleep on, so I did not sleep much, but spent most of the night
fishing round under my blankets for obtrusive stones, and by
morning I had a young mountain of them near me. There
being no trees to hang my mosquito net on, I made the most of


my deck chair, and made a very decent tent out of it, with the
net over it. My feet were about two feet above high water
mark.
August 18th. —Away by dawn, but a southerly wind got up
pretty strong, and the land did not help us much. Called in at
Lobugoro about i p.m., and had a talk with Aruligo’s father, a
nice old chap, but rather tottery now. I told the old chief,
Viragoro, that Timothy would return, and that the school house
which I went and saw, must be finished properly. I don’t antici-
pate any further trouble with him, if only Timothy tries hard
with him. The people seemed glad to hear he was coming
back. I gave the old chief a little capstan tobacco, and a tin,
and he was much pleased with them. I think he is the first
absolutely bald Melanesian I have seen. We took two men on
to Qatungaviga with us, making them work their passage.
Arrived at the landing place about 4.30, and went up a stiff
climb to the village. Stanley, who still has a maniga, gave me
his report, which is, that the people are well enough in dis-
position, but only a few are keen about school. There are in
my opinion, not enough people to justify two teachers staying
here, especially as one of the men here, Tariton, is capable of
teaching elementary classes if he is wanted. Stanley will, there-
fore, return and take up a school at Venai, near Uta, whose
people at present go to the latter place, but do not go regularly,
being three-quarters of a mile off, and they have as yet no school
house of their own. Simon Barat’s right arm is swollen very
much, as a result of the stiff pulling to-day.
August igth —After Matins (in Raga language), I inspected
the school, and found it far more advanced than I expected, the
first class, with only three exceptions, being able to read fairly
well, apparently. The other classes were only elementary, but
seemed getting on slowly, and all appeared inteiested, though
hardly keen. There are several people to be baptised when I
come back again, but of course one must be careful here, one
man I have had to refuse until he puts away his second wife.
I want to get over to Raga to-morrow if possible; but at pre-
sent it does not look cheerful; the wind being high, and plenty
of rain about. I preached in the evening, urging better attend-
ance at church and school.
August 20th. —The rain cleared off, and wind went down,
allowing of my getting away about 10 a.m. I first had an inter-
view with Tariton, who promised to put away his second wife at
once. We pulled round the S. point, and called in at the land-
ing place below Tanogaban, where the boat’s crew had a bathe.
The cork was found to be rotten, and water got into the boat


through it, so I replaced it with the cork of one of my lemon
syrup bottles. We pulled on to the same place, as last year,
and then up sail, and went across. There was very little wind,
and we had no jib, as the boat’s crew fooled the reeving of the
halyards, and did not see it till the mast was stepped. The
main halyards also were rotten, and carried away at first attempt
to haul up, so I knotted them and re-rove them. Progress was
slow, but we made no leeway to speak of, as the tide was running
against the wind, so that we brought up rather to the E. of the
landing place, and pulled down to it. Tom met us, and gave
me his report. The strife still goes on, but by no means briskly,
and there has been no encounter since I was here. Tom recom-
mends the suspension of two teachers for idleness, one of them
is Matthias Tarileo, of Aniaru, who was only put temporarily in
charge, as his course is not finished at N.I. lam much dis-
appointed in him. Another teacher, Qaimas, of Lorragopul, is
dead, of dysentery. There are 130 people waiting for me to
baptise them at the different villages, 30 of them here, at Pelaga
laga. John Pantutun is reading prayers now. Tom dined with
me, and we carried on the talk about the affairs here.
August 21 st, Sunday —A wretched stormy night, and high
wind; lam very glad I came over yesterday, instead of waiting
till Monday. Usual routine, and I went round the classes. I
preached at Evensong.
August 22nd. —Routine. I went to Aqelhuqa during the day
to get some food, and look over old stores. I have a great deal
more than I thought. There was not a soul in the place, so f
felt rather like a burglar, though all the things I took were my
own. Called in at Lamatana for boxes, etc., on the way back
a strong wind, and just outside the reef, off Averiana, the sheet
carried away; in fact all the running gear is rotten. After Even-
song I schooled the catechumens for half an hour on the first
and second questions of the baptismal service. John Pantutun
dined with me in the evening. Much to my surprise, he speaks
English very well.
August 23rd. —No school this morning, hands being em-
ployed in decorating the church for baptism. At 10.45
baptised five infants, and all but one were very good, though
awake. The day was spent in killing pigs, etc., and bringing in
food for the big feast to-morrow, after the baptismal service.
Very tired, so turned in early. A shooting party bagged nine
flying foxes, and three pigeons in one hour. I only had one
shot, and got my bird. Schooled the catechumens again.
August 24th, St. Bartholomew’s Day. —Again no school. All
the morning was spent in preparing the food, scraping yams, and


making the ovens. At 12.45 I baptised 34 people : viz., 17 men,
four boys, 13 women. Two of the men were quite old; one of
them being the chief of Lamouru, where all the disturbance origi-
nated. He is a dear old fellow, and old enough to be my grand-
father. We had a little excitement this afternoon. About half
an hour after the service was over, and when they were dividing
up the cooked food, a shot was heard, on a small rise near a
house, just outside the vanua. Everyone seized his gun, and
rushed out, and a few minutes later three more shots were fired,
and the report went round that the enemy were attacking in
force. I told the people to go out and drive them off, but some
to stay and protect the vanua, with the women and children.
But it was a false alarm after all. A small child got fooling
with a rifle, and Jet it off in the house before mentioned. Then
two parties of men left the village in pursuit of the supposed
enemy by different paths, and catching sight of each other
through the bush fired on each other, but no one was hit, and
then they discovered their mistake, and the real cause of the
disturbance, and came back again. Everyone was talking at
once, and the women and children yelling, and making an awful
row. One old fellow whom I had just baptised, had a narrow
escape. He was sitting on the ground near my house, and a
stray bullet pased under his legs, and lodged in the ground
beyond him, someone had fired without thinking where his
bullet would go to. When the real cause came out, the excite-
ment soon cooled down, but it was near being another “ Bla 'k
Bartholomew ” for one at least, of those here. There were close
upon 200 in the village to-day, and the church was crowded,
many having to stay outside. I wanted to preach in the evening,
but was dog-tired, as was everyone else here, so I did not do so.
Baptismal fee paid as before.
August 25th. —Big preparations again all the morning for the
two weddings which I performed at noon (my first). I had to
supply the rings. Fancy a parson doing that at home, at St.
Paul’s, Knightsbridge, for instance, or St. George’s, Hanover
Square. It would cost him a small fortune in about three
months. My rings, however, are only brass, and cost about 2s.
6d. a dozen. There was one amusing incident during the cere-
mony, that very nearly made me laugh outright at first, as I was
quite unprepared for it. Of course, the service was in Mota, as
it is not yet translated into Raga, but it might almost have been
read in English, as far as the parties were concerned, because
none of them knew Mota. In the marriage vow, at the words
‘ Na te tape ko ” (I will love thee), each of the four said, “ Na te
tobacco,” which was not a little disconcerting, at first; tobacco
being current coin, and much valued. It struck me as being as
good as “with all my hurdle goods, I thee and thou,” at any rate


it meant about as much. As I did not know enough Raga to ex-
plain the situation, and was too taken aback to argue it out
through an interpreter, I had to accept it. In the evening I
pulled round to Lamatana.
August 26th. —I schooled the baptismal candidates from La-
matana and Averiana, in the morning and evening. About 10, I
went up to Qatvenua and baptised seven infants. Strolled about
the vanua, and talked to different people. Took two photos of
my Lamatana house.
August 27th. —Usual preparations, and fee presented; at noon
I baptised nine adults. A large congregation, and the service
was very bright, and went off smoothly, Tom acting as before,
master of ceremonies, presenting candidates to me, and making
all arrangements. The church was too small to hold all the
people, so we had to put logs down outside, where, luckily, there
was room enough for the overflow. I took a photo of some of
those present; but have not yet developed any. lam much
afraid the plates are damp, and they are certainly old. At high
water, about 2 p.m., I got away, and pulled round to Aqelhuqa.
1 found my new house nearly finished, and as far as the bed-
room went, quite so, so I took up my residence therein. Basil
Tarivagalima dined with me in the evening. Heard that during
baptism service at Palagalaga, the enemy had destroyed the
garden of yams of one of the catechumens. People asked leave
to retaliate, and thinking it best to bring the disturbance to an
end as soon as possible, I gave leave, and told them to finish it
up.
August 28th, Sunday.—Usual morning routine. It has turned
quite cold, with a strong wind which, however, kept off the rain.
I went round the classes in school, and read the lessons at
iMatins. Preached at Evensong on the Gospel for the day. Have
got a nasty cold, and voice very husky; and felt altogether
rather aguish, so took a hot whisky and water, to try to bring on
a perspiration, and get it out of me.
August 2gth. —The toddy was successful. In the morning I
had a catechumen’s class during school time. Basil took the
boat to Palagalaga, and on return everyone began preparing for
to-morrow’s feast. I went to Solurage during the day, and got
school statistics. In the evening the women did not turn up, so
I put the class off till to-morrow. I developed photos at night,
using Eikonogen developer for first time, it seems very rapid.
There was a very slight shock of earthquake during the evening.
Tarisiri, the teacher at Gimori, turned up during the day.
August 30th. —Held my class after Matins, and at 11.45 t> a P’
tised 15 people (three babies). I had asked Basil if there were


any babies, and he said “ No,’’ but at the last moment I dis*
covered that three of the six children were in arms still, and blew
him up pretty strongly about it. The whole thing was very
badly managed by him. He put the candidates right up at the
east end of the church, so that I had to go and fetch them back.
I had a talk with Charles Garu, in which it transpired that the
charge against Arthur Sawi, of Lanana is at least partly proved,
inasmuch as nine of the chiefs baptised by the Bishop last
year, are now living with two wives each, or more, and Sawi
knows it, and apparently has taken no pains to correct the abuse.
I am uncertain yet, whether the men put away their wives before
baptism or not, and then took them back again; but it is bad
enough as it is. It is also true that some church money, which
Sawi had in his keeping, is not forthcoming, and he is supposed
to have embezzled it. Charles gave me a letter from him, the
tone of which I do not like; he seems to dread my going to
Tavalavola, before seeing him, so that I think he wants to get
in a first word about something. He also wishes me to buy him
50 yams, but as it is very doubtful whether I shall allow him
to teach, I certainly shall not do so, especially as he is always
begging. Jack’s photo excites universal respect and admiration,
as it did in Maewo; they all like English naval men.
August 31st. —A party of men from Qatunmaqe and Lobscuna
came down to act at bearers, and having loaded them up I got
from Qelhuqa about 9.30 a.m. There was a report that the dis-
turbers of the peace were going to waylay Tom and shoot him
on the road, so we all kept close together, and about 20 men
with rifles, formed an escort, the bearers going on in front and
resting occasionally till we came up with them. It was rather
exciting, because one never quite knew until we arrived safe at
Qatunmaqe where or when a shot would be fired. However,
if they were anywhere about we saw or heard nothing of them.
At the start, we had a stiff climb of about 900 feet, the road
being very rocky, and in places muddy and slippery after the
rain, though it was a lovely day with no wind. After we got
to the top of the hill, however, it was all pretty plain sailing.
Soon after reaching the top, we, and our escort branched off in
a north-easterly direction, and went to Gimari, while the bearers
went on to Qatunmage, and waited for us. We stayed some
little time at Gimari, and I got statistics. The teacher is not
yet baptised, but will be next year. There are no candidates
from there this year. Leaving Gimari, we again branched off
and visited a very small school at Vatparai (population, 15 all
told). From there, we went on to Qatunmage, which is a nice
roomy looking place, with a good sized school house, large
enough to hold all the rather numerous population. Livustabua,
the brother of M. Navul (at N. 1.), who is teaching pro tern., is


sick with an (apparently) incurable disease, but is able still to
get about and teach occasionally. The people, and especially
the children and women, welcomed me heartily. After a short
stay there, we went on, preceded as usual by the bearers, to
Lolvenua, where I am staying until Tuesday, next week, as far
as I know. It is arranged that all the candidates for baptism
(51 of them) in this hinterland district, shall be baptised to-
gether here on Saturday. They include people from Lolvenua,
Qatunmage, and Laqatramute. There is a capital new church
here, built by Rupert Tariturani and his people since Easter,
when he returned from N.L I should not have given him
credit for so much energy, but all hands entered into the work
with zeal worthy of the cause. It has not yet been used, and I
am to open it to-morrow evening, before Evensong. I am un-
certain what a deacon ought to do in such a case, so I have
drawn up a short form of service, not exactly dedicatory, but
naming the Church after St. Andrew, and asking God’s accept-
ance of it, and blessing on it and those who worship in it 1
hope I have not gone beyond my province, but in case I have,
I shall write out the form of service, so that if I am wrong, it
cannot be said I tried to conceal what I did. I have no priest’s
prayer book, so I had to make up a prayer out of my own head,
which I translated as best I could into Mota. The arrange-
ment of seats is like that at St Barnabas, the people facing
each other from opposite sides. The church is roomy, with a
good Sacrarium, but of course no altar at present. While we
were at Evensong, some shots were fired in the direction of Lnqa-
tramute, and when we came out we heard the people shouting.
I asked what it meant, and was told that there was more fight-
ing going on there with the heathen, from a large village further
south. These people, it seems, shot a woman dead for no
reason that I can discover, though there must be one, and ever
since they have gone to Laqatramute almost nightly, on the
chance of killing someone else. Laqatramute people have
killed no one yet. Rupert Tariturani dined with me in the
evening, and told me that the trouble had been going on for a
long time. The woman shot was a candidate for baptism. I
was pretty tired after that walk to-day, distance between 10 and
12 miles I should say. This village is on the top of high cliffs
forming the south head of a fine bay. From where my house
is, I can see north headland of Raga and part of the east side of
Maewo. Tavalavusi is also to be seen, and the disturbed area
about it. The bay is fringed with a constant line of white surf,
and there is only one narrow stretch of sand with a reef outside
it. From here, across the bay to the north head, is perhaps six
miles.
September Ist. —After Matins, I had a class of catechumens,


as usual, but the Laqatramute women did not come, the reason
for which transpired at breakfast, when I heard that one of them
was shot last night, but not killed. Some of the boys went over,
and brought me a report of the affair. It seems that she was
squatting down to light a fire, when she was fired on. The bullet
enteied the thigh from above, passed through it, entered the
calf of the leg, and passed through that too, without breaking
anv bones, or apparently injuring any large vessels, since she
had not lost much blood. It must have been fired at fairly close
quarters, probably from a rock or bank above her. The boys
told me she was still lying down. I supposed she was; I hardly
expected her to get up next day, as if nothing had happened.
Altogether the wound is not very dangerous, I think, and they
have enough sense to keep it clean and sweet, and as I have not
got any diessings or bandages here, I should be useless if I went
over, end even then she might not wish to see me. I am going
over there to-morrow in any case, and if she gets worse I shall go
to-day, but lam quite easy about her. She, too, is a candidate
for baptism, and may be able to come over after all. Tom trans-
lated the prayers I wish to use into Raga for me, so that now the
people will be able to enter into the service, I hope. The
form is as follows:
In Mota, Hymn 28 (215 A. and M.), “The Church’s One
Foundation.”
In Raga, Psalm 15, “ Lord, who shall dwell in Thy tabernacle? ”
Lesser Litany and Lord’s prayer.
Collect for xix Sunday after Trinity.
Collect that I wrote, and Tom translated.
Collect for St. Andrew’s Day.
Evensong with Special Lection.
The prayer used for the occasion, and its translations are as
follows;
English:
Almighty and most merciful Father, who always hearest
those who pray to Thee, mercifully hear us, Thy children,
who pray now. Accept this House that we have built in love
for Thee, and in remembrance of Thy servant, St. Andrew.
Bless this House, and all who worship Thee in it, and grant
them, in this world knowledge of Thy truth, and in the world
to come, life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
Mota :
Mama turmana, tru magarosa, Ko we rouotag vagae rana-
turma we tataro muniko, ka rouotag magarosa ikamam we
tataiO ilokenake. Ka taur Naimama iloke kamam me ge


muni Ko alo tapeva we poa aneaue, wa ape nomkel apen i
rowrowovag anama St. Andrew. Ka vawia o Ima iloke wa
iniera nol we wievavae Iniko alolona. La ma muneira o
lolomarau ape nom o nun alo marama iloke, wao esu galava alo
marama iloueia mun Jesus Christ i Lord Ramam. Amen.
Raga :
'Fata, masiu rorono, masiu hahagavi, Gov rou tagaro rani-
tuma rav tataro lalai Nigo, Gov rou hagav kamai gav tataro
kekhadogaha. Gov hagoi Imama Keko gav 10l lalai Nigo la
tapeva gaivua maragai, ita huri binihimulei huri laiagova
ausma St Andrew. Gov vatavuhania Ima keko, ita kera
duluai ravkarigo alolona. Lai mai lalaiuira be rav iloilo huri
nom masigi la marama keki, i rav ralm vatuwai la marama
kahaga, giu Jesus Christ Lord Kamai. Amen.
I have written this, I repeat, sincerely trusting I have not done
wrong, but if I have, the proof thereof is written above.
A heavy downfall of rain made the procession either way im-
possible, and the effect of the service was rather spoilt by the
reader, Chas. Garu, who made two mistakes, beginning the Order
for Evensong before I had read the special service, and then,
when I had finished the prayers, he began Evensong at the Mag-
nificat. I had a very bad headache all day, and a touch of fever
all the afternoon, though the ague would not come out. I turned
in early.
September 2nd. —A good night chipped me up a bit I held
my class as usual, this time in the new church, when I had a full
attendance. The rain holding off for a bit, I walked over to
Laqatramute, and baptised the woman who was shot the day be-
fore yesterday evening. She was not suffering much pain, and
was able to move about a very little, and help herself; but it is
a very nasty wound, though if kept clean, not dangerous,
expect she will be laid up with it for some months, though. I
thought it right to baptise her under the circumstances, because
under the conditions prevailing here, the wound might mortify.
I gave them directions for keeping it clean, etc., and ordered
oil to be applied in case of much pain. Came back in pouring
rain. It seems that the woman was in her own house, and the
man came and fired through the reed wall, not two yards from
where she was sitting. Her husband was out at the time. At
Evensong, baptised five infants.
September 3rd. I had a final class with the candidates, and
after the usual preparations, I baptised them, 58 in number, con-
sisting of 39 men and boys, and 19 women and girls. An inci-
dent occurred, showing that these people in this new district,
really do grasp the Christian teaching. There was a child of an


uncomfortable sort of age, too heavy to carry, but too young to
stand still alone at the font; so after consultation with Tom, I
decided to postpone his baptism for a year. This morning,
however, his parents, whom I baptised to-day, went to Tom and
implored him to ask me to baptise the child to-day, because,
they said, if he should die a heathen, they will not be able to be
with him hereafter. This is not a high ideal of faith; but it is
very encouraging to one, because it shows that they have em-
braced the belief in Eternal Life and Heaven, in place of their
former place of departed spirits, a kind of Hades, with nothing
good, and a great deal of bad in it I baptised the boy, because
I thought their faith deserved it, and I think they will look well
after him, because they seem to realise what baptism really is.
Just before Evensong a shot was heard quite close here, and
several men went out to investigate. They came back soon
after service, and reported that some of the Laqatramute people
returning home after the feast, had seen the man who shot the
woman the other day, and had fired two shots at him but missed.
It appears that he is a young Laqutramute man, not one of the
enemy, and some relation of the woman, and had a grudge
against her. There was some doubt from the first, that one of
the enemy had fired the shot that wounded her; so an inspection
of rifles was ordered by one of the chiefs, with the result that
he was caught rubbing earth on the muzzle of his, to try and
bring it to the usual rusty look that they generally have, and
which had been destroyed by the powder blackening the end of
the barrel. His was the only recently fired rifle, and on the dis-
covery, he escaped into the bush, where he has been ever since.
I was right, after all, in going to baptise the poor woman; be-
cause news came in later on that she had gradually sunk, and
died towards evening, about the time when they shot at her
murderer. Exhaustion and fright were apparently the cause of
death, as the wound, though very severe, was not, I think,
dangerous.
September 4th, Sunday.—l went over the first thing to bury
her, but found on arrival, that her heathen relations had come
over and buried her already, indeed, I arrived just as the women
had finished their wailing. They had already killed, and were
cutting up the pig, whose spirit, according to their belief, goes
with hers on her journey to Banoi (their Hades), so that she may
not go there without property. None of the school people had
taken part in the burial. I blamed the teacher pretty consider-
ably for not stopping the proceedings, at least until I had given
her Christian burial, but he seems to have been helpless, and
stayed in his house all the time. I did not quite know what to
do; but since she was a Christian, I decided to read a portion of
the burial service over her grave, which I did, omitting the Psalm


and Lesson, and the words in the committal prayer from “ we
therefore commit to dust.” All the school
people, including her husband, whom I had baptised yesterday,
and some of the heathen, stood round the grave. The faces of
the wailing women were smeared with ashes, and a kind of red-
dish juice, and looked very ghastly. It poured with rain on the
way back, and so we waited in a Gamal belonging to Tom
Viranobu, the most powerful chief of these parts, and a staunch
supporter of the school, only baptised last year. We were late
for Matins, owing to the rain. It cleared up in the afternoon,
so I put my many damp clothes out to dry. Last night the
heathen population of this village (68), about half the total
danced, and beat drums, and wailed, and at dawn buried an old
heathen chief, Viramemea, whose death drums I heard beating
on Thursday evening. His was a natural death. I have not
heard who is accused of charming him yet, in fact, I believe that
practice is almost extinct now, owing to the action of Tom, and
other powerful chiefs. At Evensong I preached on the Gospel
of the day.
September sth. —Usual morning routine, and I went round the
school. Took four photos : (1) View across the bay, showing
N. end of Raga and the disturbed area (extreme left), by Tava-
lavusi, and three points to S. of Maewo, on lee side. (2) Some
of the people of Lolvenua. (3) Tom Viranobu and some of his
chiefs, all “Virds.” (4) Rupert Tariturani, head teacher, and
his son, who is in my opinion, very much spoilt, and conse-
quently always crying. In evening I developed the photos.
First bad, other three fair.
September 6th. —Returned to Qelhuga, and on arrival heard
that a labour ship was lying off Lamatana. I therefore went
away at once, and boarded her. She turned out to be a 40*ton
ketch, Sydney built, called “ La Voleur,” and entered at Noumea.
Her captain, a Dane, is the only white on board. He is recruit-
ing labour for Ambrym this trip, but though a fortnight out, he
has only got one man. Though sailing under French colours,
he seems to be one of the better class of recruiters, as he uses no
coercion, that is his report; but all natives confirm it, and
they don’t seem at all afraid of him. I told him that so long as
things were done properly and straight, I would say nothing,
but if I had any complaint made, I should report it at once (pro-
vided, of course, that I have good grounds for it). I went on to
Apacagalaga, and got a few things I wanted (not a soul in the
village), and returned to Qelhuga.
September ytk —Went round classes as usual. I am very
much dissatisfied with Basil Tarivagalima, he seems to be get-
ting slack and to take no trouble with his school, the numbers


having fallen off a lot. I gave my boat’s crew a rest, and spent
the day on the shore, and enjoyed a salt water bathe.
September Sih. —Got away pretty early. Looked in for an
hour or so at Mr. Bramwell’s station. He is the only English
trader in Raga. He is a very Scotch-looking man (he comes
from Cumberland), thin, with a long iron-grey beard and mous-
tache. He was very agreeable, and seemed pleased, as I was, to
get his tongue round a real English word for once. His station
is in a very pretty and deep bay, about four miles S. of Qel-
huga. He has no boat, hence my never having seen him be-
fore. We passed two new R. C. school stations, both places
never touched yet by us, and I hear there are several more up the
coast, towards Ambrym. Of course, I cannot turn them out,
and my idea is that so long as they do not follow their favourite
game of proselytising where there is already a school, they are
rather to be welcomed than ignored, because I feel that it is
better to bring Christianity to the natives in any form (except
Arian and other early heretical forms), rather than that they
should not have it. Whether lam right or not in this, I can’t
say; but that is the way I look at it, and so long as the Roman
Mission confines itself to heathen parts, I have nothing to say,
and can have nothing, seeing that this is no man’s land at pre-
sent, with a great probability of its becoming a French protec-
torate before long. In that case, if I objected now, where
should I be, and where would the M. M. be then ? The natives,
however, do not love the French, and their mission is not very
popular. I called also on “ The Missis/’ a French woman who
is trading near the landing place at Lonagobul, and being
divorced from her husband, in Noumea, is married (?) to a
native. She is middle-aged, and very pleasant and polite. She
wishes to go to Maewo to trade, and asked for the loan of my
boat to go and see the place. Seeing a chance of getting her
out of Raga, I consented to lend her the boat after I had re-
turned to N. 1., provided she lends her small dinghey to Tom in
exchange, finds her own boat’s crew and pays them (Tom to
help her choose the crew), and is responsible for the boat
After landing, had a long walk into the interior, about six miles,
to Tom Tumu’s village. It is the best native road I have
travelled yet, being well trodden, and distinct all the way. At
the first a stiffish hill, but the rest fairly easy. 24 people are
preparing for Holy Baptism here, 10 men and their wives, and
four children. Tom Tumu and Tom Ulgan dined with me
after Evensong.
September gth. —Morning and evening I had a catechumen’s
class. During the day I walked over to Venurak, a good two
miles, and saw the schoolhouse. I scolded the teacher, a re-
turned labourer, for only having school on Sundays, and made


him promise to school every day in future, and have Matins
and Evensong.
September loth. —l baptised 29 people, 14 men and 15
women, and received one boy into the Church, who had been
baptised when thought to be “in extremis,” by one of the
teachers. I made the usual enquiries about form and matter,
etc. Not much doing the rest of the day.
September nth , Sunday.—At Matins I baptised the only
infant in arms in the place. There were 55 people at school out
of a population of 59, and some of them read very well. This
in a village that was heathen three years ago or rather less. I
preached at Evensong, and tried to encourage them to go on as
they had begun.
September 12th. —Rained hard all day, and I had a slight
touch of fever in the morning. I had intended to return to
Qelhuga to-day, but it was impossible. Very heavy thunder
all day.
September 13th. —Threatening, but we got away pretty early,
and the rain held off, though the road was very slippery and
muddy. The wind was very unsteady, blowing hard one min-
ute and a stark calm the next The jib tack carried away in
one squall when near Qelhuga, that makes fourth rope carried
away this trip; but I was able to repair the damage this time
satisfactorily, having a little small rope on hand with which I
had also repaired the main tack. Called in at Bramwell’s for
his letters, and stopped an hour, discussing the European situa-
tion of April last, which was the latest news we had heard. On
arrival at Qelhuga, I had another sea bathe, and I feel the
better again. The S. C. may turn up any time now, so I shall
wait hereabouts for her for a week, and then go to Opa if she is
later.
September 14th . —Sighted two ships off Opa in early morn-
ing. Went to Atabiaba, and saw teacher, and got statistics.
Crew got gear down, and on return pulled down to Lamatana.
False alarm on the way. Sighted ship very like S. C. in dist-
ance, but turned out to be a French man-o’-war, the “ Eure.”
She did not stop here, but passed two miles out. Tom returned
to Palagalaga.
September 13th. —Inspected school. Very wet, so spent the
day letter writing.
September 16th. —Another false alarm in morning; but ship
never came anywhere near. Saw another ship leaving Opa in
evening. Heard of the death of Trinistapua at Qatumuage.


September lyih. —A French recruiting cutter passed close in
during the morning. Seemed to be pretty full of men. Saw
me on the shore, so paid off a bit, and ran past. Went up to
Averiana, and got statistics. In the evening, tried an experi-
ment in pudding making. Object: To make a roley-poley jam
pudding. Method of procedure: Washed rolling board (part
of a tobacco box) with rain water and soap. Put to dry near
lamp, so as to be handy. Got out rolling pin (a bottle of
whisky), and forgot to take the label off. Put five very full
dessert spoons of flour into canteen dish. No suet, so added
two teaspoonsfull of lard. Mixed with rain water into a paste
with a spoon. Sprinkled flour over rolling board (still damp,
and rather soapy, but not enough water to wash soap off properly
and allow for boiling as well and none to be got nearer than half-
a mile). Put paste on'rolling board, sprinkled flour over it, and
rolled for about ten minutes in approved style, with whisky
bottle. After a time paste got sticky, and some of the label
came off the bottle and got rolled in. Couldn’t see the paper,
and didn’t like to disturb symmetry of paste by looking for it.
Added jam (black currant), and rolled the mixture. Result, a
very long, thin, but clean cylinder, oozing jam at the ends.
Blocked up ends, and tied up in two clean, but torn handker-
chiefs, as I had no decent cloth. I told the boys to boil it for
two hours as I thought that was about the time; but after about
Ihree-quarters-of-an-hour they reported, very little water left
in the billy, and they thought it was cooked. It was. I eat
about two-thirds of it, and very good it was, though somewhat
hard and heavy, but not at all soapy. lam still alive, however,
and there were no evil effects, so it cannot have been very bad.
By the way, in the mixing I added two teaspoonsfull of sugar,
and meant to have added a pinch of salt, but forgot; though I
am not sure if it was necessary. I did not add baking powder,
as the thing was to be boiled, not baked. I consider that it
was a complete success, and I shall try again when I am brave
enough.
September iStk, Sunday.—No ship yet. Read the lessons at
Matins. The singing, which had been very slow, improved very
much. I had remonstrated pretty strongly about it On the
night of my arrival they had sung, “We love the place,” at
about the same rate as one would sing, “ O come and mourn.’’
In the evening I took Evensong, for the first time, and preached,
Isaac interpreting.
September igth. —Examined the school. A weary wait for
the ship. Cleaned my gun.
September 20th. —Went over to Palagalaga. Got ready to
leave for Opa next day.


September 21st. —Left for Opa in strong wind. Landed
Molds in the bay S. of Maewo and ran across in
about two hours, to Tavalavola. The gear stood until
we got into calmer water, and then the main sheet
carried away again. Sailed right into Tavalavola without
having to get the oars out at all. Things much as usual; but
on the whole, rather a better report than I expected. The
school at Lolvenua is closed, the people being far from keen, and
never attending, but James Tariguli has started another
school in a fresh place, and is doing better. Lanana news
confirmed by Lili. A French trading schooner anchored
off Geo. Nordvje’s, soon after we got in; but we never saw a
sign of her on the way over. Wm. Lili dined with me in the
evening. Wind too much for boat to-day.
September 22nd. —The “Southern Cross” was sighted early, off
Maewo, standing over towards Opa. And while I was break-
fasting, she was reported off the village. Consequently a great
rush to get off so as to prevent her waiting. Ivens and Ferrall
on board, and 38 boys from the North. I was afraid, at first,
that D. N. had not come after all, as I did not see him; but he
came on deck very soon. He is rather bigger, but the same
as ever. The news from North is pretty good, except from
Santa Cruz, where there is trouble again. Received letters from
Comins and Jasper Wowutmas. Ran down to Walurigi, and left
one of the old ship’s boats with A. Huge. He reports a little
fighting again in the district, and that his wife and children
have not been very well; but the school still goes on. Stood over
to Maewo, and ran down under the lee. Wind blowing a gale in
the open and Channel. Had a talk with D. N. on the way over;
and when we got into Palagalaga, about 4 p.m., he came ashore
with me, as also did Ivens. Tom Ulgan, after the fashion of
Melanesians was not ready to go to N. 1., though I had decided
to let him go, and told him to be ready when the ship came. He
wanted to go, but not having time to wait, we left him behind,
and pulled on to Lamatana, where I put some gear ashore, and
took some off. We then stood awav for the S. end, whither I
was very anxious to go, as for three years the place has not been
visited. It was very doubtful whether we could be taken round
there, and at one time they thought of dropping me as far down
as possible, and I was to chance getting ashore by moonlight;
but it came over hazy, so we slackened down to half speed, and
I spent the night on board. After dinner I had another long
talk with Daniel, up to Evensong, and after that I stayed down in
the boys’ schoolroom, and had a general talk all round. Three
of them made bracelets of creeper bark dyed red, and worked
them on to my wrists, one on each. D. N. and Daniel Parapolo
started them, and D. N. and Ben Tiaku finished them with E.


Palukue’s help. They were wonderfully made, and very in-
tricate, being in appearance rather like Turk’s heads, but flat.
Had two or three yarns with Ferrall and Ivens, the latter lending
me his medicine chest, and the former giving me some papers.
I recovered my camp oven and tobacco.
September 23rd. Wind and sea went down somewhat during
the night, so that I was able to be taken right round into the
Channel, opposite Lavatagele (the school village). They took
me to windward of the opening of the reef, and dropped me at
dawn, so that I only had to drop gently down and pull in. Poor
old Daniel very solemn at saying good-bye, as he always is.
On landing I was met by Tom Korsal, and a host of people,
and found that the Roman Priest was off up the coast.
He has been trying to proselytise Tom, and some of my people,
but they will not have him at any price. It seems that he is
unpopular here, and the people are better pleased when he is
away. After prayers, which were taken in a mixture of English
and dialect (half Raga, half Ambrym), with a Mota hymn, and
Lord’s prayer, said word by word in English. I had a talk with
Tom, and a long walk along the beach, which is beautifully
sandy. I also went up to the bathing place, which is small, but
affords a lovely shower bath, under a small waterfall. While writ-
ing this I have upset my inkpot twice, with dire results as seen on
former pages, and much loss of ink. Afternoon, employed
washing clothes, etc. Coming up from the shore in the even-
ing, I carried away the top of fourth toe on right foot by strik-
ing it hard against a root, or stone, that I could not see. It was
very painful, and bled a great deal.
September 24th. —Went and had a grand wash in the fresh
water pool along the shore, and on return dressed my feet; left
with boracic acid, right with Friar’s Balsam. During the morn-
ing the French missionary returned in his boat with two other
priests, visiting him from Ambrym. They had not been ashore
half-an-hour before I received a present of half-a-dozen fish, like
herrings, from them. I wiote an acknowledgment of the gift
in French, after immense labour and searching of memory.
And also expressed a wish to see them, warning them, at the
same time, that I could not speak French. It is most remark-
able and annoying how I have forgotten all the French I ever
knew. It is partly from disuse, partly from nervousness, and
parth r from learning Mota, which is so different. As I had
called on them when I was here to pay Tom, I concluded it was
their turn to call on me, so waited in for therm During the
wait, Jno. Pantutun and I had a small game of cricket, with a soft
ball made of print and string; my umbrella for a wicket, and a
stick for a bat. Sundry small boys were somewhat afraid of


the performance at first; but after a time were induced to field
the ball. About 4 p.m. two of the Frenchmen turned up, and
stayed till 5.30. As I expected, they wore the usual black “sou-
tane,” dungaree trousers, and navvy boots. Both spoke pidgeon
English fairly well, and I found that they had each spent a year
in England, at Torquay, and knew the country round pretty
well. They have not made so much progress here as I ex-
pected ; having only four schools altogether, and not eight, as I
thought. We smoked and chatted most of the time, and were
on the best of terms. They are not handsome men, and both
have thin scraggy beards; but they are not Jesuits, which is a
good thing. I walked back with them when they went, and stayed
a few moments at their place. On the way back I spoke pretty
plainly to them about proselytising, and told them that if they
let my people alone I would do the same by them, but that if
they interfered with me I should feel iustified in returning the
compliment. I said that we were far enough from the world to
be able to' avoid petty differences in our opinions, and so far from
working contrary to each other, I thought that the ends of
Christianity would be best served by each keeping to his own
sphere, and where new fields were opened by one or the other,
the other would honourably avoid interfering. This he agreed
to, but rather reluctantly. To show his good faith, however,
he told me that if I got weatherbound at, or near any of
his stations, I might use his houses for shelter, and I could do
no less than return the compliment. Had Mota Evensong for
boat’s crew.
September 25th, Sunday. —I attended morning prayers, and
listened to a long sermon by Tom Korsal, which was rather too
long for the people, whose attention flagged very much. After
the service I baptised two of Tom’s children. The service, of
course, was taken in Mota. The school was crowded, quite 100
being present (there were 84 at the first service). It was the
first baptism ever held here. I preached at evening prayers on
baptism, and afterwards had Mota Evensong, at which most of
the former congregation were again present. The boat was got
down and anchored off, ready for the morning.
September 26th . —Got away, with a fair breeze astern, about
8.30, after saying good-bye to my French neighbour. Tom
came with us a little way, and I landed him round the S. point.
I managed to pick up a good club before I left; old, but in good
condition, but I had to pay for it, 3s. The breeze was fitful,
now strong, now dead, all day; but we made fair progress.
About 1 p.m. called in at Varevorevo, south of Whale point, and
went up to the village; but the teacher was away in his garden,
up in the bush, and I had no time to wait for him, so I left orders.


Called in at Qelhuga for a few more stores. Nobody there, as
usual, all in gardens. Got to Lamatana at sunset, very tired,
and promptly went to sleep. I have a faint idea that they woke
me up and gave me supper, but I don’t know what it was, and I
turned in at once, without a smoke.
September 27th. —The two Johns slept at Palagalaga, so I
went round and picked them up, and started for Tavalavola,
Opa, but though the wind was good to start with, it died away
before we were fairly across, so we had to just drift with the tide,
and after getting round the point we pulled the rest of the way to
Biel Roads, where I found H.M.S. “ Mildura,” just anchored. 1
had to shift into decent clothes in the boat, and then pulled up
and went on board. I was received by the first lieutenant, Mr.
Greville, and taken at once to the Captain, who said he had been
hunting for me for some time, and was very glad he had found
me. As I had not lunched, he ordered some up for me, and
then he asked if I wanted anything done. I said no, I had no
complaints to make of traders, recruiters, or anyone. In the
course of conversation I mentioned, incidentally, the fighting in
the N. end of Raga, and said that one of my teachers had been
shot. The captain at once informed me that by shooting him
the enemy had interfered with me and rendered themselves
liable to punishment by him. I did not know that before; but
it strengthens my hands very much. I thought that a native
killing a native had nothing to do with a man-o’-war, but it seems
that a teacher in the M. M. is counted as being under British
protection. I told the captain that the actual murderer was
dead, but that the rest were still at war with us. He most kindly
offered to take me across with him in the morning, boat, crew,
and all, and settle the matter if we could get hold of the people,
and if not, leave a message for them. Of course, it was a chance
not to be missed, as I should then be able myself to see the old
chief, Viratailen, the prime mover, and show him that I could
call in a man-o’-war if I wished to, which before he had been
inclined to scout as a wild fancy. I was invited to dine with the
Captain in the evening, and a cabin was prepared for me on the
lower deck. I sent my boat ashore to take my gear to
Tavalavola, and stow it, and get only the few things I wanted,
and later on I went ashore with the Captain, who walked over
with me to Tavalavola (we landed at George Nordvje’s). The
French schooner we saw last week was still in the Roads. She
is called the “ Aoba,” and belonged to the late Geo. Fachio, a
Greek half-caste. The Captain returned to George’s at once,
and I got my things ready, and just before starting, Mr. Greville
and Dr. Miller, of the “ Mildura,” turned up and had a smoke
with me, and I gave them a passage back to the ship in my boat,
which was hoisted up, and my crew (of whom I took five) were


made comfortable and happy forward. I spent some time in
the ward-room talking to the officers, and dined aft as arranged,
and afterwards played whist in the captain’s cabin till 10.30,
and then after a last smoke on deck turned in.
September 28th. —Got under way at 5 a.m., before dawn.
The ship made such a row working cable that I went on deck
after a bit to get out of it. I also had to close my port because
of washing decks, and the cabin got stuffy. I went forward on
to the foc’s’le and inquired after my boat’s crew, who reported
that they had had a grand time of it, but that the Ship’s
biscuit ” was a bit hard. The Surgeon came on deck after a time,
and we had tea and smokes for a bit, and talked about native
customs, etc., and his chance of coming ashore with us at Raga.
I also had a hair cut, performed by one Leek, A. 8., and done
very well indeed. I then went below and had my bath, and on
coming on deck again met the Captain, and we went to break-
fast. The Captain was most kind, and besides giving me some
easy grass slippers gave me several papers, notably seven issues
of the “ Naval and Military Record,’’ an excellent service paper,
the best I have seen, and which I must add to my list if possible.
I also got a Navy List of June last. We had a quick and easy
passage across, and after breakfast I went up into the chart
house, and the Captain asked me to point out the anchorage,
which I was able to do, as I knew where the S. C. had anchored,
and also how the reef lay. The N. end of Raga has not yet
been surveyed by the Admiraltv, so the chart there is a blank,
though the S. end is well known. The charts, however, are only
on a small scale. We landed soon after 8 o’clock, but had no
time to wait for Tom Ulgan, as the ship had to search for a
lost trader’s whale boat, which I had seen along the coast, but
did not know that it was lost. We landed at Lamatana, and
went straight up to Qatvenna, and without waiting, went on
under the guidance of Peter Moltata, to Lavuaulu, where Mol-
galuri took up the lead, and led us to Tavalavusi. I had not
been that road before, and on the way we passed through a
tunnel made through a banyan tree, whose roots spread across
the road. Our party consisted of Captain Leak, Dr. Miller, and
myself, with the guides, three of my crew, and a few followers,
none of us were armed, at the special request of the Captain, who
thought that we were far more likely to get at the people if we
went so, and the event proved that he w r as right. We sent a man
off by a bye path to summon the old chief, Virataliu, and his
surviving son, who are the prime movers of the trouble. After a
rest at Tavalavusi (about two miles from Lamatana to the east-
ward), Captain Leak wanted to go on to Lamouri, the chief
village, but after consulting with the people, they thought it
better not, as the malcontents might get a fright and run into the


bush, whereas if they came to a school village, they knew they
would be treated fairly. After waiting some time Viratailiu
turned up with his son. He is a fine tall handsome old fellow,
but very fat, and his son is as grey as he is. He (the old man)
has a long white beard, and carried only his old walking club,
and had on a brown slouch hat He was told to come and
squat down in front of us, and when we were all seated he was
ordered to tell his story. Peter Moltata acted as interpreter for
me, and I for the Captain. Heathen superstition was at the
bottom of it all. One of his sons had died of dysentery, and
another, thinking that the school villages had brought the disease
by charms, went and killed the teacher, as being the author of
it all. The old man encouraged him, and then a regular teacher
hunt began, and although the original murderer, Virapul, was
killed, the rest kept it up, and the old man, though past fighting,
gave away mats and pigs to outsiders to aid him. The skipper
told him that he had done very wrong, and had rendered him-
self liable to transportation to Fiji for life; but that, as the office
of the magistrate was to help, as well as to punish, he would
not do more on this occasion than warn him not to so offend
again. He said that any further complaints would be severely
punished, his village burnt, and himself transported; but that
now all that was asked for was his promise to live at peace for
the future, and to stop hostilities. The old fellow gave the
promise, and to clinch it we shook hands with him, Captain
Leak, the doctor and myself first, and the natives afterwards.
The captain suggested that as an earnest of his good faith the
old chap should present a pig to Palagalaga, and they, in their
turn, said they would give yams, etc., towards a feast to conclude
the hostilities. That ended the matter, and after the doctor had
photographed the old fellow, we got back to Lamatana as quickly
as possible. There we met Tom, but had no time to do more
than tell him roughly what we had done, as the skipper was in a
hurry to be off. The whole matter had been settled in three-
and-a-half hours from the start from the ship. The actual
palaver took less than 10 minutes. A few were rather doubtful
of the old man’s good faith but the majority think there is an
end of it, as he was pretty thoroughly frightened. When I get
back to Raga I shall hear, of course. I merely went aboard and
said good-bye to the officers, and tb e ship got under way at once,
and I dropped astern, and after putting two belated natives into
canoes, stood over for Opa once more, for the third time in eight
days, and after a good passage arrived at Tavalavola about 4
p.m. The skipper’s parting present to me was a bottle of
claret. My feet were very painful, and the left much swollen
and puffy, from too much walking.
September 2Qth , Michaelmas Day. —No goose! I was that


yesterday, for walking too far, and as a result I spent the
day with my foot on a rest under Dr. Miller’s advice, given be-
fore we parted. During the morning, a trader, named Young,
from Laoni, near Duidui, 12 miles to the west, called on me,
bringing with him a boy named Sam Doarli, who was
under Williams of the M.M. in Queensland, and only returned
last year. He has started a school on his own account about
four miles inland, and came to tell me, and put himself under
my orders. I arranged to go and see him as soon as possible.
September 30th. —Young called again on his way back to
Duidui, and later I went over and saw George Nordvje, who has
a bad foot, and gave him some iodoform for it. I stopped for a
time at Losino (school village), and while there doctored a boy
who is suffering from dysentery, and later made up a bottle of
medicine for him of laudanum, rather weak. lam very much
displeased with the school here at Tavalavola. The congrega-
tions are practically nil, and often there is no school because
only two or three turn up for it Teachers are as bad as
the people, and do not take the trouble to beat them up. It
was the same last year, but the head teacher was ill. Now he
is quite well, and if anything, it is worse. I spoke pretty
strongly to him, and he had nothing to say. This is far and
away the most unsatisfactory island in the group.
October Ist. —Sailed over to Walurigi and saw Arthur Huge.
Things are brighter there, and everyone goes to school again
now. Thirty-three years ago work was started there, and then
the school lapsed into heathenism again; last year Huge was
put there to renew it, which he seems to have done. There is
still a remnant of the fighting there; but it is practically over,
and now they are going to rebuild the school. Up to now they
have been having it daily in the Gamal. I bought four grand
dancing arrows at is. each, heads made of carved human thigh
bones. I could not get the bow, it was too dear altogether.
Returned in the evening, leaving two of my crew to stay with
Arthur till morning, when I go down to Laoni to visit Sam.
After that I purpose to get to Lanana as soon as possible, as I
have much distasteful work to get over there, re Sawi.
October 2nd , Sunday, and Bee’s Birthday. —l had the usual
school, which was very small, as I expected, and preached at Mat-
ins from I. Cor. 1-14. I was thoroughly disgusted with everyone,
and spoke rather strongly. I was not inclined to spare anyone,
and didn’t, and I expressed my intention of closing the school
here if I found no improvement when I returned from Raga.
People from Losino, and two other villages were present, and I
thought it as well that they should hear what I had to say. Of
course, anyone who is anxious for school will go to other places




SHOOTING A FISH.


near here if I close the school, and so I told them. Closing
means shutting up church, school, and my house, and taking
away all church furniture, and lending it to places where it will
be used. It also means the stopping of teachers’ pay. The
Mission cannot afford to pay idle teachers. On the other hand I
hear of two more returned labourers, anxious to start schools
inland of Lababa, and that Lababa itself is anxious to he re-
vived after 18 months’ lapse. The head teacher, who was a
bit lazy, has died, and the second, Matthias, only last week asked
for permission to start again. Last year there was fighting there,
the third teacher having killed a man who stole from him, and
the people were afraid to rebuild their school after it was burnt
down; but now it is all over, and they wish to try again.
October 3rd. —Started in early morning for Duidui to visit Sam
Gole (not Doarle as before written, I find he has both names).
Called in at Walurigi for A. Huge. The wind died clean away,
and owing to misunderstanding, we put in at Vatgaban, where
one Sam Mago lives, and saw him. He is very asthmatic, and
at present is quite unable to teach, and only occasional help is
given him by yet another Sam, Bani, who has started a school
a little further West, at Lovuti. The fact of there being
three Sams caused the misunderstanding, and by the
time my visit at Vatgaban was over it was too late
to go on to Duidui. On roundiner the point, going
home, we found a strong head wind had sprung up
from N.E., and we had a hard pull against it up to Walurigi,
where we went ashore and rested for an hour, and thereby
cheated the wind a bit, for when we started again it had died
down.
October 4th. —Started early for Lanana in the boat. Shot a
Kaova (shore bittern) on the way, and had a try for flying foxes,
but they were too sharp. Met A. Sawi in a canoe before round-
ing the E. point, but I would not allow him in the boat. It
seems he does not know that I have heard of his misdoings,
though they are the talk of the whole island. Tried to sail a
bit, but the boat would not keep up to it, so had to pull. The
entrance through the reef at Lanana is vile, and can only be
attempted in calm weather, so that there is always a chance of
being windbound here. Hauled the boat up, and went to
Havutu, Mark Tarise’s village, where I found a large new church
not quite finished yet, but with the altar well raised up, and a
vestry door at the E. end (vestry not built yet). The church is
to be finished, and ready for me to open, when I return here in
November. I have decided to baptise no one this time; but to
collect them all together from the various villages for school
when I return, and when I shall have more time. At present I


can only visit the villages. I found a new house also, for my-
self. One room only, but well built, and quite large enough.
I had a long talk with Tarise, and after careful inquiry decided
to suspend the second teacher, a youth named William Wiri, for
marrying a woman (also baptised) in the heathen fashion, and
without any ceremony in church. I have suspended him for one
year entirely, when, if his report is good, he will be taken on
again on probation. Had Evensong in the school. 1 arises
reading is curious, and eccentric in the extreme. After Even-
song I interviewed two men of middle age, whom the Bishop
baptised last year, but who have since relapsed into heathenism,
and have taken to themselves each another wife, and knowing
themselves in the wrong have left school of their own accord.
This action on their part made it hard for me to punish them in
any way, so I spoke pretty strongly to them, and finally told them
that they had, by their own action, left the church, and that I
should refuse to allow them back until they had conformed to
her rule, and shown themselves penitent. lam afraid it was of
little use though, because they evidently do not see the wrong,
and polygamy is one of the customs of the country, far more so
than elsewhere in my district. The women here are mere slaves,
who look after pigs and gardens, and the richer a man is, the
more wives he wants.
October sth. —Went over to Lavoda Gairue (Sawi’s place) to
inquire into his case. Found a very nice church, with altar well
elevated, and with a red frontal. A vestry is also attached to the
church. I also found a new house (two roomed, with a
verandah), which I had not heard of before. Sawi had gone to
Tavalavola, angry because I came here instead of going to his
village; but I never heard of his house, so it is not my fault;
besides, the two villages are not far off. I interviewed Mabel,
Sawi’s wife, as to school statistics. And then saw Paul Vire-
gaviga, who was baptised last year by the Bishop, being at the
time in possession of two wives. He has since divorced one
wife, though she still works for him as nurse for his children.
He confirmed all that I had previously heard, namely, that Mark
Tarise said they were wrong to seek baptism as bigamists, but
that Sawi told them not to mind him. Sawi knew he had two
wives, but said nothing to him about divorcing one until after
the baptism. He did not remember being in any way prepared
for baptism except by the Bishop, in fact the whole of Sawi s
proceedings seem to have been utterly irregular. The old
fellow is the chief of the village, and a very nice old man he
seems. He is very keen for school, and is much distressed at
the irregularities of the teacher. He told me that one man,
Virehalegi, who was baptised, has seven wives, and still attends
school and church, no one having forbidden him, though he


too knows it is wrong. I therefore said that he was not to
school again until he had conformed, because all the school
people are much exercised about him. His wives I have not for*
bidden, because they are not to blame, being bought and sold
like pigs, and unable to say “yes” or “no” to the bargain. In the
evening I interviewed an old fellow of Havutu, who was reported
to me as contemplating bigamy. But on inquiry it transpired
that his wife is very old and cannot last long, and he has there-
ore arranged for her successor, and has killed the necessary pig,
and paid for the girl, but has not yet taken her to wife, in fact
she is as yet too young to marry. According to his lights he is
acting honourably, merely making provision for the future, as
he is a wealthy man and pants someone to look after his belong-
ings, especially as there is a famine here, and the young taro and
yams are only just planted. The customs of the country forbid
servants, and a man’s own children even may not work for him
after they are old enough to marry. These customs are of the
kind that will last until the race dies out, and cannot be altered
even in Christian villages. I got the old chap to promise that
he would not take the girl until after the death of his present
wife, and then told him that if he did he could not be allowed to
come to church and school, a privilege which I am told he values
highly, and would not lightly give up. During the day I was
visited by the teachers of the four new schools in this district
namely, George and Qanana from Tosaraboe, Edgar from
Sololagalaga, Simon Bale from Negiabule, and Tarihile from
Ararono. These four are schools started this year, and there
is one more above D. laributu’s place (which is almost impos-
sible to get at by sea or land), at a village called Lavunmetul, by
one Philip. Most of the new schools, both this side and the
other, are started by returned .abourers. At present there are
nine new and three renewed schools, of which seven are taught
y Queens anders. 1 only hope they will keep it up, and that
Opa is really waking up at last, after 3 o years’ lethargy and in-
difference. The people seem most keen, not in the enthusiastic,
headlong way that means nothing as a rule, but in quiet, .steady,
determination of purpose, that I hope will be more lasting in its
opa . tem P era ment is fickle, and one must be pre-
pared for disappointments; but lam decidedly hopeful. The
great trouble at present is Sawi’s case, but when I have settled
that, and shown the people that we do not allow laxness and
wrong doing, but punish it, I hope things will settle down on a
irm basis. Wherever I have been so far, except at Tavalavola,
I have been received most heartily by everyone, men and womeii
October 6th.—l meant to have attempted getting to Tolaru,


Daniel Taributu’s village to-day; but it rained hard all day, and
going anywhere was out of the question.
October yth. —The rain held up during the morning, but it was
not calm enough to go to Tolaru, so I went a round of the new
school villages, beginning with Negiabule, then Sosarabor, and
finally Arurono, passing also through Solmari, a small, but old
school village, close to Havutu. Sololagalaga being in rather
a different direction I propose going there to-morrow if possible.
It is the biggest of the new villages. The rain came down again
just as we got back to Havutu. During the afternoon I had a
very slight touch of fever ) but it passed off in the evening. In
the evening Sawi came over, and I settled his case. There
were three charges I had to inquire into, namely; i, Embezzle
ment of school money, ios. 2, Appropriating to his own use
the pay of two absent teachers. 3, Presenting improper candi-
dates to the Bishop for baptism on Trinity Sunday, 1897,
namely, polygamous persons, well knowing them to be so. His
answer to 1 was not altogether satisfactory, there being some
uncertainty as to what he was really allowed to procure with the
money. I thought that kerosene, or lamps, or cloth for the
church only were to be bought therewith, since it was the price
of copra subscribed by the people as an offertory towards church
expenses. But it seems that the Bishop said that tobacco might
also be bought with it to reward those who helped in church
building or repairing. It seems further, that this tobacco was
used by Sawi to buy food with, which I take it, was noUntended
by his lordship. The point, however, being uncertain, I did
not press the charge beyond advising him to be more carefu
in future. As to 2, he admitted having taken the goods, but
said in mitigation that he had divided them out among the un-
paid teachers in the district, and he further said that this was
the rule with my predecessor, and the Bishop last year. Arthur
Huge, however, said that what they gave to the teachers was
from their own private store of trade, and never came from the
pay of absent, or suspended teachers. I told Sawi that he had
acted very thoughtlessly, knowing that I was in the district it
would have been better to have kept the things dll 1 came here,
and then handed them over to me for disposal, instead of taking
ic into his own hands to do so. And for those of last year, he
should have written asking what to do with them. This was
chiefly carelessness, I think, rather than an actual act of thett,
and the distribution to unpaid teachers was not in itself wrong,
but it was not his business to distribute. To charge 3, he con-
fessed that he had presented unfit people to the Bishop, knowing
them to be so, and without telling his lordship anything about it.
He said that he told them they must put away their superfluous


wives, but they would not listen to him. I asked him why, in
that case, he had presented them, and he said because he
thought they would conform to the rule on being baptised. I
said that that was not the point, that the wrong lay in the fact
of his presenting them at all, knowing what he did. I told him
that wherever I had been, Opa people had spoken to me
about it, and that even in Raga they were talking of it, and that
it was a very bad example to set to inexperienced teachers. I
asked him if he had anything to say; but as he could offer no
further explanation or defence, I told him that being myself in-
experienced in cases of this kind, I had carefully inquired as to
the course I ought to take, and the opinion of all I asked at N.l.
was that there was but one course open, and that was suspension
from teacher’s duty for a time. I said that I had given him
every opportunity I could to clear himself, but that until now he
had avoided me, though he had three times written to me asking
me to come here as soon as possible, and before I went to
Tavalavola. I then told him that I should suspend him for
two years from teaching and taking prayers in church and from
school. After that time, if I had a good report of nim, I
might take him on again on probation for a year, but only if the
report was good, and he showed signs of being sorry for his
error. His wife is still on the active list as she had nothing
to do with the scandal. It is unfortunate that the only man at
Lavoda on whom I can fall back to take Sawi’s place is himself
only just out of trouble. But Huge tells me that the Bishop
allowed him to teach on probation again, and he will continue
to do so. He was not to have read prayers until the new year,
but owing to the new development I have been forced to
antedate that permission, and he will start now, vice Sawi.
He will, however, receive assistance from a boy named Chas.
Goru, who, though rather young, is fairly clever and well able
to read prayers. It has been a sad business, and I am glad
it is over, though I was in hopes up to the last that Sawi could
clear himself. lam not sure that the punishment is not rather
stiff, but I shall submit it to the Bishop or Archdeacon, and
then if he sees fit to abate some of it I shall not be sorry.
October Bth. —Walked over to Lolologalaga, about 3 miles,
and on the way crossed four streams, one of them a good size,
and after the hard rain of the last two days a ramping, roaring
torrent. The road is good, having only a very gradual rise.
On arrival I found a new church in course of building. It
has a vestry included, and a fairly well raised Sacrarium,
though no altar as yet. The seats are not yet all in either.
It is to be finished and cleaned up by the time 1 return, when
I hope to open it. That is the second new church on Opa


(both this side) this year. The village is a large one, and is
some way further up the hill, and, being newly started, the
people do not come very well to school as yet; 43 names
being on the register out of a total of about 100. The chief,
however, is favorable, and is, in fact, a candidate for Holy
baptism. They have got a boy for me, but 1 fancy he is too
big. rjpent about two hours there and then returned, and on
arriving here, a beast of a deg tried to cart oil part of my left
leg. However, he only drew blood, and got a good thrashing
for his pains. I dressed the wound, which began to swell
directly, with Friar’s balsam, that being the best thing I have,
and having no cauterizer or fire going. There is a regular
epidemic of coughs here, and I am employed making up
cough mixture constantly. Eggs are cheap here. I have
bought three dozen at a total cost of nine sticks of tobacco
October gth , Sunday . —Walked over to Lavoda for School
and Matins. There were plenty of people present, and work
in School went on very well, and the time was not cut short at
all. Sawi did not appear at all. At Matins I preached on the
trouble in the school, and made public my sentences on Sawi
and Virehalegi. There was an idea that I had forbidden the
people to school altogether; but I was able to reassure them
on that head. After the service I waited for some time in
the village and talked with different people. In the afternoon
several of the teachers from the new schools came down and I
had interviews with most of them. I preached at Havutu
in the evening.
October 10th. —Got away about 7.30, the sea being quite
calm, and no wind, and pulled round to Pavalavola,' taking
Mabel Sawi and one child on their way to Lababa to see her
mother. The sun was very hot when it got well up, quite the
hottest it has been yet. Had a glorious bathe off the rocks at
Tavalavola, sea a nice temperature. Hauled the boat up in
the evening.
October nth. —Had a long talk with Arthur Huge and the
teachers here as to the future of this place, and told them
plainly that I should close the- school for a time unless I saw
a very marked improvement when I returned from Raga, and
even then I should only allow two teachers here, the other
must find a berth as assistant at Lotino. In the event of
closing the school, W. Lili will go to Lolvenua to revive the
new school there, and Paschal to some place nearer here, which
will be settled later on. If the school is closed it will be
partly their faults, and, consequently, stipends will be reduced,


and if they do not take up fresh work, will, of course, be
stopped entirely. The chief here gave a dance, to which I
went and looked on at for a time, and when it was over I sent
Huge back to Walurigi in the boat. Some of the crew did not
want to go , but eventually all went except Sike, who is on
the sick list, and Jacob Lalegi, who was lazy, and went and
hid when I gave the order to man the boat. That man asked
to be allowed to come, and I am very sorry I allowed him in
the boat; he has been utterly lazy all the time, and will never
come again. Of course, they are wanting to get back home
again; but Jacob’s rank disobedience has no excuse, because
none of the crew* have been hard worked at all, as they all
confess. Geo. Nordvi sent me a loaf of bread; very good.
October 12th. —Still waiting for the S. C. During the day
went over to Losinoburia, and paid for part of the new school
house there. Rest of the day devoted to clearing up odds
and ends of work.
October 13th. —Sold George half Jdozen tins of meat, his
supply being exhausted. Nothing happened of importance.
October 14th. —A demand came from Qatu’s brother for a
pig, as he said the bittern I had shot was a brother of his
“ ghost,” or whatever it is. Of course, I refused the demand,
because if I had accepted it, the heathen would have believed
that I believed the story of the “ ghost,” which I had laughed
at and told them was only a hoax and no miracle at all. It
seems that Huge is to blame for this; because visiting George
the day after we got back from Lanana (a week after the bird
was shot) he met Qatu and asked him how his ghost was and
if he was dead yet, as it seems he claims the power of turning
himself into anything he likes, a bittern being a favorite form
cf his. Qatu said no, he was all right, and nothing the matter
with him, and then Huge told him I had shot this bird. It
was a very foolish thing of him to do, knowing the superstition
of the people about this so-called ghost. Of course, Qatu
went back and reported that I had killed this bird, and now
four days later comes this absurd request. In refusing the
demand I said that we Christians did not believe in the ghost,
but that he was only a man trying to deceive the people. No
ship yet.
October 13th. —Demand renewed with threat of war on non-
compliance. Refused again and restated reasons. Huge ought to
have told me before I shot the bird about their superstitions,
and then, as he did not, he ought to have held his tongue
about it. Donoghe, the trader in Boat Cove, called on me
and told me Huge was interfering with his trade; this will


have to be enquired into when I return, for he had hardly
gone before I sighted the ship, and we had a rush to get the
gear down and into the boat so as to be ready for her. I
found Wilson and Robin on board, and a visitor, a Major
Guise. Put a cask of school materials ashore and shewed the
Major the Church and vanua. I had 20 letters, but no papers,
so what I shall do for reading I don’t know. News good
throughout, letters from| May 26th —August 26th, but three
missing. The box and tin I sent to N.I. were not put ashore
there, but brought back in the ship, overlooked. Robin tells
me he is leaving the Mission. The Major is indefatigable
with his note book, and I had to supply him with all the im-
portant bits of news and folk-lore in extenso. Anchored oft
Kere Pei, Maewo, at 8 p.m. Read letters by light of binnacle
lamp.
October 16th, Sunday . —A Celebration on board, for which
I was most thankful,, that being my first since their leaving
me to go North, second voyage, two and a half months ago.
Rained hard all day, so only went ashore in an interval for a
bathe. Cut my hand.
October 17th. —Watered ship, still raining hard, with only
brief intervals. Went ashore with the Major about 10, and
stayed two hours. Report fairly good, but Rebecca still rather
troublesome, though not so bad as before. It has been raining
steadily for the last five weeks, with only a few short breaks,
though better at Raga and Opa, it having been fairly fine
there. The ship never called at Raga at all, so I have only
two Johns for boat’s crew at present, and Tom, of course, by
his own fault, did not go to Mota. I shall have to get three
Maewo men, but as I have to be back here to meet the ship
in six weeks, I ought to get them. I can only spare a
week here and at Raga, because I must put in three at Opa
if possible, owing to the number of new schools to be visited
there, and baptisms to be taken. But if it keeps raining like
this (and there is every prospect of its keeping on for a month,
according to the natives) I cannot expect my crew to leave in
it, nor would it be wise in regard to health, as we should be
wet through in 10 minutes,, and everything else in the boat,
too.
October rSth, St. Luke’s Day.—Blowing a gale of wind. Got
away at 4 a.m., and stood out to avoid the rock off the coast,
and then tried to get in to Tasmate, where they were to drop
me, but we overshot the mark, and took two hours steering up
against a strong head wind, trying to make it, so that instead of
dropping me off the place at 5.30, the best they could do was


to drop me a mile to leeward of it at 8 o’clock. Rain held off
till we got ashore. Stayed a short time in Tasmate, and then
started for Tasmouri, where I wished to spend two days. Most
people being away, I had to leave three bundles behind at
Tasmate. About half way the rain came down in torrents, and
though we waited a bit in a garden house, it shewed not a
sign of clearing, in fact, it kept on hard all night. At first,
the bush sheltered us a bit, but soon we were wet
through (I had forgotten my oilskins). Arrived drenched
at Tasmouri about noon, and took up my quarters
in Tom Aruloli’s house, my own being not yet rebuilt,
owing to the heavy rains. Caleb and most people were away
in the bush, not knowing the ship was in, only Timothy and
a few women, girls, and boys were here. Distributed quinine
all round to bearers at once, and got a kettle boiling, and when
ready, all hands had a cup of hot tea. My things drenched,
so changed trousers and coat and shirt for a malo, worn Maewo
fashion, but long in front, and my rug, while my clothes were
drying. Received my few visitors dressed like a Red Indian
without the feathers. Change of clothes and pyjamas had not
arrived, hence the makeshift Only one of my blankets wet,
thanks to waterproof sheet, though the bearer slung the
bundle wrong way up. No bread or biscuits or books arrived,
so could only re-read letters; but being plenty of them, had
time to spare fully occupied. Supper = yam and tea. Short
Evensong in my house, impossible to get over to Church.
October igth. —Still raining hard, but managed to get across
to Church. Had a shirt and trousers lent me by Timothy, so
managed to look fairly decent. Three boys went over to Tas-
mate and brought the rest of my gear across, all dry, fortunately.
No bad effects so far from my welting. Had long visit from
Tom Aruloli, and hear that things are not very happy at Uta,
owing to a teacher having fallen badly. The Church, however,
is now repaired, and waiting for me to open again. Caleb
also came back. I never saw such awful rain, it beats every-
thing, so hard and so steady for hours together. Wind still
very high from E.S.E. There is no pen or ink here, mine are
at Taurig, I believe. I have two baptisms of infants to-night;
but I doubt its being possible to get to Church again. In
fact, I don t think I shall be able to get away from here to-
morrow, as I wish to do.
October 20th. —It cleared up quite unexpectedly last night,
and I was able to have the Baptism Service after all, and the
children were fairly good. There was no rain in the night,
and, being a fairly line morning, I managed to get away about
8.30, most of my things going straight to Uta, while I went


to Tasmate and baptised an infant there. A great part of the
road was under water up to my knees, and there were signs by
drifted leaves and sticks that it had been at least 3ft. higher.
Directly after the Baptism the boat was got round, and I cleared
away at once up the coast, and landed at Peivara, and put
most of my gear in a house near the shore, and with the rest
went up to Uta. Part of the road lay up a small waterfall,
which was very pretty indeed, and which, if still flowing, I must
try to photo on Saturday when I hope to go to Taurig. No
sooner had I got here (Uta) than the rain came down hard.
In the evening I re-opened the Church after restoration (which
is very well done), and baptised two infants. A fair day’s
work, as I had preached at Matins at Tasmouri.
October 21st. —Bought some arrows, which are made by the
people here, and sold to Opa people (chiefly) for war. They
are highly poisonous, and the least prick is usually fatal, and
even touching the poison pigment with the fingers and un-
thinkingly applying them to any sore on the body, or touching
the tongue with them brings on tetanus, which is fatal within
24 hours. The very greatest care, both for self and others,
must be observed in handling them, and it is well to wash
hands directly on putting them down. The shafts are harm-
less ; but the point is of human bone, and the greenish paint
below is said to be poison; but the actual pigment is the
lump of stuff on the bone point generally put on anyhow and
very roughly. It is made of many things, among them the sap
and juice of various trees and plants, and the pounded ashes
of human bone all mixed together into a thick paste and stuck
on the point. It is said that the poison is never lost, but
retains its power for any length of time. During the morning
I was also given sundry other things; which the people here
wish me to take right away, as their staying here may be a
source of trouble at any time. Their history is curious and
worth setting down. They consist of a holy stone, and a very
powerful charm, and two smaller and less important stones, also
holy. They all belonged to a great Raga chief, named Sursur-
wwisaoa, who died not long ago, and they had belonged to his
family for many generations. He was a bloodthirsty old ruffian,
and wanted to kill off everybody in Raga, so the people
possessed themselves of these charms, and brought them here
to Uta many years ago. Abraham, my second teacher here,
remembers their being used in the last war here, when he was
one of the fighting men; that seems to have been between 20
and 30 years ago as near as I can gather. They then came
into his possession, and he has kept them hidden away ever
since, and only produced them to-day and gave them to me,
on the suggestion of A. Huge, who was teacher here last year,


that I might take them clean away from the Islands and so
put a stop to superstition about them.
The Holy Stone is called Vat Vuroliliu, and is a piece of
hard black rock, about three inches long and one and a half
broad, of irregular shape, its bottom end kept wrapped up with
an old black piece of native rope. In war time it was carried
by the chief of the tribe stuck in the back of his belt or girdle,
and was supposed to give power to his tribe to shoot well and
to make them victorious in battle. In heathen times it was
very much thought of and feared, and would be now in some
parts of Raga if they could get it again. Even here it is a
thing of some value in the heathen mind. There are two
smaller irregular black stones of less value, being only able to
protect and assist individuals, not a whole tribe. They have
no distinguishing names, and are carried the same way as the
other. All these things are well known, and one of middle
age now would recognize them and tell their powers.
The charm is called Boui, and is a small piece of charcoal of
very great age. It is kept in a small piece of bamboo, with
only a very little of it shewing at the sidej and stopped up with
a piece of fibre, the whole kept in a small black dilapidated
grass case. The chief carried it with him in war, and it was
more powerful than the stone, being only used after fighting
had been going on for a long time. If such was the case, the
chief would take it in his hand and make a rapid circular move-
ment with it once or twice, and this was said to bring confusion
on the enemy by causing them to become partly blind, so that
they saw no better than they would on a very dark night. This
enabled the possessors of the charm to go and butcher them
as they pleased, because they had not the power of running
away. It is said that many doubtful contests have been turned
into victories by its help. I did not know that these things
were in existence until they were brought to me this morning,
and their history told me by Abraham as I have set it down.
They are valuable, I should say, as curiosities, on account
of their history, and not, of course, in the least, from their
intrinsic value, though still thought much of by the natives.
lam very lucky to have got them. I was also given two old
stone axes, but not very good ones.
All this description quite puts in a corner the really great
event of the day, for at noon I was able to baptise nine boys
and girls in the church, having had school with them after
Matins. At the feast afterwards I was asked to say grace before
the food was distributed, which seems to me an excellent thing.
1 got my boat’s crew for next trip completed, viz., Stanley,
Timothy, Roscow, and Kaspar Kara. The youngsters had
games in front of my house in the afternoon, girls and boys to


gether, so different from Opa, and a dance in the evening. I
hope to get Raymond Tuwutal, whom I baptised this morning,
for N.I. He is willing if Peter, his father, will let him go.
October 22nd. —Raining hard, utterly impossible to leave here
to-day at present Had short Matins in School House, and
Tom took another service in the lower village at same time.
'Prying to write with a very old G pen is no easy task. But
there are letters to be written somehow, so I must try during
the day sometime. Didn’t, after all.
October 2jrd. —-A very good muster at school. I went round
the various classes and made a few alterations in the mode of
procedure. Had a talk with David about Kava drinking, and
told him to drop it in future. He is very slack and haphazard
about school, and must forfeit a year’s salary as a stimulant.
Preached to a crowded church in the evening. A fairly fine
day. I tried hard to get Raymond, and his father was willing,
but his foster father, who has the say in the matter, would not
let him go.
October 24-th. —Got away in good time. Called in at Sinoa,
and saw Samuel Eva for a few moments. Got gear ashore and
anchored boat off boat-house and started up to Taurig, as 1
thought by the hill road, but suddenly found that we were near
the waterfall. Jno. P. got over, but it was utter foolishness to
try, and, as it was, he had a very close shave of being knocked
over, the rush of the water was so strong. The rest of us went
back and got round an easier way. Found Taurig people in
gardens near the falls, and as the upper pool was also dangerous,
and there was no one at Taurig, I told them what things I
wanted from my house, and they went back to get them. I
returned to the shore as I intended to sleep there the night
and start early to-morrow for Raga, I shall be back here again
in about five weeks, and shall wait for the ship at Taurig, so
my not going there now does not matter so much. They
brought my gear down at dusk. I discussed affairs with Harry,
and decided that the Taurig school people should, after yam
planting is over, go with the Naruru people and start a new
village this side of the upper pool, while the other people who
do not want to leave Taurig can go to to Uduna, which is quite
close. In that case there will be plenty of teachers in the new
vanua, and I am thinking of sending W. Gao to Uta again to
give him another chance, and Simon Duni will, I hope, go and
start a school on the Windward side of the Island, about five
miles from Taurig, over the mountains, where the people are
very anxious for a school, and have given a site for the house,
and have given ms a boy for N. 1., named Aruliuban. I think


if he takes this chance it will be a great opening for Simon, and
will help to prove him. Name of place, Tobarabara.
October 25th. —Got off early and pulled down the coast, sea
calm, no wind and no rain though it threatened several times.
Could not get right down because we rested some time and
had a bathe in middle day because it was too hot to pull.
Timothy never came after all, as the people said. I could not
call in at Labugoro without him, and it was dark when we got
there, and also everyone was away in the bush mourning for the
young wife of the old chief Viragoro. This last we heard on
the way from a chance meeting. She only died to-day. Alst>
met Geo. Nordvi’s boat from Opa, and was given a letter from
I. Tariguli, telling me that the Lolvenua people and Tavalavolo
are fighting over that bird I shot, that one woman has been
killed, and asking for instructions. It was an impertinent
letter and quite uncalled for. He says it was my fault that
the fighting began. If I had knowingly shot that bird, knowing
I mean, that this man or woman claimed to be able to change
into one, I should have been guilty; but I did not know until
some time after. Huge is to blame for having told Qatu
about it, knowing the disposition of the people. Of course,
I must hurry over to Raga now and get across to Opa as soon
as possible. Slept in a cave about two miles N. of Sauwari.
Arrived dead tired, and quite done up.
October 26th.-— Rained all night and till noon, with a strong
breeze. Then cleared up and became calm, so we got away
and called in at Sauwari, and then went round the point (inside
the rocks), and called in at Tanogaban, and saw Nicholas
Tioni for a few moments, and explained why I could not stop.
So calm, we had to row all the way over to Raga, and got in
about 6 p.m. lam thankful to hear that all trouble here is now
over, the visit of H.M.S. Mildura having been most efficacious.
Even tribal warfare is stopped for fear of her. She is the first
man-o’-wnr to call here since the Nelson some 10 vears a;o, and
so has instilled much fear into the breasts of turbulent spirits
among the people. Only to-day Viratailui sent two of his sons
with a pig for peace-offering to Tom. Everyone goes about un-
armed now, so different to four weeks ago. Put the two Johns
ashore at Palagalaga, and came on to Lamatana. Present
boat’s crew: Jno. Onl (man) teacher, and Jno. P. Pantutun,
teacher from Raga; and Roscow Miki, Toasivi from Uta, and
Stanley, the teacher who deserted from Qatungaviga without
leave, and who I don’t like and did not want, but was forced
to take for want of men on so short notice. He has a cold,
and therefore has not done an ounce of work yet. I had a good
mind to put him off at Sauwari, and told him so.


October 2jth . —Tom came over in morning and confirmed
news of general peace. Visited Averiana, Aniaru, Qatuenua.
October 28th , SS. Simon and Jude’s Day.—Had a long day’s
work and walk. Started early with M. Torinni, and visited
Apalagalaga, Lamouru, Agatoa (where two boys were given me,
Torigoli and Tarilasa), Sararua, Lavasunlu, and Tavalavusi.
Between the two latter I sent for Viratailui, and had a talk with
him. He and his family all came. I told him that I had no
quarrel with him, and did not wish to have. But that I would
not allow School people to be persecuted. I said I was glad
the war was over, and that he had sent his pigs in sign of peace.
We all wanted peace, and if he remained friends with us we
would remain ditto with him and help him all we could. He
was the biggest chief in the extreme N. of Raga, but has lost
prestige considerably over this affair. I shook hands all round
and gave him a present of tobacco as a sign that we were friends.
At first he thought that the man-o’-war was here again ; and that
I had a strong land’s party in ambush, but on being reassured,
he heartily endorsed his former remarks, and we parted good
friends, he saying that he was egged on by others to start the
row. Returned to Palagalaga for Evensong, and preached
there, going back to Lamatana in a canoe by moonlight.
October 2gth. —Waited some time for Gimari people with
yams, but as they did not turn up, started for Agelhuga about
noon, leaving Stanley, sick. B. Taritena not to return to N.I.
On landing, fell in with boat of Labor Ship, “ Roderick Dhu,”
and went aboard for lunch. Went over the ship, which is in
the Queensland trade, sailing out of Maryboro’, and of 160 odd
tons burthen. She has 80 recruits on board, 57 from Tanna.
Got along very well with Government Agent, Skipper, and
Second Mate (in charge of boat). All knew Cullwick and
Comins, and seemed on good terms with us generally. Seemed
pleased to fall in with a Church of England parson. Gave me
some fresh bread on leaving. Went up to village, and did
various things there.
October 30th. —At Matins baptized an infant, daughter of
second teacher at Atabiaba. Spent part of day on shore.
Walked up to Atabiaba and took Evensong and preached;
coming back by moonlight.
October 31st. —Got off about 9 a.m., and pulled up to Lona-
gopul, calling in at the French Mission Station, where I found
a rather nice young priest, and at Bramwell’s on the way.
T.atter kindly gave me several papers and magazines and two
novels, which he had kept for me. Stayed about an hour there.


This time pulled round the point! about a mile and landed,
after picking up Tom Tumu, just under the new village that
the Lagarongarok people are already beginning to build, and
which is called Lolqage. A stiff climb to get there; but right
royal reception when once up. Could not get round to Vare-
varevo as I had hoped owing to very stiff breeze and a tired
crew. Slept in gamul alone and got blankets full of qoe ta
Maori.
November isi, All Saints. —Interviewed people all morning,
and gave Tom T. some trade, with which he is to buy clubs
for me during the next fortnight and to bring them down to
Tom Ulgao for me to pick up in S. C. I find there are six
soits of Raga Clubs, each with its distinctive name. They are
as follows:
1. Malio: head like a cricket stump: common.
2. Malmala: head like a Chinese hat: rather rare.
3. Ta Maewo: pineapple head: faiily common.
4. Matatatawora ; head with four spikes: rare.
5. Vatere: like a short paddle: these two last are new to me, and so far Ihave not seen any; very rare.
6. Qatvisvis: like a reaping hook:
Called in at Bramwell’s again on way back, and got in after
dark, (very black, moon not up) fairly tired. No sleep from
qoe ta Maori.
November 2nd. —Started in easy time for Qaturimage, having
only Tom and my boat’s crew, as against the armed escort of
last journey there. Went straight there, and after stopping a
few moments and saying I would sleep there, we went on to
Lagatramute, picking up Matthias (teacher), in his garden, on
the way, and also getting a sight of old King Tom Viranobu.
I found things at Lagatramute much better than I expected,
and I only wish I had a wiser teacher there. Eighty-two out of
104 attend school; a large new church is being built to accom


modate the 116 people who come in from the bush villages on
Sundays only for Service and school. The tribal war is over,
and the murderer of Mabel Mesalhuhu has fled into the bush,
and has not been heard of since. After staying there some
time, I went back to Lolvenua, where things are also going well,
and where I left Tom Ulgari, who was to sleep there. I finally
got back to Qaturimage Tabana about 5 p.m., and found all
hands busy making me a bed in the gamal, which was set apart
for me and my crew for the night,, and my own division parti-
tioned off with a palm, leaf screen. look Evensong and
preached. Again got no sleep from same cause.* There has
not been enough sun to air any blankets for some days, hence
continued discomfort. Rained a good deal during the night.
November 3rd. —Made a very late start back to Aqelhuga,
because waited for a qarahis. Rain held off till evening.
Branched off and visited Girnori on the way. Found when I
got there that I had no interpreter, so I had to carry on the
conversation in Raga as best I could. Tarisiri and t got on
very well considering. After a stay of nearly an hour we went
on and rejoined the others on top of the hill. Blowing hard,
and I am afraid I shall not be able to get over to Opa on
Saturday with a heavy boat if it keeps on. In that case I must
take the first fine day, Sunday or not, as I have already been
over my time here. An unsatisfactory and slow day somehow.
Not at all inclined to turn in.
November 4th. —Wrote to Isabel until the somewhat small
hours. Then eyes got very sore and had to stop. A regular
downpour, roof leaking, and thunder fairly close followed Did
get some sleep after all. Very wet morning, wrote more to
Isabel and began a letter to Tom George. Cleared up about
3 p.m. so took the chance and pulled round to Lamatana, and
intended to go up at once to Qatvenua, so as to baptize Peter’s
child about a fortnight old. Found, however, that the mother
and her child were there at Lamatana, so sent up for Peter; and
baptized the child at Evensong on the shore. Made another
roly-poly, but not so good. About 8.30 the rain came down
again hard. Eyes again very troublesome.
November 3th. —Got away about 10 a.m. for Opa. Doubtful
at first as to whether should be able to go or not on account
of heavy rain ; and, as it was, had several showers on way over.
Heavy sea in channel and nasty rip off reef on Opa Coast; but
at first very little wind, though it freshened rapidly, and blew
stiff before we were across. Jib lacing (for leach rope) carried
* Melanesian fleas, etc.


away, but jib stood all right. Went straight to Walurigi, and
took them by surprise. Had a very nice, though small, house
lent me for the few days I shall be here. On talking things
over with Huge, I hear that the reported war has, after all,
nothing to do with Qatu and his “ ghost ”; and that W. Lili
promptly disobeyed me, and gave a pig as soon as my back was
turned, thus avoiding war, but with the result that I had antici-
pated, namely, that the heathen believe that we believe in the
power of their “ ghost.” The quarrel is among Tavalavola
people entirely, and it is true that the woman is dead ; but the
idea that Qatu’s people killed her is James Tariguli’s alone,
which makes his letter to me all the more unjustifiable. People
say that he believes in this “ghost” and its powers. Huge
acknowledges that he ought to have held his tongue, however.
I also enquired into his action in regard to Billy Donoglu,
trader, of Boat Cove, and he says that Balu, his brother, died
after drinking spirits supplied by the trader. He (Balu) was
ill before, so that the spirits possibly hastened death, though
not the actual cause of it. He (A. H., tells me that this is
the second man who has died after drinking Billy’s spirits).
The land that Billy claims as his was bought, Huge tells me,
from Balu for a musket long ago by Billy’s predecessor, one
MacLeod. I told him he had no right to prevent a man taking
cocoanuts from his own land, however he got that land.
Another point Huge makes against the man is that he cheats,
or rather, does not buy fairly, only giving one tobacco for 20
nuts, whereas other traders, e.g., George Nordvi, give two. The
man, he tells me, is also a drunkard, which I knew already
from Captain Leak, R.N., and from the man’s face. He denies
that he does all in his power to injure Billy’s trade, and also
denies—and I believe him—that George ever bribed him to
chuck Billy over. His action was taken mainly owing to his
brother’s death. He absolutely refuses to trade or allow his
people to trade with Billy, even if they wished to, which they
do not apparently, seeing they can get better value elsewhere.
I have no intention of quarrelling with the traders, however,
because some of them may be able to do immense harm to the
work here, as they have in the North.
November 6th, Sunday.—Usual routine. No School House
yet, so school is held in the large gamal for the men, and Amy
takes the women in their quarters. Prayers are also read in
tne gamal, and, of course, the women never go there so as
yet, get no prayers. We had choral Mota Matins in the gamal,
which I took, and afterwards I had a shortened form for Amy
and Fanny mmy house. Huge gave me a fowl, which I had
boiled, and enjoyed very much. Huge read Opa Evensong in


the gamal; no Sermon. Several heathen came down from
other villages to listen to the schooling and services. They
would not go inside, but sat outside and listened. I got some
much-needed sleep during the afternoon. Had a long visit
from Amy and Fanny in the evening.
November yth. —Pulled down to Laoni beach, went on board
the Aoba, trading schooner, and then to Mr. G. Young’s trader,
in hope of finding Sam Doarle there. He was away, but was
reported as coming to-morrow, mid as his village was a long
way off in the bush, and Young very kindly offered me and
my crew the use of a new copra house he has just built, and
there was no use in going round the point as land was very
bad, I decided to stop the night at Laoni. Saw a little of
a trader’s daily life,, and was very pleased to get the chance.
It is not entrancing as a whole, I think. Paying for cocoanuts
(or rather ready cooked copra in this case), and having it cut
up and finally dried on bags in the sun. Mr. Young attended
Mota Evensong, first held in a copra house. He comes from
near Dundee, is a member of the Episcopal Church of Scotland,
and an M.M. (Queensland, East Coast). We talked very late,
and had a mutual supply of provisions for supper. Had a
fresh water bath in a small spring on the rocks in evening.
November Bth.— Again followed traders’ routine. Sam
Doarle came down with a lot of his people, and brought his
infant daughter to me for Baptism. I had received notice of
this overnight. I baptised her in the copra house, making a
temporary font of piled boxes and tins covered with a piece of
print. There is no bamboo near, or I would have had a
better one. The service was in English, at Sam’s special
request. Mr. Young stood Godfather for her. Many heathen
from all around came out of curiosity to see me, and they were
allowed, or rather, invited, to be present. She is the first to
be baptised here, and also probably the first native to be
baptised in a trader’s copra house. Had a long talk with Sam
(who swears by Rev. P. T. Williams) and arranged that he is
to keep on schooling as he has begun, and to try to all
the children he can together with him. The people are against
coming down nearer the shore, so the school must stay in the
bush. lam going to try to send William Dili here from Tava-
lavola, as I shall close that school I think, and he will help
Sam under Huge’s supervision; but I doubt if he will come.
S. Wili Piti will also probably be put here to help during his
holiday. I also interviewed another Sam Bani (the third), who
came over from his village Lovuti, between here and Vatgaban,
where Sam Mago is nominally teaching, but, owing to asthma,


does very little. Sam Bani HI. tells me that all his people are
willing to come to school ; but that only very few come just
now; the rest, however, will help him to build a school, and
will come themselves after the garden planting is over. Picked
up a curious axe for 20 sticks of tobacco (10 flat and 10 twist).
1 he club end was what I wanted, beluga new shape to
me, having four flying buttresses at an angle, thus,
through which the shaft was visible, the whole worked
from one piece of Ironwood (Aru) which is very hard,
and is generally used for making clubs. This in fact is a con-
ciliation club and axe. Another fellow I sent for never turned
up. He is, however, slack, and not much inclined for school.
1 here was a big land slip close by during the evening.
November qth. —Left Laoni about 9 a.m., and called in at
Lovuti, where I met Sam Bani and his wife Gracie (regular
English get up), and a lot of their people. I spent over half
an hour ashore with them, and gave them directions and instruc-
tions. They are going to build a house at once after yam
planting. They seemed very pleased to see me, and though
I was not able to be long with them, I hope the school is
firmly planted there. A very bad, and, at times, dangerous
landing. Went on to Vatgaban, where I also called and saw
Sam Mago, the teacher, who is very asthmatical still, but is
better. Very few people, nearly all having gone off to a big
dance beyond Walaha. Went on to Walurigi, and before going
ashore went again to the Aoba, which was lying off there.
Huge’s brother (a heathen) and his two wives on board, man
wished to return to shore, but having been fairly taken on
his own request, I did not press the request. Got a box of
twist tobacco £2 4s. and five kilos (nibs) of beetroot
cube sugar, ss. Expensive, but needful. Went ashore and
found several men with rifles, waiting for return of boat from
schooner, when they were going to fire on her for taking their
wives without their leave, which the French may do, but the
English not, I believe. The schooner, however, went down
to Bice Roads, when I left her. Slept at Walurigi.
A ' ovember 10th. —Went to Tavalavola straight, not calling at
I .obaha as everyone had gone to this big dance, and were not
yet back. Huge gave me an utterly false report of affairs at
1 avalavola, and it seems he never went there at all, though he
passed four times since I have been away (four weeks), in his
boat, which was loaded to within one lathe of the water with
cocoanuts and men. I wrote him a very strong letter in conse-
quence of these doings, telling him that the boat was given him
for school work, not trading, and unless it was better used in
future I should not allow him to have her at all.


The state of the case at Tavalavola is as follows: —Qatu’s
people did kill the woman, but Lili and the teachers obeyed
me, and never gave a pig at all. However, Viralumlum, the
heathen chief there, being afraid, gave one, but explained that
the teachers had no hand in it Qatu was satisfied, and fighting
stopped. But now a fresh trouble cropped up. The lather
of the girl wanted pigs to compensate for her death, or threat-
ened war. Lili and three others, therefore, clubbed together,
and gave five pigs, which were accepted as sufficient. It was
a weak thing to do under the circumstances, but as it was not
against my orders, I passed it. Then came another difficulty.
Sise and Sese, two very powerful chiefs had made a general
peace by killing 100 tusker pigs a short time before, and the
custom here is that when a peace is broken it is a case of general
war, until the village responsible for the breach is rich enough
to collect 100 tuskers for another feast, and that takes a long
time. However, the two old fellows were sick of war, and
agreed to preserve the peace in consideration of two or three
pigs each, and on condition that I be told of it. 1 hey then
held a sort of council of big chiefs, Sise, Sese, Viralumlum, and
David Virapageo, and decided to leave the affair entirely in
my hands to be dealt with as I saw fit, either by confirming
their peace or declaring war (shews how much some of them
know about us). They suggested that I should report the
case to the Captain of the man-o’-war, and ask him to keep a
bright look-out on Qatu, who is an utter liar, and his brother
Vali, who is a regular firebrand and the cause of all the rows
round here. This I have decided to do, especially as this
woman is the second person he or his people have killed who
belong to us. He does not touch the heathen, but only school
people. I gathered all this in an interview with two of the
teachers here. After that, I referred to the laxity of the school.
They appealed to me to carry out the principle of the parable
of the barren fig tree. They acknowledged that they were very
slack and useless, but asked me not to close the school this
year, but to give them a chance. I pointed cut that they had
had the vear’s grace already, and that slack as they were last
year when the Bishop refused to baptise any of them for that
very reason, and they were then warned, they are worse this.
Seeing, however, that they had faithfully obeyed me in a very
difficult matter, I decided to give them the chance they asked
for; but I said I could not overlook their past laziness entirely,
so I took off a third of their pay all round. They fully under-
stand that it is the last chance they will get.
November nth . —A decided improvement in the school


attendance; 18 instead of the usual six being present; but will
it go on? Walked over to Losinoburia and interviewed old
Sise. Told him I would consider his suggestion as to writing
to Senior Officer about Vali if he promised to preserve peace.
This he did promise, and I said I would write, and everything
was quickly and satisfactorily settled. In face he is very like
an old edition of Aubrey K., with all the very courteous
manners, only dene in the native way.
Then walked back on to Losino, where I saw the teacher,
and arranged for having school this evening with his catechu-
mens and those from Lolilisu. Went on to George Nordvi’s,
and asked him to dinner in evening, to which he came. Saw
Qatu, who was working for George, and he told more lies;
saying he was with Vali all the afternoon of the day the girl
was killed (Vali killed her), whereas Vali was working with
George until 5 p.m., and only got home very late, while Qatu
never left the village (Tolirune). Qatu also said that the
lighting had nothing to do with the bird I shot; another lie,
according to his brother’s own shewing; because it was the
brother who sent for the pig, claiming it in compensation for
the death of the ghost’s brother, i.e., the bittern 1 shot. Had
a catechumen’s class in the evening after Evensong; it lasted
a long time, but I was unable to give two evenings for it or 1
should have done so. I pitched into James Tariguli for writing
me such a letter as he did, and he acknowledged that he had
no business to write so, and said he did it in the heat of the
moment. In talking over the wars here and in Raga, I learnt
an interesting piece of native lore in regard to the latter place.
If a war is in progress in Raga, and the chiefs decide to bring
it to a close, the custom of the country is that the people
wishing to stop the war cut down a gaviga (a kind of wild rose-
apple tree), and put branches of it as boundaries beyond which
the combatants on either side may not go, and having placed
the boundaries in position a day is agreed on between the
chiefs, and when it comes round (a week seems to be the limit)
the people on each side come to their respective sides of the
boundaries fully armed and in force, but out of sight of each
other. The chief of each party then advances along the track
towards the boundary, never allowing himself to look at the
ground at all, but keeping his head up, so that the two may
sight one another at the same moment. Immediately on sight
they stand still and call out the name of the opposing chief, the
honour resting with the one who calls first (hence the never
looking down). He who is first called answers “Uwa” = Yes,
and then the other the same immediately after, and the war is
ever, and all go home peacefully to the feast of pigs and vams
and taro m honour of the occasion. Say the two opposing


chiefs were called Viratailui and Viranobu; the dialogue would
be simply this : —•
Viranobu (loq.): Viratailui!
Viratailui (loq.): Viranobu!
Viratailui (loq.): Yes!
Viranobu (loq.): Yes!
That is all, and peace ensues till the next dispute, which
may be next day or not for years.
When Capt. Leak, the Doctor and myself went ashore and
settled this business, the usual forms were dispensed with, as
it was considered that by talking with Viratailui we had
fulfilled the law of the gaviga, and by shaking hands with him
the calling of names and answer was dispensed with, that being
treated as its equivalent. I hear now that the heathen were,
after all, far in excess of our numbers in that war, as all down
the length of Raga, Viratailui had bought them over to his side,
and there would have been a general dead set against schools
but for the “ Mildura.”
November 12th. —After Matins I baptised seven people at
Tavalavola, and, directly after the service, got my gear together
and started for Lanana. Left a letter for W. Donogley. A
perfectly smooth passage all the way round, not enough sea
on to wreck a paper boat, yet when I came over a week ago
from Raga it was a perfect race round the point, and a heavy
sea all along the weather side. Off the native trader’s place
(Tambe’s) I fell in with the ketch Vulcan (Noumea) Capt.
Petersen, which was the same I had previously seen off Lama-
tana (Raga). Went on board for an hour, and bought a few
stores very cheaply, I think, viz., 6fr. 25c. (55.) 3 tins salmon,
half-a-dozen sardines, 1 tin preserved carrots, 3lbs. Irish spuds,
and 2lbs onions. Landed under Lavodagairne, and sent the
boat round empty to the usual landing place. Mabel Sawi
came back again in boat, Huge having failed in his promises to
take her back. Mark Tarise came along shore and met me (1
l ad picked up Walter Aru on the ketch), and reported much
f'ghting in the bush near the new school villages. Six men
have been killed and eaten during the week. Mark, Alfred,
Walter, and A. Sawi have all been threatened by the heathen,
and are rather shy (naturally) of going far into the bush. All
roads, as I saw for myself, are blocked at this end that lead
to the interior, so as to confuse the enemy, who are expected
down any hour of the day or night It was rather creepy work
sitting alone in my house after the crew had turned in, never
knowing but that any moment a bullet might come through the
reed walls, fired by some bushman thinking I was a teacher


living in the house (which they do in my absence). Ever)’
falling bread-fruit leaf —and they are large and fall heavily —•
sounded like someone breaking through the bush, and made
one hold one’s breath, and bats, rats and moths made one jump
every now and then. I went through the same unpleasant
sensations at Apalagalaga (Raga) during my first visit this
year, and before the fighting stopped, and at Lolvenua, so 1
ought to be used to it by this time, but somehow I am not yet
1 don’t believe though that even Opa people would attack a
white man without some good cause; the risk to themselves is
too great. Our first attempt at bread making with Island yeast
was not quite successful. The bread was sweet enough, but
the oven was too hot, and so the inside was not cooked at all,
while the crust was burned black; otherwise, it would have
been good and light. The yeast is very simply made, the
recipe being this: —lnto a bottle pour the milk of green cocoa-
nut, add one tablespoonful of flour, one ditto sugar, one tea-
spoonful of salt, shake up, cork, and leave to work for 24 or
48 hours to get full strength, though 16 hours will do at a
stretch (as we found).
November ijt/t, Sunday.—Sunday School and Matins as
usual at Lavoda where I am staying this time. Very close
day with some rain, and I was very tired and slack. In evening
went over to Havutu, and immediately before Evensong opened
the new church there to the glory of God and in memory of
St. John the Baptist, using the same form of service as at
Lolvenua. Evensong followed, and I preached, as my custom
is, after the second Lesson, from Psalm xv., 1. The whole
service went off very well, and I returned to quarters by torch-
light (burning dried cocoa-palm leaves). Hardly any sleep,
owing to bread.
November 14th. —Calmer than ever to-day, so took the oppor*
tunity, and pulled round to Lolaru, Daniel Taributu’s village,
which is extremely difficult of access, as the least sea makes
landing dangerous, and often quite impossible, so the first
chance has to be taken of getting there. It is 10 miles or
more along the coast and round the southern point of the
Island, so that it gets all the force of S.E. wind. Llowever,
the hurricane months having begun, it is usually calm round
here, though very seldom as calm as to-day. Everyone seemed
very pleased to see me, especially as no one was able to get here
last year and I believe also the year before. After lunch 1
walked about two miles into the bush to visit a new school
just started by a returned laborer named Philip. lam losing
my prejudice against these gentry as they are often the means
of giving me a footing on new ground, frequently starting the


school themselves. The place is called Levunmetui, and the
man has got all his people but 10 to attend school, i.e., 87 of
them. This is my champion village here on Opa in point of
numbers; but it is to be seen whether it will be kept up; but
at least it is a beginning. I asked for a boy, and they promised
to try and let me have one. After stopping a good time 1
returned to Lolaru. I have a 3-roomed house there with a
small verandah, about 15 yards from, and facing what is now, a
small stream running through a succession of pools, but in wet
weather a raging torrent, quite impassable. The church and
school combined is different from all the others in the district,
having a long table of reed down the middle with seats on each
side like a dining hall; and people can sit up to it for school,
which is a great advantage over the usual logs of wood. The
singing at Evensong was the heartiest, best, and most congre-
gational I have heard in these Islands, and it was quite a
pleasure to join in it. Got my statistics for the three Islands
finished.
November 1 sth. —Started fairly early for Sauwori, about five
miles S.W. of this place, and just this side of the South point
of Opa. Drifted down, there being a very light wind astern.
Sea low but the surface choppy. A beastly landing place,
and I had to pick my way very carefully through an irregular
reef to a shingly beach ; but it was almost dead low water when
we arrived, so is probably better at floodtide, that is, when it
is not blowing S.E. wind, under which conditions it would be
impossible to land. The chiefs have built a nice little school,
and are waiting for a teacher. I think of sending W. Wiri there
to pull up his character, and give him a chance. It is a large
roomy, and very pretty village, and all seem keen for a school,
especially as now there is peace at this end of the Island. 1
stayed there and talked for some time, about three hours 1
should think. I asked for a boy, not in the least expecting
one, as the place is quite new, and does not know us well yet;
however, a returned labourer from Noumea gave me his nephew
and ward after the native fashion, a bright looking youngster
called Boro, and the man who started the school also expressed
his wish to give me his younger brother next year; but now the
boy is away in another vanua. When I left, Boro came with
me in the boat, and will go to Maewo with me when I go, as
also will the youngster from Levunmetui, who was given me
to-day. We shall be a big party from N. Hebrides this time;
but I want teachers badly, so it must be so. A very stiff pull
back to Lolaru, the wind having got up. Preached at Even-
song, and afterwards talked to the solitary candidate for Holy
Baptism, whom lam to baptise to-morrow. On return from


Sauwari had a visit from some Levunmetui people, who told
me of school wants. I want to write letters; but my eyes are
very troublesome and painful again, and I cannot see properly
to write even now, so I shall join the singing that is going on
in the house among my crew. Heavy thunderstorm just over,
with the result that the water is rushing down from the hills
in great force, and making a constant roaring just outside my
house.
November 16th. —I baptised one man in the morning, and
soon after got away with my two boys, Boro, from Sauwari,
and Vano, from Levunmetui (both of whom are at this moment
sitting on the verandah here cleaning my table knives with
pumice-stone; they being new to this place and somewhat
shy, it gives them something to do). Went away from the
place where the boat was hauled up, nearly a mile from Lolaru.
A good sandy beach, but a very awkward entrance through a
long reef. But neither landing place was nearly so bad as I
had been led to expect. A hard pull against a choppy sea at
first, but the wind shifting a bit to the Eastward, we managed
to sail about halfway, and got back to Lavodagairne about
2 - I 5 P- m * Walked over to Havutu for Evensong, and then
had a class for candidates for Holy Baptism, about 20 present;
and returned to Lavoda.
November 17th.— William Wiri came over as I had asked
him; and I offered to keep his name on the list if he went as
teacher to Sauwari, otherwise I should adhere to what I had
already told him and strike it off. He accepted the post, and
is to start as soon as Igo to Maewo. He is a nice
boy, and only shyness made him go astray. Wrote letters all
day, and 111 evening again had a class at Havutu.
November iSiJi. —That crew is incorrigibly lazy, and has not
done a thing for me or anybody else since the year 1, except
cook for themselves. Walked" over to Negiabuli, and held
two classes there, morning and afternoon. The bush was cut
down all along the path the whole way as a guard against
affording cover to the enemy. It was also cut away for a
large area round gamals and villages. The Arurono candidates
were afraid to come at first as they had a quarrel with one of
the chiefs of Negiabuli, whose son is one of the enemy, and
they had tried unsuccessfully to shoot him. But they did
come in the end, and I was able to settle the squabble. The
two chiefs then asked if I would baptise them. It seems that
they are very anxious to be baptised, and have been for some
time; and to-day they told me that in the capacity of Christians
they could forbid the people now fighting from interfering


with any one of the school villages on this side, while as
heathen the other heathen would not believe them, but rather
annoy us the more. This was confirmed by various people 1
asked about it, and not wishing to get the reputation of a
fighting parson, as I am afraid my actions in Raga and the other
side of Opa tend towards, I agreed to baptise them, other
conditions as to wives, etc., proving satisfactory, which proved
to be the case, as the older of the two has put away his second
wife. They attended school with the rest, who had been
already preparing for some time, and I kept them afterwards
for some time longer, talking and explaining to them. 1 feel
justified in this course because the men both bear good charac-
ters, and are powerful, and will be able to protect the bush
villages where there are schools, and also prevent, by their
orders, any outrages in those on the shore, though they cannot
prevent the bush people fighting among themselves. Got back
early in evening. John Oni baked some bread. One of the
two old chiefs above mentioned gave me a young pig, and the
other some taro when I left the village. Fees, I suppose.
November igth. —Baptised 34 persons at Havutu about
10 a.m. Church crowded, and much enthusiasm shewn. The
two old chiefs I named above were baptised just before those
with whom they had quarrelled. On account of the resump*
tion of peace, they were called, the one Leotamata= Peace,
and the other Tabeana = Love; to remind them and all around
that they were now determined to live peacefully. By the bye,
I learned to-day that by effecting that reconciliation yesterday,
which barely took three minutes to accomplish, I have put
a stop to all the fighting that has been disturbing the peace of
the district. Only one old fellow named Kao holds
out and threatens to kill another man; but as he is the only
one who wants to fight now he will have to quarrel with and
kill himself, as all other villages have thrown him off, and will
have nothing to do do with him; a general peace having been
proclaimed. The country will probably take a few days to
settle down again, end reopen paths and regular communica-
tion between coast and bush. Everyone seems glad that 1
spoke, though I had not the least notion that what I said
would affect anyone beyond those to whom I spoke, even if it
affected them.
I had an opportunity of telling my boat’s crew, or rather the
Maewo part of it, what I thought of them this evening, and 1
used it and rather rubbed it in, because their casualness and
laziness is more than I can stand. I told them I was going
to take a Raga crew next year, but that in any case people from
Uta (their village) need not expect to come with me for some


time, and themselves never again. I find tney have been
begging tobacco from the two Johns, who cannot afford to give
it to them, and even if they could they ought to come to me
first, but mock modesty or dread of a grumbling at deters them,
even though I told them to come to me at reasonable distances
of time. Next year I must either make an allowance every
week, or else give them each so much to last the trip. Truly
experience is somewhat dearly bought now and then. I can’t
think what is wrong with my spelling to-night; perhaps spelling
words as they are pronounced has spoiled my English spelling.
November 20th , Sunday.—Went over to Havutu again, and
baptised five infants at Matins. Preached at Lavodagaime at
Evensong.
November 21st. —Walked over to Lololagalaga, Edgar
Vironas village; arriving about noon. The water-way over
part of which I had to pass by a bridge made of tree branches
cn my last visit, was now reduced to a scarcely perceptible
trickle, and the stones all worn smooth by the pouring water
after heavy rains. At Evensong I opened a new church,
naming it after St. Matthew. Directly after Evensong I had
a catechumens’ class. In the evening after supper a long talk
with Edgar. The small school house being given over to my
crew, a qea was prepared for me in the vestry, and a very' good
bedroom it made, though narrow.
November 22nd. —At Matins baptised two infants, and then
had another class. Waited to allow all the people to come
together, and then baptised eight adults; among them Vire-
gogona, the old chief, who had the fame of being a great fighter
some years ago, always seeking quarrels; but he signed an
undertaking not to do so again, and has kept his promise very
faithfully, even in spite of provocation, and has been waiting
some time for Baptism. I was again asked to say grace before
and after the usual feast, as I was at Uta. When’it was all over
I returned to Lavoda and got everything ready for an early
start in the morning.
November 23rd. —Up before sunrise this morning, and soon
ifter seven o’clock we got away from Lanana, with a very light
breeze from S.E. The horizon was hazy, however, and as we
thought, the wind quickly freshened up, in fact, if we had
delayed our start by an hour we could not have got away at
all. We got across to Maewo by neon, and hauled the boat
up at the Kerekerepei; a very sharp piece of work, as there
vas a nasty sea on by that time. The boat leaked like a sieve
all the way over, and I had my two Opa boys hard at it bailing


all the time. The boat had not been used for a week, and the
sun had opened her seams. Walked up to Taurig, and found
the place deserted, everyone being at work yam planting.
Paid my lazy crew and sent them home. Harry Aregi told
me all the news in the evening. The charges against two
teachers for misconduct were proved, and I have had to suspend
them; and the charge against another was also further explained
to me, but I have not yet heard his side of the story, and shall
not be able to as his place is a long way from here. I have,
therefore, had to give Harry power to suspend him in my
name if necessary, when he has fully enquired into the case.
He is to send me a leport of it as soon as possible. The other
charge against yet another is only a rumour, and no one here has
heard of it; but that, too, must be enquired into and reported
on to me. If only I knew when to expect the ship I could
go into all these myself, and settle them at once, but as it is,
I must stay here and not go far away in case of her being
reported any moment. There is, however, good news to put
beside the bad. Simon Duni is to go to the new school at
Lobarabara on the windward side. I am very glad of that,
because he is, I believe, a strong man, and though the place
is smallish, he will not be wasted there, as there are several
more heathen villages near by, which will stand more chance
of being won by him than if I sent a weaker and more ignorant
man. Another good thing is that it has been definitely decided
that the people here and at Naruru will join forces and build
a new village nearer the Kerepei, about two and a half miles
from here on the sea side of the upper bathing place. This
is an immense pull, but has been a long time coming to
pass; and Bishop Selwyn, Bice and Brittain having all tried
to bring it about 1> will, I hope, be the means of bringing
a heathen village that still exists on the shore into the field of
work. They have promised for a long time to come to school
if it were accomplished. The Naruru people are in favor
of a move to a man, but there is some opposition here. The
opposers, however, with only one or two exceptions, are people
who never come to church or school; but Uduna being so
close, (and now that they are building a new school house
there, nearer still), those who prefer to stay can go there, as it
is absurd to have two schools so close to one another. The
Uduna teachers also object, but on purely personal grounds,
and they will have to make the best of it; in fact, it will do
them good to get a rebuff, and may wake them up a bit. As
regards Venai, I find that the Bishop and my predecessor both
deprecated a school being built there, as it is so close to Uta
though not so close as Uduna is to Taurig —so I have also for-
bidden the building of a school there, and have arranged with


Stanley that on fine days the people are to go to Uta as hereto-
fore, but on wet days he must have prayers and school at Venai.
It is possible that Tom Aruloli will have to go back to
Tasmouri, and school there, in which case Abraham will have
charge of Uta with Stanley to help him, unless Walter Gao
goes at last, when he will have charge. Walter has not gone
yet He has been here now for four months helping here,
where he is not wanted, and all because his wife won’t go. If
he is going to let her take charge, he may as well not go
anywhere at all, as he will never be any good. My work here
is nearly done, and now my report stares me in the face. I
might start on Opa any time now, as I shall not be there again
this year I expect.
November 24th. —Nothing much occurred to-day. I went
and had a bathe in the upper pool, and in the evening walked
over to Uduna to see about the new school house, but the
teacher was away and had not returned, so I did not wait for
him. Got back just in time, as it came on a heavy rain,
which, however, soon passed over. After Evensong, I had a
class for the three boys, who are to be baptised to-morrow,
and who have been, I think, very carefully prepared for it.
Dived into the rough draft of my report, and finished Maewo.
November 25th. —The last of my baptisms for this year
were administered this morning at 9.30. Some of the bigger
men went out shooting, and J. P. P. took my gun: result of
day’s sport, one pigeon to S. Duni. I stopped at Taurig.
Nearly all the afternoon we played rotten cricket in the vanua.
Sticks for bats; and old saw and bits of bamboo for wickets,
and half ripe oranges for balls, of which we must have used
about 300. In the evening the youngsters had a sort of Tom
I iddler’s ground outside my house.
November 26th. —Interviewed the chief at Lolarabara, the
new village to which S. Duni is going. He and a contingent
of his people have come over to goodbye to Aruluibau,
whom they have given for NT. Their school is to be built
after Christmas. A showery day, so wrote letters and a good
deal of my Report, finishing that of Opa, so only Raga remains
to be done. The two Johns dined with me in the evening, a
sort of finish up to the two trips they have made with me in
the boat this year. They have both worked splendidly. John
One (Man) as cook and boathand, and John Pantutun as valet,
coxswain, and boathand. The latter is a thoroughly good
boatman and keeps his head in a tight place. After badgering
him all the trip, I got John One to make his will and dictate
a draft letter to me. I therefore consider I have scored


a victory, as I never for one moment expected he would do
either.
November 27111, Advent Sunday.—Appallingly tired this
morning, and not at all inclined to turn out. Right foot
swollen and puffy, bandage round ankle too tight 1 suppose.
T preached at Matins. In the afternoon walked over to Naruru
to arrange about starting new vanua to-morrow. Spent nearly
three hours there. Had very short Evensong owing to lamp
going out, and there being no more oil handy. Somebody
forgot to trim and refill. Wrote most of the evening. My
two small Opa boys are quite at home here, and seem to make
themselves understanded of the people, though neither of them
knew one word of Maewo, though they did know Raga. One
o c them is singing the canticles now, though he can’t read yet,
and he has picked up the chants very quickly and accurately.
November 28th. —The long wished for work of starting a
new village nearer the sea has been begun at last. All day
we have been clearing the bush on the edge of the cliff, and
got a good deal done. The position is a capital one, over-
looking the Anchorage at Kerepei, and when all is cleared
away and the houses built they will be visible from the ship.
A report has just come up that the ship is at anchor at Kerepei;
that means that we must leave here early to-morrow morning.
I have just had a very great stroke of luck. I have had a
Vatere club sold to me, though I had to give 100 sticks of
tobacco for it, nearly 10s. It belongs to the family of Tom
Togo, the chief here, and the reasons it was so expensive are
(i) that it is an heirloom, having belonged to Tom’s brother,
and his father before him; that it is the onR Vatere known
to be in Maewo (even in Raga, where they are made, they
'are very rare). For shape, refer to p. 51. Its use is curious ;
the convex side is used only for killing men, and the knob
on the other side only for killing women.
November 2gth. —The ship being due to-day, all my gear
was cleared out of Taurig and taken down to David’s house
near the boathouse, and in the midst of the taro gardens. I
am camping out there until-the ship comes.
November 30th, St. Andrew’s Day.—No sleep at all, owing
to mosquitoes, and the boys had forgotten my net. lam told
that they are just as bad now in the vanua as here, though 1
am now only about five yards from water. Found a nest of
ants in my loaf sugar, and had to clear everything out of the
box and repack it. Took a large part of the day out in sleep
on the shore. Provisions getting very short. lam reduced
to two tins meat, half tin milk, two and a half tins jam, about


one and a half lbs. biscuits, but I have about a dozen tins of
potted meat, and plenty of tea and sugar. Yams are rather
scarce just now, though taro is plentiful, of course, and I am
afraid I shall have to fall back on that if the ship is late.
December isi. —Got my net up, and had rather a better night
in consequence, though several hundred mosquitoes got in
through sundry small holes and fed off me. But I killed them
all in the morning. Pretty well everyone from Taurig and
Naruru are camping out down here now. Sent boat away with
letters to Uta and Sinoa. Tried for a snippet, but was unsuc-
cessful. John P. got four pigeon, but only three cartridges
left. Mended some holes in mosquito net
December 2nd. —Better night than usual. Rain came down
very heavy all night and lasted all day. People returned to
villages; glad lam here.
December 3rd. —A really good night for a change, and I slept
very late. Got boat out and went fishing. Ten of us caught,
eight fish; I got two. No chance of the ship now, I’m afraid,
before Monday night, and, most likely, not then.
December 4th, Sunday. — The two Johns and Arthur Arutan
formed my congregation, with the two small boys, morning an<:
evening. Pulled round to Kerepei, and had a bathe in after-
noon. Spent two hours in evening clearing blow flies out of
my house, and from inside my mosquito net. The latter pests
are awful, but I think I prefer them to blow flies.
December sih. —Spent some time on the shore this morning,
and paddled about in Patrick’s canoe for a bit. It is too heavy
in the water, and, consequently, turns about as if on a pivot.
A large canoe full of heathen passed from Tancrowo for Tas-
mouri. They came ashore, and I had a confab with them,
and bought sundry tusks and a mat. Rain came on about
noon, and lasted all day, therefore, having had a poor night,
I tried to get some sleep, but with only poor success.
December 6th. —Ship a week overdue, and 1 have practically
wasted a week here waiting for her. Meat gave out yesterday,
flour and biscuits will give out to-morrow, but I have got a
few yams in. Went over to Tasmate, and laid in some fat,
eggs, and other needful stores, and got in in the cool cf the
evening.
December yth. —Went up the hill, and had a look at the
clearing for the new village. Pulled about a bit in boat and
canoes. Came on to rain, and ship turned up and anchored
about 7.30, and we went off to her. Causes of delay were (i)


three weeks quarantine at Tulegi, Florida, for alleged measles ;
(ii) fracture of after part of crank shaft of engine, between
Solomons and Torres. Light and head winds, and steam only
possible at three-quarter speed = three knots. There are io
Northerners aboard, a most unfair thing, as this voyage the ship
is supposed to be kept for the Southerners, the others going
second voyage. As a result of the Northerners being on board
food is scarce, and so Robin has only three boys from Torres,
instead of nine. Cullwick has only one from Banks, instead of
about 30; and lam only allowed my two Opa kids because 1
cannot get them back home, instead of the 20 I had hoped to
take from the district.
December Bth. —Watered ship, and had a final bathe. In
virtue of the large supply of food (cocoanuts) taKen from
Maewo, I was allowed to take two boys, Joe and Ason, back.
So my complement is four. Leaving Kerepei had a grand
stern wind, and so ran down coast well, but wind freshened,
and calling in at Raga was dangerous, as the Northerly wind
made it a nasty lee shore with a big surf, and low tide made
it worse. Why we were not capsized I don’t know, but we had
three very close shaves of it, the boat becoming unmanageable.
A fearfully long and heavy pull back to the ship in pitchy
darkness in a heavy sea. At first doubtful whether we could
get off, and we did not think it safe to turn back in the then
state of the sea. However, we got off, and after some dis-
cussion, sent the boat back with two Johns and Raga crew,
and stood by until we saw the signal of safety (three fires close
together on the beach). 1 was very thankful to see it too. 1
shall probably hear next year that the people got ashore all right,
but the boat was smashed up on the reef.
December gth. —Wind shifted eight points during night, and
we could not make Dip Point, so stood out through Selwyn
Straits between south end of Raga and Ambrym. Couise was
S.E. to clear the Islands, which trend about S.S.E., then we
shall come round, and if the wind goes to S.E., shall fetch
clear to NT., on one board from about latitude of Sandwich.
Saw Islands of Pama, Sopevi, Tongoa, and Mai for the first
time. It is very seldom we go down E. side of the group now,
and we should not have done so now but for breakdown of
machinery.
December 10th. —Wind fell very light about noon, so took
in all sails, and proceeded S.E. under steam. A hot day
rather, but nights are perceptibly colder now, and also days
longer. Major Guise (visitor) is sick with fever, Comins
rather ditto, Cullwick slack and seedy, Robin very well, myself


ditto, but not up to much on account of ship’s unsteadiness.
Cook also sick. No vegetables, and most things short. If
we get to N.I. by Christmas at this rate we shall be lucky.
December nth. —Sea very calm, and no wind, and that con-
dition continued all day. Early Celebration in English,
Cullwick celebrant. Sighted Eromango early in morning,
Aniwa, about i p.m., and Tanna soon after, Futima also in
sight on port bow at sunset. Volcano on S.E. of Tanna very
active, and the glare from it was plainly seen all night. I
took Mota Evensong and preached.
December 12th. —Futuma very plain just astern, looked from
our position like a steeple crown hat with rosette in front.
Tanna faint on opposite quarter, and Aneitium just abaft star-
board bow. This latter most southerly of N.H. group. Dis-
tance from N.I. at noon, 546 miles, and at our present rate of
four knots, we should be in to N.I. by Saturday evening. Sea
just as calm as before, like heaving glass. Day very hot, so
rigged awning. Slight breeze in evening, but not enough to
sail. Heavy swell set in from S.VV.
December ijth. —Calm day until sunset, when a breeze sprang
up, but not strong. Nothing happened.
December 14th. —Engines stopped for eight hours to-day to
put in new bolts to secure the band over the fractured crank
shaft. Wind held enough to steer by. I got badly licked at
backgammon by Robin. Getting perceptibly colder. Sighted
Walpole Island, and I went aloft to see.
December 15th. Wind died away entirely, and sea calmer
than ever. A lot of Portuguese men-o’-war about. Played
quoits in afternoon. Glorious sunsets and beautifully clear
nights all the week. Three hundred and five miles from N.I.
at noon.
December 16th. —Another calm day, and nothing doing. A
light breeze in evening.
December lyth. —A fair breeze from N.E., and ship went
about 120 miles since noon yesterday. Heavy S.W. roll set
in in evening.
December 18th. — 100 rough for a celebration. Cousins very
seedy. Ship very slow owing to head sea. Sighted N.I. 30
miles to S.S.W., at 6.30 p.^v


gOJa
1-3
H
Sim
>
2
$ *
Dd
p
c
>— i
C fi
W
c n
O
Ln
M (0
VO VO ON
No. of Schools.
IO
to Oj On
Total Teachers.
w
O
t— 1
‘|
>
Ln *-<
Confirmed.
1
O
1— ■
U)
Om a
h— 1
M
2
in
10 OJ
Baptised.
-P o/i oo
p:
h-i
N'OW
n
>
00
1 - W On
Children at
r 1
00
on
t\2 On O
| VO O ON
School.
c n
H
z
>
w
bo
OJ
KJ OvvO
ON 10 On
Total at
School.
H
jyj
H
00
M O On
O
e
to
02
w
HH m
Population of
w
'O
to
-P O On
0-0
School Villages.
5*3
4^
00 On O
1
0
OJ
1
JO On On
Estimated
K
y 3
b
b b b
Population of
o
o o c
Island.
o
coo
00
M
_
New Schools,
vO
00
10 O ON
1897-98.
00
Raga ...
Opa
Maewo
Totals
II. —Statistics for 1898 only.
ULn Q\
K) OCLn
Baptisms.
to |
1 : : to
Marriages.
F unerals.
I
4*.
H tO W
Churches
| Opened.
a i
I to o On
New
Schools.
|u>
n h :
Lapsed
Schools.
December igth. —Wind shifted to S.E. during night, but we
got to an anchor at Cascades about 6.15 a.m. Stayed on board
for breakfast, and went ashore about 9 o’clock, and rode up to
Mission. General report fairly good.
THE END.
Revereue teti ma nogo, tamha marajai!
Below is a tabulated summary of the work referred to in
the Diary :


17° LONGITUDE.
15° LATITUDE.
NEW HEBRIDES, SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN.






