

DIRECT TAXATION,
THE INCOME TAX,
THE PROPERTY TAX,
AND FREE TRADE.
PEACE,
RETRENCHMENT,
AND
CAPTAIN WARNER’S AWFUL ENGINES
OF
WAR.
BY SAMUEL COBHAM.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, 95 NEWGATE STREET,
AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1848.
Price One Shilling .


ON
DIRECT TAXATION, &c. &c.
Repeated enquiries have been made after the following- paper:
the chief part, or that which contained its principle, was privately
and gratuitously circulated rather more than two years back. It
was almost flatteringly esteemed by some persons; some others,
who spoke of it as an excellent and first rate paper, were, on tint very
account, angry that it had not been put forth anonymously : these
persons forgetting that the benefits solely resulting from anony-
mous writings are as nothing when compared with the evils in-
flicted by them.
The government ought to make anonymous writing a jmnishable
offence. And if all those who write in the public papers were
compelled to put their names and residences thus publicly to their
writings, much evil would he prevented and much good would be
done thereby.
The paper was sent to the government, and to most of the pro-
minent men in and out of parliament; and to the greater part of
the press of the kingdom. No notice was taken of it by the press
—as far as is known—with the exception of The Weekly Dispatch. ,
which noticed it about sis months afterwards ; spoke of it as a
clever paper, and approved of it.
Still, from what is going on in reference to taxation, there is
reason to think that the labor has not been in vain, and that the
paper has not been ineffective. Some extraordinary changes of
opinion are known to have been produced, by the reading of the
paper, in persons, who, before, were violently opposed to both
direct taxation, and to the income tax: indeed there are many
reasons for believing, that if this paper could be put into the hands
of every person, that the principle of direct taxation, and its ad-
vantages over indirect taxation, would not only be firmly esta-
blished, and the system desired—but that the income tax {levying
the same rate upon all incomes alike ) would be resolved upon, as the
most Just and suitable, and the least injurious of all the means that
can possibly be devised for the levying and the raising of the na-
tional revenue. And that the poor-rate —which ought to be a
national and not a local rate —indeed that all—even local rates,
should be levied on income, and not on rent; for all ought to con-
tribute to these things according to their means, and not according
to their rents; as the rent which a person may pay is no measure,
test, or standard of his income, nor any guide to it.
A republication has therefore been induced; improved with
such additional matter or argument, as seems to be necessary, in
order to prove that a property tax, or a graduated income tax, are
alike unjust and impolitic and nearly impracticable. And that an
impartial income tax, levying the same rate on all incomes, is alike
just, politic, and practicable. Also to stir up a demand for retrench-
ment.


If objections should arise in the mind of the reader, he will,
probably, find them satisfactorily answered , as he proceeds with the
perusal. A complete and an attentive reading is therefore earnestly
solicited.
11th March t 1848.
It becomes an important enquiry—what effect will the removal
of the Corn Laws have upon the revenue of the government, as at
present raised and levied? The conclusion generally arrived at
seems to be, that the removal of the Corn Laws will render ne-
cessary, an almost entire change, in the mode by which the
government is to raise that revenue. Such being the case, it is
proper to show to the government, to the public creditor, and
for many reasons, to the people themselves—another, and a prac-
ticable mode of raising the present, or the necessary amount of
revenue. The mode about to be proposed is such, that while
it would entirely change the present system of taxation, would
tend also, to increase considerably the means of the people at large;
and at the same time provide for the government, probably, a
larger amount of revenue than they now receive: and would also
enormously increase the trade of the country: for it would relieve
the manufacturers and the commerce, the trade, the industry and
the skill of the people of this country of every impediment and
burthen that now so heavily bears them down; and by which
they are retarded to a degree that is hardly to be conceived, or to
be believed. If the people can be made to see the desirability, as
well as the justice, of the mode to be proposed, there cannot be
much reason to doubt its accomplishments. The Peel adminis-
tration have taken some steps in the right direction. But it
must have both the assent and the active support of the people at
large.
Hitherto, unfortunately for the people themselves, so blind, or
inconsiderate, or so prejudiced have they been—that they have
been led to oppose the little which has already been done by the
Peel government, in the matter: which is not much to be won-
dered at, when it is recollected, that even the liberal part of the
press have deluded and then urged the people on to such im-
proper and to such foolish opposition.
The press of this country, and particularly the liberal portion of
it, have denounced ai d stigmatized the income tax as inquisitorial
and oppressive; as though it were more oppressive than any other
tax: which is not the fact: for £5 taken out of the pocket by
any other sort of tax, is just as much taken out of the pocket as
if it had been taken in the name of the income tax. Therefore to
denounce such tax in particular , is a folly; and, for reasons which
will be presently given, there is much greater folly in denouncing
the income tax, than in denouncing the Customs and the Excise
duties, and all other indirect taxes; all of w’hich ought to be scouted
until abolished.
When people become a little better informed on these matters
they will say, What fools we have been to oppose the income tax :


and what still greater fools have we been to be led on to make •>
hue and cry in favor of indirect taxation.
From what has been already said, it is almost unnecessary to
announce, that the principle on which it is proposed to raise the
entire amount of taxation—whether for governmental, or for local.
or for parochial purposes—is that of the income lax.
The population of the united kingdom at the present moment, is
nearly, if not quite, 29 millions of persons. The number of
persons who are charged with the income tax, is certainly less than
halt a minion of persons. Thus only one out of every 58 persons
is charged with the income tax.
The rats of the income tax is 7d. in the pound : last year it pro-
duced <£5,191,600. The income on which it was assessed
amounted to £l7B millions ; which was thus proved to be the in-
come of less than half a million of persons.
There are no means at present of knowing what the income of the
kingdom really may amount to; therefore approaches can only be
made to it. But it is proved, as just stated, that half a million of
persons, or even less, have an income of £l7B millions; which
would make the average income of each £356 a year, or about a
sovereign a day, as the income of those wbo now pay the income
tax.
Now as half a million of persons have an income of £l7B mil-
lions a year, it cannot vcell be considered an over estimate to con-
clude, that 28£ millions of persons have an income of £422 mil-
lions. That is, that 57 times as many people, instead of having
57 times as much income, have considerably less tbano times as mucti.
That estimate, however, would make the income of each average
less than £ls a year; or not quite 10 d. a day, to provide each of
them with food, drink, clothing, lodging, schooling, and every
other thing. And yet out of that miserable pittance of 10 d. a day,
at least 3 d. is insidiously taken by the government, and by the
contraband dealer —or robber as he should be called —through the
present system of taxation and corn-laws. By the system now
commended to you, instead of 3 pence, about S farthings would be
taken out of the 10 d. ; which is too much ; but which this system
would soon cause to be lessened.
Well then taking this estimate, the income of the united kingdom
is £6OO millions. Now if this £6OO millions were taxed at the
rate of per cent., which is equal to Id, in the shilling, it would
produce to the government £SO millions a year; which is more
than they require: and as much, or more than they now get from
all their other sources of taxation. And thus by this plan, the
government would be enabled to abolish all the other taxes of every
son, that they now are obliged to levy.
If you now take into consideration the great reduction that would
be made in the price of all such commodiiies as bread, butter, tea,
sugar, meat, beer, tobacco, &c.,—indeed of everything that can be
named, —if the customs and excise, and stamp duties were abo-
lished as now proposed, with your corn laws repealed—you will
immediately see that the government would not require anything
like the sum , which they now’ require, for the victualling, clothing.


&c., Ac., of the army and navy, and for the other departments of
the state. The materials required for the dock-yards, for the
oranance, &c., &c., would also be so much reduced in price, that
considerably less money would be required than is now necessary,
for the contracts for all these things would most likely be made at.
a reduction, upon the whole, of about £3O per cent, below the
present contracts. The government, even on their present ex-
travagant system, would then not need more than £ls millions;
which would reduce the rate of the income tax to about per
cent, or Is. 6d in the pound. And as the whole revenue of the
country would be raised from one source, so there would be but.
one collection. Thus reducing the expence of collection to a frac-
tion of the present cost.
Ivor must you forget the increasing wealth of the nation: and
under the proposed system, that increase of wealth would be much-
greater, great as its progress is even now. This increasing wealth
of the country —consequently of its income—would therefore
enable the government to reduce the rate of the income tax every
year, as well as from the smaller amount of money which would
be required by them, through the cheapening of commodities, and
from the curtailment of extravagant expenditure; which curtail-
ment would then be enforced upon them. Every one under the
proposed system, would know exactly how much the government costs
him. And if the noble and the rich thought that the government
was too expensive for them, so would they be amongst the first to
compel the government to reduce its expenditure : and as they
would pay more for its extravagance and for its recklessness
than others—so there would be very strong reason for hoping and for
believing, that their pugnacious and warlike desires would thereby
he restrained; and that then they would not be in a hurry to go
to war; for if they did, then the cost of the glory would fall the
heaviest upon themselves. Not that they would pay one farthing
more, proportionally, than the poorest person (the mite of the
poorest person being indeed a greater sacrifice from him, than the
mass is from the rich man) but because of the very large incomes
of the rich, so would they have to pay upon so many the more
pounds.
The aristocracy and the rich, thus paying more to the general
or aggregate sum of the revenue than they now do—and not being
able, as a body, to get back out of that revenue but a very small
portion of it—would therefore have an interest in compelling the
government to reduce its expenditure as much as possible: and as
they have the power to compel, so would they use it for such pur-
pose : because the more extravagant the government, so the more
heavily would it fall upon themselves, the rich and the powerful.
Depend upon it, that then they would neither sutler nor sanction
the shameful extravagance that they now do.
.Now if the people will agree to, and will demand, this system of
taxation, which would remove an incalculable amount of evils and
of loss, as inflicted by the preset system —then, beyond all doubt,
it will become the system adopted by the government; and even-
tually by the world. For it is better and more Just than any other
system that has been or that can be devised and acted upon (in


highly taxed countries in particular) for the purpose of levying
and of raising the national revenue.
Local, parochial, and county rates or taxes, ought also to be
raised on this principle: for all ought to be made to contribute to
these things according to their means. And the only means by which
any or all persons live, who support themselves, is by their in-
cam# ; —shape it, and change it, or call it what you will; or let it
be derived from any source that you can even imagine.
The government might take these local rates under their con*
troul, which in many cases would he better ; or leave them, as now,
in the hands of the local authorities. The amount of income, as
declared by each person for governmental taxation, should be taken
as the basis on which to levy the rate which might be required, in
order to raise the money which was necessary for such purposes.
This mode would save much trouble and expence in the levying,
and in collecting of those rates; the levying would then be upon
the principle of justice: which is very far from being the case
now. The present unjust mode cannot be remedied under the pre~
ent system : it can only be accomplished by substituting the mode
or principle now proposed.
As an instance of the present injustice:
Two persons occupy two adjoining honses: each house being
rated at £IOO as a fair rental: these two persons, by the present
system, are called upon to pay the same amount of poor-rates, and
of all other rates, because of their being rated alike : and yet the
income of one might be, and often is, £2OOO a year; while the
income of the other might not be £SOO,
One parish may be unfortunate enough to have a great number
needing parochial assistance; which might require a rate of ss. in
the pound to relieve them : while another pariah might have very
few poor, needing a rate of only 6d. in the pound to relieve them.
How unjust then is the present system,—which compels the one
parish,—and which perhaps is the poorer parish,—to pay ten
times as much as the other parish. And which compels a person
with £SOO a year, to pay as much as one with £2OOO a year.
A national rate levied on the income of each person—for rental
is no measure of a person’s means or income—would put an end
to this gross injustice: for it would compel each person, and each
parish, to contribute equally according to their means ; which is
their income*
By the plan now commended to your notice, governmental taxes
of every other kind would be abolished. Under it, there would
be no duties on wine, spirits, beer or tobacco ; no duties on tea,
coffee, sugar, &c. &c,; nor on either the necessaries, or on the
luxuries of life : no window tax, or other assessed taxes; no tax
on tiles, bricks, or timber, &c.; all of which operate veiy much
to the injury-of the community, independently of the amount of
the tax. No land tax, or taxes on carriages, or horses, on hounds,
nor on servants, &c. &c. &c.: there would be no duties on wills,
legacies, or property of any kind: no stamp duties at all, either on
bills, receipts, nor any thing else; no duties on licences, deeds,
leases, or indentures; nor on paper, or advertisements, nor yet on
newspapers. The obstructive and the baleful penny stamp on news


papers, could not then be retained on the score of revenue: for
small as that lax may be considered, it jet has an omnipotent effect,
such as but few can perceive or can believe—in retarding the
spread of real social or true political knowledge amongst tbe
people. The people will have to unlearn —a most difficult thing
to do—many things which the press has taught and still teaches
them—before they will be able to comprehend rightly.
Under the proposed system, all the duties on life, ship, and fire
insurances would be abolished ; which duties prevent tens of thou-
sands of persons from insuring, who would insure, were it not for
the very heavy duties thereon. The removal of which would again
re-act for the public advantage ; for the business of the insurance-
offices would then be so vastly increased, that they might or would
reduce their charges for insuring, to a fraction of what they are
now compelled to charge, in consequence of so few persons in-
suring.
Dealers in brandy, wine, rum, tobacco, tea, coffee, sugar, &c.,
in consequence of the duties upon these things, require twice,
three times, four times and even five times as much capital to carry on
their business, beyond what would be necessary—under the pro-
posed system: and in making bad debts, they not only lose the
value of their goods, but they lose the duties also which have
been paid upon then; thus increasing their losses upon an average,
probably, fourfold beyond what they would have lost, had there
been no duties. These persons are also subjected to great incon-
venience and expence, by their goods, or stock in trade, being
necessarily held by the government (in bond, or in pawn) in the
docks, until the duties are paid. Where they remain for many
years sometimes; and for which they are charged a good sum for
warehouse room, or rent.
As the duties are so heavy, and as the owners are not allowed
to take them away until the duties are paid—so they pay the
duties and take their goods away in driblets , as they are required
for immediate sale or consumption. If they were to remove their
goods to their own premises, instead of letting them remain in the
docks, they must first pay the duties: by which they would sink
or lock up for years, sums of money for these duties, four times
as great as are already locked up in the money which has already
been paid for them to tbe foreigner. By this means they avoid
losing the interest of immense sums of money, for years. But
this saddles them with considerable expence for dock warehouse-
room-rent; and compels them to suffer the inconvenience of having
their stock in trade in the docks instead of at home. Thus a per-
son’s stock in trade is in the docks while his place of business, in
a great many cases, is miles away.
Undoubtedly the public to a considerable, indeed to the chief
extent—pay for the losses, for the employment of so much addi-
tional capital, and for the great inconveniences that these persons
labor under. But these become additional reasons why the public
should endeavour to put an end to such a system : and which, in
a great variety of other ways, largely increases the cost of these
things to the consumer, beyond the amount of the duties, heavy
as they are. The preventions to the increase of manufactures, com


inerce ani trade, which result from the customs and excise duties
are incalculable; besides the obstructions, delays, hindrances, and
losses which they entail on the trade already carried on.
To enumerate the evils that would be removed, and the advan-
tages which would he gained by the proposed system, as cornpan-d
with the present system of taxation, would he an almost insupi-r-
--------able ta*k : some have been alluded to ; another may be addo n
Thousands of persons now go abroad to live, for the sole purpose =>f
making their incomes go further than they can in fin's country.
Such persons would then be glad to stay at home. Thousand* iff
foreigners would also be induced to come here ; for they couni
then live as cheaply in England as they could abroad ; besides par-
taking of the many benefits and advantages which England affords
beyond what other countries do.
It is a fact , that a tax of about £8 per cent, on all Incomes,
would be more than amply sufficient to raise the necessary amount
of revenue of the government.
To those who have not reflected on the subject, it may seem cruel
to tax the poor man £8 per cent, on his already wretched pittance
of 10s. a week : but when such consider the admitted fact that by
the present system of taxation and corn laws, he has taken
him not less than £3O per cent ., some estimating* it as high as £6O
per cent. —the half of which never goes to the government; but,
through the foolish system of taxation, into the pockets of others
—you will then see, that by the plan now proposed, the poor
fellow would have some addition to his means, instead of a dimi-
nution : not only so ; for while the present system takes from mm
£3O per cent, instead of £8 per cent, as now proposed—that
system while it takes so much more from him, at the same time
produces a diminution of wages —by crippling the trade already ex-
isting ; and thus causing a scarcity of employment. Kot only that,
for the present system prevents a very large increase of manufac-
tures, commerce, and trade, which would and must ensue , if freed
from the bonds and shackles in which the present system of taxa-
tion now hold and choke them.
The mode proposed, is therefore peculiarly worthy of the support
of ail those who live by their own labor and industry : tueir best in-
terests and welfare are bound and wound up in it; and in the
results which must flow from its adoption. It is little better than
madness for such persons, to allow themselves to be led on by the
rich, and by the prejudiced , by the inconsiderate , and by the short
sighted , to raise a hue and cry against it. Examine therefore, and
reflect, and see for yourselves; and do not allow yourselves to be
made the dupes of others, to serve their purposes, and to advance
their interests ; and which in many cases really are only imaginarv
for undoubtedly, some of those w’ho would mislead you, are actu-
ated by honest motives: hut they themselves are laboring under
gross delusions. Your real interest is dependent on consenting ro
the proposed system of taxation : and then in honestly paying your
fair share. Then, when you demanded the right of voting, you
could not be taunted with the false assertion that you paid no
taxes. For although it is true that you now pay but a small por-
tion of taxes directly —yet indirectly you pay nearly' the whole of
the taxes. And by the proposed plan—on account of your num


bers forming so vast a majority, you would still pay at least double
the amount of taxes that all the other classes put together would
pay; from the Queen down to the churchwarden. For even then
the working classes would pay £34 millions a year to the govern-
ment; while the nobility, gentry, merchants, shopkeepers, &c.,
would pay only £l6 millions a year to the government.
Yet still this plan of taxation is just, the least injurious to your-
selves, —and therefore additionally desirable. Besides which,
you would throw off a host of contraband robbers and many others ;
who, by the present system of taxation, are enabled to take even
more from you than the government does. You would thus rid
yourselves of a burthen greater even than that of the government.
According to the old maxim, honesty is the best policy : and so it
is in this matter: for people trying to avoid paying directly , that
is, in a straight forward way, that which they must otherwise pay
indirectly; are even more foolish that the ostrich, which drives its
head under the sand, and then fancies that its pursuers cannot see it.
So those people who fancy that by refusing to pay direct taxes,
they shall escape paying them at all, as much deceive themselves
as does the silly ostrich: for by causing the taxes to be taken
from them indirectly and by a roundabout process —not only do
they not escape paying of them, but they, unconsciously, have to
pay, and do pay, considerably more, through the insidious processes,
and the cunning and expensive machinery, which they compel to
be employed against them, for the purposes of levying and for col-
lecting the taxes.
There is no necessity for , nor wisdom , in making the income tar
inquisitorial. The proper way would he, to call upon each person to
make a return upon his oath or affirmation that his income does not
exceed the amount stated in his return. Persons might then state
their incomes to be as much above the true amount, as would
satisfy their vanity; but not beloxv the true amount. By so
doing, the authorities must admit that returnand if any person
could be proved to have made a wilfully false return, then let
such person he punished for purjury. And as it would be the
duty, so also would it be to the interest of all persons to help to
convict, or treat with scorn and '‘send to Coventry”—which,
perhaps, would be the most elective remedy—any one who
attempted to pay less than his fair share: for in proportion as
such persons could shuffle off, so would the honest have to make
up the deficiency which the roguery of others would cause.
In respect of the collection of this tax ; it would, no doubt, in
some cases, be more convenient and proper that employers should
pay it for their workmen; and for the master to deduct from the
wages, the amount that bad been paid on the workman’s account:
which the workman ought to, and no doubt would pay cheerfully.
For supposing him to receive 30s. a week, then the deduction for
this tax would be, not quite 2s. 6a.: he would therefore receive
275. 6d. And now let him enquire of himself how much more that
27 5. 6d. would then purchase for him beyond what the 30s. does
under the present system: for with perfectly free trade, and with
all other taxes abolished , as would be the case under the new system;
his loaf would cost him about 4 d. or sd. instead of B d, or 10 d. :
meat instead of being B d. and 9d, would be about M. per lb.-, tea


would be about 3s. and Is. 6d. instead of 4s. and 6s. a lb.: sugar
would be 1 %d. and 3d. a lb.: and so would be the price of many
other things in the same diminished proportion: indeed there is
every reason to believe that the 275. 6d . would then purchase as
much as 40s. would now: he therefore would be the gainer to the
extent of the value of several shillings a week. And the man
who has 10s. a week, after paying his lOd. tax —would with the
9s. 2d, which he had left, be able then to purchase therewith as
much probably as he could now purchase for 15s. Surely then
the industrious classes ought to demand such a system, as it would
be peculiarly beneficial to them, and to all persons of small in-
comes. Self interest and justice alike call upon the people to
submit to this income tax system of taxation: for it can hardly be
expected that the rich will consent to such a system, if the millions
object to it. For if nobody below an income of £l5O were to be
taxed, then the tax must be raised to £3O per cent.; and to sup-
pose that those above £l5O would consent to that, much less that
they would propose it, is entirely beyond the range of probability.
Depend upon it, the matter can only be accomplished, by the
people consenting to bear their fair share: which consists in their
paying the same rate as the rich: by the people demanding it; and
by actively supporting any administration which may have wisdom
and virtue enough to propose it. Corn law repeal should have
been accompanied with the abolition of the customs and excise
duties; and the establishment of the income tax as the only
proper means of raising the national revenue: for without the total
abolition of the customs and excise duties or taxes—and the sweep-
ing away of the navigation laws which injure and entail loss upon
the people of this and of all nations—you cannot have free trade.
In that matter therefore you would but mock yourselves.
This is merely a skeleton sketch of the positive or rather per-
haps the negative advantages of this system of taxation; for tax-
ation in any shape is an unavoidable evil.
By this mode of taxation, there would be no other tax whatever to
be paid to the government, but this one tax, the Income tax. It
behoves all persons whose incomes are under ,£2OOO a year, and
in many cases even the more wealthy—to do all that tb«y can to
cause it to be adopted by the government. The Peel government
has advanced a little in this direction; and must go on in it in pro-
portion as they advance to free trade .
Urge upon them this £8 per cent, tax on all incomes: let them
be able to plead, that the people demand it; and thus you may
get it established. The government could then, with propriety,
safety and consistency—not only abolish the corn laws—but they
could scatter to the flames and to the winds all the duties and taxes
which now load the statute book; and which hold in bonds the
bursting energies, powers, and capabilities of this country, so
much, so grievously, so seriously, and so detrimentally, to and
against, the interests of its people, and of the world.
21 st December , 1845,


January, 1848.
Most persons after having read and considered the foregoing
matter, have been willing to admit that direct taxation would be
much less injurious, and therefore to be preferred, to indirect
taxation. But for want of a better understanding of the matter,
many call for a Property tax; or a graduated income tax, which
levied different rates of tax; higher rates as the income was
higher, and lower rates as the income was lower; higher rates on
incomes derived from sources which made the income certain; and
lower rates on incomes which are uncertain , such as those derived
from manufactures, trade, professions, &c. &c. Which system of
taxing would be highly unjust and foolish —as will be shewn : yet,
very naturally, desired by those having little property, or small
incomes. For after all attempts to make these unjust distinctions
—to do which would require a great deal of complicated and ex-
pensive machinery—it would be a thousand times more unjust,
than an equal rate of tax on ALL Incomes: for by an unequal rate
nearly all would pay either too much or too little.
The agriculturist ought now, as a matter of common justice—to
insist upon the abolition of the ciistoms and excise duties; in order
that there might be free trade in all other things; as that which he
produces is to be thrown open to the competition of the world.
The Corn Law League ought not yet to have disbanded themselves,
for their work is not yet quite finished: as there is still to be a duty
of one shilling a quarter on corn; which is called merely a nominal
duty : but which will, in one way or another, entail on the con-
sumer, a charge of not less than 3s. a quarter. For all the evils
and obstructions, detentions and expensive machinery, before ex-
isting, must be kept up and inflicted to collect that one shilling. If
there is any use in knowing how much corn comes into the country,
every person importing it would freely send a penny note, to any
office appointed by the government for the purpose, stating the
quantity received, at the time of its importation. The League
ought also to have kept themselves embodied, for the purpose of
assisting the agriculturists and others in procuring the abolition of
the customs and excise duties: as well as of the navigation laws;
which inflict enormous losses upon society, and are a disgrace to any
people pretending to intelligence; and are harriers to free trade.
Comparatively nothing has yet been done In the way of free
trade: the repeal of the corn law, which is but very partial free
trade—has not come into play yet: the fruits or effects are all yet
to come: the customs and excise duties are in full vigour, and the
navigation laws in active operation. It is therefore a gross delu-
sion or a cheat, to charge upon free trade the commercial and the
social ills, which have recently resulted from famine; and from
casualties, to which trade and commerce have always been liable.
Besides, the admission of foreign corn did not result from free
trade: the ports were opened in violation of the law. If free trade
had existed, more than a million of people would have been saved—
who have been destroyed by starvation, and are now in their
graves—because the law prevented food from coming here.
Lord J. Russell ought, by the people of Ireland, to be made to
pay in purse and in person as far as he could—and which would


be next to no recompense' —tor the horrible and devastating starva-
tion and misery that he, by his cruel policy, allowed there to
prevail by his refusal to open the ports —until too late ; by his
refusing to stop the waste of grain used in distillation ; and by re-
fusing to employ the ships of the navy in bringing food from
America, where plenty might have been procured.
The result has been, that in Ireland there have died through
starvation not merely one thousand—or ten times one thousand-
nor even a hundred times one thousand—but a thousand times one
thousand, or even more! The number is so enormous that the
government have used all their power to prevent a return being
made of the multitude* who have been starved to death.
Mocked and outraged Sampson could only say of his destroyed
enemies—there they lie, heaps upon heaps. While to Lord J.
Russsll and to the Landlords of Ireland, it should be thundered—
as with the voice of heaven’s artillery—there they lie multitudes
upon multitudes! If poor Sampson he justified and held up to
admiration for the slaying of his oppressors—what should be the
conduct but stop, forbear.
Lord J. Russell’s talk of responsibility is a mockery, and is
offensive: for it is little better than the footman who drives the
baker from his master’s door—who plays all sorts of disgraceful
pranks in his master’s house—who insults and refuses to admit his
master’s friends—and who, upon being remonstrated with, in-
solently replies that he takes the risponserbillerty on his-self; well
knowing that all bis master can do is to discharge him. Russell’s
refusal to open the ports, has also entailed on the people of
England an additional cost for their bread, of probably, £lO
millions. Russell improperly and quickly interfered with the
Bank, to enable speculators and forestalled to keep up prices:
but he refused to act so as to keep down prices: when most immi*
nently necessary too. Almost every thing which he has done has
been wrong for the people; while he has left undone things of
the greatest importance to them. So there is little good use in him.
What is meant by a property tax ? If it is a tax on property
which produces no income, then, as will be shewn, is such tax
unjust: if it is a tax on property which does produce income, then
is the distinction unnecessary; as it would he justly chargeable
with the income tax.
There are three positions with regard to income: the first, where
a person has as much as he ought to have : next where a person
has more than he ought to have; the other, where a person has less
than he ought to have.
If a person has as much income as he ought to have, then would
the income tax be a fair way of taxing him. If a person has more
income than he ought to have—the proper way to deal with him
would be, to prevent him having more than he is entitled to: and
not to allow this injustice to continue upon the condition of his
paying a little more tax. Do not advocate such folly as that: but
cut down the income.
If a person has less income than he ought to have, he must be a
fool indeed to submit to this wrong, upon the condition that he


should pay a little less tax. Never waste time on such wretched
attempts at justice: but let all pay the same rate: and set to work
manfully and wisely to remedy those monstrous wrongs of too
much and too little , Depend upon it, this, is by far the best way
of acting.
It is thought that those having large incomes ought to pay a
higher rate than those having small incomes.
Now if a person having a large income, has a just right to it,
then ought he to be taxed at no higher rate than he who has a small
income; and if he who has a small income has as muck as he is
justly entitled to, then ought he to pay the same rate as those of
higher incomes. And if it be contended that some have much
greater incomes than in justice they ought to have: then take the
bull by the horns—for you will accomplish the one as easily as the
other—and cut down these unjust incomes; or cut off the sources
through which they are filched. And if some persons have in-
comes less than in justice they are entitled to, then put your shoul-
ders to the wheel, and cause such incomes to be raised. In the
name of all that is good and wise do not be content, where the in-
come is less than it ought to be —with the wretched instalment of
paying a little less tax, nor yet continue to allow yourselves to be
plundered and beggared, on condition of the rich paying a little
more'tax, on the riches which, in the supposed cases, they would
unjustly be heaping up.
It is unsuitable now to go into its mode of operation—but this
income tax system of taxation, for levying and raising all the re-
venue for national or local purposes, would of itself have a powerful
effect in remedying of these evils: independently of many other
things that might and ought to be done for their removal.
Suppose a person to b e justly receiving £4OO a year income;
and that be pays the income tax, say of Is. in the pound: and that
he saves £2OO a year out of it; at the end of 20 years he would
have saved £4000; every pound of which would already have
paid the income tax amounting in the whole to £200; it may
therefore seem to be unjust to charge the £4OOO again with the
income tax. Now suppose that he invests it in land or funds,
so that he may have a certain, though small income therefrom:
it would again be unjust to tax that income at a higher rate
than any other income: unless the doctrine is admitted that the
paying or the receving interest for money is usury and ought
not to be allowed by the law—otherwise, some might think that
that income should be taxed lower, or not at all even: but that
would be wrong: for as h© is secured in his possession by the
law, so ought he to contribute the equal rate, but not more, for the
sustaining of the law, or government.
If a person owns land which produces him no income, because
be cannot cultivate it, or because he cannot let it on Just terms,
or because he cannot get any rent, if let—then he ought not to be
taxed on that property.
If a person owns land which produces him nothing, because he
will not let it, but chooses to keep it uncultivated and overrun with
weeds, or as parks, or as game preserves or wilderness—and if its
non cultivation in no way affected the welfare of society —then that


property ought not to be taxed : for it would be similar to a per-
son who chooses to close his mill or manufactory, and so had no
income: or like a person who did not choose to work and so
had no income: these, if burthensome to nobody, must be passed
by ; having no income to tax: so the trader who did not choose to
do but a fraction of the business which he might do, could only
be taxed on the small income that suited his whim.
But if the welfare of society required the cultivation of such land
then should he be compelled by law either to cultivate or to let it:
then income would accrue and the tax be justly levied. It would
be folly and highly improper in such case, to allow the person to
gratify his fancies or his caprices, in that way to the injury of society
upon condition of his paying a tax however high it might be; un-
less the tax wer e fully equivalent to the injury: for no one has a
right to do what he likes with his own, if in so doing he injures
society.
Let those who contend that settled incomes should be taxed at
a higher rate, than incomes which are precarious—such as those
derived from trade, commerce, and professions—let such remember,
how very small an income is derived from £IOOO invested in land
or in the funds, &c.; the income from which would be under £SO a
year : while £IOOO employed in trade would, probably, produce an
income of £3OO or £SOO a year. Let them consider also that if
these incomes from property were taxed higher than others, so
would it cause such property to he employed in trade, commerce,
Sec., &c., and thus bring down this £3OO or £SOO a year, as well
as the larger incomes which are derived where much larger sums
or capitals are employed—to a much lower mark. The employ-
ment in trade of this, comparatively, dead capital, would operate
in many other ways to diminish the promts or incomes which are
now derived from mercantile, trading, and banking affairs. Con-
sent therefore to an equal rate of tax: it is wise and just.
Now bear in mind the fact, that he who has an income of £IOOO
a year from landed property, has a capital of £30,000; while he
who has an income of £IOOO a year from trade has less capital
than £5000; so that the trader reaps £2O per cent., and in many
cases more than £SO per cent. Yet such is the avarice of some
commercial men, that while they grudge, and would tax at a
higher rate, the small profits of the landholder, yet they would
consider their own capital as almost thrown away if they did not get
seven times, ten times, and even twenty times as much as the
landholder gets. As he is content with so small a return, so the
others ought to blush for their avaricious desires. If he were to
employ bis £30,000 capital in trade he would get at least £6OOO
instead of £IOOO a year.
Surely then the smaller capitalist is unwise and ungenerous in
wishing the landholder to pay a greater rate of tax than himself;
while he is left to reap a return upon his capital six, ten, or
twenty times greater than is reaped by those against whom they
raise the cry of injustice. If the landholders are rogues* then are
the others greater rogues; and fools as well: and if they contend
that the landholders never bought the land p or have no fair right'to
it, —then take it from them; and do not be content to let .them
keep it, on condition of their paying a mite more tax.


As all property is liable, from a variety of causes, to produce
nothing to its possessor —so it ought not to be taxed when it pro-
duces nothing; and when it does produce anything, then that
produce should be taxed in the shape of income, which is alone
the just ground on which to tax property. A person may have
land, houses, or ships, which he may have unoccupied, or even
employed at a loss , or occupied by tenants from whom no rent can
begot. How unjust then to tax such property; which in many
cases would soon amount to confiscation. Therefore the only
proper way in which to tax property, is to tax the income which
it produces. Thus you would bring all property, which ought to
be taxed, to be taxed in a fair and honest manner.
Now even supposing, for the sake of argument, that the income
tax were not a just system of taxation—still it would be good-
policy for all whose incomes are under £2OOO a year, to get the
system adopted. For all such, would pay on their incomes , much
less than they now pay to the government out of their incomes through
the ordinary assessed taxes, the customs and excise duties—which
dip so deeply into every one’s pocket—and from the loss suffered
by those of small means, and by the crippling of trade and by the
low wages consequent thereon.
If it be supposed that the ruling classes cannot be induced to
adopt the income tax system, which would tax them only £8 per
cent., it must be madness to suppose that they will consent to a
property tax which would tax them at least £3O per cent., to make
up the deficiency in the revenue which would be caused by the
abolition of the customs and excise duties, &c., and other taxes.
All those receiving salaries, or pensions from the government,
fixed fees, &c., &c., ought not only to be taxed in common with
all others—but their fees, pensions, &c., ought also to be reduced.
For under corn law repeal, and this system of taxation, relieving
them from all other taxes —commodities would all be much reduced
in price: which in effect would increase the value of their incomes,
&c., perhaps £3O per cent. So it would increase the value of
the physician’s guinea, as well as the lawyer’s 6s. Bd., and the poor
award of the schoolmaster: for all these, in effect, would -have the
value of their incomes increased far beyond what they would have
to pay to the income tax, which now they would so unwisely avoid.
The repeal of the corn laws alone , ought to have been accom-
panied with a reduction of the fees paid to solicitors, &c. etc.;
because the cost of living will thereby be much reduced, when it
has had fair time to produce its effect, and which has not yet even
began. And if tbe proposed system of income-tax taxation were
completed, housekeeping and living would be rendered still less costly.
Therefore the present amount of fees, &c. would, in effect be in-
creased in value very much beyond what those receiving them
would be called upon to pay to the income tax. These persons
(professional men) therefore, had better, perhaps, hold their
tongues ; for the more noise they make, the less likely are they to
be forgotten, or overlooked. Professional and commercial men
ought to assist in carrying out this system, and not oppose it; for
it would powerfully tend to increase the means of the great body
of the people ; and recollect that it is tbe small expendings of tbe
millions that make up the mighty mass of a nation’s affairs; and


not the lumping, but isolated transactions of the comparatively
few rich.
The mass of the people, now, never employ, except gratuitously
and as paupers,— and are by far too poor to pay, as they ought to be
able to do, and as the income-tax taxation would have a powerful
tendency in enabling them to pay,—schoolmasters and teachers,
physicians and solicitors, and tradesmen of many varieties ; which
employment from the millions, would increase the business of all
these persons beyond anything, that they as a body, have ever
yet experienced.
Even were it just to make a different rate for different incomes,
there is the insuperable difficulty —that a line must somewhere be
drawn, or even lines; which, draw them as you would, would
inevitably cut through Justice and injustice. The levying of a differ-
ential rate, while, therefore, attended with increased difficulty and
expence, would be unattended with a single advantage.
It is said that some persons would return their incomes below
the truth: it mightbeso; you can have nothing perfect: but
remember the evasions and plunderings consequent on the customs
and excise duties. The smuggling going on through them is enor-
mous ; and by which the illicit traders or robbers are enabled to
charge upon the public a large part of the duties which never goes into
the public exchequer; hut into the pockets of a multitude of smugglers
and illicit traders: whereby the fair trader is injured or ruined,
the public robbed, and these smugglers and traders amass large
fortunes at the public expence. The public are short-sighted, or
thoughtless enough to wink at this, thinking it is only cheating the
government; while it is themselves alone who are being robbed: for
the government do not lose a farthing by these frauds; for they
raise more by other means. Thus the whole class of smugglers
are enriched by the robberies which these customs and excise laws
emble them to commit upon society : and so the community are not
only compelled to support a most expensive and extravagant
government, but a host of smuggling robbers of all grades and sizes
as well.
It is a ruinous mistake to bold, that it matters not how taxes are
levied. For although it is true that the producers of all the wealth
eventually pay all the taxes ; yet it is equally true that according
to the modes in which taxes are levied, so is society the more, or
the less indifferent or aware, as to the amount of taxation which is
laid upon them, it then becomes highly important that each per-
son should have his share of the taxes taken Immediately or
directly out of his own pocket; because each one knowing and
feeling how much he paid would look at it, and would endeavour
to compel the government to cut down as much as they possibly
could, the amount taken from him; for by as much as he could
get the amount reduced, by so much would there be the more in
his pocket.
The income tax system as proposed, would operate very differ-
ently in many way# to the customs and excise duties. For as it
would necessarily lessen each person’s expenditure or saving to
the extent of the tax, so it would therefore be a real sacrifice from
all who paid it; for it could not be shifted or saddled upon


another person. Suppose a person’s income to be £I2OO a year,
and the tax £8 per cent; then the whole amount of taxes that
he would pay would be £IOO a year. Now suppose that he could
wring that sum additionally, out of those he employs; it would
be at the cost of the vexation and the loss, through carelessness and
inattention of those he employs, and of the odium which is due
to a grinding taskmaster; while he no to keeps all that he can.
Yet he tcould still have to pay the £100; although he squeezed it
out of others. And would, nevertheless , be endeavouring to compel
the government to reduce the amount. Tor one who would wring
it out of others, would most grudgingly pay the £IOO ; he would
look at it as his life’s blood, and would be a thorn in the sides of
the government to enforce retrenchment.
Those who argue that the people would still have the tax thrown
upon them, are driven to the ultimate position, that those who pay
the tax shift it on somebody else, and are therefore none the worse
off: now somebody must be the poorer; and if it be the poor—as
this argument supposes, who are made poorer; then would the
poor be benefited in proportion as the amount of tax was lessened.
And as those who paid the tax, would still fancy that it was so
much out of their pockets, so would they be continually importu-
ning and enforcing the government to reduce its demands upon
them. The amount of which reduction would go into the pockets
of the people, the poor people—if the former position were true.
So upon that showing there would he a material reduction in the
amount of taxation; and all to the advantage of the labouring
people.
The middle classes so long as they sit comfortably in the saddle,
seldom join in any just or popular demands. But direct taxation,
as proposed, would make them look into the extravagant expendi-
ture of the government. The income tax is arousing, and will
always arouse the middle classes , and all who pay taxation in the
lump , to compel the government to reduce its expenditure: and
having the power, they will effect it too. This mode of taxation
teems with advantages for all who desire cheap and righteous
government.
Hear what Peel or Bentinck, Gladstone or Wilson, Cobden or
DTsraeli, or Milner Gibson, who seems to be one of the best of
them—hear with caution all they say: and endeavour to judge
independently: and do not adopt, nor yet oppose, anything,
merely because a man of note may do so.
Undoubtedly the repeal of the corn laws, and this change in the
system of taxation, will and would reduce the incomes of the aris-
tocracy, and of persons in the employment of government and of
others ; but the income of the kingdom will not therefore be reduced -
for it must be remembered that, on the other hand, there will be a
corresponding increase of income, and of means amongst the great
body of the people; probably to much more than a corresponding
extent. Besides the value of commodities will be so much cheap-
ened, which in effect is the same thing as increasing the value of
money; that £1 then would purchase much more of articles of
general consumption than it would now ; so therefore, the ratio of
the government taxation might, or should be correspondingly re


duced: and thus a nominal decrease of the national income would
be of no consequence: for the state would require a less amount
nominally.
To allay any fears which might exist by the proposed change
bein°- effected at once—but for which there is no reasonable
around —it might be done gradually. Let the government begin
by repealing the window tax, and the duties on malt, hops, beer
and tea ; and let them increase the income tax in order to make up
the deficiency : and so let them go on, repealing other taxes, and
in the same proportion increasing the income tax, until the entire
change is effected ; and no other tax whatever is left. The people
at large would support, and not oppose a government who acted
thus.
els perfection cannot be attained in anything; so it is very-
easy to pick holes and to find fault. But let those who disapprove
of the income tax as now proposed, only try to propose a better
sysiem: they will then discover the difficulty,— the impossibility
indeed of doing so : for any other scheme, after a little investiga*
tion into its bearings, and a little discussion on its merits, will be
found to be less just, by far; a great deal more objectionable in
other respects as well; and therefore a worse system of taxation.
The abolition of the corn laws having been effected: common
justice requires that the English agriculturist, and the landlord —
unless you mean to contend that he has no right to rent —should
he enabled to purchase the things which they want, free from the
high prices caused by the customs and excise duties: for how will it
be possible for the farmer to live, with the average price of wheat
below 30s. the quarter, (which, it is more than probable, will be
the case, when corn law repeal has had time to produce its legiti-
mate effect) if he is to be subjected to the present charges for goods,
taxes, rents, and tytlies: he therefore in particular, as well as the
landlord, ought to demand this proposed change in the system of
taxation.
The agriculturist, and almost everybody besides, should also
vigorously insist upon a large reduction in the amount of expenditure
and taxation of the government. They should demand the disband-
ing of half the army and ordnance : for they are not needed, except
to overawe the people; who have too much cause for discontent.
Give them the franchise and the whole nation would at once spring
into national guards; securing life and property at home; and
rendering invasion but a madman’s dream. Nearly the whole of
the Isiavy might be dispensed withy and nine tenths of the Army might
be disbanded , if the government could be induced to adopt Captain
Warner’s irresistible and terrific engines, or missiles of destruction ;
which, paradoxical as it may appear, would be the greatest peace
makers that have ever yet existed: fur such is the dreadful and
sweeping destruction they would deal out, that if two opposing
armies were to use them in the field, scarcely a soul would he left
to tell the tale of slaughter and destruction ; which being so great ,
and the chance of escape so small , would cool the courage of
people ; and would make them endeavour to settle their differences
by arbitration. And it seems that these powers could not be used
long, if more than once, before other nations would discover the


means of making' them. The materials , it is said, abound every-
where in superabundance : thus giving the weakest an equal power
with the greatest and stronger.
If these devastating and equalising engines of war and destruc-
tion, were adopted by the government, there might be a saving of
at least £l4 millions a year : which is equal to a saving of £39,000
a dap in army, navy, and ordnance. The expenditure now is
£50,000 a day! Sunday and week day: so that there would still
be left the sum of £II,OOO a day, to be expended for the infernal
purposes of war, bloodshed, and destruction. Which sum of
£l 1,000 a day, with the adoption of Captain Warner’s tremendous
weapons, would much more efficiently protect the country from inva-
sion, then the present enormous expenditure for army and navy
of £lB millions a year. But then ( and there perhaps is the obstacle )
the occupation of military and of naval officers would be gone :
and that would not suit the patronage of the government, nor the
interests of the members of the houses of Lords and Commons :
and so an unwilling ear is turned upon Captain Warner’s dis-
coveries. For there is this important fact : that while Lord J. Russell
pretends not to believe in them, he yet believes enough to feel it
necessary to threaten Captain Warner and Lord Ingestrie— which he
did as the Queen s chief minister , and in his place in the House of
Commons a few months ago—with a charge of high treason if they
should dare to divulge the secret to a foreign power .
The people therefore ought to compel the government to adopt
these means of Captain Warner’s, by which so great an amount
of taxation might be saved. It therefore concerns the people
deeply: so let them look to it. It is also a matter of the first im-
portance in bringing about the reign of peace, which is so essen-
tial to the prosperity and to the happiness of the people of
all nations. These agents of destruction, while so terrifically
powerful, yet would be so equally at the command of the weak
as well as the strong, of the small as well as the great, of the
poorest and smallest nation, or island, as of the richest and greatest
continent, that nations and powers, great or small, would be put
vptm a par. For the smallest power, even a small ship could inflict
the most dreadful and extensive havoc and destruction. Indeed
the largest powers would then run the greatest risk: like a giant
and a dwarf fighting a duel with pistols: the dwarf could hardly
avoid hitting so large a mark; while it would be difficult for the
giant to hit so small a one. And thus it would be quite as ne-
cessary and prudent for the great to keep civil tongues in their
heads, and to do no wrong, as for the small.
For the larger the nation and the more extended its colonies, so
the points for attack are increased. A single steamer could de-
vastate a town in almost no time. And if the Nemesis steamer,
which was one of the vessels employed against the Chinese, had
been armed by Captain Warner, she alone would, if necessary,
have dealt out more destruction, and sooner have compelled the
Chinese to submit, than was done by all the ships of war, steamers,
and transports, with their thousands of soldiers and sailors, which
were sent against that inoffensive and injured people the Chinese.
INo nation or government could keep this awful power to them


selves: it would, after being adopted, soon be as common, and
within the reach of all, as is that of gunpowder: any half dozen
of persons, it seems, could use and could convey without attract-
ing any notice, a power equal in effect to the broadside of a first-
rate line-of‘battleship, or to a park of artillery: while any individual
might carry almost in his pocket a power sufficient to destroy with
certainty a hundred congregated people, or more.
Governments would thus be afraid to act oppressively: while
individuals would scarcely dare to injure one another, Castles,
fortresses, palaces and all within, might be utterly destroyed
before the bugle could be scarcely sounded. No mountain fort-
resses, however strong and inaccessible for scaling—the rock of
Gibraltar with its garrison, &c., places which have been deemed
impregnable, all could be destroyed and laid waste within about an
hour by Captain Warner’s mighty engines of destruction.
Whatever may be done with regard to taxation, every one not
in the pay of government, ought to hand themselves together and
urge the government Largely to reduce their expenditure . The
administration, in speaking of economy in the government, commit
an outrage upon the word. Their talk of economy partakes of
mockery, imposition and assurance to such an insulting extent, as
should induce only deep indignation and scorn; for they are reck-
lessly extravagant from top to bottom: the larger extravagancies
being upheld by the smaller extravagancies; while the smaller are
upheld by the larger extravagancies. The two mutually dependent
upon, and supporting one another; at a ruinous cost to the people*
The Queen has allowed to her an income of £385,000 a year,
besides having several palaces to live in rent free; and which
have been built, and are furnished and kept in repair at the public
expence. Yet the economical government think that income insuffi-
cient to enable her Majesty to support her husband ; so they give
Prince Albert £30,000 a year besides; which is at the rate of
£577 a week: and in due time you will be taxed to make an
allowance on the same economical scale for each of the Queen’s
children, which will make the birth-day of these, rather a day of
mourning to the people who are compelled to make these ex-
travagant contributions, than a day of rejoicing.
The income to the Queen, is more than £IOSO a day, Sundays and
all: which is more than is paid for fifty years wages to the agri-
cultural labourer, if his wages are Bs. a week; and some are paid
even less than that;—it is more than is paid for forty years
wages; if his wages are 10s. a week: and it is more than i* paid
for thirty-three years wages ; if his wages are 12s. a week. One
day’s pay to the Queen swallows up as much as is paid to the
navigator for twenty years wages, in return for his valuable and
excessive labour, by which our docks are dug, our canals are
excavated, and our railways are cut, even through mountains.
The Queen Dowager, who is not of as much use in society as
the poorest washerwoman, is allowed £IOO,OOO a year, which is
at the rate of £274 a day: this is more than is paid to a hard-
working man and valuable laborer for six years useful and excess-
ive toil. There are millions of persons, and some of our most use-
ful, skilful, able, and scientific men, even, who would think them


selves handsomely provided for, if they could insure only one such
day’s pay for a yearly income in return for their useful, valuable,
scientific, continuous and excessive labors.
Now these are but samples of the reckless extravagance of the
present system of government: for it runs throughout the whole
of the government offices, and officials; who are paid £3OO,
£SOO, £BOO and up to thousands a year, for doing an hour’s work
a day, or perhaps not even that. It is so in Somerset House; the
clerks there do about half an hour’s work a day : for which their
average pay is at the least £3OO a year. It is true they have to be
in attendance, but are doing nothing; one fourth of their number
would be amply sufficient: and were it a mercantile office, nine
out of every ten would be discharged ; while those remaining would
have their salaries reduced : and would then be considered as being
well paid, and net hard worked.
All ought to try to keep the mind open to conviction and rea-
son : and to be careful that prejudice does not rule: and to be par-
ticularly on the guard against sophistry: for such is its nature, that
a plausible case may be made out against this system, or even
against any well established truth , and in favor of anything how-
ever false or bad. Matters should be judged of on their own
merits , and not be accepted because coining from the mouths of
great men. For these have deceived and have misled the people
in favor of war, corn laws, prohibitions, restrictions, and even in
favor of the national debt: that incubus and curse on the nation.
Lord Eldon and many others, used to contend that the national
debt was a national blessing; for that it gave employment and
trade to a vast number of persons. He and they not considering
how much greater an amount of trade and employment was pre-
vented by the money being first taken out the pockets of the mil-
lions by taxation. Indirect taxation too taking an extra sum
greater than that even which goes to the support of the govern-
ment:—forgetting also how much more proper as well as advan-
tageous it would be to leave the money in the pockets of the millions
to fructify; or for the millions to spend it themselves in buying the
comforts or even the necessaries of life which they so much need.
Let not the people be alarmed, at even thousands of useless per-
sons being thrown out of employment, as would be the case, in
proportion as are cut down the salaries paid to the Queen, and to
all the other government officials, dependents, and employes; and
as the army and navy is reduced ; and by the cutting down of
the incomes of the aristocracy : (which the repeal of the corn laws
will do pretty handsomely) for the results will be highly beneficial
to the community. A large number of persons may be thrown out
of demand, such as gentlemen’s servants, who are enabled through
the riches of their masters to live on the fat of the land , dressed in
expensive liveries of gold and silver, as costly in many cases as
the regimental dresses of military officers ; and the cost of a
serjeant’s coat is £l6, and that of a serjeant-major costs £2O, and
both of these are only non-commissioned officers —and thus, these
footmen, &c., who noio are as locusts on the commonwealth, would
be compelled to become useful and productive members of society;
instead of leading the useless and debasing lives which they now


do; in most cases assuming, consuming, and destroying a great
deal more than their masters do.
Of corpse as taxation is lessened, and as the incomes of the
aristocracy become diminished, so will be thrown out of employ-
ment proportionally, such as are supported from those sources; as
gentlemen’s servants, soldiers, &c. &c.: and the enquiry is made,
what is to become of those people? The proper answer to which,
is, that if they cannot find other employment, then they must be
supported out of the poor rate. And even so the nation would be
gainers: for the present employment of those people is of no more
value to the nation, than the digging of holes one day and filling
them up the next day would be; in many cases it is even of less
value than that; for it is positively injurious to society.
Every person, from the king to the beggar—no matter how his
income is derived, or by what legal fiction it may be sanctioned ;
whether as a landholder or a fundholder; pensioner, general, or
soldier; servant or bishop; speculator, forestaller, or regrator;
every one icho does not render , or who has not rendered to society a full
equivalent in useful , physical or mental labour in return for what he
receives, is a drone or a locust in the hive of the industrious : and is
living at their expence; and at the cost of the poor horse: the
wrongs of man are small, when compared to the cruel oppressions
which are inflicted on that dumb and enslaved creature. (Pray
consider and sympathize with the ill-used horse; and with all
animals which man compels excessively to labor for him.) The
footman and the soldier, &c. whose labor is of no use to society
cost society, at a low estimate, not less than £SO a year each.
Now these persons if discharged, and unable to find other em-
ployment, must be sustained out of the poor rate: they could
thus be well sustained for £2O a year each; whereas they now
cost society £SO a year each. Society would therefore save £3O
a year in each such individual case. The industrious hive so
far, therefore, would have cause to be glad. Besides, the ranks
upon their side, would, so far, be increased and strengthened;
while their opponents, to the same extent, would be weakened;
and, by so much the less able to resist just and necessary
reforms.
The poor soldier, who is paid the least of any in the employ-
ment of the government—even his cost is extravagant; because
his occupation is neither productive nor useful to society: he be-
comes a soldier by the compulsion of necessity, arising from in-
competent and pompous rulers. For the life of a soldier, although
deprived of liberty, and so a slave—is preferable to the condition
of multitudes of honest laboring people. Neither the soldier,
nor policeman would be such if they could help it, any more than
the people would be in an union workhouse. Their welfare is
all one with the people; they are all in the same boat. It is there-
fore improper for the people to be hostile to either the soldier or
policeman; whatever hostility they may please to feel against the
commissioners, officers, or ministers.
Those who think it proper, and beneficial, to support in extrava-
gance, for the sake of trade , such as have been alluded to, and are
of no use to society—might increase that sort of trade to a very-
great extent , if they were to support extravagantly and sumptu


ously—the more sumptuously the more trade,—all those who
are now dependent upon parochial relief. But would it not be by
far better for the sake of trade , to have that trade increased by
letting the millions of laborers and workmen (who produce all that
man enjoys) have the means of providing themselves with the
necessaries and comforts, if not of the luxuries of life?—that
would increase trade far beyond anything that has yet been ex-
perienced.
Submit not to be ground down into the earth by such a system
of government and by its profligate extravagance. The new French
government have just discharged the ambassador whom the govern-
ment of Louis Philippe kept in England at an income of £l s thou-
sand a year, and have sent one in his place, at an income of
£4OO a year: who, in all probability, will discharge his duties
much more to the advantage of the French people, than did the
other.
Yet the government of England is more extravagant in these and
in alt other things, than was that of Louis Philippe.
The purpose of the foregoing matter has been to shew—
That direct taxation is much less injurious than indirect taxation.
That taxation should be raised from one source ojily; by which there
would be the expence of only one levy, and one collection ; and
by which every person would know how much the government
cost him.
That the one source from which all taxation ought to be derived is
the income tax: for that would make each person contribute
according to his means.
That the income tax is just, simple, and practicable: thatit is quite
unnecessary to make it inquisitorial: that a rate of about £8
per cent, on all incomes—and were it double that amount it
would still be highly beneficial to adopt the system —would
produce a revenue more than sufficient.
That a Property tax is unjust, impolitic and unsuitable.
That a rate of tax higher or lower , on different properties, or on
different incomes, is unjust, and impolitic;—impracticable,
and irreconcilable with reason.
That retrenchments to a very large extent , could, and ought to be
made in all the departments of the government. All of
which are now kept up at a most profligate cost.
That an income tax charging the same rate alike, upon all incomes,
is the only just principle that can be devised lor levying and
raising the taxes. And to induce the people of this, and of
all nations, if possible, to support and to demand the Income
Tax System of Taxation.
SAMVEL COBHAM,
nth March , 3 848.
W. Lake, Printer, 170, Fleet Street.
