

Disabilities of Aliens and Coloured Persons within the
Commonwealth and its Territories.(¹)
PRIME MINISTER'S DEPARTMENT.
P.M. 20/1373.
Printed for Departmental Use.]
MEMORANDUM.
Pacific Branch, December, 1920.
This Memorandum contains a summary of the
disabilities and restrictions to which aliens are sub-
jected within the Commonwealth and its Territories* 2 *
by or under the authority of legislation of the Com-
monwealth or the States. Disabilities and restric-
tions which apply also to British subjects, as well as
any which arise otherwise than from legislation of the
Commonwealth or the States, are not within the scope
of the Memorandum; but disabilities and restrictions
placed upon coloured persons, irrespective of nation-
ality, are included.
Paragraphs 5 and 6 contain a brief reference to the
Statutes of the Commonwealth and the States which
affect foreign companies and foreign ships.
1. DISABILITIES IN REGARD TO POLITICAL
RIGHTS.
{a) Franchise for and Membership of Parliaments.
Commonwealth. —An alien cannot be a member
of the Senate or House of Representatives (Con-
stitution, sections 16, 34) or an elector for the
Senate or the House of Representatives (Common-
wealth Franchise Act 1902, section 3). An abo-
riginal native of Australia, Asia, Africa, or the Is-
lands of the Pacific (except New Zealand) cannot
be an elector for the Senate or the House of Re-
presentatives, unless he is entitled under the law
of the State to vote at elections for the more
numerous House of the Parliament of the State
{Commonwealth Franchise Act 1902, section 3.
. and Constitution, section 41).
New South Wales. —An alien cannot be an elector
under the Parliamentary Electorates and Ejections
Act 1912, section 20(1).
Victoria. —An alien cannot be an elector or mem-
ber of the Legislative Council or Legislative As-
sembly {Constitution Act , section 11; Constitution
Amendment Act 1915, sections 47, 242). No
“ male adult native of China or its dependencies or
of any islands in the Chinese seas not born of Bri-
tish parents,” and no person born of Chinese
parents, unless a British subject, may V9te at a
Parliamentary Election {Chinese Act 1915, sec-
tion 4).
Queensland. —Aliens, as well as naturalized
Asiatics and Africans, are disqualified from mem-
bership of the Legislative Council and Legislative
Assembly {Constitution Act 1867) and from vot-
ing at elections for the Assembly {Elections Act
1915, section 9). Aboriginal natives of Australia,
Asia, or of the Islands of the Pacific may not he
enrolled as voters {Elections Act 1915, section
11).
South Australia. —Electors for the Legislative
Council and House of Assembly must he British
subjects {Constitution Further Amendment Act
1913, sections 17, 20).
Western Australia.- —Electors and members of
the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly
must be British subjects. No aboriginal native of
Australia, or Africa, or person of the half-
blood, may be registered as an elector for the Coun-
cil, except in respect of a freehold qualification, or
tor the Assembly. ( Constitution Acts Amendment
Act 1899, sections 7, 10, 20; Electoral Act 1907,
sections 17, 18.)
Tasmania.—An alien cannot he an elector for or
a member of either 'House of Parliament {Consti-
tution Amendment Act 1900, sections'3, 5).
(h) Franchise for and Membership of Municipal Bodies.
Slew South Wales.—An alien may not vote for
or hold office as an Alderman or Shire Councillor
{Local Government Act , section 30(2)(a)).
victoria.—No “male adult native of China or
its dependencies or of any islands in the Chinese
seas not horn of British parents,” and no person
of Chinese parents, being an alien, may vote at a
municipal election {Chinese Act 1915, * section 4;
LocvJ Government Act 1915, section 79.)
Queensland. —An alien may not be a member of,'
or vote at an election for, a local authority ( Local
Authorities Act 1902, sections 14, 24).
Western Australia. —An alien may not be a
Mayor or Councillor, or elector of a municipality,
or a member or ejector of a Bead Board {Munici-
palities Act 1906, sections 37, 49 ; Road Districts
Act 1919, sections 23, 33).
(c) Naturalization.
Commonwealth. —The Nationality Act 1920
(passed by both Houses, November, 1920) removes
the restriction contained in the Naturalization Act
1903-1917, by which aboriginal natives of
Africa, or the Islands of the Pacific (except New
Zealand) could not he naturalized.
■ Papua. —Alien aboriginal natives of Asia,
Africa, or the Islands of tiie Pacific (excepting
Aew Zealand) may not be naturalized {Aliens
Ordinance 1911, section 5).
{d) Employment in Public and Municipal Services.
Commonwealth. —An alien (except with the per-
mission of the Governor-General) may not be ad-
mitted to the Public Service {Commonwealth Pub-
lic Service Act 1902-11, section 26).
New South Wales. —Aliens (unless with the per-
mission of the Governor in Council) may not be
admitted to the Public Service {Public Service
Act , section 28). An alien may not receive or
hold any certificate as a town or shire clerk, audi-
tor, engineer, or overseer (clause 39 of Ordinance
No. 4, made under the Local Government Act
1919).
Western Australia. —Aliens may not be &r
pointed to the Public Service {Public Service
1904, section 24). e Mi
( l ) This Memorandum has been compiled from th“ Statutes and Statutory Rules of the Comm onwealth and the Ordinances of the Territories and the Reg
tions thereunder (Nov. 1920); from information supplied by the Premiers of N.S \V. (28A20), Viet. (30.9.20), Queensland (22.9.20), W.A. (22.9.20), Tas, (29.(
(P.M. 20/1373); and in the case of South Australia, from the Index to the Statutes of that State.
(*) Not including the New Guinea Territory.
C. 20948. *


(e) Service on Juries.
New South Wales. —Aliens who have resided in
New South Wales for less than seven years are nor,
qualified to serve on juries ( Jury Act 1912, section
4(a)).
Victoria.— Aliens are not qualified to v serve on
juries (Juries Act 1915, section 5, as amended).
Tasmania. —Aliens who have resided in Tas-
mania for less than ten years are not qualified to
serve on juries (Jury Act 1899, section 5).
r ~
2. DISABILITIES IN REGARD TO PROPERTY.
(a) Holding of Land.
New South Wales. —An. alien who, on applica-
tion, is granted (a) an original conditional pur-
chase, original homestead selection, original settle-
ment lease, original conditional purchase lease, or
original special conditional purchase lease; or (b)
a homestead farm, suburban-holding Crown lease,
or lease within an irrigation area, forfeits all his
rights unless, in cases (a) within five years, and
in cases (b) within three years, he becomes natura-
lized. The rights of subjects of foreign powers
with which there are treaties extending to New
South Wales are preserved. (Crown Lands Con-
solidation Act 1913, section 241.)
In 1914 the Land Appeal Court held that in view
of this provision, the privileges of the Crown Lands
Act should not be extended to Asiatics, as they were
at that time debarred by Commonwealth law from
naturalization.
These restrictions apply to original applicants
for leases; there is no restriction on acquisition by
transfer.
The Closer Settlement ( Amendment ) Act re-
stricts alien applicants under that Act (but sub-
ject to treaties) to subjects of allied powers, and
to subjects of neutral powers -who served with the
British Forces during the w 7 ar. Failing naturali-
zation within two years of application, the land is
forfeited.
Queensland. —The Leases to Aliens Restriction
Act 1912 forbids the granting of a lease, or the
entering into any agreement for a lease, of any
parcel of land exceeding 5 acres in extent, to or
with any alien who has not first obtained in the
prescribed manner a certificate that he is able to
read and write from dictation words in such
language as the Secretary for Public Lands directs
(section 3). Treaty rights are preserved by section
7. (“ Lease ” includes “ any contract, agreement,
scheme or device (a) by which any estate or in-
terest in land less than fee-simple is created or is
agreed or is intended to be created; or (b) relat-
ing to the leasing of land on the share system ”
section 2.)
Regulations made under the Act authorize the
Attorney-General to exempt any alien whom, by
reason of—
(a) the subsistence between the nation to
which such alien belongs and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland of a treaty conferring most
favoured nation rights; or
(b) such aliens long residence within Queens-
land or the Commonwealth; or
(c) such alien having a lawful wife and
Ml family residing with him in Queens-
HHB land; or
( d ) other circumstances satisfactory to the
Attorney-General,
it is not considered necessary to examine. (Re-
gulations of Ist November, 1912, Queensland Go-
vernment Gazette, 9th November, 1912, page 1256.)
Regulations dated 22nd May, 1913, provide for
the exemption from the Act of subjects and citi-
zens of Italy, Russia, Colombia, and Switzerland
so long as certain treaties remain in force in
Queensland ( Queensland, Government Gazette,
24th May, 1913, page 1476).
The Lands Act 1910-20 provides that an alien
who has not first obtained in the prescribed man-
ner a certificate that he is able to read and write
from dictation words in such language as the Min-
ister may direct, may not acquire a selection (sec-
tion 59(1) (b)).
If an alien acquires a selection or any estate
or interest in a selection, and does not within five
years thereafter become naturalized, all his right,
title, and interest in the selection is forfeited (sec-
tion 62).
The lessee of a selection may not sublet to any
alien, or enter into any partnership or agreement
with any alien, under which any interest fin the
land or any part thereof shall pass to such alien
unless the alien has obtained in the prescribed
manner a certificate that he is able to read and
write from dictation not less than fifty words in
such language as the Minister may direct (section
94).
South Australia. —Asiatics are disqualified from
obtaining leases of lands in irrigation areas (Ir-
rigation and Reclaimed Lands Act 1914, section
19).
northern Territory.—The Northern Territory
Crown Lands Act 1890 provided (section 102) that
an Asiatic alien could not acquire the fee-simple
of land in the Territory. According to an opinion
of the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor, this pro-
hibition applies only to the acquisition of Crown
Lands, and does not otherwise affect a provision
in the Aliens Act 1864, by which alien friends were
given complete rights of acquisition* and disposal of
real property.
In so far as the prohibition affects Crown lands,
it no longer operates as a discrimination, since by
Ordinance No. 8 of 1912 leases only of Crown
lands, and not titles in fee simple, can now be ac-
quired.
( b ) Shares in Companies.
Commonwealth. —lSTo alien may, without the con-
sent in writing of the Treasurer,, acquire any share
in any company incorporated in the Common-
wealth ; and no company in which more than one-
third of the shares are held by aliens may, without
the consent in writing of the Treasurer, acquire
any mine or interest in a mine, or carry on any
mining or metallurgical business (War Precau-
tions Act Repeal Act 1920, section 8).
See also Part V. below.
3. DISABILITIES IN REGARD TO EMPLOYMENT
AND OCCUPATION.
(a) Bounties, Industries Assisted by.
Commonwealth. —Bounties under the Bounties
Act 1907-1912 and later Acts granting bounties,
are payable only in respect of goods grown or
produced by white labour; but the employ-
ment of any aboriginal native ‘of Australia or
of any coloured person born in Australia and hav-
ing one white parent shall not prejudice a claim to
bounty.


(b) Dairying.
Queensland. —The Dairy Produce Act 1920 pro-
hibits the employment in the working of any re-
gistered dairy produce premises of any person who
has not first obtained, in the prescribed manner, a
certificate that he is able to read and ’write from
dictation words in the English language of not less
than fifty words (Section 35).
The Margarine Act 1910 contains a similar pro-
, vision in regard to the employment in licensed fac-
tories of persons not of European descent.
(c) Factories, Occupation of and Employment in.
Restrictions in respect of factories imposed by
the laws of the following States are rendered more
onerous in respect of Asiatics*by the definitions of
a “ factory,” which are as follow:
New South Wales.—A factory is defined as any
place in which four or more persons are engaged
in handicraft, &c., or any place in which one or
more Chinese are so employed ( Factories Act
1912). The hours of work ip factories in which
Chinese are employed are restricted by the Act
(section 49).
Victoria.—A factory is defined as any place in
which four or more persons are employed in handi-
craft, &c., or in which one or more Chinese per-
sons are so employed ( Factories Act 1915, section
3). The hours of work in factories in which
Chinese are employed are restricted by the Act
(section 38).
Queensland.—A factory is defined as any place in
which two or more persons are employed in handi-
craft, &c., or in which a person or persons of the
Chinese or other Asiatic 'race is or are so en-
gaged ( Factories and Shops Act 1900, section 4).
Furniture made by Chinese workmen or on the pre-
mises of any Chinese employer must be stamped
with the words “ Chinese labour ” (section 58n).
South Australia.—The hours of work of factories
in which any Chinese person is employed are re-,
stricted (Industrial Code 1920, section 356).
Western Australia. —A factory is defined as any
place in which six or more persons are engaged in
handicraft, &c., or any place in which a person or
persons of the Chinese or other Asiatic race are so
engaged (Factories Act 1904, section 2).
No person of the Chinese or other Asiatic race
may be registered as owner or occupier of a fac-
tory unless he satisfies the Minister that he carried
on business in such factory before Ist November,
1903; or employed in a factory unless he» was so
employed before Ist November, 1903 (section 46).
The fee for registration of a factory of which
the occupier, or any person employed in or about
which, is of the Chinese or other Asiatic race, is
y I ' y
higher than that payable in respect of factories not
occupied by or employing such persons (Regula-
tions under the Factories Act 1904, dated 19th Jan-
uary, 1905).
Tasmania. —A factory is defined as any place in
which four or more persons not of Chinese ot.other
Asiatic race, or one or more persons of the Chinese
or other Asiatic race, are engaged in handicraft,
&c. (Factories Act 1910-11, section 2).
(d) Gold-buying.
Victoria.—A certificate or licence under the Gold
Buyers Act 1915 may not be issued to any person
having a Chinese father or mother (section 10).
(e) Government Contracts.
Commonwealth. —Employment in Carriage of
Mails.—The Post and Telegraph Act 1901-16 pro-
vides (section 16) that no contract or arrangement
for the carriage of mails shall be entered into on
behalf of the Commonwealth unless it contains a
condition that only white labour shall be employed
in such carriage.
Queensland. —The Railway Constructional Land
Subsidy Act 1892 prohibits companies receiving
subsidies from employing Asiatics or Africans not
of European descent.
(/) Hawkers’ licences.
South Australia. —A hawker’s licence may not be
issued to an alien except on proof that he has a
sufficient knowledge of the English language for
the exercise of the trade of a hawker, and that he
has resided in South Australia for at least two
years ( Licensed Hawkers Amendment Act 1898,,
section 4).
(g) Liquor Licences.
Victoria. —Liquor licences may not be granted
to aliens ( Licensing Act 1915, section 22).
Western Australia. —■Liquor licences may not be
granted to aliens ( Licensing Act 1911, section 27).
( h ) Mining.
New South Wale?. —No Chinese who arrived in
the Colony after the passing of the Chinese Re-
striction and Regulation Act 1888, may engage in
mining without express authority from the Min-
ister (section 11 of that Act).
Queensland. —The Mining Act 1898 disqualifies
any alien holder of a miner’s right, “ who by line-
age belongs to any of the Asiatic, African, or Poly-
nesian races ” from exercising any of the rights
conferred by the miner’s right otherwise than for
the purpose of mining for gold on alluvial ground,
or for purposes connected with such mining, or
from exercising any of such rights upon any gold-
field other than a gold-field upon which an
or African alien was at the commencement of the
Act permitted to mine for gold ( Mining Act 1898,
section 15).
A consolidated miner’s right shall not authorize
the employment by virtue thereof of an Asiatic
or African alien upon any gold-field or mineral
field (section 15).
Business licences may not be issued to aliens
who by lineage belong to any of the Asiatic, Afri-
can or Polynesian races other than members of
those races who at the date of the passing of the
Act were holders of such licences (section 17.)
Gold mining leases under section 24 of the Act
and mineral leases under section 30 of the Act,
may not be issued to any alien who by lineage be-
longs to any of the Asiatic, African or Polynesian
racdk (section 24).
Miner’s homestead leases may not be granted to
an alien who has not obtained in the prescribed
manner a certificate that he is able to read and
write from dictation words in such language as the
Minister may direct ( Miner s Homestead Leases
Act of 1913, sections 3,5). Treaty rights are
preserved ( Amendment Act of 1913, section 2).
South Australia. —A miner’s right issued to an
Asiatic alien is available only for the particular
goldfield or locality described in it ( Gold Mining
Act 1886, section 2). A miner’s right may not be
issued to any Asiatic alien for working on any
new r goldfield, .unless the first discoverer of it was
• an Asiatic alien (section 3).
Western Australia. —Miners’ rights may not be
issued to, nor may an interest therein be held by,
Asiatic or African aliens, nor without the Min-
ister’s approval, to or by Asiatic or African sub-
jects ( Mining Act 1904, sections 23, 24).


Mining leases may not he granted to Asiatic
or African aliens {ibid sections 42, 48). Asiatic
or African aliens may not mine on Crown land
and may be removed therefrom; and they may
not be employed in or about any mine {ibid section
290).
Northern Territory.—The Northern Territory
Mining Act 1903 contains the following restric-
tions in regard to Asiatic aliens:—
{a) All miner’s rights, except those issued to
Asiatic aliens, are available for the
whole of the Northern Territory (sec-
tion 17).
{b) No Asiatic alien holding a miner’s right
is entitled to exercise any of the rights
and privileges conferred on the holder
of a miner’s right otherwise than for
the purpose of mining for gold or tin
on alluvial ground, the registration of
which as a claim or prospecting area is
• not required by the Act; and a miner’s
right issued to an Asiatic alien is avail-
able under section 19 only for the par-
ticular mining district, gold-field or lo-
cality described in the right (section
19).
(c) A miner’s right may not be issued to an
Asiatic alien for working on any new
gold-field, and an Asiatic alien may not
work on any -new gold-field unless the
first discoverer was an Asiatic alien
(section 21).
Tin-dredging leases may npt be granted to any
xisiatic alien, and an Asiatic alien may not ac-
/ x/
quire or hold any tin-dredging lease or any interest
therein {Tin-dredging Ordirmnce 1911, section 10).
{i) Navigation.
Commonwealth. —Aliens may not be- admitted to
examination for an officer’s certificate of com-
petency or be granted a pilotage exemption certi-
ficate {Navigation Act 1912, sections 17, 341).
New South Wales. —Pilotage exemption certifi-
cates may not be granted to aliens {Navigation
Act, section 68).
Victoria. —Pilotage exemption certificates may
not be granted to aliens {Marine Act 1915, section
75).
South Australia.—Pilotage exemption certificates
may be granted only to British subjects and in
respect of British ships engaged in certain trades
and of whaling ships {Marine Bdard and Naviga-
tion Act Amendment Act 1902, section 20).
(;) Pearling.
Queensland. —No person who has not first ob-
tained in the prescribed manner a certificate of
having passed the dictation test may hold any
licence in respect of any ship or boat employed
in the fishery, or any lease under the Pearl-shell
and Beche-de-Mer Fishery Act 1881-1913 (Act of
1913, section 7).
Regulations made on Bth January, 1915 under
the Pearl-shell and Bcche-de-Mer Fishery Acts
Amendment Act 1913 exempt from the Act —
(1) All native-born residents of Australia
of European descent.
(2) All residents of Australia of European
parentage. *
(3) All residents of Australia who are de-
scended from any resident of the Continent of
North America other than from any abo-
riginal native thereof or negro or aboriginal
of African or Asiatic race.
(4) Any person not otherwise entitled to
exemption under the foregoing provisions of
this Regulation whom, by reason of any cir-
cumstance satisfactory to the Treasurer, it is
not considered necessary to examine (Queens-
land Government Gazette, 9th January, 1915,
page 66).
Western Australia.—No licences in connexion
with pearling, other than a diver’s licence, may he
granted to an alien; and the Minister is authorized
to issue directions as to granting of licences (Pearl-
ing Act 1912, sections 11, 15). Directions dated
18th July, 1913, prevent the granting of licences
to —
(a) any person of Asiatic or African race
to use or employ a ship in pearl-shell
fishery (except to any such person who
was on Ist April, 1913 the holder of
a licence under the Pearl-shell Fishery
Act 1886) ; or
( h ) any other person who, there is reason to
believe, will be associated in any way
in the business of pearl-shell fishing
with any person of Asiatic or African
race.
An exception to the above provisions is that a
ship licence may be granted to any alien who, at
the commencement of the Act, is holder of a licence
under the Peatl-shell Fishery Act 1886, but so that
the number of ships in respect of which such alien,
is licensed shall not exceed the number in respect of
which he was licensed at the commencement of the
Act ( Pearl Act 1912, section 21).
Northern Territory.—A licence to deal in pearls
and mother-of-pearl shells may not be granted to
an Asiatic alien ( Northern Territory Pearl Sale
and Export Regulation Act 1901, section 3).
Papua.—No ship or boat may be licensed to be
employed in the pearl-shell and beche-de-mer
fishery unless owned by a British subject or, bodv
corporate established under the laws of some part
of the British Dominions {Pearl, Pearl-shell and
Beche-de-mer Ordinance 1911, section 7).
A pearl-buyer’s licence may be issued only to a
person who has obtained in the prescribed manner
a certificate of having passed the dictation r test
{Pearl, Pearl-shell, and Beche-de-mer Ordinance
1915, section 2).
( Jc ) Poisons, Sale of. .
Queensland. —A certificate to deal in poisons
may not be granted to any person of the Asiatic
race {Sale and Use of Poisons Act 1891).
(/) Sugar Industry.
Queensland. —The Sugar Works Act of 1911,
which authorizes the construction and establish-
ment of sugar work-s by means of moneys advanced
by the State, prohibits the employment, in or about
the construction, maintenance, management, or
working of any sugar works managed or worked
under the Act, of any person who has not first ob-
tained in the prescribed manner a certificate that
he is able to read and write from dictation words
in the English language of not less than fifty words
(section 9).
The 'Sugar Cultivation Act of 1913 prohibits
any person who has not obtained a certificate of
having passed a dictation test in any language
directed by the Secretary for Agriculture from
engaging in or carrying on the cultivation of sugar
cane upon any land of which he is the occupier; or
from being employed in or in connexion with the
industry of the cultivation of sugar cane and the
manufacture therefrom of sugar (sections 3,4).


• Regulations under this Act, made on 16th Octo-
ber, 1913, exempt from the Act —
(1) All native-born residents of Australia of
European descent.
(2) All residents of Australia of European
parentage.
(3) All residents of* Australia who are de-
scended from any resident of the conti-
nent of North America other than from
any aboriginal native thereof or negro
or aboriginal of African or Asiatic race.
(4) Subjects of Italy and Russia and citizens
of Columbia, so long as certain treaties
remain in force.
(5) Any person not otherwise entitled to ex-
emption whom, by reason of —
(a) the subsistence between the
nation to which such person
belongs and the United King-
dom of Great Britain and Ire-
land of ' a Treaty conferring
*j p
most favoured nation rights;
or
( b) sucty person’s long residence
within Queensland or the
Commonwealth; or
. (c) Such person having a lawful wife
or family residing within
Queensland; or
Ql) any other circumstance satisfac-
tory to the Secretary for
Agriculture—
it is not considered necessary to examine
under the Act ( Queensland Government
Gazette, 16th October, 1913, p. 990).
An Award of the Court of Industrial Arbitra-
tion, made on 27th June, 1919, provides as fol-
lows :
“ 3(a) No coloured labour shall be employed
or (if employed at .the date of this
award) be continued in employment at
cane cutting.
(h) No coloured labour shall be employed or
(if employed at the date of this award)
be continued in employment in or in
connexion with the cultivation of sugar
cane on land which lias been ploughed
on any farm on which more than 75
acres are planted with cane. For the
purposes of this sub-clause, two or more
farms held by the same person shall be
regarded as one farm: Provided that
this sub-clause shall not take effect until
the Ist day of January, 1920.
t / «/ 7
(c) Nothing in this clause shall prevent the
owner of a sugar-cane farm from em-
ploying his own countrymen on such
farm.” ( Queensland Government
Gazette, 2nd July, 1919, page 38.)
/ictoria.—The Beet Sugar Works Act 1915 pro-
hibits companies obtaining advances under the Act,
from employing Asiatic labourers or coloured
labourers not born in Australasia (section 37).
(m) Tramwaiy and Omnibus Services.
Queensland.—No person who has not first ob-
tained in the prescribed manner a certificate
that he is able to read and write from dictation
words in the English language of not less than fifty
words may be employed in or about the construc-
tion, maintenance, management or working of any
tramway or omnibus service of a local authority
( Local Authorities Act 1902-1907, section 137 a).
Ao regulations have been made to give effect to
this section.
4. MISCELLANEOUS.
( a ) Advances from State Banks.
Queensland. —(Advances may not be made by the
Agricultural Bank of Queensland to any alien who
has not first obtained in the prescribed manner a
certificate that he is able to read and write from
dictation words in’ such language as the Secretary
for Agriculture may direct. ( Agricultural Bank
Act (Consolidated ) of 1911, section 17 (3). A
similar provision is contained in the Queensland
Government Savings Bank Act of 1910, section
25'.)
(b) Arms and Explosives.
Papua. —An explosives permit may be issued only
to a person of European descent. — (Arms, Liquor,
and Opium Prohibition Ordinance 1916, section
3 0
(c) Invalid and Old-age Pensions.
Commonwealth. —Aliens, Asiatics (except those
born in Australia, and aboriginal natives of Aus-
tralia), Africa, the islands of the Pacific or New
Zealand, are disqualified from receiving invalid and
old-age pensions.—( Invalid and Old-age Pensions
Act 1908-09, sections 16, 21.)
(d) Natives, Disabilities in regard to.
Queensland.—A permit to employ an aboriginal
or half-caste may not be granted to any slien of the
Chinese race.— ( Aboriginals Protection and Re-
strictions of Sale of Opium Act 1901, section 5.)
Northern Territory. —A licence to employ
aboriginals may not be granted to any male per-
son of any Asiatic race or any race prohibited by
regulation.—( Aboriginals Ordinance 1918, sec-
tion 23.)
Papua. —Recruiters’ licences may be issued only
to Europeans.— {Native Labour Ordinance 1911,
section 14.)
( e ) Registration.
Commonwealth. —Aliens entering, or resident in,
the Commonwealth are required to register their
names and other particulars, and, in case of change
of name or abode, to give the particulars prescribed
by the Aliens Registration Act 1920.
(f) War Legislation of the Commonwealth.
The Way Precautions (Enemy Shareholders)
Regulations, the War Precautions (Land Transfer)
Regulations, and the War Precautions (Mining)
Regulations expire on the 31st December, 1920. —
{Land, Mining, Shares and Shipping Act 1919,
section 3.)
( g) Restrictions Imposed by States on Subjects of
Former Enemy Countries.
, New South Wales. —The Medical Acts forbid the
registration as medical practitioners of German or
Austrian subjects. (For restriction in regard to
applications for selections, see para. 2(a) above.)
Note as to Immigration. —The laws relating to
immigration into the Commonwealth and Papua
apply equally to British subjects and to aliens.
5. FOREIGN COMPANIES.
The War Precautions ( Companies, Firms and Busi-
nesses) Regulations 1916-1920 (which by virtue of sec-
tion 7 of the War Precautions Act Repeal Act 1920 are
continued in force until 31st December, 1921), require
that the consent of the Treasurer of the Commonwealth
shall be obtained for the registration of any private or
proprietary company or firm, or of the name-or change
of name of any such company or firm, any of the
shareholders, partners or members of which are not
natural-born British subjects.


The same Regulations also require that the consent
of the Treasurer shall be obtained for the registration
of any company incorporated outside the British Em-
pire or of any firm registered outside the British Em-
pire, or of any company or firm any of the capital of
which has been subscribed by or on behalf of any per-
son or body of persons ordinarily residing or carrying
on business outside of the British Empire; as well as
for any issue of capital, or transfer or disposal of
shares or assets (other than stock-in-trade) of any
company or firm incorporated or registered in the Com-
monwealth, to any person or body of persons or the
nominee or representative of any person or body of
persons, ordinarily residing or carrying on business
outside of the British Empire.
The Regulations empower the Treasurer, in his abso-
lute discretion, to consent or refuse to consent to an
application, and to attach to his consent any conditions
he thinks fit.
No other discrimination is made in the law of the
Commonwealth or the States between companies incor-
porated in other parts of the British Dominions and
those incorporated in foreign countries. By the laws
of some of the States all .companies formed outside
the State (whether in other States, in other parts
of the British Empire, or in foreign countries) are
subject to some conditions rot imposed on local com-
panies; e.g., in Queensland a company incorporated out
of Queensland may not acquire land in Queensland ex-
cept upon receiving a licence from the Governor-in-
Council (Companies Acts Amendment Act 1909, sec-
tion 24).
* The War Precautions Act Repeal Act 1920 prohibits
any company in which more than one-third of the
shares are held by aliens, from acquiring any mine or
carrying on any mining or metallurgical business with-
out the consent* in writing of the Treasurer (section 8).
6. FOREIGN SHIPPING.
The Common wealth accords the same treatment to
foreign ships as to British ships, with the exception
that in regard to pilotage certain exemption certificates
will, when the provisions of Part VIII. of the
Navigation Act 1912-1920 are brought into force, be
obtainable in respect only of British ships and by
British subjects. The coasting trade provisions (not
yet brought into force) of the Navigation Act apply
equally to British and foreign ships; but ships in
receipt of subsidies or bonuses from foreign Govern-
ments are debarred from engaging in coasting trade
(section 287).
In Western Australia ship licences under the Pearl-
ing Act 1912 may be granted only in respect of Rritish
ships (section 24).
In Tasmania, the specification of tonnage in the regis-
tration certificate of a sh : p possessing British or
Colonial Registration is accepted; while in all other
cases, in the event of the tonnage being disputed,
measurement of the ships, with consequent expense to
the ship, is resorted to (Marine Boards Act 1889).
7. CLASSIFICATION ACCORDING TO LEGISLATIVE
AUTHORITY.
Commonwealth —
Franchise for and membership of Parliament
(para. 1 (a)).
Employment in Public Service (para. 1 (d)).
Shares in companies (para. 2 (h)).
Employment in industries assisted by bounties
(para. 2 (a)).
Employment in carriage of mails (para. 3 (e) ).
Navigation (para. 3 (i) and 6).
Invalid and old-age pensions (para. I (c)).
Registration (para. 4 (e)).
Temporary war legislation (para. 4 (/)).
Companies, firms and businesses (para. 5).
New South Wales —•
Franchise for and membership of Parliament
(para. 1 (a)). .
Franchise for and membership of Municipal
Bodies (para. 1 ( h )).
Employment in public and municipal services
(para. 1 (d)).
Service on juries, para. 1 (e) ).
Holding of land (para. 2 («•)).
Factories, occupation of and employment in
(para. 3 (c)).
Mining (para. 3 ( h )).
Navigation (para. 3 (t)).
Restrictions on subjects of former enemy coun-
tries (para. 4 ( g )).
Victoria —
Franchise for and membership of Parliament
(para. 1 (a)). .
Franchise for and membership of Municipal
Bodies (para. 1 (h)).
Service on juries (para. 1 (e)).
Factories, occupation of and employment in
(para. 2(c)).
Gold-buying (para. 2 (d)). .
Liquor licences (pafa. 2 (g)).
Navigation (para. 2 (i)).
Sugar industry (para. 2 (/)).
Queensland —
Franchise for and membership of Parliament
(para. 1 (a)).
Franchise for and membership of Municipal
Bodies ('para. 1 (h)).
Holding of land (para. 2 (a)).
Dairying (para. 3 (h)).
Factories, occupation of and employment in
(para. 3 (c)).
Government contracts (para. 3 (e)).
Mining (para. 3 (h)).
Pearling (para. 3 (;)).
Sale of poisons (para. 3 (&)).
Sugar industry (para. 3 (I)).
Tramway and omnibus services (para. 3 (m)).
Advances from State Banks (para. 4 (ci) ).
Disabilities in regard to Natives (para. 4 ( d )).
Companies (para. 5).
South Australia —
Franchise for and membership of Parliament
(para 1 (ft)).
Holding o£ land (para 2 (a)).
Factories (para. 3 (c) ).
Hawkers’ licences (para. 3 (/)).
Mining (para. 3 (h) ).
Navigation (para. 3 (i) ).
Western Australia —
Franchise for and membership of Parliament
(para. 1 (a)).
Franchise for and membership of Municipal
Bodies (para. 1 (h)).
Employment in Public Sendee (para. 1 (d)).
Factories, occupation of and employment in
(para. 3 (c)). *
Liquor licences (para. 3 (g)).
Mining (para. 3 (h)).
Pearling (paras. 3 (;) and 6).


Tasmania —
Franchise for and membership of Parliament
(para. 1 (a)).
Service on juries (para 1 (e)).
Factories, occupation of and employment in
(para. 3 (c)).
Navigation (para. 6).
Northern Territory—
Holding of land (para. 2 (a-)).
Mining (para. 3 (/&)).
Pearling (para. 3 (;')). '
Disabilities in regard to Natives (para. 4 ( d )).
Papua—
Naturalization (para. 1 (c)).
Pearling (para. 3 (;)).
Arms and explosives (para. 4 (6)).
Disabilities in regard to Natives (para. 4 ( d )).
Federal Capital Territory—
Norfolk Island—
No disabilities or restrictions are imposed by
any Ordinance made under the authority of the
Commonwealth.
8. DISABILITIES AND RESTRICTIONS ON PERSONS
OF COLOURED RACES.
Commonwealth—
Aboriginal Natives of Australia, Asia, Africa,
or the islands of the Pacific (except New Zealand).
Franchise for and membership of Parliament
(para 1 ( a )).
White labour only to be employed. Industries
assisted by bounties (para. 3 (a) ). Carriage of
mails (para. 3 (e) ).
British subjects who are Asiatics (except those
born in Australia), or aboriginal natives of Aus-
tralia, Africa, or the islands of the Pacific or New
• Zealand. Invalid and old-age pensions (para.
4 (0).
New South Wales—
Persons incapable of naturalization. Holding of
land (para. 2 (a)).
Chinese. Factories (para. 3 ( c ) ).
. Chinese. Mining (para. 3 ( h )).
Victoria—
Male adult natives of China or its dependencies
or of any islands in the Chinese seas, and persons
born of Chinese parents. Franchise for and mem-
bership of Parliament and Municipal Bodies
(para. 1 (a) and 1 (&)).
Chinese. Factories (para., 3 (c)).
Persons having a Chinese father or mother.
Gold-buying, para. 3 (d)).
Asiatic labourers and coloured labourers not
born in Australia. Sugar industry (para. 3 (Z)).
Queensland —
Aboriginal Natives of Australia, Asia, or of the\
islands of the Pacific. Franchise for and mem-
bership of Parliament (para. 1 (aj).
Persons incapable of naturalization. Holding
of land (para. 2 (a)).
Persons not of European descent. Dairying
(para. 3 ( h )).
Persons of Chinese or other Asiatic race. Fac-
tories (para. 3 (c)).
Asiatics and Africans not of European descent.
Government contracts (para. 3 (e)).
Aliens who by lineage belong to any of the
Asiatic, African, or Polynesian races. Mining
(para. 3 ( h )).
Persons of Asiatic race. Sale of Poisons (para.
3 (*)). :
Persons not of European descent. Pearling
(para. 3 ( j ). Sugar industry (para. 3 ( I )).
Aliens of the Chinese race. Employment of
natives (para. 3 (d)).
South Australia—
Asiatics. Holding of land (para. 2 (a)).
Chinese persons. Factories (para. 3 (c) ).
Asiatic aliens. Mining (para. 3 ( h ) ).
Western Australia —
Aboriginal Natives of Australia, Asia, Africa,
or the islands of the Pacific, or persons of the half-
blood. Franchise for and membership of Parlia-
ment (para. 1 (a)).
Persons of the Chinese or other Asiatic race.
Factories (para. 3 (c)).
Asiatics and Africans. Mining (para. 3 ( h )).
Persons of Asiatic or African race. Pearling
(para. 3 (;)).
\
Tasmania —
Persons of Chinese or other Asiatic race. Fac-
tories (para. 3 (c)).
Northern Territory—'
Asiatic aliens. Holding of land (para. I (a)).
Mining (para. 3 ( h ) ). Pearling (para. 3 (;) ).
Male persons of Asiatic race. Employment of
natives (para. 4 ( d ) ).
Papua—
Aboriginal Natives of Asia, Africa, or the
islands of the Pacific (except New Zealand).
Naturalization (para. 1 (c)).
Persons not of European descent. Arms and
explosives (para. 4 (Z?*) ). Recruitipg natives
(para. 4 ( d ) ).
E. L. PIESSE,
Director of Pacific Branch.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by Albert J. Mullcti,
Government Printer for the State of Victoria.


