

DISCOVERIES
IN
The Nature and Treatment
OF
GOUT,
WITH ORIGINAL NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS AFTER
TWENTY-SIX YEARS’ CONSTANT TREATMENT
OF THAT DISEASE.
BY LOUIS L. SMITH, L.S.A,
MELBOURNE.
p^elbou^ne:
H. CORDELL, PRINTER, 18, LITTLE COLLINS STREET WEST.
MDCCCLXXVIir.


DISCOVERIES
IN
The Nature and Trenatment
OF
GOUT,
WITH ORIGINAL NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS AFTER
TWENTY-SIX YEARS’ CONSTANT TREATMENT
OF THAT DISEASE.
BY LOUIS L. SMITH, L.S.A.,
MELBOURNE.
Pflelboutine :
//. CORDELL, PRINTER, 18, LITTLE COLLINS STREET WEST.
MDCCCLXXVIII.




ON THE NATURE OF
GOUT.
BY LOUIS L. SMITH,
Medical Practitioner,
COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
In a short treatise like this, written so that “ those who
run may read,” not one superflous word can be used, and
as the reader is doubtless suffering from the above complaint,
jhe requires me to come to the point at once.
What then is Gout ?
This question, simple as it is, has been asked many
millions of times, and the medical attendant has as often in
olden time, with most learned wig and cocked hat, sucked
his golden-headed cane, looked wise, hummed and hawed!
As in later times, the learned physician with the modern white
choker and orthodox black clothes (symbolical I hope not
of our death dealing profession) had profoundly evaded
answering the question, by drawing the patients’ attention
away from the subject, and requesting him to put out his
tongue, &c.
When “ cornered,” however, our ancient physician had
a ready answer. PaulusiEgineta, Galen Avicerma, Alexander,
Hoffman, and others of a more modern date went back upon
a certain “ Humerusbut this humerous style of treating
the subject caused many to cavil at the cavilier manner in
which it was argued. As science advanced and a more
accurate observation was taken of the condition of the blood
and the urine, and the symptoms were more closely studied,
not only by the profession, but by the laity also, and by
philosophers generally, —who lost all their philosophy, by the
way, the moment they had a reminder by a twitch and a
screw in the ball of the big toe. As Boerhaam and Van
Swietor, both of whom believed it to be contagious and who
believed also that the disease was due to a morbid matter
in the blood, and by the way they both distantly hit the


mark. Sydenham, who suffered severely, and compared the
commencement of the attack on him as “ a dog gnawing
at his foot,” always i believed the nature of Gout to be
dependant on a certain morbific matter thrown on the joints
• producing these phenomena of attacks. Dr. Holland believed
it to be a materies morbi, capable of accumulating in the
system and changing places about, thus producing the
inflammation.
Dr. Profit states that the “ lithic acid developed prin-
cipally during the mal-assimilation of food produces the
characteristic feature in Gout.” Scheele and Herrison
theorised that its nature was the same as that which
produced urinary calculi. Wollaston confuted this, and
Fourcry backed him up. Berthelet said it was because there
was too much phosphoric acid in the blood. Scudamore
and Dr. Garrod incline to uric acid in excess. Broussais and
others believe that the disease is located in the primae vise,
and due to mucous irritation. Dr. Barlow as a vascular
plethora, &c., &c.
I could go on enumerating and shewing the difference
of the theorists on this matter, the humorists and the
solidists, &c., and the ambiguous ; but I prefer not to take
up the time of the reader, but to give my own idea, founded
upon careful examination of the large quantity of Gout cases
I have attended in this colony, and also from personal obser-
vation both of my late father and many of his friends, who
have suffered most intensely from Gout, and from my own
personal past sufferings; and knowing this disease to be"
to a great extent hereditary, as it is in my own person, and
having had several attacks myself, led me to the study of it,
and to experiment upon the subject; and I believe I will
clearly shew to my readers that I have hit on the nature of
this disease, and I will prove it, challenging any one in the
profession to refute —at any rate in a scientific point of view
—that lam wrong. Now, there is every thing in the use of
proper terms, so that there must be no ambiguity about it,
and I will therefore be as lucid and clear as it is possible, —
further than that, I cannot go.
I remember, when a student, our professor saying,
"Gentlemen, this is,” alluding to the kidney which he was
describing, “ this kidney is kidney-shaped ; I can use no other
term to express its shape.” So in describing this disease.


I plainly state that the nature of Gout is a diseased condition
of the blood * —the result of a depraved nutritive process,
by which that fluid becomes loaded abnormally with dis-
integrated, or decayed tissues and food, known as uric
acid, in plain words, decay. A deranged condition of
the kidneys preventing the excretion of said uric acid,'
so that the deposition of this uric acid is in the shape of
urate of soda into a particular part (as for instance the ball
of great toe) j and that such deposition produces in that joint
inflammation, or else the very existence of this material in Large
quantities produces an irritating quality in the blood, inducing
injianrmation of the capillaries. May not its presence in the
blood stop the re-organisation of tissues, arrest circulation in
the part, and cause degeneration of tissue ? For where circu-
lation is arrested, and by repeated attacks the vitality of a
part is lowered, there decay of that part must of necessity
set in ; for if wasted or worn out tissue remains in contiguity
with living tissue, the latter becomes poisoned. Can this
account for the co-existence of Carbuncle with Gout, which
I have so frequently remarked.
Now to establish the proposition I must show it clearly,
and I want to do so because the majority of gouty people
imagine that Gout means a plethora, or too great a fulness
and richness of blood and fat, and they enjoy the erroneous
idea that an attack of Gout is a most beneficial thing, as it
gets rid of this fulness and other materies morbi from their
system. I might state that this idea is also entertained by a
large section of my medical brethren, and, consequently, they
with the best intentions, take a lot of trouble to get rid of
this plethora by blood-letting, purging, &c., —all of which
debilitate the patient, and make him a more easy susceptible
victim, for a speedy second recurrence 5 which, in fact, prolong
the symptoms, and retard the recovery from the other
attack 3 whereas Gout really is a decay of the system.
* Depraved Nutritive Process. —Liebig in his “ Animal
Chemistry ’’ gives us the following : —“ When we reflect that the power
of exciting putrefaction or fermentation belongs to bodies of the most
different composition—that blood, flesh, cheese, membranes, cells, saliva,
infusion of malt, emulsion of almonds, &c.—acquire this property as
soon as, by the chemical action of oxygen, a disturbance of the state of
equilibrium in their attraction of the elements takes place, every doubt
as to the true cause, by which all these phenomena are determined,
seem to disappear.”


This idea, that plethora is the nature of Gout, has so seized
on the public, and profession, that it has been the means
of retarding that calm and quiet study of the disease, which
so serious and painful a malady merits. Thus, in place of
searching for an antidote or a neutraliser of a particular
poison, we find them oblivious of that, and hailing wtih a
certain amount of joy, the appearance of their enemy. These
forget, that recurring inflammations, alter the tissues, weaken
the system, and lessen re-actionary power.
And now for my proposition. Amongst a number of
my gratuitous morning patients suffering from Gout, I
have drawn from each an ounce or so of blood —I won’t
say it has not been done by deceiving them that a little
blood-letting would relieve them, still I have drawn
it. I have evaporated the serum, reduced to a powder,
dissolved in rectified spirits, tested with nitric acid and
ammonia vapour, and there has been this uric acid in excess
indisputably. This is Abel and Bloxam’s test.
Now, it may be asked cannot you by this process find
the acid in the blood of persons not suffering from Gout ?
My answer is, yes, but only a trace of it 5 but in the Gouty
subject you will find it in abundance. We then arrive at
a conclusion, namely, that in Gouty cases there is a larger
quantity (to say the least) of uric acid in the blood than in the
non-Gouty. Now, the question is, can this uric acid exist in
the blood of a Gouty person, and yet he not exhibit the
the symptoms, —in plain words, have an attack. My
answer is yes, and that it is always there. Further, this is
characteristic of the Gouty man, and it exists in the shape of
urate of soda. Now the peculiarity of this salt is, that it is
very insoluble; but it is held in solution in strong alkaline
fluids, such as the serum or watery part of the blood. Now,
should anything, such as an excess, or the taking of food
which creates acidity, or a drink like champagne, beer, port
wine, which likewise engender acidity,—should these render
the serum less alkaline, —then this uric acid no longer has a
soluble agent to hold it, and it becomes precipitated into the
ligaments or non-vascular part of the body—the part the
furthest from the circulation, say the ball of the toe, the knee,
the ear, &c. —and then by its presence, it sets up irritation,
and we get the peculiar pain and redness found as symp


tomatic of Gout.* I do also think that there is a peculiar
property in this surcharged blood which produces phosphites.f
But it must be remembered that this is much accelerated
by anything which will give a shock to the kidneys, and
thus prevent them from excreting uric acid, as is for instance
illustrated in the liver, which in certain circumstances will*
not excrete its bile, but causes it to be taken up into the
system. So in like manner a shock, a cold, a mental
disturbance, will stop the excretion of uric acid from the
kidney, and thus accumulate it in the blood in an abnormal
state. If then, to reiterate, the alkalinity of the serum (by the
admixture of acid from gastric disturbance or from any galvanic
or electric disturbance) becomes less alkaline, we shall imme-
diately have the deposition of this urate of soda on some of
the ligaments. I speak here of electric or nervous action as in
electro-plating. This latter, I own, is but yet crude in my
mind, but I throw it out as a suggestion, as perhaps a cause
of this deposition, by disturbing the molecular action; but
no matter the cause, we know the fact, that when the serum
of the blood loses a part of its alkalinity, this salt is deposited
or thrown down.
But it may be asked, how is it you prove, that it is the
deposition of the urate of soda in the tissues, which gives
rise to the inflammation, and not the inflammation causing
the deposition of the urate ? My answer is, because these
depositions are found in cartilage and other tissues which
* This is only differing from cases of fever, in the fact that in the
latter case, especially typhoid ones, we have the urea in excess in the
blood, but when the heat of fever is over we get a deposition of urea
(uric acid oxydised) in the urine. And here again, is this instance I
throw this out as a nucleus, around which the reflective medical man
can cogitate, and build up a great theory. For let him consider this,
there being an increased discharge of nitrogen in fever, it must come
from either the albumen of blood and lymph or from the tissues. It cannot
come from the food for he takes none. Now here, during the whole time
of the pyrexia the urea does not appear inordinately in the urine, but the
instant it does, the heat subsides. Query for the investigating pathologist
—ls it then owing to the peculiar diathesis or constitution, which in the
one man produces fever, in the other Gout ? Another example—
Calculus or stone, means only a deposit of uric acid in bladder; Gout a
deposit of same material into the ligaments and tissues,
t I suggest, as a proof, that pain originates from the contact of this
poison in the capillaries ; thus, if you use equal pressure all over these
small blood vessels and exclude the blood, pain ceases.


have but little vascularity, and they create but little irritation
after it, and it often is sometime afterwards, when the inflam-
mation shews itself. But this very inflammation, has the
effect of dissolving and getting rid to a considerable extent
of the uric acid deposit; and this is proved, that where
there is the least vascularity (quantity of blood vessels) there
the deposition is greatest, and in fact there the chalk stones
are. Whereas, where vascularity is, there the deposition is but
seldom seen; and if for instance, as Dr. Garrod has shewn,
we raise a blister over the inflamed surface, and examine the
water or serum, you will find that there is nothing indicating
uric acid; but if you put a blister on another part, you will
there see on examination, that the uric acid exists, only because
it has been got rid of by the inflammation at that particular
part, but it still exists in the system, as is shewn by the
blister, away from the inflamed surface, having the uric
acid in its serum or water.
The ancients then were right to a certain extent when
they taught that a Gouty fit was, “a good thing,” because it
got rid of a poison from the system, (a certain amount how-
ever remains) and it was this which caused me to think,
would it not be as well if all, or at least a great part of this
enormous suffering were saved, and the morbid matter be
got easily away before it could create all this fearful shock
to the system,—that is, in place of waiting till the deposition
took place, causing the inflammation to arise, and leaving
nature to destroy it, would it not be better to introduce into
the system a chemical agent which would go undeterred into
the blood and neutralise and chemically alter and dissolve this
urate crystal ?* A series of experiments on the poison in
the system, and out of the system, has given me power to
say that I have succeeded in thus introducing an antidote.
Time of course will prove this ; but that I have found a
remedy which will alleviate, if it does not in all cases cure,
is quite true.
On the sth of April, after attending the banquet of a
* Of course it must be distinctly, understood that the neutralising the
poison, or rendering it into a soluble salt and thus enabling it to be carried
off by the kidney: is only good as far as it goes ; for if the origin remains
and can be renewed, it is after all but a temporary remedy j but if with
this chemical agent we can by constitutional and dietarytreatment. prevent
the re-formation, our cure can certainly said to be effected.


medical friend who was leaving the colony, I got home
and was taken with a serious pain, in the ball of my left
toe, (I had been ill for some time previously with sciatica
of the left leg, and had dislocated the foot) the ball
of the toe became quite of a beautiful pink color, and the
foot felt as if it weighed five hundred weight, and there was
a hot, gnawing, grinding-in-a-vice-sort of agony. I knew
immediately that ray old friend the Gout, who had deserted
me previously for nearly two years, had come to visit me. I
woke up my apprentice, told him to go down stairs and
get me the bottle of Gout specific, the same as I had given
so successfully to my Gout patients. I thought this was
a most excellent opportunity to test my own physic on my
own person, a very bold thing to do, doubtless, but when
one is in agony to what dreadful shifts will not a man
fly? I may as well state my feelings from the begining
whilst I retain them fresh in my memory. The taste of
the mefficine is sweetish and pleasantly, aromatic, and after
being in the body (to which it communicates a glow) for
about half an hour, the pain somewhat subsided, and a
langour gentle at first came over me; finding that I still
had pain, and very considerable pain too, I in one hour
from that, repeated the dose, a table-spoonful. The langour
increased, amounting almost to drowsiness, but still no
sleep. I could not bear the clothes near the toe and yet there
was not half the sensitiveness ; two hours after this I took
another draught, and I then began to dose, then to sleep for
an hour or two, which refreshed me and eased the terrible
pain. I suppose it was four hours in all after the last dose
mentioned, that I took another, and then I found the whole
of the pain had gone, after I had broken out into a profuse
sweat, although I had not an extra quantity of bed-clothes
on me. The pinkiness, however, still showed itself at
daylight when getting up, —for I got up and attended to
my business that evening; however, I had another few
twinges.
Thus far then, for a brief statement of the action, and of
its curative property. My attention was drawn to this state
of affairs by reasoning, that the whole of the formation of
this uric acid in excess, was due to a ferment in the blood,
that the product of this ferment, caused the extreme pain in the
shape of its setting up inflammation in the smaller veins, as


we know it does in the larger veins of the body. Now Dr.
Garrod, the great living Gout physician of London, to whom
I have before referred, looks upon it simply as if the pain was
caused by the deposition of the urate of soda, and that this,
so to speak, mechanically set up irritation; but I think it will
be obvious to any one who has observed the phenomena
which follow the pain, that this cannot be, and herein I set
up myself as suggesting new matter for thought, whether it
is not inherent in the poison itself to initiate the inflammation
in the small veins or capillaries of the body ? for instance,
it may be said, oh! this is not a new theory, for Dr. Gardener
has, as is well known amongst well-read men, started a
theory that the cause of the painful phenomena of Gout
is in the distended veins; but I would observe to those who
would thus cavil at ray discovery, that I do not account
thus for it, but that it arises from the peculiar irritating poison
generated, which has a specific action on the smaller veins.
A small pamphlet like this will not allow me to dilate upon
this important matter, but it will be obvious that if my
discovery or theory be correct, and that the kidney will not
excrete this, —nay, may not this very non-action take place
through the irritation and consequent partial paralysis (so
far as excretion of uric acid goes) of that organ by this
product of fermentation, viz., uric acid ?
However, it will be obvious now to my reader, that if an
agent is found which will do two things :
ist. —Stop the fermentation and thus arrest the excessive
product.
and.—Which will change the uric, into a soluble and
non-irritating substance, we will get it excreted by
the kidney, and destroy the pain by removing the-
cause, i.e., changing an irritating and poisonous
matter, and making it innocuous.
Well, this agent I have found. I defy any one to contravene
that what I have advanced is not new, and that it is not logical
and founded on the purest scientific basis. But above all,
that I confirm all and waive every objection, by the practical
results, the alleviation of pain and the cure. I was about six
weeks since entertained by a gentleman who had suffered
most excruciatingly with the Gout, and who having sent


for me, I was ushered in and found a medical gentleman by
the bedside. I apologised, stated I did not know another
medical man was in attendance, when the latter stated it
was with his acquiescence I had been called in, that he had
heard of my theory and my “so called cures,” but he did
not believe in them. We got into a dispute, forgetting the
patient until at last in agony and rage, the latter cried out,.
“D n your theories, can you cure me, Smith!” and
therein lies everything.
And I did cure him.
My medical brethren may say that because they have not
the benefit of my knowledge at their finger ends, that it is a
secret, and therefore it should be but I say
I intend to publish the remedy after I have gained the result
of my labours, thoughts, observations, practice and ultimate
discovery. I place myself the same as any other discoverer,
who could benefit humanity, but knowing how grateful-
the latter is to its benefactors, prefers taking a patent and
securing to himself the benefit of his invention or discovery.
The nation by its laws recognises this, and I intend in like
manner to benefit by ray skill.
Those who like to avail themselves of my knowledge can
do so, and reap the benefit, —those who do not, can bear
their pain and keep their prejudices and their Gout. Suffice
it to say, that I am totally independent of this branch of my
profession, —that I have -made it my speciality, together with
rheumatism and sciatica j likewise another branch of my
profession, for which I am well established, and which
makes me quite independent of my Gout patients.
My non-medical readers and probably many of my
medical ones, who have not had access to the more modern
medical, and other scientific works, may not have a clear
definition of the word fermentation as I here employ it.
Let me illustrate. For instance in Obstetrics, puerperal
fever is now being understood by our most scientific obste-
tricians as due to a ferment. What then is a ferment ?
Take an example —the juice of the grape, when the latter’s-
skin is crushed up with it, begins to boil up, and the sugar
of the grape juice is converted into two different substances-
—alcohol and carbonic acid gas —and with it there are
certain organisms, consisting of microscopic cells or yeast


plant. Now, so long as the grape is contained within its
skin no change takes place, but the moment it comes in
contact with any substance which would nourish the yeast
plant, then we get fermentation. But then my intelligent
reader will exclaim, Ah! but here we have a living or
organic matter, causing this change of material j and this
cannot be the case with uric acid, &c., &c. Can you give me
an example where a substance, which has no life at all, can
make a decomposition or an alteration of any kind ? Yes,
I can. Bruise bitter almonds up with water, what do we
get ? why prussic acid and essential oil of almonds. Now
how do we get these ? They never existed before in the
bitter almond, but the mutual action of water and the
almond give us two constituents acting one upon the other
and the product—a deadly poison and an essential oil. Still,
together in the bitter almond they do not act on each other,
but the simple addition of water, gives us the above products.
Of course, this is not true fermentation the highly exact
scientist will say, but it shews that a substance emulsin, not
an organism, and perfectly dead, will beget a new product.
So it is ■, the extra or abnormal quantity of uric acid in
the blood will remain there and not produce any ill results,
till an agent, the result of a ferment, causes what we will
here call an acid, as space will not allow me further to dilate,
and the consequence is, a destruction of the harmony hitherto
existing, and a deposition of the urate of soda no longer held
in solution; and perhaps there could not be a better illus-
tration of one of these agents than alcohol when in
conjunction with other matters, as in wines and malt liquors.
These at certain times when the stomach is disordered, and
hence non-assimilating, and yielding a secretion, which may
cause a product or ferment, producing all the phenomena of
Gout. Now, be it understood here, that I do not lay down the
rule that alcohol is the sole producer of the Gout ferment, for
men who are total abstainers have Gout also, although one
cannot tell whether certain conditions of the stomach may
not in the teetotaler produce alcohol out of the sugar, as we
have seen in the case of the grape fermentation. But lam
travelling here out of the bounds of a pamphlet. Probably
I will in a few months, if I can find leisure from professional
duties, finish a work 1 have already commenced on the
Nature and Treatment of Gout, Rheumatism and Sciatica.


I have endeavored to shew, that Gout is the result of a
ferment; that it is due to an excess of uric acid in the blood;
that the kidneys are implicated, inasmuch as they will not
excrete this uric acid j that this latter has a baneful influence
of a specific character on the smaller veins (the capillaries),
causing pain and inflammation, I have endeavored to make
clear that the cure is simple, namely, to stop the excessive
formation of the product, by arresting fermentation, to intro-
duce into the system an agent which will hold in solution,
and thereby prevent, the deposition of uric acid into the
tissues, and to administer a remedy which will combine
with the excessive uric acid, and alter its chemical composition,
causing it to pass innocuously out of the frame, as an alto-
gether harmless body.*
In addition to the above, I think a great deal of my
success is due to the fact that I am continually counselling
my Gout patients to keep clean the pores of the skin, and I
excite these perspiratory glands by the action of a new drug
not generally known, called Jaborandi. Those of my readers,
not medical, will have noted that when their skin does not
act, their urine becomes turbid j this is, because of the direct
sympathy of the skin with the kidney, as a compensation
balance.
Now excess of uric acid means excess of nitrogenous
matters in the blood. The skin gets rid in health of a large
quantity of ammonia or nitrogenous matter 5 therefore to
set that emunctory in order, and action, is to relieve the
blood of excess of matter to form uric acid. Erasmus
Wilson mentions that there are 3,528 perspiratory pores to
the square inch, or reckoning these at a quarter of an inch
in length, there are 7 3 feet of drainage in every square inch
of the body, —in all, nearly 28 miles. Sequin reckons from
the skin there are on an average eleven (11) grains of
matter exhaled in a minute, equal to 33 ounces in 24
hours. Therefore the amount of perspirable matter, nearly
* My remedy is a neutraliser and solvent of uric acid, —it does not
purge or produce any disagreeable result whatever. After the third
dose, the medicine, which is most pleasant to take, begins to soothe, and
give agreeable languid sensations, —a sleep and sweat is produced; and
in most within 24 hours the patient gets out of bed and walks
about, —and if taken in time, in many cases as my own, one day efleets
a cure.


equals the amount of urine, and there is urea exuded also.
Now then, yvhen this matter containing large quantities of
nitrogen (the basis of uric acid) cannot get out by the skin,
it either remains in the blood, or is excreted from it by the
kidneys, and appears in the urine as urate of ammonia. Am
I not then right in causing great action to take place in the
skin? I therefore recommend the Turkish bath} and further,
I have a portable hot-air bath or Turkish bath, which I carry
with me, and introduce under the bed clothes of the patient
without any inconvenience to him, but to his great comfort
and relief of pain.
As regards the diet of the patient: Give him as little
solid food as possible ; let him have oatmeal porridge, baked
apples } no meat, but sago, arrowroot or rice chiefly. I
allude now to severe attacks.*
The drinks and fluids require great care and discrimi-
nation, or you may make a most fatal mistake, especially in
severe and chronic cases.f
Let me inform my readers, be they medical or otherwise,
that, if they will write to me a description of the patient, his
symptoms, age and general habit of body, I will be most
happy, should they find any difficulty in the proper doses or
blending of these drugs, to give it to them in the fullest
* I cause the housewife to make biscuits of arrowroot with the
melted oil of the butter, which latter can be melted by placing the butter
in a pipkin or pannikin and placing this in a hdt water bath, add sugar
to the arrowroot, bake the cakes, in fact the chief aim is to cut off the
nitrogen and prevent formation of uric acid. Gouty patients are often
forbidden by their medical attendant and their own fears to take baked
fruits or raw fruits,butremeraber that there is no acidity engendered, for
their eating of these will make the urine alcaline; the same applies with
regard to thin wines, but they forget that these contain bi-tartrate of potash
and this is chemically changed in the system into a carbonate of potash.
f In acute cases, however, where I cannot be called in, or my remedy
obtained, bi-tartrate of potass and borate of potash and bi-carbonate of
potass at the rate of 15 grains each of the two latter to a drachm of the
former, dissolved in a pint of decoction of the leaves of the wild strawberry,
or water (warm if able to be retained on the stomach) will most materially
assist in dissolving the uric acid, or 25 grains of the phosphate of soda
in gruel or decoction of wild strawberry leaves, or water, will assist
materially where my remedy cannot be obtained. But remember that
you do not weaken the digestive organs, for these must have tone given
to them under all circumstances, for if the food is properly assimilated
cannot pass into the blood and produce uric acid in excess.


detail according to the symptoms. I may mention that to
cut off an attack as a rule from ia to 16 hours treatment
suffices.*
I may here briefly state that Gout is nothing more nor less
than a decay and a degeneration, and each succeeding attack
makes the man more susceptible to another attack, and
renders him weaker. The main object, then, is to get rid
of uric acid and prevent its re-formation in excess. This is
done by diaphoretics of sweating (not inordinately) by the
agents above mentioned, if the patient cannot afford to
undergo my treatment, and take my remedy. By keeping
the bowels regular, but avoiding purging; by restoring tone
to the digestive functions f (for by so doing, you prevent
crude nitrogenous matter being introduced into the blood,
and converted into uric acid, you likewise prevent the
generation of acids in the stomach, which, by their intro-
duction into the blood, precipitate, as I shewed, the uric
acid from the serum); and by using extreme care not to
introduce a nitrogenous diet, but rather to stick to the
arrowroot cakes and jelly, and such other character of diet.
Lastly, as a prophylactic or warder-off of Gout, in the
more severe cases, I always recommend that the patient
should continuously take, a day or two before he feels the
attack is likely to come on, about 10 grains of bi-carbonate
of potash and 5 grains iodide of potash three times a day in
a little bitter infusion, I have thus known many a dreaded
recurrence warded off; but at the same time I repeat there
must be as little nitrogenous food as possible taken in,
and, above all things, no alcohol.
I remain, &c..
LOUIS L. SMITH.
* The subsequent treatment should be the administration of ferri Tart,
and lodide of Potash to increase the red corpuscles of the blood, and
give tone to the system, and with it a grain of Quinine three times a day.
f A most excellent and inexpensive domestic tonic and stomachic,
I would suggest, is a decoction of the field chicory (endive succory), about a
wine-glassful each morning on an empty stomach.


DISCOVERIES AND OBSERVATIONS
IN THE
JVA. T TTJtJS AJSTJD the a. tmejstt
Opinions of various authors, ancient and modern. Opinions also
of Dr. Holland, Di. Prout, Wollaston, Dr. Barlow, Dr. Garrod. Opi-
nions of laymen sufferers.
The Author’s clear statement of the Nature of Gout.
A proposition. Chemical changes. Abel and Bloxam’s test for uric
acid; how to determine it in the blood. Is there a larger quantity in the
Gouty than in the non-Gouty ? Peculiarity of formation. What is it ?
and how is it formed ?
Comparison with typhus fever. With Calculus.
Does the pain and inflammation arise from deposition, or does
inflammation, &c., produce the deposit in the tissues ? Author combats
both views. Original idea of cause of inflammation and pain. Ex-
amples. Dr. Garrod.
Does an attack of Gout get rid of Gouty matter, or does it predispose
for second attack ? Author’s original views on subject.
Author’s ideas respecting action of the kidneys.
Can an antedote be administered to the poison. Discovery of author.
Personal Gouty man. This matter explained.
How uric acid is produced. Electric or nervous action. Urate of
soda. Illustration. Cases of typhus fever, also stone in the bladder.
Whence the pain ? Illustrations—deposition in the tissues.
Does a Gouty fit get rid of the poison ? Author’s opinion.
Discovery of a neutraliser or solvent of the acid. Experiments—
examples.
The Author’s antidote—has the courage to take his own medicine—
survives it! Description of its action, &c. —effects on his system.
Rationale. Explanation. Nature of fermentation. Fermentation in
the blood. Nature of Rheumatism and Sciatica. Action of skin. Nitro-
genous state of blood.
Baths—Food—Proper Diet for Gouty subjects. Recipes.
Resume —How to ward off attacks of Gout.
OF
By Dr. L. L. SMITH,
182, Collins Street East, Melbourne.
SYNOPSIS.
THiat is Gout ?
