

A rabian- China Trade.
reason it is that the Chorassans can make
no irruptions into China. That part of
the empire which lies furthest westward
is the province of Madu, which borders
upon Tibet, so that on this side the two
nations are at perpetual war witli eacli
other.
In Tibet there are men who go in quest
of musk, and are very ready at knowing
it ; and having found it, they carefully
collect it, and put it up in bladders, and
it is carried to their kings. The musk
animal is like our roe-buck ; his skin
and colour the same, with slender legs,
a split-horn hoof, but somewhat bend-
ing ; on each side he has two small white
teeth, which are straight, and rise above
his mouth, each half a finger long or less,
and turn not unlike the teeth of the ele-
phant ; and this is the distinguishing
mark between them and the roe-buck.
PARTICULARS CONCERNING THE INDIANS,
AND THEIR IMMOLATIONS.
In the kingdom of the Balhara, and in
all the other kingdoms of the Indies, there
are persons who burn themselves. This
custom proceeds from their notion of a
metempsychosis or transmigration, which
they firmly believe as a truth never to be
questioned among them.
In the mountain of Sarandib they find
precious stones of various colours, red,
green, and yellow, most of which are at
certain limes forced out of caverns, and
other recesses, by waters and torrents.
In these places the king has his officers to
keep watch over such as pick them up.
Frequently they dig them out of the mines
just like metals; and find precious stones in
the ore, which must be broken to pieces
to get at them.
In the same island there are great num-
bers of Jews, as well as of many other
sects, even Tauwis or Manichees, the
king permitting the free exercise of every
religion. At the extremity of the island
are rallies of great extent, reaching quite
to the sea. Here travellers stay two
months or more in that part called Gab
Sarandib, allured by the beauty of the
country, adorned as it is with trees and
herbage, watered with ri 11s, and blessed
with a wholesome air. This valley opens
upon the sea called Harkand, and is trans-
cendanlly pleasant.
In the first book no mention is made of
the sea which stretches away to the right,
as ships depart from Oman, and the coast
of Arabia, to launch into the great sea ;
but the author describes only the sea on
the left hand, in which are comprehended
the seas of India and China, which he
seems to have iiad particularly in remark.
In this sea, which is as it were on the
right of the Indies as you leave Oman, is
the country of Sihar or Shihr, where
frankincense grows, and other countries
possessed by the tribes of Ad, Hamyar,
Jorham, and Thabateba. The people of
this country have the Souna in Arabic.
The country they inhabit extends almost
as far as Aden and Judda, on the coast of
Yamau, or Arabia the happy. From
Judda it stretches up info the continent
as far as the coast of Syria, and ends at
Kolzuin [near Suez], The sea is in this
part divided by an isthmus, which God
hath fixed as a line of separation between
those seas.
From Kolzuin the sea stretches along
the coast of the Barbarians to the west
coast, which is opposite to Yaman, &nd
then along the coast of Ethiopia, from
whence you have the leopard skins of
Barbary, which are the best of all, and
the best dressed ; and lastly along the
coast of Zeilah, whence you have amber
and tortoiseshell.
When the Siraf ships arrive in this sea,
which is to the right of the sea of India
[looking toward the south], they put into
Judda, where they remain; their cargo
is from thence transported to Kahira
(Cairo) by the ships of Kolzuin, which
are best acquainted with the navigation of
the Red Sea, and which those of Siraf
dare not attempt, because of the extreme
danger, (he sett being lull of reefs at the
water’s edge ; and besides, there is scarce-
ly any inhabited place upon the whole
coast; and in short, because ships are
every night obliged to put into someplace
of safety for fear of striking upon the
rocks, so that they sail in the day time
only, and ride all night fast at anchor.
This sea is moreover subject to very
thick fogs and violent gales of wind, and
so has nothing to commend it from with-
in or without. It is not like the sea of
India, or of China, whose bottom is en-
riched with pearls and ambergris; whose
mountains are rich with gold and precious
stones ; whose gulfs breed creatures that
yield ivory, and among the plants of
whose shores is found ebony, red-wood,
the precious wood of Hairzan, aloes,
camphire, nutmegs, cloves, sandal-wood,
and all manner of spices and aromatics;
where parrots and peacocks are birds
of the forest, and musk and civet are
collected from the lands. In short, so
productive are these shores of inestimable
things, that it is impossible to reckon
them up.
In the same se r is the island of Socotra,
whence come the Socotrin aloes. This
island lies near the land of the Zinges,
and near also to the country of the Arabs,
and most of its inhabitants are Christians,
which is thus accounted for. When Alex-
ander subdued the kingdom of the Per-
sians, his preceptor Aristotle, to whom
he had by letters communicated his con-
quests, wrote back to him, desiring that
Asiatic Journ. —No. 48.
Vol. VIII. 4- A


by all means he would seek after the
island of Soctora, which afforded aloes,
an excellent drug, and without which
they could not prepare the famous medi-
cine called Hiera: that the best way would
be to remove the inhabitants thence, and
instead of them, to plant a colony of
Greeks, that they might send aloes into
Syria, Greece, and Egypt. Accordingly,
Alexander gave the necessary orders to
dispossess the inhabitants, and to settle
a colony of Greeks in their stead. Then
he gave orders to the sovereigns, who di-
vided his empire after he had defeated
Darius, to regard the preservation of the
Greeks. They remained then as a guard
upon this island, till God sent Jesus Christ
into the world, when the Greeks of this
same island, being informed concerning
his advent, embraced the Christian faith,
as the other Greeks had done before
them : and in the profession of this faith
have they persevered to this day, as well
as the inhabitants of the other islands.
DISCOVERIES IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
An account of Mr. Oxley’s first expe-
dilion to the westward of the Blue Moun-
tains, to trace the course of the Lachlan,
and to survey the country which previous
calculations had considered it to intersect
in its way to the sea, has been given in
the sixth volume of the Asiatic Journal,
p. 291. The disappointment in the ori-
ginal object was then supposed to be com-
pensated by the discovery that the Mac-
quarie river was continued in a north-
west direction, and that successive tri-
butes toils volume by many large streams,
had augmented it, in the section then
observed, to a river of great magnitude.
A second expedition has since been un-
dertaken, in which a party descended the
Macquarie, as long as it maintained any
thing like the individual character of a
river ; and the result has again been dif-
ferent from what was anticipated. In
the subjoined report, Mr. Oxley expresses
an opinion that the interior of this sin-
gular continent is covered with water, and
that the rivers flowing in a direction from
the coast are lost in a depressed level,
diffusing themselves into a shallow flood
of immense surface. The country round
the margin, as far as it has been explored,
presents, on most points, a vast tract of
level, subject to periodical inundations,
and as the soil differs, divided, on the
waters’ retiring, into bogs, marshes, and
spots of dry quicksand. These are the
conclusions to which the discoveries of
this intelligent engineer and indefatigable
traveller appear to lead ; the proofs
which he has supplied, that many of the
rivers traced actually terminate in mea-
sureless tracts of uninhabitable marsh,
leave little hope that his general deduc-
tion, that “ waters cover the interior,”
will be found to be premature.
Sydney—Civil Department—General
Orders by the Governor. — Government
House, Parramatta, bth December,
1818.—The sanguine hope which his Ex-
cellency the Governor was induced to
entertain, that by pursuing the course of
the Macquarie river, which hud been dis-
covered running in a north-west direction,
by John Oxley, Esq. on his return last
year from tracing the course of the Lach-
lan to the south-west, would have amply
compensated for the disappointment sus-
tained on the occasion ; and his Excel-
lency having in consequence accepted the
further services of Mr. Oxley, on a second
expedition, the party, consisting of John
Oxley, Esq. surveyor-general ; John Har-
ris, Esq. late surgeon of the 102 d regiment
(who most liberally volunteered to accom-
pany the expedition) ; Mr, Evans, deputy
surveyor general ; and Mr. Charles Fra-
zier, colonial botanist ; together with
twelve men, having eighteen horses and
two boats, and provisions for twenty-four
weeks, took their final departure, on the
4th of June last, from a depot prepared
for the occasion in the Wellington Val-
ley, at about ninety miles west of Ba-
thurst. And those gentlemen, and the
entire party, having a few days since ar-
rived at Port Jackson, by sea, from the
northward, his Excellency is happy in
offering his most cordial congratulations
to John Oxley, Esq. the conductor of this
expedition, and to James Harris, Esq. Mr.
Evans, and Mr. Frazier, on their safe re-
turn from this arduous undertaking.
The zeal, talent, and attention mani-
fested by Mr. Oxley, considering the perils
and privations to which he and his party
were exposed, in exploring a tract of
country so singularly circumstanced in its
various bearings, are no less honourable
to Mr. Oxley, than conducive to the pub-
lic interest; and although the result from
the principal object, namely, that of trac-
ing the Macquarie river to its embouchure,
has not been so favourable as was antici-
pated, yet the failure is in a great degree
counterbalanced by other important dis-
coveries made in the course of this tour.


which promise, at no very remote pe-
riod, to prove of material advantage to
this rising colony.
Whilst his Excellency thus offers this
public tribute of congratulation, he de-
sires to accompany it with expressions of
high sense and approbation ot Mr. Oxley s
meritorious services on this occasion;
which his Excellency will not fail to re-
present to his Majesty’s ministers by the
earliest opportunity.
The personal assistance and support so
cheerfully and beneficially afforded to Mi.
Oxley by the gentlemen associated with
him on this expedition, demand his Ex-
ceHeney%-best acknowledgments, which
he is happy thus publicly to request them
to accept.
The following letter received from Mr.
Oxley on his arrival at Port Stephens, on
the Ist November last, is now published
for general information on the interesting
subject of this tour.—By his Excellency
the Governor’s command.
J. T. Campbell, Sec,
Port Stephen, Nov. 1818.—Sir: —I
have the honour to inform your Excel-
lency that I arrived at this port to-day ;
and circumstances rendering it necessary
that Mr. Evans should proceed to New-
castle, I embrace the opportunity to make
to your Excellency a brief report of the
route pursued by the western expedition
entrusted to my direction.
My letter, dated the 22d June last, will
have made your Exc. acquainted with the
sanguine hopes I entertained tiom the ap-
pearance of the river, that its termination
would he either in interior waters, or coast
ways. When I wrote that ieltei to youi
Exc., I certainly did not anticipate the
possibility that a very few days further
travelling would lead us to its termination
as an accessible river.
On the 29th of June, having traced its
course, without the smallest diminution
or addition, about seventy miles further
to the N.N.W., there being a slight fresh
in the river, it overflowed its banks ; and
although we were at the distance of near
three miles from it, the country was so
perfectly level, that the waters soon spread
over the groqnd on which we were. We
had been for some days before travelling
over such verv low ground, that the peo-
ple in the boats finding the country flood*
ed, proceeded slowly, a circumstance
which enabled me to send them directions
to return to the station we had quitted in
the morning, where the ground was a
little more elevated. This spot being by
no means secure, it was arranged that
the horses witli provisions should return
to the last high land we had quitted, a
distance of sixteen miles ; and as it ap-
peared to me that the body of water in the
river was too important to be much affect-
ed by the mere overflowing of its waters,
I determined to take the large boat, and
in her to endeavour to discover their
point of discharge.
On the 2d of July I proceeded in the
boat down the river, and in the course of
the day went near thirty miles on a
N.N.W. course, for ten of which there
had been, strictly speaking, no land, as
the flood made the surrounding country
a perfect sea ; the banks of the river were
heavily timbered, and many large spaces
within our views, covered with the com-
mon reed, were also encircled by large
trees. On the 3d, the main channel of
the river was much contracted but very
deep, the banks being under water from
a foot to eighteen inches. The stream con-
tinued for about twenty miles on the same
course as yesterday, when we lost sight of
land and trees, the channel of the river
winding through reeds, among which the
water was about three feet deep, the cur-
rent having the same direction as the
river. It continued in this manner for
near four miles more, when without any
previous change in the breadth, depth,
and rapidity of the stream, and when I
was sanguine in my expectations of soon
entering the long sought for lake, it all
at once eluded our further pursuit, by
spreading on all points from N.W. to N.E.
over the plain of reeds which surrounded
us, the. river decreasing in depth from
upwards of twenty feet to less than five
feet, and flowing over a bottom of tena-
cious blue mud, and the current still run-
ning with nearly the same rapidity as
when the water was confined within the
banks of the river. This point of junc-
tion with interior waters, or where the
the Macquarie ceased to have the form of
a river, is in latitude 30° 45' S. and longi-
tude 147° 10'E.
To assert positively that we were on
the margin of the lake or sea, into which
this great body of water is discharged,
might reasonably he deemed a conclusion
that has nothing but conjecture for its
basis ; hut if an opinion may be hazarded
from actual appearances, which our sub-
sequent route tended more strongly to
confirm, I feel confident we were in the
immediate vicinity of an inland sea, most
probably a shoal one, and gradually de-
creasing, or being filled up by the im-
mense depositions from waters flowing
into it from the higher lands ; which on
this singular continent, seem not to extend
a few hundred miles from the sea coast,
as westward of these bounding ranges
(which, from the observations I have
been enabled to make, appear to me to run
parallel to the direction of the coast)
there is not a single hill, or other emi-
nence, discoverable on this apparently
boundless space, those isolated points ex-
U 2


eepted, on which we remained until the
28th July, the rocks and stones composing
which are a distinct species from those
found on the above ranges,
I trust your Excellency will believe
that, fully impressed witli the great im-
portance of the questions as to the inte-
rior formation of this great country, I was
anxiously solicitous to remove all ground
for further conjecture, by the most care-
ful observation on the nature of the coun-
try ; which, though it was to me a proof
that the interior was covered witli water,
yet I felt it my duty to leave no measure
untried which could in any way tend to
a direct elucidation of the fact.
It was physically impracticable to gain
the edge of these waters by making a de-
tour round the Hooded portion of the
country on the S.W. side of the river, as
we proved it to be a barren wet marsh,
overrun with a species of polygonum, and
not offering a single dry spot to which our
Course might, be directed : and that there
was no probability of finding any in that
direction I had a certain knowledge, from
the observations made during tiie former
expedition.
To circle the flooded country to the N.E.
yet remained to be tried ; and when, on
the 7tli July, I returned to the tents,
which I found pitched on the high land
before-mentioned, and whence we could
see mountains at the distance of eighty
miles to the eastward, the country be-
tween being a perfect level, Mr. Evans was
sent forward to explore the country to
the N. E., that being the point on which
I purposed to set forward.
On the 18th July Mr. Evans returned,
having been prevented from continuing on
a N.E. course beyond two days’ journey,
by waters running north-easterly through
high reeds, and which were most probably
those of the Macquarie river, as, during
his absence, it had swelled so consider-
ably, as entirely to surround us, com-
ing within a few yards of the tent. —•
Sir. Evans afterwards proceed more east-
erly, and at the distance of fifty miles
from the Macquarie river, crossed ano-
ther much wider, but not so deep, run-
ning to the north. Advancing still more
easterly, he went nearly to the base of
the mountains seen from the tent, and
returning by a more southerly route,
found the country somewhat drier, but
not in the least more elevated.
The discretionary instructions with
which your Excellency was pleased to fur-
nish me, leaving me at liberty as to the
course to be pursued by the expedition on
its return to Fort Jackson, I determined
to attempt making the sea-coast on an
easterly course, first proceeding along the
base of the high range before-mentioned,
which I still indulged hopes might lead
me to the margin of these, or any other
interior waters which this portion of New
South Wales might contain, and embrac-
ing a low line of coast, on which many
small openings remained unexamined, at
the same time that the knowledge ob-
tained of the country we might encircle
might materially tend to the advantage of
the colony, in the event of any communi-
cation with the interior being discovered.
We quitted this station on the 30th
July, being in latitude 31° 18' S., and
longitude 147 r ' 31'on our route for the
coast, and on the Bth August arrived at
theloftv range of mountains to which our
course had been directed. From the high-
est point of this range we had the most
extended prospect ; from south by the
west to the north, it was one vast level,
resembling the ocean in extent, but yet
without water being discerned, the range
of high land extending to the N. E. by N.,
elevated points of which were distinguished
upwards of one hundred and twenty miles.
From this point, in conformity to the
resolution I had made on quitting the
Macquarie river - , I pursued a N.E. course ;
but after encountering numerous difficul-
ties', from the country being an entire
marsh, interspersed witli quicksands, un-
til the 20th Augusr, when finding I was
surrounded by bogs, I was reluctantly com-
pelled to take a more easterly course,
having practically proved that the country
could not bo traversed on any point de-
viating from the main range of hills which
bound the interior, although partial dry
portions of level alluvial land extend from
their base westerly to a distance which I
estimate to exceed one hundred and fifty
miles, before it is gradually lost in the
waters which I am clearly convinced cover
the interior.
The alteration in our course more
easterly soon brought us into a very dif-
ferent description of country, forming a
remarkable contrast to that which had so
long occupied us. Numerous fine streams,
running northerly, watered a rich and
beautiful country, through which we
passed, until the 7th September, when
we crossed the meridian of Sydney, as
also the most elevated known land in New
Soutli Wales, being then in latitude 318
03 7 S. We were afterwards considerably
embarrassed and impeded by very lofty
mountains. On the 20th September we
gained the summit of the most elevated
mountain in this extensive range, and
from it we were gratified with a view of
the ocean, at a distance of fifty miles,
the country beneath us being formed into
an immense triangular valley, the base of
which extended along the coast, from the
Three Brothers on the south, to high land
north of Smoky Cape. We had the fur-
ther gratification to find, that we were
near the sounce of a large stream running
to the sea. On descending the mountain.


vve followed the course of this river, in-
creased by many accessions, until the Bth
October, when we arrived on the beach
near the entrance of the port which re-
ceived it, having passed over, since the
18th July, a tract of country near five
hundred miles in extent from west to
cast.
This iidet is situated in latitude 31°
23’ 30" S., and longitude 152° 50 7 18" E.,
and had been previously noticed by Capt.
Flinders ; but from the distance at which
he was necessarily obliged to keep from
the coast, he did not discover that it had
a navigable entrance. Of course, our
most anxious attention was directed to
this important point ; and although the
want of a boat rendered the examination
as to the depth of water in the channel,
incomplete, yet there appeared to be at
low water at least three fathoms, with a
safe though narrow entrance between the
sand rollers on either hand. Having as-
certained thus far, and that by its means
the fine country on the banks, and in the
neighbourhood of the river might be of
future service to the colony, I took the
liberty to name it Port Macquarie, in
honour of your Excellency, as the original
promoter of the expedition.
On the 12th October we quitted Port
Macquarie on our course for Sydney, and
although no charts can be more accurate
in their outline and principal points, than
those of Capt. Flinders, we soon expe-
rienced how little the best marine charts
can be depended tipon, to shew all the
inlets and openings upon an extensive
line of coast. The distance his ship was
generally at from that portion of the
coast we had to travel over, did not allow
him to perceive openings, which, though
doubtless of little consequence to shipping,
yet presented the most serious difficulties
to travellers by laud, and of which, if
they had been laid down in the chart, I
should have hesitated to have attempted
the passage, without assistance to the
sea-ward. As it is, we are indebted for
our preservation, and that of the horses,
to the providential discovery ot a small
boat on the beach, which the men with
the most cheerful alacrity carried upwards
of ninety miles on their shoulders, thereby
enabling ns to overcome obstacles other-
wise insurmountable.
Until within these few days, I hoped
to have had the satisfaction to report the
return of the expedition without accident
to any individual composing it; hut such
is the ferocious treachery of the natives
along the coast to the northward, that
our utmost circumspection could not save
us from having one man (W. Blake) se-
verely wounded by them ; hut by the skil-
ful care bestowed upon him by Dr. Harris
(who accompanied the expedition as a vo-
lunteer, and to whom, upon this occasion
ami throughout the whole coarse of it,
we are indebted for much .valuable assist-
ance), I trust his recovery is no longer
doubtful.
The general merits of Mr. Evans are
so well known to your Excellency, that it
will here be sufficient to observe, that by
his zealous attention to every point (bat
could facilitate the progress of the expe-
dition, he has endeavoured to deserve a
continuance of your Exc.’s approbation.
Mr. Charles Frazier, the colonial bota-
nist, has added near 700 new specimens
to the already extended catalogue of Au-
stralian plants, besides many seeds, &c.
and in the collection and preservation he
has indefatigably endeavoured to obtain
your Excellency’s approval of his services.
I confidently hope that the journal of
the expedition will amply evince to your
Excellency the exemplary and praisewor-
thy conduct of the men employed on it,
and I feel the siucerest pleasure in earn-
estly soliciting for them your Excellency's
favourable consideration.
Respectfully hoping, that on a perusal
and inspection of the journals and charts
of the expedition that the course I have
pursued in the execution of your Excel-
lency’s instruction will be honoured by
your approbation, I beg leave to subscribe
myself, with the greatest respect, Sir, your
Excellency’s most obedient and bumble
servant,
(Signed) J. Oxley, Surveyor-Gen.
To his Exc. Governor Macquarie, Sfc.fyc.
In so vast a region discoveries nve inex-
haustible, and whole countries adapted to
culture and habitation may lie in recesses
behind the belt of mountains which inter-
vene between the settled parts of the coast
and the interior. A late enterprize by-
Mr. Throsby has brought to light an en-
viable seat for a new branch of the colony
to occupy.
Extract of a General Order by the Go-
vernor.
“ Government-House, Sydney, May 31,
1819.—His Exc. the Governor having re-
ceived and perused the journal of a tour
lately made by Charles Throsby, Esq. by
the way of the Cow Pastures to Bathurst,
in the new discovered country westward
of the Blue Mountains, takes this early
opportunity publicly to announce the hap-
py result of an enterprize which promises
to conduce, in a very eminent degree, to
the future interest and prosperity of the
colony.— The communication with the
Western Country having been heretofore
over a long and difficult range of moun-
tains, alike ungenial to man and cattle,
from their parched and barren state, it be-
came an object of great importance to dis-
cover another route, whereby those al-


most insurmountable barriers would be
avoided, and a more practicable, and con-
sequently less hazardous access effected
to the rich and extensive plains of Ba-
thurst.—His Exc. adverts with pleasure to
Mr. Throsby’s general report of the capa-
bilities, qualities, and features of the coun-
try intervening between the Cow Pastures
and Bathurst; which he represents to be,
with few exceptions, rich, fertile, and
luxuriant, abounding with fine runs of
water, and all the happy varieties of soil,
bill, and valley, to render it not only de-
lightful to the view, but highly suitable to
ail the purposes of pasturage and agricul-
ture. —The importance of these discove-
ries is enhanced by the consideration that
a continuous range of valuable country,
extending from the Cow Pastures to the
remote plains of Bathurst, Is now fully
ascertained, connecting those countries
with present settlements on this side the
Nepean.—His Exc. the Governor, highly
appreciating Mr. Throsby’s services on
this occasion, offers him this public tri-
bute of acknowledgment, for the zeal and
perseverance by which he was actuated
throughout that'arduous undertaking; and
desires his acceptance of one thousand
acres of land in any part of the country
discovered by himself that he may choose
to select.
“ By command of his Excellency,
(Signed) “ J, T. Campbell, Sec.”
We have not a copy of Mr. Throsby’s
report adverted to by the Governor. Late
advices from Port Jackson convey some
additional information on the subject, in
the following terms:
<£ We some time since announced, that
a passage had been effected across the Bine
Mountains, and that a most desirable
country bad been discovered to the west
of those towering heights ; and we have
now the additional gratification of stating,
that a communication has been opened to
it of easy access, running through lands
of the first description. The colonists are
indebted for this acquisition to their re-
sources to the exertions of 0. Throsby,
Esq. a large land and stockholder, many
years resident in New South Wales, who,
after two preceding attempts, succeeded
in May last, with the assistance of two
native guides, Cookoogonn, chief of the
Burrah-burrah tribe, and Dual, in passing
from the Cow Pastures direct for Ba-
thurst, having encountered only those dif-
ficulties inseparably attendant on the first
explorers of the forests of a new country.
Mr. Throsby was, on the whole, occupied
fifteen days on the expedition, his pro-
gress being protracted from some of his
party falling ill, and bad weather; but by
the delay he had greater opportunity of
examining the country on each side of his
route; and in his letter to the gentleman
from whom we have the information, he
says, ‘ I have no hesitation in staring,
we have a country fit for every and any
purpose, where fine woolled sheep may be
increased to any amount, in a climate pe-
culiarly congenial to them: ere long you
will hear of a route being continued to
the southward, as far as Two-fold Bay,
and so on further in succession through
a country as much more beautiful and su-
perior to the Cow Pastures, as that now
enviable district is to the land contiguous
to Sydney, and where our herds, our
flocks, and our cultivation may unlimit-
edly increase, at an inconsiderable dis-
tance from the great aud grand'essential
in a young colony—water-carriage.”
VARIETIES.
Irregulation of Seamen in Private-
Traders. —Wc are indebted for the suit-
stance of the following suggestions to the
Bombay Courier, of the 9th June. By a
few concise remarks, is indicated the
want of some system having the force
of law, for better regulating the crews of
ships employed in the individual trade to
India, in manning and navigating which
national considerations are frequently
found to give way before private advan-
tage and convenience. We have made
two or three verbal alterations, in order
to avoid an incidental occasion for dissent
in a hasty phrase.
Whilst legislation is so much in fashion,
would it not be worth while to take a
glance at some of our maritime laws ; the
present ones have the appearance of be-
ing lamentably deficient: vveallude to the
government of our seamen in the free
traders who visit our Indian possessions.
No sooner do they enter our ports, than
a squabbling takes place ; the crew only
work while they list, menace their cap-
tain and officers, and then take refuge in
a man of war : a sanctuary we shall al-
ways desire to see respected, aud where
our seamen will aud ought to find protec-
tion from outrage and ill usage.
There is something, however, in the
outset of all this that is radically wrong—
a something that calls for reformation —a
something that says to freemen and free-
traders, redeem your characters.
English sailors are said to be the most
troublesome, the most dissatisfied race of
