

DISCLOSURES OE CRUELTIES
INFLICTED ON PRISONERS AT THE
LABOR PRISON, DRY CREEK,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
PREVIOUS TO THE YEAR 1869.
TO THE READER.
PAMPHLET NO. 1.
(NO. 2 WILL APPEAR SHORTLY.
BY
JOSEPH STEVENS.
In bringing 1 before the notice of the South Australian public
my Pamphlet, The Kevelations of the Dry Creek Stockade,
I humbly beg to inform them that my motive m doing so
is to enlighten their minds respecting the evidence taken by the
late Commission of Enquiry at the Stockade. For some in-
scrutable reason the Government have suppressed this evidence,
but if they 1 - any desire that the affair should pass into oo-
livion I have none, and therefore I now lay before my
readers a few of those painful and cruel incidents which were
so frequently occurring during the superintended ship of F. . W-
Howell. In the following pages I have brought forward nothing
but what is strictly true, incredible though it may seem to
some of my readers that scenes like those described should occur
in this age of enlightenment. In conclusion I beg my readers
to weigh the following pages with attention, and then to pass
such an opinion on the character of F. W. Howell as they may
consider he deserves. Adieu, and believe me to remain, your
very humble servant,
J JOSEPH STEVENS.
Adelaide Sept. 20, 1866.
THE evidence on the cruelties practised by the
of the Stockade upon those of our fellow in bondage, is
apparently confined to the limited sphere of Ministerial knowledge;
and the public have been persuaded to believe that whatever may
have been done was merely what the Superintendent of a Labor
Prison was called upon by his duties to perform. We thus read in
the leading article on “Prison Management, in the Evening Journal
of Aug. 31, 1809. “It was this want of familiarity with the affairs
of the dry Creek Prison that gave such heat to the excitement pre-
vailing a few months ago in regard to it It was not so much the
abuses whieh existed, as the abuse which might east, that stim-
ulated the demand for an enquiry. Had there been explicit reports
issued every quarter or every half year, Mr. Howell would doubtless
have had more justice done him, and a great deal of superfluons
sympathy with the prisoners might have been spared." Fellow
Colonists, I would ask you is it not high time to draw aside the veil
which, would place in obscurity, and if possible cast into oblivion
traces of deeds so dark that the mind recoils with a cold horror from
their contemplation. The individuals on whom these acts of cruelty
have been committed were men unable by their peculiar position to
obtain any redress. Mr. Howell invariably showed a desire to
make as much additional punishment as his invention could origin-
ate or his tiger-like ferocity cause to be executed, on those men most
highly gifted, and who consequently felt their mere incarceration an
all-sufficiently terrible thing, without any such formidable additions
as heavy irons, starvation-diet, and the lash. Some I could name,
who, previous to their fall from rectitude, adorned cue circle m which
they moved, had their limbs cruelly fettered, and were subject to the
unnecessarily coarse and brutal language of the overseers placed
over them. 'Well do those poor men remember the, golden days of
happiness and integrity, when their limbs were free from the degra
ing iron, and they moved happy and respected in then-several circles.
In an evil hour an act is committed which causes them to forfeit
their position, and steals away a link from the family chain. But,
that link is not lost. Is it a father ? He is our father still. Is it a
brother? He is our brother still. Or, is it our dear children: They
are our dear children still. They are not lost, we hope; if they have
broken the law, we humbly how to the law's decree and wait hope-
fully till time restores those absent links to us. In order that my
readers may fully understand my position in respect to the Stockade
enquiry I will lay my proceedings before them. I left tae Steckacle
in'last November, and promised the prisoners, previous to leaving,
that I would bring the conduct of the Superintendent before the
Government. The feelings of the prisoners had risen to such a
heio-ht, through Mr. Howell’s mismanagement and cruelty towards
prisoners, that he would doubtless have met with a similar late at
their hand as did his former master, John Price, comptroller o, con-
victs in Melbourne. I was after some trouble introduced to a person
who interested himself so far as to get a document drawn up for me
containing eleven charges against the Superintendent. It was com-
pleted during the month of December, 1868, and on the fust Monday
in the present year, I placed the said document m the hands of some
of the leading gentlemen of the city, for their opinion upon them.
The document contained eleven charges against i, W. Howell, the
Superintendent —
1. Brutal treatment of Prisoners
2. The rations given to prisoners in the dead-house cell.
3. Employment of prisoners on the Sabbath.
4. Prisoners kept from attending Divine Service on Wednesdays.
5. Allowance of rations not supplied to prisoners.
6. Slops allowed by the regulations not supplied to prisoners.
7. Desecration of the dead in their graves.
8. Credit system.
9. Prisoners working on private property for F. W. Howell.
10. Prisoners making articles out of Government materia for
F. W, Howell’s private use.
11. Fraud on the Government by F. W. Howell.


Prisoner White dy
present year, I was ; toito „r ro -crcrcmmnir to rue vro-
vernment until after an enquiry had been made respecting the cause
of his death. Au inquest was held on his body, and, seeing the re-
port r>f the inquest issued to be so unsatisfactory, I was the cause of
the following letter, dated from North Kensington, being sent for
publication-. I knew White in the Stockade, and knew he had been
bayonetted on the day I left the Stockade. I saw him leaning against
the outside of his cell, (the “ dead-house,”)blood running down his
legs at the time. The following is a copy of the above-mentioned
letter, which w r as duly published : — :
“TO THE EDITOR,
“ Sir —In your issue of yesterday I noticed a very short report of
what I should take to be an unsatisfactory inquest on a death in the
Stockade, Samuel White, who was under sentence of six months’
imprisonment, is said to have died ‘ from natural causes,’ but there
is not the slightest evidence given to show what those natural causes
were. One of the guards appears to have been charged with pushing
deceased with the butt-end of his rifle, and it is evident that some
idea arose of this accelerated his death, There is not the
slightest trouble taken to shew whether this charge is correct or
otherwise. Because deceased was a criminal, no one seemed to care
whether he died from the effects of ill-treatment or not. If the cir-
cumstance had happened outside the prison walls, the evidence re-
specting the pushing with the butt-end of the rifle would have been
fully gone into, and Guard Beames would very possibly have been
committed for manslaughter; but, as it happened in a prison, the
man is simply buried and Guard Beames censured. And what will
he care for that ? It is evident that the guard had something to do
with ill-using the prisoner, or he would not have had this censure.
Then why did not the verdict say what was the real cause of his
death, and not say, ‘ died from natural causes ?’ What are ‘ natural
causes, I should like to know ? Are they different under these cir-
cumstances from what they would be under others ? Is it natural
for guards in the Stockade to push prisoners about with the butt-
end of their rifles, and if death followed, is it therefore the result of
“ natural causes ?” I think the circumstances call for the loudest
censure from the public. To allow a poor man, who had only com-
mitted some slight offence, perhaps, without any bad intentions, to
die in the Stockade after only being in a month or two, and under
which clearly indicated that he had been ill-used; then
'seat the matter as if no one troubled about his death, but rather
it a blessing to get him out of the way-; to hold an inquest,
only, apparently, because it was customary to hold inquests, and the
sooner they got over the job, and the less they knew about it the
better. Such proceedings are disgraceful for!a place like this, and
should be stamped with the most indelible stigma of public
abhorrence.
I am, Sir, &c.,
North Kensington.
Not being satisfied with the verdict returned by the Jury, I wrote
a letter to the Editor of the Evening Journal on the subject, asking
that White’s body might be exhumed, in order to prove that he had
been bayonetted. The letter appeared in the Evening Journal of
January 14tli, 1869, and was as follows :
’‘WHITE’S CASE.
“ TO THE EDITOR.
“ Sir—Having seen and associated with White in the Stockade, I
send you the following notes on the evidence taken at the inquest.
When he came to the Stockade he was given in charge to Chief
Guard WOoldridge. He was put to stonebreaking, at which the
Government task is one cubic yard per day. This task White was
unable to accomplish. Mr. Howell, in his evidence, stated that he
had given orders to the officers not to exact the Government task
from him, but at the same time he placed him on half rations be-
cause the task was not accomplished, viz., twelve ounces of bread,
four ounces of meat, and two pints of tea per day. The evidence
given at the inquest is otherwise incomplete. During the first month
of his imprisonment I have known the deceased, who, according to
Mr. Howell’s own evidence, was imbecile, to be confined in the dead-
house cell, on half rations. It was only when he was waiting to see
the doctor that he was allowed to be in a shed outside the deadhouse
cell, except for exercise. Respecting the usage he received, I beg
to certify that I have seen him ill-used by the Chief Guard, Wool-
dridge, as well as by Guard Beames, with the butt-end of the rifle.
He also told me he had been bayonetted, which may be proved on
the body being exhumed. I left the Stockade in November, 1868,
tousto leaving I saw him with a mass'of bruises and sores,
■wmeir lie told me were caused by the ill-treatment he had received.
“ Yours, &c.,
“ Joseph Stevens.”
I had placed my documents in the hands of the Editor for his
perusal, and in the same Evening Journal, January 14tli, 1869, is a
leading article respecting them, and my request that he would, in
my name, demand a public enquiry into my allegations. The article
is as follows :
“ MORE ABOUT THE STOCKADE.
“ The parliamentary action kindly undertaken by the Honorable
Mr. Barrow in White’s case has not as yet come to much. On Wed-
nesday, the Chief Secretary gave the following reply to Mr. Barrow’s
question:—‘ The Government are instituting enquiries into the
alleged ill-treatment of a prisoner named White. The Government
have directed enquiries to be made if any case of cruel conduct in
the Stockade has taken place.’ Under any circumstances this would
have struck us as a rather vague deliverance on a point involving
so much scandal. But further disclosures which we are now enabled
to make, will probably inspire the public with a desire for a more
searching enquiry than that contemplated by Mr. Bagot. The first
part of them will be found in a letter which appears elsewhere, from
a prisoner recently released from the Stockade. This man, Joseph
Stevens by name, avers that he saw White in the Stockade, and wit-
nessed the ill-treatment to which he was subjected. But on that
particular case we do not wish to anticipate any action which may
have been taken by the Government. We did what we conceive to
be our duty by it at the time, and with the rest of the public will
await the issue. Other documents have been submitted to us by
Stevens, which involve more serious and comprehensive charges
against the Stockade management. It appears to us that the public
and the authorities ought to be distinctly informed of their purport,
in order that both may have an opportunity of considering calmly
what should be done upon them. Our readers will observe that this
time we do not profess to be publishing a detailed narrative of any
particular occurrence. The statements made by Stevens are merely
reminiscences of his own observation in the Stockade, extending
1 over a period of seven years. Neither do we pledge ourselves in
any way, or even profess to give an opinion on the relative credibility
of‘the statements, either individually or collectively. The man has
come to us with his story. He has told it in a manner to invite as
much confidence as is possible under the circumstances. He has shown
us all the details which he had prepared for publication in another
shape. He has, at our request, brought two comrades who corrobo-
rated his tale. He says there are several more about town, also
quite prepared to do the same; and all he asks in return is that in
his name we should demand a public enquiry into his allegations.
In describing the nature of Stevens’s memorial, we shall specialize
only those parts of it which may be most readily and thoroughly
tested. Like every other bill of wrongs, it contains much that is
trivial, amid a good deal that is important. The serious points
o u«ht to be considered first, and afterwards, when public attention
has been concentrated on the case, the minor ones may be drawn in,
At present, the principal question before the country is, have the
officers at the Stockade been in the habit of ill-treating prisoners
with their rifles and bayonets, as was indicated at the recent in-
quest? This man, Joseph-Stevens, alleges not only that much ill-
treatment was practised on White, but that there are others in the
Stockade now who bear marks of it upon them.
In the report of the Legislative Council, on January 13th, 1869,
the Honorable John Barrow asked the Hon. Chief Secretary,
“ whether the Government have instituted, or intend instituting en-
quiries into the alleged ill-treatment of a prisoner named Samuel
White, who recently died in the Stockade; and also, whether the
Government will enquire whether any other cases of tyrannical or
cruel conduct have occurred at that prison ? The Chief Secretary
replied as follows“ The Government are instituting enquiries
into the alleged ill-treatment of a prisoner named White. The
Government have directed enquiries to be made if any case of cruel
conduct in the Stockade has taken place.
From the Chief Secretary’s answer, the public would infer that
the Government was not aware of any case of cruel conduct in the
Stockade having taken place. The Government appointed a Com-
mittee, and I handed in the following list of citizens, ex-guards, and
prisoners whom I wished to be examined .
1. Mr. Goodman Hart, Adelaide.
2. Mr. Hurst, Adelaide.
3. Mr. W. Miller, Adelaide.
4. Mr. Humphries, Adelaide.




EX-GUARDS.
I. Mr. Blakely, Adelaide. 2. Mr. Harris, (Foot Police),
Adelaide.
3. Mr. Hanralian, (Foot Police) >
Adelaide. 4. Mr. Lowtlier (Foot Police),
Adelaide.
o. Mr. Caskey, Adelaide. 0. Mr. John Howell, Port
Augusta.
7 ■ Mr. Chambers, Port Augusta. 8. Mr. Smith, Blackwood
Fann.
9. Mr. Hassell, Allendale. 10. Mr. Bush, Walkerville.
11. Mr. Aldridge, North Road. 12. Mr. Featherstone, North
Adelaide.
PRISONERS THEN IN THE STOCKADE.
Name and sentence.
1. Webber, 11 years.
2. John Brown, 4 years.
3. Johnson, 5 years.
4. Prentice, 8 years.
5. Anthonieff, life.
6. Morris, 2 years.
7. Hebermann, 3 years.
8. R. Turner, 10 years.
9. J. Riley, 8 years.
10. Travers, or Baldey, life.
11. Halliwell, life.
Name and sentence.
12. Walsh, 10 years.
13. Bootlia, 7 years.
14. O’Donnell, life.
15. Corbett, 10 years.
16. J. Jones, 10 years.
17. D. Kerney, life.
18. J. Kerney, life.
19. McEllister, 2 years.
20. Whitehead, 10 years.
21. Gow, 7 years.
22. G. White, 8 years.
Thus supplying a list of thirty-eight individuals to be examined. I
was informed that the charge of fraud could not he entertained by
the Commission, as their duty was to look into the management at
the Stockade, in connection with the prisoners. The Commission
sat. Their report, with the evidence taken, has been sent in to the
Government, and has been asked for in the House, hut the evidence
has been withheld; so that it becomes the duty of the public to
demand it. If there is nothing in it to condemn Mr. Howell, let the
Government issue it out, and then the public can judge for them-
selves.
The following is the Commissioners’ report, and from it the public
know that grave charges have been made against the late Superin-
tendent, and they have a right to demand the publication of the
evidence. Let not these records of man’s injustice and cruelty be
allowed to pass into oblivion, but let the public know and understand
their full purport, and then deliver their opinion which will haply
differ widely from that expressed by a certain learned lawyer of ours
some short time since. Let the members of Parliament enforce the
demand, and so give the necessary satisfaction to the public at large.
THE STOCKADE ENQUIRY.
The following was laid before Parliament on Tuesday: —
“ Report of Board appointed on the 15th January, 1869, to en-
quire into the alleged ill-treatment of Samuel White, deceased,
lately a prisoner in the Stockade, and generally into the mode in
which discipline is maintained in that prison.
Adelaide, February 17th, 1869.
“ Sir —1. The Board, consisting of the Mayor of Adelaide, the
Colonial Surgeon, the Police Magistrate, and John Williams, Esq.,
J.P., commenced their duties on the 18th of January, ultimo, and
held twelve subsequent meetings, at which they examined fifty-seven
witnesses, including the Superintendent, the Medical Officer, two
Justices, and a number of guards, ex-guards, prisoners, and ex-
prisoners, whose evidence accompanies this report.
2. “The conclusions arrived at by the Board in respect to White
are, that he was received into the prison about the 15th of August,
last, under a sentence from the Chief Justice of six calender months,
with hard labor. From the first it was perceptible that White’s in-
tellect was defective, and that he was unable to apply himself stea-
dily to his work—stone-breaking.
3. “ By the end of September it must have been clearly evident
to the Superintendent that White was unfit, from imbecility of mind,
for penal discipline; and he (the Superintendent) ought to have taken
steps to have had him removed to the Lunatic Asylum, under the
provisions of the Lunatic Act of 1864, clause 43, which is expressly
framed for such a contingency.
4. “ White does not appear to have been required to labor after
October, but during the period he was at work; viz., about two
months, the Board have no doubt that he was subjected to frequent
ill-usage from Guards Beames and Woolridge ; that he was beaten
with the but-end of a musket, pinched, pushed, and dragged about,
and otherwise maltreated, and at least once pricked with a bayonet
by Beames.
5. “ The guards in so acting exceeded their legal powers, and there '
is reason to believe that the same practices have been caniecl on.
with many other prisoners for years past, and that, if not in this in-
stance, in many former instances, the Superintendent both sanction-
ed and encouraged them.
6. “White, not being capable of doing the recognized daily quant-
um of work was, for a considerable period, on reduced rations, suffi-
cient to support life, but not to afford strength to do a full day’s work
to a man unable on a full ration, to do the required amount of labor
7. “ There is not evidence to prove that the violence used
White on the works hastened his death; but the opinion entertainec
by many that such was the case, is not without some basis.
8. “ An inquest was held on White’s body on the stli day of Jan-
uary, and a verdict ‘ Died from natural causes,’ was returned. There
were six prisoners upon the jury, which seems to be an unfair ar-
rangement, as they cannot fail to be more or less under the influence
of the Superintendent. This unfairness was considerably enhanced by
the circumstances that the prisoners so placed on the jury, are what
are called ‘ billetted men,’ employed in and about the building,
and who are more immediately under the influence of the Super-
intendent. The Board would respectfully urge that in future, no
prisoners should sit as jurymen.
9. “ With respect to the mode in which discipline is maintained
in the prison, it may be as well to premise that the Dry Creek Labor
Prison, usually called the Stockade, with the section upon which it
stands, was proclaimed a gaol in August, 1854, but the main build-
ing, in which nearly all the prisoners are confined in separate cells
at night, was not completed for several years after. It is governed
by the Acts No. 4, of YI Victoria, No. 3, of 1854, No. 17, of 1855-0,
and certain regulations made by the Governor and Excecutive Coun-
cil, as authorized by the two latter Acts, and published in the
Gazettee of May 27, 1858. Act No. 3, of 1854, taking the Labor
Prison from under the charge of the Sheriff, and placing it under
that of a Comptroller of Convicts.
10. “ Previously to the 4th July, 1860, Mr. Hare was Comptroller,
and Mr. F. W. Howell, Superintendent. Since that date Mr.
Howell lias held both offices.
11. “ The Gaol Act, No. 4, of VI. Victoria, provides for the ap-
pointment of a Visiting Justice to each gaol, who shall visit such
gaol, at least once every week, and whose powers and duties are to
some extent defined, it does not appear that any Visiting Justice
has been appointed to the Stockade, and this omission ought to have
been pointed out to the Government by Mr. Howell, more especially
after the restraint upon him of a superior officer was withdrawn.
12. “ Mr. Howell appeared uncertain that he had ever been ap-
pointed Comptroller, and stated that he had never exercised the
powers of a Visiting Justice, conferred on the Comptroller of Con-
victs by clause 7 of the Punishment Regulations.
13. “ It appears to the Board expedient, in order to relieve the
present head of the establishment of much responsibility, and to
diminish his power, to separate the offices of Superintendent and
Comptroller; and they would suggest the latter appointment be
conferred on the Sheriff, in addition to his present duties.
14. “ Though the Comptroller is, as stated, a Visiting Justice, the
Board consider it necessary that the provisions of clause 8, of Act
No. 4, VI Victoria, should be carried out by the appointment of some
magistrate to be Visiting Justice; who, in addition to the powers
given him by the Act, should be furnished with similar instructions
and authority to those issued to the Visiting Justice of the Adelaide
Gaol, 28th April, 1854 — vide letter of the Colonial Secretary of that
date, No. 1,048.
15. “ The only justices who have exercised the functions of Visit-
ing Justice have been successively the late and present Comissioner
of Police and Chief Inspector of Police. It is not clear how these
gentlemen first came to believe that they had any authority to act as
Visiting Justises; and, their visits being-infrequent, and no apparent
beneficial result flowing to prisoners who complained, complaints
ceased to be made.
16. “Disciplineßegulations. —These regulations appear well suited
to effect their object, and the only alteration the Board will propose
are of a minor description, which they think experience has shown to
be expedient.
17. “ The preamble implies that prisoners should be classified
according to sentence, and that their moral and religious instruction
should be carefully attended to.
18. “ The Board do not find that much attention has been paid to
classification ; but they see that it would be attended with some
difficulty, whilst there is but one building in which to confine
prisoners when not at work (except their solitary cells), and whilst
there is so little diversity of occupation.


19 “ Moral instruction is much neglected. The prisoners at
present unable to do so, might he taught to read and write
and a number of them could be assembled each evening to
listen to reading from instructive books. To this end it would be
useful to appoint a schoolmaster, who would also act as storekeeper.
20. “ Religious instruction is sufficiently given by the clergy o
the various Churches, by whom Divine Service is performed twice on
Sundays, and once on Wednesdays. , •
21. “Duties of Superintendent—Under this head the Supei
tendent is authorised to punish minor offences by solitary confine-
ment of offenders on bread and water for three days. This poivei
the Board advise should be withdrawn as it places the Superin-
tendent in the position of prosecutor and judge, and lias sometimes
led to prisoners being so punished several times with veiy little m-
Traffic,—The regulation under this head is very useful, and
the Board would extend it by providing that no work should be done
by a prisoner for any officer of the establishment.
23 “ Taskwork.—The Board would recommend that this regula-
tion be altered by striking out the exception relating to prisoners a
second time convicted. ,
24. “ Letters. —Restrictions are placed on prisoner s corres-
pondence. Letters must be inspected and endorsed by the Superin-
tendent before being forwarded, and can only be written every two
months. Some prisoners complain that they are only allowec to
unite a draft letter on a slate, to be copied in the office ; that they
are not allowed to sign the letter which is forwarded; and that they
have no means of knowing whether it is correctly copied.
2b. “ Ration Scale.—An addition of two ounces of rice to the
lio-ht labor ration is deemed advisable, and the Board also recom-
mend that the winter scale be adopted for the whole year in all the
rations ; and also that more attention should be paid to the growth
or procuring of vegetables wherewith to vary the diet.
26. “ Punishment Regulations. —The maximum punishments pro-
vided by these regulations appear somewhat, severe ; but assuming
that they will be always imposed by a Visiting Justice, after due
proof, upon oath, of the commission of the offence, and with a lull
regard to any point in the evidence in extenuation, the Board do not
propose any alteration. , e
27. 66 Prisoners in Irons. —-The Board found that upwards of
thirty prisoners were kept in irons, consisting of a chain about three
feet long, having at each end a ring with a hinge to enclose the
ancles, round which the rings are fastened with rivets. These lions,
of various weights from about seven to thirty pounds, being a serious
aggravation of the prisoners’ sentences, viz., imprisonment with hard
labor, enquiry was made as to the authority for tlieir use. t
28. “ Mr. Howell produced a letter from the Chief Secretary s
Office, dated 4tli January, 1856, signed “O. K. Richardson, and
numbered 14, in which the Comptroller is authorised to keep pri-
soners in irons, the weight to vary according to the occupation.
29. “ The letter was written in answer to one from Mr. Hare, and
not very long after an escape of twelve or more prisoners from a veij
insecure place, in which a number of men were accustomed to sleep
whilst there w T as no separate accommodation for them, and whilst the
prison was very incomplete, took place. ,
30. “ The Board believes this authority was only intended to be
temporary, otherwise it would have been embodied in the regulations
published in the Government Gazette two years and five months later,
and which have the force of law. . ,
31. “ The Board deem that the use of irons can only be justified
as a matter of necessity, and that in any amended regulations that
may be determined upon, they should be limited to certain classes ot
prisoners, and that no man should be kept more than seven days m
irons, except with the written assent of the Comptroller and the
Visiting Justice. . . , ~, ~
32. “ Out of the number so suffering heavier punishment than the
law provides, the Board consider that one-third should be selected,
and at once relieved from their irons, and that most of the remainder
might have their irons changed for lighter ones.
33. Harsh treatment of Prisoners. —There is reason to believe. that
the undivided responsibilities of the charge of so many convicted
criminals devolving upon the Superintendent, and the absence of any
effectual check upon his mode of treating them, have conduced to a
number of instances in which the guards, with his sanction, have
taken illegal means to urge on the prisoners to and at their work.
The Board cannot doubt that several prisoners have been beaten
with the butts of muskets, and even stabbed with bayonets —actions
deserving of severe reprehension, and that cannot too soon be put a
stop to.
34. “ Sunday. —The prisoners are kept in close confinement on
Sundays except to attend Divine Service, and the Church being in
the main’building, it follows that from Saturday to Monday they are
not in the open air, and have no exercise. They are not allowed to
smoke on Sunday, or on Wednesday afternoon.
THE CASE OF J. SCHOFF.
35 « Many of the prisoners spoke of the case of Schoff, as an in-
stance of the barbarity of the Superintendent in reducing a man by
starvation to such a state, that he ate a dead cat to appease hishungcr.
Schoff' was under sentence of twenty years with hard labor, and as
he obstinately refused to work, he was kept upon the reduced allow-
ance of food prescribed in No. .3 of the ration scale, (a copy of which,
and of the other regulations is upon the door of each cell). He
might at any time have had full rations by performing his allotted
task; and therefore if he suffered from hunger, he alone was to
blame.
CASES OF RICHARD TURNER AND JAMES RYLEY.
36 “ Though bearing only indirectly on the enforcement of disci-
pline the Board think it necessary to notice the position of these
men ’ Previously to the 13th of December, 1861, a practice was
carried on of reducing the term of prisoners sentences, which on that
date was thenceforth prohibited (834-61), except as to prisoners then
undergoing punishment. Turner and Ryley, coming within the
exception, have often claimed a right to their liberty, and though
they may have no legal right, there has been an apparent breach of
faith in depriving them of privileges accorded to others similarly
situated, and they are now recommended to the favorable consider-
ation of His Excellency the Governor in Executive Council.
CASES OF JOHNSON, CORBETT, AND ANTHONY.
37. “ In these and several other similar cases the Superintendent
appears to have lost his self-control, and acted in a tyrannical and
illegal manner. . , , , , .
38 “ Record of Credit Time.—Certain prisoners also who by doing-
more than their allotted task could earn some remission of their sen-
tences used to have a record of their “ crjdit-time, as it is ca, et,
upon the small label which hangs on the door of each cell. lor
some months past these records have been removed, and taereby
dissatisfaction is produced, the prisoners not being aware of the
length of time they have still to serve, llie Board recommend that
each prisoner’s credit-time should be replaced on Ins ticket without
delay ; and, as a me: as of ascertaining the same, that a more satis-
factory system of calculating the work done should be instituted
39. “ Tobacco. —A general grievance with the prisoners is, that
though they are allowed a ration of tobacco, yet if they save up any
of it for the purpose of exchanging for flannels or socks, it is taken
aw r ay This seems rather harsh treatment, and to be concerv ed m
the same spirit that debars the prisoners smoking or taking any
exercise on Sundays. The Board recommend that 15 minutes be
allowed for smoking each forenoon and afternoon, Sunday included.
40 “ The Board' have experienced some difficulty m arriving at
conclusions from the almost total absence of disinterested and un~
preiudiced witnesses, able to speak to facts from tlieir own obser-
vation ; but without accepting as literal truth all the circumstances
detailed by persons under sentence for their crimes, or ex-guards,
avlio have had differences with the Superintendent, the truth may be
deduced from a careful collation of the various. statements, and
thereby the Government can test to what extent this Report is borne
° U 4I “ With regard to the expediency of removing certain officers
of the establishment, forcibly suggested by much of the. evidence, the
Board do' not consider that it is within the scope of their duty, oi of
the nowers assigned to them, to make any recommendation.
1 “ We have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient servants,
“ Samuel Beddome, P.M. (Chairman).
“John Williams.
“H. R. Fuller/’
“ In appending my signature to the above, I do so quite agreeing
with my colleagues in the conclusions they have drawn from the
evidence produced before the Commission. advisahilitv of
“I only differ from them on one point, viz., the advisability oi
allowing affected to he present during the investigation,
which their instructions did not seemto mlmr.
“ To the Hon. the Chief Secretary.”


Regulations and Scale of Rations of the Dry Creek
Labor Prison :
Stockade Hegulations.
Although pending an official investigation, it would not be
right to comment upon any particular case of alleged hardship
at the Dry Creek Labor Prison, still less to animadvert upon
the conduct of any officer of that establishment, it cannot be
improper to inform the public what are the existing regulations
at that establishment. We have a copy of these Regulations
now before us, printed in the form of a small pamphlet, at the
Government Printing Office, and bearing date 1867.
An introductory paragraph states that “ the general principle
of the discipline of convicts should be both punitive and refor-
matory,” and that to accomplish these objects (alter classification
according to sentence) “ unremitting labor must be exacted by
formidable punishment, if needful.” The phrase u unremitting
labor” is, however, an unhappy one, as the labor authorised by
the Regulations is not “ unremitting.” The hours of labor are
—in summer, from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m., with one hour’s cessation
for breakfast, and one hour for dinner. In winter the hours are
from 7 to 5, with half an hour for breakfast, and one hour for
dinner. Ten minutes every morning, and ten minutes every
afternoon, are allowed, in addition, for smoking. The day’s
work expected of each man is to break one cubic yard of stone
to a gauge. Those who break 1| yards are allowed
credit time of half a day for every such half yard, if they have
been sentenced to more than one year’s servitude ; to other
prisoners the credit time is only a quarter of a day for half a
yard. Where this labor test cannot be applied, credit time is
allowed for over-work of an equal value, except in the case of
prisoners who have been more than once convicted in this
Province.
With regard to discipline and punishment, the Superintendent
is responsible for everything, and—in minor cases—he has
power to put prisoners inro solitary confinement for three days,
with half-scale rations. A.ll such sentences on his part must be
entered by him in the Record Book, and we do not see that he
is empowered to inflict, or order to be inflicted, any other
punishment whatever.
The general Punishment Regulations are as follows :
1. Solitary confinement for not exceeding 30 days, and reduction,
of food to Scale 11., for the following offences: —Refusing or neglect-
ing to obey the lawful orders of any officer of the Labor Prison ;
neglecting to perform the required amount of task labor; holding, or
attempting to hold, intercourse with others than officers of the Labor
Prison while employed on public works ; assaulting a prisoner; in-
solence to any officer or officers of the labor prison; destruction of
the property of the Government; and profane swearing and obscene
language.
I
2. Solitary confinement and diminished' food (as above), or by
personal correction, not exceeding 50 lashes—for the following
offences:—Manufacturing or concealing, or being in possession of
any tool, key, or implement intended to effect the escape of any
prisoner, or for any unlawful purpose; attempting to escape; con-
niving at and concealing prisoners attempting to escape: and
threatening to do grievous bodily injury to an officer.
3. For the following offences, nersonal correction is to be inflicted,
not exceeding 150 lashes: —Mutiny or outbreak ; assaulting an offi-
cer with intent to do grievous bodily harm; setting on fire, or attemp-
ting to set on fire, any prison, stockade, building, or other property ;
and unnatural crimes.
These punishments may be awarded by any visiting- Justice
upon sworn proof that the accused has been guilty of the
offence, and wherever such punishments are inflicted a properly
attested entry is to be made in the Record Book. One special
regulation is, that “no corporal punishment shall be inflicted,
unless in the presence of a Medical Officer and of a Visiting
Justice.”
The rule last quoted ot course precludes ill-usage of prisoners
by their guards ; yet it is the incumbent duty of the guards to
shoot any prisoner who may even attempt to escape, and they
may also use their arms to prevent prisoners committing as-
saults. But we had better quote in full the “Duties of Guards,”
as embodied in the Regulations :
Guards (except when acting as Overseers), not to be allowed to
hold any communications with prisoners, except on matters of
discipline
Guards, when on duty, never to be allowed without arms, to con
sist of a musket, bayonet, and pistols, with twelve rounds of ball
cartridge.
Guards, when on duty, not to allow any prisoner to approach
nearer than ten paces to them ; nor to permit any prisoner to go be-
yond the prescribed lihiits, without the Overseer’s order.
On any prisoner passing, or attempting to pass, the prescribed
bounds, it is the duty of the Guard to challenge him by callingjaloud,
“ Stand, prisoner,” with the prisoner’s name or number. On this
challenge being ? eqeated twice, and the prisoner neglecting or refusing
to stand, then’it shall be lawful for the Guard, or other officer, to use
his weapons; and in case of inability to prevent escape by other
means, to fire on the prisoner to prevent his escape.
On the escape of any prisoner, the Guard shall fire (immediately
reloading) his piece, to give an alarm; but on no account shall he
leave the gang under his charge without the orders of an officer.
On an alarm being heard, all officers and guards in barracks are
to turn out fully armed to await the orders of the officer in charge.
Guards are justified in using their arms to prevent prisoners from
assaulting each other, any officer, or other person.
The Guards of each gang shall receive from the'Overseer in charge
the number of the gang : they are to count the same, at least, every
half hour. They are to report to the Overseers any irregularity in
the conduct of the prisoners.
These are the principal regulations ; but to complete the out-
line, we may add that no guard is allowed to buy from or sell
to any prisoner. Prisoners are allowed to write letters only
once in two months, which must! be read and endorsed by the
Superintendent or Comptroller before they can be forwarded.
Visitors allowed to see good behaviour prisoner (only) in the
presence of an officer, once in two months, the visitor and
prisoner being separated by a barrier. Prisoners to wear prison
clothing only, to have their hair cut close once a month, and to
be close shaved twice a week. There is no compulsion to attend
Divine service, but it is held at least once every Sunday, and
books are issued from the library every Saturday, returnable the
next Saturday. Under the head of “ Minor Offences,” there is
the following regulation :
It is by the most exemplary conduct alone, that prisoners will be
allowed the slightest indulgence. Any irregularity, disobedience of
orders, want of cleanliness, insolence, idleness, refusal to work,
making use of indecent, abusive, or improper language ; damaging,
defacing, or destroying Government property, or other misconduct,
will not only subject a prisoner to immediate punishment, but may
issue in the loss of the whole of any credit time he may have pre-
viously earned,
The two ration scales are as follows :
No. 1 ration is allowed only to such prisoners as perform the re-
quired amount of labor, unless ordered by the medical officer.


Summer: No. 1. Full Ration.—Per man daily—Bread, 1 lb.;
meat, 1 lb.; potatoes or other vegetables, 8 ozs.—bread in lieu
thereof, 8 ozs.; tea, f oz.; sugar, 3 ozs.; salt, £ oz.; soap, £ oz.;
tobacco, £ oz. Vide conditions winter scale.
No. 2, Solitary Rations.—Bread, 1 lb.; water, ad lib.
No. 3, Sick and Light-Labor Ration.—Bread, 8 ozs.; meat, 8 ozs.;
potatoes or other vegetables, 4 ozs—bread in lieu thereof, 4 ozs.; tea,
£ oz.; sugar, 3 ozs.; salt, £ oz.; soap, | oz.
Winter.—No. 1, Full Ration—Per man daily—Bread, 1 lb. 8 ozs.;
meat, 1 lb.; potatoes or other vegetables, 8 ozs. —bread in lieu
thereof, 8 ozs.; tea, \ oz.; sugar, 2 ozs.; salt, | oz.; soap, oz.
together with tobacco, \ oz., to those earning credit only, or for spe-
cial good behavior, to those in whom credit may not apply.
No. 2, Solitary Ration.—Bread, 1 lb.; water, ad lib.
No. 3, Sick aud Light Labor Ration. —Bread, 12 ozs.; meat, 8 ozs.;
potatoes or other vegetables, 4 ozs.—bread in lieu thereof, 4 ozs.;
tea, 1 oz.; sugar, 2 ozs.; salt, £ oz.; soap, oz.
These regulations, of course, equally hind officers and
prisoners; and from their perusal the public will be enabled
to see what the law provides and allows, as regards the manage-
ment and discipline of the Stockade Prison.
In commenting upon the preceding report, allow me to call your
attention to No. 5 and No. 33, and did I not say another word, those
are sufficient I believe for any nnbiased mind. I have a duty to per-
form towards the inhabitants of South Australia —some have rela-
tions in the Stockade—some have friends there —and as was ob-
served in one of our South Australian publications some time since,
“ The law was no respecter of persons, for Government officers,
ministers of religion, lawyers, doctors, and editors were sometimes
called upon by the strong arm of the law to take up their abode in
prisons at the Government expense.’ Therefore, let me here say a
word in the ears of some to whom the name of “ convict” falling
upon their ear brings to their imagination a being in some form which
it is impossible to approach without contagion, or some evil coming
upon them. Whilst in the calendar of prisoners there are some des-
perate men, there are also some spoken of in the prece ling remarks,
who stood as high as those now stand, to whom I would give the
counsel, “Take heed lest you fall, and become like unto them.
I have a duty to perform towards those wretched prisoners I have
left in the Stockade. It is true I have been instrumental in bringing
to light some dark transactions, and I earnestly pray that my humble
efforts to effect the amelioration of their past unhappy moral and
physical condition may prove availing. I nftw proceed to state a
few facts taken from various prisoners’ documents in my possession.
I will also bring forward cases in support of the charges aforesaid
against F. W. Howell.
BRUTAL TREATMENT OF PRISONERS.
Some persons would suggest “harsh” instead of brutal, but as I
believe “ brutal” to be the right word in the right place, I use it.
1. Charles Ashley.—This prisoner died in the Stockade. His
melancholy end caused a great sensation at the time, in consequence
of the inhuman treatment he received previous to his death, which
elicited the following letter inserted in the Evening Journal of Jan-
uary 16th, 18(59:
Sir —There was an inquest held on the body of Charles Ashley
some time ago. I could disclose some horrible tales of ill-treatment
of that poor man. He was not fit to work, yet I have seen him
knocked about with a gun, so that lie. could not stand on his feet.
After this he was put into a dungeon where they starved him and
heat him fearfully. The Jury brought in a verdict of “ Died from
natural causes,” but God knows how he came bv his death. If their
verdict had been “ From starvation and ill-treatment,” it would have
been nearer the mark. It is a shame that the Government do not
look to the Stockade more than they do. If a man is sent there he
is not to be beaten in that manner. If there should be a Court of
Enquiry I shall attend, for when we are in we must not open our
mouths—if we do, God help us !
I am Sir, &c.,
“ One who was there.”
The truthfulness of this letter can be attested by numbers who
were eye-witnesses.
Case No. 2.—The next is an old man in for life, his name is Good-
ridge, he was paralyzed on one side of his body whereby he lost the
use of his speech. Yet this poor old man was confined in heavy
irons • he had to be dragged in and out of the Stockade quarry six
times every day by 2 prisoners. The old man had to break stones in
the quarry, and yet he dare not complain or repine, or like poor
Schoff it would have been said he would not work.
Ca s e No. 3, M artelli. —This prisoner reports his own case, the account
was printed in the leading article of the Evening Journal, January
16th, and is as follows
« This man (so runs the report), has shown us an old cut mark in
the calf of his right leg, which he alleges to have been caused by a
bayonet thrust received from Guard Smith. On the same occasion
he was hit three or four times on the shoulder with Smith’s rifle.
He has more than .once seen other prisoners treated in the same way
especially Johnston, Prentice, and Antoni ffe. He was a witness to
the revolting incident mentioned the other day, the eating of the dead
cat by Schoff after he had been about ten months in solitary confine-
ment Schoff was taking exercise near where Martelli was at work,
and the disgusting scene took place under his eyes.
Case No. 4. Miller.—This man has received severe injury to his
eyes, through being compelled to ram powder, in blasting the rock,
with an iron, whereby the- powder exploded, burnt his face, and in-
jured his sight for ever. There are other grievances in his case,
which are in the Evening Journal of January 16th, 1863, reported by
him as follows :
William Miller tells us that he has seen both the bayonet and the
musket used on prisoners. But his strongest complaint is against
the solitary confinement, of which he had three months’ experience
himself, with only occasional intervals for exercise. The diet is
eight ounces of bread, four ounces of meat, and two pints of tea, per
diem. The original cause of Miller’s quarrel with the authorities
was a severe accident he sustained in the quarries, through an ex-
plosion which deprived him of his right eye, and one of his thumbs.
According to his own assertion, he was forced to do full work again
before he^had completely recovered, and for not being able to do it,
he was put on half rations. We shall, however, avoid as far as pos-
sible, the details of individual cases, believing that they may be
better and more fairly elicited at the public enquiry. The signifi-
cance of Miller’s deposition lies in the alleged abuse of the power
of solitary confinement.
Case No. 5.. John Corbet.—One day, as Corbet was working in the
quarry. Mr. Howell called him up, whereupon he, Mr. Howell, took
the rifle from the guard and, pointing the muzzle at Corbett, told
him he was going to shoot him. Corbet asked him for what cause.
Mr. Howell said he had orders from Government to shoot him and
others under his charge. Corbett thereupon opened the bosom of
his shirt and cried out to the Superintendent to put the ball m the
right place, at which Mr. Howell turned very pale, and then sen-
tenced him to one day’s solitary confinement, with bread and water.
The punishment here inflicted for.such a slight cause proves the
violent and unrestrained temper of the late Superintendent, and
how unfit he was to have charge of a body of men.. Corbett was
subsequently permitted to speak to the late Sir Dominic c Daly on
an occasional visit made by him to the prison, and Corbett lodged a
complaint. When Mr. Hamilton next visited the prison, guards and
prisoners being on parade, Mr. Hamilton addressed Corbett in the
presence of all hands, telling him if ever he dared do such a thing
aorain he would make him suffer for his presumption 11 he had any
complaints to make, he should make them to linn (Mr. Hamilton).
Yet in clause 11 of the Report of the late Commission, it is stated
that no Visiting Justice had been appointed to the Stockade.
Case No. 6. Black Bootha.-This man was working in the quarry
with 26 tbs weight of irons on him. He lodged a complaint that
they were too heavy for him to work in, whereupon a charge was
laid against him for refusing to work He was brought before Mr
Hamilton and Mr. Tomkinson, and he poor fellow, knew too well
on seeing the latter gentleman, what his fate would be, foi Mr.
Tomkinson used rarely to pay the Stockade a visit except a man


was to be flogged. He received fifty lashes, four of the guards re-
lieved each other at this business so as to ensure vigour of stroke.
One of the local papers, in an article on the infliction of punish-
ment says, “his horrible yells and cries could be heard for miles
around,” but at all events it was no wonder Bootha’s voice might
have been heard for some distance, seeing that the cat tore away the
bruised and bloody flesh, so that you might lay a finger in it, Mr.
Howell standing by the while, indicating with a scientific accuracy
(worthy of an inquisition torture chamber foreman) the precise spot
for his understrappers to plant their blows.
Case No. 7. O’Donnell, who was flogged the same day, by order
of Messrs. Hamilton and Tomkinson. By what power did they order
these punishments if there were no Visiting Justices?
Case No. 8. Black Jemmy was a stout man when he entered the
Stockade. He was placed in heavy irons, 30 lbs weight, and had
to work in the quarries, This prisoner suffered from some internal
complaint. He died. I helped to carry him to the grave. I lifted
the coffin containing his corpse and was horror struck, I could have
carried it to the grave myself, it could not have weighed more than
40 tts.
Case No. 9. Wilson, a prisoner who was under sentence of four
years, was flogged twice during his term of imprisonment by order
of trie justices. The prisoner was in irons the whole term of his
imprisonment, the greater part of which he spent in the dead house
cell on short rations. The fiist grievance brought against him was
for asking to see the Governor. This prisoner was most sadly used.
I have seen him fastened on a stretcher in the yard day after day
so that he could not move. His hands and feet being in irons fast-
ened to the stretcher, the prisoner was laying on liis back, a gag—
a piece of wood nine inches long—was placed in his mouth, the wood
had a hole in each end through which a piece of cord was passed
and tied at the back .of his head, thereby keeping the gag across his
mouth, in the open yard on his back as described. This prisoner
lay all day with his countenance exposed to the scorching rays of a
summer sun, in this southern climate. This prisoner on being let
out to work one morning went to a pail to drink some water; a cat
that had been drowned the night before was in the pail the prisoner
seized it, and through starvation wars about to devour it, when the
guard, who now lives in Adelaide, charged him with the bayonet, he
dropped the cat and went to his work. This prisoner was suspected
of eating his own filth, the guard whose duty it was to search the
prisoners’ cells, found Wilson with some filth in his cell, it appeared
to have been dried in the sun, some portion having been consumed
the guard placed the portion he had found outside of Wilson’s cell
door, while he proceeded to search his cell, prisoner Prentice pass-
ing at the time, seized the filth placed outside the cell door, went to
his own cell and when search was made it was discovered that Pren-
tice had eat it.
White, a prisoner, having a charge laid against him was sentenced
to be flogged, his head was placed in a bag during the laceration, the
bag being tied round his neck to prevent it being slipped off, his
body was suspended by the waist from the top of a high gate so that
his feet could not touch the ground —liis clothes all off him, with the
exception of his trousers. Mr. Howell inflicted a portion of the
flogging, I, Joseph Stevens, saw him do it, and when White was
taken down he was almost suffocated.
Case No. 10. Webber a prisoner whose case was brought under the
notice of the present Governor of this Province when on a visit to
the Stockade, and received the clemency of His Excellency’s gra-
cious prerogitive. Webber, through sickness, had been p ! aced to
light labor (stone-breaking), Chief Guard Wooldridge ordered him to
■wheel dirt and stone. The old burial ground had been undermined
for stone, it was here Webber was at work when the earth fell in
upon him and broke his thigh.
Case 11. Harris a prisoner.—This evidence I extract from a docu-
ment from an ex-guard. “ I once saw from my office window
Harris being ironed, preparatory to a dose of solitary confinement.
He remonstrated with the guard who gave him a violent push, when
Harris turned round and with his manacled hands tore the guards
shirt. F. W. Howell called out ‘ knock him down,’ which was in-
stantly done, and I lost sight of them by their passing round the
corner of the prison, store. Instantly afterwards I heard an intense
scream, such as a liare utters when mortally gripped by a greyhound.
On guard Bush coming by the office, I asked what was that learlul*
scream? he replied it was H 'rris who would have gone quiet en >ugh,
and Was doing so until violence was used. John Howell knocked
him down, ‘and the Superintendent, F. W. Howell, jumped on his
belly three times. Dr. Moreton, since dead, attended the man in his
cell.
Case No. 12. Morris a prisoner was on the muster ground. Chief
Guard Wooldridge was calling the prisoners uames over. Morris an-
swered to his name. Wooldridge called his name again, when 1. W.
Howell shouted out, stand out, which he did, he then ordered a guard
to bring him to the office. When there, he said I saw you looking at
a guard, I will not have the men detained by you, put him in the cell
for three days on bread and water, and when he has done that bring
him here again. Morris asked for what he was being punished, but
received no answer. The guard was told to kick him out of the office.
When he got to the dead house cell in which he was to be confined,
he found it plastered with filth of the worst description. He asked if
he was to be confined there and was told yes, on which he used every
remonstrance, but to no avail. Prisoner White had been confined in
this cell and was unable to get to the bucket used tor private pui po-
ses, consequently the cell was covered with his filth He was taken
sick at the sight and smell, and vomitted up his breaklast, his other
meals during the day being brought up in the same manner. At
night Morris was removed to his own cell to sleep, and in the morning
was brought back again. The cell was in a worse state than before,
knowing remonstrance was useless, he went and finished his three
days sentence, when the guard brought him again before the Super-
intendent who told him he could have some more solitary if he re-
quired it. Morris told him it was not a desirable place to be in, he
told him not to let him hear another word, and take care he was not
brought there again or he would give it to him severely for the least
cause.
Case No. 12. Antoniffe a prisoner.—Has been cruelly used, he
has be n bayoneted a great many times. The Superintendent him-
self has bayonetted him on the works in the presence of the other
prisoners. Ant mifi’e has the mark on his ear now wnere a piece
was torn or cut away with the bayonet; he lias been badly used, and
a great part of his time has been passed in the dead house cell.
Case No. 13. Stafford a prisoner.—Sentenced to one year; brutally
used by guards and Superintendent; when he left the Stockade he
had twelve bayonet wounds on his body beside cuts in his head.
Case No. 14. George Anderson a prisoner.—Whose sentence has
expired. One morning when this prisoner came out ot his cell ho
found his pockets had been cut out of his trousers. Anders m asked
the guard for what cause. The guard then took' him before F. vV.
Howell who had the prisoner placed in heavy irons over 20 lbs.
weight, his hands were handcuffed behind him, he was thrown down
on a tank by the guards. F. W. H nvell then stood over him with a
life preserver and cut his head open with it in seven places. Too
prisoner was then carried to the Hospital insensible, after he had
recovered he was brought before a magistrate on a charge of mutiny.
He was sentenced to one hundred lashes, he received fifty. The
Stockade books will attest tae truthfulness of this. All prisoners
have to undress and leave their clothes outside the cell door at
night.
Case No. 15. White a prisoner who died in the Stockade in
January of the present year 1869, respecting whom I desire to draw
your attention to a letter published eleven days after White’s death, it
is from the Evening Journal of January 16th, 1869, from Henry
Gilmore, just out from the Stockade, says “he knew White. About
three months ago was gbing into No. 1 quarry with water when ho
heard a man cry out as if in pain. Found it was White who had just
been probed by guai'd Beames. White at the time was wheeling
stones to the breakers. He was put into one of the cells for a length
of time, being disabled for work. He was kept there till the doctor
thought fit to take him out. Had been twice struck himself by guard
Caddell. Thomas McEllister could have given evidence at the
inquest, but F. W. Howell would not allow him to do so. All the men
No. 1 .quarry could bear testimony to the ill-usage White received.
Gilmore also charges the Superintendent with favouritism, and com-
plains that the meat served out is so bad that the prisoners cannot


eat it. So much has been published with regard to the ill-usage on
this prisoner, that I beg to call your attention to the Stockade Com
missioners report, from clause No. 1 to No. 8 in the foregoing pages
which I think will be sufficient testimony as to how White came by
liis death.
Case 16. SchofF, a prisoner, respecting whom I extract the following
from a document from one of the ex-guards, “ SchofF entered the
Stockade at the latter end of 1862, I think with a 20 years’ sentence
He always appeared dull and melancholy, as if his sentence clung
to his brain as heavily as his 10 lb. or 12 lb. irons did to his lower
limbs. His appearance gave you the idea of weakness both of mine
and body, although naturally he seemed framed for physical strength
When he first arrived he was sometimes allowed to sit by the quarry
while the others of his gang were at work, and on one of these
occasions he manufactured a pretty little basket from grass and
stalks and buds of flowers. He soon came under punishment, con-
sisting chiefly of almost incessant solitary confinement and short
rations. He was always begging for food, and continually grew
weaker and more sullen. One morning, in August, 1863, I was
called from my quarters before daylight to Schoff’s cell, from which
a cry had been heard, when a guard found him sunk on his nighl
pail, unable to rise. I thought him dying, but by the help of resto-
ratives he rallied and was removed to the Hospital. His irons were
kept on him. Three days later a change for the worse occurred. X
told the Superintendent he was evidently dying, and at 5 o’clock I
told him he would probably live but an hour or two. On that he
replied, Ihey must lose no time in knocking off his irons,” and he
accompanied me to the Hospital. The five chains were then
removed. The process took some time. One prisoner held out the
legs of the almost dead man while the smith liberated first one and
then the other ankle by a rapid succession of heavy blows. The
jarring seemed to torture SchofF much at every blow. His eyes
opened with an unearthly glare. For the last moment or two' he
seemed to become insensible to the shocks, and the irons being
removed he slept the sleep from which our dearest friends awake
not. _ An inquest was held on Scoff in the prison with closed doors.
The jury consisted almost entirely of neighbours, who supplied the
prison with one article or another. The verdict, of course, was
“ Natural death.” One man named Waldin, lately a guard,’ who
had witnessed the treatment of the deceased, being a juryman, tried
to do something ; but, being an ignorant man, wh4n told to ask wit-
nesses questions, began to make statements, and was effectually
stopped.
I, Joseph Stephens, saw SchofF, who had been confined in the
dead-house cell so many months, out for exercise one morning, and
saw him seize the putri'fied body of a cat that had been dead a long
time, and he devoured a great portion of it, great maggots dropping
out, before it was taken from him by a prisoner named Black Billy,
who was ordered to do so by the guard. The truthfulness of this
revolting scene was attested in a leading article of the Evening
Journal, of January 16th, 1869, by Martelli, who had been
bayoneted in the Stockade, and was an eye-witness of the foregoing
revolting spectacle. In Clause 35 of the Commissioner’s report,
Scoff’s case is reported upon, and the public are informed that he
was allowed No. 3 scale of rations, which scale you can refer to in
the foregoing pages, under the heading of “ Stockade Regulations
and I think you will agree that no prisoner would starve who got
that scale of rations. I do not doubt but the Commissions report
was in accordance with the evidence produced; but if that con-
clusion was arrived at by the evidence of an officer who kept that
man in irons on his dying bed, and life was fast ebbing out when the
smith removed the fetters from Ins manacled limbs, and as the last
stroke was given poor Schoff’s last sigh was drawn, and he passed
beyond the reach of those who delight in causing their fellow
creatures to be placed in torture, suffering, starvation,'and agony.
Case 17. —Prentice, a prisoner.—As a number of free men one day
were loading the railway trucks with waste dirt from the quarry Prentice
was working in, John Howell receiver) the order from his brother,
F. W. Howell, to bayonet Prentice, which he did, the bayonet pene-
trating so deep, that the doctor was sent for immediately, and Pren-
tice was carried by four men to the hospital. His trousers, which
were in a dreadful state with blood and filth, were sent to prisoner
Miller to cleanse, who, at the same time was exempt from labor
through sickness; yet, however repulsive it was to him, he was a
prisoner under F. W. Howell, therefore it was at his peril to refuse.
I At one period of Prentice’s imprisonment, he was placed in a cell
opposite to one in which prisoner Morris was confined. At this
time there was a guard, named Caddell, employed at the Stockade,
and on six Sundays running Morris saw this brute Caddell, drag
Prentice out of his cell, after being nearly strangled by him, Cad-
dell. This sometimes happened about a quarter of an hour before
Divine Service. Morris saw him knock Prentice down twelve times
with the butt-end of his rifle. Prentice’s body presented a horrid
spectacle ; it was a mass of bruises, and a great number of bayonet
wounds. Morris has seen the guards tear the clothes from off his
back, and the poor fellow’s rags flying in the winter wind, and Pren-
tice shivering like a man with the ague. Prentice at one time was
an inmate of the hospital, suffering from dysentrv; having cause to
use the night-pail, he was seated on it one day, and blood was pass-
ing through him, when F. W. Howell entered the hospital,
and ordered Prentice to get up and go to his bed. He said, “ I can-
not.” F. W. Howell then said, “ I will stop your imposing upon
the doctor.” He then ran at him, and kicked him about two yards,
the bucket falling upon him. I, Joseph Stevens, helped him into
his bed; the blood was passing through his body at the time. Pren-
tice is now an inmate of the Lunatic Asylum, Adelaide.
Case 18.—Johnson, a prisoner, was bayoneted five times; and at
the late Criminal Sittings, F. W. Howell was arraigned as prisoner
for so doing. He was tried, and ably defended by Mr. Stow, Q.C.
The evidence was so complete, that all the ability of that learned
gentleman could not overpower the minds of the jury against the
straightforward evidence for the prosecution, and the ability of the
Crown Solicitor who conducted the prosecution. F. W. Howell was
found guilty; sentence was passed on him. His term of imprison-
ment has expired, but his name will ever be found in the Calendar
of Convicts in South Australia. In the Police Court at the time
when F. W. Howell was heard on the charge, Johnson was
not permitted to show his bayonet wounds. He offered to show
them to the Jury, but the reason he was not allowed to do so, I
must leave the public to infer; for it is quite certain Johnson would
never have offered to show to the jury bayonet marks if they were
noton his person. The learned Judge'remarked that it was the
glory of the English law, that in whatever position a person was in,
he could apply and have his grievances redressed. Johnson only
came out of the Stockade in May last; he, therefore, did not lose
much time before taking proceedings. I think in the following pages
you will see how hard au a flair it was to get any complaint the pri-
soners made, investigated. You will find this statement verified in.
tiie Commissioner’s Report, in Clause 15 : —lf Johnson did wrong
in staying till he obtained his freedom before taking proceedings, I
trust some humane individual may be found who will take the case
in hand of so many prisoners now in the Stockade, who have re-
received brutal treatment. —John Howell, on the trial, swore Johnson
was the worst character he had ever known, and yet not one single
charge was brought to the notice of the jury, which had beln
brought to the notice of any Migistrate visiting the Stockade.
Surely Englishmen have cause for thankfulness for trial by jury,
and for individuals who are authorized according to law to be mem-
bers thereof.
Case 19.—Gow, a prisoner, while at work one morning, was ac-
cused by F. W. Howell, of looking at him. The Superintendent,
taking a rifle from one of the guards, swore he would run him
through with a bayonet, which caused a great excitement among the
prisoners, who rose from their work with their hammers in "their
hands, on perceiving which, F. W. Howell trembled, returned the
rifle to the guard, and walked away. On the prisoners’ returning
from work, Gow was locked up in the dead-house cell, and kepi
there for three months.
The statements in the foregoing acts of barbarity may appear too
hideous to place any reliance in; but lam able to point you to two
of the worst cases, if there is any distinction in acts like these re-
ferred to. There is Antonieff, now a prisoner in the Stockade, who
has been most shamefully bayoneted. A mark is on his ear where
the flesh has been torn or cut away with the bayonet. Prentice,
who has been so brutally used, and who ate the filth found by the
guard in Wilson’s cell, and has so many bayonet wounds on his
body, is now in the Lunatic Asylum, iu Adelaide. This is the pri-
soner that was kicked oif the pail by F. W. Howell.
Fe'low-Colonists, do you think F. W. Howell would have had more


justice done him if he had reported these things every quarter ©r
every half-year ? Do you think too much sympathy has been shown
towards the prisoners—or does your heart sicken at the disclosures
of such abominations ? Do you not feel surprised that the prisoners
did not take vengeance into their own hands ? The truth is, the pri-
soners have lived upon hope, for as the prisoners have left the Stockade
they had promised those left behind that they would bring before the
public and Government the awful state of affairs at the Stockade ;
and I firmly believe it was my faithfully promising to do it as soon
as I got my liberty that kept them from staining their hands with
blood, and causing many prisoners to have lost their life. I have,
therefore, fulfilled my promise to them, so far as the Government is
concerned; and as the evidence taken by the Commissioners is with-
held by the Government from the public, I have felt myself in duty
bound to adopt this course to bring it before the public. There are
many horrifying things to record, a great deal yet to be made known,
which I shall lay before the public in my next pamphlet. The
ravenous state of some of the prisoners no person could conceive. I
have seen them take grease from the boxes on the railway trucks,
which was placed there to grease the axles of the trucks, and
devour it in a voracious manner. I remember some old pails had
been rebottomed with green hide. Some hungry prisoners cut out
the bottoms and boiled them down in the blacksmith’s shop, adding
some grease from the truck-wheel boxes to make them palatable, I
suppose. I have myself seen patients in the hospital absolutely take
their bread poultices off their sore legs and devour them, regardless
of what they might contain. It is well that conscience lives within
the human breast, whose demands upon us, if not satisfied, leave us
destitute of every pleasing thought. I cannot envy that man his
feelings. In his after life the thought of how fearfully he has
abused the power entrusted to him, which he might have used for
good, perchance to' the reformation of many a man who by his harsh
treatment has become hardened in the road that leads to ruin. This
thought, I say, will become hideous to him—the more so when he
reflects that thq Great Superintendent will one day demand of
him an account of his talent, and consign him to outer darkness as
an unprofitable servant.
Employment of Prisoners on the Sabbath.—On Sundays the
prisoners mend their clothes, whitewash their cells, or wash them
out. Any prisoner refusing would be punished.
Prisoners kept from Attending Divine Service on Wednesdays.—
The Revs. Moody and Pollitt have come to perform religious service
on Wednesdays, and, doubtless, signed the books respecting their
attendance, they can testify to the prisoners not being there some-
times, which must have ensued from the authority of F. W. Howell.
Desecration of the Dead. —F. W. Howell issued orders for stone’
to be raised from underneath the Old Burial Ground. He was
told it would fall through if done. As he gave instructions, he in-
sisted on its being done. The result was as anticipated—the dead
came falling through. To my horror I was called upon. A coffin
containing a corpse had fallen through ; a portion of the coffin had
burst away through the fall ; and a ghastly spectacle presented
itself. I was ordered by Guard Wooldridge to cast the corpse out of
the coffin, and it fell to pieces. The prisoners had to remove the
bones with some dirt, and fill up some holes close at hand. Guard
Wooldridge commanded prisoner Johnson to cut up the skull with
his shovel. The coffin was broken to pieces and cast into the creek.
I cast a part in myself. It was at the above quarry that Webber, a
prisoner, met with the accident which broke his thigh.
Prisoners working on private property. —Prisoners who work on
private property for F. W. Howell, ploughing, mowing, reaping,
horsebreaking; also, prisoners who do work for F. W. Howell’s
private use, such as cart making, carpentering, picture frames,
coopering, water engines, engines for grinding corn, blacksmiths’
work, shoemaking, tailoring, sailrnaking for water engines, received
special favor at the hands of F. W. Howpll. Such meu are what are
termed in the Commissioners’ report “ billetted hands.”
Fraud.—A charge was sent in to the Government on the 31st May,
1869, by Hugh Humphreys formerly a prisoner in the Stockade. The
charge was against F. W. Howell for using Government materials.
The said Hugh Humphrey’s not receiving an answer, requested me
to write and ask for a reply, which I did on the Ist July, 1869, but
not receiving any answer, other charges have been held in abeyance.
I must now ask you to consider well the foregoing, and give your
verdict while I am preparing fresh cases against F. W. Howell. The
annexed petitions will show my own unjust incarceration and deten-
tion for seven years. Also, my being kept in irons for no reason
whatever, except to satisfy the tyranny of F. W. Howell who told me
on my admission that “ I need not expect to leave the place alive.”
It will be further seen that my application to the Government for
compensation has met with a refusal, so that I take the only course
open to me, and make this appeal to the public in the full confidence
that justice though tardy, will at length be done to myself and all
parties.
JOSEPH STEVENS.
Adelaide, 29th Sept., 1869.
PETITION NO. 1.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR-IN-CHIEF OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
The following Petition is in behalf of Joseph Stevens, who
was tried at the Fourth Criminal Sittings in November 1861,
under the name of Joseph Stevens, alias Edward Sharpels, who
was committed at the same time as a female named Chatherine
Geoghagan, by Mr. Beddome, the magistrate at the Adelaide
Police Court, September 13th, 1861. Catherine Geoghagan
was committed on a charge of larceny from the person of Wil-
liam Ward, at Adelaide, in the Province of South Australia,
and the said Joseph Stevens, alias Edward Sharpels, as being
accessory after the fact.
At the trial, the said Joseph Stevens was arraigned on a
charge of attempting- to bribe the said William Ward not to
prosecute the said Catharine Geoghagan. To which charge
the said Joseph Stephens pleaded no guilty. Evidence was
taken, and Joseph Stevens was acquitted. The said Joseph
Stephens was then arraigned on the charge of stealing or re-
ceiving the £1 note stolen from the said William Ward; the
jury finding the said Catharine Geoghagan guilty of stealing
the £l note, and Joseph Stevens not guilty of stealing, but
guilty as an accessor. The same Joseph Stevens was sentenced
by Judge Gwynne, before whom he was tried, to seven years’
imprisonment. The said Joseph Stevens was taken from the
Criminal Sittings to the Adelaide Goal from thence to the Dry
Creek Prison where the said Joseph Stevens was confined for
the' full term of seven years. The said J oseph Stevens, there-
fore, seeks compensation at the hands of the Government for
the illegal act of being detained a prisoner beyond the time
allowed under an Act of Council, entitled the Commutation
Act, under which Act the said J oseph Stevens was entitled to
his liberty at the expiration of four years.
When the said Joseph Stevens had been two years aud a-half
at the Stockade Prison he had an opportunity of seeing a
magistrate (Mr. Beddome), respecting his case. Mr. Beddome
advised him to petition the judge by whom he was tried, as
doubtless a wrong view had been taken of his case, and no
doubt they would do something for him. I, Joseph Stevens,
therefore, sent a petition to Judge Gwynne setting forth my case
and at the expiration of three weeks I received an answer
through Mr. Howell, Superintendent, at the aforesaid prison.
That my petition had been sent to Judge Gwynne, and by the
Judge to the Governor of the Province.
The answer which Mr. Howell read to me as from Judge
Gwynne I listened to with great attention, and was in substance
as follows :—“ The property having been found in my possession,


the prosecutor having also sworn to me as the person that re- ]
ceived it from Catherine Geog'hean, the jury having found me
guilty of receiving it, it remained for him, Judge Gwynne, to
pass sentence, which he did, and could not interfere with it at
present.
I therefore beg’ to call your attention to the depositions taken
at the Adelaide Police Court before the sitting magistrate Mr.
Beddome by whom I was committed.
The Prosecutor William Ward does not in the whole of his
evidence swear to Joseph Stevens as being connected with the
robbery, he gives evidence of seeing the said Joseph Stevens
at half-past ten in the evening of the robbery when he William
Ward gave Catharine Geoghogan in charge to Police-Constable
Marion, also to seeing the said Joseph Stevens on the following
morning at 8 o’clock at the residence of the said William Ward,
and between 9 and 10 o’clock that morning the 12th of Sep-
tember the said William Ward meets by appointment the afore-
said Joseph Stevens at the City Arms public house, King \V illiam
Street, Adelaide, and there treats the said Joseph Stevens to
something to drink. (See depositions taken at Police Court
page No. 2 and 3).
William Ward the prosecutor also swears that the man who
ran away with the said Catharine Geoghagan when the note
was stolen, had on white trowers. (Seg deposition page
No. 6).
No white trowers was found on me, or at my residence, al-
though it was searched by the authorities.
In the whole of rhe evidence there is no witnesses, that says
Joseph Stevens is the man who received the note from Catharine
Geoghagan.
Detective Brown gives evidence to seeing- the said Joseph
Stevens at 9 o’clock on the evening of the robbery, in Hindley
Stieet, and at 11 o’clock of the same evening,'at the residence
of the said Joseph Stevens in Hindley Street.
Police Constable Marron sees the said Joseph Stevens at half-
past 10 o’clock on the evening of the robbery when William
Ward gave the said Catharine Geoghagan in charge.
Not one witness swears to seeing the said Joseph Stevens
at the time of the robbery.
As regards the property being- found in possession of the said
Joseph Stevens, the said Joseph Stevens drew the attention of
the Magistrate to the fact of the police having a one pound note
in their possession belonging to him the said Joseph Stevens,.
Mr. Beddome ordered it to be produced in Court, it was brought
into Court and given to Mr. Beddome. Mr. Beddome then asked
the prosecutor William Ward what kind of a note it was that
was stolen from him. William Ward the prosecutor replied it
appeared to be .a dirty one. (See depositions page No. 3. /
Inspector Hall swore to the one produced m Court as the note
taken from Joseph Stevens, and to its being a Melbourne note.
(See depositions, page No. 5.
Mr. Beddome then said it was not the one described by the
prosecutor as having been lost, and directed its restoration to
the said Joseph Stevens.
The Melbourne one pound note was afterwards given to Mr.
Andrews, Lawyer, on the occasion for the aforesaid Joseph
Stevens, it is therefore apparent that a serious injustice has
been done the aforesaid Joseph Stevens, inasmuch as in the evi-
dence the prosecutor to whom the said Joseph Stevens had been
known for years does not swear to him as the man in connexion
with the robbery.
Neither was the note found on him (Joseph Stevens) the one
described by the prosecutor as lost. [See depositions, page No.
3, and deposition page No. s].
I would now direct your attention to the answer from the
Governor of the Province, which was read by Mr. Howell to
the said Joseph Stevens.
The Governor declined having anything to do with it on
account of the Judges’ remarks.
When the said Joseph Stevens had been four years in the ’
Stockade Prison, he applied to Mr. Howell for his discharge,
under the Act of Council then in force, and under which two
prisoners sentenced for eight years, and having served five
years, were discharged the very same day as Joseph Stevens
applied for his discharge. The names of the prisoners dis-
charged were White and Crosswell. Croswell was a prisoner
who had been previously convicted. Mr. Howell refused to
discharge the said Joseph Stevens, and told the said Joseph
Stevens that the Governor of the Province, nor any one else,
had anything to do with it, and he could, and would do as he
liked.
After having been a little more than four years in the prison
at the Stockade, I, the said Joseph Steven?, spoke to Mr.
Hamilton', the Visiting Magistrate, on the subject of my deten-
tion. He advised me to send a petition to the Judge by whom
I was tried, which I did, and at the expiration of six months
I received the following answer through Mr. Howell :
“ The Government declined interfering with my sentence.”
When Judge Gwynne was going to pass sentence upon me,
he said he believed I was leading a bad course of life. I told
him I could have brought forward a good character at the time
of ray trial, but I had been led to believe I was sure to be
acquitted, there not being any evidence upon which I could be
convicted. The Judge remarked he had been informed
different. He said if I liad produced the good character I spoke
of, he would have passed a very light sentence upon me. He
then sentenced me to seven years imprisonment.
Judge Gwynne having made these remarks at the time of
passing sentence upon me, I communicated with Mr. John
Chambers, who forwarded my character to the Stockade Prison,
and which ought to have been with the petition I sent'to Judge
Gwynne, after having been at the Stockade more than four
years. The following is a copy of the character sent by Mr.
John Chambers: —
“ Adelaide, Ist November, 1866.
“This is to certify that Edward Sharpies alias Joseph Ste-
vens, was in mv employment as a well-sinker for about
years, between 1856 and 1860, and I have much pleasure in
saying he proved himself a first-rate workman, and otherwise
gave me much satisfaction during that period.
“(Signed) John Chambers.”
Having been made aware that the said character was lying
at the Stockade Prison, I applied for it when I was leaving.
I was told it was not there. I then said I should place it in
the hands of those who would cause it to be given up. It was
then delivered to me; and 1 have forwarded the original cha-
racter with this petition to you.
I would now beg to call your attention to the torture I have
been subject to at the hands of Mr. Howell, at
the Stockade.
On my arrival at the Stockade Prison, irons of 16 lbs. weight
weie placed around my ankles, and kept on for four years.
They were kept on me day and night, awake or asleep alike
the same.
When I had been two years in the Stockade I was so ill the
doctors—Dr. Moore and I)r. Fisher—certified I was unable to
work, through disease of the heart and asthma.
Yet, Mr. Howell compelled me to wear the irons—sixteen
pounds in weight —for two }'ears of my sickness. Day and
night I had to Wear them, thus making the four years I was in
irons.
I ask you to look at the cruelty practised upon me, and for
what cause ? During the seven years of my confinement in the
Stockade Prison there was not a single charge laid against me;
'not once was I taken to the office to answer any act of mis-
conduct on my part.


And while I call your attention to Mr. Howell’s acts of
tyranny, torture, and oppression, I ask you to look into the
illegal act he has committed in placing me in irons, his not
being empowered to do so by any Act of Couucil, so I have
been given to understand. ,
Surely Right Honorable Gentlemen, in having thus called
your attention to these acts, I desire to say there is something
within my breast that can plead for the Magistrate that com-
mitted me, and for the Jury that tried me, however wrong I
might consider their conclusion was on my behalf. There is
something within my breast that can plead for a Judge whose
idea of my character had bepn prejudiced by some report un-
founded and false. Bi t for th t ac‘s of cruelty p rpetrated on me
by Mr. Howell, I cannot find within my breast anything but
contempt; and a thrill of horror runs through my frame when
I think that a being in human form can be found to perpetrate
on his fellow men with an apparent degree of delight in the
torture he inflicts.
I, therefore, seek at the hands of the Government compen-
sation for having been detained within the prison at Dry Creek
for a longer period than allowed by an Act of Council, entitled
“ The Commutation Act,” whereby my health Ins been
destroyed, my constitution broken down through sickness, and
my mind districted through torture and oppression by being
kept in ’confinement bevond the term permitted by law, to
witness acts of barbarity towards the prisoners confined in the
said prison, thereby rendering me incapable of obtaining a live-
lihood by manual labor.
Looking for a compensation at the hands of the Government,
I am, Right Honorable Gentlemen, yours in duty bound to
ever pray,
his
JOSEPH X STEVENS.
mark.
i
After the preparing of Petition No. 1 (now inserted in my
pamphlet to ibe public) I was advised on the part of certain
persons not to send it in to the Government in consequence of
Its great bulk. Acting up to the advice given, I prepared
another (called in my pamphlet Petition No. 2), which 1 in due
time forwarded to the Government. A'copy of the said Petiti-
tion I now insert, with the answer I received from the Chief
Secretary’s office, dated March 9th, 1869. I am now sorry that
I did not send in to the Government Petition No. 1, has it con-
tains much more satisfactory and solid information in connec-
tion with the case occurring to me in the year 1861, in the
Supreme Court.
I have now published both the Petitions, also a copy of the
letter received by me from the Secretary’s office ; so that not
only the public but also the Government may have the oppor-
tunity of judging' whether 1 am a fit subject for compensation.
Printed by Alfred Waddy, Leigh Street, Adelaide.
' . his
JOSEPH X STEVENS,
mark
COPY OF PETITION No. 2.
To His Excellency the Right Honorable Sir James
Fergusson, Bart., Governor of South Australia.
The following-Petition is on behalf of Joseph Stevens, who
was tried at the Fourth Criminal Sittings of the Supreme
Court, November 1861, at the same time as Catharine Geogha-
gan was tried on a charge of larceny from the person of Wil-
liam Ward, and Joseph Stevens as accessor
The prosecutor Ward swore to the said Catharine Geog-ha-
gan as the individual that robbed him; and, when asked if the
prisoner Stevens was the accessor, prosecutor did not swear to
Stevens, but to a short man wearing white trousers. Joseph
Stevens stands five feet nine inches in height, and is nine stone
four pounds weight, and his trousers was of a dark color. He
was sentenced to seven years imprisonment, and was kept in the
Stockade the full term of seven years; whereas, under the Com-
mutation Act in force at that period, he ought to have been re-
leased at the expiration of four years.
1, Joseph Stevens, therefore seek compensation at the hands
of the Government for having suffered as follows
Firstly—As the innocent man, and not the individual sworn
to< and therefore not the access or.
Secondly—Detained a prisoner longer than the time allowed
by law.
Thirdly—lllegally having to wear irons (16 pounds in
weight) put on my ancles and kept on for four years.
There was not a single charge laid against me during the
seven years of my imprisonment. I, therefore, seek compensa-
tiou at the hands of the Government, trusting to your faithful
investigation and consideration of the above.
Your Petitioner, as in duty bound, will for ever pray,
his
JOSEPH X STEVENS,
mark*
(The Certificate of Character given by Mr. John Chambers
was enclosed with this Petition, and is now in the Chief Secre-
tary’s office.)
COPY OF LETTER
Received by me, Joseph Stevens, from the Chief Secretary's
Office.
Chief Secretary’s Office,
Adelaide, 9th March, 1869.
Sir, - .
I have the honor, by the Chief Secretary’s directions, to
acknowledge the receipt of your Memorial, without date, re-
ceived in this office on the 25th ultimo; and to inform you that
the same has been duly laid before His Excellency the Gover-
nor; who, however, after careful consideration, declined to
entertain your application. , . •
I have the honor to be, sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. BOOTH BY,
Under Secretary.
To Mr. Joseph Stevens,
Union Street, Adelaide.
Printed by Alfred Waddy, Laigh-street, Adelaide


