

IDSCIPLINE
S ENSE




DISCIPLINE SENSE
BUREAU OF NAVAL PERSONNEL
U. S. NAVY • 1951 • NAVPERS 91785




DISCIPLINE SENSE
There’S ONE ANGLE of Naval Discipline on which most every-
body agrees its purpose.
The purpose of Naval Discipline, they’ll tell you, is to make sure
that everybody is in there fighting the same war.
The war they have in mind, of course, is Uncle Sam’s war, hot or
cold, as the case may be —that is, it will be a cold war if this is the
tall-talk-and-take boys’ year for trying to give us our lumps by remote
control, and it will be a hot war if this is the year they’ve picked to actu-
ally come calling.


In either case, as many joes point out, without Naval Discipline some
characters might tend to neglect Uncle’s war on occasion by getting side-
tracked into private and at times more interesting wars —such as the
War Between the States, the War Between the Sexes, the Battle of Times
Square, and skirmishes with that lug on the starboard watch.
A lot of guys further note that
1. although people get mixed up in these private wars on account
of they’re human,
2. humans are still the best things we have for manning ships;
3. and hence Naval Discipline is probably here to stay on account
of Naval Discipline is the best thing we have for keeping us
humans all working on the same war.


As a matter of fact, many observers feel that Naval Discipline will
become even more necessary in the rough years ahead. Their reasoning:
The tall-talk-and-take boys outnumber us mightily because they are sort
of given to gunning and goosing into their gang just about anything they
can beat out of the bushes. To off-set these great numbers each of us at
times has got to be able to do the work of several guys, and Naval
Discipline is insurance that when the clutch comes we —and the gent
next to us —can get in there and pitch —and will.
The Chief of Naval Operations summed up the situation in a speech
before the Naval War College.
"... The material superiority enjoyed by the United States today may
not always exist. We may be rigidly restricted in the use of certain mate-
rials ... [This] we must counter-balance by the quality of our equipment
and superior men to use it.
"We can be certain that we will not have the number of men avail-
able to our adversaries . . . We will have fewer men to fight and fewer
men to work in our factories . . .
"The restrictions of man power may limit us in the number of ships
we can man, in the number of planes we can fly, and in the number of


bases we can use for support. We can compensate for smaller numbers
only if each man is more skillful, is better trained, is more enthusiastic,
and has more combat ability than the men he will oppose in battle.”
CNO’s remarks, circulated through the Fleet by All Hands maga-
zine; received wide approval.
And as a seaman recruit chimed in:
"Just like I been telling these guys.”
As one old chief put it:
"The dope in that talk was as straight as a deck seam
we’ve got to have 4.0 discipline to get this job wrapped up."
And as a BM2 further stated it:
"Now these jokers have heard it straight from CNO . . .”
You might figure from the above comments that the value of Naval
Discipline to the country and Joe Gish is pretty well recognized
throughout the Fleet, and in the words of Savvy Sam "you wouldn’t just
be a-clickin’ your pickets.” One sign that you’re right is the fact that


almost 99 per cent of Uncle’s sailors round out their Navy careers with-
out any serious breach of Naval Discipline.
Also —and this is perhaps even more to the point the figures show
that an impressively large number of guys eventually learn that Naval
Discipline is a force which will work for them personally not only
during a shoot-up but throughout their service—once they understand
it —and in the past 20 years about 88 per cent of the men making the
Navy a career have come to understand it well enough to make chief,
warrant or commissioned officer.


It would be nice if it could be reported at this point that everybody
in the Navy is well on the way toward acquiring a similar understand-
ing, but it will scarcely come as any news to you that we still have with
us a few jaspers who are as far from an understanding of Naval Discipline
now as they were on the day they enlisted.
That day, by the way, is not so long ago in the lives of most of those
who foul up with Naval Discipline—in fact, over 90% of these men
have been in the Navy less than a year, which would seem significant.
8


The point is that after you’ve been in the Navy awhile discipline
comes to mean something pretty definite to you, but to a guy fresh from
civilian life it could mean a number of different things.
Webster’s king-size dictionary, for example, has a list of discipline
definitions as long as a wind-sock —and every definition is a good defi-
nition —but no one definition gets to the core of what to most of us is
Naval Discipline.
This is not to say that some of these definitions don’t give a good pitch
on parts of Naval Discipline. Because they do. Take Brother Webster’s
definition, for example, which says that discipline is "training . . . which
. . . molds, strengthens, or perfects.” Anyone who has been around this
Navy at all will recognize that Naval Discipline is in part "training
which molds, strengthens, and perfects.”


Naval Discipline can also square with Webster’s definition that disci-
pline is "punishment by one in authority.”
Needless to say, however, the Navy’s "punishment by one in author-
ity” doesn’t exactly jibe with the picture of Naval Discipline some movie-
goers have picked up from those sea epics which apparently can’t be
shot without a corpse at every yardarm and grating, and two tons of
catsup.
For one thing, <sf course, every punishment handed out in the U. S.
Navy must conform to the law that the representatives of the American
people in Congress have set up; but even more basic is the fact that actu-
ally the punishment angle of Naval Discipline is rarely present in daily
naval life for the simple reason that you can’t build a winning Navy
around fear of punishment. True, as has been pointed out above, Naval
Discipline can be punishment at times but the boom is lowered only
on the hammerheads who try to trip the 99 per cent who are carrying
the ball not through fear of punishment but because they’re the kind
of guys that they are, period.
THE FOUR HORSEMEN
DIDN’T DEVELOP THAT TEAMWORK
THROUGH FEAR OF PUNISHMENT


THE RULES FOR THIS LEAGUE
Naval Discipline can also be Webster’s "rules affecting conduct or
action,” the rules in this case being certain unwritten customs and tradi-
tions, and certain rules published in the Uniform Code of Military
justice —developed by civilian committees —and in several pounds of
book called Navy Regulations, and in various ship and station orders.
It might be well to point out here for the benefit of any newcomers
to this man’s Navy —that these unwritten naval customs and traditions
aren’t of the type that says that liver goes with onions, or that Wednes-
day night is date night —in fact, many of these customs and traditions
have behind them the same force of law that an order from any superior
has, which is*why they are taught at length in boot camp.
It might also be well to point out here again for the gents making
their first cruise—that the Uniform Code of Military justice and Navy
Regulations ARE the law, approved by Congress; and although you’ll
11


never find these books competing with Ernest Hemingway for top honors
on the best-seller list, the fact is that they are among the great writing jobs
of our time. Hundred of thousands of men from CNO to the new-
est boot —literally live by them because they take into account the lat-
est mechanical gimmick and the ding-bats and push-buttons of tomor-
row —and an experience with human nature afloat and ashore that
stretches back to Decatur and John Paul Jones and beyond. They spell
out a way of life that gives the Country, the men, and their families the
squarest possible shake.
Webster also defines discipline as "strict government, as of a group,
for effective action ... through self-control.”
This comes pretty close to defining Naval Discipline, but it’s still not
bingo, unless along with this you consider some thing that veteran sailors
say when they’re not even talking directly about Naval Discipline.
Here, for example, is Commodore Dudley W. Knox on organization:
"... We of the Navy accept as a matter of course that a ship must be even
more than a unified organization. We know beyond the least question
that she has to be integrated internally” ... to the point where you have
the closest kind of team-work, with the team-work sparked by . . . "the
authority of a single individual. Otherwise she cannot be effective enough
as a unit in combat or other emergency. In principle the same pattern


applies to fleets and to naval shore stations... Within both the Navy and
the Marine Corps, integration amounts to an instinct...”
This just about says it —that is, Naval Discipline is instinctive team-
work, with the plays being called by one guy —tjie one with the facts
and the training who is ultimately responsible to the American people.


Everyone who has ever barreled through a real-blow or shoot-up
knows why it’s got to be this way —and especially why the team-work
must be instinctive.
The point is, of course, that sometimes things can get so rough that
only a trained instinct for team-work will bring us through, and you
can’t begin teaching yourself an instinct for team-work at the moment
when something sounding like the Bronx express comes over your stacks.
You have to begin months before. In short, the only way to latch on to
a trained instinct for team-work is to begin practicing at it NOW until
it does in fact become instinctive.
As has been hinted above, this is sometimes hard to explain to a guy
who hasn’t been around. He’s due back on board at 0800, for example—
and for reasons which were really under his control he poles in at 0807,
and "gets put on the report.” How do you explain to him that in an occu-
pation where you can have thousands of deadweight tons of steel cream-
ing along in an incredibly tight formation anything but the habit of exact
and instant obedience to orders is out? —that the danger to your ship,
your shipmates and perhaps even to the Country is too great for any
other attitude?


Or how do you explain that the custom of standing when addressed by
an officer is not only a military courtesy but also has the effect of giving
him a habit for which he may one day be more than grateful when the
fact that he is on his feet may give him a few precious seconds leeway to
carry out an order that could save a life, or win a battle?
The fact is that you can’t really explain things like this to a recruit
until he has a chance to prove it he must take Naval Discipline, and the
reasons for it, on faith. Fortunately, most recruits do because they come
into the Navy already tuned to the fact most of us don’t get very far
stroking along on our own —that we go further, and get more out of
life, if we throw in with the team.
15


WHO GETS WHAT—AND WHY?
This business of who gets some of life’s better rewards, and who gets the
Mickey, has been the subject of no little study over the years.
The interesting thing is that
1. the Jackson who gets the rewards, and
2. the Sad Case who gets the bug-juice
are in agreement as to
a. why Jackson does so well, and
b. why Sad Case doesn’t.
The answer, they say, is obvious:
the outfit has a lot of approval for Jackson;
it doesn’t for old Sad Case.


"YOU ARE SO RIGHT ..."
The medics who spend their time sounding the human think tank agree
that this is probably the answer. They feel that it’s the approval, or lack
of it, that makes a man —in the words of Savvy Sam —"a rater from
Decatur, or a big bore from Singapore.” That is, a guy can’t give out
with the best that’s in him unless he has the approval of the men —as
distinguished from the boys —in his crew, but the joker is that he won’t
get the approval of the men until he does give out with the best that’s
in him.
For the Sad Cases this may seem to be a pretty vicious circle; but,
actually, it is not as rough as it may at first seem, because anybody able
to get past the Navy’s screening tests —which means, of course, anybody
in the Navy —can start going places if he wants to.


SOLID JOE
To start going places all our boy really needs to do is sign himself on with
the team —i.e., to get with Naval Discipline to the point where, for
example, he will fill a breach when nobody will know who filled it, and
where he finds himself doing more than he is required to do for his outfit
because he wants to do it.
The odd things is that as Sad Case pitches in like this he finds himself
getting on better with (1) himself, and (2) other people; and he
begins to get earned approval from (1) himself, and (2) other people.
INSTEAD OF GRIPING
START PITCHING


This approval gives S. Case a feeling of "belonging” that makes him
a much happier joe and a bigger one. He is in there batting not just
for himself now but for his outfit —and the solid Jacksons on board
sense what is happening and approve of the guy still more; and he begins
to lose his damp lamp rep. and may eventually come to be thought of as
old Super-Solid —what the Aussies call "Fair Dinkum,” meaning the
genuine article, the real stuff, the old solid jaboo.
The super-solids are among the most fortunate people of this world,
and perhaps the next.
They have the pleasure of getting pretty much what they want out of
life, and of being widely approved for getting it.


This is because a solid joe has an understanding of life’s score and
people that prompts him to tie his personal ambitions in with his outfit’s
ambitions—to the benefit of himself and the outfit. He doesn’t, for
example, just submit to Naval Discipline with a you-can’t-beat city-hall
attitude; because he understands something about people—including
himself —he sees that Naval Discipline is working for both the Navy
and himself, and so he makes Naval Discipline a part of his way of life.
Needless to say, a solid joe’s understanding doesn’t just extend to a
solid joe-Navy merger. •
He will tie his personal ambitions in with the ambitions of any group
he joins—and with the same mutual benefits whether the outfit is the
Navy, A. T. & T., The Jet-Propelled Lawn-Cutting and Baby-Sitting
Service, Inc., or the Saturday Night Poker and Poetry Club.


He does this because he’s that kind of a guy. He figures that in any
dodge life can be pretty much what you make it, and he is too busy
developing his own talents to be hag-ridden by envy and fear. He neither
over-rates nor under-rates what he has on the ball —and others have.
The result is that he is generally still around and enjoying himself
long after many smarter guys have burned or beaten themselves out,
and over the long haul he generally wins more success in the real
sense of the word.


It would be pleasant to be able to state at this point that our hero and
his virtues are always appreciated by one and all but it will probably not
come as any news to you that although life can be beautiful, it is seldom
that beautiful.
Fate —and people hand out the old hot-foot to the solid joes from
time to time, just as they do to all of us, but he manages to take this in his
stride because he goes right on believing that on the whole life and
people are on the plus side and particularly the people. Like Naval
Discipline he takes into account the good and bad sides of people
and continues to bet on them.
As a matter of fact —although he almost certainly doesn’t recognize
it at the time —the average guy begins to strike for a solid joe billet the
moment he decides that people including himself —are not just here
on loan from Forest Park Zoo. They are here to stay. This is the model.
In ease of operation it doesn’t compare with the Model T or the old
dollar watch. But this is the model. There isn’t any other. This.is what
he will have to work with from here on in.
So he begins looking into the possibilities of the old buzz-bucket, and
he is generally pleased to find that although the human lash-up can look


pretty awful at times, there are also times when its performance is but
little short of terrific. _
The science birds —poking around into this and that —have con-
firmed this view; and some of their findings on the good and bad features
of the model have been set forth below with the idea that they might
interest (1) anyone wanting to really floor-board the model, and (2 )
anyone still wondering why Naval Discipline is what it is.
One of the first things noted by the noggin boys is the fact that we
come into this world strictly stripped-ship —no cold-weather gear, no
small stores, and with a mind so unformed that we can’t tell the world
outside our own bodies from ourselves.
The mind mechanics call this unformed mind the "subconscious,” of
course, and it should be further noted that the subconscious is not among
the world’s most appealing things.
All it does is
1. demand everything be done to please it; and
2. demand approval for so demanding.
23


And, parents being what they are, we generally get that approval.
Mama greets Papa proudly at eventide: "Junior got that upper and lower
tooth lined up today. In Grandmother’s leg.” And even Grandmother,
the human teething ring, gimps up to beam lovingly on the little fugitive
from a muzzle.
Maybe parents just get sort of twitter-pated during the first few months
they have junior aboard, but some of the bean boys who have looked into
this matter think that parents may go along with the infant Jesse James
because they instinctively sense
1. that without his subconscious mind hollering to be pleased their
pride-and-joy would have no ambition, no energy-spur; and
2. that this pint-sized hood must be assured that he is still approved
even while efforts are being made to gentle, groom and civilize
him to the point where he can be let loose in human company
without a leash.


THERE'S GONNA BE SOME CHANGES MADE
However, this anything-goes attitude toward Buster eventually wanes,
of course, and with reason.
The fact is that even before Buster reaches what cow-pokes call "fryin’
size” he has developed a fine new part of his mind —the conscious
that enables him to tell his elbow from first base and to ride herd on
the pleasure demands of his subconscious —if he wants to. Ta help
25


him want to, the average nipper has by now also developed what many
scientists consider the world’s most powerful gimmick: the conscience.
This is that "still inner voice" with the attention-getting power of a
sound truck.
"I AIN’T COMIN’ ON THAT TAB ..."
There’s one thing, however, that has NOT developed and that’s our
chum’s subconscious. He can live to be 103, and it will still be a hold-out
much of the time.
The reason for this is that Modern Man has come along so fast that
the subconscious part of his mind hasn’t caught up yet —it’s still thou-
sands of years behind. Here’s Modern Man splitting the atom —and here’s
the subconscious still way back there swinging happily through the tree-
tops.


As has been mentioned before, we need our subconscious — : ic’s our
ambition, our energy source. But the trouble is that in today’s tight and
complex world an unleashed subconscious can cause more of a mess than
an unleashed gorilla and the blame, of course, must be hung squarely
on the guy who owns the thing. There can be no excuses because every-
body has to live with a subconscious, and everybody’s subconscious has the
same motto: "Nuts to this team-work noise! — what are you giving
ME FOR XMAS?”


It’s up to each man to develop the conscious-znd-conscience combo
that will keep his subconscious in line. In fact, if he is to be reasonably
happy in today’s world he has to develop his conscious to the point where
it can do something more than enable him to tell port from starboard;
and he must develop his conscience to the point where it does something
more than keep him from dropping lead nickels into the collection plate.
To spell it out, Jackson will have to develop
1. a conscious filled with
a. some real know-how about his specialty, and
b. some equally real skinny about the world in general; and
2. a console# in the driver’s seat that’s for the team.


SUBCONSCIOUS
CONSCIOUS
CONSCIENCE


In short, the specifications call for the old solid joe.
All organizations try to develop solid joes there are never enough
to go around but no organization goes to greater lengths than the
Navy.
To give Jackson the chance to develop the solid joe cons clous, for
example, it provides him with a high order of technical training in any
one of a number of subjects.
And to encourage him to fill himself in on life’s score in general it
places on tap —through U. S. Armed Forces Institute —a priceless
cultural education for a two-buck enrollment fee.*
30


The reason the Navy wants all the solid joes it can get is obvious:
a Navy run for and by solid joes can win wars, and help police the
peace.
So there it is.
We could go on kicking this thing around for pages, but it is doubtful
if anything much could be added to the foregoing.
Summing up, what it all seems to come down to is this:
Humans are (1) still human, and (2) still the best things we have
for manning ships; and hence Naval Discipline is still the best thing we
have for giving each human —and his family and his Country —the
fairest possible break.
Solid Joes recognize this by getting with Naval Discipline and
staying with it.
TOUGH ON THE SELFISH
A SMOOTH RIDE FOR THE SOLID JOES!


But we could do with more solid joes because we all know that when
the tall-talk-and-take boys decide that this is the year to work us over per-
sonally we are going to find the U. S. battling for its life —against terrific
odds —in the toughest scrap we’ve ever had.
Because we bet the Naval Discipline way we’re convinced that the
additional solid joes are on the way; and for this reason we know that if
the t.-t.-and-t. boys are also on the way we can and will stretch ’em out
among the sweet peas.




