

DISEASE IN FOREST TREES
CAUSED BY THE
LARGER FUNGI.
BULLETIN NO. 12.
Issued October, 1918.
FORESTRY COMMISSION, N.S.W.
BY
EDWIN CHEEL,
Botanical Assistant, National Herbarium, Sydney,
AND
J. B. CLELAND, M.D.
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1918.
* 35839




FORESTRY COMMISSION, N.S.W.
Disease in Forest Trees caused by the
Larger Fungi.
Bulletin No. 12.
Issued October, 1918.
BY
EDWIN CHEEL, Botanical Assistant, National Herbarium, Sydney, and
J. B. CLELAND, M.D.
As far back as 1881, the Rev. J. E. Tenison-Woods and F. M. Bailey (Proc
Linn. Soc. N.S.W., vol. 5, p. 50, 1881) called attention to the great im-
portance of the study of fungi in a young country like ours which depends
so much upon its natural resources. In their list of fungi enumerated in the
above-mentioned paper, quite a number of the larger ones were recorded
which are found in the close dark scrubs and open forests on rotten trunks
and decaying trees as well as on burnt surfaces with much charred wood,
and on the bark of trees.
Although attention has been called 'to the fungi found on the above-
mentioned substrata, it is not generally known that many of these apparently
innocent-looking fungi are frequently the cause of rot in the heart-wood
of living trees, as well as of the decay of stored timber and even of fence-
rails and wood used as flooring in buildings, &c.
One frequently meets with fallen trees in the forests, but very rarely
enquires into the cause of their fall. If we stop to examine further it will
be found that in many instances the parts of the fallen logs which were
severed from the remaining up-standing trunks are more or less permeated
with the mycelium or so-called “ spawn ”of some fungus. This mycelium is
the vegetative stage of certain fungi and has caused disintegration of the
tissues, or even converted the solid timber into diseased and decaying
matter.
This mycelial stage of the fungus eventually develops a sporophore or
bracket-like protuberance such as one frequently finds on the trunks of
living trees or on fallen logs. These bodies are of various shapes and
colours, but usually of rusty-brown or white. Some of the bracket-like
excrescences are known to bushmen by the name of “punk.” The most
common forms belong to the family Polyporacese, and are the receptacles in
which are contained the millions of spores which are analogous to the seeds
of flowering plants. When the spores germinate they develop thin mycelial
*35839—A


threads or hyphse, which eventually penetrate the wood cells and gradually
destroy them. This causes disintegration and ultimate decay of the parts
affected and may finally result in the overthrow of the tree itself during
strong wind-storms.
In addition to those fungi which cause heart-rot of living trees, or decay
in lumber or stored timber, there are other forms which cause root-rot.
Such are the “ Honey-coloured Mushroom ” ( Armillaria mellea) and Poly-
porus Hartmanni and P. Schweinitzii. Ihe mycelium of these latter forms
or species grow in the living tissues of the roots, where they bring about
changes which ultimately result in the death of the shrub or tree. Of these
the “ Honey-coloured Mushroom” is one of the worst. Its long strands of
mycelium, commonly known as “ shoe-string,” grow between the bark and
the wood in a short time after infection, and kill the delicate bark and
cambium cells. As a result the tree dies from lack of nourishment though
the wood is not injured.
Other fungi which cause disease may do so by affecting the living parts
so that they cease to perform their functions, or they may destroy the dead
supporting parts so that these can no longer maintain the living wood and
the leaves. In any consideration of the life and growth of trees one must
not forget that every tree, after it has reached a certain age, which varies
with different species, is composed of two distinct parts, the living part and
the “ dead ” part. The former consists of the leaves, the younger branches,
and the smaller roots, and of a thin layer including the most recently formed
wood and the inner bark, while the latter includes the old wood of the trunk,
much of the newer wood and the bark. The living parts are renewed at
short intervals, while the old wood, known as heart-wood, becomes permeated
with certain preservatives and colouring materials, and serves mainly as a
support for the growing parts of the tree.
How Trees are infected, and Methods of keeping such Diseases in Check.
Plants usually have natural means for protecting themselves against the
attacks of fungi—such as the cuticle or skin-like surface of the leaves, thick
bark, and the exudations of gums, resins, &c. But wherever a break is
made in these natural protections, insects and fungi are liable to enter.
These wounds, by which the spores of fungi may enter, are caused in various
ways such as, for instance, by native bears and opossums, by birds of various
kinds, more especially the woodpecker (in Europe) and probably members
of the parrot family, and by boring insects. The latter are probably the
worst, as they make passages by which the fungus threads or hyphae may
penetrate deeply.
Although a few of the larger bracket-like fungi may be regarded as true
parasites, a large number of the fungi causing disease in trees may he con-
sidered only as “ wound parasites,” i.e., they can only grow in the heart-
wood of the living trees, thus rendering the wood unfit for commercial
purposes, after the way has been paved by other agencies. It has been sug-
gested that, when infection brings about the changes described, the rapid
disintegration of the cellular tissue is brought about by the secretion of
poisonous substances in the tips of the fungous hyphae. These poisons kill
the cells of the host in their immediate neighbourhood, somewhat in advance
of the tips of the hyphae, which subsequently in the course of their growth


reach these dead cells and feed on them in a saprophytic manner. A good
example of this is the secretion of oxalic acid in the hyphae of the Botrytis
stage of species of Sclerotinia. Very many fungi give rise to crystals of
calcium oxalate, apparently as a waste product, these either being stored
inside 'the hyphas of the fungus, or being formed on the outside of the
hyphal wall. A much more remarkable instance of this secretion of a
poison is furnished by a fungus known as Stereum purpureum. This
causes a disease known as “ silver leaf,” affecting plums, peaches, apples,
pears, laburnums, and the Portugal laurel. Some recent work on this
fungus by Mr. Spencer Pickering has been published in the Twelfth Report
of the Woburn Experimental Fruit Farm —a short account of this appears
in the Gardeners’ Chronicle for 12th November, 1910. The mycelium of
the fungus lives in the branches only, and does not appear to extend to
the leaves. It secretes a poison, however, which is carried to the leaves
of the host plant by way of the wood and the leaf veins; this is produced
in sufficient quantities to cause a material alteration in the appearance
of the leaves, viz., to turfl their colour from green to silvery or ashen
grey. Lime or calcium carbonate, if absorbed by the roots and present in
the water carried in the wood, would neutralise the acid, with the formation
of calcium oxalate. Colletotrichum glceosporoides, known as the withertip
fungus of citrus trees, found in Florida and other places, similarly attacks
its host by means of a poison. The leaves in this case turn yellow.
The treatment for these various diseases should be preventative. All
sporophores (bracket-like fungus protuberances) which form on the trees
should be destroyed by burning them. Still better, all such diseased trees
should be removed, as they may give rise to sporophores which escape notice.
Their retention as periodic spore bearers is fraught with grave danger. It
is also advisable to cut trees after they have reached a certain age, as old
trees are more liable to attack than younger ones, the liability increasing
with age.
Agaricaceae (Gilled-Fungi).
Though the gilled-fungi, of which the common mushroom is our best-
known representative, are very numerous and many grow on wood of
various kinds, fortunately only a few are of definite economic importance
from a forestry view-point. The fleshy species occurring on the ground have
obviously no connection with our present aspect unless, as in the case of
A rmillaria mellea, they spring from mycelial threads attacking roots. The
majority of the kinds found on wood in the bush are destroying useless
lumber and, so far,' are useful. The following species are those most im-
portant to us in Australia as destroyers or injurers of timber-trees.
Armillaria mellea, Yahl.
The Honey Fungus (Plate I).
This is a very destructive parasite of the roots of troes and its recogni-
tion is therefore very important. Not only does it destroy timber-trees of
value, but its presence in a forest is of danger to the fruit trees of surround-
ing orchards. It may be readily recognised by the following features:—
It is of clustered habit, growing at or near the‘bases of trunks; the cap,
which may be several inches wide, is somewhat honey-coloured and sprinkled
with small blackish-brown warty scales; the gills tend to run down the stem,


and are fleshy-white then brownish in colour; the stems are dingy, rigid,
and have often a dull greenish mouldy appearance whilst there is a more
01 less well-marked ring on the stem a little below the attachment of the
gills.
The following is its technical description, given in full owing to its
importance:—
“ Pileus 2-5 in. across, disc fleshy, remainder thin, convex, then expanded,
often becoming more or less depressed at the centre, often sooty or covered
with olive down when young, soon becoming paler, usually ochraceous with
a tinge of honey-colour, sprinkled all over with small, spreading, blackish-
brown scales, margin striate; gills adnate, then becoming more or less
decurrent, rather distant, white with a flesh tinge, then brownish and
powdered with the white spores; stem 3 to 5 inches long, 3 to 6 lines thick,
rigid, more or less grooved, dingy ochraceous, floccose or almost naked
below the ring, base often covered with yellowish down, stuffed then hollow,
elastic; spores elliptical, 9xsto 6 g. At the base of trunks or on the
ground.
Exceedingly variable; usually densely csespitose ( i.e ., growing in a bunch)
when growing at the base of trunks; larger when solitary or almost so,
among leaves on the ground. Sometimes the stem and pileus are suffused
with a yellow or orange tint, which at other times is entirely absent, leaving
the pileus dingy ochraceous; stem and pileus sometimes almost or quite
glabrous, especially when old.” —Massee.
It is very common in the Sydney district during the months of May and
June, being found at the bases of Eucalypts and various introduced culti-
vated trees. In the Botanic Gardens it has been found l at the base of
Eloeagnus pungens, and on trunks of “Weeping Willows” (Salix baby-
lonica, L.). We have collected numerous specimens of this species from
dense tufts at the base of trees at Mosman, Sydney, at Terrigal, and at
Kendall, near Wauchope, usually in May or June. The stems of many
specimens present a dull greenish mouldy appearance. The spores vary
from 7 to 103 g x 5-2 to 7 g.
The mycelium is somewhat flat and resembles shoe-strings, hence it is
sometimes called the “ Shoe-string Fungus,” and is found beneath the bark
of trees in flattened strands, and also runs long distances through the
ground and attacks the roots of trees. In some districts this fungus is a
serious pest, especially in newly cleared land. In order to check its spread
it is necessary to keep the land thoroughly free from decaying roots of trees
and timber, as these frequently encourage the development of the sporo-
pliores. The sporophores together with the timber and roots should be burnt
so as to destroy the spores or portions of the strands of mycelium which may
be in the timber. If the land is low and requires to be drained, it will be
advisable to use pipe-drains, as bush drains aggravate the trouble. In some
localities, where the fungus is very prevalent, it is advisable to grow a crop
or two of cereals, potatoes*, &c., before planting fruit trees. It has also been
found advisable to avoid ploughing in green manure crops as the decaying
vines may assist in propagating the fungus.
* Although this fungus has been known to attack potatoes, the object of advising
potato culture before planting trees is to permit of the scarifier or other implement being
used freely between the drills so as to expose and eventually destroy the mycelium.


Photiota adiposa, Fries.
The Sticky Timber Pholiote. (Plate II.)
This remarkably handsome brown-gilled agaric should be easily recognised
from the plate, and by the fact that it is found attached to the sides of the
trunks of the atfected trees, up to a height .of 20 feet or more. In Europe it
is considered a destructive timber parasite, the positions in which the
fruiting “ toadstools ” appear indicating the distances to which, at least,
the fungus threads have extended in the tree, destroying the wood corres-
pondingly. So far the fungus has only been met with in one situation in
Hew South Wales, namely, in dense forest at Mount Wilson. The trees
affected were probably coachwood. It is also recorded for Queensland. As
a number of European trees are grown in the neighbourhood of Mount
Wilson, the fungus may have been introduced there with one or more of
these, or it may, of course, be a rare native of Australia. In any case it
does not seem to be widely distributed, and it would be a wise course to
make every endeavour to exterminate it entirely by cutting down and burn-
ing all trees infested by it, thus destroying the fungus threads which
annually produce new fruiting bodies to perpetuate the species.
Potyporaceae (Pore-Fungi).
A number of the pore-fungi in general appearance somewhat resemble the
Agaricacese or gill-fungi, but may be distinguished by having the spores
borne in the inner surface of tubes or pits.
In the most typical forms, comprising such genera as Boletus and
Polyporus, the texture is more or less fleshy, and the tubes collectively form-
ing the hymenium are frequently 2 to 3 centimetres long; and vary in
different species from 05 mm. upwards in diameter.
In the highest types the tubes are cylindrical and are packed compactly
side by side as seen in a vertical section, whereas when viewed in the entire
plant the pores or openings of the tubes only are seen. The form of the
pores is circular when the tubes are cylindrical; in other instances the
pores are polygonal, or sinuous when somewhat elongated, or wavy or
flexuous. In some genera such as Poria, the tubes may be so very shallow
that they merely resemble circular, polygonal, or sinuous pits or depressions.
The bordering walls of the tubes, which bear the hymenium on their free
surface, are called “ dissepiments.” The elements of the hymenium consist
of basidia and paraphyses, and in many instances large cystidia are also
present in considerable numbers.
The family includes a large number of species commonly known as
“ bracket ” or “ shelf ” fungi, which are frequently found on fence-rails,
tree-trunks, and decaying logs, and several of these are very destructive to
timber. For instance, the felt-like masses of mycelium of certain species of
Pomes and Polyporus are frequently found coiled around the heart-wood
of several species of our Eucalypts and Acacias.
The genera into which the pore-fungi are divided may be briefly
described as follows:— Boletus and Strobilomyces comprise fleshy putres-
cent species, chiefly growing on the ground, and do not concern us as
timber-destroyers. The species of Polyporus are more or less Arm and
leathery and do not readily decay; though some are stalked, they are usually
attached by one side in bracket form and have a well-defined upper surface


and a lower, pore-bearing, surface; the tubes are sharply defined, but are
not separable easily from the flesh; some of the species are very large and,
by their mycelium ramifying as fungus threads through the woody tissues
on which the fruiting bodies (the pore-bearing bracket fungi) are borne,
are often very destructive to timber. Polystictus is similar, but the sub-
stance is thin and tough, leathery, or even papery. In Fomes, the species
are more or less perennial, producing during each growing period a fresh
layer of pores superimposed on the preceding layer; their substance is hard
and woody; many species are large and destructive in the same way as some
species of Polyporus. Ganodermus is separated from Pomes by having a
crust which is more or less smooth and shining (laccate, lac-like), and by
having peculiar coloured spores. In Poria, there is no definite separation
of upper and lower surfaces, the fungus lying exposed on the surface on
which it is growing and being composed of short pits or pores. Trametes is
like Polyporus, save that the tubes penetrate to different depths in the
flesh instead of all ending at one level. In Hexagona we have forms like
Polyporus, but the tubes are more or less polygonal rather than rounded.
Similarly, in Dcedalea the tubes are elongated and sinuous, being in fact
not true tubes, but the first stage towards the gilled type seen in Agarics
such as mushrooms. In Merulius, to which genus a common dry-rot fungus
belongs, the fungus is spread out as in Poria, but is subgelatinous, and the
pores are represented by shallow irregular pits or folds.
Polyporus.
The following arc the most important timber-destroying species of this
genus recorded for, or hitherto found in, New South Wales.
Polyporus squamosus, Fries. —This species is obviously rare in Aus-
tralia, but this is an additional reason, considering its destructive action on
the trees that it attacks, why it should be specially searched for and its
fruiting bodies destroyed, together with any infected host, so as to prevent
further spread. Its cap is described as being broadly fan-shaped, fleshy,
pliant, and dingy pale yellow or pallid, being variegated with large brown
adpressed scales. The pores are short, variable, and pallid. The stem is
excentric or almost lateral, short, thick, and with a black base. It sometimes
attains a relatively enormous size.
Polyporus portentosus, Berk. —A very large species, characterised by
having a thin tan-coloured skin on its upper surface; its substance pure
white, fragile, and chalky; and its pores white. The species seems to be
rare in Australia and, though hitherto found on fallen timber, probably
attacks living trees.
Polyporus eucatyptorum, Fries. (Plates XIII, XIV, XV.) —This
species can be readily recognised by its “ punky ” characters. The dried
fruiting body, which is often found on the ground much channelled by insects,
having fallen from its original site high up on the butt or branch of a tree, is
popularly known as “ punk,” and forms excellent tinder, taking several
hours to burn away. When removed in the growing state from the tree it
is usually more or less hoof-shaped, has a thin skin delicately coloured in
greyish-brown tints, white flesh, and bright almost canary yellow pores (in
some specimens we believe the pores are white). This fungus is very
destructive to the Eucalypts it infests, the heart-wood being decayed and


penetrated by the mycelium which often forms extensive flat white sheets
of the consistency of chamois-leather. Once attacked and penetrated by this
perennial mycelium, the tree affected will annually produce a bracket-fungus
from which spores are detached to affect other trees. Consequently every
tree on which the fruiting body appears should be marked and cut down —
the tree is already useless itself and a danger to others from each new fungus
fruit borne on it. .
Polyporus fumosus , Pers. —This species is met with growing in dense
masses more especially on stumps. The masses consist of small bracket
fungi growing one on top of the other and more or less overlapping. Some-
times the brackets are appreciably thick, sometimes thin and pliant. The
upper surface is pallid with a smoky tinge and silky becoming smooth.
The flesh is pallid. The pores are shallow and pallid and dry with a
distinct smoky tinge. It plays an undoubted part in destroying useless
stumps, and as it is said to grow sometimes on trunks will have a similar
destructive action on these. Its practical importance is, however, apparently
not great.
Polyporus ochroleucus, Berk. (Plates Xlla and XVI A) —This species
can be readily recognised as being the small, pale, yellowish-brown or
biscuit-coloured, bracket fungus found commonly on posts and fences. In
these situations, its mycelium penetrates the substance on which it is
growing, causing a slow rotting. We recently found a telegraph post in
Xorth Sydney extensively attacked by this fungus. Its base was evidently
rotting whilst numerous small brackets were developing, to shed their spores,
for a distance upwards of at least 10 feet. We have not found this species
attacking living trees, but it unquestionably causes some definite monetary
loss by its attack on fences and posts. It is probably too common to
combat successfully, but its spread may be somewhat diminished by systema-
tically collecting and burning the sporophores. Where possible affected
rails and posts should be removed and also burnt, so as to prevent further
crops of fruiting bodies.
Polyporus gilvus, Schwein. (Plate Xlu.X —This is a common species
on stumps and at the base of trees. It is attached by its side and
often a number of fruiting bodies overlap one another to form an exten-
sive patch. Its upper surface is brown and slightly wavy; the substance a
bright yellow ochre to cinnamon brown; and the pores small and brown. Its
thinner pileus and less woody structure distinguish it from such species
as Fomes robustus and F. rimosus, which 'it, rather remotely, resembles.
This species probably confines its damage to worthless material such as
stumps rather than to the larger living forest-trees.
Polyporus dryadeus. (Plates Xa and b and XI6.) —Though hitherto
only found in this continent on a Eucalypt in South Australia, this
species and its close ally, P. rheades ( P . dryophilus), are so destructive to
the hosts on which they occur that special attention must be directed to it
so as to check any further spread should it already occur in our forests.
The mycelium attacks the heart-wood of the tree whilst the brackets appear,
often out of reach of the ground, on the sides of the trunk. Our Australian
specimens are wedge-shaped, being about 2£ inches high at their attachment
and extending forwards 3 inches. The upper surface is a light-brown,
somewhat zoned and nodularly irregular. The substance is firmish and


reddish-brown and with an indefinite whitish mycelial core. The pores
are up to half an inch long, whitish at their openings and nearly the colour
of the context on section. The upper surface of the bracket is horizontal,
and so, from its wedge-shape, the under surface bearing the pores descends
in a convex fashion from the slightly inturned edge pf the cap to the
attachment.
Polystictus.
The species of this genus are distinguished chiefly by the substance of
the sporophore being thin, tough, leathery, or papery. The upper surface
of the pileus may be silky or hairy, and the flesh is quite thin and the tubes
are short and not stratose.
The most common species are P. cinnabarinus, P. sanguineus, P. versi-
color, and P. hirsutus, all of which are found on fallen logs and on stacked
timber as well as on fence-rails. As the substance on which they are found
is usually permeated with the mycelium of the respective species, it is quite
clear that these species cause a rot and as a consequence a rapid decay of
valuable timber. All sporophores should, therefore, be destroyed by burning.
Polystictus cinnabarinus , Jacq.—This is easily recognised by the bright
cinnabar-reddish coloured brackets which are usually about 3 to 4 inches
wide, and I to i inch thick. It is very common in the Port Jackson dis-
trict, and is sometimes called “ Red Indian’s Ears.” It has not been found
attacking living trees. There are upwards of fifty collections of specimens
represented in the National Herbarium, which have been gathered from
various kinds of timbers, including Melaleuca styphelioides, M. parviflora,
Banksia sp., Ironbark, Red Box, and Peach Trees.
Polystictus sanguineus, (L.) Meyer (Blood-red Polystictus).—This is
very similar to P. cinnabarinus, but is much thinner in texture and is
usually found in our warmer and moister districts.
Polystictus versicolor, Fr. (Plates XVIc, XVII, and XVIII). —This is
a very variable species found in nearly every part of the world. It is usually
found in dense clusters on wood which, as a rule, is permeated with the
mycelium and quite rotten. Whilst usually attacking fallen timber and
stumps, we have seen, near Morpeth, in the Newcastle district, many rails
of a fence rendered quite rotten and almost useless by an extensive* infesta-
tion of the fungus. The species can be readily recognised by its thin, pliant
nature; its velvety upper surface, beautifully variegated by zones usually
from a dark-grey or bluish-grey to whitish colour; and its minute creamy
whitish pores.
In the National Herbarium, Sydney, there are quite a large number of
specimens from the Port Jackson district and Blue Mountains. There are
also specimens from Burrinjuck and Cobar.
Polystictus hirsutus, Fr.—This species closely resembles the pre-
ceding, its upper surface being more hairy.
Fomes.
The following are the most important timber-destroying species of this
genus known in New South Wales. The species of Fomes are characterised
by their firm wooden nature and perennial habit manifesting itself in suc-
cessive layers of tubes.


Forties hemitephrus, Berk. —This is a fairly common species. It is
occasionally hoof-shaped, but usually flattened and extended (applanate) and,
until cut into, superficially resembles Fomes applanatus. Its inner texture,
however, is whitish to pallid fawm (isabelline) and not dark reddish-brown
as in the latter. Its upper surface is usually more or less concentrically
furrowed and shows zones of colour of varying tints from dark-brown to
pallid brownish. There is usually an orange stain just under the crust. The
pores are minute and their colour more or less that of the internal structure
as a whole. We have found this species growing some distance up the
trunks of forest-trees, and it probably plays an important part in killing
those it attacks.
Fomes robust us, Karst. (Plate IX), Fomes Robinsoniae, Murrill
(Fomes squarrosus, Wilson), and Fomes rimosus, Berk. —This group of
species is very common and also very destructive, apparently taking the place
in Australia of F. fomentanus and F. igniarius of Europe. Both these last-
named species have been recorded for New South Wales, but we are
inclined to think that the plants so identified were probably really F.
robustus, F. Robinsonian or F. rimosus. We have not met with F. fomen-
tarius or F. igniarius ourselves, and both, if they do occur, must be rare.
F. robustus is readily recognised as the large, often very large, very hard and
heavy, brown-textured, hoof-shaped, bracket fungus found attached to the
sides of tree-trunks. We find difficulty in distinguishing, without micro-
scopic examination, between F. robustus and F. rimosus, but the latter seems
to be usually smaller and flatter, microscopically the spores are brown and
not whitish, and on section the context colour is a darker reddish-brown
rather than the yellow brown of F. robustus. F. Robinsonian is also very
similar to the other two, and we have to use the microscope to differentiate it
—this reveals the presence of setae in the pores, which are rare, if present,
in F. robustus, and uncoloured spores. The upper surfaces of these three
species show in the older part usually a dark-brown, almost black, hard,
more or less cracked crust. The younger free edge is a lighter brown
passing to greyish-yellow or yellowish-brown at the growing edge. The
pore-mouths are very minute.
These three species are all probably highly destructive to our native
timber trees —certainly F. robustus is. Their mycelia traverse the heart-
wood, disintegrating it, and, in the case of the lastnamed species, giving it
a peculiar speckled appearance from whitish to yellowish-brown. Annually,
from these buried fungus threads, a sporophore—the bracket fungus—bursts
forth, as it were,- through the bark. To prevent the spores from these being
distributed to infect other trees, they should be removed and burnt, whilst
to stop the tree from annually producing this danger, it should be cut
dow T n and destroyed.
Fomes conchatus, Pers. —This is a relatively small species with its sub-
stance a brown colour something like that of F. rimosus. The projecting
bracket portion is often ill-developed, the fungus being consequently more
or less effused like a Poria. The bracket part, when developed, is usually
thin and shell-shaped and, with us, so disposed as to form a slightly concave
surface below in which the minute brownish pores develop. Sometimes the
bracket is much thicker with a dark rimose crust as in F. rimosus. We
have found this species killing a peppermint gum (E. piperita ) and also
growing on a she-oak (Casuarina).
35839—8


xm WTh? I"*’ . PerS " and itS varieties - (Plates VI, VII, VIII, and
J , OU , g i distinctive names have been given to forms of this species
them thin T rieS ‘’ the tubes are very long and the “ substance ”
above them thin, F oroflavus, Wilson, when the pore-mouths are yellowish
and not whitish, &c.,-we believe these departures are hardly entitled to
rank as varieties, much less as species, being dependant in great part on
adventitious circumstances and probably not breeding true. For practical
forestry purposes, at least, they may all be considered together.
Fomes applanatus is one of our commonest species, and probably does a
considerable amount of damage. It grows as extensive, relatively thin
brackets at or near the bases of trees. Sometimes these brackets are l foot
h "“V 6 d ° Se *° ° ne another on the same
nk. Occasionally hoof-shaped specimens are found. The upper surface
is crusty, usually of a brownish rusty tint becoming greyish when very old
or l ess wrinkled ( , and somewhat Wow'd
The substance is a nch dark bay brown. The tubes are sometimes quite
shallow, sometimes an inch or more in length and of an almost purplish-
wh v\ CO i° Ur ’ " th “ the substance - The pore-mouths are minute and
w itisli, brownish, or yellowish. The rich dark-brown context colour on
tting a specimen in two, is one of the readiest means of recognising’ the
onTof th£ f T “ . P ’7 l,sh - brow l n P° wdCT will be found in abundance under
its spores Whe " a ° tlTe y - r °wing this is composed of millions of
tim^thatThat 11 ™ 0 /- *’? bracket : fungus at the baa e of a tree is a sure indica-
t on that that particular tree is permeated at its base by the mycelium of
7 * mterfenng with the vital Processes at work there. In
lorests, F. applaruitus is common at the base of Eucalypts- it also killer!
a tree of Acacia horrida in the Botanic Gardens, Sydney. (Plate VIII.)
Hexagona.
The genus Hexagona is distinguished from other polypores by the larire
round or hexagonal pores. It is found chiefly in the tropical or subtropical
egions, but is occasionally met with in temperate regions.
The context of Hexagona is usually of a corky-woody nature and the
coiour of the spores white. As specimens of two common species ie
H. Gunnu, Berk., and H. tenuis , Hook., are frequently found on lfving trees"
y 011 f ke !? lky . oak (Greuillea robwsta), and a eucalyptus, we feel that
Sfct zzt ,s ~ y to find out if the rarious •»
Trametes.
vMtim 6 ° f i his ge T S are charactorised by the tubes extending to
stratum at ° ne layer ’ 80 as to form a definite
Fomes * perennia1 ’ and ™&ht be classed with
The New South Wales species of this genus are probably not of much
economic importance, their timber-destroying activities being expended
hiefly on dead trees and fallen trunks. Possibly, however some of the
dead trees on which T. lactinea has been seen flourishing were killed by
this species when its economic importance would be enhanced. So far we
have not noticed it on living trees.


XXWnf eS ,aCt ' n f a ’ I3erk - (Milk-white Trametes.) (Plates XIX and
8 in h cb 18 e d Sl y ? 5C ? gnisable by forming often extensive brackets
and on f len" Ws Th 2 *° 3 thick ’ ° n the sides of dead
velvetv the Lhfi The , u PP. er sur face is whitish to pallid and somewhat
vehety, the flesh firm and white, and the pores rather small and white.
Trametes feei, Fries., and T. Wacino=gHva, Berk.—These are our two
most common species with rosy-pink flesh, by which they can be recognised
They probably grade one into the other, being extremes of one type They
re both found chiefly on fallen timber, hastening its decay and are not of
more e n kZn ” ay sidewaZfoVa Zt or
its attachmZ’ f ? nmng a narrow b l raoket Projecting about 2 inches from
SriV specimens the upper surface is rather smooth and
c , ‘ ‘ htacmo-gtlva is not so extended, and its upper surface is
ug y rugose and fibrillose, and usually of a coppery-rosy-pink colour.
EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
isrss"’- Two
Plate U.—Pholiota adiposa (Sticky Timber Pholiote), showing—
{a) 2I U^ r Sl T faCe f the ca P; (&) remnants of the veil and the
stem! SeCtlon showing hollowness of the upper part of the
Plat ti!Lh~ A b ™ k en sheet of sterile mycelium of the so-called “ Xvlostroma ”
Plat ofT«foaw“ Bheet ° f S,OTi ' e myCellum ’ tak “ fro “ «>e Hollow trunk
I’late V.—Cylindrical or finger-like forms of sterile mycelium nrohnhw 0
Pom™, taken from a - Box-tree ’• at 7 ° f a
rlat the'T™SeWlL“aSore rar ' Sb ° wlns the "W®' -■*>«» of
P,a lfL^mr t VufX%pM.' r “' iS - Sh °""’ g " nte surface
Plate Vlll.—Portion of the heart-wood of Acacia horrida, permeated with
VI and VIIT ° t e F ° meS applanatus var - australis, given on Plates
Pbate IX.—Cross-section of trunk of Bank sia end folia, showing (a) heart
wood partially destroyed; and (ft) heart-wood wholl/pefmeated and
tefiTS in’ ( b). inyCehUin ° f Fomesrop astns. The bracket-like sporophore
Plate X. -Polyporus drya<lem—{a) The upper surface of the brackef-like
or°p6res° re ’ ( >) a seetion of the sauie species, showing context and tubes
EucalymT "’ ere attaChed ab ° Ut 15 feet Up t,le truuk <>f a »ving
Plite XP—(a) Polyporus gilvus. Two bracket-like sporophores in nosition
(ft) 7 olyporus dryadeus. Showing the pores of the under surface? ‘
Plate XII (a) Polyporus oclirolcucus. Upper surface of a bracket like
sporophore. ? ° *’ OWC * applan *tus . Upper surface of a bracket-like


Plate Xlll.— Polyporus eucalyptorum. A complete bracket-like sporophore
attached to the trunk of a “ Blackbutt ” (Eucalyptus pilularis) in the
Government Domain, Sydney.
Plate XIV. — Polyporus eucalyptorum. Section of timber Eucalyptus capi-
tellata permeated with sheets of the white felt-like mycelium, and section
of the bracket-like sporophore in position.
Plate XV. —Wads of felt-like sterile mycelium, probably of Polyporus euculyp-
torum, separated from the heart-wood of a stringybark (Eucalyptus).
Plate XVI. — (a) Polyporus salignus. Under surface of a bracket-like sporo-
phore. ( h) Polyporus ochroleueus. Under surface showing the i>ores.
(c) Polystictus versicolor. Under surface of a solitary sporophore.
Plate XVII. — Polystictus versicolor. A group of superimposed sporopliores, in
position on portion of a branch of tree.
Plate XVIII. —Section of the branch of a tree, showing the rotting of the
timber, caused by the Polystictus versicolor, shown in Plate XVII.
Plate XIX. — Tramctes lactinea. Upper surface of a bracket-like sporophore.
Plate XX. — Trametes lactinea. Showing the small pores of the under surface
of a bracket-like sporophore.
[We are indebted to the Government Printer for the excellent photo-
graphic illustrations. The coloured illustrations were drawn by Miss P.
Clarke.]
S-'datj' : " iiiiiun Applegate Gullick, Gorenunent Printer —1913.


Two-thirds natural size.
Plate I.
ARMILLARIA MELLEA.


(a)
(b)
(c)
Two-thirds natural size.
Plate II.
PHOLIOTA ADIPOSA.
Showing upper surface of cap, under side with gills, and sectional outline.


Plate III.
Sheet of Sterile Mycelium (Xylostroma) from the Hollow Trunk of Eucalyptus.
35839


Plate IV
Sterile Mycelium from the Hollow Trunk of Eucalyptus.


Plate V.
Cylindrical or Finger-like Forms of Sterile Mycelium from a Box (Eucalyptus sp.).


Plate VI.
Forties applanatus, yar. australis. Upper surface.


Plate VII.
Fomes applanatus, var. australis. Under surface showing pores.


Plate VIII.
Heart-wood of Acacia horrida, permeated with the mycelium of
Forties applanatus, var. australis.


(a)
(b)
Plate IX.
Cross-section of trunk of Banksia ericifolia permeated by the mycelium of Fames robustus. The sporophore seen in situ in (b).


(a)
(b)
Plate X.
Polyporus dryadeus. (a) Upper surface ; ( b ) in section.


(a)
Polyporus gilvus.
(b)
Plate XI.
Polyporus dryadeus. Under surface showing pores.


(a)
(b)
Plate XII.
(a) Polyporus ochroleucus. Upper surface.
(b) Forties applanatus. Upper surface.


Plate XIII.
Polyporus eucalyptorum from a “Blackbutt” (Eucalyptus pilularis).


Plate XIV.
Polyporus eucalyptorum. Sporophore in situ and permeation of the timber of Eucalyptus capitellata
with the sheets of white felt-like mycelium.


Plate XV.
Wads of felt-like sterile mycelium, probably of Polyporus eucalyptorum, from the heart-wood
of a stringybark (Eucalyptus sp.).


(a)
(b)
(C)
Plate XVI.
(a) Polyporus salignus. Upper surface.
(b) Polyporus ochroleucus. Under surface showing the pores,
(c) Polystictus versicolor. Under surface showing the pores.


Plate XVII.
Polystictus. versicolor on a branch.


Plate XVIII.
Section of the Branch of a Tree, showing the rotting of the timber caused by Polystictus versicolor.


Plate XIX.
Trametes lactinea. Upper surface.
35839


Plate XX.




