

DISTRIBUTION OF PATRONAGE
BY THE
DUFFY GOVERNMENT.
SPEECH
THE HONORABLE THE CHIEF SECRETARY
ON THE
MOTION OE NO CONFIDENCE.
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY, MAT 22, 1872.
PUBLISHED BY
B. NEEDHAM, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER, 154 BOURKE STREET EAST.




/<? 5 00
SPEECH OP THE HON. THE CHIEP SECRETARY.
Mr. SPEAKER, The motion before the
chair is one designed not merely to over-
throw the Government as a political party
but to dishonour them as public men by the
charge that they have unworthily employed
the power with which they have been in-
trusted. It is my intention to meet the
attack in both its branches. When I as-
sumed my present office 1 did so with a
full determination that the public patron-
age intrusted to me and my colleagues
should be used only for public ends ; and
I am here to contend that that intention has
been carried out. I approach the question
under some difficulty because I do not
know whether all the charges the Govern-
ment are expected to meet have already
been exhibited against us. I know that,
on the last occasion, after the honorable
gentleman at the head of the Opposition
had made such statements as he thought
proper to this House, and 1 had given, I
think, a clear and conclusive answer to
his statements, other gentlemen —all those
in fact who hope to rise on the fell of
the present Government —did, one after
the other, assail me, personally and vindic-
tively, when my mouth was closed. And
when it was suggested that an opportunity
ought to be afforded me to reply on the
whole case, instead of eagerly consenting
to that arrangement, instead of courting
fair controversy, they joined in a chorus
of opposition to the end that I might not
be heard again. I do not know if, on the
present occasion, that course is to be re-
peated, but it seems to me that the order
of the day in the present attack is to throw
dirt at the head of the Government, be-
cause if he and his colleagues do not
forfeit the confidence which the country
has given to them, then the conspiracy of
Flinders-lane will end in disaster. For
a time that design was successful ; but
my turn is come now, and I confidently
rely on the electric force of the simple
truth to carry conviction to every honest
mind. I will take so much notice of the
rambling statement of the honorable mem-
ber who last addressed the House as to
begin by referring to his charge that I and
my colleagues—l at all events —used these
public banquets, so often referred to, as op-
portunities of assailing my political oppo-
nents. Now I declare that a grosser mis-
representation was never uttered on the
floor of this House. I used the platform
of those public entertainments simply lor
self-defence against those assailing me.
Among the members of the late Govern-
ment there are at least three contributors
to newspapers, and among the other mem-
bers of the Opposition twice as many.
These gentlemen, under the convenient
shield of the anonymous system of our
journalism, were not sparing ot their
criticisms upon the Government. Does
any reasonable man think it was my duty,
or the duty of my colleagues, to listen to
these things in silence, or to seize a fair
opportunity when a fair opportunity
offered —to refute and answer them ? If
we had pursued the former course, and
listened to them in silence, I am persuaded
the effect would be that, during the long
recess, the Government would have been
lied out of existence.
Mr. MACK AY.—Mr. Speaker, is the
Chief Secretary in order in inferentially
stating that-three members ot the late
Ministry have systematically maligned
him? He knows perfectly well that that
is a misstatement.
The SPEAKER. —I am not aware that
the Chief Secretary directly pointed to
any one, and, under the circumstances, I
don’t think I can call him to order.
Mr. MACKAY. —Mr. Speaker
Mr. YALE. —I rise to the point of
order. I venture to call attention to the
compact entered into that we were to have
orderly sittings. Such interruptions are
cowardly and disgraceful.
Mr. G. V. SMITH.—I rise to a point
of order. I want the words of the last
speaker—“cowardly and disgraceful”—-
to be retracted. I insist on maintaining
that point of order. (Cries of “ With-
draw.”)


Mr. YALE.—I have simply to say that tell me that we were to sustain, in absolute
I used those words advisedly. I used
them because honorable members in
opposition know that the Chief Secretary
suffers under great disadvantages in ad-
dressing a large public assembly.
The SPEAKER. —The honorable mem-
ber should withdraw such terms. Ido not
think the Chief Secretary has gone beyond
the reasonable limits of debate. (Re-
newed cries of “ Withdraw.”)
Mr. YALE.—When I am allowed to
speak quietly I will carry out the prac-
tice I have never diverged from in this
House, that is to bow to the ruling of the
chair, I used those words to point out to
honorable members opposite that it is un-
fair—
The SPEAKER. —The honorable mem-
ber is not in order when he goes on to
justify his remarks before withdrawing
them.
Mr. YALE. —I am not going to justify
them, but simply to point out that I used
those words because it was unfair to an
honorable member having a weak voice
to make a noise while he was speaking.
Sir, in deference to your ruling, I with-
draw those words.
Mr. DUFFY. —I stated, sir, that I used
the platform of those public entertainments
simply and exclusively for self-defence ;
and I am now about to illustrate that
statement. I mentioned at those public
meetings four members of this House, and
each of those four had rendered it necessary
that I should take that course. On one of
the last nights of this debate, the honorable
and learned member for Dundas made a
pathetic appeal to the House how I had
assailed his land policy upon occasions
when he was not present to answer. Sir,
the land policy of the honorable member
for Dundas belonged to the dead past, and
would have interested me no more than
what is going on in Kamtchatka, if the
honorable member had not placed me on
the defensive, by assailing the land policy
of the present Government. The honor-
able member for Dundas is one of the
proprietors of and one of the writers for
a newspaper in this city, in which I and
the Government with which I am con-
nected were assailed six times a week,
and sometimes six and twenty times a
week, in all the moods and tenses of vitu-
peration. Nothing that we did, nothing
that we said, nothing that we omitted to
say or do, but was misrepresented in that
ournal. Will any man in this Chamber
silence, a running fire of calumny of this
nature ?
Mr. MACPHERSON.—Mr. Speaker,
I beg to tell the Chief Secretary that I
never had a share or any interest whatever
in any newspaper in this colony, or any-
where else ; that I never wrote a line for
any newspaper ; and that I never dictated
or laid the foundation for any newspaper
article.
Mr. DUFFY. —I am bound in parlia-
mentary courtesy to accept absolutely the
statement of the honorable member, that
he is not one of the proprietors or writers
of the Telegraph newspaper. The honor-
able member has not only set me right, but
he has set right a large number of mem-
bers of this House, and a considerable
number of persons in this country. (“No.”)
I say that the conviction was entertained
by a considerable number of persons, upon
whom, no doubt, the absolute contradiction
of the honorable member will come with
as much surprise as it came upon me. I
will then content myself by saying that
the specific reason why I took occasion at
these various banquets, or at some of them,
to refer to the honorable member for Dun-
das was because I was assured, by persons
who ought to know, though it appears they
were not well-informed, that the honorable
member was directing that machine against
me.
Mr. MACPHERSON.—Never.
Mr. DUFFY. —If I had had the opportu-
nity of hearing that denial from the honor-
able member at some earlier period, he
would not have had occasion to complain of
my referring to him, because I did so in his
case, as in other cases, simply in what I
believed to be self-defence. I think it will
be conceded that public life might be made
intolerable to a public man if he did not
carry a weapon to chastise unreasonable
aggression. Sir, I referred also, upon
several occasions, to the honorable mem-
ber for West Melbourne (Mr. Langton) ;
and when he last addressed the House he
complained that I had done so in his ab-
sence. Now I will say that, in referring
to the honorable member for West Mel-
bourne, I was simply rebutting an unfair
and ungenerous charge which he made
upon me in my absence. One evening,
when I was absent from the House through
illness, the honorable member endeavoured
to raise the impression that I had aban-
doned my opinions upon the education
question, because certain modifications


were made in the Estimates for the year order that, while he holds us accountable
from the Estimates of three or four years
back. But the honorable member knew
perfectly well that the change was made
by the honorable member for Richmond
(Mr. Francis) ; that for two years the
education vote had been set out in detail ;
and that if, when the Treasurer of the
present Government came to deal with the
Estimates, I had insisted upon the aban-
donment of that practice, and upon re-
course being had to the one I preferred,
he would have had just ground to complain
that, inasmuch as the education question
was an open question with the Govern-
ment, I was trenching upon his individual
liberty. Strong as the opinions of the
honorable member for West Melbourne
appear to be on that question, if ever he
finds himself in a Government with the
honorable member for Richmond at the
head of it, I undertake to say that he will
bring down the Estimates in the identical
fashion which he charged as an offence
against me. Now, as I have said, the
honorable gentleman complained that these
charges were made behind his back ; but
it seems to me that the honorable gentle-
man is precluded from making that impu-
tation upon anybody, seeing what he is
instrumental in inserting in the journal
to which he carries his amiable criticisms
of his co-members of this House.
Mr. LANGTON.—Which journal ?
Mr. DUFFY. —The journal I refer to
is the Argus newspaper.
Mr. LANGTON. —That is absolutely
without foundation.
Mr. DUFFY. —I accepted the state-
ment of the honorable member for Dun-
das ; but, unfortunately, I cannot accept
this denial, because the honorable member
for West Melbourne showed me one article
at least before it went into the paper.
Mr. LANGTON.—Since the honorable
member has been in office ?
Mr. DUFFY.—I have had no con-
fidential communication with the honorable
member for West Melbourne since I have
been in office; but, if anything has inter-
rupted the ordinary practice of the honor-
able member, he has not taken occasion to
communicate the fact to me. I will say
that, as the honorable member often has
recourse to Hansard —where our speeches
are set forth at length—to start fair, the
honorable member ought to lay on the
table a list of his contributions to public
journals, and especially his criticisms on
members of both sides of the House, in
for what we have said, we may be able to
hold him accountable for what he has
written. During the present session, the
honorable member for West Melbourne
has taken up a prominent position of an-
tagonism to the present Government. I
don’t know whether the honorable member
will understand the naked fact—about
which there is no exaggeration—when I
tell him that I rejoice that it is so. I have
tried the honorable member as an ally
and I have tried him as an antagonist, and
I prefer him in the latter character.
Mr. LANGTON. —Since I refused to
join the honorable member.
Mr. DUFFY. —Of this, at all events, I
am quite secure, he will not by his vote
raise me to a position of authority with the
party with which he is connected, that he
may privately assail me with sly para-
graphs in a newspaper.
Mr, LANGTON. —There is no foun-
dation for that. It is merely the honor-
able member’s imagination. I never did
such a thing in my life.
Mr. DUFFY. —I have a letter acknow-
ledging the fact, in his own handwriting.
Mr. LANGTON.—I beg to say the
honorable member has nothing of the kind.
Mr. DUFFY. I will undertake to
bring it down to the House. Dealing with
the honorable member in his present posi-
tion of antagonism, I ask whether he did
not solicit ray aid to get into the House,
and, as soon as he was there, employ his
position to defame me to my fellow mem-
bers ?
Mr. LANGTON.-—I never asked it.
Mr. DUFFY. —The honorable member
never asked my aid ?—neither at his elec-
tion, nor when there was a parliamentary
committee fighting the McCulloch Go-
vernment, nor at the last general election?
Mr. LANGTON.—No more than the
honorable member asked for my assistance.
Mr. DUFFY. —Why, what use does the
honorable member suppose he would be
to me in the constituency of Dalhousie ?
But I won’t debate that. I understand
now what the honorable member for West
Melbourne will say. He will state that he
never asked, and of course never received,
active assistance from me in two elections
for the city. That is a tide-mark which
I will never forget as to what state-
ments the honorable member is capable of
making. The honorable member for West
Melbourne, the last time he addressed the
House, was good enough to give me a lesson


on fidelity to principle. Now it seems to from the Government because they adopted
me that the honorable member is not ex-
actly the authority I am bound to take
upon questions of political morality. I
admit that upon one question, that of free-
trade, the honorable gentleman has been
tolerably steady, except on one occasion—
the debate on the Budget of the McCulloch
Government —when he was willing to
outbid the honorable member for Rich-
mond, and told that honorable member
that if he was afraid of 25 per cent, he
(the honorable member for West Mel-
bourne) was not. I say that on the question
of free-trade the honorable member has
been tolerably steady, because he repre-
sents in this House a number of persons
who have considerable interests on that
question. But on other public principles
■ —bringing them to the test of the honor-
able member’s conduct—let us see how the
honorable member becomes entitled to be
a preacher of political consistency. When
Mr. Higinbotham introduced his Education
Bill to this House, the honorable member
for West Melbourne got up and congratu-
lated him on that Bill.
Mr. LANGTON. —That is not the fact.
Mr. DUFFY. —Is it not in Hansard?
Mr. LANGTON.—No.
Mr. DUFFY, —The honorable member
for West Melbourne is reported in Han-
sard to have congratulated Mr. Higin-
botham upon his Bill.
Mr. LANGTON.—No.
Mr. DUFFY.— Afterwards the tide of
popular feeling ran high against that Bill;
and the honorable member for West Mel-
bourne floated upon the tide and became
one of the most vehement opponents to the
Bill. When the so-called constitutional
party were fighting in this House the so-
called loyal liberals on the Darling ques-
tion, one of the test-points on which the
constitutional party set the most stress was
that the power of this House over the
public expenditure was violated and set at
nought by the system of confessing judg-
ments —that the system of confessing
judgments withdrew from the control of
Parliament the public expenditure—and
the honorable member for West Melbourne
was among those who manifested the most
vehement and positive opposition to that
proceeding. The honorable member came
into office, and when he was in office he
jommenced confessing judgments ; and his
honorable colleague —the gentleman who
now presides over our deliberations in this
House —rejected and separated himself
that practice. Again, the grant proposed
to be given to Sir Charles and Lady Dar-
ling was itself a test-point. Concerning
that matter, I always took this ground —
that had I been in Parliament when it was
proposed, I would have voted against it,
but that, as the faith of Parliament and
the country was pledged, it ought to be
conceded in a separate Bill. That was the
ground which I took from first to last.
But the honorable member for West
Melbourne would not touch the unclean
thing under any pretence ; and, when the
Government of which he was a member
came into office, he was prepared to reject
any proposal having for its design the
granting of this money. I may here ob-
serve, parenthetically, that a dissolution of
Parliament had taken place, and that a
large majority of repi’esentatives had been
returned pledged to grant this money ;
and I think we heard from the honorable
member the other night a lecture on the
obligation which a general election places
upon the Parliament to accept the will of
the country. However, the honorable
member, being a leading member of the
Administration, declined to do so. That
was the first step. After a little while, one
of his colleagues—the honorable member
for Villiers and Heytesbury (Mr. Bayles)
—was to bring in a Bill as a private mem-
ber. But that did not satisfy the House.
Step by step the honorable member for
West Melbourne proceeded until he framed
a Bill to grant the money to Lady Darling.
Now it seems to me that, whereas the
older members of this House have all these
facts in their memory, it is scarcely becom-
ing for the honorable member for West
Melbourne to set himself up as a guide and
prophet to other honorable members with
respect to political consistency and political
morality. The honorable member for West
Melbourne thought proper, also, to lecture
me upon certain angry controversies which
had taken place between myself and the
present Minister of Customs, Now I will
say, without hesitation, that in all the
transactions which have occurred since the
present Government came into office there
are, I think, none which afford a greater
guarantee of a generous desire to make a
party based upon popular sympathies and
national interests than Mr. Vale and my-
self having forgotten the controversy we
have had. I will state, without hesitation,
the inducement in my mind to blot out the
past. All the attacks which Mr. Vale made


upon me originated in one feeling be- the honorable member’s recollection on
gotten of the prejudices of early education.
I can make allowances—any reasonable and
generous man can make allowances—for
feelings and prejudices of that nature,
especially when they come to an end.
And when my honorable colleague, upon
further acquaintance with me and with
life, was willing to put them aside, it was
my duty gladly to welcome such a recon-
ciliation as a security to the people of this
country that I desire to make not a sec-
tional party, but a party based upon the
broad sympathies of the whole people.
On the other hand, the honorable member
might very reasonably forgive my attacks
upon him on this ground—that they were
all in self-defence. I never assailed the
honorable member, except when he attacked
me ; and therefore I might very fairly
expect that he would drop these old
recollections. With respect not merely to
the case of myself and my present col-
leagues, but also to the case of myself and
those gentlemen with whose allegations —
that I used the banquets for the purpose
of attacking my political antagonists—
I am now dealing, I may state that I
have long made it an unvarying rule of
public life never to attack anybody, but
never to permit anybody to attack me
with impunity. When the honorable
member for West Melbourne was pleased
to lecture me about my former misunder-
standing with the Minister of Customs,
he might have remembered attacks of
quite a different nature which probably
he will be called upon to answer him-
self. The honorable member is going to
speak, as I observe he is taking notes,
and I respectfully request him to tell the
House whether it is not true that, on one
occasion, he charged upon the honorable
member for Richmond that, having in-
duced this House to grant a sum of money
for novel industries, he distributed it
mainly among his own political supporters
for political purposes. Did he charge
that corruption upon the honorable mem-
ber for Richmond ? Did he charge upon
the honorable member for Richmond that
he illegally suspended an Act of Parlia-
ment for the purpose of paying money
into his own pockets, and the pockets of
his then colleague, the late member for
Mornington, and the pockets of their
supporters ?
Mr. LANGrTON.—Never.
Mr. DUFFY.—It is very likely that
somebody will follow me who will revive
this point. Did he not also charge upon
the honorable member for Richmond that
he had subjected this country to an ex-
penditure of £63,000, which he distributed
among his own friends, some of whom
were specified, and some of whom I still
see on the front benches opposite ? More-
over, I will ask the honorable member, did
he not put these charges, in a more aggra-
vated form, into the newspaper press of this
country? Did he not put these charges
into the mouth of Mr. Sladen, a gentleman
who is not given to attacks upon anybody,
and make him the organ of levelling them
at the honorable member for Richmond
and Sir James McCulloch ? I trust, when
the honorable member comes to address
the House, he will tell us that. For my-
self, T will say that I never took the
slightest part in making these imputa-
tions, in encouraging them or in sustaining
them, and for the reason that, although I
think the honorable member for Richmond
has an abundance of political and personal
faults, I have never attributed to him a
greedy spirit, I have never attributed to him
dishonorable or discreditable intentions, or
the use of his political position for selfish
and personal motives. I say that is the
feeling I have entertained; but if the
honorable member takes to his arms
the gentleman who has made these
statements the gentleman of whom his
colleague (Sir James McCulloch) stated
that, in making charges of this nature, he
had lowered this House more in the eyes
of the country and in the eyes of England
than any oiher member who ever entered
it—then, I confess, one will be bound to
reconsider one’s opinion of him. For my-
self I will say that, although I am willing
cheerfully to forgive any one who assails
me from motives that are not discreditable,
if any man charged me with having seized
upon the public funds and distributed them
among myself and my friends, and with
having illegally suspended an Act of Par-
liament for what is literally a fraudulent
purpose, whatever political changes might
come, I would not touch him with my
boot. I have specified two members
whom I referred to at these banquets—■
the honorable member for Dundas, whose
explanation I have accepted, and the
honorable member for West Melbourne,
whose explanation, I trust, we will hear
by-and-by. I also referred to the honor-
able member for Richmond, but I will say
that, except upon one occasion, in relation


to the new pre-emptive right, when it was oralludedto in these after-dinner speeches,
part of the necessary narrative, as I con-
ceived, to state how it originated, my re-
ferences to the honorable member were
simply badinage, of which he had no just
reason to complain. I said nothing to
wound his feelings or impugn his honour.
I simply spoke of him in that fashion
which is part of the by-play of political
life, and which I don’t think the honorable
member would feel justified in complaining
about. But supposing the honorable mem-
ber does complain, I will say that one of
the faults of his character, which I took
the liberty of referring to just now, is that
he is rather free of his criticism about his
competitors and opponents in their absence.
A member of this House, whom I now
see on the far side of it, stated some time
ago that, for five years, he was whipped up
to vote on every test division when the
McCulloch Government was in danger,
by the honorable member for Richmond
coming to him and saying—“ You will
have Duffy in, if you don’t do this.” I
have had three contested elections since
I returned from Europe, but in every one
of them I found the heavy hand of the
honorable member for Richmond against
me.
Mr. FRANCIS. —I was not aware of it.
Mr. DUFFY. —In three contested elec-
tions which I have fought, the honorable
member for Richmond has acted on the
other side ; but I will very humbly submit
that, although political contests are per-
fectly fair, I have a reasonable claim to be
member of this House ; and the honor-
able gentleman might have permitted me
So come in without an absolutely futile
Contest, which was attended only by
Expense—nothing more. The only other
Member I referred to was the honorable
Member for Mornington. I will not take
c his occasion to go into the grounds upon
which I found it necessary to refer to that
honorable member ; but I will remind him
Pf the promise which he made to his con-
stituents, that he would call my attention,
In this House, to my statement with
Aspect to him. I think it becomes him
t o do so.
Mr. PURVES. —I stated my opinion
the honorable gentleman in the news-
lapers.
Mr. DUFFY. —I will to-morrow, at the
'roper time, ask the honorable member if
:I 'e means to refer to his statement, and if
> does not, I shall. And now, having
lecified every member whom I named
and having justified the course I took with
respect to all of them except the honorable
member for Dundas, and justified that also,
I think, by the impression which then
existed in my mind, perhaps I may be
permitted to pay some attention to honor-
able members whom I did not attack, but
who have attacked me. Sir, I think that
during the long debates we have been
engaged in there have been two or three
fine melo-dramatic effects. When one
honorable member crossed the floor of
the House at the close of his speech, no
doubt a sensation was created ; but that, I
think, was nothing to the thrill which
must have passed through the minds of
young members when the honorable mem-
ber forCollingwood(Mr. Harker) suddenly
arose to shake off the dust from his shoes
against the present Government and against
me. Of course, those young members who
accept the tradition that has managed to
get itself somehow established about the
honorable member, thought the milk of
human kindness in the honorable mem-
ber’s bosom was turned into a curd of
vexation and consternation at having such
a task to perform. They did not know,
as I knew, that it had sprung from the
black bile of personal malignity.
Mr. FRANCIS.—Mr. Speaker, I do
trust that, after a second or two of re-
flection, the Chief Secretary, as the leader
of the House, will see fit to withdraw the
expression he has just used with reference
to an old and much respected member.
“ Black bile of personal malignity.” I
think a more concentrated bitter expression
could not be used. I submit that, in
making such an aspersion, the Chief Sec-
retary attributes the most bitter personal
motives.
The SPEAKER. —No honorable mem-
ber is justified in attributing motives to
another honorable member, and I trust
that the Chief Secretary’s own judgment
will lead him to refrain from personal
allusions.
Mr. DUFFY. —Sir, I respectfully sug-
gest that you allowed the honorable mem-
ber for Colliugwood to specifically state
that I had voted for the abolition of State
aid to religion in order that I might make
my way into the Government. You
allowed Mr. Harker to make another impu-
tation of a most grossly offensive personal
character upon me. My turn has come to
answer him. If I have made an imputa-
tion upon the honorable member which is


not borne out by the circumstances lam high position which he holds in the House
_ . .< . rt 11 ill I !11 nnA 4-a tin fn _
about to state, the weight will fall upon
me.
The SPEAKER.—The Chief Secre-
tary will allow me to state that it does
not become me, as Speaker, to translate
the observations which any honorable
member may think fit to make. I noticed
at the time that the honorable member for
Collingwood (Mr. Harker) made one of
the most offensive remarks that could pos-
sibly be made in this House. At the same
time it was not pointed so directly as to
justify me in interfering ; and it is not for
me to couple a remark of one honorable
member with thenameof another honorable
member. I state, as I have stated repeated ly,
that an honorable member is not justified in
attributing personal or any other improper
motives to another honoi'able member ;
but as a rule I do not interfere, unless my
attention is called to the fact that some-
thing which is unjustifiable has been said
in debate.
Mr. DUFFY, —I have only to say that
if I or any member of this Idouse makes
an imputation upon another member which
he does not proceed to justify, so much
the worse for him. The House is sitting
in judgment—the House has its ears open,
and so have people outside the House —
and nobody can take that course with
impunity.
Mr. GILLIES.—Sir, I am obliged to
rise to order. No person is more willing
to listen to the Chief Secretary than I am ;
but 1 put it to you, if the leader of the
House is to lead off in the use of such
language, where will this end ? I submit
that the expression which the Chief
Secretary has used is not in order. The
Chief Secretary says that personal reasons
—not political reasons —and those of a
malignant character, have governed the
course which the honorable member for
Collingwood (Mr Harker) has taken in
this debate. I am perfectly certain, Mr.
Speaker, if you permit the Chief Secre-
tary to lead the debate iu that direction,
that you will not be able to prevent any
honorable member following suit. I
undertake to say it will not be possible
for you to occupy your seat in that chair,
if you allow conduct of this kind to pass
unchallenged.
The SPEAKER. —I have before stated
that I think the Chief Secretary, in attri-
buting a malignant motive to the honor-
able member for Collingwood, was out of
order; and I hope that, considering the
and the country, he will see fit to with-
draw the expression.
Mr. DUFFY. —As you appear to con-
sider that I should withdraw the words,
I will withdraw them, and proceed with
my narrative. Sir, twelve years ago it
was my fortune or misfortune to be the
colleague of the honoi’able member for
Collingwood, and I assert that any time
between that time and this, and a fortiori
during the existence of the present Go-
vernment, the honorable member would
have been well pleased with an opportunity
of making the pronunciamento which he
made the other night, and therefore the
sudden necessity which he professed for de-
livering his sentiments about me scarcely
corresponded with the desire and inten-
tion which existed a priori in the mind
of the honorable member. I say that
twelve years ago I was the colleague of
the honorable member. I had some
controversy upon public questions with
the head of that Government, and I lefl
the Government. After I left it, it was
asserted in some of the newspapers thal
the ground of my leaving was a con-
troversy with the honorable member foi
Collingwood, who was the Treasurer ir
that Administration. I took occasion t<
deny in the most emphatic manner that s<
trivial a cause would produce my with
drawal as any controversy with the honor
able member for Collingwood. However
the subject turned up in this House ii
October, 1859, and it then appeared tha
the honorable member for Collingwoot
had two grounds of complaint against me
Two grounds of complaint; and I entrea
the HouseAo give me its attention while
endeavour to harmonize them with th
eminently respectable and disintereste
neutral position in relation to the Govern
ment which the honorable member re
cently desired to occupy. I was Ministe
of Roads and Bridges, and the honorabl
member was Treasurer. The honorabl
member, as Treasurer, put on the Est
mates a sum of £4,000 to be expended i
his own constituency on a street not ver
distant from his own residence, I struck th
£4,000 from the Estimates, and afterward
the honorable member for Collingwood, i
my absence, managed to get the item o
again; and at last I had the choice force
upon me, when I found the item on tli
Estimates, either of probably breaking u
the Government or of allowing the honoi
able member to have money voted which


tad resisted because it was contrary to law. a far lower and grosser motive, turns his atten-
. , , , *(, •tion to heap up worldly wealth, utterly regard-
contended then, and it will be obvious f th / hi A dutie / he owes to the country
0 anybody familiar with local govern-
nent and local government Acts, that
noney, expended as it was on a street in
1 town, ought to have come out of the grant
o the municipality. However, the honor-
able member, as Treasurer, managed to
;et that particular vote carried through
he House, notwithstanding the resistance
•f the Minister of the department, and after
. had struck it off the Estimates. That
3 the first ground. The second ground of
omplaint of the honorable member was
his. Toll is levied on all the bridges over
he Yarra connecting the city with the
-üburbs —as, for example, between Rich-
hond and Prahran, between Richmond and
dawthorn, and between Melbourne and
tt. Kilda—and when the Johnston-street
bridge, leading to Collingwood, was about
be opened, the honorable member for
Collingwood wanted that bridge to be free
If toll. I resisted that, because I consi-
dered that the constituents of the honor-
ific member should be subject to the same
hie that was applicable to all the other
Üburbs. That was the other ground,
f left the Government, as I have stated,
nd, when Parliament met, a vote of
r ant of confidence was levelled against
hem for various crimes and misdemeanors
firarged upon them. One of the offences
charged against that Government, and
Pushed home in a trenchant manner by the
bien member for St. Kilda (Mr. Michie),
lr as that the honorable member for Colling-
dood, along with Mr. Henry Miller and
ffhers, had advanced money at the rate of
! <S per cent, to the contractors engaged in
instructing the great railway works of
n iis country ; and, it was manifest that, if
Hose contractors failed to carry out the
I‘orks effectively, the members of the
Government, having advanced money to
°icm, would not be in a position to enforce
gainst them the proper penalties for the
-in-fulfilment of their work. At all
1 vents, it was held to be a strong induce-
ment to them not to do their work, and
lat no man ought to put them in that
)sition. Mr. Michie, on that occasion,
sed very strong language. He said —
“ If there is any trading politician in this com-
pnity, it is the honorable member himself,
f . . In making this statement, lam sure
at I speak the deliberate convictions of the
800 constituents who sent me here
! it not disgraceful when the honorable the
'■casurer, actuated, not by that love of appro-
,tion which has been attributed to him, but by
less of the high duties he owes to the country
and the respect due to his colleagues.”
Mr. Michie added that whenever it became
necessary to put the stringent law in force
against the contractors, Ministers in those
relations could not enforce them. Finally,
the honorable and learned member for St.
Kilda stated that during his occupation of
office he had made certain Members of
Parliament magistrates—l happened to be
one, and the honorable member for Col-
lingwood another—and he proceeded to
declare that, had he been acquainted with
the transactions already referred to, he
would have hesitated before conferring
upon the honorable member for Colling-
wood the not very exalted dignity of a
magistrate.
“On going over the list,” said Mr. Michie, “I
found among others the name of the honorable
and learned member for Yilliers and Heytesbury
(Mr. Duffy), and although he had been opposed
to me, and from time to time we had passages of
arms, I remarked that I could not say he was
not fit to be a magistrate, and I passed his name
together with that of the Treasurer,” that is the
honorable member for Collingwood, “although
had I known then as much as I do now of that
honorable gentleman I might have acted dif-
ferently.”
After this attack, the Government were
beaten by the largest majority that ever
defeated a Government in this House—by
a majority of more than three to one. I
have now narrated what were my relations
with the honorable member at that period;
and I ask young members of this House,
who saw him rise like the ghost of Ham-
let’s father in all his solemnity, the other
night, whether, with these recollections in
his mind, he was not glad of the oppor-
tunity to assail me in a reckless and
unjustifiable manner ? lam told that I
have committed another sin, and a more
recent one, against the honorable member.
The honorable member lately resigned the
office of Commissioner of Education.
When his resignation came to me, I knew
no more why he had resigned than I knew
of what was going on at the antipodes.
Mr. BARKER,—I never said you did.
Mr. DUFFY.—No human soul had had
any communication with me on the subject.
The honorable member did not state any
reason for his resignation, and, when I
brought the matter before my colleagues,
they were unanimously of opinion that he
left us no option but simply to accept the
resignation, and we accepted it.
Mr, BARKER.—I did not intend to
leave you any other option.


Mr. DUFFY.—And I must confess that by the honorable member who last ad
I had no compunction at all in taking that
course.
“ Who rules o’er free men should himself
be free.”
And it seems to me not at all an unreason-
able expectation that a gentleman who
presides over the education of a community
should have some tincture of education him-
self. If before I thought the honorable
gentleman unfit for such a position, I have
become aware of circumstances which
drive home that conviction in the most
conclusive manner to my mind. No doubt
honorable members have read the pro-
ceedings at the meetings of the committee
of the Blind Asylum. The honorable
member for Collingwood is the chairman
of that institution, and, in that capacity,
he has delivered himself of sentiments
which, if they had been put by Swift, in
his cynical humour, into the mouth of
some politician in Gulliver's Travels ,
would have been thought too extravagant.
It was charged upon the honorable mem-
ber, by some newspapers, that it was very
improper to exclude from the management
of that institution a Catholic lady and a
Jewish lady who were on the committee;
and the honorable member proceeded to
justify the proceeding. There are some
dozen Catholics among the pupils, he
said ; the books prepared for their in-
struction are religious books that is,
Protestant religious books and if there
are Catholics on the committee they will,
no doubt, interpose objections to teaching
the pupils out of those books. Now I
put it to the House to take the reverse
case. Suppose we were to read of this
being done in Spain or Italy, would we
not consider it an instance of the most
shameless bigotry, to insist upon thrusting
on the children of a particular religious
denomination books prepared for another
denomination, and to shut their friends off
the committee, in order that this might be
done successfully? Well, sir, in my con-
nexion with the honorable member, when I
was younger and perhaps less considerate
than I am now indeed it is more than
twelve years since I was connected with
him —I may then have felt too impatient
of pretentious dulness when, as a man of
the world, I ought to have known that
an angry woman is not half so easily
outraged or so unforgiving as conceited
imbecility. And now I come to deal
with another of the many charges which
have been made against me, re-echoed
dressed the House, suggested by varioui
members before, and put in the most often
sive way in the newspapers. I think tin
honorable member for East Melbourne
(Mr. Cohen) was the first to say in thi
debate —“ What would the late Willian
Nicholson say to see the leader of th
free-trade party associated with the pro
tectiouists” ? I believe there have bee
free-trade organizations in this country-
no doubt there was a free-trade party i
this House to fight the question of th
Tariff—but I never had the slightest cor
nexion with any free-trade organization i
this country. I was not here when th
question of the Tariff was fought ; I wa
in Europe. After I returned, the questio
did not present itself in a manner callin
for debate and deliberation until the recer
Tariff proposals of Mr. Francis were sul
mitted. No doubt I have always been h
conviction a free-trader, but —and this is
fact to which I desire the attention ot tli
House —I was the first public man in th
country to call attention to the exceptic
which Stuart Mill suggests as to the fo
tering of the industries of a new county
I was the first to suggest a method (
nurturing the new industries of a counti
without violating the fundamental princ
pies of free-trade. I suggested a syste
of bonuses, and illustrated it by this imat
—that when you employ protection, yc
employ a system which is like the ra
which falls over all the parish, on plan
that want it and plants that do no
whereas a system of bounties would be lil
carrying the Yan Yean in a hose to tl
identical plant requiring moisture. Win
I took offise in 1861,1 stated these opinioi
in my address to my constituents. Iho
in my hand an extract from that addres
which speaks conclusively upon the poir
I said—
“Prior to the late election I explained to y
my conviction that what protectionists aim
accomplish by protective duties might beaccor
plisbed more effectually without violating ai
of the principles of free-trade; that it is t
duty of the State to aid in planting new indi
tries for which unusual facilities exist (in tl
abundance of the raw material for example
by subsidising manufacturing enterprises with
certain limits for a few years till they ha
reached a point at which they may maintain
competition on more equal terms with long-esta
lished rivals. I read you the dicta of politic
economists, from Adam Smith to John Stuc
Mill, sanctioning this doctrine. My colleagr
(who do not all concur with me) have authoriz
the appointment of a commission of practic
men to report upon the probable effect of such


experiment in this country. For myself, I feel Stuart Mill. This country took a different
confident that it furnishes the only safe, fair, and
unobjectionable method of stimulating local en-
terprise.”
That was the opinion which I expressed
eleven years ago, before the contest in re-
ference to protection came to a head in this
House. That opinion I over and over
again urged in this House, and, when the
honorable member for Richmond got his
original vote to encourage special indus-
tries, the honorable gentleman asked me to
frame or to suggest rules for the application
of the money. How does that correspond
with, how does it justify, the declaration
that I was the leader of the free-trade
party ? I was a free-trader who felt that
the exceptional condition of a new country
I required exceptional treatment; and I pro-
posed the treatment which the extract I
ihave read discloses. Some honorable
i member—l think the honorable and learned
member for the Ovens—suggested that I
endeavoured at first to make a free-trade
: Government, and then to make a protec-
tionist Government. That statement is
jwithout any foundation in fact. When the
tGovernor thought proper to send for me
to undertake the formation of a Govern-
ment, I set about forming a Government
that would fairly represent the majority
(that had turned out the previous Govern-
:ment. Without any personal predilection,
.but acting in the performance of a public
[duty and on public grounds, I applied to
igentlemen who seemed to me to represent
with the most capacity, and most con-
spicuously, the two parties in this House,
; whom I hoped to see united in it for the
purpose of making such a compromise as
mould fairly settle the question. But, so
ifar is it from being true that I first ap-
plied to the free-traders and then to the
protectionists, the fact is that, on the
•evening I came down to the House, and
[announced that the Governor had com-
;raunicated with me, before I left the build-
dug, I sent messages to my honorable col-
league, the Minister of Lands, and to my
date honorable colleague (Mr. Berry),
asking them to meet me the next morning,
•as I considered them both indispensable to
imy Government and fairly to I’epresent the
majority thatputout Sir James McCulloch.
,On this subject I desire to say no more.
• My opinions have not altered substantially
*at all. Eleven years ago I desired to see
'local industries stimulated in a manner
(which seemed to me to be reasonable and
tcousistent with the proposal of John
course. This country, as everybody
knows, by a very large majority, deter-
mined, instead of bonuses, to have protec-
tive duties ; and the people of the country
are supreme, I pass now, to touch very
rapidly, upon another subject which I was
not allowed adequately to deal with when I
desired to do so by way of personal ex-
planation. The honorable and learned
member for Dundas charged upon me the
other night that, whereas I had declared
that I had never said anything about en-
abling the free selectors to mortgage their
property —the honorable member for Kich-
mond having charged me with being a
party to a dangerous proposal of that
nature —he found a paragraph in my
speech at Kyneton, in which I said that
Mr. Grant was going—to do what ? To
enable the free selectors to mortgage ?
No ; to take them out of the hands of
mortgagees —to take them out of the hands
of the money-lenders. I specified a project
with that view. It was a project of which
the honorable member for Dundas had
himself given an example ; that is to say,
it was a project for enabling selectors to
borrow money from the banks on getting
their licences endorsed by the President of
the Board of Land and Works. It was a
proposal to enable them to borrow money
from institutions which would have no aim
or desire, as private mortgagees might have,
to grasp the domain. A different method,
however, was suggested in some corre-
spondence between an official of the Board
of Land and Works and some local society.
That method was canvassed in nearly every
newspaper in the colony, in March and
April. The honorable member for Rich-
mond, speaking on the Ist of May, with
that project fresh in one’s ears, I naturally
thought, and I still think, he was applying
himself not to an obscure sentence in a
speech delivered nearly a year ago, but to
the project mooted in nearly all the news-
papers in the colony, which was still recent,
and which must have thrust itself over and
over again upon his attention. The honor-
able member, however, says that he was
not referring to the clamour which had
been made in the newspapers, but to the
speech I made at Kyneton. I understand
that there are in this country, and indeed
all over the world, people who, though they
cannot he induced to believe in anything
else, believe in spixrit-rapping and spiritism.
For my own part I should be almost pre-
pared to join that sect if I could swallow


the fact that it was the distant and obscure have travelled, I was clearing the pat
circumstance, and not the recent an del amor-
ous one, which attracted the attention of the
honorable member for Richmond. One
other point, and I w ill come more specifically
to the amendment before the chair. It has
been alleged over and over again in this
debate, and still more emphatically alleged
in the newspapers, of which the debate in
this respect is but a faint echo, that I
violated the duty of a constitutional Min-
ister in going to the people and talking of
our policy. We are told what a Minister
of the Crown ought to do, and what he
ought not to do. It seems to me that
those who attack me in this matter are
thinking of Ministers in the reign of
George III.; they certainly are not think-
ing of Ministers in the reign of Queen
Victoria. Where did Mr. Gladstone, the
present Prime Minister of England, state
the policy of his Government before the
commencement of the present session of
Parliament, and to whom did he state it?
To an open-air meeting at Greenwich.
An Honorable Member. —They are
his constituents.
Mr. DUFFY. —An honorable member
suggests that the assembly whom Mr.
Gladstone addressed were his constituents;
but the honorable member will have to
answer this fact, that every year it is the
practice of Ministers of the Crown in
England to attend a dinner given by the
Lord Mayor of London, at which they are
expected, and at wnich it is their habit,
to foreshadow their policy. As I see the
honorable member for Sandhurst (Mr.
Mackay) troubling himself about the Lord
Mayor’s dinner, let me call his attention
to another fact conclusive of my argu-
ment. What did the last mail bring us ?
Intelligence that the leader of the conser-
vative party in England, desirous of see-
ing in the manufacturing districts what
he calls the reaction of conservatism, was
invited to attend three meetings in the
manufacturing districts. He answered
that three meetings were too many for him,
but he would be happy to go to Manchester
and hold a central meeting there. Is
Manchester the constituency of the right
honorable member for Buckinghamshire ?
I am extremely sorry that the preliminary
matter has occupied so long, because I am
only now coming to deal with what the
amendment directs itself to—the appoint-
ments made by the Government. I trust
the House will feel that, in leading them
through the rather discursive ways we
from impediments, in order that I might
effectually approach what is, after all, the
question. I will ask honorable members
and others, to whom what I am now saying
will be conveyed, to remember that, al-
though charges are multiplied and re-
iterated in the newspapers, unless they
are stated in this House, we have no right
to notice and no means of noticing them.
I ask the country to mark that, if any
charge is made outside which does nol
find an echo here, it is probably utterly
unfounded and untrue ; because, if it were
worth making, it would be made here
And I will say that, beyond and below the
newspapers, there is another method o
misleading the public mind which hai
latterly been in very active operation
Somewhere in the city there is a bank o
lies of daily issue, from which anybod;
who mixes with this community find
stories propagated that are too bad eve;
for newspapers. I will state two or thre
of them as illustrations, that the Hous
and the country may know what mean
are employed to damage the Governmen
—what shameful means are employed t
deceive the country. Within one wee
since the opening of Parliament three cii
cumstances happened to me. One of m
colleagues came in and said to me—“
have been stopped in Collins-street by
person (whom he named), who told me th
cause of the appointment of Mr. Denni
late of the Rangitira, to the pier-mastershi
at Williamstown was that, being a Sydne
man, he brought you an introduction froi
the Catholic Archbishop of Sydney.”
find that story was sedulously circulate
in this country. My honorable colleagu
the Minister of Railways, had it repeate
to him on several occasions. Now I nevi
heard Mr. Dennis’name except when it w
submitted for appointment by myhonorab
colleague. I never got a recommendatu
from the Archbishop of Sydney for ai
person whatever. The next case is th
Another of my colleagues came to me, ai
sa id—“ It is greatly complained, but I su
pose it is not true, that Mr. John Holme
because he is a rabid Irish Catholic, h
been put into the position of a poli
magistrate.” I am sorry that when tl
vacancy occured —the gentleman who di
being the only Catholic magistrate in t
co l on y—I did not insist upon a Catho
being put in his place. There are abo
30 police magistrates, and not one of the
is a Catholic; and I think a Catholic oug


to have been appointed to supply this him, I would have removed him imme-
vacancy.
Mr. GILLIES.—Why ?
Mr. DUFFY.—Because Catholics were
unjustly set aside by Government after
Government. But, so far from the story
told to ray honorable colleague being true,
my personal impression, till I heard of his
letter to-night, was that Mr, John Holmes
was an Orangeman. I gathered that from
his personal conversations with me. I
believe he says in his letter that he does
not belong to any secret society. I have
known Mr. Holmes for the last three
years. I think he was introduced to me
by the honorable and learned member for
Mandurang. I found him the chum and
associate of the honorable member. My
personal impressions of Mr. Holmes were
very favorable ; but I positively assert
that when 1 consented, on the repre-
sentation of one or two of my hon-
orable colleagues, that he should be
made a police magistrate, I thought that
—however personally estimable he might
be—he was a fierce partisan against
Catholics. The third story brought under
my notice is one which I trace to a
former member of this House, whom I
don’t choose to name, but who certainly
ought not to have been a person to malign
me behind my back, if he had considered
past relations and obligations. This former
member of the House stated that I dis-
placed from the public service a man
named McCall, because his brother, in
Ireland, had been a political antagonist of
mine. I may say that, while I was in Ire-
land, I never heard of a person of the name
of McCall in any public position, and, if
there has been any such person in a public
position in Ireland since I left that country,
his name, to this hour, has not reached me.
Now, what are the circumstances under
which McCall was removed ? The Audit
Commissioners wrote me a letter to state
'that Sir James McCulloch had put Mr.
McCall into a position, temporarily,
during the absence of a classified officer,
which, so far was legitimate, but the
officer having died he had since been
maintained in that position, and paid
a salary intended for a classified officer,
and that they had come to the conclusion
that such payment was illegal. I want to
Lnow if it was my duty to maintain a man
in an office which the Audit Commis-
sioners had declared he was illegally occu-
pying ? If I had appointed him myself,
;or, if one of my colleagues had appointed
diately. I gave him a reasonable notice,
and asked the Registrar-General to let
him have such employment in his office
as he could give him. I will state how
the vacancy created by the removal of Mr.
McCall was filled up, and I desire the
House and the country to note it, because I
have invariably desired and endeavoured to
apply the same principle to public appoint-
ments. I got out of another department—the
Sheriffs office I think —a superfluous clerk,
who could be dispensed with. I put him in
Mr. McCall’s place, his office was not filled
up, and wo saved the salary. Before pass-
ing to the appointment specially referred
to in the amendment, I desire to say that,
while we were subjected to these assaults
outside the House, the honorable member
for Ballarat West (Mr. Smith), addressing
himself to a different audience, declared
that “No Irish need apply” ought to be
written upon our door-posts. Which of
these charges is true ? They cannot both
be true. Are we unduly preferring
Irishmen, or acting on the principle
that “No Irish need apply? Sir, neither
is true; that is the answer. I have now
to crave the indulgence of the House,
because I have reached the appointment
which is mainly aimed at by the resolution
proposed by the honorable member for
East Bourke (Mr. Ramsay) —the appoint-
ment of Mr. Cashel Hoey. I wish circum-
stances had permitted me to commence
with this subject when I was fresher, but
I have taken the course which seemed to
be necessary, and at last I have reached
this topic. If the House will favour me
with its attention I will demonstrate
that the resolution levied at the Govern-
ment is an unfair and an unfounded one.
How did the appointment of Mr. Cashel
Hoey originate ? Of course the theory
of the Opposition upon the subject is quite
complete. “ Mr. Duffy made the appoint-
ment in order to give it to Mr. Cashel
Hoey.” That I think is the theory. Just
let us see how this theory corresponds
with the facts. I will prove this, that the
determination to appoint a secretary to
the Agent-General, and the conclusion
that Mr. Hoey, one of the members of the
board of advice in London, was a suitable
person for that appointment, existed in
London before I knew that a vacancy in the
Agent-Generalship had occurred. Mark
that. I am prepared tp show that the
necessity for appointing a secretary to Mr.
Childers, and the intention of appointing


the particular gentleman who has been (Cries of “ Question.”) I had no pre-
selected for it, existed in London before I
could have communicated with London,
or known anything of the circumstances.
Now honorable members who have been
in office know very well that, just as it has
been the habit of the Governor of the
colony, along with his public despatches,
to write a confidential despatch, or a
private letter to the Secretary of State,
and just as it is the habit of an ambas-
sador of a country to write, in addition to
his public despatches, a private letter to
the Minister, so it has always been the
habit of the Agent-General of this colony
to communicate to the Chief Secretary,
in addition to his public despatches, a
letter upon the current political affairs in
England, so far as they are of interest
to the colony. As respects any com-
munications from Mr. Childers, that gen-
tleman is 16,000 miles away, and they are
to me absolutely sealed books. Ido not
wish it to be supposed that, if they were
available, I could find in them any pro-
posal to justify what I am now stating. As
I cannot use them, I desire to put them,
like evidence withdrawn from a jury,
absolutely out of court as it were. But
Sir George Yerdon is on this continent—
he is in Sydney—and as he is a man of
honour and integrity, and knows the poli-
tical exigencies of a contest like this, I
take the liberty so far to trench upon one
of his confidential despatches as to read a
single sentence from it, being perfectly
convinced that, if he were in Melbourne,
he would put me at liberty to do so. The
resignation of the Agent-General was
known here, I think, on the 27th of
November, or about the close of that
month. On the 29th of December the
mail went out, and in that mail I sent
the letter which appointed Mr. Childers
Agent-General, and suggested that he
might have a secretary. I am going to
read an extract from a letter from Sir
George Yerdon, written in London in
January. Without the electric telegraph,
no communication could have taken place
between Melbourne and London in the
meantime.
Mr. G. Y. SMITH. —Was there no pre-
vious letter ?
Mr. DUFFY. —The honorable member
suggests a previous letter. I had no more
notion that Mr. Yerdon was going to
resign the Agent-Generalship than I have
that the skies will fall to-morrow. The
news took me absolutely by surprise.
vious communication suggesting that this
arrangement which has taken place should
be made, and I could not by any possi-
bility have. This is what Sir George
Yerdon says in his letter of January
1872
Mr. BAYLES.—What is the date ?
Mr. DUFFY. —It was written towards
the end of January. I have not noted
the day. My letter was written at the
and of December, so that it is wholly
immaterial what date in January Sir
George Yerdon’s was written. After ex-
pressing his conviction that Mr. Childers
would be an extremely effective agent, and
stating the time that he thought he would
continue in the public service, Sir George
Yerdon says—
“ But he must have a secretary, and has said
so to you. I have told him how well-fitted Mr.
Hoey is for such a post, and, if he is authorized
to appoint any one, he will appoint him.”
Sir George Yerdon knew quite well, of
course, that I had recommended Mr. Hoey
to the office of one of the board of advice,
and he knew that I had the highest opinion
of his character and capacity, as well as
the greatest respect and affection for him.
No doubt Sir George Yerdon also knew
perfectly well that it would be highly
gratifying to me if Mr. Hoey obtained
promotion ; but J no more knew that there
was any change by which Mr. Childers
could come in, and a secretary be appointed
without expense to the colony, than I know
what will happen this time twelve months.
The letter which I wrote in December
authorizing Mr. Childers to appoint a secre-
tary, arose from an impression created in
my mind by'letters I had received specify-
ing duties which Sir George Yerdon had
undertaken, which it was clear to me that
Mr. Childers could not undertake. Now
I will just ask the House to consider
fairly whether the appointment of a
secretary was necessary under the cir-
cumstances. That is the question.
Mr. FRANCIS.—They had one in the
office.
Mr. DUFFY.—No, they had not one in
the office. The honorable member has
said that Mr. Yardley, the chief clerk,
ought to have been promoted to the secre-
taryship. I submit that the functions
which it is proposed that the secretary
will undertake are functions which a clerk
could not undertake, and could not fulfil.
I am about to specify some of the things
which Sir George Yerdon did, several of


which it would not be reasonable to expect man whose status enables him to communi-
Mr. Childers, with his political employ-
ments, and with the very small salary we
are giving him, to undertake. The number
of letters sent from the Agent-General’s
office in 1871 reached over 11,000; the
number in 1870 was much larger. Is it to
be expected that Mr. Childers, for the
paltry sum which remains after his pension
is merged, will sign 11,000 letters per an-
num ? In the next place, there is a large
portion of the business of the agency which,
if not conducted by the Agent-General
personally, must be intrusted to a gentle-
man holding a recognised status, which a
commercial clerk could not successfully
undertake. He has to conduct correspon-
dence with Governments and with other
public institutions ; he has to communicate
with contractors who send supplies to this
country; he has to attend to the bank
business and see payments properly made ;
he has to hold interviews on behalf of the
'Agent-General; he has to institute in-
quiries on questions referred from this
'colony to the Agent-General, which are
Iso numerous that I intended to set down
on paper a few which I myself have
sent home. Is it reasonable to expect
that a commercial clerk could under-
bake to ascertain for us what is done
about prison labour in other European
countries ?
Mr. FRANCIS.—Do you say that Mr.
Yardley is only a commercial clerk ?
Mr. DUFFY.—That is just what I say.
Could a respectable and intelligent clerk
!in the Agent-General’s office ascertain
'from engineers the information asked for
labout the broad and narrow gauge ?
'Could he ascertain information as to the
practice with respect to drawbacks in
[England, which the Minister of Customs
idesired to have transmitted to him ?
Could he obtain information from the
as to the working of
i the postal card ; or could he send us
information about the operation of the
Education Act in England ? Besides
information having to be obtained on such
subjects as these, the Agent-General has
to superintend the transmission to this
country of military stores and arms, of
pictures and works of art, of instruments,
books and other publications, and to
attend to various other matters of interest
bo the colony. In short, to be in the
slightest degree useful, the office wants
flie vigilant superintendence of a man of
active intellect—a man of the world—a
cate with persons in a high official or pro-
fessional position. It would be utterly
hopeless to expect this from a clerk pro-
moted from the desk. I do not say this
disparagingly of Mr. Yardley, who, for
anything I know, is an eminently worthy
person ; but I say it requires what is
technically known as a gentleman—that
is to say, a man who can mix on equal
terms with men of the highest class. I
have shown, I think, that some such
appointment was necessary. I reiterate
now what I said when the question was
originally mooted, namely, that the ap-
pointment will not cost this country one
penny. And why ? Because we are
going to pay for the Agent-General and
the secretary of the Agent-General, less
than we paid for the Agent-General alone
last year. If that be so, does this appoint
men! of secretary cost us one penny ?
We are going to pay, I repeat, to Mr.
Childers and Mr. Cashel Hoey less than
we paid to Sir George Yerdon, because
Mr. Childers receives a political pen-
sion, which will merge in his salary
and be saved to the country. Sup-
pose that such an appointment as Mr.
Cashel Hoey’s was necessary, what was
the method of making it ? Did I take an
improper step in the matter ? The only
method of making it is that prescribed by
the law, which says that the Agent-General
and his board of advice shall appoint all
officers required to conduct the business
of the agency. An alteration effected in
the Immigration Act by the Upper House
against the Government of the day, of
which I was a member, gives the patron-
age to the Agent-General and his board of
advice, subject to the approval of the Go-
vernor in Council. If this appointment
was to be made, it had to be made by Mr.
Childers and his board of advice; and so
it was made. By no other method could it
possibly be made. It has been suggested—
Why did not Mr. Duffy boldly appoint
Mr. Cashel Hoey himself?” Sir, Mr.
Duffy had not the power. The honorable
member for East Bourke says that, instead
of increasing the immigration staff, we
ought to have considerably reduced it
under the circumstances. We did some-
thing quite different from considerably re-
ducing the immigration staff—we abolished
it. We took the vote last year for only
six months, and it will not appear at all
on the Estimates for the ensuing year.
The highest officer on the staff was a


person employed to see emigrants off, at a gentleman only while he (Mr. Childers)
salary of, I think, £3OO a year.
An Honorable Member. —£500.
Mr. DUFFY. —Whatever the salary
was, that was the kind of work he was fit
for. Probably he was a person accustomed
to a seafaring life ; but, at all events, that
was not the sort of man we wanted for the
purpose of communicating with the Min-
isters of public departments in England,
and with public institutions. Again, it
has been said why did we not appoint
some colonist ? that many colonists would
have been glad to have had the office.
Sir, it seems to have escaped the recollec-
tion of the House under what circumstances
the appointment was made, and what terms
and conditions it was made upon. It was
conferred upon the gentleman who was ap-
pointed as long as a saving could be effected
by Mr. Childers’ pension merging in the
publicrevenue. If Mr. Childers ceases to be
Agent-General, the office of secretary will
cease, because there will be no method of
paying it. If there were no other objec-
tion to appointing a colonist, could we offer
such an appointment to any man in this
country without providing against the
possibility of a change—without giving
him compensation when he lost his office ?
Could we ask him to go home, and take an
office of this sort, which might terminate
before he arrived there ? Who can tell
that Mr. Childers will not be called upon
again to join the Government at home, as
he was before ? If he does, the office of
secretary is at an end. It was suggested
that we ought to have offered it to a mem-
ber of this House. Thanks to the honor-
able and learned member for St. Kilda
(Mr. Fellows) a clause was put into the
Officials in Parliament Act, providing that
no member shall be capable of being
appointed to any office, except that of a
Judge of the Supreme Court, for six
months after he has left Parliament. 1 his
appointment could not wait for six months,
in addition to the three months it would
take to get home ; indeed, the office could
not wait for six weeks.
Mr. MACPHERSON. —If the appoint-
ment of a secretary is necessary, why
should it not continue if Mr. Childers
resigned his office ?
Mr. DUFFY. —If the honorable mem-
ber for Dundas had read the correspondence,
he would have seen that Mr. Childers, in
communicating with Mr. Hoey, says that
the appointment is conferred upon that
holds the office of Agent-General.
Mr. MACPHERSON.—But, if asecre
tary is necessary, why should there not b
one after Mr. Childers ceases to hold th
office of Agent-General ?
Mr. DUFFY. —For the very obvious
reason that, I suppose, our next Agent-
General will, like Sir George Verdon, be
a gentleman who can devote his whole
time to the office. If we paid him £1,500
a year, we would be fairly entitled to ex-
pect that he should devote his whole
time to it. We pay Mr. Childers only
£6OO. I now come to another statement
in connexion with this case, which I am
glad at last to have reached. The honor-
able member for Williarastown very frankly
and boldly states what was only whispered
and hinted at elsewhere, namely that Mr.
Hoey is an Irish rebel and ought not to
have been appointed. I say these charges
against Mr. Hoey originated in gross and
shameful disingenuousness on the part of
the newspaper which made them. I mean
the Argus newspaper. What did it do ?
It quoted a sentence from a copy of the
Nation, and said—“ This is the way Mr.
Hoey wrote about the Queen when he was
editor of that paper.” The sentence was
quoted from a Natioti published several
years before Mr. Hoey was the editor.
Mr. Hoey became editor of the Nation in
the autumn of 1855—he never was editor
before that period and the extract, I
think, was from a paper of 1852 or 1853.
It is said by the honorable member for
Williamstown —“ Was he not engaged in
stimulating rebellion in Ireland ?” Sir, for
the Nation newspaper which existed be-
fore the attempted insurrection in 1848,
and for that insurrection Mr. Hoey is no
more responsible than the honorable mem-
ber for Williamstown, because he was then
a boy at school or a lad at college. For
these things I may be held responsible,
and I never did shrink from the respon-
sibility. But, as respects Mr. Hoey, I
never set eyes upon him till 1850, after all
these transactions had passed, and when
the Nation, under altered circumstances,
had to apply itself to what it was possible
to hope to accomplish then the dis-
establishment of the Irish Church and
security of tenant-right for Irish tenants.
One day in that year I had the good for-
tune to secure the co-operation of three
young men—none of them much over 20
years of age, Mr. Hoey being the youngest
—as writers for the Nation, Mr. Cashel


oey was one ; another was Mr. Edward notion of what in point of fact the Nation
lutler, who was last week sworn as Her
Majesty’s Attorney-General in the colony
f New South Wales; and the third was
Mr. James Doyle, who died in the employ-
ment of the identical journal which is
now assailing Mr. Cashel Hoey. The only
thing which has been used fairly against
Mr. Hoey is a sentence he employed in a
speech at a dinner, given to me at the
historic town of New Ross. It is known that
Derry is famous for one siege ; and New
Ross is famous for two sieges—one in the
dme of Cromwell, and the other in’9B. Mr.
Hoey, who is now not more than 40 years
)f age, said, in a speech which he made
ibout 20 years ago, as I dare say he would
low, in addressing himself to an historic
■ecollection in an historic town This
“amous town has its chronicles which it can
>e proud of; and I may say for myself
hat I had two ancestors who distinguished
hem selves in the time of the sieges with
rhich the town is connected—one fought
nth Cromwell, and the other was hanged
a ’9B. I can tell honorable members there
re few families of distinction in Ireland
fho have not had members sacrificed in
ome of the contests for maintaining the
idependence of Ireland. And we Irish-
len are not ashamed of that—not a bit
lore ashamed of it than Lord John Russell
> that his ancestor was executed on the
lock for rebellion under one of the Stuarts.
Ir. Hoey said, as any gentleman might
iy under the circumstances “In this
istoric town, let me remind you that I,
io, have historic associations.*’ After
eing a year or two the editor of the
Nation, Mr. Hoey became a member of
le English bar. He has lived in London
nee, and has had no connexion with Irish
ilitics. Let me say I am not offering this
i an apology ; for if he lived in Ireland
is sympathy would naturally be with his
vn people. I should be ashamed of him
it were not. I will ask the honorable
id learned member for Mandurang, who
ill probably address the House by-and-
y, whether he is outraged and shocked at
young man sympathizing with the po-
tical struggles ol his race ? If he is, I
ope that he will separate himself from
lera, and keep himself quite clear from
isociations of that nature. But it appears
at Mr. Hoey, though he may have been
istakingly called an Irish rebel, is at all
ents liable to this charge—that he was
liter of the Nation. I really wonder
lw many members of this House have a
was—what its position was. If I thought
proper to put my hands upon books in
the Library, I could find many, and I may
note in particular one that came by the
last mail, a book by Mr. Lecky, now one of
the most distinguished writers in England,
who has succeeded Buckle as the historian
of rationalism —as one of the modern
philosophers—which speaks of the Nation
in a way that I do not hesitate to say gave
me a thrill of satisfaction. The Nation
was a journal that existed for upwards of
a quarter of a century, and has never but
once been prosecuted for a private libel.
That libel was one written by my fingers
denouncing a quack advertisement. The
Nation, as a journal, did insist—fiercely,
determinedly—upon the national rights of
Ireland. That was its mission. It
kindled in the young men of Ireland
literary aspirations which have graced
libraries, not merely in Ireland, but in
England, with books, which some of the
best men in England refer to with pleasure
and satisfaction. There is scarcely a
country in Europe that has not estab-
lished, since the Nation, a newspaper
called the Nation in imitation of it.
There have been two newspapers called
the Nation in France, two in Italy, one
in Belgium, one in Germany, and one in
the United States. And though I have
lived fifty years and upwards in the world,
there are hanging up over my chimney-
piece in Hawthorn the portraits of two
men —once young men—who were asso-
ciated with me in the founding of the
Nation, because, long as I have lived, I
have never met on the face of the earth
more gifted, upright, or honorable men
than Thomas Davies and John Dillon.
One of them was the son of a Welsh
military officer and an Irish mother ; the
other is descended from the old Celtic
race. These two men, whom I knew and
loved, were patriots if ever there were
patriots on the face of the earth ; they
stamped their character and impress on
the Nation, and for many a long day,
whoever had a finger in that paper felt
it as a sacred duty not to disgrace
the career and character of those brave
and good men. '1 hough I have shown
that the determination to appoint a secre-
tary to the Agent-General, and even to
appoint Mr. Hoey, existed in London, I, not
knowing that fact, wrote a private letter
to Mr. Childers, recommending Mr. Hoey
as eminently suited for the post. May 1


ask, what is the objection to that ? Ire- Brown to a certain office, does he say
commended him to Sir James McCulloch,
to be a member of the board of ad-
vice. Why should I not recommend
him to Mr. Childers as well as to Sir
James McCulloch? I could not ap-
point him in either case. In each case
I asked the interposition of another person
—in the one case I asked Mr. Childers,
and in the other I asked Sir James McCul-
loch. What is there wrong in one that
was not wrong in the other? If one was
right, were not both right ? If I wanted
any other reason for making the recom-
mendation in addition to my conviction of
the character, capacity, and fitness of this
gentleman, I would have it in this, that
for the last two or three years, at my re-
quest, at my instance—instigated by me—
Mr. Hoey has made himself eminently
useful to this colony. It was he who in-
duced the distinguished artist, Mr. Herbert,
and the distinguished art critic, Mr. Bus-
kin, to give us their assistance in selecting
pictures for our National Gallery ; and
over and over again may be found in Sir
George Yerdon’s correspondence state-
ments that when he had got some particu-
lar information, he had obtained it through
the intervention of Mr. Cashel Hoey, even
before he became a member of the board
of advice. It seems to me wise policy, in a
country which gets services of this nature,
to take the earliest opportunity of recog-
nising them. But then I am asked, why
I did not state to the House that I had
recommended Mr. Hoey, and the honorable
member for Williamstown ventured to say
that I equivocated when I was asked the
question. That statement, at all events,
is absolutely without foundation. When
the honorable member for West Melbourne
asked me, I answered him as directly as a
musket shot. The honorable member for
Collingwood (Mr. Harker) said he believed
that, after two questions, it was drawn out
of me. That was a misstatement —it had
not the slightest foundation. The moment
the honorable member for West Melbourne
asked me I told him. It has been asked,
wdiy did I not volunteer the information.
Is it the practice when an appointment is
made by the person upon whom the law
confers the power to make it, to specify
who recommended the person appointed ?
Why the majority of the members I am
looking at, on both sides of the House,
have recommended persons to the Go-
vernment for employment ; but when
the Governor in Council appoints John
that Mr. John Smith recommended the
appointment ? It was quite time enough
to say anything on that point when
I was asked ; and the moment I was
asked I answered the question. It was
no part of the res gestce. I might have
declined to answer the question on the
ground that Mr. Childers and the board
of advice had, by law, the right to make
the appointment, and whether I had
recommended Mr. Hoey or not was no
portion of the process. But, instead of
doing that, I answered promptly and
frankly that I had recommended him. If
I wanted an additional reason why I did
not state to the House, before I was asked
the question, that I had recommended Mr.
Hoey, there is a reason. I knew perfectly
well that the intention had existed on the
part of the Agent-General with the board[
of advice to appoint Mr. Hoey, and there-;
fore I would have been taking more!
responsibility than actually lay upon me
if I had said the appointment was made
at my recommendation. It is clear front
the extract I have read from Sir Georgef
Yerdon’s letter that, if I had not recorn-L
mended him, nevertheless Mr. Hoey, being*
a member of the board of advice, and,
eminently suitable for the office of secre-
tary, would probably have been appointed.
The honorable member for Collingwood 1
(Mr. Harker) could not sufficiently ex-
press his indignation that I had not*
promptly and clearly stated that the;
appointment had been made at my in-
stance. Let us compare the doctrine of 3
the honorable member with his practiced
The other night, when the question of
appointment of Mr. Dennis was brought 1 '
under consideration, did the
member not sit as dumb as a stone ? Didf
he tell us he had recommended Mr. Dennis?
Not a syllable ; on the contrary, when his
name was mentioned he got up and made!
a statement which, to use the honorable 1
member’s own language, I will say was only;
part of the truth—a very minute part
it indeed. The honorable member said—*
“It is quite true that I did sign a general
recommendation that this gentleman should
have a Government appointment.”
This is the way the honorable member:
described it before the document was read.
How does the document which the honor-
able member signed correspond with this
statement ? It says— I
“We believe him,” Mr. Dennis, “tobeemiJ
nently qualified,” not for some Government!
employment, but “ for the appointment he novl


seks, that of pier-master to the Victorian rail-
ay pier, Williamstown.”
; really becomes honorable members, be-
»re they set themselves up to lecture their
mipeers in this House, to take care their
ractice squares with their doctrine. One
r ord more, and I have done with this part
f the case. When notice of the amend-
icnt was given, I felt it my duty to send
lis telegram to Sir George Yerdon, in
ydney—
“ Cashel Hoey’s appointment is to be resisted
the Assembly on Tuesday. Can you say any-
ing respecting it ?”
0 which Sir George Yerdon sends this
iswer—
“ Message received. Childers approved. Said
1 could not act without a secretary. Board
iproved, but thought Hoey should not continue
member. He is highly qualified for an official
isition,”
have now said all that seems to me neces-
ry to say on the appointment of Mr.
oey, and I put it to any honorable mem-
;r of the House whether he can vote for
at portion of the amendment which
larges me with acting disingenuously in
is matter, when in point of fact and
nth the appointment would have been
ade if I had been absolutely still, and
hen I, on being asked if I recommended
r. Hoey, answered the question clearly
id promptly ? I trust that I have suffi-
3ntly met this branch of the case. I
>w pass to another, which I am glad the
morable member for Williamstown
ought out in a sufficiently clear and
ifinite manner to enable me to deal with
Hitherto there have only been hints
d inuendoes about it ; but the honorable
ember for Williamstown has placed the
after before the House distinctly. I refer
the suggestion that I had offered an ap-
intment to the honorable and learned
ember for North Gippsland (Mr. F. L.
nyth), and a railway to Gippsland, in
ier to get a seat for rny son. After I
d spoken in the former debate, some-
dy asked me why I had not told the
ouse anything on this subject ? The
ason why was because the honorable
ember for Richmond did not make the
ghtest allusion to it in the speech which
answered ; but as it is now brought
rward, I shall not delay to explain the
itter. At the close of last session, the
aorable and learned member for North
ppsland communicated to me his desire
retire from Parliament, and get promo-
n in his profession instead of pursuing
tolitical career. When the honorable
and learned member made that communi-
cation to me, what answer does the House
think it was my duty to make ? Is the
honorable and learned member not fairly
entitled to promotion in his profession ?
This House had selected him as its Chair-
man of Committees, a distinction wdiich he
must hold much above that of being ap-
pointed a Crown prosecutor. He has beep
a long time in his profession ; he has been
a long time in politics ; and I don’t think
the promotion which was finally offered to
him is one that can reasonable be consi-
dered beyond his merits. It is just, how-
ever, to say that the honorable and learned
member himself suggested that there were
county court judges going home, and that
he ought to be made a county court
judge. That was his own estimate of what
was proper. If a member of the House
of Commons, who was a barrister, went
to Mr. Gladstone and said the same thing,
Mr. Gladstone could appoint him next
morning, if he thought proper, to any
office in his gift. The reason why we
cannot make an appointment here in the
same waj is that the honorable and learned
member for St. Kilda (Mr. Fellows) —who
has never failed to show contempt for this
Parliament—when he was a member of the
Upper House, moved an amendment in
the Officials in Parliament Bill, which
made it impossible—the amendment being
carried—to confer an office upon any
Member of Parliament till he has ceased to
be a member for six months, except one
office. The honorable and learned member
has pretensions to be a judge of the Su-
preme Court, and a judge of the Supreme
Court may be appointed off-hand. It
seems to me that, if any exception ought
to be made, the very office which might
reasonably be held to be unsuitable for a
man who has taken an active part in poli-
tics is a judgeship of the Supreme Court.
A political partisan could not do much
harm as a Crown prosecutor, but he might
as a judge. The answer which I gave Mr.
Smyth was this : —“ The Officials in Par-
liament Act is in operation ; however, if
you think proper to retire from Parliament,
at the end of six months —if there be any
patronage at my disposal—l will give you
promotion.” Was that an improper thing
to say ? Is Mr. Smyth not as well entitled
to promotion as any other member of his
profession ? The honorable and learned
member who framed the Officials in Par-
liament Act says this was evading the law.
Was it ? Sir, it is a penal statute, and is


to be interpreted liberally. We proposed science that the question of filling up tl
to appoint Mr. Smyth when he had ful-
filled the conditions of the law, when he
was six months out of Parliament—not a
day before. What is there to require that
he should wait longer than six months ?
What was there to prevent him, if he
thought proper, from going out of Parlia-
ment for his own hehoof and pleasure, ac-
cepting the risk—where political changes
are so frequent of finding the same
Government in office at the end of six
months ? The arrangement was absolutely
unobjectionable if he is entitled to promo-
tion, as I contend he is. There was no
office vacant at the time, and the honor-
able and learned member, having expressed
his views generally, did nothing more.
Some months afterwards Judge Macoboy
died, and, as I make a rule to keep my
promises, I sent for Mr, Smyth, and said
to him—“ Mr. Smyth, I promised you,
when an opportunity came, to promote
you in your profession—that I would re-
commend my colleagues, the law officers,
to do it ; there is a judgeship vacant which
they are going to give to a Crown prose-
cutor, and a Crown prosecutorship will
then be vacant, which you can have if you
think fit to accept it.” Mr. Smyth hesi-
tated, and finally came to the conclusion,
as I thought, not to accept the Crown
prosecutorship. Of the two I was much
better pleased that Mr. Smyth remained
in Parliament, and made an election un-
necessary, than accept the Crown prose-
cutorship. Some time after that (I don’t
know how long, but I suppose about a
month or six weeks) I was down in
that retirement which seems to be so
much envied and so much commented on
in the newspapers —I was a recluse at
Sorrento —when, to my extreme astonish-
ment, one evening Mr. Smyth arrived
there without having given me any notice,
and told me he had altered his mind,
that it was his intention to resign, and
that he was tired of Parliament, and would
take the Crown prosecutorship, which
might lead to some other promotion. I
said I would very much prefer he should
not resign, but I was bound by my word,
and would recommend the law officers to
appoint him if he continued of that opinion.
Upon the same evening that Mr. Smyth
came to Sorrento, my eldest sou, Mr. John
Duffy, arrived there. Mr. Smyth had
never seen him before ; they had travelled
together that day, and did not know each
other. I declare upon my honour and cou-
vacancy in the representation of Nort
Gippsland, if Mr. Smyth resigned, ha
never crossed his lips or name till tba
night, when Mr. Smyth, as I conceivec
definitely determined on resigning. Mi
Smyth and my son travelled together t
Sorrento, and, as they both told me, mad
acquaintance with each other on comin
over in the boat from Queenscliff. The,
took separate conveyances from Geelon
to Queenscliff, not knowing each othe}
for if they had been acquainted they woul
of course have travelled in common. Afte
Mr. Smyth determined to resign, this stat
of things occurred. It was just after th
Mornington election. My son has live
in Mornington several years, and, whq
the vacancy occurred there, he informe
me his friends in the district wished hii
to stand for Mornington, and he thougl
he would be successful. I told him th?
I had promised, as a resident of the dii
trict, to support Mr. Everard, and then
fore I could not encourage him to con
forward. When he heard of the ne
vacancy, he suggested that he ought 1
be permitted to go to Gippsland. For tl
first time I asked Mr. Smyth whether 1
thought John Duffy would be returned f(
Gippsland, and I hope the honorable men
ber will forgive me for repeating distinct!
what he said, which was—“l don’t thip
he will; there are too many Methodisi
there.”
Mr. F. L. SMYTH.—I did not use tl
word “ Methodists.” I said that Mr. Jol
Duffy was of a religion which might le<
to his being opposed by two large ai
influential bodies of a different religioi
persuasion, and those were the Wesleya
and Presbyterian bodies. I said that, hov
ever little the members of other persn
sions might be opposed to him, the men
hers of those two persuasions mig
have stronger objections to him on th
account.
Mr. DUFFY.—Perhaps I put it in tc
compressed a shape. However, my in
pression is now that my honorable an
learned friend under-estimated the libe
ality of that district. Ido not think tbs
religious feeling would have been a serioi
impediment. Be that as it may, M;
Smyth next morning returned to Me
bourne, and John Duffy, having transact
his business with me, returned with hii
The boat was too late that morning
crossing for them to catch the train, an
as they were waiting all day at Queenscli


they then and there commenced commu- months after their resignation ?If they
nication with Gippsland, to ask certain
persons by telegram if Mr. John Duffy
was likely to be successful. Turning the
matter over in my mind again, after they
were gone, I came to the conclusion that
it was undesirable, for various reasons —
none of them, as far as I remember, refer-
ring to the candidate coming into the fieldi
—that Mr. Smyth should resign, and when
he arrived in town he found a letter
Tom me —which had gone by the other
lirection through Dromana—asking him
lot to proceed with his design, but
;o keep the matter open till I came to
Vlelbourne. In point of fact, I desired
hat he would not proceed. However,
when I did come to town, I found that it
vas telegraphed from Sale that John
Duffy was going to be a candidate, and
hat there was a great desire to support
lim—stating, in fact, that he would be
videly supported, and would he returned
—and I firmly believe that he would have
>een returned had he contested the elec-
ion. Then the various newspapers com-
nented upon the matter, and put the same
nterpretation on it as the honorable mem-
ier for Williamstown —that I had made a
targain with Mr. Smyth to give him a
ituation if he resigned to my son. I was
nxious to stop the proceedings from going
,ny further, in order that I might not be
iut in a wrong position, and that my son
light not commence public life with the
mputation that he had come into it in a
srong manner. The honorable and learned
lember then brought me his resignation,
nd, as far as I know, I believe I had it a
ay or two.
Mr, F. L. SMYTH. —One day.
Mr. DUFFY. —It was stated here last
ight that I had it longer. I sent for him
) tell him that I had a great disinclina-
on to carry the matter further, as it
ould not be done without misrepresenta-
on. The honorable and learned member
lid he had come to the same conclusion
imself, and that what had been said in
tie papers made it undesirable for him to
nter upon an official position with the
nputation resting on him that he got it
y sacrificing his seat. He said he would
old his seat; and that is how the matter
irminated. In the whole of it there is
>thing, so far as I know, to be in the.
ightest ashamed of. Why should honor-
ile members of this House be for ever
:cluded from official positions ? Is it
it enough that they are excluded for six
do all that the law requires, what further
impediment should be placed in their way ?
Now a word as to the other aspect of the
case. My son desired to be a candidate
for North Gippsland ; may I ask why he
should not be a candidate ? He is 27
years of age, and of competent capacity
and education. I think his university
career proves that. Why should he not
go into public life ? Ido not know one
case of a public man in a prominent posi-
tion, in England, who has a son, who has
not brought him into Parliament. Whereas,
here, out of the 60 or 70 men who have
been Ministers, not one of them has a son
in public life. My desire is that my son
shall enter public life, and my intention is
to encourage him to contest a constituency
on an early occasion. And now I will
deal with some of the smaller questions of
appointments that have been referred to.
The honorable and learned member for St.
Kilda (Mr. Fellows) ought to be here to-
night, after having levelled such imputa-
tions at Judge Dunne. It has been said in
the newspapers that Judge Dunne was ap-
pointed because he was a political ally of
mine in Ireland. Now anybody who knows
anything of Irish affairs, knows that this
gentleman, when a young man in politics,
was a political antagonist of mine. I had
no political, and even no social, intercourse
with him, except of the slightest sort, till
quite recently, perhaps because some of
the sting of old recollections remained;
but I have no hesitation in stating that he
is as upright, honorable, and fit a man as
any on the judicial bench of this country.
The honorable and learned member for St.
Kilda ought of all men to have been slow
in making charges of this nature. He has
himself appointed nearly all the rest of the
county court bench, and in his original
appointments he swept Temple-court.
He made a county court judge of one man
who literally never held a brief, and of
another with whom it was a moot point
whether he was a lunatic. When last in
office he raised to the county court bench
a broken-down police magistrate.
Mr. LANGTON.—What is the mean-
ing of “ broken-down ”?
Mr. DUFFY. —I do not know that I am
bound to define it to the satisfaction of the
honorable member ; but my idea of it is a
man so long habituated to the practice of
the almost mechanical administration of the
law in a police court as to be unfit for its
higher functions. However, I will say,


without fear of contradiction, that Mr. about it. In that particular instance, how-
Dunne is as fit and competent for the bench
of this country as any person who has
preceded him in that office. I beg to ask
a question on a point on which I may
be under a misapprehension. I wish to
ask the honorable and learned member for
Mandurang (Mr. Casey) if the rumour
prevalent in the newspapers and in Temple-
court, when he was Minister of Justice,
that, in case of vacancies occurring, he
would promote Mr. Dunne to the county
court bench, and Mr. John Holmes—the
reputed Fenian —to his place as Crown
Prosecutor, was true ?
Mr. CASEY. —It was absolutely without
any foundation whatever. In justice to
Mr. Dunne I may say, however, that there
is no barrister in the colony whom I would
be more pleased to appoint. I merely
reply to the question put to me as to
whether there was any foundation for the
rumour.
Mr. DUFFY.—As to Mr. Holmes,
enough has been said. I believe that his
appointment, which was made at the in-
stance of some members of the Govern-
ment who have had a much longer ac-
quaintance with him than I have, is not
open to exception. And now I may leave
the case of the pier-master, and that class
of thing, to the Ministers in whose depart-
ments they occurred to deal with. But I will
say this ; this House will come to a miserable
pass if it is permitted to honorable members
to solicit and urge on the Ministry the ap-
pointment of a particular person, and that
they shall afterwards come down to the
House and make complaints, because they
have or have not been successful. In what
position do we find ourselves here? We
are assailed with a vote of want of confi-
dence for appointing, among other persons,
a pier-master who was recommended by the
mover of the amendment. That person was
recommended by six or seven other mem-
bers of the House, including the honorable
member for Collingwood (Mr. Harker),
who of course comes down to vote against
us for doing the particular thing he re-
commended. And now I have done with
the appointments. I believe, on my honour,
that no Government ever existed in this
country who, on the whole, have adminis-
tered their patronage in a more honest and
unexceptionable manner. I deliberately
believe that. As to the paltry question,
whether I took John Mooney out of one
Yarra Bend and put him into some other
Bend, it is ridiculous to ask a Minister
ever, I was rejoiced to have the oppor-
tunity of serving the son of a man who
had been so lavish in his expenditure
upon public objects in this country. I
mean the late Mr. John Mooney, the
squatter, one of the most liberal of men, till
he sank in misfortune, and it gave me
infinite satisfaction to be of service to his
son. The only point that remains is one
which—after traversing such an immense
field —I feel disposed to leave to the
Minister of Lands. I mean the California
mail contract. My honorable colleague is
perhaps acquainted with the subject as
much as any Minister. When that postal
scheme, as a whole, comes before this
House, I believe it will be found capable
of successful defence. I believe it to be
a most wise and liberal scheme, as a whole,
that has ever been presented to Parliament.
If honorable members think proper to ac-
cept one-sided statements on such a point,
without giving Ministers an opportunity
of debating it, or waiting till the sanc-
tion of Parliament is asked, why then
unfairness must be the result. At present
they have heard one side of the question
on which the case is prejudged without
explanation, but they have not heard the
other, which would explain it. And now,
sir, one word, in conclusion, upon the
position of this Government with respect
to the country. This Government came
into office by no action of their own; but
their acceptance of office has been con-
firmed by the almost universal assent of
the people of this country —over this wide
colony—down to the present time, down
to this very day, by warm, generous,
and enthusiastic meetings in their favour.
I do not know whether in any former
period of our history circumstances have
occurred to justify the conclusion that
the people accepted and confirmed the
policy of the Government more completely
than at this moment. The history of this
Administration will be found, not printed
iu volumes of factious debates in Hansard;
it will be found in the living and flourish-
ing populations settled on the land, or
engaged elsewhere in reproductive work.
I believe the people are eager to see our
policy carried out. There is opposition,
of course —in a free country there always
is ; but the number of persons who an
anxious to see the public lands shut uj
again from settlement, to see another finau
cial deficit manufactured, to see grea
public measures hung up for several years


more, is not great. The people have ac- not snatched from you, for, oh, my friends,
cepted our measures ; and in the name of
the people, and on behalf of the people, it
is our determination to urge them on, and
to maintain and defend them by all legiti-
mate means, and to all legitimate lengths.
It is recorded of Oliver Cromwell that,
when he saw, for the first time, the golden
vale of Munster, he said, to his soldiers
“ Oh, my friends, this is a country
worth fighting for.” Modifying that lan-
guage to suit our peaceful times, I say
to the people of this country —“ You
have got possession of political power,
you have got control of the country,
almost for the first time, take care it is
this is a country worth fighting for.” I
do not think—l have never thought—that
this Government undertook an easy task.
I have not read history—l have not read
human nature —to so little purpose. As
far as I know, there has been little done
in the world worth doing or worth re-
membering that did not make its way to
success through forests of impediments
and over morasses of doubt and difficulty.
But men who see the end afar off, who
press on steadily towards it, neither turn-
ing to the right nor; to the left, reach
it at last; and so by God’s help will
we.
