

DISTINGUISHED
COPYRIGHT
E. R. fIOWK OYD
PRICE FOUR SHILLINGS




Distinguished
Gasmanians
BY
E. R. HOWROYD, M.H.A.
S/ze
ezrzc/
/
Tasmania :
Wholly set up and printed in Australia byj. Walch & Sons Pty. Ltd., 130 Macquarie Street. Hobart
1940
[Registered at the General Post Office, Hobart, for transmission through the Post as a Book]




FOREWORD
By THE PREMIER
/ERYBODY knows that Mr. E. R. A. Howroyd, M.H.A., is himself the son of a distinguished Tas-
manian who was in our Parliament many years ago. He is an effective speaker in our Assembly, but
I have observed that when there is a dull debate there, on some subject of little importance, he will
get out his clever pencil and do some lampooning instead of listening. As his impromptu drawings
nearly always go the round of the House the effect is most refreshing, and a stranger might wonder
why the depressed Assembly becomes so quickly unanimously smiling and genial once more.
I have laughed at myself quite heartily once or twice, after viewing myself as Mr. Howroyd has some-
times depicted me on these occasions. It is a real triumph to make any man laugh at himself—and a real
tonic, too, We are all inclined to take ourselves too seriously—especially when panoplied in some position of
admitted importance—and to forget that, after all, even the most prominent strutters on the stage of life are
necessarily a little absurd in their pose. For, without exception, we are all contributors to the Comedy of
Errors that constitutes the strange story of mankind.
The present volume consists of caricatures of some three hundred "Distinguished Tasmanians.” Satire
and caricature, which are somewhat akin, can both be used either cruelly or kindly. It is a characteristic of
this bright Tasmanian’s work that it is always good-humoured. I never saw a caricature by him that could
hurt, and yet he can take off the peculiarities that are part of every man and woman’s personality with great
nicety, and with a humour that is truly delightful.
In my editorial career in Ireland and Tasmania, it so happens that I had opportunities of giving several
very successful caricaturists their first press publicity, and once or twice I have told Mr. Howroyd that he
could make a great name for himself with the pencil, if he chose, as well as certainly gilding his way through
life. But he seems to prefer public service in the arduous political sphere and looking upon his art as in the
nature of an amusement. And very amusing it is, too.
Without pretending to any authority on this subject, I should say that the art of caricaturing cannot be
acquired; in other words, that a man is either born with a gift for satirical portrait-drawing, or he is not.
And it is certainly a rare gift. It can be improved, no doubt, by study and practice; but there have been
millions of skilled artists and portrait-painters who could not possibly make a good caricature. It is partly a
gift of the hand, but it also means the possession of a very keen sense of humour, and especially of the incon-
gruous. Unless it is retouched, a well-taken photograph is the actual presentation of a man or woman, and yet
this may not disclose the personality of a sitter nearly as effectively as a caricature.
The caricaturist seems to me to see things which others only really see when they are shown them. He
sees the essential peculiarities which differentiate the personality he is illustrating, and, by a deliberate exagger-
ation, compels others to see them too. Hence the smiles. If he is a cynic, he will be cruel, and emphasise a
peculiarity till it hurts. If he is good-hearted, he merely delicately suggests what everybody then sees. The
caricaturist has always been the greatest illuminator of personality, though, all purists notwithstanding, illu-
minant might be a better word.
Take the 29 pages of clever and kindly caricatures now presented to you. How much more interesting
they are than photographs. These illustrations speak to you. You know more about these men and women,
after looking at these delicately satirical pictures, than you ever knew before, no matter how familiar you have
been with some of them. And they will all cause you to smile.
This little volume will not only interest Tasmanians. It will be useful to the State in many ways, and
be sought by tourists, and the mainland friends of those whom he has illustrated.
Mr. Howroyd has not made the mistake of including amongst his distinguished people only Parlia-
mentarians and the like, and has very felicitously illustrated leading personalities of the present day in many
spheres of Tasmanian life. I, as Premier of Tasmania, congratulate him on his merrymaking work, and predict
that his "Distinguished Tasmanians” will be received with popular acclaim. He will not make one foe by his
fun, and I should say that his chief trouble will be that, like Oliver Twist, the public will be sure to ask for more.
Hobart, December 15th, 1939.
E. DWYER GRAY,
Premier.


HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR OF TASMANIA
BORN at Kent, England, on April the 13th, 1864, Sir Ernest Clark is the son of the late S. H. Clark
and Ann Leaver.
Educated privately and at King’s College, London, he entered the British Civil Service in
1884, and in 1894 was called to the Bar, Middle Temple.
Married in 1899 to Mary, the daughter of the late J. T. C. Winkfield, D.L., he was lent to
the Cape Government in 1904-5. From that period his career was marked by a succession of
important appointments.
He was Assistant Secretary to the Board ol Inland Revenue in 1919, Secretary to the Royal
Commission on Income Tax in 1919-20, Assistant Under-Secretary for Ireland in 1920-21, Secretary
to the Treasury and Head of the Civil Service for Northern Ireland from 1921 to 1925.
In 1928-29 he was a member of the notable Australian Economic Mission, and at various
times was member of other Commissions and Committees, including the Joint Exchequer Board of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. He also made special reports on business in Cuba and Brazil.
Afterwards, Sir Ernest became Director of many London companies, including the Tube
Railway, the London General Omnibus Company, Martin’s Bank, the North Metropolitan Electric
Power Company, and Harland and Wolff Limited.
He was created Companion of the British Empire in 1918, Knight Bachelor in 1920, Knight
Commander of the Bath in 1924, and Knight Commander of St. Michael and St. George in 1938.
Sir Ernest has had considerable military experience. He was for many years a Territorial,
and was also a member of the Inns of Court Officers Training Corps.
In the South African War he volunteered for service but was not accepted.
During the Great War he commanded a platoon in the City of London National Guard.
Appointed as Governor of Tasmania on the 4th of August, 1933, he has endeared himself
to all sections of the community.


SIR ERNEST CLARK, K.C.8., K.C.M.G., C.B.E.


THE LADIES
NO collection of people would, be quite complete without at least some representatives of the fair
sex. Indeed, it is reasonably safe to say that the menfolk, notwithstanding any protestations to
the contrary, will be the happier for the company.
In these days, when the emancipation of femininity is so far advanced along the road of sex-
equality, it may well be that an accusing finger may be raised at the apparent disproportion in the
space allocated respectively in this instance, but, in extenuation, it must be remembered that the
caricaturist has some stalking to do before his legitimate prey is cornered, and womankind has for
so long been adept at evading the hunter.


H/IeMB. Br OFH/lmO£MB/ll I
/ L'tw. Public Hospital U|pl
ffismfa* / \ Proprietress"BftimwHotel j\ \
Committee. J I \ I /
W-Q/ft /i Jf*
*5a7£IW£.
Mbtroiv
Lro/v. Public Hospital.
S Royal Hobart Hospital .
/Wax £ Dwysr Gray r\ . ,, r n /////jllj\ \
Life Mem JmMP////
In trip LX/on / ifi/r%0 rtj. r j j j j j j I1 f ' I f
TrcPPbMjPL?- j


CHURCH DIGNITARIES
NO single factor has had a more profound influence on world history than the impact of the Christian
Church, and who can assess the sum total of human misery and suffering averted in its age-long
crusade against evil thought and action?
Progress is the natural outcome of normal growth, and past error, consistent with all human
endeavour, has the advantage, where intelligently viewed, of promoting greater tolerance for the
other fellow.
Grouped on this page are men of various creeds, but as one in their unrelenting fight for
moral rectitude in public and private life.
Dr. Justin Simonds, Archbishop of Hobart, is a man of outstanding scholastic attainments,
and possesses the splendid gift of a fine speaking voice guided by a clear mind and a mastery of the
King’s English.
Dr. R. S. Hay, Bishop of Tasmania, well loved mentor of the Church of England, has been
much in the public eye, his features and clerical garb readily recognizable wherever he goes.
Rev. A. R. Gardner, a young man —and popular, too —is President of the Methodist Ladies’
College, served with the A.I.F. in Egypt, and holds a commission as Chaplain to the militia forces.
He is a keen Freemason, and holds the rank of Grand Chaplain in the Grand Lodge of Tasmania.
Rev. R. W. Dobbinson served in the Great War as a private, and helped in the formation of
the R.5.5.1.L.A., was elected Padre to the Tasmanian Old Originals in 1933, and is President of the
City Mission. In 1939 he became President of the Baptist Union of Tasmania. His well-deserved
0.8. E. was the result of his brave and unselfish efforts during the scourge of the Infantile Paralysis
Epidemic.


Rev.A.RCardner, BA.
n crn Chairman Meth. Assembly
Col. ns Rev. EC. Bremer.
Sens Chaplain §> Connexional Secy-
WSi Jmm
AH Rev J.A. Clou dsdale. nn
Diocesrn Home Missioner.
mf Rev. R.W. Dobb/nson, 0. B. E.
Ckss. Ministers Frrternhl Assn.
Rev. A. [.Chancellor.
Sect Meth. Overseas Missions.


THE JUDICIARY
FROM ancient times the British race has prided itself upon its conception of the principles of justice
and equity, and has struggled through trial and error to the high standard which now sets an example
to others less civilised.
The sculptor has immortalized in marble the personification of Justice as a woman of noble
mien, with eyes blindfolded against prejudice, one hand holding an even balance and the other grasping
an up-raised sword. It is thus that men selected for integrity and legal experience, and elevated to
to this high office, hold the scales and carefully weigh the evidence before dispensing justice tempered
with mercy to all and sundry, irrespective of race or creed, position or riches.


Hon. Wilfred #
//, AM L.L.B.
Judges fluocm. PoL,CE Mmstmte.


HEALTH AND MEDICINE
THE health of the people, both individually and collectively, is of first importance in any com-
munity. A healthy neighbour makes for greater personal safety; thus the first law of nature, self-
preservation, demands an increasing sense of responsibility toward the other fellow’s hygiene.
Evidence of our progress along the pathway of the ideal is shown in the provision of better
hospital accommodation, a stricter supervision over food supplies and the disposal of waste, a more
rigid control of infectious disease, and a dawning appreciation of the value of prevention.
We in Tasmania have made our mark on medical history in a pioneer essay at the principle
of a free service, irrespective of financial or other considerations, in certain country districts. Its
outcome is awaited with considerable interest in far wider spheres than our own, for who knows what
fruit may be borne, in the shape of healthier and happier generations to come?


Ds A p^° UN0S ' MB - a5 -
Dr B. Wl.CflRRUTHERS, M.B.
Public Health Department.
Dr. VR. Ratten, C.B.E., M.D.
Dr. E.Brettingham Moore, M.B..B.5.
Ho Bfl RT. jf
Dr.R.J.DTurnbull, M.B..B.5. Dr.C.H.Martin, M.B..B.5.
Launceston. Burnie.


THE MEDICAL PROFESSION
THE medico, whose profession has graduated from potion-mixing and spell-binding to the highly
skilled and much specialized calling demanded in correct diagnosis and the scientific application of
healing medicine, is at times not to be envied. Prescribed hours are not always rigidly adhered to,
as is natural where sickness and accident wait not upon the clock. It must, too, be a terrible respon-
sibility to feel that a man’s life may rest upon one’s decision in a moment of emergency.
However, there are, no doubt, occasions in plenty when compensation in one form or another
presents itself. But whatever form it does take, no reward is too great in return for the immeasur-
able service given to mankind in the prevention and cure of disease.
The value of organisation is not lost upon the medical man, and the principles symbolised by
the man with the bundle of sticks across his knee is exemplified in the British Medical Association
(8.M.A.), members of which are many in Tasmania.
From time to time there is naturally a change of personnel in the executive positions, but
the caricatures opposite will be readily recognised as of some who have held, and are holding, important
place in the Association.


1 FIR.
DAKmRhn Md/vTmM,MGMCM,B^
JiRJmRm5AY, C£1,MS,B.S
//X M /te 77/. Goddard. B. A, M. 6.
JU tom ~ Order 5 T John ** Jerusalem.
—w> Or John L Grove, M- 0., FRA C.P
Dr. Frank Fay, MCCimr), Md.b.G.FRM.5.
5 Js! Dr Ralph WHtSHA\N,M.B.MRCRF.RMR DrTereme Butler, M.R.CS,LR.CJ?MRMJ?


MILITARY HIGHLIGHTS
WHEN the time-honoured game of international bluff is up, the fighting man is apt to gird his loins
with some effect. His spick-and-span uniform suddenly assumes an even greater significance than
usual, the "Sam Brown” belts take on more polish, and boot-heels clang on city pavements with
sergeant-major-like precision.
As the Hitlerian era blooms—or rather blights—and John Citizen gloomily surveys the
prospect, his inherent commonsense comes to his aid as he realises that the immense Empire
resources of men and materials are destined to play a vital part in obtaining victory.
As time passes we are becoming accustomed to seeing so many uniforms in the streets, and
memories of that other "Great War” are frequent.
No army is efficient without discipline, nor effective without planning, and for this it is neces-
sary to have highly trained officers.
Gathered on this page are some of these officers destined to guide the training and equip-
ment of our section of the Australian Defence Forces.


t ' Brigadier C.AXlow D.5-0.,MX. — ■ «**^
0th. Military District.
D.S.O. Lt.Col. Thirkeu, M.B.E..V.D..J.R
Co-ordinating Secretary.
Civil Defence Legion.


THE UNIVERSITY
AT the peak of educational eminence stand those individuals whose natural qualifications and
specialised training fit them for the management of that final tempering process through which the
"degree” seeker must pass before being considered fit to join the commercial and professional jousts
of everyday life.
What man of letters does not feel a natural pride in his achievements, and what man of sense
does not appreciate the value of such distinction? The whole range of learning is open to anyone
with the desire and the perseverence necessary for success.
Our Tasmanian University is an acquisition to the City of Hobart, not only for its cultural
value to the State, but because of the beauty of its architectural appearance. And so, too, from its
dignified precincts has stepped many a man of mark, to grace the ranks of the great and the near-
great, here, and elsewhere throughout Australia —and yes, even overseas.
We are indeed fortunate in having at the helm of this important institution men of such high
mental and moral character. "By their works ye shall know them,” and theirs is the task from which
spring truly the most satisfying of all products, the man and woman fully equipped to fight, with self-
confident vigour, the battle of life.


Economics. E. Morris Miller, M.A.,Irrr.D
M}' W Government. V lCtL ChANCELLOR.
W.H.5chneider, B.E., B. Comm. //ijjm
letruRLR Mech.Eno. to University, lf/ijllj
Economic Adviser to Transport Comm*
University.
Professor of Classics. Professorof English.
Registrar
University.


MEMBERS OF THE TASMANIAN LABOR GOVERNMENT
SINCE 1934 the political destiny of the State has been in the hands of the Labor Party, a narrow
majority of whose candidates obtained election in the House of Assembly in that year. This majority
was substantially augmented on February 20th, 1937, when 18 out of 30 seats went to Labor.
Under the leadership of the late the Hon. A. G. Ogilvie, K.C., industrial expansion and Gov-
ernmental enterprise showed much progress. At his death in June, 1939, his seat was filled by F.
McDermott, who received the greatest number of preferences under the accepted system of emergency
election, whereby only the deceased member’s primary votes were taken into consideration.
According to constitutional practice, a new Cabinet was sworn in, E. Dwyer Gray consenting to
hold the office of Premier until the New Year, when R. Cosgrove would take over that onerous respon-
sibility.
The Speaker, D. J. O’Keefe, holds the distinction of having been a member of the first Federal
Parliament, and, with but a short break, has been a Parliamentarian ever since.
A distinctive figure, Dwyer Gray comes from a family of Irish descent, with a flair for politics
and journalism, his own early Tasmanian days being synonymous with the "Daily Post.” He is now
the mainspring of its successor, the "Voice.” With a taste for involved figures, he, as Treasurer, has often
held the House spell-bound on Budget days, his leonine crop of snow-white hair offering a fascinating
temptation to the caricaturist.
R. Cosgrove, the personification of courtesy and tact, has won the respect of his confreres, and
has earned the grudging admiration of hard-headed countrymen for his balanced efficiency as Minister
in charge of Agriculture.
Tom D’Alton, whose rapid rise to prominence has set the prophets talking, is full of fire and
vehemence, and daunts the would-be attack with his undoubted courage and daring. A world trip did
much to broaden his outlook, and his fellow party members regard him highly for his unselfish co-op-
eration in their little difficulties.
E. J. Ogilvie, whose friends are many, a brother of the late A.G., has administered his Depart-
ments in the thorough manner to be expected of one with office experience, and who appreciates to the
full the value of highly trained officers under his direct control.
Tom Davies —or "Major,” as he is better known among his constituents —won considerable
distinction during his war service, and has been signally successful in his ministerial capacity, being uni-
versally admired for his nervous energy and attention to the myriad details of his office.
Jim McDonald, Honorary Minister in the Legislative Council, has a name justly honoured as
of sterling honesty and blunt straightness. With many ups and downs in his long political career, he
possesses an almost inexhaustible vocabulary, and is the unfailing champion of the industrial worker.
E. Brooker, new to Cabinet rank, with a knowledge of the new economics, has a reputation for
dogged persistence in his objectives, speaks well, and commands a big following among the industrialists.
Frank Gaha, the genial and voluble doctor, the possessor of a staggering array of distinguishing
letters after his name, is Minister for Health in the Upper House, is the sponsor of far-reaching reforms
and experiments in the realm of health, and in his spare time upholds his name as a first-class surgeon.
J. L. Madden, lately arrived "Honorary,” is gifted with a fine speaking voice, which has been
used to advantage as prognosticator of football results over the Tasmanian broadcasting network. Affable
and energetic, he is already justifying his elevation, and willingly shoulders his increasing responsibilities.
G. G. Becker, always a fighter, has a great flow of words, and makes his points with clearcut
emphasis, his practical knowledge of farming standing him in good stead in debate. He has seen many
changes, has tasted the sweets and bitters of office, and is a sturdy prop for Labor ideals.
Charlie Culley, a determined bulwark of the industrial unions, has taken part in the councils of
the great at Geneva on more than one occasion, is in firm but just control on those frequent times when
deputising as Speaker or Chairman of Committees. As Chairman of the Public Works Committee, he
ponders muchly on the question, "to construct or not to construct?”
Phillip Kelly, Chairman of Committees, full of humour, and proud of his Irish ancestry, popular
with everyone, in serious mood is yet a force to be reckoned with.
Frank Heerey, Secretary and Whip, with a tendency to dry fun, a laudable war record and some
experience at the bar (liquid) in his association with the L.V.A., has a calm delivery that must be
listened to for full appreciation.
Jack McDonald, of the family political clan, speaks occasionally but with force and direction,
the fabric of his feelings leaning distinctly textile.
Basil Plummer, fiery, and ever ready for a verbal fight, by reason of his fruity past a confirmed
lover of apples, and never backward in municipal argument.
Frank McDermott, retired enginedriver, a new arrival with an enthusiasm for causeways.
Harry Lane, with a sympathetic ear for the Licensed Victualler, and a knowledge of Hospital
Boards, stands up for the North-West Coast.
Jack Dwyer, a frank and open nature, timbers his arguments with the woes of the log sheer, his
Victoria Cross modestly kept in the background.
E. R. Howroyd, full of apologies.




NATIONALIST MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY
THE Nationalist Party have occupied the Opposition benches since the general elections of 1934, and
is led by the Hon. H. S. Baker, whose scholastic, military and professional career is decorated with dis-
tinction of no mean order. Liked by every other member for his clean methods of attack, he has
proved his capacity in the field of oratory.
Sir Walter Lee, the veteran of the Chamber, belies the implication in such a title. Interesting
to a degree in debate, and wily with experience, he is always sure of an audience, and woe betide the
unwary who, at first unanswered, and in a sense of false security, persists with interjections.
Neil Campbell, a bachelor beyond temptation, and (is there a connection?) never at a loss for
words, pays commendable attention to business before the House, with particular attention to bills
affecting his country constituents.
J. F. Ockerby, Mayor of Launceston, never fails to provide entertainment for the gallery, when
his zeal for a drinkless community, couplied with his striking appearance, calls forth ribald comment
from some heartless interrupter.
Captain Marriott, a soldier whose war service cost him dearly, speaks very clearly and to the
point, parrying with lightning bitterness interjections of a hostile nature. In his spare time he gives un-
selfish service to the Boy Scout movement.
Dr. Lewis, whose legal background is traditional, handles his subject with the dignified thorough-
ness worthy of his professional training, and rarely trespasses on the tolerance of standing orders.
John Soundy, always strictly observant of the etiquette demanded of his position, easy of
approach and courteous to all, often feels called upon to defend the constitutional bastions of the
City of Hobart, over which he presides as "My Lord Mayor.”
G. L. Doyle (better known as Leo), a lawyer, too, in quite masterly style, joins in the verbal
jousts and leaves the impression that his side will find him yet more useful when the mellow of
experience tones his unquestionable ability.
Jack Chamberlain, likeable and bluff, grows curiouser and curiouser as harried departmental
officers prompt ministerial replies to privileged questions, and his earnest speechifying always arouses
kindly interest.
F. B. Edwards, never allowed to forget his Rhodes Scholarship, bends his endeavours to the
unravelling of knotty legal points which have a habit of baffling the less enlightened, and treats his fel-
low members to discourses on the frailty of careless parliamentary draughtsmanship.
Allen Hollingsworth, a quiet but persistent speaker, is careful to inspect all corporation bills, is
a master cabinet maker in private life, and gains some publicity as a member of the Launceston City
Council.
Francis H. Foster, of Midlands fame, knows all about wool and mutton by right of ownership
and his association with the Meat Board, and loses very few opportunities of upholding the innocent
lamb as a commercial prodigal, able (though unwilling) to expand bankrolls as well as stomachs.




THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
UNDER the Bicameral System, Tasmania has an Upper House in the form of the Legislative Coun-
cil, which is elected on a different franchise to that of the House of Assembly. For this purpose the
State is divided into eighteen "single electorates,” and those entitled to vote require certain property
or other qualifications.
On this page, only sixteen out of the eighteen are caricatured, the remaining two (Hon. J. F.
Gaha and Hon. James McDonald) being shown on the State Labor Party page.
Chief among those here shown, stands the figure of the Hon. T. Murdoch, whose position as
President of the Council entitles him to that distinction. Prominent business man of Hobart, he has
always found time for public service, and is widely known for his association with the Marine Board,
the Caledonian Society, the Regatta Association, his Consulship for Belgium, and many other matters
of moment.
Easily recognised is the Hon. J. ("Joe”) Darling, one-time Test Cricket Captain, often success-
ful as a "stonewalling” champion in Legislative debate on behalf of the farming community.
The Hon. J. W. Cheek, an Evandale farmer, a Coroner for that district, and veteran of the
Legislative Council.
The Hon. R. O. Shoobridge, of Glenora, a returned soldier, a son of the man who "fathered”
water-power development in this State. He has much municipal experience, and is associated with
some important semi-public bodies.
The Hon. A. W. Bendall, a genial newcomer to politics, with a strong leaning to agriculture
and some experience on the licensing bench.
The Hon. Frank Percy Hart, a member for Launceston since 1916, an Alderman for over 25
years, and widely known for his extensive business and financial connections.
The Hon. C. J. Eady, of Hobart, Chairman of Committees, a legal man with a taste for cricket
and other sporting pursuits.
The Hon. W. H. Strutt, one of Hobart’s newest representatives, Governor of Kennerly Boys’
Home, is connected with the Hobart Savings Bank, and is also known in the Marine Board of that city.
The Hon. Alex. Lithgow, Devonport, a Municipal Councillor for many years, and a great one
for the details contained in House of Assembly Bills.
The Hon. W. H. F. Calvert, a resident of Sandy Bay, first elected in 1924; a grower of the
really perfect Tasmanian apple.
Lieut.-Colonel the Hon. A. C. Blacklow, a comparatively recent arrival, with experience in the
Federal Parliament, and a distinguished war record.
The Hon. A. T. Cutts, of Northdown, another recent arrival, and a breeder of good cattle.
The Hon. A. B. Fenton, a dairy farmer, and an A.I.F. "original,” with more than one honour-
able mention.
Major the Hon. A. ("Lex”) A. Evans, served in two wars, and has a number of coveted mili-
tary distinctions to his credit. One-time Mayor of Launceston, and a Coroner for the State.
The Hon. P. ("Percy”) C. Best, Deloraine, a farmer, too, was Warden of that Municipality,
and was formerly a member for Wilmot in the House of Assembly.
The Hon. L, A. Procter (known to his intimates as "Les,”) took the seat made vacant by the
death of the Hon. Alan Wardlaw. He is President of the Municipal Association, and between whiles
conducts his long-established business as wheelwright in his home town of Lilydale.




TASMANIAN REPRESENTATIVES IN THE FEDERAL PARLIAMENT
TASMANIA is represented in the Federal Parliament by six Senators elected on a State-wide
basis equally with all the other States, and five members of the House of Representatives each
of whom are singly elected from a different division. Senators hold the seats for six years, half
the number coming before the people alternately in each three-year period. M’s.H.R. are elected
for three years.
The Senate was constituted, not only to act as a brake on legislation, but to give the States
equal representation, irrespective of population.
On the other hand, this State is distinctly at a disadvantage in the lower House by reason
of our small numbers. However, this is to some extent compensated by the vigour and enthusiasm
of some who have fought in our cause.
Wide is the sphere from which these men spring into the political limelight, and varied are
their callings and individual interests. Like the meteor that intrigues the amateur astronomer, some
come from obscurity, then just as quickly, after briefly basking in the public eye, vanish into the
darkness from whence they came. Others more fortunate stay for longer terms, varying with the
whim of public fancy.
What is it that lures the candidate for Parliamentary honours? It cannot be money or
security, because neither is the lot of most of them. Is it, then, the honour and glory, the desire
to serve, or the thrill of battle?
In the person of Senator J. B. Hayes, a resident of Scottsdale, we have the President of
the Senate; and on Colonel Bell, of Burnie, rests the mantle of Speakership in the House of Rep-
resentatives. Up till the death of the late the Hon. J. A. Lyons, we also held the Prime Minister-
ship. This cornering, as it were, of the principle positions is unique for our Island State, and har
been viewed with some pride.


' DeNISO*.


PARLIAMENTARY OFFICIALS
NECESSARY to the efficient running of Parliament are a number of carefully trained individuals who
necessarily see many comings and goings of members old and new. Many are the anecdotes they
could relate of events both interesting and comic, were discretion not their watchword.
Clerk of the Legislative Council, Mr. C. H. D. Chepmell has a dignified bearing thoroughly in
keeping with his office, and keeps Councillors well informed when standing orders are in question.
/
Ably seconding him in Chamber duties, Mr. C. I. Clark, the Usher of the Black Rod, is of a
retiring nature and keeps busy looking after the piles of documents which seem inevitable in any leg-
islature.
Veteran Clerk of the House of Assembly and Librarian to Parliament, Mr. Henry McPherson
is a familiar figure to gallery habitues. Underneath his quiet exterior he hides a quick appreciation of
the quaint and the humorous.
Mr. Charles K. Murphy (or "Pat,” as he is affectionately known), Clerk Assistant, Sergeant-
at-Arms and Assistant Librarian, is of genial nature, with a special liking for yachtsmen and their tools
of trade.


i. fl .5ruU«.
to «& www *‘’ bXJ f u^T,. E w


LEGAL LUMINARIES
THE legal fraternity —that much maligned body whose mission is to interpret the law, and is looked
upon with awe for its somewhat ponderous phraseology —sees too often the seamy side of life, but is
occasionally lightened by unrehearsed humour. Witness the reminiscences of any notable barrister.
The road to fame is beset with many pitfalls, and few among those young hopefuls first called
to the bar reach that desirable goal, but the rewards are great, and at the least the training involved is
an excellent aid for progress in many another sphere of life.
Here we find the Hon. Tasman Shields, a King’s Counsel, with many years of public service
in the Legislative Council and elsewhere; he is a "criminal” lawyer of no mean reputation, is the main-
spring in a big legal firm, and is notable for his clearcut opinions on matters of moment.
Mr. J. Heritage, apart from his law career, is widely known for his Associate Commissionership
in the Hydro-Electric Commission.


Wfl ix.6.


PRINCIPALS OF SECONDARY SCHOOLS
OUR big Public Schools cater exceedingly well for that section of the population whose pocket
and inclination look for something a little different from the State Educational system. With many
years of splendid tradition behind them, and a keen desire to keep their own particular standard as
high as possible, it is small wonder that so many of their pupils do well in after life.


m -&-
d_ , „ , jami^ss^k l Headmaster.
«H|> r «-~-
no..,,. AJ|p|(
W\.R.,Dip.Ed. * *
HeflOMflSTER.
Scotch College, AMLRoff, M.fl.
Launceston. Headmaster.
Church &r amnia a School.
Launceston.


THE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
IT is an old saw that knowledge is power,” but its essence is truer than ever, and a well-equipped
mind, developed as only modern educational methods know how, is the best inheritance any young
man or woman can receive from parental indulgence. Free as the air, from the kindergarten almost
to the University except for increasing text book costs, this priceless gift of modernity, the product
of our forebears bitter legislative fights, will surely bear fruit in an enlightened and tolerant posterity.
The Department has the inestimable advantage of a practically inexhaustible well of specially
trained teachers who, in the main, and on the male side at least, generally follow this training to its
logical conclusion, giving their services wherever the whim of those responsible places them, and often
painfully conscious of a salary deficiency not commensurate with parallel professions.
Directing the multitudinous phases coincident with the control of so many responsible men and
women and their teeming charges, is Mr. G. V. Brooks, who mutely takes some kicks—and gives a few,
too. Coming by easy stages through the atmosphere of the schoolroom, he knows by experience the
woes and troubles of the master and mistress.
Aiding him to the full, the inspectors and headmasters help to keep the standard up near the
perfection mark, and keep the earnest juvenile on the straight and narrow path of correct method.


ieM^H0 ° L W.CMorris, B.fl.
W'&IBSON. B.E. LDeCHAINEUX
SuPE-RiKTENOENT HEADMASTER.
Technical Education. Technical College fa'Jr'~-" : \ 1 V v >
av/iu£N,Bjr
Semor Education Officer. Ji V,V0 ‘!
Inspector.


HOBART AND LAUNCESTON CITY COUNCIL OFFICERS
UNDERNEATH the apparently smooth working of city administration there teems a hive of
activity. The man in the street mutters about excessive rates and wonders where it all goes, but a
glance at the executive officers of the two main Tasmanian cities, each man with specialised know-
ledge and a very responsible department under his control, is illuminating.
Tramways have to be run, electrical services guided, important matters of health carefully
looked after; streets have to be kept clean and well surfaced; water services and drainage must be
absolutely efficient; reserves made thoroughly presentable; and, mark well, those accounts they
simply must be kept according to rule and to the complete satisfaction of the eagle-eyed auditors.
Town Clerk and City Treasurer of Launceston, Mr. F. C. Crawford, a Melbournian by birth
and municipal training, joined the city service in 1918 as Treasurer, reaching his present status in
1924.
Mr. W. E. Potts, Launceston’s City Engineer and Building Surveyor, was appointed to that
position in 1930. The possessor of a number of distinctive letters after his name, to wit: 8.E.,
M.lnst.C.E., M.l.E.Aust, M.8.E., M.C., his war service covered the period 1915-1919.
Educated at Geelong Grammar and "finished” at Melbourne University, Dr. J. M. Pardey,
M.8., 8.5., was for a considerable period Surgeon-Superintendent of the Launceston General Hos-
pital. For 16 years he has guarded the health of the northern city and the adjoining municipality
of St. Leonards.
Chief Inspector O. C. Gavitt, M.R.5.1., learned the three "R’s” at Clemes College, and owes
much to Hobart for his early training in the rudiments of health control, and what he doesn’t know
about weights and measures is inconsiderable.
Hobart, too, is careful of such things as becomes such a key centre, and looks with con-
fidence to Dr. Atkins, M.8., 8.5., D.P.H., who, incidentally, has earned a wide circle of listeners to
his broadcast talks over the Tasmanian network.
Associated with him is Chief Inspector Charles L. Colvin, who, by the way, is an examiner for
the Royal Sanitary Institute and the Technical College. He has a passion for aquatic sports, and is
quite an authority on first-aid.
Mr. R. W. Koch, F.R.A.1.A., has combined the positions of City Architect and Building
Surveyor for the past ten years, prior to which he was in successful private practice. Honorary
Architect to the Tasmanian Sanitarium since its inception, he has never lost his innate love of games,
his specialty being the rifle.
Director of the municipally controlled Launceston Museum, Mr. E. O. G. Scott, B.Sc., orig-
inally a school teacher with a liking for cricket, has a distinct bias for matters scientific, as readers
of his press contributions appreciate. A world tour of famous museums is already bearing fruit to the
discerning eye.
Superintendent of Launceston’s many beautiful reserves, Mr. W. McGowan comes from expert
stock, and daily demonstrates his uncanny ability to the flower lover in intoxicating displays of beau-
tiful blooms and velvet-smooth lawns.




HOBART
HOBART, the beautiful, the capital city, with more than sixty thousand persons to its credit, blessed
with a truly marvellous waterway capable of gently harbouring a tremendous fleet of ships that sail
and steam, spreads its sunny precincts beneath four thousand odd feet of Mount Wellington.
An intricate series of bays and inlets offers intriguing interest to the motor-boat owner, and
the broad expanse of obstacle-free water is a steady temptation to the many yachtsmen whose prowess is
a household word in wider spheres, while the shoreman and his family find consolation in the golden
miles of sand within easy reach of his residence.
From here the legislation of the country is improved or worsened, according to one’s poli-
tical bias, and it is here that is the jumping-off place for many a delightful day’s outing. It is here
that Tasmania had its historical beginnings, and it is here that fine buildings spring up overnight and
that business has a healthy growth and optimistic outlook.
Many are the men of note who grace its fine streets, not least among them Sir John Evans,
Lieutenant-Governor, whose Parliamentary and business career read as well as any romance; Sir John
McPhee, who also knew the political arena with some distinction to himself and is now a business man
with extensive associations in the city.


Sec. RR.C.T
Pres. AthenAEUmClub Weller Arnold, J.R " T.RJ.C.
R. G. Webster&Sons, Ltd.
Captain D.5HRRP, R.fl.fl, Secretary. J&jtf Jg>
Royal Hobart Hospt
5/r John Evans, C.M.G.
Master Warden.
Marine Board.
£•*••* c»n. Manager. manager *
Tas. Breweries Roberts & Cot Browi/kllj.


LAUNCESTON
LAUNCESTON, often called by local patriots the "Capital of the North,” is the thriving centre from
which radiates the transport systems feeding the rest of the State.
Unique in geographical position, at the conjunction of the North and South Esk Rivers and at
the beginning of the River Tamar, forty-five miles from the sea, its thirty-odd thousand people concen-
trate their varied activities in a busy valley wherein the main shopping centre sits within easy reach of
the waterfront.
Civically well managed, investors look with kindly eye on its municipal bonds, and the City
Fathers do their best to encourage the establishment of new industries, proof of not inconsiderable
success in this direction being apparent on every hand.
Scenically, the city is gifted with many beauty spots, not least among them the famous Cataract
Gorge, well within town boundaries, a mighty cleft in the surrounding hills through which tumultuously
pours the shedded waters of the eastern inland.
Mr. D. S. Jackson, in business as an employer of a number of expert lock and spring makers,
had some acquaintance with the Federal Parliament, and is an enthusiastic supporter of the famous
Launceston Musical Competitions.
Mr. L. A. Cuff was a prominent athlete in New Zealand, his native country, and followed his
natural sporting bent ever since his arrival in Tasmania in 1899. Fie confiscated the State Golf
Championship as far back as 1906, and is now President of the Northern Tasmanian Cricket Asso-
ciation, in addition to his connection in an executive capacity with other organisations of a wider sig-
nificance in public affairs.
Mr. J. W. Hughes, retired Chief Audit Inspector in the Government service, latterly Chair-
man of the Georgetown Municipal Commission, was a prominent footballer and cricketer in his early
days, and earned some local fame for his skill in sketching his fellow-officers. He is well known for his
championship of the spiritualistic belief in the survival of the individual.
Mr. John Watson, business man, will be recognised for his advocacy of the "Watson Gold Plan.”
Mr. Cyril Carrington, a Director of the "Tasmanian Woolgrowers,” has a deep-rooted love of
the water, and consequently has a close knowledge of all forms of acquatic sports.
Mr. W. R. Young, better known as "Bob,” is the popular and efficient Secretary of a number
of organisations in the North.
Mr. George McElwee, a skilled electrical engineer with a flair for politics, has made a study of
the new economics, and believes there is some truth in the saying that "money is the root of all evil.”
Captain Eric Von Bibra, of correct military bearing, as befits his title, has a likeable manner and
often comes into the City Council spotlight.
Mr. A. G. ("Algy”) Findlay, an old boy of Scotch College, is Managing Director of the
family firm, with which is incorporated a number of commercial broadcasters. He is an ardent
"club” member, presides over a well-known cricket club, and manages a good game at both golf and
time-honoured bowls.
Mr. W. Robinson, widely appreciated for his broad outlook on many subjects of public interest,
is associated with a number of organisations in Launceston.
Mr. F. B. Barber, in between his official Bank duties, is a very keen Chairman of the Queen
Victoria Hospital, and has a way of convincing his listeners of his grip on kindred matters.
Mr. Jack Carter, most conscientious in his capacity as Secretary of the St. John Ambulance
Brigade, is well liked for his sincerity and his attention to the job in hand.
Mr. Alex. Menzies, Launceston’s City Missionary, is an example of good nature and friendli-
ness, and keeps his flock in tune with harmony.
Mr. J. Couch keeps the postman busy here and elsewhere with his epistolatory praises of our
little State as a prospective settling place and a tourists’ paradise.
Mr. H. V. Sellers, Secretary to the Launceston "50,000” League, has some thoughtful
moments in the delicate task of selecting luncheon speakers for that assembly.


«MJ*CKS0«
A\ T SEtRewtw. y'
Overseas C'p’oent.
5o - oco LEASue. r^
HAN ' eERtf^°,AWv£ ’ ?C£
E ' £ ' V0N^l6RR
MflSTER RD€N n.


NORTH-WEST COAST
THE North-West Coast, fortunate indeed in its seascapes, mountain views, meandering rivers, and
huge areas of really good land, is truly favoured of nature. Filled from end to end with many pros-
perous farms, it is an example to the rest of Australia in the comparatively even distribution of its
population.
A splendid array of alert, clean-looking towns follow one another from Launceston to the
furthermost corner, and to tourist and would-be settler alike it is a refreshing experience to traverse
its interesting road system. After leaving Devonport, both road and railway hug the coastline, to
the constant delight of the traveller, while the mountain backdrop near Deloraine gives inspiration to
the budding alpinist.
Judging by the recent impetus in industrial expansion, notably the great paper manufacturing
enterprise at Burnie, this part of our Island State bids fair to claim an increasing share of the lime-
light in the future; but no hard feelings exist, because Tasmanians know that the growth and pros-
perity of one section inevitably reacts favourably on the whole.
Mr. H. H. ("Hector”) McFie is known far beyond the confines of his home town, where he
conducts a tailoring business. Students of political history will readily recall his sojourn in the State
House of Parliament.
Mr. E. Ingledew, a Londoner with early recollections of some famous British statesmen, has
known Devonport for a very long time, and has given good service in local government.


Insp.Tersei Herd 5otW. L-S.Taylor.
|a WHITE MO MftNWrER^TRNvRRCO.
Tbt£ ?RtstNTKTlv4E
P M c CoRn\ick. Aw. Supt. S.BlRD-
fl.OM*.Soc-E. Prp«* W\u.lV iy " T*ervjR6R.
Manager. J'D BuRNlE-. 1~ Municipal Council.
E.&.R'ts, ■ '' T _/ Burnie.
tfl*CKENT. A. Devonport.
-ED. 1 S«port L '
Warden. rl.H.NI Fit. O.B.E. J.R Deyonport l'enonport.
Municipal Council DevoNPoRT.
Burnie. Draper.
JEWELLER.


NORTH-EAST COAST
THE North-East Coast, full of delightful panoramas, winding roads, and a variety of elevations, is
stepped with highly productive oases of green, where bright farms surround thriving rural townships.
Well endowed with valuable minerals, of them all tin is the best money spinner, fossicker and
dividend seeker alike keeping anxious watch on the rain gauge in the dry season lest water reserves fall
too low.
Prodigal depletion of forest hardwoods has not yet exhausted Nature s bounty, but far-sighted
re-planting will provide a compensating addition in the popular softwoods.
Fortunate in its meed of public-spirited citizens, this area is gradually focussing attention on its
absorptive capacity for visitors, investors and settlers.
Among the more readily recognised personalities stands James Le Fevre, a physical giant, of
striking appearance, with a healthy appetite, a profitable experience in cheese making, and a know-
ledge of cattle dealing. Impregnated with municipal service, he made Ringarooma Council history
with a proposal for its substitution by a Commission.
Charles Northeast, appropriately named, a well-known business man of Scottsdale, his inspira-
tion and untiring energy the main factor in the creation of "Northeast Park, ’ knows all about working
bees.”
Harold G. Salier, an excellent farmer and a well-tried officer in the Masonic Fraternity, with
a bent for public speaking, served for several years as Warden of the Scottsdale Municipality.
Edmund Button, retired Council Clerk, a pillar of the Methodist Church, and a keen townsman,
rises early and uses a full day to the best advantage.
Will McCann, a man of decided views, has more than a passing acquaintance with local affairs.
At one time famous as "Skeeter” McGann,” the cycling champion, he now finds the bicycle still his
friend as the mainstay of his business.
Donald McLennan, connected with "Dinham 8C C 0.,” a member of the much publicised Royal
Commission on Local Government, has found the homely potato of great assistance to the ambitious
farmer, and between whiles cultivates an excellent garden.
Robert Wardlaw, of "Wardlaw 8r05.,” pays due attention to business matters, but has found
politics an interesting study.
Harry Spotswood, always ready to help in any local effort, knows all about the Municipal
Association in his capacity as Secretary to that body, is a conscientious churchman, and uses his mili-
tary experience to the advantage of the wartime volunteer.
Mr. Gerald Bartlett, son of pioneer parents, a returned soldier and a farmer, is a member of
the Ringarooma Municipal Council, an active member of the North-Eastern Soldiers’ Memorial Hos-
pital Board, and is closely associated with various other district activities.
Mr. Roy Diprose will be readily recognised, by those interested in the primary producer, as a
determined fighter for the rights of the small cheese factory, and an inquisitor as to the efficacy of
C.A.B. tests.




THE PRESS
THE Press, that deeply maligned disseminator of information, well represented in Tasmania by three
leading dailies and a number of others less frequently published, serves a great and abiding need in a
modern civilised community. Keeping abreast of current events means an intricate and expensive
organisation with agencies throughout the world. Those agencies employ correspondents who often-
times carry very real risks of bodily injury, and even death.
The news thus gathered is dished up to the avid reader with his breakfast bacon and eggs, little
thought being given to the hosts of people whose night and day efforts made it possible, or to the gap
its loss would leave in our midst. The thought instantly conjures up those dark and gloomy days of
old when ignorance and superstition held sway, when balanced judgment was difficult because so many
unknown factors came into the picture.
We hear so much of the "freedom of the Press,” failing to appreciate the full significance of
such a phrase, until a Hitler, a Mussolini or a Stalin comes along and shows the inevitable and soul-
destroying result of a ruthless suppression of freedom in public utterance.


SuB w


THE HYDRO-ELECTRIC COMMISSION
HOW far we would be along the destined path of industrial expansion were it not for the far-sighted
initial development of our highland water power, is a question not to be answered off-hand; but one
thing is certain —the State’s enterprise in Hydro-Electric works is rapidly bringing into prominence the
possibilities from the investment point of view.
Radiating from the giant generators housed at Waddamana and Tarraleah, where the pent-up
waters of the myriad mountain-borne lakes find expression for their bursting energies, and grave-eyed
engineers keep jealous watch on a bewildering array of instruments, stretch web-like wires carrying
Man’s latest conquest to be the unquestioning servant of every switch-touching woman and child whose
breadwinner chooses to pay for the privilege.
The man whose word is law in this great activity is Mr. W. E. Maclean, a biggish individual,
both physically and mentally, his Commissionership being supplemented by two associates, Messrs. J. E.
Heritage and C. B. Davies, whose caricatures appear elsewhere in this publication.
Of course, no organisation could prosper without its complement of thoroughly trained execu-
tive officers, and a glance at the formidable engineering and accountancy qualifications decorating the
names of others on the page helps to explain, in some measure, the overpowering efficiency and ultra-
smooth working which seems such a natural accompaniment to that magic word, Electricity.


CO^j N p^^
1/ m. i.E.Cflus.)* I t%WmQtqm\ Engine-cr.
Chief Electrical En&imeer. Cmief enginecr.
Engs- Designs.
HoBHRT District
MflNflseR'


TRANSPORT
TRANSPORT, the problem child of every democratic government, is a particularly difficult proposi-
tion in Tasmania, where short haulages and parallel systems of road and rail, aggravated by the marked
difference in financial burden, make competition at times rather one-sided.
Over six hundred miles of railroad and an amazing network of good roads whose surface is
being improved every year, serve a comparatively small population, but the economics of the question
caused such concern that a revolutionary departure in administration has taken place.
Mr. M. S. Wilson, the new Transport Superintendent, is in complete command, and hails
from New South Wales, where he gathered much experience and cultivated his native wisdom in the
service of the Government Railways. He succeeds Mr. F. P, St. Hill, the popular ex-Commissioner
of our Railways, and now one of two Associate Commissioners of the newly constituted authority.
Around this nucleus of the powers that be, are assembled a galaxy of highly qualified specialists
with years of absorbing experience to their credit.
Mr. C. J. Rollins, lately installed in the newly created position of General Manager of the Rail-
ways, has been in that service since 1891, rising by successive stages to the position of Secretary and
Comptroller of Accounts, and thence to his latest appointment.
Mr. R. C. Procter joined the Government Railways in 1900, graduating by rapid promotion to
the position of Staff Officer and Industrial Officer. In line with the recent reorganisation, he is now
Secretary for Railways.
Mr. E. H. Connor, Transport Superintendent, is another veteran in the service, can look back
to 1896, when he joined up as a clerk, and is now in charge of all matters affecting railway transport.
Mr. C. G. Blakney, entering the Railways in 1899, became successively Station Master, Record
Clerk, Audit Inspector, Book-keeper, then Supervisor of Accounts. He is now officially designated
as Accountant.
Mr. C. G. Wadley, now in the important position of Supervisor of Stores, began life as a school
teacher, but early left that occupation for the Service. He had some interesting war experience as a
wireless operator in Mesopotamia, receiving recognition in the British medal. His technical qualifica-
tions include several secretarial and accountancy distinctions.


48 (jfiTjfjf/ [*) OM-U.fl. SERVICES.


POLICE
FROM the days of "John Peel” the attitude of the public toward our civil protectors has undergone a
curious psychological change. Whether this can be attributed to any change in uniform, or in the
methods of "protection” used, or to the natural course of evolution, is not quite clear; but it is more
likely that we have learned collectively to realise how helpless without them we would become. Be
that as it may, the man in the street, with the exception of the comparatively rare malefactor, now
recognises the man in blue as a friend to whom he may turn in distress.
From the Commissioner of Police down to the veriest raw recruit, each and every member of
the Force is a part of a great and efficient machine designed for the preservation of law and order, the
prevention of crime and the apprehension of the evil-doer. To this end, many and divers are the details
to be recorded and mastered.
However, the duties of this important branch of communal activity does not end with "tailing
up” criminals, as a visit to any police station would readily demonstrate.


iP'"'
<1 - g4- nJS Jf
Jl^
#%.'“" n ?
[f Det. /ns?. Burke Launceston. |J|f
**%, Launceston < $gi£ : *


PUBLIC SERVICE
IT is only when we come in close contact with some of the individual heads of the various departments
under Federal and State control that we begin to realise what a hive of activity is contained in that
simple descriptive phrase, "the Public Service.” Each of the men on these two pages represents an
important section of that service, and is responsible for many others, each with his allotted task to per-
form, according to schedule or the needs of the moment.
Mr. B. J. Thompson, Secretary of the Attorney-General’s Department since 1925, is a returned
soldier, was President of the Tasmanian Public Service Association for four years, has acted as liaison
officer for the Government in the Legislative Council, and is now the Service Representative on the
Classification Board.
Mr. A. J. Simmons has had experience in both Commonwealth and State Government Depart-
ments, spread over many years. His official designation is Sub-Collector of Customs, but he discharges
many other important duties as well. He is also well known for his active association with many semi-
public bodies, with cricket, with bandsmen, and for his efforts on behalf of charitable organisations.
Mr. M. G. Robertson, who manages the Tasmanian Government Insurance Office, has been
connected with the insurance world all his business life, and brought to his latest position a valuable
knowledge of accountancy. He takes an active interest in sport, golf and the ancient game of bowls.
Mr. E. T. Emmett knows all about the beginnings of the Government Railways, by reason of
his automatic transfer with the sale by the old Main Line Company, with whom he had worked since
1888. He has held his position of Director of the Tourist Bureau since 1914, and has seen it grow
from the swaddling stage to its present considerable proportions. He is a great believer in hiking,
introduced ski-ing to Tasmania, and is fortunate in the possession of a facile pen. He is the author of
"A Short History of Tasmania.”
Mr. F. J. Batt, Auditor-General, has had nearly 50 years with the Service, and has come into
considerable prominence recently in connection with the enquiry into municipal administration. His
personal services to the State have been many and varied, particularly in regard to the "Case for
Tasmania.” His special sporting hobby is yachting, and wherever any form of aquatics is under discus-
sion in Hobart the name of Batt is sure to be mentioned.


I S.R.Aprws, F.U-S F.J.Bflrr, 1.5.0.
/ / MftNRGtR, f\ GR'C- BpiNK fluPlTOR &ENE(?Rt-
(jr i.*Ainsworth. '•' Reece.


PUBLIC SERVICE
JUST take a glance at the varied branches of Government activity represented opposite.
Public works, wherein a host of skilled men labour unceasingly to keep us supplied with well
surfaced and obstacle-free roads, where bridges and public buildings are designed and constructed,
and maintained in proper order. What a beehive it is when you get behind the scenes.
The Tourist Bureau, that has done such wonders for Tasmania, advertising its beauties and
business possibilities everywhere, bringing people here as visitors who will surely come again and again,
putting our Island State on the map.
The Mines Department, that fosters the discovery and steady production of the precious metals,
surveys and carefully annotates the mineral-bearing areas, and keeps a welter of valuable information
filed away for instant reference.
The Agricultural Department, so consistently helpful to the farmer. There are highly trained
specialists in every branch of agriculture, ready to give skilled advice where needed, carrying out
research work of inestimable aid in the ultimate development of the State.
The Agricultural Bank, the instrument of easier financial assistance.
The Lands Department, so necessary for correct record, and constant keeping up-to-date of
changes in property ownership.


f? B-R'CHflRps
mintlzg? Stt.roBo •* N\*NW**t Sec. Post. \ SecRerrtiTf.
M.»ft. l- S -°- a Afl , M M .
U„ ot «5ac™ L - C m C ST ffl
LflUMCCATO^
ffi.


MINE HOST
MINE host of olden days —no doubt a genial soul —consistent with those spacious and leisurely times,
never missed "what he never had,” and so felt no anticipatory jealousy for the amenities and comforts
at the instant service of his modern prototype. Perhaps, though, the modern customer sometimes feels
a nostalgic envy for the "pint-pot” his great-grand-daddy bought so cheaply, and —let’s whisper it —
so frequently.
However, pretty barmaids, rubber floors, clean glasses and lounge conveniences aside, it is
refreshing to realise that hotel proprietors, as a body, are waking up to a sense of their responsibilities
to the long-suffering public, and are sincerely endeavouring to provide that home-from-home atmos-
phere so appreciated by the seasoned traveller.
Learning late the power of organisation and the principle of unionism, but not quite satisfied
that the State is an indivisible whole, licensed victuallers owe allegiance to two separate and distinct
bodies, the U.L.V.A. and the T.L.V.A., having their headquarters in the North and the South
respectively.




HERE AND THERE
PROMINENT on this page is Mr. Harold Bushby, who, as all those who have been addicted to the
sport will promptly remember, handled the managerial end of the Australian Cricket Eleven in their
last successful crusade for the recovery of the famous "Ashes.”
Then there is Mr. E, W. Barwick, whose efforts at the Olympic Games helped to place our
Island State on the map as a breeding ground for the fleet of foot.
Mr. E. Atherton ("Tic,” if you please), the song-bird, every ready to give his vocal best in
any worthy cause.
Mr. E. J. Balfe ("Eric” to his intimates), the man who dishes up the political news for the
"Mercury.”
Mr. L. Atkinson, who held the seat for Wilmot in the House of Representatives for so long
until the late "Joe” Lyons proved his claim in open contest.
Mr. R. C. Smith (well known as "Ron”), an engineer with a pronounced interest in politics
and an inside knowledge of social service work.
Mr. H. S. A. Blackburn, a newspaper man and man about town, has several brothers all
bearing the same initials to their name.
Mr. W. H. Nicol ("Bill,” to be sure), a figure of considerable count in the industrial
movement.
Then who does not know Mr. C. B. Campbell, of pottery fame in other States as well as our
own. Ask the old boys of "Glen Dhu.”
The name of Mr. F. Warland Browne is synonymous with City Council activities, and what
he doesn’t know about medicine is not of much moment.
Those interested in the commercial processing of wool will, of course, associate Mr. H. S.
Gray with the now famous Launceston firm. It must be quite a problem to supply the inveterate
knitter with exactly the right shade.
Of course, Mr. Basil Murray, who now presides over "McLaren’s Hotel,” will be remembered
by those who knew the "Who’s Who” of commercial travelling in the North.
"Mercury.”


Sporting Commentator.
j &wRoundsman. "Exams
/TJKmmm M*HMm Director M
Alderman. U Campbell's Potteries. M
Launceston. LrunceSTOn. Jg
//. v3. £/?flV.
Warden L ton. Marine Bd.
Mamger. R&S.


INDEX TO CARICATURES
The figures denote the pages on which the respective caricatures appear, descriptive matter (if any) appearing on the opposite page
Page
His Excellency the Gover-
nor, Sir Ernest Clark 5
Abel, J. R. .._ _ 45
Adams, S. R. 55
Ainsworth, L. 55
Allen, D. V. ._ _ 35
Arnold, Weller 39
Atherton, E. _ 61
Atkins, Dr. C. N. 37
Atkinson, L. 61
Aylett, Senator W. E. 27
Baird, C. E. 51
Baker, Hon. H. S. 23
Balfe, E. J. 61
Balsille, G. D. 55
Barber, F. B. 41
Barnard, H. C 27
Bartlett, G. 45
Barwick, E.W. 61
Bastick, J. H. 57
Batt, F. J _ __ __ 55
Batten, Wm. C. 59
Baxter, Mrs. E. C. 7
Becker, Hon. G. G. 21
Beedham, R. N. K. 31
Bell, Col. _ __ _ 27
Bendall, Hon. A. W. __ 25
Bennett, E. E. 45
Bennett, H. B. 51
Beresford, Insp. C. W. 53
Berkery, J. R. 59
Best, Hon. P. 25
Biggins, H. V. 35
Binns, A. P. 49
Bird, S. .... .... .... .... 43
Blackburn, H. S. A. 61
Blacklow, Hon. A. C. 25
Blackwood, H. M. 29
Blake, F. .... .... _.. __ 57
Blakney, C. A. 55
Blakney, C. G. 51
Boxall, D .... 29
Boyes, E. 29
Boyes, J. 59
Boyle, Major H. N. 17
Bravo, W. P. _. _ _ 59
Bremer, Rev. F. C. 9
Briggs, Lionel F. 35
Briggs, W. W. V. 33
Brooker, Hon. E. 21
Brooks, G. V. .._ _. 35
Brooks, R. W. .._ _. 47
Brough, F. 49
Brown, Det. Supt. W. S. C. 53
Browne, F. Warland 61
Burke, Det.-Insp. T. G. 53
Bushby, Harold 61
Butler, Dr. Terence 15
Button, E. 45
Calvert, Hon. W. H. 25
Campbell, C. B. 61
Campbell, Neil 23
Campbell, N. L. 31
Carew, Bro. L. P. 33
Carrington, C. 41
Carruthers, Dr. B. M. 13
Carter, F. J. 29
Carter, J. 41
Chamberlain, J. H 23
Chancellor, Rev. A. E. 9
Cheek, Hon. J. W. 25
Chepmell, C. H. D. .... _ 29
Cherry, J. R. 47
Cherry, P. J. 47
Clark, C. _.. _ 29
Clark, Col. J. P. 11
Page
Clark, Sir Ernest 5
Clements, E.T. 43
Clemes, W. H _.. 33
Cloudsdale, Rev. J. A. 9
Clowes, Brigadier C. A. 17
Cockayne, Miss R. 7
Cole, H. J. R __ _.. 37
Collatz, C. W. __ __ .._ 39
Colvin, Chas. 37
Connor, E. H. 51
Cooper, K, L. 51
Cosgrove, Hon. R. 21
Couch, J. 41
Crawford, F. C. 37
Crisp, T. M. ._. _.. .._ 31
Crosswell, Insp. H. G. 53
Cuff, L. A _.. _ 41
Culley, Hon. C. E. 21
Cutts, Hon. A. T. 25
D’Alton, Hon. T. 21
Dalton, J. F. 39
Darcey, Senator R. 27
Darling, Hon. J. 25
Davies, C. B 47
Davies, Hon. T. H . 21
Davis, F. D. 49
de Bavay, F. X. 39
De Jersey, M. L. 59
Debnam, F. A. 29
Dechaineux, L. 35
Diprose, R. T. 45
Dobbinson, Rev. R. W. 9
Dowling, Insp. M. T. 53
Doyle, G. L. 23
Driscoll, R. .... __ __ 49
Dunbabin, Prof. R. L. 19
Dwyer, J. J. 21
Dwyer-Gray, Hon. E. 21
Dwyer Gray, Mrs. E. 7
Eady, Hon. C. J. 25
Edwards, Hon. F. B. 23
Emmett, E. T. 55
English, Insp. M. A. 53
Evans, G. H. 49
Evans, Hon. A. A. 25
Evans, Sir John 39
Eyles, Supt. __ 53
Fay, Dr. Frank . . 15
Fenton, Hon. A. B. 25
Findlay, A. P. __ 41
Fisher, H. R. 51
FitzGerald, Tom 39
Fleming, Det.-Insp. R. W. - 53
Fletcher, C. E. B. 35
Foster, F. H. 23
Frost, C. W. __ __ _ 27
Fry, H. _______ 51
Fulton, Dr. J. C. 13
Gaha, Dr. J. F _ 21
Gardner, Rev. A. R. 9
Gavitt, O. - 37
Gibson, W. 35
Gill, J. S - _ 47
Goddard, Dr. T. H. __ 15
Goss, L. C. 57
Grant, Senator C. W. 27
Gray, H. S. 61
Grimes, A. W. 59
Grounds, Dr. A. E. E. 13
Grove, Dr. John L. 15
Grubb, R. D. 59
Harris, Len. 47
Harris, Selby 47
Hart, Hon. Percy 25
Page
Hay, A. S. L. .._ .._ .... 51
Hay, Right. Rev. R. S. 9
Hayes, Senator J. B. 27
Hays, Senator Herbert 27
Heathorn, P. G. 59
Heazlewood, Roy K. 43
Heerey, F. X. 21
Henley, Lt.-Col. F. 17
Henry, J. H. 31
Heritage, J. 31
Hicks, F. W. _ __ - 57
Hill, Insp. H. 53
Hills, W. __ 19
Hollingsworth, Allen 23
Holman, Dr. W. P. _ 15
Hopkins, D. E. __ 39
Howroyd, E. R 21
Hughes, J. W. _.. .- 41
Hunt, C. .... .... .... 59
Hutchins, Hon. Wilfred 11
Hutton, N. C. 37
Ikin, H. C. _. __ _ 39
Ingledew, E. 43
Jackman, Dick 59
Jackson, D. S. 41
Johnson, E. M. 31
Joyce, Lt.-Col. S. E. 43
Kearney, Bro. J. A. 33
Kelly, Hon. P. ._. 21
Kelly, Mrs. S. __ .._ 7
Kent, A. C. .... _ 43
Killalea, W. J _ __ 59
Knight, Allan W. _. .... 57
Koch, R. W. _ _ 37
Lamp, Senator Chas. A. 27
Lane, H. T .- 21
Le Fevre, Jas. 45
Leckey, G. W. .... 49
Lee, Sir Walter 23
Lewis, Dr. A. N. 23
Lillico, Hon. A. 25
Limb, Allan 37
Lipscombe, B 37
Lofts, G. H. __ -- _ 49
Loosmore, T. C 45
Lord, Lt.-Col. J. E. C, _ 53
Low, R. D 51
McCann, W. .._ _ _ 45
McCormick, F. 43
McDermott, F. 21
McDonald, Hon. Jas. 21
McDonald, J. J. 21
McElwee, Geo. 41
McFie, H. H. _ 43
McGaw, A. K. __ _.. _ 43
McGowan, W. ... 37
Mclntyre, Dr.Wm. Keverell 15
McKenna, N. E. 31
McLennan, Don. 45
McLeod, G. J. 35
McNeair, M. A. S. 35
McPhee, Sir John 39
McPherson, H. 29
Macfarlane, C. W. 35
Maclean, W. E. 49
Madden, Hon. J. 21
Mahoney, G. W. 27
Marriott, Frank 23
Martin, Dr. C. H. 13
Meagher, R. J. 55
Menzies, Alex. 41
Miller, Prof. E. Morris 19
Moore, Dr. E. Brettingham- 13
Moore, H. Brettingham- 11
Page
Morris, Hon. J. D. 11
Morris, W. C. _ _ 35
Muir, W. __ _v 29
Muir, W. A. __ .... __ 29
Murdoch, Geo. 39
Murdoch, Hon. T. 25
Murphy, C. K. 29
Murray, Basil 61
Newton, A. W. 51
Nicholl, F. M. __ _ 49
Nicol, W. H. ._. __ __ 61
Northeast, Chas. 45
Oakes, Met. Supt. W. G 53
Ockerby, J. F. 23
Ogilvie, Hon. E. J. 21
Ogilvie, Jas. 45
O’Keefe, Hon. D. 21
Osborne, A. E. 47
Page, L. E. 31
Pardey, Dr. J. 37
Park, A. R. ._ _ 51
Parkes, A. R. 57
Parkes, B 57
Patman, C. 47
Peacock, Geo. W. _ 39
Pearson, J. 39
Pedder, F. J. 59
Perkins, Insp. C. W 53
Pimblett, H. H. ._. _ 29
Pitman, C. A. 57
Pitman, Prof. E. J. G. 19
Pitt, C. M. .... .... _ 57
Plummer, Basil 21
Potts, W. E. .._ ._ _ 37
Preshaw, A. S. 19
Pritchard, C. E. . 59
Procter, Hon. L. A. 25
Procter, R. C. _ 51
Quigley, Miss E. 7
Quinn, J. R. 29
Ramsay, Dr. Sir John 15
Ratten, Dr. V. R. 13
Reece, A. 55
Reid, A. K. 51
Richards, R. B. 57
Riggs, V. 47
Riley, J .... _ 55
Robertson, M. G. 55
Robinson, W. 41
Roff, N. H. _. .._ _ 33
Rollins, C. J. .... _ 51
Rolph, Gordon B. 47
Rolph, W. R. 47
Rowntree, E. F. 49
Rule, J. R. __ .... 29
Salier, H. G. 45
Scaife, R. 49
Scanlan, Col. J. J. 17
Schadel, J. F. 59
Schneider, W. H. 19
Scott, A. C. 53
Scott, E. O. G. 37
Scott, G. H. 57
Scott, J. B. 57
Seager, C. F. 55
Sellers, H. V. 41
Sharp, Capt. D. 39
Shields, J. 45
Shields, Hon. Tasman 31
Shoobridge, Hon. R. O. 25
Simmonds, A. J. 55
Simonds, Most. Rev. J. 9
Skirving, Miss 7


Page
Smeeton, L. F. 57
Smith, H. C. 57
Smith, R. C 61
Smith, S. L 53
Solomon, Harold J. 31
Somerset, H. B 43
Soundy, John 23
Soutar, A. D. 43
Spinner, W. R. 49
Spotswood, H. 45
Sprent, Dr. J. 13
Spurr, Lance 27
St. Hill, F. P. .... .._ _.. 51
St. Leger, L. A. 29
Steane, S. W. 55
Steele, Lt.-Col. W. A. B. _ 17
Stevens, C. D. 47
Page
Stops, F. N 11
Stops, W. J. T __ 19
Strike, R. J 37
Strutt, Hon. W. H. 25
Sullivan, J. T. 51
Sutherland, H. A. 45
Tanner, J. V. 53
Tapping, H. C. - 55
Taylor, Capt. W. 17
Taylor, L. S 43
Taylor, Prof. A. B. 19
Thirkell, Lt.-Col. _ 17
Thompson, B. J. 55
Tomkinson, Insp. C. E. 53
Tracey, Reg. 59
Tudor, E. J __ __ 55
Page
Tumney, T. 59
Turnbull, Dr. R. J. D. 13
Unwin, E. E 33
Usher, F. _ _ 47
Von Bertouch, V. 35
Von Bibra, Capt. E. E. 41
Wadley, C. G. ._. _ 51
Walch, C. E. __ 39
Walch, G. A. __ _ _ 17
Walker, Prof. E. R. _ 19
Walshe, G. H. _ __ _ 37
Wardlaw, Robt. 45
Waterworth, O. W. 31
Watson, J. H. 41
Page
Weston, Maurice 31
Whishaw, Dr. Ralph 15
White, Murray 47
Williams, R. J. 47
Wilson, Hugh 45
Wilson, L. C. P. __ 31
Wilson, R. W. __ 57
Wilson, S. 51
Wilson, W. _ _ _ 45
Woodhead, Robt. 43
Wright, H. M. 39
Wright, W. _ _ 35
Young, W. R. 41


NATIONAL
L)3.t6 DUe LIBIUXT Of AUSTRALIA
I
—rrccnro


NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA I |
3 1508 01446935 2


