

ALITTLEBIT OF LAMB
WITH
ALITTLE MINT SAUCE
Our
CENTENARY
BILL OF FARE.
CHARLES LAMS Poet and Essayist
MARCUS & ANDREW
SUCCESSORS TO
JOHN WOODS & Co. L . T D .
PUBLISHERS
13 Bridge S. SYDNEY.


IF YOU WANT TO
ADVERTISE
Call at
|owpile, 'fCost',
oz o&iii, fE-rmE?b ‘DKattvz
C'Uazij be^cripticm.
MARCUS & ANDREW,
SUCCESSORS TO
JOHN & CO,, LTD.


DISTANT
CORRESPOADEATS.
CHARLES LAMB
TO
BARON FIELD, Esq.,
AT
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
MATCH, 1822.


licensed to Soil
Postage Stamps,
Duty Stamps,
Stamped P’Ns , and
Post Cards.
CSuAtoraA, Contract, and igcgal ||ormA.
Articles of Association (Blank for filling in),
Forms of Will, Shipping Forms, Window
Bills (Office and House to Let),
&c., &c., &c.,
And a large and Varied Stock of sundry
i)fei 10
©]Qcry ©:r)
d Office I^ccjuisiles.
MARCUS & &IPIIW.
/Manufacturing & general Stationers,
13 Bridge Street, Sydney.


PREFATORY EPISTLE.
Dear Reader,
It may be you feel sufficiently curious
to know the reason why this little pamphlet
has been published ? As human nature has
frequently shown a marked interest in all that
has been said or written by men eminent in
Literature, in Science, or in Art, bearing upon
the early history of a country or place or
people, a time such as the present seems a by
no means inopportune time for the publication
of a letter written during the early part of the
century by one of England's greatest humorists,
having for its text New South Wales.
The letter is not written in a spirit of
spitefulness but rather in one of playfulness,
and is full of that quaintly suggestive humor so
characteristic of its author—
The mild, the gentle little Lamb.


The words of the epistle may in parts savor
of Lamb Cut-le ts, but we can assure you, dear
reader, they are rarely tender with a most
delicious flavor, and very much in accoid with
the humor of the subject.
*****
Australia in general and New South Wales
in particular is entering upon the second century
of a most marvellous history—from a convict
settlement to a congregation of powerful
colonies, with a combined export and import
trade greater than that of the Mother Country
50 years ago, reads like a fantastic figment fiom
a fairy tale rather than sober fact —but fact
undoubtedly it is, as figures fully prove.
Those of us who have travelled the colonies
during the past 10 years, and have seen the_
mighty changes wrought in that short period of
time, can forgive much of the hazy indefiniteness
and positive ignorance displayed, with regard to
matters Australian, by the great mass of the
people of the Northern hemisphere, dhe writei,
on leaving the old country for Melbourne some
ten years ago, was met by an old school-fellow,
who seemed anxious to know by what charm or
romantic circumstance he were induced to leave
for such a God-forsaken country, at the same
time hazarding the remark that to go to
Australia was as good as a decent burial. You
ought to have seen the face of that young man


on being told the combined population of
Sydney and Melbourne. Half-a-million ! ! ! !
Striking a stage attitude—did it considerable
damage—may tell you he fancied he were a low
comedian of purest ray serene —he ejaculated,
“Nonsense, man!” Then that young mans
face relaxed, a broad grin took possession of his
countenance, and, with a knowing “ Ha ! ha !
ha!” suggested “ Kangaroos ! ” “ No,
men, women and children.” His mobile
features fell, the shock the information gave his
preconceived opinion was so great he went
away leaving the remark behind —“Men-
SHUN it no more , dear boy--Farewell ! ”
We might continue to record experiences of
this sort to an almost indefinite extent, but life
is too short and business too brisk to admit
of it.
So wishing you all a bright career
Throughout our great Centenary year;
Please —No demurs.
Scan, kindly with care,
Our Bill of Fare.
THE PUBLISHERS.


March, 1822.
My Dear Field,
When I think how welcome the sight
of a letter from the world where you were
born must be to you in that strange one to
which you have been transplanted, I feel some
compunctious visitings at my long silence. But,
indeed, it is no easy effort to set about a cor-
respondence at our distance. The weary world
of waters between us oppresses the imagination.
It is difficult to conceive how a scrawl of mine
should ever stretch across it. It is a sort of
presumption to expect that one's thoughts should
live so far. It is like writing for posterity ; and
reminds me of one of Mrs. Rowe’s super-
scriptions, “Alcander to Strephon, in the
Shades.” Cowley’s Post-Angel is no more than
would be expedient in such an intercourse.
One drops a packet at Lombard Street, and in
twenty-four hours a friend in Cumberland gets
it as fresh as if it came in ice. It is only like
whispering through a long trumpet. But
suppose a tube let down from the moon, with
yourself at one end, and the man at the other ;
it would be some balk to the spirit of conversa-
tion, if you knew that the dialogue exchanged
with that interesting theosophist would take two
or three revolutions of a higher luminary in its
passage. Yet for aught I know, you may be
some parasangs nigher that primitive idea—
Plato’s man—than we in England here have the
honour to reckon ourselves.


Epistolary matter usually compriseth three
topics; news, sentiment, and puns. In the
latter, I include all non-serious subjects; or
subjects serious in themselves, but treated after
my fashion, non-seriously.—And first, for news.
In them the most desirable circumstance, I
suppose, is that they shall be true. But what
security can I have that what I now send you
for truth shall not before you get it unaccountably
turn into a lie ? For instance, our mutual friend
P. is at this present writing— my Now —in good
health, and enjoys a fair share of worldly
reputation. You are glad to hear it. This is
natural and friendly. But at this present
reading— your Now —he may possibly be in the
Bench, or going to be hanged, which in reason
ought to abate something of your transport
(i.e., at hearing he was well, &c.), or at least
considerably to modify it. lam going to the
play this evening, to have a laugh with Munden.
You have no theatre, I think you told me, in
your land of d d realities. You naturally
lick your lips, and envy me my felicity. Think
but a moment, and you will correct the hateful
emotion. Why, it is Sunday morning with you,
and 1823. This confusion of tenses, this grand
solecism of two presents, is in a degree common
to all postage. But if I sent you word to Bath
or the Devizes, that I was expecting the afore-
said treat this evening, though at the moment
you received the intelligence my full feast of fun
would be over, yet there would be for a day or
two after, as you would well know, a smack, a
relish left upon my mental palate, which would
give rational encouragement for you to foster a
portion at least of the disagreeable passion,
which it was in part my intention to produce.
But ten months hence, your envy or your
sympathy would be as useless as a passion spent


upon the dead. Not only does truth, in these
long intervals, un-essence herself, but (what is
harder) one cannot venture a crude fiction for the
fear that it may ripen into a truth upon the
voyage. What a wild improbable banter I put
upon you some three years since of Will
Wetherall having married a servant-maid ! I
remember gravely consulting you how we were
to receive her —for Will’s wife was in no case to
be rejected; and your no less serious replication
in the matter; how tenderly you advised an
abstemious introduction of literary topics before
the lady, with a caution not to be too forward
in bringing on the carpet matters more within
the sphere of her intelligence ; your deliberate
judgment, or rather wise suspension oi sentence,
how far jacks, and spits, and mops could with
propriety be introduced as subjects; whether
the conscious avoiding of all such matters in
discourse would not have a worse look than the
taking of them casually in our way ;in what
manner we should cany ourselves to our maid
Becky, Mrs. William Wetherall being by;
whether we should show more delicacy, and a
truer sense of respect for Will’s wife, by treating
Becky with our customary chiding before her,
or by an unusual deferential civility paid to
Becky as to a person of great worth, but thrown
by the caprice of fate into a humble station.
There were difficulties, I remember, on both
sides, which you did me the favour to state with
the precision of a lawyer, united to the tender-
ness of a friend. I laughed in my sleeve at
your solemn pleadings, when lo ! while I was
valuing myself upon this flam put upon you in
New South Wales, the devil in England, jealous
possibly of any lie-children not his own, or
working after my copy, has actually instigated
our friend (not three days since) to the com-


mission of a matrimony, which I had only
conjured up for your diversion, William
Weatherall has married Mrs. Cotterel’s maid.
But to take it in its truest sense, you will see,
my dear Field, that news from me must become
history to you; which I neither profess to
write, nor indeed care much for reading. No
person, under a diviner, can with any prospect
ot veracity, conduct a correspondence at such an
arm’s length. Two prophets, indeed, might
thus interchange intelligence with effect; the
epoch of the writer (Habakkuk) falling in with
the true present time of the receiver (Daniel);
but then we are no prophets.
Then as to sentiment. It fares little better
with that. This kind of dish, above all, requires
to be served up hot : or sent off in water-plates,
that your friend may have it almost as warm as
yourself. If it have time to cool, it is the most
tasteless of all cold meats. I have often smiled
at a conceit of the late Lord C. It seems that
travelling somewhei'e about Geneva, he came to
some pretty green spot, or nook, where a willow
or something, hung so fantastically and invitingly
over a stream —was it ? —or a rock ? —no matter
—but the stillness and the repose, after a weary
journey ’tis likely, in a languid moment of his
lordship’s hot restless life, so took his fancy,
that he could imagine no place so proper, in the
event of his death, to lay his bones in. This
was all very natural and excusable as a senti-
ment, and shows his character in a very pleasing
light. But when from a passing sentiment it
came to be an act; and when, by a positive
testamentary disposal, his remains were actually
earned all that way from England ; who was
there, some desperate sentimentalists excepted,
that did not ask the question, Why could not his
lordship have found a spot as solitary, a nook as


romantic, a tree as green and pendant, with a
stream as emblematic to his purpose, in Surrey,
in Dorset, or in Devon ? Conceive the senti-
ment boarded up, freighted, entered at the
Custom House (startling the tide-waiters with
the novelty), hoisted into a ship. Conceive it
pawed about and handled between the rude
jests of tarpaulin ruffians—a thing of its delicate
texture —the salt bilge wetting it till it became
as v,apid as a damaged lustring. Suppose it in
material danger (mariners have for some super-
stition about sentiments) of being tossed over in
a fresh gale to some propitiatory shark (spirit of
St. Gothard, save us from a quietus so foreign
to the deviser’s purpose !) but it has happily
evaded a fishy consummation. Trace it then to
its lucky landing—at Lyons shall we say ?—I
have not the map before me—jostled upon four
men’s shoulders—baiting at this town—stopping
to refresh at t’other village—waiting a passport
here, a licence there; the sanction of the
magistracy in this district, the concurrence of
the ecclesiastics in that canton ; till at length it
arrives at its destination, tired out and jaded,
from a brisk sentiment, into a feature of silly
pride or tawdry, senseless affectation. How
few sentiments, my dear Field, I am afraid we
can set down, in the sailor’s phrase, as quite
seaworthy.
Lastly, as to the agreeable levities, which,
though contemptible in bulk, are the twinkling
corpuscula which should irradiate a right
friendly epistle—your puns and small jests are,
I apprehend, extremely circumscribed in their
sphere of action. They are so far from a
capacity of being packed up and sent beyond
sea, they will scarce endure to be transported
by hand from this room to the next. Their
vigour is as the instant of their birth. Their


nutriment for their brief existence is the intel-
lectual atmosphere of the bystanders : or this
last, is the fine slime of Nilus —the melior lutus,
—whose maternal recipiency is as necessary as
the sol paier to their equivocal generation. A
pun hath a hearty kind of present ear-kissing
smack with it; you can no more transmit it in
its pristine flavour, than you can send a kiss.—
Have you not tried in some instances to palm
off a yesterday’s pun upon a gentleman, and has
it answered ? Not but it was new to his
hearing, but it did not seem to come new from
you. It did not hitch in. It was like picking
up at a village ale-house a two days’ old news-
paper. You have not seen it before, but you
resent the stale thing as an affront. This sort
of merchandise above all requires a quick return.
A pun, and its recognitory laugh, must be co-
instantaneous. The one is the brisk lightning,
the other the fierce thunder. A moment’s
interval, and the link is snapped. A pun is
reflected from a friend’s face as from a mirror.
Who would consult his sweet visnomy, if the
polished surface were two or three minutes (not
to speak of twelve months, my dear Field) in
giving back its copy ?
I cannot imagine to myself whereabout you
are. When I try to fix it, Peter Wilkin’s
island comes across me. Sometimes you seem
to be in the Hades of Thieves. I see Diogenes
prying among you with his perpetual fruitless
lantern. What must you be willing by this
time to give for the sight of an honest man !
You must almost have forgotten how we look.
And tell me, what your Sydneyites do ? are
they th**v*ng all daylong? Merciful heaven!
what property can stand against such a depre-
dation ! The, kangai'oos—your Aborigines—do
they keep their primitive simplicity un-Europe-


tainted, with those little short fore-puds, looking
like a lesson framed by nature to the pick-
pocket ! Marry, for diving into fobs they ai - e
rather lamely provided a priori ; but if the hue
and cry were once up, they would show as fair
a pair of hind-shifters as the expertest loco-
motor in the colony.—We hear the most impro-
bable tales at this distance. Pray, is it true
that the young Spartans among you are born
with six fingers, which spoils their scanning ?
It jnust look very odd; but use reconciles.
For their scansion, it is less to be regretted, for
if they take into their heads to be poets, it is
odds but they turn out, the greater part of them,
vile plagiarists.—ls there much difference to see
to between the son of a th**f, and the grandson ?
or where does the taint stop ? Do you bleach
in three or in four generations ?—I have many
questions to put, but ten Delphic voyages can
be made in a shorter time than it will take to
satisfy my scruples.— Do you grow your oxvn
hemp!—What is your staple trade, exclusive of
the national profession, I mean ? Your lock-
smiths, I take it, are some of your great capital-
ists.
I am insensibly chattering to you as familiarly
as when we used to exchange good-morrows out
of our old contiguous windows, in pump-famed
Hare Court in the Temple. Why did you ever
leave that quiet corner ?—Why did I ?—with its
complement of four poor elms, from whose
smoke-dried barks, the theme of jesting ruralists,
I picked my first lady-birds ! My heart is as
dry as that spring sometimes proves in a thirsty
August, when I revert to the space that is
between us; a length of passage enough to
render obsolete the phrases of our English letters
before they can reach you. But while I talk, I


think you hear me,—thoughts dallying with vain
surmise—
Ay me ! while thee the seas and sounding shores
Hold far away.
Come back, before I am grown into a very
old man, so as you shall hardly know me. Come,
before Bridget walks on crutches. Girls whom
you left children have become sage matrons,
while you are tarrying there. The blooming Miss
Winter (you remember Sally Winter) called upon
us yesterday, an aged crone. Folks, whom you
knew, die off every year. Formerly, I thought
that death was wearing out, —I stood ramparted
about with so many healthy friends. The de-
parture of J. W., two springs back, corrected my
delusion. Since then the old divorcer has been
busy. If you do not make haste to return, there
will be little left to greet you, of me, or mine.
[Something of home matters I could add ;
but that , with certain remembrances never to be
omitted, I reserve for the grave postscript to this
light epistle; which postscript, for weighty
reasons, justifactory in any court of feeling, I
think better omitted in this first edition. Lon-
don, March Ist, 1822. Elia]


EXTRACT
FROM
SYDAEY SMITH'S REVIEW
OF
COLLINS’ ACCOUNT OF N.S.W.
1803.
The Governor, who appears on all occa-
sions to be an extremely well-disposed man,
is not quite so conversant in the best writings
on political economy as we could wish : and
indeed (though such knowledge would be
extremely serviceable to the interests which
this Romulus of the Southern Pole is super-
intending), it is rather unfair to exact from a
superintendent of pickpockets that he should
be a philosopher. In the 18th page we have
the following information respecting the price
of labour:—
“Some representations having been made to the
Governor from the settlers in different parts of the colony,
purporting that the wages demanded by the free labouring
people, whom they had occasion to hire, was so exorbi-
tant as to run away with the greatest part of the profit of
their farms, it was recommended to them to appoint
quarterly meetings amongst themselves to be held in each
district, for the purpose of settling the rate of wages to
labourers, in every different kind of work ; that to this
end, a written agreement should be entered into, and
subscribed by each settler, a breach of which should be
punished by a penalty, to be fixed by general opinion,
and made recoverable in a court of civil judicature. It
was recommended to them to apply this forfeiture to
the common benefit; and they were to transmit to the
headquarters a copy of their agreement, with the rate of
wages which they should from time to time establish, for
the Governor's information, holding their first meeting as
early as possible.”


£ s. d.
Felling Forest timber, per acre ..
Ditto in brush ground, ditto ..
o
9
o
o
IO
6
Burning off open ground, ditto ..
I
s
o
Ditto brush ground, ditto ..
I
IO
o
Breaking up new ground, ditto ..
I
4
o
Chipping fresh ground, ditto ..
o
12
3
Chipping in wheat, ditto ..
0
7
o
Breaking up stubble or corn ground, ijd
rod, or per acre
per
o
16
8
Planting Indian corn, per acre ..
o
7
o
Hilling ditto, ditto ..
o
7
o
Reaping wheat ditto ..
o
IO
o
Thrashing ditto, per bushel
o
o
9
Pulling and husking Indian corn, per bushel..
o
o
6
Splitting paling of seven feet long, per hundred
o
3
o
Ditto of five feet long ditto
o
I
0
Sawing Plank ditto
three
o
7
o
Ditching per rod, three feet wide and
feet deep ..
o
o
IO
Carriage of wheat, per bushel, per mile
o
o
2
Ditto Indian corn, neat
Yearly wages for labour, with board
o
o
3
IO
o
O
Wages per week, with provisions, consisting of
4 lib. of salt pork, or 6 lib. of fresh, and
2i lib. of wheat with vegetables ..
0
6
o
A day’s wages with board
o
I
o
Ditto without board
o
2
b
A government-man allowed to officers Or
tiers in their own time
set-
o
o
IO
Price of an axe
o
2
o
New steeling ditto ..
o
o
6
A new hoe ..
o
I
9
A sickle
o
I
6
Hire of a boat to carry grain, per day ..
o
5
o
And, again, at p. 24, the following arrange-
ments on that head are enacted :
“In pursuance of the order which was -issued in
January last, recommending the settlers to appoint
meetings, at which they should fix the rate of wages that
it might be proper to pay for the different kinds of labour
which their farms shouud require, the settlers had
submitted to the Governor the several resolutions that
they had entered into, by which he was enabled to fix a
rate that he conceived to be fair and equitable between
the farmer and the labourer.
“The following prices of labour were now estab-
lished, viz.—


“ The settlers were reminded that, in order to pre-
vent any kind of dispute between the master and servant,
when they should have occasion to hire a man for any
length of time, they would find it most convenient to
engage him for a quarter, half year, or year, and to make
their agreement in writing ; on which, should any dispute
arise, an appeal to the magistrates would settle it.”
This is all very bad ; and if the Governor
had cherished the intention of destroying the
colony, he could have done nothing more
detrimental to its interests. The high price
of labour is the very corner-stone on which
the prosperity of a new colony depends. It
enables the poor man to live with ease ; and
is the strongest incitement to population, by
rendering children rather a source of riches
than of poverty. If the same difficulty of
subsistence existed in new countries as in old,
it is plain that the progress of population
would be equally slow in each. The very
circumstances which cause the difference are,
that, in the latter, there is a competition
among the labourers to be employed ; and, in
the former, a competition among the occu-
piers of land to obtain labourers. In the one
land is scarce, and men plenty ; in the other
men are scarce, and land is plenty. To
disturb this natural order of things (a practice
injurious at all times) must be particularly so
where the predominant disposition of the
colonists is an aversion to labour, produced
by a long course of dissolute habits. In such
cases the high price of labour, which the
Governor was so desirous of abating, bid fair
not only to increase the agricultural pros-
perity, but to effect the moral reformation of
the colony.


TO THE
THEATRICAL * PROFESSION
C«?3 C«?X- -O.U
>
Do you require an effective
ltwamer,
llfaree ter,
tMauqez oz ?
J <?i 0
Then Call at —
w mmm mm*m
WE can give you a more striking
£S" Bill in TWO Colors than you
SS" can get elsewhere in Three or
m" Four Colors. (3 Q> Q Q>
MARCUS & ANDRE W,
SUCCESSORS TO
:SSB SSSBS S f®-, limited,
• Agents for David Allen & Fens’ (Belfast), Pictorials.


§
SUCCESSORS TO
Limited.
©
-*;
githographic and gcttcrprcdd
PRINTERS
AND
f)l£anw Stationers,
13 BRIDGE STREET. SYDNEY.
PUBLIC AND MINING COMPANIES* POINTING
A SPECIAJUTY.
Special attention given to
IllurtjirjeEied • erjd. < Seatsor)
mmm.
k :
M »JF :
