









DIVER’S LUCK
A STORY OF PEARLING DAYS


Spearing turtles


DIVER’S LUCK
A Story of Pearling Days
By
CLARENCE BENHAM
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON
SYDNEY LONDON


First Published 1949
Obtainable Overseas —
Great Britain: Angus & Robertson Ltd., 48 Bloomsbury Street,
London, W.C.i.
U.S.A.: P.D. and lone Perkins, 1603 Hope Street, South Pasadena,
California, U.S.A.
South Africa: Fran\ Mee\in, 43 Church Street, Capetown, South
Africa.
SET UP, PRINTED AND BOUND IN AUSTRALIA BY
HALSTEAD PRESS PTY LTD, 9-19 N I CKSON STREET, SYDNEY
REGISTERED IN AUSTRALIA FOR TRANSMISSION THROUGH THE POST AS A BOOK


Oh, my ways are strange ways and new ways and old ways.
And deep ways and steep ways and high ways and low;
I'm at home and at ease on a track that I know not,
And restless and lost on a track that l know.
—HENRY LAWSON.




CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
FOREWORD Xi
I. GETTING INTO IT FEET FIRST 1
11. THE GROPER AND THE “WILLIAM” 11
111. THE GROPER PLAYS CRIBBAGE WITH THE OLD
SCHOONER 23
IV. RUM DOINGS ON THE OLD GROUND 34
V. GIRTIE AND A SHARK 44
VI. “THE TIME HAS COME,” THE WALRUS SAID 54
VII. PHILOSOPHY, MONKEY HOWE, AND A CROCODILE 64
VIII. THE GREAT BARRIER REEF 79
IX. INTERLUDE WITH JIMMY 104
X. I BECOME A DIVER H 2
XI. INNOCENTS ABROAD 138
XII. WILLIAM DUNPHY, ESQ., J.P. 157
XIII. mrs Macquarie’s chair 177
XIV. CAPTAIN WALSH AND THE DUKE OF ORFOLK 186
XV. MARAU SOUND 199
XVI. ASU PAINA AND m’bOLI PASS * 211
XVII. PORT PRASLIN 226
XVIII. THE CASE OF WHISKY 245




ILLUSTRATIONS
spearing turtles Frontis'piece
(Department of Information)
JAPANESE PEARLING LUGGERS AT DARWIN 2
(Australian National Publicity Association)
GOLD-LIP PEARLSHELL 3
Miss Hope Macpherson (National Museum, Victoria)
BLACK-LIP PEARLSHELL 3
Miss Hope Macpherson (National Museum, Victoria)
THE VENOMOUS CONE-SHELL 66
Miss Hope Macpherson (National Museum, Victoria)
TROCHUS-SHELL 66
Miss Hope Macpherson (.National Museum, Victoria)
GIANT CLAM-SHELL • 66
Miss Hope Macpherson (National Museum, Victoria)
A GORGONID CORAL 67
(H. Chargois, F.R.P.S.)
STONE-FISH 67
(H. Chargois, F.R.P.S.)
CONCH-SHELL 82
Miss Hope Macpherson (National Museum, Victoria)
BAILER SHELL 82
Miss Hope Macpherson (National Museum, Victoria )
SUNRISE FROM MABUIAG ISLAND 83
(The Australian Museum, Sydney)
CORAL-FISH IN CORAL GROTTO 83
(The Australian Museum, Sydney)
PEARLS AND BLISTERS CUT FROM THE SHELL,
THURSDAY ISLAND 130
(Frank Hurley)


CAPTURED GREEN TURTLES, BRAMBLE CAY, TORRES
STRAITS 130
{The Australian Museum, Sydney)
SPEARING TURTLE NEAR LINDEMAN ISLAND 131
(Queensland Government Tourist Bureau)
I PEARLS OF VARIOUS SIZES 146
BLISTER INSIDE A GOLD-LIP, IN WHICH MAY BE A FINE
PEARL 146
(Australian National Publicity Association)
STINGAREE SPEARED BY CAPE YORK NATIVES 147
TYPICAL JAPANESE DIVER, THURSDAY ISLAND 178
{Frank Hurley)
HUNTING DUGONG, DARNLEY ISLAND, TORRES STRAITS 179
{The Australian Museum, Sydney)
NATIVE DIVING FOR TROCHUS 194
{H. Chargois, F.R.P.S.)
PEARLING LUGGER UNDER WAY 195
( H. Chargois, F.R.P.S.)


FOREWORD
This is a story of pearl-diving, as experienced by me, during
a brief period of my life, in the waters of Torres Straits,
the Great Barrier Reef, and the Solomon Islands. It depicts the
nature of the work, the rough conditions, the rude men, and
some of the dangers that may be met.
It is possible that those who are squeamish may not care for
this narrative because it tells, as I have said, of rough men, their
work and ways. However, some people who live in towns may
like to learn a little about pearls, and the men who dive for
them, in spite of the fact that those with whom I was associated
in the work of pearl-diving had not the polish or lustre deemed
desirable in some strata of humankind.
The principal pearl fisheries of the world are those of the
Persian Gulf and Ceylon; the Gulf of California, once fished
by the Aztecs, the Paumotus, and Australia. The greatest pearl
production is that of Ceylon, but the shell is very small, and
of little, if any, value. The Australian shell is the most valuable,
and the largest of all pearlshell, one kind (Pinctada maxima)
growing to a diameter of twelve inches and a weight of seven
pounds.
Captain Banner, in the brig Julia Percy , is reputed to be the
first to bring the news of the Torres Straits pearl-beds to Sydney
some time in the sixties of the nineteenth century. For a long
time all the vessels engaged in the Torres Straits pearling were
fitted out and sailed from that town, simply because there was
no other suitable place nearer at hand.
All of the divers were swimmers in those days, the dress not
being introduced until 1874. The divers and crews were brought
from various South Sea islands, and from the northern parts


of the continent. Very often the natives were shanghaied. In
any case they were paid only a few shillings’ worth of trashy
trade goods a month, and were forced to work willy-nilly. In
1872 an Imperial Act was passed for the protection of the
natives and, in order to show that the Government meant busi-
ness, several vessels were seized and forfeited. Thursday Island
was selected as the seat of authority and settled in 1878, but
the conditions generally continued to be very rough for a long
time afterwards.
When the dress was introduced many white divers, and some-
times white crews, were employed. Shell brought up to £4OO a
ton in Sydney, and white divers commonly earned £SOO a year.
Gradually, as more shell came on the market, and the price
dropped accordingly, the earnings of the white divers decreased
so that they were no longer attracted to the life. At the time
when I was there no more than half a dozen remained.
Thursday Island is about thirty miles nor’-west of Cape York,
the most northerly point of the great continent of Australia,
and is one of many other islands in Torres Straits. With the ex-
ception of the soldiers in the Fort, and a few gold-miners on
neighbouring islands, the resident population depend upon those
engaged in fishing, of one kind or another, in the same way as
people in a goldfields town live on the earnings of the miners
and the production of the mines.
It will be incomprehensible to many people that any normal
young man should voluntarily submit himself to the privation
and discomfort, apart from the dangers, experienced by the
writer and described in this book. On the other hand, it is diffi-
cult for others to comprehend how any healthy young fellow
can put up with a pampered, petted life in town, meeting the
same people, and doing the same things day after day for the
whole of his life.
Today, as throughout the history of mankind, and as I hope
it ever will be, young fellows seek the untrodden wilds, or the
unusual. It is not easy now to do something that no other has
done, but the spirit of adventure beckons and heedlessly we
plunge into something that has excited our imagination. When
whalers call at Hobart they have no difficulty in signing on
additional hands for a voyage to the bitter Antarctic. There will


always be volunteers to go anywhere and do anything, no matter
how perilous and rough the task may be. If they were called,
thousands would offer themselves for a journey to the moon,
or into space; in fact, they would proffer big sums of money for
the privilege of being one of the lunatic crew.
Acknowledgment is hereby made to the Melbourne Herald,
which has printed some parts of this story, and to Mr Sim-
monds, the Editor, for his kindly encouragement.
All the characters in this book are now dead, or fictitious, or
both, except me.
CLARENCE BENHAM




CHAPTER I
GETTING INTO IT FEET FIRST
All my life I have been fond of the water, and I do not
remember when I first learnt to swim. In my childhood,
my father took my elder brother and myself to the big sea baths
at Holdfast Bay, in South Australia, every fine morning during
the long, long warm season of the year. Those baths were situ-
ated on one of the finest beaches in the whole world, and faced
the broad waters of St Vincent Gulf. Whenever a strong wes-
terly wind blew, big seas swept through the baths to crash on
the beach beyond, but that did not stop father, and other hardy
ones like myself, from swimming. By the time that I was twelve
years old I could swim a hundred feet under water, and the
seas were never so big as to stop me from having a swim.
It is therefore no wonder that my interest was excited by
pearl-diving when I found myself in Port Darwin, in the far
north of the continent. There were opportunities for doing many
things that appealed to me in that tropical region—shooting
buffaloes for their hides and horns, hunting crocodiles for their
skins and taking a job as a stockman on a cattle station. There
was something about diving, however, that rubbed other notions
right off the list. It was not at all difficult to make the acquaint-
ance of the divers, and after a few drinks I was on very good
terms with them. The more I saw and heard them the more
determined I became to learn diving.
There is a place in Port Darwin called Fort Hill, where the
Government Residence is situated. At the foot of the hill were
the small swimming baths where I often went in the afternoon.
C ne neap tide, Jimmy Wilson the diver was working just off


the baths, and actually getting shell there in the harbour. He
had promised to give me a dip when the chance presented it-
self, and if this wasn’t a chance I didn’t know one when I saw
it. Hailing Jimmy, when he got out of the dress, I reminded him
of his promise. Presently the dinghy carried me on board, and
in a very little while they had me in the dress, standing on the
ladder outside, all ready to go down. Having already seen divers
at work, I was not an entire stranger to the procedure of a diver
entering the water, which made it all the easier for Jimmy
Wilson. My only instruction from that gentleman before I
stepped off the ladder was, “Don’t forget to close your valve
when you come up—one pull on the line is the signal to come
up.”
The tender, who had been waiting with the face-glass in his
hands, now called, “Pump.” A nasty, rubbery, warm air at once
began to fill the helmet to the tune of “Umph, rumph, grumph”
from the three-cylinder pump. A boy threw over the weighted
plumper-line, and held the bight towards me; the tender screwed
on the face-glass, patted my helmet as a signal that all was well,
and—l was definitely committed to my first dip.
Now, when a man first tries to fly, or to swim, or to do any-
thing that is strange and difficult, a tutor is generally at hand
to render assistance by advice, or otherwise. But there is none
to give advice or comforting assurance to the new-chum diver.
His only consolation is the knowledge that he is connected with
the world by his life-line and air-pipe, though he may after-
wards be glad that there were none to witness his sufferings, or
to hear his anguished, lurid language.
I knew what to do when the tender tapped my helmet. Open-
ing the valve on the helmet to let the air rush from the dress
when the water compressed it, I stood up straight, seized the
plumper-line, and stepped boldly off the ladder backwards. Up
rose my helmet, leaving my eyes level with the corslet rim, but
only for a moment. Then I began to sink. Raising my right
hand, I shut the valve, and continued to slide down the plum-
per. Almost immediately there came a “gck-gcking” in my ears,
which presently changed to an intolerable, hot sensation, almost
as though a hot corkscrew was being driven into my ears. Hold-
ing fast to the plumper, I found, eased the pain, and when I


Japanese pearling luggers at Darwin


ABOVE: Gold-lip pearlshell
BELOW: Black-lip pearlshell


began to rise, owing to the steadily pumped air filling the dress,
the pain disappeared.
Opening the valve, I once more went down to meet again
that agonizing torture of my ears. My legs were gripped tightly
by the pressure of the water, but there was no apparent weight
on my abdomen or chest. Having found that hanging to the
plumper eased the pain, and that rising a few feet stopped it,
I adopted those measures several times, but I did not surrender
altogether by going back to the surface. Eventually, I reached
the mud bottom, opened the valve a little, gave my line a shake
as a signal to pull up the plumper, and looked round. My de-
light was great to find that the active pain was gone, and that
only a dead, dull, aching numbness remained in my ears.
Accidentally, I found that I could take enormous strides by
inflating my dress, and going with the tide. But my joy was
great indeed when I found that something I had picked up
was actually a “gold-lip” (mother-of-pearl shell). Altogether, I
was a pleased and contented man, for had I not gone to the
bottom successfully in twelve fathoms of water at my first dip,
and capped it by picking up a shell off mud bottom?
It must be remembered that there are no telephones attached
to the gear of shell-divers, so there was nothing very surprising
in what next occurred. Getting a pull to come up, I remembered
the injunction, “Don’t forget to close your valve before coming
up”, but I also reasoned that the valve was closed during my
descent, and that the pain in my ears was terrific accordingly.
What could be more natural, therefore, than that I should
ignore my orders, and leave my valve open, fearing that if it
was closed I would suffer again? So, having no means of com-
municating with me, all hands tailed onto the life-line and
hauled me to the surface.
Innocent, unwitting of wrongdoing, I rose eventually to the
surface with the lower part of my smiling face smeared with
blood from my nostrils, and waved the gold-lip triumphantly
above the water. On deck, I received the smiles of the coloured
crew, and all the congratulations that any new-chum diver is
entitled to get after making good.
Of course, nobody should be sent down in water so deep as
twelve fathoms at first. It is quite dangerous. But the pearl-
B


divers were a fairly rough lot of chaps, and besides, there were
many things connected with their work of which they were
ignorant. Before leaving Port Darwin I went out for a cruise
with another diver named Billy Dunphy, or Maryborough Bill,
and he actually proposed putting me down in seventeen
fathoms. Although more ignorant than he was, natural caution
and some not so very latent commonsense induced me to wriggle
out of that business.
Neither Jimmy Wilson nor anybody else had said a word to
me about getting my ears syringed, or even a hint that a little
warm oil dropped in the ears overnight might be a wise pre-
caution. They had been broken in to diving in the same rough
and ready manner, by men who had also been broken in like
that. There was no deliberate cruelty to another in what was
done; it was simply that they did not know any better.
While at this place I had several trips to sea with the divers,
and also had a look at the buffalo shooters in another part of
the Northern Territory called Arnhem Land, but it became in-
creasingly obvious that if I wished to continue with diving I
should have to go somewhere else to learn.
My ambition led me from Port Darwin to Thursday Island
in Torres Straits where there were greater opportunities to learn.
For in Port Darwin, owing to the great velocity of the spring
tides, the divers are compelled to be idle every alternate week.
I took with me a letter of introduction to the manager of a
large fleet of luggers, and so, soon after my arrival at Thursday
Island, I signed on as crew at £2 10s. a month. However, there
was an understanding that I should sail with a white diver
known as Billy the Groper, and that he would give me an
opportunity to learn something about diving.
During the sou-east season, while there is a steady, almost
unvarying, strong breeze blowing night and day, the pearling
fleets haunt the otherwise lonely waters of Torres Straits known
as the Old Ground. So that the work will not be interrupted
a large vessel goes with them to supply water, firewood, stores,
and such luxuries as the coloured crews of the luggers crave—
tobacco, hair-oil, tinned fish, Epsom-salts, scented soap, and
clothing. A smaller craft, usually a fast ketch, or schooner, is


the intermediary between the floating station and Thursday
Island.
The large craft, as I have indicated, are known as floating
stations, and may be from one hundred and fifty to two hun-
dred tons register. Besides the captain, they carry the manager
and a clerk, and it is those white men who open all the shell
collected by the luggers each day, and search zealously for
pearls. The remainder of the crew are natives of various kinds
and colours, but they are very capable, and include the mate,
bo sun, carpenter, sail-maker, and packer.
The tender, or supply craft, was a pretty thirty-ton fore-
and-aft schooner named Wai-wia, kept very shipshape and natty,
below and aloft, by her master, Peter Peblo, a half-caste Bris-
bane born Manilla-man. It was on this schooner that I left
Thursday Island, one beautiful morning, in search of the fleet.
We sailed through a lovely picture of vividly green islands, on
a blue sea flecked with white, across which passed the swiftly
moving shadows of the white clouds that were hurried under
the blue dome above by the fresh sou’-east breeze.
There is not, there cannot be, a more delightful sensation
of motion than to stand on the deck of a fine sailing craft in
such joyous surroundings, and feel how very much she is alive.
She seems to quiver with pleasure, to love to feel the scattered
splash of spray on her deck, to rush at the next white-capped
sea, and to show her gleaming copper in a contented smile.
More than once we saw a great kingfish leap, quivering, nearly
vertically from the water to a height perhaps of forty feet, to
fall back with a smacking splash. Many large boobies and black-
headed gulls that dived repeatedly headlong into the water gave
another interest to the scene.
It was interesting for a stranger to watch the crew of four
at their work on this little schooner. Their appearance might
be described by a good-natured person as “homely”. All of them
had crinkly hair, and dark brown skins. The ear lobes of two
of them hung in grisly loops nearly to their shoulders, like strops
from which the blocks had fallen; but one of them had one
of his pendulous ear-loops broken, and, on that side of his head,
two brown, macaroni-like fleshy cords dangled from his ear,
and danced a little jig whenever he moved. That gentleman


also had his nostrils slit, and the septum of his nose pierced
so that a long ornamental bone could be slung athwart his
figurehead, and he had broad bluish tattoo marks on his cheeks.
Otherwise he looked all right.
After the schooner was under way, the remainder of the sails
set, the ropes coiled down, and the anchor secured at the cat-
head, there was very little work for them to do except to grace
the bare deck bare-headed in their bare feet. Very few orders
were given by Peter, for the crew knew there was little to do
and did it without being told.
We passed Hawkesbury Island, and soon were so far out
that the summits only of any islands could be seen. It was then
that two masts, standing out of the water in the distance ahead,
were identified by Peter Peblo as belonging to the Tarawa , the
floating station of the fleet. A seaman can always recognize any
craft he knows by peculiarities of her masts, sails, rigging, and
hull. Soon the vessel herself came into view, and before long
the Wai-wia anchored as close to her as was safe. Seen from our
deck the Tarawa presented a strange sight. There she was,
all lonely on the Old Ground, a great fore-and-aft schooner,
long jib-boom jutting jauntily from her bow, the after end of her
great main-boom striding out from her stern, her graceful hull
low in the water, and two tall masts bare just now of everything
but cross-trees and rigging.
There was a fairly big sea, and the tide was running to lee-
ward, so, to keep her from drifting too much, the Tarawa had
both anchors down, and a great deal of chain had been paid
out. Naturally, with wind and tide both exerting themselves,
and the seas helping as well, the one hundred and fifty ton
Tarawa was putting a tremendous strain on her cables. She
appeared to be trying to break free, like a vicious horse that
pulls back to break its harness. She rolled heavily and con-
stantly, save when she would raise herself now and then and
heave hard on the chains that were holding her. Then up
would rise her bows with the water streaming down while she
showed her copper as though grinning and crying with temper.
Full twenty fathoms of chain in a double line would rise above
the sea, taut as a fiddle-string—but grinding a more savage tune
than any fiddler ever played—when she reared. Having made


her effort to break free, and failed, the Tarawa would sink her
head and roll, roll, impotently roll, only to try again, and yet
again.
When Peter Peblo and I were pulled across in the dinghy
by one of the coloured crew of the Wai-wia and I tumbled over
the side of the Tarawa, I was greeted with open arms by the
Captain. He said, Hold on to something else; you want to
watch your feet here with so much slime on deck. Put your
things down in the sail-maker’s locker, and find something to
do. You can lend a hand cleaning that shell.” And then the
Captain settled himself again on his low seat, near the manager
and clerk, and went on with the work of opening pearlshell.
The crew before the mast were coloured, except myself. All
of them were skilled, in some way or other, such as the sail-
maker, the shell-packer, the cook, and the seamen. I, the only
white man, was the only new-chum. But they were a good-
natured lot who seldom had to be told what next to do, so
accustomed were they to their work.
It seems that shortly before I had arrived the collecting-boat
had returned from making her round of the scattered fleet of
luggers, and brought with her all the shell the divers had
obtained the day before. The collecting-boat was a small, broad-
beamed, centre-board, half-decked cutter, sailed by a skilful col-
oured coxswain and two of a crew. She had no engine, for oil-en-
gines of any kind were quite unknown at that time. How the man
sailing this little craft could find each of seventeen luggers,
usually far apart, was a great puzzle to me. I found a part of
the explanation in the steadiness of the wind, which blows
with little variation of direction or force during the sou-east
season. So, as a good man in the bush keeps a direction by the
sun, the man in the collecting-boat left the station with the
wind blowing from a certain quarter and, in all his subsequent
travelling, remembered and returned accordingly. The shell
from each lugger was kept apart with a board bearing the
lugger’s name on the heap, because, as the divers were paid
by result, the shell had to be weighed on the floating station.
I got to work with some of the crew of the Tarawa who were
cleaning the newly arrived shell. Seizing a shell, and resting
the heel of it on a block of wood, a few light blows from a


sixteen-inch knife on either side left the outside bare of the
various parasitical growths on it. Among the rubbish on the
deck, chopped from the shells, were many queer animals. Tiny
crabs, brittle crawly things with legs, and strange worms that
had escaped major injury did their poor best to avoid the awful
wrath of the fearsome gods—in some cases causing some irrita-
tion to the said gods by attempting to hide between their toes.
A bright, hot sun blazing on the rubbish caused that smell des-
cribed by seaside landladies as ozone.
After each diver’s heap of shell had been cleaned it was
carried aft to the group of openers, to one of whom I had already
hastily introduced myself. These, seated low, had each a block
of wood in front of him and a small wooden tub close by. A
shell would be placed on the block and quickly opened with an
ordinary large table knife, the thin blade finding no trouble
in passing the tightly shut mouth of the oyster. Pressing apart
the shell, the opener cut the fish from its anchorage, gathered
it in his hands, and pressed and squeezed it so that it might
give up any pearls contained in its flesh. Usually the poor fish
had nothing to give up save its life, but, to avoid the possibility
of missing even a seed-pearl, it was then thrown into the
wooden tub to undergo further treatment later on. Often a
little soft crab was found in a shell. These had such short legs
that, tumbled on deck, they could not walk at all but lay
helpless. Pallid wee shrimps and other tiny creatures were also
discovered living with the oyster. After that, each shell was
examined for loose pearls, pearls attached to the inside nacre,
and blisters that might contain pearls, for an oyster often forms
a pearl and then builds a cover over it attached to the inside
wall of its shell.
Leaving the openers, more resplendent to the eye in death
than it was when alive, the shell was passed to the packer.
That experienced coloured worker packed it tightly into large
cases, using his knowledge of “rights” and “lefts”, as the top
and bottom halves of the shell are known, to fill the case with-
out loss of space. When all the shell had been treated, the
same thing was done to me by the manager with the aid of a
bottle. The rubbish was passed over the side, the decks washed
and scrubbed, and everything made shipshape for the night.


l’he crew, which had been talkative all day, having now nothing
to interfere with social intercourse, talked all the more. Fresh
air and ozone—the latter inseparable from their occupation-
combined to give them and myself a prodigious appetite. There-
fore the boiled fish, curried pearl-oysters and rice, bread, and
tea went down very well at sunset. That night I found a com-
fortable doss in the sail-maker’s locker and, being well stowed,
turned in.
The schooner was very large, and down in the sail-locker,
itself as large as a big room, I had a most comfortable bed each
night on one of the sails being repaired. The food was good,
and there was plenty of it—fresh bread every day, fresh fish,
and food that wasn t fresh had its taste pleasantly disguised
with curry-powder. The bath was large and well ventilated—
it was the deck—and if that wasn’t large enough there was a
larger one outside.
It was not until Saturday afternoon that the fleet of luggers
came flocking round the floating station. There were seventeen
of them and, anchored as they were all round the mother-craft,
they seemed to be like a lot of cygnets swimming with their
matronly mother swan. The scene on Sunday morning was
a busy one. The sun was shining brightly on a somewhat rough
sea; a continuous succession of light clouds passed swiftly over-
head. The tide being to leeward, the schooner strained on her
heavy anchor-chains, sometimes lifting many fathoms of her
tautened cables clear of the water as she rose on a sea. As for
the smaller craft, none of them was more than about sixteen
tons register, and they were all dancing crazily on the tumbled
waters. Some of them had a reefed mizzen set so as to steady
them somewhat; and it did, too, in the same way that a half-
sober man might steady a drunken companion. To and fro
passed small dinghies laden with people, great canvas water-
bags, firewood, or other stores. The deck of the floating station
became crowded with coloured people of various kinds, but they
all appeared to be cheerful. They smilingly slapped one another
on the shoulder, and chattered with most extraordinary words,
and sounds. For the most part they were clad in dungaree
breeches rolled up to the knee, and white singlets. The slop-
chest was open, some of these people buying little things dear


to the heart of poor coloured folk. There was a continuous
slapping sound as flat, yellow-soled feet were brought down
heavily and firmly on the deck so that the owner would not
slip. This method of bringing down the feet becomes a habit,
and may be observed when these people are on land.
The time had now come for me to change my comfortable
quarters in the Tarawa for the crowded, varied life of a lugger.
Early on that Sunday morning I was stretched out smoking
and reading something I’d picked up, when a red face fringed
with rough red whiskers made its appearance above the combing
of the hatch.
It was the Groper.


CHAPTER II
THE GROPER AND THE WILLIAM
The Groper was a short, blocky, florid man, originally from
the Yarmouth trawlers. He was now middle-aged, vigorous
and alert. Smiling, and with blue eyes twinkling with expec-
tancy, he said, "Hullo, are you the young fella whats a-comin’
for ter larn the divin’?”
I said, "Yes, that’s me. Are you the Groper?”
Smiling like the sun at early morn he hoarsely whispered,
"Yes. I say, you didn’ bring nothin’ out with yer, did yer?”
"Yes, Groper, I did,” I said, "but we drank it coming out.”
"Oh, you pirate!” was what the Groper said as he turned
away, and it was a long time after that before he overlooked my
depravity, or forgot his disappointment.
I got aboard the Groper’s lugger William that morning, and
found her very lively indeed, though steadied with her mizzen
lug-sail, and full of life. Two of her crew were, perfunctorily,
cleaning their bunk-boards of bugs, cockroach-eggs, and some
of the other mess they held. It took but a little time to find that
there were other forms of living creatures sharing the cramped
space with the crew. There were tremendously huge cock-
roaches sporting antennae as long as themselves, with brown
heads and immensely long and powerful wings. Later on, I
found that these ferocious animals chewed the skin from the
ends of my toes so very gently when I was sleeping that they
did not wake me. The painful part came next day when the
salt water made the sore spots smart. The pain was not less each
time I stubbed my toes against a cleat or a ring-bolt. It became
necessary to pull washed flour-bags on my feet, like bedsocks,


when turning in at night, though the cockroaches never attacked
other more tender parts of the body. There were also numbers
of small black ants, which I never became so used to as to like
them in my tea. Small scorpions, centipedes, and so forth, how-
ever, caused little or no comment unless they bit.
The William was about twelve tons register. She was sharp-
sterned, steered with a tiller, as were all the other diving vessels,
and was a real lugger, having lug-sails hauled up by one halliard.
Setting those sails was exercise that developed muscles. The hold
of the William was never covered by hatches, no matter what
the weather was like; it couldn’t be covered because she had no
hatches. Abaft the mizzen was a small cabin occupied by the
Groper, his Mabuiag wife, and her little daughter.
Down in the hold, strongly lashed, stood the canvas-covered,
cased-in, three-cylinder, air-pump. Heavy fly-wheels, and a
handle at each end, all helped to occupy room. Under the deck,
abaft the pump, was a four-hundred-gallon tank for fresh water.
On either side of the tank firewood was stacked. At night the
crew were stacked, not so neatly, under the fore-deck at the
for’ard end of the hold, in bunks that almost touched one
another. Just for’ard of the pump was the fire-place, consisting
of a square box of earth in which was set a decapitated oil-drum.
A square-cut hole in the drum was used to feed the fire, and
two or three iron rods through it were used to set the pot on.
The advantage of this kind of arrangement is its simplicity; a
disadvantage is that only one thing can be cooked at a time,
though the person nearest to it, turning the pump, may con-
tradict that. In wet weather the cook may pull the fire-place into
shelter fnder the deck, or, instead of being suffocated, he may
prefer to cook in the rain.
Some time before sunrise next morning the crew tumbled
out, further sleep in the smoke from the fire being most im-
probable. Besides, the Groper was talking very loudly to the
cook; he was wondering if the crew were waiting for the sun to
warm the water for them. Soon four of us had the two lug-sails
set, then we proceeded to get up the anchor. For that purpose
there was a small windlass with two handles. It would hardly
be believed what an awkward job to a new-chum that was. The
lugger was dancing and prancing about so that it was impossible


to stand at all without holding on to something. Then it was
necessary to put strength and weight on the low-set handles,
to push and to pull. The lugger would duck her head, then
rear up and tauten the chain so much that it would grind worse
than a jazz band. Then she would shake herself, and us, and
take another dive.
While we were getting the anchor up, the diver’s tender
was getting all ready for the Groper. He coiled the long, red,
heavy, stifhsh air-pipe on the deck on the port side near to the
mizzen rigging, with the helmet attached on top of the pile,
or rather in the centre of the coil. He placed the lead-soled
boots on deck near by, put a little fresh water in a tin, and
generally got ready for work.
While we were sailing to some spot on this tumbling, wet
world the sun rose, and life seemed a little less unpleasant. The
Groper came quickly from the little cabin clothed in
knitted woollen garments, and sat on the forepart of the cabin-
housing. He got into the heavy diving dress legs first, of course.
Pulling the dress well up under the arms, he sat down, soaped
his wrists, then stood again, and the dress was pulled up so
much by the tender that the Groper quite disappeared inside,
arms and all. But presently the sleeves of the dress extended and
the hands of the Groper appeared at the ends, then his head
came up as the dress settled down in bulky folds. He adjusted
the rubber cuffs of the sleeves to his wrists, and salt water was
dashed over them to wash away the soap and prevent them
from slipping. After that there followed the corslet to which
the dress is clamped by the corslet bands, secured by butterfly
nuts. Before stepping into his boots the life-line was made fast
round his waist. The life-line is a stout Manila rope, usually
two-inch, first fastened round the waist, and then attached to
a strong cord that is permanently in place on the collar of the
corslet. This is done so that when the diver is hauled up he
will not slew round.
After the Groper was dressed, everyone was served with hot
coffee and a piece of bread by the cook. The coffee was handed
to us in old jam-tins, and it was not a part of the stores, but
was provided by the benevolent Groper. When this was finished,
the diver prepared to go down. As the tide was then running


to leeward, the long bar at the top of the anchor (the stock)
had been taken out, and the chain fastened with hitches round
the flukes in such a way that when let go it would be dragged
backwards and not grip the bottom, his had been done so that
as the divei walked along with the tide the vessel overhead
would follow him, its speed being regulated by the length of
chain and the anchor it was dragging along the sea bottom.
1 he lugger was brought up into the wind, the sails lowered
and rudely secured on the right, or starboard side, the anchor
let go, and we lay jumping and tossing about on the rough
sea. A strong rope-ladder with wooden rungs was thrown over
between the steel ropes that held the mast on the port side, a
small log of wood keeping the ladder from the side of the
lugger. (I am avoiding sea-terms because nowadays few under-
stand them.) Ihe Groper, with his heavily soled boots on,
clumped across the deck, grasped the figging, turned round
and, stepping backwards, descended the ladder outside until his
chest was level with the low rail. The tender had seized the
life-line and closely followed the diver. He, and one of the
crew, now placed the two forty-pound pieces of lead, secured
together with cord, over the shoulders of the Groper so that
there was one on his back, and one on his chest. These were
firmly fastened.
The helmet was then put on, the air-pipe, which is fastened
to the back of the helmet, being passed under the diver’s left
arm and tied to a cord at the front to prevent a sudden pull
detaching it altogether, and because by having it in front the
diver can see if it is clear at all times, and if necessary can send
signals up above with it. The round, thick, heavy, beautifully
clear face-glass, mounted in metal, was then screwed into place
on the helmet by the Malayo tender. A netting bag was handed
to the diver and the weighted plumper-line was dropped over
the side. The Groper now stood upright, grasped the plumper-
line, and stepped off the ladder backwards.
As the face-glass was about to be screwed on the tender
called, “Pump!” and two of the crew began to turn the handles,
the pump saying, “Umph, rumph, grumph.” When the Groper
stepped into the water he floated for just a little while, with
lis helmet level with the surface, while the surplus air escaped


noisily from the open valve on the helmet. Then, as he began
to sink, he raised his right hand, shut the valve, and quickly
sank out of sight. The plumper is pulled up as soon as the diver
reaches the bottom;,the tender takes his position at the stern,
skilfully balancing, and holding the life-line so that he may
feel every movement of the diver. One of the crew takes his
place near the ladder, holding the air-pipe, paying out or taking
in slack as occasion requires.
While turning the pump I was able to see what the others
were doing. A lugger is manned by six—the diver, his tender,
and four hands. One of the hands was, with me, turning the
pump; one held the air-pipe; the other was engaged in cooking.
The cook had also to take his turn at the pump. In fact, he
was not excused from any of the work performed by the others.
Each of the four hands took week about at cooking.
Occasionally the tender would give an order such as, “Heave
in”, or “Slack chain”, and the cook would promptly carry it
out at the windlass. As the anchor was being drawn backwards
on the bottom, and the bottom was not level, taking in chain
increased speed, while slacking it retarded the vessel.
The cook took a nasty-looking piece of smelly salt-beef from
a wooden keg. He washed it by holding it over the side, and
sluicing it about. Then he placed it in a large, rusty-looking
saucepan with water drawn from over the side, and put it on
the fire to cook. He then brought forth a canvas-covered bucket
and unlashed the cover, revealing the sickly, fermenting paste
it contained. To this he added flour, working it in with his
hands until it became workable dough.
Spreading a piece of canvas on the deck below, he emptied
out the dough in the bucket; any of it that reluctantly clung
he pawed out, flipping it masterfully to the heap on the canvas.
Kneeling on the deck, the cook kneaded the dough, shaped it
to a design of his fancy, and placed it to rise in the camp-oven,
which he had previously greased. He rolled up the canvas and
poked it out of sight, put the cover over the empty yeast-bucket,
shoved that away out of sight, and that job was done.
In about an hour the tender called, “Come up.” At this the
hand at the pipe began to haul in and coil down. The tender
was doing the same with the life-line. The bubbles from the


diver below, which had been forming an aerated ring several
feet wide, moving about on the surface indicating the position
of the Groper, now ceased, and we at the pump turned the
handles slowly. As the Groper neared the surface he opened
his valve so as not to rise too quickly, and he came to the top
in water that seemed to be boiling, so great was the volume of
compressed air that he had suddenly released.
He rose, perhaps, fifty yards away, and was drawn hissing
and bubbling to the ladder. Leaning over the side, a hand took
the bag and flung it on the deck. The Groper climbed the ladder
until he could rest the ballast on the ten-inch high rail, and
there he stopped while the tender unscrewed the face-glass.
When the face-glass was removed a little rush of air followed
it, and the wet dress of the diver collapsed into folds and
wrinkles.
There were only three or four rather small gold-lip in the
bag. The helmet was not removed, and the Groper remained
on the ladder, his legs sousing in and out of the water as the
lugger rolled. After a few minutes he went down again.
Now the cook and the other hand manned the pump, while
the pipe was held by the chap who had been turning the pump
with me, and I was the spare hand ready to carry out the
orders of the tender. Presently I again went to the pump to
relieve the cook, who had to attend to his bread. He lifted off
the salt-meat pot, put on the camp-oven and reduced the fire.
After a while, when the bread had risen somewhat, he covered
the lid of the camp-oven with hot coals from the fire, using a
shovel made of a flattened out bit of tin to do so. After the bread
and the salt-beef had both cooked, the cook boiled some fresh
water in a large kettle. He threw in a handful of tea, some hand-
fuls of moist brown sugar, and put the kettle to one side. Then
we impatiently waited for breakfast.
Breakfast is served on a diving lugger when two things are
in agreement-the diver on deck, and the food cooked The
Groper had been up and down several times before the tea had
been made, and it so happened that he was down at the time
when that was done. Perhaps half an hour afterwards he came
up on deck, had the ballast and helmet removed, sat down, and
gave orders to get the anchor in and sails set. When this had


been done, and we were beating up to windward, breakfast was
served.
The salt-beef on a piece of plank, the freshly cooked bread
on bagging, the tea-kettle, and an empty jam-tin for each person
were all placed on deck, an effort being made by the cook to
set them so that they would not be thrown about by William,
who was now very lively under sail. The beef had most, if not
all, of the colours of the rainbow; it had blue, green, grey, and
yellow in streaks and blobs. I have an idea that the smell was
coloured, too. All there had good healthy appetites, but none
took more than a very small piece of that beef. The bread was
excellent; so that and the well-stewed tea were really what we
had. The vivid impressionism of the beef seemed quite out of
place beside the conventional restraint of the tea.
The Gropers cabin mate, and her pretty little half-caste
daughter, had come on deck some time before breakfast. They
sat on the cabin, near the Groper, both eating from the one
large enamel plate. The Groper always referred to her as “my
Old Schooner”, and IVe heard the little one spoken of by the
crew in their queer pidgin English as a “halb-cask” (half-caste).
The Groper was not the father of the little girl; she was too
pretty. Her father had loved and sailed away. Afterwards, the
Groper had vicariously made amends for the fathers behaviour
by marrying the Old Schooner in the little missionary church
at Mabuiag, one of the Torres Islands. I don’t think that any
idea of amends entered his head. It was merely that, having
once been deserted, the Old Schooner thought, wrongly enough,
that she would make sure of the Groper, and he found that
she would not sail without being properly married.
This woman was a very heavy eater so, to stifle murmuring
somewhat, the Groper bought a bag of rice or flour each month,
besides providing coffee each morning at dawn. He also brought
up from the bottom, edible seaweed and large shellfish, such as
conchs, and he sometimes speared big fish and brought them
up, too. All this he did not only to counterpoise what the Old
Schooner ate of the stores, but also because almost anything
at all was better than the awful salt-beef.
We continued to beat to windward for some time after break-
fast, the Groper alertly watching, and smoking at the same time.


A man in the dress is somewhat handicapped so, when the
Groper wished to smoke, the Old Schooner would prepare his
pipe, light it in the cabin calm, and then bring it to him, puffing
heartily to keep it alight. She also sat on deck smoking her pipe.
When the Groper again went down the tide had turned and
was running to windward, so, instead of dropping the anchor,
the sail was simply lowered on deck, the current of the tide
being strong enough to carry the William along against the
wind. If the breeze becomes light enough sail is set to keep the
lugger from going too quickly for the diver to follow, for a
diver must always walk with the tide; it is quite impossible for
him to do otherwise. William had been lively before, but it
was a mere nothing to the way she behaved now. The tide going
to windward had forced up a much bigger sea and, having
nothing to steady her, the lugger performed like an umbrella
in a whirlwind.
Harbour-divers would be appalled at the conditions common
to a shell-diver. Their work requires much skill and experience,
but in two things only does it resemble what a shell-diver has
to do—the same dress is used by both, and both work in water.
The harbour-diver commonly works in water so dirty that it is
impossible to see at all, and the tips of his fingers are the only
eyes he has. On the other hand, he has not to work in a heavy
sea, and he has all the comforts of a town life. Nor is he exposed
to the dangers common to the shell-diver.
Heavy rain, of course, makes little difference to a diver any-
where, but it made a lot of difference to us of the crew, for
there were no awnings, and not an oilskin on the lugger. When
it rained heavily we were able to soap our clothes, and our-
selves, in fresh water-it was just too bad if the rain passed
while our things were still soapy. Even the Old Schooner,
stripped to the waist, did as we did when the rain was heavy.
Little Girtie, her daughter, was less bashful still. At other times
we washed ourselves and our clothes in salt water. Fresh water
was used only for drinking, bread-making, cooking the rice, or
any other absolutely necessary purpose.
The work of the diver went on from sunrise to sunset every
day, the only spells on deck being when we were under sail for
short periods, or having meals. I never saw the weather so bad


on the Old Ground in the sou’-east season that the diver stopped
working.
When the Groper had his dress removed that evening the
hitches of chain were taken off the flukes of the anchor, so that,
when it was again let go, we rode “anchor fast”.
The cook had prepared a delectable curry from the salt-beef
he had cooked that morning. He had placed the empty camp-
oven on the fire and melted a quantity of brown sugar in it.
Into that he had stirred lumps of the rainbow salt-beef, and
sprinkled curry-powder liberally into the mess. He had gently
poked and furrowed the queer mess with a clean piece of fire-
wood until all the sugar and curry-powder was taken up and
the meat was coated uniformly, and disguised properly.
This, with a large pot of puddeny rice, and the kettle of stewed
tea, was something like a feed. Very likely a guest at Bucking-
ham Palace would not have had anything like it.
Before crawling into his bunk that night the cook set the
bread for the next day. He emptied a bottle of yeast into the
dough-bucket and stirred enough flour into it to make a sloppy
paste, using a narrow, smoothed piece of firewood to do so. He
lashed a much-soiled canvas cover on the bucket, and stowed
it away in the darkness for’ard, where it would not capsize. *
The canvas cover was very necessary to keep out the cock-
roaches, if for no other reason.
The yeast was held in an ordinary rum bottle. A third of
the bottle was filled with uncooked rice, which remained un-
changed, day after day, until its strength had waned. When
that happened the rice was shaken out and replaced with fresh.
Every morning a handful of brown sugar was poked into the
bottle by a brown finger, the bottle held over the side until
nearly filled with salt water, the cork lashed down, and the
bottle put aside until the evening.
Some weeks passed before the resentment of the Groper at
my depraved conduct, and his disappointment at not getting the
bottle of schnapps sunk on the voyage from Thursday Island,
abated sufficiently to bring him to the point of giving me a
dip in his dress. But my time was not lost, for there is a great
deal for a man to learn about diving other than the actual work
in the dress,
c


There is the behaviour of the tides, which constantly varies
with the waxing and waning of the moon, and it is a matter
of importance to the diver whether the tide is flowing against
the wind or in the same direction. There is something to be
learnt in launching the dinghy, and how to clear it of water
should it be swamped. There are many other matters, such as
neatly patching a worn dress, learning to converse with the
crew in the queer pidgin they use, becoming hardened to the
food, smells, insect life, and so on.
The Groper forgave me fortuitously, or at all events it was
his absence of mind which gave me a chance of getting into
his dress. I have said that the face-glass, which is screwed on
the helmet immediately before the diver steps backwards off
the ladder, is kept beautifully clean and clear. It is so very
clear, indeed, that it is the custom of the tender to rap the
helmet with his knuckles after he has screwed on the glass so
that the diver will know for a surety that he has done so. Many
divers make a point of feeling for the face-glass with their
fingers before their descent, for a diver may be so accustomed
to his environment that his thoughts have been straying.
Anyhow, one afternoon, while the Groper was standing on
the ladder ready to go down, the tender turned away to sponge
the glass. As he did so, the Groper suddenly straightened him-
self, stepped backwards off the ladder and swiftly disappeared
with one big bubble and disturbed cries from all hands and the
cook to mark the event. At once we all tailed onto the life-line
and pipe and vigorously hauled the Groper back again.
It was not very long before he was addressing us, and the
Deity, comprehensively. After relieving himself of words, and
water, he was relieved of his dress. It was then that he afforded
me the chance to go down. He said, ‘Took here, young fella, if
yer likes ter go down in this here wet dress now’s yer chanct.
I’m not a-goin’ for ter let yer wear me other dry flannels acos
they 11 get wet, too, an 111 be a-wantin of em meself in the
momin’. Anyhow, take it or leave it; please yerself what yer
does; it’s ah one ter me; I don’t care; it’s your funeral, not mine.”
“I’m on,” I said, pulling on the wet stockings, and in a few
minutes I was ready to go down.
The dip I had had off Fort Hill in Port Darwin was an ex


perience that had taught me quite a lot. Twelve fathoms of
water is rather too much for a beginner, but the idea behind
the scheme is to make one descent serve the purpose of many
dips in more shallow water, and thus save worry and trouble
to all concerned excepting the unimportant new-chum in the
dress. On that occasion in Port Darwin I had suffered excru-
ciating pain in my ears all the way down to the bottom—twelve
fathoms of agony.
Descending now from the William I was careful to behave
correctly in all things before the critical eyes of those on deck.
My ears hardly troubled at all; sometimes they seemed to be
on the point of resisting the increasing pressure and giving
painful moments, but each time something gave way with a
click and I thankfully went on down. Somebody had told me
if my ears gave trouble to press my nose hard against the helmet
and blow. T hat advice saved me much trouble then, and often
afterwards; for it often happens that the fine passage between
the nose and the ears is partially obstructed and it must be
cleared to equalize the air pressure.
All those things I had heard should be done by a diver were
kept in mind, such matters as preventing the life-line and air-
pipe from becoming twisted, and kneeling to pick anything up
instead of bending. I dreaded greatly arriving back at the sur-
face all twisted up or, worse still, going up ignominiously feet
first, which may happen if the air somehow gets into the legs
of the dress.
The water was very clear, and it was possible to see for some
distance. As soon as I reached the gritty, undulating bottom and
had adjusted the pressure of air inside the dress so that I might
walk with ease I looked about me. The anchor-chain, clearly
visible less than fifty feet away, and some fish-lines suspended
from the craft above rose and fell in unison. There were many
small, prettily marked fish about the size of herrings, locally
called “china-fish”. Three or four of these fish had managed
to hook themselves upon the unattended lines dependent from
the lugger. Their movements resembled the Sufferings of pretty
birds as they joined the rhythmic up-and-down dance of the
fish-lines.
There is very little vegetation on the Old Ground compared


to some other places, the bottom being mostly a kind of grit,
or gravel. Walking steadily over the undulations, it was some
time before I seized my first shell, and it was more by luck than
gumption that I got it. Seeing an object with a semi-circular
mark, which turned out to be the open mouth of a gold-lip,
I should have passed it by if it had not at that moment suddenly
closed, so that the semi-circular mark vanished. My excitement
was great, and so also was my satisfaction, for in this simple
manner I had learned the secret of discovering shell. It is
strange that none of the divers had informed me about this
trait of the oyster, that it commonly lies with its mouth open
and closes it upon the approach of the diver, some vibrations
carried through the water informing the creature that danger
is nigh.
Once having picked up a shell, I was keen to go up with a
bag full, but although I trudged along for about an hour I
found no more than five or six. That did not worry me, for the
Groper often came up with no more than two or three, and
sometimes none at all.


CHAPTER III
THE GROPER PLAYS CRIBBAGE WITH THE
OLD SCHOONER
N'o work is good unless there is a place for pride in it, and
there can be no pride without interest. Nothing is more
likely to kill ardour than endless dreary monotony, day after
day, and a vista of dragging years beyond.
There were many things of interest to be seen down there on
the Old Ground. In the first place there was the mysterious veil
past which I could not see, for, although the water was very
clear and visibility was good for some considerable distance,
there was a queer bluish fading away into the apparent infinite
and unknown. It seemed that at any moment something strange
or terrible might come swimming into view.
I had heard quite a lot about monkey-fish before I saw one.
Tales were told about them and tales are not told about any-
thing unless it is interesting. I had been told that an anchor
held by one of their holes resisted the combined efforts of all
hands and the cook, toiling at the windlass, to break it out, be-
cause of the skill which the monkey-fish had put into the build-
ing of its walled haven or fortress. The monkey-fish were plen-
tiful. 1 hey dived into their holes at my approach and then
poked out their heads to keep an observant eye on my doings.
It was then that they strongly resembled a rather large monkey,
i heir holes were big, and seemed to be walled up with shells
or stones.
Numerous snakes of many different colours and sizes, all
said to be highly venomous, but all inoffensive to a man in the
dress, were very common. Some of those snakes wriggled along
the bottom; others lay coiled near a hole, waiting for some prey


to come out, much as a good cat waits for a mouse. They were
much like land snakes except that their tails were flanged, and
that they were generally stouter than our land snakes. Some of
them appeared to be quite ten feet long.
Long Jack, the diver in the Two Brothers , had told me that
if a snake was trodden and rolled by the heavy boot of a diver
it went at once to the surface to swear. That was surely a worth-
while experiment, so, tucking both hands well into the folds of
the dress under my armpits to avoid a bite, I brought my heavy
boot down on a snake and rolled it well before releasing it.
Then, stepping back, I saw the snake swimming vigorously for
the surface and knew that Long Jack had told me the simple
truth, though there may be contentious people who would say
that the outraged snake merely hurried to the surface to renew
the supply of air, squadged from it by my boot. They, however,
would only be guessing, whereas Long Jack, being a diver of
long experience, ought to know what he was talking about.
A diver cannot look at his boots without stretching his legs
out in front of him, nor may he gaze directly overhead, so,
until I stepped back and saw the snake hurrying upwards, I
was in doubt whether I had trodden on it or not. I could not
feel its body on the grit of the bottom.
All the time the steady, unceasing throb of the pump came
to my ears with a seemingly slight pause at each revolution of
the fly-wheel, like “urr-umph-gmph, urr-umph-gmph”. That
was something talking to me, and I listened to it with some
slight comfort. In fact, afterwards, I do believe that I did talk
back a bit; it was nice to think that there was something to
which a chap might address himself. •
The noise of the pump never does stop, of course, until one
is back again on deck, unless an accident has occurred. If the
diver does not hear the pump he at once raises his right hand
and closes the outlet valve completely. Once when that hap-
pened I found, when back on deck, that two of my boys had
had a slight debate, which was cut short by a knife. As that
little dispute was of the briefest my crew quickly turned to
again, and I suffered hardly at all. But that experience did not
happen in Torres Straits.
If I stopped walking, as I did when the snake suffered from


my callous curiosity, I was soon enveloped in a dense cloud of
sediment, which made it impossible to see until by moving
along and to one side, I was free of it. It was exactly like dust,
and was carried along by the tide as dust is by the wind. A diver
is always followed by that dust-like cloud on any bottom of a
loose nature, such as mud or grit.
Sometimes I found myself close to the anchor and watched
it being dragged backwards jerkily by the lugger overhead, the
chain cable sagging and then tautening as the seas caused the
vessel to rise and fall. Down where I was, on the bottom of the
Old Ground, with about eight or ten fathoms of water above
me, the seas that disturbed the surface could not be felt. It was
that fact, I suppose, that made the behaviour of the anchor
rather bewildering, until reason supplied the answer.
When the tender took off the dress in the evening the Groper
was moved to say, “You ain’t done too bloody bad for a new-
chum”, because he had enjoyed his spell on deck when he
found that I was getting shell for him. My pride was tempered,
however, because I had been wretchedly sick each time I had
been on deck, and a powerful sample of headache was an anti-
dote to any swelled head I might otherwise have had. That is
how diving affects a new-chum, and it takes the conceit out of
him.
It sometimes happened that we did not see the collecting
boat for several days. In the case of the coloured divers that
would have been unfortunate, to say the least, because they
were not allowed to open their shell. All kinds of fish seem to
resent being kept out of water for a long time, and there is no
way of escaping from their expressed resentment when on a
lugger out of sight of land. But the Groper was supposed to
receive half the value of any pearls found in his shell, and
he never hesitated to open it if the collecting boat did not call.
I use the word “supposed” because the Groper often repeated
a tale of a beautiful pearl he had found, and trustingly handed
over, which he valued at not less than £6O.
“Ten quid was what they give me for me share on it,” he’d
say. “Ten quid! The bloody pirates!”
The consequence of this was that our lugger was fairly free
from bad smells, except, of course, those habitual foul odours


that seemed to be part and parcel of the venerable William.
At a distance, our William and a billy-goat would alike suggest
to any sagacious stranger the one word—“stink”.
In addition to this comparative freedom from unwanted per-
fumes, we could vary, our fare by having curried pearl-oysters.
Ihese were curried because they were far too coarse and rank
to eat otherwise. The big conchs (Megalatractus) and other
big coarse shellfish were also often boiled, cut up, and curried.
Curry-powder was just about as necessary on the William as is
insect-powder in some cheap lodging-houses.
Sometimes the Groper would bring up a bag full of flat,
narrow, very slimy seaweed. This was served in two different
ways. Either it was well washed in fresh water and eaten raw
with vinegar, or else it was boiled, when it would become some-
what like cornflour. It was welcomed and relished both ways.
Sometimes the Groper received a visit from a school of fish,
about the size of large snappers, known as “white-fish”. These
fish were noted for the interest they took in any diver they
happened to find. The white-fish would swim as close as pos-
sible, rolling their eyes, pursing their mouths, making faces,
turning this way and that, and generally showing much curi-
osity. They also nosed up the bottom, making the water dirty,
so that a visit from them was not welcomed by any diver. How-
ever, the Groper, perhaps because he kept in mind the appetite
of the Old Schooner and the rainbow salt-beef both waiting
for him up there on the lugger, made the best of things as he
found them. So, when the white-fish paid him a visit, he would
make a signal to the tender to send down a spear. Then the
tender would promptly fasten the fish-spear to the life-line, and
the Groper would pull it down.
When the Groper was successful in spearing a fish he gener-
ally came up with it himself, but sometimes he sent one up on
the line. In that way the Groper might succeed in gettina two
of his visitors, but that did not happen often. In fact, it some-
times happened that all the fish had departed by the’ time the
spear reached the bottom. I afterwards speared many fish my-
self, and this is how it is done. When a fish is close enough, and
broadside on, a thrust is made with all the power and "weight
of the diver. Then, with the spear grasped in both hands, the


fish is brought to the ground and the spear forced through to
secure it. If the diver desires to send the fish up, he draws down
enough of his line to take hitches on the spear on either side
of the fish, thus ensuring that it will reach the surface.
Often, when we were sailing fast enough through the water,
a strong line was towed with the hope of catching a “tow-line
fish”. The hook was baited with a piece of white rag, which
the fish apparently mistook for the belly of a fugitive fish.
Commonly king-fish were caught, their length varying from
about three to five feet. Occasionally a dolphin was hauled in,
and once a swordfish, a small one.
The Groper wished to keep the sword of the swordfish; he
said the barmaid at the Royal, in Thursday Island, wanted one.
His intention was frustrated because the cockroaches feasted
on it to such an extent during the night as to make it an object
for ridicule.
“Blow me tight!” said the Groper when he looked at the
sword in the morning. “Well, it’s a good job they doesn’t eat
none er me terbacca, an’ don’t get a-chewin’ of me Old Schooner
nothin’ ter speak of so’s ter notice it in the dark. I’ve knowed
’em ter chew holes in me shirt-tails an’ the toes of me socks.
1 hey’re gettin’ that savage an’ ferocious that Lord Nelson him-
self wouldn’t know what ter do with ’em. Heave the bloody
thing over the side.”
“Old Noah must have had a pretty lively time of it in the
Ark, what with cockroaches, bugs, and other things crawling
all over him, and teasing the elephants, and kangaroos, don’t
you think, Billy?” I said.
“Noah? I hear about that geezer when I was in the North
Sea,” said the Groper. “That wasn’t the bloke what went
a-whalin’ an’ got hisself washed over the side, was it? No, I
remember, that was Jonah. I hears about him from one of them
mishnory sky-pilots what used ter come out ter us on the Bank,
an’ invite us ter go aboard whiles they jawed us, an’ played
toons on one of them harmonias. They was a rum lot, they was.
Yer couldn’t get nothin’ ter drink on them mishnory craft, no-
thin’ but trac’s, ’n a cup er cocoa. *
“Dry lot they was! My Old Schooner could tell yer all about
’em, couldn’t yer, ol’ gal? She’s been a-goin’ ter their schools


singin hymns, an prayin’ more’n enough, an knows nearly as
much about it as what they does.
Noah was the geezer what went a-cruisin’ round the world
pickin up a cargo of livestock before they was all drownded by
God Almighty in the Flood, wasn’t he? Well, as fur as I can
make out, in them days they didn’t know too much about navi-
gation. lhey didn’ have no compasses, an’ they didn’ have no
charts, so it stan’s ter reason they musta missed a lot of places
where they shoulda called fer orders. They couldn’ have picked
up the lot, it stands ter reason; they didn’ have no craft big
enough in them days fer such a tall order—they haven’ got none
big enough now, fer that matter. So what Noah done was to
pick up what he could, an’ the others could go ter hell an’ get
drownded. Anyhow, not havin’ got no book-larnin’, I gives it up.
“When I was so high,” the Groper went on, “an’ was firs’
goin’ ter sea, me mother give me a Noo Testamen’ an’ tol’ me
fer ter read a bit on it ev’ry night before I turned in. She didn’
know no better, poor ol’ dear. So I puts it in with me duds in
the pilla-slip, what was all I got fer a bag in them days, gives her
a kiss an’ goes aboard.
„ Yes, that was a long time ago, when I come for to think on
it,” ruminated the Groper. Then he went on, “Well, a long
time after that I meets a tidy young piece in a pub down by
the docks, an’ we has a drink together. Not meanin’ any harm,
I gives her me Noo Testamen’, not havin’ any use fer it meself
as yer might say. The way she blows off at me was somethink
scanderlous. She went off like a packet of crackers. She couldn’
have behave worse if I’d drunk her beer. What she says was,
‘What sort er game d’yer think yer a-comin’ at? What sort er
low bitch d’yer think I am? You carrot-headed, knock-kneed,
swivel-eyed, imertation sailor!’ An’ she goes on like that, a-callin’
me things I never knowed or heared on before. She calls me
a imertation sailor! Me! I’d been five years a-goin’ ter sea then.
Five years! An’ she calls me a imertation sailor. So I allers
steered clear o’ religion after that lot, acos it took too much beer
an’ blarney a-stoppin’ of her, an’ a-tellin’ her how I didn’ mean
no harm, an’ wasn’t insultin’ of her when I goes an’ gives her
me Noo Testamen’! An’ now when I sights one er them religious
geezers what’s a-tryin’ to lay alongside fer a yarn, up goes me


helium, an’ off I sails fair-wind, wing-an-wing. Fer I’ve took
notice that all them what’s religious is dry, an’ terrible cranky.”
“But what did you want to stop there for? Why didn’t you
clear out and leave her to it?” I asked.
“Why didn’t I clear out?” the Groper echoed scornfully.
“Clear out? What, me clear out? After blewin’ me dough on
her a-buyin’ half-pints? Not me. Besides she was a fine, trim
little craft, an’ carried her clothes well set like one er them pilot
cutters, or one er them yachts like what I seen in the Solent.
She had a fine figurehead, she did, nice rounded bows, an’ one
o’ them starns what it’s a pleasure for to look on. But all the
same, I was pretty close ter gettin’ out of it, an’ a-leavin’ of her
to it, jus’ like you says. She opens up somethink cruel. I call
ter mind she says, ‘I pity yer poor mother the shock what she
must er got when you was launched. After you come down the
ways an’ the nurse picks yer up an’ hands yer to her, an’ she
sees yer hull fer the firs’ time—Oh, me gordfather!’ she says.
But I hang on, an’ by an’ by she pulls down her colours an’
surrenders. Then I takes her in tow, an’ off we goes ter a place
what I knows on. I takes ter that piece er goods as soon as I
claps eyes on her. Clear out? Not me! But I never makes no
more mistakes handin’ out Testamen’s ter skirts in pubs.”
There came a day when the Groper decided to sail into Badu
for firewood and water, the reason being that the floating
station was short of these things herself. After sail was set, and
the Groper was seated having his dress removed by the tender,
a large kingfish came from the water on the weather side, struck
the tender a heavy but glancing blow on the side of his face
with its tail, plunged through the after leach of the mainsail,
and fell into the sea to leeward. The skin of the tender’s face
was abraded and sore, and so were his words, while all others
were vastly interested and sympathetic. That was the first time
on the William that I had heard the Malay language. There
was not much of it, but it was spoken with great emphasis.
The fact that a fish can go through pretty good canvas gives
an idea of their speed through the water. A common sight is a
kingfish leaving the water and going to a great height, often
nearly vertically. The greatest height reached by them I do not
know, but guess it to be quite forty feet and probably a lot


more. They are chasing smaller fish when they leave the water
like that. From near at hand the fish they have caught may be
seen in their mouths.
Other fish occasionally jump into the air. When the big rays
do so they make a great splash on their return to the water.
One theory is that they are rounding up other fish for them-
selves, but whether they are playing, being chased, or chasing
something I have never learnt for certain. However, there is this
consolation, that it must be one of those reasons—unless it’s
another.
We anchored in Badu Bay that evening, and it seemed strange
fo have an even deck underfoot. On going ashore, the ground
appeared to heave, so accustomed had I become to the lively
In the morning the large canvas water-bags, two or three rusty
axes, and all the dirty clothing belonging to the Groper family
were put in the dinghy, and pulled the short distance to the
beach. All that happened, all that I saw while I was on the
W illiam was strange to me, but nothing tickled me more than
to witness the sedate Groper family being pulled to the beach
in the dinghy with the soiled family wash. The Groper, smok-
ing his pipe, was always dressed on these occasions in a white
cotton singlet and a luva-luva (waist-cloth). He never wore
trousers unless on a visit to town. The rather fat Old Schooner
also smoked a pipe, and always carried a very large bar of vellow
soap.
As is commonly the case in tropic lands when the beach is
sheltered from the turbulent winds, the forest growths come
right down to high-water mark. Here were the graceful palms
great shady trees, plants, bright birds, and the insects which
are expected in a place such as this. But of unusual interest to
me, though I had seen them before in Northern Australia were
small goggle-eyed fish, a few inches in length, that hopped
about on the roots of the mangroves, other trees at the edge of
the water, and the stones. 6
These fish were very active, and so constantly alert, that it
may be said that it is impossible to catch them otherwise than
with a net. They refused to swim absolutely, for if I chased
them they skipped nimbly over the surface of the water, making


at once for some other root or stone. 1 hese fish are common in
tropic places, quite as common as hermit crabs, but they never
ceased to interest me. They grow to the largest size where there
are mangroves, and mud flats, so they are known as mud-hop-
pers or mud-skippers.
From a newspaper article by the well known naturalist
Charles Barrett, I have since learned that there are at least three
kinds of Periofhthalmus, the mud-hopper, and that it gets its
scientific name because of its periscopic eyes, which are one of
the things that draw attention to it. They are as noticeable as
the eyes of a crab, and can turn in any direction, which is one
reason why the mud-hopper is so difficult to catch. They use
their pectoral, or forefins when they are not in any hurry, walk-
ing or climbing up the rocks or roots of the mangroves.
Barrett says that the mud-hoppers may grow to a length of
twelve inches. Also, not only may it remain out of water alto-
gether for a long time because it holds a large supply of air
in its gill-chambers, but that it absorbs oxygen through its tail
when that is left hanging in the water. Mr Barrett says, “Here
we have a fish as notable in its way as the platypus is among
mammals; a fish that might ‘drown’ if confined to its native
element for a long period: it must spend much of its time out
of water or be a most unhappy fish, even if it does not die from
too long a spell in the sea.”
We filled the water-bags at a little spring, using a length of
large hollow bamboo left there by others for the purpose. As
the bags were filled the necks were lashed, then they were
shouldered, carried to the dinghy, and thence to the tank in the
William. When that job was done we set to getting firewood.
There were two species of large mangroves, black and white.
The white is chosen because it is easily split, and is first class
firewood, whereas the black mangrove is heavy, hard, difficult
to split, and indifferent to burn. Each one of us was in good
trim, and all did their graft, so by that evening the work was
done.
But we did not sail next morning, for the Groper seized the
chance of cleaning the William’s bottom, which was very dirty.
The tide must rise and fall twice for the copper to be cleaned
on both sides. The craft is brought in as close as possible to the


beach at high water. When the tide is out, and the vessel heeled
over on one side, all hands take chunks of coco-nut husk, or
anything else that will do, and thoroughly clean the copper.
After the tide has risen, and is again falling, the booms are
brought over to the side already cleaned, to ensure that the
dirty part of the bottom will be exposed at low water.
It was while we were cleaning the copper, when the William
was on an even keel at high water, that the Groper and the Old
Schooner had a game of cribbage. They sat aft on the cabin
housing beneath an awning. Both of them looked very clean
and sedate, somehow or other bringing to mind Sunday as it
was in my childhood. The seemly behaviour of the stout, frizzy-
haired Old Schooner and the rubicund, bare-legged Groper was
most admirable. Both of them smoked black, fragrant tobacco
in ripened pipes endeared to them by long association. The two
presented a pleasing picture of contented marital bliss.
Presently I heard the Groper say, “Go on, shuffle ’em up, it’s
your deal. Don’t sit looking at ’em all day.”
And the Old Schooner most politely answered, “No, Billy,
you been forget I takit sixus in my crib. It you deal.”
Then, while the Groper shuffled, and dealt the cards, the Old
Schooner primly smoothed her skirt down over her knees, con-
scious of the correctness of all that she did.
The game went on. I heard, “Seben.”
“And four’s eleven. Come on, play one and look at the rest.”
“And four’s fifteen, and I takit four holes.”
“Well, peg back one, you took five. None er yer monkey
tricks.”
“I makit mistake. You play, Billy.”
“Yes, my bloomin’ play. How’d yer like it? An’ four makes
nineteen with six holes. . . . Have yer got another four?”
“No. Twenty-nine with a jack.”
“And two’s in time. It’s your crib this time.”
After a while I heard the Groper say, “Here, none er that.
No yer don’t. You shifted yer peg acrost the board. You was
cornin’ up, not goin’ down.”
Then a tense few seconds in which I caught the denial of
the Old Schooner, “I wasn’t.”
She tried to stop the Groper moving her peg, and, finding


that useless, struck him an exasperated smack on the face. The
Groper jumped to his feet, seized the Old Schooner and pushed
her backwards over the side. The angry scowl on her face dis-
appeared as she splashed under the water and changed to one
of sullen brooding when she began swimming round the stern
to climb the ladder.
The poor Groper was much upset by the indignity of being
struck by a woman. He struggled with his feelings for a
moment until a few descriptive words chosen from a sea vocabu-
lary, rich in invective, gave him some ease. As for the Old
Schooner, she came aboard by way of the ladder and slunk
dripping, and disgraced, down into the cabin in inarticulate
wrath.
There is little doubt that when we sailed away from Badu
we all were somewhat happier. The all-round clean-up and
the smell of land once more had sweetened our tempers and
outlook on life. Besides, we had exchanged a keg of stinking
salt-beef for a huge piece of fresh dugong recently harpooned
by the local natives. I guess they must have thought us a bad
lot when they opened up that keg.
When we left Badu the William went through the water very
much better now that her bottom was clean. The Groper sat
aft dressed in a cotton singlet and coloured print luva-luva that
he always wore in fine weather when not grafting. He and the
Old Schooner sat smoking their pipes with a satisfied air. Every-
body is more cheerful when he feels that his ship is happy,
and no craft can be happy while encumbered with a lot of foul
growth on its copper. That’s why doting mothers always teach
their children the good old maxim, “Cleanliness before godli-
)>
ness .


CHAPTER IV
RUM DOINGS ON THE OLD GROUND
Shortly after we went out again on the Old Ground, some
time in October, we got word to turn up at the Sand Bank
on the Sunday, since the floating station had anchored there.
As usual the whole fleet assembled, but on this occasion all the
divers were called into the cabin to be told about a fresh patch
of shell that had been found close to the Sand Bank. As a
further incentive to their glowing ardour a bottle of rum was
promised to the diver who picked up the first forty shell on
Monday morning. To find the patch all they needed to do was
to follow the lugger which had brought in the news of the
discovery.
It is most unusual to find gold-lip, or other pearlshell, on a
sand bottom. It is much the same as finding gold in hungry
white quartz—by no means unknown, but unusual. So, as the
new patch was said to be on clear hard sand, and also plentiful,
there was quite a lot of excitement. The Old Ground, and other
parts of Torres Straits, having been trudged over by divers for
many years, rarely yielded new patches, and the constant work
of the divers was hard, tedious, and monotonous.
Before daylight on Monday crews were busy everywhere
setting sail and getting up anchors with much noisy clacking
from windlass-pawls and grinding of chain cables. The big
floating station was also preparing to follow. In a very little
time the whole fleet was on the new ground, all close together,
and the divers going their hardest.
Before long the Groper gave a signal for a bag to be sent
down to him. At once our crew responded to this new excite-
ment. They yelled, and stamped their feet, shouting the glad


tidings, "Bag up! Bag up! Bag up!” A stranger would be justi-
fied in thinking that our crew shared in the shell brought up,
but nothing of the kind. Although working on a new patch like
this meant extra work for them, they gloried in the success won by
their diver. They had the satisfaction of being associated with
good fortune, so they turned the pump with right good will,
sending plenty of air to the toiling Groper. Pretty little Girtie
ran about, infected with excitement, clapping her hands, and
trilling, "Bag up!” And the Old Schooner sat in fat contentment
on the cabin, all smiles, quite satisfied to wait for a late break-
fast.
When a diver gives a signal on his life-line for a bag, or
anything else, to be sent down to him, the tender bends the
thing to the line and gives a signal to the diver, who hauls away
until the article reaches him. When the Groper received the
empty bag from the surface he hitched his full bag to the
line, and while that was going up he went on gathering another
bagful.
There was twelve fathoms of water at this place, and although
double that depth, and even more, is commonly worked in
by divers, still an hour at a stretch of steady work is enough to
earn a spell on deck, especially when a man is at it from sun-
rise to sunset. However, when the Groper did come up, and the
face-glass was removed, he looked at the unusually big pile of
shell on the deck, and said, "How many yer got there? How
many is they? Have I got me forty?” And when he was told
that there were only thirty-five so far he said, after anxiously
looking round at the other luggers, "Has any of the others got a
flag up yet?” And when he was assured that none of the luggers
had a flag hoisted he eagerly gave the order, "Then get one
up quick. It won’t take me long to make up me forty. Hurry
up, Old Schooner, an’ give ’em one er yer skirts; that’ll do fer
a flag just as good as a royal ensign.”
As soon as he had seen the Old Schooner’s gaudy Sunday
skirt fluttering well up on the rigging the Groper went down
again. Less than ten minutes had passed since he had risen, and
the face-glass was taken off. The effect on the rest of the fleet of
the Old Schooner’s skirt fluttering in the breeze was somewhat
D


remarkable; it quickly became evident that each of them also
had the desired forty shell, for flags of some kind or another
appeared fluttering from them all.
The pressure in twelve fathoms of water is more than forty-
five pounds to the square inch. I do not know how many square
inches the Groper had on his blocky body, but presuming that
there were two thousand five hundred, then the total pressure
he had on him at this place must have been more than forty
tons. It should be unnecessary to explain that this pressure was
evenly distributed over his body, and not coming directly to
bear downwards.
After the first few exhilarating hours the work went along
steadily, everyone being in great good humour. The shell was
large, being about the size of a dinner plate—as used in private
families, not eating houses—and first-class gold-lip. The weather
also was fine, and everything was lovely. It was a matter of
about three days before the patch was thinned out, and when
that happened the Groper was good enough to give me a chance.
Ever since the day when he had stepped off the ladder with-
out his face-glass, and had found that I could pick up shell, the
Groper had been giving me more and more opportunities of
working, and himself spelling. It must not be thought that the
Groper was not a worker, for he was, but it was only natural
that he enjoyed sitting on deck, free and easy, smoking his
pipe and watching me getting experience for myself, and shell
for him.
So down I went into the deepest water in which I had worked
up to that time. The number of shell that had been overlooked
was surprising. It was all the more astonishing because all the
shell was easily found, being almost, if not quite, devoid of
any covering growths, and lying in full view on the hard sand
bottom.
Graft! I could not have worked harder. I was here, there,
and everywhere. In one day I picked up nearly a hundred shell,
and that after the place was supposed to have been cleaned up
by experienced divers. The Groper was surprised, and admitted
that he had no idea so much had been left behind. As those
shell were estimated to go forty to the hundredweight I was


doing well, so for the rest of the week I was rewarded by being
allowed to do all the work.
What especially pleased me was the discovery that headaches
and nausea had quite gone, so my breaking-in period had about
passed. Also I was able to show that none of those notable
Torres Straits hard-working divers could graft harder than my-
self. It was really a pleasure to work in that place. The water
was so beautifully clear, my health was so good, and as for the
pressure, I was hardly conscious of it. Whenever a cloud passed
beneath the sun the shadow swept along the bottom, seventy
to eighty feet below the surface, almost as noticeably as it would
on top. There were comparatively few fish. A few turtle could
be seen, but in this place I saw no snakes.
On Saturday afternoon, during the usual week-end assembly
of the luggers round the floating station, each diver got a lovely
bottle of rum. The Groper, Long Jack, Jimmy Ditdonc, and
Chris Samoa agreed to meet that same salubrious evening in
the large cabin of the Two Brothers , Long Jack’s lugger. Harry
Enzed and myself were invited to join in with them. The Old
Schooner and Chris Samoa’s missus had a big tin of boiled lollies
and a tin of sweet mixed biscuits given to them. They were
told to get gay on that lot, since rum was not good for women.
The coloured crews of the luggers had a small tot served to
them before we met on the Two Brothers, and then most of
them went to the Sandbank to catch turtle.
When decent men meet in the quiet lonely parts of the world
they invariably have a carousal if at all possible. There is
nothing else to do. So that evening, in the cabin of the Two
Brothers, the six of us met and had a splendid time. The Groper
sang many stirring songs with both his eyes shut, his face very
red and radiant. Nearly all his songs were about agriculture,
and most of his songs were the same song, excepting one about
a boarding school, called I think, “Mrs Tickle-Tobie”. The agri-
cultural song had a chorus like this:
For to reap and to mow,
For to plough and to sow,
And to be a farmer's boy-oy-oy,
And to be a farmer's boy.


I’ve always had the impression that the songs of Samoa were
musical ditties, so what Chris Samoa sang is somewhat doubtful,
but we had a drink when he’d finished. Each of us did his
best, no matter how bad it was. All were quite tolerant when
I sang the old colonial song, “The Old Bullock Dray”, which
I had picked up from an old-time teamster at a camp-fire con-
cert on the goldfields of the West.
Now, the shearing is all over and the wool is coming down,
And l mean to get a wife when l get back to town:
Everything that has a mate presents itself to view
From the little paddy-melon to the bucking kangaroo.
I've got a tidy cheque so 1 mean to buy a team;
When l get a tidy wife, boys, I’ll be all serene.
By calling at the depot 1 hear there’s no delay.
In getting an off-side help-mate for your old bullock dray.
CHORUS:
So it’s roll up your bluey and let’s make a push,
I’ll take you up the country and show to you the bush.
I’ll be bound that you don’t get a chance another day,
So it’s come and take possession of the old bullock dray.
Oh, we’ll live like fighting cocks, for good living I’m your man:
We’ll have leather-jacket johnny-cakes, and fritter in the pan,
And if you fancy fish I’ll get them for you soon,
For we’ll bob for barramundi on the banks of the lagoon.
Then we’ll boil in the bucket such a whopper of a duff —
But when we all get at it there won’t be half enough.
And my mates will all dance in honour of the day
To the music of the bells of the old bullock dray.
There was momentary unpleasantness when the Groper
essayed the first few steps of a dance he had seen at a music
hall. Long Jack yelled, “Cheese an’ rice! Sit down, you clumsy
cow! You take up more room than a full-rigged ship in stays.”
But the Groper apologized by telling us that we should have
worn boots, too.
I remember a yarn told by that same Long Jack. “We was
working on the Normanton line, down in the Gulf, an’ me an’
me mates gets terrible tired of scoffing soda-bread. We was
gettin’ so full of soda that we was all turnin’ yeller. So I says
like this, ‘I tell yer what! You chaps get ter work on Saturdee
af’noon an’ knock me up a oven out er these here white-ants’


nests; it won’t take the three of yer long ter do that, an’ I’ll
take on the job of keepin’ us all in yeast-bread.’ Well, they
gets ter work on Saturdee af’noon an’ pugs up a lot er white-
ant’s nests, an’ knocks up a oven, an’ me, why, I goes ter a
cobber er mine an’ borrows some of his yeast, an’ goes ter the
store fer what I wants.
“Well, on Sundee I hots up the oven, an’ works up me bread,
an when everything’s jakeloo I rake the fire out er me oven
an claps in me bread. Well, in about a hour’s time I go to
look at me bread, an’ what’ja think? When I takes a look in me
oven what’ja think I sees? Why, blow me tight if the bleedin’
white-ants ain’t been and scoffed the lot!”
Then we had a drink, and Chris Samoa said, solemnly
looking into the depths of his empty glass, “No white-an’s can’t
get that rum now.”
Jimmy Ditdonc, the French diver, said little, but sang with
fervour one or two songs in French. There is no doubt that
Long Jack had the best voice, a good baritone. The words of
“Rum Below” are not up to much, but sounded well as Jack
sang them.
Here's to good rum in a coco-nut shell,
And here's a stout man what drinks it.
While up my nose goes the glorious smell,
Down my neck l quickly sinks it.
If athwart my knees sits a taut young miss
All a-dolled up like a gipsy,
l drinks up my rum and gives her a kiss,
And tells her she drives me tipsy.
If l sights a geezer what don't like rum
l gives him a very wide berth:
He'd be better dead and in Kingdom Come
Than drifting sour-faced round this earth.
While Chris Samoa was tangling us up in a yarn Harry
Enzed whispered in my ear, “What’s he talking about? I can’t
understand him, can you?” Then he began singing, “I met her
in the moonlight by the gasworks.” Then he stopped and said,
“I thought you’d finished, Chris.” But Chris said kindly, “Go
on, Harry, I like hear you sing. You go on.” So Harry carried
on:


I met her in the moonlight by the gasworks,
We cuddled up inside the big main gate:
1 shouted her some saveloys and peanuts,
And she said she would be mine did darling Kate.
She got outside the things what l had give her,
And then she said she'd like to have some beer,
And when she found I'd blewed up all but fourpence,
She come to light with, ‘'here's the other tuppence, dear'.
None of us could take any more of “Gasworks Kate”, so
Harry shut up like the gentleman he was.
Billy the Groper sang the last song of the evening. That was
a real sailor’s song, that was, but I can recall the first verse
only:
/ shipped on board of a whaler bound for the Arctic seas,
The wind and snow and hail did blow, Jamaica it would freeze,
And the worst of all the Yankee mate he beat me very sore,
Which made me fully make up my mind I'd go to sea no more.
REFRAIN:
No more, no more, no more, no more, no more,
Which made me fully make up my mind I'd go to sea no more.
In all ways except one the evening was a great success—we
had to knock off too early because there was not enough rum
to keep things going all night.
One Sunday night in October I went, with others, to the
Sandbank to catch turtles. It was a large, high sandbank
covering, perhaps, two acres. Near the centre was a galvanized
iron hut, a four-hundred-gallon tank of water, and some man-
grove firewood.
A white man was stationed here throughout the nor-west
season, quite by himself, to catch turtle. While the fleet was
near by, however, he had plenty of company each night. He
was pleased to have the coloured crews on shore because they
not only broke the monotony, but also gave the valuable hawks-
bill turtle, or most of it, to him, keeping the edible green turtle
only for themselves.
It might be supposed that with a big crowd of people on the
Bank the turtle would be too frightened to come ashore. Nothing
of the kind. Perhaps the hen turtles could hold their eggs no
longer, and nature prevented them from discharging them into


the sea. Certainly the crowd would gather near the centre of
the Bank and be quiet for a while, until many turtle had
come from the water. Then there would be a disorderly scramble
in all directions to seize, and turn, the unfortunate creatures.
There was enough noise then to warn off any other turde in
the water thereabouts, but the same thing happened again and
again.
Later, when most of the people had gone back to the luggers,
the white man showed me how the turtles laid their eggs. We
quietly followed a large green turtle—only the females come
on land—and got quite close to her while she scooped out sand
to make her nest. She made a hole about two feet deep. Then
she appeared to withdraw somewhat so that her stern lay over
the hole. She cupped her two after paddles together to form a
chute, or guide, for the eggs as they left her to fall into the hole.
With our heads together, we peered into the hole, and struck
matches to see the egg-laying as well as possible. My guide
took off his hat, holding it under the turtle’s stern, and brought
it out full of eggs. The turtle remained where she was until
her job was done, but showed her uneasiness and displeasure
by hissing at us. T hen we stood to one side and watched her
fill her nest with sand, and do her poor best to efface the
evidence of her work. As she was a valueless creature in the
eyes of the turtle hunter—her shell was not the kind from which
“tortoise-shell” was obtained—she was permitted to go in peace,
instead of in pieces. The night was dark, but I believe that my
description of what took place is pretty accurate.
The toll taken by crabs, fish, birds, and animals on the eggs
and newly hatched turtles is great, yet the number that escape
is very large, for in some places there are people regularly
engaged in catching them either for the tortoise-shell of com-
merce or for the meat. Even the large turtle do not escape the
attention of sharks, for I have seen them attacked, and have
also taken turtle-shell from the maw of big sharks.
Turtle steak is excellent. When it is covered with bread-
crumbs and egg and fried in butter not even tender young
pigeons are so tasty. At intervals during many years I have tried
to make turtle soup, but never succeeded in turning out a decent
dish. There is some ingredient missing, or some method I know


nothing about. But there is no mistake about the goodness of
turtle steak. The eggs are quite all right for a very hungry
person when there is nothing better. They are round and soft-
shelled, always with a dent, and they vary in size but may be
said to be about that of a duck egg. 1 hey cannot be hard-boiled,
no matter how long they are cooked, the white remaining always
soft.
Our crew made an omelet of any kind of eggs by breaking
them into a boiler, and stirring them over the fire with a smooth
piece of firewood. The more young ’uns there were in the
omelet the better pleased our crew seemed to be.
Our manner of living at this time was very high and fastidi-
ous. It is more than doubtful if the best restaurant in Sydney
would have served such food as we enjoyed. We had fish that
was dried or fresh, boiled or curried. Not long before we had
eaten much dugong that had been cooked with similar diversity
and imagination. Now came the peak of luxury in the shape
of turtle meat, and eggs. As though that were not enough, the
Groper sometimes ordered the cook to make macaroni. After
a helping of macaroni we could lie round on the deck in the
evening and smoke with the contented knowledge that we
had eaten a tasty dish that could be relied upon to stick to the
ribs.
To make macaroni the cook first put a pot of fresh water on
the fire to boil. Then, having made a lump of stiff dough, he
would roll it out and cut it into long thin strips. 'When the
water boiled violently the strips of dough were dropped separ-
ately into the pot. After a while a one-pound tin of jam was
emptied in and—can you imagine anything better than that
after a day’s work at sea?
Some of us are never satisfied, so sometimes I found myself
wishing that an onion would sail into view, but none did. 1
heard from the Groper that Long jack had bought a few
potatoes, and had one or two at a time cooked exclusively for
himself. The Groper evidendy thought such conduct was to be
deprecated, even after I had pointed out that Long Jack could
hardly afford to shout his crew spuds at sixpence a pound. 1
gathered that the correct thing in such circumstances was to


go without, and not make people’s mouths water eating potatoes
which they could not get themselves.
“How would you like fer ter cook pertaters an’ then watch
another hungry-gutted son of a sea-cow a-scoffin’ of ’em?” in-
quired the Groper.
“Weren’t you in the Navy, Bill?” I asked. “How did you get
on for tucker? Pretty rough, wasn’t it?”
“Oh, we gets our Liverpool pantiles, an’ salt-horse, an’ pork,
an’ onct a week a duff with a few raisins stuck in it if yer
could on’y find ’em. Yes,” he went on reflectively, “I was in the
Northumberland at the time when they bombards Alexandria.
We gets there when most of the fuss was over, an’ they was
doin’ the cleanin’ up. Our owner was Cap’n Bosanky, an’ he
gives us plenty ter do. I call ter mind a snotty called Dudley de
Chair—fancy names some er them snotties carries round with
’em—he was took prisoner by the Gyppos, but they never done
him no harm. Then there was Fisher, an Beresford, an’ others
what got a smell er powder fer the first time.
“I was tol’ off with a party what was on guard while they
was a-hangin’ the poor wretches what got sentens by court-
martial. Fair made me sick on me stomach it did. I don’ never
want ter see nobody hung no more, I don’t.”


CHAPTER V
GIRTIE AND A SHARK
N-OW came the period of the year when the change of season
takes place. For many months the sou-east had been blowing
freshly, night and day, with hardly any variation. It was now
becoming feeble, veering about, and sometimes dying away
altogether. As a rule, this period of change first becomes notice-
able in October, and lasts until December, when the nor’-west
musters enough strength to take control completely.
As the weeks went by we endured glassy, greasy calms,
alternating with heavy squalls accompanied by torrential rain.
Although this was far from pleasant there was some compensa-
tion even in those torrid calms. The creatures of the depths
came to the surface, apparently to enjoy the changed condi-
tions and to bask in the rays of the sun. Dozens of serpents
of many different colours and sizes swam lazily about. Some-
times we invited one aboard, using as a card the blade of a
long sweep. When on deck, the snakes seemed to be apathetic,
sluggish, and not at all vicious. Having satisfied our curiosity,
the serpent was always thrown back into the water unharmed.
Nobody showed any hostility towards the snakes, as is so often
the case with a captured shark, nor did any desire to sample
them as food.
At one time, for a few days, vast numbers of sea-horses
appeared on the surface, each clinging with its slender tail to
a piece of seaweed. Whence did they come, and why? Maybe
this was the season for the sea-horse nuptials. Did they then
aspire to consummate their union before the blazing altar of
the sun? These small creatures had long snouts and little fins
near their gills, and were only a few inches in length. No


harm was done to them, except for the few that were dried
so that they might be given to sweethearts as a most delectable
present.
Some seafaring people have a quaint belief that the women
they meet on shore hanker after such things as shells, coral,
fish dried or stuffed, and other things collected on a voyage.
Generally these are accepted merely from a well-founded belief
that better gifts will follow, or because of a nature too weak
to make a refusal that might offend. A landlady of mine pro-
fessed great admiration for a fine piece of coral, so I gave it
to her. She placed it on her mantelpiece where it could be
brought to the attention of her visitors. A few weeks afterwards
it was in the rubbish-tin. She found the dust it had collected
had so altered its appearance that it was no longer of any value
as an ornament.
At another time the calm sea was covered with small, oval-
shaped, flat-bodied jellyfish. There seemed to be millions of
them. These were about three inches long. Above the surface
was a thin, semicircular sail of sufficient strength to enable
them to be lifted from the water between a thumb and finger.
Underneath they had nothing but a small fringe of tiny tentacles.
These things were also let alone because they were not good to
eat and were not looked upon as enemies.
A fish that I have not mentioned before, though it was
common enough, could be more easily observed now that the
water was so often calm. This was the sucker. A very large one
might possibly be three feet long. The peculiarity about it is
that on the back of the head is an oval, corrugated disk like
the sole of a rubber shoe. The fish clings with this to the bottom
of a vessel, or almost anything else. They are carried about by
big animals such as sharks. Often they fasten on the helmet
of a diver, but have to let go when he comes to the surface.
When anything was thrown over the side the suckers de-
tached themselves from the copper in order to swim out to
investigate. They would eat any food, whether bread, meat, or
fish, and then at once go back to the copper. It was an easy
matter to catch them on a hook, but unless they were promptly
pulled on board they would hasten to fasten themselves to our
craft. If they succeeded in doing that it was just about im-


possible to pull them off. Although so many queer things are
fancied by natives for food, these fish were never eaten by
anybody. Unlike other fish, when cut they bled profusely.
We left the Old Ground towards the end of November, and
began to work the passages among the islands round about
Badu. Here the spring tides were so strong that we were idle
while they were running at their height. The ground in these
passages near the Long Reef was often rough and foul, so that
the Groper and I had to take care that our gear did not become
caught. All this made the finding of gold-lip more difficult.
In these passages there were many fish that I had not seen
in the open water of the Old Ground. Cod, savage looking eels,
weed-fish, and a myriad of tiny fish of every conceivable colora-
tion took advantage of the shelter to be found. I have often been
asked about the sights of the undersea world, and whether
there really are great submarine forests and beautiful gardens.
For myself, I shall say at once that I have never seen a sub-
marine forest, nor have I seen anything very like a garden on
land. But I shall try to tell of some of the sights that were
common in the warm waters of those tropic seas.
Imagine, then, that you descend in the heavily weighted,
stiff dress of the diver, from the side of a pearling-lugger, down
into the calm but deep water close by a coral reef in Torres
Straits. Sounding in your ears is the unceasing metallic throb
of the air-pump overhead. You feel that your legs are being
gripped tighter and tighter by the increasing pressure as you
descend, and possibly you may see a tiny stream of silvery
bubbles rising from your dress where it is clamped to the
corselet.
It is not possible to look directly beneath you, but you may
see the kind of bottom that you are approaching at an angle
of about thirty degrees. As soon as you reach the ground, and
have regulated the valve on your helmet so that you may move
about without difficulty, you proceed to walk with the tide. It
is quite easy to do this, but when you have passed by something
and attempt to go back for it you find that the tide prevents
you from doing so, or makes it very difficult.
Life is abundant everywhere. Brilliant little fish, some so
small and dainty that they are no larger than flies, are in swarms,


each of its own kind. They appear to be painted in the most
fantastic manner possible, and are wonderfully shaped. It is
doubtful if a futuristic artist, or any other modern crank,
demented by frustration and alcohol, could imagine such weird
creatures as may be seen here close at hand. None of them,
however, have an appearance more weird than yourself as an-
other diver would see you, for, your dress all swollen with com-
pressed air, a turbulent rush of bubbles continuously escaping
from your grotesque helmet, and magnified by the other diver’s
face-glass, you are a fearsome sight.
Some of the creatures will come right up to your face-glass,
goggle their eyes, open and shut their mouths and gills, wave
their long fins and tails, and show a passing curiosity. Besides
these dainty little things there are other larger fish that are
equally queer. There are, for instance, those dark chaps with
yellow mouths and staring goggly eyes, looking like animated
boxes. Perhaps it would be better to describe them as being
coffin-shaped, for their hulls naturally taper off towards the
tail. They are quite flat on each side, top and bottom, and
are stiff as cardboard, while their tail, fins, and head seem to
poke out from their bodies and to be stuck on with something
flexible like elastic.
None of the fish are frightened to any extent by your
presence; they carry on with their apparently frivolous business
of showing off, and generally display only a slight interest
towards you. All around, and growing up the precipitous wall
of the reef, are plants of vivid green. There are some that
resemble the cosmos of your gardens; there are long, slender
whips like creepers stripped of their foliage, clumps of broad-
leafed, fleshy weed, and sponges of many kinds, but quite
unlike those that are sometimes found in bathrooms, the huge
fans standing stiffly upright being most noticeable. Some of
those plant-like things are really of an animal nature, and
started life as free-swimming creatures; then they regressed and
became rooted, and plant-like—just like some of us when we
marry and settle down.
All of these growing things that are flexible sway and bend
in the direction of the flowing tide. There are plenty of them,
but leave them where they are, for if you carry any to the


surface they quickly lose their beauty, and smell dreadfully in
death.
Besides the massive reef that overhangs the path you take,
and here averages sixty feet in height, there is a great deal of
other coral about. There are “mushrooms”, with short stems
and broad tops, and some of them are huge. Be careful that
your life-line or air-pipe does not get caught round one of
them, or any other coral, because if it does the weight of the
drifting lugger overhead will soon be brought to bear on it,
and then you may stop for ever in this wonder garden of the
sea.
Then there are great beds of spiky stag-horn coral, so named
because of its form, boulders of “brain”, and fan-shaped, and
some so pretty and delicate that it appears to be a plant.
1 he reef is very rugged, and you notice that here and there
are caverns, dark and eerie, and some of them very large.
Naturally you feel a little nervous when passing one of those
recesses, for there some monstrous shape may dwell; so you
turn to watch, and feel rather glad when it is passed. It is
the unknown that stirs the mind to frightened fancies.
The sea-snakes, resembling those on land but for their flanged
tails, that crawl or swim harmlessly near by do not frighten you,
though you know they are venomous. Like the general run of
snakes on land, which hurry to hide if they can when you near
them, they will not bite unless trodden on or suddenly startled.
Not all of the coral is green. It is a mass of colours. It appears
to be blue, gold, pink, red, and violet, but no doubt some of
the colouring belongs to the growths, animal and vegetable,
that swarm over it everywhere, blending their hues with those
of the reef.
If you had to earn your living as a diver you would so have
to train your eyes that they could detect the presence of the
things sought, however much they were camouflaged by
growths of sponge and other parasites. Even then the trained
diver would pass by many a pearl-oyster if it knew how to
keep out of trouble by shutting its mouth at the right time.
The crabs, large or small, betray themselves by their move-
ments for they, too, are commonly hidden artfully by weeds
actually placed on their backs by themselves. The pretty cray


fish, all gold, blue, and green, do not follow the example of the
crabs, but rely chiefly upon their quick movements, and hiding-
places, to avoid their enemies. In spite of its hard shell and
formidable spines the crayfish is eagerly sought by many
creatures. Probably its worst enemies are the octopus and the
groper, which also prey on the crabs.
One day I found an old rum jar, all encrusted with shells
and growths, and brought it up. It was soon seen that a small
octopus was inside, for, after being on deck awhile, it had put
out an inquiring tentacle. Attempts to get it out failed, so the
question arose as to which was the more valuable, the jar or
the octopus. If the jar was to be retained the occupant must
be rotted and, after that aromatic process, be washed out stink
and all. To get the octopus out in a fit state for consumption
the jar would have to be cracked. There was little doubt about
how the decision would go. The jar was broken, and the
octopus won easily—with a good show of hands, too, or should
I have said legs? Coloured people everywhere seem to be fond
of such strongly-flavoured tucker as octopus, shark, and croco-
dile. In one place where I lived the natives hid all their
octopus beneath mats in the bow or stern of their canoes so
that I should not get it, for they thought that I would be as
fond of it as they.
Again, you would never have noticed that turtle at all, big
though it is, if it had not moved. Many other creatures are
alike hidden from your notice until they move. The huge
clam-shell lying in that cleft is well disguised by its own over-
flowing mantle, spread so as to conceal the great interlocking
teeth on its shell. If, unseeing, you had walked into the gaping
jaws of that giant clam, in all probability you would be past
any chance of rescue from death, for instantly your leg would
have been seized, and held, and there you would have been
screaming like a rabbit in a trap.
There are not only caverns in the cliff but, more rarely, great
chasms under foot. Peering down into one of these fissures,
into what looks like a deep immensity reaching beyond your
vision, you may feel a chilled frustration at your impotence
as you pass by. It would be no trouble to climb this cliff if
you wished to do so. All that is necessary is to partly inflate the


dress by closing the outlet valve, and the buoyancy gained
permits you to climb with astonishing ease. You find, too, that
you may take very long jumps by inflating the dress, and this
is sometimes the best way of passing some great lump of coral.
But if you do happen to climb the cliff be careful not to get
your hands scatched by the “green” or live coral. If you do
you will be pretty certain to get a nasty suppurating sore that
is difficult to heal.
Into this wonder garden, where you have trespassed, come other
intruders more fearsome even than yourself. Perhaps you glance
through the side-glass of your helmet and see something that
causes you to swing quickly round, while your heart almost
misses a beat. There, but a few feet from you is a monstrous
ray placidly swimming along so near to the bottom that each
beat of his wings fans the sand and grit, raising little dust-like
clouds. Seemingly he pays no great attention to you, but con-
tinues on a straight course. How big do you think he is athwart
the beam? Fourteen feet? Twenty feet? You must remember,
though, that your face-glass magnifies a great deal.
Before you leave this place you may have a companion even
more undesirable than the big ray. Something, intuition per-
haps, causes you to look above, up the wall of the reef, and
there you see a shark so huge that you cannot help being fright-
ened. She is nearly motionless, and does not seem to notice
you at all. The great long gill-slits abaft the jaw, five or six
of them, are slowly swinging as might the slats of a Venetian
blind, opened and shut by an idle child, but otherwise the big
fish barely moves. Presently, much to your relief, the huge
shark moves slowly and sinuously away, to disappear through
the hazy veil of distance.
It was in this region that I made the discovery that sharks
frequent the waters near land and in quiet passages far more
than the open water. Nearly every day that I was in the dress
I saw one or more, and some of them were big. Never did
any of them show any serious sign, or intention of attacking
me. They showed no more curiosity than any other fish, in
fact not nearly as much as some, which was a very good thing
indeed. It is quite possible that the interest of any passing shark
in a diver is intense, but that he is able to restrain himself


and keep at a little distance is altogether admirable. One huge
shark I saw had a girth so great that she was, without much
doubt, gravid. That she was a female was shown by the absence
of the two protuberant external sex organs which the male shark
has near his vent. Some sharks lay eggs, while others give birth
to their young alive and kicking, for I have seen more than fifty
lively young ones taken from a shark that was captured and
opened. I noticed that all large fish, such as the groper, made
themselves scarce whenever big sharks appeared in the offing.
One day an incident occurred that gave me an intense dislike
for sharks, which I have retained. Little Girtie and I had become
very friendly. Everybody was kind to her, but she favoured
me more than all others. Often she sat on top of me, or by my
side, when I sprawled smoking on the cool deck in the evening.
If her mother spanked her, it was to me that she came for
consolation. Even then, with her tear-filled eyes, and screwed-
up sobbing face, she was pretty. I always have been fond of
girls, even naughty girls.
We were sailing close to the shore with a very light air right
aft. Little Girtie was near the helm when the sail gybed over
and, the sheet catching her, she was tumbled into the water.
The helm was at once put down; I noticed that as I placed one
foot on the low rail and went after her. Girtie could swim well,
but she was sure to feel better with someone in with her.
A few strokes and we were together. She brightened up at
once and told me, in the awful jargon of the Straits, that the
sheet had hurt her—“himi fightum belly belonga me”.
With the very light air that there was at the time, the William
was coming slowly round, close hauled. To hasten her a sweep
had been put out, and two of the crew were putting their weight
on it. All things considered, I should have enjoyed the swim
if only I could have forgotten all about those sharks. As it was,
I was continually putting my head under water and looking
about.
There may be a lot of truth in the theory that an animal
more readily attacks a person who is frightened. I was certainly
scared, though nothing to what I was presently. A shark did
come, and perhaps I brought it by being too frightened. The
E


people on the William saw it first. My head was under water
looking about for anything that might come up from below.
Little Girtie pulled me and, when I looked up, she pointed to
the big fin making straight for us.
A lot of nonsense has been written about scaring away sharks
by splashing. That does frighten some sharks, but a genuine
man-eater is more likely to be attracted by the splashing of his
bait than scared away. A very keen sense of smell, and noise,
are what the shark relies upon to put him on the track of his
tucker.
My attention was concentrated absolutely on two things, my
companion, and the shark. During my life I have had a great
number of what are called “narrow squeaks”, and this was one
of them. In my mind is the memory of the rush of the shark,
after one or two descents and swerves while he was making up
his mind. The thing was on me with his great mouth open.
There followed a few confused moments, mainly recorded in
my memory by the recollection of the haft of a heavy sweep
being jammed with great force into that horrid mouth, and
the grinding of the shark’s teeth on it.
Eager hands lifted Girtie aboard, and almost pulled me on
deck in the same manner immediately afterwards. Looking
round, I saw Girtie held close in her mother’s arms. After a
while, when things were quieter, each one of the crew shook
hands with me, and had a good deal to say, which was hard to
follow, because they were a little excited. This much I did find
out as soon as possible; it was Monkey Howe, a Mabuiag man,
who had seized a great, heavy sweep and, using it like a spear,
had rammed it with wonderful precision into the shark’s mouth
at just the right time.
The Groper said, among other things, “Well, blow me tight,
I thought you was a goner. An’ you would ha bin, too, on’y fer
Monkey here. Instead er sleepin’ nice an’ cosy with yer bugs
temight, you’d ha’ bin stowed in the belly ev that hungry
bloody shark. They’ll eat almost anythink, they will. I seen
all sorts ev things took out ev them when we’ve cut ’em open,
I have. I seen a ship’s log, an’ I seen a fourteen-pound tin er
beef took out er one—unopened, it was. An’ I once seen a big


dog like a collie what had been swallowed without bein’ bit, an’
a pussy-cat what had been bit in two bits took out er one shark—
a big ’un, he was.”
That evening I found that the old William, and those in
her, were quite different. A ray of understanding had shown
them to me in a different light.


CHAPTER VI
“THE TIME HAS COME,” THE WALRUS SAID
The memory of Christmas is retained by me vividly enough,
though at the time I was distinctly bored. The day before
was hot and calm and, as we in the William were many miles
from the rendezvous at Badu, we were compelled to put out
the long heavy sweeps and pull all the way. Everybody became ex-
ceedingly hot. The Old Schooner, finding that she was being
slowly baked in the cabin, came on deck and exuded gravy
there instead. The deck became so hot that I drew water from
outside and poured it where I had to stand.
Early on Christmas Day awnings were set so that for one
day at least we should have a little relief. A small pig, bought
the night before from the natives on shore, was cut up and
cooked in the camp-oven, but there was no enthusiasm dis-
played even over such an unusual event as that. Something
seemed to be lacking; everything appeared unreal, and jollity
was dormant. The spirit of Christmas was absent—probably
being as far away as were the pubs at Thursday Island.
Shortly after Christmas another patch of shell was found
near the Torres Reefs southward of Hawkesbury Island, but this
time we did not have it to ourselves. Luggers sailed down upon
us from all directions, like vultures to the feast, so this patch
was soon worked out. While it lasted, though, there was plenty
of excitement because of the rough nature of the ground, and
also because the luggers were so close together.
The William was among the first half-dozen vessels on the
spot. Perhaps I should explain that if a diver is not doing very
well he soon sails off to try some other ground. If he sees an-
other lugger apparently satisfied and stationary, he naturally


sails across to investigate. If there is plenty of shell close to
the other lugger then, of course, he is soon busily engaged get-
ting as much of it as he possibly can. Other discontented divers
seeing two luggers working close together think that they might
as well investigate. So betore very long the news spreads, and
a large number of divers’ vessels are congregated near one
another, all snatching at the spoil. As the Torres Reefs are quite
close to Thursday Island, that was an additional reason why
the news should become quickly known. I was sitting dressed
ready to go down when we dropped our anchor about nine in
the morning. We knew at once that we were over rough bot-
tom by the loud grinding and complaining of the anchor-chain,
which always does grumble when made to work on foul ground.
The full force of the spring tide having passed, I went down to
find conditions even worse than I had expected. While attend-
ing to the main business of finding shell 1 had also to keep an
anxious eye on my air-pipe, and life-line.
Sitting on deck after my first dip, I warned the crew to be
extra careful with the gear. They were all experienced, besides,
the Groper was on deck, so I went down again with a fair
amount of assurance, more especially as the tide was nearing
the period of slack water.
Down once more, I became busy picking up shell. Presently
a sharp signal from the tender called my attention to the pipe.
I turned to find that the pipe was foul at least twenty feet from
me upstream. There was only one thing to do, and that was to
try to haul myself hand-over-hand along the pipe to the coral
that was holding it, and release it. That was hard graft, but I
succeeded, just as the weight of the William was about to come
on the pipe. I was only just in time. Then my attention was
occupied in running quickly along to make sure that the pipe
did not again catch anything while the slack was drawn up by
the hand above. Then I went up much out of breath and
rather frightened, but too pleased at my escape to be very angry.
My friend Monkey Howe, the big Mabuiag boy, had been
holding the pipe when it became foul of the coral. It appeared
that he had lien telling Brazilian Joe, who was turning the
pump, a most humorous story about his experience when he
had been locked up for being drunk and disorderly. He had


nearly reached the climax, which came when he was brought
before Sir John Douglas in the court at Thursday Island, and
was about to imitate Sir John giving his celebrated formula,
“Five pounds or one month”, when his attention was distracted,
and the whole of his story to Joe spoilt, by the tender rudely
calling to him to look after the fouled pipe.
Monkey, realizing that he would have to put off the story
to another time, and that what was now happening might make
an even better yarn, proceeded to give all his stout attention to
the pipe. He held on to the tough, red, rubbery thing, paying
it out reluctantly only because he was forced to do so as the
vessel drifted.
When first he found the pipe was foul he noted it was abeam,
and the bubbles breaking on the surface indicated that the
diver (myself) was nearly at right angles to the direction of the
pipe from the craft. Quickly the angle became more acute as
the William drifted. Monkey now hung on to the pipe des-
perately, as though he was pulling in a tug of war, and cast
an anxious eye on the few remaining coils of piping. Then,
when nearly all the pipe had left the deck, he took a turn
round a cleat with it and resigned himself to seeing the pipe
break under the strain it was about to receive when the full
weight of the William came upon it.
Nobody had much to say when I came on deck, but Monkey
was emphatic in his praise of the pipe. He said, “Dat plenty
good falla pipe. He strong lika hell. S’posem you me falla
hangem up two, tree falla bullock alonga him, himi no bin
breakem. He plenty good falla too much.”
While spelling on deck, I asked Mai, a New Hebridean boy,
to bring my pipe. He found it, cut the tobacco, filled and lit
the pipe, and then brought it to me slowly, puffing vigorously
while doing so. Politely he wiped the mouthpiece carefully on
the seat of his dungarees before handing the pipe to me, and
said, “Terbac belonga you more better. Good fella plenty too
mush.”
Looking round while sitting there taking my spell, and smok-
ing, I saw that several more luggers had arrived and started
work, and others were sailing down, or beating up.
Before long the impatient Groper said conversationally,


‘‘Must be just about slack water now; pity to lose that, but you
have yer smoke out, don’ mind nothink I say. When yer goes
down again well lift the anchor off the bottom, an’ yer can
let us know when ter drop it again when yer gets on a good
bit er ground. Yer’d better keep yer weather eye lifting whiles
yer down, an’ not go gettin’ foul er any anchor-chains—they’re
gettin’ pretty crowded. I’ll put on the dress if yer likes; I seen
more on this’n what you has.” Then, going to the side and
looking at the pendant ladder to confirm his opinion he said,
‘‘Yes, the tide’s near done. I wouldn’ stop too long if I was you—
but have yer smoke out, I sees as how yer enjoyin’ on it.”
Stowing my pipe in the folds of the mizzen, I stood and
shook myself, and was about to step to the ladder when the
attention of all was drawn to a lugger close at hand. We saw
that all hands were tailing on to the life-line and pulling up the
diver with a will. As soon as the diver had been drawn from
the water the helmet was removed. Then he was hauled on
deck and laid out. We knew that the trouble in his case was
a burst air-pipe because we saw the crew examining it, and
could plainly see the rent. To our shouted inquiries the answer
was that the diver was coming round. “No long time he all
right. Himi catchem wind belonga him; wind belonga him come
back quick fella now.”
Curiosity satisfied, I stepped to the ladder and \yas soon on
the bottom once more.
During the period of slack water, before the tide began to
run strongly, there was little danger of getting foul of the bot-
tom, but I saw two divers entangle one another. Seeing several
shells close together, I had hurried towards them. At the same
time two other divers forced their way through the still water
to the spot so that the three of us got there together. Each man
seized, and bagged, as many as possible just like boys scrambling
for pennies. The three of us, being so close together and actively
moving about, stirred up a great amount of sediment, which soon
made it difficult to see anything. Satisfied, I stepped back out
from the murk and instinctively glanced upwards to see if I
had twisted my pipe and line. Then I looked for the other
men’s gear above the cloud of sediment we had raised, and was
interested to find that they were twisted together.


Intent on not losing such a good chance for a joke, back I
went and, finding one of the two divers, gave his life-line a strong
pull. Then the other man came my way, so I pulled his line
also. At once the tenders above began to haul their men up
and the divers, probably thinking the matter urgent, closed
their valves and proceeded to ascend. The Groper informed
me afterwards that the two divers had considerable difficulty
in freeing themselves, because the air-pipe of one man had
been so slackly held that it lay on the ground, and the other
man had stepped over it. Little things like that help to keep
the birds on a lugger from going mouldy.
No thought of joking entered my head when the tide turned.
It increased in velocity in a remarkable manner, so that all my
attention was on my work and nothing else. With the experience
of the morning fresh in my memory I was alert, especially in
regard to my gear.
About three o’clock I saw a Japanese being captured by Davy
Jones in such an effective trap that there was no escape possible
for him, or any chance for a rescue.
That diver and myself were travelling abreast of one another
with the tide, separated by a distance of about forty feet. Re-
member, please, that the only sound that reaches the ears of a
diver as a rule is that of the pump that forces aid down to him.
That being the case, I should have known nothing of what
was happening so close to me if I had not turned my head just
then and looked through the glass on the left side of the helmet.
What I saw then made me exert myself at once, with all the
strength I had, in a useless attempt to reach him. There was no
formed plan in my head. Both his pipe and line had been
caught round the stem of a big coral mushroom, and he had
been drawn to it himself, and was acting the part of a toggle
when first I saw him, to the drifting lugger overhead.
It was remarkable how quickly the tragedy happened. As I
struggled uselessly to reach him the full weight of the vessel
above him came on his gear, and it stretched taut as a loaded
whip in a double line. The diver was jammed right up against
the coral. Some pieces were broken off the edge of the mush-
room by the tensioned gear. Then the pipe went, and a moment


afterwards the life-line snapped where it had been frayed on
the coral.
Now an extraordinary thing occurred. The diver struggled
to his feet. 1 urning, he saw and ran desperately towards me.
We both knew that could we but meet I might carry him to
the surface by taking a turn of my life-line round him, for his
valve was closed and he had yet some air to breathe. But it was
determined otherwise by the gods. Struggle as hard as I might,
by clutching at the coral growths, deflating my dress to gain
weight, and scrambling with all my power, I could not meet
him before he toppled, and went slowly turning over, and over,
along with the tide.
The Groper was keenly interested when he was told about
what I had seen—after normal breathing was restored, and I
had cooled down somewhat, for my flannels were absolutely
soaked in perspiration.
"Go on!” he said. "That beats cockfightin’. I never heard
tell er nobody seem’ nothin’ like that afore on the bottom. So
yer seen him done in? Well, I’m blowed! We seen what was
goin’ on—that’s her over there,” pointing to a lugger some dis-
tance away, “settin’ sail fer Thursday. We seen the tender takin’
turns er the line round the mizzen-sheet cleat, an’ nex’ thing
we seen is she’s swingin’ starn fust to the tide, an’ then she’s
away again, an’ we knows he’s a goner. She’ll be goin’ in with
her flag half-mast. Well that’s another Japansie what’s chucked
a seven.” He pronounced "Japansie” to rhyme with "chimpan-
zee .
“It’s my opinion,” continued the Groper, "that these here
Japansies gets sort er jealous er one another. They’re all so
damn eager ter be divers that they sort er helps ter pull the
trigger, if yer knows what I mean. Why, not so long ago a
lugger sails inter Thursday with two dead Japs in her. When
one ups an’ dies, another hops inter the dress an’ carries on till
he gets done in. I hears tell that when they gets ter Thursday
they wasn’ what yer might call otter er roses.”
I had one more dip after that, and then got out of the dress
as the tide was running too strongly. That would be somewhere
about five o’clock. We did not bring the anchor on deck to


remove the hitches of chain from the flukes, but simply paid
out enough chain to hold the lugger from drifting.
When the tide was at its strongest, when all others had
knocked off graft for the day, one Japanese lugger came down
with the tide towards us at such a rate that the diver below
must have been absolutely bounding along the bottom. It was
quite impossible for him to have picked up a shell at the speed
he was travelling. He was just showing off.
As the lugger neared us we saw that there was great danger
of their diver getting foul of our anchor-chain by the lugger
drifting on one side of it and the man below on the other. We
shouted to the Jap tender to haul up his diver. We made signs
of any kind we thought he might understand, but the Jap
merely glanced towards us, contemptuously it seemed, and
carried on. When it became obvious that the diver was foul of
our chain the Jap tender paid out line until, having no more
to pay, he took turns with it round the cleat aft. The Jap hold-
ing the air-pipe did the same thing amidships. With the lugger
drifting so speedily, everything happened quickly. Soon the Jap
craft began to swing her stern to the tide, as the weight came
on the life-line and pipe, with the result that she swung in
towards the William. She did not actually collide with us, she
swung astern.
We wondered if the pipe and line of the Jap diver could
stand the great strain they were being subjected to now until
the force of the tide abated. The Groper said that they would
if they were in good order; anyhow, he didn’t see why they
shouldn’t hold if they were any bloody good. Also, the Groper
said perhaps the “Japansie” might get pulled over our chain
by the weight of his vessel. In fact, he said if he wasn’t pulled
over he should be, and if he wasn’t pulled over our chain in
one bit he might be in two; anyhow, we’d hope for the best.
Looking over our bow we could see nothing but the outline
of things dimly. lime passed and still everything held. Then
suddenly one of the boys said, “He go. Himi finish.” And that
was the truth tersely spoken, for the Jap lugger was away, the
tender and the pipe holder hauling in, and coiling down the
lost diver’s gear.


We heard of other accidents that had occurred that day, and
on the next, but the fatal cases were among the Japs only. None
of our divers had gone west.
None of our luggers carried any Japs, and we were glad,
for nobody anywhere likes them. There are several reasons for
this dislike, which is shared by whites and coloured people.
For one thing, the Japs are too clannish, and for another, they
have an exaggerated opinion of their importance. While all
divers were hard grafters, they yet ceased to toil on Saturday
eve, but the Jap continued to work on Sunday just the same
as on any other day—more days, more dollars. Again, the Jap
did not hesitate to offer his services for much less than the
current rates; some of them were known to sign on for £l4 a
ton when the usual rate for coloured divers was £25. I have yet
to meet a man who, knowing the Jap, has a good word to sav
lor him. Contrariwise, men who have been intimate with Jap
women say that they got on very well.
Paralysis, and gear fouled on the bottom, cause the death of
divers more than anything else. Paralysis may overtake a diver
breathing highly compressed air, with which his lungs, and also
his arteries, become charged. The diver should ascend slowly
in order to give the air in him a chance to become of equal
pressure to that at the surface. In practice, he often fails to do
so, being reckless perhaps, or too impatient to reach the deck
for a smoke, or for some other natural reason.
When the diver ascends too quickly the air in his body forms
bubbles, as it does in soda-water when the cork is withdrawn,
and that can lead to death, or bring on a painful malady of the
joints known as “divers’ rheumatics” or “the screws”. Death
caused by paralysis in deep water is absolutely painless; there
can be nothing much better. Unlike an anaesthetic, it does not
involve a lingering, beastly, stinking wait before passing out
to nothingness. With no warning, or only the slightest, cons-
ciousness ceases; just a quiet, painless going out into the infinite
darkness like the flame of a lamp. How do I know? You will see.
Many people do not understand pressures of air and water.
I have listened to more than one heated argument when men
have maintained that a ship, sunk in deep water, cannot get
to the bottom because of the pressure. That is because they do


not realize that we are all living at the bottom of a deep ocean
of air, where the pressure at sea-level is fifteen pounds to the
square inch, and if that pressure were not distributed equally
round about us, but applied directly downwards on our heads
and shoulders, we should be promptly flattened. For the weight
of air on an average man having, say, 2200 square inches body
area would be about fifteen tons. At 5i fathoms, that is 33 feet, a
diver has double that pressure, or nearly 30 tons. The pressure
under water increases at the rate of fifteen pounds to the square
inch for each 33 feet of depth.
Although air is tenuous at high altitudes, and compressed
at ground level, that does not apply to water, fresh or salt, for,
unlike air, water cannot be compressed. Therefore, anything at
all that sinks at the surface of the sea will continue to sink
right to the bottom—unless it is eatable and a fish gobbles it,
or it dissolves, as sugar might. For the same reason, a ship is
not flattened on the bottom by pressure, however great that
may be, because the pressure is the same inside the ship as
outside, the same on the top as on the sides. But a ship sinking
to a hard bottom of rock would suffer much injury from the
impetus of her descent. And sudden descents are a grievous
matter to a diver, as well as to a ship, under water. As an illus-
tration, suppose a diver at the surface, through his own fault
and his tender’s carelessness, suddenly fell “wop” down to a
depth of five fathoms. The result of the extra pressure, twice
as much as that at the surface, so suddenly brought to bear
on him would force his body into his helmet, or try to force it
there. If the diver were not killed outright he would be severely
hurt. The reason is that there is no protective cushion of com-
pressed air inside the dress about the upper part of his body,
and his lungs are not adjusted to the change—there is more
pressure outside than inside, fifteen tons of it!
More care is taken nowadays in diving in deep water than
when I was being tutored. Divers then had to learn as I did—
just pick it up the best way they could, like the blind fowl
with the wooden leg.
There are other ways in which death can claim a diver in
his dress. A much discussed case was one in which a new-chum


crew of natives became tired and hungry while their diver
walked below. As he persisted in ignoring their signals to come
up for breakfast, they made fast the life-line and pipe, left
the pump, and had their meal. It is said that they were much
astonished to find that their diver was entirely dead when at
last they hauled him up.


CHAPTER VII
PHILOSOPHY, MONKEY HOWE, AND A CROCODILE
As I have said, nearly all the serious accidents that happen
to pearl-divers are caused by getting foul down below, or
else through becoming paralysed from the effects of great pres-
sure. Many people suppose that sharks are a serious danger, but
they are not greatly to be feared, as the following cutting from
a newspaper shows.
Divers at work on the Malabar today reported that the ocean was
swarming with sharks, which were feasting on the thousands of car-
cases of frozen mutton that had been released from the motor ship.
The divers were seeking huge quantities of tinned goods, which are
known to lie in the hold.
On Darnley Island, Thursday Island, and other places in Torres
Straits, at Darwin, and all along the nor’-west coast, there are
many hundreds of graves of divers. Yet few of these have lost
their life through being attacked by any of the numerous and
savage habitants of the sea.
All the same, even when a man has been long accustomed
to work in the dress and to seeing the various sea-creatures at
close quarters, the appearance of a large shark near him is apt
to make him uneasy to say the least. A big shark looks anything
but kindly, even if its intentions may be harmless. In such a
case the diver will not go at once to the surface, fearing that
if he does so the beastly thing may be tempted to take a bite
at him on his upward flight. For the fugitive diver, having
closed his valve to inflate his dress, has now no noisy outburst
of bubbles coming from his helmet, and he can no longer look
about above and below, and does not know if the shark is


following him or not. Usually the shark does not remain long
about the place but, having satisfied himself that the queer-
looking diver is beneath his notice, soon swims away. Then
probably the diver goes up and tells his crew what a whopper
he has seen, “as big as this craft”. I know, IVe done it myself.
However, it sometimes happens that a shark does attack a
diver in the dress. When this occurs it is most likely because
something, such as fish-slime, has been smeared accidentally
on the dress; or the diver may have carelessly wiped his hands
on his equipment after breakfasting sumptuously on boiled
salt beef. That is quite enough to set the sea tigers mouth
watering.
While I was in Torres Straits a diver was attacked by a shark
immediately after landing on the bottom. The explanation he
gave was that the fish must have been lying on the ground
immediately below him, and, being unable to see it, he had
accidentally kicked it. The shark, feeling outraged, first tore
off a sleeve of the divers dress and then, still harbouring a
feeling of enmity, had another bite, this time leaving teeth
marks in the huge lump of lead ballast between the man’s
shoulders. It is likely that the shark then went away to grow
new teeth. As there was not more than forty feet of water the
crew managed to haul their diver to the surface before he was
drowned, but he was a “wash-out” for some time after.
Jimmy Wilson, who nearly killed me in Port Darwin, often
told the story of an encounter he had with a shark. The yarn
varied little, however often it was told. It went like this: “We
was out on the Old Ground, and it was me first dip that day.
I d been down a long time but I didn’t want to come up till
I d filled me bag. The first time I saw the shark was when he
rushed past me with his mouth open. He wasn’ no more’n
three feet off me, and he nearly knocked me over. He was that
big, and me not ready for him, I got the fright of me life.
Wait a bit, I’m tellin’ this yam! He was a tiger-shark, that’s
what he was; I’m cornin’ to that presently. The crew all saw
him, and I’ll tell you what I did. When he’d make a charge
I’d open me valve and let out a rush of air, or else I’d let him
have it out of me sleeve, and he’d sheer off and go away for
a bit. Then I’d close me valve so’s to fill me dress with air


and be ready for his nex’ rush. Then, when I see him cornin’
again, I open up me valve and claps both me hands under me
arm-pits—like this!
“I’d been down a long time, and the crew wanted their break-
fas’. The tender was a Malayo, and he kep’ givin’ me the pull
to come up, and I kep’ givin’ him a shake on the line to leave
me alone, and I was frightened like hell he’d pull me up
because the crew, and him too, wanted their breakfas’, and the
shark’d get me while I was goin’ up. Anyhow, they didn’t, and
after about an hour I thought the bloody shark would never
go away. Then I looked around and couldn’ see the shark, so up
I goes. Just as I reaches the top the shark follows me up and
snatches the bag fair out of me hand!
“Yes, I s’pose he wouldn’ find four or five gold-lip too good
for his grinders, but I wish it had been four or five plugs of
dynamite. Oh, what I think brought him around was one of
the crew must have dropped the bag where they’d been cleaning
fish, and the smell fetched him. All the crew see him, and
hungry—l dunno . . .”
A Torres Straits native diver working from a swimming-
boat, that is, a naked diver who swims for shell in water gener-
ally not deeper than seven or eight fathoms, once got his head
right in the mouth of a shark, though some say that it was a
big groper, and lived to parade his decorations! His name was
Treacle, and for a long time after his miraculous escape, his
natural ugliness, accentuated by the dreadful scars round his
throat and head, brought to him quite a lot of cash from tourists.
He was a major attraction at Thursday Island. Treacle had
escaped death by his wonderful presence of mind, for he had
found and gouged the eyes of the man-eater without the loss of
a second. A more remarkable escape has never been known.
We have now learnt two things about dealing with sharks.
One is, don’t kick them until they are dead; and the other,
don’t tease them while they are hungry, alive, and free.
The night is far more dangerous than the day to a man in
the water, especially a dark, calm, cloudy night. One of the
reasons is that the phosphorus is always more noticeable on
calm dark nights. Each moving creature is outlined, and leaves
a blazing track like a comet. Gazing from the deck on such a


ABOVE : (left) The venomous cone-shell
BELOW : Giant clam-shell
(RIGHT) Trochus-shell


ABOVE: A Gorgonid coral
BELOW: Stone-fish


night at porpoises playing about may be likened quite truth-
fully to watching a display of gorgeous fire works. Sometimes
a pulsating cloud of light is seen deep down in the water near
to a reef—caused by devils, the natives say, but it may be
merely a number of small fish huddled sociably together.
Twice I have seen the water aflame on the surface as far
as might be seen, all golden, quivering, pulsating fire for an
hour, and then it died away as quietly and quickly as it came.
If by some chance anybody gets into the water on such a
night in sharky places, they had better get out of it, or they
will last only as long as their luck. Even black-finned reef
sharks that do not attack usually, and are treated with indif-
ference by natives in the daytime, will eagerly attack at such
a time. I knew a Ninigo native named Taleim who was attacked
by an albacore, a long, fierce fish, one dark night as he was
fishing on a reef. Taleim was fortunate that it succeeded in
tearing only a mouthful of brown meat from the inside upper
part of Taleim’s thigh.
The Groper was in the dress on the day following my some-
what unusual experiences, while I took up my ordinary duty
as one of the crew. He avoided accidents partly because he was
a most experienced and skilled diver, and also because those
on deck were thoroughly alert. Without any doubt all the other
crews were aroused too, so no more accidents took place among
those in our fleet. That day we heard that the William was
to go into Thursday Island for an overhaul, and that the Groper
was to take charge of a reconditioned vessel named Margaret.
This news had a most enlivening effect on Monkey, Mai, and
Joe. Monkey stamped his big splayed feet noisily on the deck,
and bellowed mightily, “Blow, blow, blow, blow!” the others
joining in with grinning delight. Little Girtie, too, trilled out,
‘Blow, blow, blow”, just so she should share the excitement.
The cry spread everywhere, quickly, so that from near and far
came to our ears, ‘Blow, blow, blow”, like a great supplication.
Evidently everybody who mattered was heartily in accord
with the aspirations of Monkey, whatever they were, but I
was quite in the dark. The explanation came to me slowly
through the laboured efforts of Joe, and the others, though
they evidently considered me to be thick-headed. It appeared
p


that when the nor’-west set in properly the water about the
Straits became much dirtier. Because of that, and because the
wind was often violent, the luggers were compelled to shelter,
or to cruise up the coast of Queensland inside the Great Barrier
Reef, where the water was clear and calm. Conditions for the
crews thus became much easier, and there was more variety in
their life.
After getting his orders to go in it is more than likely that while
the Groper was below on that rough, rocky bottom he had
visions of himself midst the beer and beauty that might be
found in any one of the five pubs at Thursday. In any case,
when the force of the tide compelled him to cease work late
in the afternoon he gave orders to set the sails, and get up the
anchor.
We did this while the tender helped him out of the dress,
but it was not until we saw which way we were heading that
the intentions of Billy the Groper became known to us. He
explained his views by saying, “There ain’t more’n another
day in it anyhow, an’ I don’t see no good in me grafting me
guts out on this here rough patch. It’ll be all the same in
another thousand years. We’ll leave it to them others; p’raps
they needs it more’n what we does. Anyhow, there’s some
things the Old Schooner wants ter get a-buyin’ of. Anyhow,
I’m goin’ in, an’ that’s all there is to it.”
When I priggishly hinted that we should stay to work out
the patch, and that for us to be the first to leave without good
reason did not look well, the Groper said, “Never you mind
about that. I know what I’m a-doin’ of. I knows where there’s
a bigger pearl in Thursday’n any I’m like to pick up here-
abouts. She’s in Sullivan’s an’ has red hair an’ two big gold
teeth, one on each side ev her gob in her top jaw. She told
me she had ’em done like that in Sydney afore she signed on
an’ set sail for Sullivan’s. I give her a pearl the las’ time I was
in—me bein’ a bit in the wind—cos her name is Pearl, an’ acos
she said she’d give me two bottles ev Sullivan’s strike-me-dead.
But so far I on’y has one on ’em, an’ I’m a-goin’ ter remind
her about it, an’ get the other or take it out some other way
somehow.”
Sitting on deck that evening while a light breeze abaft the


beam gently urged the William along the quiet watery track that
led, we hoped, to a few days on shore, we listened to squat little
Mai as he told Monkey and Joe about something or other.
Exactly what he was talking about was difficult to understand.
Nobody interrupted him, so his unusual effort at expression
flowed on for some minutes. Probably because he knew that
others did not understand him well he had repressed his
desire to talk so long that now he had a big accumulation of
language stored inside his black hide, and the sudden excite-
ment of going in to get his discharge had released quite a
torrent of almost inarticulate speech.
A part of his story was in this manner: “Now he takem he
go. Himi go, go, go, finish. Himi stop lilli bit no more. Himi
bin makem talk-talk alonga Puppa, Mumma belong him. Himi
bin give it two fella somesing himi bin bringem. All about
three fella makem plenty talk. Himi talk, talk, talk, plenty too
mush.”
Quite suddenly Mai came to the end of his story and retired
forard by himself. Nobody had understood him fully, but we
S)mipathized, and with that knowledge, and with having eased
himself of so many syllables, he had to be satisfied.
The Groper said, Queer thing Mai never larned for ter
talk Good English like these here other fellas, Monkey and
Joe.”
Perhaps he s too lazy to take the trouble to try,” I said.
Well, what on it? replied the Groper. “S’posin’ he is lazy,
what on it? He can t help bein lazy no more’n nobody else
can. You take some of them geezers what yer can’t stop from
graftin’ anyhow—what about them? Can they help it? I seen
fellas what if yer stopped em workin’d die; if yer stopped ’em
at one thing they’d start on another; couldn’ keep still they
couldn, must be a-doin somethin; if it wasn’ one thing it’d
be another. What about them blokes, can they help it?
You wants ter do a bit er thinkin’ afore yer starts talkin’
about bein lazy. Nobody can’t help bein’ lazy no more’n no-
body can help bein’ a hard grafter; it’s the way they’re born.
So it ain t a bit er good handin’ out bookays ter one man fer
doin a lot er toil, an puttin the boot inter another man acos


he can’t get out er his own road. They can’t help it, they’re
bom that way.’
Finding that I was listening to him, the Groper went on,
“There’s some geezers too lazy for ter think, lot’s on ’em. An’
there’s some what’s too lazy for ter do a bit er graft. I seen
some er these here lazy fellas what works better’n anybody
when they once gets goin’. That’s acos they wants ter get the
job done quick, so’s they can go away an’ have a smoke, or a
pint—or two pints. Onct yer gets some er them lazy blokes ter
work, s’longs yer don’t get a-givin’ em too much ter do all at
once, you’ll find them graftin’ hard all right so’s ter get the job
done an’ go home an’ sen’ the old woman out fer a jug er beer.
An’ you’ll often find them lazy fellas has got a better head-
piece’n what you has. They got ter have ter dodge the toil.
While a silly sort er geezer like yerself is hard at it, these here
lazy fellas has done a bit er thinkin’, an’ dodged it.
“Why,” he went on, “I’ve knowed a lazy man ter pull so hard
that he broke his oar, an’ then he sits back a-watchin’ us pull.
It’s my belief he done it on puppose. Don’ tell me, I knows
’em.
“I heard tell on a king onct that lived long before ol’ Vic
was born—King Alfred he was, that’s him—what lost the track
whiles he was a-goin’ through a big forest in the Old Country.
He comes ter a bit ev a humpy stuck all be itself, an’ sees a
ol’ woman a-doin’ a bit er cookin’, an’ says, ‘What about a bit
er scran?’ An’ she says, ‘All right, look arter these here johnny-
cakes, an’ yer set.’
“So this here King Alfred squats down, an’ the nex’ thing
he knows the ol’ woman comes blowin’ through the door an’
scuppers him with one over the napper fer a-bumin’ of her
johnny-cakes. ‘l’ll lam yer,’ she says. But it’s my belief he done
it on puppose. He didn’ want no job cookin’ johnny-cakes—on’y
a-eatin’ on ’em—so he pertended he didn’ know nothin’ about it
so’s he’d get out of doin’ it.”
By sunrise next morning we were on deck looking at the
shore and the few folk that were out and about, and waiting
until the time was ripe for us to go on shore ourselves. We had
anchored late the night before, close to the beach near the
Government jetty.


Straight up the road on the right was the big wooden Metro-
pole Hotel. Nearer to us was a shipyard where Japanese began
to work thus early even as we watched. Beyond the shipyard
Japanese women, who sometimes laboured through the night
entertaining paying visitors, lodged in small, white wooden
cottages that stood on short piles. Near the jetty, on the left,
was the customs house; beyond that, the post office, and then
the Grand Hotel where the Groper thought he might find
Farquhar, the manager of our fleet.
The sea front had rather a squalid appearance, which was
relieved a little further along by a line of coco-nut palms.
Passing over the galvanized iron roofs of the town, at the back,
were low hills that concealed a fort, and the barracks of a
hundred soldiers. There were three six-inch and other guns up
there in the fort, but of more importance to a few privileged
people was the canteen that sold an imperial pint of beer for
fourpence.
A coal-hulk, a brigantine from Papua, a local schooner, a few
luggers, and some other small craft were all that the harbour
contained just then. The harbour is a good one, almost land-
locked by the islands that enclose it. Looking outwards from
the beach of Thursday Island, on your right is Prince of Wales,
the most rugged island of the group; straight in front is Horn
Island, where gold was obtained from an open-cut or quarry.
Although white labour only was employed on Horn Island, the
open-cut was worked so efficiently that three pennyweights
to the ton was said to pay expenses, and a pennyweight of
gold at that time was worth 3s. 9d. only. Partly closing the
entrance of the harbour on your left are Tuesday and Wednes-
day islands. All of the land is hilly and clothed with dense
jungle, green near at hand, but merging into purple in the dis-
tance. Overhead, on the morning of our arrival, were fleecy
white clouds driven along by a cool, fresh breeze. Altogether,
it made a pretty, sparkling picture.
Thursday Island is in latitude 10° 34' S., and longitude
142° 12' E. It is quite surrounded by other islands but, through
some lapse or other, none of them were named Saturday or
Sunday. It is thirty miles nor’-west from Cape York, which is
the most northerly point of the Australian continent. New


Guinea is only 90 miles away to the north; Brisbane, the
capital of Queensland, about 1500 miles south; and Cooktown,
where Cook the navigator repaired his barque, is four hundred
miles south, inside the 1200-mile Great Barrier Reef, the largest
and longest coral reef in the world.
The climate is grand during the sou’-east season. Then,
from April until October, it is about seventy degrees at night,
and seldom more than eighty in the day. It is the steady, almost
unvarying sou -east breeze that blows so freshly night and day,
and the absence of mugginess, that makes the climate so
healthy and pleasant. During the nor’-west the thermometer
may show ninety-five, and frequent squalls with heavy rain
make the place muggy, but the inhabitants, and their thirsts,
remain healthy under those conditions.
At this time the population numbered about four thousand.
They were coloured, discoloured, and white, so that monotony
was abated whichever way they were viewed, or heard. Nearly
a thousand of them were Japanese, while there were not more
than seven hundred and fifty white people. Most of the popu-
lation were afloat getting up such things as various valuable
shells, and thirsts. Coloured people from such far away places
as Haiti, the West Indies, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, and Sudan
might be found among those on shore, and afloat, and the hue
of their skins varied from the dense black of the Sudanese to
the beautiful light brown of a native from the sou’-east Solomons.
The value of the shell they brought in, and the quantity,
varied from year to year. Most of it went to the United States
of North America. In one year (1924) that country bought
£280,653 worth, while Britain took only £52,658. The total
got in that year was £444,234. Japan has taken in twelve months
trochus-shell valued at £70,999. China likes beche-de-mer soup
so much that she paid Australia £17,893 for the quaint sea-slug
that looks so much like a burnt shoe when it is dried. The
quantity of turtle-shell also varies from year to year. In 1928 it
was valued for export at £2141, in 1925 at £4730. It is not
possible to state the total amount obtained.
When a diver or a self-respecting sailorman goes on shore
he is always shaved, dressed in his best, and looking his best.
What he is like when he returns to his ship depends on the


people he has met, and how much money he had. So when the
Groper was pulled to the beach before seven he was neat, natty,
shaved, and wearing trousers—not a luva-luva this time. He
said he would get something to eat by and by, and that he
wanted to catch Farquhar before he went out. He told us to
stand by the William until he came back with orders.
Protesting whimperings which rose to occasional squeals told
us that Girtie was being prepared for the shore-going by her
mother. On deck, Monkey was being painfully shaved by Joe,
who had at first tried a razor, but, as that had failed to stand up
to the job, was now using a splinter of glass. The tender
examined his nearly hairless face in a mirror, and when he found
anything like a hair anywhere but on his upper lip he plucked
it out with a pair of tweezers. All of us washed some of our-
selves in fresh water, and then dressed in clean, crumpled
clothes. The others glanced curiously at me while I attempted
to straighten out, and polish, the old pair of boots in which I
had come on board. Their looks seemed to say, “He won’t know
us if we meet him on shore and he is wearing those.”
The Groper came back about eleven o’clock, quite sober but
cheerful. He told us that the Margaret was on the slips, and would
be in the water the next day. That being the case there was no
need for all hands to remain on board the William. Mai being
willing to keep watch, because he was to be paid off, the rest
of us went on shore. The Old Schooner and Girtie, bare-
foot and with loose print gowns covering their brown bodies,
the Groper, and myself, were pulled over the short distance to
the beach by Mai. As I walked with his party the Groper told
me about what had happened that morning.
He had met Farquhar on the veranda of the Grand, and had
been invited to breakfast. “Everything up to the nines,” he
told me. “I never seen nothin’ better nowhere. All the knives
an’ things polished up like the brasswork on the old Northum-
berland so’s yer could see yer face in ’em if yer wanted ter. Each
on us had a clean hand-rag, folded up ter look smart like, on
his port hand for ter wipe his moustache on when he mucked
it up with his tucker. I seen the others usin’ of ’em, but I let
mine be—l didn’ want ter go a-spoilin’ on it. A nice little bit ev
a titter drifts along now an’ then, an’ says, ‘What would yer


like nex’ sir?’ or, ‘Will yer have some ham an’ eggs, sir?’ jes’
as polite as if she was a-talkin’ ter a admiral. I’m a-goin’ ter
give her a look-up by an’ by an’ ask her ter come fer a ride on
the round-about this evenin’.
‘There was a couple er pearl-buyers there; one on ’em was
a Froggy. I tol’ ’em about them Japansies what got done in, an’
how you seen one on ’em caught. I thought they might have
turned it on so I could have a dash er somethin in me corffee,
but they none on ’em did. So at last of all I says, ‘What about a
taste? Don’ none er yer care about a drop er rum, er somethin’?
I don’ like a-drinkin’ with the flies, but I could do with a drop
er Red Hart or somethin’.’ But they tells me ter go ahead acos
they never takes nothin’ till the sun’s over the fore-yard, an’ so
I leaves it till after. I seen others like that afore—won’t touch a
drop till they’re that dry the booze fair fizzles down their neck
when they does breast the bar.
“When we gets outside arter breakfas’ one on ’em says, ‘What
about havin’ a look at the crocodile?’ he says. ‘We got a croco-
dile made fast under the pub, Groper. Have ver seed him vet?’
he says.
“So I says, ‘Go on, yer haven’, have yer? Is he a-pullin’ of
me leg?’ I says ter Farquhar.
“So they says, ‘Come on down an’ have a look.’
“So we goes down under the pub, an’ there he is moored ter
one of the piles. An they tells me he was brought across in the
cattle-steamer from Normanton where he’d been catched. He
was on’y about a fathom an’ a half long, but he had plenty er
beam. Nasty lookin’ cow, he was.
“Whiles we was a-lookin’ at him, down comes a geezer what
had blown in from the Gulf on the same steamer what had
brought the croc. He’d been on the booze ever since, an’ he tol’
us we didn know nothin about ’em, an’ they was all right
when yer knowed ’em, an’ treated ’em kind like. He steps aboard
the croc afore nobody could stop him jes’ abaft his ugly figure-
head, an’ starts to walk aft along his back to his starn. ‘l’ll show
yer,’ he says.
Come off, yer bloody fool!” we all on us gets a-yellin’ at him.
“Jes’ then the croc swipes his helium round quick, like this
here,” and the Groper swung his arm round to illustrate and


nearly knocked me over. “I didn’ mean that—did I hurt yer?”
said the Groper. Then he went on, “He swiped the silly geezer
on the legs an’ broke ’em—both on ’em. An' he would ha’ got
his teeth into him, too, on’y he couldn’ get to him acos of his
bein’ moored a bit short,” regretfully ended the Groper.
I hen, in answer to my inquiry, “Oh, they takes him away
ter the horsepital in course. Whadjer think they’d do—chuck
him in the sea? That's what they ought ter ha’ done. It’ll be
funny if he gets the ding-bats in the horsepital, him with both
his legs broke, an’ thinks the crocodiles an’ triantirantiwonti-
gongs is a-chasin’ of him.”
Leaving the Old Schooner and Girtie to look at the croco-
dile under the Grand, |he Groper and I mounted the steps and
found Farquhar. After asking me in a kindly manner how I
was getting along, Farquhar asked us to join him in a drink.
While at the bar, he passed me a Queensland National Bank
note for £1 without being asked, which made a deep impression
on me. Shortly afterwards I parted from the Groper simply
because I could not afford to keep him company, but I noticed
that he sent the Old Schooner away in smiling contentment,
with money enough for a good shopping spree, before he started
his own holiday.
Early the next morning I was awakened by a policeman. I
had sought the cool sand for slumber rather than the William,
or a bed in town. I found out later that there were two police-
men on the Island, and that one of them was a sonuvver. It
was the sonuvver who had interfered with me because I was
sleeping on the beach, and in his mind anybody who did that
was not respectable. He roughly told me to get along, that he
had his eye on me, and not to let him catch me again. So I
went along blissfully unconscious that that was the beginning
of a day of upsets.
Margaret was to take the water that morning, and William
was to be drawn up for overhaul in her place. So everybody
was on board, early if not very bright, ready to exchange from
one craft to the other. Big Monkey was surly, and caused some
delay and slight inconvenience. He blundered into Joe down
below, and rudely ordered him to get out of his way. Joe remon-
strated.


“Yous look here, Monkey,” he said, “I knows yous bin boozin’
dat Chink sam-su stuff, an’ we all things oursels berry smart
when we’s like dat, but you talk probally to this hombre when
yous do talk. See?”
Monkey at once flared. “Who you?” he spluttered. “Who you?
I bin talk you dis way one-time, all-a-time. Who you talk? Me
nothing drink it sam-su. Me bin drink it all-a-time beer, whisk.
You sit down all-about down below like it big falla master, like
it cap’n belonga schooner.”
Sounds of struggling followed; then pantherish Joe sprang
on deck waving a sheath-knife. Monkey followed grasping a
hefty piece of mangrove firewood. He ran at Joe and brought
his cudgel down on the cabin housing with such force as to
splinter his weapon, for Joe had avoided the blow. Twice was
Monkey stabbed before the Groper and I had time to interfere.
Joe was seized and thrown headlong down the cabin by the
Groper, while I shoved Monkey over the side.
Squeals from little Girtie and her mother, in addition to the
row made by the rest of us, quite apart from some loudly voiced
appreciation from some onlookers, brought a huge policeman
to the beach. In a casual, matter-of-fact sort of way, quite good-
humouredly, that big policeman took charge of Joe and Monkey,
and away they went, Monkey being supported and almost
dragged along between the policeman and Joe. Since then
those two have been only a memory to me.
The Groper had come on board late the night before down
to the plimsoll with grog, but without a sign of contrariness. He
was evidently one of those who drink like a gentleman. When
he was feeling prime he sang simple songs, and nothing pleased
him more than being encouraged to sing again with another
drink. He could also dance most interestingly when he had
room enough. I was told that in the afternoon he had barely
begun an eccentric dance, requiring great nicety of balance,
in front of Sullivan’s before a small crowd of admiring people
who had collected when, to the annoyance of all, the approach
of the wowser policeman caused the Groper to retire, for, like
many stars, he was temperamental and did not care to perform
before a hostile audience.
Three new hands were signed on in place of Mai, but as


one of them was discovered shortly afterwards to have a vene-
real disease a search had to be made for yet another. One of
the new hands had both his nostrils slit open in such a manner
that, if he was swimming, he could send jets of water into the
air most charmingly when he rose to the surface. Many years
afterwards I had a boat’s crew like him, so I know he was a
Polynesian from Ontong Java, or Lord Howe Group, near the
Solomons. He name was Wuggi, and he was just as ugly.
One of the others was Cranky Sullivan, not to be confused
with Cranky Francis, a crack Manila-man diver. Cranky was a
light-skinned West Indies chap, who was quite normal when
he was not stirred up with booze, undue exposure to the moon,
or thoughts about his parentage. Sometimes I thought I had
nearly got a clear idea of Cranky’s ancestry, and then I’d get
all mixed up, as they were, by his changing his mother from
Queen Victoria to Marie Louise, or somebody else. Some of his
ideas were good. One of them was to get a cross between a mus-
covy duck and a turtle. He told me that he thought it was pos-
sible under certain conditions because they were both creatures
of the water and, if only it could be done, see what a fortune
there was in it. What prodigious quantities of eggs the hybrid
would lay!
The other new hand was Maltese Joe, and he seemed to be
quite all right too, but I made up my mind not to annoy him
after I heard him describe a night at the opera. He said he
went to the theatre so happy with wine that he laughed loudly
at everything but, when some of the dour audience made them-
selves objectionable by objecting, he carved as many of them
as possible with a razor. This new Joe was an excellent cook.
He taught me to make splendid Vienna bread just by kneading
ordinary dough until it made a rich sucking noise, and then
it became almost elastic in its consistency. When it was like that
it could be twisted about easily into all sorts of fancy shapes.
Besides, he made nice cakes from nothing more than yeast
dough, brown sugar, and salt-beef fat. He knew other things,
too. He knew that his curly hair was unique, and kept himself
from going bald by never letting it get wet if possible, and
rubbing plenty of fat into it. And he said he could speak French


and Italian, but then he said he could speak English, so per-
haps he was exaggerating.
Margaret sailed early next morning, going out by way of the
boat passage between Horn Island and Prince of Wales. We
had the tide with us running strongly over the shallow, foul
ground. The Groper himself stood for’ard on the look-out and
waved, or called directions to the tender at the helm.
We anchored near Entrance Island. The Groper was pulled
over to a watering place at the end of Prince of Wales with
the Old Schooner, some soiled clothes, and Girtie, “all for to
get a bit of a wash”. Some of us went crayfishing with spears
on Entrance Island, and got such numbers of pretty, prickly,
blue and gold crays that we filled the dinghy with them. For a
few days we cruised about, doing a little work, but mostly idling.
We went to Wednesday Island for firewood, and the largest
mangroves I have seen grow there. We talked to the white gold-
miners on Possession Island, and found them to be a manly,
cheerful lot, as gold-miners invariably are wherever they may
be found, full of hope and courage while poor and struggling,
gentlemanly and generous when they have struck it rich.
Possession Island is the place where Cook, the great navigator,
took possession of the eastern coast of the continent, about 1770.
Every one of those islands in Torres Straits, and inside the
Great Barrier, too, is delightfully pretty. On most of them the
vegetation grows to the high-water mark so that there is often
no beach at all when the tide is high. On some of the islands
there are coco-nuts, but these have been planted and are not
indigenous. All the thousands of square miles of water inside
the Barrier, and of Torres Straits are ideal for those who enjoy
sailing or the simple joy of studying the queer creatures living
in the warm water, or bathing, and fishing.
There are dangers in those waters, but they are not serious
enough to cause a normal person any worry. Ordinary care and
caution when handling strange fish or other animals is neces-
sary—the best way is to watch what happens when somebody
else handles them. Although it is possible to meet crocodiles,
sharks, stinging rays, venomous snakes and fish, stinging trees,
centipedes, biting ants, and other disagreeable things, yet it is
rarely that anyone gets hurt.


CHAPTER viii
THE GREAT BARRIER REEF
The nor’-west having set in properly, the fleet assembled at
Somerset before going south along the Queensland coast.
Besides our fleet there were three other floating stations with
their luggers, so that when a smart steamer bound for China
passed through the passengers saw a rare sight, for it is most
unusual for such a large number of pearlers to be together.
Albany Pass, where we were all anchored, is a clear, deep,
narrow strait between the island of that name and Somerset
on the mainland. This passage is the gate to the waterway in-
side the Great Barrier which all vessels using that track to or
from Asia must pass. There are other passages, but they are
tortuous, or have obstructions. The pass between Albany Island
and Mount Adolphus is miles wide with nine to ten fathoms
of water, but there is a pinnacle of rock, covered at all tides,
which ripped open the Quetta one night while she was out-
ward bound. Since then the pass has been forbidden.
The Quetta was torn open at a quarter past nine in the even-
ing of 28 February 1890, and went under within three minutes.
There were one hundred and sixty-two passengers, and a crew
of one hundred and twenty—twenty-seven whites and ninety-
three others; eighty-eight whites, and thirty-five coloured were
drowned. Because of the sudden nature of their death, and the
loss of a good steamer with her valuable cargo of wool, meat,
silver-lead and tallow, a little curiosity shop of a church was
built at Thursday Island. There now is the bell, and other
relics of the ship. No church has been erected in memory of
the dozens of divers who have died in the dress, which shows


the difference it makes to the clerical mind whether a lot of
people die a tragic death together, or singly.
In a good house, overlooking the beach at Somerset, lived a
man big in every way named Jardine. He was married to a
Samoan lady. About this couple many romantic stories are told,
but all are to their credit. It is said that timely warning of an
attack by blackfellows brought to Jardine by the lady opened
the door to his heart. Jardine was the first man to overland
cattle through the wild, unknown country of Cape York Penin-
sula. This rugged land is clothed with dense jungle in which
grows the dreaded stinging tree. Wild blacks beset the stock-
men all the way, spearing cattle, and men, too, when they
could. So great was the renown of Jardine that all mail-steamers
passing his door saluted him, while the passengers lined the
rail and stared, hoping to get a glimpse of the big man with the
big reputation.
While at Somerset we beached Margaret and cleaned her
bottom. Some of us bought a bullock from Jardine and divided
it. Excepting that the quiet, orderly behaviour of so many mixed
coloured people was to me remarkable, the only other incident
of note was the way I got the bottle of rum.
A messenger came to Margaret asking for the Groper to go
to the floating station to clear the anchor, which was foul. The
Groper was on shore somewhere so, seeing my chance, I per-
suaded the tender to take Margaret over to the Tarawa without
bothering about the Groper. Freeing a fouled anchor is usually
a simple matter. All I had to do was to go down, follow the
chain cable of the anchor which was first hove taut “up and
down”, stand clear when I reached the bottom, signal to those
on the Tarawa to slack chain, then to throw a hitch of the
anchor chain over the fluke that was above ground, and my job
was done. By the crew heaving in now, the strain came on the
fluke instead of the ring on the shank, and the anchor came
away easily. It had been foul, in stone bottom. The job took no
more than half an hour or thereabouts, including dressing and
undressing.
When the Groper saw what was going on he left the beach
hastily, like a dog with a tin tied to its tail, but the job was
done and the rum handed over before he could get on board. I


knew exactly how the poor fellow was feeling, so I took all the
wind out of his sails by saying, “It’s down in the cabin, Groper.
The Old Schooner has it waiting for you.”
There is plenty of evidence that the Spaniards sailed to the
Australian Main long before the British sent Captain Dampier,
in the Roebuck one hundred years earlier than Cook, to report
on the southern continent about which so little was known.
The wreck of a Spanish galleon, which had been lost probably
two hundred years before was found by Jardine of Somerset.
The salvors found her overgrown with weeds and coral. They
recovered masses of coin, blackened and consolidated by the
action of salt water. They broke old coral below it and found
fifty bars of silver grown over by coral, and shells. Remains of
other Spanish wrecks, guns, and so forth, have been found
along the Queensland coast, bearing silent testimony to the
unwitting discovery of the Great South Land by early sixteenth
and seventeenth century Spanish adventurers.
After a couple of days at Somerset the great fleet of more
than a hundred luggers, and about six floating stations, sailed
south inside the Barrier Reef up along the Queensland coast.
It was like being with some joyous holiday excursion.
The very first evening there was a touch of the unusual for,
as we anchored for the night, close at hand we saw a shark
chasing a turtle in the shallow water on a reef. The turtle
was making a passage like a steam launch, and the shark, in
his wake, meant business. The outcome we did not see, for
they left the reef and passed into deep water. The desire of the
shark for turtle meat awoke a similar taste in some of the on-
lookers. Wuggi walked aft saying to the Groper, “Diver, me
like takem dinghy go walkabout lookout turtle-fish.”
Presently Wuggi was seen standing for’ard in the dinghy,
his prehensile toes grasping the gunwhale, while he held a hard-
wood spear in his hand, watching for a turtle. I managed the
dinghy silently, or nearly so, obeying the signs conveyed by
slight motions of Wuggi’s hands. When we were a little way
from Margaret Wuggi swept back his arm and launched his
spear. It was a truly wonderful effort. The turtle was a couple
of feet under the surface, and quite thirty feet from us. Also,
it was travelling at a fair speed, and Wuggi had to allow for


refraction, for an object under water is not where it appears
to be if you attempt to put a spear in it. Wuggi speared the
turtle and, as soon as the dinghy was near enough, jumped
feet first in and grabbed it so that there would be no possibility
of its escaping. It was a small green turtle, about fifty pounds,
the best kind for eating. We kept going until dark but got
nothing else.
And now, while on the subject of “turtle-fish” we might as
well say a little more about the champion egg-layer of the
world. The nesting season is, south of the line, from October
to March, or thereabouts. The male turtle takes no part in the
nesting, or anything else except his business of fertilizing the
mary-turtle, and, so that there will be no mistake about that,
he takes a month doing it, being inseparable from his sweet-
heart all that time. So turtles are not only champion egg-layers,
hut they are also champion love-makers.
None of the turtles can breed without coming to the land,
for they all make nests in the sand where their eggs are hatched.
A green turtle may grow to six hundred pounds, but, whatever
its weight, the poor creature has to drag itself along on land by
flappers and, having no flexibility like a seal, its progress is
slow and ponderous. I do not know how often a turtle lays
during the season, but some say every two or three weeks. If
that is the case, then thousands of eggs are laid by one turtle,
barring accidents, each season. The babies are pretty little
things, dressed in black with sleeves edged in white, and are
three to four inches from sneezer to breezer.
Now and again a turtle is caught while it is apparently sun-
ning itself on the surface, As it frequently passes a fore-flapper
over its head and back at that time it gives an impression of
washing itself. It is not easy to catch them then. They must
be approached cautiously, silently, with a boy standing ready
to jump. If two turtles are coupled lovingly in the mating
season, and cannot separate, so much the better for the hunter
who suppresses any tender sentiment he may have. But he will
spear them, and not attempt to catch them by hand.
While I was manager of the L’Echiquier Group, away north
of New Guinea, a boy of mine named Wailam caught a big
cock turtle early one morning. We approached the turtle with


ABOVE: Conch-shell
BELOW: Bailer shell


ABOVE: Sunrise from Mabuiag Island
BELOW: Coral-fish in coral grotto


great care, and Wailam, all tense with excitement, jumped
behind the big animal and, before it could dive, seized its
shell on either side near the fore-flappers. By using his elbows
as fulcrums he kept the turtle from diving. Wailam was but
a small native, a mere bantam. He called excitedly to a big
fellow-islander, “Hully up, hully up, Sahainaha, hully up,
him stlong fella too mush.” We did ‘hully up’, and soon the
big hissing turtle was helped inboard by willing hands.
Sailing south inside the Great Barrier among a maze of pretty
islands, sandy cays, and reefs, with the hilly jungle-clad main
on our right hand, we worked or idled all day, and generally
managed to anchor close to an island for the night. As this
was the breeding season for pigeons, and everything else seemingly,
we had ample variety of food. At this time of the year vast
numbers of pigeons come across from Papua to nest on these
small islands off the North Queensland coast. The trees are
crowded with birds each evening. During the day most of them
fly across to the mainland for food, returning at sunset. We had
no firearms, but the birds were so plentiful and tame that we
always got enough simply by throwing sticks at them, or by
striking them down. However, those migratory pigeons from
Papua cannot be said to be good eating when compared to the
other fruit-eating pigeons.
On these small islands inside the Great Barrier Reef, at this
time of the year, the trees and air are full of wings, and the
clamour hardly ever stops night or day. Some of the birds draw
particular attention to themselves. There is the drongo, dressed
in metallic black, who seemingly resents the presence of others
and hopelessly strives to drive them away. Then there is the
dragon bird, who loudly calls long before the dawn in such
a way that you just naturally say to yourself, “I’ll find out what
blasted bird that is that wakes all hands at this ungodly hour!”
And another noisy beggar is the honey-eater who shouts, and
shouts. Pigeons, other than those from Papua, with plumage of
gold, green, yellow, and maroon, boom with the joy of recurrent
love and luscious living. Maybe, on the top of the tallest dead
tree, there rests in what appears to be jumbled confusion the
huge nest of a sea-eagle, made up of quite big dead branches held
together in some inconceivable manner. If you were near
G


enough to that eagle’s nest you would find, apart from all else,
that it ponged a lot. That great, heavy, rather clumsy-looking
bird may be seen to pick up a fish from the water with his
talons. When you see that done you may revise any opinion
you have had about the eagle’s clumsiness.
Elsewhere, clouds of screaming birds hover and dive head-
long into schools of sardines, or other small fish, while frigate
birds sail effortlessly, like the albatross, ready to spoil at their
wanton will. The sardines, or pilchards are herded and then
attacked by kingfish, bonito, or giant mackerel, and if they are
close to a reef or beach, as they often are, they leap wildly from
one danger to another, so that they are left gasping helplessly
until picked up by the birds. Attacked from all sides, from the
water and from the air, the sardines have a lively time. It is
just one more mystery that even one sardine is left alive, and
yet here they are in millions.
If there was much life in the air, and on the land, busy
obeying the prime fundamental law of reproduction, the life in
the water was also stupendous.
It is not necessary to go down in the dress in order to see
a lot of the wonders. Quiet pools of warm, tide-fed, coral-
enclosed basins are common, and easily found. A visitor, desiring
to look at the delightful marvels in those pools, will find a
water-telescope helpful, for things below the surface appear
hazy when viewed from above, but the telescope makes every-
thing clear. If the visitor intends to swim beneath the surface,
goggles, like those used by a swimming diver, are necessary
in order to get clear definition. The water-telescope is a tube
two or three feet long and about six inches in diameter, with
a piece of glass let in at one end.
If it is a large pool into which you look there may be fairly
big animals in it, such as a small turtle, a ray, or shark, tem-
porarily prisoners betrayed by the tide. Quite likely there may
be a few big fish such as cod, and eels that dwell in weed-
covered coral homes. There will be animals of many, many
kinds, ranging from the almost microscopic ones that draw at-
tention to themselves by biting your bare legs to the ones I
have mentioned. The brilliance and variety of the colours in
the pool seem almost unreal.


Sea-anemones, opened out like a flower until they are touched,
and up to a foot in diameter, usually brown or olive green, har-
bour a certain brightly-coloured little fish ( Actinicola ) which is
quick to sting sharply other intruders, and is one more of the
bewildering inhabitants of these interesting aquariums. To get
a clear idea of the wonder I have just described it must be
remembered that the sea-anemone has quite powerful poison-
nettle cells, deadly to creatures as big as the little fish it be-
friends, which swims in and out of its tentacles with impunity.
Also protected by the anemone is a tiny crab marked with
orange spots, and a wee shrimp.
Black and white banded coral-fish move among pink-tipped,
blossom-like coral that is so very easily broken and yet is not
damaged by the fish. Blue-bodied, yellow-striped fish with long,
pointed tails of silver and spotted fish of orange and silver are
also there. Black leather-jackets splotched with orange, with
razor-sharp gills, and others of their kind which have thin blades
set on either side near their tails; blue starfish, so big and
powerful that they are capable of forcing open a pearlshell so
that they may devour it, are sure to be seen. Black or green
sea-urchins, covered all round with stiff, brittle, spiky, six-
inch legs on which they travel and are able to climb wooden
piles or rocks under water, are there. Those sea-urchins are said
to be a dainty; delicious to any who can muster enough courage
to try them.
Most decidedly, shellfish will not be missing from the pool.
Perhaps you may find a conch, bailer, or helmet shell, all of
them common enough as ornaments in suburban homes. As for
cowries, you will find them everywhere. You may even find an
orange-cowrie, worth a couple of smackers to almost any
collector.
Jellyfish big and little abound, if not in one spot they will
be found in another, and you may be found in spots, too, if
you get into touch with one that is antipathetic to you. Some
of them can capture active little fish, so a creature as sluggish
as one of those may yet excite a wondering interest. How can
they catch fish? I don’t know, but it is said that they settle
over coral where small fish have their home, open themselves
amidships, and draw in the fish by suction. Anyhow, I have


seen five little fish embedded in the middle of a large jellyfish
that was about three feet long and five inches broad. Before
breaking open the jellyfish, the five little fish that it had
absorbed were quite plainly visible there inside, truly embedded
in jelly.
I do not pretend to special knowledge of the creatures about
which I am writing. I am merely giving a rather bald des-
cription of some of the wonders of the Great Barrier that are
likely to interest people who are fond of the sea and the open
air.
While exploring a pool, or any part of a reef, do not forget
my warning about the necessity for caution. Unfortunately, it
is possible to come across some creatures that are decidedly
dangerous. The stone-fish is a horror. As it lurks among the
weeds, and strongly resembles a stone, it is not readily seen
and therefore may be trodden upon with bare feet. It is seldom
more than a few inches in length, but it is absolutely packed
with venom. Along its back are thirteen spines showing their
naked points. Any of them singly may inject enough poison
to kill a man, and his death will be an agonizing one. In
addition, this horror can spurt poison from its warty skin. It
will often hide in a shell, and in that way come into contact
with a groping hand. What the All Merciful was thinking
about when He created the stone-fish is difficult to conceive.
Small cone-shaped shells, up to four inches or so in length,
are another danger. They are prettily marked with wavy stripes
of bright orange-red. If one happens to get on its back, it uses
a sickle-shaped projection to turn itself over again. When it
protrudes its head it may be seen to have eyes on stalks. It
has a long fleshy proboscis with a number of teeth, each of
which has a venom gland at its base. Like the stone-fish, this
pretty little shellfish is deadly, and the result of a bite from it
is agonizing. There are several kinds of cone shell, but I have
been informed by Miss McPherson, a conchologist at the Mel-
bourne Museum, that Conus textillis is about the worst.
Nearly all the creatures of the sea appear to be carnivorous,
one kind eating another in a “vicious circus”, as I have heard
that one man described it. Vegetarians would get little evidence
in support of their theories here. A large number of shellfish


are carnivorous, so also is the creature that builds the coral.
The coral-maker, or polyp, is armed with venomous barbs so
that it may gather its tucker more readily.
Reason may resist belief in what is seen, for what is seen is
nearly incredible—a worm that bores a hole right through a
big, thick pearlshell, starfish that can force that shell apart and
eat the occupant, clams ( Tridacna ) that hollow out a bed for
themselves in the hard coral and mussels, called date-mussels
because they have the shape and colour of a date, that also
bore into the coral as deep as they wish to go.
Can such a thing be as a jellyfish-snake? I tried to lift one
on the flat blade of an oar, and the thing broke into three
pieces. The head part, about a foot of it, went swimming away
by itself. Do you think that a small fish like the parrot-fish
could wrench limpets with its teeth from a rock? Well, it does,
and seems to get fat on its diet, too. Many of the things that
happen, much of the tragedy, would not be observed, so quietly
are the dramas performed, if they were not pointed out by
someone who has knowledge of what is going on in those
theatres.
There is some analogy between “doubt” and “caution”. Both
are admirable words to keep in mind. Doubt leads to inquiry,
and inquiry may point out the track to truth. May the good
guardian spirit Doubt induce caution when we deal with things,
or theories, strange to us; and may we have no definite faith
in the words of others without proof.
The alacrity and enthusiasm shown by the sea creatures in
gobbling one another is paralleled by the prodigality they show
in their methods of reproduction. A small worm known as the
palolo breeds but once a year, exactly one week after the
November full moon, but it does the job properly. Two days
before the spawn appears the water becomes turbid, thus
warning the natives. The worm protrudes its hind part, swollen
with eggs or sperms, from the crevices in the coral rock. When the
day comes for spawning this part breaks off, leaving the front
part in the coral to grow anew hind portion. Such vast quanti-
ties of this spawn are floating on the surface of the sea at this
time that its appearance has been likened to vermicelli soup.
This annual event occurs in various parts of the Pacific; for


instance, in the Solomon Islands, and Samoa. The worms are
scooped out in nets, canoe-bailers, anything at all, and are usually
cooked in native ovens, wrapped in leaves. They are considered
to be a greater delicacy than whitebait. There is little doubt
that if the palolo were introduced to the epicures of America,
Europe, or anywhere else, it would be sure to get a goodly
reception.
The coral polyp also breeds like the palolo, and scatters its
progeny by the million. The young swim round and about,
presumably having a good time, for two or three weeks before
they settle down to build a home, enjoy the scenery, and multi-
ply as did their ancestors. If they select a building-site that is
not hard, such as mud, they perish, thank God, and so the
greater number die after their brief fling. Coral is easily killed,
and is often killed, by fresh water brought to the surface of
the sea by rivers swollen with rain, and by being exposed too
long to the sun at the time of unusually low spring tides. At
a time like that, when the reef is under a very hot sun for a
while, rising from it comes a smell which people of plain speech
call a stink.
The oyster, too, sends it young abroad in myriads. These
swim about for some time, somewhat like a jellyfish, before
becoming sedentary for the remainder of their existence. I have
read than an English authority states that the young oyster
has eyes, and if it cannot actually distinguish objects it would
know the difference between day and night.
The octopus is quite common in tropical waters, but all that I
have seen, or heard of, have been small. If there are any big
ones I have not come across them, except in books of fiction.
The octopus is a great delicacy—to those who think the octopus
is a delicacy. I have seen a native literally throw himself upon
a five-foot octopus, so eager was he to secure it. It was in about
three feet of water. When the boy got to his feet the thing
was squirming all over him. While we waited in the boat close
to him, the native exerted himself to turn it inside out so that
it could no longer suck. To do that he dug his fingers into the
forepart, just abaft the head, while at the same time he rather
rudely forced his thumbs into the thing’s stern. The tussle


was soon over, and the octopus turned inside out and thus
made helpless.
Beche-de-mer of several kinds may be seen hereabouts. None
of that may be called beautiful, but it is interesting partly
because some kinds of it are the most valuable fish in the world.
The most highly prized bring, or brought, £2OO a ton in the
China market. I have heard of parcels that were sold for £6OO a
ton in China. There are several kinds. A lot of it is quite
valueless as is always the way with much sought-after things,
such as pearls, beautiful women, and so on.
Beche-de-mer is like a gigantic slug, but more inert than that
animal, with little or no power of defence or offence. One
striped variety, however, about a foot long, will emit from
both ends long, sticky, thread-like viscera that will cling to hair
or clothing. There is another beche-de-mer that empties its
bowels out for inspection by its captor. That does seem strange.
It has been said by somebody, seeking to find an explanation,
that this beche-de-mer throws out its inside in the hope that its
enemy will devour the offering, and depart appeased. After that,
the beche-de-mer will grow anew lot of entrails.
Chinese are fond of tucker that most of us would not care
about. Birds’ nests, shark-fins, beche-de-mer, and many kinds
of dried shellfish are all used by them in making soup or some-
thing, and all of those things fetch a big price in China. In
fact, there must be a lot of very wealthy people there because
of the huge quantities bought by them at fantastic figures. I
have sent dried trochus shellfish that we were throwing away
until I had a brainwave. I was gladdened by the news that it
brought £9O a ton, and that they wanted all I could send. All
that we had to do was to dry and bag the shellfish. It was
the trochus shell, which was fetching £4O a ton, that we
were after.
All of the life that I have mentioned may be found in the
pools along the reef, but do not expect to come across the lot
all together.
Out along the mighty coral wall of the Great Barrier Reef
the broad waters of the teeming Pacific crash and thunder un-
ceasingly. Protected by that wall, and by numerous reefs and
islands, the waters inside are as calm as an inland sea. Here


may be observed the manner in which coral islands are formed.
First of all sand and debris are washed on to a reef that is
exposed to sun and air at low water. The sand is held by
timber that is driven there by wind and tide; even large trees
are found embedded in the soil of those islands. Then seeds
find a home, and the islet begins its life. Sometimes an island
is washed away by an extra big tide that coincides with a big
blow, and a consequently big sea.
There are some seeds that retain their vitality while in the
sea for a year or more. Carried here and there on the face
of the waters, it will not be long before some of those drifting
seeds are flung upon the new land and take root. One of the
first to reach the infant island is certain to be casuarina, or
beach oak. Pandanus, that common tree with roots that spread
out widely all round its base, and support it like a mangrove,
will soon make its appearance, borne to the new island by the
tides. So too will the mangrove, the cotton-tree, and many an-
other. Other seeds are carried there by birds. One of these is
the pisonia. The fruits of the pisonia are covered with adhesive
matter which attaches it to the legs and feathers of birds. Some
of the smaller ones get in such a mess because of that sticky
stuff that they become helpless, and die.
All of the islands are not of this type. For instance, Whit-
sunday and Ffinchinbrook are quite large and hilly and, with
others, once belonged to the mainland. Some of the Torres
Straits islands are volcanic. There is plenty of room for them
all in the eighty thousand square miles of water inside the Barrier.
Eighty thousand square miles of water dotted with attractive
islands, and reefs, all enclosed between a wall of coral more
than a thousand miles long, and the picturesque, densely-clad,
hilly mainland of the continent! It is a wilderness of beauty
with a ceiling of blue, flecked with cloud. A wilderness it was,
when last I was there, for there was not a hamlet, not even
a house, to be seen for the hundreds of miles between Cook-
town and Cape York, the most northerly point of the continent,
with the one exception of Somerset, where Jardine had his
home.
People fond of the outdoor life and sport will find nothing
amiss with the climate during the sou-east season, that is,


from April to September. No place can offer greater attractions
for those who enjoy boating, fishing, bathing, or shooting, and
there will be enough excitement added to keep boredom round
the corner out of sight. For, besides savage sharks, there are
almost equally fierce great reef eels, and fish that can, and do
fight. Among others there are the big, swift albacore, sword-
and saw-fish, bonito, whitefish, snapper, kingfish, and others.
Herrings and pilchards are unlimited, and somewhat larger
than those are the huge diamond-rays, which I think are identi-
cal with the big “bat”, much prized by wealthy American sports.
The sporting man coming to these grounds will find the best
way of getting about and being independent of others is to
charter a pearling lugger or cutter. If he does that he is able
to go anywhere at will, and live in comfort free from intruders.
Ihe only people he is likely to meet, however, are the crews
of swimming boats, pearl luggers, or those in a party like his
own.
Why the tremendous wealth in the water inside the Barrier
is not put on the markets of the continent and of the world is
a puzzle. Encouragement is not given by the Australian Govern-
ment to private enterprise, nor do they do anything themselves.
Sardines and herrings are there in absolutely unlimited quanti-
ties, also innumerable turtles of the best kind, and fish, such
as the tunny, that is eagerly sought by Americans and
Europeans.
We sailed up the coast towards the south, keeping nearer
the mainland than the outer reef to avoid the intricate channels
and patches of coral. Moreover, there was more shell towards
the mainland because the bottom was better. Pearlshell favours
a bottom of coral-grit and sponge, or a hard mud, although it is
found on coral if that is alive, and sometimes on sand. There
must be a good tide that will carry food to the oyster, or it
would open its mouth in vain. We often heaved the lead, which,
having soap worked on its end, would bring back to us the kind
of bottom that was below, and thus save us the trouble of
needless dips when the bottom was barren. Heaving the lead
to get indications of the ground below is called “prospecting”.
When seeking new ground a diver will sometimes seat himself
in a loop of his line, and be carried along by his drifting vessel


a few feet from the bottom until he finds a place where shell
is more plentiful.
By this time my experience was such that the Groper placed
a lot of confidence in me, and a lot of his work on me. The
other divers, too, became alive to the new-chum diver and his
value. The first to seek my services was Billy Blanket, a Solo-
mon Islander, who was so unfortunate as to come down heavily
on a small stingaree one afternoon on a mud bottom, with the
consequence that his own bottom claimed his whole attention
for some time afterwards. Billy was going down when that
happened, so he was not able to see the ray, which was right
beneath him. The bony barb in the tail that viciously lashed
the diver pierced his dress and his behind, giving poor Billy
merry hell all that night. Luckily, it must have been only a
small ray, because the wound was slight, or he might have gone
out to the shock, for there was nothing to give him ease except
very hot saltwater. That, and explaining to his crew what he
thought about things while lying face down, was the only ray
of comfort poor Billy Blanket got that night.
Stinging rays, or stingarees, are much like other rays, and
belong to the shark family, being without proper bones. The
black stingaree is supposed to be the biggest and worst. It may
grow to fourteen feet or so long, and about seven or eight feet
wide. One as big as that would weigh round about eight hun-
dred pounds. The stinging barb varies from a few inches to a
foot or more in length. Stingarees are fair eating, and may be
killed in very shallow water by pounding them with an oar.
When I was pulled across in the morning, and had condoled
with Billy, I condoled somewhat with myself, for the dress was
in a bad state. It not only required a patch; it also needed
scouring thoroughly. It absolutely stank. I saw to it that it was
turned inside out and scrubbed and scrubbed. After that it
should have been scrubbed some more, but it was hung up to
dry. That business took all day. The next morning, or most
of it, was occupied in patching the damaged part. So, you see,
I did no diving for Billy for a day and a half.
As I have said, the bottom was mud and the going conse-
quently hard. A diver has a lot of weight to carry, so trudging
through that mud, especially when the tide was slack and I


had to force my way through the still water, was hard work.
The depth was about twelve fathoms. Shell was plentiful, but
all of it hidden in the mud. If it had not been for the open
mouths of the oysters most of it would have been overlooked.
It was good big shell, and cleaner than usual because, being
in the mud, it did not have sponge or weeds clinging to it.
There was hardly any coral or anything else down there, ex-
cepting large numbers of long green whips up to about ten
feet in length. These were popular with the crews, for they
made them into walking sticks. Green on the bottom, the whips
turned black when exposed to the sun and air. It may be
readily understood that a coloured dandy, dressed in white and
flaunting a black stick made from one of those whips on a
Sunday morning in Thursday Island was very distingue, what?
A lot of flexible green fans, which always grow edge o$ to
the direction of the tide and so do not sway about as most things
do down below, were scattered here and there. Some of those
appeared enormous, being perhaps ten to fifteen feet high.
One afternoon I was on the point of giving the tender the
single pull on the life-line that means ‘come up”, the ground
ahead being criss-crossed with the tracks of divers and therefore
not likely to have much shell on it when I had another fright.
In my description of a submarine garden I have described
the sudden appearance of a giant ray near the bottom, and its
effect upon me. Try to imagine, if you can, how scared I was
this time by the swift onrush of six or seven huge diamond
rays, or “bats”, as I am told the Americans call them. This time
it was not just one big ray swimming leisurely along close to
the bottom, but a horde of gigantic, fearsome-looking rays
charging at me swiftly from all directions. I stood there para-
lyzed, yet I remember thinking, “By God, these are the ‘devil-
fish’ that seize the lines of divers and run away with them!
Keep your head, you poor frightened cow, keep your head!
Don’t lose your nerve.”
These animals are diamond-shaped, with long tails like other
rays, but in front, on either side of their big mouths, they have
thick, heavy arms. As I saw them, those arms were spread apart,
disclosing a great gaping mouth. They all came close, but one
huge brute charged right at me, swerving only at the last pos-


sible fraction of a minute to avoid actually knocking me over.
Not one of them seemed to be less than ten feet athwart the
beam, yet they were as lively as kittens. One of them did travel
up along my line, but did not engage it, for if he had that
would have been the end of me. How long they played their
game with me I do not know, but it was at least several min-
utes before they sailed erratically away.
I shall never forget those chaps. Especially will I remember
the giant that charged so close to me with his arms wide apart
and his great mouth agape. His eyes seemed baleful, like the
eyes of a policeman who has had his helmet knocked from his
head.
Since then I have learnt more about the diamond ray, or
devil-fish, as the coloured divers call it. It is an inoffensive
anipial really, and if at any time it does seize the gear of a diver
and, startled into fear because it has not sense enough to free
itself, makes off with it and the diver, it is all very sad. The fish
is not malicious, but bolts with the diver much as a frightened
horse does with a rattling milk-cart.
That spell with Billy Blanket lasted about a week for, after
he had recovered from his wound, he kept me there by playing
“old soldier” and by judicious flattery, to which he found I
was susceptible.
After I had returned to the Groper, leaving Billy Blanket
once more free to odoriforize his dress as much as he liked, my
task of learning to dive continued as before, though it would
be wrong to suggest that Billy the Groper just sat silently on
deck and smoked. In fact, the Groper was a good worker, and
shared the work pretty equally, and he wasn’t so silent, anyhow.
All the same, the Groper got something for what he did, where-
as I did not. As he put it, “You’re like the young sodjer, you
looks fine in yer dress—when yer back’s turned—but yer don’
get no pay fer it. Yer like the man what’d come home drunk
on pay-day an’ wakes up in the mornin’ an’ finds as how his
missus has pinched his dough. Yer graftin’ fer nothin’, the
same as we all on us has ter do until we knows how.”
By this time I had about mastered the business of signalling
from below by paying attention to the tender, and, by making
mistakes and being corrected for doing so, for Billy would ex


plain nothing, or very little. Very often sail was used when
the tide was running to windward to prevent our craft from
going too fast, and it is necessary for the diver below to learn
how to give directions to the tender by means of signals on
his line to make more sail or to reduce it. The diver must learn
how to manage his craft while he is below. Also, there are sig-
nals for lowering or raising the anchor, letting the tender know
when to send down another bag, and all sorts of things. The
anchor may be needed or not according to the tide, and the
weather above. Well-remembered signals and working know-
ledge of conditions are needed for all of that. A first-class tender
saves a diver much by intelligent anticipation.
Slowly we continued towards the south in what seemed
rather an aimless, haphazard way. It might be guessed that
somewhere south lay our goal. There was no hurry to reach it,
but nobody wished to be left behind.
If we happened to be close to the mainland in the evening,
likely enough immense numbers of flying-foxes in undulating
masses like dark clouds would be seen on their way to ravish
some place or other. These giant fruit-bats do tremendous dam-
age to plantations of bananas or other fruits.
Now and again, in the daytime, a column of smoke would
rise from the foreshore, and our crew always acknowledged it,
drawing one another’s attention to it by pointing and saying,
“Flag up”. For the column of smoke signified the presence of
blackfellows, or “binghies”, the unfortunate aborigines of Aus-
tralia, who wished to draw our attention and attract us to them.
The poor beggars had nothing to offer as a rule except the water
of a stream, or help in cutting firewood. But on one occasion
they had a freshly killed dugong, part of which was bartered
to us for an old axe, and some tobacco. The blackfellows that
had captured the dugong had only one woman with them,
just the bare one, and in the opinion of our crew she was dis-
appointingly old.
The dugong is a harmless, innocent animal, like the turtle,
and like it has the great misfortune of being good eating. Also,
it is without any means of defence. In shape and size it has
some resemblance to a seal, and it moves like a seal, but it is a
grass-eater, and it keeps to the water. Like a woman, it carries


its baby in its arm, and suckles it, too. Harpooning the dugong
is almost an industry at Maubiaug, in Torres Straits, where
the people erect rickety stages on the mud flats for that purpose.
There, when a dugong is harpooned, the eager native will hold
the line and act the part of a drogue until others come in canoes
and help to drown the wretched animal.
As I have said, our living conditions were much better than
when we had been out on the Old Ground. Included in our
bill of fare were plenty of good fish, big crabs, and those pretty
blue and gold crayfish. Now and again we had turtle, and some-
times there were pigeons, beautiful to look at and to eat. Now
was added some choice dugong. From that good living may be
adduced good tempers, for there was no bickering on the
Margaret .
Watching some pigeons being prepared for our kai-kai, Billy
the Groper reflectively said, “I knowed a fella oncet, skipper
ev a barque he was, what anchored at a place in the East Injies
where fowls was very cheap because them what had ’em never
ate ’em because they wasn’ worth eatin’—they was nothin’ but
bundles ev feathers on legs. They wasn’ never fed. The on’y
scran what they got was what the dogs an’ pigs didn’ get, an’
that wasn’ much cos they never got nothin’ give ’em neether.
So the Old Man buys a lot of them fowls, for he says ter him-
self, ‘l’ll give me crew a treat an’ save the ship’s stores all at the
one time.’
‘‘At eight bells the Old Man is leanin’ on the rail at the break
ev the poop for ter watch the smiles ev his crew when they
comes for ter get their, chow, but he never sees no smiles. The
doctor, when he gets them skinny fowls give him, cursed them
an’ the Old Man an’ the crew every way he knowed how. After
that he puts them fowls in boilin’ water for ter get the feathers
off easy, gutted ’em rough, an’ boiled ’em. An’ when the crew
sees them yeller, skinny skeletins what’s fer their dinners they
take their turn at cursin’, an’ two on em starts off aft with them
fowls on their platters.
“The Old Man glares on them two, an’ roars, ‘Well, an’ what
the bloody hell do you want?’ An’ one on ’em says, ‘lt’s like
this here, cap’n. God damn and b yer hollow meat, we
wants our salt-horse.’ ”


Seldom a day passed without some incident of interest hap-
pening. In one case, a Japanese diver beached his craft on a
beach so steep that when the tide returned it flowed over the
stern, into the cabin, and then completely flooded the lugger.
The day was a Sunday, so we were not working, but the Jap
intended to use that day to clean the bottom of his vessel. Our
ribald crew quite enjoyed watching the frenzied activity of the Japs
as they frantically tried to prevent the swiftly rising tide from
pouring into their home. Our chaps shouted suggestions—one
was to cut a hole in the planks with the axe to let the water
out, and another was to cut the masts to lighten her. That was
a most serious matter for those Japs, for all their rice and every-
thing else below deck would be saturated with salt water, and
they were a long way from any substantial help.
Another Jap diver made the mistake of going over a reef at
high water instead of round it. He made progress with his short-
cut until he stuck because there was not enough water be-
tween his keel and the reef. It was high spring tide when he
struck. If he had at once lightened his lugger considerably he
would have been able to get off the reef at the next high tide,
but he did not lighten her enough. At all events, whatever he
did, he stuck there for a long time. I know that he was there
until the next spring tide.
An event that also occurred on a Sunday morning was
fathered by indolence and had a lurid ending. As we lay at
anchor in calm water, two of the mainland blackfellows came
alongside in a small, frail canoe. They had been fishing. Be-
sides paddles, there were many-barbed fish-spears, ordinary
spears without any fancy-work about them, native made fish-
lines, several fine fish, and glowing fire-sticks carefully wrapped
in pandanus leaves and stowed so that the water would not get
at them. Also, each of them had the usual dilly-bag holding
little things dear to their hearts.
They knew no English. They were given some tucker, and
well-stewed tea. Maltese Joe displayed great interest in those
two. Presently he showed them an old sheath-knife with a
broken point and, by animated signs and English broken like
the knife, besought one of them to give an exhibition of diving.
The water was no more than about five fathoms, and so clear


that the empty jam-tin that Joe threw over was quite distinct
when it reached the bottom.
I think that it was more from good nature and a desire to
placate Joe, who had become quite heated by his energetic
signs and fevered words, than from any real wish for the knife,
but suddenly one of the blackfellows hopped feet first into the
water. He went down a few feet like that by working his hands,
and then turned over and went down the rest of the way swim-
ming. We saw him get the jam-tin, and start upwards. Then-
well, I have seen many things I would dearly like to forget, but
nothing ever sickened me so much as what happened then.
Quickly, without any wavering, absolutely intent, flashed
into view the shark. The doomed blackfellow saw the form of
death and faced it, stretching out his arms in a futile effort to
ward it off. The shark eagerly rushed in and with his first bite
amidships nearly severed the poor fellow’s body. Surrounded
with bloody water, the blackfellow reached the surface quite
close to us, and appealed with his eyes for aid—just for a mo-
ment—and was then pulled under by the shark.
Impotently we stood and watched while the ravenous shark
came again, and again to bite, and shake pieces, from what
was left of the body. I know that each of us was badly shaken,
and my stomach felt turned to jelly. The others, including the
lonely blackfellow in the canoe, turned a lurid tint and looked
askance in guilt and sorrow.
Chris Samoa was a gentleman if ever there was one. He
asked for my services because he had a touch of diarrhoea and
when I went over to him and examined his dress I found no
cause for complaint. Chris was a big man of about forty-five,
an age commonly called “middle-aged” in a man, but “elderly”
in a woman. His skin was a light brown, and his expression
generally good-natured. Sharing his cabin was his darker-skinned
wife from Badu, and also his daughter of twelve or thereabouts.
The Groper, and others, told me that one time, out on the
Old Ground, Chris got fed up with his missus, who had de-
veloped into a nag. So, instead of belting her into better be-
haviour as an ordinary man might have done, he tumbled her
to the deck, fastened his life-line round her, and then bundled


her rather rudely overboard. After Chris had paid out about
ten fathoms of the line he took a few turns of it about a cleat,
and then watched his strong-tongued missus cutting capers,
and battling for her life—l have forgotten to state that the lug-
ger was under sail in a fairly stiff breeze. When he saw the
time was ripe, he shook the wind from his sails and had the
half-drowned woman hauled to the side and brought inboard.
She recovered after some time, and never again did she nag.
All the talk had been towed out of her, and I am a witness to
that, anyhow, for a quieter woman never ate a fish.
One day, while I was with Chris, a number of big white-
fish came nosing round me, stirring the bottom so much that
it was difficult to see. So I signalled for a spear, and presently
managed to get one of them. I went up with it at once, but
as I reached the surface a shark took the white-fish off the
spear. Luckily for my nerves, I did not know a shark was about
until it made off with my fish.
After a spell on deck, to give the shark a fair chance to go
away, I went down again. It was then that I had an experience
exactly like the one Jimmy Wilson had, out on the Old Ground,
which I have already described, in his own words. As in his
case, I expect some of the fish-slime had left a taint on my
dress and, in addition to that attraction, the same shark that
took my fish may have been waiting and reasoned like this:
‘What-ho, here comes the chap who so kindly caught that big
fish for me, and handed it to me on a fork. Perhaps he has an-
other. Anyhow, if he has no more fish, he may taste all right
himself. You never know; they come in all shapes.”
My experience, as I have just stated, could be described in
the words of Mr Jimmy Wilson, the only difference being the
climax. In my case, I owed my escape to a million-toone chance.
An unfortunate turtle came by, close enough to attract the
shark, which went after him at once. That was a big, particu-
larly nasty shark, that was. He was a tiger-shark, he was. There
are many bad sharks—l mean wicked sharks that eat people if
they can do so. The whaler, hammer-head, white shark, grey-
nurse, and blue-pointer are all of them bad, but the tiger-shark
seems to me to be extra ferocious. It does not take much to
H


frighten me at any time, but I was extra specially badly
frightened by that chap.
The nor’-west weather brought squalls with heavy rain, but
it was not icily cold. Hatches are seldom used on diving craft
and we did not have them. The crew have no shelter whatsoever
except the small space for’ard where they sleep, so they are con-
tinually exposed to the weather, whatever it may be. They must
be out and about, because the weather does not stop the diver
from working unless it is something exceptional altogether. It
was naturally dark on that mud bottom and when heavy rain was
pelting the surface overhead the gloom increased noticeably.
Although it was not possible to hear thunder, however loud,
lightning lit up perceptibly the murkiness down there under
about seventy feet of water.
If we were sailing, and one of those squalls whitened the
water with its violence, the order was sometimes, “Down every-
thing”, and all sail was lowered to the deck till the wind moder-
ated. Now and again we saw a waterspout, and two or three
came so close that I, at least, became a bit scared. During the
next nor’-west season, in the first week of March, a cyclone
struck the fleets on the coast off Cape Melville and Cape Flat-
tery. The Channel Rock lightship, with four men, foundered;
six of the floating stations, and fully eighty luggers were lost,
and not less than four hundred of the crews went west. Four-
teen white men died. The cyclone raged for twelve hours from
Saturday through to Sunday. The glass dropped to 27.1, which
is somewhat lower than an ordinary barometer registers. The
beach was strewn with dead fish, birds, snakes, and other bodies
of those drowned or otherwise killed. Thirteen porpoises were
found fifty feet up a cliff at Flinders, an island group due west
of Cape Melville, and wild blackfellows were killed in the
jungle. The wind hurled stones with such force that they were
embedded up to six inches in trees, and the trees themselves
were stripped even to their bark. The centre of the cyclone was
at Flinders, and Bathurst Bay, just round to the west of Cape
Melville, where many of the craft had fled for shelter.
When the Kasuga Maru sailed south after the blow she
passed through floating dead bodies for the whole of one day.
The vermin-infested old William finished high and dry on


Howick Island. The Tarawa dragged her anchors till the cables
parted and went aground on Pelican Island, but was refloated.
Long Jacks Two Brothers was lost. Billy Pitt, a coloured man,
and two women swam for twelve hours, and lived. A Samoan
woman swam twenty miles, and was rescued by Captain Jones
or the Tarawa. Another coloured man, and two women, are
said to have been swimming for four days. Two women, with
children, swam for many hours in that dreadful sea, but it was
too much for the children. Among the lost were twenty swim-
ming cutters with most of their crews, and that fact alone shows
what a poor chance for survival faced more than the thousand
people, all told, of the fleets, for those divers of the swimming
boats are at home in the water almost like fish.
That cyclone was not an isolated calamity. The nod-west
coast has had more than a fair share of cockeyed-bobs, and willy-
willies. Those blows, during the years, have blasted the for-
tunes, lives, and property of so many men on the
coast that pearlshelling is not now attempted during the hurri-
cane season. Port Darwin, too, has suffered from blows. In fact,
the only part of the north that seems to be free from such
major disasters is Torres Straits and the surrounding area as
far south as Cape Melville and Flinders. Never before or since
has a cyclone been so far north on the Queensland coast as the
calamitous one I have been writing about.
Many of the divers and crews that I had come to know so
well perished in that blow; gone for ever with the pretty, grace-
ful craft they sailed. The reason why Billy the Groper, who
lived long enough to be murdered later in the Admiralty Group,
and myself were not in it you will learn presently. To Thurs-
day Island the cyclone was a major disaster, and it was a long
time before the people recovered from their grievous loss.
There is no fear of anything so dreadful as a cyclone during
the sou -east, which reigns from April to September. Also, nowa-
days a warning is given by wireless hours ahead when a disturb-
ance is approaching the continent during the nor’-west season. The
region where those blows occur extends from Gladstone to
Lairns, a narrow, fairly well-defined area known as the “hurri-
cane belt . During the sou’-east season the climate is ideal, for


the bright sunny days are tempered by a breeze that is con-
stant, and there is little rain.
We left the waters near Cape Melville in March, so as to
make Thursday Island by April, slowly wending our way
without any studied order. At no time was a serious effort made
to work out the shell anywhere. No incident occurred worthy
of note excepting one that might have interested Queen Vic-
toria had she heard of it, but that is doubtful.
Cranky Sullivan, one of our crew who had once told me about
a brilliant idea he had conceived which was to cross a turtle
with a Muscovy duck to produce a wonderfully prolific egg-
layer, and who sometimes claimed that Queen Victoria was his
mother, became ill and died.
The poor fellow got severe pains in his belly that became no
better however many big pills made of soap, with a little tobacco
added, he swallowed. Maltese Joe did all that he could think
of to cure him, and to ease his pain, no matter how much the
dying man protested. Joe cooked little cakes made of flour,
brown sugar, salt-beef fat, parings from Crankys toenails, and
any other infallible charms that he could think of, and coaxed
the sufferer to eat as much as possible of them. Cranky was a
good-hearted poor cow, so he gave me some of his cakes to eat,
and I told him I would eat them on Sunday as my religion
stopped me from eating them on a week-day. Joe also pre-
scribed epsom-salts, and plenty of hot tea to ensure that the
salts worked properly. Cranky Sullivan was not at all a talka-
tive man except when the moon, or himself, was full. He had
a habit, or mannerism, of talking with his teeth clenched, but
when Maltese Joe applied very hot salt-water bandages or poul-
tices to his belly, or tried to massage him, his efforts at effective
expression caused him to open his mouth quite a lot.
The Groper was concerned, too. He asked me what I thought
was the trouble, and then said, “You don’t know nothin’ about
it. What I thinks he wants is fer one on us to boil a bit ev
europe-rope in some salt water an’ give him that for ter drink.
I onc’t seen a man what was took terrible bad, and groaned
an’ carried on somethink awful when the Old Man come for’ard
for to have a look, an’ we thinks he’ll die on us an’ we’ll have
ter do his work on top o’ ou’n for the rest ev the voyage.


“After the Old Man has a look at him he says, 1 don think
I got nothin’ in the medicine chest aft what’s good enough fer
this here what you got, but I’ll fix yer. I’ll fix yer with some-
thin I knows on what cured a man what was a lot worse n you.
He was near a goner, he was.’
An the 01’ Man goes an’ biles a bit er europe-rope in salt
water, an’ he puts a good dose ev Epsom-salts in it, an’ brings it
for’ard hisself for to enjoy a-curin’ of that sick sailorman. After
a hell era lot er trouble the Old Man gets him to take a dose,
an’ jus’ that one dose done the trick. He don’t stop in his bunk
no more ter get no more medicine; an’ if poor ol’ Cranky wasn’t
took so bad I thinks we might cure him, too.”
We sought the Tarawa, but Cranky Sullivan slipped his
moorings before we made her. So Captain Jones told us to make
straight for Thursday Island so that the Government Doctor
and the police would know all about it. He told us not to
heave the body over the side, no matter how high it got. Then
he wished us good luck and a pleasant time, and away we went.
By good luck, because we had a leading wind all the way,
we sailed to an anchor two days after leaving the Tarawa, and
anybody who saw it took no notice of the Old Schooner’s skirt
flying half-mast in our rigging, because they are used to flags
at half-mast coming to Thursday Island.
If anyone did notice it at all, he might remark, “Look, there’s
another diver gone west.”


CHAPTER ix
INTERLUDE WITH JIMMY
Farquhar, the manager of the fleet, did not fetch Thursday
Island until about a week after we did. So there was time
to look round, talk to people, and make up my mind as to the
future. Several jobs were offered to me, but all of them were
just plain hard yacker, except one, which was painting the
outside of a two-storied hotel. If it had been to paint the inside
red that, of course, would have been different
While I was waiting, Jimmy Wilson blew into the place on
a steamer from Port Darwin, on his way to Samarai, in Papua.
This chance meeting led to incidents that would not have
happened otherwise. Jimmy was a character pretty well known
to everybody and, as he had been away from the Island for a
long time, his jovial manner and his manly appearance were
enough to make him highly popular.
When I first met him in Port Darwin Jimmy had not been
back long from a tour of Asia with another man, and a para-
chute. The other man was an acrobat on his way to Asia when
Jimmy met him one night in a pub on Thursday Island. As
the steamer sailed next morning there was not much time for
those two to get acquainted, but they hit it so well together
that some arrangement was arrived at between them, and off
Jimmy went with the acrobat.
For a year or more Asia was worked for what could be got
out of her. Those two went through the Dutch Indies, China,
Japan, and India, living like fighting-cocks at the best hotels.
Rajahs paid a big lump sum so that their wives, themselves,
and their subjects might possibly see a white man come whizzing
down squasho if the parachute failed to open.


Jimmy told me that they had nothing to do but enjoy them-
selves. Natives set up the balloon, got the fire ready for the
hot air to fill it, carried everything to the place selected for the
ascent, and rolled up and carried all back afterwards. All that
the acrobat had to do was to sit on the bar of the parachute and,
when he was high enough, give the tug which released the
parachute and perform on the bar. It was a great life while it
lasted, but Jimmy came back to his native continent broke. “It’s
all experience,” as the farrier said when his apprentice picked
up the hot horseshoe with his bare hand.
Because Jimmy was so well known I met many old-timers.
One man was exceedingly deaf, so much so that talk was a
little one-sided. Now and then Jimmy wrote a few words, or
paid for drinks when it was his or my turn to shout.
When he left the pub, Jimmy said, “That’s Deaf Bill. I’ll
tell you about him some time. Terrible deaf, Bill is. It’s a pity
he’s so deaf, isn’t it?”
I had already heard a yarn about Deaf Bill. All the Admiralty
charts of Torres Straits were marked, “Natives dangerous”, and
that was true some little time ago. Monkey Howe, the coloured
gentleman who had had the row with Brazilian Joe on the
William, told me that when he was a piccaninny a big ship
had run aground on the mud flats at Mabuiag, and that all
the people there had a great time looting her. Everybody in
the ship was killed, including a white woman, because she
had long hair that seemed unnatural to the good folk of
Mabuiag. Monkey remembered laughing at one man who dived
over the side head first into the mud. It did seem so funny to
see him stuck there with his legs kicking until he died. Monkey
laughed again as he told me his story.
Well, at that time Deaf Bill, engaged in his lawful graft
of pearlshelling, found a big ship becalmed close at hand.
Naturally, he got out his sweeps and pulled his lugger towards
her. All that Bill wished to do was to exchange some of his
shell for a bottle of grog, and to be sociable. The captain of
the ship had seen the warning on the charts, “Natives dan-
gerous”, and had other ideas. Poor Deaf Bill got no grog, for
the captain, thinking Bill was a bloodthirsty pirate, would not
allow him near enough to explain his pacific desires but warned


him off with guns. All of Bill’s amiable signs were useless, and
the other signs he made when leaving confirmed the bad opinion
the captain had of him.
An opportunity came a night or two afterwards to remind
Jimmy about Deaf Bill.
“Oh, yes,” said that gentleman. “The first time I met Bill
he’d just come out of the calaboose where he’d done a month
chopping firewood and gard’ning, for bein’ stoushed be a
p’liceman.”
“That’s not a baddie, being shot in for being stouched by a
copper. You mean the other way about, don’t you?” I said.
“No I don’t,” said Jim. “Poor old Bill got lumbered for bein’
stoushed be a p’liceman.”
“But, Jim, what did he get stonkered for? The john wouldn’t
stoush him for nothing, would he?” I asked.
“Yes he would,” said Jimmy. “He was a young john just
up from Brisbane, an’ he’d heard tell that ‘Thirsty’ Island was a
rough shop, an’ he didn’t know that poor of Bill was stone
deaf. When he saw Bill propped up against the door of B.P’s
store, sleeping it off, along about two bells in the middle watch,
he spoke to him an tol’ him to get off home, an’ when Bill
never took no notice he handles him rough.”
“What a cow!” I said.
“Now, the only way you could talk to Bill,” went on Jimmy,
“was be writing down what you said, or else make sensible
signs—like pertending to raise a glass—but the john didn’t know
that. So, when Bill starts in to tell him off, an’ makes to get
on his feet, the john belts him on the head with his baton
because he wanted to get in first, see? Then, when he sees what
a mess he’s made of poor ol’ Bill, why, of course he rips his
tunic to rags, an’ runs Bill in an’ charges him with doin’ bloody
near ev’rything short of murder. He had to, to save himself.”
“I’ve heard Bill called ‘Bill the Hangman’, Jimmy. Anything
in that?” I asked.
“Whoever told you that wasn’t makin’ no fatal bloody error,”
said Jim. “Some time in the eighties—about eighty-eight—a
white diver with a crew of New Guinea boys was working
by himself off the south coast. An’ one day he was pulled up
onto the ladder, an’ then his crew chopped through his life-


line an’ pipe with a tomahawk, an’ shoves him off the ladder.
He went down like a dog with a stone round his neck. Then
the niggers cleared out with the lugger to Milne Bay, where
they come from, an’ got away with the loot.
“01’ Doctor Billy McGregor was the Gov’nor of British New
Guinea then, an’ when he hears about the murder he sen’s out
one of his p’lice patrols, an’ after a while back they comes with
a batch of native pris’ners. They all gets a fair trial at Port
Moresby, ev’rything’s according to Hoyle, proper British justice,
an’ four of ’em’s picked out from the bunch, found guilty, an’
senten’s to be hung till they’re deader than dog’s meat.
“Then they looks round for an executioner, an’ fin’s out they
haven’t got none, an’ they thinks they’re in the soup. But ol’
Billy McGregor hears about a sailor in his yacht, the Merrie
England, what’s a bit of a hard nut.”
“Deaf Bill?” I interrupted.
“That’s him. His right name’s Bill Pritchard. Anyhow, Billy
McGregor offers him a fiver a head to do the scraggin’, an’ Bill
says he’s on, so ev’rything’s jake.
“Then Billy McGregor gets a brainwave. He says to himself,
Why not take these birds along to Milne Bay, where they come
from, an’ hang them there? That’ll show all these niggers I
mean bus’ness. I’ll learn ’em to go round murderin’ white men.’
“So away they all goes in the Merrie England, the whole
crowd of ’em, to Milne Bay. Then they gets to work an’ roun’s
up about a thousand niggers, tellin’ ’em all what a time they’re
going to have. While they’re doin’ that, Bill Pritchard looks
round for a suitable kind of tree, an’ fin’s one made for the
purpose. It’s a fine big shady tree, with two strong branches
sticking straight out, one a bit above the other—couldn’ have
been better. He makes a bit of a platform on the lower branch,
an’ fixes it so’s he can let it tumble down when he wants to,
an’ the rope what’s to do the bus’ness he makes fast to the
branch on top, an’ ev’rything’s set.
“When the great day arrives, the mob of niggers comes
pourin’ in from all sides. They all got plenty of kai-kai with
’em, an they sit round an’ enjoy the proceedings. They sing
out to the four pris’ners, an’ the four pris’ners sing out to them.


They all think it s a great joke. Nobody takes it serious. Ev’ry-
bodys having a great time—pris’ners an’ all—it’s a gala day with
a hangin’ thrown in.
There was only six white men there, an’ about twenty p’lice
boys, an the crowd could have rushed them easy, but they
was enjoyin’ themselves too much to think of that. While
Bill was swingin’ one of his pris’ners, the others were looking
on quite unconcerned, an’ talking to him. One of ’em what
had a sore foot would brush away the flies, an’ scratch himself
quite natural, just as he had done at home ev’ry day of his
life. The only hitch in the proceedings was the hangman’s
hitch.
Bill Pritchard come from Llandudno in Wales, an’ he tol’
me he would hang with pleasure ev’ry nigger in New Guinea
for a fiver a time always providing they’d murder a white man
first. It was after the hangin that Bill started to learn the diving,
an ( at his very first dip he came up deaf as a dead dingo.
“Good ol’ Bill! He wouldn’ hurt a fly-unless it was silly
enough to get in his booze—but when you’re drinkin’ with him
you want to make sure he knows what you’re talking about
or he might dong you. Thats his one an’ on’y drawback—his
bein so terrible deaf. The bes thing to do to avoid accidents
when you re drinkin with Bill is to do like they do in the
p’lice-courts— write it down, an’ hand it to his nibs.”
Well, Jim, Im telling you, straight-wire, that I won’t get
drinking with Mr Deaf Bill Pritchard, even if he is getting a
bit old now, and not as quick off the mark as he was. When I’m
with anybody, trying to enjoy myself, I don’t want to be
donged, and maybe get my jaw in a sling. No good to me, I’m
not having any.”
‘‘Please yourself,” said Jim, “it’s a free country.”
While you re on the job, Jimmy, you were talking the other
day to the Groper about Nick the Greek. You know, you were
asking him what had become of him. He’s another of the
characters about here, is he?”
The last time I saw Nick the Greek was in Samarai before
I went round Asia, said Jimmy. “I was just havin’ a drink
when Nick comes in an’ makes straight at me. So I heaves


me drink, glass an’ all, at him an’ picks up a chair an’ cracks
him with it. I leaves him there tryin’ to get up to have another
go, an’ goes on board, sets sail, an’ gets out.”
“There must have been a bit of trouble one time or an-
other,” I said, thinking a lot, because Jimmy could fight a bit,
and it seemed queer that he should clear out like that. “What
was the row about, Jim?”
“Oh, nothin’. Just a bit of an argument. Nothin’ at all,
really. You wouldn’ understand unless I told you,” said Jim.
“I got nothin’ against him; he is a good sort when you get to
know him, but you have to watch out if he takes a set on you.
“I’ll just tell you the sort of bloke Nick the Greek is. When
Murphy had the pub where Sullivan is now he sent to Sydney
for a barmaid, an’ a rouse-about, an’ the agent sends him up
a married couple. The barmaid turns out to be a good-looker;
a nice little tabby, an’ it’s not long before Murphy puts the
hard word on her, an’ she’s not havin’ any. Then Murphy gets
her in a bedroom, but she kicks up such a rumpus, an’ starts
squealin’ soprano operato, that the mob comes up an tells
Murphy off proper.
“Seeing he can’t get any snazzum, Murphy gets the nark, an’
one night he accuses her of boning the boodle. Charley, her
husband, chips in, and Murphy takes it out of him, an’ heaves
the two of ’em out, an’ their duds after ’em.
“The pair of ’em spend the night on the beach, an’ they’re
not feelin’ too clever nor lookin’ their best when Nick the
Greek spots ’em in the morning. In fact, Charley had stopped
a few that Murphy give him the night before, an’ he was sore
an’ sorry, an’ the two of ’em looked like two calves what had
lost their mother an’ been crawlin’ through barb-wire all night
lookin’ for her.
“After a talk with them, an’ seein’ how things shaped, Nick
offers them a job. He says he’s goin’ to take ’em to an island,
inside the Barrier, until they get enough money to decide how
they’re goin’ to act. He’ll leave them a tank of water an’ plenty
of tucker, an’ they won’t have nothin’ to do on’y to see that
the blackfellows he’ll give ’em get plenty of beche-de-mer which
they has to see is properly cooked an’ smoked. An’ Nick says


they’ll have two boats to get the beche-de-mer, so they can get
away from the island any time if they feel that way.
“Charley and his missus can’t see nothin’ else, so Charley
says, ‘Righto, an’ the sooner the quicker/
“They leaves Thursday Island in Nick’s cutter, an’ sails out
through the passage between Tuesday Island an’ Wednesday
Island, an’ that’s about as far as they got. Charley an’ his
missus, the two of ’em, was down in the cabin aft fixin’ things
up a bit. You know what women are—she wanted to show
Nick how she could fix things up goodo. You know what
they’re like; after a woman has tidied up a joint it takes a man
a month of Sundays to find what he wants after she’s finished.
Nick was sittin steerin’ an’ feelin’ pretty good at the way
things was going. His crew of binghies was all for’ard. They
was jabbering an lookin at something. Then two of ’em came
aft to show Nick something they got.
It was a pearl one of ’em had got hold of somewhere, an’
when Nick give the helm to one of ’em to steer, an’ stood up
to look at the pearl, the other binghie give him a shove over the
side.
Charley pops his head up from below to see what’s up,
an falls back with it stove in by a tomahawk. In the excitement,
the binghie whats steerin lets go the helm an’ the cutter, of
course, comes up in the wind. The cutter sags to le’ward, and
this gives Nick a chance. He swims hard, an’ gets hold of the
bob-stay under the jib-boom, an’ starts to climb aboard.
The binghies crowd for’ard, but there’s on’y room for one
of em at a time to have a go at Nick. An’ he is so cut about
before he can grab one of ’em by the arm an’ pull him over,
that he s all in. But that gives him a chance to scramble on
deck an grab a handle of the windlass that’s lyin’ on deck there,
an lay about those lovely niggers of his. In quarter-less-no-time
the deck is clear, an the crew are swimming for their lives.
Nothing can be done for Charley, but when Thursday
Island, hears about it all they gets up a subscription, an’ I’m
told it s a pretty solid kind of magnum bonus at that, an’ they
sends the little tabby away south as happy as a hen in a dust-
bath.


“An’ that’s the kind of man Nick the Greek is,” concluded
Jimmy.
“I shouldn’t think any woman would be so extra special happy
after what she had been through,” I said.
“She might have been blubberin’ an’ crying her eyes out for
all I know,” said Jim. “I finished the yarn the proper way. Any
yarn what’s any good always has a happy ending.”


CHAPTER X
I BECOME A DIVER
When I saw the Wai-wia at anchor one morning at sun-
rise I knew that Farquhar, the manager, would be at the
Grand, and went there to see him. While he was making his
toilet we talked. He told me that the report he had about me
was very good, that I should know by this time the days had
passed by when divers could make big money, and that he had
decided to let me have the Gertrude if I cared to have her.
That was all right as far as it went, but I had no intention
of signing on for twelve months on the same conditions as
the Groper, and told him so.
Well, said Farquhar, ‘you’d better come and have break-
fast with me, and we can talk about that quietly while we eat.”
There was no doubt that Farquhar wanted me to work for
him, for he agreed to everything that I asked eventually. The
agreement was that I was to take the Gertrude for six months
on the same terms as the other white divers, which was £25 a
ton for my shell, and half the value of all pearls found. Also,
I could work where I liked, providing that I reported to the
Tarawa once a week, and that seemed to me the most important
thing of all, because the idea of being out on the Old Ground
for six months did not appeal to me at all.
Later on, after Farquhar and I had been to the Shipping
Master, where I was paid off from my cruise with the Groper
and signed on again as a diver for my next cruise, I went away
to tell Jimmy Wilson and Billy the Groper, and to walk round
the town with the buoyant feeling that at last I belonged to
the aristocracy.
Pedro Rodriquez, the tender in the Gertrude, found me


during the afternoon, with the result that a little party of big,
somewhat portentous divers escorted me from Sullivan’s to my
newly acquired lugger. Jimmy, the others backing him up,
assured me at length that the only way to get on in this world
was to pay attention to your job, and that my job was looking
after my job and not boozing in a pub.
After a cursory inspection of my Gertrude, and an assurance
by Pedro that there were neither bugs or cockroaches in her,
my friends pulled back to the beach leaving me behind. Before
getting into their dinghy, Jimmy began a few final words of
advice, warning me to stop where I was and get on with my
job, but was prevented from saying all that he wanted by the
Groper, who suddenly remembered that he had left a shilling
on the bar and said if they were quick they might still find it
there.
Pedro Rodriquez was a natty Manila-man. His bunk, down
in the cabin on the port side, fairly astonished me. His bedding
had a pretty cover, and he even had white pillow-slips and
sheets. And more than that, somehow he managed to keep
his bed like that all the time, more or less, which was quite a
trouble to him—“ And you can lay to that,” as Long John would
have said. People like Pedro, who are fastidious about their
dress, bedding, and general appearance, are usually touchy, and
on guard against undue intimacy, and Pedro was no exception
to that rule.
Before we sailed, a few comforts were brought to the craft
by both Pedro and myself. He had some bottled chillies, hair-
oil and scent, and a large jar of spiced fish in brine, generally
known as Macassar fish. And 1 had some onions, as many paw-
paws as possible, some lemons and limes, and plenty of dark
tobacco and matches. Also, sent aboard by me was a whole
case of Australian assorted tinned meat, a bag of white sugar,
and ten pounds of coffee. The underlying idea of getting those
goods was that if you want people working with you to be
happy and doing their best, feed them well. Another good
maxim is “Never nag”. Much better than nagging, or trying to
keep order with dour superiority, is a little cheerfulness with
a smile now and then, and that’s not so easy sometimes.
Those of the crew for’ard were one Sudanese, blacker than


it is possible to be, two Torres Straits islanders, and a Malayo
from the Dutch Indies. Everybody was in good spirits when we
set out, for all knew of the extra stores..
The first evening at sundown, when we had our kai-kai,
Pedro offered me some of his private store of Macassar fish when
he saw me looking at it. His offer was declined because I re-
membered the yam once told me about a Cousin Jack and his
pasty. The old Cornish miner had a new mate working with
him, a young fellow. When they went to crib the old chap
noticed the young fellow gazing greedily at his big pasty. He
said, “Have a bit o’ pasty, you?” Not knowing any better, the
young man said, “Thanks, I could do with a bit.” And the old
man, having complied with the conventions, ate his pasty,
satisfied in all respects, while the other got nothing of it but its
disappearance. Next day at crib when the young chap was
asked again, “Have a bit o’ pasty, you?” he savagely answered,
“No, I don’t want none of your pasty. Shove it up.” Compla-
cently the Cousin Jack said, “Why didn’ ee say so first time?”
On our way out to the Old Ground, to report to the Tarawa
before we began to work, Pedro and I overhauled everything.
Pump, dress, air-pipe, life-line, everything was most carefully
examined. A Government official had examined the gear and
certified it, so Farquhar told me, but seeing for yourself is a
good idea.
Also, on the way out four kingfish and a dolphin were caught
on a tow-line, the hook having been baited with a piece of
white rag. One of the kingfish was very big. When we had
those fish the only thing to do with them was to sun-dry them.
We did not need them, but it seemed a pity to throw them
away. So the crew got to work, and presently fillets of fish
threaded on several lines were strung across from the main
to the mizzen rigging, and were no ornament. We could not
salt the fish because neither salt nor empty keg was available.
The greater part of my first month as a diver in command
of my first lugger was spent on the Old Ground working near
the other craft of the fleet. Consequently I saw quite a lot of
the Groper, and the others, and met them on Sunday when
all the luggers gathered round the floating station. The Groper,
especially, took an interest in me, assuming the kindly attitude


of a successful tutor. The fact that all the clivers were friendly,
both white and coloured, was pleasant. All of them, however,
criticized me for buying the extra stores for my crew, and so
did Farquhar. The gist of their comments, as put by the Groper,
was, “It won’t do you no good in the long run; you can’t never
keep it up. When you starts a thing like that you wants to
keep it going. Your crew’ll be expecting of it all the time—
they’ve been a-skiting of it to the others—and when you don’t
they’ll be sore about it, and so will you.”
Personally, I could see no good reason whatever why the
crews of the fleet should not have much better stores than
were issued to them. Pedro Rodriquez turned out to be a first-
rate tender; he held the life-line like a fishing-line, always
feeling my every movement but not retarding me in any way.
He watched the hand with the pipe and the other hands,
keeping them up to the mark, and he saved me a lot of trouble
by anticipating my wants. Pedro was always polite, though
not talkative, and as I met him half-way we got along very well
indeed. I was satisfied, too, with the four chaps for’ard. When
sitting in the dress on deck at meal times, or when we were
sailing, I liked to watch them, listen, and join in their talk a
little now and then. They were a good lot.
After about a month of really hard graft; and finding that
my shell was a good deal short of a ton, which meant that I
had not earned more than about £2O, I decided that diving
for shell out on the Old Ground was no good—life was too
short. Having found absolutely no pearls during that time
helped me considerably in reaching a decision. Working on the
Old Ground was all right for the Company, for the small, high
quality shell fetched a big price in the market, but there was
poor pay, hard graft, and very few pearls for the divers. Indeed,
the coloured divers were allowed no share at all in any pearls
found in their shell.
Another matter of great importance to everybody connected
with the pearlshell industry, whether out on the Old Ground
or anywhere else, was a law passed by the Queensland Govern-
ment limiting the size of the smallest shell allowed to be taken
and sent to market to four inches from heel to lip. The inten-
tion of the law was good, but it failed because all the shell taken
i


was opened before being measured. It was the packer who
measured the small shell, and any that did not come up to the
standard was tossed over the side by him. A tremendous amount
of that waste was going on all the time, and everybody lost by
it—Government, divers, owners, everybody. WTien I spoke about
it I was laughed at. “Throw it back unopened for someone else
to pick up, eh?”
I heard of two mishaps only during that time on the Old
Ground, before sailing a wav by myself. One dav Jimmv Dit-
donc suffered because of a burst air-pipe. As the water was
only about seven fathoms he was not drowned altogether—
merely half drowned. The other misfortune occurred to Chris
Samoa, who found that his missus was pregnant. I w r as told
that Chris became justifiably annoyed, and told his marv that
he had a good mind to drown her, which was exactly w 7 hat she
might expect him to say. Being a gendeman, Chris Samoa did
not carry out his threat, but freed himself of his worry by sail-
ing off to Maubiaug and dumping her there. Both those divers
had a lot of inconvenience, and lost a lot of time through their
trouble, but Chris seemed to be as bright as ever after he had
got rid of his.
Working the passages while the neap tides w T ere on was not
so bad, but even then care w r as needed w 7 hen the tide w 7 as at its
strongest. In fact, I sat on deck usually for about an hour at
that time. At the time of the spring tides when the moon was
at the full, or new, no work in the dress w r as done whatever
except between the tides. One noticeable difficulty in Torres
Straits is the fact that it is not possible to forecast just when
the tides will run at their strongest, and for how long, or when
they will turn. How ; ever, the tides were mild compared with
those of the nor’-west coast, or round about Port Darwin, where
they are terrific, about twenty eight feet being the difference
between high and low w 7 ater.
The Gertrude had a hundred and twenty fathoms of anchor-
chain, and it may be said that the water w 7 as generally not
more than eight fathoms. Three times the depth of the water is
enough chain to hold a vessel in calm water as a rule. That


being the case, there was some ninety-six fathoms of chain
left for me to play with.
I have shown how dangerous it was in those passages for a
diver to work with his craft drifting, the tide dragging her
anchor backwards along the rough bottom. This time another
method was adopted, which was much safer while working
when the tide was running. Before diving began, as much
chain as possible was brought in on the windlass without break-
ing out the anchor. Then, when I was below working along
with the tide, one of the crew paid out enough chain gradually
to allow the lugger to keep close to me. When all the chain
possible had been paid out, and I had got so far that there
was no air-pipe left to spare on deck, I would come back and
have a good spell while the crew toiled at the windlass, winding
the chain in again.
When my first dip was made the helm was amidships so, to
cover new ground at my next dip, the rudder was turned to
one side, causing the lugger to swing over by the force of the
current against it. Then, at my next descent, by turning the
rudder the other way, new ground was covered. In this manner
it was possible to greatly lessen the danger, cover new ground
each dip without moving the anchor, and give myself a long
rest between dips.
When it was the time of slack water, between tides, the
anchor was lifted from the bottom, and Gertrude drifted along
with me until such time as I came to a likely piece of ground,
or the tide began to run strongly, when it would be dropped
once more.
This method of working gave the crew much more, and
harder work to do, but, strangely enough, there was little if any
grumbling. Without much doubt the reason for that was my
care for them, and because they saw results from their work.
If no shell had been brought up by me for them to see they
would have had the feeling that they were working for nothing,
even though it made no difference at all to their pay. Having
cheerful faces on deck instead of gloom helped a lot in keeping
me wound up and ticking, too.
Working there in those rough passages by myself was a real
pleasure; it was so different from the sameness of the ever-


lasting trudging along the gritty, undulating, rather bare bot-
tom of the Old Ground, and passing the time, while on the
surface, looking at wet decks and white-capped tumbling seas.
Down below here was more life, more companionship, even
if none of it was well disposed, and ever so much more to look
at. There were continual surprises, too. Both Staid and Sudden
had their homes here, as well as Grisly Jape. Beauty also lived
just round the corner, for gardens such as these surely have
some naiad, mermaid, or other being besides Davy Jones and
a stray diver to admire them.
What a number of home-lovers lived here! Some, like the
coral polyp and the clam, lived in the one residence all the
time, and in the one place. Not so the hermit crab. That un-
seemly animal is a home-lover of quite another kind. He not
only loves his home, but he also loves the other fellow’s, too,
if it is better than his.
It is not always possible for a hermit crab, forced from home
by growth, to get a new house that will fit him, but he must,
he must find some covering for his posterior, which is very
thin-skinned, tender, and vital to his well being. Those that
can find no immediate cover seek safety by backing into a
crevice of some kind. It is a common thing on tropical beaches
to see such a crab with just that part thrust into the bowl of a
clay pipe, a small nut, a shell, or anything at all until some-
thing better may be found. On a beach, and below in a tropical
submarine garden, I have also watched one home-lover without
a home eject another, and seize the portable property quickly
like a kookaburra diving on a young snake. That can be done
when there is a piece missing, a hole, in the back part of the
desired shell, which is often the case. Then the pirate, while
engaging in battle with the resident force at the entrance, at-
tacks at the rear through the gap with one of his so sharp-
pointed claws. The mangling by the pirate of his tender abdo-
men gives the holder of the shell such anguish that he hurriedly
emerges, assisted in a Cruel manner by the pirate, who pops into
the ravished joint very quick and lively. Ejecting may also be
done if the shell occupied is much too large for the crab inside,
otherwise the great claw that covers the entrance tightly when
the owner retires prevents intrusion by any pirate.


On a beach in the Solomon Group I once saw an ejected
crab recover his home, which was one of those shells with a
hole where there should have been no hole. This crab had not
been injured badly when forced from his tenement, so he in
turn attacked the pirate through the gap in the shell, and so
viciously did he tear his opponent that he not only recovered
his shell but he was left in peace, and the pirate in pieces.
Mr Grisly Jape had a hand in that.
Large numbers of hermit crabs are on the sheltered beaches
in some places, wee crabs in tiny shells and some, found beneath
rubbish, as big as lobsters without shells. They are enthusiastic
scavengers, quickly gathering round anything eatable no matter
how foul it may be. Apart from that, they are useful, when
pounded, as burley to attract fish.
There were snakes here, too, but not so many as on the
plains of the Old Ground. Their bill of fare seemed to embrace
small fish, all dainty and pretty. I have ‘seen a snake seize a
tiny fish, one of a number passing by in a small, undulating
iridescent cloud, and move on, holding its little victim in its
mouth with many of its companions swimming close round its
head like pall-bearers at a funeral. That was Mr Sudden at
work.
During the past years many divers had been over the ground
now being searched by me. Consequently shell was difficult to
find. Much of it was old, thick, and well hidden with growths
of weed and coral. Two shells had such big coral growing upon
them that I told the crew not to clean them, for they were good
curios. Some of the shell was eaten through by worms, and
some dead. It was all to the good, for such shell was more likely
to contain pearls. Having heard that pearls may be found in
the shell itself I broke a lot of the dead shell, but found nothing.
From the age of sixteen I had spent my life mostly in the
country, where there were no wire fences or any other barriers
to progress. There the senses become trained to read many
things hidden to the multitude. Even so, it was difficult to find
the shell, so well did it merge with all else, especially when
closed. Searching, I climbed the rugged walls of the coral reefs,
parted the fronds of weeds, looked everywhere, and found
shell in likely and unlikely places. One solitary, naked old chap


was right on top of a big coral mushroom. It seemed as though
some hand had put him there temporarily, and then walked on,
forgetting. Probably he had been dropped by some diver from
above.
Any shell found during the day was cleaned by the crew
ready for me to open. That task was done by me with much
the same earnestness and desire for knowledge that a boy
employs when he gets his first chance at an alarum-clock, or
the innards of his sister’s talking doll. In the evening, or when
the tide was running too strongly for work below, with a large
table knife I opened my shell on deck. Many were the disap-
pointments, but I found an astonishing number of pearls, mostly
of very little value or none, that encouraged effort just the same
as a small prize in Tatts whispers, “Keep going, your luck’s in;
you might get £IO,OOO next time. Nothing venture, nothing
win. If you don’t speculate you won’t accumulate.”
The pearls found were roughly graded as good, bad, and
indifferent, and kept in the cabin in anything handy. There
was no place to hide, or secure valuables unless they were
carried on the person in a belt continually, and that is not an
easy thing to do without the knowledge of another sharing the
cabin. When a pearl that seemed to be extra good, or even
just extra big, was seen by me, Caution nudged Emotion say-
ing, “Look out! Empty it into the bucket by your side with the
other fish, and get it afterwards.” If Caution didn’t say that it
generally said something just as sensible. That way of keeping
anything pretty good from the eyes of the crew was not possible
when the pearl was attached to the shell, or when good blisters
were found. Shells that had those were stowed under the bunk,
or elsewhere aft. One beauty, which I handed over to the
Manager the next week-end, rolled out of a shell as soon as it
was opened, and all the crew saw it. Just that one pearl was
enough to repay the Company for the upkeep of Gertrude, the
crew, and myself. All I got for my half share was £lls, but I
said nothing.
Each Saturday afternoon Gertrude sailed away from the place
we were working to find the Tarawa, as I had promised Farquhar
she should. Then questions were asked, and answered. The
Groper said, “Tell ’em nothin’. If anyone goes round askin’


questions you can bet yer life they wants ter find out something.
Tell ’em nothin’. How yer been doin’ 1 ? Been gettin’ anything?”
The two shells overgrown with pretty coral and most care-
fully preserved by me from damage found little favour with
anybody. Farquhar took the two. When I told the Groper he
said, “Well, what did I tell yer? Sarve yer right. More fool you
fer lettin’ ’em see ’em if you wanted ’em yerself. Sarve yer
right fer bein’ such a bloody fool.”
As for some shell, thought by me to be worth some considera-
tion because it had a big crescent-shaped piece bitten out of
it as cleanly as though a saw had been used, on showing it I
was told that it was not uncommon. It seems that there is a
ray, with a mouth like a stone-crusher, that sometimes tests
its power of mastication by biting a pearlshell; just like those
men who show off by chewing glasses in a public bar. Trying
to interest others by showing them my discoveries was entirely
given up by me when Long Jack, seeing me coming one day,
called out, “Look out, here comes Clarry with another of his
cunos!
Life in the Gertrude went on its interesting way for several
months. Pedro Rodriquez became a little closer, a little more
inclined to confide. He even went so far as to show me some
photos, including some of his sweetheart—a slim, childlike
Manila-woman—but we talked little. At night I usually sat
on deck for a while and watched the weather, and the life in
the water if we were close to a reef or land, and built castles
in the air. My only books were Shakespeare and the Bible, but
they were quite enough.
Down in the cabin at night, when I was fed up with reading
the Bible or Shakespeare, Gertrude spoke to me in a language
that differed little from that spoken by wooden ships anywhere.
She told me often that there was a rough bed beneath her, and
this disturbed her a good deal when both wind and tide were
strong. Now and again she shuddered as her anchor-chain
caught on some coral and, presently breaking free, jerked when
it again took the strain. And there were many other things
brought to my ears by Gertrude, some of them quietly whis-
pered, and others said loudly, in that nasty insistent way that
an ever-loving wife uses when she has you helpless in bed, so


that I, or Pedro, would be forced out on deck to attend to what-
ever was the matter.
My hearing was acute, so Gertrude merely whispered gently
one night that someone was after a small tin of seed-pearls that
was on the shelf at the fore end of the cabin. There were four
ports in the cabin, one on either side and two looking out for-
ard. Gertrude had told me gently that someone was on deck,
nearly overhead, and on quietly turning out my legs from the
bunk, and looking up, I saw she was right as usual. It was what
a newspaper would call “the exact, identical, psychological
moment”, or would it? Anyhow, I was in time to grab a dark
arm that was being withdrawn through the port. There was a
bit of excitement after I had seized the arm, put one foot
against the for’ard bulkhead, and put my weight in the pull. I
knew at once it was the arm of the Malayo because he said so,
in fact he shrieked so that all hands and the cook heard him say
it. So I eased the strain while Pedro turned up the lamp, and
then went on deck.
Nothing was done, and little was said to the thief except a
brief aspersion from Pedro, because when people are crowded
together as they are in a diving lugger the least said the sooner
mended. Anyhow, the poor disappointed fellow had a sore arm,
and shoulder, and some skin off as well.
Shell was getting scarce. During my last dip I had got no-
thing. As I sat on deck smoking I looked at the bag reflectively.
Then I said to Pedro, in the hearing of the others, “No more
shell here—finish. Where we go this time, Pedro? What you
think? You think all right we go try Darnley?”
Before Pedro could answer my question Jehova Joe, one of
the Torres Islanders who hailed from Badu, earnestly said, “No
you go alonga Darnley Island, diver. He no good. Plenty diver
he die finish alonga dat place. You me fella go walk about
lookem ’nother fella place more better.”
And the others, including Pedro, supported Jehova Joe. Pedro
explained one reason why the water near Darnley had such a
bad reputation. He said that the lead being heaved might give
eighteen fathoms as the depth, which was reasonable. Then,
after the anchor had been let go, the diver found that there was


twenty-five or even thirty fathoms of water where he was. In
other words, the bottom was very irregular, and it was an easy
thing for a diver to be in water much deeper than he realized
and so get paralysed.
Jehova Joe had some more to say, “Diver, very good you try
one small fella passage he stop no long way. Name belonga him
Baisek. One time, two time me fella lookem Japanee man go
along dat place. Dat Japanee man no stop long time. Ah! He
stop little bit; now he go. Me fella no savvi good alonga him.
Very good you go look what somesing Japanee man he been
makem.”
When I suggested that the “Japanee man” had been to Baisek
for firewood and water that idea was scouted. The Japanese
lugger had been seen only in the early morning, had never
been there long enough to get a supply of firewood and water,
besides which there was no water there good enough even for
such people as Japanese.
Jehova Joe told me that the entrance to Baisek Passage was
shallow, and bad, so that we would have to make it at high
water. That being the case, we stopped where we were that day,
but I did no more work.
Anything like a mystery is to most people interesting, and I
thought quite a lot about the yarn Jehova Joe had told me. The
name of the place, too, was queer. There is a word in Joe’s
lingo which means “I don’t like” or “I don’t want to” that to me
had the same sound as Baisek. Anyhow, the yarn was interest-
ing, and I quite looked forward to my visit to the place in the
morning.
“When dawn’s left hand was in the sky” we brought in our
anchor next morning and, following Jehova Joe’s easy direc-
tions, sailed towards the entrance of Baisek Passage. About an
hour afterwards, as we rounded the point of a small, hilly
island, we sighted a lugger close at hand headed in the same
direction as ourselves. She was unmistakably a Jap. Anyone
could see that at a glance. At this time the Japs were turning
out much smarter craft than any other from their shipyard at
Thursday Island. They could be recognized by their fine, long,
yacht-like hulls and the cut of their high-peaked sails.
As soon as we sighted the strange craft we all stood up, as


people will do when under the stress of some excitement, and
stared hard at her. We saw the Japs face aft looking just as
intently at us.
“Him,” said Jehova Joe.
“That one Japan man you been lookem before alonga pas-
sage?” I asked.
“Him,” replied Joe, and then again positively, affirmatively,
“Him.”
The Jap did not alter his course, but continued straight on
for the entrance to the passage which the two Badu boys pointed
out to us. It was nice to have such a competent pilot as the Jap,
but it would have been ever so much nicer not to have had him.
From the time when the Jap had been sighted I had been
filled with qualms. There is a lot of caution in my make-up, and
Caution, with a capital C, was getting in some good work. It
was shaking up the cerebrum quite a lot, and urging me to quit.
It was saying something like this: “Go on, clear out, don’t be
a fool. You can come back afterwards when the Jap has gone.
If he is up to any funny business in that passage he may get
nasty, and what’s the good of going round looking for trouble?
Go on, clear out.”
But Caution had to contend with another part of my make-
up which was Cowardice. Cowardice said in a dominant man-
ner, “You can’t clear out now. What! Clear out and let the
Monkey-brand Cow see that you are frightened of him? Why,
he’d spread the yarn all over the shop that a white man ran
away like a little boy from him. And what about these others?
How about when you go to the Tarawa on Sunday and every-
body hears about how you ran away because you thought that
a Jap diver might give you a hiding?” So I followed in the
wake of the Jap.
At the entrance to the passage the Jap reduced sail but other-
wise showed no concern, but of course he must have known
the place well by this time. On the Gertrude we downed every-
thing except the headsail, and got out our sweeps as an extra
precaution, but had no need of them.
One of the Badu boys, not Jehova Joe but his mate Thomasi,
climbed up the mainmast and conned us through. We touched
once lightly, but it was a bad place. When we came abreast


of the Jap craft she was anchored, her sails neatly stowed and
her diver in his dress sitting on deck. Those on her took no
notice of us, just as though they were there by themselves.
There were no inquiries, no greetings; they turned their backs
to us as though we had no existence. I think that we were all
chilled by that studied aloofness. I did not like it. None of us
hailed the Jap, which was strange, too, but I suppose that we
all felt the silence of those mutes was inimical.
In its broadest part the passage was no more than a chain
wide, and its length was less than a quarter of a mile. Slowly
we sailed from one end to the other, using the soaped lead all
the time. The lead showed that most of the bottom was barren,
but there was some good sponge bottom where the Jap was
anchored, and that is where the passage was deepest—about
seven fathoms. The other end of the passage we found impass-
able to anything except small boats, or canoes, even at high
water.
Having explored Baisek Passage from one end to the other,
I decided to anchor near the Jap and let him hate us as much
as he liked. I talked to Pedro Rodriquez, and the four for’ard.
I said, “I’m going down close to the Japan man because that’s
the only good bottom here. This place no belonga him; he be-
longa all about. Pedro, you got revolver?” Pedro said that he
had. “Well, you go get it, and keep it handy here on deck.
When I stop down below and that Japan man makes something
no good alonga you me fella, maybe revolver makem savvi,
eh?” And Pedro smiled with assurance and said, “I makem
savvi.”
The others all had sheath-knives, but I told them to pick out
a good piece of mangrove firewood each just in case of accidents.
Also, Pedro promised to give me timely warning if the Jap diver
went down after I did. There was really no need to ask Pedro
to give me that warning for he would have done so as a matter
of course, but I was nervous and apprehensive. The boding
silence of an inactive enemy may rouse uneasiness in those
far braver than I am.
We thereupon anchored Gertrude about a hundred feet
from the Jap lugger whose name, by the way, was Pearl Queen.
Then Pedro got busy on me. Before stepping over the side to


the ladder I looked round much in the same way that a man
condemned to die might take his last look at the blue sky before
being executed. All the Japs stood stonily staring. One of them
had a dreadful scar across his face, running from near his right
eye to the left side of his chin. That slash had cut his lips
deeply, so that when the wound healed one yellow tooth was
left permanently disclosed. I thought, “By gum! I’ll know you
again, you ugly cow, wherever I run across you.”
A diver can reach the bottom quickly when the water is only
about forty feet deep, but I knew before getting there what
was the business of the Jap. That brainy gentleman had not
been taking shell from Baisek Passage, he had been bringing
it there. He had stumbled across a place served with a good
tide, a good sponge bottom, and such a bad entrance that it
was unlikely anyone would run the risk of wrecking himself
trying to get in. Having found such a place, he had decided
to start growing pearls for himself by introducing seed-pearls
into some of his live shell, and leaving them in this quiet spot
to be developed by the obliging shellfish. Just one comprehen-
sive look told me all that while I was on my way down. It was
not guessing, for the shell had been laid out in rows systemati-
cally and, another thing, they were all about the same size.
Also, the shell were nice and clean; there were no growths on
them.
No sooner had I landed on the bottom and adjusted the out-
let valve than I began to fill my bag with the Jap’s shell, for I
thought, “In for a penny, in for a pound.” If I returned empty-
handed what would my crowd think? What would the Jap mob
think? Why, they would all think I was afraid and so I was,
but nobody but myself ought to know that.
You might think that many thoughts were chasing them-
selves through my mind during that brief period, but no. Just
one word kept repeating itself monotonously. It was “Baisek,
Baisek, Baisek”, nothing but that one word “Baisek”, until sud-
denly it was halted by Pedro Rodriquez giving me the agreed
upon signal to let me know the Jap was on his way down.
A wise man, in those circumstances, would have closed his
valve, given a pull on the life-line, and thus allowed the Jap
to enjoy all the scenery there was on the bottom and to look


at all his shell—less a bagful—by himself. But I was afraid to
do that, for if I did the Jap would feel all bucked up, and go
round about telling people how he had frightened hell out of
a white man.
Well, there he was. He stumbled on something and then,
after adjusting his valve, came straight towards me. He meant
business all right. When first seen by me he was about a hun-
dred feet away, but leaning forward to force his way through
what was now still water, soon brought him nearer. Whether the
Jap held a weapon in his right hand could not be seen, for he
held it behind him. Dropping my bag, I stepped towards him,
picking up a big shell as I did so, for 1 reasoned like this, If you
stop where you are he may think you are scared.
When the Jap was within about six feet his hand came from
behind, holding a heavy bolt with a big nut on its end. He
raised this while he stretched out his left hand to seize me.
“My God,” I thought, “the cow wants to smash in my face-
glass!”
Dropping the shell in my right hand I suddenly grabbed his
left and pulled hard, and quickly, towards me. He had not
expected that. He lurched forward, and an outstretched leg
and a push sent him toppling. Using the whole of my strength
to force my way through the still water to where he was trying
to get to his feet, I arrived just in time to kick his face-glass
with my heavy, lead-soled, right boot. What a big bubble that
made! But it did not finish the job. It was no good to let a
murderer like that Jap get away to try some more of his monkey
tricks. Oh, no! I got on top of him, knowing that he would
struggle like a fiend for a little while, and he did. He tried to
get his life-line so as to signal to his tender, but I smashed at
his fingers with the heavy bolt with which he had intended to
murder me.
Suddenly he went limp, but I still held him down just in
case he was foxing. Then I realized the murdering swine was
dead, so I picked up the heavy bolt, and my bag of shell, and
went up very much out of breath.
There is not much more to tell about my venture in Baisek
Passage. As I was on the point of leaving the dead Japanese
diver I gave his life-line a pull, because some impulse directed


me to do so. In consequence, when I was relieved of my helmet,
and looked, I saw all the Japs tailing on to their diver’s pipe
and line, hauling him to the surface. After the diver had been
laid out on deck, and examined, there was a great hullabaloo.
No more was there any studied aloofness, nor stony stares.
The five Japs on the deck of the Pearl Queen worked them-
selves into a state of frantic excitement. Threat followed threat
as fast as they were able to think up a new one, and that, too,
in spite of my most emphatic assurance that I had not even
touched their diver. It was not a bit of good telling them he had
fallen down on a sharp piece of coral, thus accidentally break-
ing his face-glass, for they definitely would not believe me.
However, I am glad to say that they did not attack us, for
quarrels wherein people get hurt are most distasteful to me.
That evening, when the moon was at the full and a flood
tide had opened the portals of the passage, the Pearl Queen
departed with her cargo of vengeful hatred so that we could,
at last, relax.
I had expected, at all events hoped, that those with me would
swallow my yarn as to what had happened on the bottom that
day, but I was deluding myself. Down in the cabin that even-
ing Pedro Rodriquez, never talkative, without a word took the
wind out of my sails by silently handing to me one of my div-
ing boots—the one for my right foot. He was sitting at the side
of his immaculate bunk smoking a cigarette. I stared at the
boot, and then at him. He pointed. Then I saw what it was.
A small but thick splinter of crystal-like glass was imbedded
in the toe of my boot, between the lead and wooden soles.
Now, the only evidence against me which the Japs on the
Pearl Queen had was presumptive, but this small piece of glass,
stuck in the toe of my boot, now brought forward by Pedro
Rodriquez was circumstantial evidence of the strongest kind
that I had killed that damned Jap.
Recovering from the shock a little, I asked Pedro if the crew
for’ard knew about the glass, and was relieved a lot when he
shook his head. Then, after a pause, I brought out a couple of
really good pearls and, placing them in the palm of my hand,
held them towards him saying, “Pedro, suppose you like, you
take one good pearl for you. Present from me, eh?”


To my dismay Pedro shook his head while looking seriously
at the pearl. Then he turned his gaze on me and smiled.
“I won’t talk,” he said. “True. I won’t talk no man. S’pose
you give me pearl, s’pose you no give me pearl alia same. I
promise you I no talk.”
There seemed to me to be regret, sadness, in his tone at this
renunciation of the lovely pearl offered. Pedro continued, “I
like you. All boy he stop for’ard he like you verra much. You
verra brave man. You plenty savvi that Japan diver no good.
You plenty sawi s’pose you go down steal that shell belong
that Japan diver he like kill you. You verra brave man. You
go down steal that shell, and you kill that Japan diver. I like
you verra much. I talk no man. True, I like good pearl. S’pose
you like give me one pearl for present. I take this one good
pearl present from you, my friend. All right; 5 Thank you verra
much.” And Pedro reached out and took one of the two pearls.
It took two days to skin the passage. I went down and stopped
hours at a stretch sending “bag up”. I was well rewarded for all
the trouble that Jap had given me, and for the hard work I did
in Baisek Passage. When we next went out to the Tarawa
there was great excitement, and great expectations, among
divers and everybody else. They all wanted me to lead them
to the new patch, for what other explanation could there be
but a new patch to account for the quantity of shell brought in
by me—more than a ton, besides ever so many pearls, though
most of those I handed over to Farquhar were rather a poor lot.
Of course, I had to give my version to Farquhar and Cap-
tain Jones of my meeting and wrestling with the Jap diver.
Neither of them thought any more would be heard of the mat-
ter but if there was I could rely upon them to use influence
on my behalf. A big heap of first-class shell, like that brought
in by me, quite apart from the pearls, smooths much roughness
from the track of life.
Then came the telegram from Melbourne. Peter Peblo in
the Wai-wia brought it from Thursday Island, and I got it on
Saturday afternoon, not more than a week out from Melbourne.
Pretty quick that, coming the best part of three thousand miles
in less than a week—the telegram, I mean. It was from Jimmy
Wilson, and it said Jimmy wanted to engage me to go diving


with him, and to stand by until he came in the steamer, but it
didn’t say where we were going. Farquhar had another tele-
gram, too, asking him to release the Groper. This was nearly
as exciting as when a boy gets his first sailor-suit, or his first
watch.
The next time the Wai-wia came out from Thursday Island
she brought with her two coloured divers to take the places of
the Groper and myself. She also brought another case of as-
sorted tinned beef, and other things, as a final present from me
to the crew of the Gertrude .
There was quite a little party going away from the Old
Ground. There was Billy the Groper, the Old Schooner and
little Girtie, both beaming like a new florin and a sixpence in
a velvet purse, the Malayo thief, who was also being discharged,
Farquhar, and myself. Our send-off out there had been quiet,
but cordial. Jimmy Ditdonc, Long Jack Randall, all the coloured
divers, Captain Jones, everybody had shaken hands and wished
us good luck. We wished them the same, good wishes all round
—what more could any man want when parting from old
friends?
Both the Groper and I were more or less satisfied after we
had settled with Farquhar, and I dare say he was, too. Farquhar
and his Scotch were both mellow, and that goes a long way.
Also, he handed to me a splendid reference addressed to “Those
whom it may concern”. There was no way of telling exactly
what our pearls had brought, and it is a certainty that Farquhar
knew nothing about my toilet soap, but I knew that soap could
hold a lot more than its scent only.
While waiting for Jimmy Wilson I made the acquaintance of
two or three characters. The first one of note was Sir John
Douglas. This man was the Resident Magistrate. He had the
power to deport anybody, looked shaggy and fierce with his
big, bushy, silvery beard and jutting eyebrows, was respected
by all except those to whom he gave a month’s toil at cutting
firewood, or gardening, and was never seen to enter the bar
of a pub like everybody else. That being the case, I had to go
to his residence when the idea came to me of putting in a word
for the Groper.
It was this way. That wowser policeman whom I mentioned


ABOVE: Pearls and blisters cut from the shell, Thursday Island
BELOW: Captured green turtles, Bramble Cay, Torres Straits


Spearing turtle near Lindeman Island


before had threatened to run the Groper in because he did not
like his song-and-dance act, or something. If Billy the Groper
got shot in it was just about a certainty that he would get a
month if Sir John Douglas was running short of small firewood,
and that might quite capsize our plans for sailing with Jimmy.
So, titivating myself up somewhat, I made tracks for the house
of Sir John Douglas.
My reception was much better than I expected. That fierce-
looking man absolutely roared with laughter when I told him
what I wanted him to do. He got me to tell him all about the
interfering, wowser John Hop, and what sort of a chap Billy
the Groper was. One thing led to another so that presently I
found he had got me talking about myself, and life on the gold-
fields. I told him about the man who shot an Afghan for wash-
ing his feet in a waterhole, and who was tried for murder in
Perth because the Government knew no jury on the goldfields
would convict him—and neither would the jury in Perth when
they were told that the waterhole where the Afghan washed
his feet was the only one within fifty miles.
I told Sir John Douglas about the blackfellow who took a
small piece of gold to a digger. The digger weighed the gold in
the palm of his hand, and said, “This piccaninny fella, Jacky.
Him pennyweight.” And Jacky emphatically answered, “No
plurry fear, him shillunweight.”
Thinking it possible, indeed probable, that Sir John Douglas
might at times be less cordial than he was just then, I gave him
my yarn about Baisek Passage. Then I found that he knew
nearly as much about the business as I did for, it appears, the
leading Japs of the place had been to him already and lodged
a complaint. Also, he had been in communication with Farqu-
har. Now he asked me a question or two, stroking that big beard
of his.
After pondering the matter, and walking to a window and
gazing on a scene that must have been very familiar to him,
he came to a decision.
“Well,” he said, “I suppose the Japs wouldn’t have made a
complaint if their diver had broken your face-glass instead of
his own. From their point of view he was most unfortunate not
to have done so. I consider you to be a lucky man to be sitting
K


where you are now. My advice to you is to keep quiet and not
to talk about the matter, especially after you have had a drink
or two. Let the matter drop/’
The end of my interview resulted in Sir John Douglas say-
ing that he would talk to the wowser John Hop, and make him
steer clear of the Groper, and I’d better come along in the
evening to dinner. “And bring some more yarns with you,” he
concluded. Which was satisfactory, and shows what diplomacy
may do if handled rightly.
At dinner that night I met the O.C. of the Fort, and a very
fat, big missionary named James Chalmers. That led to dinner
at the Fort, and meeting others. Also, the missionary asked me
to call at the Metropole, where he had pegged out a claim, so
that we might see more of one another.
Twice I called upon the Reverend James Chalmers in his
room at the Metropole, and each time we yarned for about an
hour, which is not long enough to know a man thoroughly. A
man keeps a lot of himself hidden if he can possibly do so, as
a rule. It is necessary to live with people, see what they are
like first thing in the morning or when they have been put out
about something, see them in all moods, before it is possible
to know them thoroughly. That’s first-class advice to people
contemplating marriage, to which may be added, “Get him or
her in swimming with you so that you may see the figure you
are going to get!”
Early in April 1901 Chalmers sailed in his yacht Niue to
Goaribari, an island near the Kikori River in the western dis-
trict of Papua. None knew better than he the character and
customs of the natives of that part. Long before, they had
dared to attack the armed boats of a British warship, and re-
cently Sir Billy McGregor with trained, armed, and trusty
native police had been defied by them. Yet the foolhardy
Chalmers went there unarmed, leading to their deaths eleven
natives, and another white missionary named Oliver Tomkins.
All of them were killed without delay, and the lot eaten, so
that any good that Chalmers did by his visit was of a temporary
character only.
Jock MacFlodden was another character I met at this time.
His views were totally at variance with those held by James


Chalmers. Nothing delighted Jock more than to capsize the
common beliefs of credulous mankind. Equinoctial gales, rain-
bringing or dry new moons, broken mirrors, omens, ghosts,
spirits good or evil, all got knocked by Jock.
“The reason why missionaries, confidence men, members of
parliament, and other take-downs get such a good hearing is
that you can get people to believe anything. There’s a mug horn
every minute. Tell a child some flihbertigibbety yarn, and tell
him it’s true, and he’ll go on believing it all his life. He’ll never
reason about it partly because he’s been told that it’s wicked
for him to doubt, and partly because most people are too lazy
to do much thinking, anyhow. Take the belief in spirits—you
believe in spirits, don’t you?”
“I suppose I do,” I said. “I haven’t thought much about it.”
“There you are! Nobody thinks much about it,” Jock went
on. “Don’t you see, if there was anything in spirits, or ghosts,
the scientists would have got hold of one before this and found
out all about it?”
I laughed. “Get out, how could they?”
“Yes, they could,” said Jock. “They could get hold of some-
body who was just going to snuff out—a criminal, or a lunatic,
or somebody—and put them in a glass case and pump all, or
nearly all, the air out. Then, when the fellow was properly dead,
they could finish pumping out the glass case into a cylinder
made for the purpose, and put a tremendous hydraulic pressure
on the gas they got. Then, by lowering it to a very low tem-
perature, away below zero, they would make it into a liquid, or
perhaps into a solid. Then they would be able to have a look
at it, and see what it’s like, and cut junks off it, and analyse it.
Then there wouldn’t be any more mystery about ghosts, every-
body’d know all about them.”
“What’s wrong with that, anyhow? And what’s wrong with
you? Laughing at a man just because you never heard of a
new idea like that before. Spirits!” said Jock MacFlodden con-
temptuously. “Ghosts!”
Jock came to me a day or so later, saying, “Hey! You ought
to know something about shells; what do you make of this?
He passed me a spiral shell the size of a tea-cup. It was a left-
handed shell.


“Throw it away, Jock/’ I told him. “It’s no good to you be-
cause you’re not superstitious. It’s one of those left-handed
chank-shells that are supposed to bring good luck. Throw it
away.”
“No fear, I won’t. I want all the good luck I can get, and
then a bit more on top. I’m going to the Mambari gold-diggings
in New Guinea as soon as the schooner comes. I’ll keep it. I
believe there’s a little good-luck devil inside it, I can hear it
when I put it to my ear.” And sceptical Jock MacFlodden put
the lucky charm in his pocket.
When Jimmy Wilson arrived he chartered a very small
centre-board, half-decked cutter, from the Manager of the Met-
ropole, and got me to sail her to Albany Pass, near Cape York,
in order to engage Billy Dunphy for our expedition. For some
time Bill had been diving at the wreck of the Quetta for
Jimmy Clarke, the Pearl King, getting up silver-lead bullion.
After he had read the letter from Jimmy Wilson, which told
him that Clarke was agreeable, he heaved his job at the wreck
over at once, and sailed back with me.
Billy Dunphy, commonly known as Maryborough, was
shooting buffalo in Arnhem Land the last time I had seen him,
and nobody but a first-class horseman and a good shot can take
on a piece of graft like that, for it is very rough graft indeed.
He was a good all-round bushman as well as being a diver.
Outside a town there were not many jobs that Maryborough
could not tackle. Since leaving a place he referred to as “home”
when he was a mere child he had worked at all sorts of jobs,
and with all sorts of men. Teamsters, miners, drovers, sleeper
cutters, blacksmiths, as well as cattle and sheep stations, had
all given sustenance, subsistence, subsidies, mutton-and-damper,
hard yacker, and a good all-round education that did not in-
clude writing and reading. That omission was put right by
Bill, with a little help from others, when he had reached the
age of twenty-five.
It seemed to me that Maryborough Bill and a bull-terrier
had something in common. Flis face was rugged and seamed.
His affection was centred on one man—Jimmy Wilson. He was
direct and tactless like a bull-terrier, and he had a habit of


twisting his nose slightly to port and sniffing, especially when
he was not in agreement with something said or done.
Jimmy was there to meet us when we got back. The two big
fellows grinned at one another as they shook hands.
“Well, how is it now, Bill?” Jimmy said. “Everything jakaloo?
I fixed things up with Jimmy Clarke. He’s up at the Grand
now with Farquhar, and that crowd. Come along, and after
that I’ll give you two the strength of things.”
“Aw, Jim,” said Maryborough, “let them wait. Can’t we have
a drink first? Let them wait. I haven’t seen you since we left
Port Darwin.” But he was overruled.
The “strength of things” was that Jimmy Wilson had gone
to Samarai, chartered a lugger, signed on a Japansie diver, and
started to work somewhere near the China Strait which is close
to Samarai. The Japansie diver refused duty, so Jimmy sailed
back and charged his diver before the English magistrate.
After hearing Jimmy the magistrate said to the Japansie, “Do
you think you can come to this country and do just as you
like? Six months.” Then Jimmy and the magistrate went along
to “Billy-the-cook’s” and had a few.
However, Jimmy could not pick up another diver at once
so, turning things over, he decided to make tracks for Melbourne
in the steamer, for he had not been home for a long time. The
steamer, a cockroach-infested, kerosene-lighted abomination,
passed through the Solomon Group on her way up south. There
Jimmy met Oscar Svensen, a Dutch trader, who put up a good
tale about the pearlshell in the passages of the Group. In the
brief time at their disposal they came to an agreement whereby
the Dutchman found the capital, and Jimmy the experience,
to work the passages.
Armed with an introduction, and instructions to the agent
in Sydney, Jimmy continued on the track south. In Sydney he
started Fisher, of Blue’s Point, at building a new lugger mod-
elled on the lines of the Torres Straits craft. Then he went on
to Melbourne to see his people, find out how a tabby he had
been struck on was wearing and send me my telegram.
Jimmy entrusted me with the information that the tabby, his
quondam sweetheart, had not been wearing at all well; in fact,
she was worn out—was a wash-out. The mental picture of a


finely modelled, pretty little craft that he had carried round
with him in his wanderings was irrevocably shattered when he
sighted the near-hulk she had become. It seems that the swains
of the township had been so attracted by her charm that, in
time, they robbed her of it.
Before the time of departure I went round to various people
and said good-bye. First on the list came Sir John Douglas, the
fine old chap who looked fierce partly because he led a rather
solitary life because of his position. He could tell a good yarn,
and his sense of humour was strong. Much of his reputation
for fierceness originated in the needs of the residential grounds,
garden, and wood-heap. They had to be kept up to the mark,
hence the dire “£5 or one month” heard by drunks and disord-
erlies. He told me it was too early in the day to have a Scotch—
that I was sure to get plenty of that when saying good-bye to
others—but he wanted to give me an autographed book of
verses by Sir Walter Scott. He also advised me to kick any
Japanese diver I disliked in the behind, and on the surface, as
being less dangerous than kicking him in the head under water.
Nothing gullible about Sir John Douglas! A very fine old chap.
It was more difficult parting with a young woman whom I
had first met at dinner at Douglas’s place. She was the daugh-
ter of the O.C. at the Fort, so for that, and other reasons, her
name is not mentioned here. Just turned twenty years of age,
without being beautiful she was charming. No woman could
be more desirable, for she was healthy, and sane, with ambition
and great power of imagination. We met at night only in
secluded places, for her honour was a most precious thing to
me, and had to be protected from any slightest tittle-tattle. She
would have made an ideal mother. I still treasure her little
handkerchief, all wet with her tears when she gave it to me,
and one of her garters, which I replaced with one of my boot-
laces.
When the time came we walked to the wharf with a few
friends, all reasonably sober. In a prominent position stood the
Old Schooner, holding little Girtie by the hand. When the lines
that had held the steamer to the wharf were plashing, and the
final roar of her whistle had fled seeking the echoes, Billy the


Groper waved cheerfully, his face all red with booze and ani-
mation, and called out, “Well, good-bye, Old Schooner! Good-
bye, Girtie! Don’t you get a-frettin’ now, old gal, I’ll be back
by the next steamer, you see if I don’t.”
And the Old Schooner dolefully replied, “No, you won’t,
Billy. I won’t never see you no more.”


CHAPTER XI
INNOCENTS ABROAD
Man is the most destructive as well as being the most feroci-
ous animal in the world, but he has not yet had time to
destroy all that is good and beautiful. Norwegian fiords, New
Zealand sounds, and the island-dotted water enclosed by the
Great Barrier Reef are still a delight that give zest to travellers.
The last mentioned deserves a distinctive name to itself, such as
“The Barrier Sea”.
Our long track up south, from Thursday Island to Sydney,
now took us through that charming Barrier Sea, but brought
forth little or no verbal admiration from anybody. Scenery,
curiosities, and tourists are alike beneath the notice of such
blase folk as seamen, and other toilers of the sea. Headlands,
inlets, islets, and reefs that recalled the memory of some hap-
pening were pointed out, and a few words of vernacular judi-
ciously enriched with adjectives chosen for their strength be-
stowed upon them.
Conversation was centred on things of greater interest such
as, “How far do you think we are now from Townsville?” or
“Where are we going to stop when we get to Sydney, Jimmy?”
Naturally enough, Maryborough Bill was looking forward
to his visit to a big city, for he had not yet seen any town larger
than Port Darwin or Thursday Island. Kindly people told him
things about Sydney that they thought would be of most in-
terest to him. Tempting tales of scrumptious counter lunch free
to anybody, rich and poor alike, who cared to buy a beautiful,
sparkling pot of lovely beer for thruppence made him laugh
aloud at their fairy character, until repeated assurances made
him think that there might be something in it after all. Also,
Maryborough was cautioned to keep his weather eye open


when dealing with crafty women who would bilk him of any
money he paid in advance if they could.
“1 he cunning cows!’ said Maryborough. “What’s a fella to
do—leg-rope ’em? You’re not allowed to knock ’em in the city,
are you, like you can with a lubra if she tries to clear out?’’
Our track to Sydney was blazed at night by the brilliant lights
on famous headlands such as Smoky Cape and Seal Rocks, and
we were helped on our way by the great southerly current
which, like a river, flows from the warm tropics bringing with
it simple creatures that may be devoured by ravenous sharks
that dwell in the South.
It was a Sunday eve when we sailed inside Sydney Harbour,
through Pyrmont Bridge, and moored at a wharf in Darling
Harbour. Jimmy Wilson was our pilot, and he thought a suit-
able berth for us was Ellis’s Coffee Palace in King Street, quite
close to the ship. I think that at one time Ellis’s had been a
teetotal joint but, like other places of the kind, is was found to
be going on the rocks, so they changed it into a Beer Palace.
I mean that a licence to sell drinks was obtained.
Ellis’s was a very fine place indeed, very up to date. There
was a lift. This rather astonished Maryborough, because he had
been used to stairs only in big houses, and this thing that he
thought was a small room suddenly moving in the way it did
was hardly fair. There were bathrooms and water-closets all over
the place—at least one on each floor—and there was gaslight in
each room, in fact, there were gaslights everywhere, and some
of them were alight, too.
After we had been shown to our berths, Jimmy Wilson and
Maryborough in one room and the Groper and myself in an-
other just across the passage, the four of us sat for a while drink-
ing beer and yarning until Maryborough told the Groper and
me to shove off. Maryborough said to Jimmy, as we were going
out, “What do I do with this thing, Jimmy?’’ referring to the
gaslight.
From the door I told him, “Blow her out, Bill, blow her out.
Give her a good hard puff.”
Bill huffed and puffed, and he blew the light out. As he did
so I saw Jim pull the bedclothes over his head, and I heard him
laughing. Presently, from outside the door, we heard, “I say,


Jim, there’s a hell of a stink here. Have you got the matches?
Go on, hurry up and find the matches, and strike a light so’s
we can find what’s stinkin’ the place out.”
Jimmy hopped out of bed and opened the door and window
wide. Maryborough opened nothing but his mouth, because our
door was locked.
With the exception of Jimmy, who had bought a new lot of
everything while he was in Melbourne, we were a rather shabby
lot, and we were well aware of it. So the first thing to be done
was to call on the Dutchman’s agent, Justus Scharffe, in York
Street, and get a sub. While we were waiting after breakfast
until it was office time we stood about outside the Coffee Palace
so that we could see the sights. If some sensitive souls had been
dressed as we were they might have remained inside until the
shops opened, but we didn’t. No fear! And I feel sure that
Maryborough, who wore old canvas shoes on his feet and a
coloured handkerchief round his neck, did not think that he
looked a bit more wonderful than any of the Sydney people
who stared at him as they passed.
As I have said, we stood watching the trams go clanging up
and down the steep street, listened to the patter of vendors of
studs, bootlaces, and so on, and enjoyed every minute of it, too.
Justus Scharffe’s place turned out to be a big ironmongery
and ship chandlery business where it was possible to buy prac-
tically anything really useful, but not clothes or things like that.
The people there were all Germans. They were nice and polite
and made no bother about anything. A clerk took us in tow,
first to the Savings Bank round the corner in Barrack Street,
because, as he said, it was not wise to carry much money about
with us—he had sized us up. Then, to one of the big stores
where we all got a rig-out. A first-class suit of clothes, good
material and good fit, cost only 255., and smart boots 16s. It
would have been silly getting tailor-made for the short while
we were to be in Sydney.
We soon found that Ellis’s was a favourite pub of country
folk, so it was well patronized by spielers eager to show their
trust and faith in anybody with a few loose quids. Buskers
came there, too. Sometimes the busker would be a woman, woe-
begone and shabby, holding a child by the hand, or carrying


a baby. A woman like that always squawked a mournful ditty
in keeping with her appearance. More cheerful and melodious
as a rule were the two men, one with a tiny organ, and his mate
who might let go one like this:
Oh, don’t have nothin’ to do with women,
To do with women, to do with women,
Or you’ll soon find yourself in trouble swimmin':
So don't have nothin' to do with women.
A-lumti-iddli-umpti-hie.
1 don't want a girl who has blue eyes,
Who has blue eyes, who has blue eyes,
When you tries yer luck she cries, and cries,
So I don't want a girl who has blue eyes.
A-lumti-iddli-umpti-hie.
1 don't want a girl who wears tan shoes,
Who wears tan shoes, who wears tan shoes,
She'll go through yer pockets and drink all yer booze,
So 1 don't want a girl who wears tan shoes.
Etc.
Other buskers were often children who generally sang dolor-
ous dirges such as:
Why are you sad, papa, my darling,
Why are those te-ars falling today,
Why do you look at me so strangely,
Have 1 done wrong? Tell me 1 pray-ay.
No, no my child, you are an angel.
There's no heart purer than thine:
Yet I've a fear that some day you'll le-ave me,
Just as your mother did; there'll come a time.
There'll come a time some day, when l am far away;
There'll be no father to guide you from day to day;
Think well of all I've said. Honour the man you wed.
Always remember my story; there'll come a time.
On the day after our new clothes had been bent we went
across in the ferry to Blue’s Point, on the North dhore. Our
craft, which Fisher was building, had a long way to go before
being ready to take to the water. Her timbers were all set up, and
the shipwrights had started on her planking, so a good idea
could be got of what she would be like. She was a deep-heeler,
drawing little water for’ard but about nine feet aft. We were


told that her tonnage would be near-enough to sixteen tons
register.
After that first visit we went to look at her at intervals of a
few days. Watching a vessel being built, gradually taking shape
under the skilled hands of the shipwrights, is worthwhile. Those
shipwrights! They seem to do all their work with an adze.
Hardly any measuring or marking, an uncanny harmony of eye
and hand.
In a few days’ time we stuck less closely together. The Groper
went off one day in search of folk he had known in the region
of the Rocks, once a fashionable part of Sydney but now chiefly
occupied by workers. He was highly successful. Looking for
him one day, I found him singing away in great voice in a
little pub near Argyle Cut, to the unanimous admiration of a
few men who had less money than he had.
Argyle Cut is one of the best-known places in Sydney. It is
a narrow road, cut by hand, straight through the high rock that
is a feature of that part of the city. The road runs straight
through from Circular Quay to Miller’s Point, the Cut being
the part nearest to the Quay. On either side of the Cut build-
ings crowd wherever possible, and shove one another to the
edge of the narrow footway, and some of them encroach upon
it. Looking up, as one passes along, one sees more houses perched
on the rim of the high, straight stone walls of the cutting,
which is spanned by stone bridges at various elevations. Several
steep, narrow stairways, cut out of the solid rock, provide a
laborious way of passing from one level to another.
The Groper s orbit in this district was centred on Playfair
Street, a short lane jammed with little houses and their in-
habitants, which ran in from the Cut until it was barred by
the stony heart of the Rock. Maybe the folk dwelling in the
lane took the name Playfair literally, and maybe they didn’t.
Mottoes, and words with an uplift, are like that. The churches
have one which applies to their vested interests only, “Peace on
Earth to ymen of good will . The Yanks have another, “In God
we trust , with perfect understanding of the missing words,
“All others cash”.
I was greatly astonished one day, after we had been in Syd-
ney about a month, when the Groper told me he was married.


In fact, he was greatly astonished, too. He looked and acted
that way. “Go on, you’re not!” I said. “You can’t be. You’re
married already to the Old Schooner. If you’re mad enough to
have got married again you’ve committed bigamy.”
“No, I haven’t,” Billy the Groper answered. “No, I haven’t.
I’m not silly enough for to do nothin’ like that. You oughter
know me better’n that. I wasn’t never married to the Old
Schooner, not proper married I wasn’. I ain’t never been married
to nobody nowhere although some on ’em thinks I has. That
time what I goes an’ gets married to the Old Schooner it was
on’y a mishnory what married us. That’s nothin’ at all. That
doesn’ mean nothin’. Them mishnories hasn’t got no licence for
to marry nobody. I made sure of that before I married her, but
this is differen’.”
“What are you going to do about it, Billy? How did it hap-
pen? Tell us the yam. Anyhow, you’re a nice one, you are,
why didn’t you ask a chap to the wedding?”
“I couldn’—how could I? I didn’ know nothin’ about it me-
self until she ups an’ tells me one mornin’, an’ I gets the shock
o’ me life an’ I haven’ got over it yet, neether. I wakes up one
mornin’ an’ there she is a-lyin’ in bed with me as cool as yer
like. I was never more astonish in me life. I looks at her an
says, ‘Hullo, what are you doin’ here, Norma? How did you
get here? You’d better hop outer this quick an’ lively an’ get
back ter yer own bed, or there’ll be a fine stink in the house if
they finds out you’ve been here. I’m a respecable man, I am,’ I
tells her, ‘an’ I don’t want no nasty things said about me.’ An’
she says, ‘Why, don’t you remember, Billy, can’t you remember
a thing like that? Are you tellin’ me yer can’t remember a-
marryin’ of me? Why,’ she says, ‘you married me at the Regis-
tror’s yessaday af’noon.”
“I’ve knowed that titter since she was just a babby, the
Groper went on, “an’ I wouldn’ have believed it. Gettin me
along to the Registror’s an’ me not knowin’ nothin’ about it!
That’ll just show yer how cunnin’ they are. I haven’ got over
it yet. Got any money about yer? I haven’ got a bean. Lend s a
coupler quid, come on, an’ I’ll shout yer a drink.”
The Groper told me that his new wife was only eighteen
years old. Later on, when he took me to Playfair Street, and


introduced his wife—Mrs William Howard, if you please, not
Mrs Billy the Groper—l found her to be a healthy-looking,
very presentable, bright little thing. I gave her a small pearl for
a wedding present before setting out with Billy, his new “in-
laws”, and one or two others. As soon as we got into Argyle Cut
the Groper asked me, “What did yer want to go a-givin’ her
that for? Must be worth about thirty quid, that must. Why didn’
yer give it to me so’s I could’ve looked after it for her?”
We called at many houses on the Rocks that evening. Here
are a few of their names: The Whalers’ Arms, Sailor’s Wel-
come, Sheer Hulk, Sailor’s Return, Ocean Wave, Three Jolly
Sailors, Rising Sun, Cat and Fiddle, Black Dog, and the Brown
Bear. Then I believe that I had supper with them in Playfair
Street. At all events, that is where I found myself next morning.
Maryborough Bill never ceased to wonder at the marvels of
the city. In Elizabeth Street there was the little steam tram,
looking like a railway train, which would carry you as far as
Botany Bay; the fine ferry steamers, especially the beautiful,
big Manly ferry; the huge post office in Martin Place with its
tall tower; the ever-changing, bustling life hardly pausing, day
and night the same, and the counter lunchesl
In no other part of the world, not even in Melbourne, was
anything to be seen, or had, like those counter lunches of Syd-
ney. It is not as though those wonderful lunches were offered
invitingly to the public by just one or two hotels only. They
were brought out at 11 a.m. each day by ever so many pubs,
and again put out in the evening from 9 p.m. to 11 p.m. Mary-
borough found that there was no fairy tale about them. All
that it was necessary for anybody to do was to buy a drink be-
fore attacking the lunch. In fact, some who had a thrifty nature,
and some who had not as much as that, just grabbed a pot that
was not quite empty and used that as a passport to the table.
Sometimes a barman would interfere, but rarely, saying to a
man, “Here, git out of here. You’ve had threepenn’orth of beer
and two bob’s worth of counter lunch. Git out and stop out.”
It was not only possible to get a good meal at the cost of buy-
ing yourself a good pot of beer for threepence, it was impossible
to go anywhere and pay a big price for a good meal. Everything
everywhere was cheap and pretty good in Sydney. In restaurants


of the highest standard the cost of a meal never exceeded five
shillings. There were plenty of sixpenny restaurants round
about, and some of them were excellent. As good, or better,
could be had in them as would cost five or even seven shillings
in London. At only one other place in all the world have I
known a first-class meal cost less than it would in Sydney, and
that was at Ware’s Exchange Hotel, in Adelaide, where only
one shilling was charged for the midday dinner served by the
landlord at the head of his table in the old-fashioned manner.
We four divers were big men with very fair appetites, yet we
never rose from the table at Ellis’s dissatisfied in any way, and
meals there were only ninepence.
The Sydney folk are inclined to be cosmopolitan in their out-
look. There is nothing stand-offish about them in their attitude
to strangers. It is possible to enter into conversation with almost
anybody anywhere at any time, quite apart from those with big
empty pipes, big hopes, and big confidence that a big mug like
yourself will refuse them nothing. These remarks lead me to
the introduction of an affable, friendly old parson who was one
of the crowd at Ellis’s.
I think he would have joined us at our table but for the fact
that there was room for us only. However, he sat close at hand
and joined in the talk now and then. He came to the Coffee
Palace about the time when the Groper found that he was, at
last, legally married to a wife. He introduced himself to us at
dinner one day. He half turned his chair, and was wiping his
mouth with a handkerchief—Ellis’s did not provide napkins—
as he began to speak.
“Pardon me, I do hope I am not intruding, but I cannot resist
an impulse to ask you a little question. May I? You don’t mind?
How kind of you! I have been informed that you gentlemen
are divers bound for some place in search of pearls. Is that so?
How very, very interesting! What an adventurous, hazardous
life to lead! I do so hope that I shall be able to have a little talk
with you before you depart.”
At that sitting he told us his name, and that he came from
Hay, an inland town towards the west. He confided the reason
why he was at Ellis’s Coffee Palace. It was the name that had
attracted him, because he was a life-long teetotaller—but, oh,


how fortunate, for otherwise he would not have had the
unique experience of meeting us! What a lot of interesting
things he hoped to be able to relate when he got back to Hay!
We had all promised Jimmy that we would not tell anybody
we were going to the Solomons, so the parson had to be put off
when he indirectly asked Maryborough, “I suppose you are all
very keen to get away from Sydney, down to the charming coral
isles where you are bound, I believe?” Then, with a roguish
smile, “Perchance some beauteous, lithesome brown maid
anointed with fragrant coco-nut oil, bedecked with garlands, and
with hibiscus blossoms entwined in her wavy hair may entice
you to dance the hula-hula with her. Ah, passionate youth
dancing in the scented air of those magic isles in the moonlight!”
Then, when Maryborough only laughed inanely, as by an after-
thought, “by the way, I don’t think you have told me the name
of the place—may I ask?”
Bluntly Maryborough answered, “Sorry, parson, but we ain’t
tellin’ nobody. You’d better arst Jimmy Wilson; he’s the boss.
He might tell you. Gawd! You can talk. I wish I could talk
like you do. You’d make a bonzer actor, you would. You oughter
arst em for a job round at the Tivoli. Harry Rickards might
give you a start if you was ter arst him. You’re as good as Bland
Holt in The Lights of London. I seen him, so I oughter know
what I’m talkin’ about.”
Oh, hush, my friend, hush! You really must not talk like
that, replied the parson. “You must not take the name of the
Lord in vain. I am surprised that you have not more respect for
my cloth. As for being an actor, I am one in the sense that I
play my part on the world’s stage as, indeed, did our Lord dur-
ing his brief ministry on earth.”
Maryborough jumped in quickly with, “Sorry, parson, it slip
ped out. I was fergettin’ you mightn’t like it. I was dragged up
differen to what you was. But don’t start none er yer sermons;
you don’t like me swearin’, an’ I don’t like you preachin’. That’s
straight wire!”
Very well, Bill, I shall bow to your dictum, for the time being
at all events. But I am sure that you will understand that my
feeble remonstrance at your use of such an expletive implied


ABOVE: Pearls of various sizes
BELOW: Blister inside a gold-lip, in which may he a fine pearl


Stingaree speared, by Cape York natives


nothing but goodfellowship on my part. Let me hear, do, some
more of your exciting experiences.”
“Not just now, parson, another time,” said Maryborough.
“The sun’s over the foreyard, an’ I’m goin’ to look fer Jimmy
an’ have three or four pints of beer. Come on, Clarry. It’s damn
dry work talkin’ ter the parson here. See you another time,
parson. So long.”
When we were in the bar of the Coffee Palace, after the
first two pints had done the disappearing trick, Maryborough
chuckled and said, “He’s a character, that fella, he is.”
“What fella? What character? Who’re you talkin’ about?” in-
quired Jim.
“The parson bloke. He’s a character. He reminds me of a
fella on a sheep-station the other side of the wire-fence where
the birds fly backwards. This fella had just come in an’ hitched
his brumby ter the post, an’ was sittin’ on the edge of the veran-
da havin’ a bit o’ a yarn to himself. Stringybark Joe sees him
squattin’ there, so he goes over an’ says, ‘Just come in? Come
an’ have a taste, mate.’
“ ‘No thanks,’ says the bloke. ‘I never touch it.’
“ ‘Don’t drink?’ says Joe. ‘Do yer smoke?’
“ ‘No,’ says the bloke, ‘I hate the smell of it.’
“ ‘Don’t drink, don’t smoke,’ says Joe. ‘Do yer go with
women?’
“ ‘No,’ says the bloke, ‘I don’t have nothin’ ter do with
women, neither.
“ ‘Well,’ says Joe, ‘d’ye eat grass?’
“ ‘Of course I don’t,’ says the bloke.
“So Joe says ter the bloke, ‘Don’t drink, don’t smoke, don’t
go with women, don’t eat grass—yer neither fit companion fer
man or bloody beast.’ ”
Maryborough laughed at his little tale, and so did one or two
others, but one man chipped in, “That’s got whiskers that has.
They was tellin’ that yarn when me father was goin ’ter school.”
“Oh, was they?” said Maryborough. “Who arst you to get
shovin’ yer oar in? I don’t believe yer never had a father, unless
it was one of them stinkin’ old billygoats what goes rootin’ round
after dark sniffin’ fer things.”
“You don’t call my father a stinkin’ old billygoat and get
L


away with it,” said the interjector, reaching for a pot on the
bar. Before he touched the pot he was on the floor, sent there
by Jimmy.
"I don’t allow a mongrel like you to sling pots about at my
crowd,” said Jim. “Why don’t you get up and fight like a man
instead of reaching for a pot?”
The fellow got up and went to the door and, when half out,
turned to say, “I’ll see you mob again. I’ll bring my mob, and
then you look out.”
When he had gone, Maryborough said to Jimmy, “Aw, Jim,
why didn’ you leave him to me? Aw, I could have fixed him,
pot an’ all, quick an’ lively.”
And he was told, “You don’t know these city fellas yet like
I do, Bill. They’re dirty fighters. You’ve got ter watch ’em.
They’ll do anything, an’ if they get you down they’ll put the
boot in an’ kick you to death as like as not.”
Next day the Parson, Bill, and I had another little meeting.
The Parson hopped off with, “I have heard a little of what
happened after you left me yesterday, Bill. You know, you
chaps have one most admirable quality at least. It is that of
standing up for one another. I warmly approve your conduct
in that respect. All true Christian gentlemen should, at all
times, stand fast together in the cause of their Faith, Truth,
Honesty, and Uprightness. Now, come up to my room, do. I
have a little stock of bottled beer there for your refreshment,
for you must not run away and leave me when you get thirsty
like you did yesterday.” And the parson smiled knowingly.
When we entered his room, he went on, “Now sit down,
Bill, take a seat, Clarry. Smoke as much as you like. Make your-
selves thoroughly at home. Presently we will open a bottle. Ha,
ha, that’s the spirit! All present and correct, everybody jolly as a
sandboy! Now, Bill, I’d like you to tell me something more about
pearls, if you please. How are they made by the unintelligent
oyster? Just think of it! Away down in the murky depths, be-
yond the reach of ordinary mortals, a flabby fish toils day and
night incessantly manufacturing lustrous pearls for the adorn-
ment of beauteous women! Now, come along, Bill, do.”
So Maryborough started out to enlighten the good parson,


me, and himself, too, as he went along the broad track of his
narrative.
“Aw, I don’t know much about it, parson, not like some of
them experts and perfessers say they do. It’s like this, parson,
I never went to no college like you done. All the schoolin’ I got
was how ter look after meself, so’s not to get took down by
three-card spielers, an’ by them conference men I hear tell of
what goes round in the city lookin’ out fer mugs from the way-
back.’’
“Yes, yes,” said the Parson. “Confidence men. I’ve heard tales
anent them, too.”
“That’s right, confidence men. Soft-soap mechanics, I calls
em. Oily, sneakin’ lot of city sharks. Shootin’s too good fer ’em.
Well, yer see, a pearl is made this way. Somethin’ gets inside
the pearl oyster, an’ the oyster can’t heave it out, ’cause it can’t.
So it gets ter work, an’ coats it all over with a kind of cement
which sets hard very quick. We call that kind of cement, what
the oyster uses, nacre. An’ that’s what you fellas calls pearls. I
mean ter say, when the oyster has kep’ on puttin’ coats of its
patent cement on long enough, the thing it started on gets big-
ger an’ bigger until its worth somethin’ ter the pearl-buyer, if
yer unnerstan’ what I mean.”
“I quite understand,” said the parson. “Most interesting. Your
word picture of the process is vivid. You have a gift for express-
ing yourself clearly, Bill. Go on, do, while I open a bottle. I’ll be
listening attentively all the time.”
“Well, I thought I’d have a go on me own at makin’ pearls,
an’ say nothin’ to nobody, an’ keep it quiet—l never told you
nothin’ about me makin’ pearls, did I, Clarry?”
“No. First I heard about it. When was this, Bill?”
“Never mind about when it was, or where it was. We don’t
want none of yer inquisitive questions, Clarry. Yer too fond of
askin’ silly questions, you are. I finds a place with nice gravel
an’ sponge bottom, where nobody never sailed because of the
coral makin’ it very foul, an’ I started makin’ me pearls in me
own pearl fact’ry, an’ I done it this way. I’d sail there with a lot
of gold-lip, an’ by the time I got there they was all o’ them wide
open from bein’ kep’ out o’ the water. So all I has ter do was
to keep ’em open with a small bit er wood, an’ shove five or six


seed pearls inter all of ’em. Then I’d lower ’em down in a bag,
an’ go down after an’ put ’em anyw'here where I thought they’d
be all right. Then all I had to do was ter leave ’em there makin’
pearls fer me as long as I liked. That’s all I had to do. I jus’ had
to wait like the caperalists do when they give a mortgage on a
station. Where’s that beer you been skitin’ about, parson?”
“Here you are, Bill, here you are, all waiting for you. You
deserve it, you deserve a gallon of it. Drink up, and you, too,
Clarry. I didn’t like to interrupt your story, Bill, or you might
have had the beer before.”
“Here’s luck,” said Bill. “An’ yer needn’t mind interruptin’
me with beer. I don’t mind yer interruptin’ me with beer. You
can keep on interruptin’ me as much as you like, parson.”
“All right, Bill, I’ll remember. You remind me, will you,
Clarry? Now, Bill, do go on with your delightful story. I sup-
pose you became most frightfully rich, did you, Bill?”
“You keep yer ears open an’ your mouth shut, parson, an’
don’t get askin’ questions like Clarry here. Always askin’ ques-
tions, he is. When anyone gets askin’ questions I always think
they’re tryin’ ter find out somethin’.”
“Dear, dear, how thoughtless of me! I beg your pardon, Bill.
I really must curb myself. I shall be more discreet, indeed I
shall.”
“All right, parson. I don’t mind yer askin’ questions so long
as they’re sensible questions. Well, I gets an idea in me nut
how to improve the pearls I’m makin’ in me fact’ry. I’d heard
tell of the ‘Southern Cross’—did you ever hear of the famous
‘Southern Cross’ pearl, parson? You did, Clarry.”
“No, Bill, I’m sure I didn’t,” said the parson.
“Well, the Southern Cross was found off the nor’-west coast,
an’ sold in London or somewhere for £IO,OOO. It was shaped
like a cross, that’s all. So I says ter meself, ‘Why not get them
gold-lip I got workin’ fer me ter make me a Southern Cross?’
So nex’ time I’m in Thursday I yabber ter a Malayo I knows a
bit, an’ tells him what I want. Mind you, I don’t let him in on
nothin’, I just tell him what I wants. So the nex’ time I goes in
he has ’em waitin’ fer me. What he does is to cut out about a
dozen little, tiny things not much more’n about a quartern a
inch big. The Malayo cut ’em out er pearlshell, an’ polishes


'em up very goodo. They was all of ’em crucifixus, an’ they
was the dead spit of them all of you parsons an’ priests get
hangin’ round yer necks so’s ter try an’ make people think yer
very holy.”
The hard, seamed dial of Maryborough broadened into a
happy grin, and the parson shook a finger in mock reproof at
Bill.
“Then I takes them little crucifixus out to me pearl fact’ry
an’ plants ’em in me gold-lip, hopin’ for the best. When yer
got a job ter do yer wants ter do it prop’ly, none o’ yer, ‘That’s
near enough’, or ‘That’s good enough fer Gundey’. Yer wants
ter do a job prop’ly if yer goin’ ter do it at all. So I gets a good
lot of fresh gold-lip what was in the best er nick ter do me job
of makin’ me pearl crucifixus. An’ I leaves ’em alone then. I
leaves ’em alone, an’ don’t go near ’em fer about two years. If
you got a man graftin’ fer yer, you don’t want ter go nosin’
round lookin’ ter see how he’s gettin’ on all the time, an’ word-
in’ him how ter do what he’s doin’. Leave him alone, an’ if he
don’t do the job right, kick him out an’ do the job yerself, or
get another man ter do the job. An’ that’s what I done with
me gold-lip what was makin’ me pearls there in me pearl fac-
t’ry. I started a few pink-lip an’ black-lip on the job, too, while
I was about it—how about another swankey at the pig’s ear,
parson? I know you’re a teetotal, but we’re not.”
After the parson has turned it on, and made a few com-
ments, Bill carried on.
“I never went near me fact’ry fer about two years after that,
an’ when I did I was all worked up about it. I was sayin’ to me-
self, ‘Yer never know yer luck in this world, or in a big city.’
For all I knew, some bloody pirate might have been at me fac-
t’ry an’ done me in. There was always the chance that one er
me crew had been blabbin’, you never know!
“Well, I went there an’ picked up some er them, but not the
lot, because the on’y way ter find out how things was goin’ was
to open the shell an’ look, an’ yer can’t do that ter a oyster an
expec’ him ter go on bein’ a oyster. What I got was goodo, but I
see another year or two an’ they would be so good I won t have
ter do no more graft, I’ll be able to sit back pretty then an’ let
some other fool do it for me.”


“Well, I takes me pearls an’ crucifixus, an’ sails inter the
Island, makin’ up me mind all the way ter keep off the booze
while I got them things ter look after. I shows what I got ter
two or three of the buyers what’s always kickin’ round, an’
they gets tailin’ me round like a lot of dogs smellin’ round a
bitch, wantin me ter have drinks, an’ go ter dinner up at the
Grand.” r
Then Maryborough paused to reflect, finish his beer, and
silently held out his glass for another.
Don t stop, Bill, don’t stop. Do go on,” said the parson. “I’m
getting so excited as your story draws to what, I feel, will be
its dramatic conclusion.”
“I will,” returned Bill, “if you’ll hold your jaw, an’ not keep
interruptin’.”
The parson subsided, and Bill went on, “I remember on the
second day bein’ with a dago pearl buyer what calls himself
Florio Damiano what come from some place in Europe where
dagoes come from, an’ he started me off with what he calls a
appertizer. That done it, that appertizer done it. I remember,
not long after, givin’ one er me crucifixus to a barmaid at Mc-
Nulty’s ’cause she got kiddin’ me about me Irish blood. An’ I
give another of them crucifixus to that little freckly kid of the
Sail-maker ’cause he played the mouth-organ so bloody won-
nerful. I loved that kid so much I picked him up an’ sat him
on the bar, an’ give him ev’rything I thought he liked, an’
finished up givin’ him one er me crucifixus.
“The dago was goin’ damn near ravin’ mad, an’ tryin’ ter
stop me, but I was just as mad as him an’ nothin’ can stop me
when I’m like that. I near belted him one in the jaw, an’ he
cleared out, an’ nex’ day I hears how he gets the kid outside
an’ gives him ten bob fer the crucifix what I give him—the
cunnin’ dago cow!
“I remember Streeter’s buyer givin’ me near £5OO fer a parcel
er pearls, an’ he had witnesses so’s I couldn’t deny it after. An’
the Bank Manager had a few he told me about, after I got a bit
sobered up, what I’d forgot I give him to look after for me. An’
there you are! That’s what yer get by goin’ roun’ an’ mixin’ up
with dagoes, an’ drinkin’ appertizers!”
“Oh, Bill,” said the parson, deeply stirred, “oh, Bill! Poor,


poor Bill! What a pity, oh, what a pity! But, at least you had
the great consolation of knowing that you had a reserve of
potential wealth in your pearl factory. You know, those beauti-
ful words of Thomas Gray are strangely apropos to your story:
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathom'd caves of ocean bear:
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Do you know that poem, Bill? Very appropriate, don’t you
think?”
‘ I don’t know no po’try, on’y the words of a few songs,” said
Maryborough Bill. “Tell the parson that one you made up fer
Bill Smith when it was his birthday, Clarry.”
I looked towards the parson, and he was polite enough to
say, “Yes, do.”
“Bill Smith was a friend of mine,” I explained to the parson,
“and I sent him this on his birthday.
The World was young, with convulsions tom,
When the first of all the Smiths was born.
Each moment since this helpless Earth has yelped
While into life another Smith is helped."
“Ah, yes, very good, very good,” said the parson. “And was
the friendship between Bill Smith and yourself of a lasting
character, may I ask?”
“I was goin’ ter say,” said Maryborough, “when you two
have done yappin’, them beautiful words you spouted shows
the bloke what wrote ’em didn’t know the first thing about
pearlshell, or nothin’ else either what grows. Anyone could’ve
told him things don’t grow nowhere, on land or in the water,
without they gets sunlight. They all wants sunlight—excep’
moss, an’ mushrooms, an’ things like them. An’ pearlshell wants
tides as well as sunlight, so it’s no good lookin’ for pearls in
dark caves, an’ it’s no good lookin’ fer nothin’ else excep’ p’rhaps
a fish. Poets ought ter know better’n ter write such potty stuff.”
“Of course you went back to your factory, your ingenious
pearl factory, when you had recovered sufficiently from the
buffets you had received? Did you achieve some measure of
success on your return, may I ask?”


“No, I never got nothin’/’ said Maryborough. “That bloody
dago pirate nosed out one er me crew, chartered a lugger, an’
got a diver, an’ sailed out while I was on the burst. When I
gets ter me fact’ry, an’ goes down, there’s nothin’ left; ev’ry-
thing cleaned right out. But there’s a very funny thing I see.
Whiles I was lookin’ about, an’ swearin’ somethin’ bloody
awful, a crab, a big crab with a cross marked deep on his back
like it was cut in, kep’ followin’ me about wavin’ his claws
over his head. When I took notice I thinks, ‘Hullo, here’s a
bloomin’ crab wants a fight’, but I didn’ kill him ’cause he’s
the on’y funny thing down there.
“When I stops fer a bit the crab’d come along wavin’ his
claws an’ try ter climb up me leg. The second time he trys
ter climb up me leg I holds me foot out so’s I can see what’s
goin’ on, an’ I’m damned if that bloody crab wasn’ holdin’ one
er me crucifixus in his claw, wavin’ it at me! Now, yer needn’
laugh. It’s gospel truth as sure as I’m sittin’ here. That crab’d
been followin’ me about ter give me one er me crucifixus what
he had found. Straight wire! That’s true as each word in your
Bible, parson.’’
“I’m not laughing, Bill, far from it,” said the parson. “Identi-
cally the same thing happened, the same miraculous restoration
of a lost crucifix may be found in the chronicles relating to that
most remarkable man Saint Francis Xavier. While in a small
boat Saint Francis lost his precious crucifix when dipping it
into the ocean to still the turbulance caused by the wailing,
raging elements. The storm ceased, but the good Saint Francis
had the misfortune to lose his precious crucifix in the flood.
When, however, he at last reached the far-distant shore, a crab
came to him from the sea bearing in its uplifted claw the lost
crucifix.”
“Whalin’, did yer say?” said the interested Maryborough.
“I did hear tell of a yarn in the Bible what says how a bloke
called Jonah falls over the side, an’ gets swallowed up by a
hell of a big whale, an’ after he’d been there fer a week they
cuts him out alive, but I didn’ know the Bible had that one of
yours. I must get hold er that book an’ read it.
“Well, we’ll be off now, parson. Get some more beer in an’


we’ll come along an’ have another yabba-yabba some time if yer
feels like havin’ another yabba-yabba some time. So long.”
As Maryborough was rising, the parson delayed him with,
Wait a minute Bill, just a minute. I particularly wished to
see some of your pearls, now that I have this fortunate chance.
Bring some down now and show them to me like a good fellow,
will you? Please do, Bill.”
I can t. Not now, anyhow, said Bill. “I haven’t got none ter
show yer. I give ’em all ter Jimmy ter look after for me, an’ I
don’ know where he’s got ’em stowed. Yer didn’ think I’d be
goin’ round Sydney with pearls hanging’ roun’ me like dags
roun an old stag-ram s bum, did yer? Ask Clarry here ter show
yer some.”
I hastened to say that the few I had were shut up in a bank.
“Oh, never mind then,” said the parson. “But I am so disap-
pointed. I did so very much want to see some genuine pearls,
shown to me by the very diver who had torn them from the
vasty deep. Never mind. But perhaps you, or Clarry, may let
me see a few before you depart?”
“Righto, parson, we will if we gets a chance. So long.” And
we left the parson and went up to our room.
When we got there we found both our rooms as upset as
we were to see them like that. It’s bad enough to have your
room searched by thieves, but what makes the victim ramping
mad is to see the way the low swine have thrown things round.
But none of us had anything of great value there so we did not
make a song about it. On the contrary, we said nothing to any-
body except to Jimmy, and the Groper. We just got to work
and tidied up, and made things shipshape ourselves.
Jimmy Wilson had been out to the races. When he came
back we told him. We went up to our rooms, and, after a bit,
when Jimmy had made sure that he had lost nothing, he said
he had had “mug’s luck” that day. He had lost nothing out at
the races, and lost nothing out of his room. It must have been
pearls “they” were after, he said, but it was funny how anyone
knew about us having any. Perhaps the Groper had been open-
ing his gob too wide. But when I told Jimmy about me giving
the pearl to the Groper’s young missus for a wedding present he


said, “That’s it. One of them crowd down at the Rocks has been
doin’ a bit of fishing. That’s it, sure enough. Never mind, they
got nothing: an’ now they know it’s no good diving for pearls
in Ellis’s Coffee Palace. What about me, an’ you two, going
along to the theatre tonight? Jakaloo?”
“Jakaloo,” agreed Maryborough, and that settled it.


CHAPTER xii
WILLIAM DUNPHY, ESQ, J.P.
That evening at dinner we talked of little else than the vari-
ous shows that were on in Sydney at that time. Jimmy
had an evening paper from which he quoted. There was Charles
Holloway at the Theatre Royal in The Work Girl; Dante, “The
Juggling Genius”, at the Palace Theatre; George Lauri in The
Geisha at Her Majesty’s; and the MacMahons at the Lyceum
in East Lynne. Those were the shows at the theatres. Then, of
course, there was the Tivoli, where there was always a good
variety show run by Harry Rickards.
Jimmy read out the headings of the four acts of The Work
Girl, and sweet William grabbed the paper from him. Then he
read them out to us again. He said, “Shut up, Jimmy. Listen to
this—the firs’ ac’ is ‘The Greed of Gold’, then’s a innerval, an’
after the innerval comes the nex’ an’ it’s ‘The Momen’s uv a
Broken Heart’. Shut up, Jimmy, an’ listen. Go on, keep quiet
a minute while I read this out so’s Clarry’ll unnerstan’. Then
there’s a innerval, Clarry, so’s we can have a drink. Then they
shoves on the third ac’ an’ it’s called ‘The Love that Lasts’, an’
the nex’ ac’ is the fourth, an’ they calls it ‘The Faith Rewarded’,
an’ that’s the last. I vote we all go an’ see that one, The Work
Girl. I bet yer all the tea in China ter a pinch er dog’s lime
it’s a bonzer show. What yer say, Jim, what yer say we go ter
that one? I bet that’ll do us.”
So we went to the Theatre Royal and saw The Work Girl.
There seemed to be broken hearts all over the theatre. It was,
just as Maryborough had predicted, a good show.
The Theatre Royal is at the corner of King and Castlereagh
Streets, about three blocks from Ellis’s, so it was but a short


walk in a straight line from one to the other. Almost as soon
as we left the theatre Maryborough stopped to talk to a couple
of rather attractive, very young women. Neither Jimmy nor I
had any inclination for a woman just then, so we walked on
slowly. It was quite a while after we got back to our hotel before
Mr Maryborough Bill walked in with the explanation that both
the young women considered five shillings not enough.
“A bit grasping, Bill,” I said.
“No they wasn’,” replied Bill, “If they was they’d have taken
the five bob.”
About an hour later Bill came to my room and roused me. He
sat on the side of my bed and earnestly commanded me not to
make a noise.
“Come on, wake up,” he said. “Don’t get talkin’ loud an’
makin’ a row, an’ wakin’ Jimmy. He’s asleep, an’ I don’t want
ter wake him. Now listen, I wasn’ kept talkin’ to them two
young molls. I never wastes me time talkin’ ter no women no
matter how young they are. It’s take it or leave it, that’s me. No,
I met a man after I found I couldn’ get one of them molls fer
five bob, an’ we got talkin’, an’ I’ve got ter meet him termorrer.
Now, you listen. I want yer ter len’ me a few of yer pearls jes’
fer a bit—on’y fer about a hour. Shut up, an’ listen. They’ll be
as right as the bank. It’s on’y fer a hour. There’s nothin’ ter
worry about; I’ll see yer gets ’em back all right. You can go ter
the bank, or wherever yer keeps ’em, when it opens in the
mornin’, an’ put ’em all back in a hour’s time jes’ as yer gives ’em
ter me. I’m on a good thing, the bes’ thing ever I got onter.
Now see ter do that fer me firs’ thing in the mornin’, an’ don’t
say a word ter Jimmy about it—l don’t want him ter know. All
right, I’ll be off now, an’ see yer don’t ferget. Firs’ thing in the
mornin’. Don’t ferget.” And Bill started to creep from the room
like a mastiff stalking a rabbit.
“Hey,” I called softy. “Hey, wait a bit! Come back here, you
silly cow. What’s this good thing you’re on? You must think
I’m a mug if you think I’m going to hand over damn near all
I’ve got in this world without knowing something about it.
What have you got hold of, Bill?”
“What d’yer want ter know for? I can’t tell yer now or p’rhaps
I might. I promised the bloke I wouldn’ yap about it ter no


body. Isn’ it good enough that I’m askin’ yer ter lend me yer
pearls jes’ fer a hour? You don’t think I’d clear out with ’em, do
yer? Don’t be a fool, Clarry. You get them pearls like I tol’ yer,
an’ I’ll see yer get a good cut out of it.”
“Not good enough,” I said. “Go and get your pearls, and
give them away, or lend them, or do what you like with them,
but don’t come waking me up just to ask me for mine, because
you’re not going to get them now or any other time. I may
be the fool you think I am, but I’m not such a fool as all that.”
Maryborough Bill argued, threatened, and cajoled. He ap-
pealed to my sense of mateship, becoming quite affectionate.
He told me what a character I was, shaking me roughly in the
bed as he appealed to any dormant feelings of decency, if I
had any at all, to wake up. I told him that he was a Mulga
Mulligan, and to get to blazes. So anxious was Bill to have his
way that at last he weakened. Making me promise “on my
dying oath” that I would say nothing to anybody, he got to
work on his yarn about what had happened to him in King
Street after Jimmy and I had left him with the two women.
Maryborough said that as he started after us a man in front
of him dropped a pocket-book as he pulled a handkerchief
from his pocket. The pocket-book fell to the pavement with a
good solid clunk, and a couple of florins rolled from it. Bill
picked it up and, as it was unfastened, saw that it was fairly
stuffed with paper-money; it was a little fortune that Bill had
picked up.
Of course, Bill hurried after the owner who was walking
quickly and gave him his pocket-book. That man thanked Bill
a lot. In fact, his emotion on recovering his property, and his
astonishment at the extraordinary honesty shown by Bill nearly
overwhelmed him, but it did not wreck his speech. Reginald
Sweeny was his name—Reginald! What a name to give a
fellow—nearly as bad as Clarence!—and he came from Hay, the
same place that the parson came from. Oh, he was a tall,
skinny sort of chap with dark glasses, and his clothes looked
all right; but never mind about that, what did that matter? Mr
Sweeny was one of the churchwardens at Hay, and taught
children in the Sunday-school. The reason why Mr Sweeny
had such a lot of money with him that night was because it


had been handed to him that afternoon too late to put in the
bank. The money consisted of donations collected in the metro-
politan Sunday-schools for the Orphanage at Hay, Mr Sweeny
being one of the trustees.
Mr Sweeny told Bill that a fabulously rich squatter who had
owned one of the biggest sheep stations in the continent, not
far from Hay, had died not long before leaving all his money
to him. This squatter, the late Bernard O’Hara, had a great
admiration for all honest men, being one himself. In fact, he
thought so highly of honesty, uprightness, and truthfulness that
he had stipulated in his will that the principal legatee—meaning
Mr Sweeny—should search diligently for men of integrity and,
having found at least one each year, reward them handsomely.
Of course, men of good sound character, such as the late Mr
Bernard O’Hara so much admired, would be rewarded in
heaven, but it was also desired by the testator—meaning Mr
O’Hara—that they should get something while they were alive
and able to enjoy it. Did I understand? Also, if Mr Sweeny
failed to carry out this important injunction in the will he would
forfeit everything, and the money would go to the Hospital for
the Insane, because such a lot of good honest people were mad.
Mr Sweeny told Bill that diving was beneath a man like
him; he should be above that sort of thing. What he proposed
to do, to reward Bill for returning his pocket-book, was to give
him a cash advance of, say, £2OO and make him the manager
of the immense sheep station, out at Hay, with a salary of £BOO
a year. Bill fairly wriggled when he told me that. And as soon
as things were squared up, and he was settled down, Bill said,
there would be a job for me as book-keeper on the station.
“You won’t be no good at nothin’ else, ’cause yer not much
good at ridin’ a horse, an’ about all yer know about a sheep is
how to eat ’em. We’ll learn yer to shear, an’ sort the wool, so’s
yer won’t be as useless as yer are now.”
Mr Sweeny had explained to Bill how necessary it was that
they should have the utmost trust in one another, for otherwise
the cordial relations that should exist might become clouded
with unbecoming doubt. That being the case, he proposed that
Bill should lend him whatever he could in order to prove that
he had no doubts at all about him. Mr Sweeny said that he


would not keep whatever Bill trusted him with for more than a
few minutes; he would just walk along the street and come
back. Bill told Mr Sweeny he didn’t have much cash, but he
had a few pearls and perhaps they would do. Mr Sweeny said
they were just as good to him as cash, and he told Bill to run
away and get them at once. He said, “Never put off till tomor-
row what may be done tonight.”
When the impossibility of doing that was explained, Mr
Sweeny made an appointment for ten-thirty sharp outside Ellis’s
next morning. Then they’d said good night, and here he was,
going down on his knees almost, asking me for the loan of a few
lousy pearls just for a few minutes so as he would not lose the
chance of a lifetime.
“An’ another thing,” said Bill, “he’s goin’ back ter Hay ter-
morrer, so there ain’t no time ter lose. You’ll lend them ter me,
won’t yer, Clarry?”
“Bill,” I answered, “you said Mr Sweeny comes from Hay.
What about going to the parson first thing in the morning and
asking him if he knows Mr Sweeny? We won’t tell him any-
thing about what we are going to do; we’ll just ask him if he
knows Mr Sweeny. Then, if he says he’s all right I’ll go and
get my pearls out of where they are and lend them to you for
a while.”
Bill agreed to that slowly because he did not like Mr Sweeny
thinking that he did not trust him without the parson’s saying
he was all right. Then I told him to buzz off, for it was past
three o’clock and I wanted some sleep.
At breakfast next morning, or rather that morning, the parson
was sitting, as usual, close to us at the nearest table. When I
asked him if we might see him for a while after breakfast he
cordially said, “By all means. I am, as you should know, al-
ways at your service. But come up as soon as you have finished
your breakfast, because I am leaving town this morning to spend
a few days with my old friend the Archbishop, at his Retreat in
the Blue Mountains.”
Jimmy remarked, “What’s the mysterious business you two’ve
got on together. I see Bill winkin’ at you, Clarry. What’s on.
Ain’t I in on this?”
And Bill tactfully answered, “We’ll let you in at lunch time,


Jimmy. You shut up, an’ mind yer own business till then. We
don’t want nobody shovin’ their oar in till we arsts them.”
On our way upstairs to see the parson after breakfast, I re-
marked to Bill, ”1 still don’t quite understand why Mr Sweeny
should want you to trust him with anything valuable, Bill. Why
should that make him think any the more of you?”
“You’re too thick in the head, that’s why you don’t unner-
stan’. You’ll never be more’n what you are now, an’ that’s damn
little enough,” Bill said in his simple but direct manner. “Ain’t
he goin’ ter trust me with lookin’ after near three hundred
thousand sheep on this here run of his? Wannindi’s the name
it’s got, an’ it’s one er the biggest sheep runs there is. Besides,
he’s one er them Justisus of the Peace; when you write to him
you got ter put ‘Mr Reg Sweeny, J.P.’ on yer letter. Now d’yer
unnerstan’? An’ he tol’ me if I got along all right in me new
job, he’ll get me made a J.P., too. What d’yer think er that lot?
That knocks yer bandy, don’t it?”
“Yes, it does,” I said. “It knocks me bandy all right. I can see
it all sticking out in front of me—‘Mr William Dunphy, J.P.’
What next, Bill? Is that all?”
Maryborough went straight to the point as soon as we entered
the parson’s room. “Cornin’ down King Street last night,” he
began, “soon after six bells, I got inter a talk with a skinny sort
er bloke what looks like he been starvin’ himself. What I was
goin’ ter arst yer was, did yer ever know a skinny sort er bloke
from up your way, he says he come from up your way, what
kicked round Hay a lot he says, named Reggie Sweeny? He
says he come from there, so I thought p’rhaps yer might’ve
bumped inter him some time or other.”
“Mr Reg Sweeny? Why, of course I know him,” said the
parson. “There is no man better known in Hay than he is.
Goodness! He is one of our churchwardens, a pillar not only
of the church, but of society as well. He frequently takes his
seat on the Bench in order to dispense justice, despite his many
business interests. Know Reg Sweeny? Rather! I should say I do
know him.”
“Thanks, parson, I jus’ thought I’d arst yer if yer knew him.
He’ll be along here before long ter see me. He says he’ll be
along ter see me outside round about half pas’ ten.”


“Oh, did he? Then you must bring him up here. He cannot
know that I am in town or he surely would have called. You
must bring him to my room, Bill. I simply cannot depart with-
out having seen dear old Reg. You will promise to do that,
won’t you, Bill?”
“Yes,” said Bill, cautiously remembering his other promise
to Mr Sweeny. “I’ll tell him you’re here.”
Presently we said good-bye to the parson, in case we did not
see him again before he went off to the Archbishop’s Retreat
in the Blue Mountains. Then we loafed round the entrance,
looking at the scenery in King Street, until it was time for me
to go for my little parcel of pearls. I told Bill I did not want
him with me because some people might get it into their silly
heads that he was a friend of mine if they saw us together, so
Bill laughed and stopped where he was.
On the way, my so-called brain thought out a scheme to
avoid any accident to my ill-gotten wealth. When I collected my
pearls I asked for a couple of those small envelopes used by
bankers for holding small coins, such as threepenny and six-
penny pieces, in £1 lots.
Then I called at a novelty shop and bought some small glass
beads, and that set me up. Back at the joint, I bumped Bill
and said, “Here’s my lot, where’s yours? Let’s have them. I want
them to put with these.”
Sniffing suspiciously, Bill said, “What’s yer hurry? What
yer want ’em for? Hand yours over ter me, that’s what yer got
ter do. I’m not lendin’ yer mine, you’re lendin’ me yours.
What’s wrong with yer?”
“It’s a pity you’re not more suspicious of other people in-
stead of being suspicious of a shipmate like you are. You’re al-
ways barking up the wrong tree. D’ye think I want to steal
them? I only want them for a minute. I’m not going to lend
them to another man like you are. Never mind what I want
them for. I’ll only be a minute. You’ll know yours again, won’t
you? Come on, hand them over, and don’t be such a damn fool.”
Bill gave me his three or four, and I ran up to my room, leav-
ing him there to keep his weather eye open for Mr Sweeny.
Once in my room I emptied the pearls out on to the bed, and
did the same with the beads, so as to compare them. Selecting
M


beads of about the same size and number as the pearls, I put
them in one of the envelopes, sealed it, and made a cross in
pencil across the seal. The f earls I put in the other envelope,
unsealed. Then I went downstairs to Bill, deaf to his inquiries
as to what fool business I had been doing.
Right on time, Mr Sweeny came smartly to the tryst. He
looked at me keenly, shrewdly, when Bill introduced me to
him. But when he grasped the fact that I was contributing nearly
all the pearls that Bill was about to entrust, merely temporarily,
to him he smiled at me nicely.
“Ha,” he said. “Ha, that’s fine. I can see at once, Bill, what
a fine, honest, trustworthy man your friend is. We mustn’t
overlook a man like this when we find one. You’re the kind of
man I’m always searching for,” he said, addressing me. “We
mustn’t forget you, we must think of something we can do for
you.” Then to Bill, “Well, come on, where are the pearls? Let
me see them.” And when Bill brought them out of his pocket
in the envelope Mr Sweeny peered at them, and stirred them
round with an inquiring finger. “H’m,” he said, “they look all
right, they look all right. I suppose these are genuine pearls?
These are genuine, are they? Yes, all right. Well, you put them
in my pocket yourself, Bill, and then nobody can say I took
them from you, can they?” Mr Sweeny laughed pleasantly,
while he held wide his coat so that Bill might put the envelope
into his inside pocket.
It was then that Mr Sweeny was told that the parson wished
to see him most particularly before he left Sydney that morn-
ing to go on his visit to the Archbishop up in the Blue Moun-
tains.
If ever I saw a man look surprised I saw one then. Mr
Sweeny positively gaped. Then, recovering, he said, “Why,
how on earth did he know I was in town? Who could have told
him I was in Sydney?”
Bill said, “Well, you told me you was from Hay, and the
parson comes from Hay, an’ when we was talkin’ I jes’ tells
him I seen a man from Hay las’ night an’ was talkin’ ter him.
There’s no harm in that, is there? An’ when he arsts me his
name I says ‘Mr Reggie Sweeny’, an’ he says at once, ‘Why, I
know Reg Sweeny. I didn’ know he was in town. You must


be sure an’ bring him up to my room/ he says. He says, ‘Make
sure an’ bring him to my room if you’ve got ter drag him up
here be the scruff uv the neck.’ There’s no harm in that, is
there?”
“No, Bill, there’s no harm done. On the contrary I’m de-
lighted. What a pity I did not know before. And now I come
to think of it, it is just the very thing to suit me, for now we
have a reputable witness to our little transaction. You see, Bill,
and you, too, Clarry, that a man like myself cannot be too
careful, holding, as I do, such a prominent position in society.
I’ve got to watch every step I take or the malicious tongues of
scandal will be set wagging. Now, Bill, you lead the way, and
I’ll go up and visit my very dear old friend.”
Mr Sweeny and the parson were delighted to see one an-
other, and asked a lot of questions about a lot of things. The
parson told his old friend what a charming companion Bill was,
and put in a good word for me, too. When he learnt that Mr
Sweeny intended to include Bill as a beneficiary in the will of
the late Mr Bernard O’Hara he jumped from his chair to shake
Bill by the hand, and heartily congratulate him upon his ex-
ceeding good fortune. “Oh, I am so glad, I am so glad,” he said.
Presently Mr Sweeny said, “I think we’ll finalize that little
matter of your trust in my integrity, Bill, and then we can go
on to more important business.” Turning to the parson, he ex-
plained. “Bill is going to go through the usual formula, of
trusting me for a few minutes with a parcel of valuables, that
you know so well. Right, Bill, get on with it.”
Bill brought out the pearls from his pocket. I reached for
them, saying, “Here, give them here a sec.” I took them from
Bill and let them run out of the envelope, carefully, on to my
doubled handkerchief, spread on the table.
“Look as much as you like, but don’t touch,” I said. “There’s
a lot of money lying there on that handkerchief. There’s near
enough to about £3OOO in that lot lying there in front of you.
Now, Bill and I together are trusting Mr Sweeny with these
while he goes out of the room for a few minutes. But so none
of them get loose, as such little things might do easily, I am
going to put them in the envelope while you watch me, and
seal it.”


No objection was made to that, though Mr Sweeny breathed
hard. So I picked up the pearls, one by one, dropping them in
the envelope and, when that was done, I licked the gum, stuck
the flap down with a good slap, and then made a cross with
my pencil across the seal.
And then I clumsily dropped the envelope down by my feet.
Everybody ducked their heads to look, but, quick as they were,
I was quicker. I placed the envelope on the table seal up, show-
ing the cross mark in pencil. “There you are, Bill, carry on. I m
finished with it.”
“All right,” said Bill. “Now you’re finished muckin’ about
with it in that clever way of yours you’ve always got—always
showin’ how damn clever you are, always showin’ other people
what yer can do. Here you are, Mr Sweeny, where’s yer pocket?
Goodo! Now, how long do we have ter wait fer yer to come
back?”
“Oh, only a few minutes, Bill. Good-bye, old man,” he said
to the parson. “Very glad indeed to have seen you. Don’t forget
to write and let me know when you expect to get back to Hay,
so that I may be there to meet you.” And to Bill, “You two had
better go to the bar and have just two drinks while I am away.
You’ll just have time for two. I guess you’ll need them. Well,
ta-ta, everybody.” And Mr Sweeny, stepping briskly, started
on his walk with what would seem to many people a little for-
tune in his pocket.
“Now, Bill, now Clarry,” said the parson, pulling out his
watch and looking at it, “I must fly. My word! I haven t any time
to spare. I must really fly. How the time does go when we are
having an agreeable meeting with friends! I’ll just be able to
catch my train if I hurry. Run down—no, take the lift, Bill, like
a good fellow, and call a cab for me, will you? I’ll say good-bye
to you down there.”
Both Bill and I went down to get a cab, and had no sooner
got one than the parson came hurrying out with his gear. He
tumbled in at once, gave directions to the driver, and, as the
cab got under way, called to us, “Good-bye, you dear fellows.
I'll be back in a few days. Cheerio!” And the parson was off.
As we turned towards the bar, Bill said, “Good-hearted sort
er good fella, him. Not a bad sort er silly cow, that parson. Pity


all parsons wasn’ like him; if they was, a fella might go an’
lissen to ’em jawin’ sometimes. I wonder how long Mr Sweeny’ll
be cartin’ them stones round Sydney. I’m beginnin’ ter think
he’s a bit uv a character, too.”
“They’re characters all right, both of ’em,” I said.
We drank the two pints of beer Mr Sweeny had prescribed
for us without loss of time, and then went outside, also without
loss of time, but there was no sign of him. By and by half an hour
had passed, and still Mr Sweeny had not turned up. Next it
was lunch-time, and Jimmy came dawdling along without a
care in the world by the look of him. Jimmy was always going
away by himself somewhere; if it wasn’t races it was tabbies,
or something.
“Have you two been hangin’ round here all the morning?”
he asked. “Can’t you find somethin’ better ter do than hang
roun’ in front of a pub all day? What’s up, Bill? You look like
something’s gone wrong. What’s up? I remember now you
was goin’ ter tell me somethin’ about some mysterious business
you two had on, an’ didn’t want ter tell me nothin’ about. You
was goin’ ter tell me at lunch-time—well, it’s lunch-time now,
out with it. What is it? What’s gone wrong?”
Jimmy got the story from Bill mostly, and it did not take long
for him to conclude that disaster had overtaken our pearls, our
Bill, and myself. He started off gently, first dropping his jaw so
that the deep breath he drew would not be impeded by a closed
mouth. Bending well forward, staring with earnest intent at
Bill, and giving me some share, too, he selected some words and
let us have them.
“You bloody fools, you bloody, bloody fools! After all you ve
been told! Haven’t I laid in me bed at night after the gas was
turned out, when I should’ve gone asleep instead of wastin’ me
time talkin’ ter yer? Haven’ I, haven’ I, haven’ I told you, until
I got sick er tellin’ yer, about spielers an’ confidence men?
What’s the good er me tryin’ ter educate yer? What’s the good
er me tryin’ ter do anything ? An’ now you’ve been an give a
lousy spieler me pearls what I give yer because I thought you
were a pal er mine, an’ because I thought you was grown up,
an’ gettin’ educated. An’,” turning to me, “what about you ?
Haven’t you got no sense, lettin’ Bill get took down like this?


You should have learnt something about a town. You was
brought up in a town, wasn’t yer? I can’t go away an’ leave yer
ter look after Bill fer half' a day, I can’t. You’re not ter be
trusted.”
Jimmy paused long enough for him to take off his hat and
throw it violently on the pavement. The loungers in front of
Ellis’s moved nearer in anticipation. Then Jimmy jumped on
his hat a lot, and finished by kicking it as far as possible. Several
passers-by stopped then and joined the big ring of people form-
ing round us, while those more distant began running towards
us.
“Come on,” shouted Jimmy, “I’ll fight yer, I’ll fight yer one
at a time or both together. No, it’s no good tellin’ me ter be
quiet. I go away an’ leave yer fer half a day an’ come back ter
fin’ yer’ve made a holy show er yerselves, an’ me, too. What’s
the good er me bringin’ yer all the way from Thursday Island,
an’ talkin’ ter yer, an’ educatin’ yer, if I can’t go away and leave
yer fer half a day an’ not come back an’ fin’ yer’ve made a fool
er yerselves? It’s all me own fault, I shouldn’ have brought yer
ter a place like this. I should’ve took yer ter the zoo an’ put yer
in a cage, with a coco-nut ter keep yer company, so’s nothin’ or
nobody can’t hurt yer, or rob yer of yer coco-nut.”
One of the boys in the crowd suddenly gave cry, “Red light,
mister, here comes a john.”
Jimmy had sense enough to go inside at once, take the lift,
and go to his room, though two or three in the crowd called
to him, “Don’t be a dingo, stick it out.”
Anybody mixed in a street row who stays behind in order to
argue with a policeman is a fool. Jimmy was no fool. Bill and I
buzzed off, too, but I firmly believe that Bill, and those in the
crowd, disapproved of the action taken by Jimmy. It was too
tame, an anti-climax.
I stopped Maryborough from going at once in search of Jimmy
by reminding him that our rooms were in a hell of a mess after
the thieves had turned them over, and there was no sense in
going up there now and getting them all messed up again.
Better to let Jimmy quieten down a bit. Bill saw there was reason
in what I said, so I led the way to the room behind the bar.
Pausing for a few moments on our way, Bill ruminated on


current topics passing from parson to pearls, pearls to Sweeny,
Sweeny to murder, and so on, like a butterfly flitting from one
scented blossom to another. Coming to rest on the disappointing
retreat made by Jimmy, Bill expressed amazement at such con-
duct before the eyes of all King Street.
“I wouldn’ have believed it,” he said. “I can’t get hold of it.
Why he didn’ stop an’ fight it out’s got me beat. The three of
us, me an’ Jim an’ you, could give a good go ter any cops they
got in Sydney. Why he cleared out’s got me beat, with all them
crowd lookin’ on, too.’’
“Well, Bill,” I said, “I think it’s like this. Jimmy’s in Sydney
on a pretty important job. Justus Scharffe, round in York Street,
is the agent for that Dutchman down in the Solomons, and if
they heard that we three had got shot in for mixing things with
the police that might mean the end of everything. Justus
Scharffe wouldn’t have anything more to do with us, and then
where would we be? We’d be here for God knows how long,
and I think Jimmy took a tumble to that when the kid sang
out, and did a duck like a sensible man. He cleared out like any
gentleman would do, rather than get dragged before a magis-
trate, and perhaps sent to jail.”
By this time, still talking, we had made the bar parlour.
“H’m, p’rhaps yer right. Yes, I think yer right now I come ter
think it over. It’s ’cause he’s a gen’leman. Jimmy always was a
gen’leman. He’s not like me an’ you, he’s a gen’leman.”
“Funny sort er gen’leman,” said one of the men in the room.
“Funny sort er gen’leman he is, runnin’ away soon’s a bit er
trouble crops up, an’ leavin’ his mates ter face it be theirselves.”
Bill smacked him at once with both hands. As the man did
not have the sense to go down, Bill bored into him giving him
quick, heavy punches until the man dropped.
“Jimmy’s a gen’leman, but I’m not,” gritted Maryborough.
“Any more er yer like a bit er me?”
“Bill,” and I turned him roughly to face me, “leave this for
a bit. We’ll get a couple of bottles of beer and go up and see
how Jimmy is. Leave this till later. If there’s any man eager
to get smacked he knows where to look for us. Come on.”
“Aw, all right,” said sweet William, looking round to make
sure that his services were not in urgent demand.


We found Jimmy lying on his bed, reading a book with one
band and smoking with the other. He put down the book,
staring at the bottles. His first words were reproachful.
“You’ve been a long time coming with that beer. I’m that
dry I can hardly raise a whisper. What’s been keepin’ yer? You
musta known I was up here all by meself, an’ yer stop down
there pourin’ beer down yer necks till yer stink of it. I can smell
it from here. Open one er them bottles an’ give us a drink
quick, or I’ll get up an’ knock yer.”
I had the bottle between my knees, and had just drawn the
cork with a loud, heartening plop, when a knock sounded on
the door.
“See who’s there,” said Jimmy rather nervously.
“It’s on’y the lift-boy,” said Bill, obeying instructions. “He’s
found yer hat, an’ brought it up to give it back. Shall I let him
in?
The lift-boy was admitted with the battered hat. Jimmy in-
spected both without enthusiasm, while the boy made a weak
effort to make the thing he held look like a hat.
“I give it to one of the bedroom maids, Nelly, an’ arst her
to straighten it a bit afore I brought it along up here,” said the
boy, “but she said she couldn’ do nothin’ with it. She said it
mighta been a hat one time fer all she knew, but a dead China-
man would have a fit er appleplexy if he had to wear it now on
top of his pigtail. I’ve had a go at it, mister, but it don’t look too
good, do it?”
“Put it on, sonny, so’s we can see what it looks like.”
The boy did so, and grinned. We all grinned.
“Righto, keep it on, it’s yours. Bill, give the young gen’leman
two bob fer wearin’ my hat.”
And the boy went away with the hat on his head, leaving a
more cheerful atmosphere behind him.
After the three of us had emptied one bottle I went to the
door saying, “I’ll be back in a minute.” I went to my room, and
there I capsized the pearls from the little envelope in my pocket
on my bed, picked out those that belonged to Bill, put mine
back in my pocket, and returned to my mates. Shaking Bill’s
pearls in my hand so that they rattled lightly I held them to his
ear.


Whats that you got, Clarry? What’ve yer got now?” they
both asked as with one voice.
I answered them by throwing the pearls on the foot of the
bed, whence they promptly rolled to the hollow occupied by
Jimmy’s big stern. Jimmy jumped out of bed as though stung,
and collided with Bill who was diving at the bed. In a flash
they knew what was there, for they held in their hands the
pearls they had believed, till then, were gone for ever.
“How’d yer git ’em, Clarry? Where’d they come from?” said
Bill.
“He’s had ’em all the time. Haven’ yer, Clarry?” from Jim.
“The cunnin’ cow’s been playin’ a trick on us.” Then another
thought struck him. “My God! What a suck in for Mr Reggie
Sweeny of Hay. What a pain in the belly he musta got. He got
away with something. What was it yer give him, Clarry? Tell
us how yer did it. Open that other bottle, Bill. Tell us how yer
did it, Clarry.”
In a few words I explained the simplicity of the deception
practised upon Mr Sweeny, how the works of genius for the
good of mankind are often based on the most simple ideas, and
how easy it was to substitute the envelope containing glass
beads for the one with pearls when I ducked under the table.
“Why didn’ yer tell us before, down in the street, instead of
lettin’ me kick up such a shindy? You could’ve done that, couldn’
yer? Why didn’ yer tell us then?” was the natural enough ques-
tion from Jimmy.
“Yes,” chimed in sweet William. “I shouldn’ wunner if you
haven’ done me out er me job out at Wannanindi. Too bloody
clever, you are. That’s why Mr Sweeny never come back. See,
Jim? Don’t yer see? When Mr Sweeny opens that envelope an’
finds nothin’ but a lot of lousy glass beads he’d say, I’m done
with that lot. To hell with ’em.’ Then he wouldn’ come back;
he’d make tracks fer Hay. Now we know why he never come
hack.” And poor disappointed Bill looked savagely at me.
“Shut up, you damn fool,” Jimmy barked at him. “If Clarry’d
liked he could’ve stuck ter the lot, his an’ yours, too, an’ no-
body’d been the wiser. He needn’ have let on what he’d done.
That’s what yer should’ve done, Clarry. Look what thanks yer
get from our beautiful Bill for gettin’ his pearls from bein


pinched. Tell us why you didn’ let us know before so’s ter
stop me from kickin’ up such a bobbery down in the street.”
“I couldn’t, Jim. I never got a chance. You went off like a
packet of Chinese crackers, and I didn’t get a chance to tell you.”
That satisfied Jimmy, and Bill said no more but I could see
that any common sense he had was tainted by disappointment.
After a little more talk on the events of the morning we went
in search of something to eat, as lunch-time was past. After
that I made tracks looking for Billy the Groper, leaving the
other two to carry on. Jimmy proposed taking Bill to see the
Cyclorama, down George Street near the Railway Station. I
heard Jim tell Bill to keep his weather eye lifting for “that
Sweeny-swiney fella” while they walked along to the Cyclorama.
And when Bill said Mr Sweeny was well on the track for Hay
by that time, Jimmy said, “Look, we pass the Mun’cipal Lib’ry
on our way, so we’ll call in an’ take a look-see at the D’rectory
jus’ ter satisfy yer there’s no such a person as Mr Reggie Sweeny,
an’ I don’t mind bettin’ the parson either, in Hay or anywhere
else in New South Wales.”
Mrs Billy the Groper was at home in Playfair Street. She
told me being married to Billy agreed with her, and her appear-
ance supported her statement, for she was neat and cheerful.
She said the only time Billy had shown any temper was when
the kid she had sent with the bedroom jug for beer had fallen
on her way back. He had said, “Never you mind about the big
bedroom jug bein’ broke, what about me beer? Why didn’ yer
go fer it yerself?”
I found the Groper easily enough in the pub where his wife
thought he would be, and got him to walk back with me. On
the track back to Ellis’s, along Clarence Street, I gave Billy
the history of the last few days interrupted, now and again, by
pithy comments.
The parson interested Billy the Groper. He said, “What like
was this here sky-pilot? From what I knows on ’em, none on
’em’s no good. Them’s the ones ter dodge. Alius keep ter wind-
ward of a parson if yer can, or the nex’ thing yer knows is yer
cotched, an’ theys got yer married an’ made fast fer life.”
I told Billy that the parson had taken me in all right, but I


could see now that he was running in double harness with
Sweeny, and, most likely, no more a parson than I was.
Then Billy got on another tack. “Yer know, they gets
me spliced at what they calls a Registrar's Orfice. I been
doin’ a bit er thinkin’ on that an’, d’ye know what, I don’
b’lieve they gets me proper married after all. Isn’ a Registror’s
a kind er place where women goes when they wants a job
makin’ beds, an’ messin’ round in a house? Isn’ it a place
where a man goes if he’s silly enough ter want a job pullin’
cow’s tits? How’d yer like a job pullin’ cow’s tits, Clarry?”
I told Billy he had better ask Mrs Howard to show him their
marriage certificate if he had any doubts in the matter, but in
my opinion he was “cotched” at last.
Then he said he had good reason to believe that he had laid
the keel of a young Groper since being married. “But I won’t
be here at the launchin’. No, I won’t be here when my babby
comes down the ways.”
That evening I went to the Tivoli by myself, and when I
returned late at night I learned that Bill Maryborough had
been carried off by the police—three of them—in a cab, hand-
cuffed and with his legs fastened together with one of their
belts.
The Worldly Hope men set their Hearts upon
Turns Ashes—or it prospers; and anon,
Like Snow upon the Desert's dusty Face
Lighting a little Hour or two—is gone.
Of course, what old Omar said about worldly hope is quite
right, and it fits in with the tale I heard, and what I knew about
one of Bill’s hopes, or ambitions, which was earnest debate with
one or more policemen. For some reason, perhaps because his
ancestors were Irish, Bill looked upon all policemen with a dis-
taste that was markedly emphasized when he was drunk.
It seems, so ran the tale I heard, that Maryborough wandered
into Clarence Street by himself and was there hard hit on the
left temple with a heavy stick by somebody unknown. The big
artery of the temple was opened and carried on with its job of
distributing blood dispassionately, not seeming to care one damn
that Bill’s clothes were becoming saturated.


It can be understood from what has been said that Mary-
borough was not looking his best, nor speaking his best, when
he blundered into the bar-room at Ellis’s soon after he was hit.
The people of the hotel thought that a hospital, not a bar-room,
w’as the place for Bill, because no respectable hotel proprietor
likes to have an angry, drunken man making a disturbance,
especially if he is dropping blood all over his furniture and cus-
tomers. When a policeman came to help, Maryborough misun-
derstood his intentions, with the result that a lot more blood was
distributed. The policeman, getting more than he liked, wel-
comed the arrival of two other constables and Bill, who had lost
goodness-only-knows how many pints or gallons of blood, was
overpowered.
Hurrying to the Casualty Room at the Hospital in Macquarie
Street, I found Maryborough Bill being attended to by one
surgeon and three policemen. As I approached them the doctor
complained because the behaviour of Bill’s head—the top part,
not his jaw—made it exceedingly difficult for him to stitch the
wound. Admonitions, and requests to keep still for a moment
v/ere promptly answered by Bill with reiterated challenges to
fight the police one at a time, or all together.
One big constable held Bill’s shoulders, another had one knee
and both hands keeping William quiet amidships, and the third
policeman was kneeling on his legs, thus making it extremely
difficult for Maryborough to make an effectual kick at the sur-
geon, or anybody else.
Obeying the ethics of true mateship, the cardinal rule of
which is to “stick”, I at once took Bill’s part. I took the only
part of him available, which was a part of his legs, and knelt
on that. That kept Bill quiet long enough for the surgeon to
put a lot of stitches where needed, and for Bill to say a lot of
things to me. Then, after the doctor had parcelled his head
with about one and a half fathoms of calico, Bill was considered
to be ready for stowage, and the place where they stowed him
was a padded cell at the Clarence Street lock-up.
Looking very pale, but standing erect, washed, and in clean
clothes that I had brought to him at the lock-up, with his head
parcelled in white calico, Maryborough Bill did not look notice-
ably heroic when he faced the magistrate next morning at Liver-


pool Street police court. Also, the magistrate knew nothing
about his gallant resistance against overwhelming police odds,
for he was charged only with being “drunk in Clarence Street”.
He was fined “five shillings or the rising” just like any ordinary
roisterer. Not a word was said about his efforts to dismember
the members of the police force; no charge was made for cab
hire, or for the unique accommodation he had received over-
night.
What was the reason for the forbearance and toleration shown
by the police? I think it was partly because Maryborough Bill
used no bad language. Also, he had fought fairly, making no
attempt to use any weapon or missile, such as a bottle or glass.
Again, at the hospital I had said that Bill was a diver from
Thursday Island in Sydney for a while only, and the fact that
he had the social distinction of being a diver may have carried
a lot of weight. All told, the words of that sage Omar Khayyam
may be transposed slightly in Bill’s case to read:
The Worldly Hope men set their Hearts upon
May land them in the Boob, and then anon,
Confronted with the Magistrate's cold Face
Their Throat feels dry as Dust—and five bob's gone!
Now that Maryborough Bill was free to give an account of
what had happened to him the night before, we poured a little
beer into him to liven him up a bit, and goaded him with a few
remarks. However, Bill could tell us very little. He did not
know who had smitten him, or the reason thereof. He remem-
bered nothing worth knowing.
Jimmy Wilson thought that the bloke Bill had cracked in
the bar at Ellis’s a few days ago might have donged him with
a bottle, and I thought the same, d he Groper had an alterna-
tive solution. “You know what I thinks? I thinks it was yer
parson what done it. Yer never knows what a parson like him 11
be up ter nex’. I wouldn’ put it past him, I wouldn . Yer see,
when them two gets away from the pub with that there enve-
lope full er pearls, they thinks it is, what s the fust thing they
does?”
Bill interrupted by saying that Mr Sweeny went off by
himself to Hay, while the Parson pushed off separately, some


time later, for the Blue Mountains so how could they be to-
gether?
“The blowflies must a got at yer when yer had all that blood
on yer, an’ now yer fly-blown,” said the Groper. “Yer head’s
full er maggots, that’s what it is, or yer wouldn’ talk so silly.
Them two fixed it for to meet some place soon’s they gets away
with them pearls. Can’t yer see they was workin’ together, Bill?
Didn’ Jimmy here show yer they wasn’ in no d’rectory? What
I’m a-askin’ of is, what’s the fust thing them two does when
they gets away be theirselves? That’s what I’m a-askin’ of. Well,
I’ll tell yer. The fust thing they does is ter have a squint at
them pearls, isn’ it? An’ they gets a eyeful of nothin’ but a lousy
lot er glass beads.”
The Groper went on impressively, “Now, what’d you do,
what’d any of us do, if he gets a lot er lousy glass beads when
he’s all set for ter get a bootiful lot er lovely pearls? Wouldn’ yer
want ter murder the bloke what done yer? In course yer would.
An’ that’s how yer got took ter the horsepital, Bill. It was the
parson what done it. Never you get boozin’, an’ makin’ free
with no parsons agin. None on ’em’s no good; they’ll get yer if
they can. It was yer parson what waited on yer an’ clouted yer,
and that’s the lot on it in a coco-nut shell.”
Bill sniffed.


CHAPTER Xiii
MRS MACQUARIE’S CHAIR
The four of us went across one beautiful morning in one of
the fine ferry steamers in order to attend the launching of
our little craft. Justus Scharffe and a few others were on the
ferry, and we walked across to the shipyard in a decorous bunch,
though Maryborough Bill did seem a little incongruous with
his head parcelled in white.
We were expected to laugh quietly, and we did, when Justus
Scharffe put a warning finger to his lips while he drew our
attention to the inscription on the after combing of the hatch.
Cut in deeply, we saw “11 tons”, whereas all concerned knew
she was sixteen tons register, or thereabouts. The explanation
of that was the fact that the British Government imposed a tax
of £5 per ton register on all craft owned by traders in the Solo-
mons. Therefore the surveyor in Sydney had had his palm
greased with a five-pound note, which saved the Dutchman,
Oscar Svensen, £25 a year in taxes.
Viking, as our craft was named, was painted dark green, with
a yellow band between the waterline and covering board to
give relief. There were no speeches, no fuss of any kind except
the bottle of wine broken on the bow by the young daughter of
Justus Scharffe, just at the right moment, when naming our
craft as she quietly moved down the ways to sit on the water of
the little cove, tucked away almost imperceptibly in the rocky
shore of Sydney Harbour.
After the launching, Fisher invited Justus Scharffe, ourselves,
and a few others down south where there was bottled beer,
sandwiches, salads, and so on—“a bit er counter-lunch”, as
Maryborough said. Then we walked across to the ferry quay


with Justus Scharffe, formality still dogging us. Billy the Groper
did his best to ease things.
“I seen a big ship, a big iron-clad she was, launched in the
Old Dart. They brings down one o’ the Royal Fam’ly, a prin-
cess I think she was, an’ a big crowd of Navy off’cers, an’ a few
gen’rals an’ such all togged up somethin’ wonnerful. They
brings ’em all down for ter do the launchin’ proper like they
does it in the Old Dart. This Princess they gets hold on ain’t
much ter look on, but she can’t help that no more nor nobody
can help their looks, but she wasn’ the kind I’d care to turn—
oh, oright, oright, Jimmy.
“When it come time fer the Princess for ter talk her piece,
like it was writ on the bit er paper she was holdin’ in her hand,
things didn’ go right. She got her words spoke, an’ she heaves
her bottle er champagne like a good ’un, but the ship don’t
budge. There’d been a bit of a mistook made somewhere, an’
the Princess, an’ all her dolled-up crowd what was come down
for ter do the launchin’ was stuck lookin’ at one another, whiles
the shipwrights an’ engineers sweats theirselves ter get the ship
launched.”
Justus Scharffe politely hoped that the Princess was not kept
waiting very long, and the Groper, taking the hint, hastened to
say that the ship was launched just as the Princess and her
party were about to leave the shipyard. “I jus’ thought I’d tell
yer about it,” concluded the Groper rather lamely.
“Well, you’ve told us about it, so shut up,” said Marybor-
ough Bill. “You’re like all the other Englishmen I’ve bumped,
always skitin’ about yer Old Dart, as yer calls it. Always skitin’
about how things is better’n they is here. Why don’t yer go
back an’ live there if it’s like yer crack it up ter be? Here’s yer
ferry cornin’ in, Mr Scharffe. You just caught her nice if yer
can get up a bit of a wriggle.”
Justus Scharffe, who was a cripple, “got up a bit of a wriggle”
and caught the ferry, to learn that we were crossing later in the
day, since we had to meet a man with a dog. He laughed, shook
his fist at us, and shouted something as we turned back to-
wards a little pub not far from the wharf.
“I thought you were giving me the go-by,” said the publican,
who was standing at the door of his neat little tavern. “Come in-


Typical Japanese diver, Thursday Island


Hunting dugong, Darnley Island, Torres Straits


side and have one on the house. Who was the little old lame
gent you had with you? Oh, that was Justus Scharffe, was it?
Fisher was telling me about him. He says he’s as tight as a
Aberdeen Jew. Well go on in, and sit down. I’ll bring ’em in
ter yer.”
We went in and sat in the back room, which overlooked a
part of the harbour. Harry, the landlord, followed with four
pints, and a glass for himself.
“Well, here’s wishing you all the best,” he said. “And I hope
you have a successful voyage, and a quick return with plenty
of pearls. And don’t forget to give me a look-up when you do
come back. Chaps like you are welcome anytime. I can put
you up here quite easy, and you’d be a lot more comfortable
here than where you are staying over there in the city. Don’t
forget that, will you?” Then he went on, “I was down at the
yard to see your ship launched. Very good, I thought it. You
didn’t see me, I was taking a back seat. I thought it was a good
piece of work. What did you chaps think of it?”
And Maryborough answered him, saying, “Aw, we all
thought it was goodo—all of us excep’ the Groper here. He says
they does things better in England where he comes from. Go
on, Groper, tell Harry here how yer launched the iron-clad, an’
all about yer iron-clad princess, an’ how loverly she was, an’ how
yer’d have liked ter sleep with her. Go on, let’s hear it all over
again. You ought ter know be this time how we all likes ter hear
about you, an’ yer princesses what yer didn’ sleep with. Go on,
let’s hear it.”
Billy the Groper’s chair went back with a whine as he jumped
to his feet, his face red with temper. Before he could pour out
his wrath, however, Jimmy took charge.
“Damn you, you Mulga Mulligan,” he roared at Marybor-
ough, “can’t you let up on Billy here? What you got against
him? What’s he ever done ter you, or said about yer, that yer
always harpin’ an’ lookin’ fer rows with him? Let up on it, or
I tell you what, you’ll make me so sick I’ll dump you on the
beach an’ leave yer here. Yer worsen a old woman the way yer
go on. I’m fed up, I won’t have any more of it. You’ll stop here
in Sydney, that’s what you’ll do if I hear any more of it. I’ll
dump yer on the beach, an’ we’ll sail away without yer.” Then
N


more quietly, “Come here, Groper, come here, Bill. Now shake
hands, the two o’ yer, an’ promise me yer goin’ ter be friends,
an’ if I hears any more barney from either o’ yer yer 11 get all
the barney yer wants from yours truly, Jimmy Wilson. Now,
come on shake hands an’ ferget all about it, an’ don’t ferget
what I said about dumpin’ yer on the beach, Mr Bloody Mary-
borough Bill Dunphy.”
“Aw, all right, Jim, I won’t,” said Maryborough quite mildly,
as he shook hands with Billy the Groper. “Me an’ the Groper
isn’t as bad friends as what you might think we was. But what
gets me narked is the way he goes off be hisself an’ allers comes
back full as a addled emu’s egg.”
Sweet as the dawn, and the daisies on the lawn,
Sweet as a turtle in the sea,
But sweeter far than such things are
Is our sweet, sweet William to me,
I declaimed to the company.
“That’ll do you, Clarry,” said the said William. “We don’t
want none er yer clever sarcastic sarcasms, we can get along
without ’em. Always bein’ too clever you are.”
“Did you make that up yourself? Did you make that up
now?” asked Harry the Landlord.
“No,” I answered, “I got that out of London Punch.”
“Why, I always thought London Punch was a funny paper,”
said Harry.
Jimmy, walking to the open window overlooking the harbour
to blow his nose, turned his head to say to Harry, “Let’s have
four more pints, Harry, and bring one for yerself. Good fresh
beer you got here. We all of us like it, that’s why we come here.
Let’s have four more, Harry.”
The landlord beckoned me to follow him. While he was
pulling the beer he said, “That boss of yours seems to me to
know his way about. He’d be a good man to have behind the
bar to settle any little argument that got started. He quieted
that big Bill of yours quick and lively. Well-spoken kind of
chap, too. Been well educated, I’d say, brought up as a gentle-
man—what do you think?”
“I’m sure of it,” I said.


“Have one with me while were here together,” said Harry.
“ ‘Another little drink won’t do us any harm.’ You know that
one, don’t you? They sometimes sing it when they get a bit
merry at a shivoo or a picnic. It goes like this:
There was a little hen, and she had a wooden leg,
The best little hen that ever laid an egg,
And this little hen she lived on a farm—
And another little drink won’t do us any harm.
Harry sang that sotto voce, but Jimmy heard him and began
calling out, so Harry said, “Go on, drink up quick. We’ll have
to go back to those others. I like to drink with a man like you
’cause you can stand up to it, not like that big Bill in there. I
should think he’s one of those that go out to it pretty quick.”
“Yes,” I said, “he’s a chap that shows it pretty quick all right,
and he gets nasty if he has whisky, so put him off if he asks for
it.”
Just then Jimmy opened the door saying, “What’s up? She
hasn’t run dry, has she? You haven’t pumped her dry, have you,
Harry? What are you up to, Clarry? Having an extra one on
your own?”
“We’re coming now, Jim,” said Harry. “I was just asking
Clarry here about a chap we both knew at school together over
in Adelaide. Ever been in Adelaide, Jim? Nice place, Adelaide.”
We sat in that back room overlooking the harbour for an
enjoyable hour, touching lightly on pleasant things as they hap-
pened to crop up. Passing from the Viking to pearls, pearlshell,
Harry and his beer, we arrived at the subject of the parson and
Reg Sweeny, J.P. Among many treatments that were suggested
as suitable for those two, that of Maryborough Bill stood out
from the rest as being especially diabolical. He said he would
like to take Mr Reg Sweeny into Arnhem Land, where the
buffaloes are, in the “wet” (wet season), strip him naked, and
leave him that way exposed to the fury of the mosquitoes until
his lousy ghost had sneaked its way out of his carcass!
Harry invited us to have dinner, explaining that he had din-
ner in the middle of the day because his busy time started in
the evening, when everybody else had knocked off. It was a


nice, cosy little dinner in the English style—roast beef with
Yorkshire pudding, apple pie, and cheese and celery. It suited
us all. The Groper expressed what we thought by saying, “This
is what I likes, a real English dinner, roast beef and Yorkshire
puddin’. None er yer fancy frig-at-seas, or tripe-a-la-muscovy-
sauce. Give me a good ol’ English dinner like this here. Roast
beef and Yorkshire puddin’! There’s nothin’ better’n all the
world than a good ol’ English dinner of roast beef an’ Yorkshire
puddin’—an’ some of Harry’s beer for ter wash it down,” he
added as an afterthought.
“And while you’re about it,” I said, “say a word for the fresh
mustard, and horse-radish.”
“I’m not a-forgettin’ on ’em,” replied the Groper. “Beef an’
such like without mustard fresh made ain’t right an’ proper, no
more’n what a woman is without her drawers on. She might
look all right, but when yer finds out she ain’t got no drawers
she ain’t respec’able, she ain’t dressed proper. An’ it’s the same
thing with beef, if there’s no mustard it ain’t right an’ proper
put on the table.”
When the ferry landed the four of us at Circular Quay, in
Sydney, we parted company. Jimmy and Maryborough took
the track for the Coffee Palace, while I went with the Groper
at his pressing invitation.
“Me an’ Clarry’ll be at the Corffee Palace before you two
gets there, if it takes us until termorrer a-doin’ of it,” the
Groper told the others.
When we were by ourselves he said, “You come alonga me,
an’ have a feed wi’ my crowd. You won’t mind much what
she gives us arter that feed what the two on us gets at Harry’s,
will yer? If we don’t get nothin’ else she’ll dish us up somethin’,
you see,” was the comforting assurance of the Groper.
And that’s how I came to learn that there were two Mrs Mac-
quarie’s chairs in Sydney. The better known is on the point
in the harbour between Farm Cove and Woolloomooloo Bay.
The Chair is a heap of big rocks, one of them horizontal. Mrs
Macquarie was the wife of an early governor of New South
Wales. He was one of the best colonial administrators, and so
left a splendid record behind him. I believe that Mrs Macquarie


was a good wife, and she left behind her that heap of rocks
known as Mrs Macquarie’s Chair—whether she actually used
it or not doesn’t matter twopence.
When we got to Playfair Street Billy the Groper introduced
me to his mother-in-law, who was also a Mrs Macquarie. On
my previous visits I had missed the pleasure of making her ac-
quaintance. She was a short, solidly built, dark woman, well
past the prime of life. She gave me a hesitant welcome, at the
same time noting my size and apparently doing a little calculat-
ing.
“How’d yer do?” she said, and gave me her hand to shake,
after wiping it on her apron.
“Friend of Billy’s, are yer? He seems ter have a lot er friends.
Always askin’ someone in, he is. If on’y he’d let me know first.
That’s the trouble with him, brings ’em in without sayin’ a word
ter me first. Sit down, if you can find a place ter sit. This place
ain’t too big. It’s not big enough for us what’s in it without
Fringin’ others in without sayin’ nothin’ first. Take yer friend
out in the yard, Billy, an’ let him wash his hands if he wants
ter. I’ll give him somethin’ somehow. Here, Norma, run out
an’ get some more sausages, an’ a bit more bacon, an’ be quick.
“Don’t take no notice on her,” said Billy when we were out
in the tiny, brick-paved yard. “She’ll be all right when she’s
done messin’ about cookin’. We’ll go out an’ leave her to clear
up as soon as we’ve had a feed. I can’t a-bear for ter watch a
woman cleanin’ an’ washin’, or doin’ nothin’. I goes out an
leaves ’em to it.”
The kitchen, which also seemed to serve as a dining-room
and parlour combined, was certainly small. It was about twelve
feet square, and the ceiling was so low that I could have easily
reached it with my hand. In the room were Mr and Mrs Mac-
quarie, Norma, Billy, and myself. Then there was the furniture
—table, cupboard, chairs, and so on, so there was not much room
for movement.
Mr Macquarie had not long returned from work. In fact, he
had come straight home, he assured his wife, merely stopping
to talk to a couple of his friends for a few minutes outside the
Whaler’s Arms.
“I know all about you an’ yer stoppin’ outside the Whaler’s


Arms. I s’pose they brought yer beer out ter yer, did they? I
can see them doin’ it, I can.”
The Groper took a seat near the stove on which Mrs Mac-
quarie was frying things in sputtering fat, and her husband and
I were standing together as much out of the road as possible.
Then it happened this way. The Groper rose from his seat
to get a box of matches from the mantelpiece, while at the same
time Mrs Macquarie removed the sizzling frying-pan from the
stove in order to put down more fuel into the fire. So that both
hands would be free, she placed the frying-pan on the chair
from which the Groper had just risen and—he promptly sat
in it. It is a great pity that the room was not larger. It really
was too small for what now took place. Already, from lack of
ventilation, the air in the room was heated, heavy with the
odour and fumes of cooking. Now it was further loaded with
the smell of squashed sausages, hot fat, and hot hurried lan-
guage. The first act of the Groper was to fling the frying-pan
violently from his outraged behind towards Macquarie and my-
self.
“Oh, me poor sausages!” Mrs Macquarie squealed. “Why
can’t yer look where yer sittin’? Look what yer’ve done ter me
poor sausages!”
Billy the Groper said, inter alia, “Damn you an’ yer poor
sausages, what about me poor backside? Give us a hand,
Norma.”
Amid the confused din, Norma assisted the Groper to tear
down his trousers, applied some sort of oil to his painful scalds,
and then helped him upstairs by holding up his greasy trousers
from behind. Thus the Groper and his young bride went from
our sight, her soothing, comforting accents mingling with his
pain-wrought grumbling sostenuto sinal fine.
Both Macquarie and myself got some of the contents of the
frying-pan flung by Billy, but not much, because most of it was
absorbed, or sticking to Billy’s trousers, and luckily we received
no burns, our clothing taking what there was for us to take.
The frying-pan finished its journey on the seat of another chair,
after sweeping a loaf of bread, and other things, from the table.
After that, I retired also, though pressed to stay, telling them


that Mrs Macquarie had trouble enough on her hands without
having to bother about me.
When I returned to Ellis’s, having had a late dinner at a
restaurant, I found that Jimmy and Maryborough had turned
in, so I retired to my room and wrote a long letter to my sweet-
heart down in Thursday Island. Knowing how kind-hearted she
was, and lenient, I enclosed the following verses, and then,
calling it a day, turned in about one o’clock in the morning.
A SONG OF AUTUMN
The grass is a-growing now summer has gone,
And all is a glorious green,
The parched fields on which the summer sun shone
Shall course now with life then unseen.
The blue dome of April, white flecked with cloud,
Seems pastured with heavenly sheep.
All lovely and fair, with such soft charm endowed,
Dame Nature will soon slumber deep.
Our Earth is a pearl in a mantle of light
Which her glorious Mother graces.
The stars are the gems in the tresses of Night
Whom Dawn eternally chases.
The cyclonic clouds that come up from the North
Hearten our land with their treasure.
And fruits, yet unseen, in the spring shall put forth:
Dame Nature seems smiling with pleasure.
The days now grow shorter, and colder nights loom,
For Nature her long rest must keep.
Let us then walk abroad and peep in her room,
And watch how she smiles in her sleep.
My loved is an angel, and winter is nigh:
Chaste Winter demure in cold green,
May love warm my Angel, and may she close lie,
My Angel, my loved one, my Queen—
My Angel, my loved one, my Queen.


CHAPTER xiv
CAPTAIN WALSH AND THE DUKE OF
ORFOLK
An old retired master mariner named Walsh was hired, for
JLX the lump sum of £lO and his passage back to Sydney in
the steamer, to navigate our Viking to the Solomon Islands.
Fisher, the builder, naturally wanted the beautiful little
yacht-like craft he had turned out to make a fast passage so as
to make a name for himself, and to be a good advertisement for
his business. With that idea uppermost he had paid particular
attention to the ballast, and the trim of the Viking, so that she
would sail at her best. So his disgust can be imagined when old
Walsh insisted on having another ton of ballast put below after
he had taken our craft outside the heads for a trial.
From Fisher’s point of view, a worse man than old Walsh
could not have been engaged, for, although he had been all his
life in sail, he had not been before in such a small craft. So,
when he sailed the Viking outside the heads and saw how she
canted over to the fresh breeze with her lee rail under, her deck
awash to the combing of the hatch, he became frightened.
Yachting was all right for those who liked yachting, but Captain
Walsh had no intention of learning yachting at his time of life.
When the time arrived for him to cast off the mooring lines that
bound him to earth and sail to the Better Land he wanted to
start off dry and comfortable. Anyhow, he didn’t want to die
for £lO, and be done out of his passage hack to Sydney in the
steamer.
So, although Fisher grumbled a lot at having to turn the
beautiful little craft he had built into a “hopper barge”, as he
expressed it, Walsh had his way and another ton of ballast was


shipped below. Our four hundred gallon tank of water weighed
two tons so, with firewood and stores of all kinds properly
stowed, there was not much copper sheathing showing above
the waterline when we were ready for sea.
Unlike the luggers of Torres Straits we had our galley on
deck just abaft the hatch. This galley was a little deck-house
firmly lashed down but easy to remove if required. It occupied
very little space, being only just large enough to hold a small
Dover stove. Having the stove on deck made a lot of difference
to us, as may be judged by my description of the discomfort
caused to the crew of a lugger where the cooking was carried
out below.
Besides old Walsh, the master mariner, another man named
Jack Scullin was hired as a seaman and tender. Jack knew
nothing about being a tender, and there was no need so far as
I could see to sign him on at all. But Jimmy explained things
this way:—“lt’s like this; there’s three of you divers going along,
and there’s the Viking, and a cutter down there named the
M.C. for the three of you to work from. Now, a lot of the water
in the Solomons is deep an’ I reckoned that no diver could keep
going all the time, an’ you’d want a lot of spellin’. Well, you
can see that, can’t yer? Well, my idea is that one o’ yer can
tender the chap what’s workin’ on the Viking, say, and after
we’ve broke him into it Jack Scullin can tender the diver what
takes the M.C. An’ another thing, Justus Scharffe says Captain
Svensen has writ ter say that if Jack Scullin turns out ter be a
good sailorman he might take him on as mate on his schooner
when the divin’ is done. Get the idea?”
So Jack was signed on at £4 a calender month, which was
the same pay that a coloured tender got in Torres Straits, or a
white sailor in a British ship for that matter. That made the
crew of the Viking five all told, because Jimmy Wilson sailed
in the steamer before we did. He said he wanted to have every-
thing ready for us when we got there. That may have been the
reason why Jimmy took a passage in the steamer, but I could
think up a better one—a passage in a steamer with some comfort.
We left Parbury’s Wharf at Miller’s Point one beautiful day,
with a few friends to see us off. Again, as at Thursday Island,
the Groper had a wife to bid him farewell. I wondered if that


was usually the case with him. Unlike the old William we had
no livestock except a kitten given to me by a fond old lady, and
a large, black, hairy dog carried down in his arms by the Groper
shortly before we sailed. The Groper s explanation for carrying
the dog was simple—“He didn’ want ter come.
Another reason for bringing the smelly thing was, “He s one
on them aristocractic poodles what’s called a peer. Hes all the
time huntin’ roun’ fer good, rich posts what s got a tang to em,
but when he finds what he thinks is somethin’ prime this morn-
in’, an’ christens it goodo, the woman nex’ door thinks differen’
for she says it’s her ironin’ board what she lef outside for ter let
the sun take the damp outer it. Well, there’s such a lot er talk
goin’ on about what they’re goin’ ter do ter the dog—some
sayin’ for ter poison the poor cow, an’ some sayin for ter give
him a passage inter the harbour with a brick medal roun his
neck—that I walks off with him meself, them thinkin’ I’m a-
goin’ ter dround him, an’ here he is.”
We got no farther that day than Watson’s Bay, near South
Head, where we had to wait for some papers from Sydney. It
was here that the dog showed by his gentlemanly conduct, and
consideration for us, that he was indeed a peer. For a while he
had been seeking for something urgently, some spot apparently
where something might be done. Just then a small launch came
off to us on business. No sooner had the two officials in her
gone below with old Walsh than the dog hastily jumped into
the launch and let us see that he had found just the place for
his purpose.
Later in the day several boats came out with people to in-
spect us in a friendly way, and to ask nice innocent questions,
for word about our voyage had become bruited round. Because
of these visits our peer of a dog had further opportunities of
showing his reluctance to soil the deck of the Viking , but be-
came unpopular with at least one nice bit of skirt who expressed
herself as follows: “What a horrid, dirty, nasty dog you’ve got
with you! Look what he’s done to my cloak! Why don’t you
drown him?” )
The Groper approving, at Jack Scullin’s suggestion it was
decided to call the dog “Duke of Orfolk”, because he was such
a gentleman, showed such consideration for others, was un


doubtedly a peer, and stank so much. Jack Scullfn explained
that there had been one Duke—he was not sure which, but he
had read all about him in Tit-Bits, or it might have been in
Reynold’s Weekly— who was unable to get a wife to sleep with
him because he did not wash himself. “ ’ls wife said in court
as ’ow she couldn’ stand the stink of ’im, ’is feet they was some-
think cruel.”
And that is how the Groper’s dog came to be christened
“Duke of Orfolk”, for christened he was immediately at the
end of a line in the beautiful harbour of Sydney.
We sailed through the towering Heads of Sydney Harbour
early next morning with a light breeze from the nor’ard ruffling
a swell from the south. Numbers of shark-fins showing above
the surface gave an idea of the unseen shark population below.
A few sailing craft, and one big yacht, gave us a chance to
compare the way the Viking could sail close hauled with what
they did. We soon found our craft could sail full and bye, that
is, as close to the wind as possible, no more than four and a half
points off the wind. Not only could the Viking sail with full
canvas close to the wind, but we were greatly tickled to see how
she went about, that is, turned on the other tack, without losing
way or ground. The manner in which she went about from,
say, nor’-west to nor’-east, and then continued straight on
with her job of getting through the water without any sagging
off to leeward, reminded us of the Chinese sampans of Port
Darwin. The Viking was nearly as quick off the mark as a wild
pig. She had but three sails, namely one head-sail or jib, one
large mainsail, and the aftermost mizzen. So there was nothing
to do when she went about except for one man to pay off the
jib-sheet to help her into the wind, and then to make fast the
sheet on the other side—but doing that with the Viking in a
fresh breeze the man had to be lively.
She was such a handy, handsome little lady, so willing to do
anything she was asked, that two men could have sailed her
anywhere, round the world if they liked, and had an easy time
doing so—barring acts of God and other calamities. However,
old Walsh had other ideas begotten by natural stupidity and
long years in deepwater sailing ships. He set us in watches of
two men to a watch. The Groper and Jack in one watch, Mary-


borough and myself in the other. The watches were four on,
and four off, deepwater style.
Do you know what that means? It means you are on deck for
four hours on duty, and then have four hours off duty, and that
routine continues all the time, night and day, Sunday and every
other day. Very absurd, but nobody made any fuss about it.
Jack Scullin was the only one of the seven of us to get sea-
sick. He said he was seasick every time he went to sea—just the
same as Lord Nelson always was—and he put it down to the
costive state of his bowels, which he proceeded to ease by swal-
lowing large boluses of common soap. The Groper suggested
his favourite remedy for others as an alternative, namely a
piece of europe-rope (hemp rope saturated with Stockholm tar)
boiled in salt water with a packet of Epsom-salts added to give
it some body, but Jack said he had seen that used in a ship be-
fore, and that he was going to stick to soap.
Sailing north down the coast we kept as close as possible to
the main so as to dodge the strong current that runs up to the
south. By the second day we were able to do this without tacking
because the wind hauled round more to the east. We continued
with good weather and easy conditions like this right down
along the coast. We sailed inside Seal Rocks, and wondered at
the huge sea-lions sprawling on the rocks. Nobody could say
why there were not more of them, for they were strictly pro-
tected by the Government, unless it was because sharks ate the
young ones. Nobody even knew what they lived on; they seemed
to be too big and clumsy to catch fish. We agreed positively on
one thing only, and that was that those animals were as big as
bullocks.
Jack Scullin said, “Ooh-a, youse oughter go ter the Falklands
if yer wanter see real big seals. Them what’s there’s as big as
elephan’s. Ooh-a, youse oughter seen ’em like I done slidin’ down
the ice, an’ floppin’ in the water jus’ like a thunderin’ big
whale. An’ youse oughter have a look at them tortoises what
they got in the Gallopagos. When youse see one o’ them the
first time yer thinks it’s a house takin’ a walk all be itself. Yus,
it’s jus’ like a house on four legs it’s that big, true. You wait
till you seen one like I done, then you’ll know I ain’t tellin’ yer
no lies.”


‘‘You musta knocked about a bit in your time, Jack,” said
Maryborough. “Ever been in South America? Ever been up
the Amazon? That’s a place I’d like ter see, the Amazon.”
“Was I up the Amazon? Was I? I’m tellin’ yer I was up the
Amazon, an’ seen it all with a perfesser what wanted me ter go
along an’ look arter him whiles he’s huntin’ fer bugs an’ things.
One ev’nin’, jus’ arter we’d ’ad our scoff it was, I was goin’ ter
wash our things in a pool near the river, an’ I seen the perfes-
ser’s pony jus’ goin’ ter ’ave a drink in the pool. Mind yer,
that’s the same pool what I’m makin’ fer ter wash me pots an’
things in. Jus’ as the poor pony takes ’is fust mou’ful a great big
electrical eel grabs hold on ’im, an’ scoffs ’im. The pony squeals
somethink awful. Me? I drops me bundle, an’ runs like ’ell.
When I tells the perfesser he says, ‘Yus, them electrical eels is
the cuss er the Amazon. What er big pity the pony got ter the
pool before you done. If you’d on’y got there fust I wouldn’
’ave lorst me pony.’
“Ooh-a, you oughter been with us, Bill. When we got up the
river a few ’undred mile we come ter a place where a plain
was. There wasn’ no trees nowhere as fur as yer eye could see.
An’ all over this here plain was little animals all rootin’, an’
gruntin’, an’ they looks that tame like yer could go up ter ’em
an’ scratch their backs fer ’em like yer would ter a pig if yer
seen one. But the perfesser says, ‘Small as them things is, an’
innocen’ as they look, there ain’t no animal what’s more deadly
ter man. Many a strong man might be walkin’ cheerful-like
roun’ this here world terday if there wasn’ none o’ them ani-
mals what yer see now. Them’s the famous peccaries,’ he says,
‘an’ when they chases yer up a tree they’ll camp unner it,
takin’ watch an’ watch, till yer drop, if it takes yer a week ter
do it, an’ then they come at yer an’ tear yer ter pieces.’ That’s
what the perfesser says, an’ I know it’s true, too, because I arst
some injuns, an’ they said it was, too.”
There, must have been plenty of sailing craft that did not
have such things to keep the crew quiet and contented as an
old Walsh, and the best of tucker, as we had. Probably even
the King’s yacht did not have such fare as ours.
When the Viking left Sydney she had enough bread in her
to last for a week at least. By bread I mean “soft-tommy” like


that everybody eats on land, not biscuit. Not much in that,
you will say, eating beastly stale bread for a week. But we didn’t
eat stale bread for a week. We had fresh bread every day while
it lasted simply by dipping a stale loaf quickly in and out of
salt water and then clapping it into a hot oven for about forty
minutes. We had enough potatoes and onions to last us for a
month, or more, and unless you’ve sailed without those you
don’t know what a difference having them at hand means.
There was an unlimited supply of butter, jam, pickles, mustard,
and that sort of stuff. Besides that, we had two sides of bacon,
a case of assorted tinned meat, and some extra prime salt-beef
specially put up for us, each fifty-pound keg holding an ox-
tongue and a piece of two-tooth mutton, something in the way
of luxuries that less fortunate people than ourselves did not get.
The Old Man was fond of his belly, and urged us to do our
best as cooks repeatedly. ‘‘There’s plenty of good stuff here, the
best of everything, it only wants cooking,” he would say. And
so we lived well. By process of elimination, or the survival of
the one best able to withstand criticism, Jack Scullin gradually
came to do most of the cooking, but the rest of us helped him
somewhat even if Jack didn’t always seem grateful for the
advice.
Fresh water on a sailing craft is used only for cooking any-
thing that absorbs water, such as rice. For anything else—one’s
toilet, washing clothes, or cooking things like potatoes—salt water
is used. Because of that, Jack cooked his puddings in sea water,
and that was the first time I had seen that done. The puddings
turned out goodo, just a little of the outside having to he
scraped off. The main idea is to be quite sure that the raw pud-
ding is put into plenty of boiling water, and the fire built up
just beforehand so that the water comes back to the boiling
point again quickly.
The only one on board who openly and loudly raised a voice
against Jack’s cooking was the cat. Apparently puss-puss, find-
ing the door of the yet warm stove open one evening, snuggled
inside unseen by any, and somebody closed the door. Some
time after the fire had been lighted in the early mom, by Jack,
there was another early mourn by the kitten, who was getting
undone by being overdone. When the cries of the kitten were


heard, and the door opened, pussy came out of the oven hot and
hasty. She gave a disgruntled look at the wet deck and, thinking
the ash-pit below the fire would be a nice dry spot, made for
that. However, the ash-pit was warmer even than the oven, so
she compromised by crawling on top of the bricks under the
stove.
When Jack announced one day that the Sydney bread was
all gone, we showed him how to make yeast from rice in the
Torres Straits style. Jack became quite a good bread-maker after
a few days, when Maryborough had shown him his way, I had
shown him tny way, and he had evolved a way of his own.
That first day without bread, Maryborough made some flap-
jacks in the frying-pan. So far as I could see, the flapjacks were
nothing but flour paste fried in plenty of fat, but the way Bill
fussed round you’d have thought he was dishing up something
scrumptious.
“Get yer silly great carcass away outer this, Clarry, he said
to me. “You’re always gettin’ in the road, you are. I’m goin ter
show Jack, an’ the Cap’n here, how we make flapjacks out
back when we’re drovin’ in Queenslan’. We live high when
we’re on the track out back, Cap’n, what with flapjacks, johnny-
cakes, puffdelooners, fritter-in-the-pan, damper, an’ mutton
straight off the hoof. Now, you watch how I make this lot Jack.
When the flapjacks were served hot in the cabin the Old
Man wouldn’t even try to eat one. Ive been ordered by my
doctor to be careful what I eat, and those things look a bit
heavy. They’re all right for you young fellas, you go ahead an’
eat ’em. I’ll have biscuits.”
The Groper said, “You cooked ’em, you eat ’em. Try some
ras’berry jam on ’em. An’ don’ ferget Duke; he’ll eat ’em. He’ll
eat anythin’.”
Me? I said nothing, but I did try to eat a piece ot Bill s ttap-
jack with a lot of jam on it. Although I am fond of peace, I
could not stomach that piece.
Both Maryborough and Jack pretended the flapjacks were
bonzer, with butter and jam, but after they had each eaten
about one big leathery, greasy horror, Bill suddenly grabbed the
lot, took them on deck, and gave them to the Duke of Orfolk
who, as the Groper had said, would eat anything.


When Bill came back he said, “That’s done it. I’m finished.
If you want any more flapjacks you can cook ’em yerself. An’
don’t you cook none fer ’em, neether, Jack.”
And Jack assured Maryborough that he wouldn’t cook a
flapjack, “No, not even if the King of Englan’ was ter arst me
I wouldn’.” Jack would do anything, or nothing, for big Mary-
borough Bill.
We took our departure from the continent when we passed
the latitude of Brisbane, and set a course that would take us
across the Coral Sea to the Solomons. Old Walsh had been
extremely cautious since coming into the Viking, but now he
became extra, specially extremely cautious.
Just after leaving Sydney he had directed us in making a
sea-anchor. That was a large basket such as coalies use when
discharging a collier. The basket was partly lined inside with
canvas firmly sewn to it where needed, then it was roped se-
curely and attached to a coil of coir rope, and, when done to
the satisfaction of the Old Man, stowed below. There was no-
thing wrong in having a sea-anchor at hand to use in case of
emergency, such as a heavy gale of wind or a hurricane. Then,
providing a craft has plenty of sea-room, the sea anchor at the
end of a long rope will help to keep the head of a craft to the
wind, and allow her to ride the seas.
But now, whenever a slight disturbance in the weather, such
as a rainsquall in the offing appeared, as it often did, Old Walsh
made us shorten all sail during the second dog-watch. We all
growled at this, that is to say, we three divers did, but Jack
sniggered and that comes to much the same thing. The Groper
told the Old Man, among other things, that he had never heard
of such nonsense, but it made no difference, not even when he
asked if Captain Walsh felt nice and comfortable wearing his
lifebelt when he turned into bed at night. Growl or no growl,
snigger or no snigger, the Viking was close reefed nearly every
evening.
And then, one night during the middle watch, I was called
from below to help reef the jib! Half awake, and thinking that
I was called in the ordinary way to keep watch on deck, I
paused long enough to don my oilskin, as it was raining. When


Native diving for trochus


Pearling lugger under way


I got on deck I was told it was too late, the job was finished,
and I could go below again.
Four men to reef a small headsail! It was raining, but there
was not much of a breeze. I have been a lamb always, but this
time I bleated. I told Old Walsh, and the others, that what had
delayed me was saying my prayers, since the dreadful weather
had given me a fright. Then I said to Walsh, “The other night
you were sore because my talking to Maryborough about the
stars woke you, but you don’t mind waking me for nothing, do
you? You stupid old fowl, do you think you were engaged so
that you might amuse yourself by giving silly damn orders to
us? Won’t Jimmy Wilson be pleased when he hears how you’ve
delayed the Viking?”
A day or so after that I jumped overboard, and so did the
kitten. We were sailing along in beautiful warm weather. The
water was calm because we were to leeward of one of those
immense coral atolls that give this sea its name. Since the fire
had been lighted that morning, evicting her from the ash-pit
of the stove, puss-puss had been on deck making the best of the
pleasant conditions, and putting quite a lot of toe and tongue
into her toilet. Calm though it was, a little water and spray wet
the deck now and then, and it happened that pussy thus got
her feet sloppy while she was to leeward of the cabin. Any cat
can be quick when she likes, and this was a time to be quick
if ever there was one. Instantly, as though touched off like a
muzzle-loader, which she was anyhow, pussy leaped for the
low rail just between the mizzen rigging. And what did the low
rail do? Did it stop there, or did it?
It didn’t. As the kitten jumped the Viking rolled. “There
goes poor pussy,” I heard Maryborough say to Jack, and I saw
Jack snigger. Old Walsh had his thick head out of the cabin
scuttle, and it would have been a waste of time trying to get
him to go round after the cat so, nearly as quickly as pussy, I
took a header after her.
Because I had acted quickly, I reached the frantic cat within
a couple of minutes. I had to hold her away from me with one
hand because of her claws. In less than ten minutes I was back
on the Viking, which shows what a handy little craft she was.
Then Old Walsh was silly enough to tell me that I had no
o


business “to leave the ship without permission”, and that a
shark might have got me.
It was true enough that there were sharks here and there,
but they generally kept fairly close to the reefs, because that is
where most of the fish also found their food and scanty shelter.
It was at times when we happened to be close to a reef that
this could be seen plainly, for then the sharks would come out
to meet us in numbers.
If we were in the vicinity—and it was to windward—of one of
those large atolls, though we could not see it there was ample
proof that it was there. For one thing, the water was calm, and
the birds were several more things. Each evening great numbers
flew past us on their way home to the atoll from the day s fish-
ing. Belated birds frequently roosted on some part of our craft
rather than continue on their way in the darkness. These birds
were usually boobies, large birds that made quite a lot of mess
during their stay, but we rarely disturbed them. The kitten did
not, for she had interest now in nothing but food and the ash-
pit. Besides, the birds were a good deal bigger than herself. In
fact, that swim had about finished pussy. She became semi-
paralyzed right aft, and walked stiffly in consequence.
Although the Duke of Orfolk was fond of stinks, like all
other dogs, he quickly lost interest in the boobies, for they can,
and did, peck very hard indeed. He wouldn t even stand clear
and vent his opinion of them in ribald barks after the first
evening when he had gone through an informal ceremony of
“nose-rubbing” with one of them.
I have said that when close to an atoll and the sharks came
out to look at us we could see them plainly. The lucidity of the
water was almost unbelievable. Looking into the depths was
much the same as gazing at the sky. That could be done only
when the water was quite calm, and the Viking had no way.
Standing beside me, peering into the clear water, the Groper
said, “I wunner how deep she goes. She goes down a long way,
any fool can see that. What’s the deepest she goes anywhere?
Did yer ever hear, Clarry, what the soundin’s was what they
gets in the deepest part anywhere?”
I told him that I had read that an American expedition had
found a part of the Pacific near Japan which was about five


miles—or was it seven?—deep. The Groper responded to that
by taking a deep breath, exhaling it vigorously, pointing over-
head, and saying with awe, “Five miles! Five bloomin’ miles
of water! Why, all we fellas can do is about thirty fathoms, an’
that’s too much fer most on us. There couldn’ nothin’ live down
there, no, nor a quarter o’ the way neether. Five miles! Phew!”
If the breeze was fresh, and there was a sea, looking astern
we might see a small bird about the size of a swift, brownish
with a dash of white under the wings, following in our wake.
Nobody saw it arrive, and nobody ever saw it depart. Next
day there might be another, or perhaps two or three more. They
just were there. Much like swallows in their flight, those ex-
ceedingly graceful little birds flew closely to the water, rising
and falling as the seas rose and fell. They had rather long, slen-
der legs, and webbed feet that they continually dipped into
the water as though liking to feel how refreshingly cool and
clean it was. Nobody ever saw them eat anything. Indeed, what-
ever it was upon which they lived must have been exceedingly
small, because a human eye would have found nothing on the
surface of those seas viewed from the deck of a ship. Probably
there were minute Crustacea, such as shrimps, upon which they
preyed. From dawn, until darkness hid them from sight those
graceful little birds flew continuously, never alighting, seemingly
tireless, up and down, up and down just above the surface of
the water. They were Mother Carey’s Chickens.
Another beautiful and quaint bird that paid us a brief visit
one day was a bosun bird. He came when no other bird was
within sight. He came to honour us only when he was sure
that he would receive our undivided attention. He was worth
it. Snowy white, with bright eyes, and a tail the shape of a
marlin-spike, he sailed above us at mast-head height. For a few
minutes only he was there, turning his head this way and that,
his bright eyes missing nothing. Then he sailed away. Presently
he was a white speck in the distance, and then—nothing.
Quite often we saw bonito at work, sometimes close to us,
and at other times at a distance. There would be a sudden
violent disturbance on the surface, so much so that the water
had the appearance of boiling. The bonito, a short, sturdy fish
of the mackerel family, leaped into the air in all directions, and


so also did the small fish that had been rounded up by their
hungry aggressors. Those scenes never lasted more than a few
minutes, and subsided as quickly as they began.
If heavy rain came during the day Jack, Maryborough Bill,
and myself stripped and had a shower bath. Puss-puss and the
Old Man never washed, and the Groper seldom below the
waist. The Old Man had a belief, firmly established, that
‘washing makes you weak”, and I think that the Groper was
inclined to agree with him for he said, “What about them
Eskimos, and the blackfellas here, an’ the Rooshins? None er
them geezers ever has a wash, an’ what’s wrong with them?
Cap’n Walsh don’ smell no worse nor what they does, do yer,
cap’n?” and when the Old Man had exploded, sputtering with
wrath, the Groper hastened to explain that he was, “On’y a-
backin’ of yer up!”
Sometimes we had just nice time to get wet, and to soap our-
selves, before the rain passed, leaving us open to the ribaldry of
the Groper, who never got caught like that. The Duke of Orfolk
was once miserable for days in a like manner after being thor-
oughly soaped by the nude Maryborough in a futile effort to
moderate his effluvia.
Passing over, or under, such things as flying-fish, we had our
first sight of the Solomons when we passed between Rennell
and Bellona islands on the one hand and the mountainous
island of San Christoval on the other. Between those we were
becalmed for a while, had a swim, and then lowered a small
piece of flour-bag made fast to our lead-line. We did not lose
sight of the white rag until twenty-five fathoms of line had run
out. Twenty-five fathoms is a hundred and fifty feet, and that
shows how clear the water may be in some parts.
Two sharks, from goodness only knows what depth, followed
the white rag back to the surface, and Old Walsh duly shuddered
at what he considered our narrow escape. He most solemnly
warned us never to swim from any craft again in those waters.
“How d’ye know but what a shark isn’t just below the keel, and
what chance would you have then?” he asked.
By sunrise next morning we had made the eastern end of the
big island of Guadalcanal, and the Old Man told us that straight
ahead lay our destination.
It was Marau Sound.


CHAPTER XV
MARAU SOUND
This place is one of the main attractions shown to tourists
who choose to go to the Solomon Islands. It consists of a
number of small, hilly, densely wooded islands, and narrow,
winding waterways enclosed by big coral reefs and the island
of Malappa in such a manner as to give perfect protection from
any blows.
As a place in which to live it is not so perfect for, although
the thermometer is remarkably constant between eighty four
and seventy eight degrees, the warm air is so saturated with
moisture that life there is made uncomfortable. It does not at
all resemble other well-known places in the Pacific, such as
Tahiti, or Samoa. All perishable goods, such as flour, biscuits,
and sugar, have to be imported in tins. Butter, also in tins, is
never anything but a sickening mess worth little except for
cooking. Flour becomes lumpy and full of weevils, salt turns
to brine, biscuits go soggy soon after the tin is opened, and
leather goods, such as boots, grow whiskers overnight.
A clear sky is quite unknown throughout the year, and it
hardly ever stops raining. It is not the gentle, please-excuse-me
kind of rain that places like England get. It often comes down
“whoosh” like a waterfall, hard enough almost to cause the tide
to rise out of its turn. If there were any flies they would need
webbed feet. Thunderstorms are frequent, and lightning may
come so close that it sizzles as it whizzles past your ear. I never
saw Marau Sound otherwise than heavily overcast with clouds.
We entered the Sound through a wide break in the outer
reef, and sailed slowly along a broad passage. As I have said, all
the isles were densely wooded, even down to the edge of the


water. Coco-nut palms, varigated crotons, bread-fruit trees with
their big bright green leaves gave variety to the more sombre
vegetation. The few dwellings of the natives that we saw seemed
to be neat, but none of the people could be seen except a couple
in a canoe at some distance. In the background, on our star-
board hand, we had a glimpse of the rain-drenched, heavily
timbered foothills of Guadalcanal, and Marau Peak.
Presently, a white man in a whale-boat came to meet us. He
was Louis Ackinborn, the mate of Oscar Svensen’s schooner
Sikiana. After he had introduced himself his first words were,
“Where have you been? We expected you to turn up more
than a week ago. Ihe Captain got tired of waiting, couldn t wait
any longer, but said to tell you that he would be back soon.
Jimmy Wilson’s gone away in the cutter along the coast for a
cruise, and I expect him back any time.”
Louis was a bright, friendly, lightly built German of the dark
type. He had a habit of corrugating his forehead, and smiled
readily. He spoke good English, and was anything but reticent,
in fact, he kept going quite a lot. He quickly saw the Duke of
Orfolk and at once took a kindly interest in him in the true
German manner.
“Ah! I see you have a dog with you. Come here, doggie, come
on, I won’t hurt you.” Then, after the Duke of Orfolk had
advanced and duly been patted on his head, “Pooh! He smells
a bit, don’t he? I’m afraid he won’t last long here in Marau—
the crocodiles will get him. We can’t keep a dog more n a week
or so if he lives on the station. The only way to keep a dog is
to keep him on the schooner, in the night-time, anyhow.”
As we had no intention of living with the Duke of Orfolk
longer than necessary it did seem as though he was now receiv-
ing a sentence of death from Louis.
The station at Marau was on a small, flat island entirely planted
with coco-nuts. Sheds, concrete store, and a small three-roomed
cottage on short piles faced as snug a little anchorage as may
be found anywhere. Although this haven was but little more
than a chain in width, the bottom in the centre could not be
seen because of the depth. The water shoaled so rapidly that
the wharf to which we moored was only a few feet in length.
As a coral reef blocked this tiny harbour, which was really the


passage separating one island from another, neither tide nor
wind ever disturbed the water. The principal habitants of
Marau station were cattle, rats, some native labourers, a few
goannas, and fewer cats. There was also a large sow, but her
tenure was brief.
Some of the experiments Oscar Svensen had made in im-
porting animals had not been altogether a success. The cattle
brought to the island were a good investment, for they kept
the weeds down, and were readily bought by the steamer super-
cargo so that he might give his tourists a change from their
deadly diet of dreadful mutton. The steamer had no freezer and
so carried a deckload of sheep, one of which was killed each day
by the cook on the main deck, in full view of the passengers,
giving them both entertainment and appetite.
The importing and stocking of the island with rats was
purely fortuitous. Having few natural enemies there, and food
in abundance, they multiplied exceedingly. They climbed to
the tops of the coco-nut palms and reared families there in cosy
nests. They ate the green coco-nuts by gnawing a hole through
the husks so that the greater part of the nuts were lost by the
rightful owner. That was the reason why Oscar imported the
cats. ,
He induced the steamer people to ship a load of cats in Syd-
ney, and eventually received about a hundred that survived the
terrors of the deep, which generally took on the appearance of
an exasperated sailorman. As Oscar told me that a clerk from
Justus Scharffe’s paid out £lO, at a shilling a puss, for cats
brought to the ships side, the casualties among the pussies
during the voyage from Sydney amounted to fifty per cent.
That was a mere nothing to what they suffered during their
brief rat campaign at Marau station. _
Each time that Oscar came back from a round trip in his
schooner he saw fewer and fewer cats. He was greatly puzzled
until one evening while strolling round his island home he came
upon two natives and their canoe. Sudden suspicion caused him
to search the canoe with the result that he found enlightenment,
and two defunct pussies, under some mats. The natives of
Marau Sound enjoyed poached puss quite as much as some


people say they like jugged hare. That was the reason why
Oscar lost his cats.
Another commercial venture was saved from complete disas-
ter by taking prompt action at the first yelp of calamity. In this
case it was a shipment of dogs, which Oscar had imported when
he had found that he could get £2 from the natives for a dog
that cost no more than two shillings in Sydney.
News of the arrival of the dogs at Marau station spread
quickly among the local natives and crocodiles, both equally
fond of dog-meat. 1 he result was that there was a serious loss
of the new stock during the hours of darkness. Oscar avoided
further loss by taking his dogs for a cruise on the Sikiana. Louis
confided that when he went to put his hand on a coiled rope at
night during that cruise it was more than likely that he got a
handful of something quite different. “But if it’s not dogs, it’s
pigs. Captain Svensen nearly always has pigs, or dogs on the
Sikiana because the natives’ll pay almost anything you like to
ask for pigs or dogs.”
Jimmy Wilson turned up in the cutter M.C. the day follow-
ing our arrival, but what with one thing and another, and a
couple of bottles of whisky, nothing in the way of work was
done until next morning. Then we got to work on the Viking
—fixed the pump, coupled up the piping, removed the galley
from the deck and put it below where our boys would
get the full benefit of it in the confined area of the hold, just
as we had to do in Torres Straits.
All natives are known as “boys” to white people whatever
their age may be unless they are boys, then they are known as
“monkeys” or “piccaninnies”, with the same amount of reason
for doing so as the Americans have for calling their women of
any age “girls”. Louis told off several boys for us, and we
whacked them up between the Viking and the M.C.—four to
each. They had, with one exception, light brown skins, and
appeared to be a quiet, easy-going lot. The boy with the darker
skin was also the best-looking chap in the bunch. Although
slight, he was beautifully modelled. Indeed, he attracted the
attention of us all by his beauty. His name was Lina.
Next day Jimmy took us across the Sound, past various
islands, to the “back passage”, which was a good place to start,


since it was known to have shell. The back passage divided the
mainland of Guadalcanal from the islands of the Sound. It was
exactly like a river. Narrow, winding about, with deep water
confined between densely wooded banks, there was nothing to
show that it was not a river except the fact that the water was
salt. The illusion was helped by the vegetation, which grew
right to the edge of the clear water. The roots were actually
lapped by the salt water, not only here but everywhere in the
Sound.
The average depth in that passage was not more than about
five fathoms, but it was dim on the bottom, like twilight. That
was no wonder, heavy clouds hung always overhead, except
when they tumbled down on top of us in the form of rain. It
hardly ever stopped raining. An awning was fixed amidships,
which gave some protection to our naked crew, and the cook,
but there was nothing aft for the reason that an awning there
would have interfered too much with our work.
Another thing that helped to make it dark below was the
trees. Big, big trees overhung the narrow pass. Big trees with
abundant foliage of their own, and plenty more that belonged
to great creepers, and other parasites. And, as the water was
deep right up to the banks, we sometimes found the branches
of those trees had laid hold of our rigging. In the placid water
of the back passage there was no danger of breaking anything,
and we always got free without fuss or trouble.
It seemed to me that beneath those big trees, encumbered
with strange, clinging, encroaching life, with what appeared to
be unceasing rain pelting down upon us, we were floating on
an unreal dark pool that might have been created by the imagin-
ation of Hans Andersen, a place where something stealthy,
something uncanny, might happen at any instant. There was
life there, yes, but it seemed to be furtive because, I suppose,
it came more suddenly from obscurity, and vanished as quickly
as a ghost. Moreover, we had been told by the talkative Louis
that only a few days ago a young woman had been seized by
a crocodile from a village on this same pass close to where we
now worked, and nasty crocodiles that eat women, darksome
waters, and whimsies are not a pleasant mixture.
Shell was so plentiful that we worked “bag up” for the first


couple of weeks. That was hard graft for the diver, but though
a profuse perspiration was sure to break out when we were at
work in the dress we much preferred that to taking our turn
as tender. No oilskin could keep out the rain Marau Sound pro-
duced for long. Consequently, after standing with the other
chap’s life-line for a while, we felt the cold quite a lot. Anyone
might naturally think rain would not be cold in a warm climate
like that, but I can give an assurance that being exposed to
continual heavy rain aoes chill, even when one is wearing an
oilskin. As for our boys, who had no clothing except a narrow
strip between the legs, they shivered and shook, and broke out
into gooseflesh each time that they stood in the rain for a
lengthy period.
It was a wet, uncomfortable sort of life, with hard work
thrown in for good measure. Dampness, or absolute wetness,
permeated everything in the cabin. It was hard to get a good
smoke for that reason. Inured as we were to a life that quite
a lot of people would have considered a little rough, we began
to fret. Jimmy consoled us somewhat by telling us that M’Boli
Pass, the next place we had to work, did not get so much rain
as Marau Sound. Also, we had the Groper, who grumbled little,
to remind us that the fishermen of the North Sea had cold,
besides wet, with which to contend. And Jack Scullin chipped
in with a wordy, vigorous denouncement of starvation ship-
owners, brutal bluenose skippers, and Cape Stiff (Cape Horn)
weather to show that he agreed with Billy the Groper that
other people elsewhere suffered more than we did. All the same,
my thoughts reverted often to Sydney, my nest-egg in the bank,
and my sweetheart on Thursday Island.
We saw little of the natives. Generally speaking, their figures
were good and their faces bad. All the Solomon Islanders are
Melanesians, with frizzy hair.
The natives of Marau were a colony of Malaita people who
have had a bad reputation always, and were much darker than
the natives of Guadalcanal. Hardly any curiosity was shown by
them in our work but, finding it difficult to steal our shell,
they bought quite a lot of it at ten shillings for half a shell.
Pearlshell was used by them for decorating themselves, their
canoes, and anything else that had a high value in their eyes.


Solomon Islanders are highly skilled artists. When it is con-
sidered that until white traders came among them they had no
metal tools, it would be no more than the simple truth to say that
what was done by those neolithic people was marvellous. Go to
a first-class museum and look closely at their work.
It happened one day that a wedding party came by in three
canoes. Both Bills were below at first, so the party stopped to
look at the effervescence on the surface of the channel, and to
wait for the divers to come up. The bride was very young, being
no more than a child, and quite naked. She sat in the centre
of a canoe with about an inch of water about her, her eyes
downcast, appearing to be anything but jolly. In all probability
the man to whom she was going already had one or more wives
and, more than likely, would be three times as old as she. Young
virgins, like herself, are so very expensive, so rare, and so well
guarded, that wealthy men only, or men with wealthy relations,
have much chance of acquiring one. Many, many Malaita men
go through life without ever having known a woman, just like
some of those dear, dirty, holy hermits are said-probably erro-
neously—to have done. ,
Maryborough Bill was one of those men who make little, or
no effort, to hide their feelings. So far as women were con-
cerned Bill had no more modesty or reserve than a bull-terrier.
When he came up and found that such a tempting little crea-
ture was there, almost within reach, he had his helmet remove
and came on deck at once so that his eyes, anyhow, would get
their fill. He was tantalized and said so, but the young native
girl went away as she had come, still a virgin.
So strict are the ethics of the Malaita natives in regard to their
womenfolk that death confronts any who break their savage
code, unless the offender has a very strong backing or can get
clean away. While we were at our graft in those secluded,
peaceful waters of the back passage, the Groper found the body
of a fine young native. It was plain to us that he had been
recently murdered, for a big clam-shell had been lashed o
his feet, and he was lying prone. In all probability he had been
murdered the night before. In fact, he must have een, or
otherwise the gases generated so quickly in that warm climate
would have caused the body to swell, and rise. Louis told us,


on our next visit to the station, that the poor lad had been done
to death because his ardour for a girl had prompted him to
fondle her adorable little breasts.
I here was quite a pow-wow, or yabba-yabba, about that
business. The Groper had a lot to say on the subject, and said
it. Among other things, he said, “Look here, Jimmy, I ain’t
a-been a-growlin as you know, now, have I? But it’s bad enough
for to be a-graftin in this here place where it never stops
rainin long enough so’s a man can get a bit uv a smoke when
he s on deck, but bumpin’ inter these here corpseses what should
be buried proper instead uv driftin’ round like a lot er Cock-
neys on a Bank Holiday down at Margate ain’t right. I tell yer
what, Jim, well take a bit uv a cruise, takin’ this here poor cow
with us, an we 11 find out where he come from, an’ who done
him in. Then we’ll make ’em bury him proper, an’ give ’em a
dressin down whiles we’re about it, an’ tell ’em we ain’t a-goin’
to have ’em heavin’ no corpseses overboard where we’re workin’.”
But Jimmy said we didn’t want nothing to do with the nig-
gers of Marau Sound, and the best thing to do was to take the
poor murdered cow the Groper had found into the station, and
ask Louis what was the best thing to do. Louis had been here
long enough to know more than we did about dead niggers,
and what to do with em. Then he suddenly flared up because
of the interruption to our toil, and because arguments or oppo-
sition of any kind always did make him angry. He said, “Come
on, Groper, 111 go with yer in the cutter. Why yer want ter go
rootin up dead niggers like this’s got me beat. Why didn’ yer
leave him there an say nothin’ about it? Wbat’d yer want ter
come roarin an howlin ter us for? Well, come on, we ll go an’
dump him in the deep water outside while he’s fresh.”
Our one relief from the drudgery of our work, wet clothes,
and sodden everything else were the week-ends at the station.
On going there after our first week of graft in the passage we
learnt that the poor little semi-paralysed puss-puss had fallen
from the wharf and been drowned. I doubted that yarn, think-
ing it far more likely that she had gone to the bourne of some
dark stomach.
Our week-ends were quiet enough even for a wowser, but I
always found some slight pleasure somehow. Immediately oppo


site the station was the island of Malappa within easy swimming
distance, and on the rocks were oysters nearly as good as the
famous rock oysters of Sydney. Maryborough Bill and I had
been over in the dinghy getting, and eating, some of them one
day. When we came back we halted at a little distance in order
to watch the Groper playing with a parrot.
Billy the Groper lolled back in a canvas deckchair entertain-
ing a very small, lively, coco-nut parrot, which was perched on
the forefinger of his left hand. The Groper was enjoying him-
self, and so, too, was the bird. It danced about on the finger
with great vim, stretching its neck first to one side and then to
the other, and reaching out as though about to kiss the pouted
lips so invitingly close. Billy chirruped constantly, except when
he was saying, “Pretty bird, pretty bird, pretty bird”, and the
merry little feathered clown kept his part of the duet going
very well indeed, too.
Now and again Billy varied his love talk by saying, Give
Billy a kiss, birdie, come on, give Billy a kiss. And presently
Birdie surprised Billy immensely by accepting the invitation.
The next instant the Groper seized the tiny parrot and flung it
violently away, and Birdie seemed to be much astonished, and
somewhat annoyed, too, judging by the indignant noises it
made. The Groper proceeded to behave in much the same way
as the parrot; he behaved wildly, and made noises deemed
suitable for this special occasion. He scrambled to his ten-
derly feeling his bottom lip, and said with great fervour, Son
uvva bitch!” So that there could not be any possible misunder
standing he repeated, ‘ Son uvva bitch , several times.
When the Dutchman, Captain Oscar Svensen, turned up he
proved to be a tall, dark, rather thin man with black hair, and a
moustache of which he was proud. His skinny legs were cov-
ered with the scars of tropical ulcers. His manner was at times
jovial, but there was another side to his character, for he always
had a nasty taste in his mouth when he turned out in the
morning, and he often remained like that until the sun was
over the fore-yard. He was not a true Dutchman at all, for he
hailed from Norway.
One day when we were at the station Oscar suggested fowls
for dinner as a change, and he provided rifles so that a little


sport might be had at the same time. The idea was welcomed
by Jimmy and Maryborough, who set out at once to shoot the
fowls in friendly rivalry. After the first shot the startled birds
scuttled, squawking, with flapping wings in all directions, zig-
zagging as frightened poultry do. It was all over very quickly.
Bill chased the birds, firing as quickly as he could load and
press the trigger, laughing continuously while Jimmy, protest-
ing, pleading that it was his turn to have a shot never had a
chance. About seven or eight fowls were killed by Bill, and he
did not waste a cartridge. It was an extraordinary exhibition of
rifle shooting at a most difficult target. But an expanding bullet
does not improve fowls for table use.
Immediately in front of the little cottage, right on the beach,
was a great sprawling tree with big, heavy branches spreading
widely over the water. Advantage had been taken of this, in a
most practical manner, by building a neat little closet on a stout
horizontal bough overhanging the water at all tides. An in-
clined ramp from the shore led to this convenience. The dwel-
ling itself was enclosed by a neat fence calculated to hinder a
crocodile from wandering about the small yard and causing
annoyance to all hands and the dog. At the right-hand corner
of the fence, within a few feet of the huge bole of the tree,
which was lapped by the salt water, there was a gate used
mostly by those going to or from the closet.
One Saturday night, while we lolled in canvas chairs on
the veranda of the cottage, Louis suddenly seized a lighted
lantern and made hurriedly for the gate in front. The Duke of
Orfolk darted after Louis, as a dog will. Those two had barely
time to get outside the gate, which was only about thirty feet
from the veranda where the rest of us were sitting, when there
were a few yelps, half a yelp from the Duke of Orfolk and the
rest from Louis. It was not more than a second or two before
Louis’s first words reached us, but by that time all of us were
on our way to the gate, Maryborough a little in the rear because
he had first gone inside for a repeater.
As we had seen from the veranda, Louis had turned to close
the gate and, while he was doing so, the lantern was flung
violently against the big tree with a crash, and tinkle of breaking
glass. We saw no more than that.


Louis said he saw nothing, because he shut his eyes, having
a hazy idea of nothing in particular. He was quite straight-
forward about that. What he did know is that the Duke of
Orfolk was pressed against his knees at the time when he was
seized by the crocodile, and began his last yelp. Louis said he
fell on top of the crocodile, and that something hit him a hell
of a whack that flung him where we found him lying on the
gnarled roots of the tree. None of us had any doubt that it was
the tail of the crocodile that had struck him with such force.
Up on the veranda of the cottage, we found that Louis was
badly bruised, and Oscar diagnosed some broken ribs—how many
it was difficult to say, because Louis said they were all broken,
and they were his ribs anyhow, and he didn’t want anybody
to do the counting for he could do that himself some time on a
Sunday when he had nothing better to do.
Louis felt well enough, after Oscar had parcelled him up
tightly in several fathoms of unbleached calico from his store,
given him three fingers of Geneva and put him to bed, to
say to us, "What did I tell you? As soon as I saw him I told
you your dog wouldn’t last more n a couple of weeks. Didn t
I tell you a crocodile’d get him? You heard me say that, didn t
you Clarry? A crocodile likes a dog better’n anything else. Hell
take the Duke of Orfolk away somewhere and anchor him
down and pile a lot of rocks on top of him till hes ripe, and
then he’ll eat him. They always do that. Anything they can
get hold of, it doesn’t matter if its a dog or a pig or what it
is, they keep it stowed away somewhere till it gets ripe, then
they eats it.” ,
The Groper rubbed his reddish whiskers with one hand re-
flectively, and said, "Well, he won’t want for ter keep the
Duke no long time. He’s ripe, as yer calls it, now. He s been
ripe ever since I’ve knowed him. If this here crocerdi e o yours
wants a dog what’s riper’n what the Duke of Orfolk is hes
a hard ’un ter please.” , ,
With the voice of one searching his memory so that he
might say something in favour of a departed ever-loving wi e,
Maryborough Bill said, "Poor old Duke of Orfolk, took be a
bloody crocerdile! Pretty rottin’ stinkin’ bad luck I call it, after
bringin’ him here all the way from Sydney. Well, hes gone


now. The best I can wish him now is I hope he gives the
bloody crocerdile a hell uv a guts-ache. Well, I’m off ter bed,
an’ you fellas’d better go, too. We don’t want yer yappin’ all
night, an’ keepin’ us awake, do we, Louis?”
The last thing I remember before turning in that night is
Oscar taking another three fingers of square Geneva to Louis,
and telling him not to be afraid to call out if he wanted any-
thing.


CHAPTER XVI
ASU PAINA AND M’BOLI PASS
When we had worked out the shallow water at Maiau
Sound we decided, like sensible men, that the deeper
channels would keep well enough while we worked passages
elsewhere of moderate depth.
At Oscar’s suggestion it was resolved to prospect a passage
in Malaita before going to the island of N’Gela to work M’Boli
Pass. The southerly end of Malaita is bisected by a winding,
very narrow channel marked on the chart as “Maramasiki Pass”.
It is possible for quite a large schooner, say one hundred and
fifty tons, to go right through, but few masters would care
about the job even if they had an auxiliary engine. The exact
length of the passage I do not know, for it has many, many
turns, but it is about twenty-five miles long measured as the
mythical crow flies.
We spent our first night in a little bay at the entrance to
the Pass, only about thirty-five miles away from Marau, but
we were in a different world. It was a distressful, depressing
place with a scanty population of morose lads who deserved
their reputation of being particularly treacherous and murderous.
It was here that we saw some specimens of the ugliest bipeds to
be found anywhere, but a lot of their ugliness was owing to
art. All of them had the lobes of their ears so enlarged into
loops that when they did not carry a full load of ornaments
they dangled down in gristly strops as far as their shoulders.
Some had pegs of bone clean round the bulbous part of the
nose. Others were spritsail-yarded with a long bone slung
through a hole in the septum of the nose and sticking out on
either side in a highly impressive manner. One or two had a
p


big crescent of mother-of-pearl pendant on their dark, dirty
chests that usually bore, as well, many scars like weals, also
intended to be ornamental.
All were totally nude except for armbands, anklets, or a
cord round the waist. Being without any kind of covering was
no advantage; it made them more repulsive. They came in
small canoes of a poor type, stared, spoke a little to each other
in a guttural dialect, but had little or nothing with them in the
way of trade. However, one canny native paddled off to us
bringing with him an orange cowrie, which Oscar was quick
to buy for ten sticks of tobacco. I use the word “canny” because
this chap waited until it was dark so that none of the others
would know of the tobacco he had been paid and claim a
share of it.
Our boys were terrified by the close approach of the Malaita
natives in their canoes. The mere name “Malaita” causes con-
cern to almost any other Solomon Islander, and here were
those brown lambs of ours brought right to the shambles of
the dreadful Malaita cannibals! Wasn’t that enough to make
any lamb tremble? We did not have to worry about a watch at
night in that place!
All the people of this group were cannibals before the advent
of those gallant men, the traders, and for long afterwards. In
the middle of the twentieth century it may be said, almost with
certainty, that cannibalism is still carried on by natives in the
mountains of the big islands. None of these people ever fought
pitched battles, but planned murder, kidnapping, infanticide,
and things like that were going on all the time, just as they are
in America and other highly civilized countries today. In fact,
about the only thing that marked these people as being dif-
ferent to others was their predilection for human meat, having
better morals, and being more honest. For most of the time they
were vegetarians for the simple reason that meat of any kind
was difficult to get. That is why Oscar could not keep cats or
dogs at Marau. That is why Solomon Islanders eat big fruit
bats, goannas, possums, and practically any animal whatsoever.
Generally speaking, they robbed strangers only, being quite
unlike white people in that respect. Also speaking generally,


their attitude to sex questions and all-round morality was much
higher than that of any white race.
Next day we lost no time, but entered Maramasiki Pass, or
Asu Paina, as the natives call it, at sunrise. It was an un-
attractive place. Mangroves, and dense forest growth seemed
ready to stride right into the stream, which, like the back
passage at Marau, had the appearance of being a fresh water
river. It was a depressing place, and I began to understand the
reason why the local lads were such a horrible lot. It did seem
reasonable enough to do a little murder now and again in such
a place as a tonic, a pick-u-uppo.
We kept the lead going. Every now and again Maryborough
Bill from the cutter M.C. or myself from the Viking went down
and did some exploring of the bottom, which was mud. It was
dark down there, much darker than the back passage at Marau.
In fact, it was not possible to see anything at all without going
on one’s knees, and then for a brief few seconds only, because
the mud got stirred up and made sight impossible. So what
we did was to grope about in a rather haphazard way. Even
under those conditions we found several shell, which proves
that if the water had been clear the Asu Paina would have
been a good place to work, but it was also a place from which
to get away.
What greatly helped or hurried our decision to get out was
an incident that happened next day, after a night when sleep
was made difficult because our boys kept calling us.
Two natives came to us early in the morning and, after the
customary dodging the issue, told Oscar that they had a young
woman for sale at a most reasonable price. Of course, slavery
was not legal with us, but they knew nothing about our absurd
ethics, so the only way to release their captive was to buy her.
Oscar, who was expert at understanding the incomprehensible,
if I may be permitted to put it like that, said that the woman
had been kidnapped, but those responsible now found she was
a danger to them and had to get rid of her in a hurry. Also,
if they could not sell her to us they intended to kill her because
they were not able to keep her. That being the case, Oscar
told them to bring the woman and, providing she wished to


come with us, he would buy her for the price agreed upon, a
box of tobacco worth £4 in trade value.
About midday the old ruffian and his younger companion
came back in their canoe and, sure enough, they had the
woman with them. She was lying there, in the water that was
sloshing about in the bottom of the canoe, with her wrists and
ankles tightly bound. The pole on which she had been slung
and carried to the canoe was still in place and now lying
lengthwise on her quite naked young body.
Having fastened their canoe fore and aft to the Viking, they
lifted their victim on the pole and, with one heave, flung her
to our deck like a bag of potatoes before our dull wits had
grasped what they were about to do. The poor creature fell
heavily, crying and moaning with agony, for her wrists and
ankles were cut, and dreadfully swollen. Oscar then did a
queer thing, a thing that still seems to me to have been a
quite unnecessary piece of callous cruelty. He ordered the vil-
lainous brutes to return the woman to their canoe, cut her
loose, and let her come to us of her own accord. I think his
idea was to clear himself of any possible charge of felony.
However, the woman had to be pushed from behind, and
pulled from above, before she regained our deck, and there
she lay helpless for a while, moaning, with her head turned
down on her arms until the box of tobacco had been paid to
her ravishers, and they had gone. Then, while our boys were
getting in the anchor and setting sail, Oscar bathed her swollen
wrists and ankles, afterwards powdering them with boracic.
When she had been made as comfortable as possible a fathom
of print, pipe, tobacco and matches were given to her, and she
smiled a little then for the first time, confidingly. She had a
pretty, light-brown skin, and quite a pleasant face. She appeared
to be not more than twelve or fourteen years old. Her name
was Karuaili. The last time I saw her she was the contented
housekeeper of a trader near Aola on Guadalcanal, and was
suckling a wee, light-brown baby.
Oscar told us that he once bought a boy-child under the
same circumstances for ten sticks of tobacco—trade value, one
shilling.
The Asu Paina, as already stated, divides Malaita, the sou’-


easterly part being known as Maramasiki. Now, while the
Viking is sailing with a beam wind back to Marau, I take this
opportunity to mention that at Port Adam, near the extremity
of Maramasiki, a most unusual missionary had his station.
There were no traders living anywhere on Malaita at this time
to help him if he got into trouble, because there were not suf-
ficient trade inducements, and also because of the murderous,
treacherous character of the people. However, those facts di
not deter Walter Ivans from starting his gospel business there.
He was successful, too, partly because he was unafraid.
He had other commendable qualities, as well as fearlessness,
that helped him greatly. He was one of those rare men who
quickly learn new languages and dialects, and he was able to
talk to the natives like a Dutch uncle. And that is just what
he did do whenever he thought they needed that sort of thing,
for he had force as well as pluck. I came to know Walter Ivans
well, and admired him as a man.
Like other missionaries, Walter had to bribe his dus y er
to go to "schoolu”, as the thatched native building used tor
divine service is called. At the door of the schoolu each Sunday
stood a proud boy with sticks of trade tobacco in a basket As
each native passed inside he was given one stick o ter ac .
There were twenty-six sticks of tobacco to the pound, and
usually these were cut into two. After some time had gone by
Walter thought it a fair thing to cut out the tobacco stunt,
relying on eloquence alone, or eloquence, precept, and practice,
to draw a packed house to his show. In fact, so he told me,
it was about time to educate his flock of lambs into contri utmg
some of their wool, in the shape of copra or something else, to-
wards the upkeep of the church. j
The first Sunday that the payment of tobacco was stopped,
Walter said, the congregation stopped, too. They went on stn e.
“No more terbac, no more schoolu , was their ultunatu .
Walter said that it cost him a lot of trade to an 0
presents, to break that strike, but eventually he did succee £
getting the people to go to schoolu without having to pay the
difficulty he had was in overcoming the reluctance
of the young women to wearing clothes of any m ,


those unmarried are bound by custom to go naked. Walter con-
fided that he admired those pretty, light-brown, nude figures
immensely, but they undoubtedly detracted something from the
solemnity of the service.
Soon after our return to Marau we sailed again, without
Oscar, for M’Boli Pass in the island of N’Gela, which is about
the centre of the Solomons. N’Gela is not one of the large
mountainous islands, but it is important because one small islet
named Tulagi held the Government Residency, and another
islet contained the coaling and trading station of Gavutu. The
sound formed between the islands of Gavutu and N’Gela made
an excellent, though small, harbour. It was to this place that all
steamers, men-o’-war, and other craft came, for it was the most
important shipping centre of the group.
Close to Gavutu is the deep, narrow entrance to Port Pervis,
which is a splendid little harbour with a magnificent mud
bottom that would hold anything, and twelve fathoms of water
that is always calm. We tried here and there in the mud of
Port Pervis, but all that we found were a few huge, coarse
oysters.
Then we came to the mouth of M’Boli Pass almost hidden in
one corner of the nearly rectangular little harbour. This passage
divides the island of N’Gela in two just as the Asu Paina
bisects Malaita, and is identical in character to that waterway
and the back passage at Marau, but is not so gloomy. It is
possible for craft of two or three hundred ton to pass through
although it winds a lot.
While we steadily worked the whole length t>f M’Boli we
had much better conditions than at Marau. There was less
rain and, because the trees were smaller and did not overhang
the water, more light got through to the bottom. Shell was
plentiful along the bottom and right up the sides and, because
of that and having much less rain, we were a more cheerful
crowd.
A number of natives came in canoes, not to watch the diving
so much as to steal the shell. There is no doubt that some of our
gold-lip did go while we were at work, for those chaps were
pretty sharp. Then, when we woke up and would not allow
a canoe alongside or natives on board while a diver was below


and everybody too busy to watch them, the beggars stopped
coming. They were a cheeky, thieving lot, those natives ol
N’Gela. , . ,
A rule with us was never to strike any native, even when
caught in the act of stealing, so, as there was nothing else
in the way of effective punishment that could be done to them,
all we could do was keep a good watch. The British Govern-
ment is not lenient to those who inflict summary punishment
on a native. Even if one of them is shot in self-defence it is
more than likely that the white man involved wdl have to
stand his trial before a judge and jury. Moreover m the West-
ern Pacific the trial would take place in Fiji, and that would
mean a long voyage and much time wasted apart from the
expense. It is for those reasons that we left the Asu Paina m
such a hurried manner after we had rescued the young native
woman from the cannibals, otherwise I felt sure t at eac
one of us would have been delighted to wait awhile on the
chance of shooting one or more Malaita savages.
Nothing much happened while we cleaned up M Boh Pass.
However, one day the Groper came up, just as I was abou o
step off the ladder, and called across to Jimmy Wilson to stop
me When we asked him, “What’s up, Billy? he puffed out his
cheeks and blew a mighty blast to the welkin shoutmg with
great vigour, “I jus’ seen the biggest whopper o a s ar
seen. Look, Jimmy, you seen a few, an so as you, 1 ,
so’ve you, Clarry, but I bet none er yer ever seen nothin hke
this here geezer what I seen down below unner w ere ,
you’s anchored now in this here passage. It was as big roun
the belly as this here," and Billy the Groper stretched his arms
as wide as he could, bending his hands inward so as to give
some idea of the girth of the shark. . ,
“What I think,” he went on, “is it’s a maty shark what
come for ter drop her young uns in a nice quiet spo .
be that full on 'em she's close up bustin’ Anyhow, don you
go down fer a bit, Clarry; stop on deck an ave a ' , ,
what I’m a-doin’ on, I’m havin’ a smoke, I am. And tha
exactly what I did, too. .
At the other end of M’Boli Pass, where >t opens to the
there is a mission station prettily situated on lug g


day when we were grafting away “bag up” close to the station,
a party came off in a smart whale-boat. We kept working for
a while so that they might watch the diver, then those in the
boat came aboard for a yarn.
Soon three of the missionaries went back to the station, for
there was little in common between them and ourselves, but
one man stopped. He told us that he had been a surgeon in
the British Army for a number of years. We got along well
together. Some of his yarns were a bit tough, but they made
us laugh, and the tougher the yarns the more did Maryborough
enjoy them. This missionary was a human being, and in his
past life had been accustomed to the society of men. Now he
was decanting some of his best, which for too long had been
bottled up.
He had heard us refuse an invitation from his companions
to attend church next Sunday, but when he asked us to go to
the mission on that day we all said “yes” pretty promptly. He
said, “Come after church. There’ll be some beer, and you can
get some fruit to take back with you. We can have a good old
talk, and a smoke. Do come.”
We did go, and we did have some beer, and got some fruit
to take back with us. Also we talked and smoked. We found
that chap a first-class fellow. We learnt afterwards that he
treated any sufferer, native or white, at the little hospital at
Sioto with great skill and every consideration. As he was the
only medical man in the group, his coming to the Solomons
was a splendid thing in every way. He was Doctor Welshman.
From M’Boli we went to Gavutu for water and stores. Then
we set off upon what was pretended to be a recruiting trip,
but was really nothing more than a holiday jaunt. None of us
cared twopence whether we secured more natives for our crew
or not. We merely wished to sail about, see things, meet some
of the traders, and loaf before tackling our next job.
Leaving Gavutu, we cruised past Tulagi, where Woodford,
the Government Commissioner lived, and on to Savo, a round
dormant volcano about midway between the big island of
Guadalcanal and N’Gela. Here we found Dynamite Jack, so
called because Woodford had fined him for selling dynamite to
the natives. This man was the nearest approach to a beach


comber in the Solomons. He was a densely ignorant and very
devout Irishman. Men like Dynamite Jack treat natives as
equals, whereas, of course, the ordinary native is a much
superior being. It is a bad thing to allow men like that to
live anywhere among natives, for they lower the prestige of
the white man.
Jack came olf to us and, after a few drinks, joined us at
dinner. Shortly afterwards, when Jack learnt that it was Friday,
he went to the side, poked one or more fingers down his throat,
and retrieved from his troubled interior not only his dinner but,
presumably, all the drinks that he had had as well.
A native of Savo would not go into the water on any account;
not even waist-deep on the beach to hold a boat. Jack the Irish-
man told us that the night before our coming a woman had
squatted on the beach, in a few inches of water only, in order
to wash herself, and a shark had taken her. Dynamite Jack
evidently did not expect us to believe him, for he appealed to
some Savo boys for confirmation, which they promptly supplied,
adding additional supporting testimony by supplying vivid de-
tails of the immoral character of the deceased.
Possibly the reason why the sharks round Savo were so savage
is that it was the custom there to dump the dead into the sea.
Also, so that the story of a woman being taken while she was
in only a few inches of water may seem less improbable, I may
state that the sea round Savo is very deep, and even a boat s
length from the shore it might be over a man s head.
The reason why Dynamite Jack sold explosives to the natives,
or rather, why they bought the dynamite, was because Solomon
Island fish are most difficult to catch. Nor do fish seem to be
anything like as plentiful as inside the Great Barrier Reef, or
in Forres Straits. Surface fish in small shoals, such as mac ere
and mullet, are common, but they do not bite. And, cause
of coral reefs, or surf on open beaches, netting is quite im
practical in most places. Besides, nets suitable for catching s oa
fish are expensive to buy, and there are none made y t e
natives. So, for one reason or another, dynamite is wide y use
not only in this group but in many parts of the Pacific.
It is not much use to throw into a school a two-ounce p ug
of dynamite that has a long fuse attached to it, for the simp e


reason that it is most unlikely that the fish will wait for it
to kill them. So a very short fuse is used, with the result that,
here and there, there are people who have no right hand
through having held the plug a trifle longer than absolutely
necessary. Of course, many dynamiters lost their life as well
as their hands.
In consequence of those scattered folk having carelessly blown
themselves to one or more bits, the motherly old British Govern-
ment prohibited the sale of dynamite, and any other explosive
whether in u gin bottle or not, to all natives under her juris-
diction. That order did not apply to white men; it did not
matter so much about them. That was a most excellent law, and
Mr Dynamite Jack should have been deported for what he did,
and he was.
Fortunately, the traders in the Solomons were an exception-
ally good lot of clean-living men who refrained from selling gin,
firearms, and dynamite to the natives. Nearly all of them were
British sailors. Captain Woodhouse was said to be the oldest
pioneer in the group. Then there were Frank Wickham,
Norman Wheatley, Alf Thrower, Billy Pope, and Billy Pitt,
besides Oscar Svenson, and Ericsen of Gavutu. Those, with
some others, were the men who quietly, in a matter-of-fact
sort of way, were civilizing the people of the Solomon Islands—
the “Savage Solomons”, as they were known throughout the
Pacific. The missionary follows the trader, not the contrary.
That statement is not without exceptions, as I have shown to
be the case with Walter Ivans and James Chalmers.
Leaving Savo, we met Alf Thrower and his partner Jack
Weldon at their station on Buena Vista. The hearty welcome
those two gave us included some pretty hearty, hefty drinking
after dinner. Next day, to work off the effects of the green
coco-nut water that we had used to dilute our grog, we tried
the passages of Buena Vista for pearlshell, although we knew
that nothing was there, for neither Alf nor Jack had ever seen
a diver at work.
From Buena Vista we sailed round the nor’-west end of
Malaita to Manoba, an island that had a good anchorage and a
bad lot of niggers. The good anchorage consists of the passage
between iManoba and iVlalaita. It is blocked at the south end


by a coral reef, but our Admiralty chart did not show the reef
with the result that we very nearly ran onto it.
Making no effort to hide their disappointment at our escape,
dozens of natives sought to board us from their canoes.
We had seen them launching canoes while yet we were
at some distance. Knowing something of the character of
those lads, we had loaded our sniders and brought them
on deck so that they might know we were not quite defenceless.
Yet it was necessary, even then, to heave some of them over
the side. When asked by one savage, who was armed with a
cocked musket, whether we wanted a fight, Jimmy promptly
answered, “Yes, me fella plenty savvi makem big fella fight.
Spose you fella likem fight, all right, me fella likem. More
better you fella stop good, no makem humbug alonga me fella.
Me fella walkabout look out boy belonga work alonga me fella.
S pose some boy like come alonga schooner, walkabout alonga me
fella, himi catchem plenty good fella kai-kai, plenty terbac,
plenty all about good fella something belonga him. Some boyi
like come?”
That’s pidgin English, that is. Pidgin varies a lot according
to the class of men who happen to live in the place where it is
spoken. One general rule applies to all pidgin more or less. It is,
attach a vowel to words ending with a consonant unless the
following word begins with a vowel. Often a native will ij 1 !* 0 "
duce a substitute word when at a loss to express himself luci y.
Told to bring cheese, our little cook, Su-su, asked, What name
jese? Thas fella allasame soap?” And another boy, wanting to
use a saw, said, “Very good you givem thas fella a asame
brother belong akkis.” And still another, not knowing the word
“envelope”, made his meaning perfectly clear with trousers
belonga paper”. Again, little Su-su referred to the lid ot a
saucepan as “hat belonga him”, which was as close as aw
man gets when he says, “Where sme lid? meaning, ere
is my hat?” . D .
The people of Manoba were a cut above those at Asu Faina.
Their skins had a healthy appearance; fewer were afflicted with
buckwa, the giant ringworm that so often covers a native trom
head to foot. They seemed to be more ambitious, enterprising,
and bold. They had arrogance, and pride, but t ey were not


too proud to take such spoils as trusting strangers might bring
within their grasp. The heads of visitors were considered by
them to be desirable, and to have an attractive appearance when
bleached and displayed as ornaments.
Those people were not fools, but they thought that we might
be. One bright business deal they tried to slip over us was their
suggestion to bring out several eligible young boys during the
night, receiving payment of a box of tobacco for each boy so
delivered. The most plausible reason made by them to induce
us to fall in with that scheme was the plea that those willing
to sail with us were visitors who must, for some obscure motive,
depart from Manoba that night, so, if we did not take them on
board at once, we would not get them at all. Of course, the
basic idea of the business was to get all the tobacco and any-
thing else possible from us, and then for the recruited boys
to dive for home and brother. There was the possibility also in
their plan that they might be able to gain our craft by surprise.
There were so many well-armed natives, a lot of them with
muskets, cruising about that night with specious tales and
plans for our undoing that none of us were game to sleep.
Next morning, after a great deal of talk, two healthy looking
young boys agreed to sail with us on condition that we gave a
thirty-pound box of tobacco to the best friend or representative
of each as an advance payment. Behind that was the fixed,
conservative, one-track idea of getting the tobacco well beyond
our reach, and then for the two boys to clear out by swimming.
Jimmy’s plan to euchre that plot was to sail out so far that the
two boys could be caught by us if they did dive after the tobacco
had been paid. The result of the whole futile business was that
the two natives jumped into the water when it was seen that
their plan had no chance of succeeding. And so we got away
from Sio Bay, as the anchorage was named, with no loss, and
the gain of a little experience.
I dare say that if a man lived among them and won their
confidence and friendship he would find some admirable traits
in their characters, but we did not discover many. A long time
ago a lad shipped on board a Yankee whaler that had called in
at Sydney. The whaler was one of those notorious craft from
Martha’s Vineyard or thereabouts. That being understood,


nothing further is needed to explain why he and an older man
skedaddled from her in a whale-boat, without a compass and
with very few provisions.
After a long voyage, during which death from starvation was
dodged because a shark was harpooned by the elder man, the
two made the coast of Malaita, not far from Manoba. The
natives of the small island to which they had drifted took a
fancy to the lad, and adopted him as one of themselves. He
learnt their lingo and their customs, taking his place and part
in every respect in all things common to the community. Long
afterwards the master of a labour vessel called at the place
where the castaway lived and persuaded the people to let him
depart. The natives were reluctant to do this, because they
looked upon him as one of themselves. Many years later that man
was killed by natives in the New Hebrides while recruiting
labour for the Fiji plantations. When the Malaita folk heard
of the murder of their white protege numbers of them volun-
teered to join the ship so that they might go to avenge his
death. f
The two weeks we spent ostensibly looking for labour after
leaving M’Boli Pass were not entirely without result. Close to
the extreme northerly point of Malaita a canoe holding two
boys came out on purpose for one of them to ship with us.
This chap had lime-bleached hair, his body covered with t e
smelly, scaly tropical giant ringworm, the usual tattoo mar s,
drawn-out ear- lobes, and so forth. Apart from his unsightly skin,
which he could no more help than he could the lice in his
hair, he was a good type. His ringworm would vanish in a
month, cured by us in a most simple manner by anointing im
once a day with a mixture of sulphur and kerosene, and is
skin would look better than that of anybody else. As for is
lice, he was free of them as quickly as he was of his hair and
the time it took to rub some kerosene into his scalp.
Shipping that boy was a queer business, with no advance
payment demanded or given. He simply stepped onto our ec
with the remark, "Me like come walkabout alonga you fella.
Then he said what I suppose was a brief farewell to the ot rer
chap in the canoe. His name was Manippa.
We sailed away from Malaita with a fresh breeze on our


quarter making it necessary to use tackle on the tiller because
of the strain when the Viking sheered. We were making for
Thousand Ships Bay at the island of Ysabel, the nearest land
to the nor’ard, and the reason we were going there was to
poach as much shell as possible. The Germans, who owned
that part of the Solomons, did not want it, or they would not
have left it lying around as they did. If people leave valuable
things like money or pearlshell lying about uncovered and un-
guarded, other people are prone to hop in for a share.
Thousand Ships Bay is a good anchorage during the sou -
east. It was so named by Mendana because such numbers of
canoes came out to his ships while he was there. He had been
sent by the Viceroy of Peru in quest of the Great South Land,
and that is how it came about that he sailed into Thousand
Ships Bay, because he wanted to make his discovery of the
Great South Land somewhere in the tropics where it is nice
and warm. None of the early Spanish searchers for the un-
known continent reported to lie in the south ever sailed beyond
the tropics.
That was round about 1567. For the next two hundred years
nobody knew a thing about it except a few Spaniards who
nursed the quaint notion that some day they might colonize
the place. That is how the group came to get its name. The
archipelago was artfully called the Solomon Islands in the
hope that thereby settlers would be attracted, thinking it the
place where King Solomon got his gold.
The population has greatly declined since 1567, partly be-
cause of raids made by headhunters from Vella Lavella, Ren-
dova, and other islands, and partly because of epidemics of
disease such as dysentry. However, a large village still existed
at Thousand Ships Bay—the only big village remaining on the
island of Ysabel—and many canoes gathered round us. The
people were glad to see us for it was seldom now that any
vessel called, principally because there was almost nothing in
the place that would tempt a trader, but also because there was
a chance that a German gunboat might pop along.
Quickly the natives found that we were not traders to whom
could be sold such copra, dogs’ teeth, ivory-nuts, or other valu-
able goods that they happened to possess, but their acumen


soon found a way to get tobacco from us. Tobacco is in demand
all over the group because it may be smoked, but also for the
reason that it is a form of coinage.
Fowls began to come off in the canoes and, when it was seen
that just one chook brought as much as five sticks of terbac
it was not long before all hands and the cook in the village,
and the whole of the Thousand Ships Bay navy, got into the
fowl trade quick and lively. The price paid by us for poultry
soon dropped until from five sticks (about 2Fd) the maximum
became one stick, and still they came.
Fowls! For a day or so a fellow had to watch where he stepped
on deck, and half his time was spent picking feathers out of
his teeth, or hair, or both at once. And when Maryborough was
spitting feathers and saying something at the same time he
sounded like a bearded Russian with a bad cough, hairy teeth,
a bellyful of vodka, and a mouthful of feathers and swear
words. In a day or two the fowls abated considerably, because
our boys were invited to eat them, and because I helped several
of them to escape by swimming at night, when nobody was
looking. . . ,
To the Americans, who are a nation of people with such
delicacy of feeling and nicety of expression that they call a
coffin a casket, the birds that I have been calling fowls would
be referred to as chickens, irrespective of their age and relation-
ship to countless thousands of descendants. For the purpose of
deception, and other customary business reasons, restaurant pro-
prietors the world over would do exactly the same thing just as
mutton always appears on their bill of fare as lamb.
Fowls!


CHAPTER XVII
PORT PRASLIN
WE got away from Thousand Ships Bay through the Ortega
Channel, which separates St Georges Island from the
big island of Ysabel. Maryborough Bill donned the dress and
went down a few times just so that it might be said we had
tried the passage. Soap on the lead had told a story the theme
of which was “No shell here”, bringing up a little of the bottom
as evidence each time it was dropped.
Growing close to the water on St George’s Island was a tree
so bare of leaves that numbers of pigeons sitting on the branches
could plainly be seen—or at all events they looked like pigeons.
When we were close to this tree, while Bill was on the bottom,
Jimmy Wilson got my marlin from the cabin and fired a shot
at the birds. Nothing happened. Saying, “That’s funny!” in
great surprise, Jim fired again, with the same result. The crew
tittered, and then we woke up to the fact that the “pigeons”
were some sort of parasite that looked so much like birds that
even the native crew were deceived at first.
When Maryborough came up Jimmy seemed suddenly to
discover the tree with the birds, and called Bill’s attention to
it saying, “Hey, Bill, look at that tree with all them pigeons
on it! I’ll get Clarry’s rifle for you, you’re the best shot. Re-
member the way you skittled them fowls at Marau?”
After some objection, because he was in the dress and it was
therefore exceedingly difficult for him to aim properly, Bill took
the marlin and fired. No result. Bill stared, had another shot,
and stared somewhat harder. “Them pigeons ’re tame,” he said,
“but I’ll shift ’em, by cripes I will.” And Bill had another shot.
It was not until then, when all hands began laughing, that


Maryborough discovered the joke, and when he did discover
it he couldn’t see it even after we had explained it to him.
Remembering that the marlin was mine he would have thrown
it over the side, but he had to let go of it to keep his balance
when I objected. In fact, it was not until we told him that
Jimmy, too, had been firing at the “pigeons” that he subsided
with a few sniffs.
Along this southerly coast of Ysabel are a chain of small
islands through which we now threaded our way. Little sur-
veying had been done, the chart merely showing a dotted out-
line, and such warnings as “Position doubtful” and “Shoals re-
ported here” appeared here and there to engender caution.
We got over any danger there may have been in sailing
uncharted water by using our eyes, and the lead now and again,
in the daytime, and when night fell we anchored in some
quiet cove. As for the possibility of being caught by the Ger-
mans, no one showed much concern but it was discussed by us
in a small way. Some harrowing experiences in South American
and other jails, related with considerable feeling by Jack Scullin,
failed utterly to alarm us.
A large population might be expected on such a big, fertile
island as Ysabel, but right along the coast we saw no sign what-
ever of native life, no smoke, nothing at all. The headhunters,
and disease, had made a remarkable clearance of the people,
though there must have been some tucked away in the hills
here and there.
Shortly after leaving Thousand Ships Bay we sent our crews
ashore early one morning to cut firewood on a small island at
which we were anchored. Having seen no signs that it held
natives, Jimmy concluded that' there were none. I went with
the first dinghy to stretch my legs and look about. Setting off,
with the marlin repeater on my arm, I was soon at the point
where the beach formed a rather sharp angle and so disclosed
to me what had been hidden from us all.
Not more than two hundred yards away, there on the beach,
two great black canoes had been pulled from the water and
lay close together, partly overhung by the heavy, dense foliage
of a big tree. Standing about, all facing me, were the best part
of a hundred fine-looking natives. They did not hold any
Q


weapons, they (Jid not show hostility, but I was afraid
and, for a moment, very nearly turned to run, for I knew at
once who they were. They were the famous and dreaded head-
hunters from Vella Lavella or thereabouts. I am glad to say
that I did not run, but stood for a while, as they did, gazing.
Then it came to me that those people had been there all night,
that they must have known about us, and yet had not attacked.
Then came the disturbing thought, “And we didn't keep any
watch last night, or any other night. This crowd could have
murdered the lot of us had they wanted to.”
From that it was easy enough to reason that they had no
intention to attack us, whatever might be their plans in regard
to the local lads and lasses. So, mustering up the very small
amount of daring I have, I walked towards them, being ashamed
to show fear of natives.
The headhunters were quite friendly when I got among
them; there was nothing in their behaviour to make me scared.
In fact, the two leaders, both past middle age, shook hands with
me and seemed to be delighted by my visit. I told them we
were divers from Sydney, for we were able to yabba in pidgin
English, and they passed that on to the rest of their mob, who
were very interested, for pearlshell held a high value in their
eyes. Several had mother-of-pearl ornaments, such as crescents,
suspended on their chests.
The canoes were wonderful. They were not out-riggers nor
dug-outs, but were built of planks, carvel fashion, as our ships
are built. And when it is considered that a Solomon Island
canoe has not less than five planks, each of which has been
hewn with stone adzes from a single tree, the amount of time,
skill, and labour put into a canoe may be seen to be enormous.
Each canoe was inlaid with shell for the entire length, and
the bow and stern, besides being inlaid, were decorated with
large white cowrie shells. One plank only may be cut out of a
tree, partly because several strong, solid projections must be left
on each plank, by which it is lashed to what would correspond
to the timbers and stringers in one of our ships. The canoes
were black. An idea of the size of those beautiful craft may be
had when I tell you that they carried, without crowding, fully


forty men each. I have been told by island white men that
there were canoes that held a hundred men.
All of those headhunters were fine fellows physically, in
splendid condition, with clean brown skins, and no clothes
to hide the beauty of their bodies. It was a great pleasure to
look at them at such close quarters. Even their tattoo-marked
and ornamented faces had something attractive about them, in
spite of black teeth.
Exactly as white women do, those warriors carried in a bag
their personal articles de toilet, quick lime for their hair, betel-
nut in an ornamented case, shell money, pearl fish-hooks and
fine lines, shell scrapers for scraping coco-nut, cartridges if they
owned a musket, and anything else that was valuable and small
enough to be carried. No white woman could be more sedulous
at her toilet than those chaps were. Coco-nut oil was applied
freely by them to most parts of their skin, and lime was used
with discretion both to bleach their teased-out, frizzy hair and
to keep in check the louse population thereof.
Being sportsmen, those people, especially the two elderly
leaders, admired my marlin repeater somewhat more than
enough, in my opinion. In fact, it was not long before I had an
uneasy feeling that getting away from them might be harder
than coming had been. Their weapons were principally spears,
and thin-bladed tomahawk heads fitted into three-foot-long
handles. They also had a few muskets, such as old Sniders, and
some bows and unfeathered arrows, but they had nothing as
effective as my light marlin. A marlin, by the way, is almost
exactly the same kind of rifle as a Winchester.
I got out of this situation better, perhaps, than I deserved.
Presently, after I had been with the headhunters for about
half an hour, I noticed that they were looking towards the
point from where I had first seen them. Turning, I saw my
three shipmates, and at once set out towards them waving my
hand as I did so to the gentlemanly savages. There is reason
to believe that I had been silly, but, to remove any possible
doubt about that, Jimmy and the others had a few words to
say on the subject, and said them.
On the same day that we met the Vella Lavella pirates we
made Port Praslin. The entrance was narrow, but once inside


the waters widened so as to deserve the name of a sound ,
not a “passage” like IVI Boli or Asu Paina. Low hills, five to
eight hundred feet high, clothed with rather stunted jungle
that, as elsewhere, came down to high-water mark encircled
the sound. In most places mangroves invaded the water and
gave a sombre touch to the scene. Altogether, it was not a
cheerful place. The absence of visible life helped that impres-
sion, for apart from some hornbills flying heavily across the
sound uttering an occasional loud, doleful squawk there was
little to be seen.
Early on the first morning after our arrival at Port Praslin
we saw that there was some life in the place, for two small
canoes came slowly, hesitantly towards us. It seemed as though
the folk hereabouts had been taught to be cautious, and had
waited awhile until more or less satisfied that the signs of
peace were dinkum before daring to make a call. Later on, we
found that their poor village was on a hill at the other end of
the sound, but could not be seen by us because just there the
channel turned sharply to the left.
The people who lived in that hamlet were liable to raids by
headhunters: they were never free of their fear. Even supposing
that they had the courage to resist, there were not enough of
them to beat off an attack made on them by any flotilla of fierce
pirates. Indeed, their village seemed to be like a sheep-fold
nicely situated for the convenience of those headhunting
pirates and marauders.
However, I think the village was semi-immune to attack,
the headhunters looking upon it as being a convenient half-
way house, a resting place where a little fun might be found
that cost them nothing. The place could have been wiped out
at any time had the pirates so desired. My theory is supported
by incidents that happened while we were at Port Praslin.
There was much blowing of conch-shells at the village one
day, and a canoe came off to beg assistance from us because a
big war canoe was in the offing. The headhunters spent one
night at the village, and then went further along the coast. In
a week or so the pirates came back, so we were informed, with
five heads, and three live young women. Unlike some of us,
headhunters never carry off women unless they are really and


truly young—they would take the heads only of others. What
a pity that we are not able to do the same!
The natives who so timidly came out to see us that first
morning were given some trifling presents by Jimmy, and from
that time until we left the sound we were assured of all the
assistance required by us that the local natives could render.
Sunday excepted, not a day passed without a number of canoes
coming out to us bringing people of all ages to watch us, and to
volunteer to work. We had no more difficulties so far as re-
cruiting labour was concerned. The joy with which those
natives welcomed us may be easily understood when it is real-
ized that they did not see a trader from one year to another,
and so had no chance to get such things as knives, axes, tobacco,
calico, and fish-hooks. Besides, our presence there was to them
some sort of shadowy protection, as is a constable of police to
a lonely white woman living on a selector’s holding, even
though the township where the policeman lives is thirty miles
away.
We started graft at once just inside the entrance because
shell was there in plenty. The water was deeper than at M’Boli
or Marau, and became still deeper when we got further inside.
Because of the tides we worked anchor fast, as I had done in
Torres Straits. By shackling one hundred and twenty fathoms
of coir rope to a like amount of chain the diver at work got three
long spells below with a wide range merely by shifting the
helm, and three equally long spells on deck merely by sitting
there while the boys toiled heaving in over two hundred fathoms
of cable.
It would be pleasant to give an account of beautiful sights
seen by us in the waters of Port Praslin. However, I cannot,
because Port Praslin down below was even more dreary than
the surface, having little besides small weeds, a quantity of in-
evitable fringing coral and, in the deepest water, much sponge.
Most of the bottom was nearly bare, slightly undulating, and
gritty. Fish were not nearly as plentiful as along the coast of the
continent, but the water was remarkably clear.
As we gradually worked our way further into the sound
the water became deeper and tlje toil harder, but there was
a fair amount of cheerfulness. Jimmy was pleased because he


was getting cheap labour; our crew because their work was
made easier; and the locals because they got a few luxuries out
of it such as “tinni bullamucau”, and “bissikick” or “bisskitti”,
otherwise tinned meat and biscuits. The word “bullamucau”,
by the way, is said to have originated when a native asked the
name of cattle. He was told, “Bull and moo cow.” Now, all
over the Pacific the accepted name for cattle, or meat in a tin,
is “bullamucau”.
As I have said, volunteers came eagerly to us each day to
help with this work. I don’t know how we should have got on
without them in that deep water, for turning the handles of
the pump was very hard graft indeed. Standing on deck, the
additional help pulled ropes fastened to the pump handles—as
many of them as could get a hand on a rope. Others below,
eager to claim some share of the work, laid hold of a pump handle
if they could do so. One of the volunteers was exceedingly in-
telligent and willing. He quickly picked up all there was to
learn of the work, and the way he gestured at the others, in-
cluding our crew, if they were slow to follow on with the next
thing to be done, was very funny. He anticipated things; he
looked ahead and, knowing what came next, he assumed com-
mand and bossed the others. He was deaf and dumb.
It was interesting to watch sweet William when he was
able to give some of his time to a piccaninny. Maryborough
Bill adored the little ones. His leathery looking, weather-beaten
dial became all wrinkled, each muscle of his face became con-
cerned in giving its best in a whole-hearted smile. If Bill was
seated on deck in the dress, he would often send Jack to the
cabin for some dainty for a child—usually a biscuit spread
thickly with jam. At first, more likely than not, the puzzled
child might stand staring at the strange tucker held in its hand,
a little frightened of the novelty. That delighted Bill. He would
say, “Look at him. Isn’t he a dear little kid?” And then to the
child, “Come here, I’ll show yer what ter do with it.” Bill would
then take the jam laden biscuit from the naked brown young-
ster and bite a piece from it, munching with exaggerated enjoy-
ment.
We had a case of Geneva gin when we left Gavutu, and each
evening since, or nearly every evening, we had gathered aft
on the Viking and talked about this and that. The ordinary


case of Geneva held fifteen big square bottles, kept apart by a
frame of wood. To further lessen the danger of breakage the
case was filled tightly with rye husks. Now nothing of all that
was left—not even the empty case, for the little brown cook
had used that as firewood.
From the considerable experience I have had I know what
a pleasure it is for a fellow to listen to himself enthralling others
with what he has to say after a couple of three-finger drinks
have loosened his willing tongue. Now the “square was all
gone, and loquacity did not bother to visit us in the evening. Of
course, we could 101 l on the deck in fine weather and smoke,
yarn, and have a drink from the tank, but it was dry—dry as
a sermon is on a beautiful sabbath morning in a chapel. Think
what a difference it would make if all prosy parsons took a
couple of snifters ten minutes before giving out their text—
and another after. If they did that they might succeed in rousing
their audience from apathy.
Respectability was the key to the character of Jimmy Wilson.
Carefully tended in childhood by a doting aunt, he had not
entirely rid himself of all her inhibitions, though some ‘of his
efforts to do so were not to be sneezed at. With the square
gone, it must have been rather a dull life for Jimmy. He did
no work because he was boss, and what is the use of keeping
dogs and barking yourself? Certainly, he saw dividends being
won for himself and Oscar by his ill-paid divers, and on top of
that he had their company all day and all night, every day and
every night, but there was no doubt about it, things were dry.
Before long he came to me privately. “Now look here, Clarry,
I’m going to go across to the British islands an meet the
steamer, an’ get a few more stores an things, an I want you
to come with me, an’ I’ll take Jack, too. 111 leave Bill an the
Groper here to work the cutter. It s no good us all goin. I
can trust you, but if I take Bill an’ he gets one sniff of whisky
inter him Oscar’ll want ter know what I was doin havin all
the ructions on the steamer. More than likely there 11 be a
lot of towrists an’ mishnories on her, too. You see what I mean
-I’ll have to leave Bill here.” That’s the worst of having a
bull-terrier; you’ve got to leave him behind if you are going


among poodles like missionaries and tourists, and wish to re-
tain your respectability.
So it was settled like that. Jimmy and I went across in the
Viking, taking Jack with us, got the badly needed stores, prin-
cipally whisky and square, and sailed back to Port Praslin, much
refreshed, in a few days.
And then a queer thing happened. It turned out that the
case of square was for the Groper, who had ordered it. The
Groper had been getting his whack of the other case of square
while it lasted, and we naturally thought that with the new
case it would be “Round about squary, black dog for a white
monkey”. But it turned out otherwise, for the Groper said, “If
yous wants a drink of my square you’re welcome to it any
time yer like, but you’ll have ter come fer it like I had ter do
when yer has yer square on the Viking. Now I got a case on
me own yous can come fer it ter the cutter, the same like I
has ter be a-doin’ on when yous has it in the Viking. See?”
None of us thought the Groper had been nursing a griev-
ance and, except for one bottle broached when Jimmy and I
were coming back from the steamer, the Groper had his case of
fifteen big square bottles of Geneva all to himself. There were
cockatrice eggs in those bottles.
And another queer thing happened. Immediately after
coming back, that is to say immediately after the more im-
portant matter of delivering his case of square to the Groper
had been effected, Jimmy was told that Manippa, the boy who
had joined us at Malaita, was sick and not working.
“Don’t give him anything to eat fer a few days an he’ll soon
want ter work again,” said Jimmy. “What’s the matter with
him, anyhow?”
“Me an’ Bill don’ know what’s the matter with him. As fur
as we can make out, it seems like he’s fell out with his village
high-cockalorum, an’ his nibs has been a-pointin’ of a bone at
him, or somethin’. You’d best take a screw at him, Jim, an’ see
what you makes of him. Anyhow, I can tell yer this much, he
ain’t eat nothin’ fer jus’ on a week. Them other boys seen as
how he never got nothin’. Bill here says, ‘No work, no kai-kai’,
didn’ yer, Bill? Anyhow, yer’d best take a screw at him yerself,
J. »
Im.


Jimmy got into a temper at once, as he always did when he
was puzzled and didn’t know what to do. “Here, where are
yer? Come on out of it an’ le’s have a look at yer—what’s yer
name, Manippa, isn’t it? D’yer hear me singin’ out ter yer?
Come on, get out, unless yer want me ter come an drag yer
x. »
out.
Slowly, with painful difficulty, Manippa crawled from the
for’ard recess until he reached the pump fly-wheel. Then, while
all watched, none offering help, he pulled himself upright, or
nearly upright, and to Jimmy’s question made answer.
“Thas time me look you fella firs’ time, me lika go walkabout
alonga you fella. Now, one fella boy stop place belonga me.
Himi plenty sawi makem strong fella medcin. Himi makem
talk-talk alonga me. Himi talk allasame: ‘S’pose you go walk-
about along thas fella schooner, you die quick fella plenty too
much.’ Now me die.”
Having said these words, Manippa turned and slowly passed
from sight, on all fours, as he had come.
Turning savagely to the Groper, Jimmy said, “What’s the
good of telling me to have a screw at him now when he’s like
this, when it’s too late to do anything? Why didn’t you two
do somethin’ before he got like this? You ought ter have known
what ter do,” he said to Maryborough Bill. “Even if the Groper
didn’ know, you ought ter have enough sense ter have done
somethin’ after livin’ with niggers half yer life, an’ bein half a
nigger yerself. Anyhow, you’ve got no more brains than a
nigger if you are a bit white outside. Why, in the name of
God, didn’ you bring him on deck an’ throw water over him
till he fergot all about the bone pointed at him by his lousy
witch doctor? Why didn’ yer give the poor cow somethin ter
eat? Why didn’ yer? Ain’t none er yer got no sense? I can t go
away fer a few days an’ trust what I thought was two grown
up adultified men without cornin’ back an’ findin half me
crew dead an’ dyin’. Here, Su-su, cook some rice, an put plenty
of sugar an’ condensed milk over it, an’ see if the poor cow 11 eat
it. It might do him good even now.”
Then remembering that little Su-su, who was feebly scratch-
ing himself fore and aft, and staring dumbly at him, did not
understand, he continued, “You cookem rice, capsizem sugar,


capsizem su-su belonga bullamucau alonga him. Makem good
fella kai-kai belonga boyi sick. Savvi?”
And litde Su-su brightened somewhat and answered, “Me
savvi.” I think that the name “Su-su”, which means literally
“milk” or “breast”, was the nick-name of tenderness given to
our little cook because of his gentle nature and extreme youth.
Before sunrise next morning Alina told us that Manippa
had died during the night. The manner of the funeral, with
some digressions made in order to introduce unusual and un-
orthodox proceedings witnessed at other out-of-the-way burials,
was considered while we had our morning coffee.
The first proposal was to dump Manippa over the side, well
weighted. That was Jimmy’s idea. Maryborough Bill then got
an imagination going that he was not known to have before
this, and he described luridly the experience of meeting the
defunct on the bottom, in a couple of weeks’ time, carried
towards him by the tide upright, but not pure. So we, that
is to say the Groper, Bill, and I, voted against dumping Man-
ippa, and Jimmy gave way graciously, if reluctantly.
I proposed that the body should be cremated, as in India.
The others thought that the green timber ashore was too sappy,
and that it would take too long.
Then Jack Scullin said, “I say, Jim, why not bury ’im proper
like they alius does ter hus Christyuns?” An eager note came
into his voice. “I tell yer what, Jim, lemme do hit for yer. Me
an’ the boys’ll take ’im in the dinghy an’ make a proper hole
fer ’im. An’ when I’ve got ’im ready I’ll sing out ter let yer
know, an’ yer can all come over in the dinghy an’ watch whiles
I spouts a bit uv a prayer what I knows. An’ after that all
hands can beef out a ’ymn we all knows like, ‘There is a nappy
lan’ far, far away’. An’ then, yer see, there won’t nobody be
able ter say we never give ’im a proper Christyun fun’ral.
What d’ye say, Jim? What d’ye say?”
And what Jimmy said was, “Shut yer silly damn head. What
the hell do you know about prayers, or Christians either? What
yer tryin’ ter do is ter make a goat of the thing. Well, you’re not
goin’ ter make a goat of nothin’, even if he is on’y a poor nigger,
so shut yer mouth, or I’ll damn quick shut it for yer.”
We all knew—Jack, too, but I guess he had forgotten it—


that there were no tools on either of the craft suitable for
digging a grave, and that is why nobody else but Jack had sug-
gested anything of the kind. However, we had one man
amongst us who could be guaranteed to think of a way out of
almost any difficulty, and his name was James Wilson. Pre-
sently he had an inspiration, at the right moment, too, when
we were all stumped for an idea. It was so simple that it was
a great wonder that nobody else had thought of it.
Suddenly Jimmy said, “Here, I tell yer what we’ll do. You
know that old tops’l you got over there in the cutter, Groper?
Well, we’ll roll him up in that, give the boys the axe, an’ let
them take him ashore an’ bury him which way they like. We
can’t be sittin’ here all day talkin’, an’ doin’ nothin’. Go over
an’ get that old tops’l, Groper, an’ that old broken hatch, too,
while you’re about it.”
When our boys went ashore with the body of poor lonely
Manippa parcelled up in the old topsail, lying athwart the
broken hatch, with only the firewood axe for use as a tool to
bury him, we did not expect them to return for some hours
at least, because of the matted roots interlocked in the ground.
However, in about an hour back they came, as fresh as when
they started, with the news that the job was done. With some
dubious wonderment we questioned them, and got the reply,
given with the assurance of those who know they have done
a good job, “Me fella put him on top alonga mangrove; alla-
same fashion place belonga him.”
What they had done was to fix the bier, with Manippa on
it, more or less securely in the branches of the mangroves after
the fashion of the Malaita people. And that was that.
For the remainder of the time that we were in Port Praslin
Maryborough Bill did not allow the “burial” of Manippa to
fade from our memory, at all events at meal times.
With fifteen fathoms, or more, of water overhead, divers may
become seized with the “screws , or paralysis. And that is
what happened to Bill one day; he got the screws and carried on
quite a lot until Jimmy gave him an injection of morphine.
After that we agreed to take things a little easier, taking longer


spells on deck, stopping under for shorter periods, and trying
to come up less quickly than was usual with us.
No longer now did we take lengthy walks while the cable
was paid out on deck; the water was too deep. The coir had
been dried, and coiled below for’ard where it was out of the
way and might make a bed for any of the boys who fancied coir
rope as a couch. Before long the lead told us there was twenty-
two fathoms, or more, above us, and something new in diving
experience came my way. One afternoon I picked up five shell
and then remembered no more until, somehow or other, I was
on the ladder at the surface.
After the helmet and ballast had been removed, and I was
seated on the cabin, I became increasingly aware of what
was taking place. Everybody was staring at me, and Jimmy was
blowing off. I heard him say, among other disagreeable things,
“What sort er diver d’ye call yerself, floating up out er near
twenty-four fathoms er water? Don’t yer know no better’n that?
If it wasn’ the best er new gear, ev’rythin’ brand new, some-
thin’ would ha’ busted. What yer mean by it, eh?”
Now, it was my invariable rule when coming up to give the
pull on the line that was the signal to the tender that I was
leaving the bottom, before closing the valve to inflate the dress.
I was as sure as possible that I had done so this time, but Jack
said he had felt no pull. Even so, he should have known by
the “feel” of the line what was going on. I told Jimmy that
there should be five shell in the bag, which was still on the
bottom, and that I had closed the valve without any memory
of doing so.
There is no doubt at all that if I had not closed my valve,
thus inflating the dress and floating to the surface, I’d have
been a gonner, for neither Jack the tender nor anyone else
knew anything of my condition until I was blown to the sur-
face with such force as nearly to bounce out of the water. I
may say at this point that nothing warned- me that paralysis
was creeping over me. I felt no symptoms at all. No death
could be easier than one that came as did that attack of paralysis
down there on the bottom of Port Praslin.
Maryborough Bill found my bag; it had seven, not five, shell
in it. That affair did not make Jack more careful, though he


had been sternly cautioned by Jimmy. A day or so afterwards
I had completely filled a bag with shell, and was about to
“come up”, when the anchor from the cutter crashed down
quite close to where I was standing. Strangely enough, I had
never seen that happen before, so I was vastly interested. The
anchor and chain came hurtling down through the wonderfully
clear water, accompanied by a lot of unwilling bubbles that
escaped from their temporary bondage as fast as possible, clam-
bering frantically, erratically back to the surface. When the
anchor and loose chain did fetch the bottom, with a great
bump, a cloud of dust, or what looked exactly like dust, rose
up into the nearly still water and was slowly carried away by
what little tide there was at the time.
It was then that I noticed that my life-line was lying along
the gritty bottom, neglected and idle. I looked at it and laughed
as I pictured my tender standing aft on the Viking holding a
bight of the line of a man whom he had completely at his
mercy, and not caring a damn. My life-line lay along the
bottom in pretty curves, sometimes doubled upon itself, for
about thirty fathoms, and then rose limply to the surface. I
have said that I laughed, and I did, but it was ironic laughter.
Then I watched the Groper come down. First came his
plumper, which was a small line weighted with some old rusty
chain, and that hit the bottom in a weak imitation of the
anchor. Then came the Groper quickly. At once he opened
his valve, and up went the bubbles in swarms. Then he shook
his life-line, which caused the plumper to be pulled up by an
unseen hand. Walking energetically, he picked up two shell.
Turning, he became aware of me quite close to him, and came
to me at once. I did not move, or make any sign, so thinking
that I had another seizure, after an ineffectual attempt to see
through my face-glass, he overhauled my life-line until it was
“up and down”, and then gave it a mighty pull.
Even then my line was drawn but slowly upwards. Ine
Groper stood by until he saw me going up, and then resumed
his graft. It was all most interesting, and I was glad to hnd
the Groper behaving as he did.
That evening Billy the Groper came over looked at me
queerly, and then said to Jimmy, "Look here, Jim, did Clarry


say anything to you about his life-line bein’ all over the bottom,
lyin’ all about anyhow?” “No,” Jimmy replied, “he didn’t say
anything ter me about it.”
“Well, if he won’t, I will.” And the Groper spoke up, telling
all hands what had happened.
Mr Jack Scullin also spoke up, saying, “It’s a lie, it’s a bloody
lie!” He didn’t have time to elaborate his thesis, for Jimmy
rudely interrupted him with a violent blow, swosh on the
mouth, which most people consider a very disconcerting thing
to happen. He was also admonished with a few brief words
culled at random and hastily strung together before being
heaved at him by Jimmy.
“I’ll teach a son uvva bitch like you to call one of my divers
a liar! I’m satisfied now that it was you not looking after the
line that damn near conked Clarry the other day when he
was blown up. You pay a bit of attention ter what yer doin’
when yer holdin’ the line, or I’ll do more next time’n smack
yer in the mush—l’ll murder yer.”
Which all goes to show that a tender should be reasonably
circumspect in what he does and says.
Usually one day was much the same as another, but a small
whale made things interesting for me in that deep water one
afternoon. I became aware that something out of the ordinary
was going on, in that queer way that inclines a man to think
he has a sense that warns him when danger is nigh. Looking
round in an upward direction, I saw a small whale, perhaps
thirty feet long, circling round about fifty feet up from the
bottom.
This visitor did not appear small to me; he seemed to be much
too big. At first I was not at all nervous; my interest, amazement,
and general curiosity made me stand as a little child might do
if suddenly confronted with a—well, with another whale, if
there was a spare one handy to confront him with. The whale,
too, was inclined to examine what it saw for, circling rapidly,
it came lower and closer. Of course, I turned, too, habit making
me mindful not to twist my gear. Very soon this astonishing
fellow—the whale, not me—was right on the bottom, which was
coarse grit with a lot of sponge growing on it, and so close that


I could see several big suckers clinging to it, and quite a lot
of barnacles. Moreover, I got the idea that the whale winked
at me, and smiled, and I half believed that it did.
As I say, the whale went along the bottom stirring up a
prodigious cloud of what looked like dust. It was getting closer
and closer, but it had little way. It was nearly at a standstill
when it turned slightly so that it was lying partly on its star-
board side, and it wriggled then, for all the world like a clumsy,
playful puppy.
When the whale began to wriggle so close to me I did not
wait any longer. I pulled my life-line hard, closed the valve,
and cursed because I couldn’t get away a bit quicker. He came
up with me, enjoying himself, I bet, while I nearly died of
fright.
When I got on deck I found excitement bubbling. The
Groper was on deck, over on the cutter, shouting across to us,
just as though it were his whale, "I seen it, I seen it when I
was down. Did you see it, Clarry?” The cheek of him! And
without waiting for an answer, As soon as I seen it I comes
up. I wasn’ a-goin’ for to stop down with no whales skylarkin
close by like that big geezer was a-doin’ on.” Anyone would
have thought it was his whale, the way he was going on!
Presently, there was the whale motionless, or nearly so,
blowing away and having a great time close at hand on the
surface. Then all hands and the cook pointed fingers of dif
ferent colours at the whale, telling each other, and me too, that
he was there.
“There he is. There he is, Clarry, over there.”
And Jimmy Wilson said to me presently, “The Groper says
he seen him down below. Did you see him?
After a while, finding that nobody wanted to play with him,
my whale sorrowfully put up his helm and went off, blowing
disconsolately.
The only one who had suggested hurting the harmless
creature was Jack, and he might have succeeded if I had not
put in my oar. He had appealed to Maryborough, Bill saying,
“Ooh-a, Bill, what about getting Clarry’s rifle an’ ’avin’ a shot
at ’im? Shake ’im up a bit, eh, Bill? Go on, ’ave a shot at im,


an’ le’s see what ’e’ll do. I bet ’e’ll cut some capers when ’e gets
a lump er lead in ’im. I’ll get hit fer yer, eh, Bill?”
I hopped in with, “Bill's not a mongrel, if you are. Bill
doesn’t go round murderin’ things as big as a house for the
fun of murdering things, do you, Bill? Let me tell you, Jack,
that Bill’s a sport—if you know what that is—a real sport. He
would no more think of shooting a poor harmless little thing
like a whale than he would of punching a piccaninny for the
fun of making it howl. Would you, Bill?”
And Bill rather hesitantly admitted that he wouldn’t. Bit of
diplomacy, that was.
The Groper did not have the cutter M.C. all to himself.
That would not have worked, because there were three of us
divers sharing the two craft between us. But the Groper did
not leave the cutter. Either Maryborough or myself went across
and worked there, but Billy the Groper never came to us on
the Viking. I don’t know how that came about, but it happened
like that somehow.
Thus it was that a few days after the jolly whale had paid
us his visit I was working from the cutter while Billy idled,
dressed in a white cotton singlet and coloured print luva-luva.
In his quiet way, taking it easy, he “was enjoyin’ on hisself”.
I had been down six times that day, with a long spell
between dips, coming up each time with a full bag holding,
perhaps, twelve shell, for our bags were big ones made of
canvas. Sitting on a box right aft on the cutter before going
down for my seventh, and last, dip that day I listened to the
Groper while smoking my pipe.
“I think you done enough; you better get out er the dress,
an’ me an’ you’ll get down inter the cabin an’ have a drop er
square.”
I said, “No,” for I wanted to make a good tally, though a
feeling of numbness in one shoulder should have warned me
to knock off.
“Please yerself,” said the Groper, “you know best. Y’know,”
he went on, “I been doin’ a bit er thinkin’ on one thing an’
another terday ’cause I’d nothin’ better ter do, an’ I gets thinkin’
on them bagpipes what Highlan’ers play. You seen ’em marchin’
along with the drummer knockin’ hell outer the big drum, an’


the drum-major in front cuttin’ capers—looks fine, they does.
Well, you notice they alius plays the same toon. So what I
gets a-thinkin’ on is, s’pose some geezer invents a bagpipes what
can play another toon or two he’d make a fortune, he would.
Think how them Highlan’ers would go for a bagpipes what
played more’n one toon. They’d heave out them they got now,
an’ go for the noo ones. In course they would; it stands ter
reason. They’d soon learn some more toons, don’ yer think?”
Now, by this time we had worked our way well into the
sound. Where the cutter was anchored there was a channel, or
gutter, in the bed below with gently rising ground on either
side of it. The lead-line told us that we had twenty-eight
fathoms of water at this spot.
Down there, with one hundred and sixty feet or more of
water over me, it was wonderfully clear. The shadows of clouds
overhead were plainly visible as they passed across the sponge
bottom. Looking up, I could not see the copper of the cutter,
but when the sun shone brightly the shadow of the craft over-
head made a steady mark on the sponge that distinguished it
from the shadows of the clouds. There was a strange absence
of animal life. One shark only did I see, far above me, in Port
Praslin, and other fish were anything but plentiful. It was
rather a dreary place, a lonely place, in which to work, but I
told myself that many people would undergo my experience
gladly.
After my seventh dip, Tom, a boy whom the Groper had
broken in as tender, was taking off my dress. He was loosening
the butterfly-nuts that clamped down the bands on my corslet.
It was my custom to unscrew the nuts within my reach after
they had been loosened. This time I was surprised, and some-
what amused, to find that my fingers refused duty. I raised
both hands but my fingers went on strike; they were numb
and helpless. I looked at them, and tried to make them work
but they would not, and I was mildly amused.
Suddenly Tom stooped so that I saw him looking up into my
face. He called, “Billy, diver sick, you come look.”
Then the face of the Groper with its red fringe of whiskers
appeared, looking up into mine. It said, “Get the dress off
quick.”
K


Although helpless, quite unable to move or make a sound, I
could plainly hear all that was said. It was very strange. I had
no feeling at all. The only sensation I had was one of amuse-
ment. It did seem so dreadfully funny to be so helpless and
yet to see, and hear, the concern of the Groper while the
dress was hastily removed. They tenderly lifted me, taking the
greatest care not to bump my head, and got my heavy body
down into the cabin. There my flannels were taken off, and I
was massaged.
Jimmy Wilson, and Maryborough Bill came across. All of
them peered so intently at my face that it made me querulous. I
wished they wouldn’t stare so much. I wondered what sort of
expression my face did have.
In about half an hour I had recovered enough to be able
to swear a little, though not so distinctly as was desirable, so
they knocked off rubbing, but continued to glare. Inside an
hour, after the Groper had given me a second mate’s tot of
square, speech had returned, with the result that I got another
man-sized drink.
As a consequence of my experiences I can confidently recom-
mend death by paralysis as being a first-rate way of dying.
Death may be caused in all sorts of ways, some of which bring
excruciating agony with them. From what I know of it there
is nothing like that about paralysis. It is a beautiful death.


CHAPTER XVIII
THE CASE OF WHISKY
IT was Saturday afternoon. Heavy clouds overhead, and the
absence of wind, made the day sultry. The Groper on the
cutter, and Maryborough on the Viking, were grafting away as
usual, while I amused myself making a new strop for a topping-
lift block from a strand of hemp rope.
It was quieter than was ordinarily the case, for Jimmy had
sent away the locals because we had moved back into water of
less depth. The water of the sound was almost without move-
ment. Nothing disturbed it save the bubbles from the diver
below breaking on the surface in a continuous sparkling wide
ring. The crews toiled at the pumps, and the pumps protested
with a monotonous complaining clamour as though they were
weary and would like to rest. The moody tender stood aft
holding the line, his attention drawn to the cutter when the
Groper came to the surface, or to his line when he got the pull
that told him that his diver was coming up.
Jimmy was down in the cabin. He had been down there for a
long time. Once I heard a subdued sound like wood being
wrenched apart. Round about three o’clock, Jimmy came on
deck. He was so drunk that he had to steady himself with one
hand as he worked himself round the cabin towards me. He
held an ordinary glass half full of whisky towards me, saying,
“Here, Clarry, have a drink. I opened the case er whisky we
got at Gizo. The Groper can keep his square, an’ drink his
square if he wants to. What do we care what he does, hey ?
We got our case er whisky, haven’t we? Go on, drink up an’
I’ll get yer another one. What do we care about the Groper’s
square? We got our whisky. Whisky’s berra ’n square any day,


isn't it?” And Jimmy carefully made his way back towards the
cabin scuttle, glass in hand, to get me another drink, serious
as an undertaker.
I enjoyed the drink that Jimmy brought, but I did not
hanker after another. I had guessed what Jimmy was up to
when the slight noise he made opening the case had reached
my ears, and yet did not go to look. I drank partly because a
refusal is puzzling to a drunken man, and is resented. That
case of whisky had remained unopened, hidden, since Jimmy
and I had returned from our little trip to the British islands for
stores. It was never mentioned. Out of sight, out of mind.
Everybody knew it was there but it was tabu, sacred, and
brought out only when the high priest considered the time was
ripe.
The time was ripe; the high priest was about to officiate, and
he was drunk. Slowly, cautiously, Jimmy rose from the cabin with
another big drink held in his hand. Nobody knew better than
he how easily accidents happen, and so he took care not to
disgrace himself by spilling one drop of the sacred whisky.
However, I did not get that drink.
Maryborough Bill came up just then and Jimmy sat on the
cabin watching until the tender had removed the ballast and
helmet. Then he addressed the diver on the ladder, “Hullo, Bill,
I got a drop er whisky here for you. Come on deck an’ have a
good ol’ drink with me.”
Bill was a little hesitant, and shy, as a boy might be at a
party when first meeting a pretty girl. He said, “Aw, wait till
I knock off, Jim. Wha’sa time? Y’know what I’m like, if I
have one now I won’t do no more terday. Leave it till I knock
off, Jim, an’ then I’ll have a drink with you.”
“Never mind about yer work; knock off now; it’s Sarraday
af’noon. Take off dress an’ you, an’ me, an’ Clarry’ll all have
a drink t’gether. Come on. This’s whisky, not square. This’s
whisky, good ol’ whisky. The Groper can keep his square. I’m
goin’ have drink wi’ me ol’ pal Bill.”
So Bill, smiling with pleasure at the warmth of Jimmy’s
invitation, came on deck and was soon out of the dress. He
drank the tot of whisky pressed upon him. “That’s goodo,” he
said. “So yer opened her up at last, did yer, Jim?” Su-su, at


jimmy’s order, brought the bottle from the cabin. The three
of us had a drink together. Then Jimmy, having reminded Bill
how they had always stuck together, and always would stick
together, embraced him as though he were a woman, and then
went down to sleep it off, almost sobbing as he went, so maudlin
had he become.
When Jimmy had gone, and he had given Jack a drink,
Maryborough Bill raised the bottle on high and shouted an
invitation to the Groper. “Hey, Groper, I got somethin’ here
fer you! Hey, look what I got! It’s whisky. Come on over while
I give yer a drink. It ain’t none uv yer square-face, it’s whisky.”
With little pressing, the Groper got out of his dress and
came across in the dinghy—we had only the one dinghy be-
tween the two craft. Smilingly, his sturdy frame dressed in a
singlet and luva-luva, the Groper walked aft towards the mizzen
where Bill stood, holding out the bottle of whisky.
“Come on, Groper, have a drop er whisky.” Then, as Billy
the Groper put out his hand to take the bottle, he altered his
mind; he had a better idea.
“No,” he said, “I’ll pour it out fer yer.”
He poured some whisky into the glass, held it up, squinted
at it, then poured a little more from the bottle. “There! I’m
givin’ yer a good nip. Drink it.”
The Groper, keeping up his appearance of good nature, took
the glass and drank, saying, “Well, Bill ol’ man, here’s luck.
This isn’ the fust we had together, is it?”
“No,” agreed Bill, “it isn’t. But it’s the last drink of this
whisky me an’ you is goin’ ter have together. That’s the last er
this whisky yer goin’ to get, Groper. I jes’ wanted yer ter come
over ter get jes’ one drink er this whisky ter show yer how good
it is, an’ that’s all yer goin’ ter get of it, see?” He put the
bottle of whisky on top of the cabin and advanced towards the
Groper in a menacing manner. “You can keep yer square-face,
we don’t want it. We got somethin’ better.”
The Groper hastened to say, retreating a little, ‘That’s all
right, Bill ol’ man. I jus’ come over acos yer arst me. I’ve had
a drink wi’ you, now I’ll go back an’ leave yer to it.”
Then Maryborough Bill happened to think of something


else, water or something he wanted, and called to one of the
boys.
Now, natives are frightened of drunken white people. That is
not to be wondered at. There are many sober white folk who
are scared, too, of a big quarrelsome intoxicated man whether
he is black, white, or brindle. That being the case, our boys had
quietly drawn the dinghy along the starboard side, the side
furthest from Maryborough Bill, until it was immediately under
the bow without any of us having noticed what they were
about. They were all gathered in a bunch now, right for’ard.
Maryborough called a boy, but none made a move to obey
him. Muttering, ‘Til shift yer,” Bill started forard. Then the
plan of the crew became apparent. Before Bill could get among
them they tumbled into the dinghy and shoved off.
“Oh, that’s yer game, is it? We’ll soon see about that.” Bill
hastened aft towards the cabin.
The Groper looked at me nervously. “What’s he goin’ ter
do?” he asked.
Without answering I went aft and met Maryborough as he
came up from the cabin with my marlin.
“Yes, and what are you going to do with that?” I said con-
fronting him.
“Get out er me road,” he snarled. “Get out er me road or
I’ll shoot you. I’m on’y goin’ ter scare em,” he added in a milder
manner.
I could not bring myself to believe that Bill would do any-
thing else but fire merely to scare the boys. So saying, “Be
careful what you do, Bill, for God’s sake be careful,” I side-
stepped the muzzle of the rifle.
Working the lever of the marlin so as to put a cartridge into
the chamber, Bill got down on his haunches by the port mizzen
shrouds, aimed, and fired.
“He’s got one,” I heard the Groper say.
The cutter was quite close to the Viking ; not more than
twenty fathoms away on our port beam. When Bill crouched
with my rifle the dinghy had nearly reached the cutter loaded
with our crew and two of the Groper’s. When they saw Bill
come on deck with the rifle the boys jumped into the water
at once. Those with the most presence of mind got out of


the farther side of the dinghy, keeping it between them and
Bill. When sweet William fired two heads showed on the water
between the cutter and the dinghy. Then I could see only one
head.
Maryborough again worked the lever of the rifle in a busi-
ness-like way, but he was disturbed by Jack Scullin, who had
snuggled down alongside him.
“Give us a shot, Bill, give us a shot. Come on, it’s my turn,
its my turn, its my turn. Don’t be greedy, Bill. You got one
with your shot, now give me a go.”
Just as good-natured, unselfish Bill handed the rifle to Jack
I leant over and jerked it savagely away, and passed it quickly
to the Groper for I knew what would happen next. The Groper
hurried round and flung the marlin, barrel first, down into the
cabin, where it exploded. The drunken sleep of Jimmy had
not been disturbed by the noise on deck, but the accidental
going off of the rifle in the confined space of the cabin woke
him up a bit. That, and something the Groper said, brought
him on deck very quickly. The first thing he saw when he
got there was Maryborough going over the side, and me getting
to my feet.
I have said that I knew what would happen next when I
tore the rifle from the hands of Jack Scullin, and I was quite
right, too. Maryborough scrambled to his feet and sent a blow
swinging at me. Not able to side-step or back because of the
cabin and lack of room, I tumbled sprawling on top of the cabin
with sweet William on top of me. Bill took a quick movement of
my knee low down and howled like a dog. He had just put both
his hands over that sensitive part when I gave him a kick in
the guts that sent him over the side. That was when Jimmy
came on deck and, as Jimmy lost no time in coming after he
was roused by the Groper, you can see that all those things
did not take long in happening.
Seeing that Maryborough Bill was out of his reach, Jimmy
made straight for Jack, who put off any argument to another
time by diving over the side, and swimming towards the cutter.
He was begged to return in the most earnest manner possible,
and promised all sorts of things by Jim without avail. Until
Jack was alongside the cutter he turned his head repeatedly so


that he might look back, but what he saw and the promises
he heard merely seemed to make him increase his efforts to
reach the cutter. He swam for protection to the people he was
so anxious to shoot only a few minutes before and, when he
reached the side of the M.C., two of them actually extended
their hands and helped to pull him on deck.
Jack being out of reach, Jimmy turned his attention to Mary-
borough Bill, who was now alongside near the ladder. He
reached over and grabbed a handful of Bill’s hair, not as
might be erroneously supposed, to help his old shipmate
inboard, but so that he might bang the attached head
hard against the side of the Viking. The terms of endearment
so recently lavished upon his dear old pal were now back in
the locker, and another and a different lot of terms were brought
out and put into use. So hard and so often did Jimmy bang
Bill’s head against the side of the ketch that I interfered.
I said, “Here, cut it out, Jim. Don’t kill him, leave a bit of
him for me. Let him get on deck while I have a go.”
Jimmy, who was getting tired anyhow, and wasn’t sober
enough to enjoy himself fully, allowed Bill to climb on board.
Bill did not understand the diplomacy I had used on his
behalf so, as soon as he was on deck he said to me, “Now,
what are you goin’ ter do?”
I showed him. I feinted with my left and donged him with
my right. All I had went into that smack, and he copped the
lot, for he was coming in. He folded up like a pair of compasses,
and lay there like an innocent little child. I owed Bill that one.
“What a beaut!” said Jim.
Now that things had quietened down a little, Jimmy sat on
the cabin. He was making an effort to collect his wits, and
size things up a bit. The boys on the cutter began to heave in
the anchor.
“My Gawd!” said Jimmy. “What are we goin’ to do with no
dinghy or nothin’? They’re goin’ ter clear out with the cutter,
Groper. How’re we goin’ ter stop ’em?”
Jimmy got to his feet and shouted to those on the cutter
to stop heaving in the anchor, but, although some of them
turned their heads, they carried on with the job. Jimmy prom-
ised that none of them would be hurt, that everything was all


right now, but it made no difference, so Jimmy sat down again
in silence.
“Jack’ll be down in the cabin,” said Billy the Groper. “I
wunner what he’s a-doin’ on? Havin’ a go at me square, I
s’pose. I got nine bottles stowed down there not touched yet,
an’ I can’t get at ’em ter save ’em—the bloody pirates!”
We could do nothing but look while those on the cutter,
having got the anchor up, got out the sweeps and proceeded
down the sound towards the point beyond which they would
be out of sight.
“It’s no good,” said Jimmy, “we can’t do nothin’ to stop ’em
now. If on’y we had a canoe, or somethin’. Well, it’s no good
moanin’ about it. There’s one good thing; there’s no wind,
so they can’t get far tonight. The three of us can’t do much.
We’ll wait till Bill gets sobered up a bit, then we might be
able ter do somethin’. That was a helluva crack you give him,
Clarry. I wouldn’ be s’prised if he never woke till tomorrow.”
Then, as another thought crossed his mind, he said sud-
denly, “How much of that whisky did Bill have, Clarry? I
on’y give him one drink. How much’d he have after that?”
I told Jimmy he was wrong, for he had given Bill two drinks,
but that was all he had had. And the Groper agreed, saying,
“All I knows is he never had no drinks arter I come over, he
was too busy argifyin’ wi’ me, an’ wantin’ fer ter shoot all on
us, ter do any drinkin’.”
“My gawd!” said Jimmy. “Two drinks! Why can’t he leave
it alone? A man like that should never touch it. He oughter
go on the water wagon, don’t yer think? Well, what yer say?
We’ll have a drink, anyhow. I wants one. Get the bottle one
er yer, an’ a drop er water while yer about it.”
Jimmy wanted to know if we were to have anything to eat,
and I volunteered to get something. It was then that I went
to the bows to do something first and, looking down, discovered
little Su-su squatting on the bobstay. The poor little chap
looked up timidly and said, “All right now, Clarry?
Finding little Su-su like that—finding he had stuck when
the others had gone—cheered us up immensely, somehow. We
gave him a great welcome. Being cook, the child now found
us something to eat. I remember very well that the main item


of the bill of fare that evening was a fine hot dish of dried
hash made from cold salt-beef and bacon and smashed boiled
yams and peas, all mixed together very nicely by Su-su, who
did not forget to heave in plenty of cayenne pepper!
It was not until about nine o’clock, long after we had had
our dried hash, that Bill stirred. He was a sight. The two
whiskies helped, but the main cause of his trouble was what
he had received from Jimmy and me. His port eye was both
black and green, his mouth bruised and bloody; he had other
contusions, and he tenderly caressed his off-side jaw—the one
that had stopped my wallop.
At Jimmy’s suggestion he stripped and plunged over the
side. Then Su-su got some fresh water frofn the tank, and
Maryborough meticulously soaped and washed his figurehead.
When he had bent a clean cotton singlet and luva-luva, and
was sitting on the cabin in the darkness, he seemed much the
same as usual.
Maryborough was quite unaware that he was a murderer
until we told him. Neither the Groper nor I enlarged on the
subject. We simply said that the head of the swimming boy
disappeared when Bill fired and, as he never missed, it looked
as though the boy was a goner. Bill was greatly shocked, not
so much on the boy’s account as on his own. He swore that he
would not touch whisky again as long as he lived. As his
imagination got under way he could not keep still, he squirmed.
Sometimes he brightened a little, but when one of his more
morbid thoughts had shown him dangling at the end of a rope
in a Fiji jail there was a sob in his voice while he pleaded
with Jimmy to “think of somethin’ .
Jimmy had plenty of trouble of his own to think about. It
looked like ruin to him, whichever way things turned out,
so he was not very patient with Bill. We all had something to
worry about, especially the Groper, who had left nine bottles
of square and all the rest of his possessions on the cutter.
Now and again Jimmy reiterated something like this, “Well
see what we can do in the morning. I might get a canoe from
the village and go after them. It’s funny none of them niggers
has come out to see us, they must know there’s some funny
bus’ness goin’ on. If they haven’t caught the wind I might


catch up with them. The best thing you can do, Bill, is ter
get somethin’ to eat, and go an’ turn in. We’ll see what we
can do in the mornin’; we can’t do nothin’ now. Go an’ turn
in; that’s the best thing you can do, go an’ turn in.”
Before dawn next morning I roused Su-su and, while he
was making coffee, Maryborough Bill, the Groper, and I got to
work getting up the anchor. It was Sunday without any sun,
not a bright gleam anywhere. The gloom of yesterday carried
on as though a great sorrow beyond relief had settled upon Port
Praslin and those unfortunates who dwelt therein. Heavy clouds
beset the sky; there was no wind; the water of the sound was
inert, but we had the tide in our favour.
As soon as the anchor was up we got out the sweeps and
laboured at them, urging the drowsy-seeming Viking towards
the point where the village lay. After about an hour’s heavy
graft, when we were getting close to the village, a canoe came
off with the news that the M.C. had been anchored near by
all night but was now under way and making for the open
water.
It did not take Jimmy long to bargain with the two boys
in the canoe to take him in pursuit of the cutter. It was an
ordinary canoe, such as I have described, made of planks with
no outrigger. An outrigger would have been too slow. Jimmy
got carefully into the centre, my marlin was handed down,
and away went the canoe, Jimmy paddling as well as the two
natives.
The Viking was anchored at the watering place nearly
opposite the village. There the day passed slowly while we
waited anxiously for the return of Jimmy. Late in the afternoon
the M.C. came round the bend and, because we could see
Jimmy, we had hopes that all was well.
Jimmy told us, when he came back to the Viking, that he
caught the cutter just in time. The runaways, when they saw
him coming, had exerted themselves with the sweeps to get
away. Being outside the entrance, and seeing a breeze coming,
they had set the sails. The wind had reached them just as he
got the canoe alongside and hopped on board. No attempt
was made to resist him though there might have been if he
had gone without my marlin. By gum, another couple of


minutes and they’d have had the breeze, and he’d have lost
them!
Jack was down in the cabin reading something and didn’t
budge, so he let him lie. He let him stop where he was; he
would see about him afterwards. It seems that Jack and Tom
had fixed it up between them to sail the cutter to Star Harbour,
where Tom belonged. Tom, the Groper’s tender, told Jack he
would be all right there with him, and Jack, like a fool, had
believed him and was going off with him! By God! Jack would
have been killed within an hour of his landing at a place like
Star Harbour.
No boy had been shot by Bill after all. The boy he had
fired at must have ducked his head just at the identical moment
when Bill pressed the trigger. When James gave him that bit of
news there is no doubt that Maryborough was relieved of a
big load of worry. I believe that he would have laughed out
loud if his sore jaw had been better, but his pleasure was
tempered because he felt that his reputation as an infallible
shot was dinted.
It was a great pity to learn that Maryborough Bill was not
a murderer, for now he had no longer such a big halo of
romance, not the same kind of perfumed aura about him. He
just went back to what he was before he promoted himself by
shooting a nigger. Opportunity knocks once at every man’s
door, and poor old Bill might not get another chance like the
one he had just had. He had banged off a rifle, and got banged
a lot himself, all for nothing. It was all so very, very dis-
appointing.
After Jimmy had given us all his important news, inter-
rupted now and again by suitable comments from his congre-
gation, the Groper went over to the M.C. to get some more
news—and got it. The cutter was anchored within twenty
fathoms of the Viking, so we could hear the Groper talking
plainly to somebody after he had disappeared down the cabin.
In fact we could make out some of the words he used.
After a while the Groper came on deck again and, after he
had taken a little exercise by walking a few steps for’ard and
a few steps aft, he stood still and looked up at the sky. Then he


looked at the deck while his arms swayed in an undecided
sort of way until he began to rub his fringe of whiskers.
Jimmy called across, saying, “What’s up, Groper? Something
wrong? What’s the trouble now?”
There was a hopeless, pathetic, tragical note in the Groper’s
voice as he raised his despairing eyes and answered Jimmy’s
question.
“They’ve been an’ dumped all me square,” he said. “Nine
botdes on it I had. Nine bottles an’ a good drop lef’ in another
one. That’s what I had, an’ they been an’ dumped the lot on it.
The pirates, the flamin’ bloody pirates.”
His voice rose as the full magnitude of his disaster swept
across him. “What made ’em go for ter do that ter me for? I
never done nothin’ fer them ter go for ter do a thing like this
here ter me. An’ all the time there was that Jack uv yours down
there a-readin’ on some rubbige he got hold on, an’ never
offered for to stop ’em. He jus’ lays there on his back stinkin’
the cabin out and never done nothin’.”
“Hard luck, Billy, hard luck!” called Jimmy. “Dumped all
y er g ro g> did they? An’ yer ain’t got a drop left? They had no
kind er right ter do that. Hard luck, hard luck, thats what
it is.” And Jimmy had all he could do to stop from laughing.
“What about this here Jack uv yours?” called the Groper.
“What are yer goin’ fer ter do about him? I ain t a-goin ter
have him in the cabin wi’ me. What are yer goin ter do with
him now? He’s not a man. He’s not a man’s fly-button, he ain’t.
Anyone what’ll lie on his back an’ do nothin while a lot er
pirates dumps me booze ain’t a man; he’s on y a man s spendin s,
that’s all he is. What are yer goin’ for ter do with him, Jim?
When Jimmy told the Groper that there was no room in the
Viking for Jack, and to do what he liked with him so long
as he did not send him back to us, the Groper turned and
addressed the cabin.
“Come on, get up out o’ there, he called. Get a move on,
unless yer want me for ter shift yer.” In response to which
Jack came on deck, looking at the Groper very miserably in-
deed, and said something we could not hear.
“Never you mind about that,” answered Billy to whatever
it was that Jack had said, you get for ard, and stop for ard. I


don’ want a objec’ like you in me cabin stinkin’ it out. Go on,
get for’ard or I’ll kick yer there.” And the poor, forlorn out-
cast moved dejectedly away.
I should like to say here, in parenthesis, that neither Tom
nor any of the other boys was punished in any way whatever
for clearing out with the cutter. About a year afterwards, when
Tom was in Oscar’s schooner, Sikiana, he ran away with an-
other boy whom he had induced to go with him. Tom made
his way to the missionaries and told them such a tale that they
gave him, and the other boy, a passage in their steam yacht
to Star Harbour. I heard, on very good authority, that soon
after Tom had got to his clan the boy who had run away with
him was killed and eaten. Tom had planned it that way.
The events of the past two days put an end to our diving
in Port Praslin. Everybody and everything became unsettled.
Something had been removed from the ordered way of our
lives—it was harmony. Besides, there was a great quantity of
shell neatly stowed in the holds of both the M.C. and the
Viking. The shell in the cutter had been very nearly lost, and
Jimmy considered it would be wise to make sure of what he
had rather than run any further risks. ’He brought forward,
as an additional reason for leaving, the fact that we were
poaching. There was always the possibility of our being dis-
covered by the Germans and losing our shell, pearls, liberty,
and the two craft. Then there was Jack. Jimmy wanted to
get rid of him as quicky as he could; he was untrustworthy as
a tender and in every other way.
I have not mentioned pearls in the Solomons for the reason
that they were few and far between. Besides, there was little
chance for me to get any; Jimmy saw to that. I think the clarity
of the water in the Solomons had a lot to do with the scarcity
of pearls.
Before leaving we gave to the people of the village everything
that could'be spared, such as trade prints, tobacco, pipes, knives,
and provisions. Cheerful, willing Dummy was given an extra
special parcel. He wanted to come with us, but Jimmy was
frightened to take him because of possible complications; he
would have been evidence of our poaching. The poor chap


was greatly capsized when he found that he was to be left
behind.
When we arrived back at Gavutu, among other things, there
was a letter from my sweetheart in Thursday Island. It was
an answer to my last letter to her, which I wrote just before
we left Sydney. Commenting on my “Song of Autumn” my
sweetheart was very nice—she could not be otherwise—but her
advice that I should read and study the works of other poets
seemed to me to carry a kind of insinuation, or something. It
seemed to me that she was rather hinting that she had read
verses that were even better than mine. Then she went on
to say that she was married now and, because she did not want
anything to come between her husband and herself, she would
rather I did not write to her any more, but if I did write to
be very careful what I said just in case her husband, who was
the adjutant of the garrison, got hold of my letter.
Well, of course I had had an idea that I had a pre-emption
on my darling, and it was a shock to think that another man,
swa gg er ing about in uniform, should now be cuddling her.
Then the thought came that he was not much of a gentleman
anyhow if he was capable of reading letters that were not his
—bit of salve, that. So, after I had calmed down somewhat, I
wrote quite a nice letter to my late sweetheart, saying that I
had heard she was now married, and that I most sincerely hoped
her life would be one of happiness. I added that when she and
I were together not even a postage stamp could have divided
us.
Various slight incidents that happened at Port Praslin, trifling
but irritating, had made me dissatisfied with my present life.
Learning that I had lost the most charming woman that I had
yet met made me resolve to go to Sydney, and get Fisher to
build me a craft like the Viking. Then I could set out on my
own venture, free from doubtful white company, with the
seas of the whole world spread out in front of me. There was
little about pearl-shelling now that I had not learnt, so it was
supremely silly for me to share my labour and knowedge with
any other.
Having made up my mind, I spoke to Jimmy, saying nothing,
however, about buying a craft for myself. Jimmy said he was sorry,


but made no difficulty for, after all, there was no need for more
than one diver on each vessel. Then the two of us sought
Oscar, who had arrived at Gavutu in his schooner. When Oscar
heard that I wished to leave, and to go at once to Sydney, he
was quite concerned, but put no obstacle in my way. The shell
we had brought into Gavutu was weighed, and my proportion
allotted. A credit note on Justus Scharffe was given me for
my share of the takings since coming into the Solomons, and all
I had to do now was to wait for the steamer.
While I was waiting Oscar surprised me by making a busi-
ness proposal. He suggested that, instead of going to Sydney,
I should stay in the Islands and enter into a trading partner-
ship with him. Oscar could be very persuasive, and he made
his proposal a most inviting one indeed. He told me that,
although I had not said what I intended to do, he had formed
a good notion of what it was and, if he was right, in my place
he would do the same. However, there was a lot of risk in
diving; there was the danger always attendant upon all ven-
tures afloat, besides much loss of time in sailing to and fro.
He now pointed out that most of my time at trading would be
spent ashore, and that there was little, if any, uncertainty
about the profits. As for danger, why, with ordinary precaution
mixed with common sense I could avoid being murdered by the
natives just as easily as I could dodge being kicked to death
in Sydney.
I welcomed the proposition made by Oscar, and an agree-
ment was drawn up. It was something new. It was a change
from the life I had been leading. I was far more upset over
losing my sweetheart than you might think was possible. It
was all jolly fine to say that there were plenty of other fine
women in the world, plenty of fish in the sea as good as any yet
taken from it, and that she wasn’t the only pebble on the beach.
All that may have been true enough, but she was easily the
best pebble I had ever handled on a beach. She was warm to
the touch, she was beautiful, and, loving her as I did, I was
disconsolate. And that was how I came to go diving into trade.




This is the true story of a young
man who looked for adventure. The
author tried his luck as a diver, first
'ti Torres Straits and later in the
Solomons, and his experiences make
a story as absorbing as any fiction.
He tells of the rough and ready life
of the pearling fleet, of its pictur-
esque crews and their ways, and of
the strange beauty and perils of the
undersea world.
The men he worked with, brown
and white, come vividly to life, at
their skilled and dangerous work or
at play, making merry on board or
ashore on Thursday Island—even as
far afield as Sydney, where the con-
fidence men soon smell out the
pearls in their pockets. The author
has an unerring eye for character
and an ear for dialogue. Such a
figure as Billy the Groper, whose
rich originality has almost a Dicken-
sian flavour, would alone make the
book worth while.
These old-time divers play their
part in many thrilling incidents,
whether in the clear sunlit waters
of Torres Straits or the uncanny
tree-shadowed passages of the
Solomons, in which sharks, head-
hunters, and cannibals are involved.
Most memorable of all is the author’s
underwater fight to the death with
a Japanese diver. Diver's Luck is a
book for all who are interested in
the development of our pearling
industry, and most particularly for
everyone who loves adventure, the
smell of salt water, and the breath
of more spacious days.




