

DIVISIONS OF NORTH AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
»




DIVISIONS OF NORTH AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
{Read May 5, 1599.)
The division of a tribe into intermarrying sections or classes,
although one of the most interesting of the institutions recognized
among the Australian aborigines, has not hitherto received the
attention which its importance deserves. In a former number of
the Proceedings of this Society 1 I tabulated the names of eight
sections, with the rules of marriage and descent in force over a
large extent of country in the Northern Territory. Since then I
have reported 2 a similar eight-section system, but with different sec-
tional names, in the northwest corner of Queensland, extending
southerly from the Gulf of Carpentaria for a distance of about
three hundred miles, including the Wentworth, Nicholson, Greg-
ory and Upper Georgina rivers.
In an article contributed to the Royal Society of New South
Wales in June, 1898, I described the eight sections of the Arrinda
tribe on the Finke, Todd and other rivers, 3 but, while that paper
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxvii, 151-154.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 251, 252
3 Ibid., xxxii, 72.
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC. VOL. XXXVIII. NO. 159.


was in the press, a correspondent furnished me with additional
information which shows the line of descent in a manner that is
more readily understood than by the table appended to the article
in question. I propose, therefore, to supply a new table, showing
how the divisions intermarry, with the sections to which the off-
spring belong, as follows:
TABLE I.
Husband
Wife
Offspring
f
i. Panungka
Parulla
Pungata
Group A.
2. Mbutjana
Pungata
Ngala.
—
3. Knurraia
Ngala
Bultara
L
4. Koomara
Bultara
Parulla
r
5. Parulla
Panungka
Koomara
Group B.
6. Bultara
Koomara
Knurraia
7. Ngala
Knurraia
Mbutjana
-
8. Pungata
Mbutjana
Panungka
It will
be observed by the fo
regoing table that the sons
It will be observed by the foregoing table that the sons of the
women of one group marry the daughters of the women of the
other; and, also, that each group has perpetual succession through
its females. For example, take the women of Group A in the
table, we find that Parulla is the mother of Pungata; Pungata of
Ngala; Ngala of Bultara, and Bultara is the mother of Parulla,
and this order of succession is continually repeated. 1 Among the
women of Group B the line of descent conforms to the same rules.
I have traced some of the section names of this organization,
namely, Bultara, Koomara, etc., across the country from the Upper
Finke river northeasterly to the Georgina river, a distance of more
than four hundred miles.
My correspondent also made some further investigations respecting
the order of succession in four of the sections of the Warramonga
tribe 2 at Tennant’s Creek, with the result that it becomes necessary
to prepare an amended table of one of the groups. As it might
cause confusion to show only one group, I have included both in
the subjoined table:
1 The names of the eight sections of the Upper Finke river tribes were first
reported by the Rev. L. Schulze in 1891 (Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, xiv,
223, 224). Their arrangement into two intermarrying groups was the result of
my investigations (Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 72).
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 73.


TABLE 11.
Husband
Wife
Tungulli
Apungata
Opalla
Kabajee
Offspring
Apungata
Opalla
Kabajee
Tungulli
' 1. Aponunga
2. Ampajona
3. Ungary
4. Akamarra
Group A.
5. Tungulli
6. Kabajee
7. Opalla
8. Apungata
Aponunga Akamarra
Gkoup b 6. Kabajee Akamarra Upgary
7. Opalla Ungary Ampajona
Ampajona Aponunga
In Group A of the above table, the rotation of the section names
is different from that given in my former table, which, necessarily,
alters the order of descent among the women and children. Group
B is the same as that previously given. If my correspondent is
now correct, it can be shown by this table that a brother’s son’s
children intermarry with a sister’s son’s children, instead of
the son of a brother marrying the daughter of a sister, and
vice versa, as stated in my former paper. 1 In examining the two
tables, I and 11, it is seen that the names of several sections in the
Arrinda tribe are almost identical with some of the section names
of the Warramonga.
On the McArthur, Kangaroo and Calvert rivers, in the Northern
Territory, reaching thence along the shore of the Gulf of Carpen-
taria beyond the Queensland boundary, and extending inland
about one hundred miles, are several native tribejs, among which
may be mentioned the Yuckamurri, Yanular, Leanawa, Yookala and
Kurrawar. The following synopsis shows the section to which a
man belongs—the section into which he can marry—and the desig-
nation of the offspring :
TABLE 111.
Husband
Wife Offspring
Jungalagoo Bullaranjee
Bullaranjee Jooralagoo
Jooralagoo Bungaranjee
Bungaranjee Jungalagoo
1. Joolanjegoo
2. Jameragoo
3. Jinagoo
4. Yukamurra
5. Jungalagoo
6. Bungaranjee
7. Jooralagoo
8. Bullaranjee
Group A.
Joolanjegoo Yukamurri
Y ukamurra Jinagoo
Jinagoo Jameragoo
Jameragoo Joolanjegoo
Group B.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxti, 74.


Some native tribes on the Victoria liver, in the Northern Terri-
tory of South Australia, are segregated into two intermarrying
groups, with the following subdivisions :
Husband
Wife
Offspring
I
GroupA |
1
' i. Jamada
2. Jameram
, 3- J anna
4. Jummiunya
Jungalla
Dhalyerree
Joolam
Dhungarree
Dhalyerree
Joolam
Dhungarree
Jungalla
I
Group B -j
f 5. Jungalla
6. Dhungarree
I 7. Joolam
[ 8. Dhalyerree
Jamada
Jummiunya
Janna
Jameram
Jummiunya
Janna
Jameram
Jamada
If we compai
re Tables I, II,
III and IV with
the table of
TABLE IV,
If we compare Tables I, 11, 111 and IV with the table of eight
sections reported by me in a former article to this Society, 1 it will
be observed that the four tables are constructed on the same system,
and all contain the same order of succession. In other words, all
the tribes dealt with have substantially the same organization,
although there are dialectic variations, more or less, in the names
of the sections. In the Tables I, II and 111, I have omitted the
feminine form of the name of each section, which, it is thought,
will enable the reader more readily to follow the rules of marriage
and descent. The divisional system, or social organization,
reported in this article, extends from the Upper Finke river to the
embouchure of the McArthur, in the Gulf of Carpentaria, a distance
of about six hundred and fifty miles. lam informed by some of
my correspondents that the same system, but with different divi-
sional names, reaches westwardly from the Gulf of Carpentaria to
the Daly and Victoria rivers, and onwards into West Australia.
The southern portion of the Arrinda and adjoining tribes occupy
the Middle Finke and Charlotte waters, reaching as far south as the
Macumba river. Among them there are only four sections em-
ployed to regulate the intersexual relations, as shown in the follow-
ing table. These sections comprise four of those enumerated in
Table I:
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., xxxvii, 152.


TABLE V.
Husband Wife Offspring
Croup A / I * Panungka Parulla Bultara
l 2. Koomara Bultara Parulla
Bultara Parulla
t urnip R / 3. Parulla Panungka Koomara
l 4. Bultara Koomara Panungks
Koomara Panungka
It will be seen that the community is segregated into two inter-
marrying groups, and that the children take the name of the com-
plementary section in the division to which their mother belongs.
In the southern portion of South Australia there are a number of
tribes who possess the two primary groups only, like A and B in the
foregoing tables, without any subdivisions into sections. As an
example of this system, it may be mentioned that in some districts
these two divisions, or groups, are called Matturri and Karraroo f
in others they are Krokee and Kumite; in other parts they are
called Kookoojiba and Koocheebinga, and, again in others, they
are known as Koolpirry and Thinewah. In each case the men
belonging to one primary division marry the women of the other,
and the children take of their mother’s division. As I
am now engaged in the preparation of a comprehensive article
dealing with this type of organization, I shall not enter farther
upon it at present.
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxii, 69.


1508 00074302




