

DIVISIONS OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.




-
t
t
♦


DIVISIONS OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
WITH MAP.
(Plate VI.)
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S
(Read January 19, 1900. )
The territory dealt with in the following pages comprises approxi-
mately that part of the province of South Australia situated east,of
the 132 d meridian of longitude and south of the 24th parallel of
latitude, but is more particularly delineated on the accompanying
map. All the native tribes within this immense region are divided
into two intermarrying phratries, with the exception of some tribes
on the Murray river and Yorke’s peninsula, among whom no well-
defined divisional system has been reported.
I shall endeavor in this article to determine the boundaries of
the country occupied by certain aggregates of tribes possessing the
same divisional names and practicing similar initiatory rites, which
it is proposed to denominate nations, following the method adopted
by me in showing the distribution of the native tribes of New
South Wales, 1 Victoria 2 and Queensland. 3 A map is added, on
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. Philada., xxxvii, 54-73, Plate v.
2 American Anthropologist, Washington, xi, 325-343, Plate v.
3 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. Philada., xxxvii, 327-336, Plate xiii.
REPRINTED FROM PROC. AMER. PHILOS. SOC., VOL. XXXIX, NO. 161.


which is marked the geographic range of each nation and defining
also the limits within which circumcision and subincision are in
force.
I. The Parnkalla Nation
In 1846 the Rev. C. W. Schiirmann published a pamphlet on the
Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln, South Australia, in which, on
p. 9, he stated that the Parnkalla tribe was “ divided into two dis-
tinct classes, the Mattiri and Karraru people If a husband be
Mattiri, his wife must be Karraru, and vice versa, the children
taking invariably the appellation of that class to which their mother
belongs.” This is the first accurate record of the divisions of abo-
riginal tribes, not only in the colony mentioned, but in any part of
the Australian continent. Owing to this priority and for conveni-
ence of reference I have adopted the name of the Parnkalla tribe
for the whole nation. I shall endeavor to give the names and ter-
ritorial limits of a few of the most important of the many tribes of
which this large nation is composed.
The Rev. Mr. Schiirmann says 1 the Parnkalla language extended
“ from Port Lincoln probably as far as the head of Spencer’s
Gulf,” which would be about where Port Augusta now stands, and
that “ northeast of the Parnkalla was the Nukunna tribe.” The
Nauo, or Nowo, tribe adjoined the Parnkalla on the west 2 and in-
habited the country from Venus Bay to Koppawanata station.
Northwest of the Nauo, around Yardea station, was the country of the
Willeuroo tribe. The Parnkalla, Nauoand Willeuroo, were practically
the same people in language and customs, and are included in the
same nation on the map. I am informed by old residents that a
small tribe called Kooapudna was formerly located around Frank-
lin Harbor. These people are not mentioned by Mr. Schiirmann.
Mr. B. Hack states that a tribe, which he calls Noocoona, occu-
pied the eastern side of Spencer’s Gulf, from Port Augusta to Bun-
dalear (see map) and extended east to Coonatto. 3 As the Noocoona
of Mr. Hack were located in the country indicated by Mr. Schiir-
mann'as being inhabited by the Nukunna, it seems safe to infer that
both writers meant the same people; for although the spelling is
different the pronunciation is substantially the same.
1 Native Tribes of South Australia (1879), p. 249.
2 Ibid., p. 249.
3 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), pp. 64-66.


Mr. Noble, a police trooper, in describing the customs of the
Alury tribe of the Flinders Range, 1 says they were divided into
“ two clans,” called Muttay and Arriee, which I have assumed are
intended to represent Mattiri and Karraru of the Parnkalla divi-
sions. Mr. Noble includes “ Crystal Brook and surrounding coun-
try ” in his description, which would overlap and include the ter-
ritory of the Noocoona tribe above referred to. This suggests the
inference that the Alury and Noocoona were subtribes of the same
people.
The Kooyeeunna and some smaller allied tribes occupy the coun-
try from South Lake Eyre, including Turret Range, Chambers
creek, Screech-Owl creek, and others, to Lake Torrens, and
southerly along its eastefn shore as far as Nilpena station, where
they adjoin the Alury already mentioned. A friend of mine who
resided a long time on Willochra creek, in the heart of the country
occupied by the Alury tribe, says their proper name is Eeleeree.
He states that they are divided into the two groups, Mattiri and
Karraru, like the Hillary people, who are their near neighbors on
the western side of Lake Torrens. Both tribes circumcise and split
the penis of the youths, and their language has many words in com-
mon. The Kooyeeunna extend northeasterly to meet the Dieyerie ;
and on the southeast they are joined by the Kutchnamootha and
friendly tribes, who are spread over the district from Mount Free-
ling to Lake Frome and Lake Blanche. 2 East of the Kutchna-
mootha is inhabited by the Pulladapa tribe, including the country
adjacent to Lake Callabonna, and thence toward the New South
Wales boundary.
Adjoining the Kooyeeunna and Kutchnamootha, and reaching
northerly, beyond Cooper’s creek, is the territory of the Die-
yerie tribes. Their eastern boundary is approximately a line
drawn from Mount Freeling, through Lakes Blanche and Hope, to
Lake Perigundi. 3 From the debouchure of the Diamantina river
into Lake Eyre, up that river to Goyder’s Lagoon, taking in
Kalamurina, Cowarie, Mungarane and Berlino stations, is inhab-
ited by the Ahminnie tribe. Beyond the Ahminnie is the Wonka-
1 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 64.
2 Mr. E. M. Curr, in his book, The Australian Race (,1886), refers to these
two tribes, whom he calls Cooyiannie and Kudnamietha. Vol. ii, p. 118.
3 Compare with description given by S. Gason in his Dieyerie Tribes of Aus.
Aborigines (1874), p. 11.


oora tribe, occupying the country from Macumba river nearly to
Alton Downs. The southern end of their country is watered by the
Macumba river and the lower portion of Kallakoopa creek. North
of the Wonkaoora is the Wonkamudla tribe, reaching from Alton
Downs to Annandale and other stations.
The Wonkaoora and Wonkamudla tribes extend a long way to
the northwest into the desert country, consisting of sandhills, with
sterile patches and salt marshes between them. The only water in
this tract is obtained from native wells, called mickeries, and the
natives of that district are on this account known as “ the mickerie
blacks. ’ ’ These wells are for the greater number shallow holes, little
more than “soakages,” and generally contain only small supplies
of water, but a few of them are as much as twenty feet deep, or more ,
being wide at the top and tapering almost to a point at the bot-
tom, into which the water percolates through the loose strata.
Adjoining the Wonkaoora on the southwest are the Arrabunna
people, who inhabit the country from near the Macumba southerly
along the western side of Lake Eyre as far as Margaret creek,
where they adjoin the Kooyeeunna tribe already mentioned. The
Arrabunna extend up the Neale and Peake creeks till met by the
Andigarina people; toward the southwest they reach to Stuart’s
Range, where they adjoin the outposts of the Kookatha nation.
Touching the Kooyeeunna about Red Lake, and extending thence
southerly down the western side of Lake Torrens is occupied by
the remnants of the Hillary, Kakarrura, Yallingarra and other
friendly tribes, meeting the northern limit of the Parnkalla and
Nauo before referred to. I propose calling this tract of country
the Hillary Nation, after the Hillary tribe, mentioned by Mr. J.
Bryant in 1879. 1 '
In all the principal tribes or aggregates of subtribes and fami-
lies, whose boundaries are outlined in the preceding pages and
enumerated on the appended map as 1 to 10, the people are
bisected into the phratries, Matturri and Kirraroo, 2 the men of the
one marrying the women of the other. No previous writer has
attempted to define the geographic distribution of all the people
possessing this organization, and show the correct relative location
of each tribe on a map of South Australia. The collection of
1 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 103.
2 1 have adopted these forms of the Phratry names, because they are used by
the Kooyeeunna tribe, who are located near the centre of the nation.


reliable data, from which to prepare such a map, has been the
result of long and patient inquiry extending over some years.
The following synopsis shows how the two phratries intermarry
and the descent of the resulting offspring :
Table No. i.
Phratry.
Husband.
Kirraroo,
Matturri,
Wife.
Offspring.
Matturri.
Kirraroo.
A
B
Matturri,
Kirraroo,
All the people, men and women alike, bear the name of an ani-
mal or some other natural object, which is their totem. I have
noticed that certain totems which belong to one phratry in a
given district are found to belong to the other phratry among the
members of a tribe occupying a different part of the country.
Similar differences have been observed by me among the native
tribes of New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria. Therefore,
in supplying a few lists of some of the totems attached to the two
phratries—Kirraroo and Matturri—the name of the tribe will be
mentioned in each case. 1 will take the totems of the Arrabunna
tribe first.
The undermentioned totemic names may be enumerated as some
of those belonging to the people comprising the Kirraroo group :
Emu, Rainbow, Diver,
Mopoke, Scrub Turkey, Bull-dog Ant,
Fish, Gum Tree, Crane,
Common Fly, Top-knot Pigeon, Moon,
Sun, Clouds,
Sandalwood Tree,
Barley Grass,
Rain, Lightning,
North Wind, Thunder,
Nardoo, Crow,
Acacia,
Carpet Snake,
Spoonbill,
Hailstones, Opossum,
Box Tree, Pelican,
Beefwood Tree,
Green Snake.
Needle Bush, Mimosa,
Among the totems of the people
may be mentioned the following :
constituting the Matturri group


Wild Dog, Eagle Hawk, Small Lizard,
Spider, Common Magpie, Brown Snake,
Curlew, Black Duck, Whip Snake,
Swan, Frog, Kangaroo Ra
Frog, Kangaroo Rat,
Grasshopper, South Wind, Wattle Tree,
Quandong Tree, Shag, Ring-neck Parrot,
Iguana, Quartz Stone, Mulga Tree.
Plain Turkey,
11. The Yowerawarrika Nation.
The Yowerawarrika tribe adjoin the Dieyerie Ahminnie, Wonk-
aoora and Wonkamudla on the east, and reach northerly and eas-
terly into Queensland. Their territory includes Coongie, Clifton
Hills, Pandy Pandy and Cordilla Downs. Adjoining the Yowera-
warrika on the south are the Yanderawantha, who reach from
Patchawarra creek southerly across the Cooper and down the
Strzelecki creek till they meet the northern limit of the Pilladapa
about Lake Callabonna. On the west they are bounded by the
Dieyerie, and on the east they extend within the Queensland and
New South Wales frontier. Innamincka, Tinga Tingana, Kano-
winna, Oontoo and other stations, are situated within the territory
of this tribe.
The social organization of the Yowerawarrika and Yanderawan-
tha consists of two intermarrying phratries called Koolpirro and
Thinnawa; a Koolpirro man marries a Thinnawa woman, and, vice
versa , the sons and daughters of the marriage taking the name of
the group to which the mother belongs. Arranged in tabular form
these rules of marriage and descent appear as follows :
Table No. 2.
Phratry.
Husband.
Wife. Offspring.
Thinnawa, Thinnawa.
Koolpirro, Koolpirro.
Koolpirro,
Thinnawa,
There is a collection of totems attached to each phratry. The
following are some of the totems of the Koolpirro people :
Carpet Snake, Rainbow, Rat,
Red Ochre, Pigface, Native Companion,
Crow, Emu, Curlew.
Kite-hawk, Pituri.


The Thinnawa division claims the undermentioned animals and
objects amongst others:
Iguana, Eaglehawk,
Plain Turkey,
Black Duck,
Plover,
Bull-Frog, Shag,
Jew Lizard, Dingo,
Witchetty, Native
Native Cat,
Crane,
Diver.
Ground Frog, Kangaroo Rat,
Water Rat,
The phratry name Koolpirro is the equivalent of Kirraroo, and
Thinnawa corresponds to Matturri of the Parnkalla organization.
Koolpirro is likewise equivalent to the pair of sections Woongo and
Koobaroo, and Thinnawa to the pair, Bunburri and Koorgilla, of
the tribes adjoining them on the northeast.
111. The Barkunjee Nation.
The divisional system and initiation ceremonies of the tribes
constituting this nation have been fully reported in my paper pub-
lished in the Journal of the Royal Society of New South Wales ,
Vol. xxxii, pp. 240-255.
IV. The Adjadurah Nation.
The Adjadurah tribe occupied Yorke Peninsula, a long tongue of
land lying between St. Vincent and Spencer Gulfs and reaching
north as far as Crystal brook. Mr. McEntire says these natives
were more similar to the Adelaide tribe than any other; and Mr.
E. M. Curr states that the language of the Adelaide blacks resem-
bled that of those occupying Yorke Peninsula more than the lan-
guage of the natives of the Murray river. I have compiled the fol-
lowing comparative vocabulary of twenty-four words used by both
tribes, selected from four different authors—Teichelmann and
Schiirmann, 1 Edward Stevens, 2 E. McEntire® and E. M. Curr. 4
1 Grammar and Vocabulary of Aboriginal Language Spoken by Natives
of Adelaide (1840), pp. 1-176.
2 your. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxiii, 498-501.
3 Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (1879), p. 63.
4 The Australian Race (1886), ii, 146, 147.


English.
Teich. and Sch.
Adelaide.
E. Stevens.
Adelaide.
E. McEntire.
Y. Peninsula.
E. M. Curr.
Y. Peninsula.
Kangaroo
Opossum
Dog
Nanto
Pilta
Munthu
Nan too
Bilta
Kadli
Kan
Kua
Cudlee
Curree
Kuddelee
Kadle
Garrie
Gooa
Emu
Crow
Swan
Fish
Egg
Kudlyo
Kuya
Guldyoo
Guya
Cooyar
Kooya
Muka
Mokka
Kakka
Mudla
Minni
Tea
Head
Nose
Eye
Makarta
Mudla
Kukaa
Mudla
Midna’
Teeya
Murra
Thidna
Meedla
Meena
Mena
Tia
Teeth
Hand
Foot
Marra
Tidna
Moora
Tidna
Mirra
Didna
Breasts
(female)
Blood
Ngammi
Karro
Umme
Ammie
Garro
Gerra
Excrement
Reed Spear
Fire
Kudna
Goodnarie
Giea
Kaya
Gadla
Puiyu
Tindo
Kudla
Gurdla
Booyoo
Tintoo
Birra
Smoke
Sun
Tindoo
Cackera
Deento
Bigha
Moon
Kakirra
or Piki
Purle
Boorlee
Barloona
Burlie
Die or Dead
Moorloona
Barluna
Besides the affinity of their speech, the Yorke Peninsula and
Adelaide natives had many customs in common. ' Mr. E. M. Curr,
report that
2 last-named
Mr. E. McEntire and Mr. T. M. Sutton 1
was practiced on Yorke Peninsula, and the
tions the use of a bullroarer. 1
circumcision
author men-
that in the Adelaide tribe a
circumcised; Turlo was the
Teichelmann and Schurmann state tha
youth was called Pappa after being cir
name of the circumcisor; and the being
to their ancestors was named Yura, who
Turlo was the
being who first taught the rite
also punished those who
neglected to carry it out. He further says that a bullroarer called
Kadnamangutta was employed in the ceremony. It was a thin, oval
piece of wood, five inches long and an inch and a half wide, tied to a
1 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc., S. A. Bch., Vol ii, 3d series, p. 17.


string, by which the natives swung it rapidly round, causing a hum-
ming noise. Females and children were not allowed to see it.
Mr. G. F. Angas reports that circumcision was in vogue among
the Wirramayo tribe, who occupied the vast scrub country to the
northwest of the river Murray, and that an instrument called Wittoo
Wittoo , an oval piece of wood fastened to a string of human hair,
was whirled round with great rapidity, producing a loud, roaring
sound. 1
Owing to the similarity of the dialects of the Yorke Peninsula and
Adelaide tribes, the prevalence of circumcision and other customs,
together with the fact of their being adjoining neighbors, seems to
me to justify the assumption that they were practically the same
people. I have therefore included these two tribes in one nation.
Mr. McEntire and Mr. Sutton say that in the Yorke Peninsula
tribe the children followed the father. Having read all that both
these writers have to say on the subject, I am nevertheless of opinion
that the descent of the children depended directly on the mother,
being led to this conclusion by inquiries I have made from old resi-
dents of that part of the country and from natives of adjacent tribes.
Whether or not they were divided into two intermarrying phratries,
like the nations to the north and west of them, appears to have
escaped the notice of early investigators.
V. The Narrinyeri Nation,
The tribes composing this nation have been dealt with in my
article on “ The Victorian Aborigines,” 2 so that a brief reference
will be sufficient in the present treatise. Their territory was chiefly
in South Australia, but extended a little way into the adjoining
colonies of New South Wales and Victoria. Their southern limit
was Lacepede Bay, whence they reached along the coast to Cape
Jervis and up the Murray river almost to the junction of the Dar-
ling (see map). They did not practise circumcision, and their lan-
guage differed from that of their neighbors. The Rev. G. Taplin,
who is the most experienced of tbe early writers on the customs of
these people, gives no group divisions, and says descent was counted
through the father. 3 In the Barkunjee and Booandik tribes, who
1 Savage Life in Australia and New Zealand, Vol. i, p. 99.
2 American Anthropologist (Washington), xi, 336-343.
s Folklore, Manners, etc., S. A. Aborigines (Adelaide, 1879), p. 157.


adjoin the Narrinyeri, the descent is on the mother’s side, although
they marry into the phratry of the father, and the children are
brought up in his tribe.
VI. The Booandik Nation.
More than three-fourths of the entire area of this nation is situated
on the other side of the boundary between South Australia and Victo-
ria, and their social organization has been described in my paper on
the aborigines of the latter colony. 1 I wish to repeat here, however,
that the community is divided into two intermarrying phratries,
called Krokitch and Kamatch. If a man belongs to the Krokitch
division his wife must be taken from among the Kamatch people,
and vice versa —the children taking the name of the phratry to
which their mother belongs.
VII. The Kookatha Nation.
Lying to the west of the Parnkalla, Hillary and Arrabunna Na-
tions, the country is occupied by several tribes, including the Koo-
katha, Geebera, Wirrunga, Yilrea, Warnabinnie and some others.
This aggregate of people will be designated the Kookatha Nation,
and the following is a brief outline of the geographic distribution
of the different tribes composing it.
The Kookatha tribe extends from the Stuart Range, taking in
Lake Phillipson, Mount Eba Station, Wilgena Station, Mount
Finke and Lake Bring. The Geebera people are on the north of
Lake Gairdner. Between the Gawler ranges and the head of the
Great Australian Bight we encounter the Yilrea, Warna-
binnie and other tribes, inhabiting the coastal districts. The peo-
ple of the interior are more friendly among themselves than with
the coast people, and speak a slightly different dialect. They all
mix together, however, in their great corrobories, and have simi-
lar ceremonies of circumcision, subincision and the enlargement of
the vaginal orifice. The coast tribes do not extract a front tooth
from the upper jaw of the males, but this custom prevails all over
the back country.
In the Geebera tribe, and for a long way westward of them, the
two intermarrying phratries are designated Kookoojiba and Koo-
cheebinga, and the resulting offspring take the name of their
1 American Anthropologist, xi, 33 I- 33^-


mother’s phratry, which may be exemplified in tabular form as
under:
Table No. 3
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Offspring.
A Kookoojiba, Koocheebinga, Koocheebinga.
B Koocheebinga, Kookoojiba, Kookoojiba.
Among the coastal tribes, in order [to prevent]consanguineous
marriages, the chief old men appoint certain women to be uumree
to certain young men, and the men thus selected are also uwtirec
to these women. This can be illustrated by supposing that a
woman who is uuviree to a certain man has a son and a daughter.
The man, who may be called A, who is also uumree to her, takes
her daughter as his wife, and if he himself has a sister he is sup-
posed to give her to the woman’s son, who would, of course, be his
wife’s brother. Then the man A and his wife’s brother would be-
come what the natives call maratho , which signifies that they must
always assist one another in time of danger. A man and woman
who are uumree, therefore, stand in the relationship of son-in-law
and mother-in-law. They never speak to one another as long as
they live, and avoid looking at each other if possible, yet remaining
the best of friends.
Female children are betrothed in their infancy to such of the
males as may be entitled to claim them as their wives in accord-
ance with the laws of the tribe. A man is supposed to contribute
something in the way of food to his future wife, until she is old
enough to go and cohabit with him.
Where the law permits, women who have very dark hair and
complexions are appointed uumree to men whose complexions and
hair are lighter, and vice versa. This distinction in the color is
also apparent in the betrothals, a lighter girl being betrothed to a
darker boy, and a darker girl to a lighter boy. In all cases, how-
ever, the parties who are uumree, and also those who are betrothed,
must belong to opposite phratries. 1
The tribes who adjoin the Kookatha nation on the west are sub-
stantially the same people in language and customs, and extend
onwards into western Australia. Commencing about Israelite Bay
1 The Parnkalla divisions, Kirraroo and Matturri, are known at least as far
west as Murat Bay, owing to the intermarriage of the people of the two nations.


and extending a considerable distance westerly and northerly along
the coast of western Australia, the tribes are divided into two inter-
marrying phratries 1 called Munnichmat and Wartungmat, with
groups of totems attached to each, particulars of which will be given
in another article.
VIII. The Andigarina Nation.
Bounding the Arrabunna on the northwest are the Andigarina
and friendly tribes, occupying the country up the Alberga river to
the Musgrave range, and onward to the Petermann ranges and
Lake Amadeus, where they meet the Locrudgee tribe. The Andi-
garina and Loorudgee are divided into four sections, called Koo-
mara, Panungka, Bultara and Parulla, particulars of whose inter-
marriages have been dealt with by me elsewhere. 2 This organiza-
tion, with some modifications in the names of the sections, and in
the order of their intermarriage, extends westward across the colony
of western Australia to the Indian Ocean. 3
Lying northward of the Andigarina, and adjoining also the
Wonkaoora and Wankamudla referred to in a previous page, is the
Arrinda tribe, occupying the country at Macumba, Dalhousie,
Charlotte Waters and the Lower Finke river, and stretching north-
easterly a considerable distance. They have the same four sections
as the Andigarina, and their rules of intermarriage and descent are
identical. The Arrinda and Andigarina people have a similar
language.
Northeasterly of the Arrinda are the Yorrawinga and friendly
tribes, located on the Field, Woodroffe and Georgina rivers. They
1 Divisions on the same principle, but differing in the names of the phratries,
are also found on the northeast coast of Queensland, between Cardwell and Cape
Melville. In some places the names are Koorabunna and Kooragoola—in others
Darboo and Tooar—in others Chunna and Jaypar, and so on.
2 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc. Phila., xxxviii, 79.
8 Among the Weedokarry tribe in western Australia, the following table shows
he -names of the four sections and their rules of intermarriage and descent :
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Offspring.
f Butcharrie, Burronga, Banaka.
I Kurrimurra, Banaka, Burronga.
B f Burronga, Butcharrie, Kurrimurra.
I Banaka, Kurrimurra, Butcharrie.


have four intermarrying divisions named as follow : Koomara, Bel-
thara, Gaballa and Deringera.
Adjoining, but farther to the northward than the Andigarina,
Loorudgee, Arrinda and Yorrawinga people, are a number of tribes
who are distinguished by having eight intermarrying divisions, in-
stead of two, or four, as in the communities herein described. This
eight-section organization extends northerly to the Gulf of Car-
pentaria and Cambridge Gulf, and will be dealt with in another
article.
The language spoken by the Arrinda and allied tribes, and reach-
ing a long way into the eight-section system, has been ably studied
and explained by the Rev. H. Kempe. 1
Explanation of the Map.
I. The Parnkalla Nation.—This is the largest nation in South
Australia, occupying a territory of upwards of 700 miles in length,
by a maximum width of 300 miles. In consequence of the immense
tract occupied, it has been thought advisable to locate on the
map certain communities, consisting of one or more of the tribes
constituting the nation. These communities are represented as
Nos. 1 to 10 on the map, and are all divided into the two phratries,
Matturri and Kirraroo, already explained. The names of some of
the principal tribes in each community are as follow: No. 1, Parn-
kalla, Nauo, Willewroo and Kooapidna tribes. No. 2, Nookoona
and Eeleeree. No. 3, Kooyeeunna and others. No. 4, Kutchna-
mootha. No. 5, Pilladapa. No. 6, Dieyerie. No. 7, Ahminie.
No. 8, Wonkaoora and Wonkamudla. No. 9, Arrabunna. No. 10,
Hillary, Kakarraru and Yallingarra tribes.
11. The Yowerawarrika Nation.—-The principal tribes compos-
ing this nation are the Yowerawarrika, Yandrawontha, Wonka-
murra, Mullinchie, Kullally and others.
111. The Barkunjee Nation, extending into New South Wales,
has two intermarrying phratries, Muckwarra and Keelparra, and the
offspring belong to their mother’s division.
IV. The Adjadura Nation, comprising the tribes on Yoike Pen-
insula and around the district of Adelaide.
1 “A Grammar and Vocabulary of the Language Spoken by the Aborigines of
the Mac Donnell Ranges, South Australia,” Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia , Vol.
xiv, pp. 1-54.


Proceedings Imer. Philos. Sot.
Vol. XXXIX No. INI. Plait VI.
No
\ i—' M
VfTT
-rrNl g
\ yFirdsville
N \ * * NO it
——>*», V _. "~~ — — \ ''Fyf’ertqundi /*
s
/s,
1*
X- " \ -r"-' VrfteY'
v n I fcV
CfJyl /
|+ 9 <^U-
LqKjH l -i. A*5rO
VII T^
&«*» r" \s>
~™ffan<je •wHgenaSin 1 V^,
.JR. (\ x N
MtFmke VX1 \
> 6 lUp”
Jsps 5 ’ ri/4
3'T7 y/ 5 .f
\ d*™ *<S>/I
»V • s' f *
t ->w
/•O
W)
S
NWm in 1
N| 1U <;
aV\ r y+ J
/ ,x*x ;
ft Augusta x 111
V
tJ* 9$l 1 N
o' a$ \ 1 \
r
.H
n<rt L /-* — X T7
* \ rn'A Vr^
\
% \# n /0)lf? yi JA t -
Jfotes •— H~ cs WL^
•/1 i/tCo • C.Spencer $j fTjLtike .
Boundaries of j/atxons shewn, iluis —v—x —x F. Jervis \
it
* Tribes ..
o \ V
‘h
„ Subwaswro » —• •—••—•• —
<0
„ Qrcuma&wrv „ — —-• —*
12
Scale of JAdes
0 SO V)0 150 200 250 300
Nyi
1 1 J\Jl/ } lauiews dal.
Map showing Divisions of South Australian Aborigines.




V. The Narrinyeri Nation.—This and the next following nation,
VI, have been described by me in The American Anthropologist,
Vol. xi, pp. 331-343-
VI. The Booandik Nation, reaching into Victoria. There are
two phratries, Krokitch and Kamatch, the men of the one marrying
the women of the other.
VII. The Kookatha Nation. —The principal tribes are the Koo-
katha, Wirrunga, Yilrea, Warnabirrie and others.
VIII. The Andigarina Nation, consisting of the Andigarina,
Loorudgee and Arrinda tribes, with four intermarrying divisions, as
explained in the text of this paper. To show the wide geographic
range of this system, it is interesting to notice that on the Batavia
river, in the extreme north of Queensland, the Joongoonjee tribe
is divided into two intermarrying phratries, called Chamagunda
and Gamanutta; the former is subdivided into two sections, named
Langename and Namegoore, and the latter into two, called Pack-
wicki and Pamarang. The children of both sexes belong to the
same phratry as their mother.
There are no feminine equivalents for these section names, but
each phratry has a collection of totems, which the natives call edeet,
some of which are the emu, dingo, rock, bamboo, wood, crow, fire,
kangaroo, carpet-snake, sea, shark, sun, black-duck, rat, pigeon,
fresh water.
The reader’s attention is invited to a line (see map) from Port
Augusta, passing east of Lake Frome and entering the New South
Wales boundary south of Tilcha. All the tribes to the west,
northwest and north of this line practice the,rite of splitting the
penis in addition to that of circumcision. There is a belt of coun-
try, including Yctrke Peninsula, Adelaide, Bundalear, and extend-
ing into New South Wales, in which circumcision only is in force ;
the southeastern limit of this tract is also delineated upon the map
as far as the New South Wales boundary. From the latter point
onward, through the Australian Continent to the Gulf of Carpenta-
ria, the position of the line separating the tribes who practice cir-
cumcision and splitting the penis from those among whom neither
custom is in vogue, is defined on maps accompanying contributions
by me to> different societies. 1
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales , xxxii, 240-255, PI. xii; Proc. Amer.
Philos. Soc. Phila., xxxvii, 327-336, PI. xiii.






