

price one shilling.


r A
*
%


DIVORCE EXTENSION
JUSTIFIED
AN IRISH ANGLICAN
(A VICTORIAN SOLICITOR)
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY




PREFACE.
5 5 / r9%7^
77
I HAVE jotted down this in the midst of many distractions,
and doubtless many inaccuracies will be detected and
triumphantly exposed. My end will have been attained if I
shall have provoked discussion, and have persuaded any to be
industrious before they presume to dogmatize.
It is for the State to say what shall be the law ; and what-
ever the creeds may teach, the State will act wisely if it, at the
instance of the innocent party, pronounce divorce for the
causes stated in Mr. Shiels* Bill, which causes not only
utterly destroy the essence of matrimony and the happiness
of wedded life, but go far to ensure a posterity profitless and
dangerous to the State.
HANBURY C. GEOGHEGAN.
Melbourne.




To the Anglican Synods of New South
Wales and of Victoria.
DIVORCE EXTENSION
JUSTIFIED.
“Art thou the Teacher of Israel and understandest not these things ? ”
“ He who wisely would restrain the reasonable soul of man within
due bounds must first know perfectly how far the territory of just
liberty extends ; as little must he bind what God hath loosed, as loose
that which He hath bound : mistake on this high point hath heaped up
one huge half of all the misery that hath befallen man.” —John Milton.
A Bill recently passed, and for the second time, both
chambers of the Parliament of New South Wales, to which
Her Majesty has refused her assent. It has now again passed
both chambers, and by a larger majority. Had this measure
become law, it would have enabled any married person, who
had then been resident in that colony for two years or
upwards, to obtain a divorce on any of the following grounds,
viz.:—
(1) That without just cause or excuse the petitioner had been
wilfully and continuously deserted for three years or upwards.
(2) That the respondent had by continual habitual drunk-
enness for two years and upwards habitually left his wife
without the means of support, or, being the petitioner’s wife,
had for such time, and by such habits, neglected, and disabled
herself from discharging, her domestic duties.
(3) That at date of petition the respondent had been im-
prisoned for not less than twelve months, and was then under-
going a sentence of seven years’ imprisonment or upwards
for some crime ; or, being a husband, had, owing to frequent


convictions for crime, left his wife habitually for two years
and upwards without support.
(4) That within six months of presenting the petition the
respondent had been convicted of an attempt to murder the
petitioner, or that respondent had repeatedly, during that
period, assaulted and cruelly beaten the petitioner, or during a
period of two years had repeatedly been guilty of cruelty
towards her.
If the Court upon any of these grounds granted the petition,
the petitioner might marry again.
A similar Bill (differing, however, in one important
particular) was debated in the recent session of the Legis-
lative Assembly of Victoria, but little progress was made
with it. It is much to be desired that some such Bill may
be introduced and pass both chambers in the present session.
The particular in which Mr. Shiels’ Bill differed from the
New South Wales measure was that by Mr. Shiels’ Bill
adultery was made a ground entitling a wife to a divorce ;
but, as this relief is already open to a wife domiciled in
New South Wales, the effect of his Bill would have been to
subject husband and wife to precisely the same law in both
colonies.*
This is the measure which a rev. gentleman, in speaking
against it in the Anglican Synod of this colony, with equal
decency and humour characterized as “in the direction of
making marriage a contract by a wink, and dissolving it by
a kick.” Up to the moment of writing this a woman cannot
in this colony divorce her husband unless he has been cruel
to her as well as adulterous.
The cruelty referred to means cruelty in the eye of the law.
But learn how supremely wretched a woman may be before
the law will relieve her, and admit her adulterous husband
has been less than kind. For our courts here and at home
have authoritatively determined that inhumanity is not
cruelty—that neither does neglect, coldness, indifference,
isolation, abusive language, drunken habits, want of con-
sideration or courtesy, petty annoyances, nor harsh and cruel
treatment of the wife’s children, amount to legal cruelty. To
establish legal cruelty you must convince the Court that there
has been actual personal violence of such a character as to.
. * Mr. Shiels’ Bill also contained a clause which would have put a
period to the preposterous attempts of “ Old Father Antic,” the law, to
enforce specific performance of a contract which neither our legislators
nor divines seem capable of understanding.


endanger personal health or safety, or that a reasonable
apprehension of such violence exists, on proof of which
the husband or wife cannot get divorce unless adultery also
be proved, but only a decree for judicial separation.
In a case of Scott v. Scott (29 L.R. Mat. 64) it was decided
“ that habitual drunkenness, even when accompanied by acts of
co7isiderable violence , is so far from entitling the victim to a
divorce that it is not even a substantial ground for a decree
of judicial separation.” While Hudson v. Hudson (3 S. and T.
314) is authority for saying the Court will not grant a decree
■of judicial separation to protect a wife “ from mere unhappiness
resulting from an ill-assorted marriage, nor from the destruction
of domestic co7nfort caused by drunkenness.”
Are the fathers and brothers of Victoria content to leave
their kinswomen still dependent on a law so powerless to
protect or give redress ? How much of a man’s courage is
but the consciousness of superior strength ?„ A woman
apprehensive of violence, physically so feeble and inferior,
may for years suffer the torments of the damned, shrinking
from that blow which may never fall.
The Anglican Synod of New South Wales, presided over
by the very learned Primate of the Anglican communion in
Australia, denounced the Divorce Extension Bill, and made
these four objections to it—
(1) That it is against the Christian faith.
(2) That it is hostile to the moral and public welfare.
(3) That it is opposed to the conscientious convictions of
large bodies of Christians.
(4) That it is opposed to the present tenor of the law of
England and her colonies.
The Anglican Synod of Victoria were not a whit behind
their elder sister, and they passed a resolution expressing
disapproval of the then pending Bill. This is the resolution,
which was carried by a very large majority—“ That in view
of the report circulated in the newspapers of this colony that
a Bill has been introduced into Parliament to alter the legal
grounds of divorce, this Assembly desires to record its opinion
that any change in this respect will be injurious to the best
interests of the community. At the same time the Assembly
desires to state that it hails with satisfaction the report that
measures are to be taken to remove the difficulties which
prevent the poor from obtaining divorce, when it may be
claimed on grounds which are Scriptural.”


The Victorian Synod debated neither the Bill nor the ques-
tion of divorce. An amendment amounting to a mild
negation of the resolution was, however, proposed, seconded,
and supported by a small minority, numbering amongst them
those most conspicuous for learning and ability.
The Victorian Synod protests against any alteration being
made “in the legal grounds for divorce,” though they know
the Victorian law does not allow divorce for the husband’s
adultery ; yet the Synod admit “ adultery ” is a Scriptural
ground for divorce equally open to both sexes. “ These be
your Christian husbands.”
Sir Alfred Stephen, ex-Chief Justice of New South Wales,,
who is still a distinguished member of the Legislative Council,,
and who is furthermore a prominent and conscientious
member of the Church of England, has answered the four
objections taken by the Synod of New South Wales. The
first objection, by arraying greater authority against them
than they had to marshal. The second, by citing startling
facts and figures (better read in his pamphlets), which
demonstrate that the well-meaning opponents of this
measure are but protecting cruelty and shame. The third,
by proving that the teaching of the Anglican Church
upon divorce differs from that of all the other reformed
churches ; while, in answer to the fourth objection, which
(and it shows how little study has been given to this
matter by its opponents) was urged in the Legislative
Assembly of Victoria, Sir Alfred Stephen refers to the well-
known case of Harvey v. Farnie, reported in 8 Law Reports,
Appeal Cases, page 43, in which case a divorce obtained in
Scotland upon grounds not warranting a divorce in England
was upheld by the English Court of Appeal. This case, decided
in November, 1882, authoritatively establishes the principle
that any marriage, wherever celebrated, and between persons of
whatever nationalities, will be effectually dissolved by the
decree of a competent tribunal in any country, whatever may be
the grounds for the divorce , if the husband and wife be there
domiciled in good faith, and such decree will be valid through-
out the world. It is astonishing that during the debate in the
Victorian Legislative Assembly the extraordinary misstate-
ment there made of the law remained uncorrected by the
speakers who rose in support of the Bill.
In this paper I propose mainly to deal with the first objection
taken by the Synod of New South Wales, because this objection
is thought by many estimable persons both here and at home


to be absolutely unanswerable, and to be one which takes
the question out of the region of debate. I propose to go
more fully into this question than Sir Alfred Stephen was at
leisure to do, and to prove here that the proposed Divorce
Extension Bill is not contrary to the Christian faith, and that
the Anglican Church, in teaching the contrary, has misappre-
hended and mistaught what the Scriptures, but for their
expounding, would appear plainly enough to warrant. Yet
we have been so accustomed to hear and to accept
their wrong rendering as the right meaning that it will
require a vigorous effort, shaking ourselves free from
custom and prejudice, to separate the various passages of
Scripture from their glosses upon them. This, then, I shall
now attempt.
The opinions and arguments here advanced, to which the
Synods have opposed themselves, are not novel—they are in
accordance with the practice of the early Christian Church
and Christian Emperors, Theodosius, Valentinian, Justinian,
and Constantine, and are supported by the great authority of
names we have been taught to reverence :—Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Origen, Jerome, Austin, Wickliffe, Martin Luther,
Martin Bucer, Erasmus, Calvin, Knox, Melancthon, Paulus
Fagius, Peter Martyr, and Milton (whose works on this sub-
ject still await their answer).
I have to tell the Synods, as against their sudden, hasty
resolutions, we point to the Reformatio Legum Ecclesias-
ticum,* the industrious work of 20 painful years (as Hallam
tells us)f and of 32 divines and scholars, the most eminent
for piety and learning of their day—the best and purest day
that ever dawned on England. But for the untimely death
of Edward VI. (for the Bill had been sanctioned by both
Church and State, and wanted but the King’s assent), their
opinions had enriched the Statute Book of England. These
great men, as conscientious as they were learned, yielded to
none in their reverence for the Scriptures. It was all their
study to shape their purposed reforms solely by its teaching,
and they thought they found there far greater freedom of
divorce than appears in the Bills vetoed by the Synods. You
have heard their names before. I shall remind you of a few.
*This is the recognized abbreviation for “ Reformatio Legum Eccle-
siasticarum,” and it is always cited as in the text.
t“Nor do I see,” writes Hallam, “how we can justify the denial of
redress to women in every case of adultery and desertion.” P. 85 of
his “ Constitutional History.”


They include in their number—Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop
Goodrich, Dr. Cox (Bishop of Ely), Dr. May (afterwards elect
of York), Peter Martyr, Dr. Rowland Taylor, Archbishop
Parker (who was Primate of England), Dr. Haddon, Sir Jno.
Cheke (tutor to King Edward VI.)
The Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticum authorized divorce
for adultery, desertion, and “ mortal enmities,” and abolished
altogether judicial separation from bed and board. This
expresses the unanimous opinion of the reformed churches
as to what the Scriptures sanctioned ; for this was then
considered not a social but solely an ecclesiastical question ;
and Sir John Stoddart, an eminent master of the Canon
Law, informs us that from 1550 to 1602 marriage was not
held by the church, and was therefore not held by the law, to
be indissoluble.*
In 1571, in the 13th year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth
(who was no friend to marriage), a last attempt was made, at
the instance of Archbishop Parker, to obtain a statute which
would give effect to the Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticum.
How this attempt sped every student of history knows.
The existing law of marriage and divorce is not founded
on right reason. None of the great ancient nations, not the
Jews, nor Greeks, nor Romans, ever sweated under such a
marriage chain as we have hammered out for our necks.
This rigour is due to what ?—to naught but the erroneous and
illiberal construction placed upon certain passages of Scrip-
ture by the Roman Catholic Church (a church with whom
for many ages marriage lay in disgrace, regarded almost as a
defilement, denied to priests, and for long discommended to
the laity), whose errors on this subject have been adopted and
echoed by the Church of England. This, with true Protes-
tant freedom, I shall shortly make appear—dissenting from
those ecclesiastics who, even in our own time, have proved
themselves no safe interpreters of Scripture. Who so young
as not to remember when our pulpits rang with denunciations
of the atheistical teachings of geology, which dared assert
the world was something older than our reverend teachers
affirmed ? Who does not know that the Church of England,
obstinate in this error, still construes the words “ Neither
shalt thou take a wife to her sister to vex her, to uncover her
nakedness beside the other in her lifetime ” as prohibiting
marriage with a deceased wife’s sister ?
* See Macqueen’s “Husband and Wife,” p. 158.


This colony has by its statutes corrected the Church,
anticipating the halting legislation of the mother country on
this point. Let us see what special reverence attaches to this
law which the Synods would forbid our touching with even a
reforming finger.
Here are some anomalies : —ln Ireland there is no tribunal
empowered to pronounce divorce. In Scotland divorce can
be obtained on the ground of desertion and for the husband’s
adultery. In England divorce cannot be obtained on either of
these grounds. In Victoria a man may marry his deceased’s
wife’s sister, though a woman must not marry her deceased
husband’s brother. In England, Ireland, or Scotland this
would be incestuous; while our ancestors carried with them
to America and India the old law, which enabled them to
marry without being assisted by any ecclesiastic.
In Victoria girls and boys of 12 and 14 years, though by
law regarded as incapable of entering into other and trivial
contracts, can at that tender age enter into the irrevocable
contract of matrimony. ’Tis true the statute stipulates for
their guardians’ consent, but ’tis also true that evasion or
non-compliance therewith invalidates not the marriage.*
They must endure, repent they never so bitterly, till death
relieves them, unless proof be forthcoming that any of the
following grounds for divorce or annulling marriage exist: —
Physical impotence, insanity at the time of the marriage,
mistaken identity, adultery of the wife, adultery of the
husband coupled with desertion for two years or upwards
of the wife, incestuous adultery of the husband (which is
defined as adultery between a man and woman who, though
both unmarried, could not intermarry),*f or adultery of the
husband together with legal cruelty.J
Our marriage law admittedly is founded on the Canon Law
handed down to us from Roman Catholic sources, which
starts with the assumption that marriage is a sacrament, and,
though we reject their premises, we (or, rather, the Anglican
Synods) subscribe to their conclusions. Yet in the Bible
sacraments and the holiest and most solemn institutions are
*See section 11 of the Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Statute, 1864,
of Victoria ; also, Regina v. Griffin, 3 V.L.R. (L.), 278.
t Adultery with the wife’s sister would in England enable a wife to
divorce her husband, but not so here.
| There are a few other unspeakable causes for divorce, or for decreeing
nullity of marriage. On the score of “ mistaken identity,” in a case of
Allardyce v. Mitchell (6 W.W. and a’B. 45), the Victorian Court relieved
the lady of her husband.


subordinated to man’s necessity, and (see Numbers ix.) those
who were unclean or on a journey were absolved from keeping
the Passover till the second month. In Roman Catholic
countries throughout Europe, down to the middle of the
sixteenth century, marriage was regarded as a consensual
contract, capable of being completed by the parties without
the interposition of any authority, clerical or lay. This was
the opinion of St. Thomas Aquinas and the Council of
Florence, and so it stood till the Council of Trent thenceforth
declared that all marriages should be celebrated in facie
ecclesice; but apparently even that Council considered the
bridal pair the real ministers, while the priest did but attest
and bless the union. This pronouncement of the Council of
Trent, being made after the breach between Henry VIII. and
Rome, had therefore never operation in England,
The teaching of the Church of England on divorce agreed
with that of the Roman Catholics, and differed from that of
all the other reformed churches, by denying relief for adultery
or desertion, and this intolerable state of things existed, with
one or two lucid intervals,* down to 1857, when an Act,
strenuously opposed by the clergy of the English Church, was
passed, legalizing divorce for adultery on the wife’s part, and
for adultery, together with cruelty, &c,, on the husband’s part.
Prior to this Statute of 20 and 21 Viet, c. 85, anyone
proving adultery of the wife and adultery, with cruelty or
desertion, by the husband, could get divorce on paying the
cost (some £soo, if unopposed) of a private Act of Parliament.
But in earlier times the Canonists, though all divorce was
denied, refused relief only to those who were poor as well as
miserable. A pronouncement could be obtained in those
early days from the Ecclesiastical Courts, not divorcive, but
declaring the marriage itself invalid upon many and slight
grounds. Numerous marriages have been annulled because
the contracting parties were within the seven prohibited
degrees, and this bar, be it remembered, included (opening a
wide field), not only spiritual relationships, but also affinities
created by illicit commerce between the sexes. Thus Queen
Margaret, widow of James IV. of Scotland, intermarrying
with Lord Methven, petitioned to have her marriage declared
* Milton, at page 425 of the 3rd vol. of his Prose Works, states divorce
could then (February, 1647) be obtained “ for proved adultery and for not
less than long years of desertion,” but I confess I have found no such
statute, though I have found one which a layman might easily have so
misconstrued.


null, on the ground that prior to it she had been carnally
known by Lord Angus, her husband’s eighth cousin. (See
page 156, 3rd edition, Macqueen’s “Law of Husband and
Wife.”)*
In the year 1215, by the 4th Lateran Council, the pro-
hibition was reduced from seven to four degrees of kindred,
and our Statute Book shows this alteration was adopted by
England. By 24 Henry VIII., chap. 12, Papal power in
England was abolished ; yet four years afterwards, in the year
1540, by the 28 Henry VIII., chap. 7, sec. 10, it is affirmed
as the law of England that illicit carnal intercourse created
the prescribed affinities quite as validly as the actual legiti-
mate blood relationship could do.
Then the aid of the Roman Catholic doctrine of “Intention”
was also invoked for the purpose of evading matrimonial
obligations, and shortly stated—but I am addressing learned
bodies. I shall hasten to the instance.
In 1880 a Committee of Cardinals pronounced the marriage
of Lady Mary Hamilton with the Prince of Monaco null and
void on the ground of lack of inward consent on the lady’s
part, though her external compliance with the rite was not
questioned, and though she carried her complaisancy so far as
to live with the Prince and bear him a child—evidence suffi-
cient, one would think, of internal compliance ; nevertheless,
her explanation satisfied the Cardinals that she meant nothing
matrimonial, and they suffered her to marry another man.
By the decrees of the Council of Trent (Leo VIL, Can.
XL) —(decreed too under penalty of anathema for rejecting
this Intention Doctrine) —it is declared necessary that the
bishop or priest who performs any religious ceremony shall
inwardly mean to do that which the Church intends to be
done in and by that ceremony, and that if the minister from
unbelief, ill-will, malice, or any other cause do withhold this
inward assent, the ceremony is null and void, and conveys
no grace whatever (which may explain why marriages, even
in the Roman Catholic Church, where they are sacramental,
*This Queen Margaret was elder sister of Henry VIII. of England,
who had himself some experience of this subject. He not being then
quite twelve years of age, his father, to save a second jointure, compelled
him to marry Catherine of Aragon, then nineteen years of age, and who
was probably his brother’s widow. To legalize this marriage, at the
lady’s instance a second Bull was obtained, which contained the significant
words velforsan cognitam , and which were wanting in the first one. See
page 452 eiseq. of Lord Bacon’s “ Essays and Historical Works,” edition of
1884.


are not invariably successful). And Cardinal Bellarmine, no
mean authority in that church, admits that “No one can be
certain with the certainty of faith that he receives a true
sacrament, because it cannot be valid without the intention of
the minister, and no man can see another’s intention.”*
By the same Council, and with the same solemnity, it
was also decreed that a valid marriage is dissolved by
the entering of either party into a monastic order. The
Pope also, perhaps in virtue of his power to release from
purgatory, claims, and is by all Roman Catholics allowed,
to have the power to dissolve marriage.
In England, though the Intention doctrine had no foothold,
something perhaps more monstrous still existed down to
1753, when Lord Hardwicke’s Act was passed. Prior to this
the parties could privately enter into a dubious marriage by
mere words indicating such present intention, or by words
declaring an intention to so contract in the future, followed
in the latter case by cohabitation, whence followed all these
consequences. This mere oral promise or whispered state-
ment, privately interchanged between the parties,f was held
to be of the very essence of matrimony, so that neither party
could be proceeded against in the Ecclesiastical Courts for
fornication, although they might have anticipated the parson’s
blessing, while if either married another he or she could be
punished for adultery. This marriage was also irrevocable.
The parties, though never so willing, could not release each
other from their promise, and even many years afterwards,
if either married someone else, the other could, by proceeding
in the Ecclesiastical Courts, compel the first contract to be
solemnized in facie ecclesice , breaking through the subsequent
marriage and bastardizing the children. Persons living
together as, and being as they themselves and their neigh-
bours believed, husband and wife for many years and become
the parents of a numerous offspring, have been pronounced to
be living in sin, and their children bastards, because the
father had formerly entangled himself in some promise which
amounted to a pre-contract, and rendered his subsequent
marriage a nullity.*
Nor was the proof of these grounds for invalidating
* See “ Disput. Controv. de Justific., 111., viii. 5.” This is the Cardinal
Bellarmine who was appointed to visit Galileo, and obtain from the
astronomer a recantation of the heresy that the earth moves round the sun.
t This is the contract per verba de prcesenti.
J See Lord Campbell’s “Lives of the Chancellors,” vol. v., p. 124.


marriages difficult. Mere confession was sufficient ; and so
largely were such shifts availed of that the preamble of an
English Statute, 32 Henry VIII., chap. 38, recites “That no
marriage could be so firmly knit and bounden but it should
lie in either party’s power to prove a pre-contract, a kindred
and alliance, or a carnal knowledge, to defeat the same.”
This Act in its preamble states how easily, and for money, the
various impediments to marriage could formerly be removed
on application to the Pope, and it attempted to remedy many
most grievous mischiefs recited in its preamble ; but so wedded
were the lawyers and clergy to unreason that this statute was
repealed as to pre-contracts by the 2nd of Edward VI.
Ben Jonson, in his play of “ The Silent Woman,” makes a
jest of the Canon Law, and the twelve impediments to
marriage ; while in “ As You Like It” Touchstone prefers to
be married by Sir Oliver Martext for prudent reasons.
Various statutes of Henry VIL, of Elizabeth, and of
Philip and Mary recite that women and children were some-
times openly sold in marriage, sometimes forcibly carried off
and compelled to go through a form of marriage ; and for a
punishment they deprive the husbands and ravishers “ of their
clergy ” (benefit of clergy), and sometimes deprive them of any
interest in the wife’s fortune, but none of them venture to declare
such marriages invalid. By 26 Geo. IT, cap. 33 (Hardwicke’s
Act), the marriages of children under 21 without the consent
of parents were indeed invalidated, but this statute contains a
provision that it shall not apply to parts beyond the seas.
In 1781 Fox brought in a Bill to deprive parents of this
veto, which was successfully opposed by Edmund Burke in
a well-known speech.
Lord Hardwicke’s Marriage Act, with amendments added,
still regulates this contract, and prior to it young heirs and
heiresses hardly out of the nursery had been ruined by
mercenary and fraudulent marriages. For there were always
profligate parsons ready to perform the ceremony in' taverns
and brothels, and in Ireland priests were forthcoming to
“solemnize” matrimony between the mercenary ruffian and
the reluctant protesting victim of his brutality, carried off
forcibly at midnight from her father’s house.
Statesmen from time to time proposed to relieve such victims
by divorcive legislation framed to meet the mischief, but, owing
to the opposition of the Anglican clergy—who regarded even
such outrages as sacramental—none was attempted*
* See Froude’s “ English in Ireland,” vol. i., pp. 417-8.


The clergy of the English Church have ever opposed all
amendment of the marriage law. Reforms have been made in
spite of them; and when, in October, 1651, a much-needed law
was passed, enacting that marriages might be solemnized
before Justices of the Peace, their indignation was extreme.
Prior to this statute, all Roman Catholics and other dissenters
in England had to remain unmarried or resort to the Anglican
ministers.*
Any progress which the clergy have made towards charity,
equity, and liberality, they have learned from the laity, and
though now they admit adultery dissolves the marriage, for
centuries they denied this and taught the contrary. For
how much misery and sin they have thus made themselves
answerable it is beside my purpose to inquire.
A judicial separation can now be obtained upon any of the
grounds upon which a divorce is obtainable, and also upon
the ground of legal cruelty ; but the English Church and the
Ecclesiastical Courts at one time considered every decree of
separation a thoro et mensa , warranted the separated parties in
contracting another marriage, for the first volume of the
Statutes and Canons, &c., of the Church of England (Tit. XXI 1.,
cap. 17, c. 7, edit, of 1761), requires the judges, before pro-
nouncing such decree of separation, to take “ good and
sufficient caution and security that the parties shall live
chastely during each other’s life, and not contract matrimony
with other persons'.'
But let us get nearer to our subject, and grapple with those
texts of Scripture which, in the judgment of the Synods, forbid
them to grant divorce except for adultery, and forbid them
then also “ to heal the broken-hearted,” to preach “ deliver-
ance to the captives, to set at liberty them that are bound.”
To understand the matter we shall do well to take Christ’s
advice, and look at the first institution—
PASSAGES FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT.
Genesis i. 27 —“And God created man in his own
image, in the image of God created He him; male and female
created He them.” 28—“ And God blessed them, and God
said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply.”
This is the first mention in the Bible of the relation between
* See Hallam’s “ Constitutional History of England,” p. 460 ; and see
also 12 Car. 11., cap. 33, “An Act for Confirmation of Marriages in
the 111 Times.”


the sexes; but in the subsequent chapter, which is granted by
the commentators to be an exposition of the previous one, we
touch an earlier point of time :
Genesis ii. 18—“ And the Lord said, It is not good that
the man should be alone; I will make him an help-meet for
him.”
Here we have a wife not named, but, still better for our
purpose, defined for us. She, then, with what care soever she
be coupled, who answers not to this definition, can be no wife;
a bad wife, Paroeus, quoting Chrysostom, says, is the devil’s
help-meet.
Genesis ii. 23. —“And Adam said this is now bone of my
bone and flesh of my flesh ; she shall be called woman because
she was taken out of man.” 24 —“ Therefore shall a man
leave his father and his mother and shall cleave unto his wife,
and they shall be one flesh.”
“ It is not good that the man should be alone.”
So even in Paradise, where Adam had angels to converse
with, and the society of God himself, and knew not lust nor
sin, he was yet companionless till, as a result of God’s deliber-
ative meditations, after passing in review all created things
and finding for Adam no fit help-meet (the word is repeated),
Eve is brought to him.
Here, then, we have the reason stated of marriage : a
remedy for loneliness, to furnish man with a help-meet for him
—“ meet for him.” The original here is more expressive than
other languages, word for word, can render it, but all agree it
signifies effectual conformity of disposition and affection.
Adam spake like Adam, of flesh and bone, of the mere shell
and rind of matrimony, but God—God-like—of love and
solace and meet help—of that which alone distinguishes
marriage from the coupling of the brute creation.
Now this 24th verse is mainly relied on by the literalists
as making marriage blunders irremediable.
“ Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother,
and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh.”
But let us consider—
“ Therefore he shall cleave to his wife.” That is, he shall
do so, upon the premises of that meet help and society before
mentioned. No other a wife than she can be such fit help.
“ Therefore ” cannot refer to Adam’s words, or it would
make the force of the injunction to rest in the mere anatomy
of a rib, to a matter personal and peculiar only to the first
wedded pair, and not in those moral and relative causes


stated by God for Eve’s creation, and before He proceeded to
shape her out of Adam’s side.
In Paradise man and woman were perfect; with the Fall
far greater was the need for solace, but that solace had lost
both virtue and fitness. It soon was found that every woman
was not a help-meet for every man. To prevent the devil
wresting what was meant for good to utter evil this relief was
given:
Deut. xxiv. I —“ When a man hath taken a wife, and
married her, then it shall be if she find no favour in his eyes
because he hath found some unseemly thing in her, that he
shall write her a bill of divorcement, and give it into her hand
and send her out of his house.” * 2 —“ And when she is
departed out of his house she may go and be another man’s
wife.”
Moses again and again reiterates that he has given the
Israelites no commandment but such as he had God’s high
warrant for. (See Deut. iv. 2,5, 40 ; vi. 1.; xiii. 18). For this,
then, he had God’s authority.
Therefore, divorce is a Divine institution.
“ Because he hath found some unseemly thing in her.”
Some good expositors translate this “ nakedness of aught; ”
and “nakedness” is in Scripture usually referred to the mind
as well as to the body; and as a meet and happy conversation
is the chiefest and noblest end of marriage, it would be matter
for surprise to find careful provision made for the lower, but
the higher need left unhelped. This expression “ unseemly
thing” is constantly expounded as any “defect, annoyance,
or ill quality in nature,” to be joined with which makes such
company worse than solitude. Is it necessary to labour
anything so obvious as that here divorce is permitted for
causes other than adultery—other than physical? This
woman was not being divorced for adultery, because the Jews
promptly stoned such to death—neither was it “ frigidity,” for
she carries with her permission to marry again ; nor because
of impotency on the part of the man, for a prohibition is
inserted against, her re-marrying the man who had divorced
her.
Special reverence has been claimed for marriage because
the mystical union of Christ with the church has been
resembled to it, and because it has been called in Scripture
* Even now in England, when proceedings are instituted by Jews for
divorce, the giving of this bill of divorce must be proved.


the covenant of God. But even the dubious contract that
Zedekiah made with the King of Babylon (Ezek. xvii.) is
called the oath and covenant of God, and why ? Merely
because God was thereto attested. The Bible, moreover, from
the beginning to the end is full of threatenings that, if the
Church prove herself no true bride, Christ shall divorce her,
and that without remedy. Doubtless marriage is a Divine
institution; but this makes for my contention, and argues the
chief essence to be in the soul rather than the body, and the
greatest breach thereof, therefore, to be unfitness of mind
rather than adultery or mere physical defect, for the body’s
share is least in a covenant more than human.
For nearly two thousand years, without rebuke, the Jews,
living under the law, under a covenant of works had, and
doubtless some of them abused, this permission to divorce ;
but it is to the Gospel, the covenant of grace which dissolved
all law into charity, that the literalists point as having petri-
fied the law into a still stonier rigour.
It has been asked what institution seems to have been more
designed for God and less for man than the Sabbath, and in
the decalogue (which names not marriage, and forbids not
divorce) strictest injunctions for its observance are given ; yet
Christ, discovering a hierarchy or gradation of commands,
pronounces that the observance of charity, even in favour of
a poor ox or ass, is supreme to Sabbath keeping. “ The
Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath.” In
what could God’s part appear less—in what could man’s
appear more, than in marriage ? Has the principle which
Christ enunciated no application here? or must we subor-
dinate man’s interests to an institution whose only origin was
his good ?
Observe the reason given for instituting this ordinance of
matrimony—“ It is not good for man to be alone.” All
philosophers are agreed that no law given, together with a
reason, prevails longer than that reason exists. If, then, the
husband or wife be no help-meet, and if their presence be an
evil more intolerable than solitude, what then ? Do you
still think God has joined them ? Some good folk are in-
tolerable to each other; nor does Christianity always cure
this, for Paul and Barnabas, though engaged in the same high
business, and in spite of their saintliness, differed so sharply
that they thought it wise to part.
“ A hated woman,” Solomon says, “ when she is married, is
a thing for which the earth is disquieted, and cannot bear it.”


And Moses sent back Zipporah, his wife, to her father, being
offended by her profane speeches, and we may assume that
her dismission differed nothing from a divorce.
Marriage, now exalted above all that is called God (for by
the meaning they put upon Christ’s words the literalists in
effect charge His Almighty Father with having authorized and
legalized adultery by statute and with licensing—with system-
atizing adultery),* was subordinated in the Old Testament to
the authority of the master (see Exod. xxi.), to the chances
of war (Deut. xxi. 10 to 14), and the Anglican and other
reformed churches have taught that it gives place in some
cases to parental authority.
It has also been made give place to the soul’s health, as
when the husband or wife attempted to seduce the other to
idolatry they were in that case to be stoned to death (Deut.
xvii. 5-7), and this is carried into the New Testament,
for Christ says that whosoever hateth not his wife for His
sake is not worthy of Him. It has also always been regarded
as inferior to the well-being of the body. Thus those that
practised against the lives of their consorts were divorced.
We have looked at the first institution of matrimony, and
have found nothing there to forbid relief to the wretched, nor
is a reasonable freedom of divorce opposed to natural equity.
God Himself has created a standard of right from which He
cannot swerve, and Abraham, seeming to doubt if divine
nature were reconcilable with the faint notion of this standard
with which God had irradiated his mind, inquires, “Wilt
Thou destroy the righteous with the wicked ? That be far
from Thee. Shall not the J udge of all the earth do right ? ”
PASSAGES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT.
Let us now look at the New Testament, remembering
“ that the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life; ” that
doubtful passages of Scripture are best expounded by the
Scriptures ; and that, believing God wrote both the Old and
New Testaments, we should be slow to receive as the true
meaning of either any construction which would involve a
contradiction between them.
The most competent man, perhaps, who ever wrote on this
subject, and from whom I have largely borrowed, warns us
that though the New Testament be writ in Greek, it hath not
* This much resembles the heresy of Manes.


nearly so many Atticisms as Hebraisms and Syriacisms, and
that he who, unread in these Eastern tongues, ventures upon
his knowledge of the Greek, will want no occasion to stumble.
The first place in which we find divorce mentioned in the
New Testament is in Matthew v. 27, 28—“ Ye have heard
that it was said, Thou shalt not commit adultery. But I
say unto you that everyone that looketh after a woman to
lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his
heart.” 3 1, 32. —“It was said also,Whosoever shall put away his
wife let him give her a writing of divorcement: but I say unto
you that everyone that putteth away his wife, saving for the
cause of fornication, maketh her an adulteress ; and whosoever
shall marry her when she is put away committeth adultery.”
These words occur in Christ’s sermon on the Mount,
wherein he tells us not to swear at all ;* to pluck out our eye
if it offend us, and cast it from us; to reward with our cloak
the robber of our coat; to resist not evil ; to lead, hoping for
nothing again. What other sentence in this sermon do you
take literally ? Why single out this one ? A lustful look is
called adultery; but you will not construe that literally, though
spoken on the same subject and in the same breath. This has
well been called playing fast and loose with Scripture.
What figure more frequent in Scripture than hyperbole ?
as when we would straighten what is warped we force it as far
in the contrary direction that in rebounding it may keep the
mean. So Christ, who tells us but a few verses earlier
“that He is not come to destroy the law, but to fulfil it”
(though in spite of His protest you disbelieve this), and that
“one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass away from the
law,” speaks here in forcible language to reprove the gross
abuses of divorce—not by repealing Moses to stultify himself.
That the Jews had so abused the law appears from the 19th
chapter of this Gospel, verse 3, where it is said, “ There came
unto Him Pharisees, tempting Him, and ‘ Is it lawful
for a man to put away his wife for every cause ? ”
Christ tells us He has not come to destroy the law. But
you say, spite of His own disclaimer, His subsequent words
expressly destroy that law of divorce which had been
practised unrebukably and under express Divine enactment
* The 39th Article states in reference to this passage that vain and rash
swearing is forbidden, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate
requireth in a cause of faith and charity. I say, then, that but vain and
rash divorces are here forbidden, and that the Magistrate may pronounce
divorce when charity and justice demand it.


for then nigh 2,000 years. This, your rigid rendering, plunges
you in worse danger. You have contradicted the Son of God.
You now do more, and charge Him with revolt against His
Almighty Father—with teaching not only that thenceforward
His Father’s law shall not prevail, but, as He gives a reason
for revoking, and one which had existed at the beginning and
continuously down to the moment of His utterance (to speak
it reverently), in interpreting Him as you do you cannot
exonerate Him from thereby charging God, who is of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity, with having sullied his ineffable
brightness and entered into a confederacy with sin. Had
Christ purposed to repeal this law of divorce, He would not
have begun by an express and purposeless confirmation of
that law. His abrogating would have been but to have told
us thenceforth such law should cease ; but as you handle it
the reproof, which Christ intended for the Pharisees, is cast
upon the law—a law which God himself had ordained.*
“ The Pharisees came unto Him tempting Him.” *f*
Doubtless they had heard of His sermon on the Mount :
and a matter had lately occurred to make divorce the subject
of every controversy. Herod, as Josephus tells us, had been a
long time married to the daughter of Aretas, King of Petra,
and being entertained on his journey towards Rome at Philip’s
house, he there cast an unlawful eye upon Herodias, his
brother Philip’s wife, the daughter of Aristobulus, their
common brother, and proposed to marry her (his niece) from
his brother’s bed. She consenting, provided he expelled his
former wife, this was done, and rebuked by John the Baptist
at the cost of his head.
These Pharisees in their questioning were thinking less of
matrimony than of murder. They knew Christ to be a friend
of John the Baptist, and hoped to discover Him a contradictor
of Moses, and a condemner of Herod, and to encompass Him
within the same accusation as had ended His friend. Christ
then so frames His answer that they might perceive His
* Deut. iv, 5. —“ Behold,” says Moses, “ I have taught you statutes and
judgments even as the Lord my God commanded me ; ” and in the 2nd
verse, and in many other places, warns the Jews neither to diminish nor
add to it.
t Some commentators state Christ’s words were purposely evasive to
guard against his being entangled in the divorce controversy existing
between the rival schools of Sammai and Hillel. Christ did not speak in
Greek, and the loss of Saint Matthew’s original memoir makes it im-
possible to state what was the word which has been translated into the
Greek equivalent for “ fornication.”


penetration pierced through to their motive, and recognize
also in it Herod and his adulteress, though unnamed.
As little should we expect to find here what is lawful in
divorce, as to learn statecraft from that other occasion where
these same plausible Pharisees questioned Him as to the law-
fulness of giving tribute to Caesar ; and what make you there
of Christ’s answer ? So, when the young man came asking
Him what commandments he should keep, Christ neither
repeats the first table nor all the second, nor that in order which
He repeats ; and though He came to preach eternal life by
faith alone, He yet dismisses him with a salvation taught by
works only. These instances should instruct us that when
we would learn what right there may be to divorce, we should
repair thither where God professes to teach His servants, and
not where we see Him intending but to dazzle sophisters.
“ Wherefore they are no more twain but one flesh.”
This is true in the general, not in the chance medley of
every match, otherwise they could not by adultery become
twain, or else they were never one flesh rightly, never meet
helps for each other, which is my contention.
“What, therefore, God hath joined let no man put asunder.”
Granted, but do you think all wedded folk are of God’s
joining? Your own marriage service pre-supposes the con-
trary, as I shall show you by-and-by. Solomon records
that “a prudent wife is from the Lord” (Proverbs xix. 14).
Not every wife, then ? Doth God join fraud, unfitness, per-
petual discord ? Nor does man, but God himself, disjoin
when the causes are wanting which alone could ever justify
their joining. It will not be wise to build much upon
wedlock, making married folk of one flesh, for St. Paul in his
epistles says as much of harlotry. “ Know ye not that he
that is joined to a harlot is one body? for the twain, saith he,
shall become one flesh.” (1 Corinthians vi. 16, 17.)
But to consider this matter more closely. Observe, the
Pharisees do not quote the law accurately, nor does Christ
trouble Himself to correct them—“ Is it lawful for a man to
put away his wife for every cause ?”
There never was warrant for this.
The words here translated “ to put away ” are read in the
Septuagint for an involuntary act, as when Abimelech drove
David counterfeiting madness from his presence. (34-th
Psalm).
A woman is not “ put away ” who departs of her own
accord. If this be so, Christ’s answer applies only to those
m ' ?■'* *■


cases where both parties are not willing. This, without doubt,
is the true meaning of the passage. Christ interposes to
protect the helpless, not to perpetuate misery and discord.
I shall say in passing that in construing this passage the
words “ his wife ” are too lightly passed over. Christ meant
no less than a wife indeed, one according to the first institu-
tion, one truly a help-meet.
“ Fornication,” which is not a matrimonial offence at all, is
the one ground expressed here for divorce.
Exceptions that arise from natural equity are silently
included under general terms. This is the reason why Sts.
Mark, Luke, and St. Paul writing to the Corinthians, mention-
ing this precept of Christ, give no exception at all, St. John’s
gospel containing no reference whatever to the subject. And
that Christ did not intend to speak here the last word con-
cerning divorce is demonstrated by the fact that St. Paul
undertakes to add another exception, namely, “desertion,”
while you yourselves add another cause, namely, “impotence,”
and one which you can only justify either by admitting that
it is permitted by natural equity (and if so, why not other
like causes ?) or by setting up again the authority of that very
Old Testament law which you tell us has been revoked.
You abandon your position utterly in thus adding an excep-
tion to that stated by Christ*
What meanings other than adultery do we find given in
the Bible for “ fornication ? ” Why, comparatively trivial
matters, far short of adultery. For instance, a lewd glance, a
stubborn resistance of the husband’s authority (Judges xix. 2),
where the Levite’s wife was said to have played the whore,
which Josephus and the Rabbis (Kimchi and others) inter-
pret only as stubbornness. *f*
It signifies also not idolatry (which may seem to answer to
adultery), but a mere turning away the eyes from God, and,
as in Numbers xv. 39, a wilful disobedience to any, the least,
of God’s commandments ; it sometimes notes the love of
earthly things, though in a true believer. We may therefore
conclude fornication could not import thus much less than
does idolatry in the borrowed metaphor between God and
* After twenty years of wedded life the Victorian Courts, on the wife’s
petition, declared her marriage a nullity on the ground of the husband’s
impotence. See Mulligan v. Boyce, 3 V.L.R. (I. P. and M.), 69.
t She had run off from her husband to her father’s house—the least
secure refuge for a Hebrew adulteress, and, had she been one, a Jew and
Levite would have disdained to fetch her home again.


man, if it meant not as much less than adultery in the
ordinary acceptation between man and wife, nor is Christ
likely to have by it signified adultery, for which it would have
been a folly then to grant divorce, the law existing determin-
ing both the marriage and adultery by death.
Learned writers have understood this exception as includ-
ing any fault equivalent to fornication. This opinion
strengthens when we read in St. John iv. 18, that
Christ in his interview with the woman of Samaria tells
her she has had five husbands, but he whom she then had
was not her husband. Do you think five husbands pre-
deceased her ? What made such havoc of them in that pacific
land ? She was still young enough to be desired—nor is
fetching water from the well an old woman’s task. It is but
reasonable to infer then that she had divorced, or been
divorced by, some of these husbands, and observe Christ
admits they had all in turn been lawfully her husband.
Amongst the Samaritans also, in case of adultery, the exe-
cutioner dissolved the marriage.
But “ fornication ” to the Greeks and Romans had another
meaning; it meant nothing less than open public prostitution
of the body for money, and if you take this meaning rather
than that it receives in the Old Testament, you are compelled
to deny divorce for adultery till it has become public and
marketable.
Solomon finds the secrecy of an adulterous woman undis-
cernable even to his wisdom (Proverbs xxx. 18, 20). The
intelligence, then, of the average husband may little avail
him.
“And whoso marrieth her that is put away committeth
adultery.”
But by what follows we may assure ourselves Christ here
intended not to deliver the whole doctrine of divorce, but
only to condemn abuses, for otherwise to marry after deser-
tion, which St. Paul and all the reformed churches —you only
excepted—allow, would by this be forbidden as adultery.
But St. Paul says, “ A brother or a sister is not enslaved in
such cases, for God has called us to peace.”
That Christ did not abrogate the law, we may further infer
from what St. Paul says —“ Do you not know ? ” “ For I
speak to them that know the law that a woman is bound to
her husband as long as he liveth,” and he was writing to those
who knew and recognized only the law of Moses.
This anomaly also would ensue from your reading, that


while the guilty woman could lawfully marry again, the inno-
cent one, wrongfully put away, could not ; and, observe the
remedy provided for fornication has failed in her case,’ and
she may not have the gift of continence, wdiich we are told on
Divine authority, is not given to everyone. We are sure to be
reminded that Christ repeated his answer to the disciples.
Yes, as probably obnoxious to the same rebuke. Too
had they thought they might as casually divorce a wife as
discharge a servant, nor did Christ always correct them, even
when they palpably misunderstood Him ; He preferred, as
we do with children, to set their brains working. But mark!
Christ adds here—“ All men cannot receive these sayings ”
yet you will force not only these sayings, but your expounding
of them, which alone makes them hurtful, down all throats
I have already said that St. John’s Gospel contains no
mention whatever of the subject ; that Saints Mark and
u . ° accounts also of this same interview with
the Pharisees (which, as narrated by St. Matthew, we have
been considering), do not give any ground whatever, not even
fornication, for divorce; while it is noteworthy that St. Luke
iepeats Christ’s explicit denial of any intention of repealing
the law of which divorce was part, and inserts this caveat
immediately before mentioning this matter of divorce.
In the 10th chapter of Mark and 3rd verse, Christ himself
acknowledges as a law this right of divorce.
Truly, Christ told the Pharisees it was because of the
ardness of their hearts that Moses gave them the precept,
but what make you of that ? Has the human heart softened
since that date ?
While man was perfect and in Paradise, incapable of
wronging or being wronged, he needed no divorce ; but with
Jus tall and hardening of his heart the need arose for remedy
against choosing unsuitably, and was presently supplied, as
already shown. r
The 1 auline teaching upon divorce I shall not touch at
great length reserving the full arguments till it be disputed
mat ot. Paul allows divorce for desertion.
The highest authorities both in theology and scholarship
can be cited m support of this proposition.*
* The conjugal debt was scrupulously exacted by the Athenian anrl
iCpp’ m%J ee Rv el i en ’ M- Ux ° r Ebra V -3' Ata hU w“S, a vo?
one^welk 7 AnH MlSna a lt vow of abstinence was allowed for
re-peruse Wel ' ° f this ' With this


St. Paul, in the 7th chapter of Ist Corinthians, in answer to
some questions written to him, and referring to the case of an
unbelieving wife or unbelieving husband who wishes to stay
with his or her consort, advocates the retention of such wife or
husband ; but St. Paul adds, “ If the unbelieving departeth, let
him depart ; the brother or the sister is not enslaved in such
cases ” —not “ case,” observe, but “ cases.” Their doubt was
whether they could retain an unbelieving wife or husband
who wished to stay, and not as to their ability to divorce such.
For, by the law of Moses (Exod. xxiv. 16, Deut, vii. 3,6), they
were commanded to divorce an infidel, not only for fear of
ceremonial defilement, but of irreligious seducement, and this
is also the New Testament teaching, so far as irreligious
seducement is concerned, for in Matt, xix., rather than come
in danger of backsliding, we are told expressly to forsake a
wife ; and in Luke xiv. we are told that he who hates not a
wife hindering his Christian course, much more despising or
assaulting it, cannot be a disciple. How then can the apostle
command us to love and continue in that matrimony which
Christ bids us hate and forsake ? Nor are we commanded to
divorce an adulteress ; it is but permitted. Yet if adultery
were the one thing of force to dissolve matrimony, it would
hardly have been but left permissive; and though adultery be
a sin against marriage, it is a greatly less offence than a
malicious hatred, or than causeless desertion.
It is noteworthy that what restores their liberty to the
husband or wife, is the desertion, and not the “ unbelief,” of
the departing consort — i.e., not the sin against God, but the
breach of the matrimonial obligation.
All the other reformed Churches have construed these words
of St. Paul as justifying divorce on the ground of desertion,
and this has been the teaching and the law in Scotland since
the Reformation, Nor have those mischiefs appeared there of
which the literalists appear so apprehensive.
The reformed Church of Strasburg, mindful of the fact that
divorce, for many good and sufficient causes, was allowed till
Pope Alexander 111. usurped to himself and his successors
the sole right to this power, thought their vindication of the
right of sufficient importance to make it, as they did, part of
their creed.
This Alexander 111. is the Pontiff who supported Thomas
a’Becket against Henry 11., of England, who canonized
a’Becket subsequently, and who placed his proud foot on the
neck of Frederick Barbarossa, Emperor of Germany. He


decreed matrimony should be dissolved for no cause, though,
for many causes, it might separate.*
Before venturing a few considerations to the general public
in support of some well-matured measure of increased facilities
for divorce, I shall quote some authorities to the Synods and
to our Roman Catholic friends in support of my views. But
I shall first ask them this question—“ Why tempt ye God to
put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples which neither our
fathers nor we were able to bear? ” (Acts xv. 10.)
SOME AUTHORITATIVE OPINIONS, SHOWING THE EARLY
PRACTICE OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH AND OF THE
REFORMERS.
Justin Martyr, in his first Apology, written less than fifty
years after St. John’s death, relates approvingly how a matron
of Rome, who had become a Christian, divorced her husband,
neither for adultery nor desertion, “ but lest she should be a
partaker of his ungodly deeds, left him by a lawful divorce.”
Tertullian, in the same age, in his fourth book against
Marcion, witnesses that Christ justifies rather than destroys
Moses’ law, and that He but forbade the lust or malice of a
needless change, allowing it in other cases, and that the
vehemence of the sentence was bent against Herod, and he
construes the prohibition as pointed only against those who
put away in order that they may marry another.
Origen, in his jqh Homily on St. Matthew, relates that
certain bishops, to his knowledge, had allowed the wife to
marry again during the lifetime of the former husband, and he
adds—“To endure faults worse than fornication seems a thing
unreasonable.”
Grotius quotes Origen as stating Christ named “ fornication”
rather “as an example of other like causes than as one only
exception, and adds that it is frequent, both in divine and
human laws, to express one instance, that thereby other
like cases may have like rule, as in Exod. xxi. 18, 19,20, 26,
Deut. xix. 5,” and Grotius observes, “ Hence it appears why
Sts. Mark, Luke, and St. Paul to the Corinthians, mentioning
Christ’s precept, state no exception. Because exceptions
arising from natural equity are included silently under general
terms, and if we mark diligently Christ’s commands we shall
find that they begin and end in charity,”
*See Decret. Gregor. 4 tit., 14.


St. Jerome defended Fabiola, a noble Roman matron, who
divorced her husband and married another man, and, com-
menting on Matthew xix., explains that for fornication,
xi or the suspicion thereof, a man may freely divorce.”
Leo., Bishop of Rome (Ep. 85), writing to the African
bishop of Mauritania Caesariensis, complains of a certain priest
who, having divorced his wife, had married another, and the
bishop neither dissolves the second marriage nor excommuni-
cates him, but only unfrocks him.
Basil, in his 73rd rule, determines —“ That divorce ought
not to be, unless for adultery, or hindrance to a godly life.
Epiphanius, writing against heretics, tells us in his second
book (tom. i.), the whole church in that ancient time thought
other causes besides adultery justified divorce. “ If,” saith he,
"“a divorce happen for any cause—fornication, adultery, or
any heinous fault—the word of God blames neither the man
nor woman marrying again, nor cuts them off from the
congregation ; not that he may keep both wives, but that,
leaving the former, he may lawfully be joined to the latter.
The word and church of God commiserate this man, especially
if he be otherwise of a good conversation and live according
to God’s law.”
Ambrosiaster observes upon Luke xvi., and teaches that
all wedlock is not of God’s joining, and on Prov. xix.
“ that a wife is fitted and tempered by the Lord to harmony:
where that is, there God joins ; where it is not, dissension
reigns, which is not from God, for God is love; ” and, on the
Ist Epistle to the Corinthians, chap, vii., allows a wife may
leave the husband for causes other than fornication —viz.,
apostasy and inverting nature —yet most inconsistently con-
cludes, “ the wife may not marry again, though the husband
ma 7” „ „ .. „
St. Austin, in his books to Pollentius, affirms that “ infi-
delity, as being a greater sin than adultery, ought so much the
rather to cause divorce,” and, referring to the Sermon on the
Mount, will have under the name of fornication idolatry or
any harmful superstition included, and that not only for bodily
fornication, but for anything that draws the mind from God’s
law, a man or woman may freely divorce, and that we are
constrained to interpret the word in a general sense ; and in
the first book of his Retractations, chap. 16, he retracts not
this, but explains he counts not all sin fornication, but only
the more detestable sins.
Then the Col. of Agatha, in the year 506 (Can, 25), decreed


“ex-communication should follow, if, before the provincial
bishops were made acquainted and judgment pronounced,
laymen divorced their wives without some great fault, or
giving no probable cause, or therefore divorced that they
might marry some unlawful person.”
Theodosius and Valentinian, Christian emperors both,
ordained “ that as by consent lawful marriages were made, so
by consent and by bill of divorce they might be dissolved,
careful provision being made for the children. . . . and
their law further provided for cases where consent was
wanting. We design,” say they, “ the causes of divorce
by this most wholesome law; for as we forbid the dis-
solving of marriage without just cause, so we desire that a
husband or wife distressed by some adverse necessity should
be freed by an unhappy yet necessary relief.”
And see Cod. I, 5, tit. 17, and Authen collat. 4, tit. 1, Novell
22, where Justinian adds three more causes ; for divorce, nor
was there any difference at this time in the teaching of Church
and State.
By the edict of Constantine to Dalmatius (Cod. 5, tit, 17)
if a man were absent from his wife and unheard of for four
years, though gone to war in the service of the empire, she
might marry another.
Constantine and the whole Greek Church and State
allowed that divorce was lawful for other causes than adul-
tery.
Leo, surnamed the philosopher, the son of Basilius Macedo,
about the year 886 enacted that in case of madness the
husband might divorce after three years, the wife after five,
and very learnedly expounding Christ’s words, he shows that
in allowing this ground for divorce he conflicts not with the
precept. (Const. Leon in, 112.)
Then Wickliffe, the first of the Reformers, taught that
divorce is lawful to the Christian for many other causes
equivalent to adultery. (See Wickliffe 1,4, Dial. c. 21).
Luther, in his book on “ Conjugal Love,” allows divorce for
the obstinate denial of conjugal duty.
Melancthon, in his book “Concerning Marriage,” grants
divorce for cruel usage and danger to life.
The learned Erasmus, in his notes on Matthew, and on the
Ist Epistle to the Corinthians, and also in his answer to Phim-
ostomus, maintained—and no Protestant then living contra-
dicted him—that Christ’s words comprehended many other
causes of divorce under the name of fornication.


Peter Martyr, in his “Common Places,” and on the Ist
Epistle to Corinthians, may be read to like effect; also Grotius,
and others innumerable.
REMARKS PROVOKED BY THE ANGLICAN MARRIAGE SERVICE.
I have said that the teaching of the English Church, in
forbidding divorce except for adultery, hardly consists with
the exordium of our marriage service, where it is stated that
matrimony was instituted in the time of man’s innocence, and
ordained for three causes—ist. For procreation of children ;
2nd. To avoid fornication ; 3rd. For the mutual society and
help, &c.
Now, God places the third of these causes first, as his reason
for instituting marriage. Procreation is not even mentioned
till subsequently, and as subordinate and secondary ; while
the second cause, “to avoid fornication,” could have had no
share in the first instituting, when man was sinless and knew
no lust.
But our divines, having stated these three reasons for
matrimony, go on to say “ that those coupled together other-
wise than God’s word doth allow ” (evidently meaning thereby
those influenced by other than their three cited causes) are
not joined together by God, neither is their matrimony
lawful.
If this be so, then many holy matrimonies, perhaps even
that of Joseph and Mary, were no true marriages ; whilst by
placing the primary cause last, and by granting relief for
physical, and denying it for mental, inaptitude, whatever our
divines may pretend to the contrary, they thus seem secretly
to instruct us that in their judgment the essence of matrimony
consists in carnal intercourse. This is to degrade, not to
exalt matrimony.
Neither is their matrimony lawful. You admit that those
seeking marriage for other than your stated reasons are not
validly married. Why forbid them, then, to depart from sin ?
All those who have been influenced by lucre, terror, lust, the
importunity of injudicious friends, the commands of parents
or of guardians—here are a host needing to be dealt with,
on your own admission, by some divorcive remedy. And
reflect—for we speak to them that know the law—that the


power to give a wealthy ward in marriage was a commodity
as vendible as a cure of souls.*
But what shall we say of all those reverend clerics who
have contracted matrimony at an age when none hope for
posterity? You leave them but your third and last inducing
motive, for “ flesh and blood rebel not at these years.” It is
you that say their marriage is not lawful, Ido not “to the
marriage of true minds admit impediment.”
The Anglican Marriage Service contains an express con-
tract between the man and woman, after which the minister
pronounces them man and wife : “ Inasmuch as they have
consented,” &c. But what makes them man and wife ?
Not their promise, but their performance of that promise —and
if one party habitually breaks that promise, will you continue
to enforce performance of that violated contract, and not
from the guilty person, but by, and at the sole expense of, the
injured and innocent ? But you answer me that you cannot
legislate for exceptional instances. Your master, Christ,
taught differently: Leaving the ninety-nine in but compara-
tive safety, the one lost sheep is sought out and recovered.
We already admit the principle of divorce, and what we
have now to consider is whether we have the best law, or if it
be not possible to relieve many estimable and innocent
persons who are suffering unspeakable misery without
opening the door to mischiefs greater than those we seek
to cure. You think the interests of morality are best served
by making marriage practically indissoluble ? But is this so ?
Read this extract. Mr, Lecky, at p. 269 of the sixth volume of
his “ History of England in the 18th Century,” says ; —“ It is a
notorious fact that the lowest standard of domestic morality
in Europe may often be found in countries where divorce is
absolutely forbidden, or amongst classes in which it never
takes place, nor is there, I believe, any real reason to think
that the standard of domestic morality in England has been
lowered by the great multiplication of divorces which followed
the divorce law of 1857,” and “It would be very rash
to infer that a public opinion which acquiesces placidly in
conjugal infidelity, or which condemns the victims of unhappy
marriages to lifelong misery and sin, is of a higher order than
a public opinion which, in such cases, permits and encourages
* “ The sale of a female vassal in marriage, or the exaction of a sum of
money in lieu of this scandalous tyranny, was only the law of England,
and was not, perhaps, fully authorized as such till the statute of Merton
in 1236.” —Hallam’s “ Middle Ages,” vol. ii., p. 315.


divorce.” Mr. Lecky adds, “In the 18th century the practice
relating to divorce was incredibly absurd.”
Sir Alfred Stephen, who has been indefatigable in his
efforts to obtain from the Legislature of New South Wales a
just and merciful amendment of the law of divorce, has been
at the pains to ascertain how the Anglican Bishops expressed
themselves in debate upon the Statute just referred to (20 and
21 Viet., c. 85), and he cites Bishop Thirlwall as protesting
against the statement that Christ’s precepts were to be
regarded as legislative, and he challenged the proposition and
demanded the proof. The Bishop of London observed “ that,
when they found a general statement that it was a crime to
put away a wife, they must remember general statements were
seldom to be taken without qualification. That if they were
told all children should honour their parents, it did not
pieclude instances of parents being wholly undeserving
of such honour, and that, although they were told there should
be no separation between husband and wife, there might still
be cases of such foul iniquity as to effect the utter disruption
of the marriage tie.”
The causes for dissolving marriage varied among the
Romans, but the most solemn sacrament, the confarreatio
itself, might always be done away with by rites of a contrary
tendency. The presence of seven Roman witnesses was
required for the validity of this solemn and deliberate act, yet
if the divorcing husband had given provocation, instead of the
delay of two years he was compelled to refund the marriage
portion immediately, or within six months, but the guilt or
levity of the wife involved the forfeit of the sixth or eighth
part of her marriage portion. (Gibbon, vol. v., pp. 56-7.)
I have shown you that irrevocable marriages are not
conducive to morality. I shall now show that the amplest
divorce facilities are not inconsistent with the most faithful
observance of the marriage contract.
In Mr. Lecky’s “ History of European Morals,” vol. ii., pp.
299-301, he tells us in the earlier periods the Roman husband
(and Gibbon confirms this) had an absolute, unquestioned
power of divorce, yet that law and public opinion combined
in making matrimonial purity most strict, insomuch that for
500 years, it was said, there had been no such thing as a divorce
in Rome (see Val. Maximus ii. 1,4; Aul. Gellius iv. 3). While at
page 3 21 he tells us it would be difficult to conceive anything
more coarse or more repulsive than the manner in which
the Christian ascetics regarded marriage • it was invariably


treated by them as a consequence of Adam’s fall, and almost
exclusively regarded in its lowest aspect.
In the writings of the Fathers, quoted by Lecky (see pp.
338-9), woman is represented as “the door of hell,” as “the
mother of all human ills.” “She should be ashamed at the very
thought that she is a woman.” While in the 6th century, by
the decree of a Provincial Council (Col. of Auxerre, con. 36),
women were, because of their impurity, forbidden to receive
the Eucharist in their naked hands. These diseased notions
coloured all the Canon Law and feudal legislation so oppres-
sive to women, who thereby were placed in a much lower legal
position than under the pagan empire, and many of their
disabilities resulted directly from the Roman Catholic doc-
trines concerning divorce.
Mr. Lecky concludes thus : —“ Wherever the Canon Law
has been the basis of legislation we find laws of succession
sacrificing the interests of daughters and of wives.”
This Canon Law is by the Victorian Statutes expressly
adopted as the basis of the law prevailing here on the subject*
The pages of the English Statute Book, dealing with
marriage and divorce, contain the most powerful answer which
can be urged against the opponents of the Woman’s Rights
Movement, We have seen the chivalrous mode in which we
have exercised the legislative trust we hold for women, and
we still decline to allow them any voice in making those laws
which we force upon them. Compared with the past, our
recent legislation has been almost beneficent, and now, when
divorce is applied for, our courts are empowered to ascertain
what property exists, and to give order for its distribution and
application in favour of children and of the injured party, and
to charge the earnings and income of the wrong-doer in favour
of the innocent wife and children.
To strive by statute to compel married folk to observe
their contract is to attempt the impossible. Our legislators
should content themselves by exacting the most deliberate
action, by securing that the conditions of divorce shall not
be unequal, and by providing most amply for the protection
of the children.
I think Mr. Shiels’ Bill might advantageously have dealt
with the unsatisfactory position of the law of domicile, and
might also in these days, when female artists, authoresses,
and actresses are in the receipt of such large earnings, have
* See the Marriage and Matrimonial Causes Statute 1864, sec. 51.


empowered the court to charge the guilty wife’s income in
such mode as might best meet the mischief.
I shall make another suggestion. Let our next amending
act dealing with this question give retrospective effect and
virtue to the marriage of the parents, and thus remove a
most undeserved stain from the innocent children born prior
to the marriage. Such an alteration in the law was, if my
memory serve me, proposed in the reign of Henry HI.
of England. It had the support of the Roman Catholic
prelates—for this accords with the teaching of that church.*
’Twas the English Barons who opposed it, being unwilling
as they phrased it, that the laws of England should be
altered.
In conclusion, and with the indulgent permission of Sir
Alfred Stephen, I shall set out here some extracts from
certain letters published by him in the Sydney Morning
Herald in October, 1870, and I have Sir Alfred Stephen’s
authority also to state that most of the judges of the Supreme
Courts of Australasia, and all the Chief Justices, are in favour
of some increased facilities for divorce. The President of the
Probate and Matrimonial Division in England (the Right
Hon. Sir James Hannen), whose experience of this sad subject
is perhaps equalled by that of no man living, is desirous of
abolishing altogether judicial separation, substituting in every
case a full divorce. And this gentleman has written to one
of the Supreme Court judges of New South Wales to express
a general approval of the Bill we are now discussing.
SOME EXTRACTS FROM SIR ALFRED STEPHEN’S PUBLISHED
LETTERS.
Sir Alfred Stephen says, speaking of New South Wales,
of which colony he has had long experience as Deputy-
Governor, Chief Justice, and member of its Legislative
Council ■“ lam of opinion that the power of dissolving
marriage in this colony for unfaithfulness is likely to be
even a larger act of justice to women than to men. I have,
on search, found that out of 332 cases in which orders for
maintenance have been made, and which are now recorded
in the Supreme Court offices, under the Deserted Wives Act,
no less than 53 disclose the fact of elopement by the husband
with another woman. In how many more instances of
* This is also the law of Scotland.


desertion, there being 169 from stated drunkenness, and iiq
of continued absence by the husband from home, the wife
could add the sin of infidelity to his charge, there are no
means of ascertaining. Let us take the 53 cases only, and
consider what prolonged and perpetuated vice and misery
are here, which the denial of divorce to the injured wife
renders all but inevitable. To 106 beings, the guilty parties,
the perpetuation is certain. They dare not marry ; and the
illegitimates whom they give to the world, condemned for no
fault of their own to the stain, can never claim the rights of a
descendant
“And to what temptation do you (you who oppose this
measure) expose daily and hourly the deserted wife !
“Here are 53 more human beings, with the poor young
outcasts that belong to them, doomed not merely to distress,
but to a peril, which it requires more fortitude than all possess
to escape. Many might marry again but they cannot ; and
remember that to as many as fall so many more are added to
partake of the irremediable sin. The beneficent law which
would confer on them another home you would piously
withhold. You ask piteously what will become of the children
of divorced people. Alas! what becomes of the children
now of those to whom you refuse a second parent, and
whose unhappy mother, unable alone to maintain them, is
thus tempted by you—tempted to inflict the same injury on
society that a heartless husband has remorselessly inflicted
on her ? „ „ . _ .t
“ But, say you, we are afraid of collusion. I answer, then
Introduce into the Bill all available precautions against it, but
do not reject a measure wise and good in its object and just
as to the principle on which it is founded because of the
possible, or (if you will) the inevitable frauds which may now
and then be practised under it. There is scarcely one
remedial law of any kind against which some objection might
not be raised. In point of fact the most stringent provisions
on this head have been introduced, and my own belief is that
few cases of collusion, however much men who dislike the
measure may suspect it, would, on investigation, be found to
exist For you must remember that silence and non-resist-
ance on the part of the accused in suits for a divorce are by no
means evidence of collusion. Conscious of their offence, and
probably conscious that the means of proof exist, the respon-
dents naturally desire to be spared, and therefore spare the
injured petitioner, the humiliation of exposure in detail. A


co-respondent may be actuated by additional, and far from
unworthy, motives in attempting no defence. But you might
suggest an amendment in the Bill which would present another,
and, as I think, a valuable safeguard against the risk of collu-
sion. For the damages which a jury are to award substitute
a fine to be imposed by the court. Let its appropriation be
as at present contemplated, but make the sum theoretically as
well as practically a punishment, giving the petitioner neither
an interest in it nor in any way a control over it. Such a
provision would serve a double purpose.
“ Some of you appear to think, however, that both men and
women will actually sin for the mere purpose of forcing their
partners into the Divorce Court. In a few, a very few, instances
the desperate experiment may perhaps be resorted to; for
husbands have been found base enough to throw temptations
in the wife’s way with the converse object. But cases of the
kind supposed, we may rest assured, will be raTe. Women
may indeed fall, as now, because of an unhappy home, or from
any of the other causes which at present lead them astray,
but this new source of frailty, I am persuaded, will have no
influence on them. After all we have nothing better on your
part than an opinion, and it is one which I trust that few share.
The punishment of a divorced wife, in at least the upper circles
of society, is far too great and enduring for her to risk unless
under temptations much greater than that which you appear
to dread.
“ Of the fifty-three cases which have been mentioned, it will
be admitted, whatever conjectures may be made as to future
examples, that none of them at least are instances of acts
tempted by a divorce law. Nor will it be pretended, I
presume, that there are any such among the cases which we
now see advertised of wives who have ‘ without cause or provo-
cation’ left their homes.
“ They are, unhappily, if we cast our eyes over but a few
years, nearly equal in numbers to the 53. In Victoria, whose
Divorce Act was passed in 1861, the suits for divorce or for
judicial separation have been 165 up to December last, and of
these the larger portion are by wives against deserting or
absconding husbands and fathers. There seems little ground
for suspecting collusion there , and all the less since the number
of such suits has not yearly increased. In 1862 there were
26. And the greatest number since has been 24.* It may
* Written in October, 1870.


well be asked whether the interests of religion or morality
would have been promoted by refusing relief to these sufferers,
and by shutting out the possibility of a return to decency, if
not virtue, by the many whom your system condemns to
perpetuated vice and all its attendant evils.”
Extract from a leading article published in the Pall Mall
Gazette , 1871, quoted by Sir Alfred Stephen :
“ Divorce in Protestant countries dissolves marriage for
particular purposes—that is, as regards the society of wedded
life and the control of property. It also allows the parties
to contract new marriages. In Catholic countries divorce is
not allowed, but ‘ legal separation ’ is. Now , legal separa-
tion destroys all that binds husband and wife together quite as
completely as divorce. It is true that they may come together
by reconcilement ; as they might in Protestant countries, as
far as we know, by re-marriage. But legal reconcilement is,
we believe, extremely rare. The sum of the matter is that all
the sanctity and all the dignity of marriage are as completely
destroyed, all its purposes as completely frustrated, by the
Catholic process of separation as by the Protestant of divorce.
The name only subsists. The maintenance of the ecclesias-
tical principle has this one result—that the separated consorts,
one of them at least being innocent, are condemned thence-
forth in Catholic countries to a life of privation or a life of
sin.
“But then it is argued, and pretty generally assumed (thanks
to the zealous partisanship of sacerdotalism), that the prohibi-
tion of re-marriage has indirectly the effect of preventing
separations—that persons are less eager to get rid of a wife or
a husband when the prospect of obtaining another is absolutely
excluded. If this be true, it is no doubt an argument in favour
of the Catholic rule, though whether sufficient to counter-
balance its disadvantages is another question. But let us
examine whether the proposition is true. We take for this
purpose the figures of M. Maurice Block, the well-known
statistician (L’Europe Politique et Sociale, 1869, c. 4). ‘We
can at least,’ says M. Block, ‘draw some instruction from the
comparison of countries in which divorce is lawful with those
in which it is not. The Kingdom of Saxony exhibits the
greatest number of divorces, 26 in 1,000 marriages, besides
“separations,” In Sweden only four in 1,000; in Prussia
(which we say in passing is the country of which the example
is constantly held up by way of terror as to the facility of
divorce) one in 1,000. In Belgium the law admits both of


divorces and separations ; the first are 14 in 1,000 marriages,
the latter rather more than two. In France, the number of
“ judicial separations” (which, as we have said above, imply the
same as divorce in all but the power of re-marriage) amounts
to six in about 1,000 marriages. Nor can it be said that
the suppression of divorce has had the effect of tightening
matrimonial ties, since in France the number of separations has
continually increased of late years, while in Prussia that
of divorce has diminished.’ This last position is established
in a note from statistical returns. Let me add that a Bavarian
return of 1863 proves this remarkable fact—that in that
country the number of divorces is increasing among Catholics
and diminishing among Protestants, although these latter only
may re-marry. As to the ‘ morality ’ which results from
the Catholic system, M. Block quotes a passage from an
address by M, Leqouve, printed in the Opinion Nationale ,
1869, who, it is fair to admit, is an eager opponent to the exist-
ing French marriage law :—‘Out of 20 separated consorts, 15
contract irregular marriages. Of these 15 unions, 12 gave
birth to illegitimate children. The law of separation therefore
produces and casts into society every year a whole generation of
bastards .’ ’’
I shall give one more extract, this time from Sir Alfred
Stephen’s pamphlet of 1887 ;
“Confessing that I was at one time not hostile to the
monkish invention of separation from bed and board as
the alternative of divorce, I have been convinced by irresis-
tible facts, by observation, by careful inquiry, and added
experience, that it is a system unholy and fraught with
mischief—the source of (to use the language of the West-
minster divines) a very cesspool of evils.
“ A large proportion of the loose women of Sydney, the
police will tell you, consists of wives who have been deserted,
or otherwise left without support, or driven by brutal husbands
from their home. And the children of wretched but still
existing households, what becomes of them ?
“ By-and-by those who follow me may be told of the
profligacy of this city (Sydney), and impute it to our work.
But unhappily profligacy—l speak not of prostitution alone,
nor of ordinary crime—to an extent, and in a degree scarcely
to be surpassed (in one direction without parallel, I believe,
elsewhere), exists here already ; and let separationists con
over the following statistics of bastardy : —ln the five years
1857-62, the proportion of illegitimate births in the colony was


33 per 1,000 of the population. In the five years 1865-69 it
was 40 per 1,000 of the population. In the eight years 1879-86
the proportion rose to 53 and 46 per 1,000, The number of
illegitimate births in 1880 was 1,226 ; in 1884 it was 1,495 i
and in 1886 it has risen to 1,687. Now, none of these can
directly be attributed to the existing divorce statutes, which
are for adultery alone.
“No one, however wild in conjecture, can bring himself to
believe that this enormous increase has anything whatever to
do with those laws. But it doubtless has been owing in no
small degree, as suggested by me, to the inflicted wretched-
ness of the married home, caused by drunkenness, desertion,
or other crime, and by the immoral separation system ; all of
which evils the measure advocated will, I hope and believe,
greatly tend to remove.”
George Robertson and Company, Printers, Melbourne.
