

I ■ /
DOCTORS VERSUS WAR
PSYCHIATRISTS' APPEAL TO
STATESMEN
Stern
PUBLISHED BY THE COMMITTEE FOR WAR PROPHY-
LAXIS OF THE NETHERLANDS MEDICAL
ASSOCIATION


•
( sev\^ uU \^ f '' v 4 7
ZC-%~\
Now that Humanity more than ever is being deceived by
misleading language and sophisticated talk it is good to listen
to the quiet wellconsidered doctor’s advice. Traditionally he
is the tried friend of Humanity. The Art of Medicine, which
has already helped to do away with so many prejudices and
obsessions does also denounce the false glamour of War.
In October 1935 a warning statement was sent to all the
Statesmen of the world by agency of our Committee. This
letter was signed by 340 psychiatrists and psychologists from
27 countries.
Several Statesmen have replied to it.
The Queen of Holland signified her approval by a telegram.
Our letter was published by the Press. All replies received
as well as some Press comments are gathered in this booklet
which represents considerable publicity-value.
May it contribute to the denunciation of the madness of War.
The Committee for war prophylaxis of
the Netherlands Medical Association.
Secret. Koninginneweg 107
Haarlem
Holland


October 1935.
To the Statesmen.
We psychiatrists, w/zose it is to investigate the normal and
diseased mind, and to serve mankind with our knowledge, feel impelled
to address a serious word to you in our quality of physicians.
It seems to us that there is in the world a mentality which entails
grave dangers to mankind, leading, as it may, to an evident war-
psychosis.
War means that all destructive forces are set loose by mankind
against itself.
War means the annihilation of mankind by technical science.
As in all things human, psychological factors play a very important
part in the complicated problem of war.
If war is to be prevented the nations and their leaders must under-
stand their own attitude towards war.
By self-knowledge a world calamity may he prevented.
Therefore we draw your attention to the following:
1. There is a seeming contradiction between the conscious, individual
aversion to war and the collective preparedness to wage war. This is
explained by the fact that the behaviour, the feelings, the thoughts of an
independent individual are quite different from those of a man who
forms part of a collective whole. Civilised twentieth century man still
posesses strong,Jierce and destructive instincts, which have not been
suETimatedf~br only partly so, and which break loose as soon as the
community to which he belongs feels itself threatened by danger.
The unconsciousjdesiie to give rein to the primitive instinct, not
only without punishment but even with reward, furthers in a great
measure the preparedness for war.
It should he realised that the fighting-instinct, if well directed,
gives energy for much that is good and beautiful. But the same instinct
may create chaos if it breaks loose from all restraint, making use of the
greatest discoveries of the human intellect.
2. It is appalling to see how little the peoples are alive to reality.
The popular ideas of war as they find expression in full-dress
uniforms, military display, etc., are no longer in keeping with the
realities of war itself.
The apathy with regard to the actions and intrigues of the inter-
national traffic in armsjis surprising to anyone who realises the danger
into which this traffic threatens to lead them. It should he realised
that it is foolish to suffer certain groups of persons to derive personal
profit from the death of millions of men.
We come to you with the urgent advice to arouse the nations to the
realisation of fact and the sense of collective self-preservation, these
powerful instincts being the strongest allies for the elimination of war.


The heightening of the moral and religious sense in your people
tends to the same efuT. — —
3. From the utterances of well-known statesmen it has repeatedly
been evident that many of them have conceptions of war that are identical
with those of the average man. Arguments such as „War is the supreme
Court of Appeal" and „War is the necessary outcome of Darwin's
theory" are erroneous and dangerous, in view of the realities of modern
warfare. They camouflage a primitive craving for power and are
meant to stimulate the preparedness for war among the speaker's
countrymen.
The suggestive force of speeches made by leading statesmen is
enormous and may be dangerous. The warlike spirit, so easily aroused
by the cry that the country is in danger, is not to be bridled, as was
evident in 1914.
Peoples, as well as individuals, under the influence of suggestions
like these, may become neurotic. They may be carried away by halluci-
nations and delusions, thus involving themselves in adventures perilous
to their own and other nations' safety.
We psychiatrists declare that our science is sufficiently advanced
for us to distin^uish-betumin~reaL -prttended^und^M^hm-nscmits-nmtives.
even in statesmen. The desire to disguise national militarism by
continual talk about peace will not protect political leaders from the
judgment of history. The secret promotors of militarism are responsible
for the boundless misery which a new war is sure to bring.
International organisation, if properly used, is now sufficiently
advanced to enable statesmen to prevent war by concerted action.
Protestation of peace and the desire for peace, however sincere, do
not guarantee the self-denying spirit necessary for the maintenance of
peace, even at the cost of national sacrifice. If any statesmen should
think that the apparatus to ensure peace is, as yet, insufficiently
organised, we advice them to devote to this purpose as much energy and
as much money as is now being expended on the armaments of the
various countries.
We cannot close without expressing our admiration of those statesmen
who show by their actions that their culture and morality are so far
advanced that they can lead peoples to a strong organisation of peace.
In our opinion they alone are truly qualified to act as the leaders of
nations.
We have the honour to be, Sir, your obedient servants,
Here follows a list of 340 leading psychiatrists and psychologists
from the following countries:
The Argentine Canada Great Britain Roumania
Australia Cecho-Slovakia Greece Sweden
Austria Denmark Holland Spain
Denmark Holland Spain
Belgium Esthonia Hungary Switzerland
Brazil Finland Norway Turkey
British-India France Portugal United States
Bulgaria Germany Poland of America


*
i
Telegram from Her Majesty the Queen
of Holland.
I thank you for the copy of the Address which you and
your colleagues from other countries have sent to the
statesmen, to whom the peoples have confided their destiny ♦
I assure you that this document, which tends to reflection,
has deeply interested me and that I heartily agree with
your practical and realistic point of view ♦
I trust that this Address will influence the mentality of
peoples and statesmen . May God give that the different
peoples, stimulated bij clearer and sharper insight in the
horrors of war, show themselves ready, in their own real
interest, to collaborate peacefully for the sake of Humanity ♦
This means a great task for the states, especially for
those which are members of the League of Nations ♦
WILHELM IN A.


REPLIES FROM STATESMEN.
England.
The Private Secretary to the Prime Minister begs to acknowledge
the receipt of a letter addressed to him by 350 psychiatrists and
psychologists belonging to many nations.
The Private Secretary by the First Lord’s direction acknowledges
the receipt of the letter of October 1935, from the Secretariat
Koninginneweg, Haarlem.
I am desired by Mr. thomas to acknowledge the receipt of the
letter dated October 1935, sent by 350 psychiatrists and psycho-
logists, on the subject of war. Dominions Office. Downing Street.
I write on behalf of Mr. ramsay mac donald to acknowledge
the receipt of the letter dated October 1935 and signed by 350
psychiatrists and psychologists, and to say it will receive his
careful attention.
The Lord Chancellor acknowledges with thanks the receipt of
the letter addressed to the Statesmen dated October 1935.
I am desired by the Secretary of State for the Colonies to acknow-
ledge with thanks the receipt of the letter addressed to him by
350 psychiatrists and psychologists of many nations, which he has
read with interest.
Canada.
Department of Pensions and National Health.
Your communication of October 1935 addressed to the Minister
of Pensions and National Health of Canada, has been passed to
me for acknowledgment, by the retiring Minister.
You are no doubt aware, we have just completed a National or
Dominion election in this Country and the Government has
changed. At the time of writing the new Minister of the Department
has not been announced. In any case it would seem that the
contents of the communication from the leading psychiatrists and
psychologists of many nations would have less application to
Canada than possibly to any country in the world. It should be
well known to you that National Defence has been curtailed and
expenditures upon it reduced to such a small minimum that it
would not be a factor in the propaganda which you are endeavouring
to spread.
New Zealand.
I have to acknowledge receipt of your communication dated
Oct. 1935.
In reply I have to say that I have read with interest the views


expressed by the eminent psychiatrists whose names and addresses
are appended to the circular and I am convinced that the general
acceptance of such views would mark a very substantial progress
towards the elimination of war as an instrument of national policy.
I may mention that the Government is profoundly conscious of
the incomptability of warlike tendencies with the requirements of
social justice) and I accordingly have much pleasure in assuring
you that the pronouncements made in your circular will receive
close and sympathetic study by myself and my colleagues.
Ireland.
A Dhaoine Uaisle, .
I am desired by the Minister for Education in the Irish Free
State to acknowledge receipt of your letter on the subject of the
prevention of war, and to assure you that the representation made
therein will receive his careful consideration.
South Africa.
I am directed by the Hon. j. h. hofmeyr, Minister of the
Interior, to acknowledge receipt of your letter of Oct. 1935> an d
to inform you that he is in general agreement with the opinions
expressed therein, and that he has always sought, to the best of
his ability, to act accordingly.
Australia.
I am directed to acknowledge receipt of your letters dated
Oct. 19 addressed to the Prime Minister and the Minister for External
Affairs containing the advice of certain psychiatrists and psycho-
logists in connection with war.
India.
It is no use canvassing India.in this matter, which is in the hands
of the British Government; better canvas the British Government,
the British Parliament and the British public, and I wish you
good luck with all my heart. Fazl i Hasain.
Honduras.
Secretaria de Relaciones Exteriores.
Me es grato acusar a usted recibo de su atenta comumcacion
fechada en esa ciudad el mes de octob're recien pasado.
Me permito informarle que he tornado debido conocimiento de
su expresada comunication y que estudiare este asunto con mayor
detencion.
Cecho-Slovakia.
Ministre Poste et Telegrafie.
J’ai I’honneur d’accuser reception de I’adresse d octobre 1935,
que vous avez bien voulu me faire parvenir. Je 1 avais lue avec
beaucoup d’inter et et je vous en remercie cordialement.


Austria.
Der Herr Bundeskommissar und Generalsekretar Walter adam
dankt freundlichst fair den ihm zugesandten Brief ~An die Staats-
manner”. Er bittet, seine Einstellung zu dem von Ihnen beriihrten
Thema der Rede zu entnehmen, die er im osterreichischen Rund-
funk am n. d.M. gehalten hat.
Mexico.
Secretaria de Agricultura y Fomento.
He quedado debidamente enterado del estudio que me envian
sobre las manifestaciones normales patologicas, encontrando muy
acertadas las apreciaciones que contiene y agradeciendo el envio
de este importante documento.
The Mongolian People’s Republic.
Wir sind mit Ihnen vollig einverstanden, dass die gegenseitige
Verflechtung der internationale Interessen und das Gewicht der
internationalen Organisationen den Staatsmannern erlauben einen
Kampf gegen jeden Krieg zu organisieren, und dass der Friede
viel dauerhafter wird als er es jetzt ist, falls der Sache der Friedens-
organisation ebenso viele Anstrengungen und Finanzmittel ge-
widmet werden, wie jetzt den Bewaffnungen.
Wir begriissen daher Ihr Auftreten und erklaren unsere vsllige
Bereitwilligkeit, in der Bewegung der Einheitsfront aller Kriegs-
gegner die jetzt immer breiter die Volker verschiedener Lander
ergreift, teilzunehmen. Wir sind iiberzeugt, dass die Zusammen-
arbeit der Volker —sei es nur vermittels der jetzt vorhandenen
internationalen Organisationen dass diese Zusammenarbeit der
Volker einen machtigen Faktor des Volkerfriedens darstellt.
Keinem Volke gegeniiber hegen wir einen Hass, haben auch
keinen Hass gegen das Japanische Volk, und sind fest iiberzeugt,
dass die iiberwiegende Mehrheit in jedem Volke auch in Japan
dem Kriege abgeneigt ist. Es handelt sich nur darum dieser Mehr-
heit die Gefahr neuer Kriege vor Augen zu fiihren und ihre Anstren-
gungen im Kampf fur den Frieden zu organisieren.
This letter which we have partly reproduced above had been
signed by 8 Ministers and 171 leading intellectuals of the Mongolian
Republic.
Albania.
Mmistre de ITnterieur du Royaume d’Albanie.
J’ai I’honneur de vous accuser reception de la Circulaire qui m’a
ete adressee si gentiment par les psychiatres et les psychologues
renommes du monde.
L’Albanie, qui plus qu’un autre Etat a besom de I’existence de
I’ordre et de la tranquillite internationale, apprecie hautement les
efforts qui se deploient en faveur du maintien de la paix mondiale,
a laquelle tout le peuple albanais est ardemment attache. Jem’associe
de tout mon coeur a cet appel qui vise le bien de I’humanite et la
conservation de la civilisation de notre ere.


Lithunia.
Charge par Monsieur le president du Conseil des Ministres, j’ai
I’honneur de vous accuser reception et de remercier du message
signe par les 350 psychiatres et psychologues que vous avez bien
voulu lui faire parvenir recemment.
En vous felicitant de cette heureuse initiative que vous avez
prise pour la cause de la Paix universelle, je vous prie d’agreer.
Messieurs les assurances de ma tres haute consideration.
Bulgaria.
Ministere de I’lnstruction publique.
L’antagonisme entre les tendances pacifiques des individus et
les velleites belliqueuses des collectivites, dont vous nous parlez
dans votre lettre, est etranger au peuple bulgare.
La Bulgarie jusqu’aujourd’hui n’a mene aucune guerre agressive.
Notre peuple est toujours centre elle. II fait la guerre seulement
lorsque il est contraint.
Persia.
Ministere de I’lnterieur.
Les voeux exprimes dans leur lettre d’oetobre 1935 P ar c^ s
hommes eminents, vrais champions de la paix du monde et de-
fenseurs de la securite collective, ont ete tres favorablement
accueillis et par la suite apprecies a leur juste valeur.
Je me fais un grand plaisir d’appeler 1’ attention de ces personna-
lites de haute culture et de grand sens moral sur ce fait que moi
et tousles dirigeants du Gouvernement iranien nous efforgons
toujours et par tousles moyens de contnbuer au maintien de la
paix, ayant tres vivement ressenti les funestes consequences de
la guerre.
Nous nous ferons done un devoir assidu d’agir en tout temps
contre toute demarche prejudicial aux elements de la paix et
pouvant porter atteinte a ce principe de la vitalite humaine.
Cuba.
Secretaria de Sanidad y Beneficencia.
En cumplimiento de lo dispuesto por el Sr. Secretario, tengo el
honor de accusar recibo de su impreso titulado ~Mesaje a los
Hombres de Estado”, que se relaciona con su vocacion de Medicos
dedicados especialmente a estudiar las manifestaciones normales
y patologicas de la vida mental de los hombres; siendome grato
manifestarle que esta Secretaria agradece el envio de tan apreciable
trabajo y aprecia el esfuerzo que por el mismo se realiza enpro de
la paz mondial.
United States of America.
I am directed by the Secretary of State to acknowledge the
receipt of your communication of October 1935, addressed to the
President, in which the views of 350 psychiatrists and psychologists


expressed and appreciates your courtesy in transmitting this
document.
Venezuela.
He tenido a honra recibir la interesante carta publica suscrita
por ustedes, con el generoso proposito de solicitar la atencion de
los Gobiernos acera del grave problema que entrana cierto estado
de espiritu, unversalmente reinante en la actualidad, que amenza
degenerar en psicosis colectiva de guerra.
Come Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores de una de las Republicas
americana mas severamente aleccionadas por la dolorosa experincia
de la guerra durante un period© ya, por fortuna, cerrado para
siempre, y por imperative de mis personales convicciones, no puedo
menos que compartir sin reserva las ideas expresadas por ustedes,
y formular cordiales votos por que ellaslleguen a alcanzarenno
lejano dia la consagracion de todas las conciencias, convirtiendose
asi, de evidentes postulados cientificos en normas ductoras de las
futuras sociedades.


PRESSCOMMENTS AND HEADLINES.
United States of America.
New York Times.
War perils seen by medical men.
350 Psychiatrists of Thirty Nations warn the world of secret
preparations.
1914 Agitation recalled.
Craving for power is held to be motive for preparedness by
leading statesmen.
Progressive.
Scientists urge moratorium on war propaganda.
Boston Evening Transcript Magazine Section.
War psychology, analyzed, becomes form of madness.
That whole peoples can be carried away by the hypnotic power
of propaganda until they are led into actions abhorrent under
ordinary circumstances is the chief warning contained in a remark-
able document recently sent by the Committee on War Prophylaxis
of the Netherlands Medical Association to the statesmen of the
world. It was signed by 350 psychiatrists of 39 nations, and it
presents for the first time a complete analysis of the whole field
of war psychology, from six different angles.
Statesmen are not always sane and responsible, mentally balanced
individuals. They may be suffering from hidden fears, hates, or
unconscious urges to obtain power. Personal fears may be translated
into public concern over the safety of the nation or real or imagined
threats from neighbour nations. The personal urge for power as a
desire to spread culture to unenlightened groups and to carry the
flag to the outermost reaches of the earth.
To coal and iron mines, to freight trains, to fishing fleets in
December, to dish washing, clothes washing, and window washing,
to road building and tunnel making, to foundries and stoke holes
and to frames of skyscrapers, would our gilded youths be drafted
off, according to their choice, to get the childishness knocked out
of them and to come back into society with healthier sympathies
and soberer ideas.
The martial type of character can be bred without war. Strenuous
honor and disinterestedness abound elsewhere. Priests and medical
men are in a fashion educated to it.
Flood, earthquake, famine, wind, pestilence, ignorance these
are foes that know no national boundaries. Under the banner of
scientific opposition to the blind forces of nature, men may develop
the best that is in them and put it to work for the common good.


Psychologically, the effect of war on the soldier is tremendous.
The report of American and French specialists to an International
Congress of Military Medicine and Pharmacy at the Hague, Holland,
has revealed that.
The total number of neuropsychiatric cases (mental breakdowns)
amounts to nearly 50 per cent of all the casualties, the present cost
to the Government amounting to over $ 500.000.000 and it is
estimated that the number of these cases would be far more
increased in any future war.
Utica Dispatch.
Dr. hutchings endorses psychiatrists’ warning against war
insanity.
Utica State Hospital’s chief concurs with Dutch move.
Dr. richard h. hutchings, superintendent of the Utica State
Hospital concurs with prominent Dutch psychiatrists and others
in their campaign against the surrender of our civilization to the
insanity of war.
That the people of the world may be headed for a war psychosis
is the solemn warning contained in a document signed bij 350
psychiatrists from 30 nations, according to a news dispatch from
the Hague from Science Service.
The Netherlands Medical Association sponsors the document
and has formed a committee on war prophylaxis etc.
The Flint Journal.
A wholesale revival of the views expressed by the famous psy-
chologist william james, on the psychology of war was urged by
dr. lloyd h. ziegler, psychiatrist of the Albany hospital, Albany,
N. Y. in adding his name to the list of signers of the anti-war
document.
Civilized opinion is a curious mental mixture, said prof, james
in the statement referred to by dr. ziegler. The military instincts
and ideals are as strong as ever, but are confronted by reflective
criticisms which sorely curb their freedom. Innumerable writers
are showing up the bestial side of military service. Pure loot and
mastery seem no longer morally avowable motives, and pretexts
must be found for attributing them solely to the enemy.
England and we, our army and navy authorities repeat without
ceasing are solely for ~peace”. Germany and Japan it is who are
bent on loot and glory. (This was written in 1910).
Peace in military mouths today is a synonym for war expected.
It may even reasonably be said that the intensely sharp compe-
titive preparation for war by the nations is the real war, permanent
unceasing; and that the battles are only a sort of public verifi-
cation of the mastery gained during the peace interval.
The manly virtues of the fighter, which lend a romantic at-
mosphere to war, and represent ideals of the people, are what
really keep war alive, prof, james contended. He recommended
a plan, prophetic of the CCC, for knocking the childishness out of
young men through a battle against nature.
If there were, instead of military conscription, a conscription


of the whole youthful population to form for a certain number
of years a part of the army enlisted against nature, the military
ideals of hardiness and discipline would be wrought into the growing
fibre of the people; no one would remain blind, as the luxurious
classes now are blind, to man’s real relations to the globe he lives
on, to the permanently sour and hard foundations of his higher life.
Baltimore Sun.
The post war generation has come to regard the phrases war
madness, war-time hysteria, and even war psychosis, as common-
places. Of course, the layman uses such phrases as a convenient
way of making known his disapproval of war. But now 350 psy-
chiatrists from 30 nations have formed a Committee on War
Prophylaxis and have sent a letter to leading statesmen, a statement
which, throws the weight of their science behind the popular
expressions.
If the doctors seem innocently to have neglected fundamental
aspects of the problem that agitates them the economic roots
of nationalism and war, and the political flowering of these roots
they have at least done a service first in making plain that both the
war and the preparation for war constitute, in a strict sense rather
that metaphorical, a very real disease, and second, in recalling
to the leaders that even in high places a pathological contradiction
between pretensions and intentions can be seen for what it is.
New York World-Telegram.
Psychologists warn of martial instincts.
The Washington Daily News.
World psychiatrists sense impending War Psychosis.
New York Times.
Psychiatrists see war insanity again endangering the world,
350 Medical experts of 30 countries warn against secret pre-
parations by leading statesmen for conflict. Stress that leaders’
speeches can inflame as they did in 1914.
The Flint Journal.
Psychiatrists open fight against insanity of war. Representatives
of 30 nations issue solemn warning to statesmen that man still
possesses strong, fierce, destructive aims.
The Rocky Mountain News.
That the people of the world may be headed for a war psychosis
is the warning contained in a document being circulated to leading
statesmen by 350 psychiatrists from 30 nations.
The News Sentinel. Tennessee.
Unbridled war spirit may sweep whole world, 350 psychiatrists
warn statesmen.


Berkeley Daily Gazette.
Doctors seek curb on mentally unbalanced as head of nations.
Some great nations are today led by men known to be mentally
unbalanced. This is the charge made by dr. h. j. norman, presi-
dent of the psychiatry section, Royal Society of Medicine, who
however, did not name names, but made his implication clear.
Already action has been taken by the Medical Association of
the Netherlands, which has formed a committee to study the
vital problem of curbing such leaders in their tendency to urge
the world towards war, dr. norman indicated. The group is known
as the Committee for war Prophylaxis, medical term for war
prevention.
Said dr. norman; ~When we look about in the world we can
still appreciate how applicable is the saying of the great dr. Johnson
when he pointed out ~As a madman is apt to think of himself
as grown suddenly great, so he that grows suddenly great is apt
to borrow a little from the madman.”
There are at present time individuals holding prominent positions
and influencing the destinies of whole countries who are known
to be mentally unstable or who have actually had attacks of mental
disorder, declared dr. norman.
It is not unreasonable to hope that safeguards may somehow
be set up so that such conditions will not recur in the future.
Dr. norman indicated the information of the Dutch Medical
Committee on War Prophylaxis as a first attempt to bring the hope
to realization.
The Argentine.
Semana Mcdica.
Comision para la profilaxis de la guerra.
La Sociedad Neerlandesa de Medicina de Holanda ha iniciado
un movimiento en favor de la paz universal, constituyendo de su
seno, al efecto una Comision para la profilaxis de la guerra, y en
tal sentido se ha dirigido un petitorio a todos los hombres de
Estado del mundo, subscript© por psiquiatras y psicologos de los
paises de Europa y algunos de America, contandonos entre ellos.
La Prensa.
Se hara llegar al P.E. una exhortacion da la comision de profilaxis
de la guerra.
Los representantes en nuestro pais de ese nuevo organism© la
entregaran al Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores.
La Nacion.
En favor de la paz universal, la Sociedad Neerlandesa de Medicina
de Holanda ha iniciado un movimiento, constituyendo de su seno
una comision para la profilaxis de la guerra. En tal sentido se ha
dirigido un petitorio a todos los hombres de Estado del mundo,
subscript© por psyquiatras y psicologos de los paises de Europa y
algunos de America.


La Liga Argentina de Higiene Mental se ha adherido al movi-
miento pacifista universal senalado, presentando sus felicitaciones,
con tal motivo, a la Sociedad Neerlandesa de Medicina, por su
feliz y humanitaria iniciativa. A su vez, el presidente de la referida
Liga, professor gonzalo bosch, en la sesion de la sociedad de
Neurologia y Psiquiatria celebrada ultimemente, formalo la mocion
para que tambien se adhiera a dicho movimiento.
Belgium.
Hollandsch Weekhlad voor Belgie.
Dit bericht is met voldoening ontvangen. Er blijkt ten eerste
uit hoezeer onze Koningin meeleeft met alle zedelijke en geestelijke
bewegingen in ons land. Verder geeft Haar telegram uiting aan
een gevoel dat heel ons volk van laag tot hoog bezielt: de onwankel-
bare liefde voor den Vrede. En tenslotte, en daarom is deze Konink-
lijke uiting ons bijzonder lief, blijkt er overduidelijk uit, dat H.M.
Haar vertrouwen aan den Volkenbond blijft schenken. Dat is van
het hoogste belang. Er zijn er te velen, ook ten onzent, die bij de
eerste de beste teleurstelling op de vlucht slaan. Zelfs al heeft de
Volkenbond gefaald (wat nog lang niet vast staat) in zijn pogingen
om een oorlog te beletten of te beperken, dan nog is daarmede het
beginsel, dat aan deze instelling ten grondslag ligt, niet veroordeeld.
Een werk als dat van Geneve is een werk van vele jaren, dat alleen
hecht kan opgetrokken worden door tallooze tegenslagen heen
maar dat eens tot zegen van de gansche menschheid zijn definitieve
vorm zal krijgen, wanneer wij niet kleinmoedig zijn en er ons
vertrouwen niet aan onttrekken.
. De staatsmanswijsheid van onze Koningin geeft ons hier het
voorbeeld.
British India.
The Amrita Bazar Patrika. Calcutta.
Elimination of War. Psychiatrists’ Appeal to Statesmen.
The searchlight.
War-psychosis in statesmen. Militarism disguised under peace
talk. Real, pretended and unconscious motives. World Psychiatrists’
Appeal.
The Indian Nation.
Elimination of War. World psychiatrists’ appeal to statesmen.
Bulgaria.
La Bulgarie.
De la sorte nous voyons avorter une fois de plus une initiative
tres louable, tres noble au fond’ mais assez difficile a realiser.
Apres I’echec de la diplomatic qui n’a pas pu empecher la guerre
c’est le tour des savants de voir leur appel se briser centre I’apathie
generale.


On a dit et repete que le temps on nous vivons est malade.
I’Apparition d’un nombre si grand de medecins venus pour lui
donner des soins en est la preuve irrecusable. Et nous avons d’autant
plus lieu de nous preoccuper de ce fait, parceque ce sont des mede-
cins psychiatres et psychologues qui ont cm devoir se charger de
notre guerison. Le cas, en effet, qu’on le veuille ou non, donne a
reflechir.
Canada.
Le Canada.
II semble que les psychiatres soient aussi impuissants que les
politiques, lorsqu’il s’agit de definir des moyens pratiques de
prevenir la guerre ou de la mettre comme disent les Anglais
hors la loi. Leur intervention n’est pourtant pas inutile. On
retiendra surtout le fait que les peuples n’ont pas la moindre
idee de la chose epouvantable que serait une nouvelle guerre avec
les engins de destruction que les puissances possedent maintenant.
II faut les eclairer. C’est une oeuvre a laquelle se devraient devouer
tous ceux qui sont en position de se faire entendre.
England.
Daily Herald.
350 Doctors condemn war mind. Stop profit from arms traffic.
Statesmen urged to spend on peace.
Queen Wilhelmina’s desire for Peace.
The Fife Free Press.
The Pestilence of War.
If there were no fools there would be no war, and in these
critical days it is fitting that 350 psychiatrists of all nations, whose
duty it is to investigate the normal and diseased mind, and to serve
mankind with their knowledge, should feel constrained, in their
capacity as physicians, to address a serious word to the statesmen
of the world.
Thus do the psychiatrists do their bit towards bringing about
the time „when all men’s good will be each men’s rule, and universal
peace lie like a shaft of light across the land and like a lane of beams
athwart the sea”.
Hungary.
Magyar or szdg (vertaling).
De vereeniging van Nederlandsche psychiaters heeft het grootste
probleem van de wereld heel goed aangepakt; zij doet beroep op
de collega’s in alle landen, dat zij spoedig moeten bestudeeren de
oorlogspsychose, welke uit het oogpunt der menschheid de ge-
vaarlijkste geestesziekte is.
Austria.
Der Morgen. Weenen.
Irrenarzte an die Staatsmanner. Die Wortlaut des sensationellen
Aufrufes.


Die prominenten Psychiater und Irrenarzte der Welt haben an
die europaischen Staatsmanner einen Aufruf genchtet, der in seiner
Art vollkommen allein dasteht. Die Weltpresse hat von diesem
Aufruf der Psychiater Nervenarzte und Irrenhausdirektoren, der
am 4. Oktober erlassen wurde nur beilaufig Kenntnis genommen.
Wir sind in der Lage den Wortlaut des Dokumentes zum Abdruck
zu bringen.
Spain.
El Mercantil Valenciano.
Un Documento historico.
Con este titulo y suscrito por 350 intelectuales y professores, de
alta signification en el mundo de los estudios filosoficos y psiq ma-
trices, ha sido cursado a los hombres de Estado de casi todos los
paises el siguiente mteressantisimo documento: etc.
Cecho-Slovakie.
Prager Montagsblatt.
Krieg als Irrsinn. Aus einer Unterredung mit prof, oskar fischer,
Was ist der Sinn des Aufrufs?
~Psychiater und Diplomaten”.
Der Zweck des von 350 bekannten Psychiatern der ganzen Welt
unterschriebenen Aufrufs, der im September an alle fiihrenden
Staatsmanner verschickt wurde, ist aufzuzeigen, dass vom Stand-
punkt der modernen Psychologie die zum Krieg fiihrenden Motive


grossenteils psychopathischer Natur sind. Gewiss gibt es wirt-
schaftliche und politische Gegensatze. Diese lassen sich jedoch
zweifellos auf andere Wege regeln. Die fatsache, dass hierzu der
Weg des Hordes beschritten wird, gehort eigentlich ins Gebiet des
psychisch Abwegigen. Wenn man mit niichterner Berechnung die
Kosten eines Krieges an Menschen und Material beriicksichtigt
selbst im Verhaltnis zum bestmoglichen Ausgang, so resultiert die
Endbalanz, dass jeder ungeheuer draufzahlt.^
Volkswille. Karlsbad.
Die Mahnung der Irrenarzte
Dass diese Welt vom Wahnsinn missregiert wird, diirfte fiir
jeden Einsichtigen ausser allem Zweifel stehen. Neben den Un-
zurechnungsfahigen sind es die kalt spekulierenden Verbrecher, die
das Elend dieser Erde auf dem Gewissen haben.
So ist es nur natiirlich und konsequent, dass sich jetzt die
Irrenarzte in aller Welt zusammengetan und einen Protest gegen
das Chaos beschlossen haben, das diese Erde verwiistet. Die
Irrenarzte sind gewiss competent, die pathologische Beschaffenheit
unseres Zustandes zu analysieren, der iibrigens fast unheilbar
scheint. Aber die Psychiater haben noch einen anderen Grand,
ihre gewichtige Stimme gegen den kommenden Weltkrieg zu
erheben.
Sie wissen nur zu gut, was es mit der verlogenen Phrase vom
reinigenden Stahlbad auf sich hat, sie wissen, welche Verwiistungen
ein Krieg anrichtet, wie sich Geisteskrankheit und Verbrechen der
Vernichtungsbahn der Tanks und Flammenwerfer anschliessen und
wie sehr, neben der physischen Verwiistung, die seelische Dezi-
mierung der Menschheit ihre grausige Orgien feiert.
Die Irrenarzte der Welt haben gesprochen. Mogen die Gesunden,
die Mord, Vernichtung und Wahnsinn bedrohen, auf ihre warnende
Stimme horen und den Geisteskranken die die Welt verpesten, ihr
gemein gefahrliches Handwerk legen, ehe es fiir alle, fiir die Ge-
sunden und fiir die Kranken, zu spat ist.
Sweden.
Gefle Dagblad.
Psykiatrisk diagnos av varldslaget.
350 sinnessjuklakare varna varldens statsman.
Frimodigt dokument tillstallt regeringarna.
Dagens Nyheter.
350 psykiatriker vadja till alia regeringar.
Genom sj alvkannedom kan moj ligen en varldskatasrtof forhindras.
Folkets Dagblad Politiken.
Offra militarismens miljoner pa freden i stallet for pa rustningar,
Flammende appell fran varldens psykiatriker. Den suggestiva
kraften i krigiska tal farlig.


Karlsstads Tidningen.
Psykiatrerna rikta kraftig fredsvadjan till statsmannen. Den
radande mentaliteiten i varlden kan leda till krigspsykos.
Stockholms Tedningen.
Yarning till psykopater ,
Lunds Dagblad.
Psykologiska faktorer spela viktig r.oll i det problem som kriget
utgdr. 350 psykiatrer vadja till statsman i alia lander.
Genom sjalvkannedom kan mogligen varldskatastrof fdrhindras.


Soderhams Kuriren.
Maktig fredsappell fran psykiatrer runt hela varlden.
Switzerland.
Berner Tagwacht.
Irrsinn in der Politik. Psychiater warnen die Staatsmanner.
In diesem Moment, in dem die Ereignisse alle Einsichtigen dazu
drangen, sich gemeinsam gegen die grosse Endkatastrophe unserer
europaischen Kultur zusammen zu schliessen, gelangen 350 nam-
hafte Psychiater aus alien Landern Europas, aus den Vereinigten
Staaten von Nord-Amerika und aus Kanada mit dem folgenden
Aufruf an die Staatsmanner.
National Zeitung. Basel.
Ein solches Europa ist wirklich eine psychiatrische Angelegenheit
geworden, und im rechten Moment melden sich die 350 Psychiater
mit ihrem Appel an die Staatsmanner zu Worte. Diese Geistes-
verfassung voll endeten Irrsinns muss die Staaten des zwanzigsten
Jahrhunderts hoffnungslos zerschmettern, die Nationen aushohlen
im Augenblick, da sie sich zu imposanten Gesten anschicken. Nein,
mit mittelalterlichen Formen lasst sich die Welt nicht erneuern,
sie lasst sich nicht in Zwangsjacken bringen aus der sie langst
herausgewachsen ist, in historische Kostiime, die zum Beschauen
zwar amiisant sein mogen, in denen aber das heutige Leben er-
sticken miisste. Werden die Irrenarzte gehbrt von den Krieg-
streibern, die mit ihren Friedensheucheleien iiber die Riesenkrafte
hinwegtauschen mbchten, die sie zum Sturz in das Verderben
entfesseln; von den Vblkern, die sich wiederum durch glanzende
Paradeuniformen blenden lassen, so dass sie das Massengrab der
zehn Millionen Weltkriegsopter nicht mehr sehen?
Psyche, Schweizerische Monatsschrift fur Psychologic, Heil-
padagogik und Graphologie. Bern.
Es geschieht unseres Wissens zum ersten Male, dass jene Wissen-
schaft die wie keine andere dazu verpflichtet ist, asoziale und
ahumane Kollektivwahngebilde zu zerstoren und auf ihre primitive
Wurzeln zuruckzufiihren, nahmlich die Psychiatric, aus ihrem
theoretischen Wissen als Seelenheilkunde auch die practisch-
therapeutischen Konsequenzen zieht und eine wissenschaftlich
begriindete Auferklarung iibernimmt, indem sie sich offentlich
und direkt an die Betroffenen wendet selbst wenn es Staatsmanner
sind. Wir mochten wiinschen, dass diese Art der angewandten
Psychologic nicht ein einmaliges Ereignis sei.
Die Kundgebung der Psychiater ist wohl als Manifest wie auch
als wissenschaftlicher Kundgebung von grosster Bedeutung. Wenn
diese Botschaft der Seelenheilkunde an die Staatsmanner bei
letzteren wirklich die Wiirdigung findet, die sie verdient, ware
von morgen an die seelische und wirtschaftliche Entlastung
unmittelbar in der ganzen Welt zu verspiiren. Das seelische Auf-
atmen, das durch ganz Europa gehen wiirde, wenn dieser erstaun-


liche Einbruch der Wissenschaft in die Diplomatic therapeutische
Wirkung hatte, wiirde bis in die Konsultationszimmer der Nerven-
arzte gehort -- vielleicht besonders dort. Und so stellt sich kritisch-
psychologisch zum Schluss zwangslaufig nur noch die heikle Frage;
was denn eigentlich von den Staatsmannern psychiatrisch zu halten
sei, wenn diese klare Manifestation der Nervenarzte und Psychiater
ohne therapeutische Wirkung yerhalle?
La Revue Mensuelle. Geneve.
Un temoignage de S.M. la Reine de Hollande.
S.M. la reine de Hollande a tenu en envoyant ce telegramme de
sympathie a soutenir de sa haute autorite I'Appel des 350 psychiatres
et psychologues de divers pays, adresse a tousles hommes d’Etat
du monde entier. Nous publions cet appel dans ce volume et le
remettons aux dele gues de la Societe des Nations.


