

REUfiIOUS fl'vMP.
DOCUMENTS
RELATIVE TO THE
ERECTION AND ENDOWMENT
ADDITIONAL BISHOPRICS
IN THE COLONIES.
1841—1855.
WITH AN HISTORICAL PREFACE
THE REV. ERNEST HAWKINS,
HON. SEC. TO THE COLONIAL BISHOPRICS COUNCIL.
FIFTH EDITION.
LONDON:
SOLD AT THE DEPOSITORY OF
THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS;
4, ROYAL EXCHANGE; AND 16, HANOVER STREET, HANOVER SQUARE;
AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.




CONTENTS.
Historical Preface 1
Letter from the Bishop of London to the Archbishop of Canterbury
24 th April, 1840. 13
Meetings of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and the
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge .... June, 1840. 19
Public Meeting, Willis’s Rooms 27 th April, 1841. 19
Declaration of the Archbishops and Bishops . Whitsun Week, 1841. 20
Bishopric of Tasmania, Van Diemen’s Laud May , 1842. 23
Fredericton, New Brunswick Mai/, 23
Gibraltar .' May, 24
Adelaide, South Australia May, ■ — 26
First Report of Episcopal Committee June, 25
Bishopric of Capetown, Cape of Good Hope Feb. 1843. 27
Second Report of Episcopal Committee June, 29
Pastoral Letters, London and Salisbury 31
Bishopric of Nova Scotia 31
Third Report of Episcopal Committee May, 1842. 33
Bishopric of Rupert’s Land Sept. 1845. 35
Fourth Report of Episcopal Committee Aug. 1848. 38
Bishopric of Victoria, Hong Kong April, 1849. 41
Minutes of Episcopal Committee May, 43
Report of the Treasurers May, 43
Fifth Report of the Council Ascension Bay, 45
Sixth Report of the Council March, 1850. 47
Bishopric of Toronto Oct. 48
Sierra Leone Nov. 1851. 51
Subdivision of Dioceses 53


Public Meeting and Report April, 1853. 53
Extension of Episcopate in South Africa 56
Bishopric of Grahamstown April, 1853. 56
Natal . . . April, - 56
Perth, Western Australia Bee. 58
Income of Colonial Bishops . . . . June, 1852. 60
Increase of Clergy in the New Dioceses June, 1855. 61
Past of Patents Aug. 1787 to Nov. 1854. 62
Table of Colonial Dioceses -67
Progress of the Episcopate in the Colonies, Western Hemisphere . . 68
Ditto ditto Eastern ditto , . 69
Colonial and Foreign Dependencies of Great Britain 70, 71
Table of Comparative Geography .72
Abstract of Receipts and Payments for the year 1854 74
Ditto for 14 years, 1841—1854 . . . . 75
Endowments, Stipends, &c 76
Donations and Subscriptions, 1841 —1854 . . (1 —28)


HISTORICAL PREFACE.
It is impossible to estimate the loss which the Church of England
has sustained by the want, for nearly two centuries, of Bishops in the
Colonies. It was in the year 1607, that Robert Hunt, an English
Clergyman, landed in Virginia, with a party of settlers, but it was
not until 1784, after the separation of the States from the mother
country, that a single Bishop was consecrated for any part of the
North-American Continent. Thus, for upwards of one hundred and
seventy years, and while so many new communities, of British origin,
were growing to maturity, the Church was left unorganized,—shorn
of its ordinances, —subject to every sort of disorder, —and in a posi-
tion of disadvantage, as compared with the Nonconformist bodies.
As early, however, as the year 1638, the sagacious mind of Laud had
conceived a design for the remedy of an evil then at its rise, by send-
ing a Bishop to New England; but the scheme was thwarted by the
outbreak of troubles in Scotland. 1 A similar proposal was made,
soon after the Restoration, by Lord Chancellor Clarendon, and so
fully approved by the King, that a patent was actually made out,
constituting Dr. Alexander Murray Bishop of Virginia, with a general
charge over the other provinces. But this noble project, which, if
carried into effect, would doubtless have exercised a sensible influence
on the religious and political institutions of America, was defeated by
the accession to power of the “ Cabal ” Ministry. 2
The very first Missionaries who were nominated by the Society for
the Propagation of the Gospel made strong and repeated representa-
tions on the necessity of sending out Bishops. Thus the Rev. John
Talbot wrote from New York, in 1702 ; —“ We have great need of
a Bishop here, to visit all the Churches, to ordain some, to confirm
others, and bless all."
Again, the next year, he speaks of many falling away into dissent,
1 Heylyn’s Life of Laud, p. 347.
2 Gadsden’s Life of Bishop Dehon, p. 5. Seeker states, from an examination of
Bishop Gibson’s papers, that the failure was owing to the endowment being made
payable out of the customs. —Letter to H. Walpole. Works, vol. xi. p, 355.


for want of a lawful ministry; while those who were willing and
qualified to serve shrunk from the loss and hazard of a voyage to
England to obtain holy orders. He then expresses his assurance
that—
“ Did our gracious Queen Anne but know the necessities of her many good
subjects in these parts of the world, she would allow 1,000/. per annum, rather
than so many souls should suffer. Meanwhile, I don’t doubt but some learned
and good man would go further, and do the Church more service with 100/.
per annum, than with a coach and six one hundred years hence.”
Writing in 1704, to his friend George Keith, who had returned
home, he goes so far as to speak both of the right person to be
appointed, and the mode of providing for him :
“ Mr. John Lillingston designs, it seems, to go for England next year; he
seems to be the fittest person that America affords for the office of a Suffragan ;
and several persons, both of the laity and Clergy, have wished he were the
man; and if my Lord of London thought fit to authorize him, several of the
Clergy, both of this province and of Maryland, have said they would pay their
tenths unto him, as my Lord of London’s Vicegerent, whereby the Bishop of
America might have as honourable provision as some in Europe.” 1
• The other Missionaries concurred in pressing this subject upon the
attention of the authorities at home.
“ Excuse me to the Society,” says the Lev. Thoroughgood Moor, in 1704,
“if I am earnest with them for a Suffragan, and that they would have a parti-
cular regard to the unanimous request of the Clergy in all parts of America
upon this account.” 2
In the year 17 05, a memorial to the Archbishops and Bishops was
agreed upon, and signed by fourteen Clergymen assembled at Bur-
lington, praying for the appointment of a Suffragan Bishop. 3
These urgent and repeated solicitations for the complete organiza-
tion of the American Church were not unheeded by the Society, who
embodied them in a memorial to the Queen, in the year 1709. 4 And
it was about this time that, as we are informed by his biographer, 5
a plan was proposed for sending out Dean Swift as Bishop to Virginia,
but it is needless to say that no appointment was made.
In 1710, Colonel Nicholson, the Governor of Virginia, and a most
munificent benefactor to the Church, expressed, in a letter to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, his opinion, “ that unless a Bishop be
sent in a short time, the Church of England will rather diminish than
increase in North America.” 6
1 MS. Letters, in possession of S.P.G. vol. ii. p. 23.
2 MS. Letters, vol. ii. p. 25. 3 App. to Journal, S. P. G., p. 86. 4 Ibid. p. 139.
5 Scott’s Life of Swift, prefixed to his Works, p. 98. 6 Vol. v. p. 94.


At length tlie Society appears to have matured a comprehensive
plan for providing the Church in the Colonies with Episcopal govern-
ment; and accordingly, on the 24th of March, 1713, a representation
on the subject was drawn up, and in due time presented to Her
Majesty, setting forth, as the opinion of the Society, after the most
mature deliberation, —
“ That it is highly expedient that four Bishops be sent thither as soon as
onveniently may be, to forward the great work of converting infidels to the
saving faith of our blessed Redeemer, and for the better regulating such Chris-
tians in their faith and practice, as are already converted thereunto; that is to
ay, two for the care and superintendency of the Islands, and as many for the
Continent.”
The memorial, which proceeds upon the known disposition of the
Queen to comply with the earnest applications, now eleven years con-
tinued, of her Colonial subjects, suggests further, that the two island
Sees be fixed at Jamaica and Barbados : those for the American con-
tinent at Williamsburg in Virginia, and Burlington in New Jersey;
at which latter place the Society had expended a sum of 600?. for the
purchase of a house and land for the Bishop. 1
There appears to be no doubt that the Queen’s approbation was
given to this proposal; and that the Bishoprics were to have been
endowed by the proceeds arising from the sale of land in St. Chris-
topher’s; but, unhappily, the death of Her Majesty put an end to the
arrangements.
The Society took an early opportunity, after the accession of
George 1., of renewing their Memorial to the Crown; but the
jealousies of party, heightened by distrust of a clergy suspected of
favouring the Stuart family, precluded all hope of its being enter-
tained by the administration of Sir Robert Walpole. The import-
ance, however, which Archbishop Tenison attached to the subject
may be judged of by the fact, that he bequeathed, by will, dated 1715,
the sum of 1,000?. toward the settlement of Bishops in America.
Here it should be mentioned that, soon afterwards, in 1717, an
unknown benefactor gave the sura of 1,000?. to the “ Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel,” with directions that <s the principal and
interest might be applied towards the maintenance of a Bishop in
America, when such Bishop should be established.” This fund was
increased in 1720, by a gift of 500?. for the same purpose, by Dugald
Campbell, Esq.; and, in 1741, by a benefaction of like amount from
the Lady Elizabeth Hastings. These donations show that the interest
in the full organization of the American Church was not confined to
the Clergy.
1 MS. Letters, vol. viii. p. 45.
B 2


The fund continued to accumulate till the year 1787; when the
interest was appropriated towards the endowment of the Bishopric of
Nova Scotia. On the death of the third Bishop, Dr. John Inglis, in
1850, the allowance from the Imperial Government for the support
of the Bishopric ceased, and the present endowment is now almost
entirely derived from the “American Colonial Bishops” Fund.
An event occurred in 1723 which induced Bishop Gibson to press
the matter more urgently on the attention of the Minister. The Rev.
John Talbot, who had so long and so warmly contended for the esta-
blishment of the Episcopate in America, and the Rev. Robert Welton,
were consecrated by the nonjuring Bishops, and went back to the
Colonies. The Government at home successfully interfered to pre-
vent the exercise of their functions, but still unaccountably refused
to sanction the conseci'ation of Clergymen friendly to the Hano-
verian line.
In 1725, the Society received a memorial from the Clergy of New
England, complaining of the grievances to which themselves and
their congregations were subject ; and suggesting, as the most effec-
tual remedy, the sending of “ an orthodox and loyal Bishop ” to
reside among them. “ This great blessing of a worthy Bishop ” was
desired, not only by the professed members of the Church, but by
many who, though disposed to it in their hearts, had hitherto been
prevented from joining it openly. 1
In his sermon before the Society, in 1741, Seeker, then Bishop of
Oxford, spoke of the disadvantages under which the Church in
America laboured for want of Bishops.
In 1749, Bishop Sherlock, writing to the Rev. Dr. Johnson,
says :
“ I have been soliciting the establishment of one or two Bishops, to reside
in proper parts of the plantations, and to have the conduct and direction of the
whole. lam sensible, for myself, that lam capable of doing but little service
to those distant Churches; and I am persuaded that no Bishop residing in
England ought to have, or willingly to undertake, the province. As soon as I
came to the See of London, I presented a memorial to the King on this
subject, which he referred to his principal officers of state, to be considered.” 2
It will naturally be asked, if so general a desire was expressed by
the Clergy in the plantations for the appointment of Bishops, and the
reasonableness and importance of the measure were so fully admitted
by the heads of the Church at home, why the appointment was still
delayed ? The answer must be, that the prejudices of those who
opposed the introduction of Episcopacy into America outweighed the
representations of its advocates.
1 Fulham Papers.
2 Chandler’s Life of Dr. Johnson, p. 131.


The objections commonly entertained were rather of a civil and
political, than of an ecclesiastical, character. There was, of course,
the old traditionary feeling, especially in the New England States,
against what they termed “ prelacy,” as connected with religious in-
tolerance; and this objection was much strengthened by vague appre-
hensions of some coercive power to be exercised by a Bishop over the
laity—of his interference with the authority of the governor, and of
taxes which might be levied for his support. But, besides all this,
the people were becoming gradually more democratic in their habits,
and so, more and more jealous of the influence which Episcopacy
might exert in favour of monarchy and the institutions of the mother
country.
Proposals were sent home by some of the New England Clergy, in
1750, with a view of obviating such objections ; and a plan was
drawn up in the same year by Bishop Butler, 1 embodying the pro-
posals of the memorialists, in the hope of disarming hostility; but it
shared the fate of its many predecessors. The truth is, that while
the dissenters in the Colonies and at home were united in opposition
to the measure, the mass of English Churchmen, ignorant and indif-
ferent, gave themselves no trouble about it. The Society had done
its part, by frequent addresses to the Crown; and the Bishops con-
tinued to do theirs. Bishop Sherlock thus expressed himself on the
subject to Dr. Doddridge, May 11, 1751;
“ The care of it [the Church of England] as an Episcopal Church is sup-
posed to be in the Bishop of London. How he comes to be charged with this
care, I will not now inquire ; but sure I am that the care is improperly lodged :
for a Bishop to live at one end of the world, and his Church at another, must
make the office very uncomfortable to the Bishop, and, in a great measure, use-
less to the people.”
He then alludes to the great inconveniences arising from want of a
resident Bishop, the hazard and expense of going to England for
ordination, &c., and adds:—
“ For these reasons, and others of no less weight, I did apply to the King,
as soon as I was Bishop of London, to have two or three Bishops appointed
for the Plantations, to reside there. I thought there could be no reasonable
objection to it, not even from the dissenters, as the Bishops proposed were to
have no jurisdiction but over the Clergy of their own Church.”
But although the proposal, in itself most reasonable, was made in
so conciliatory a spirit, and although no design was entertained of
sending a Bishop to New England, where the dissenters predominated,
yet it met with the most determined opposition in that country.
1 Calamy’s Hist. Account of his own Life, vol. ii. p. 335. Note by the Editor.


“ Was this,” the Bishop asks, “consistent even with a spirit of toleration?
Would they think themselves tolerated, if they were debarred the right of
appointing ministers among themselves, and were obliged to send all their
candidates to Geneva, or Scotland, for orders ? At the same time that they
gave this opposition, they set up a mission of their own for Virginia, a coun-
try entirely Episcopal, by authority of their synod. And in their own country,
where they have the power, they have prosecuted and imprisoned several mem-
bers for not paying towards supporting the dissenting preachers, though no
such charge can, by any colour of law, be imposed on them; this has been the
case in New England.” 1
Seeker, while Bishop of Oxford, wrote, in 1754, to his correspon-
dent, the Rev. Dr. Johnson, as follows: —
“ We have done all we can here hi vain, and must wait for more favourable
times. . . So long as they (the dissenters) are uneasy, and remonstrate, regard
will be paid to them and their friends here, by our Ministers of State.” 2
The whole correspondence contains proof of the anxiety which
Seeker felt for the full settlement of the Church in America, after his
elevation to the primacy. Nor did he content himself with expressing
his opinion in private. In the midst of other occupations, he took the
trouble of replying to a pamphlet written by Dr. Mayhew, of Boston,
in which the proposal for appointing Bishops in America was vehe-
mently denounced. In this answer, the Archbishop states very calmly
the undeniable right of the Church to her own Apostolical govern-
ment ; and speaks of the anomalous position of the Clergy in America
as “without parallel in the Christian world.” 3
In 1764, he says, writing to Dr. Johnson:—
“ The affair of American Bishops continues in suspense. Lord Willoughby
of Parham, the only English dissenting peer, and Dr. Chandler, have declared,
after our scheme was fully laid before them, that they saw no objection against
it. The Duke of Bedford, Lord-President, hath given a calm and favourable
hearing to it, hath desired it may be reduced to writing, and promised to con-
sult about it with the other ministers, at his first leisure.” 4
But party spirit was beginning to run high; and the Archbishop
therefore urged the importance of pursuing their object “ in a quiet,
private manner,” so as not to “ run the risk of increasing the outcry
against the Society.”
In 1766, he spoke more fully on the same subject:—
“ It is very probable that a Bishop or Bishops would have been quietly
received in America before the Stamp Act was passed here; but it is certain
1 Correspondence and Diary of Dr. Doddridge, vol, v. p. 201.
2 Chandler’s Life of Dr. Johnson, p. 177. .
3 Life of Seeker, prefixed to the Sermons, p. 52.
4 ibid. p. 196.


that we could get no permission here to send one. Earnest and continual
endeavours have been used with our successive ministers and ministries, but
without obtaining more than promises to consider and confer about the matter;
which promises have never been fulfilled. The king [George the Third] hath
expressed himself repeatedly in favour of the scheme; and hath promised,
that, if objections are imagined to lie against other places, a Protestant
Bishop should be sent to Quebec, where there is a Popish one, and where
there are few dissenters to take offence. And in the latter end of Mr. Gren-
ville’s ministry, a plan of an ecclesiastical establishment for Canada was
formed, on which a Bishop might easily have been grafted, and was laid before
a Committee of Council. But opinions differed there, and proper persons
could not be persuaded to attend; and in a while the ministry changed. In-
cessant application was made to the new ministry ; some slight hopes were
given, but no step taken. Yesterday, the ministry was changed again, as you
may see in the papers; but whether any change will happen in our concern,
and whether for the better or the worse, I cannot so much as guess. Of late,
indeed, it hath not been prudent to do anything, unless at Quebec; and there-
fore the address from the Clergy of Connecticut, which arrived here in Decem-
ber last, and that from the Clergy of New York and New Jersey, which
arrived in January, have not been presented to the King; but he hath been
acquainted with the purport of them, and directed them to be postponed to a
fitter time.”
It was at this time that Seeker wrote in the following terms to
Plorace Walpole :
“ The reasonableness of the proposal, abstractedly considered, you seem to
admit: and indeed it belongs to the very nature of Episcopal Churches to have
Bishops at proper distances presiding over them; nor was there ever before, I
believe, in the Christian world, an instance of such a number of Churches, or a
tenth part of that number, with no Bishop amongst them, or within some
thousands of miles from them. But the consideration of the Episcopal acts
which are requisite, will prove the need of Episcopal residence more fully.
Confirmation is an office of our Church, derived from the primitive ages: and
when administered with due care, a very useful one. All our people in America
see the appointment of it in their Prayer-books, immediately after their
Catechism ; and if they are denied it unless they will come over to England
for it, they are, in fact, prohibited the exercise of one part of their
religion.” 1
He then refers to the anxiety of successive Bishops for the esta-
blishment of Episcopacy in the Colonies:—
“ I believe there scarce is, or ever was, a Bishop of the Church of England,
from the Devolution to this day, that hath not desired the establishment of
Bishops in our Colonies. Archbishop Tenison, who was surely no High-
Churchman, left, by his will, 1,000/. towards it; and many more of the
. 1 Letter to Horace Walpole. Works, vol. xi. p. 342.


greatest eminence might be named who were and are zealous for it. 1 Or, if
Bishops, as such, must of course be deemed partial, the Society for Propagating
the Gospel consists partly also of inferior Clergymen, partly too of laymen.
Now the last cannot so well be suspected of designing to advance ecclesiastical
authority. Yet this whole body of men, almost ever since it was in being,
hath been making repeated applications for Bishops in America; nor have the
lay part of it ever refused to concur in them.” 2
Archbishop Seeker, as his last service in a cause which he had so
zealously advocated, bequeathed the sum of 1,000/. “towards the
establishment of a Bishop, or Bishops, in the King’s dominions in
America.”
Bishop Terrick, whose attention was naturally directed to the sub-
ject, on his translation to the see of London, in 1764, expressed
distinctly his opinion, both as to the importance of establishing the
Episcopate in America, and as to the obstacles in the way of such a
measure. His words are;—
“ I feel as sensibly as you can do, the distress of the Americans, in being
obliged, at so much hazard and expense, to come to this country for Orders;
but I own I see no prospect of a speedy remedy to it. They who are enemies
to the measure of an Episcopacy, whether on your part of the globe or ours,
have hitherto found means to prevent its taking place, though no measure can
be better suited to every principle of true policy, none can be more consistent
with every idea I have formed of truly religious liberty. We want no other
motives for declaring our sentiments and wishes on the subject, but what arise
from the expediency, I had almost said the necessity, of putting the American
Church upon a more respectable plan, by the appointment of a Bishop.” 3 _
In the anniversary sermon preached before the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel, in 1767, the Bishop of Llandaff (Dr.
Ewer) contended warmly for the rights of the American Church,
which alone (he said) of all the religious communions, was not tole-
rated; while the want of Bishops rendered it impossible to have a
native ministry.
Bishop Lowth urged forcibly the same topics, in 1771, and spoke
of the colonists as deprived of “ the common benefit which all Christian
Churches, in all ages, and in every part of the world, have freely en-
joyed,” The Bishop observes—
“ The proper and only remedy hath long since been pointed out—the
appointment of one or more resident Bishops, for the exercise of offices purely
1 Bishop Benson bequeathed a legacy “to he added to the fund for settling
Bishops in our Plantations in America, hoping that a design so necessary and un-
exceptional, cannot but at last be put in execution.”— Seeker's Answer to Dr.
Mayhem’s Observations. Works, vol. xi. p. 328.
2 Ibid. p. 348.
3 Chandler’s Life of Dr. Johnson, p. 200.


Episcopal in the American. Church of England; for administering the solemn
and edifying rite of Confirmation; for ordaining Ministers, 1 and superintend-
ing their conduct; —offices to which the members of the Church of England
have an undeniable claim, and from which they cannot be precluded without
manifest injustice and oppression.” 2
The last quotation shall be from a letter written by the same
eminent Prelate to Dr. Chandler, at the very beginning of the
American disturbances, May 29, 1775 :
“ If,” he says, “it shall please God that these unhappy tumults be quieted,
and peace and order restored, (which event I am sanguine enough to think is
not far distant,) we may reasonably hope that our governors will be taught, by
experience, to have some regard to the Church of England in America.” 3
With these earnest appeals on record, it cannot be said that the
heads of the English Church were indifferent to the claims of their
American brethren, or backward to maintain them. But political
and sectarian feeling combined to thwart the plans of the Church, till
the independence of the States had been established, when the question
of Episcopacy became with the republicans a matter of secondary im-
portance. The same objections were no longer entertained to the
introduction of Bishops. The only difficulty, therefore, that re«
raained was for the several conventions to agree upon the time and
manner of seeking the Episcopate. The middle and southern
States were for delay : “ Let us first gather together,” said they, “ our
scattered members.” The language of the east and north was wiser :
“ Let us first have a head to see, and then we shall be better enabled
to find our members.” 4 Ultimately, in 1783, the Clex*gy of Con-
necticut elected Dr. Samuel Seabury, many years a Missionary of the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel on Long Island, to be their
Bishop, and commended him to the Bishops of the English Church,
for consecration. But the Archbishop of Canterbury felt a delicacy
about complying with their prayer, both because the Bishop elect was
not the choice of the whole Church, and because the Government was
unwilling to sanction such a step till they had ascertained in what
light it would be viewed by the now independent States. Impatient
of further delay, Dr. Seabury proceeded to Scotland, and was there
1 “ The exact number of those who have gone home for ordination from these
northern Colonies is fifty-two. Of these, forty-two have returned safely, and ten
have miscarried ; the voyage, or sickness occasioned by it, having proved fatal to
near a fifth part of them. The expense of their voyage cannot be reckoned at less,
upon an average, than one hundred pounds sterling to each person.”— Dr. Chand-
ler’s Appeal, p. 34. New York. 1767.
2 Sermon before S.P.G. p. 17.
3 Chandler’s Life of Dr. Johnson, p. 207.
4 Quoted in the Life of Bishop Hobart, edited by Dr. Hook, p. 219.


consecrated, on the I4th of November, 1784, by Bishops Kilgour,
Petrie, and Skinner. Early in the summer of the ensuing year, he
returned to Connecticut, the first Bishop of our Church that had yet
been seen in the whole of the North American continent. Two years
afterwards, on the 4th February, 1787, the Rev. William White and
the Rev. Samuel Provoost, who had been duly elected to the Sees of
Pennsylvania and New York, were in the Chapel of
Lambeth Palace, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, 1 assisted by the
Archbishop of York, 2 and the Bishops of Bath and Wells 3 and of
Peterborough. 4
Among those who contributed to bring about this happy result, by
removing the obstacles which prevented the consecration of Bishops
for a foreign independent power, Mr. Granville Sharp should be men-
tioned with honour. Pie wrote urgently to the Archbishop of
Canterbury on the subject ; and spoke of the time as being u import-
ant and critical for the promotion of the interests and future extension
of the Episcopal Church in America.” 5
The two Bishops did not linger in England, but embarked a few
days after their consecration, and arrived in New York on the 7th of
April—Easter day —a happy omen, as it was considered, for the
reviving Church of that country.
Thus, at last, after nearly two centuries of struggle, the Church
was perfected in Amei'ica ; and from this moment her course had
been rapidly progressive. 6 Before, however, this happy settlement,
many of her most devoted children had been driven, by the troubles
of the times, to seek a refuge in the provinces which still maintained
their allegiance to the British Crown. Thousands of loyalists passed
over to Nova Scotia and Canada ; and it was wisely determined to
give them the full privileges of that Church to which they were so
strongly attached, by forming the remaining British Colonies into an
Episcopal See. The person fixed upon, as it were, by common con-
sent, to fill it, was Dr. Chandler ; but that admirable man was
already suffering from a fatal malady, which compelled him to decline
an elevation which he had so well merited. He, however, took the
opportunity of recommending, for the office of Chief Pastor, one who
had done and suffered much for the Church ; and Dr. Charles Inglis,
who had been obliged to fly to England for his life, in 1783, was
consecrated Bishop of Nova Scotia, on the 12th August, 1787. 7
1 Dr. Moore. 2 Dr. Markham. 2 Dr. Moss. 4 Dr. Hinchcliffe.
5 Bishop White’s Memoirs of the American Church, p. 376.
6 See Table of the American Dioceses, at the end.
7 For further particulars of the struggle for the Episcopate in the North
American Colonies, see "Historical Notices of the Missions of the Church of
England,” chap. xvii. (Fcllowcs.)


The second Colonial Diocese was formed in 1793, by the establish-
ment of the Bishopric of Quebec, with jurisdiction over the province
of Canada ; and both of these enormous dioceses were subdivided in
1839, by the erection of Toronto and Newfoundland into separate
Bishoprics.
But the American Colonies were not the only part of the British
dominions in which the settlement of our Church, in the completeness
of her doctrine and discipline, had been too long neglected. Many
years elapsed after the establishment of our power in India, before
any systematic measures were adopted for the moral and religious
benefit of that country. But neither here had their obligations been
overlooked by Churchmen. As early as the year 1694, Dr. Prideaux
drew up proposals for the Propagation of Christianity in the East
Indies. In this paper he laid down, as the result of experience in the
West Indies, as well as in the East, the position, which a century
and a half’s added experience has strengthened, “ That the existing
evils and deficiencies cannot be otherwise remedied, than by settling
Bishops and Seminaries in those countries, where ministers may be
bred and ordained upon the spot.” 1 Shortly after this, indeed, the
East India Company was required, in the charter granted to them,
and bearing date 1698, “ constantly to maintain in every garrison,
and superior factory, one minister, [to be approved by the Bishop of
London,] and to provide there also one decent and convenient place
for divine service only.” 2
Little, however, was done till the time of the renewal of the Com-
pany’s charter, in 1813 ; when, after much opposition, and many
warnings of the evils that would ensue from the introduction of
our Church system into that heathen empire, the following reso-
lution, apologetically introduced by the Government, was adopted
by the House of Commons, and made the basis of a clause in the
Act :
“ That it is expedient that the Church Establishment in the British terri-
tories in the East Indies should be placed under the superintendence of a
Bishop and three Archdeacons; and that adequate provision should be made
from the territorial revenues of England for their maintenance.” 3
The immediate consequence was, the erection of British India into
one vast Diocese, which has since been subdivided into the Bishoprics
of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay; but still, the provision for the
Episcopal Superintendence of the Church in that vast country is
lamentably inadequate, and this deficiency was pressed upon the
1 Quoted in Le Bas’ Life of Middleton, vol. i. p. 32.
2 Ibid. vol. i. p. 30. 3 Hansard’s Pari. Debates, vol. xxv. p. 242.


attention of the Earl of Aberdeen by the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel on the occasion of the last revision of the East India
Charter in 1853. 1
It only remains for me to mention the tardy organization of the
Church in the West India Islands. It has already been stated, that a
plan was presented to Queen Anne, in 1713, by the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel, for the erection of Bishoprics in Jamaica
and Barbados. This plan, so wisely and providently formed, was
destined to wait more than a century for its accomplishment. At last,
however, after the objections to it had been exhausted, the Dioceses
of Jamaica and Barbados were formally constituted. The latter has
since been divided into the three Dioceses of Barbados, Antigua, and
Guiana.
After the foregoing references to the many ineffectual attempts
made during a long series of years to introduce the full system of the
Church of England into our Colonies, and the opposition by which
those attempts were defeated, it is consolatory to reflect on the im-
proved feeling, both of the public and the Government, in our own
time. This feeling has been signally manifested by the liberal and
effectual manner in which the proposal first made by the Bishop of
London, in 1840, was taken up; and the result up to this time
has been the erection and endowment of twenty-one additional
Bishoprics.
The following Documents are now published in a collected form,
with a view of furthering the great work to which they relate, and
also as a record of by far the most important movement in the Church
of England since the era of the Reformation.
E. H.
79, Pali Mall,
June, 1855.
1 Memorial to the Earl of Aberdeen.


COLONIAL BISHOPRICS,
A LETTER FROM THE BISHOP OP LONDON TO THE
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.
Mr Lord Archbishop,
I am persuaded that I need not offer any apology for addressing a
letter to your Grace upon a subject, which I know has occupied much
of your thoughts, and which I consider to be of the most urgent im-
portance to the interests of that branch of the Church of Christ, which
looks up with reverence to your Grace as its chief spiritual ruler.
The time appears to me to have arrived, at which a great effort is
required, on the part of the Church of England, to impart the full
benefits of her apostolical government and discipline, as well as of her
doctrines and ordinances, to those distant provinces of the British
Empire, where, if the Christian religion is professed at all, it is left to
depend for its continuance, under the blessing of its Divine Head, upon
the energies of individual piety and zeal, without being enshrined in
the sanctuary of a rightly constituted Church, the only sure and trust-
worthy instrument of its perpetuation and efficiency.
The duty, incumbent upon the government of a Christian country,
of making provision for the spiritual wants of its colonies, a duty
recognised and fulfilled by those states which have maintained their
communion with the Church of Rome, was felt at far too late a period
by the rulers of this Protestant country, and has at no time been com-
pletely and effectually carried out. At present it is openly called in
question by a large proportion of the members of one branch of our
Legislature; and there does not appear to be much hope of our
obtaining, at the present moment, in the actual state of the public
revenue, any considerable aid from the national resources, for the
purpose of planting and maintaining the Church of this country in its
colonies. In the mean time, those colonies are rapidly increasing in
extent and population, and the want of some effectual provision for the
preservation of their Christianity is augmented, just in proportion as
the chance of supplying it appears to be diminished.


Every year’s experience tends to prove, and the opinion is rapidly
gaining ground, that in our endeavours to provide for our colonists
that which, in the first instance, they have not the means of providing
for themselves, the ministration and opportunities of our holy religion,
it is not enough that we send out with them, or amongst them, a cer-
tain number of missionaries ; and that we contribute to build a certain
number of churches and schools. No doubt, even this provision will
be productive of much good; but if we desire the good to be complete,
permanent, and growing with the Church’s growth, we must plant the
Church amongst them in all its integrity. Each colony must have not
only its parochial, or district pastors, but its chief pastor, to watch
over, and guide, and direct the whole. An episcopal Church without
a bishop is a contradiction in terms. The jurisdiction exercised in
former times over the colonies by the Bishop of London, and still con-
ventionally exercised by him over those clergymen of the English
Church who have no bishop of their own, is an anomalous and very
inadequate substitute for the practical authority of a diocesan bishop,
residing amongst and superintending his own clergy, and giving unity,
consistency, and efficiency, to their pastoral labours.
For a proof of the incalculable advantage which would result from
planting a perfect integral branch of our Church in each of our
colonies, we may appeal to the result of experiment. Compare the
present state of the East and West Indies, with respect to their reli-
gious and moral condition, both as to the clergy and laity, with that
which existed before the establishment of the episcopate in those parts
of the empire, and the evidence will appear to be decisive. Not that
we deem it necessary to appeal to the testimony of a comparatively
recent experiment. It might have so happened—God be praised that
it is not so, but it might have so happened—that the seemingly adverse
circumstances under which those bishoprics were constituted, and the
peculiar difficulties to be encountered by their first incumbents, would
prevent, for a long series of years, any remarkable consequences of a
beneficial nature from those wise and Christian measures. The unfa-
vourable nature of the soil, in which the tree was planted, might have
seemed to forbid the expectation of its bringing forth much fruit till
after many seasons. That it would not ultimately disappoint the just
hopes of those who placed it there, was the persuasion of all who
believed that a branch of the true Church must needs be “like a tree
planted by the water side, which should bring forth its fruit in due
season.” But its produce has already been abundant enough to justify
their wisdom and foresight, and to minister cause of thankfulness to
Him who giveth the increase ; and to encourage us to unceasing efforts,
for the purpose of conferring the same inestimable boon on every other
colony of the British empire.


The difference between our past labours in the wox-k of erecting
colonial churches, and those which are now called for, must be this;
that whereas we formerly began by sending out a few individual Mis-
sionaries, to occupy detached and independent fields of labour, —
unconnected with one another by their relation to a common oversight
in the execution of their task, although deriving their spiritual autho-
rity from a common origin;—and then, after an interval of many
years, placing them under the guidance and control of bishops; we
should now, after having supplied the wants of those older colonies,
which are still destitute of the benefit of episcopal government, take
care to let every new colony enjoy that blessing from the vex-y first.
Let every band of settlers, which goes forth fx'om Christian England,
with authoi’ity to occupy a distinct territory, and to form a separate
community, take with it not only its civil rulers and functionaries, but
its bishop and clergy.
But the first work to be done is, to supply the want of completeness
in the Church which already exists in several of our colonies and
distant dependencies. I would mentioxx, as examples, the Cape of
Good Hope, the Island of Ceylon, Van Diemen’s Land, New Zealand,
(which may be regarded as being virtually one of our colonies,) Malta,
as the station of a bishop, who might exercise a salutaxy superintend-
ence over those of our clei’gy who officiate as chaplains in the seapox'ts
and towns upon the coast, or near the coast of the Mediterranean ; and
pexdxaps Gibraltar. I speak with some knowledge of the cii'cura-
stances, Avhich show how desirable it is, that a bishop should be placed
in some of those places; having references continually made to me
upon matters of gx’eat importance to the cause of religion and the
Church, from English clergymen and congregations in foreign parts,
which I am obliged to settle as well as I can, without any legitimate
jurisdiction over the parties, and without any means of inquiring per-
sonally into the facts which form the subjects of their appeals to me.
Your Grace’s own experience will confirm the accuracy of this repre-
sentation.
And besides this, it is obvious, that our Church is not seen in her
full and fair proportions by the strangers amongst whom she dwells.
The defect of those ox’dinances which can be x’eceived only at the
hands of the highest order of the ministry, the absence of due regula-
tions for the exercise of spiritual authority on the part of the clergy,
and the want of a common bond of connexion between them, are dis-
contrasted with the discipline and completeness of
other churches, in themselves perhaps less perfect or less pure than
our own.
I believe that the view, which I have here taken, of the position of
our Chux’ch in those parts of the world which have just been enume-


rated, will be admitted to be correct, by all those persons who have
considered the subject. An opinion is generally prevalent amongst
us, that something ought to be done, without loss of time, to supply
the deficiency complained of; and the only question is, what are the
steps to be taken ?
Undoubtedly I hold, that it is a sacred duty, incumbent upon the
government of a Christian state, to make due provision for the main-
tenance and extension of Christianity in every part of the dominions
of that state; but the time is not yet come for the full and free
acknowledgment of that duty, on the part of those to whom it belongs;
and we can hardly calculate upon an immediate exertion on the part
of the government of this country, adequately to supply the want of
which lam now speaking. If they can be prevailed upon to take in
hand the more urgent duty of supplying the spiritual wants of our
manufacturing towns and populous districts at home, it is as much as
we can expect for some considerable time to come.
If we look to the colonies themselves, in some instances there will
be found a want of adequate resources for the immediate endowment
of bishoprics; in others, it is to be feared, a want of inclination,
arising from a state of feeling on the subject of the Church, occasioned
in great measure by the very deficiency which we desire to supply.
All our colonies, however, are not insensible to the advantages of
episcopal church government; for it is known that there exists
amongst the people of New Brunswick, a very strong desire to have
a bishop of their own, residing amongst them, and giving full effect to
the ministry of their clergy. For my own part, I believe that, if
measures were taken to provide a fund for the endowment of colonial
bishoprics, some at least of our colonies would evince the same feeling
of their own spiritual wants, and would be ready to assist us in the
accomplishment of an object of too great magnitude perhaps, or
thought to be so, for their own unaided resources.
Where a work is to be done for any part of a Christian community,
confessedly most important to their best interests, as well as to the
cause of our Divine Master, if it is not done by the government of the
country to which that community belongs, (which, however, I can
never regard as otherwise than bound to act as a part of the Church
Catholic, in respect of its worldly means and appliances,) it appears to
me, that all the members of that community and Church are bound to
take the work in hand, and to do that, which may in no case be left
undone. It is on this principle that the Incorporated Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts has now acted for more
than a century. It has done that inadequately, which the Govern-
ment of the country ought to have done completely; and as there
seems now to be but little prospect of its being relieved of its respon-


sibility, it is to be hoped that every member of our Church, whom
Providence has blessed with the means, will at length be brought to
feel, that some portion of that responsibility rests upon himself. It is
upon this principle, as it appears to me, that we must now proceed,
with regard to the endowment of new colonial bishoprics. I would
propose for your Grace’s consideration, the following plan :
Ist. That a fund should be formed, by voluntary contribution, for
the endowment of bishoprics in the colonies and distant de-
pendencies of the British Crown.
2dly. That this fund shall be held in trust and administered by
the Archbishops and Bishops of the English Church,
3dly. That, as a general principle, grants should be made for the
endowment of bishoprics, to meet a certain proportion of the
whole amount required for such endowment, raised in the
colonies themselves.
4thly. That the money, set apart from the fund for the endow-
ment of a bishopric, should be laid out at the earliest oppor-
tunity, in the purchase of land within the colony.
Sthly. That contributions may be made, specifically, for the en-
dowment of particular bishoprics.
I forbear from entering upon minute details; and I would be
understood as merely suggesting the foregoing regulations for con-
sideration.
It will of course be necessary, in order to the legal establishment of
bishoprics in any of the colonies, or at Malta, or Gibraltar, that
Letters Patent should be obtained from the Crown ; and I cannot
allow myself to suppose that there will be any difficulty, on the part of
Her Majesty’s Government, in advising Her Majesty to give legal
effect to those arrangements, by which the Church may make full and
effectual provision, as far as relates to her government and discipline,
for the spiritual wants of her distant children, without any additional
burthen upon the state. With respect to the proposed fund, I feel a
confident hope, that a very large amount of money will be contributed
by the members of our Church, towards an undertaking, so necessary
for the accomplishment of the great ends of her institution. To the
attainment of so important an object, we may reasonably expect that
the great Church Societies will contribute liberally from the funds
entrusted to their administration. No subscriber to the Incorporated
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, or to the


Society fox* Promoting Christian Knowledge, will grudge a large con-
tribution from their respective funds for a purpose so directly bearing
upon the objects of those associations ; and I cannot but think that
the Church Missionary Society would feel it to be a plain duty, to
assist in canning out the same purpose ; for it conducts its missionary
operations by means of clergymen of our own Church; and it is unde-
niably true, that episcopal superintendence and control is an essential
part of the constitution cf that Church, absolutely necessary to its
complete efficiency and usefulness. The want of that provision I know
to be sensibly felt, and openly deplored by many of the missionaries of
that Society, I expect also that the great colonial companies and
associations would readily contribute to this fund. The erection and
endowment of a bishopric formed one feature of the plan for colonizing
New Zealand, which was formed a year or two ago by a number of
persons of various religious denominations. The truth is, that a wiser
provision could not be made for ensui’ing even the temporal well-being
of a new colony.
With regard to the amount of money which will be requisite for
effecting the purpose which we have in view, although it must no
doubt be large, yet I do not think it need be so large as some persons
have supposed. We must be content to endow our new colonial
bishoprics with a very moderate provision; sufficient to secure a com-
petent maintenance for the bishops upon a reasonable scale of i-espec-
tability and comfort, with some allowance for their travelling expenses.
It is px’obable, that, in the course of time, the improved value of the
land, purchased as an endowment in the first instance, will add to their
means of doing good; and it is not unreasonable to hope, that the
colonists themselves, when they feel the advantages of a resident
bishop, may make some addition to his x’esources, while they multiply
the number of the clei’gy over whom he will have to preside.
I have said nothing of the probability which exists, that if the
Church of England does not send forth bishops, as well as clergy, into
those parts of the world where her distant children desire still to repose
under the shade of her branches, other kindx’ed episcopal Churches may
deem it incumbent upon them to ci’own their missionary exertions by
some pi’ovision of this kind, and to occupy the fields which seem to be
ripening for the harvest. My own deeply-rooted conviction is, that if
the Church of England bestir herself in good earnest, and put forth all
the resources and energies which she possesses, and for the use of
which she must give account, she will in due time cause the reformed
episcopal Church to be recognised, by all the nations of the earth, as
the stronghold of pure religion, and the legitimate dispenser of its
means of grace; and will be a chosen instrument in the hands of God,


for purifying and restoring the other branches of Christ’s holy Catholic
Church, and of connecting them with herself, as members of the same
mystical body, in the way of truth, in the unity of the Spirit, and in
the bond of peace.
Commending the subject to your Grace’s consideration, with an
earnest prayer that you may be guided by the Holy Spirit in this, as
in all things, to determine for the good of the Church,
I have the honour to remain, with the deepest respect,
Your Grace’s most attached and dutiful Servant,
London, April 24 th, 1840. C. J. London.
The important subject of making provision for the Episcopal super-
intendence of the Church in the Colonies having been thus authori-
tatively propounded; the two great Societies, by whom that Church
had been sustained during a century and a half of struggle and diffi-
culty, were foremost in contributing largely towards its more perfect
organization.
At a Special Meeting of the Society for Promoting Christian
Knowledge, June 10, 1840, it was agreed that a sum of
should be placed at the disposal of the Archbishops and Bishops of the
English Church, towards the endowment of the proposed Bishoprics;
and a few days afterwards, on the 19th of June, a sum of 5,0001, sub-
sequently increased to 7,5001, was voted for the same object by the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts.
But as the object contemplated was one in which every member of
the Church of England must necessarily feel interested, His Grace
the Primate, (Archbishop Howley,) early in the year 1841, issued the
following invitation to the Clergy and Laity :
PUBLIC MEETING (1841).
“ The Archbishop of Canterbury, looking to the defective provision
hitherto made for planting the Church in the distant dependencies of
the British empire, and desiring that an effort should be made to
extend to them the full benefit of its Apostolical government and
discipline, invites the Clergy and Laity to attend a Meeting at
Willis’s Rooms, King-street, St. James’s, on Tuesday, the 27th of
April, 1841, for the purpose of commencing a fund for the endow-
ment of additional Bishoprics in the Colonies.”


His Grace presided on the occasion, and was supported by the
Archbishops of York and Armagh, the Bishops of London, Durham,
Winchester, Bangor, Llandaff, Hereford, Chichester, Lichfield, and
Salisbury.
The following Resolutions were unanimously carried :
Ist, “ That the Church of England, in endeavouring to discharge her un-
questionable duty of providing for the religious wants of her mem-
bers in foreign lands, is bound to proceed upon her own principles of
apostolical order and discipline.”
2d, —“ That the want of Episcopal Superintendence is a great and acknow-
ledged defect in the religious provision hitherto made for many
of the Colonies and Dependencies of the British Crown.”
3d, —“ That the acquisition of new Colonies, and the formation of British
communities in various parts of the world, render it necessary that
an immediate effort should be made to impart to them the full benefit
of the Church, in all the completeness of her ministry, ordinances,
and government.”
4th, —■“ That a fund be raised towards providing for the Endowment of Bishop-
rics in such of the foreign possessions of Great Britain as shall be
determined upon by the Archbishops and Bishops of the United
Church of England and Ireland; that their Lordships be requested
to undertake the charge and application of the Eund, and to name a
Treasurer or Treasurers, and such other officers as may be required
for conducting the necessary details.”
DECLARATION OF THE ARCHBISHOPS AND BISHOPS;
At a Meeting of Archbishops and Bishops, held at Lambeth
Palace, on the Tuesday in Whitsun week, 1841, the fol-
lowing Declaration was agreed to by all present:
We, the undersigned Archbishops and Bishops of the United
Church of England and Ireland, contemplate with deep concern the
insufficient provision which has been hitherto made for the spiritual
care of the members of our National Church residing in the British
Colonies, and in distant parts of the world, especially as it regards
the want of a systematic superintendence of the Clergy, and the
absence of those ordinances, the administration of which is committed
to the Episcopal Order. We therefore hold it to be our duty, in
compliance with the Resolutions of a Meeting convened by the Arch-


bishop of Canterbury, on the 27th of April last, to undertake the
charge of the Fund for the Endowment of Additional Bishoprics in
the Colonies, and to become responsible for its application.
On due consideration of the relative claims of those Dependencies
of the Empire which require our assistance, we are of opinion, that
the immediate erection of Bishoprics is much to be desired in the
following places * —
New Zealand, Cape of Good Hope,
The British Possessions in Yan Diemen’s Land,
the Mediterranean, Ceylon.
New Brunswick.
When competent provision shall have been made for the endow-
ment of these Bishoprics, regard must be had to the claims of
Sierra Leone,
British Guiana,
South Australia,
Port Phillip,
Western Australia,
Northern India,
Southern India.
In the first instance, we propose that an Episcopal See be esta-
blished at the seat of Government in New Zealand, offers having
been already made which appear to obviate all difficulty as to
endowment.
Our next object will be to make a similar provision for the congre-
gations of our own communion, established in the islands of the
Mediterranean, and in the countries bordering upon that sea ; and it
is evident that the position of Malta is such as will render it the
most convenient point of communication with them, as well as with
the Bishops of the ancient Churches of the East, to whom our
Church has been for many centuries known only by name.
We propose, therefore, that a See be fixed at Valletta, 1 the resi-
dence of the English Government, and that its jurisdiction extend to
all the Clergy of our Church residing within the limits above speci-
fied. In this city, through the munificence of Her Majesty the
Queen Dowager, a Church is in course of erection, which, when
completed, will form a suitable Cathedral.
Our attention will then be directed to the countries named in the
foregoing lists, without binding ourselves to the exact order therein
followed, or precluding ourselves from granting assistance to any
place where means may be found for the earlier endowment of a
Bishopric.
In no case shall we proceed without the concurrence of Her
1 The Standing Committee of Bishops has recommended that the See be
founded at Gibraltar,


Majesty’s Government; and we think it expedient to appoint a
Standing Committee, consisting of
The Archbishop op Canterbury, The Bishop oe Durham,
The Archbishop op York, The Bishop oe Winchester,
The Archbishop op Armagh, The Bishop of Lincoln,
The Archbishop oe Dublin, The Bishop oe Rochester,
The Bishop of London,
with full powers to confer with the Ministers of the Crown, and to
arrange measures in concert with them, for the erection of Bishoprics
in the places above enumerated.
We appoint as our Treasurers, the Hon. Mr. Justice Coleridge, the
Venerable Archdeacon Hale, and W. E. Gladstone, Esq. M.P.; and
as Honorary Secretary, the Rev. Ernest Hawkins.
For the attainment of these most desirable objects, a sum of money
will be required, large as to its actual amount, but small when com-
pared with the means which this country possesses, by the bounty of
Divine Providence, for advancing the glory of God and the welfare
of mankind. Under a deep feeling of the sacredness and importance
of this great work, and in the hope that Almighty God may gra-
ciously dispose the hearts of His servants to a corresponding measure
of liberality, we earnestly commend it to the good-will, the assist-
ance, and the prayers of all the Members of our Church.
W. Cantuar. J. Ely.
J. G. Armagh. E. Sarum.
C. J. London. E. Norwich.
E. Dunelm. T. Hereford.
C. Winton. J. Lichfield.
C. Bangor, C. St. David’s.
G. Rochester. P. N. Chichester,
E. Llandaef. R, Derry & Raphoe.
J. H. Gloucester & Bristol. T. Y. Sodor & Man.
We, the undersigned, desire to express our concurrence in the
foregoing declaration:—
E. Ebor,
Rd. Dublin.
Geo. H. Bath & Wells.
W. St. Asaph,
J. Lincoln.
H. Carlisle.
J, B. Chester.
R, Oxford.
H. Exeter.
C. T. Kipon.
G. Peterborough.
H. Worcester.
George Kilmore.
C. Kildar.
Robert P. Clogher.
J. Elphin.
R. Ossory & Eerns.
James Dromore.
Rd. Down & Connor.
S. Cork.
Edmond Limerick,
Stephen Cashel.
Ludlow Killaloe & Clonfert.
Thomas Tuam.
Charles Meath.


Having thus agreed upon the outline of their operations, the Arch-
bishops and Bishops proceeded at once to nominate Special Com-
mittees to circulate information and raise the funds necessary for the
Endowment of the projected Bishoprics. Subjoined is the sub-
stance of their reports, according to the order in which they were
issued :
BISHOPRIC OF YAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
From the Report of the Sub-Committee, May 2, 1842
We have the satisfaction of stating, that the Government has not
only expressed a desire that a See should be founded in Van Diemen’s
Land, but has consented to endow it in part with the provision
hitherto made for an Archdeacon. From this source it is expected
that an income of 800 Z. will be derived; but it is obviously indispen-
sable that a further endowment for the Bishopric should be secured
from some permanent investment. For this purpose the Trustees of
the Colonial Bishoprics Fund have assigned 5,000 1., in the hope that
the remainder may be raised by the exertions of those who are
specially concerned in the prosperity of the colony.
Van Diemen’s Land at present forms part of the unwieldy diocese of
Australia, its capital being distant upwards of 600 miles from the
seat of the Bishop. The number of its clergy is twenty-one. With
a superficies nearly equal to that of Ireland, and a population of
50,000, rapidly increasing, of whom a large majority are Church-
men—with its insular position and separate civil government —this
province has surely the strongest claims to a Bishop of its own.
There is reason to believe that, should the proposition be liberally
met by those interested in the welfare of Van Diemen’s Land, there
would be no delay in proceeding to the consecration of a Bishop.
BISHOPRIC OF NEW BRUNSWICK.
From the Report of the Sub-Committee, May 6, 1842.
The Colony of New Brunswick is at present included within the
See of Nova Scotia, but the Bishop has long felt, and urged upon the
authorities at home, the necessity of dividing the diocese, and placing
New Brunswick under a distinct ecclesiastical head. The province
in extent is about 26,000 square miles, (nearly the size of Ireland,)
and its population, a rapidly inci'easing one, is now 156,000. But
these circumstances, though of great weight in themselves, yet present
but inadequately the grounds upon which the necessity for the esta-
blishment of the proposed Bishopric rests. The distance between


place and place, and the difficulty and uncertainty of communication,
from the state of the roads, the modes of conveyance, and the severity
of the climate during a very considerable portion of the year, contri-
bute to separate the Clergy from each other; and will, of course,
render their mutual intercourse, even with a resident Bishop, less
frequent and regular than would be the case under other circum-
stances. But the effect of all this is very seriously augmented by the
fact that the Bishop of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick resides
at Halifax ; and that, with the claims which Nova Scotia has on
his time, it is impossible for him to visit New Brunswick as frequently,
or so thoroughly, as is desirable, and as his Lordship most earnestly
desires.
The endowment of a Bishopric for New Brunswick cannot be esti-
mated at less than 1,200/. per annum: and this must arise from
capital invested in permanent securities. We have the satisfaction
of stating that the Archbishops and Bishops have appropriated for
this object a sum of 10,000/, from the General Fund placed at their
disposal; and there is good ground for hoping that from the Colony
itself some considerable contributions will be transmitted.
May 6, 1842.
BISHOPRIC OF GIBRALTAR.
From the Report of the Special Committee, May, 1842.
The Special Committee state, “ That on the shores of the
Mediterranean, and within the limits of the proposed Episcopal juris-
diction, there are upwards of twenty-five British congregations ; that,
in the cities thus situated, —which are the permanent residence of
many of our countrymen, and are frequently visited by still more of
the higher and wealthier classes, either in pursuit of health or
pleasure,—the Clergy and their flocks are wholly without efficient
Ecclesiastical control, and are debarred from the blessing of those
ordinances which can be administered only by the Episcopal Order;
and that our Church is thus placed in humiliating and disadvan-
tageous contrast with the ancient Churches of the East, and those of
other nations of Europe.”
They state that “ a sum of 20,000/., including the donation of 2,000/.
given by her Majesty the Queen Dowager, has been appropriated
from the General Fund to the establishment of the See, and an
annual grant of 500/., out of the sums placed at the disposal of the
Episcopal Committee, has been guaranteed until an income of equal
amount, for which their appeal is made, shall be provided from some
permanent investment.”


BISHOPRIC OP SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
From the Report of the Special Committee, May, 1842.
South Australia was created a British province by an act of Par-
liament in the year 1834. It contains an area of 300,000 square miles.
The Colony was founded in December 1836. Its" progress has been
singularly rapid—the population having, in the course of six years,
increased from a very few labourers to the number of 16,000. The
healthiness of the climate and the numerous inducements to emigra-
tion, give every reason to expect that the Colony will steadily advance
in prosperity.
Some churches have been built in and near Adelaide, the capital of
South Australia, and others are in progress; but the want of Epi-
scopal control has been already sensibly felt, and questions have arisen
which could only be satisfactorily determined by a Bishop. For,
although the Colony is nominally within the diocese of Australia, the
distance is so great, and the means of transit are so uncertain, that
the Church is practically beyond the limits of Episcopal superintend-
ence. The churches are not consecrated —the young are not con-
firmed. The Clergy and the community are suffering from the
absence of an Ecclesiastical superior, to whose decision and counsel
they may refer in matters affecting the Church. And as the Colony
increases, it is difficult to see how disunion on very solemn questions
can be prevented, unless measures be taken for planting our Church
within it in the perfection of her order and discipline. The history
of our North American settlements may teach us the wisdom of
anticipating the evil of a Colony growing in strength, and in ignorance
of the benefits of efficient Church Government. And all experience
confirms the opinion that no Christian community should be left
without the counsel and control of a Church in the completeness of
her polity.
FIRST REPORT OF THE EPISCOPAL COMMITTEE.
25 th June, 1842.
The Archbishops and Bishops forming the Committee appointed to
arrange measures in concert with Her Majesty’s Government, for the
erection and endowment of additional Bishoprics in the Colonies and
Dependencies of Great Britain, deem it right, at the expiration of a
year from the time of their appointment, to report the progress,
which, by God’s blessing, they have been enabled to make towards
the attainment of the great object proposed.


In the autumn of last year, Her Majesty was pleased to issue her
Royal Letters, erecting New Zealand into a Bishopric, and the
Rev. George Augustus Selwyn, having been consecrated 1 first
Bishop of that See, embarked on the 26th December in the same
year for his Diocese, accompanied by five Clergymen and three
Catechists, being candidates for holy orders. One-half of the requi-
site endowment of this See, namely, 600 1, a-year, will be provided
by a special contribution to the fund from the Church Missionary
Society, until they shall be enabled to redeem this annual payment by
a grant of land producing an equal revenue.
This first design being happily accomplished, the Committee then
proceeded to take the necessary steps for securing the advantages of
Episcopal superintendence to the Clergy and Congregations of our
own communion in the islands and on the coasts of the Mediter-
ranean; and they have much satisfaction in stating that the Queen
has been pleased to declare her intention of founding an Episcopal
See at Gibraltar, and of nominating the Rev. George Tomlinson to
be the first Bishop thereof. Towards the endowment of this See the
Committee have appropriated the sum of 20,000£. to be invested in
English securities, and have appointed a Sub-Committee to solicit
special contributions in aid of tbe Fund to be set apart for this
purpose.
Her Majesty has also been graciously pleased to sanction the sepa-
ration of Van Diemen’s Land from the vast Diocese of Australia,
and to approve of the foundation of a separate Bishopric for the
former colony. The Rev. Francis Russell Nixon has been called to
be the Bishop of this new See. The main part of the endowment
will be obtained by a transfer to the Bishop of the provision hitherto
made for the support of an Archdeacon; but a grant of 5,000£. in
aid has been voted from the General Fund, and a Sub-Committee
has been named to collect such a further sum, from parties specially
interested in the well-being of the Colony, as may suffice to raise the
revenue of the Bishop to the required amount.
The progress already made must be regarded as a cause of thank-
fulness, and an encouragement to further efforts. Within twelve
months from the date of the Declaration agreed upon at Lambeth,
three new Bishoprics have been founded; and the Committee of
Archbishops and Bishops are now devising measures for the erection
of Episcopal Sees in the Colonies of New Brunswick and South
Australia. When these arrangements shall be completed, they will
proceed to direct their attention to the important Dependencies of
the Cape of Good Hope and Ceylon.
1 On Sunday, October 17, 1841.


The Archbishops and Bishops forming the Committee request
attention to the following statements, circulated by the several Sub-
Committees, of the evils resulting from the want of Episcopal
Government, in four important settlements; and they take this
opportunity of renewing their appeal to all who value their own
privileges as members of the Church, solemnly calling upon them to
forward by their labours, their offerings, and their prayers, a work,
which comes recommended by the unanimous voice of the Bishops,
and which has for its object the building up of the Church in every
country and province of that extensive empire, which the Providence
of God has subjected to the dominion of the British Crown.
Ernest Hawkins,
Hon. Sec.
79, Pall Mall,
Jrnie 25, 1842.
BISHOPRIC OF THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.
Prom the Report of the Special Committee, Feb. 9, 1843,
That the settlement of a Bishop of the Church of England in the
Cape Colony is likely to be productive of the greatest advantage to
the spiritual and temporal interests of the Colony, and, in its remoter
consequences, to those of Africa generally, cannot be doubted. The
civilization of that extensive portion of the globe, so much neglected,
and yet so deeply injured by Europeans, can be accomplished only by
the more general diffusion of Christianity throughout its limits; and
we are fully convinced, that the most effective mode of spreading
Christianity, under God’s blessing, is the sending forth among the
heathen a Church complete in its organization, and able to communi-
cate to them the full blessings of the Gospel.
The Cape Colony, to which the labours of the Bishop would in the
first instance be confined, contains within it a territory nearly equal
in extent to the whole of Great Britain, and a population, thinly
scattered over the greater portion of it, estimated at about 163,000.
Of these, about 110,000 profess the Christian religion; and, of this
portion, about 70,000 belong to the Dutch Deformed Communion, and
are, most of them, settled at or near Capetown. This part of the
Colony may properly be called the western division, and was originally
colonized chiefly by Dutch settlers and their descendants. There is,
however, another, and a very flourishing and increasing portion of the
Colony, the eastern division, which has been, within the last twenty-
two years, colonized from England, and in which the greater part of
the Christian population are either members of the English Church,


or connected with the Wesleyan or other denominations; the pre-
valence of dissent being caused, in great measure, by the deficiency of
regular pastoral care, and of the authorized ministrations of our own
Church. The whole Colony is, nominally, under the charge of the
Bishop of London, but may be considered as, practically, under no
Ecclesiastical government, and of all the colonies of the British
empire, that in which the interests of the Church have been the most
neglected, and where there is the greatest need of Episcopal superin-
tendence. We have adverted to these circumstances, inasmuch as
they have not only entirely satisfied us as to the necessity for the
appointment of a Bishop to this Colony, but have also led us to the
conclusion, that it will probably be found expedient that the Bishop,
when appointed, should fix his residence in some part of the eastern
division, and that his Archdeacon should reside at Capetown.
Indeed, the salary which is at present appropriated to the Colonial
Chaplain at Capetown, would, probably, be an ample endowment
for an Archdeaconry, without any further charge, either on the
Government, or on any other fund. By placing the Bishop at Uiten-
hage, or at Grahamstown, or in the immediate neighbourhood of
one of those places, he would be enabled, in the course of his duty,
to visit Capetown and its district, on the one hand; and on the other
hand, would be near enough to regulate and encourage, by his advice
and countenance, the exertions of those who are labouring to spread
the Gospel among the heathen tribes who adjoin the Cape Colony;
whilst he would himself reside in the midst of an English popu-
lation, prepared to submit to his spiritual authority and to welcome
his ministrations.
We would recommend also, that at the residence of the Bishop, and
on land to be there acquired, a Mission College should, if possible, be
established for the education of the colonists; and that three or more
Clergymen should be placed there, to superintend the establishment,
and to be employed in regular circuits through the adjacent country.
We are of opinion that the cultivation of the Church lands by the
labour of Hottentots, would be a support to the English Mission, not
less effective than that which, we are informed, is derived from the
same source to the Moravian and other Missions in the Colony.


SECOND EEPOET OF THE EPISCOPAL COMMITTEE.
23 d June, 1843.
We, the undersigned Archbishops and Bishops, forming the Com-
mittee appointed to act, in concert with Her Majesty’s Government,
for the Erection and Endowment of Additional Bishoprics in the
Colonies and Dependencies of Great Britain, adopt this means of
making publicly known the success with which it has pleased
Almighty God to bless our undertaking hitherto, and the further
objects which, in reliance on the same Divine aid, we hope to
accomplish.
Two of the Bishops consecrated for Sees newly founded, have now
been for some time in their respective spheres of labour.
1. The Bishop of New Zealand has, in a journey of six months by
sea and land, completed the first visitation of his extensive diocese;
and reports favourably of the progress of religion in those settle-
ments.
2. The Bishop of Gibraltar, having resided some weeks at the
Metropolis of his See, and for a considerably longer period at Malta,
and having nominated an Archdeacon for the general superintendence
of Ecclesiastical affairs in each of those places, is now engaged in
visiting the several cities in which English congregations have been
gathered together in the islands, and on the coasts, of the Mediter-
ranean. Already he has exercised the functions of his office at
Athens, Smyrna, and Constantinople, where, though there are con-
siderable congregations in communion with our Church, no Anglican
Bishop had ever before been seen.
3. The Bishop of Tasmania, who sailed for his diocese at the end
of February last, undertook to remain for a few days at the Cape of
Good Hope, in order to administer the rite of confirmation, so long
intermitted, in a colony which urgently requires the care of a resident
Bishop.
Thus, within comparatively a short period, and it may be added,
by the efforts and offerings of comparatively few, three new Bishop-
rics have been erected, and the ordinances of the Church in their
full integrity communicated to many thousands of her widely-
scattered children.
But demands equal to any which have been met remain still
unsatisfied.
1. The important Colony of New Brunswick, equal in extent to
one-half of England, and rapidly increasing in population, has been
too long without a resident Chief Pastor. The time, however, seems


at length to have arrived for the supply of a deficiency so generally
felt and acknowledged; and as a proof of the interest excited in New
Brunswick, by the proposal of forming that Province into a separate
Bishopric, it may be stated that the Governor, Sir William Cole-
brooke, has officially expressed his opinion in favour of such a
measure, while the Chief Justice, the Solicitor-General, and other
leading persons in the colony, are exerting themselves to raise a fund
towards the endowment.
The Special Committee, to whom was entrusted the duty of solicit-
ing subscriptions on the same behalf in this country, have estimated
the necessary income at 1,200 Z. ; but though we are far from regard-
ing such a provision as too great, we shall be prepared to recommend
to Her Majesty’s Government the appointment of a Bishop, as soon
as a clear revenue of I,OOOZ. a-year has been permanently secured.
A capital sum, therefore, of 30,000 Z. will be required. The con-
tributions, which had only commenced in New Brunswick, amounted,
at the date of our last despatches, to 2,150 Z,, but a much larger sum
was expected; and the Bishop of Nova Scotia had addressed a pas-
toral letter “ to the Clergy and Lay Members of the Church,” recom-
mending a collection in aid of the endowment fund, in every Parish
and Mission of his Diocese.
Having taken these matters into our serious consideration, and
looking to the great urgency and importance of the case, we have
determined to appropriate a large portion of the fund remaining at
our disposal, namely, the sum of 20,000Z. S towards the endowment of
a Bishopric in New Brunswick. Assuming that 5,000 Z. will be col-
lected within the Province, it will only remain for the Church at
home to raise an equal sum, in order to complete this most desirable
work. And we cannot refrain from expressing an ardent hope that
the public at large, and especially those connected by trade or property
with New Brunswick, will make a new effort to provide the required
amount.
2. Attention was directed, in our first Report, to the want of a
Bishop in the rapidly-growing settlement of South Australia; and
the offer of land which has been made by a zealous proprietor of that
Colony, renders it especially desirable that no unnecessary delay
should occur in completing the organization of that infant Church.
3. The Bishop of Australia, though lately relieved from the care
of New Zealand and Van Diemen’s Land, is still charged with the
administration of a diocese vastly too large for his effectual super-
intendence; and he, therefore, in a recent communication, pleads
earnestly for the erection of a distinct Bishopric in the thriving
settlement of Port Phillip.


4. In like manner, and with obvious reason, the Bishop of Calcutta
has recommended the subdivision of his own enormous diocese, by
the erection of a Bishopric for the Northern! Provinces of India.
These claims are all strong and undeniable ; and, in commending
them to the Christian liberality, not yet, we trust, exhausted, of the
mother Church, we must not omit to put again prominently forward
the not less pressing, and certainly more ancient, claims of the Cape
of Good Hope, and of Ceylon.
We px*opose, then, first of all, to recommend to Her Majesty’s
Government, as soon as the adequate endowment has been secured,
the erection of a separate Bishopric for the Province of New Bruns-
wick.
We shall afterwards direct our attention to the important Colonial
Settlements above mentioned, in the order suggested by the joint con-
siderations of their intrinsic claims, the offers of assistance, and the
probability of success.
We must not conclude this statement of our proceedings and plans
without expressing our thankfulness to Almighty God for the success
which He has been graciously pleased thus far to vouchsafe to this
first systematic endeavour to impart the full blessings of our Church to
the Colonies of this great empire, and beseeching Him to dispose the
hearts of His people to carry on to its full completion a work under-
taken for the furtherance of His glory, in the extension of the kingdom
of His ever Blessed Son.
W. Cantuar. C. Winton.
E. Ebor. E. Dunelm.
John G, Armagh. J. Lincoln.
R D . Dublin. G. Rochester.
C. London.
79, Pall Mall, June 23, 1843.
PASTORAL LETTERS.
At this time important aid was given to the fund by Pastoral
letters from the Bishops of* London and Salisbux’y, calling upon their
clergy to make collections 1 in their several churches for the endow-
ment of Colonial Bishoprics. The Bishop of Nova Scotia also urged
forcibly, and at great length, upon the clergy and laity of his diocese,
the duty of contributing towards a fund which was pledged in a large
sum to the endowment of an independent see for the province of New
1 The collections were, London, 8,192?., and Salisbury, 1,107?.-


Brunswick. A few extracts ftom his letter, dated April 25, 1842,
are subjoined:—
“ Some of you must be aware of the great injury which, for more
than a century, was sustained in this Western Hemisphere, from the
anomalous position in which our Church was placed. Although
Episcopal in her form and character, she had no Bishop. She was
incompetent to the performance of several essential functions; she
had no means for preserving necessary order; several of her im-
portant ordinances were unavoidably withheld from her members ;
and she had to traverse the ocean for the Ordination of her Ministers.
These great evils were deeply felt and deplored, not only by the
immediate sufferers, but by many of the best and most distinguished
men in the Parent Kingdom, who made great and continued efforts to
obtain for their brethren in the Colonies the essential benefit of Epi-
scopal superintendence. These efforts were, unhappily, without their
due effect, through a long and dreary period ; and the date of their
earliest success is so recent, that many of ourselves can clearly recol-
lect the time when a Protestant Bishop first set his foot upon the
widely-extended shores of America. Those who shall follow us, will
find it most difficult to account for so strange and long-continued
departure from the practice of the apostolic and primitive ages, when
the Church was carried at once, in all her fulness, to every place
where an opening was made for her, by the Providence of her Divine
Head.
“ Happily the first Episcopal appointments in the Colonies, after
this long delay, have given such evidence of their importance, that an
earnest desire has been awakened for their large increase, of which
the most gratifying proofs are pouring in upon us, from a very large
portion of the world. The noblest feeling exists in the Parent King-
dom ; and a very happy moment has been selected for calling it into
action. So favourable an opportunity could not be overlooked by the
discernment and zeal of the distinguished Prelate who now fills the
See of London. In a letter to the revered Metropolitan, he made an
appeal so stirring, that it has moved the hearts of the whole
Church. * * * *
“ The division of this unwieldy Diocese, which required the Bishop
to travel, by sea and land, ten thousand miles to visit his scattered
Churches ; and the consequent appointment of a Bishop for New-
foundland and Bermuda, and the division of the Diocese of Quebec at
the same time, though a little prior to the movement of the Arch-
bishops and Bishops, were among the early results of the active
operation of those principles on which that movement was made.


“ The next object of the Fathers of the Church is the erection
of the extensive and important Px-ovince of New Brunswick into a
separate See —earnestly hoping, by this measure, to obtain benefit and
blessing for all the members of the Church, not only in that rapidly
increasing Colony, but in every part of this Diocese. They well
know the hopelessness of expecting the full benefit of Episcopal care
and superintendence, while so extensive a charge as that of the
present Diocese of Nova Scotia is committed to a single Bishop,”
% * * -x- -x- *
THIRD EE PORT OP THE EPISCOPAL COMMITTEE.
18 th May, 1842.
The Committee appointed to arrange measures in concert with
Her Majesty’s Government for the Erection and Endowment of
Additional Bishoprics in the Colonies and Dependencies of Great
Britain, cannot commence their Third Report without an expression
of joy and thankfulness at the progress which, by God’s blessing, has
been made in the great work since the time when it was committed
to their care.
During the past j’ear the important colony of New Brunswick,
and the Island of Ceylon, were constituted independent Dioceses, by
the erection of Bishops’ Sees at Fredericton and Colombo; and the
Committee are happy in being enabled to state that Her Majesty the
Queen has given her Royal consent to the immediate subdivision of
the Diocese of Australia into three distinct Bishoprics, by the
establishment of one See at Morpeth, for the Northern Division of
New South Wales, and of another at Melbourne, for the District of
Port Phillip.
These new Sees, which could not have been constituted but for
a generous sacrifice of private interests on the part of the Bishop of
Australia, will derive a considerable portion of their Endowment
from the Colonial Bishoprics Fund.
Thus, then, within the space of five years, which have elapsed
since the “Declaration of Archbishops and Bishops” was signed at
Lambeth, nine new Sees have been erected. Of these, two —namely,
Gibraltar and Fredericton—derive their endowments almost exclu-
sively from the fund placed at the disposal of the Episcopal Trustees;
and four others, namely, New Zealand, Tasmania, Melbourne, and
Morpeth, receive important assistance from the same source. The
remaining three, namely, Antigua, Guiana, and Colombo, have been


endowed by means of a different distribution of the funds at the
disposal of the Imperial or Colonial Government for ecclesiastical
purposes.
The foregoing Summary will show that of the original design, as
set forth in the “ Declaration of Archbishops and Bishops,” great
part has been already accomplished ; and the Committee have much
satisfaction in reporting, that no less a sum than 15,000?. has been
contributed towards the endowment of a Bishopric (not originally
contemplated) within the British Possessions in the Chinese Seas,
Of this Endowment Fund, the sum of 5,000?. has been most
liberally given by two individuals (over and above their donation of
an equal sum for the erection of a College); 6,000 1, was raised by
congregational collections in the Diocese of London, under the
authority of the Bishop’s Pastoral Letter; a Grant of 2,000?, was
voted by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge and about
an equal amount has been remitted to the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel, by individual contributors. But a considerable addi-
tional sum will yet be required, and a Special Committee has been
named to collect such further funds as may be necessary to make a
permanent provision for the See.
Of the Colonies still remaining without Episcopal superintendence,
the Cape of Good Hope and South Australia have been mentioned
in preceding Reports as presenting the strongest claims; and it would
have been the duty of the Committee on the present occasion to
renew the appeal on their behalf, had it not pleased God to put it into
the heart of an individual member of the Church, by an exercise of
almost unexampled liberality, to guarantee adequate Endowments for
a Bishopric in each of those Colonies.
It is well known that the Lord Bishop of Calcutta is using the
most strenuous etforts to obtain a subdivision of his own enormous
Diocese, by the erection of a Bishopric at Agra, for the North-
Western Provinces. Such an arrangement is imperatively required
for the welfare and extension of the Church of England in Northern
India ; while the recent wonderful spread of Christianity in the
southern provinces of Tanjore and Tinnevelly must, ere long, force
attention to the importance of sending forth a Chief Pastor for the
special oversight of those infant Churches.
The Committee, before concluding their Report, consider it a duty
incumbent upon them to specify those other Possessions of the Crown
which, from their importance, as well as their distance from any
existing See, appear to require resident Bishops. They are princi-
pally Sierra Leone, Western Australia, the Mauritius, and
Prince Rupert’s Land.


Bat it is obvious that a further subdivision will ere long be
required in many of the existing Dioceses; and even at present, the
rapidly-increasing population of Canada, taken in connexion with its
vast territorial extent, demands for the efficient administration of the
Church within that Province an addition of at least two Bishops.
Upon the whole, although the Committee do not look forward to an
early termination of their labours, they cannot but regard the success
which has hitherto been vouchsafed to them as an encouragement to
persevere in the good work which they have undertaken, till the
Church, by the Divine blessing, has been fully organized in every
Dependency of the British Crown.
This important end, however, cannot be attained without a strenuous
and united effort on the part of the Church at home; and the Com-
mittee feel assured that they shall not call in vain upon the faithful
members of that Church to help forward its extension, by their active
cooperation and their continual prayers.
W. Cantuar. C. Winton.
E Ebor. E. Dunelm.
John G. Armagh. G. Rochester.
R O, Dublin. J. Lincoln.
C. J. London.
BISHOPRIC OF RUPERT’S LAND.
From the Report of the Special Committee, sth Sept, 1845.
The territory, granted to the Honourable Hudson’s-Bay Company
by a charter from King Charles 11. in 16G9, generally called Prince
Rupert’s Land, is exceedingly extensive ; reaching from the western
boundary of Canada to the Pacific Ocean, and from the frontier of the
United States, in latitude 50°, to as far north as has been hitherto
explored.
Numerous tribes of Indians are scattered throughout this vast
extent of country.
The Ojibbeway and other Indians, lately exhibited in this country,
have presented a specimen of native manners well calculated to
arouse the compassion of a Christian nation in their behalf.
There is only one principal Settlement of Europeans, containing
about five thousand inhabitants, (one half of whom are Protestants
and the other half Roman Catholics,) on the banks of the Red River,
to the south of Lake Winnepeg.
There are also numerous Factories or “ Posts,” connected with the
fur trade, over the whole territory.


The Church Missionary Society commenced a Mission in this
country in the year 1822, since which time four Protestant Churches
have been erected at the Red-River Settlement. One of these churches
is surrounded by a village of converted Indians, amounting to above
300 souls, who are engaged in agricultural pursuits, and who form
an orderly community of Native Christians.
Another successful commencement of Missionary labours has been
made at a distance of 500 miles from the Red River, at a place called
Cumberland House ; and a third Station has been occupied at Mani-
toba Lake, at the distance of 120 miles from the Red River. Hitherto
the Company’s establishment has consisted of three Chaplains (two
in the Bay and one in the Columbia); and the Church Missionary
Society has four Missionaries in the territory, one of whom is partly
charged with Chaplaincy duties.
There is one peculiarity, favourable to Missionary operations, in
this country, which deserves especial notice. Here the interests of all
the European settlers are closely identified with the preservation of
the Aboriginal race, and with the maintenance of friendly intercourse
with them, as the revenue of the Company is derived from the traffic
in furs with the native-Indian hunters.
The Bishop of Montreal, in June 1844, visited the Red-River
Settlement. The distance traversed by his Lordship, chiefly in a boat
made of birch-tree bark, exceeded 1,800 miles each way. He was
only able to stay seventeen days, during which brief period he preached
eleven times, confirmed 845 persons, and held two Ordinations.
Upon the Bishop’s return to his diocese he communicated an inte-
resting Journal of his vi|itation to the Church Missionary Society,
which concludes with a powerful appeal in favour of the immediate
appointment of a resident Bishop for the benefit of this distant and
secluded branch of the Church of England, and for the more effectual
prosecution of Missionary labours amongst the tribes of native
Indians. l
The Hudson’s Bay Company have engaged to provide a house for
a Bishop’s residence, with a proper and sufficient quantity of land for
his own occupation. They have further expressed their willingness
to allow a stipend of 300£. per annum, provided that the Clergyman
selected for the Episcopal Office shall undertake the duties of one of
the churches with a district.
The expenses of a Bishop in such a country, compared with other
• The Journal of the Bishop of Montreal during a visit to the Church Mission-
ary Society’s North-West-America Mission, to which is added (by the Secretaries)
an Appendix, giving an account of the formation of the Mission, and its progress
to the present time.’ London : Seeley, Hatchard, and Nisbet. Price Is.


situations, must be very limited ; and therefore a comparatively mode-
rate sum will be required by government for an endowment of the
Bishopric. There is every reason to believe that if the sum of
10,000/. can be now raised, so as to secure an invested income of at
least 300/. per annum, in addition to the sum granted by the Company,
the erection of the proposed See will be at once accomplished.
We cannot make a more forcible appeal in behalf of this object
than by presenting the following extract from the conclusion of the
Journal of the Bishop of Montreal;—
“ Here is a country open to evangelization—a country, to borrow the
language of the Missionaries who have been sent to labour in it, larger than
Russia —and how trifling is the beginning which has been made in the work ;
yet how encouraging the effect of that beginning as an incitement to enlarge,
by God’s blessing, the borders of the Churches ! Is it, then, not to be evan-
gelized ? And if it is to be, who is to evangelize it ? To what country is it
an appendage ? To what power does it belong ? To what Church does
it address the call, Come over, and help ns ? The country is an appendage to
Britain, to Christian Britain, to the first empire upon earth; with a Christian
Government; with a great Church Establishment; with institutions, laws, and
customs, connecting all her proceedings with the name of Religion; with
immense, inexhaustible resources; with unequalled means and facilities of in-
fluence ; with responsibilities before the God who rules over kingdoms exactly
proportioned to all the distinctions which are here enumerated.
“ 1 feel, with an indescribable force, the necessity of establishing a Bishop
in those territories. Perhaps I need not disclaim such an idea as that all the
virtue of the Gospel is centered in the Episcopate, because I happen to hold
that thorny otfice myself; but it is the Episcopal Church of England which is>
specially, distinctly, and loudly called to occupy that open field —it is the
Episcopal Church of England which took the lead, and gave the impulse to
other parties, in whatever has been yet done, of any note, for planting and ex-
tending any of the forms of Christianity in that land—it is the Episcopal
Church of England, its interests being represented upon the spot by the
Church Missionary Society, which has been conspicuously successful, by the,
fruits of its Schools and Missions, in diffusing blessings among the people.
“ The effect of my own flying visit, and imperfect ministrations, sufficiently
demonstrates the existence of the want [of a resident Bishop]. Most cheer-
fully, most gladly, would I repeat the journey, under the same arrangement,
every four or five years, if that would serve the purpose, so long as I may be
spared in health and strength, and provided I could afford to steal the time
from the yearly increasing duties of my own charge. But the fact is, that the
fruits of such a visit as mine, instead of suflicing for the exigencies which
exist, serve rather to set in strong relief the real chatacter of those exigencies
as demanding, imperiously, an established provision for the exercise of the
Episcopal functions upon the spot. Aud indeed, by the time at which another
visit might be paid by myself, the Missions may be found so far to have
extended themselves, that it would be impossible to accomplish the journey


and to return, within the season open for travelling. But shall it be supposed
that things are to be left for such a shift ? Is it actually come to this, that
the Church of Rome can establish two Bishoprics in ground which ought
specially to be taken up by the Church of England, and that the Church
of England cannot establish one ? I am not proposing any interference here
with what the Church of Rome has positively in her hands, nor any control of
her zeal by measures of intolerance: there is abundance of work for the
Church of England to do without any thing like this, and they are surely
better blessings than she would dispense. We cannot think with complacency,
if we love the truth of God, of the extension of Romanism instead of Scrip-
tural Religion; but it is of the plain duties and the plain wants of the
Church of England that I am speaking, independently of all other consider-
ations, and as they exist in themselves.
“ I am well aware that whatever other effect may be produced by these poor
Appeals of mine—which, such as they are, I have made some sacrifices and
some forced efforts, in the midst of the pressure of other duties, to prepare :
they will, if known at all abroad, stimulate other parties to pre-occupy as
much as may be possible of the ground. It is not in a spirit of rivalry, or
from notions of competition with them, that I desire to see our own Church
doing her part. But let her do her own duty, and commit the issue to God
above. I cannot, for one, withhold the expression of my feelings in the cause.
While I have been musing of these things, my heart teas hot within me ; the fire
kindled , and I have spoken with my tongue. And I may speak, if so permitted,
yet again, though in a different way. It is for others to carry the work into
effect—to deliberate, to plan, and to execute. But a move should be made at
once—an earnest, a determined move, with the eye of faith turned up to God,
the heart lifted in the fervency of prayer, and the hand put to the work without
looking back.”
At a meeting of the Episcopal Committee, May 18, 1846, J. G.
Hubbard, Esq. was elected one of the Treasurers of the Fund.
FOURTH REPORT OF THE EPISCOPAL COMMITTEE.
21 st August, 1 848.
We, the undersigned Archbishops and Bishops constituting the
Committee for promoting the Erection and Endowment of Additional
Bishoprics in the Colonies and Dependencies of Great Britain, desire
to call public attention to the following brief statement of facts.
At a meeting of Archbishops and Bishops, held at Lambeth Palace
on Whit-Tuesday a Declaration was adopted, and signed by all
present, to the effect that “the immediate erection of Bishoprics was
much to be desired in the following places:—New Zealand, The
British Possessions in the Mediterranean, New Brunswick, Cape of
Good Hope, Van Diemen’s Land, Ceylort.”


And it is with a feeling of unfeigned thankfulness to the Great
Head of the Church, that we here record the fact, that these several
Dependencies have been erected into separate Bishoprics.
“ The Declaration ” then proceeds as follows: —“ When competent
provision shall have been made for the Endowment of these Bishop-
rics, regard must be had to the claims of Sierra Leone, British
Guiana, South Australia, Port Phillip, Western Australia, Northern
India, and Southern India.”
Guiana has long since had the privilege of a resident Bishop. The
Province of Australia Felix, or Port Phillip, was last year erected
into the Bishopric of Melbourne; and South and Western Australia
have been for the present united to form the Diocese of Adelaide,
though we trust that the latter Colony will ere long be formed into a
distinct See.
Thus, of the thirteen provinces mentioned in the Lambeth Decla-
ration, as requiring immediate or early episcopal superintendence,
ten are already formed into Dioceses. The urgent importance of
founding a Bishopric for the Northern Provinces of India, has been
pressed upon the attention of the Court of Directors by the Bishop
of Calcutta; while the increasing body of Missionary Clergy, with
their Churches, Colleges, and converts, amounting in all to not fewer
than 50,000 in the provinces of Tinnevelly and Tanjore, demand the
presence of a chief pastor.
But besides the places named in the “ Declaration,” Bishoprics not
then contemplated have been founded in Antigua, by a subdivision of
the Diocese of Barbados, and at Newcastle, by a separation of the
northern counties of New South Wales from the Bishopric of Sydney.
Thus, eleven Bishoprics in all have been founded within the compara-
tively short period since the attention of the Church was specially
dii’ected to this important subject.
We cheerfully acknowledge the ready concurrence and aid which,
in these great measures for the extension of the Church, we have
received from Her Majesty’s Government; and we desire once mox'e
to record our high sense of the permanent services to religion, which
have been rendered by the disinterested liberality of the Bishop of
Sydney and Miss Burdett Coutts.
But while, by God’s mercy, much has been accomplished, much still
remains to be done. And among the more ux-gent and pressing wants
of the Colonial Church, may be reckoned, that which has already been
noticed by us, a subdivision of the two lai’ge Dioceses of Quebec and
Toronto, or, at the very least, the erection of a Bishop’s See at Quebec
as well as at Montreal.
We stated, in our Third Report, that a sum of 15,00(P. had beexi


contributed towards the endowment of a Bishopric within the British
Possessions in the Chinese Seas. After mature deliberation it has
been thought advisable that this See should be fixed at Victoria, in
the island of Hong Kong. The total sum available for the endow-
ment may at present be reckoned at 18,000 Z. of which nearly one
half has been given by two noble-minded individuals, “a Brother and
Sister,” who have besides offered 2,000 1, more for the exaction of a
College.
Considering the peculiar circumstances of the settlement, we are of
opinion that the Bishop of Victoria should be also Warden of the
College, and that an important part of his duty should consist in pre-
paring a body of Students, native and European, to be trained for
Missionary employment in China.
It is obvious that the work of the first Bishop of Victoria must he
one of preparation ; and we cannot but express our strong conviction,
that the future success of the Missions of our Church in the Chinese
Empire, and the best hopes of bringing its inhabitants to the confes-
sion of the faith of Christ, will, under the Divine blessing, be mainly
dependent upon the careful training of a number of students, who
must be hereafter sent as Missionaries to grapple with the peculiar
idolatries, and the various forms of error and prejudice, which are so-
deeply seated in the Chinese mind.
We purposely avoid the mention, in this Report, of other colonies
or provinces, in which a more complete episcopal superintendence is
much needed, because we are anxious to see the design, now so long
contemplated, of establishing a Bishopric in Hong Kong, accomplished
without further delay.
The sum at our disposal, including an annual allowance from the
Colonial Bishoprics Fund, is however barely sufficient for the endow-
ment of a Bishopric, and we cannot safely estimate the amount still
required for the erection and furnishing of a College, comprising
apartments for the Bishop, at less than 6,000 Z. For this sum, small
in comparison with the importance of the object in view, we appeal to
the liberality and self-denial of the favoured members of our own
Church.
The great work of Christian faith and love, which we thus heartily
commend to the brethren, has received the general approval of Her
Majesty’s Government, and a spacious and handsome church has
at length been opened, and providentially too at a time when a more
active Missionary spirit has been awakened in this country. Already
this improved spirit has been evidenced by acts of liberality and
devotion worthy of primitive times. We cannot doubt that many,
whom God has endowed with the talent of wealth, will be ready, after


the example of the “ Brother and Sister,” by whom one half of the
endowment of the Bishopric of Victoria has been provided, to devote
it to his service.
The work before us, that of laying the foundation of an extensive
Mission to a heathen empire, is one of the most important in which
a Christian nation can be engaged. As such, as one that cannot but
be well pleasing in the sight of God, we confidently ask for it the
alms and the prayers of his faithful people.
(Signed) J. B. Cantuak. E. Dunelm,
T. Ebor. C. Winton. '
J. G. Armagh. J. Lincoln.
Ed. Dublin. G. Kochester.
C. J. London.
BISHOPRIC OF VICTORIA, HONG KONG.
From the Report of the Special Committee, 9th April, 1849.
We have now very thankfully to announce that it has pleased Her
Majesty to direct Letters Patent to be issued, constituting the See of
Victoria in the island of Hong Kong ; and that the Eeverend George
Smith, D.D. has been appointed the first Bishop.
The Bishopric of Victoria has several features peculiar to itself:
for it is not chiefly from its relation to the few mercantile establish-
ments on the coast of the Chinese Empire that the erection of this
See derives its great interest and importance. These will, of course,
enjoy the spiritual superintendence of the Bishop. But it is in its
bearing on the heathen population of that great empire, which has so
long attracted the curiosity of Europeans, and yet has been almost
closed against them, that the establishment of this Mission of our
Church, in its perfect form, engages the aspirations and hopes of
Christian minds. The opportunity of influencing that remarkable
people is now providentially offered, and the means of effecting this
must form the great object of our immediate concern.
The peculiar circumstances of the case, as well as the necessarily
small scale on which the Mission must, in the first instance, be formed,
require that a careful system be adopted, so that its force be concen-
trated, and that the instruments at its disposal be adapted to their
particular purpose. The basis of its operations will naturally be at
Hong Kong : and it is thought desirable that an institution should
there be formed for preparing the means by which its objects may be
attained. There the earliest converts may be trained and reared for


future services—there those who may seek to be enlightened, find
teachers ready to instruct them—there, also, the means of trans-
lating and publishing books and tracts in the Chinese tongue may be
provided.
The Mission will therefore assume, in some degree, a collegiate
character ; and literary pursuits will constitute one department of
the labours to which its energies will be devoted. The character of
the Chinese language and superstitions—the high honour in which
learning is held by that people-—their thirst for knowledge and
science—their inquisitive temper and fondness for reading—seem to
point out this mode of action as the best calculated to affect them;
and it is one which is recommended by the experience of the past, as
well as by the judgment of those most conversant with the character
and condition of the Chinese people.
In accordance with this view, 3,000£. of the sum munificently
given by a “ Brother and Sister ” to the endowment of the See, was
specially appropriated to the Warden of the College, and 2,0001. more
allotted, by the same individuals, to the erection of the necessary
buildings. And it is in accordance with the same view that the
Archbishops and Bishops forming the Colonial Bishoprics Committee
have made the following recommendations in their Fourth Report:—
“ Considering the peculiar circumstances of the settlement, we are of
opinion that the Bishop of Victoria should be also Warden of the College, and
that an important part of his duty should consist in preparing a body of
Students, native and European, to be trained for Missionary employment in
China.
“ It is obvious that tbe work of the first Bishop of Victoria must be one of
preparation; and we cannot but express our strong conviction, that the future
success of the Missions of our Church in the Chinese Empire, and the best
hopes of bringing its inhabitants to the confession of the faith of Christ, will,
under the Divine blessing, be mainly dependent upon the careful training of a
number of students, who must be hereafter sent as Missionaries to grapple
with the peculiar idolatries, and the various forms of error and prejudice,
which are so deeply seated in the Chinese mind.”
We learn with great satisfaction that a school and adjoining
buildings have been already erected, at the cost of the present
Colonial Chaplain and other contributors; and that the trustees of
the same are willing to appropriate this establishment, under certain
conditions, to the purpose of the contemplated Episcopal College.
Already, six years prior to the date of this appeal, the Bishop of
London had addressed a Pastoral Letter to the Clergy of his Diocese,
for collections towards the erection of a Missionary College, and the


maintenance of a Missionary Bishop on the coasts of China ; an
appeal which'was liberally answered by contributions to the amount
of 8,690/.
At a Meeting of the Episcopal Committee, May 14, 1849, it was
resolved :
“ That henceforward all the Archbishops and Bishops of the
united Church of England and Ireland form the Committee,
to be called the * Council for Colonial Bishoprics.’ ”
At the same Meeting was read
THE REPORT OF THE TREASURERS, Uth May, 1849.
To the Most Reverend the Archbishops and the Right Reverend the
Bishops of the United Church of England and Ireland.
We, the undersigned, being the Treasurers of the Colonial
Bishoprics Fund, beg leave to submit to your Lordships the following
statement :
I. At a meeting of Archbishops and Bishops, held at Lambeth
Palace on Whit-Tuesday, 1841, your Lordships accepted the trustee-
ship of a fund to be raised for the erection and endowment of
additional Bishoprics in the colonies and dependencies of Great
Britain. Three of us were at that time appointed treasurers of the
fund, and the fourth has been subsequently added to our number.
11. The total amount which has been contributed for these purposes
is 133,600/., which sum has been employed in the endowment, either
wholly or in part, of nine new Episcopal Sees, and in allowances for
the outfit and passage of ten Bishops proceeding to their new
Dioceses.
111. Upon reference to your Lordships’ original Declaration at the
meeting before mentioned, and an examination of the principal items
of expenditure, made under your orders from time to time, we trust
it will appear that the monies entrusted to your Lordships have been
wisely and faithfully appropriated to the purposes intended ; and we
gratefully acknowledge that, by the blessing of God, the good results
which were anticipated have followed as largely as could reasonably
have been expected in the time that has elapsed.
IY. It cannot fail to strike the mind of any intelligent and candid
person comparing the amount of the fund with the offices and
endowments permanently established thereby, that great and perhaps
severe economy has been pursued in fixing the rate of Episcopal


incomes ; no one can object that anything has been indulged to
luxury or splendour ; we rather believe it has been thought that
scarcely enough has been given to the reasonable claims for decent
hospitality, and the still more urgent calls for Christian Charity.
Your Lordships, however, reduced the scale so low, not without
regret for the necessity; but you trusted that this would have no
effect in diminishing the power of the Church to call on men of the
highest intellectual mark and brightest worldly prospects, to devote
themselves to her call, and it is a subject of unspeakable gratitude,
that your confidence has never yet been disappointed.
V. But the work, as you originally planned it, is still unfinished,
and emigration goes on, and may be expected to go on so rapidly to
increase the population of the colonies, that w r e must look forward not
only to the formation of new Dioceses, but to the subdivision of
Dioceses now formed, and that without the possibility of dividing at
the same time the endowment. It is our duty to inform your Lord-
ships, that the fund may now be considered as exhausted. Your
Lordships are the best judges whether the previous observations are
well founded ; and your Lordships are also best able to suggest the
mode, and perhaps in great measure to carry it out, by which fresh
funds may be raised, and the still subsisting, and continually
increasing wants of the Church in the Colonies in this respect be in
some measure supplied.
VI. It is important to remark, that of the whole sum already
raised, as much as 45,000/. has been contributed by three subscribers,
one of them having, with princely munificence, endowed two Bishop-
rics, while “a Brother and Sister” supplied more than half the
endowment of a third. About 40,000/. more was given by 160
persons, and 17,500/, by the Society for Promoting Christian Know-
ledge, and Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. These facts
seem to show that comparatively few of the more opulent class have
contributed anything, and that the class, as such, has not at all con-
tributed in proportion to its means, nor, it may be hoped, to its bene-
volence and sense of Christian duty. Probably the reason is, that the
attention of the public has not been sufficiently called to the existence
and purpose of the fund, nor to the decisive authority under which it
came recommended to them.
YII. We venture to make this representation to your Lordships,
in the hope that you will be enabled to devise some plan, whether by
concurrent Pastoral Letters or otherwise, whereby means may be ob-
tained for completing the work so happily commenced, —of imparting
the full benefits of our Church polity to every dependency of the
British Crown.


VIII. The recurrence of the season of Whitsuntide, at which eight
years ago this great movement commenced, —a recurrence to be
signalized, if God permit, by the consecration of two additional
Bishops to govern our Church in the extreme East and West, —
presents, we conceive, a favourable opportunity for bringing this
subject before the country, under the sanction of your Lordships’
recommendation.
J. T. Coleridge. W. E. Gladstone,
W. H. Hale. J. G. Hubbard,
FIFTH REPORT OP THE COUNCIL.
Lambeth Palace,
Ascension Day, 1849.
The undersigned Archbishops and Bishops, having received the
foregoing Report, do not hesitate to lay it before the members of the
Church of England, in the confident expectation of a renewal of that
liberality which has already been so largely shown, and which has
produced such abundant fruits. By a careful appropriation of the
funds entrusted to them, they have been enabled to provide competent
endowments for the five Colonial Sees of—
1. Gibraltar 1842
2. Fredericton 1845
3. Capetown 1847
4, Adelaide 1847
5. Victoria 1849
Four more Bishoprics have been in part endowed from the same
fund, viz.—
I. New Zealand 1841
2. Tasmania 1842
3. Melbourne 1847
4. Newcastle 1847
and within the same period of eight years, four additional Bishoprics
have been endowed from other sources, viz,—
1, Antigua 1842
2. Guiana 1842
3. Colombo 1845
4. Rupert’s Land (Outfit provided by the C. B. Fund) . 1849
There is still an urgent demand for resident Bishops in Sierra
Leone, Western Australia, and the island of Mauritius. It is also to


J. B. Cantuak.
E. Sarum.
T. Ebor.
E. Norwich.
J. G. Armagh,
Thos. Team.
Rd. Dublin.
G. Peterborough.
C. J. London.
C. St. David’s.
E. Dunelm.
LI. Worcester.
C. WlNTON.
A. T. Cicestr.
J. Lincoln.
J. T. Ossory & Ferns.
C. Bangor.
J. Lichfield,
H. Carlisle.
R. Cashel & Emly.
G. Rochester.
T. Ely.
E. Llandafe.
S. Oxon.
R. Derry & Raphoe.
Thos. Yowler St. Asaph.
R. Bath & Wells.
J. P. Manchester.
J. H. Gloucester & Bristol.
R, D. LIereford.
H. Exeter.
R. J. Sodor & Man.
C. T. Ripon.
J. Chester.
be borne in mind that no provision is yet made for the Sees of Nova
Scotia and Montreal, after the incumbency of the present Bishops ;
and that in respect both to these and many other existing Dioceses,
their vast extent and increasing population will soon render subdivi-
sion indispensable.
From the statement which we now lay before the public, we trust
it will appear that they, to whom the contributions of the Church
have been confided, have been enabled to render a good account of
their stewardship. We ask now for a further supply of means, that
the work may still proceed. We ask this with the more confidence,
because the measure which in 1841 was comparatively untried, has
been proved by experience to answer the warmest hopes of those who
then devised it. The creation of Bishops for the several Colonies has
been found immediately to promote the interests of religion by con-
centrating the efforts of Christian zeal, both for the welfare of the
heathen and of our own countrymen ; by increasing the number, the
influence, and the usefulness of the Clergy, and by establishing the
doctrines and discipline of the Church of England in countries where
previously its existence was practically almost unfelt.
With this conviction “of the sacredness and importance of the
work, and in the hope that Almighty God may graciously dispose the
hearts of his servants to a corresponding measure of liberality, we ”
once more “ earnestly commend it to the good-will, the assistance, and
the prayers of all the .members of our Church.”


SIXTH REPORT OF THE COUNCIL.
12 th March, 1850.
The condition of the Church in the North American Colonies, as
regards Episcopal Supervision, demands immediate attention.
The Diocese of Quebec 1 extends over the whole of Lower Canada—
a territory three times as large as England and Wales. Parishes or
Missions (upwards of eighty in all) have been established in every
part of the country, from the Bay of Gaspe to the Ottawa. For the
last series of Confirmations, the Bishop was compelled to undertake
four long and laborious journeys, which occupied him at intervals
from the beginning of 1848 to the autumn of 1849, while, to attend
his triennial Visitation, two of the Clergy had to travel upwards of
700 miles.
The subdivision of this enormous Diocese is, therefore, a matter of
pressing necessity. The Bishop has repeatedly recommended it, the
Clergy unanimously desire it, and the Government at home has agreed
to sanction the measure, as soon as an adequate endowment can be
provided. For the means of providing that endowment, the present
appeal is made. A capital sum of from 10.000/. to 12,000/., in
addition to what may be procured in the colony, it is thought might
suffice. We earnestly commend this work to all members of the
Church of England, and we desire at the same time to remind them
that the existing endowments of two of the North American Bishop-
rics, those of Quebec and Nova Scotia (at present paid out of the
Imperial Treasury), are granted for the lives of the present in-
cumbents, and will be withdrawn altogether at their death or
removal.
Much has been accomplished within the last few years towards
building up the Church of England in our Colonies, and while the
cost has been comparatively small, the good done by the multiplication
of Clergy and the consequent diffusion of the blessings of Christianity
has been incalculable. We address ourselves, therefore, with con-
fidence to the great body of our own communion. We entreat their
cooperation in the work to which we have put our hands. Those
who gave donations nine years ago, may perhaps, in consideration of
what has already been effected, be induced to renew their contri-
butions.
i At the death of the late Bishop of Quebec (Dr. Stewart), the present Bishop of
Montreal, who had been consecrated as his coadjutor, succeeded to the administra-
tion of the whole Diocese. The proposal now is to divide the Diocese, assigning
the See of Quebec to the present Bishop (Dr. Mountain), and constituting
Montreal a separate Diocese.


We cannot, however, but observe by how very few persons the
whole fund was .subscribed. Many more, we cannot doubt, will be
ready to lend their assistance now: and those who may find it
inconvenient to give in one sum all which they wish to give, may
greatly promote the purpose for which the fund has been opened by
annual contributions.
We are not without tokens that the Divine blessing has hitherto
rested upon our undertaking. Its end and aim is the extension of the
kingdom of our Lord and Saviour, and we ask for it the fervent
prayers and the free-will offerings of all his people.
J. B. Cantuar. J. Lichfield.
C. J. London. Thos. Yowler St. Asaph.
A. T. Cicestr. S. Norwich.
DIOCESE OF TORONTO.
sth October, 1850.
The following Letter on the subject of the subdivision of the
immense Diocese of Toronto, was addressed, by the Lord Bishop
thereof, to the Episcopal Council :
To the Most Reverend and Right Reverend the Archbishops and
Bishops forming the Council appointed to arrange measures in
concert with Her Majesty’s Government for the Erection and
Endowment of Additional Bishoprics in the Colonies and
Dependencies of Great Britain.
The late happy subdivision of the Diocese of Quebec into two Sees
Quebec and Montreal, encourages me to submit for your consideration
some reasons in favour of the division of the Diocese of Toronto
into two or more Bishoprics, at no distant period.
This important subject has been postponed till now on several
gi’ounds. First, there was a feeling of delicacy on the part of the
present Incumbent. The Diocese of Toronto having been established
so recently as 1839, he thought it might appear too soon to urge such
division, and that he had scarcely served long enough to be entitled
to any diminution of his labours. It was, indeed, but reasonable that
he should continue to discharge them while it was possible to do so
with advantage. But the bounds of the various settlements have been
so much extended since 1839, and the parishes and stations so multi-
plied, as to make it next to impossible to visit them within any rea-


sonable time. Secondly, another consideration suggested delay. Many
of the other Colonies required Bishops before Upper Canada had any
fair claim to a second; but now that the more important dependencies
of the crown have been supplied—and, in some cases, as Lower
Canada and New Zealand, two are allowed—the undersigned feels
that he may, without offence, mention the following facts as sufficient
to establish some claim for relief.
The Diocese of Toronto extends along the St. Lawrence, and the
great Lakes of Canada, nearly six hundred miles; and if Lakes Huron
and Superior be included, more than twelve hundred miles. It con-
tains 800,000 inhabitants, of whom upwards of 200,000 are members
of the Church of England; and from the rapid increase of population,
(for it doubles in less than ten years,) the Province will soon contain
many millions; and become the stronghold and principal seat of the
Church in British North America.
The Diocese of Toronto, or Province of Upper Canada, is at
present divided by the Local Government into twenty-one Districts;
and these might, with some slight modifications, be conveniently
arranged into three Dioceses, allowing to each seven Districts. Such
division would give to each Diocese a front on the river and lakes of
nearly two hundred miles, running back the whole breadth of the
Province, which may average from eighty to one hundred miles; and
each Diocese would thus contain an area of from sixteen to twenty
thousand square miles. 1
Ist. The seven Eastern Districts, which at present contain about
one hundred townships, and about forty Clergymen, might constitute
the Diocese of Kingston,
2d. The second Diocese, retaining the name Toronto, might com-
prise the seven Middle Districts, containing one hundred and twenty-
nine townships, and about seventy Clergymen.
3d. The third Diocese might be called the Diocese of London;
or, if that name be inconvenient, some other town within its bounds,
Woodstock, Sandwich, or Chatham. It would comprise the seven
Western Districts, with their one hundred and thirteen townships, and
about thirty-six Clergymen.
4th. The North-Western, or Diocese of St. Mary.
Ultimately a See will be required for the north-western portion
of Upper Canada, comprising the settlements and many establishments
on the banks of Lakes Huron and Superior, and on the various islands
within the same. Already an Indian Mission has been established at
St, Mary, the strait which joins Lake Superior with Lake Huron.
1 The American Church considers an area of 8,000 square miles sufficient to
constitute a Bishopric.


This Table conveys but a very imperfect idea of the labours of
the Missionaries, and of the Bishop. Each township, (of which three
hundred and forty-two are already organized, and in process of settle-
ment,) contains about one hundred square miles, or about sixty-four
thousand acres; and may be equal, on an average, to eight or ten
English parishes.
But the Province will ultimately contain more than six hundred
such townships; and, looking forward to their division into four
instead of eight or ten parishes, we shall, in time—making allowance
for rising towns and villages—have more than eight hundred parishes
for each of the three Dioceses.
In regard to the North-Western District, (or projected Diocese
of St. Mary,) it may for the present remain attached to the Diocese of
Toronto till the settlements increase ; but the period is not distant
when it will require more immediate Episcopal superintendence. The-
islands in Lakes Huron and Superior are some of them large and
fertile. Besides, the mining companies at ditferent localities on the
mainland will require resident Clergymen.
But as it is not likely that the division of Toronto into three
Dioceses can be made at once, I would respectfully suggest that the
Eastern, or Diocese of Kingston, be first established, having a prior
claim, as comprising the older settlements ; and because the Western
Division is less distant from Toronto, and more easy of access. All
which is most respectfully submitted.
John Toronto.
London, Burlington Hotkl,
October sth, 1850.


BISHOPRIC OF SIERRA LEONE.
Report of the Special Committee, Nov. 1851.
The Colony of Sierra Leone contains between 40,000 and 50,000
inhabitants. A considerable proportion, having been recently im-
ported, from captured slave-vessels, are still in a state of heathenism;
but yet the number of persons attending public worship in connexion
with the Church of England, exclusive of other denominations,
exceeds 10,000, the number of communicants being above 2,000 :
and the number of children in the various Schools belonging to the
Church exceeds 6,000.
The religious instructors connected with the Church consist of one
Government Chaplain, twelve European Missionaries, and three na-
tive Clergymen, in all sixteen Clergymen, together with fifty-six
native teachers, many of whom are training for the ministry, and
might probably be presented for ordination. It cannot be doubted
that, to such a body of labourers, the presence and superintendence
of a Bishop, as an ecclesiastical head, would prove a great benefit.
The Church Missionary Society has on several occasions pleaded for
such an appointment, and expressed its deliberate judgment that the
efiiciency of its Mission would be much increased by the appointment
of a Bishop.
The ministrations of a Bishop are greatly needed for the rite of
Confirmation. A whole generation is grown up, who were baptized
in infancy. The experience of the Church at home sufficiently testi-
fies the importance of Confirmation, both in respect of the pre-
paration of the candidates, and of the administration of the rite.
Those excellent Missionaries who are labouring for the religious
instruction of the natives, have frequently lamented their being
deprived of this special means of edification, which is enjoyed by the
Church at home.
The presence of a Bishop is also essential for the ordination and
superintendence of a Native Ministry. A Native African Church,
under a native ministry, would exhibit to the world the noblest
triumph of British philanthropy ; and prove a happy consummation
of a series of wise and benevolent measures for the melioration of
the African race.
The Mission at Sierra Leone is also capable of great extension. It
has already established out-stations among the native tribes beyond
the Colony; especially at Badagry and Abbeokuta, in the Bight of
Benin, 1,300 miles east of Sierra Leone, where there are five ordained
Clergymen, one a native ; and where a large body of the liberated
Africans have settled, and great numbers of the heathen have ceased


to worship their country gods, others have cast theirs away altogether
and are not far from enlisting themselves as soldiers, to serve under
the banner of Christ. Many hundreds are constant attendants on the
means of grace. Such promising openings might soon be multiplied
upon the western coast of Africa.
For the preparation of native evangelists to carry out these in-
tended operations, there is already a capacious College at Sierra
Leone, able to accommodate fifty students, where, besides the study
of the Scriptures in the original Greek and Hebrew, the native lan-
guages are studied under an able Professor set apart for this office.
The work of reducing to writing the native languages, and of pre-
paring translations of the Scriptures, is already commenced. All that
is wanting to complete the work of preparation is the presence of a
Bishop of our Church, to ordain and commission fit men for the work.
The Bishopric of Sierra Leone would also comprise the other im-
portant British Settlements, besides the Colony of Sierra Leone, upon
the west coast, whose very destitution of all ministrations of the
Church of England presents a strong claim for the appointment of a
Bishop, to secure a provision for their spiritual interests.
The Gambia contains, besides Europeans, several thousand native
British subjects. Only one Chaplain is provided for this colony,
and, in consequence of death and the failure of health, the colony is
too often left destitute of any Church services, and is indebted for reli-
gious instruction to the zealous labours of the Wesleyan Methodists.
The British Colony upon the Gold Coast, bordering upon the
kingdom of Ashanti, contains, it is estimated, 288,500 native British
subjects, and the number is rapidly increasing, for whom no pro-
vision is made by the Church, except the occasional residence of a
Chaplain at Cape Coast Castle, though there is an important Wesleyan
Mission in the colony.
There are smaller settlements upon the coast, which, though the
population is inconsiderable, might become important posts in refe-
rence to the evangelization of the surrounding native tribes.
Such are the claims ui’gently submitted to the Church at home on
behalf of the Bishopric of Sierra Leone. The appeals for other Sees
have been responded to with great liberality ; and for some, indi-
vidual munificence has provided an entire endowment. Africa pre-
sents peculiar claims upon the justice, as Well as the compassion of
Europe. For 150 years the desolating scourge of the slave-trade
was legalized and encouraged by European Christian governments,
and the sons of Africa transferred to the Western Hemisphere
groaned and died under the heavy chains of slavery. These injuries
have been tardily redressed. England has led the way in the cause of


mercy: she abolished her slave-trade in 1807, she abolished slavery
in her colonies in 1834, and now there is reason to hope that, under
her righteous and determined opposition, the slave-trade of other
nations is about to expire along the whole western coast of Africa.
How auspicious, then, is the present time for the accomplishment of
the proposed measure, which affords so fair a prospect of establishing
and extending upon that once afflicted coast the blessings of the Gos-
pel of Christ—that Gospel which alone can make the sons of Africa
free indeed, and secure to them the promise of the life that now is, as
well as of that which is to come.
SUBDIVISION OF DIOCESES.
The publication of his Journal of Visitation, by the Bishop of
Capetown, and his own visit to this country, had the natural effect of
very materially strengthening the feeling of the necessity of relieving
him of some part of his enormous charge, by the subdivision of his
Diocese; and, to further that important purpose, a public meeting
was called, and presided over by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
on the 20th April, 1853. His Grace Avas supported on the occa-
sion by the Bishops of London, Winchester, Exeter, Chichester,
Oxford, St. Asaph, Norwich, Llandaff; the Bishops of Quebec and
Capetown ; Bishop Carr ; the Bishop-elect of Lincoln ; the Duke of
NeAvcastle; the Earls of Chichester and Harrowby ; Lord Redesdale;
Lord Lyttelton; the Hon. Mr. Justice Coleridge, the Rev. Lord John
Thynne, and others.
The following Report was read :
Twelve years have elapsed since, at the special invitation of the
late Archbishop of Canterbury, a large body of the Clergy and Laity
met together in this room to concert measures for the erection and
endowment of Additional Bishoprics in the Colonies.
A simple reference to facts will show that rarely has any meeting
of Churchmen been followed by more remarkable or gratifying
results. At the time referred to, there Avere but ten Bishoprics in the
whole extent of the Colonial Empire of Great Britain. There are
uoav twenty-five ; being an addition of fifteen in twelve years. Of
these fifteen, eleven have been entirely endowed, or partially aided, by
the fund then commenced, to Avhich an individual member of the
Church, Avith truly Christian munificence, contributed the entire
endowment of tAvo Bishoprics.
Many at that time thought, and some, perhaps, still think, that it
Avould have been better to devote whatever fund could be raised, to
the maintenance of more Missionaries, than to the support of additional


Bishops. But not even those who entertained such views will be
disappointed at the results, which appear to demonstrate that the
appointment of a Bishop is the most effectual mode of increasing the
number of the Clergy,
At the date of the foundation respectively of the fifteen Bishoprics
to which reference has been made, there were ministering within
their limits 274 Clergymen ; there are at the present moment 504 ;
but if we look to the Dioceses of recent foundation, the comparison of
the condition of the Church before and after the appointment of
Bishops is still more striking. Thus in Yan Diemen’s Land, the
increase in the number of the Clergy has been from 19 to 54, or
nearly threefold, —in New Zealand, from 12 to 38, or more than
threefold, —in Capetown, from 14 to 56, exactly fourfold, —in Adelaide,
from 4 to 26, more than sixfold, —in Melbourne, from 3 to 24, exactly
eightfold. Thus, then, there has been, within a very few years, an
addition of no fewer than 146 Clergymen in these five colonies.
Not only, therefore, has the Church in these several dioceses been
placed on a more secure and permanent footing, but the means of
gx-ace, through the ministrations of the Clergy, have been more rapidly
increased than was ever the case at any former period, or than could
be hoped for again, if our dependence were on the finding and sending
out individual missionaries from this country.
With such evident tokens, then, of the Divine blessing on the
course which has been latterly adopted, the Council have no hesitation
in making a new appeal to the Clergy and Laity of the Church to
proceed with the work which has been hitherto so wonderfully
prospered.
Of the thirteen places specified in the Declaration of Archbishops
and Bishops at Lambeth, in 1841, as requiring direct Episcopal
superintendence, all but three, —viz. “ Western Australia, Northern
India, and Southern India,” have been erected into dioceses.
It is confidently expected and believed that, as far as India is con-
cerned, the extension of the Episcopate, so essential to the well-being
of the Church and the propagation of the Gospel in that country,
may be safely left to the wisdom and liberality of the Indian Govern-
ment ; and it is believed that means will ere long be found to establish
a Bishopric at Perth for Western Australia.
Already, negotiations have been opened with Her Majesty’s
Government, for establishing a Bishopric at the Mauritius ; and it
is hoped that the means of its endowment may be provided from
sources independent of the Colonial Bishoprics Fund.
The Council strongly recommend the immediate subdivision of the
vast diocese of Capetown, by the erection of a Bishopric at Graham’s-


town, for the Eastern province, and a second in the new colony of
Natal,—measures which they consider requisite not less for the
extension and orderly government of the English Church, than for
the furtherance of the Gospel and its attendant blessings among
heathen and hostile tribes.
The Council also consider that the time has come for a division of
the diocese of Toronto, and recommend that a Bishopric for the
eastern portion of it be forthwith founded at Kingston; while they
cannot but feel that the rapid spread of population, and the growth of
new settlements, will shortly necessitate a still further subdivision.
The projected Bishoprics will require for their endowment a capital
sum of lOjOOOZ. each, on the average, from the general fund, in
addition to what may be derived from local resources, or specially
contributed by persons interested in the particular dioceses.
The total sum to be raised for these great purposes may therefore
be computed at 40,00(E. ; but taking into account the necessary
expenses of the passage and outfit of the several Bishops, the Council
appeal to the Church at large for a contribution of and they
appeal with the greater confidence, as being able to point to the
existence, in various parts of the world, of eleven Bishoprics which
have been endowed, wholly or in part, out of a capital of 173,0007.
entrusted to their keeping, while the entire charge for the expense of
management, since the fund was first opened, has scarcely exceeded
1,600 A or less than one per cent.
The following Resolutions were then adopted :
1.— cc That the remarkable success with which it has pleased Almighty God to
bless the efforts recently made for the extension of the Episcopate in
the Colonies, and the happy results which have ensued therefrom,
ought to be regarded as a call and encouragement to proceed in the
same course, till every Province of the Colonial Empire of Great
Britain shall have its own resident Bishop.”
2. —“ That the vast Diocese of Capetown, comprising five distinct Govern-
ments, requires immediate subdivision, —by the erection of a Bishopric
at Grahamstown, for the Eastern Province, and of another for the
new Colony of Natal.’ 1
3.—“ That the remoteness of Western Australia from Adelaide, within the
Diocese of which it is at present comprised, renders it expedient that
a separate Bishopric be formed within that Colony;—and that the
rapid spread of population, and the constant formation of New
Settlements in the Diocese of Toronto, demand a division of that
Diocese by the foundation of a Bishopric at Kingston, for its Eastern
division.”


EXTENSION - OF THE EPISCOPATE IX SOUTH AFRICA.
From the Appeal by the Bishop of Capetown, 1853.
The Diocese of Capetown was first constituted in 1847. In
territorial extent it is one of the largest in the world. It comprehends
the whole of the Cape Colony, British Kaffraria, the Orange River-
Sovereignty, the Colony of Natal, and the Island of St, Helena,
Each of these five great divisions has its distinct civil government,
but all are combined under one spiritual head. The toil, the care
and the expense which are incident to the mere oversight of such
an unwieldy Diocese, would of itself be utterly disproportionate to
the physical strength of any one man or the pecuniary resources of a
Colonial Bishop; how hopeless, therefore, it is to suppose that a single
individual should be able to plant the Church, and to found extensive
Missions over so vast a territory, and at the same time raise a large
portion of the funds required for the maintenance of the work.
During a nine months’ visitation in 1850, the Bishop of Capetown
was only enabled to visit a portion of his Diocese, though he travelled
during that time 4,000 miles. Residing usually at Capetown, he is
separated from St. Helena by 1,700 miles, and from Natal by 1,100
miles.
The necessity for the subdivision of such an enormous See has
been long felt and admitted. The Colonial Bishoprics Committee,
His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury in the Chair, has reported
that the foundation of two new Sees in South Africa is a matter of
vast importance, and has recommended that they should be the first
to be erected. It is now proposed, therefore, to divide the Diocese
into three portions. The Eastern Province of the Cape Colony,
together, probably, with the Orange River Sovereignty and British
Kaffraria, will form one Diocese, the Bishop of which will be
stationed at Grahamstown, The Colony of Natal will constitute
the other Diocese. Some progress has been made towards raising an
endowment which shall provide the moderate income of 800/. a year
for the future Bishop of the Eastern Province. The Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel, out of its Jubilee Fund, has devoted
5,0001. to this purpose; to this the Society for Promoting Christian
Knowledge has added 2,000/. Donations have been further promised
by individuals to the extent of some hundreds more. A considerable
additional sum will, however, be required before the See can be
erected.
Natal promises to be one of the most interesting and important
spheres of the Church’s Missionary operations. It is expected that.


ere long, a commencement will be made of Missions on an extended
scale, to the 115,000 Zulus, who constitute the native population of
that country. The establishments which it is intended to found, will
have for their object the civilization of the Aborigines, as well as
their conversion to Christianity, and may be expected thereby
materially to assist the views of the civil government for their social
progress. It is earnestly to be desired that this great undertaking
should be placed under the immediate superintendence of a Bishop
stationed on the spot, who may be able both to watch the progress of
the new Institutions, and to extend their operations from time to
time. But a small sum has as yet been contributed towards the fund
for the endowment of the See of Natal. The Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge has given 2,000 1. ; and it is hoped that a small
unappropriated balance of the Jubilee Fund of the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel (probably about 1,000/.) will be available
for this object. A lady has given 600/. to be invested in land. These
are the only contributions of any amount as yet promised.
It is impossible to over-estimate the importance of the work which
the Church of England, in the course of God’s providence, is called upon
to undertake in South Africa. The Zulu population of Natal appear
especially susceptible of all those kindly influences which the Church
can bring to bear upon them. It is of the highest importance that
she should at once enter on the work, and that her Missionary
operations should be prosecuted on a scale commensurate with the
wants and requirements of the people. In the. prosecution of this
work she is entitled to demand, and will doubtless receive, the
harmonious cooperation of the civil power: for by such means alone
can we hope to avoid a renewal of those desolating wars which have
been the opprobrium of our age, the scourge of our colonists, and a
drain upon the resources of the mother country. It is for the
wealthier members of the Church at home to enable her to lay her
deep foundations in South Africa on the sure basis of Apostolic order;
on others will devolve the duty of extending her ministrations and
enlarging her boundaries by their holy lives, their scriptural teaching
and their self-denying labours.


BISHOPRIC OF PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
(27 th Dec. 1853.)
It is now more than twelve years since the establishment of this See
was recommended by the Archbishops and Bishops of the United
Church of England and Ireland, assembled at Lambeth Palace, in
1841. The reasons which then commended this proposal to the sup-
port of the Church, still remain in full force; while additional weight
has been given to them by the fact, that "Western Australia has since
been declared a Venal Colony. More than 2,000 convicts have
already been transported thither, and it has been determined to add
1,000 annually to the number. Many civilians and military officers
with their families, sent out to superintend the Convict establishments,
have made the Colony their place of residence, while the increase of
commerce necessarily adds to the population. If, therefore, a Resident
Bishop was desired in 1841, much more necessary has one become
in 1854.
The number of Clergy at present officiating in various stations is nine.
Two more are immediately wanted, one for the Convict Depot at Fre-
mantle, and the other for the district of Yasse. On the expiration of their
penal probation, the “ Exiles ” settle in different parts of the Colony,
and villages have been formed of Military Pensioners. From Albany,
at King George’s Sound, to Champion Bay on the North West, there
is a coast-line of more than 500 miles, along which there are various
settlements; and Cape Lewin is to be doubled; while in the interior,
along the whole course of the Avon and the Swan, there are townships
of settlers or convict Depots. From Port Adelaide in South Aus-
tralia to Champion Bay, the distance by sea is 1,500 miles. It is as
if the island of Malta wex*e annexed to the Bishopric of Sodor and
Man, The remark of Bishop Sherlock in a letter to Dr. Doddridge,
May 11, 1751, is strictly applicable:—“For a Bishop to live at one
end of the world, and his Church at another, must make the office
very uncomfortable to the Bishop, and in a great measure useless to
the people.”
In South Australia alone, the Bishop has to visit stations and
townships from the borders of Victoria, 300 miles east of Adelaide, to
others 250 miles north, in the direction of Lake Torrens; besides
those on the banks of the Murray, now opened up by steam navigation
for many hundred miles; and further, the settlement of Port Lincoln,
200 miles west by sea from Adelaide; where there is the interesting
Native Mission under Archdeacon Blagdon Hale.
How is it possible then for one Bishop properly to superintend the


ecclesiastical and spiritual concerns of two colonies so distant, so ex-
tensive, and so distinct ?
The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel has appropriated
out of its Jubilee Fund 3,0007 towards the endowment of a See at
Perth; and it is hoped that the Society for Promoting Christian
Knowledge will make a liberal grant for the same purpose. Will
there not also be found many members of our Church disposed to
contribute largely for the extension of the Episcopate, where it is so
much needed ?
The Roman Catholic Church has not been unmindful of its duty
towards its adherents in Western Australia, although till lately scarcely
numbering 600. A Bishop (Dr. Brady) has for many years been
settled at Perth ; and in 1851 a Spanish Bishop (Dr. Serra) was sent
out by his Government with a body of Benedictines, more than twenty
in number, several in holy orders, others lay brethren, to form an
Industrial Mission Station for the natives. There is, besides, a con-
vent of Sisters of Mercy in Perth, who employ themselves in teaching
young ladies of our communion in the upper classes, and native
children. The Church of England has left this colony for twenty-
five years without a resident Bishop, and since 1847, to the triennial
Visitation of a Bishop, distant some 1,300 miles. It has no Mission
to the natives, save a small school for children at Albany!
If the contrast is painful, the remedy is easy. A sum of about
5,0007, added to the contributions of the two Societies, would provide
a moderate endowment: and with the sanction of the Government,
there can be readily found a faithful and zealous pastor, willing to
take charge of this Diocese ; so important from its geographical posi-
tion, and so interesting from the great experiment of convict refor-
mation, now being carried on within its limits.
Augustus Adelaide.


A “Return of the Number of Colonial Bishops, stating the Salaries
of each, and the Sources whence those Salaries are derived.”
Ordered, by The House of Commons, to he Printed, 31 July, 1855
(No. 444). 1
Name of Bishop.
Diocese. Salary.
From what Source derived.
George J. Mountain
John Strachan . .
Francis Fulford
Hibbert Binney
John Medley
Edward Feild.
j David Anderson
Aubrey George Spencer
Thomas Parry . . .
Daniel Gateward Davis
William Piercy Austin
Frederic Barker . .
Charles Perry .
: William Tyrrell
| Augustus Short
Francis Russell Nixon.
George A. Selwyn
Robert Gray . .
James Chapman .
George Smith . .
George Tomlinson
John Wills Weeks
Vincent William Ryan
John Armstrong .
John William Colenso .
Francis T. M'Dougall .
Quebec
Toronto .
Montreal
Nova Scotia
Fredericton
Newfoundland
Rupert’s Land
Jamaica. . .
Barbados
Antigua.
Guiana .
Sydney
Melbourne .
Newcastle .
Adelaide ,
Tasmania
New Zealand
Capetown
Colombo
Victoria.
Gibraltar
Sierra Leone
Mauritius
Grahamstown .
Natal . . .
Labuan
Imperial Parliamentary Vote.
Clergy Reserves in Canada.
Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund.
{lnterest of Trust Fund appropriated to the
endowment of this see by the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel.
Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund.
!00/. Parliamentary Vote as Archdeacon of
Newfoundland.
200/. ditto as Archdeacon of Bermuda.
2007. Colonial Funds, ditto.
500/. from Soc. Prop. Gospel, as Bishop of
. Newfoundland.
Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund.
Consolidated Fund.
Ditto.
Ditto.
Ditto.
/General Colonial Revenue, under Act 5 & 6
I Viet. c. 76. Schedule C.
/1,000/. Colonial Treasury.
\ 333/. 6s. Sd. Col. Bishoprics’ Fund.
(500/. Colonial Treasury.
1 333/, 6s. B d. Col. Bishoprics’ Fund.
Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund.
.1,000/. for Salary from Colonial Funds, and
the interest of 5,000/. granted by the Colo-
V nial Bishoprics’ Fund.
Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund.
Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund.
Colonial Funds.
Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund.
Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund.
/500/. as Colonial Chaplain.
\4OO/. from Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund.
7600/. as Senior Chaplain from Colonial Funds,
< and the interest of 6,300/. granted by Colonial
(, Bishoprics’ Fund.
Colonial Bishoprics’ Fund.
Ditto.
Ditto; ,
1 The three Indian
Bishops—Calcutta,
Madras,
s, and
Bombay—and the Anglican
Bishop at Jerusalem, are not included in this list.


lylUtCOCbj clb blit/ tlclbt» UI lilt? J-iitb
time (June, 1855).
UUi
1 Ul
tilt/ OCtj dllU cl
b
tut/ pi cecii t
Date
Number of Clergy.
of Founda-
tion,
New Bishoprics.
Before the
Erection of See.
In June,
1855.
1841
New Zealand . .
♦
12
49
1842
Antigua ....
•
25
35
1842
Guiana ....
23
31
1842
Tasmania . . .
19
57
1842
Gibraltar . , .
30
35
1845
Colombo ....
22
38
1845
Fredericton . .
30
55
1847
Capetown . . .
-
f 38
1
1853
Grahamstown .
-
14
-
20
1853
Natal
7
1847
Newcastle . . .
17
29
1847
Melbourne . . .
3
34
1847
Adelaide . . .
4
28
1849
Rupert’s Land . .
5
12
1849
Victoria ....
10
13
1850
Montreal....
45
54
1852
Sierra Leone . .
15
21
274
556
INCREASE OF CLERGY IN THE NEW DIOCESES.
The following Table shows the number of Clergymen in 17 New
Dioceses, at the date of the Erection of the See, and at the present
time (June, 1855).


PATENTS RELATING TO COLONIAL BISHOPRICS.
9 Aug. 1787. —Constitutes the Diocese of Nova Scotia, com-
prising the Province of Nova Scotia and its dependencies.
28 June, 1793.—Constitutes the Diocese of Quebec, comprising
the Provinces of Upper and Lower Canada and their dependencies.
4 July, 1824. —Constitutes the Diocese of Barbados and the Lee-
ward Islands, comprising the Islands of Barbados, Grenada, St. Vin-
cent, Dominica, Antigua, and Montserrat, St. Christopher, Nevis,
and the Virgin Islands, Trinidad, Tobago, and St. Lucia, and their
respective dependencies.
5 March, 1825. —Extends the Diocese of Nova Scotia by including
the Province of New Brunswick, and the Islands of Prince Edward, of
Newfoundland, and of the Bermudas and their dependencies.
2 April, 1825. — Constitutes the Archdeaconry of Barbados, com-
prising the Islands of Barbados, Grenada, St. Vincent, Trinidad,
Tobago, and St. Lucia, and their respective dependencies: also the
Achdeaconry of Antigua, comprising the Islands of Antigua, Mont-
serrat, Dominica, St. Christopher, Nevis, and the Virgin Islands, and
their respective dependencies, both Archdeaconries being subject to
the See of Barbados.
11 May, 1826. —Constitutes the Colonies of Demerara, Essequibo
and Berbice, and their dependencies, to be a part of the Diocese of
Barbados and the Leeward Islands,
4 March, 1831.—Constitutes the Colonies of Demerara, Essequibo
and Berbice, and their dependencies, to be one colony, called the
Colony of British Guiana.
13 June, 1835. —Constitutes the Diocese of Madras, comprising
the territories within the limits of the Presidency of Madras, and
the Island of Ceylon.
18 Jan. 1836. —Constitutes the Diocese of Australia, comprising
the territories and islands comprised within or dependent upon New
South Wales, Van Diemen’s Land, and Western Australia.
19 Feb. 1836.—Erects the Province of South Australia, bounded
as follows :—on the north, the 26th degree of south latitude; on the
south, the Southern Ocean ; on the west, the 132 d degree of east


longitude; and on the east, the 141st degree of east longitude; in-
cluding therein all the bays and gulfs thereof, together with the island
called Kangaroo, and all the islands adjacent to last-mentioned island,
or to that part of the said province.
18 March, 1836.—Erects the Archdeaconry of Van Diemen’s
Land.
17 July, 1839. —Revokes the Patent of 5 March, 1825, so far as
relates to the Islands of Newfoundland and the Bermudas ; and
constitutes the Diocese of Newfoundland, comprising those islands.
27 July, 1839.—Separates the Province of Upper Canada from the
See of Quebec, and erects it into the Diocese of Toronto.
4 Sept. 1839. —Erects the Archdeaconry of British Guiana.
14 Oct. 1841.—Constitutes the Diocese of New Zealand, com-
prising New Zealand and all the islands adjacent thereto, and lying
between 34 deg. 30 min. north, and 47 deg. 10 min. south latitude,
and between 166 deg. 5 min. west, to 179 deg. east longitude,
and New Ulster, New Munster, and New Leinster.
21 Aug. 1842,—Abolishes the Archdeaconry of Van Diemen’s
Land, and revokes the Patent of 18 Jan. 1836, so far as relates to the
territories and islands comprised within or dependent upon the Colony
of Van Diemen’s Land; and erects the Diocese of Tasmania, com-
prising the Island of Yan Diemen’s Land and all islands and terri-
tories lying to the southward of Wilson’s Pi’omontory, in 39 degrees
and 12 minutes of south latitude, and to the northward of the 45th
degree of south latitude, and between the 140th and 150th degrees of
longitude east from Greenwich; and also Macquarrie Island, lying to
the south-eastward of the Island of Yan Diemen’s Land, and all other
the dependencies of the Colony of Yan Diemen’s Land.
21 Aug. 1842.—Revokes the Patents of 24 July, 1824, 2 April,
1825, 11 May, 1826, and 24 September, 1839, and constitutes the
Diocese of Guiana, comprising the Colonies and settlements of
Demerara, Essequibo, and Berbice, and their dependencies; and
establishing within the said Diocese the Archdeaconries of Demerara
and Berbice.
21 Aug. 1842.—Revokes the Patents of 4 July, 1824, 2 April,
1825, 11 May, 1826, and 24 September, 1839 ; and constitutes the
Diocese of Barbados, comprising the Islands of Barbados, Trinidad,
Grenada, St. Vincent, Tobago, and St. Lucia, with their respective
dependencies.


21 Aug. 1842.—Revokes the Patents of 4 July, 1824, 2 April,
1825, 11 May, 1826, and 24 Sept. 1839, and constitutes the Diocese
of Antigua, comprising the Islands of Antigua, St. Christopher,
Nevis, Montserrat, the Virgin Islands, and Dominica, together with
their respective dependencies.
19 Nov. 1843.—Separates Norfolk Island from the Diocese of
Australia, and annexes it to the Diocese of Tasmania.
26 April, 1845.—Sepai-ates the Island of Ceylon from the Diocese
of Madras, and constitutes that island to be the Diocese of Colombo.
18 Aug. 1845. —Defines the Province of Western Australia,
from Cape Londondeny, in latitude 13 deg. 44 min. south, to West
Cape Howe, in latitude 35 deg. 8 min. south, and from the Hartog’s
Island on the western coast, in longitude 112 deg. 52 min. to 129
deg. of east longitude from the meridian of Greenwich, including
all the islands adjacent in the Indian and Southern Oceans within
the latitudes aforesaid of 13 deg. 44 min. south and 35 deg. 8 minutes
south, and within the longitudes aforesaid of 112 deg. 52 min. and
129 deg. east from the meridian of Greenwich.
25 June, 1847. —Revokes the Patent of 18 Jan. 1836, and con-
stitutes the Diocese of Sydney, comprising the Counties of Wellington,
Roxburgh, Cook, Cumberland, Camden, Westmoreland, Georgiana,
Bathurst, King, Murray, Argyle, and Auckland, with the territory to
the west bounded by the parallel of latitude 32 deg. 30 min. and the
141st degree of east longitude, together with all those parts of the
Continent of Australia not comprised within the limits of any other
See or Diocese.
25 June, 1847.—Revokes the Patent of 18 Jan. 1836, and consti-
tutes the Diocese of Adelaide, comprising all those parts of the
Bishopric of Australia called South Australia, (with boundaries as
set forth in the Patent of 19 Feb. 1836,) and Western Australia,
(with boundaries as set forth in the Patent of 18 Aug. 1845).
25 June, 1847.—Revokes the Patent of 18 Jan. 1836, and consti-
tutes the Diocese of Melbourne, comprising all those parts of the
colony called Port Phillip District, bounded by a line drawn from
Cape Howe to the nearest source of the River Murray, and by the
course of that river until it reaches the 141st parallel of east longitude.
25 June, 1847.—Revokes the Patent of 18 Jan. 1836, and consti-
tutes the Diocese of Newcastle, comprising the counties of North-


umberland, Hunter, Durham, Brisbane, Philip, Bligh, Gloucester,
Macquarie, and Stanley, with the territory to the north and west
bounded by the 21st parallel of latitude and the 141st degree of east
longitude.
25 June, 1847.—Constitutes the Diocese of Capetown, comprising
the colony or settlement of the Cape of Good Hope, with its depen-
dencies, and the Island of St. Helena.
11 May, 1849.—Constitutes the See of Victoria, comprising the
Island of Hong Kong and its dependencies, and having jurisdiction
over all persons in holy orders of the United Church of England and
Ireland living within the dominions of the Emperor of China, or
within any ship or vessel not more than one hundred miles from the
Coast of China.
21 May, 1849.—Constitutes the Diocese of Rupert’s Land, com-
prising the Colony of Rupert’s Land.
18 July, 1850.—Alters the limits of the Diocese of Quebec by
including the district of Quebec, Three Rivers and Gasps only ; and
erects the Diocese of Montreal, comprising the district of Montreal,
which is separated for judicial purposes from the District of Three
Rivers and St. Francis, and bounded by the limits of the same.
22 May, 1852. — Constitutes the Diocese of Sierra Leone, com-
prising the Colonies and dependencies on the West Coast of Africa,
situated within and between 20 deg. north, and 20 deg. south lati-
tude respectively, and especially the Colonies of Gambia, Sierra Leone,
and Gold Coast, with their dependencies.
23 Nov. 1853.—Revokes the Patent of 25 June, 1847, and consti-
tutes the Diocese of Natal, comprising the district of Natal.
23 Nov. 1853.—Revokes the Patent of 25 June, 1847, and consti-
tutes the Diocese of Grahamstown, comprising the Eastern Districts
of the Cape of Good Hope, comprising the divisions of Albany, Uiten-
hage, Port Elizabeth, Fort Beaufort, Victoria, Albert, Somerset,
Graaf Reinet, Cradock, Colesburg, and Queenstown, and all portions
of the colony of the Cape not comprised in these divisions lying South
of the Orange and East of the Orange River and the territories called
or known as British Kaffraria.
8 Dec. 1853.—Revokes the Patent of 25 June, 1847, and consti-
tutes the Diocese of Capetown, comprising the Western Districts of
the Cape of Good Hope, comprising the divisions of the Cape, Stel-
lenbosch, Caledon, Swellendam, George, Beaufort, the Paarl, Wor-


cester, Malmesbury, and Clanwilliam, and all portions of the Colony
of the Cape not comprised in these divisions, lying South of the
Orange and West of the Orange River, and the Island of St. Helena.
Ordains the Bishop of Capetown to be Metropolitan Bishop in the
Colony of the Cape of Good Hope and its dependencies, and the
Island of St. Helena, and the Bishops of Grahamstown and Natal to
be Suffragan Bishops.
19 Oct. 1854.—Constitutes the Bishop of Sydney a Metropolitan
Bishop; and the Bishops of Newcastle, Adelaide, Melbourne, and
Tasmania to be Suffragan Bishops.
24 Nov. 1854.—Constitutes the Diocese of Mauritius, comprising
the Island of Mauritius and its dependencies.
6Wug. 1855.—Constitutes the Diocese of Labuan, comprising the
Island of Labuan and its dependencies ; and ordains the Bishop of
Labuan to be subject to the Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury.


TABLE OF
COLONIAL DIOCESES
e S
Q v.
H KI
»>
S
Square
Miles.
Popula-
tion,
Dioceses.
Jurisdiction extends over.
Name of Bishop.
(
NOVA SCOTIA 1787 ]
(■
QUEBEC 1793 ]
MONTREAL 1850
TORONTO 1839
RUPERT’S LAND.. 1850
NEWFOUNDLAND 1839 |
FREDERICTON ... 1845
JAMAICA 1824
(■
BARBADOS 1824 I
SIERRA LEONE.,
CALCUTTA.,
MADRAS
BOMBAY
COLOMBO ..
VICTORIA
MAURITIUS.
LABUAN
CAPETOWN
GRAHAMSTOWN,
NEWCASTLE.,
MELBOURNE ....
ADELAIDE
TASMANIA
NEW ZEALAND
GIBRALTAR ..
Nova Scotia, Cape 2?re-\
ton, Prince EdwardS
, Island J
'Districts of Gaspe, Clue- )
bee, Three Rivers, St. V
. Francis j
District of Montreal....
Canada West.
Hudson's Bay Territory
Newfoundland, the Ber-
L mudas
New Brunswick
Jamaica, British HonA
duras, the Bahamas, >
[ Cayman j
(Barbados, Trinidad, St A
1824 | Vincent,Granada,To-\
(. bago, St. Lucia j
1 Antigua, Montserrat,
Barbuda, St. Kill’s, I
Nevis, Anguilla, Vir-l
gin Isles, Dominica..)
1842 I Demerara, Esseguibo,]
i Berbice J
British Settlements on)
the Western Coast of\
Africa ,)
1814 Presidency of Bengal ...
1835 Presidency of Madras..
1837 Presidency of Bombay .
1845 Ceylon
(Hong Kong, and the' v
Congregralions of they
Church of England in j
China J
1854 Mauritius, Seychelles...
1855 Borneo
1847 Cape Colony, St. Helena
(Eastern Province. 8; the\
1853 \ Sovereignty, British ,
V Kaffraria j
1853 Natal..
18 „ fi / Southern Part of Newt
,3D I South Wales I
1547 /Northern Part of New\
' \ South Wales '
1847 Province of Victoria ....
,o, 7 j South Australia and\
1 ' \ Western Australia....]
: Van Diemen's Land,\
1 t Norfolk Island J
isii \New Zealand, Chatham\
18,11 \ Islands, 8;c j
(Gibraltar, and the Con-' i
IKA9 ) gregallons of the\
io iz j Church of England in |
V, the Mediterranean ...J
153,432
56,258
100,000
370,000
134,000
306,012
141,923
65,000
24,448
260,000
130,046
18,000
100,000
500,000
80,000
300,000
338,465
417,856
472,405
952,004
103.000
106,421
200.000
418,847
308,189
106,372
121,678
72.900.000
13.500.000
7,800,000
1,442,062
190,000
6,000,000
225,000
340,000
125,000
| 58
|^29
| 190,000
200,000
120,000
Hibbert Binney, D.D.
Geo. J. Mountain, D.D.
Francis Fulpord, D.D.
John Strachan, D.D....
David Anderson, D.D.
Edward Feild, D.D....
John Medley, D.D
AubreyG.Spencer,D.D.
Thomas Parry, D.D....
Daniel G. Davis, D.D..
W. Pilrcy Austin, D.D.
John Wm. Weeks, D.D.
Daniel Wilson, D.D....
Thomas Dealtry, D.D.
j John Harding, D.D.
James Chapman, D.D...
George Smith, D.D..
Vincent W. Ryan, D.D. 1854
F. T. M'Dougall, D.C.L. 1855
Robert Gray, D.D
John Armstrong, D.D.
John W. Colenso, D.D.
Fredk. Barker, D.D...
WilliamTyrrell,D.D.
Charles Perry, D.D...
Augustus Short, D.D...
Francis R. Nixon, D.D.
Geo. A.Selwyn, D.D
Geo. Tomlinson, D.D.


PROGRESS OF THE EPISCOPATE IN THE COLONIES
WESTERN HEMISPHERE.
NOVA SCOTIA,
1787. Charles Inglis.
1816. Robert Stanser.
1825. John Inglis.
1851. HIBBERT BINNEY.
NEWFOUNDLAND,
1839. A. G. Spencer.
1844, EDWARD FEILD.
FREDERICTON,
1845. J. MEDLEY.
QUEBEC,
1793. Jacob Mountain.
1826. Charles Stewart.
1836. G. J. MOUNTAIN.
r TORONTO,
I 1839. J. STRACHAN.
i
MONTREAL,
_ 1850. F. FULFORD.
JAMAICA,
1824. C. Lipscomb,
1843. A. G. SPENCER.
ANTIGUA,
1842. D. G. DAVIS.
BARBADOS,
1824. W. H. Coleridge.
1842. THOMAS PARRY.
GUIANA,
1842. W. P. AUSTIN.
GIBRALTAR,
1842. G. TOMLINSON.
RUPERTS LAND,
1849. D. ANDERSON.


PROGRESS OE THE EPISCOPATE IN THE COLONIES
EASTERN
CALCUTTA,
1814. T. P. Middleton,
1823. Reginald Heber.
1827. John Thos. James.
1829. J. M. Turner.
1832. DANIEL WILSON.
LABUAN,
1855. F. T. M'DOUGALL.
SYDNEY,
(FORMERLY AUSTRALIA.)
1836. W. G. Broughton.
1854. F. BARKER.
"(
CAPETOWN, 1
1847. ROBERT GRAY. J~~ <
1
VICTORIA,
1849. GEORGE SMITH.
HEMISPHERE.
f MADRAS,
10 „ „ •» If COLOMBO,
1835. Daniel Corrie. > — -J : ’
1837. G. T. Spencer. [ \_1845. J. CHAPMAN,
1849. T. DEALTRY. J
BOMBAY,
1837. T. Carr.
J. HARDING.
NEW ZEALAND,
1841. G. A. SELWYN.
TASMANIA,
1842. F. R. NIXON.
MELBOURNE,
1847. C. PERRY.
NEWCASTLE,
1847. W. TYRRELL.
ADELAIDE,
1847. AUG. SHORT.
GRAHAMSTOWN,
1853. J. ARMSTRONG.
NATAL,
1853. J. W. COLENSO.J
SIERRA LEONE,
1851. E. O. Vidal,
1855. J. W. WEEKS.
MAURITIUS,
1854. V. W. RYAN.


tAJ ' x v
Sq. Miles.
50
93
5,524
166
90
60
290
109
62,750
6,400
47
20
70
225
130
140
2,400
91
100,000
178,655
209,690
100,000
26,000
15,617
4,687
2,131
86,000
370,000
22
764,147
13,000
1*
H
95
1,097
1,195
Population.
2,934
31,843
26,491
122,198
400
1,600
22,200
28,927
11,066
379,690
7,365
9,571
23,177
22,594
27,573
13,027
69,814
7,600
121,678
919,648
770.000
723,292
200.000
186, OoO
35,000
62,634
96,506
103,000
9,915
2,186,347
155
2,230
12,182
127,258
204,120
345,790
COLONIAL AND FOREIGN DEPENDENCIES OF
GREAT BRITAIN.
WESTERN
HEMISPHERE,
1.—1850.
Pate of
Acqui-
sition.
Colonial Possessions.
Clergy.
WEST INDIES.
ANGUILLA
ANTIGUA .
BAHAMAS.
BARBADOS
BARBUDA .
CAYMAN .
DOMINICA
GRENADA
HONDURAS
JAMAICA .
MONTSERRAT
NEVIS . . .
ST. CHRISTOPHER
ST. LUCIA . . ,
ST. VINCENT
TOBAGO . .
TRINIDAD
VIRGIN ISLANDS
BRITISH GUIANA
NORTH AMERICA,
CANADA, EAST .
CANADA, WEST .
NEW BRUNSWICK
NOVA SCOTIA . .
CAPE BRETON
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND
NEWFOUNDLAND ....
HUDSON’S BAY
THE BERMUDAS
FALKLAND ISLANDS
EUROPE.
HELIGOLAND
GIBRALTAR .
MALTA AND GOZO
lONIAN ISLANDS .


COLONIAL AND FOREIGN DEPENDENCIES OF
GREAT BRITAIN.
EASTERN HEMISPHERE.—1850.
Colonial Possessions.
Pate of
Acqui-
sition,
Sq. Miles.
Population.
Clergy.
ASIA.
BENGAL
MADRAS
BOMBAY AND SCINDE . . .
ALLIED STATES
CEYLON
HONG KONG
1765
1639
1664
1795
1842
306,012
141,923
165.000
614.000
24,448
2
72.900.000
13.500.000
7,800,000
43,022,700
1,442,062
21,000
109
84
34
36
10
1,251,385
138,685,762
273
AFRICA.
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE . . .
MAURITIUS
SEYCHELLES
ST. HELENA
SIERRA LEONE
THE GAMBIA
GOLD COAST AND BADAGRY.
1806
1810
1794
1658
1787
1681
1661
130,000
708
80
46
508
38
6,000
170,693
172,997
6,949
6,298
41,735
4,831
275,000
38
3
1
3
11
1
8
137,380
676,503
65
AUSTRALASIA.
NEW SOUTH WALES ....
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND . . .
NORFOLK ISLAND
SOUTH AUSTRALIA ....
WESTERN AUSTRALIA . . .
NEW ZEALAND
1787
1803
1787
1787
1829
1841
680,000
24.000
2
200,000
100,000
95.000
250.000
70,164
4,300
50,000
4,460
120.000
96
61
2
16
6
31
1,099,002
498,924
202
SUMMARY.
N. America
Falkland Islands
West Indies
Asia
Africa
Australasia
Europe ( not including Foreign Chaplains) .
764,147
13,000
178,655
1,251,385
137,380
1,099,002
1,195
2,186,347
1 55
919,648
138,685,762
676,503
498,924
345,790
394
1
245
273
65
202
13
Grand Total
3,444,764
143,313,129
1,193
1


TABLE OE COMPARATIVE GEOGRAPHY,
Showing the Area op BRITISH COLONIAL POSSESSIONS by Comparison
with European Countries.
Colonial Possessions.
Sq. Miles. European Countries. Sq. Miles.
CANADA EAST 209,690 = France .... 200,000
CANADA WEST .... 100,000 = Great Britain . 90,502
NEW BRUNSWICK . . . 26,000 = Scotland . . . 29,860
NEWFOUNDLAND . . 36,Q00 = Ireland .... 81,874
NOVA SCOTIA 15,617 = Greece .... 15,000
CAPE BRETON 4,687 = South Wales . . 3,758
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND 2,131 = Norfolk . . . 2,024
JAMAICA ....... 6,400 = Yorkshire . . . 6,961
TRINIDAD 2,400 = Lancashire. . . 1,766
BRITISH GUIANA . . . 100,000 = Great Britain . 90,502
DOMINICA 290 = Middlesex . , . 282
ST. LUCIA ...... 225 = Isle op Man . . 260
BARBADOS 16'
TOBAGO 14'
ST, VINCENT 130;
GRENADA 109'
ANTIGUA 93l
BARBUDA 901
ST. CHRISTOPHER ... 7
NEVIS 20|
THE BERMUDAS .... 22)
•= Isle op Wight .
>= Jeeset 62
Guernsey ... 30
BENGAL 306,012 = France and Spain 337,400
MADRAS 141,923 = The British Isles . 122,376
BOMBAY 65,000 = England & Wales 68,828
CEYLON 24,44 8^
„ Half op England . 25,000
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND . 24,000)
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE . 130,000 = The British Isles . 122,376
NEW SOUTH WALES . . 680,000 = { France . Au ® teia »} 668,000
’ *• and Turkey , .) ’
NEW ZEALAND .... 95,000 = Great Britain . . 90,502
MAURITIUS 708 = Hertfordshire . 630


COLONIAL BISHOPRICS FUND.
ABSTRACT
RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS
For the Year ending 31st December, 1854,
NET ABSTRACT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS FOR
FOURTEEN YEARS, ENDING 31st DECEMBER, 1854,
AND A BIST OP
DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS
1841—1854.
©ffire,
79, Pall Mall, London.


COLONIAL BISHOPRICS PUND.
Abstract of Receipts and the Year ending Dec. 1854.
Receipts.
£ s. d.
Balance, 1 Jan. 1854 1,437 13 7
SPECIAL FUNDS:— £ s. d.
Sierra Leone 35 12 5
Borneo 269 6 3
Graham’s Town 211 10 0
Natal 529 0 0
Mauritius 4,001 10 0
Kingston, Canada West. 110 0 0
Capetown 50 0 0
5,206 18 8
GENERAL FUND:—
Capital, Dividend.
£ s. d.
Oct. 53. 2,000 0 0 Long Ann. 205 16 8
Oct. 53. 400 0 0 Ditto 39 13 4
Jan. 50,000 0 0 Nor. West. 1,213 10 10
July Ditto 1,193 6 2
Jan. 5,000 0 0 North Lon. 96 0 5
July Ditto 95 10 11
Jan. 15,000 0 OS. Eastern 273 1 0
July Ditto 268 10 0
July 10,000 0 0 Midland... 167 9 8
Apr. 10,000 0 0 Blackwall... 388 6 8
Oct. Ditto 376 13 4
Apr. 2,000 0 0 3Jp. Cent... 3111 1
Oct. Ditto 30 12 1
Apr. 2,500 0 0 Gt.Westem 48 10 10
Oct. Ditto 52 19 5
May 6,000 0 0 Ditto 116 10 0
Oct. Ditto 113 0 0
July 8,520 0 0 York,N.&B. 163 1 8
July 10,500 0 0 Ditto 200 19 4
Jan. 6,362 10 2 Consols .... 92 13 1
July Ditto 89 17 5
Jan. 1,500 0 0 Gt. Northern 25 9 9
July Ditto .25 1 1
Jan. 1,000 0 0 Ditto 16 19 9
July Ditto 16 14 0
Apr. 54. 2,000 0 0 Ann 205 16 8
July 1,000 0 0 Ann.,, 76 6 8
Oct. 3,400 0 0 Ann 268 14 2
Income Tax returned 549 12 5
6,442 8 5
Annual Subscriptions:—
For 1851 10 0
1852 2 2 0
1853 54 9 0
1854 267 5 6
1854 (New Zealand)... 600 0 0
924 16 6
Donations 2,823 16 6
Capital realized:—
£ s. d.
Oct. 53. 2,000 0 0 Ann....... 765 0 0
Oct. 53. 400 0 0 Ann 154 io 0
Apr. 54. 2,000 0 0 Ann 765 0 0
July 54. 5,000 0 0 Ann 394 10 0
Oct. 54. 3,409 0 0 Ann 1,332 2 6
3,41.1 2 6
£20,246 16 2
payments.
Gieraltar, 1 year to 25 Sept. 1854 ....
Capetown, 1 year to 30 Sept. 1854....
Fredericton, 1 year to 4 Nov. 1854 ....
Newcastle, 1 year to 29 June, 1854 ....
Melbourne, 1 year to 29 June, 1854 ....
Adelaide, 1 year to 30 Sept. 1854 ....
Tasmania, (Endowment paid in full)
New Zealand, 1 year to 17 Oct. 1854 ....
Victoria, 1 year to 13 Oct. 1854 ....
Montreal, (Endowment paid in full)
Sierra Leone, 1 year to 15 July, 1854 ....
£ s. d.
1,200 0 0
438 0 0
1,000 0 0
333 6 8
333 6 8
360 0 0
600 0 0
1,000 0 0
402 0 0
682 10 0
682 10 0
Natal, 1 year to 30 Nov. 1854 ....
Graham’s Town, 1 year to 30 Nov. 1854....
7,031 13 4
Mauritius, Consecration Fees 12 17 0
Graham’s Town, Outfit, &c 700 0 0
Consecration Fees 9 2 2
Adelaide, Donations 30 0 0
Capetown, Patent 4 11 6
Natal, Consecration Fees 9 2 2
7,797 6 2
General Fund, Expenses 117 6 0
7,914 12 2
Capital invested :
£ £ s. d.
Mar. 600 Jan. & July, Anns. 3,000 0 0
May 300 Long Anns 1,406 5 0
Aug. 300 ~ 1,387 10 0
Sept. 800 ~ 3,850 0 0
Oct. 400 „ 1,750 0 0
11,393 15 0
Balance in hand, 1 Jan. 1855 938 9 0
£>0,246 16 2


Net Abstract of Receipts and Payments for 14 Years,
ending December, 1854.
Mcrcipts.
£ s. d.
Donations for Bishoprics erected: —
Bishopric Erected £ s. d.
New Zealand ...17 Oct. 1841 739 10 0
Tasmania 29 June, 1842 166 10 0
Gibraltar ditto 3,100 15 11
Fredericton 4 May, 1845 2,796 7 4
Colombo ditto 84 12 0
Adelaide 29 June, 1847 17,933 11 0
Melbourne ditto
Newcastle ditto.
Capetown ditto 17,693 15 6
Rupert’s Land... 29 May, 1849 366 13 8
Victoria ditto 21,953 7 11
Montreal 25 July, 1850 6,982 16 0
Sierra Leone ...30 May, 1852 11,714 3 6
Graham’s Town, 30 Nov. 1853 7,661 8 6
Natal ditto 2,949 18 6
Mauritius 30 Nov. 1854 6,252 0 6
100,395 10 4
General Fund: —
Donations and Collections 96,799 13 1
197,195 3 5
Donations for Bishoprics proposed:—
Lyttelton, New Zealand 1,101 0 0
Borneo 2,839 7 5
Kingston, Canada West 2,115 10 6
Perth, West Australia 5 18 2
West Indian Africa 70 0 0
6,131 16 1
203,326 19 6
Interest on Capital, and
Annual Subscriptions 61,217 5 11
£264,544 5 5
sagments.
Outfits, Passage monies, fixtures, Patents,
Seals, Consecration fees and expenses, for
14 Bishoprics 10,065 10 £
Endowments;— £ s. d.
Tasmania, in full 5,000 0
Adelaide, in part 10,240 0 0
Capetown, in part 8,211 12 8
Montreal, in full 12,500 0
Victoria, for College ... 2,000 0 0
Natal, in part 600 0 0
38,551 12
General Expenses (Public Meetings, AdA
vertisements, Printing, Postage,Stationery, > 2,138 17
Clerk, &c.) J
50,756 0
Stipends 54,156 12
Capital invested (1 Jan. 1855) 158,693 3
Payable. Int. £ s. d.
York,Newc.&B. 1 Jan. 1855...4 ... 6,000 0 0
Northwestern 15 July, 1855...5 ...50,000 0 0
Blackwall 15 Oct. 1855...4 ...20,000 0 0
South Eastern. 15 Jan. 1856...3|... 15,000 0 0
York,Newc.&B. 1 July, 1856...4 ... 4,500 0 0
York,Newc.&B. 1 July, 1856...3f... 8,520 0 0
North London.. 10 July, 1856...4 ... 5,000 0 0
Great Western. 15 Oct. 1856...4 ... 6,000 0 0
Great Northern 15 July, 1857...3£... 1,500 0 0
Great Northern 15 Jan. 1858...5J... 1,000 0 0
Midland 1 May, 1858...3i.,.10,000 0 0
Great Western. 15 April, 1861... 4£... 2,500 0 0
130,020 0 0
£ s . d.
2,000 0 0 New 3ip.c.
6,362 10 2 3 p. c. Con.
3,400 0 0 Long Anns. Jan. 1860
1,000 0 0 Term.Anns. Jan. 1860
Balance in hand, 1 Jan. 1i55 938 9
£264,544 5


Bishopric.
Consecration of
the first Bishop.
Consecration
Fees.
Patents and
Seals.
Passage and
Outfit.
Furniture,
Fixtures, &c.
Original
Stipend.
Invested in
Endowments
in the Colony.
Remaining
Stipend.
1855.
NEW ZEALAND
17 Oct. 1841
29 June, 1842
Ditto
4 May, 1845
Ditto
1836
29 June, 1847
Ditto
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
TASMANIA
20 7 2
—
1,000 0 0
350 0 0
600 0 0
—
600 0 0
GIBRALTAR
20 8 8
80 14 0
750 0 0
350 0 0
400 0 0
5,000 0 0
-
FREDERICTON
20 3 0
95 6 6
500 0 0
—
1,200 0 0
—
1,200 0 0
COLOMBO
24 10 1
—
650 0 0
—
1,000 0 0
-
1,000 0 0
SYDNEY
—
—
—
—
-
-
ADELAIDE
8 13 6
—
—
—
-
-
MELBOURNE
28 7 2
750 0 0
—
800 0 0
10,240 0 0
360 0 0
NEWCASTLE
23 13 2
750 0 0
—
333 6 8
-
333 6 8
CAPETOWN
23 13 2
500 0 0
333 6 8
-
333 6 8
RUPERT’S LAND
VICTORIA
29 May, 1849
16 13 8
52 18 10
750 0 0
350 0 0
—
800 0 0
8,211 12 8
438 0 0
MONTREAL
25 July, 1850
30 May, 1852
SO Nov. 1853
Ditto
SO Nov. 1854
16 13 8
—
500 0 0
—
1,000 0 0
-
1,000 0 0
SIERRA LEONE
13 14 2
18 5 6
500 0 0
10 5 1
800 0 0
12,500 0 0
-
GRAHAM’S TOWN
NATAL
21 19 2
2119 2
19 16 8
- ’
500 0 0
700 0 0
-
402 0 0
682 10' 0
402 0 0
682 10 0
MAURITIUS
—
700 0 0
—
682 10 0
600 0 0
682 10 0
LABUAN
—
850 0 0
—
250 0 0
—
250 0 0


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS
TO THE
COLONIAL BISHOPRICS FUND,
1841—1854.
THE HON. MR. JUSTICE COLERIDGE.
THE YEN. W. H. HALE, Archdeacon op London.
THE RIGHT HON. W. E. GLADSTONE, and
JOHN G. HUBBARD, ESQ.
Treasurers.
REY. ERNEST HAWKINS, Hon. Secretary.
MR. EDMUND R. FAYERMAN, Treasurers' Clerk
OFFICE.—79, PALL MALL, LONDON.


The figures 41 to 54 denote the years 1841 to 1854, in which the Donation was made.
The figure in parenthesis denotes the number of Annual Subscriptions paid; and the figures fol-
lowing the amount, the year for which the last payment was made.
Donations given for the Endowment of particular Bishoprics are denoted thus: —
Bishoprics. Col
Bor Labuan Borneo.
Colony.
Cape Capetown Cape of Good Hope.
Colo Colombo Ceylon,
Fred Fredericton New Brunswick.
G. 8f N. Graham’s Town and Natal Cape of Good Hope.
Gib Gibraltar Gibraltar, &c.
Gra Graham’s Town Graham’s Town.
King Kingston, Upp
Lytt Lyttelton New Zealand.
Kingston, Upper Canada.
Maur Mauritius Mauritius.
Mont Montreal Lower Canada.
Nat Natal Natal.
N.Z New Zealand New Zealand.
For Perth, West Australia.
Bup Rupert’s Land Hudson’s Bay Territory.
S. L Sierra Leone Sierra Leone, Africa.
Tas Tasmania Van Diemen’s Land.
Viet Victoria.... Hong Kong, China.
W- !• A West Indian Africa.
f »* Remittances may be made by a stamped Cheque on a London Banker, crossed
“ Drummond & C 0.,” or by Order on the General Post-Office, London, or Draft
on a London Banker, payable to “ Rev. Ernest Hawrins, 79, Pall Mall, London.’*
If payment be made through a Country Banker, a Letter of Advice addressed to the
Office is requested.


TO THE
COLONIAL BISHOPRICS PUND,
1841—1854.
£ s.
PRINCE ALBERT....S-L. 100 0 51
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN, AND HIS
ROYAL HIGHNESS THE
A.
£ s.
Anderdon, J. P. Esq. Farley-liall, Reading ... 50 0 41
Ditto 20 0 42
Anderson, Mrs. Brighton 1 0 42
A 3 0
A. B 9 0
Rev. Robert 5 0 41
A. B. Taunton 20 0
Rev. J. S. M. Tomiaiton, Chippen-
ham 5 0 41
Andrews, Mrs. Maria 6 0 41
Mrs. 105, Glouc.-pi. Portman-sq. Mont. 10 0 50
Ditto Fred. 15 0
Ditto Fred. 1 0 43
A. B. C 1 0 49
Ditto 30 0 54
Abdy, Rev. J. C. St. John’s, Southwark 5 0 41
T? a. K K A A
Rev. R. Middleton, Sudbury 5 0 41
Anglo-Catholic, Newport, Isle of Wight 5 0 41
Ditto Fred. 5 5
Ditto, Cambridge 5 0 42
A beneficed Clergyman 100 0
Abingdon, Countess of 1 0
An Independent, who loves Evangeliza-
tion S.L. 1 0 51
non 0.-c. i u
An Offering 15 0 50
Ditto (3) 1 0
A. B. M. by Dr. Baron,Cheltenham Adel. 20 0 42
Anonymous •••••• 1 0 41
Ditto Adel. 20 0
Gib. 1 0 42
Abraham, Rev. C. J 10 10
N.Z. 10 42
Ackers, G. H. Esq S.L. 5 0
10 42
Acland, Sir 'l .D. Bt. m.p. 85, Jermyn-st 500 0 41
1 1 42
Ditto S.L. 100 0
5 0 42
Adams, John, jun. Esq Fred. 5 5
.Cape 10 0 42
Fred. 20 0 44
Miss L. S Mont. 5 0
Mrs. Bath S.L. 10
Fred. 2 0 44
Rev. R.L S.L. 5 0
Fred. 1 0 44
Rev. W. Merton College, Oxford. Fred. 5 0 43
1 0 44
1 1 44
Ditto (5) 1 1
..Fred. 10 10 44
Thomas, Esq 5 0
..Rup. 20 0 47
2O 0 49
W. D. Esq. Sydenham Mont. 20 0 50
Adcock, H. Esq. Humbrrstone, Leicester 5 0 50
25 0 50
Addington, 11. U. Esq. Pangbourne, Reading 5 0 42
Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto S.L. 10 0
..Mont. 10 50
Addison, Mrs. Dean’s-yard Fred. 1 0
..Mont. 10 50
A Deo, In Deo 25 0
1 0 50
A. E W 1 O’
Mont, 25 0 50
A. F. H 10 0
5 0 52
Agnew, Rev. T. R. Claydon, Ipswich 5 0
10 0 52
Agutter, Mrs. Barnes 2 0
Berks 2 0 43
Ainslie, M. Esq. Satterthwaite, Ulverst.il/onl. 5 0 50
by a Clergyman 20 0 42
Mrs. Brighton 2 0
Albrighton, Offerings 4 13
by Bishop of London 10 0 41
Bishop of Chichester 5 0 41
Ditto 3 16
by Coutts &Co 100 0 44
Ditto 6 10
by Drummond &Co 20 0 42
by Goslings &Co 72 17 49
Ditto 6 6
by Hoare &Co 10 0 42
. J , TT-11- 1A AO
Ditto 5 0
by Hon. and Rev. H. M. Villiers 10 42
by Mr. J. E. Dibb S.L. 10 52
by Rev A. H 5 0 42
by Rev. A. Horsfall 5 0 48
by Rev. A. W. Mason •*. 10 49'
by Rev. B. Harrison Fred. 250 0 44
by Rev. G. Hamilton 10 42
Ditto 7 10
Ditto 5 11
Ditto 4 3
Ditto 5 11
Alder, Mrs. Hull S.L. 2 0
Alders on, Hon. Mr. Baron, 9, Park-crescent 100 0 41
Rev. C. Kirkheaton, Huddersfield S.L. 10 51
by Rev. G. Lea S.L. 5 0 SI
. J _ . ... . 1 A A AO
Aldridge, Rev. R. Southend Bor. 5 0
Rev. J. S. M. Anderson 10 0 42
A. L. E Mont. 5 0
by Rev. R. Poole 15 0 53
Alexander, Robert, Esq. 20, Gloucester-place 5 0 41
by Rev. T. Coldridge Cape 5 5 46
by Rev. T. V. Fosbrooke Fred. 2 9 44
by Williams &Co 1 1 42
o r 1A no
Allen, Rev. J. C (8) 1 1
Rev. Robt. Barcombe, Lewes 5 0
.(8) 1 1 50
Rev. Robt. Barcombe, Lewes
Alleyne, Rev. J. F. King’s Walden, Welwyn .10 0 41
Clapham S.L. 10 52
Allies, Rev. T. W 100 0
Dursley Mont. 20 0 50
Allnutt, Mrs. Clapham S.L. 1 0
Newbury Post Gib. 20 0 41
A. L. M 10
Almack, Rev. H. n.u. Fawley, Henley-on-Th. 5 0 42
Oxford 1° 4 J
Oxford n.z. i o 42
Alton, by Rev. Durell Fred. 11 0
Alverstoke, Offertory, 16 Oct 8 8
Oxford 5 5 43
A. M. per Mr. Burns 2 12
Oxford (9 dons.) 87 0 50
Oxford Gape 110 50
Oxford 10 51
Ditto 5 0
Amicus Ecclesise 2 0
Oxford 1° 51
Oxford Gra. 1 0 52
Amphlett, Rev. M. Churchlench, Evesham... 1 1 42
Ampney Park, Gloucestershire S.L. 13 52
Anceps S.L. 10 10 52
Silsoe Bor. 10 0 51
Taunton 25 0 42


Ditto Gib. 5 0 42
Ditto 10 0 54
Rev. F. Windsor S.L. 5 0 51
Anstey, Miss 5 0 42
Mrs. Norton, Stockton-on-Tees 5 0 42
Rev. Arthur, Milverton 5 0 42
Appleton, Rev. R. Reading 1 1 42
Appleyard, Rev E. S. Crawley (10) 5 0 54
A. R. B 50 0 51
Arhuthnot, G. Esq. Brighton 5 0 42
G. C. Esq. Liverpool Mont. 25 0 50
Archdall, Rev. Dr. Cambridge 31 10 42
Archer, —, Esq. Brighton 3 0 42
Miss J. Launceston (2) 1 1 43
Arden, Lady, 26, St. James’s-place 15 0 42
Ditto 25 0 45
Ditto 100 0 49
Ditto 25 0 50
Rev. George, Came, Dorchester 3 0 45
Ditto N. Z. 2 0 45
Ditto Collected by 3 0 46
Armagh, Archbishop of (Lord J, G. Beresford), 500 0 41
Ditto 500 0 43
Ditto 200 0 47
Ditto Mont. 100 0 50
Ditto 200 0 53
Ditto King. 100 0 54
Arnaud, E.Esq.Abercromby-sq.Liverp. Mont. 1 1
Arnold, Miss, Market Harborough 5 0
Mrs. G. Caine 5 0
0 53
Rev. T. K 10 0 41
Ditto Fred. 2 2 44
Arthur, A. Esq. 13, Chapel-st. Belgrave-5q.... 1 1 41
Edward, Esq. Torquay 110 41
10 41
Ashbury, Berks S.L. 4 0 52
Ashton Hayes, Kelsall, Chester, per Rev.
G. E. Smith S.L. 9 0
Ashton,Rev. Ellis, Huyton, Liverpool.il/oreL 5 0 50
Ditto Bor. 5 0 52
A. T S.L, 5 0 52
A. T 5 0 53
Atherton, Miss C. Clifton 50 0 43
Miss E. Clifton 50 0 43
Miss Mary, Clifton 50 0 43
Mrs. G. Gresford S.L. 10 51
Atkinson, J. Esq. Leeds S.L. 5 0 51
Miss, Leeds S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. M. Whitehaven 20 0 53
Atty,MissA.J.Snitterfield, Strat.-on-Av.il/oreL 1 0 50
Audley, by Rev. C. Wordsworth 417 42
Auriol, Rev. E. St. Dunstan’s, Fleet-5t.../7ayj. 2 0 46
Austen, Col. Thos. Kippington, Sevenoaks ... 105 0 41
Ditto 5 0 41
Ditto 5 0 42
Ditto 5 0 44
Ditto 2 0 50
Miss, Brighton 1 1 44
Rev. Dr. Cloyne, Cork S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. J. T.Wt.Wickham, Bromley,Kent 5 0 41
Rev. W 5 0 45
0 45
Ditto S.L, 5 0 51
Sir Francis, Portsmouth 4 0 49
Ditto 10 0 53
Ten. Archdeacon 50 0 41
A W r ell-wisher S.L. 2 0 52
Ayling, Rev. W. Barlavington, Petworth 5 0 42
A Young Lady from the country 1 0 41
B 125 0
B.ibington, Rev. J. Cossington,Leicester.S./,. 5 5
Bacon, J. Esq. Compton S.L. 1 0
Badcock, Henry, Esq. Taunton S.L. 5 0
Badeley, Edward, Esq. Temple 50 0
Baggalley, R. Esq., St. Thomas’s Hospital ... 10 0
Bailey, L. R. Esq. Liverpool S.L. 2 2
Mrs. Bexley S L. 10
Rev. H Mont. 20 0
Rev. H. J. North Leverton, Retford ... 4 0
Ditto S.L. 10
Baillie, Rev. J. F. Quennington, Fairf'ord 1 0
Baily, Rev. W. P. Hampton Court Palace .... 5 0
Bairstow, J. Esq. Preston S.L 5 0
Miss, Preston S.L, 3 0
Baker, Miss E. M. Over Ross,Hereford Mont. 2
Rev. R. G. Fulham 50 0 41
Ditto Mont. 5 0 51
Rev. Thomas 1 1 41
Rev. W. F 1 0 4q
Balcombe, Sussex 2 7 42
Baldwin, Rev. .1 Dalton, Riverstone 10 10 41
Baiham Hill Ch ich, per Bishop Carr... S.L. 26 12 51
Ball, Rev. J. Reading 1 0 42
Eallance, John, Esq SL. 10 0 51
Ballinger, C. Esq S.L. 5 0 52
Bampton, Rev. J. B. Yarmouth, Norfolk ..(5) 1 1 54
Bangor, Lord Bp. of (Dr. Bethell) l,Regent-st. 200 0 41
Ditto 100 0 53
Banister, Rev. J. Kelvedon-Hatcb, Ongar, Fred. 10 43
Barbados, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Coleridge) , 50 0 41
Barber, A.H. Esq. 7,Cowper’s-ct.Cornhill.Grre, 10 0 53
Ditto Nat. 10 0 53
Lady M.LittleStukeley, Huntingdon.S’.L. 210 51
Rev. J. H. Little Stukeley, Hunts. S.L. 210 51
Barfoot, Rev. H. Leake, Boston 1 1 49
Baring, J. Esq. Oakwood S.L. 20 0 52
Rev. C. 42, Queen Anne-street S.L. 10 0 52
Thomas, Esq. m.p S.L. 20 0 52
Barker, Misses, Bakewell 10 0 42
Misses Mary and Anne 10 0 43
Mrs. C. St. Philip’s,Birmingham Mont. 3 0 50
Rev. C 1 0 49
Rev. C. R. Horfield, Bristol Nat. 2 0 54
Ditto Gra. 2 0 54
Rev. —, Stow 1 0 42
2O 0 41
Barking Church Union 50 0 41
Ditto 25 0 42
Ditto 25 0 43
Barkly, Miss 20 0 41
Barkworth, Misses, Braffords, Hull 50 0 49
Ditto SL. 10 0 51
Mrs. Hull S.L. 5 0 51
Barlow, G. Esq. Old-square, Lincoln’s Inn ... 1 1 42
Misses, Sydenham Cape 1 0 53
Rev E. W. Bath Mont. 10 50
Rev. G. Helston 5 0 41
Rev. J. W. Gosport Bor. 1 0 52
Barmby, Rev. J. Melsonby, Richmond,Vorks. 1 1 42
Ditto 1 1 «
Ditto (9) 1 1
Barnard, Eliz 2 0 53
Lieut.-Gen. Sir A Bib. 23 0 41
Barnes, Lady, Beech-hill, Barnet Col. 5 0 41
Barnwell, C. F. Esq 10 0 41
Ditto 5 0 43
Ditto 5 0 4a
Mrs Mont. 2 2 50
Baron, G. Esq. Hull S.L. 10 0 51
John, Esq. m.d. Cheltenham Adel. 5 0 42
Barrington, Vise. Shrivenham, Faringdon 10 0 42
Ditto Gib. 5 0 42
5 0 42
Viscountess, Shrivenham, Faringd.Gii. 6 0 42
Barrow, Mrs (2) 1 1 44
Rev. J. Queen’s College, Oxford 25 0 42
Barter, Miss, Sarsden, Chipping Norton 10 49
Miss E. Sarsden, Chipping Norton 10 49
Rev. C. Sarsden’, Chipping Norton 5 0 43
Barton, Mrs, Pontefract S.L. 5 0 51
Bartrum, J. S. Esq. Bath S.L. 3 0 53
Mont. 1 0 SO
Barwell, Captain Mont. 1 0 vO
Basingstoke Fred. 10 0 4 o
Rnfp Mrs. Gbeltenham 100 0 4i
Bate, Mrs. Cheltenham 0 41
Bateman, Rev. J. Huddersfield 5 , t.
Ditto S.L. 1 1 51
.'...' S.L. 1 1 51
iiarv Chapel S.L. 7 7 52
Bath, Penitentiary Chapel S.L. 7 7 ot
St. Michael S.L. 35 10 52
Bather, Mrs. Meol Brace, Shrewsbury 6 0
Rev. W. F 1 « 42
Rev. W. 1 “ 42
Vpn. Arrhdparon
Ven. Archdeacon 1° 0 4-
Bathurst, A. Esq. New College, Oxford 1 0 42
Rev. S. Oxford 20 0 41
Rev. W. H. Barwick, Tadcaster ...S.L. 5 0 51
xvcv. yy. xx. Damiviv, j. •
S. Merton College, Oxford 1 0
—, Esq. Oxford 1 J f
Batt, B. Esq. Chewton Mendip, Bath Gib. o 0 42
Dail, iJ. „
Battlefield and 11 ffington b " 42
Baugh, Miss, Malvern 1 J 42
Ditto i ; «
Ditto'::;;:;::;;;;;;:;;;:;;:.:;.: i \ 44
Miss, 8ath.;..;.'.;;’.;;’.; (5) 1 0
Mrs.’. 5 0 "J?
Baxter, Mr. W. E. Lewes S.L. 10 51


Bayliffe, Miss C. Godmanchester 17 44 Blakesley, Rev. J. W. Ware ..
Bayly, Miss, Brighton S.L. 10 0 51 Blandy, Charles, Esq. Readin
Mrs. Brighton S.L. 5 0 51 J. J. Esq. Reading
..S.L. 10 0 51 Blandy, Charles, Esq. Reading
Bayning, Rev. Lord, Honingham, Norwich... 50 0 41
Ditto 20 0 50
Ditto 50 0 53
Bazeley, Rev. T. T. Poplar (10) 2 2 54
B. B. Oxford 50 0 41
B. D 1 0 41
Beadon, Richard, Esq. Clifton 10 0 42
Beague, Mrs. Dunster S.L. 10 51
Bean, W. M. Esq. 2, Park-pi. Camberwell 1 1 41
Beauford, Mrs. Diddington, Huntingdon S.L. 2 0 51
Bebington, Rockferry Chapel 610 42
Beck, Miss, Bath (3) 1 1 53
Beddington, Surrey 8 8 42
Ditto Fred. 912 43
Beddome, R. B. Esq. Clapham S.L. 2 2 51
Bedford, Mrs. and Miss, Brighton 5 0 42
Ditto 5 5 45
Mrs. S. Stone-wall, Plymouth S.L. 2 0 51
Beevor, Rev. T. Newark 10 0 49
Ditto Bor. 5 0 52
Bellamy, John, Esq. John-st. Bedford-row .... 5 0 41
Bellas, Rev. Septimus, Basingstoke 5 0 42
Belli, Rev. C. A. South Weald, Brentwood ... 10 0 41
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
Bennett, George, Esq. St. Helena 1 0 42
H. E. Esq.Sparkford,CastleCary, King. 5 0 53
Bentinck, Miss R. 25, Portman-square 10 0 41
Rev. W. H. E. Sigglesthorne, Hull 100 0 41
Ditto 100 0 53
Bentley, R. T. Esq. Finningley S.L. 10 51
Benyon, Miss Constance, Brighton Gib. 10 0 42
Mrs. H. Leeds S.L. 2 2 51
Kerens, Yen. Archd. Shrivenham,Faringdon . 50 0 42
Ditto 30 0 43
Beresford, Yen. Archdeacon, Ardagh 5 0 42
Berger, John, Esq S.L. 10 0 51
Bernard, Mrs. Ross 1 0 49
Ditto 1 0 53
Rev. W. Clatworthy, Wiveliscombe ... 5 0 53
Bertie, Hon. and Rev. W. Oxford 1 1 50
Best, Hon. & Rev. S. Abbott’s Ann, Andover 10 0 41
Mrs. Bayfleld-hall, Blakeney S.L. 5 0 51
Bethell, R. Esq. Rise, Hull.. 50 0 53
Rev. G. Eton, Windsor 10 0 53
Bethnal Green Churches, Offertory 10 0 42
Sevan, C. J. Esq. 70, Portland-place ......S.L. 20 0 51
R. Esq. Bury St. Edmunds Adel. 10 0 42
R. C. L. Esq. Lombard-street S.L. 10 0 51
Rev. F. Carlton Rode, Attleburgh 100 0 41
Ditto S.L. 25 0 51
Ditto 50 0 53
Bexley, Lord 100 0 41
Ditto 50 0 42
Biber, Rev. Dr. G. E. Roehampton (5) 2 2 45
Bickersteth, Mrs. E. Shrewsbury 5 0 42
Rev. E. Shrewsbury 5 5 42
Rev. E. AVatton, Ware 21 0 41
Rev. E Adel. 1 1 42
Ditto Mont. 1 1 50
Rev. E. Penn, Amersham S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. R. Clapham S.L. 3 3 51
Yen. E 10 0 53
Biggs, Rev. M. King’s College, Strand 2 2 41
Biiton, Rev. W. Chiselhurst 20 0 42
Rev. AY 4 10 0 53
Birch, Essex S.L. 615 52
Bird, Mrs. 9, Burton-street, Eaton-sq. ...S.L. 10 0 51
W.Wilberforce,Esq.22,Sussex-sq.G.#iY. 10 0 53
Birkenhead, Trinity Fred. 8 0 42
Birkett, D. Esq. Terrace, Clapton 2 0 49
Rev. R. Emmanuel Coll. Cambridge ... 10 0 42
Birmingham, Meeting S.L. 17 15 51
Sundries S.L. 1 2 51
Birt, Miss, Bexley S.L. 1 1 51
Bishop, Rev. R. Ufton, Reading 10 0 42
Rev. W 10 0 46
Blackburn, Miss, Clapham S.L. 1 0 51
Miss C. Clapham S.L. 10 51
Blackstone, Miss M. Winchester 10 51
Ditto 1 0 52
Mrs 10 42
AY. S. Esq. Cast’e Priory 5 0 42
Blackwell, Rev. W. Mells, Frome (14) 1.1 54
Blake, Rev. C. J S.L. 4 0 52
Blakeney, J. T. Esq. Ryde, 1. of AVight, Fred. 5 0 44
..Fred. 5 0 45
5 0 42
J. J. Esq. Reading 5 0 42
William, Esq. Reading 5 0 42
Ditto (10) 1 1 51
Blanshard, H. Esq S.L. 10 0 51
Blatch, John, Esq. Exeter S.L. 1 1 51
Rev. Jas. Basingstoke 25 0 41
Ditto 50 0 53
Ditto 50 0 42
Ditto 25 0 4S)
Ditto Fred. 5 0 43
Blayds, Rev. H 10 41
Blencowe, James, Esq 10 10 53
Rev. James, Sidmouth 50 0 42
Ditto 50 0 53
R. W. Esq. Wakefield 1 0 41
R. W. Esq. Lewes (3) 1 1 44
Bletchley, Miss, Milfield-la. Ken tish-town,.FVe<i. 20 0 41
Ditto 10 0 53
Blew, Rev. W. J 10 10 41
W. Esq 10 10 41
Bliss, Harry, Esq. 11, K. B. W. Temple, Fred. 25 0 43
Rev. James, Holt, Melksham 25 0 41
Rev. W 10 0 41
Blomefield, Sir X. W. Bart. Brighton 10 0 42
Bloxam, Miss, Highgate (3) 10 53
Blunt, Rev. H 50 0 41
Rev. Prof. Cambridge 25 0 42
Bockett, J. Esq. Clapham S.L. 20 0 51
Mrs. sen. Clapham S.L. 2 2 51
Boddington, Rev. T. F. Badger, Shiffnall 20 0 41
Bodrick, Gen. John 20 0 41
Bold, N. D. Esq. Liverpool 5 0 45
Bolton, Lady, Odiham Fred. 10 0 43
Lord, Wensley, Bedale Fred. 5 0 43
■Lioro, vvenstey, rseuaie rrea. u u io
Bombay, Lord Bishop of SL. 5 0 52
Borneo Fund, Balance Bor. 419 17 53
Borough, Mrs. Chetwynd, Newport, Salop ..... 5 0 41
Bosanquet, Hon. Mr. Justice 100 0 41
Ditto 100 0 43
Miss, 12, Montagu-place S.L. 1 0 52
iviibb, iz, ivioniagu-pidce o.ju, i v
Rev. R. AY. Rock, Alnwick 10 0 42
Botfield, B. Esq. Norton, Northampton 50 0 53
Bothamley, T. H. Esq. Champ-hill, Camberw. 10 10 41
Boucher, J. G. Esq Fred. 2 0 43
Rev. H. Thornhill, Stalbridge 100 0 44
Boulger, Rev. J 10 0 53
Boulton, Miss, Haseley-court, Tetsworth...(7) 2 2 49
Ditto (5) 5 5 64
Miss K. E (2) 2 2 44
Bourdillon, Rev.T.Hilton St.lves,Hunts. S.L. 5 0 51
Bourchier, Charles, Esq 20 0 41
General H 2 0 49
Maj.-Gen. Lavant, Chichester ...Mont. 2 0 50
Bourke, —, Esq. Worcester Coll. Oxford 10 41
X. Esq. Worcester Coll. Oxford 5 5 42-
Rev. S. G. Hatherop, Fairford 5 0 53
Bourne, Rev. R. B. Paul’s Cray 31 10 42
Rev. J. B. Monmouth 1 0 42
Boutcher, E. Esq. Broad Clyst, Exeter Fred. 1 0 43
Boutflower, Rev. D. J. Radford, Exeter 7 52
Ditto (2) 1 1 54
Bouverie, Rev. Edward, Coleshill Fred. 4 0 45
Bovell, Rev. M. Hadham, Ware 5 5 41
Bowden, R. C. Esq. Clapham S.L. 5 0 51
School-room S.L. 11 0 52
Bowdler, Rev. Thomas, Onslow-sq.Brompton 50 0 41
Ditto Mont. 50 0 50
Ditto Mont. 500 0 50
Ditto 60 0 53
Bowen, Miss H. Ilfracombe 5 0 42
Rev. F. Leamington 10 42
Bowers, Rev. G. H. Manchester N.Z. 5 0 41
Bowes, —, Esq. Upper Clapton 10 49
Bowlby, Miss 5 0 49
Bowles, Captain W 100 0 41
Bowyer, Miss, Diddington, Huntingdon .S.L. 10 51
Boyd, John, Esq S.L. 10 0 52
Boydell, Mrs. & Mrs. J.Gresford, ChesterS.i. 1 0 51
Boyles, Rev. C. G. Buriton 25 0 41
Ditto Fred. 5 0 44
Boys, Rev. Richard, Maidstone S.L. 1 0 51
Bradfield 13 16 50
Bradford, Earl of S.L. 10 0 52
Robt. Esq. North End, Hampstead 5 5 50
Ditto 10 0 53
XJi.HU I V U
Braithwaite, J. Esq. Oxford’. 12 0 42


£ s. £ s.
Braithwaite, J. Esq S.L. 5 0 51 Buchanan, .T. Esq. Rompe Val. Cape Cape 5 0 43
Brancker, Miss, Oxford 5 0 42 Buckland, Rev. J. R. d.d. Peasemarsh, Rye. 5 0 51
Ditto 3 0 50 Buckle, Rev.M.H.G.Edlington, Morpeth 1 0 49
Rev. T. Wadham College, Oxford 20 0 42
Brereton, Rev. J. L. Paignton, Torquay.. S.L. 2 2 51
Brewin, A. Esq. Tiverton S.L. 20 0 51
Bridges, J. Esq. 23, Red Lion-square ....S.L. 5 0 51
N. Esq. 23, Bed Lion-square S.L. 2 0 51
Bridgnorth Cape 10 0 42
Ditto S.L. 415 52
•Briggs, J. H. Esq „...(4) 1 1 44
Miss, Chichester (4) 5 0 53
Mrs. J. H (4) 1 1 44
Bright, Mrs. Ramsgate S.L. 1 0 51
Brighton, Meeting 35 11 41
St. Andrew 21 0 48
St. George 61 6 44
St. James S.L. 13 7 51
St. Margaret 43 12 44
Ditto &Z. 12 1 51
St. Mark S.L. 12 14 51
St. Mary S.L. 64 4 51
Ditto 210 53
Trinity 56 8 41
Ditto 15 12 42
Ditto 12 7 43
Ditto 17 5 46
Ditto, per Rev. J. B. Collisson.... S.L. 33 8 51
Brise, J. R. Esq. Finchingfleld, Braintree .... 5 0 41
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Bristol S.L. 240 0 53
Ditto S.L. 34 12 54
Broadhurst, Miss, Clapham S.L. 11 51
Broadmead, James, Esq. Langport 2 2 53
Miss E 2 2 53
T. P. Esq. 16, Glouc.-gard., Hyde Park 10 0 54
Broadwood, Rev. J. Wiggonholt, Petworth ... 5 0 41
Ditto 10 0 53
Brock, Rev. T. Droxford Fred. 1 5 44
Brocklebank, Rev. J. King’s Coll. Cambridge 20 0 42
Brockman, Rev. T. Gore Court, Maidstone ... 5 0 42
Brodrick, J. R. Esq 1 1 42
Mrs. M. A. Ramsgate 10 0 49
Broke, Miss, 9, George-street, Bath S.L 10 52
Bromfield, Miss, Snitterfleld, Stratf.-on-Avon 10 0 50
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
Brooke, C. Esq. Meltham Mills S.L. 5 0 52
Miss, Haughton-hall, Shiffnal 2 0 49
Mrs. de C. Market Harboro’ 10 0 44
Rev. J. Haughton, Shiffnal 10 0 49
S. B. Esq. Malmesbury 30 0 41
W. de Capel, Esq. Mkt. Harbro’ ....S.L. 10 0 51
Brother and Sister Viet. B,ooo 0 49
Ditto, for College Viet. 2,ooo 0 49
Ditto, for Chapel Viet. 1,000 0 49
Broughton, Mrs. P. A. Handsacre, Rugeley... 5 0 42
Brovvell, E. M. Esq. Buckingham Palace 6 6 53
Ditto S.L. 5 5 51
Ditto (14) 5 5 54
Brown, A. Esq. Clapham S.L. 10 10 51
Miss W. Ramsgate S.L. 110 52
Mrs. S. Westbury, Wilts 9 0 53
Rev. E. Farleigh, Bath 100 0 53
Rev. H. H. Burton, Sleaford Fred. 1 0 43
Rev. S. Westbury, Wilts 100 0 47
Rev. S 10 0 41
Rev. Walter L 10 0 41
W. Esq. Clapham S.L. 2 2 51
Browne, Miss, per Rev. J. B. Collisson. ...S.L. 3 0 51
Rev. E. H. Kenwyn, Truro (9) 2 0 52
Rev. T. M. Standish, Stroud 25 0 44
Ditto 10 0 50
Ditto Mont, 5 0 50
Ditto 5 0 53
T. W. W. Esq. Bridgnorth S.L. 10 52
Brownjohn, Mrs. Upper Wallop, Andover 10 41
Brownlow, Earl, 12, Belgrave-squave Gib. 200 0 42
Ditto 50 0 50
Bruce, Rev. W. St. Nicholas, Cardiff 5 0 49
Brumell, Rev. E. St. John’s Coll. Cambridge. 5 0 42
Bryant, Mrs. Clapham Common 5 0 49
Brymer, James S. Esq. Bath 5 0 50
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto (11) 2 2 54
Mrs 5 0 53
5 0 53
Ven. Archdeacon 100 0 41
Buccleuch, Duke of, Whitehall Gib. 100 0 43
Ditto Mont. 100 0 50
Buckle, Rev.M.H.G.Edlington, Morpeth 1 0 49
Ditto S.L. 1 0 51
Buckley, Colonel Fred. 1 0 43
Mr. T. W. 5, Orme-square 10 41
Mr. W. A. 5, Orme-square 10 41
Rev. J. W. St. Mary's, Paddington 1 1 42
Buckworth, Mrs. Tottenham 5 0 42
Bull, Rev. H. Lathbury, Newport Pagnell .... 5 0 41
Rev. R. Collected by S.L. 7 5 51
Buller, Rev. A. Mary Tavy, Tavistock. ..N.Z. 5 0 42
Sir J. B. Y. Bart. Brixham Fred. 10 0 45
Bullock, Rev. Edward 20 0 41
Rev. W. Digby, Nova Scotia 4 0 42
Rev. W. T. 18, llam il ton-terrace, Mont. 1 1 50
Ditto 5 0 53
Bund, T. H. Esq. Malvern S.L. 2 0 51
T. H. B. Esq. Callowell, Stroud.. ..Fred. 1 0 43
Ditto Viet. 2 0 43
Bunting, Rev. E. S. Datchworth 10 0 41
Burgess, Rev. J. R. Streatley 1 0 42
Burnaby, Rev. F. G. Barkeston, Grantham ... 50 0 41
Ditto 30 0 S 3
Burnet, Rev. R. Lewes S.L. 10 51
Burney, Rev. E. Gosport (3) 1 1 44
Ven. Archd. Wickham, Witham 50 0 41
Ditto Bor. 5 5 52
Burrows, Rev. H. W. 49, Up. Alb.-st.... Fred. 5 0 45
Bury St. Edmund’s S.L. 8 6 52
Bussage, Gloucestershire 1 0 49
Ditto 1 1 52
Buston, Rev. R. Emmanuel Coll. Cambridge. 10 0 42
Butcher, George, Harlestone 5 0 49
Butler, Major R 1 0 41
Mr. 42, Conduit-street S.L. 1 0 51
Butt, Rev. P. J 1 1 41
Buttemer, Rev. R. D. Winchester 1 0 41
Butterworth, Mrs. Henbury, Bristol S.L. 10 0 51
Rev. George, Henbury, Bristol 3 0 50
Rev. G. Balliol College, Oxford 10 0 SO
Rev. J. H. Stapleton, Bristol 10 10 41
Buxton, Sir E. N. Bart. 10, Up. Grosv.-st. S.L. 250 0 51
T. F. Esq. Brick-lane S.L. SO 0 52
Byass, Mrs. R. B. Westwood, Sydenham...(3) 11 53
C 5 0 49
C. Mrs. A. M 50 0 53
Cabanel, D. Esq. 8, Somerset-pi. Bath 5 0 41
Ditto . I® 3 S 3
Cade, Mrs. Riverhead, Kent 13 0 41
Calcutta, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Wilson) 25 0 42
Caldwell, Capt. C. 3, Audley-sq (3) 2 0 42
Caiman, J. J. Esq. Wore. Coll. Oxford 10 0 42
Calthorpe, Lord 130 0 42
Calvert, Fred. Esq. 9, St. James’s-pl Gib. 5 0 42
Camberwell, St. George..... Fred. 40 5 44
Ditto Viet. 1 6 44
Cambridge, Caius Coll 8 7 42
Christ’s Coll 15 0 42
Donations 646 4 50
St. Mary 5 0 42
Ditt0.”...:"’.:... 98 14 42
St. Mary Less 23 0 43
Ditto 56 0 42
Trinity Con.' 7.:.:.:. 300 0 42
Cameron. Rev. A. A. Hurst, Reading 15 0 42
Ditto 25 0 53
Campbell, Lady, Ucklield 5 0 41
Rev. A. M. 13, Sussex-gardens 50 0 41
Rev. A. Ramsay, Isle of Man 3 0 42
Canning, Viscountess Fred. 5 0 44
Canterbury Cathedral, Whit-Tuesday, 29 May. 170 8 49
Christ Church 2 0 50
St. Augustine’s College Bor. 5 0 51
Canterbury, Lord Archbp. of (Dr. H0w1ey)...1,000 0 41
Ditto 530 0 47
Lord Arcbbp. of (Dr. Sumner) 50 0 53
UIU XUt/UOl). oi t X • wumnviy
Ditto I. S.L. 50 0 52
Dito.:::::::.:::::::...:v w ioo o 53
Cape-Town, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Gray) G.&N. 200 0 53
Carden, Rev. James 13 0 o 0
Cardin, James, Esq 15 0 41
Cardwell, Rt. Hon. £.3, Whitehall-gard.Fmf. 10 10 43
Ditto .’ 13° 0 53


£ s. |
Cardwell, R-ev. E. n.D. St. Alban Hall, Oxford 50 0 42 Cheadle, Staff. Offertory.,
Carew, John, Esq. Exeter Fred. 5 0 44
•Carey, Mrs. Gen. Cadogan-place S.L. 25 0 51
Mrs. Mary Fred. 5 0 45
—, Esq. Wore. Coll. Oxford 10 0 41
Carlyon, Rev. P. Colchester 2 0 41
Carnegie, D. Esq. 7, Athol-cres. Edinburgh... 10 0 54
Carpenter, C. Esq. Walthamstow 20 0 41
Carr, Right Rev. Bishop, Bath S.L. 10 0 51
Ditto 10 0 53
Miss Anne 5 0 53
Rev. E. H. Milhrook, Ampthill S.L. 10 51
Rev. John, Brattlehy, Lincoln 10 10 42
Carrighan, Rev. G. Plymouth Fred. 1 0 43
Carter, Rev. Thomas, Clewer, Windsor 15 0 42
Carthew, P. Esq. Kensington S.L. 5 0 52
Ditto 10 10 49
Cashel, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Daly) 50 0 41
Casson, J. Lees, Esq 50 0 41
Ditto... Gib. 50 0 42
Castellain, Alfred, Esq. Aigburth,Liverp. J/onL 5 0 50
Ditto S.L. 5 0 61
Cator, P. Esq. Beckenham S.L. 5 0 51
Catt, Mrs. Lewes S.L. 10 51
Causton, Rev. C. Stretton, Morton-in-Marsh... 5 0 53
Rev. Dr. Thomas 100 0 41
-Cavell, Rev. R. Bicester S.L. 1 0 51
Coll, by S.L. 4 0 5 2
-Cawdor, Earl, Castlemartin, Pembroke... Gib. 25 0 42
-Cayley, Mrs. Irwell-lane, Runcorn 5 0 41
Cazenove, Phil. Esq. Clapham-common 21 0 41
2O 0 49
Ditto Mont. 25 0 50
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
Ditto S.L. 10 0 51
Ditto 100 0 53
C. B. W 5 0 44
C. C. T., Prov. iii. 9.. 10 0 43
C. D. Rochester 2 2 43
C. H 25 0 42
Chalk, J. J, Esq. 5, Whitehall-place (4) 10 0 45
Chamberlain, Rev. T. C. H. Leamington 10 0 42
Thomas, Esq. Ch. Ch. Oxford 12 0 42
■Chamberlayne, Rev. G. T. Ansford, Castle
Cary 10 0 42
Ditto S.L. 2 0 51
Chambers, J. D. Esq. 7, Connaught-ter 10 41
Mrs. 1, Hill-st S.L. 5 0 51
R. S. Esq. 9, Keppel-st 10 0 41
Rev. William, Ashbury 5 0 42
Champion, Miss, Wandsworth 100 0 42
Ditto 100 0 44
Ditto 50 0 46
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
Miss E. Wandsworth 100 0 42
Ditto 100 0 44
Ditto 50 0 46
Ditto .Mont. 10 0 •50
Misses, Wandsworth S.L. 20 0 51
Ditto S.L. 30 0 51
Champneys, Mrs. Hemsworth, Pontefract .... 1 1 49
Chance, W. Esq. Birmingham S.L. 5 0 51
Chandler, Very Rev. G. Chichester 200 0 41
Ditto 20 0 53
Chapman, Miss, Bexley S.L. 1151
Miss, Highbury S.L. 2 0 52
Miss J. Bexley S.L. 1151
Misses, Wraxall, Bristol S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. Dr. Caius Coll. Cambridge 25 0 42
Rev. J. M. Tendring, Manningtree 25 0 41
Rev. W. A. Fakenham S.L. 10 51
Charlesworth, Miss, Leeds S.L. 3 3 51
Rev. B. Dartield, Barnsley S.L. 5 0 51
Charlewood, T. Esq. St. Alban’s Hall, Oxford 2 2 46
Charlton, Rev. C.D. Laughton, HurstGreenS.X. 1 1 51
Charmouth Rectory, children’s box Gib. 15 41
Offertory 217 41
Charrington, Thomas, Esq. Shadwell... Mont. 3 3 50
Chatfield, Rev. A. W. Marcle, Ledbury...(l2) 1 1 54
Cheadle,Staff. Offertory 318 42
Ditto 3 1 42
Ditto 5 1 42
Ditto 4 8 42
Ditto Viet. 5 10 42
Ditto 3 15 43
Ditto F,cd. 7 10' 43
Ditto 8 16 44
Ditto 31 18 44
8 5 44
Ditto 19 11 45
Ditto 12 4 4G
Ditto 18 16 46
Ditto 6 15 46
Ditto 3 0 47
Ditto 14 6 47
Cheese, Rev. J. A. Crick, Daventry 2 0 53
Chelsea, St. Saviour 5 0 41
Ditto, per Rev. W. Niven S.L. 22 14 51
Trinity, per Rev. S. Crowther S.L. 43 1 51
Cheltenham, C. M. A S.L. 24 17 51
Ditto S.L. 17 52
Ditto S.L. 112 52
Cherry, G. H. Esq. Danford, Reading £5 0 41
Rev. H. C. Burghfield, Reading 2 0 42
Chester, H. Esq. Highgate Fred. 10 10 43
Lord Bishop of (Dr. Sumner) 200 0 41
Ditto 50 0 45
Rev. A. Chiceley, Newport Pagneli ... 15 0 41
Ditto 10 0 53
St. John, per Rev. H. Stowell S.L. 23 0 51
Chichester S.L. 15 2 52
Cathedral 31 1 41
Earl of, 22, Grosvenor-place 100 0 41
Ditto S.L. 20 0 £2
Lordßp.of (Dr. Gilbert )43,Queen Anne-st. 50 0 41
Ditto 25 0 42
Ditto S.L. 20 0 52
Meeting 718 41
Child, Rev. V. K. Takeley, Dunmow 5 0 41
Ditto Fred. 5 0 43
Childe, Rev. C, F Islington S.L. 5 0 51
Chiselhurst, Kent V 8 3 53
Cholmeley, Mrs. Sarah, Bristol S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. J. M. High Cross, Standon ...S.L. 5 0 51
Cholmondeley, Marquis, Malpas 500 0 41
Ditto S.L. 25 0 51
Ditto (2) 25 0 54-
Miss, Gresford... S.L. 1 0 51
Miss A. M. Gresford,Chester S.L. 10 51
Christie, A. J. Esq. Oriel Coll. Oxford 5 0 41
Rev. J. F. Lfton Nervct, Reading Colo. 5 0 41
Ditto 5 0 42
Ditto Colo. 5 0 43
Ditto Colo. 5 0 43
Ditto Colo. 5 0 44
Ditto Colo. 5 0 47
Chulmleigh, Devon 214 43
Church Brampton, Northampton 1 9 54-
Church Miss. Assoc, accounts S.L. 73 II 52
Ditto S.L. 22 11 52
Church Missionary Society (13)A 7 .K. COO 0 54
Church, Miss, Leamington (4) 1 1 53
Rev. R. W. Oriel College, Oxford 50 0 41
Churchman Fred. 30 0 45
Churchwoman 5 0 42
Ditto Bor. 1 0 62
Churton, Ven. Edw. Craike, Easingwold 10 10 53
Cirencester, Glouc 1 1 42
Ditto ~. Viet. 10 43
Clapham, Surrey, Meeting S.L. 20 17 51
Small sums S.L. 17 51
Ditto S.L. 12 51
Ditto S.L. 314 51
Ditto S.L. 2 1) 51
Ditto S.L. 3 4 51
Ditto S.L. 2 18 52
Ditto S.L. 10 52
Clark, John, Esq. Lanestield, Evesham 10 10 53
Miss Ann 5 0 49
Miss Maria 5 0 51
Ditto 5 0 54
Rev. H. Harmston, Lincoln S.L. 2 0 51
Clarke, Miss C. E. Leyton Mont. 10 10 50
Rev. H. D. Tping, Midhurst 20 0 42
SirC. M. Tamworth S.L. 10 0 52
Clarkson, Miss, Godstone S.L. 10 51
Claughton, Rev. P. C. Elton, Oundle 10 0 42
Clayton, D. S. Esq. Per. 10 0 47
J. Esq. Bath ....S.L. 1 1 51
Mrs. E. Harbledowh, Canterbury 3 0 52
Ditto Cape 2 0 52
Rev. C. Cambridge S.L. 10 0 51
C. L. C S.L. 5 0 52
Cleaver, Miss C. Coxwell, Faringdon 5 0 42
Miss M. B. ditto 5 0 42
Miss M. ditto 5 0 42


Cleaver, Misses, Gt. Coxwell, Faringdon.3fo»f,
Rev. J. F. Great Coxwell, Faringdon ... 25 0 41
Ditto . Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto 20 0 53
Clergyman, a 10 0 42
lO 0 49
S.L. 5 0 53
Cambridge Tas. 5 0 44
Ditto N.Z. 5 0 44
Hereford 2 0 43
Welsh 10 49
Clergyman’s daughter 10 0 41
family 215 42
Clericus, Exeter 10 0 48
Clerk in apublic office, by the Bishop of London 20 0 41
Clerke, Yen. Archd. Oxford (2) 1 1 44
Ditto (10) 2 2 54
Ditto 5 0 42
Miss, Eydon, Daventry 5 0 42
Clerkenwell, St. Philip 2 2 53
Ditto 2 2 54
Clogher, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Tottenham) 200 0 41
Cludde, Miss, Wrockwardine, Well. SaI. ..S.L. 1 0 51
Clutterbuck, Rev. 11. Buckland, Frome 5 0 42
Rev. J. Long Wittenham, Abingdon .... 5 0 41
Clyde, Capt. h.n (11) 2 2 52
Mrs. Charmouth, Bridport (2) 1 1 54
C. N. thank-offering 5 0 47
Cobb, F. W. Esq. Margate S.L. 10 0 51
Rev. C. F. Clapham S.L. 1 1 51
Rev. W. T. Maidstone S.L. 1 1 51
T. F. Esq. Margate S.L. 5 0 51
Cobbold, M. A. F 5 0 50
Cockburn, Thomas, Esq Fred. 5 0 44
Cockell, Miss H. Deanery, St. Paul’s.. G. %N. 10 0 53
Cockey, Rev. E. Wadham Coll. Oxford (5) 2 2 46
Cocks, Hon. & Rev. J. S. Eastnor, Tewkesb. 10 0 41
Ditto Gib. 15 0 42
J. Esq 20 0 41
Ditto 20 0 50
Lady C. S ...Fred. 210 44
Lady Margaret Gib. 1 0 42
Coetlogan, Rev. C. F. J. de, Munich 5 0 43
Colbeck, Rev. W. R. Fressingfield, Harlestone 5 0 42
Cole, J. G. Esq. 8. Charles-st. Berkeley-sq. ... 5 0 41
Mrs. by W. Powell, Esq S.L. 10 0 52
W. W. Esq. Exmouth Gib 10 0 42
Colebrooke, Col. Sir W Fred. 20 0 44
Sir T. E. Bart Fred. 25 0 44
Coleridge, F. G. Esq. Ottery Fred. 5 0 42
Hon. Mr. Justice, 26, Park-crescent .... 50 0 41
Ditto Fred. 10 0 43
Ditto Mont. 50 0 51
Ditto 30 0 53
Ditto (14) 10 10 54
Miss, Thorverton, Collumpton 10 0 41
Ditto 10 0 43
Ditto Fred. 10 0 44
Ditto 10 0 49
Ditto (13) 10 54
Mrs. Thorverton, Collumpton (14) 1 0 54
Rev.Dr.Thorverton, Collumpton. Fred. 4 0 44
Ditto (10) 2 0 54
Rev. Edward, Eton College, Windsor... 50 0 41
Ditto Tas. 25 0 45
Ditto .■< 16 13 41
Rev. G. M 20 0 41
Rt. Rev. Bishop 25 0 49
Coles, J. W. Esq. Wore. Coll. Oxford 10 42
Collingridge, Thomas, Esq. Highgate 10 10 41
Collins, Mrs. Charlton, Kent 1 0 49
Rev.T. Farnham, Knaresborough 100 0 50
Colliscn, Rev. F. W. St. John’s Coll. Cambr... 10 0 41
Ditto 10 0 42
Ditto Fred. 3 0 44
Rev. J. B. Coventry 5 0 49
Ditto S.L. 2 2 51
Mrs. Brighton S.L. 2 2 51
Colonial Church Chronicle 25 0 49
Ditto 25 0 50
25 0 50
Colonial Church Society 412 0 41
Ditto 25 2 42
Colpoys, Rev. J. A. G. Droxford Fred. 210 44
Colquhoun, J. C. Esq. 8, Chesham-pl S.L. 5 0 51
Corson, Rev. C. Great Hormead, Buntingford 3 3 50
Ditto .S.L. 1 1 52
Rev. C. St. John’s Coll. Cambridge 5 0 42
. . v/. VUU O VUU. V-’CHIiUXIU.jjC i) V 74
Colvile, Colonel 25 0 41
£ s. £ s.
5 0 50 Colvile, F. C. A. Esq. Barton Heath, Warwick 5 0 49
Ditto Mont. 2 0 50
Ditto 10 0 53
Combe,X. Esq. University Press, Oxford 5 0 41
Come over and help us Mont. 100 0 50
Compton, Hants, small sums S.L. 12 51
Connop, N. jun. Esq Mont. 25 0 50
Ditto 50 0 41
N. Esq 5 0 42
Ditto Fred. 20 0 43
Mrs. Waltham Abbey Fred. 10 0 43
Constable, Rev. John, Ringmer, Lewes 5 0 42
Conway, Rev. W. Maidstone S.L. 2 0 51
Conyers, T. G. Esq. Bridge-st. Blackfrs.. S.L. 1 0 51
Cooke, Miss, Oxford 5 0 41
Ditto (8) 1 0 49
Miss S. Oxford 5 0 41
Ditto (4) 1 1 49
Rev. G. L. Cubbington, Leamington ... 10 0 42
Rev. Thomas, Brighton 1 1 42
Rev. T. L. Oxford 10 0 42
Cookesley, Rev. W. G. Eton Coll. Windsor ... 15 0 42
Ditto 15 0 43
Ditto (3) SO 0 45
Coombe, J. A. Esq. St. John’s, Cambridge .... 5 0 42
Cooper, Miss Mont. 5 0 50
Miss, Norwich (2) 1 1 53
Mrs. E S.L. 1 13 52
Rev. A 25 0 42
Coote, Rev. A. Mountralt, Ireland 50 0 44
Cope, Rev. C. R. Birmingham S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. E. M. Trinity College, Cambridge 5 0 49
Copeland, Miss, Leyton .'. 10 0 41
Ditto Fred. 5 0 43
Ditto 5 0 52
Ditto 1 1 53
Ditto 5 0 53
Ditto (1) 1 1 54
W. T. Esq. 160, New Bond-street 25 0 42
Ditto Fred. 5 0 43
Copleston, Rev. R. E. Barnes 25 0 42
Corbett, Edwin, Esq 10 0 49
Cornish, Mrs. R. St. Sidwell, Exeter 1 1 49
Rev. Dr. Ottery 5 5 42
Rev. C. L. Baltonsb. Glastonbury 20 0 41
Cornwallis, Lady Elizabeth, 12, Park-cres.( 13) 5 0 54
Lady Louisa, 12, Park-crescent (IS) 5 0 54
Corrie, C. Vice-Chanc. Cambridge 10 10 51
W. B. Esq. Gresford, Chester S.L. 1 0 51
Cory, Rev. Robt. Stanground, Peterborough.. 10 0 42
Cosens, W. Esq. Dulwich Gib. 10 0 42
Cotterill, Rev. J. Blakeney S.L. 3 0 51
Cotton, H. Esq. Christ Ch. Oxford 5 0 41
Mrs. Oxford 5 0 42
P. F. Esq Gib. 5 5 41
Rev. R. L. n.n. Oxford S.L. 10 0 51
Wm. Esq. Leyton 200 0 41
Ditto » Mont. 50 0 52
Ditto 100 0 54
Cottrell, Miss, Bath (1) 5 0 53
Miss Elizab.Rousham, Woodstock 10 0 42
Ditto Bor. 10 0 51
Couchman, W. Esq 2 2 50
Coulthard, Rev. R. Sulhamstead, Reading .... 10 0 41
Courtenay, E. Esq Fred. 1 1 43
Hon. & Rev. C. L. 45, Grosv.-pl...Ered. 10 0 43
Lady C. M (11) 1 1 54
Lord, Powderham, Exeter Fred. 3 0 43
Courthope, G. C. Esq. Ticehurst, Hurst Green 10 0 41
Ditto 25 0 41
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto S.L. 25 0 51
Ditto S.L. 1 0 51
Ditto 50 0 53
Miss C. M. Ticehurst, Hurst Gn... S.L. 20 0 52
Rev. W. sen. Lewes 5 0 42
Rev. W. Brighton 5 0 42
Rev. W 5 0 44
Coutts, Miss Burdett, 1, Stratton-st.... Cape 17,500 0 47
Ditto Adel. 17,500 0 47
Ditto S.L. 100 0 52
Cowan, Dr. Reading (2) 10 43
Cowell, Miss, Ramsgate 11 49
Cowley, Rev.A.PartridgeCross,N.W.Amer.7D/f). 5 0 47
Cozens, Miss, Reading 2 2 42
Ditto Nat. 5 0 53
C. R (4) 5 5 54
Crafer, C. Esq. Clapham S.L. 1 1 51


Cranbrook, Trinity Church, some Members
of the Congregation, per Rev. W.
Cleaver S.L. 5 5 51
Crawley, G. A. Esq. 20, Whitehall-place 15 0 42
Miss M. Stretton-on-Dunsm. Coventry 5 0 42
Ditto G. fy N. 210 53
Djtto (5) 2 0 54
Miss S. Stretton-on-Dunsm. Coventry. 5 0 42
Ditto G.%N. 210 53
Ditto (5) 2 0 54
Rev. E.J. Bath 1 1 41
Cresswell, Hon. Mr. Just. 21, Prince’s-gate ... 31 10 42
Crewe, Rev. O. Astbury, Congleton S.L. 5 0 52
Crewkerne 10 0 41
Crichton, Rev. W. J. Crayford, Kent 100 0 53
Crofton, A. Esq. Margate S.L. 1 1 51
Crofts, Rev. G. P. Mailing-house, Lewes. Adel. 10 0 43
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto S.L. 2 0 51
Croly, Rev. Dr 2 0 41
Ditto 2 0 42
Crosby Ravensworth, Cumb 10 53
Crowdy, Rev. A. Compton, Winchester ...S.L. 3 3 51
Crowther, H. Esq 1 0 44
Crutchley, Percy, Esq 15 0 41
Cubitt, Rev. F. W. Belton, Yarm. Norfolk(6) 1 1 47
Cuckfield, Sussex 28 17 41
Cunliffe, Mr. G. Gresford, Chester S.L. 1 0 51
Cunningham, Rev. F. Lowestoft S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. J. W. Harrow S.L. 5 0 51
Cupiss, P. Esq. Edlaston, Ashbourne S.L. 616 51
Curate, Oxford Colo. 1 0 42
Cure, Capel, Esq. Blake-hall, Ongar 20 0 53
Currey, Rev. Geo. SJ. John’s, Cambridge 5 0 42
Currie, Miss, Gresford, Chester S.L. 10 51
Curteis, George, Esq. Canterbury 1 1 41
Ditto (5) 3 0 46
Ditto (4) 2 0 50
Ditto 20 0 53
Ditto (4) 1 1 54
Curtis, Mrs. Anna Maria 20 0 4 9
Curzon Chapel 10 51
Ditto 1 0 52
Viscount, Gopsall, Hinckley Gib. 5 0 42
Cusack, Rev. E. Babcary, Somerton ...Mont. 5 0 50
Cust, Hon, and Rev. H. C. Hatley, Bigglesw. 25 0 42
Ditto Fred. 10 0 43
Hon. and Rev. R. Belton, Grantham... 2i 0 42
Ditto Gib. 10 0 42
Ditto Fred. 2 2 43
Ditto 5 0 50
Ditto 5 0 53
Hon. Col. Sir E. 30, Hill-st 25 0 42
C. W 15 0 51
D 2 0 53
Daintry, T. R. Esq 5 0 53
Dale, .1. A. Esq. Ballio) College, Oxford 5 0 41
Rev. Jos. Donington, Salop 5 0 41
Dallington, per Rev. R. R. Tatham S.L. 11 51
Dalrymple, Sir A. J. Bart. Hove, Brighton ... 20 0 42
Dalton, Hon Sophia Grab. 100 0 53
Mrs. Wolverhampton S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. C. Kelvedon 20 0 42
Rev. C. B. Highgate 50 0 41
Rev. W. Wolverhampton 10 0 42
Ditto S.L. 5 0 51
Daniel, Miss, Bournemouth, Poole 1146
Dansey, Rev. W. Donh.St. And. Shaftesb.(lS) 1 I 54
Darling, Sir Ralph, Bart. Brighton 2 0 42
Darlot, Henry, Esq (2) 1 1 42
D’Arlot, Mrs (3) 1 1 53
Darnell, Rev. W. N. Stanhope, Durham 100 0 41
Ditto 100 0 49
Dartmouth, Earl of 100 0 42
Ditto Fred. 50 0 44
Ditto 50 0 49
Ditto 100 0 50
Ditto 100 0 53
Daubeny, Lieutenant-General, Bath 5 0 49
Ditto Mont. 2 0 50
Mrs. Martha, Henbnry, Bristol. .. Mont. 20 0 50
Rev. G. W. Seend, Melksham....ilfoK7. 10 0 50
Ditto 20 0 49
Davies, Rev. H. 63, Connaught-terrace 1 0 41
Davis, Miss J 10 0 49
Mr. T 10 43
Davy, Sir William G. Bath 21 0 41
Ditto 5 0 49
Ditto 25 0 53
Davys, Rev. Canon, Peterborough S.L. 10 0 51
Dawes, Henry, Esq. Crabbett, Crawley 20 0 41
Ditto 10 0 51
Ditto 10 0 53
Miss E. Winchelsea S.L. 5 0 51
Dawnay, Hon. W. H 5 0 41
Hon Miss, York (10) 1 1 54
Ditto ....S.L. 5 0 52
Hon. P. York (10) 1 1 54
Dawson, P. Esq. Hornby, Lancaster Fred. 20 0 44
Rev. H. Hopton, Harling 21 0 42
Rev. J. and Mrs 4 0 49
Robert, Esq. Woodleigh, Kingsbridge.. 1 1 49
Day, Miss, Amersham S.L. 5 0 52
Deacon, a 2 0 42
Deacon, J. Esq Tas. 20 0 42
John, Esq. Birchin-lane S.L. 50 0 51
Dealtry, Miss, 8, Bedford-square S.L. 5 0 51
Miss A S.L. 5 0 61
P. Esq. 8, Bedford-square 50 0 41
Deane, Rev. G. H. Clifton 1 1 49
Delafield, Joseph, Esq 100 0 41
100 0 41
Delafoss, Rev. D. C. Wandsworth 3 3 41
Delamain, Mrs 2 0 50
De Lancey, Miss, Cheltenham Mont. 5 0 50
De Lisle, Mrs. Buccleuch-terrace. Clapton ... 1 0 49
Delmar, C. A. Esq. Worcester Coll. Oxford... 10 42
Denison, E. B. Esq. 42, Queen Anne-street... 20 0 53
Denman, Captain the Hon. Joseph, r.n. S.L. 5 0 51
Mrs. Lewes S.L. 10 51
Dennis, Miss, Clapham S.L. 2 0 51
Denny, Rev. R. Shidfield Fred. 2 0 43
Dent, John, Esq. Worcester 10 0 49
William, Esq. Worcester 10 0 49
Denton, Rev. R. A. King’s Coll. Cambridge.. 5 0 41
Ditto.... Cape. 5 0 43
Ditto (14) 1 1 54
W. Esq. 25, Charterhouse-square 10 42
Derby S.L. 123 0 52
Ditto S.L. 100 11 52
Desart, Countess of, Brighton 5 0 42
De Saumarez, Rev. Lord, Pocklington....GfS. 10 0 42
De Teissier, Rev. P. A. Woodcote-pk. Epsom 3 3 50
Deverell, J. Esq. Emsworth S.L. 5 0 51
Mrs. 3, Brunswick-terr. Brighton 25 0 41
Devereux, Hon. Miss Fred. 210 44
Devon, Earl of Fred. 10 0 43
Devon and Exeter S.L. 50 0 52
Ditto S.L. 67 4 52
Ditto S.L. 27 10 52
Devonshire, Duke of, Brighton Gib. 25 0 42
Dewar, Miss, Clapham S.L. 10 51
R. Esq. Clapham S.L. 1 0 51
Dewing, Mrs. Carbrooke, W r atton, Norfolk ... 5 0 53
Richard, Esq. Norwich 10 0 41
Dicken, Rev. Dr. Norton, Woolpit 20 0 42
Dickenson, J. W. Esq Fred. 1 0 43
Dicker, T. Esq. Lewes S.L. 10 51
Dickinson, F. H. Esq. 8, Upper Harley-street 100 0 41
Mrs Mont. 5 0 50
Rev. J 10 47
Didham,Rev.R.C.Swadlingcote,Burton-on-T. 1 1 44
Digby, Rev. W'illlam, Worcester 10 0 42
Rev. K. H. Fakenham S.L. 2 2 51
Dingwall, Chas. Esq. 2, Idol-la. Tower-st 2 2 41
Ditto (5) 2 2 54
Dixon, C Esq. Emsworth S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. R. Isle of Man S.L. 5 0 51
Dodd, Rev. P. S. Pensburst, Tunbridge 100 0 42
Dods, Rev. R. Fleet, Holbeacb S.L. 2 2 51
Dodson, P. Esq. Worcester College, Oxford.. 10 42
Rev. N. Abingdon 5 0 41
Dodwell, Miss, 21, W’oburn-place 5 0 49
Dogmersfield, Hants Bor. 3 0 52
Domville, J. G. Esq. Old-squ. Lincoln’s-inn.. 1 I 42
Don, Lady Gib. 10 0 42
Dorsett, Miss M. S. Reading Mont. 5 0 50
Doughty, Miss, Uiford, Ipswich 2 2 44
Douglas, C. M. A S.L. 13 10 52
Rev. P. H. Morebath, Bampton... S.L. 5 0 51
Sir H. Bart. 15, Green-street 10 10 42
Dover S.L. 917 58


£ s.
Dowell, J. Esq. Weston-super-Mare 10 0 53
Downe, Viscount, 8, Belgrave-square ....S.i. 10 0 51
Ditto (12) 1 1 53
Viscountess, 8, Belgrave-5quare......(5) 1 1 53
Downes, Rev. R. Berwick St. John, Salisb.... 10 0 42
Ditto Mont. 3 3 50
Downing, J. Esq 10 41
Doxat, Miss, Leyton Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto G.$N. 5 0 53
Miss Clara, Clare-lodge, Clapham-pk... 210 53
Miss J. Clare-lodge, Clapham-park 210 53
Mrs. Queen’s-road, Clapham-park 5 0 53
D’Oyly, Rev. Dr. Lambeth 50 0 41
D. P. W 5 5 44
5 5 44
Drage, Rev. W. H. Rochester (13) 1153
Drake, Rev. Dr. Langton-on-Swale 10 0 41
Drummond, Rev. J Achurch S.L. 210 52
Rev. R. Feering, Kelvedon 2 0 50
Rev. S. R. Brighton (0) 2 2 46
Dry, Rev. W. Minster, Sheppy 50 0 53
Dublin, Ld. Archbishop of (Dr. Whately) (12) 100 0 52
Driffield, X. Esq. Wallingford 10 0 41
Duke, Dr. Hastings 10 0 41
Ditto 5 0 43
5O 0 42
Dumergue, F. Esq, 10, New-sq. Lincoin’s-inn 5 0 41
Duncan, P. D. Esq. New College, Oxford 10 0 41
XJ UlltdU, X . XJ . uorj. xi v, TI
Duncombe, G. S. Hornby, Northallerton 100 0 53
Hon & Rev. Aug. 49, Berkeley-sq 50 0 54
Dundas, Lady C. Marske, Guisborough 1 0 50
Dunlap, Rev. A. P. St. John’s Coll. Oxford.. 2 2 4!
Dunmore, Earl and Countess of Fred. 5 0 44
Dunnage, l!ev. J. A. Kingsw. Epsom (9) 1 1 49
Dunster, Rev, H. P. Tottenham 1 0 42
Dupuis, Rev. Harry, Eton College, Windsor 30 0 41
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto 10 0 53
Durell, Misses, Mongewell, Wallingford Mont. 10 0 50
Ditto 40 0 53
■Ditto Bor. 10 0 52
Rev. D. Oxford 50 0 41
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
Rev. T. V. Pyrton, Tetsworth 20 0 41
Ditto 10 0 49
Ditto 20 0 53
Durham, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Maltby) 315 0 41
Olfenory 2 2 45
Durnford, Rev. F. E. Eton, Windsor 10 0 41
Dusautoy, Rev. W. S. Eton, Windsor ..Fred. 2 0 44
Duval, P. S. Esq. 5, Regent-square 5 0 53
Dyke, Sir P. H. Bart. Sevenoaks 15 0 41
Dyne, Finn. Mrs. Bradley' SL. 10 51
Rev. J. B. Highgate 10 0 41
Dyson,MissM'.A.Dogmersfield,Odiham Fred. 5 0 42
Rev. C. Dogmersfield, Odiham ...Fred. 5 0 42
Eade, Rev. J. D, Aymliffe, Darlington 5 0 53
Earle, W. H. B. Esq. Holton-park, Oxford... 10 0 42
East, R. H. Sir E. H. Bart 20 0 41
Eastbourne, Parish Church S.L. 4 5 52
Ditto, Trinity S.L. 819 52
Ditto S.L. 1 1 52
Easter Offering 5 0 50
Ditto 2 0 52
E. B S.L. 1 0 52
E. B 5 0 51
E. C 5 0 49
E. C. F Fred. 100 0 43
Ditto 300 0 49
Ditto Mont. 300 0 50
Ditto Nat. 600 0 52
Ditto Nat. 400 0 53
Eccles, John, Esq. Leyland, Chorley S.L. 12 0 51
E. C. P 13 50
E. D S.L. 10 51
E. D. B 5 0 41
Eden, J. Esq. Liverpool S.L. 1 1 51
Rev. Robert 1 1 41
1 1 41
Edgington,B. Esq. Lavender-h. Battersea S.L. 5 0 51
Edmeades, Rev. W. H. Nurstead, Gravesend 5 0 53
Edw r ards, Miss, 2, Park-crescent 1 1 42
Miss, Diddington, Huntingdon, ....S.L. 15 51
Mr. W. Clapham S.L. 2 2 51
Rev. B. Ashill, Watton, Norfolk 100 0 41
Ditto 50 0 50
£ s.
Edwards, Rev. D. Festiniog, Tanyliwleh.s L. 10 51
Rev. EJ. Trentham (13) 2 2 54
Rev. W. Hadlow Down, Uckfield.S.X. 10 61
E. F '. 1 0 41
Ditto 10 0 53
Effingham, Earl of, Rotherham..... S.L. 20 0 51
E. G 10 41
Egerton, DoWager Lady, Wrexham 10 0 49
H. Esq. 6, Old-square, Lincoln’s-inn ... 5 0 42
Lady Francis Gib. 25 0 42
Lord Francis, 18, Belgrave-square 10 0 42
Mrs 5 0 49
Mrs. Gresford, Chester S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. John, Vale Mascal, Bexley 5 0 50
Ditto 5 0 53
W. Esq. 7, St. James's-square ... Mont. 50 0 50
E. H. H. Oxford 25 0 41
E. L Maur. 5 0 52
Ditto, for late E. N Maur. 5 0 52
Ditto Maur. 10 0 52
Ditto, for late J. N Maur. 5 0 52
Elder, Rev. Edward, Durham 5 5 41
Eldon, Earl of 200 0 41
Ditto 1000 0 47
Ellerton, Rev. E. d.d. Magdalen Coll. 0xf.... 100 0 41
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Ellice, Rev. James, Clothall, Baldock 10 0 53
Elliott, Misses, Torquay S.L. 5 5 51
Rev. E. B 10 0 42
Rev. E. B S.L. 10 0 52
Rev. H. V. Brighton 10 10 42
Ditto S.L. 25 0 51
Anon, by ditto S.L. 100 0 51
Ellis, Rev. C. Cranborne, Windsor 10 0 53
Rev. J. Henley-in-Arden 10 0 47
Ellison, H. Esq. Oxford 1 0 42
Rev.N.T.Huntspill, Bridgewater Fred. 3 0 43
Mrs. ditto Fred. 2 0 43
Rev. H. J. Edensor, Bakewell (7) 1 1 47
Miss, 40, Jermyn-street (5) 1 1 54
Elmsley, William, Esq 5 5 41
Elphin, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Leslie) .... 100 0 41
Elrington, Rev. Dr .Fred. 5 0 45
Elsden, Mrs. Lynn 20 0 50
Elsley, Miss E. Skipton Bridge, Thirsk Mont. 1 0 50
Elsworth, Rev. G. S. Brighton 5 5 42
Ely, Lord Bp. of 100 0 41
Emeris.ltlev. J. Gloucester 5 0 41
E. M. L. a tithe of her yearly income ICO 0 43
Emsworth, Sermon S.L. 710 51
E. N SL. 10 0 51
England, Miss,24,Up.Phil.-pi. Kensington (1) 1 1 53
Erie, W. Esq Fred. 5 0 46
Errington, Major 51st Regiment 1 1 46
Rev. J. R. Ashbourne 10 10 41
Ditto (7) 2 0 50
Erskine, Rt. Hon. T. Eversley, Winchfield... 50 0 42
Ditto (11) 10 0 52
Miss Mary, Avonclmrch Gib. 20 0 42
Miss, 11, Montagu-square G.fyN. SO 0 53
Mrs. Mary 100 0 41
E. S 10 0 44
Estcourt, Rev. E.W. Newnton, TetburyS.X. 10 0 52
Rev. M. H S.L. 10 51
T. G. B. Esq. 82, Eaton-place 50 0 41
Evans, Misses, Darley-house, Derby S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. Evan Colo. 10 43
Rev. John, 67, Lincoln’s-inn-fields 20 0 41
Rev. T. S. St. Leonard’s, Shoreditch... 5 0 41
Ditto Mont. 3 0 50
Everard, Rev. D. Burnham Thorpe S.L. 3 0 53
Everest,Rev.W. F.Laneast, Launceston Bor. 10 48
Evetts, T. Esq. C. C. C. Oxford 5 5 43
Exeter 12 17 44
Ditto Gib. 2 1 44
Lord Bishop of (Dr. Phillpotts) 40 0 54
Archdeacon of 25 0 42
Rector of St. Martin's 2 0 42
St. Stephen 712 42
St. Sidwell 8 0 42
Ditto 4 4 43
Ditto 4 1 44
Ditto 3 1 45
E. Y S.L. 5 0 52
Eyre, C. Esq. Welford Park, Newbury 10 0 48
Ditto 10 0 50
G. E. Esq. Warrens, Lyndhurst....S.X. 50 0 51
Ditto .' S.L. 50 0 53


( 11 )
£ s.
Eyre, Mrs. M. A.’ 5 0 48
Ditto 5 0 50
Rev. C. F. Bury St. Edmund’s „..S.L. 9 3 51
F . 5 0 51
Ditto, Margaret Chapel 2 0 41
Ditto, Clericus 10 50
Fagan, Rev. G.H.Kingweston,Somerton. Fred. 5 0 44
Mrs. Colonel Fred. 1 0 43
Fair, C. J. Esq. 7, Warnford-court 10 0 4!
Faithfull, Rev. F. J. Hatfield S.L. ,6 0 51
Rev. J. G S.L. 5 0 52
Falconer, R. H. Esq. Lewes 3 0 42
Falkner, T. A. Esq. St. John’s, Oxford 5 0 41
Palmer, Sussex S.L. I 7 51
Falmouth 917 42
Family Subscriptions, by J. Browell, Esq 65 0 41
Faushawe, Col. E. Royal Engineers 5 0 41
F. Esq Fred. 2 2 43
Miss A 10 0 49
Ditto S.L. 10 0 51
Ditto 5 0 50
Miss C. E. Richmond, Surrey 50 0 41
Miss H 10 0 49
Ditto S.L. 10 0 51
Rear-Admiral, Godstone S.L. ,5 0 51
Diito SL. 20 0 51
Parish, J. Esq. 8, Lancaster-place S.L. 2 2 52
j. Esq. Norwood, Hounslow S.L. 5 0 51
Farley, Rev. T. Ducklington, Witney 5 0 41
Ditto Fred. 2 0 43
Ditto Fred. 1 0 44
Ditto Viet. 2 0 48
Ditto Mont. 2 0 50
Ditto 10 0 53
Farnaby, Rev. Sir C«F. Bart. West Wickham. 10 0 41
Ditto 10 0 42
Ditto.... Fred. 10 0 43
Ditto 10 0 49
Fames, Mr. Lewes (3) 10 45
Mr. J. Lewes S.L. 10 51
Mr. W. Lewes S.L. 1 0 51
Farquhar, Sir W. R. Bart. IP, St. James’s-st... 100 0 41
Ditto S.L. * 0 51
Ditto Bor. 25 0 51
Ditto 100 0 53
Farrer, J. W. Esq , 10 0 53
Ditto 20 0 42
W. L. Esq Fred. 10 0 43
Faulconer, R. H. Esq. Lewes S.L. 5 0 51
Fawsett, Rev. J. Carlisle S.L. 5 0 51
Fawssett, Rev. W 10 0 42
F. C. C 5 0 50
Fearnley, llev. J. King’s College, Strand 10 10 41
Fearon, Miss Mont. 1 0 60
Rev.D.R.Assington, Sudbury 10 10 43
Ditto 5 0 53
Feetham, Rev. W. Newqiort, Monmouth 5 0 53
Feilden, Miss, Gresford ....S.L. 1 0 51
Miss Eliz (3) 1 0 54
Miss M. D. Gresford S.L. 10 51
Fenn, Rev. J. Blackheath S.L. 5 0 52
Rev. J. F. Stotfold S.L. 2 2 52
Ferrybridge, Yorkshire S.L. 13 G 51
Feversham, Lord, York 100 0 41
Few, Charles, Esq. Streatham Mont. 5 5 50
F. F 30 0 53
Ffarington, Mrs. Wordenhall, Preston ...S.L. 20 0 52
Field, George, Esq. Clapham Common ...S.L. 5 5 51
Miss A. Polden, Bridgwater Fred. 5 0 43
Rev. E Mont. 1 1 50
Rev. J. W. Pidley, St. Ives, Hunts. ... 10 53
Rev. T. St. John’s Coll. Cambridge 2 0 53
Fielden, Miss Elizabeth (2) 1 0 53
Finch, Rev. William 10 0 41
Rev. W. Warboys, Huntingdon ...(14) 2 0 54
First Fruits, Ecclesiastical Commissioners.... 20 0 41
Fisher, Dr. Dublin 5 0 53
Mr. Bramley, Guildford 10 52
Mrs. Basildon S.L. 5 0 51
Mrs. J 10 0 49
Rev. R. B. Basildon 20 0 42
Ditto S.L. 5 0 51
Fitzherbert, Rev A. '1 issington, Ashburne... 5 0 43
Fitzherbert, Rev. A. Tissington, Ashburne .. 5 0 44
Fitzroy Cbapel IV. I. A. 313 52
Fitzroy, Mrs S.L. 2 2 52
Rev. A. Fakenbam, Thetford S.L. 3 3 52
F. L 10 0 50
Fletcher, Capt. E. 34, York-place 25 0 41
Major E. C. Ulcombe-pl. Maidstone ... 52 10 42
Miss Louisa I 10 41
J. Esq. Worcester College, Oxford 3 3 42
John, Esq 1 0 45
Sir Henry, Bart 50 0 42
Foljambe, Mrs. Exton, Oakham S.L. 3 0 51
Foord, Rev. R. H. Foxholes, Driffield 2 2 42
Foord-Bowes,Rev.T.F.D.n.Barton,Silsoe.GiS. 10 0 42
Ditto 5 0 50
Ditto 10 0 53
For the Gospel’s sake 100 0 50
Forbes, A, P 1 0 42
Lady Harriet S. Edinburgh 5 0 41
Rev A. P. Bras. College, Oxford 1 1 50
W. Esq. 4, Shandwick-pl. Edinb..FmL 5 0 44
Ford, Rev. J. Heavitree, Exeter S. L. 20 0 49
Rev. J . 50 0 53
Rev.R.W.Lit.Risington,Stow-on-Wold. 2 0 42
W. Esq. 4, Shandwick-pl. Edinburgh . 1 1 49
Ditto Mont. I 1 50
Ditto (4) 1 1 54
Fordyce, Capt 3 0 42
Forster, Sam. Esq. 6, New-sq. Linc.-inn.Gis. 10 0 42
Fortescue, Rev. R. H. Ailing. Woodbridge .. 5 0 41
Fosbery,Rv .T.V.Sunningdale,Chertsey.Fred. 5 0 44
Foster, John 10 0 41
Miss... 10 51
Fowler, Rev. C. Crawley (10) 1 0 51
Fox, E. Esq. Beaminster 10 0 53
E. B 5 0 41
Rev. H. Allington, Bridport S.L. 10 52
Foye, Rev. J. Dunham, Norfolk 10 0 41
Foyster, Rev. H. S. Hastings S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. J. G. Hastings 50 0 41
Ditto Mont. 50 0 50
Ditto S.L. 50 0 51
Frampton, Mrs. Laverstock-green, St. Alban’s 5 0 54
Rev. C.FLaverstook-gr.St. Alban’s, Nat. 5 0 54
France, Rev. G. St. John’s, Westminster 5 5 41
Rev. T. Davenham, Northwich S.L. 1 0 51
Franklin, Capt. Sir J Tas. 50 0 42
Fraser, Capt. A. H. h.h.a. Woolwich....Fred. 10 0 44
James, Esq. 0xf0rd..... 5 0 41
Mrs. M. M Gib. 20 0 42
Ditto 20 0 42
Freeman, Miss, Lewes S.L. 10 51
P. Esq. St. Peter, Cambridge 10 10 42
Freewill offering Mont. 1 0 50
French, Rev. Dr. Jesus Coll. Camb 25 0 42
Frere, B. Esq Gib. 20 0 42
Ditto Mont. 10 0 SO
George, Esq. 45, Bedford-square 100 0 41
Ditto.... Gib. 10 0 42
Ditto Cape. 100 0 53
Miss, Bath 10 42
Ditto (10) 10 52
P. J. Esq. Dowm. College, Cambridge.. 10 0 42
Freshfteld,J.W. jun.Esq.Betchw.ReigateFm/. 5 0 43
Friend at Compton S.L. 10 51
at ditto S.L. 10 51
at Schwalback S.L. 16 51
Barbados W.I.A. 111 49
Ditto 1 0 49
Ditto 10 50
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
Barnes 10 41
Bath 5 0 53
Ditto 50 0 53
Ditto 1 0 42
Ditto 10 42
Brighton 3 3 42
Ditto 1 0 42
Ditto 1 0 42
Ditto 5 0 43
by Archdeacon Hare S.L. 31 10 51
by Archdeacon Le Mesurier. Gib. 210 44
by Dr. Rumsey, Clifton S.L. 1 1 52
by J. H. Markland, Esq Fred. 100 0 46
by Miss Lowe, Southgate S.L. 3 0 51
by Miss Smart N.Z. 2 2 41
by Mr. Symes 100 0 41
by Rear-Admiral Fanshaw e S.L. 15 0 51


Ditto 30 0 53
Ditto 4 0 53
Ditto 20 0 53
Ditto 5 0 53
by Rev. G. Barker S.L. 110 51
by Rev. G. Lea S.L. 5 0 51
by Rev. H. Venn S.L. 10 0 51
by Rev. J. Bateman, Huddersfield. S.L. 12 0 51
by Rev. J. Fisher S.L. 10 51
by Rev. J. Tucker, Hampstead ...S.L. 2 2 51
by Rev. W. H 5 0 43
Ditto 2 0 43
Ditto 5 0 44
by Rev. W. Jowett S.L. 10 61
Ditto S.L. 10 51
Ditto S.L. 2 2 51
by Williams &Co 2 0 42
Ditto Tas. 1 0 42
content that the left band should not
know what the right hand doeth, per
Rev. R. Yarker, Chester 10 0 42
Oxford 1 0 42
to the cause 10 41
to the Established Church 30 0 41
Wanstead 5 0 42
Triends, Bath 10 41
by J. H. Markland, Esq Lytt. 100 0 50
by Miss M. E. Longmire S.L. 10 52
by Rev. F. Maurice 26 10 43
by Rev. G. Ray 10 10 49
Frith, Rev. W. A. Handsworth, Birmingham 2 0 54
Trome Selwood 8 0 42
Frost, Rev. A. P S.L. 10 62
Froude,Miss M.A.Denbury, Newt.Abb.Afowt. 20 0 50
Frowd, Mrs. 8, Oxford-row, Bath (4) 11 53
Rev. E. Clatford, Andover S.L. 2 0 51
Ditto 10 0 41
Ditto 2 0 49
Ditto 5 0- 53
F. S. by Rev. J. R. Wood Gib. 5 0 42
Fullagar, Mrs. Lewes _lO 42
Fuller, Rev. T. 1, Eaton-place, Pimlico 25 0 41
Fursdon, Mrs. Cadbury, Tiverton Fred. 5 0 44
F. W. Oxford 10 41
Newport 2 0 49
G. MissS 10 42
G. A. B 1 1 50
Gabriel, Miss, Rowde, Devizes 5 0 50
Gale, Miss, Harrow S.L. 10 52
Galway, Dow. Viscountess, Retford S.L. 4 0 51
Gambler, Rev. F. 69, Eccleston-square (8) 1 1 48
Gardiner, Mrs. Lincoln Gib. 5 0 42
Rev. W. Rochforcl 25 0 42
T. Esq. Wore. College, Oxford 1 1 42
Garnett, W. Esq.Quernmore,Lancaster Fred. 3 3 44
W. J. Esq. Bleasdale, Garstang..Jfo«L 5 0 50
Garratt, Thomas, Esq, Herne-hill Fred. 5 0 43
W. A. Esq. Hampstead Rvp. 3 0 45
Garrett, Miss J. Dulwich S.L. 5 0 51
Garstin, Miss (4) 1 0 44
Gaskell, Miss, 18, York-pl. Portman-sq.Afont. 5 0 50
Gaunt, R.ev. Charles, Isfield, Uckfield 10 0 42
Ditto 5 0 53
Gaussen, W. Esq. 12, Montagu-place S.L. 5 0 51
Gawen, Mrs 10 0 50
Gaye, Rev. C. H. Ipswich 1 0 41
G. B. L. Madeira 5 0 41
Gear, R. Esq (1) 1 1 41
Robert, Esq. Lewes 5 0 42
Geary, Sir W. Bart. West Peckham, Gib. 10 0 42
Gee, Mrs. Mary, Earl’s Colne, Halstead 20 0 42
Cell, James, Esq. Isle of Man Maur. 10 62
Ditto Grab. 10 52
Ditto Nat. 10 53
Ditto Per. 10 53
Ditto King. 10 53
Ditto S.L. 10 52
Rev. P. Duffield, Derby S.L. 5 0 52
G. H. by Rev. J. S. M. Anderson 600 0 41
Gibbons, Mrs. M. E Mont. 1 0 50
Gibbs, G. H. Esq. 11, Bedford-square 50 0 41
Ditto Gib. 25 0 42
Miss, Birmingham S.L. 5 0 51
Ditto Gib. 25 0 42
Ditto Mont. 50 0 50
Ditto 100 0 53
Gibraltar, Collections Gib. 600 0 42
Ditto Gib. 200 0 42
Ditto .....Gib. 285 8 42
Ditto Gib. 130 0 43
Ditto Gib. 59 9 43
Ditto Gib. 41 0 43
Ditto Gib. 23 0 44
Gibraltarian, an old Gib. 10 0 42
Gibson, Rev. J. Jesus College, Cambridge .... 5 0 53
Rev. M. Fawley, Southampton 50 0 42
Gidoin, Rev. J. L. Limeston, Exeter 20 0 42
Giggleswick, Yorkshire 15 13 42
Ditto Fred. 11 13 43
Gilbee, Rev. W. Gwennap, Truro Mont. 2 0 50
Gilbert, Miss, 25, Clarend.-sq. Somers-town.
Mont. 1 1 50
Ditto S.L. 1 0 51
Gilby, Rev. W. R. Beverley Fred. 50 0 44
Gillett, Rev. G. E.Waltham, Melt. Mowbray. 52 10 41
Gilliatt, J. Esq. Clapham S.L. 5 0 51
Gilly, Rev.Dr.Norham,Berw.-on-Tweed..S.i. 5 0 61
Gilpin, Miss J. East Sheen 10 0 SO
Ditto 10 0 53
Mrs. VVrockwardine, Wells, Salop S.L. 5 0 51
Gipps, Geo. Esq. Howletts, Canterbury 52 10 41
Ditto 10 0 43
Ditto 20 0 44
Ditto Fred. 2 0 44
Ditto 10 0 45
Ditto 10 0 46
Ditto 5 0 46
Ditto 7 0 48
Ditto 5 0 49
Ditto 5 0 49
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
Ditto 5 0 50
Ditto 10 10 53
Ditto 5 5 54
Ditto 5 5 54
Mrs. Howletts, Canterbury 5 0 41
Giraud, Rev. H. A. Tottenham 1 1 42
Girdlestone, S. E. Esq. 10, New-sq. Linc.-inn 5 0 41
Gladstone, Capt. Bowden, Chippenham 100 0 41
J(An, Esq 500 0 41
Robertson, Esq 75 0 41
Rt. Hon. W. E. m.p 200 0 41
Ditto 100 0 53
Thomas, Esq. Frognal, Torquay 75 0 41
G. L. J 10 0 53
Gloucester & Bristol, Lord Bp. of (Dr. Monk) 200 o 41
Ditto Mont. 100 0 50
Ditto 100 0 53
Dean of 1 0 42
Glyn, Rev. G. H. Henham 5 0 41
Sir R. C. P. Bart. Wimborne 50 0 41
Ditto Mont. 25 0 50
Ditto 25 0 52
Glynne, Sir S. R. Bart. Ha warden Gib. 10 0 42
Ditto Fred. 10 0 43
Godaiming Rural Deanry 517 44
Goddard, Miss A. Newbury 1 0 44
Rev. D. Greenham 2 2 41
Godfrey, Miss 5 0 53
Godstone, Surrey 4 1 44
Ditto Fred. 2 14 44
Goe, F. F. Esq. Louth S.L. 5 0 51
Goldesbrough, Rev. John 20 0 42
Golightly, Rev. C. P. Oriel Coll. Oxford 535 0 42
Gomm, Major-General Sir W 25 0 42
Goodenough, Ven. Archd 50 0 49
Ditto S.L. 5 0 52
Goodford, Rev. C. O. Eton College, Windsor. 30 0 41
Goodlake, Rev. T. W. Bradwell, Lechlade .... 2 2 42
Goodwin, H. Esq. Caius, Camb 5 0 42
Rev. H. Cambridge Gra. 5 0 53
Gordon, A. Esq. 57, Old Broad-street 100 0 41
Rev. O. Christ Church, Oxford 10 0 53
Rev. W. Charlinch, Bridgwater 10 0 41
Ditto Fred. 5 0 44
Gore, Rev. G. Newton, Bath (2) 5 0 42
Goring, Mrs. Wiston 10 0 43
10 0 43
Rev. John, Wiston, Steyning 500 0 53
Ditto 500 0 54
Ditto (9) 10 0 51


Gossett, Rev. I. Windsor 10 0 41
Goulburn, Henry, Esq. 18, Montagu-square .. 26 5 41
Ditto Fred. 20 0 43
Ditto 5 5 41
Mr. Serjeant 5 0 42
Govett, Rev. J. R. Norwich S.L. 10 51
Gower, W. L. Esq. Godstone S.L. 2 0 51
G. P. M 4 4 53
Grace, Mr. and Mrs. Clapham S.L. 5 0 51
Graham, Lord William, 45, Berkeley-sq 5 0 41
Miss, Clapham S.L. 3 0 51
Mrs. T S.L. 3 0 51
Rev. J. Maidstone S.L. 2 0 51
Collected by ditto S.L. 3 0 51
Granger, Miss H. Weston super-Mare ....S L. 11 51
Grant, Capt Fred. 1 1 44
W. Esq. Plowden-buildings, Temple ... 5 0 41
Grantham, Mrs. Lewes S.L. 10 51
Rev. T. Bramber, Steyning 10 10 42
Ditto S.L. 10 0 51
Grasett, Miss E. Brasted, Sevenoaks ...Mont. 10 0 50
MissE.H.sB,Up.Brunsw.-pl.Brighton (3) 5 0 54
Gray, Hon. Mrs. Brighton 10 42
Rev. C. Godmanchester S.L. 5 0 51
Ditto Gra. 5 0 53
Ditto Nat. 5 0 53
Rev. H. Almondsbury, Bristol 1 0 42
Rev. Robert, Durham 20 0 41
Greatheed, Rev. S. S. Tunbridge 50 0 41
Green, C. Esq. Spalding 1 1 43
F. Esq. Stoke Newington 5 0 42
Miss, Hertford 1 1 53
B,ev. G. R. Eton, Windsor 10 0 41
Ditto 5 0 53
Ditto (14) 1 1 54
Rev. J. Shipton Moyne S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. J. M 10 0 43
Rev. M. Line. Coll. Oxford 10 0 41
Ditto 10 0 42
Ditto 10 0 50
Rev. M. T. Steepleton, Dorchester 10 0 44
Greenaii, Rev. R. Stretton, Warrington 100 0 41
Greene, A. S. Esq. Brighton 1 0 42
A. S. Esq. Lewes S.L. 5 0 51
Miss, Lewes S.L. 10 51
Mrs. Lewes S.L. 10 51
Rev. T. Fakenham S.L. 1151
Greenstreet, Rev. W. G. Patting. Wol v.Mont. 1 1 50
Greenwood, Dr. and Mrs. Henry Col. 5 0 43
Mrs 1 1 42
Gregory, Miss Fred. 10 0 45
Miss, Lambeth 10 0 53
Rev. P. T. Loose, Staplehurst 5 0 41
Ditto 15 0 41
Ditto S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. R. Lambeth 10 0 53
Robert, Esq C. C. C. Oxford 2 0 41
Gregson, W, Esq. Temple 20 0 41
Grenville, Hon. and Very Rev. G. N Fred. 5 0 44
Gresford, small sums S.L. 10 51
Greswell, Rev. R. Worcester Coll. Oxford 100 0 41
Gretton, Mrs. Thomas, Hereford 1 0 53
Mrs. Hereford 1 0 53
Grevile, Miss, Clevedon, Bristol (6) 1 1 53
Griffin, Rev. W. N. Ospringe, Faversham 5 0 41
Griffith, Charles, Esq 5 0 41
Rev. J. d.d. Boxley, Maidstone ..Mont. 10 0 50
Griffiths, Miss, l,Lyndhurst-gr.PeckhamCr.# N. 1 1 53
Rev. J. Wadham Coll. Oxford 25 0 42
Grimshawe, Rev. T. S. Biddenham 5 0 42
Grinfield, Rev. E. W. Brighton 2 0 42
Grinstead, East 10 2 41
Groucock, R. Esq. Bow-church-yard S.L. 10 10 51
Groves, Charles, Esq. Liverpool 5 0 41
Ditto 50 0 45
Ditto 50 0 49
Ditto 50 0 53
Ditto S.L. 5 0 51
G. R. T. L 10 0 42
G. S S.L. 10 0 52
Guest, Edwin, Esq. 4, King’s Bench-walk .... 5 0 41
Guiana Diocese W.I.A. 50 0 51
Ditto W.I.A. 20 0 52
Guildford, St. Nicholas 5 0 49
Guillemard, Miss Tas. 1 0 42
Ditto, legacy 19 19 42
Rev. H. P. Barton, Moreton-in-Marsh.. 25 0 41
Gunner, Rev. W. H. Winchester 4 4 41
Ditto 2 2 50
Gunton, Mrs. J. Marsham, Norwich S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. J. Marsham, Norwich S.L. 5 0 51
Gurdon, Rev. E. Barnham, Wymondham 5 0 42
Ditto „ (13) 1 1 54
Gurney, Miss A S.L. 5 0 51
Miss A. North Repps, Cromer S.L. 5 0 51
Russell, Esq. Temple 10 10 41
Ditto S.L. 10 10 51
Sidney, Esq. Brighton 10 10 41
Gutch, Geo. Esq. Paddington 5 5 42
5 5 42
Gwatkin, J. Esq. Veryan, Truro Mont. 5 0 50
Rev. N. Barrow, Loughboro S.L. 2 2 52
2 2 52
G. W. H 1 1 54
G. W. S S.L. 1 0 52
H. Fazeley 1 2 42
Hackney, St. John 212 49
Haddan, T. H. Esq. 3, New-sq. Lincoln’s-inn 5 0 43
Hadow, P. Esq. 43, Upper Harley-street 15 0 41
Haggard, Dr. 4, College, Doctors’-coms. Fred. 2 2 43
James, Esq 1 0 52
Miss Caroline, Hereford 10 0 53
Haines, A. Esq. 2, Leicester-street, Regent-st. 5 5 53
Hale, Yen. Archdeacon, Charter-house 20 0 53
W. L. Esq. Hampstead S.L. 5 0 51
Hales, Rev. R. C. Itchinstoke 1 1 42
Hall, Alexander Hall, Esq. Emsworth... Fred. 10 0 43
Ditto 10 0 45
Ditto Cape 5 0 45
Ditto 20 0 53
Rev. H. Warminster 5 0 S 3
Rev. Henry, Christ Church, Oxford.... 5 0 41
Rev. H 5 0 45
Rev.’ T. Combehay, Bath 2 0 43
Rev. W. R. 44, Portland-place 10 0 42
Miss, 70, Albany-st. Regent’s-park.(lS) 5 0 54
Mrs. Clapham S.L. 2 0 51
Hames, Rev. William Mont. 1 0 50
Hamilton, A. Esq. Streatham S.L. 20 0 51
C. A. Esq. Bolton-row Fred. 5 0 43
Lady Charlotte, Brighton 1 0 42
Miss 2 2 42
Rev. G. collected by...,, Bor. 25 0 52
Rev. James, Beddington, Croydon 2 2 42
Rev. W. K. Salisbury 25 0 41
Hammick, Mrs 10 41
Rev. St. V. L. Milton, Tavistock 5 0 41
Hammond, Captain S.L. 10 52
E D. Esq S.L. 10 51
Mr. and Mrs. James, Jersey 3 0 49
Rev. A. Brighton 1 0 42
Hamond, R. N. Esq. Fakenham S.L. 1 1 51
Hampstead, Well-walk Chapel S.L. 39 3 51
Hanbury, O. jun. Esq. 2, St. James’s-place ... 10 10 41
Robert, Esq. Poles, Hereford S.L. 20 0 51
Hancock, Rev. John, Carlisle.... 1 1 50
Hankey, S. A, Esq S.L. 10 0 51
T. Esq. 7, Fenchurch-street 100 0 41
Hanson, Rev. F. Brighton 5 0 42
Harcourt, Col. F. V Oakfleld, Cowes.. ..Mont. 1 0 50
Hon. Mrs. V. Westdean, Chichester.... 100 0 44
Rev. L. V. Westdean, Chichester 100 0 41
Hardeastle, Miss E. Hampstead S.L. 1 7 51
Harding, Miss, Gloucester 2 2 53
Miss, Bexley S.L. 10 51
Mrs. Bexley S.L. 10 51
Rev. John Mont. 1 1 50
Rev. T. Bexley S.L. 5 0 51
Hardy, C. Esq.Odsell-house, Bradford, Yorks. 20 0 41
G. Esq. Hampstead S.L. 1 0 51
John, Esq. Thrybergh-pk. Rotherham. 250 0 41
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
10 0 50
Rev. John, Lea, Mitcheldean Mont. 1 1 50
Hare, Miss, St. Leonard’s-on-Sea 2 2 41
Miss G. F (7) 1 1 49
Mrs. Augustus 10 0 42
Yen. Archd. Hurstmonceaux, Battle.... 50 0 42
Ditto S.L. 2o 0 52
Harford, Rev. A. Locking, Bristol 20 0 42
Hargreave, Oliver, Esq. Abbot's Langley 10 10 41
Ditto 5 5 43
Ditto Fred. 5 5 44


Harleston, Richard Archibald 3 0 42
Harlow, One-third of Offerings at the Chapel
of St. John the Baptist, on the day of its
Consecration, placed at the disposal of the
Bishop of London 184 5 41
Harness, Rev. W. Knightsbridge (14) 1 1 54
Harper, Rev. H. T. C .(10) 1 1 51
Harris, Hon. and Rev. C. A. Wilton, Salisb... 5 0 53
Rev. H. Magdalen College, Oxford 5 0 42
Ditto 2 0 50
Rev. J. H. d.d. Torquay 10 0 41
Ditto 10 10 43
Ditto (14) 2 2 54
R. P. Esq. Bradford, Yorkshire 1 1 50
Harrison, Benjamin, Esq. Clapham Common. 100 0 41
Ditto Rup. 100 0 49
Ditto Mont. 50 0 50
M. Esq Croydon S.L. 11 52
Miss, Croydon S.L. 11 52
Miss, Kendal 10 50
Mrs. Bexley S.L. 11 51
Mrs. E. G (7) 1 1 49
Rev. C. R. Leigh, Rochford 10 53
Rev. J. B. Evenley, Brackley 5 0 53
Rev. T. Bembridge, Isle of Wight 5 0 53
Rev. T. B. Magdalen College, Oxford.. 5 0 41
Rev. W. Privet Fred. 2 0 44
Rev. W 1 0 49
Yen. Archdeacon, Canterbury 50 0 41
Ditto Mont. 25 0 50
Ditto 100 0 53
Harriss, H. Esq. Magdalen College, Oxford.... 2 0 43
Harrold, T. C. Esq i Fred. 500 0 44
Ditto, Legacy by 2,000 0 51
Ditto ditto 100 0 52
Ditto ditto 201 0 52
Ditto ditto 183 0 52
Ditto ditto 333 6 53
Ditto ditto 333 6 53
Harrowby, Earl of, 39, Grosvenor-square 100 0 41
Ditto 25 0 53
Ditto 25 0 54
Ditto S.L. 20 0 52
Hart, G. B. Esq '.....5.L. 20 0 51
Hartley, Mr. Janies 10 43
Rev. C. Pelham, Bishop’s Stortford 1 0 54
Thomas, Esq. Peckham 1 1 41
Harvey, Rev. R. Hornsey 5 0 42
Rev. G. G. Hailsham S.L. 2 0 51
W. H. Esq. Trinity Coll. Dublin. ..Gra. 5 0 53
Ditto Nat. 5 0 53
Harward, Rev. J. N. Godstone S.L. 10 51
Hastings 33 19 41
J. C. J 1 0 53
Hatchard, Rev. John, Plymouth S.L. 5 0 51
Thomas, Esq. Clapham S.L. 10 0 51
Haviland, Rev. G. E. Warbleton, Hurst-green 10 0 53
Hawker, Admiral 10 0 42
Ditto Fred. 2 0 44
Rev. J. Emsworth S.L. 2 0 51
Hawkins, Miss, Cheltenham Fred. 5 0 44
Miss Mary, Cheltenham Fred. 5 0 44
Miss Jane, 7, Gt. Norwood-st Cheltenh. 2 0 49
Ditto Mont. 1 0 50
Mr. B. Reading 1 1 42
Mrs. Ernest 5 0 53
Mrs. Glastonbury Fred. 5 0 43
Rev. E. d.d. Oriel College, Oxford 100 0 41
Ditto Mont. 15 0 50
Rev. Ernest, 79, Pall Mall 25 0 41
Ditto Mont. 25 0 51
Ditto 10 0 53
Hawtrey, Rev. E. C. d.d. Eton Coll. Windsor 50 0 42
Hay, Captain J. D. D. r.n S.L. 2 2 52
Haydon, Miss, Guildford S.L. 5 0 51
Miss Sophia, Guildford S.L. 5 0 51
Hayes, Lady, Cheltenham 10 0 41
Rev. Sir J. W. Bt. Arborfield, Reading 5 0 42
Haygarth, Miss, Upham 2 2 41
Ditto 2 2 42
Ditto 2 2 43
Miss, Upham Fred. 1 0 44
Miss S. Upham Fred. 1 0 44
Rev. J. Upham, Bishop’sWaltham.s'.i. 3 3 51
Ditto Fred. 5 0 . 44
Hayley, Rev. B. Catsfield, Battle 5 0 41
H. B Mont. 1 0 50
Ditto 10 0 53
H. C. Dublin 6 6 42
Ditto, Armagh 2 2 44
Head, G. H. Esq. Clapham S.L. 10 0 51
Miss, Southgate S.L. 10 51
Heath, Rev. D. J. Brading, Isle of Wight Nat. 20 0 53
Heathcote, Rev. G. Conington, Stilton Mont. 5 0 50
Rev. C. J. Upper Clapton (3) 5 0 43
Heberden, Mrs. and Miss, Exeter Fred. 2 0 42
Rev. Canon, Exeter Fred. 10 0 42
Hedding, Miss S. Stratford-on-Avon 5 0 49
Hedley, Rev, T. Trinity College, Cambridge.. 25 0 53
Heisch, Rev. J. G. Islington S.L 3 3 51
Helps, Thos.Esq.Balham-hill, legacy by Fred. 100 0 43
Hemery, V. Rev. J (5) 2 2 48
Henchman, Rev. W. W Mont. 1 1 50
Henderson, Miss, Boulogne 10 41
Ditto 10 42
Henfield, Sussex 22 17 41
Hensley, L. Esq. Trinity College, Cambridge. 1151
Henty, Mrs. R. Chichester Mont. 1 1 50
Henville, Mrs. Emsworth S.L. 2 0 51
Hepburn, Mrs. Uckfield 1 0 41
Herbert, Rt.Hn.Sidney, 49,Belgrave-sq. Fred. 50 0 43
Ditto 100 0 53
Hereford, Lord Bishop of 100 0 41
Herringham, Mrs. M. A. Winchester (10) 1 1 54
Rev. J. P. Borley, Sudbury 1 0 42
Hervey, Rev. Lord C. A. Chesterford 5 0 44
Hesketh, Rev. C. Collected by S.L. 3 5 53
Hessey, Rev. F. d.c.l. Kensington Mont. 5 0 50
Heurtley, Rev. C. A. Oxford 5 5 42
Ditto.... Mont. 3 3 50
Ditto S.L. 2 0 62
Hewetson, Rev. J. Durfield, Yorkshire. ..S.L. 10 52
Hewitt, Rev. P Fred. 1 1 44
Hewlett, H. Esq. Clapham-rise S.L. 5 0 51
Hey, Mrs. Leeds S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. S. Ockbrook, Derby S.L. 2 2 51
Rev. S. jun. Sawley, Derby S.L. 1151
S. Esq. Leeds S.L. 2 2 51
W. Esq. Leeds S.L. 5 0 51
H. H 1 1 43
H. H S.L. 5 0 51
Hibbert, Miss M. A. Clapham Common... S.L. 5 0 51
Hickes, Mr. Thomas, Hastings Mont. 10 50
Hill, Yen. Archd. Chesterfield S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. R. Balliol College, Oxford 10 43
W. Oxford 1 0 42
Hillman, Mr. Henry (3) 10 45
Mr. John (3) 10 45
Hilton, Rev. H. D. Elgin 5 0 54
Rev. J. Sarre, Canterbury 25 0 49
Hinde, Miss E. Mrs. Elsden’s, Lynn 3 0 53
Hindle, Rev. Joseph, Maidstone S.L. 5 0 51
Hinds, Rev. Dr 5 0 41
H. J 10 0 5J
Ditto 20 0 52
H. J. H, H Maur. 1 0 53
H. J. R 2 0 41
Hoare, Yen. Archd. Godstone S.L. 10 0 51
Charles, Esq. Fleet-street 100 0 4 1
Ditto . Gib. 25 0 42
Ditto Fred. 10 0 44
Ditto S.L. 100 0 51
G. Noel, Esq S.L. 10 51
Lady Mary, New-st. Spring-gardens .... 1 0 50
Messrs. Fleet-street 500 0 41
Mrs. H. C 3 0 53
Mrs. Godstone S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. E. Ramsgate S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. Henry, Framfield, Uckfield 5 0 42
Hobhouse, Edmund, Esq. Merton Coll. Oxford 5 0 41
Rev. R. Merton College, Oxford 3 0 43
Rev. R 1 0 50
Rev. R. St. Ive, Devonport Fred. 5 0 45
Right Hon. Henry, Castle Cary 30 0 53
, Esq. Oxford 210 42
Hobson, Rev. Henry T. Armagh N.Z. 20 0 42
Hockin, Rev. W. Phillack, Hayle (4) 10 50
Hodges, Rev. F. P. d.c.l. Lyme Regis (4) 1 1 53
Ditto 1 0 52
Hodgson, Adam, Esq. Liverpool S.L. 10 0 51
Miss, Salkeld-hall, Penrith ~..S.L. 10 53
Misses, Salkeld-hall, Penrith 1 0 53
Mrs. Salkeld-hall, Penrith 1 0 53
Ditto S.L. 10 53


£ s. i.
Hodgson, Rev. H. Dibden, Saffron Walden... 50 0 41 Houblon, Miss A.Coopersale, Epping...
Ditto 20 0 42
Ditt0...... 20 0 45
Ditto 20 0 46
Ditto.. 50 0 53
Ditto (4) 1 1 44
Ditto (5) 5 5 49
William, Esq. Wanstead 20 0 41
Hodson, Ven. Archd. Lichfield S.L. 5 0 51
Mrs. E 25 0 43
Hogg, Mrs. Paddington.. 1 1 42
Rev. E. Fornham, Burj St. Edmunds. 5 0 41
Rev. J. R. Brixham Mont. 1 1 60
Hoggard, T. E5q..... (10) 1 1 51
Holbech, Captain George 5 5 50
Ditto 5 0 52
Ditto 3 0 53
George,Esq. Alveston, Stratf.-on-Avon. 10 0 42
Ditto 10 0 43
Ditto 5 0 51
Miss P. Alveston. Stratford-on-Avon... 9.0 0 41
Miss C. Alveston, Stratford-on-Avon... 20 0 41
Ditto 5 0 53
Mrs. Jesse M. Farnboro’, Banbury 20 0 42
Holberton, Rev. R.Norbiton, Kin.-on-Th.S.i. 13 3 51
Holder, J. H. Esq. Staunton, Ludlow 10 0 49
Holding, Rev. J. Reading 1 0 42
Holdsworth, Miss, Dittisham 10 42
Miss, Brook-hill, Dartmouth 2 0 43
Ditto 1 0 44
Mrs. C. Brookhill, Brixham 1 0 44
Hole, Rev. George, Chulmleigh 5 0 43
Ditto 10 0 44
Ditto 10 0 53
Holford, R. S. Esq. Westonblrt-ho. Tetbury.. 100 0 42
Ditto Gib. 100 0 42
Ditto Fred. 20 0 43
Ditto 100 0 49
Holland, Miss Mont. 10 0 50
Ditto 10 0 53
Rev. C. Horkesley 1 0 42
Rev. X. E. M. Tenbury 5 0 53
Hollingsworth, Rev. A. G. H. Stowmarket... 10 0 52
Holman, H. Esq S.L. 10 51
Holme, Miss, 12, Royal Crescent, Brighton... 5 0 42
Holmes, Mrs S.L. 2 0 52
Holt, Miss, Tottenham 10 0 41
Holybourn, by Rev. Smith Fred 10 43
Hone, Yen. Archd. Halesowen, Birmingham. 1 0 41
Hook, Rev. W. F. d.d. Leeds Fred. 5 0 43
Ditto S.L. 5 0 51
Hooper, H. Esq. Lyndhurst-grove, Peckham. 1 1 53
Hope, A. J. B. Esq. 1, Connaught-place 200 0 41
Captain Henry 25 0 41
Ditto 20 0 45
J. Esq 1 1 47
Rear-Adm. Princes-st. Hanover-sq.S.L. 10 0 51
Hoper, George, Esq Tus. 5 0 42
Di to S.L. 3 0 52
John, Esq. Uckfield 10 0 42
Ditto (12) 1 1 54
Rev. H (5) 1 1 46
Hopkins, J. Esq. Tidmarsh, Reading S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. A. Birmingham S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. J. Stambourne, Halstead S.L. 1 0 51
Rev. W. Rusina vil. Leamington 30 0 41
Ditto 10 0 41
Ditto (11) 2 2 51
Ditto (3) 11 54
Rev. W. Fitz, Shrewsbury 10 0 41
Hopper, Rev. E. H. Durham S.L. 1 1 51
Hordern, Alexander, Esq. Wolverhampton ... 50 0 41
Hornbuckle, Misses, Great Missenden ...S.L. 5 0 51
Hornby, Rev. James P Fred. 50 0 45
Horner, Miss, Mells, Frome (5) 10 10 49
Ditto (5) 5 5 54
Ilorrocks, John, Esq. Preston Mont. 2 0 50
Ditto S.L. 2 2 51
Ditto S.L. 1 0 51
Horsham, Sussex 21 0 41
Hort, Fenton, Esq (6) 2 2 54
Horton, Mrs. W. Canterbury (7) 1 1 53
Hoskins, C. Esq S.L. 5 0 52
Mrs. Haslebury, Somerset S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. Dr. Appleton 2 2 42
2 2 42
Rev. H. J. Appleton 1 1 42
X'hos. Esq. Haselbury, Crowkerne Mont. 5 0 SO
Ditto S.L. 3 0 51
Hotham, Rev. Charles, Roos, Hull 10 0 53
400 0 46
R. A. Esq „..., 5 0 46
Rev. A 5 0 45
Ditto. (8) 5 0 54
Rev.T. A. Peasemore, Newbury 5 0 43
Hough, Rev. James, Ham, Surrey 1 1 41
Hove, Sussex, S.L. 14 51
St. Andrew’s Church S.L. 18 14 51
Hovenden, V. F. Esq 1 1 45
Howard, Hon Colonel F. G 100 0 41
H. &V. Rev. H. Donnington.Wolverh. 50 0 41
Howe, Earl, 8, South Audley-street 400 0 41
Ditto 50 0 50
Howell, Rev. Hinds, Shobrooke 40 0 41
Hewlett, F. Esq. Worcester College, Oxford.. 10 42
Rev. J. H. 9, Young-street, Kensington 1 1 41
Howman, Rev. G. E. Barnsley, Cirencester... 5 5 50
Ditto 5 5 51
Ditto Newf. 5 5 51
Ditto 10 0 53
H. P 1 0 53
Hubbard, J. G. Esq. 24, Prince’s-gate...AforaL 100 0 50
Ditto 100 0 53
W. E, Esq, Birchin-lane S.L. ICO 0 51
Hudson, G. Esq. Biakeney S.L. 1 0 51
Miss H. E. Farm-terrace, ClaphamS.X. 1 1 51
1 1 51
Mrs. Maria, Wimbledon-com N.Z. 5 0 41
Ditto 10 0 42
Ditto 5 0 40
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto Gra. 2 0 53
Ditto Nat. 2 0 53
Ditto King. 2 0 53
W. B. Esq. Clapham S.L. 5 0 51
W. B. Esq. 27, Haymarket 52 10 45
Hudson’s Bay Company Rup. 100 0 40
Hughes, Major,Abbey-pl.St.John’s Wood S.L. 1 0 51
Mrs. G Mont. 1 0 50
Rev. H. H. Layham, Hadleigh 10 0 42
Ditto 10 0 53
Hughs, Mrs. 58, Harley street Mont. 2 0 50
Hugouin, Colonel, Nursted, Peters field.. Err'd. 2 0 44
Hull, Meetings, less expenses S.L. 30 0 51
Hulme, Rev. G. Shinfield 50 0 42
Hulton, Rev. A. E. Keswick (12) 1 1 54
Humberston, Mrs. Chester (5) 2 2 53
Hunt, Rev. R. S 5 0 49
Hunter, Mrs. 36, Southampton-street, Strand. 1 1 41
R. Esq. 9, New-square, Lincoln’s-inn.. 20 0 41
Ditto 30 0 44
Sir C. S. Bart 25 0 41
Sir Richard, Brighton 20 0 42
Huntingford, Rev. G. W. New' Coll. Oxford .. 2 0 41
Hurnard, Rev. W. B. Seaming 5 0 42
Hurry, G. Y. Esq 1 o 45
Hurstpierpoint, Sussex 30 0 42
Ditto 7 0 42
Ditto 411 43
Ditto 3 3 44
Ditto 3 2 45
Ditto 5 2 46
Ditto 3 0 52
Ditto 1 5 54
Hussey, Miss E. Oxford 1 0 41
Ditto i o 43
Ditto 1 0 44
Ditto ] 0 53
Ditto (9) 1 0 53
Rev. Arthur 1 0 41
Rev. E. Hendred, Abingdon 5 5 53
Rev. R. Christ Church, Oxford 5 0 50
Ditto Adel. 5 0 50
Rev. W. L. Christ Church, Oxford 5 0 41
Ditto 5 0 50
Ditto (3) 1 1 45
Hustler, Rev. J. D io 0 41
Hutchinson, Rev. C 20 0 41
Rev. C. E. Firle, Lewes 10 0 42
W. C. Esq. Worcester College, Oxford. 10 42
Hutt, John, Esq Per. 10 0 46
Ditto W.I.A. 10 0 53
Hutton, W. Esq. Clapham S.L. 10 0 51
Huxtable,Mr-. SuttonWaldron, Shaftesb,R«r. 10 0 52
Rev. A. Sutton Waldron, Shaftesb.Ror. 10 0 52
Hyde, Thomas, Esq. Worcester 5 0 53
Hyndman, J. B. Esq Fred. 5 0 43
100 0 41
S.L. 1 1 51


£ s.
Ihhetson, Lady, Pontefract S.L. 3 0 51
I. 10 41
Ilex 10 41
Illingworth, R. S. Esq. 9, Norf.-crescent. ..S. L. 2 2 52
Imhoff, Lady, Stow-on-Wold 1 0 42
Ingham, Mrs. Camberwell 21 0 41
R. Esq 5 0 45
Inglis, Lady 10 0 44
Miss, Melton Bryant, Woburn S.L. 5 0 51
Sir R. H. Bart. 7, Bedford-sq 50 0 41
Ditto S.L. 25 0 51
Ditto S.L. 25 0 52
Ditto 25 0 53
Ditto 25 0 54
Inman, C. Esq. Liverpool S.L 10 0 51
R. Esq. Preston S.L. 2 2 51
Innes, J. Esq 1 1 41
Irby, H. & Rev.P.A. Cottesbrook,Northampt. 10 0 53
Ditto G.B(N. 5 0 53
Isaacson, Rev. J.F. Freshwater, I. of WightFmL 5 0 44
Isham, Sir C. Bart. Northampton Mont. 3 0 50
Islington, All Saints, Meeting S.L. 215 51
St. Mary S.L. 46 15 52
St. Stephen S.L. 30 11 51
Iver, young gentlemen at 1 0 43
Ditto 1 0 44
Ives, Miss, Bradden, Towcester 5 0 42
Ditto 10 0 45
Ditto 10 0 46
Rev. C. Bradden, Towcester 5 0 42
j. A 5 0 43
J. A. by Rev. J. Venn, Hereford S.L. 10 0 51
Jackson, Miss 5 0 48
Mrs. East Grinstead (3) 3 3 45
Rev.E. Leeds S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. John 5 5 43
Rev. Thomas, Mile End 2 0 42
—, legacy 45 0 52
Jacobson, Rev. W. n.n. Ex. Coll. Oxford 50 0 41
Jacson, S. Esq. Warrington Mont. 2 0 50
3. A. K 1 0 49
James, 10 0 52
Rev. H. Sheepshead, Loughboro’....S.i. 5 0 51
Bev. J. Headington Quarry, OxfordS.i. 2 0 51
Rev. J. Yarnton Mont. 10 50
Ditto Mont. 10 51
Rev. W. Cobham, Surrey 20 0 43
Janvrin, Rev. J.H. Bradford, Dorchesterißont. 5 0 50
Jarratt, Rev. J. North Cave, Howden S.L. 10 0 51
Jarvois, Capt Chatham SL. 10 52
J. C. Exeter Cape 10 10 45
J. C. R. Lewes S.L. 10 51
J. D. C 10 42
Jeddere-Fisher, Miss, Tunbr. Wells 16) 1 1 53
Jeffray, Mrs (1) 10 53
Rev. L. W. Aldford, Chester (7) 1 1 53
Jeffries, Miss 1 1 49
Jelf, Rev. R.W. d.d. King’s College, Strand... 100 0 41
Jemb, Miss, by Rev. C. J. Hea hcote 6 6 41
Jenkins, Mrs. R. Charlton Hill, Shrewsbury.. 1 0 42
Rev. H. Stanway, Colchester ... 10 0 42
Ditto (8) 1 1 53
Jenkinson, Rev. J. S. Battersea S.L. 5 0 51
Jenkyns, Rev. H. d.d. Durham 50 0 41
Ditto 20 0 42
Jennings, Rev. J. Smith-sq. Westminster 10 10 41
Rev.M.J.(E.I Co.Chai lain,Bengal)FicL 2 0 43
Jermyn, Earl, 47, Eaton-place 25 0 41
Jerram, Rev. J. Chobham, Bagshot S.L. 2 2 51
Jerrard, Rev. Dr. 15, Oxford-terrace 3 0 41
Jervoise, Rev. Sir S. C. Bart 100 0 41
Jessep, E. Esq. St.Andr.-ter. Plymouth. Mnvt 2 0
Ditto S.L, 2 0 51
J. F. F Mont. 5 0 50
J. H. H 50 0 54
.Tickling, Rev. F. Ashby-de-la-Zouch S.L. 1 0 52
J. K Mont. 1 0 50
3.M. C 1 1 49
J. M. J. F 1 0 50
Johns, Mr. T. C. Wine Office-court S.L. 1 1 52
Johnson, Andrew, Esq 1 1 42
C. Esq Mont. 1 0 50
Johnson, C. Esq. 3, Clarendon-sq. Leamingt.(s) 1 0 54-
Lady, Gresford, Chester S.L. 1 0 51
Mrs Mont. 1 0 50
Rev. C. J. Emborne, Newbury 1 0 42
W. P. Esq. 8, Connaught-square 5 5 41
Johnston, A. Esq. Halesworth S.L. 10 0 51
Johnstone, Rev. G.D. Stonegate, ‘Hurst Gr.S.L. I 0 51
Rev. G. J Mont. 1 0 50
Sir J. V. B. Bt. Hackness, Scarborough 5 0 41
Jones, E. Esq. Liverpool S.L. 5 0 51
H. Esq. Bexley S.L. 1 0 51
Mrs. Mont. 5 5 50
Mrs. Lower-cresc. Clifton (5) 5 5 53
Rev. J. Naseby 1151
Rev. T. Bentley, Colchester S.L. 3 0 51
Rev. W. Compton .....S.L. 1 1 51
S. Esq. Liverpool S.L. 5 0 51
Yen. H. C. 13, Portland-place 100 0 42
Wm. Bence, Esq. 107, Pall Mall 10 0 43
Jowett, Rev. J.Willoughby, Sleaford S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. J. Hartfield, Tunbridge Wells SL. 5 0 51
Rev. W S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. William, Sleaford 5 0 41
J. P.by Hon.S.R. Curzon, Tooting S.L. 100 0 51
J. S. Lewes... S.L. 10 51
Julius, Rev. H. R. Wrecclesham, Farnhara ... 10 10 41
Kadwell, C. Esq Mont. 2 2 50
Kay, Rev. J. L Mont. 1 1 50
Kaye, Miss H. Tunbridge Wells S.L. 1 0 52
Mrs. Cirencester S.L. 10 51
Rev. W. F. J. Riseholme, Lincoln 5 0 53
Keal S.L. 1 1 52
Kedington, Mrs. R. Ipswich Mont. 10 50
Keeling, Rev. W St. John’s, Cambridge 5 0 42
Rev.W.Barrow,BurySt.Edmund’sFred. 5 0 45
Kekewich, S. T. P. Esq Fred. 5 0 44
Kelly, Rev. W. Preston, Brighton (4) 1 1 45
Kember, Rev. G. Woolwich 5 0 53
Kemble, Charles, Esq. Wadbam Coll. Oxford 10 10 41
Mrs. Virginia, Leggates, Hertford 21 0 41
Rev. C. Stockwell S.L. 5 0 51
Thomas, Esq. Runwell, Essex 10 10 41
Kennaway, Rev. C. E. Campden Adel. 1 0 42
Ditto 31 10 53
Kennedy, Rev. B. H. d.d. Shrewsbury 20 0 41
Kenrick, Miss C. Bletchingley, Surrey 5 0 53
Miss M. Bletchingley, Surrey 5 0 49
Ditto 5 0 50
Kent, Miss Honor, Steart, Somerset 100 0 41
Kenyon, J. R. Esq. 11, New-sq. Lincoln’s-inn 21 0 42
Ditto S.L. 5 5 51
Kerr, Rev. Lord H. Dittisham, Torquay 10 0 41
Kerrison, Sir E. Bt.Oakley, Scole Gib. 25 0 42
Keymer, Rev. N. Hertford 5 0 41
Kidd, Dr. Christ Ch. Oxford 5 0 50
R. C. Esq. Hyde-park-gate, Kensington 10 0 41
Ditto 10 0 49
Ditto 10 0 53
Kidlington, Oxford 6 3 42
Kilvert, Rev. Francis, Bath 10 52
King, Miss Elizabeth,Hereford (4) 1 1 53
Mr. Henry, Brighton 1 0 42
Mr. Samuel, Brighton 1 0 42
Rev. John, Hull S.L. 5 0 SI
Rev. M. Moor Critchell, Salisbury 5 0 42
Rev. Thomas Mont. 2 2 50
Ditto 2 2 51
Ditto (3) 2 2 54
Rev. Thomas, Maidstone S.L. 2 2 51
Kingsmill, Miss 10 49
Kinnaird, Hon. Arthur 50 0 41
Kirby, HAY. Esq. St. John’s Coll. Camb. Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto 25 0 53
Kirkham, Lane 1 0 53
Ditto 1 0 54
Kirkwood, J. J. Esq (U)N.Z. 3 3 54
Kitcat, Rev. J Mont. 1 0 50
Kitson, Rev. J. B (2) 10 53
Knapp, Rev. Henry, Swaton, Folkingbam ... 5 0 41
Ditto Fred. 5 0 43
Knight, Rev. E. Mursley, Winslow S.L. 2 0 52
Rev. R. J S.L. 1 0 51
Rev. T. D Lor. 10 51
Rev. W S.L. 5 0 51


Knottesford.Rev.F.F.Billesley, Stratf.-on-Av. 5 0 50
K. S Fred. 2 0 44
Kymer, Miss, Wribhenhall, Bewdley 15 53
Labouchere, J. Esq. 16, Portland-place 100 0 41
Ladbroke, Felix, Esq. 77, Pall Mall Tas. 5 0 42
Ladies, by Miss Maurice 610 41
two young 20 0 49
Lady 5 0 41
5 0 41
1 0 42
2O 0 45
5 0 46
lO 0 49
lO 0 .50
Mont. 5 0 50
5 0 51
5 0 53
2 0 53
a, and her Sister Mont. 15 0 50
a, Tunbridge Wells S.L. 1 0 51
Bath 110 43
Brighton 10 42
by A. Potts, Esq 5 0 43
by Drummond &Co 300 0 42
by E. F. M 5 0 41
by Lady Caroline Murray N.Z. 10 10 41
by Miss Frere, Bath 10 44
by Rev. B. Belcher Nat. 2 0 53
Ditto . Gra. 1 0 53
by Rev. C. E. Kennaway 5 0 41
by Rev. F. Maurice 10 0 42
by Rev. John Graham 5 0 41
by Rev. J. R. Wood Gib. 5 0 42
by Rev. J. Shadwell, Southampton 5 0 41
by Rev. J. Stratton 1 0 42
by Very Rev. G. Pellew 2 2 41
Laidlaw, Rev. Martin 4 0 41
Lake, W. C. Esq. Balliol College, Oxf. 20 o 41
Lambert, T. Esq. 91, Albany-st 2 2 42
Lambeth Palace Chapel 38 0 45
St. Thomas, per Rev. J. W. Weeks. .S.L. 7 2 51
Lancaster, Rev. R. H. Warnford Fred. 2 2 44
Landon, Mrs. Bath S.L. 10 0 51
Rev. E. Kelvedon Hatch 10 41
Rev. (4) 1 0 44
Lane, Jos. Esq. Glouc. Rd. Reg.-park 1 0 41
Rev. C. Oval, Kennington 1 1 41
Langley, C. Esq. 3, Charlotte-st. Bloomsb. (7) 1 1 54
H. Esq 6 6 42
Rev. T (9) 1 1 52
Lasham Fred. 2 0 43
Laurence, George, Esq. Clapham. S.L. 2 2 51
Mrs. Clapham S.L. 11 51
Mrs. ctapnam 0.-o. i i oi
Law, Miss, Lewes S.L. 1 0 51
Mrs. Harsted (2) 2 2 44
W. Esq. Uckfield 10 41
Lawson, Miss ...(2) 2 2 52
Lawton, C. B. Esq S.L. 10 0 52
Layman, a 100 0 41
of the Church of England, one-fourth of
2,0007. placed at the disposal of the
Bishop of London for the diffusion of
Gospel knowledge 500 0 41
part of 160/., the tithe of a Barrister’s
professional income, placed at the dis-
posal of the Bishop of London 100 0 42
ditto, part of 176/. ditto 50 0 43
L. A. Z 20 0 42
L. C 1 1 49
Le Marchant, Rev. W. L. Standish, Stroud ... 5 0 50
Le Mesurier, J. Esq. Christ Ch. Oxford 10 0 42
Major-Gen 40 0 41
Miss Martha, Bradfield-pl. Reading .... 1 0 41
Ditto Gib. 3 0 42
Miss M. O. Bradfield-pl. Reading 1 0 41
Ditto ....Gib. 3 0 42
Rev. J. Bembridge, Isle of Wight 20 0 53
Yen. I.T. (Malta) 50 0 41
Ditto 10 0 53
Lea, Miss Maria, Henley-in-Arden Mont. 5 0 50
Leach, T. Esq. Preston S.L. 1 1 51
Lear, Rev. F. Bishopstone, Salisbury 1 0 53
Leathes, J. F. Esq. Lowestoft Rup. 1 0 46
Ledgard, R. Esq. Poole S.L. 5 0 51
Lee, Lieut. J. H (6) 1 1 46
Miss Maria (2) 1 0 54
Rev. H. T. Fakenham S.L. 1 1 51
Leeds S.L. 17 13 52
Parish Church S.L. 21 8 51
St. Andrew SL. 8 1 51
St. George S.L. 26 2 51
Lees, Mr. T. Oldham S.L. 10 51
Rev. W. Oldham S.L. 1 0 51
Lefroy, C. E. Esq. Crondal, Farnbam 5 0 41
Ditto 1 1 46
Lieut. .1. H. u.a Rup. 30 0 46
Ditto (6) 1 1 46
Legard, Rev. D. C. Lea,- Gainsborough 2 0 49
Legge, Rev. W. Ashstead, Epsom 10 10 53
Legrew, Rev. A. Chaldon, Reigate Mont. 1 0 50
Leicester, Rev. Robt. Woolton, Liverpool 2 0 50
Leigh 20 0 47
Hon. W. H Mont. 2 0 50
M 5 5 41
Rev. J. E. A. Scarlets, Reading 10 0 42
Ditto (9) 2 0 51
William, Esq Adel. 100 0 41
Leighlin, Dean of 100 0 41
Lemon, Miss, 42, Conduit-st S.L. 5 0 51
Lempriere, Major C. Jersey 1 0 53
Rev. W. Woolverstone, Ipswich 2 0 53
Leominster 5 0 44
Leslie, John, Esq (3) 1 1 49
Lethbridge, A. G. Esq. Taunton 100 0 41
Levett, Rev. W. Bray, Maidenhead... 10 0 42
Levy, Rev. T. B. Kirkby Thore 1 1 41
Lewes, J. S. Esq I 0 60
Lewes, Sussex 34 13 42
Ditto 1 0 43
Ditto 1 17 44
Ditto 15 45
Ditto 2 15 46
Ditto 215 47
Ditto 316 48
Ditto 4 6 49
Ditto 4 4 50
Ditto 4 6 51
Ditto 4 11 52
Ditto 3 10 53
Ditto 3 5 54
Ditto, small sums S.L. 11 61
Theological Library S.L. 110 51
Lewis, R. Esq S.L. 5 0 51
T.Esq.Brynedwin,Northop, Flint Fred. 10 0 44-
Ley, Rev. John, Exeter Coll. Oxlord 10 0 41
Lichfield, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Lonsdale) ...... 100 0 41
Ditto, Mont. ICO 0 5!
Ditto ICO 0 41
Ditto S.L. 25 0 53
Liddell, John, Es-q. 1, Manchester-square..... 3 0 42
Miss C. Bath 1 1 41
Mrs. T Fred. 10 44
Light, Rev. W. E. Tunbridge Wells S.L. 1 0 54
Lightfoot, Mrs. and Misses, Crediton 2 0 53
Rev. John.... 11 41
Lilley, James, Esq (6) 1 1 49
Lillingstone, Mrs. Birmingham S.L. 1 0 51
Rev. E. Birmingham S.L. 1 0 51
Lincoln, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Kaye) 200 0 41
Ditto (3) 10 0 52
Lord Bishop of (Dr. Jackson) 50 0 53
Lindo, Miss, Brighton (8) 1 1 51
Lingfleld, thank-offering for mercies re-
ceived S.L. 10 0 51
Linton, Col. Buckden, Huntingdon 20 0 50
Ditto Nat. 5 0 54
Ditto Gra 5 0 54
Ditto (1) 10 0 54
Mrs. H. Diddington, Huntingdon..S.L. 3 0 51
Mrs. H S.L. 5 0 51
Profits on two Tracts ...S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. H S.L. 30 0 51
Ditto, moiety of profits on “Outlines
of Sermons, tyJ. D. L.” S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. H. Diddington, Huntingdon 10 0 50
I.iskeaid, Cornwall 2 5 49
Ditto 4 14 49
Lister, James, Esq. Hoole Hall, Chester 1 1 45
John, Esq 1 1 47
Little, Major, Mrs. and Miss S.L. 3 0 SI


£
Liveing,’Charles, Esq. Denmark-hill 5
5 0 41 M'Nlven, C. Esq. Oxted, Godstone ~
10 0 41
■Liverpool .-. Fred. 20 11 44
Ditto S.L. 11 1 52
pool .-. Fred. 20 11 44 Macbraide, Mrs 5 0 42
Ditto S.L. 11 1 52 Macbride, Dr. Magdalen Hall, Oxford. ...S.L. 10 0 51
Ditto .. S.L. 5 5 52 Macdonald, Ven. W. Bp.’s Cannings, Devizes 10 0 41
Meeting at— Mackay, G. M. Esq. Shepton Mallett 5 0 53
Bootle £l2 5 Mackenzie, Rev. C. St. Olave’s, Southwark .. 50 0 41
mzie, Rev. tj. bt. Ulave’s, Southwark .. 50 0 41
Rev. H. 6, St. Martin’s-place 10 10 41
Collegiate Hall 22 3 Rev. H. 6, St. Martin’s-place " io lo 41
Everton, St. George ... 26 15 Ditto Col. 2 2 43
ChristChuroh 21 15 Ditto, coll, by ......Col. 2 8 43
St. Jude 19 14 Alex. Esq. 36, Devonshire-nlace in in ai
Alex. Esq. 36, Devonshire-place 10 10 41
St. Luke 5 2 Macleod, Mrs. Riverhead, Sevenoaks 10 0 41
St. Mary, Edgehill...... 27 0 Macworth, Miss,Finedon, Higham Fer...S'.X. 2 2 52
Seaforth...., 18 17 Madan, Rev. G. Redcliff, Bristol Mont. 2 0 50
“ M. A. F Mont. 10 50
£153 11 Mainwaring, Mrs. Gresford S.L. 1 0 51
Deduct expenses... 24 1 Mair, Miss M. E (1) 1 i 53
S.L. 129 10 51 Maitland, Rev. B. 27, Upper Seymour-street. 1 1 42
L. L. a layman 10 0 53 Ditto S.L. 1 0 51
Llandaff, Ld. Bp. of 200 0 41 Rev. C. D.... (2) 1 1 42
Llandogo 3 0 44 Majendie, Rev. George John 50 0 41
Lloyd, Geo. Esq Cowesby, Northallerton 21 0 41
Mrs. and Miss, Warwick-rd. Clapton ... 110 49
die, Rev. George John 50 0 41
Rev. H. W. Speen, Newbury 10 0 42
Ditto 20 0 53
Mrs. ana miss, warwicK-ra. Liapton ... liu 49 .Ditto 20 0 53
Rev. H. d.d Mont. 5 0 50 Ditto (101 1 1 si
Rev. H. J. Teddington 5 5 41
Rev. R. W. Wigginton, Lichfield. Mont. 2 0 50
nev. n. J. lectuington o 5 41 Major, Rev. J. R. d.d. King s Coll. Strand ... 10 10 42
Rev. R. W. Wigginton, Lichfield. Mont. 2 0 50 Male, Rev. A. S. Bremhill, Chippenham 1 1 53
Ditto (3) 1 0 53 Rev. R. Edgbaston, Birmingham.Xnr. 1 1 54
Rev. Y. G. Dmrston, Lincoln S.L. 2 0 51 Malley, F. O. Esq S.L. 2 0 51
L. M 5 0 45 Maltby, Mrs. H. Bath 20 0 41
Lockhart, Mrs. Chichester 5 0 41 Ditto Mont. 20 0 50
Loddon, Norfolk S.L. 4 8 51 Malton, A. E. Esq. '. 1 1 42
Lodington,Rv.F.W.Brington,ThrapstoneS'.X. 3 0 51 W 5 0 42
Rev. H. J. Graveney, Faversham...S.X. 5 0 51 i Manchester ............S.L. 72 16 52
Lodwick, J. Esq Adel. 210 42 Manestv, Rev. C. Purley, Reading 5 0 42
London, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Blomlield) 1,000 0 42 Rev C (3) 1 1 44
Ditto Mont. 300 0 50 Manley, Rev. J. Merstham, Reigate ...Mont. 5 5 50
Ditto S.L. 100 0 52 Manners, Lord John, Albany, Piccadilly 20 0 53
Ditto 200 0 53 Manning, Archdeacon 50 0 41
London, St. Dionisßackchurch 1 1 53 Ditto Fred. 5 0 45
Ditto (10) 1 1 51
Major, Rev. J. R. d.d. King’s Coll. Strand ... 10 10 42
Long, William, Esq. Lansd.-pi. E. Bath 5 0 53
Longmire, Misses S.L. 3 0 61
Mrs S.L. 2 0 61
Ditto Fred. 5 0 45
Manning & Anderdon, Messrs 100 0 41
Mannington, Mrs. Lewes S.L. 10 51
Manson, Mrs. Hornsey 1 0 53
Mrs •_ S.L. 2 0 51 Manson, Mrs. Hornsey 1 0 53
Rev. J. M. Sandiacre, Derby S.L. 2 0 51 Manvers, Earl, 13, Portman-square Gib. 21 0 42
Long Sutton Fred. 110 43 Harden, Rev. O. 22, Norfolk-sq. Brighton.... 2 0 42
Longton, J. Esq. Liverpool S.L. 2 2 51 Marett, Miss, 44, Above bar, Southampton .. 20 0 49
Lonsdale, J. G. Esq. Oxford 7 0 42 Ditto Mont. 20 0 50
Rev. J. G Mont. 5 0 50 Margate, Sermon S.L. 16 9 51
Loring, Mrs. Malvern (2) 10 54 Margetts, Rev. H. Huntingdon S.L. 1 0 51
Losh, Rev. James, Droxford Fred. 1 5 44 Margoty, E. Esq 5 0 41
Lott, H. B. Esq. Honiton 10 10 41 Mrs 5 0 41
Loveday, Arthur, Esq 5 0 41 Maria j 0 49
Rev. T. East Ilsley, Newdbury 2 2 41 Ditto ..., 2 0 63
Loveden, Miss, Aberystwith 25 0 50 Markland, J. H. Esq. Bath 50 0 41
Ditto 5 0 53 Marriott, Miss 1 1 42
ott. Miss 1 1 42
Miss Sophia C. Rugby (12) 1 1 54
Lowe, Rev. R. T. Madeira 10 0 41
_ ' v wojmm v* it, ug uy Ji 1 Otc
Lowndes, Rev, P. East Worldham Fred. 1 0 43 Rev. C. Oriel College, Oxford 200 0 41
Lowry, Rev. A. Kingston, Lewes, coll. by.S’.X. 5 2 51 Rev. Charles 5 0 53
Lowthian, Rev. J.Thatcham 5 0 42 Marsh, Mrs. Maidstone S L 1 0 51
Marsh, Mrs. Maidstone S.L. 1 0 51
Rev. E. G. Maidstone S.L. 1 0 51
Lucas, R. R. Esq. Wore. Coll. Oxford 10 42
iiucas, IV. n. r.sq. wore. c.Oll. uxioru 10 42 Rev. E. G. Maidstone S.L. I 0 61
T. F.sq. 2, Maiiland-pl. Lower Clapton... 10 10 42 Marshall, Rev. E. Corp. C. C. Oxford 5 0 41
Ditto 10 10 43 Rev. Edw 3 3 50
Ditto . 2 o 0 53 Rev. E 3110 53
Luck, Richard, Esq. Leicester 20 0 43 Marsham, Lady Charlotte, Maidstone 1 0 50
tarn, Lady Charlotte, Maidstone 1 0 50
R. d.c.l. Merton College, Oxford 10 0 44
Ludlow. Rev. E. Martinstown, Dorchester ... 1 1 50
X.UUIUW. ivev. marunstown, rrorenester ... 1 1 50 R. d.c.l. Merton College, Oxford 10 0 44
Lumsdaine, Rev. E. S. Up. Hardres, Canterb. 5 0 42 Rev. E. Scutthorp, Fakenham 50 0 41
Lupton, Francis, Esq. Blackheath 5 0 43 Marslanri, T. Esq. Macclesfield 50 0 53
Lush, Vicesimus, Esq. (6) 1 0 46 Marson, Miss, Diddington, Huntingdon. S.L. 10 51
Lushington, Rev. W. H. Easthng 5 0 41 Martin, Rev. Chanc. Exeter Fred. 5 o 43
Lushington, Rev. W. H. Eastling 5 0 41
Luxmoore, Very Rev. C. S. St. Asaph. ..Mont. 10 0 50
Martin, Rev. Chanc. Exeter Fred. 5 0 43
Luxmoore, Very Rev. C. S. St. Asaph. ..Mont. 10 0 50 Rev. Francis, Trim Coll. Camb 20 0 41
t ii "rtuTiJ a""l S ' L ' 1 0 51 Rev. R. Menheniot, Liskeard (1) 1 1 52
Lyall G. Esq. Old Broad-st 10 0 53 W. Esq. Cambridge 3 3 44
Lyttelton, Lord, Hagley, Stourbridge Gib. 10 0 45 Martyn, Mrs. S Mont. 2 2 50
Mrs. Thorverton, Collumpton (3) 1 1 52
, Marylebone, Margaret Chapel N.Z. 15 7 41
one, Margaret Chapel N.Z. 15 7 41
Ditto 3 0 41
IM.Zj. 10 /
M - Ditto.. 3 0 41
Ditto Fred. 1 0 41
~ , T T Ditto Fred. 1 0 41
m’ iw-’n 1 1 45 Ditto, Portman Street Chapel ...Tas. 110 42
eadln * Tas. 5 0 « Ditto :. Tas. 110 43
M. A. „ 5 0 42 Mason, Rev. A 15 49
M. A. Exeter College, Oxford 100 0 41 Rev. A. W. Stratford-green 3 3 49
lui Aii nZ v 49 Mate engaged in the China expedition... Viet. 5 0 44
’ Rs \’ F ' Bn^.?tone ’ Isle of Wight Fred. 1 0 44 Mathews, J. H. Esq. 1. Essex court. Temnle 10 Ift 41
M’Calmont, Rev. Thomas Fred. 5 0 45
M'James, J. Esq. Warwick-road, Clapton .... 1 1 49
49 Mate engaged in the China expedition... Viet. 5 0 44
44 Mathews, J. H. Esq. 1, Essex-court, Temple 10 10 41
Ditto '. 10 10 50
m James, J. Dsq. War wick-road, Clapton .... 1 1 49 Ditto 10 in w
M‘rhi ( d 'uVv rS r S , henle y,’ Barnet Most 1 o 60 Mathias, Rev.’^Ch^aHospitZZ"”""' 1 1 41
M‘G h , Jh 1 n "' ts ® outh 5 0 44 Mathison, G. F. Esq. Richmond, Surrey Viet. 100 0 46
Tenbury 1 l 42 Matson, Captain, r.n. Emsworth S.L. 2 0 51
C ' ° xford ’ 20 0 41 Matthews, Miss, Islington S.L. 2 0 51
M Neece, Rev. T. Dublin Fred. 1 0 43 Mrs. East Corsham SL. in no
P" 0, xuisa, Islington O.X/. Z U
Mrs. East Corsharn SL. 10 52


Maude, Hon. Capt. F. 10, Gloucester-terr 10 0 41
Hon. Captain F. Eaton-square S.L, 5 0 52
Rev. Joseph, Chirk 5 0 41
Ditto Fred. 2 0 44
Rev. J. B. Oxford 10 0 42
Maule, Rev. John, Greenwich 5 0 53
Maurice, Miss, 6, Mylne-street, Pentonville . 1 1 41
Miss Nat. 5 0 53
Miss, Reading 5 0 42
Miss J. E. Reading 5 0 42
Miss P. H. 21, Queen-sq. Bloomsb 5 0 42
Ditto v (3) 10 45
Maynard, Mrs. Warmleighton, Warwick 1 0 42
Mayo, Rev. Dr 10 0 43
Rev. R. Plaistow S.L. 5 0 51
Mayor, Mrs. and Miss 10 47
Mayow, Miss F. W. Sydenham 2 0 50
Ditto Mont. 2 0 50
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
M. B. Cambridge 10 0 53
M. C 50 0 41
M. E 5 0 41
Meakin, Rev. J. A. D. Newbury 1 1 41
Medland, Miss, Steyning. 1 0 53
Rev. T. Steyning, 5 0 42
Ditto 1 0 49
Ditto 5 0 53
Medley, Rev. John Fred. 5 0 44
Meek, Mrs. D. B. Godstone S.L. 10 51
M. E. H Mont. 5 0 50
Meeting at Willis’s Rooms 19 16 41
Ditto 97 12 53
Melville, Ladies I eslie S.L. 1 0 52
Member of the Universal Church 10 0 51
Mendham, Rev. R. Birmingham.... S.L. 10 0 51
Mercer, John, Esq. Maidstone S.L. 11 51
Merivale, Rev. C. St. John’s, Cambridge 5 0 42
Ditto Fred. 1 0 43
Messing, All Saints, Essex Per. 5 7 53
Methley S.L. 3 5 52
Methuen, Rev. H. H. Northbourne, Deal S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. T. A 10 0 41
Meyer, C. P. Esq. Brighton 1 0 42
Meyrick, E. Esq 10 10 41
F. Esq (2) 10 45
Rev. F. Trinity College, Oxford 5 0 33
M. F 5 0 53
M. H 2 0 44
M. H. K. 6, Ulster-terrace 10 0 41
Michel, Mrs. Lymington S.L. 1 0 51
Micklethwait, J. Esq S.L. 2 0 52
S.L. 2 0 52
Rev. R. G S.L. 1 0 62
Middleton in Teesdale, Durham 15 42
Midleton, Lord 200 0 41
Mile End, St. Peter’s Commercial School 1 0 41
Ditto 13 0 42
Miles, Rev. Robert, Bingham 5 0 44
T. Esq. Charterhouse 1 1 42
Miller, H. Esq (1) 1 1 53
Miss, Brighton 1 0 42
Rev. J. G. Compton S.L. 10 61
Rev. M. H. Hopton, Lowestoft 2 2 42
Thomas, Esq. Preston (1) 1 1 53
Millett, F. Esq. Woodhill, Ripley S.L. 10 0 51
Rev. G. Brighton 1 1 42
Rev. W S.L. 10 52
Mills, Miss, 20, Russell-square Adel. 5 0 4
Mr 1 0 4,2
Milne, A. G. Esq. Executors of 10 0 52
Milner, Mrs. C Mont. 2 0 50
Mrs. George, 58, Eaton-square 50 0 41
Ditto Mont. 17 10 SO
Milton, Berks 5 0 42
Mrs ~(2) I 1 48
Milward, Mrs 50 0 42
Mitchell, Alexander, Esq. Bath 1 1 41
Esq 10 0 50
P. S. Esq. 1, Copthall-conrt Nat. 10 0 53
W.R.Esq.North-ter.CamberwelK? fyN. 10 10 63
Mitford, Mrs. T. O ..) Mont. 5 0 50
Townley, Esq 5 0 41
M. J. H 5 0 49
Moberly, Rev. G. d.c.l. Winchester 25 0 41
Ditto Mont. 5 5 50
Ditto 10 0 53
Mogg, W. Rees, Esq. Midsomer Norton 6 0 53
Molony, James 8 0 42
Monckton, Rev. Hugh 10 0 41
£ s.
Monmouth S.L. 10 0 62
Montagu, H. S. Esq. Clapham S.L. 5 0 51
John, Esq. 31, Brompton crescent 5 5 53
Major, Clapham S.L. 11 51
Miss, Clapham S.L. 3 0 51
Montague, G. Esq. Worcester College, Oxf... 1 0 42
Monypenny.Mrs.W.St. Andrew’s,Scot. G.fyN. 1 1 63
Moody, Rev. H. R. Chartham, Canterbury ... 10 0 42
Moon, Dr. H Lewes S.L. 10 51
Moor, George, Esq. Durham i 1 0 49
Rev. J. F. Bradfield, Reading 5 0 42.
Rev. J. F. jun. Burton Agnes. .. Mont. 1 0 50
Moore, Hon. & Rev. E. Ilsley, Newbury 20 0 41
Major J. A. Queen Anne-street ... Fred. 2 0 43
Miss Viet. 5 0 46
Miss, Ash-grove, Malvern (11) 5 0 64
Rev. Edw. Frittenden, Staplehurst .... 0 51
Rev. George, Wrotham Gib. 20 0 42
Rev. J. H. Aberford, Wetherby 1 0 53
Ditto Nat. 1 0 54
Rev. Robert, Canterbury 10 0 60
Rev. R. St. Giles, Cranborne S.L. 5 0 51
Moorsom, —, Oxford 1 0 42"
Mordaunt, Dowager Lady, Hastings 25 0 41
Ditto Tas. 20 0 42
Miss Emma 20 0 41
Morden, Surrey 512 44
Morgan, J. Esq. Worcester College, Oxford.. 10 42
William, Esq 1 0 50
Ditto 1 0 51
W. Esq. Uckfleld 25 0 41,
Ditto 25 0 42
Ditto 50 0 63
Morier, J. P. Esq. 20, Upper Harley-street... 25 0 41
James, Esq. Brighton 1 0 42
Morison, Rev. G. Bombay 1 1 43
Morres, Rev. R 10 0 41'
Morris, Charles, Esq. 10, Portman-sq...i'Ve<7. 10 10 44
Charles, jun. Esq. 10, Portman-sq..Fm7. 10 10 44
Huson, Esq. Peckham 50 0 53
Miss P 2 0 50
Rev. Dr. Elstree (8) 2 2 43
Rev. T. E. Hambledon, Henl.-on-Th.. 1 0 53
Rev. T. E. Oxford (5) 1 0 52
T. Esq. Liverpool S.L. 2 2 51
Mortlake, Surrey 35 0 42
Mortlock, Miss, Moulton, Newmarket 25 0 42
Ttiomas, Esq. Cambridge 25 0 42
Mould, J. A. Esq. r.n. (Malta) 2 Q 43
J. A. Esq. Paynton 2 0, 49
John, Esq. r.n. Devonport 2 0 41
Mount, W. Esq King’s-road, Brixton ......... 5 0 4k
W. Esq. Wasing-place, Newbury .......' 10 0 42
Ditto 10 0 53
Ditto , ~(10) 1 0 51
Mountain, Rev. A. Havant................ M0nt. 25 0 50
Mowbray, J. R .Esq. M.P. 19, Camb.-sq. Nut. 20 0 53
Moxon, J. Esq. 8, Hanover-terrace Fred. 6 5 43
. —, Esq. Alveston, Bristol 10 42
Moysey, F. Esq. Hayes, Kent 20 0 41
M. P 100 0 41
M.P S.L. 5 0 52
M. S., I o 43
M. T Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto Bor. 10 0 53
Muirhead. J. P. Esq 5 0 45
Ditto 2 2 *46
Munn, Mrs. P. S. Margate S.L. 10 61
Mure, P. M. Esq. Bromley Mont. 5 0 60
Murray, C. R. S. Esq (3) 10 0 43
LadyC.2,Paragon, Richmond, Sur.Cope 10 10 41
Ditto G.$N. 10 10 53
Ditto G-4-N. 10 10 53
Lady Eliz. Cranbourne, Windsor 3 0 53
Rev. T. R. 30, Brunswick-square....... 10 10 41
Mursley 1 i 41
Ditto 214 42
M. W 2 d 0 53
Myddleton, Misses, Durham jqo Q 41
Needham, Lady Georgiana S.L. 2. 0 SI
Mrs. Godstone .....S.L. 2 0 51
Neeld, Joseph, Esq. Chippenham Gib. 25 Q 42
Nelson, Earl, 18, Hertford-street (7) 10 0 54


Nelson, Rev. G. M. Oxford... 10 0
Nelthropp, H. L. Trinity College, Cambridge 1 1 42
Nevinson, Rev. C. Stamford 2 0
Newark, Lord 100 0
Newby, Rev. Mark, Crosby Garrett, Brough. 10 42
Newcomb, Rev. C. G. Nor. Witham, Linc.(l2) 5 5 54
Newcome, Misses, Gresford, Chester 5 0
Mrs. E Mont. 1 0
Rev. Thomas, Shenley 5 0
Ditto Fred. 1 0
Newland, Mrs. Kempston, Bedford S.L. 1 0 52
Newport, Isle of Wight S.L. 715
Nicholas, Rev. T. G. West Moulsey....Mo«f. 1 0
Nicholl, Iltid, Esq. Usk Gib. 5 0
Sir John Fred. 5 0
Nicholls, Rev. B. E. Walthamstow Rup. 2 0
Nicholson, Miss, Rochester Mont. 2 0
Miss F Mont. 2 0
W. Esq Mont. 5 0
Nind, Rev. P. H 5 0
Nixon, Rev. F. R (2) 2 2
Norham, Durham 58 13
Norris, Miss Anne, Havant Mont. 2 0
Ditto 2 0
Rev. H. H. Hackney 50 0
Rev. J. Corp. Christi College, Oxford.. 5 0
Sir W. Godstone S.L. 5 0
T. G. Esq Lytt. 0
Northam, Devon 5 5
Northcote,SirS.H.Bt.l3,Uevonshire-st, Fred. 5 0 43
S. H. Esq. 13, Fred. 5 0 44
Northumberland, Duke of 500 0
Dow. Duchess of, Isleworth . 50 0
500 0 53
Ditto i.
Norwich, Lord Bp. of ~, 100 0
Nottidge, William, Esq. Wandsworth.. Mont. 5 0 50
Nova Scotia, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Inglis) 100 0 42
Ditto, Coll, by 12
50 0 41
Oakeley, Mrs 50 0
Rev. Sir H. Bart 5 0
Oakes, Miss, Gresford, Chester S.L. 1 0 51
Rev. James, Tostock, Bury St. Edmds... 10 0 53
Oakley, Mrs. Tanybwlch, North Wales...S'.A. 100 0 51
Oates, Miss, Diddington, Huntingdon S.L. 10 51
Obins, Rev. A. E. Woodside, Liverpool. ..S.L. 5 0 51
O’Brien, Miss, Dromoland,Newmkt.-on-Fergus 1 0 43
Offering from the ‘ ‘ Honeyßee” of the Quarterly 5 5 43
First Fruits 50 0 44
Okes, Rev. R. Cambridge 10 0 42
Oldrid, Rev, J. H. Boston Mont. 11 50
Ditto S.L. 1 1 51
Olive, Rev, J. Ayott, Welwyn S.L. 5 0 52
Oliver, Rev. Samuel, Whaplode 1 0 42
Rev. S. Lambley, Nottingham (4) 1 1 47
Ollivant, John, Esq Mont. 10 0 50
Omega S.L. 10 51
Onslow, Earl 100 0 41
Osier, Mrs, Bourdeaux 1 1 45
Ossory, Lord Bishop of 100 0 41
Oswald, Alex. Esq. 14, Arlington-street 20 0 41
Ottley, Rev. J, B. Thorpe, Loughborough 5 0 41
Ouvry, Mrs. 25, Cambridge-terrace 5 0
Ouyry-North, Rev. J. N 5 0
5 0 53
Overstone, Lord, 2, Carlton-gardens Mont. 100 0 50
Oving, Sussex Mont. 2 2 50
Owen, Colonel, 73, Cambridge-terrace 1 1 41
Ditto (7) 1 1 47
Rev. L. W. Colchester 2 0 41
Ditto (2) 1 1 53
W. B. Esq ■ (2) 1 0 43
Oxenden, Miss S.L. 10 51
Rev. A. Pluckley, Maidstone S.L. 10 51
Rev. M. Eastwell, Ashford 5 5 41
Oxford,Ld.Bp,of(Dr.Wiiberforce) 26,Pa1l Mall SO 0 63
All Souls College 100 0 41
Balliol College, Undergraduates of 31 0 42
Brasenose College 100 0 42
Christ Church College 500 0 42
Exeter College Mont. 2 0 50
Ditto, Offerings 20 0 41
Ditto Fred. 30 0 42
Ditto 75 0 41
Junior Members of St. John’s 20 0 42
JAncoln College 21 0 41
Oxford, Magdalen College 300 0 42
Ditto 100 0 49
Ditto 50 0 52
Magdalen Hall 6 6 42
Member of Pembroke College 1 5 42
Merton College ICO 0 42
New College 200 0 41
Oriel College 200 0 42
Queen’s College 100 0 42
St. John Baptist 3 3 43
St. Mary Magdalene 19 0 42
St. Peter East 36 0 41
Ditto N.Z. 2 0 50
Ditto, Small Sums 8 0 50
Ditto 6 10 51
Ditto 2 6 52
Ditto S.L. 15 0 52
Ditto 60 18 53
Undergraduate 1 0 43
Universityof 1.000 0 41
Ditto 2,000 0 50
Bachelors and Undergraduates 14 0 41
One hour a day for one Term 20 0 41
Undergraduate of 1 0 41
Wadham College 50 0 42
Worcester College, Small Sums 2 0 42
Ditto (8) 20 0 49
P Viet. 24 5 48
Packer, Rev. J. Danehill, Sussex S.L. 1 1 52
Page, Mrs. Speenhill, Newbury 10 0 41
Paget, Rev. F. E. Elford, Lichfield Gib. 2 0 42
Paine, C. Esq.lslington 20 0 41
William, Esq. Feltham 1 0 41
Ditto (5) 1 0 47
W. D. Esq.lslington (9) 1 1 64
Palmer, A. Esq. Cheam S.L. 5 0 51
E. Esq 2 0 SO
Miss, Holme-park, Reading 5 0 42
Mrs. Loddon S.L. 10 51
R. Esq. Holme-park, Heading 20 0 42
Panton, Lincolnshire Bor. 3 2 51
Papillon, Mrs. E. Lexden, Colchester 5 0 42
Parker, C. Esq. 41, Upper Bedford place Mont. 20 0 50
Ditto 20 0 53
Rev. W. St. Ethelburga 20 0 41
T. L. Esq. Easingwold Mont. 2 0 50
Parkinson, J. H. Esq. 36, Sackville-street..(6) 1 1 54
Mrs. J. Ravendale, Grimsby 2 0 47
Parks, W. J. Esq 1 0 41
Parrat, James, Esq. a.a. Dublin 1 0 42
Parry, Miss E. J. Widcombe-house, Bath. S.L. 1 0 51
Mr. E. P. Liverpool S.L. 1 0 51
Mrs. Higham-court, Gloucester (4) 5 0 45
T. G. Esq. Higham-court, Gloucester... 20 0 41
Ditto (7) 50 0 50
Pascoe, Rev.T. Penzance (13) 1 1 54
Patteson, Miss J. E. Feniton, Honiton 25 0 41
Ditto Fred. 5 0 42
Ditto 20 0 53
Bev. T Hambledon, Horndean...Fmf. 5 0 45
Bight Hon. Sir J. Feniton, Honiton.... 50 0 41
Ditto 20 0 53
Ditto (14) 10 0 54
Pattison, Miss, 7, Portland-place, Leamington. 5 0 54
Pauntley 2 6 47
Payne, J. Esq. Clapham S.L. 5 0 51
Miss Mont. 10 50
Miss Jane, Chichester (11) 1 1 54
R. jun. Esq. Wandsworth 2 2 41
Peachey, Rev. J S.L. 3 3 51
Pearce, C. T. Esq. Grove-hill, Camberwell.... 5 5 41
G. Esq. Blackheath-park Mont. 10 0 50
cx. rssq. jDjacKiieaui-paiii ivluhi. xu w ow
Pears, Rev. S. A. Harrow S.L. 2 0 51
Pearson, H. B. Esq. Worcester Coll. Oxford... 10 42
Priscilla 2 0 53
Rev. H. L. Sonning, Berks S.L. 25 0 61
Peat, G. A 1 0 49
VT. A 1 v
Rev. A. Lambeth 1 1 41
Rev. J. Riverhead, Sevenoaks 1 1 41
Peek, W. Esq. Clapham S.L. 5 0 51
W. jun. Esq. Clapham S.L. 5 0 51
Peel, Laurence, Esq. Brighton 20 0 42
Rev. John, Canterbury Gib. 20 0 42
Rev. G. H. Basildon, Reading 10 0 42


Captain, Royal Hospital, Chelsea....S.X. 10 51
Pelham, Hon. and Rev. G. T. Loddon ....S.L. 5 0 51
Pellew, Hon. and Very Rev. G, Norwich 10 10 41
Ditto 5 0 42
Pelly, Justinian, Esq. 1, Winchester-buildings 10 0 41
Rev. T. Birchanger, Bp.’s-Stortford .... 2 2 49
Pembroke, Dow. Countess of, Wilton, Salisb. 200 0 53
Penfold, Rev. Dr. Marylebone 100 0 41
Pennell, Mrs. R. M. Lyme Regis 100 0 41
Mrs. Surbiton, Kingstoh-on-Thames ... 5 0 49
Ditto 6 17 50
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Pennington, Joseph, Esq 1 1 42
Penrhyn, Lady C. Mortlake Fred. 6 0 43
Penrose, Miss, Coleby, Lincoln 6 0 42
Penton, Miss, Compton S.L. 10 51
Pepys, E. Esq. 7, Upper 25 0 ,53
John, Esq. 8, Lower Berkeley-street.... 50 0 41
Ditto G.SfN. 100 0 53
Perceval, Captain E. A. Taunton 25 0 47
Hon. and Rev. A. P 21 0 42
Percival, Miss, Clapham S.L. 1 1 51
Percy, Hon. Jocelyn S.L. 5 0 51
Perfect, R. Esq. Castle Cary 5 0 41
Pering, Rev. John, Skipton 5 0 42
Perry, Miss, Trevorgan, Cardigan 1 0 53
R. Esq. 18, Chester-ter. Regent’s-park.. 10 0 53
Peterborough, Ld.Bp. of (Dr. Davys) Peterbor. 100 0 42
4 sr. in n «i
Ditto .*. S.L. 10 0 51
Petley, C. R. C. Esq. Riverhead, Sevenoaks... 10 0 41
Pettitt, Rev. G. Ceylon S.L. 2 2 52
Pewrome, Miss, Gresford, Chester S.L. 10 51
Phayre, Rev. R. Fakenham S.L. 1 1 51
Phelps, Rev. T. S Mont. 1 10 60
Mont. 1 10 60
Rev. W. W S.L. 5 0 51
Philipps, J. H. Esq. Williamston 5 0 41
Ditto 10 0 43
Phillimore, R. J. Esq. ll.d. 5, Arlington-st.. 10 0 53
Phillipps, Elizabeth 1 1 49
Phillips, J. H. Esq Mont. 5 0 50
MissM. 38, Clarend.-sq. Leamington. Gib. 1 0 42
Ditto 1 0 49
Ditto Mont. 2 0 SO
Ditto 10 53
Mrs. Charles 5 0 41
Rev. H. J. 42, Upper Seymour-street, 10 10 41
Phillott, Rev. H. W. Staunton-Wye, Hereford 11 41
Ditto Fred. 1 0 43
Philpott, Rev. O. Worcester 1 0 41
Pickering, Rev. E. H. Eton College, Windsor 20 0 41
Pickin, W. J. Esq. Whitemoor, Ollerton 5 0 49
Picture called “ Guido” (moiety) 17 10 45
Pierson, James Alexander, Esq Maur. 10 0 53
Pilgrim, C. H. Esq. Maidenhead (1) 2 2 54
Pillant, Miss S.L. 1 0 52
Pinder, Rev. J. H. Wells, Somerset (13) 2 2 53
W. M. Esq. Weston, Bath (10) 2 2 5i
Pinnock, Major, Brighton 1 0 42
Pipon, Mrs. Charles, Jersey 5 0 49
Pitman, Rev. J. Broadhempston, Ashburton.. 10 0 41
Ditto 40 0 42
Rev. J. R. Bath 1 0 42
Platt, T. P. Esq. Foley, Liphook Fred. 25 0 45
Ditto 25 0 51
Plumer, Lady 5 0 41
Plummer, Rev. J. T. Alton Mont. 1 1 50
Ditto 1 1 49
Plumptre, Miss, Diddington, HuntingdonS.X. 10 51
Miss Sophia, Diddington, Hunts. ...S.L. 1 0 51
Plumptree, Rev. H. S 2 2 41
Plymouth, St. Andrew’s Chapel 10 0 49
P. M 30 0 41
Pole, Sir W. T. Bart. Axminster Fred. 5 0 44
Pole-Carew, W. H. Esq. Antony, Devonport(2) 1 1 53
pollen, Mrs. Andover 5 0 42
Mrs. E. P Fred. 2 0 43
Ditto 2 0 46
Rev. G. P. B Gib. 5 0 42
Ponsford, Rev. W. Drewsteignton, Exeter.... 10 0 53
Poole, Mrs. Bussage, Stroud 1 1 53
Mrs. Grab. 2 10 53
Ditto ...., Nat. 210 53
Rev. W. Lugwardine, Hereford 10 0 S 3
Poole, St. Paul 5 0 42
Pope, Yen. E. d.d 25 0 53
Popham, Rev. J. L. Chilton, Hungerford 10 0 41
Popple, Miss, Hull S.L. 10 51
Henry, Esq. Winchfield 20 0 41
Rev. G. 2, Great Cumberland-place 50 0 41
Ditto 50 0 46
Ditto (3) 10 0 54
Porten, Rev. S. Charlwood, Crawley 10 0 50
Ditto 10 0 53
Porter, Col. Holkham, Wells, Norfolk. .. Mont. 5 0 50
Colonel H. E 10 0 41
Miss 50 0 50
Rev. Charles . 5 0 41
Rev. Dr Mont. 2 2 50
Portman, Rev.F. B. StapleFitzpaine, Taunton 20 0 41
Postlethwaite, Rev. T. G. Plymouth S.L. 10 52
Potchett, Rev. W. Grantham Mont. 5 0 50
Pott, Arthur, Esq. Tunbridge 50 0 41
Ditto 20 0 49
Ditto S.L. 5 0 52
C. Esq. Bromley, Kent 50 0 42
Ditt0........... Mont. 5 0 50
W. Esq. Bridge-street, Southwark 50 0 42
Ditto Gib. 10 0 42
Ditto 20 0 49
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
Potton, Bedfordshire 213 42
Potts, R 'bert, Esq. Trinity Coll. Cambridge.. 2 2 42
Povah, Rev. J. V. 16, Tavistock square 20 0 41
Powell, C. C. Esq. Speldhurst, Tunbr (5) 1 1 49
Miss... 1 0 49
Miss Letitia 20 0 63
Miss Maria, Clapton 20 0 53
Mrs. Harry, Kelvedon Hatch (13) 1 1 53
Mrs. W. Notting-hill S.L. 10 10 51
Rev. E. A. Caldecott, Cambridge 1 1 41
Ditto 1 1 42
Rev. G. Bilton, Rugby 5 5 53
Ditto (14) 1 1 54
Rev. H. T. Stretton, Coventry 5 0 41
Rev. W. F. Cirencester ...-. 1 0 42
W. Esq. Notting-hill S.L. 10 10 51
Power, Rev. H. B. Bramley, Guilford 10 52
Powles, J. D. Esq. Elstree (4) 5 0 45
Pownall, Rev. C. C. B. Milton Ernest, Bedford 5 0 41
Powney, Rev. H. North Wallop, Andover 5 0 41
Powys, Miss, Bath 1 0 42
Rev. L. C. Stalbridge 20 0 42
Rev. T. A. Sawtry, Huntingdon 2 7 42
Praed, Mrs... ....' Mont. 5 0 50
Prance, Miles, Esq. Gray’s-inn-square ....S.L. 5 5 51
R. Esq. Hampstead S.L. 10 10 51
Pratt, Mrs. sen S.L. 1 1 51
Rev. J. Finsbury Circus S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. J. St. Stephen’s, Coleman-street.. 1 1 41
Rev. J. H. Calcutta 10 0 41
Ditto Fup. 5 0 45
Yen. Archdeacon, Calcutta S.L. 5 0 52
Presbyter 50 0 49
Prescot, Lancashire Bor. 3 5 52
Preston S.L. 1 11 52
M. M. Esq 10 0 41
Rev. M. M. Cheshunt Rup. 10 0 45
Ditto S.L. 10 0 51
Prevost, Miss, 27, Grove-street, Leamington.. 5 0 41
Price, W. Esq. Reigate Fred. 2 0 45
Prichard, Edw. Esq. Gibraltar 10 0 42
Rev. R. Newbold, Shipston-on-Stour... 2 2 42
Pridden, Rev. W. Stow, Bury St. Edmund’s.. 1 0 42
Priest, a 2 0 43
Ditto Fred. 2 0 43
Rochester 5 0 42
of the Church of England Fred. 5 0 44
Prince, Miss, 7, St. James’s square 10 0 53
Pritchard, George, Esq. Madeley, Shiflnal .... 10 0 49
H. Esq. Oxford 5 0 42
H. Esq. Clapham S.L. 5 5 51
Proby, Rev. Charles, Twickenham 5 0 41
Ditto 5 0 64
Procter, Lady W. Beauchamp, Loddon ...S.L. 3 0 51
Rev. Dr. Cambridge 25 0 42
Prodgers, Rev. E. Ayott St. Peter, Welwyn... 10 10 41
Pryor, F. Esq. Wandsworth 5 5 49
Pugh, Rev. J. W. Landilo 10 0 41
Ditto 5 0 43
Ditto Mont. 1 1 50
Puller, C. W. Esq. Youngsbury, Ware 25 0 41
Ditto Mont. 25 0 50
Ditto 20 0 53
Purchase, Miss .S.L. 10 52


M i.
Purchase, Miss E S.L. 10 52
Pusey, Philip, Esq. Pusey, Faringdon 5 0 42
Rev. E. n. o. Oxford (13) 31 10 54
Pyndar, Miss, Diddington, Huntingdon. .S.L. 1 0 51
Miss M. ditto S.L. 1 0 51
Quedgley, Glouc . 110 44
Ditto 1 8 45
Ditto 10 47
Oueen Dowager, H.M. the 2,000 0 41
Ditto Adel. 50 0 46
Ditto 200 0 49
Radclyffe, Charles 11 41
Rev. C. E 1 1 42
Ditto (2) 1 1 44
Radstock, Lord, 26, Portland-place 21 0 41
R. A. II 5 0 50
Raikes, Rev. Chanc. Chester.. S.L. 10 0 51
Ramsay, Gen. John Adel. 5 0 43
Ramsden, Frank, Esq. Doncaster 5 0 49
R. Esq. Carlton-hall, Worksop S.L. 5 0 51
Rand, J. Esq. Bradford S.L. 5 0 52
Randall, Alex. Esq. Maidstone S.L. 1 1 51
Rev. J. Binfield, Bracknell 10 0 41
Ditto 10 0 42
Rev. J. M. Blakeney S.L. 10 51
Randell, Henry, Esq. 11, New-sq. Linc.-inn... 1 1 42
Randolph, Rev. J. H. Sanderstead, Croydon.. 100 0 41
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
Ditto 25 0 53
Rev. T. Hadham, Bishop’s-Stortford ... 100 0 41
Ditto 25 0 53
Randulpha 1 0 43
Ditto Fred. 1 0 44
Rankin, Rev. X. Huggate, Pocklingtonlo 50
Ranson, J. Esq. Carlisle S.L. 2 0 51
Ravenhill, Mr. and Mrs. H. Clapham S.L. 10 51
Ravensworth, Lady Fred. 1 0 44
Rawlins, Mrs. Gunter’s-grove, Bridgwater ... 10 0 41
Rawlinson, Rev. G. Exeter Coll. Oxford 5 0 41
Ditto 1 0 42
Rawson, Rev. W. Liverpool S.L. 2 0 51
X. S. Esq. Bexley S.L. 1 0 51
Bay, Miss, Greenstead, Ongar 1 0 53
Miss F. Greenstead, Ongar 10 53
Mrs. General, Greenstead, Ongar 2 0 53
Rev. G. Stathern, Grantham 20 0 42
Ditto Fred. 30 0 43
Ditto 10 10 49
Ditto 10 0 52
Ditto 10 0 53
Rev. Philip (5) 1 1 45
Rev. P. W. Greenstead, Chipping Ongar 3 0 53
R. D. S. Brighton 1 0 42
Reade, Lady, Stow-on-Wold I 0 42
Rev. P. Brighton 1 1 42
Ditto (4) 1 1 46
Reading, Berks 519 42
Ditto, St. John, and Meeting S.L. 34 15 52
Record, per S.L. 3 0 51
Ditto S.L. 9 1 52
Redesdale, Lord 100 0 41
Ditto 100 0 53
Reeves, Jas. Esq 5 5 42
Ditto 5 5 43
Renaud, Rev. G. Bayford, Hertford S.L. 1 0 51
Reynell, Sir X. Bart. Avisford, Arundel 10 0 41
F 5 0 41
R- H Fred. 5 0 44
R. H. Oxford 210 41
Rhoades, Rev. J. P. Rugby Mont. 1 1 50
Rhodes, Rev. F. W. Bishop’s Stortford ....(3) 1 1 43
Ricardo,Miss,Fetcham-lodge, Leatherhd. S.L. 2 0 51
Richards, E. P. Esq. Cardiff. 10 0 53
Mrs. 19, Russell-sq 25 0 41
Mrs. G. Andover 10 0 50
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Mont. 5 0 50
Rev. Dr, Exeter Coll. Oxford 30 0 41
Ditto 20 0 42
Rev. H. M. Andover 5 0 50
Ditto Mont. 1 0 50
lO 0 53
£ s.
Richards, Rev. Thos. Aherystwith 100 0 41
Richardson, Charles G. Esq 3 0 41
Dr. Birkenhead (8) 1 1 49
Dr. Comhedown, Bath 50 0 42
J. J. Esq . 2 0 41
Richard 15 15 42
W. S. Esq. 3, Tanfleld-court, Temple(l4) 5 0 54
Richmond, St. John, Surrey Fred. 416 43
Riddell, Capt. C. J.B. Artil. B.ar. Woolwich... 5 0 41
Ditto Fred. 2 2 44
Rev. J. C. B. Harrietsham, Maidstone 21 0 41
Sir W. B. Bart. Maidstone 5 0 41
Ditto Fred. 5 5 43
Ridge, Mrs. Ahbey-lodge, Morden Mont. 10 60
Ridgway, Rev. J. Penge, Sydenham S.L. 2 0 51
Ridley, Rev. N. J. Hollington, Andover 5 0 53
Sir N. W. Bt. 16, Carlton-ter Gib. 5 0 42
Riband, Miss C. Oxford 1 1 47
Rev. J. Magd. Coll. Oxford (6) 1 1 53
Rev. S. J. Ipswich Mont. 3 3 50
Ripon, Earl of, 1, Carlton-gardens 100 0 41
Lord Bp.of(Dr.Longley)l3,Bryanst.-sq. 200 0 41
Ditto Rup. 10 0 45
Ditto 40 0 48
Ditto 20 0 49
20 0 49
Rippingall, Rev. S. F. Langham, H01t....S L. 5 0 51
Risley, Mrs. W. C. Deddington 5 0 42
Rev. W. C. Deddington..... 5 0 42
Rirington, W. Esq. 52, St, John’s-sq, 10 10 50
10 10 50
Ditto 10 10 53
Roharts, T. J. A.Esq. 1, Dean-street, Park-la. 5 0 42
Roberts, Mrs. Liverpool S.L. 10 51
Rev. A. Billericay Mont. 1 0 50
Rev. J. C 10 0 41
Robertson, Capt. D. Aldboro’, Borobridge (5) 1 1 54
Mrs. Gretton-pl. Bethnal-gr S.L. 1 0 52
Rev. D. Courtney-ter. Brighton 10 0 53
Rev. E. Shorwell, Isle of Wight. .. Fred. 2 0 44
Rev, J. C. Beakesbourne, Canterbury... 10 0 41
Robin, James, Esq. Jersey Mont. 5 0 5.0
Robinson, C. F. Esq. Effingham, Letherhead 25 0 53
F. Esq. Oxford 1 1 42
G. Esq. Leeds S.L. 5 0 51
G. J. 11, Hart-st. Bloomsbury 2 0 44
Miss, Tottenham 1 1 42
Mrs. 9, Hertford-street Fred. 1 0 44
1 0 44
Ditto 1 0 50
Rev. F. Corpus Christi Coll. Oxford ... 1 1 43
Rev. F. Stonesfleld, Woodstock ...S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. Sir G. S. Bart. Cranford, Kettering 80 0 41
William, Esq. Settle Mont.’ 10 0 50
Rochester,Ld.Bp.of (Dr. Murray) 55, Eaton-pl. 25 0 42
Rodwell, Miss A. Islington S.L. 10 51
Roe, W. H. Esq. Newbury I 1 41
Ditto 2 2 42
Roehampton, Surrey Fred. 12 1 43
Rogers, John, Esq. Sevenoaks 25 0 42
Miss, 9, Union-street, Bath (8) 1 1 53
Rev. Canon, Penrose, Helston 40 0 42
Ditto Fred. 2 0 43
Rev. H. Cambourne S.L. 1 1 51
Rolfe, Mr. James, Booking 10 53
Rooper, Rev. X. R. Hove, Brighton 1 1 41
Rose, C. L. Esq , 1 0 42
Mr. X. Godstone S.L. 1 0 51
Mrs. F. X 5 0 42
Ross, Lady Mary, 60, Portland-place (12) 1 1 54
—, Esq. Oxford 2 2 42
Round, C. G. Esq. Colchester S.L. 10 0 51
Rouse, Mrs. 18, York-pl. Portman-sq. ...Mont. 10 0 50
Rowarth, Mrs. Bath S.L. 2 0 51
Rowden, Rev. E. Highworth 10 0 42
Rowlands, Dr. 57, Wimpole-st 5 0 43
Rowsell, Rev. E. E 5 5 41
Rowton, Rev. R. J. Southwood, Acle S.L. 1 0 51
Roxby, Rev. H. R. Clapham... S.L. 10 51
Royds, Rev. C. S. Haughton, Stafford 20 0 41
Ditto 5 0 47
Ditto 2 2 50
Rev. E. Brereton, Rugeley 5 0 50
Ditto.. .’ ° 20 0 54
R. S. Windsor"”"" 5 0 41
Rushout. Miss H. legacy 300 0 49
Ditto 200 0 52
Ruskin, J. Esq. Christ Church, Oxford 100 0 42
_ .~ inn A O
Russell, C. Esq. Swallowfield 10 0 42
Lord W. Windsor S.L. 5 0 51
JiOlU . \i
Miss, Shepperton h....5.L. 1 0 51


£ s.
Russell, Miss A. Shepperton S.L. 10 51
Rev. J. d.d. Devonshire-sq. Bishopsg. 20 0 41
Ditto 3 0 53
Rev. J. C. Lewes (3) 10 45
Ditto 1 1 42
Rev. W. Shepperton S.L. 10 51
Ryde, Rev. J. G. Aberdeen 5 0 53
Ryder, Hon. G. D. Berkhamstead Rup. 5 0 51
Ditto S.L. 5 0 51
Bye, Sussex 6 9 41
S. Oxford 1 0 44
S. Rev. J Tas. 1 0 42
Ditto 5 0 42
Ditto Fred. 10 0 42
Ditto Cape. 10 0 42
Sacerdos 3 10 42
Saffron Walden S.L. 22 9 52
Sale, Rev. X. Sheffield 3 3 42
Salisbury, Dean of 50 0 42
Lord Bishop of (Dr. Denison) 200 0 41
Salt, G. Esq. 9, Russell-sq (4) 1 1 54
Rev. Joseph, Penkridge Fred. 5 0 43
W. Esq. 9, Russell-sq Mont. 10 0 50
Ditto S.L. 10 0 51
Salter, Mrs. Trowbridge S.L. 1 0 51
Sandars, Miss, Owston, Gainsborough ...S.L. 1 0 51
Sandbach, Rev. G. Brasen. Coll. Oxford 2 0 41
Sandford, Miss, Bath (2) 1 1 53
Saunders, Charles, Esq. Sneaton, Whitby 20 0 45
G Esq. Worcester Coll. Oxford 10 42
Rev. J. X. C. Far Forest, Bewdley..s'.X. 11 51
Robt. Esq. Henley-on-J hames SL. 10 0 51
Saverland, Miss Tas. 1 0 42
Savory, A. Esq S.L. 10 10 51
J. S. Esq. Bath S.L. 10 0 51
X. Esq. Wore. Coll. Oxford 10 42
Sawbridge, H. B. Esq. E. Haddon, Northamp. 25 0 41
Sawyer, C. A. Esq. Maidenhead (14) 1 0 54
Sayer, Charles, Esq 3 0 49
Ditto Mont. 2 0 50
S. C 2 0 49
Ditto 1 0 54
Scarborough, Yorkshire 5 0 41
Scarth, Rev. H. M. Bathwuck, Bath 2 2 41
Schofield, R. L. Esq. Howden 1 1 41
Scholar of Worcester Coll. Oxford Gib. 1 0 42
Scobell, Rev. John, Lewes 5 0 42
Ditto Fred. 1 0 43
Scott, Hon. Lady 5 0 49
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Ladies A. and H 30 0 41
Miss Mont. 10 50
Mrs. E Mont. 10 50
Rev. Robert, Duloe Fred. 5 0 43
X. Esq. Brenthouse, Penrith S.L, 5 0 51
Scrivener, J. F. Pike, Esq. Andover 10 0 41
Scrivens, Mrs. Clapham, Winchester S.L. 10 0 51
Sealy, Rev. W. G. Compton S.L. 1 1 51
Selkirk, Earl of Rup. 100 0 49
Rup. 100 0 49
Selwyn, C. J. Esq. 2, New-sq. Linc.-inn 2 2 41
Rev. G. A 20 0 41
Rev. W. Melbourn, Royston, a land
order for 101 acres in the settlement
of New Zealand, cost N.Z. 101 0 41
Sex, Edw. Esq S.L. 10 0 51
Seymour, E. W. Esq. Porthmawr, Crickhowel 20 0 46
Rev. G. A. Compton, Winchester.. .S.L. 1 0 51
Rev. R. Kinwarton, Alcester 5 0 53
Sir Geo. Bart 5 0 41
—, Esq 1 1 41
S- F 210 49
Shadwell, Louis Herme, Esq 2 2 41
Shafto, X. D. Esq. Hunton, Maidstone...,...(6) 25 0 54
Ditto Mont. 1 0 50
Shalbourn, Hungerford S.L. 1 2 52
Shand, Geo. Esq. Queen’s Coll. Oxford 5 0 41
Shann,Rv.T.Hampsthwaite, Harrowgate S.L. 2 0 51
Sharp, Mr. Thomas 1 0 50
W. Esq 1 0 42
Sharpe, J. C. Esq. 19, Fleet-street 100 0 41
Ditto Gib. 5 0 42
Ditto Fred. 10 0 44
Ditto (3) 5 0 43
Ditto (6) 10 0 49
Ditto (5) 1 1 54
(5) 1 1 54
£ s.
Sharpe, Miss 15 0 41
Misses Mont. 110 50
JVlrs. Rectory, Barnes 5 0 41
’’"'Mrs. L. A. St. John's, Oxford 25 0 41
Rev. L. Allhallows Staining Colo. 10 10 42
Ditto 5 0 50
Rev. L. A. St. John’s, Oxford 25 0 41
W. Esq. Birmingham S.L. 5 0 51
Shaw, Miss, Walton, Melton Mowbray 10 42
Mrs. Clapham S.L. 1 1 51
Mrs. Walton, Melton Mowbray 1 0 42
Mrs. Philippa 30 0 41
Shawl, a 10 45
Sheen, Staffordshire 1 7 53
Shed eld, Earl of, Brighton Gib. 50 0 42
Shepherd, Rev. Geo. d.d 30 0 41
Ditto 1 0 42
MSIV ••••••••• • •• ••• • •• • •• ••• ~, m ~f ••• 1 U
Sheppard, J.G.Esq. Campsea,WoodbridgeS.Z. 5 0 51
Mrs. Sophia Gib. 100 0 43
Ditto Tas. 100 0 43
Rev. H. W. Warbling. Havant 5 0 41
Ditto S.L. 2 0 51
Sherbrooke,Lady,Diddington,Huntingd.. S.L. 1 0 51
She. wood, J. Esq. 7, Gt. George-st 10 10 47
Ditto 5 5 49
Ditto 10 10 83
T. E. Esq. 4, Mecklenburgh-sq 10 10 47
Ditto 5 5 49
Shields, J. Esq. Durham S.L. 1 0 51
Shiffner, Rev. Geo. Lewes 5 0 42
Sir H. Bart. Lewes 5 0 42
Shillibeer, Mrs. Oundle Mont. 10 50
Shirley, C. M. A S.L. 2 5 51
Shirreff, Rev. R.St. J.Thorley, I.of Wight(l2) 1 1 52
Short, Col. C. W. Odiham.. 5 0 41
Rev. Aug 5 0 42
Rev. Dr. Bloomsbury 100 0 41
Rev. W. 43, Great Ormond-st 50 0 41
Ditto S.L. 5 0 51
W. Esq. Barnes 50 0 42
Shortland, Capt 2 0 49
S. H. P. Brighton 1 0 42
Shuckburgh, C. B 5 0 49
Sikes, Henry, Esq. Clapton Mont. 10 0 50
Ditto Bor. 20 0 54
Silsoe Nat. 2 0 53
Simcoe, Miss C. Honiton Fred. 1 0 43
Simes, J. X. Esq. Highbury-park 3 3 42
Simms, Miss Anne Fred. 110 44
Simons, Rev. E. Ovington, Watton, Norfolk . 5 0 51
Ditto S.L. 5 0 52
Simpson, Geo. Esq. 19, Old-sq. Linc.-inn Gib. 10 10 42
Rev. F. Boynton, Bridlington 10 0 41
Ditto (8) 1 1 50
Rev. G. Horsted, Uckfield S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. Joseph, Little Horsted, Uckfield(7) 1 1 47
Ditto 5 0 50
Samuel, Esq. Executors of 200 0 46
Sinclair, Rev. John 5 5 41
Rev. W. Leeds S.L. 2 2 51
Sisters, two Mont. 40 0 50
Ditto Mont. 100 0 50
Ditto G.&iN. 10 0 53
S. J. B 1 0 49
S. J. W 10 41
S. K N.Z. 25 0 43
Ditto Tas. 25 0 43
Skeffington, Hon. H. R.jun. Wore. Coll. Oxf. 1 1 42
Skinner, F. Esq. 1, New-sq. Lincoln’s Inn ... 26 5 41
Skynner, Rev. W. Rushden, Buntingford .... 5 0 49
5 0 49
Ditto 10 0 53
S. L 5 0 41
Slack, Miss, Bath (2) 1 1 53
Slade, Mrs. Bath S.L. 10 53
Sladen, Rev. —, Warnford Fred. 1 1 44
Smalley,Rev.C. 12,Orme-square, Bayswater.. 5 0 41
Ditto S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. C.jun. 12, Orme-sq. Bayswater S.L. 1 1 51
Smart, Miss N.Z. 1 1 41
Rev. N. G. Farley, Salisbury 10 0 41
Smith, Isaac, Esq. Brighton 1 1 42
Joseph, Esq. Brighton 10 4
J. W. Esq. 12. Clarence-terr 50 0 41
Miss, 1, Barton-st. Gloucester 10 0 49
Mr. & Mrs. J. Clarence-ho. Reading S.L. 10 0 51
Mr. James, Brighton 1 0 42
Mrs Fred. 5 0 43
Mrs. G. Goldicott, Stratf,-on-Avon Gib. 2 0 42


Mrs. Joseph, Brighton 2 2 45
Stapylton, Miss, C. Richmond, Surrey ...Fred. 1 0 43
Ditto 1 0 50
Oswald, Esq. Bexley S.L. 5 &
Rev. Edward, Ashley, Newmarket 10
Starey,B. H. Esq. Milf.-la., Kent.-town Fred. 21 0 41
Staunton, Rev. J. G. Warwick . 210 50
Rev. P. Pattiswick, Kelvedon 2 0 53
Rev. R. S. Brighton (2) 1 1 42
Stephens, H. W. Esq. 25, Portman-sq 5 0 41
Ditto 1 11 42
Lady Frances, 25, Portman-sq 5 0 41
Rev. S. Margate S.L. 10 51
Yen. Archd 20 0 49
Rev. S. St. Geo. Camberwell 10 10 41
W. Esq. Reading 50 0 42
Rev. Theyre, Wymondham 2 2 41
Stephenson, Rev. J. H. Corringham, Romford 5 0 49
Sterry, H. S. Esq. Bermondsey Colo. 5 0 43
Rev. T. R. Awkley S.L. 110 51
Thomas, Esq. Ramsbury Fred. 2 0 45
Ditto Fred. 2 2 44
Smithers, Mr. H 10 41
Stevens, Yen. Archd. Exeter 50 0 53
Smyth, Wm. Esq. Lit. Houghton, Northamp. 10 10 41
Sneyd, Admiral Mont. 1 0 50
Stewart, J. Esq. Down-terrace, Edinburgh.(7) 1 1 51
Still, Miss Selina, Tunbridge Wells... 2 2 S 3
Soames, H.A. Esq. Dartmouth-rd. Blackheath 20 0 41
Society forAdvaneing theChristn.Faith Maur.l. ooo 0 52
Ditto Maur. 1,000 0 54
Ditto, Legacy by 90 0 53
Stillingfleet, Rev. E. W. Hull S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. H. A 2 2 42
Rev. W. H 1 1 42
Ditto (5) Maur. 30 0 52
Stisted, Essex 3 0 42
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.lo,ooo 0 43
Ditto Fid. 2,000 0 46
Ditto 610 43
Ditto Fred. 512 44
Ditto 80r. 2,000 0 52
Ditto Gra.2,000 0 52
Ditto 719 45
Ditto 7 0 46
Ditto Lytt. 1,000 0 52
Ditto 5.L.2, 000 0 52
Ditto 710 47
Ditto Maur. 2,ooo 0 52
Stobart, Mrs. Etherley, Durham S.L. 1 0 51
Stokes, Josiah,Esq. WestDerby,Liverpool Mont. 1 0 50
Rev. E. Ch. Ch. Oxford Adel. 1 1 50
Ditto M0nt. 2,000 0 52
Ditto King.2,ooo 0 52
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in
Foreign Parts 7,500 0 49
Rev. J. W. Ennisoorthy 5 0 41
Rev. T. T 2 2 41
Ditto, interest 375 0 50
Stone, W. Esq. Streatley 1 0 42
Ditto, Jubilee Fund 5.L. 2,433 16 52
Win. Esq. Dulwich-hill Fred. 5 0 43
Ditto ditto S.L. 251 16 52
Stonhouse, Rev. H. Stanton, Oxford 6 0 50
Ditto ditto Gra. 5,000 0 53
Stocks, Miss Gib. 1 0 42
Ditto ditto S.L. 32 10 53
Rev. T. F. 6, Holly-terrace, Highgate(6) 1 1 47
Ditto ditto W0f.1,000 0 53
Thomas, Esq * Gib. 5 0 42
Ditto ditto Maur. 3,000 0 54
Stopford, Yen. Archd. Leighlinbridge 10 0 41
Ditto ditto Gra. 198 10 54
Ditto Mont. 10 0 50
Ditto ditto Nat. 505 0 54
Ditto 10 0 53
Ditto ditto Bor. 247 15 54
Stourbridge, Lye-Waste Meeting S.L. 17 51
Stowe-Nine-Churches 10 0 44
Sodor & Man, Lord Bp. of Hup. 25 0 45
South Australian Shareholder 2 2 41
Ditto 2 0 49
Southampton, AH Saints S.L. 26 10
Southwark DecSnal Association, S. P. G. Colo. 2 2
Stracey, Rev. W. J. Lavant-ho. Chichester ... 10 0 53
Strachan, J. M. Esq. Teddington Tas. 5 0 42
Ditto 25 0 42
Spalding, A. Esq. Trinity Coll. Camb 1 1 42
Sparkes, Rev. C. Cobourg-pl. Up. Kenngtn.-la. 1 1 41
Ditto Mont. 10 50
Ditto Fred. 2 2 43
Ditto S.L. 5 0 52
Ditto (1) 11 53
W. Esq. 34, Hill-st 25 0 42
Sparrow, Lady O. Huntingdon S.L. 25 0 52
Strachan, Paul &Co 25 0 42
Miss, Bishton-hall, Stafford S.L. 5 0 52
Straith, Maj. H. Penge, Sydenham S.L. 1 1 51
Sperling, J. Esq. Kensington-pal.-gardns.S.Z. 5 0 51
Rev. J. H. Papworth, Huntingdon S.L. 5 0 51
T. Esq. Brighton 1 1 42
S. P. G 5 0 41
Spranger, Rev. Dr 10 0 41
Mr. and Mrs. John. Clapham S.L. 5 0 51
S tratford-Wing field, Hon. Mrs. Maidstone AfonL 10 0 50
Ditto King. 10 0 50
Streatfeild, Rev. W. East Ham 10 10 41
Ditto S.L. 2 2 51
Ditto 100 0 42
Street, J. Esq. 9, Taviton-st. Euston-sq 10 10 41
Spry, Rev. J. H. n.n 50 0 41
Stretton Gransome 312 49
Spurling, Stephen, Esq. Camberwell 5 0 49
Strickland, C. W. Esq. Boynton, York... Fred. 10 0 45
Stringer, Miss, Worthing 1 1 49
i. R. Oxford 5 0 42
S. S 10 0 49
Miss L. 3, Park-place, Camberwell 1 1 50
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto 1 1 50
Ditto 5 0 50
Strong, Rev. T. L. Sedgefield, Durham 50 0 41
Ditto 5 0 53
St. Asaph. Ld. Bp.of(Dr.Short) 22,Wimpole-st. 200 0 41
Ditto 100 0 50
Ditto 100 0 53
St. Barbe, Rev. R. F. Stockton, Heytesbury... 10 0 41
Ditto 5 0 53
St. Bees Coll 21 0 49
St. David’s, Lord Bp. of (Dr. Thirlwall).s.Z. 10 0 52
Ditto 100 0 '53
Ditto 10 0 53
Stuart, Capt. C 5 0 42
Capt. C. Gren. Guards 5 0 43
Lieut.-Col. C (9) 2 2 54
Miss Mary 10 0 53
Mrs. C. E. 18, Hill-st 5 0 60
Rev. J. H. Am pton, Bury St. Edmund’s 2 0 41
Yen. Archd. Skibbereen Mont. 1 0 50
Sturges, Rev. S. Knowl-hill, Maidenhead-.... 2 2 51
Sturt, Miss Emilia 5 0 49
St. Mark, North Audley-st 3 0 44
Stackallan, Ireland Fred. 1 1 44
Style, Rev. F. Thames Ditton 1 0 42
Stainton, Rev. J. G 2 0 49
Sulivan, Rev. H. Bishopstoke 1 0 41
Standert, Mrs. R. New Steine, Brighton G.fyN. 10 0 53
W. A. Esq. Brighton Mont. 5 0 50
Sutherland, Dr.A. J.Richmond-terrace.... JforcL 10 10 50
Duke of, St. James’s palace Gib. 25 0 42
Stanger, James, Esq. Lairthwaite, Keswick... 20 0 41
Joshua, Esq. Keswick 5 0 41
-l/ukc ui, oi. Jcimes s-paiace vriu. to u
Sutton, R. Esq. Rossway, Beikhamstead 10 10 41
W. M. Esq (2) 1 1 52
S. W. Gib. 1 1 41
Stanley, Hon. Miss E. J. 14, Grosvenor-sq... 10 0 53
Lord, m.p Fred. 100 0 44
Miss Mont. 5 0 50
Miss, Lauder, Berwick 5 0 49
Rev. A. P. Univ. Coll. Oxford 10 0 41
Ditto 10 10 42
Ditto 15 o 43
Ditto 20 0 50
Swainson, Rev C. A. Christ’s Col. Camb. Fred. 3 0 44
Rev. E. C 2 0 41
S. W. B 5 0 49
Sweet, H. Esq. Taunton 1 0 50
Sweetland, Mrs. W. Bath Gib. 10 0 42
Symons, Mrs. Oxford S.L. 1 0 51
Ditto 20 0 50
Stanton, Rev. T. Spettisbury, Blandford...(s) 1 1 45
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Rev. B. P. d.d. Wadham Coll. Oxford . 20 0 42
Ditto S.L. 10 0 61
Synge, F. H. Esq. Weston-super-Mare 210 49


V )
lO 0
X. A. C 25 0
Ditto Cape 25 0
Ditto Maur. 30 0
Ditto Maur. 12 0
Ditto Maur. 20 0
Taddy, Rev. J. Northill, Biggleswade 5 0 49
Tait, Rev. A. C. Balliol College, Oxford 20 0 41
Rev. Dr. Rugby Fred. 10 12
Rev. W. proceeds of Lecture S.L. 14 19 51
Talbot, Hon. J. C Gib. 5 0
Hon. Mrs. John, 10, Great George-st... 50 0 53
Tanner, J. Esq. Speen, Newbury (2) 1 1 41
Taplin, T. Esq. 14, St. James’s-square 10 0 53
Tarbutt, Rev. A. B. Reading 1 1
Tasmania, Lord Bishop of (Dr. Nixon) 10 0 42
Tate, Rev. A. Emmanuel College, Camb 5 0 41
Rev. A. Brompton, Dulverton S.L. 1 0 51
Tatham, Rev. R. n.n. St. John’s Coll. Camb. 25 0 41
Ditto 20 0
Ditto S.L. 5 0
Tatton, Miss, Knutsford ...Fred. 1 0
T.W.Esq.Northenden, Stockport. Fred. 5 0 44
Taunton, Lady S.L. 1 0
Taylor, D. Esq. Clapham SL. 5 0
Miss, Birmingham 5 0
Miss 10 0
Miss, Moor Green S.L. 5 0
Miss Mary Anne 5 0
Miss Sarah 5 0
Mrs Mont. 10
Mrs. M. A... . 5 0
Rev. G. i,l.d. Dedham 15 15
Rev. M. D. Morefon Corbet 5 0
Tebbits, Mrs. Clapham S.L. 1 0
Teignmouth, Lord, Clifton 10 10
Ditto S.L. 10 0
X. 20 0
T. H S.L. 2 2
Thank-Offering, Bath 2 0
Ditto, for the abundant harvest 5 0 47
Ditto 5 0
Ditto 1 0
Ditto Bor. 2 0
Ditto 100 0
X. H. Mont. 15 0
Theed, Rev. E. R. Selling, Faveisham 2 2 50
Thomas, Mrs. V. Oxford 10 0
Mrs. Milbrook-house, Crickhowell...(3) 10 52
Rev. V. Oxford 20 0
W. Esq 2 0
Thompson, Mr. James, Tottenham . ..< 1 0
Mrs. James, Tottenham 1 0
Mrs. Poulett Fred. 1 0
Rev. G. Abbots Ann, Andover (7) 1 0 47
Rev. G. H. Friern Barnet 26 5
Rev. James 5 0
W. J. Esq. Brighton S.L. 5 0
Thomeycroft, Rev. J. Thorneycroft-ha11..5.i. 25 0 51
x iionicyurun,, ivcv. u. xm/invjvxuii,
Thornton, E. Esq 11, Princes-st Hanover-sq. 10 0 42
H. S. Esq. Battersea-rise 100 0
J. Esq. Brockhall, Weedon (2) 2 2 53
J. Esq. Clapham S.L. 25 0
Lieut.-Gen. William 105 0
Miss L. Brockhall, Weedon (2) 2 2 53
Rev. P. Brockhall, Weedon (2) 2 2 53
Rev. W. Dodford, Daventry 10 0
Ditto N.Z. 5 0
Thorpe, Rev. Dr. Belgrave Chapel 25 0
Ven. Archdeacon, Bristol 50 0
Thorverton (Devon) Clerical Society 5 0 43
Thresher, Rev. P. Fareham Mont. 5 0 50
Rev. W. Fareham 2 2 50
Ditto 1 1 33
T. H. T. Broxbourne 10 0
Ditto Mont. 5 0
Ditto 10 0
Thurlow, Rev. C. A. Malpas .S.L. 10 0
Thurtelli Rev. A. Caius College, Cambridge.. 5 0 41
Thynne, Rev. Lord J. Cloisters, Westm.Fmf. 5 0 43
Ditto 50 0 53
Tillard, Rev. R...’...’ 10 0 43
Tindal, Lord Chief Justice N.Z. 100 0 43
Tinney, W. H. Esq. 31, Montagu-place.il/onf. 10 0 50
Tipping, Miss Eliza, Ardwick, Manchester.... 10 0 53
£ s,
Tissington, Derby 2 0 44
Ditto 4 0 46
Ditto 2 0 47
Ditto 4 0 54
Titchford Fred. 5 0 43
Tithe of a professional man’s income 200 0 50
Ditto 12 14 51
Ditto 20 0 52
Ditto 34 0 53
T. L. C. by R. J 1 1 49
To be offered Mont. 100 0 50
Todd, Dr. 3, New-street, Spring-gardens 1 0 43
Tomlins, Rev. R. Shrewsbury 1 0 53
Tomlinson, Rev. G 50 0 41
Tonkin, Rev. U. Lelant, Hayle 2 0 53
Torr, J. Esq. Exchange-bdgs. LiverpoolJ/o??f. 5 0 50
Ditto S.L. 2 2 51
Torriano, Rev. J. Stansted, Bp.’s Stortford... 5 0 41
Rev. J (10) 1 1 50
Tory, N. Esq. Liverpool S.L. 5 0 51
To spread the Gospel S.L. 100 0 60
Totteridge, Herts 5 0 42
Towne, Jos. Esq. Guy’s Hospital 5 5 42
Townsend, Rev. A.B. Easthamstead, Reading 10 0 41
Rev. C. G. G. Hatfield, Chelmsford(l) 10 0 54
Rev. G. F. Brantingham, Chester...(3) 2 2 43
Townshend, J. Esq. Gresfoid S.L. 1 0 51
Mrs. Gresford S.L. 1 0 51
Toye, Rev. J. T. Exeter Gib. 5 0 42
W. Esq. Exeter Gib. 25 0 42
T. R 50 0 41
Travis, Rev. W. J. Trinity College, Camb 10 0 41
Treacher, H. Esq 10 0 41
H. Esq. Tunbridge Wells S.L. 2 0 51
L U Ol
Mont. 2 0 50
Trebeck, Rev. T Mont. 2 0 50
Tredcroft, Rev. H 5 0 41
Tremenheere, S. Esq. 105, Pall Mall 10 0 47
Ditto Mont. 5 5 50
Trench, Miss H. R Mont. 1 0 50
Rev. R. C. Itchingstoke, Alresford 5 0 53
Trevelyan, Miss Julia, Wetton, Morpeth 50 0 53
Ditto 50 0 53
Ditto 35 0 54
Trevenen, Misses, Dunsborough, Ripley .(6) 5 0 54
Trevor, Misses, Tingrith-bouse, Woburn 100 0 41
Tripp, H. Esq. Worcester College, Oxford .... 11l 42
Rev. H. Silverton, Collumpton Nat. 2 2 53
Tritton, Rev. R. Morden, Surrey 10 0 41
William, Esq 10 10 42
Trocke, Rev. R (2) 1 1 42
Trotter, Captain H. D. 43, Porchester-ter S.L. 5 0 51
Mrs. Cuckfield 5 0 42
Trower, Mrs. Godstone S.L. 2 0 51
Rev. Walter 5 0 41
Right Rev. Bishop, Glasgow (12) 6 0 53
T. R. W 1 0 42
x. S 10 42
T. S. Dover 10 43
Tucker, Miss E. Hampstead S.L. 1 0 51
Rev. J 5 0 41
Rev. J. Hampstead S.L. 5 0 51
Rev. M. jun. Exeter 2 0 42
W. Esq. Eastleach, Taunton Fred. 2 2 44
Tudor, H. Esq. 42, Conduit-street S.L. 10 0 51
Mrs. by Miss I. Fenwick 10 0 63
Tufnell, Rev. E. W. Beechingstoke, Devizes 10 42
Ditto Nat. 1 0 53
Tuke, Rev. F. C. Canterbury Mont. 5 0 50
Tupper, Rev. \V. G. All Saints, Knightsbridge 10 0 53
Turnbull, M. H. Esq. Shalford, Guildford.... 10 53
Rev. T. S. Caius College, Cambridge... 20 0 41
Turner, C. H. Esq. Godstone S.L. 5 0 51
John, Esq. North Bank, Regent’s-pk.... 20 0 41
Miss 10 0 54
Miss Mary Mont. 5 0 50
Mrs. R (2) 10 45
Rev. W. T. Oare, Hastings 5 0 41
Ditto S.L. 5 0 52
Sharon, Esq (0) 3 3 46
Thos.Esq.Fenton-ho. Hampstead Mont. 5 0 41
Ditto 30 0 42
Ditto 3 0 60
Ditto S.L. 5 0 51
Ditto 10 0 53
Tweedy, W. M. Esq. Alverton, Truro 6 0 42
Ditto •••••■ 5 0 49
Ditto S.L. 5 0 52
Twining, Mrs, A 1 0 49


Twining, Mrs. Ann, Bitteswell, Lutterworth.
Rev. G. B. Tottenham
Ditto (14)
3 0 50 Wallace, Rev. A. C. J. Monk’s Eleigh, Bil-
-25 0 53 destone
3 0 42
Ditto (14) 2 2 54
Twisleton, Rev. C. Woodlands, Kenilworth.. 10 0 41
Ditto 3 3 50
Rev. J. L 5 5 41
Twopeny, Col. Kingskerswell, Torquay (4) 1 1 51
Waller, Sir W. Bart G ib. 5 0 42
Wallinger, Arnold, Esq io o 41
Mr. Serj. 3, Serj.lnn, Chancery-lane(lO) 2 2 52
Ditt0...... (j) ] j 63
E. Esq. Woodstock, Sittingbourne S.L. 2 0 52
Rev. R. Casterton 10 0 41
Tyler, Rev. J. E. 18, Bedford-square 50 0 41
Tyrwhitt, Rev. T. Whitchurch, Hants...Fred. 2 2 43
Rev. W. Chichester 60 0 41
Dit to Tas. 5 0 42
Walpole, S. H. Esq. 6, Serle-street 10 0 42
Walsall S .L. 810 52
Walsh, Henry, Esq. Oxford 10 0 41
U 10 0 42
Uckfleld, Sussex 12 10 41
Miss, Dublin 2 0 42
Rev. J. H. A. Warminster 10 10 42
Walsingham, Norfolk io o 41
Walton, Rev. Dr.... 5 0 41
Walworth, St. Peter Fred. 25 0 43
Ditto Fred. 10 0 44
W.A. N on n a.
Unknown 20 0 41
Unwin, Rev. S. H Islington S.L. 1151
Upton, Hon. Miss, 5, Chesterfield-street.ilforaf. 1 1 50
Urwick, W. Esq. Clapham S.L. 10 5!
Uttermare, T. B. Esq. Langport (2) 1 1 54
W.A. N 20 0 42
Warburton, Dr. 23, Park-crescent Fred. 5 0 43
Rev. J. Lewes S.L. 10 51
Ward, Miss Eliza, Hayes, Kent 1 0 42
Rev, Edward 1 0 49
Rev. Henry, Milton, Pewsey 1 0 42
Rev. R. 12, Eaton-square 20 0 41
Ditto 25 0 53
Ware, Mrs. Robert, Hornsey Hup. 10 10 46
Vale, W. S. Esq. Worcester College, Oxford... 10 42
Vallance, Rev. W. Maidstone S.L. 2 0 51
Valpy, Captain, r.n. Wargrave 20 0
Rev. F 1 i
1 1 42
Vansittart, A. Esq. Bisham. Marlow S.L. 210 51
Ditto s.L. 10 10 51
Rev. Dr. Waltham, Maidenhead 10 0 41
Rev. James 59 0 41
Ditto (8) 2 0
Vaughan, Rev. E. T. Leicester 6 0
Ditto 5 5
Ditto 40 0 43
Rev. J. Wyverstone, Stowmarket..s'.Z. 10 0 51
5 5 43
Warne, Colonel, Bath 3 3 41
Rev. James (2) 1 1 42
Vaux, Edward, Esq 1 1 41
Ernest, Esq 1 1 41
Warneford, Rev. Dr. Bourton-on-the-hill 20 0 42
Ditto 100 0 63
Warre, Rev. Jos 25 0 50
Warren, Rev. E. A. SouthWarnborough.FVed!. 1 0 43
Mrs. E. 15, Gloucesier-place, Hyde-pk. 1 1 41
Rev. E 1 1 41
Rev. John 25 0 42
Ditto 10 0 49
Ditto 10 0 50
Washington, Capt. & Mrs. W. Harwich. .W.Z. 10 10 45
Veasey, Charles, Esq. Huntingdon S.L. 1 0 51
H. Esq Mont. 1 0 50
Venables, James L 2 2 50
Rev. A. R. P. Cuddesd. Wheatley 30 0 53
Captain 15, Duke st. Westminster....(B)
Captam 15, Duke st. Westminster....(B) 2 2 52
Wastell, Miss, Bury St. Edmund’s 3 0 53
Miss F. Bury St. Edmund’s 3 0 53
Rev. J. D. Risby, Bury St. Edmund’s... 10 0 42
Watkins, Miss L 15 0 51
Rev Edmund (4) 5 0 45
Rev. E. Hurstmonceux,Battle S.L. 10 0 51
Venn, Rev. H. 14, Salisbury-square 10 10 41
Ditto Rup. 20 0 45
Vernon, Rev. H. J. 79, Pall Mall (6) 1 1 54
Verrall, Miss, Southover, Lewes 1 0 42
Mrs. Southover, Lewes 1 0 42
Veysie, Rev. D. Daventry Adel. 10 0 50
Mrs 1 1 50
Rev. F. Privy Council Office 1141
Rev. F 1 i 50
Rev. D. Daventry Adel. 10 0
Ditto Adel. 10 0
Ditto 10 0
Rev. F. Lewes 5 0 43
Rev. F. and Mrs Mont. 2 2 SO
Ditto 10 0 53
Vickers, Archd 20 0 42
Rev. Henry, South Mailing 5 0 41
Rev. H. G. St. Swithin, Cannon-street.. 50 0 41
M ! s s ! 5 0 49
Rev. H. G. Potter’s-bar S.L. 25 0 51
Watkinson, Rev. R. Earl’s Colne, Halstead... 20 0 42
Watson, Joshua, Esq 100 0 41
Ditto Tas. 10 0 42
, M' ss S.L. 5 0 51
Vidal, Rev. O. E s.L. 2 0 52
Vigers, Rev. D. F. Kelvedon 10 53
Villiers, Hon. & Rev. H. M. Montagu pi. S.L. 5 0 51
ras. JU 0 42
Ditto ...... Mont. 50 0 50
Vincent, R,ev, F. Alfr. Club, Albemarle-street 20 0 41
jjicio Mont. 50 0 50
Ditto.... Gra. 60 0 53
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
niuu..,. Gra. 50 0 63
Ditto Nat. 50 0 S 3
Ditto 1,000 0 54
J. Esq. Worcester College, Oxford 10 42
Miss C. H. Fulboum, Cambridge 10 10 49
Ditto Mont. .5 0 50
Rev. W. St. A. Bolney, Cuckfield 5 0 41
Rev. W. Park-cottage, Islington. ..S.L. 5 0 51
Vivian, George, Esq. 47, Albemarle-street .... 50 0 41
Vores, Rev. Thomas, Hastings 10 0 41
Miss C. H. St. Leonard’s-on-Sea....S.Z. 5 0 52
Rev. W. Loughton 1 0 43
Ditto 10 46
Sir Frederick, 4, Albany-terrace ....Gib. 5 0 42
Watts, Miss, Upper Clapton 10 49
W-••••••• 25 0 43
Wavell, Mrs 1 0 41
Wayet, Rev. W. Pinchbeck, Spalding 5 0 42
W. by Rev. T. W. Allies Tas. 10 10 42
Wade, Sir C. M. India 5 0 42
Wagner, Miss, Brighton 10 0 41
Wayte, Henry, Esq. Bristol Mont. 1 0 50
W. E. 10 0 46
Ditto (6 j 1 1
„ Ditto (6) 1 1 4C
Rev. H. M. Brighton 10 0 41
Wait, W. Esq. Newbury 10 43
Webb, Mrs. John. Sutton 2 2 41
Webster, Rev. G. E. Grundsb.Woodbridge(l2) 1 1 54
. Esq. Newbury 10
Ditto 2 5
Ditto S.L. 1 0 51
2 5 44
Weekly Offerings of a Family (moiety). ..Fred. 1 0 45
Wakefield, Parish Church S.L. 17 15 52
Wakeham, Miss, Marshalls, Braintree 5 0 53
Miss (2) 1 1 54
Waldegrave, Captain Fred. 2 0 42
Ear l S.L in n S 9
Weeks, Rev. J. W. West-sq. Southwark..S.Z. 1 0 51
Weinholt, Miss, Reading 5 0 43
Welbank, R. Esq. Godstone S.L. 1 0 51
Welby, Rev. G. E. Barrowby, Grantham 50 0 S 3
Rev. M. E. Sketty, Swansea ...S.L. 10 0 52
„ Ear ‘ S.L. 10 0
Walker, Miss, Southgate s.L. 5 0
=r, iviiss, bouthgate s.L. 5 0 51
Rev. Robert, Oxford 20 0 42
S. Esq. Pendleton, Manchester ...Mont. 5 0 50
„ Ditto 20 0 53
Wellesley, Hon. and Rev. Dr Fred. 1 0 44
Wells Theological College, Somerset 1)18 43
Ditto Fred. 15 15 44
Wall, Rev. M. S. Torquay 10 0
Ditto,,. s.L. 5 5
Ditto Mont. 15 0 50
Ditto Maur. 2 0 53
Wells, Miss, Boxford, Newbury 210 4i
lO 0 41
.S.L. 5 5 52


£
Wells, Miss M. Boxford, Newbury . 2
Ditto 1
Ditto.... 1 1 42
Rev. F. B. Woodch. Tenterden 5 5 41
Rev. George, Boxford, Newbury 1 0 42
Robert, Esq. Ebury-street, Pimlico.(9) 5 5 49
Ditto (1) 2 2 50
Welsford, W. A. Esq (1) 1 1
Welwyn, Herts 1 18
1 18 50
Wentworth, Edward 5 0 41
Were, Joseph, Esq. Exeter 50 0 42
West, Thomas, Esq. Brighton 10 0 42
John, Esq. Wendlebury, Bicester.. S.L. 2 0 52
Westcott, Rev. B. F. Cambridge 11 51
Westminster Abbey, 24th August, 1842 114 4 42
Ditto, 29th June, 1847 . 529 6 47
Ditto ..Adel. 7 0 47
Ditto ~ , Newc. 10 0 47
Ditto Cape 1 0 47
Ditto, 25th July, 1850 130 15
Dean of 200 0
200 0 41
Marquis of, 33, Upper Grosvenor-street 100 0 63
W. G. F 5 0 63
Whall, Benjamin, Esq. Lincoln 1 0 49
Ditto Mont. 10 50
Whalley, Miss Alicia, Hereford 5 0 60
Whateley, W. Esq. 6, Park-st. Westminster... 10 10 42
Whately, Rev. H. T. Roding. Shrewsb (1) 1 1 52
Rev. T. Chetwynd, Newport, Salop 2 2 53
Wheatley, E. B. Esq. Mirfield, Dewsbury 100 0 53
Major-General Sir Henry Gib. 5 0 42
Miss, Mirfield, Dewsbury 100 0 53
Wheeler, Mrs. sen S.L. 1151
T. R. Esq S.L. 1 1 51
Whewell, Rev. Dr. Trinity College, Cambridge 31 10 43
Ditto S.L. 5 0 51
Whichcote, Rev. C. Burton, Colsterworth 5 0 43
White, Miss, 10, Pembroke-road, K.enstn.S'.i. 1 0 51
Miss Mont. 3 8 50
Ditto 10 49
Misses Mont. 6 6 50
Mrs. C. E. Winchester 5 0 49
Mrs. P. Clapham S.L. 2 0
Mrs. W. Oxford 50 0
50 0 42
Rev. W. S (4) 1 1 • 44
Whitfield, , Esq 100 0 43
Rev. W. B 50 0 41
Ditto 100 0 47
Thomas, Esq 3 0 42
Wickham, Rev. E. D. Godstone S.L. 3 0 51
Bev. R. Gresford, Chester S.L. 2 0 61
Wigan, Alfred, Esq. East Mailing, Maidstone 10 0 42
John A. Esq. Clare-ho. MaidstoneFVcd. 20 0 43
Ditto Fred. 20 0 44
Miss G. and Miss J Fred. 1 6 45
Miss JaneL. Mailing Fred. 5 0 43
Misses E. and H Fred. 5 0 43
Bev. Alfred, Trotterscliffe, Maidstone.. 10 0 42
Rev. W. L. East Mailing, Maidstone ... 10 0 42
Ditto Fred. 5 0 44
, Esq. Oxford 5 0 42
Wightman, Miss 5 5 41
Wigram, E. Esq. 2, Connaught-pl.-west Mont. 50 0 50
Miss, Wanstead 10 0 54
Miss M. Wanstead S.L. 3 0 53
Ven. Archdeacon, Southampton. .. Fred. 10 43
Wilberforce, Archd. R. J 50 0 41
Archdeacon S 50 0 41
Ditto Rup. 5 0 46
Rev. H. W. and Mrs Fred. 7 0 45
Wilbraham, Major, Gresford Vale, Wrexham. 3 0 49
Mrs (4) 2 2 53
Wilde, George, Esq. dream 1 0 53
Wilder, Mrs. Maty, Ryde, Isle of Wight 2 2 53
Rev. J. Sulham, Reading 10 0 53
Ditto 26 10 53
Wilkinson, Miss, Clapham S.L. 1 0 51
Miss F. Clapham S.L. 1 0 51
Rev. Dr. Marlborough (4) 1 0 45
Robert, Esq. 22, Cumberland-terrace... 105 0 42
Wilks, Miss 1 1 41
Willes, Francis, Esq 1 1 41
Williams, Allen, Esq. Southwark S.L. 5 5 51
Dr S.L. 5 0 51
J. S. Esq. Musselburgh, North Britain. 5 0 49
Ditto Mont. 2 2 50
Mr. John Mont. 10
Mrs 10
10 42
Mrs. A. Campie-house, Musselburgh.... 5 0 49
~ £ s.
210 41 Williams, Mrs. Gresford, Chester S.L. 2 0 5-1
1 1 42 Rev. C. Uxbridge 1 1 41
Rev. C. Uxbridge 1 1 41
Rev. Dr. New College, Oxford 50 0 41
Ditto Mont. 20 0 50
Rev. J 5 0 53
Rev. E. Pinxton, Alfreton S.L. 5 0 51
Robert, Esq. Birchin-lane 50 0 53
Sir C. F Gib. 3 0 42
Williamson, Rev. R. d.d. Pershore 25 0 41
Ditto Mont, 1 1 50
Ditto Nat. 10 0 53
Rev. William, Welton, Lincoln 20 0 41
Willis, Miss C. Camden-house, Brighton 5 5 49
Mrs.C. 36, Regency-sq. Brighton Afo»<. 20 0 60
Rev. A. Ludlow 30 0 43
Rev. T. Southwick, Shoreham (14) 2 2 54
Willmott, E. Esq. Lewes S.L. 10 51
Wilmot, Sir Robert 1 1 41
1 1 41
Wilshere, C. W. Esq 2 2 50
Wilson, Joseph, Esq. Brighton... 10 0 42
Joseph, Esq (2) 5 5 43
Joshua, Esq. Stamford-hill 5 0 42
Major, Titchfield, Fareham 10 53
Mrs. Broadley, Clapham S.L. 20 0 51
Rev. D. Islington 10 0 42
Rev. Dr. H. B (6) 1 1 47
Bev. H. B. b.d. St. John’s Coll. Oxford 20 0 41
Rev. James, Corpus Christi Coll. Oxford 1 0 41
Winchelsea, Earl of, Eastwell, Ashford 100 0 41
Winchester College 100 0 42
Lord Bishop of (Dr. Sumner) 300 0 41
Winder,Rev. E. Brit. Chap. Alexandria 5 0 41
Ditto 10 0 53
Windle, Miss, Brighton 5 0 4g
Ditto 5 0 53
Windsor, Dean and Canons of 50 0 42
Sermon S.L. 37 13 51
Wingfield, Mr. G. Malvern Wells S.L. 10 61
Mrs. Oxford Mont. 5 0 50
Ditto 5 0 50
Winn, Miss, Nostell Piiory, Wakefield 5 0 53
Winter, Rev. J. S. Tottenham 5 0 42
Winterton, Norfolk I S.L. 1 0 52
Wise, Mrs. W. F. Plymouth 1 0 50
Wiseman, Mr. W 10 53
Witham Essex 44 0 53
All Saints 1 0 46
Ditto 1 0 47
Ditto 1 1 48
Witherby, Miss, Reading 2 0 43
Withers, Rev. Dr. Millbrook, Southampton... 50 0 43
Ditto 5 0 45
Ditto Mont. 5 0 50
Witts, Rev. F. E 215 42
Wix, Rev. S. St. Barth, the Less, Smithfield.. 21 0 41
Ditto 2 0 49
Ditto Mont. 2 2 50
W. Esq. St. Barth. Hospital, Smithfield 50 0 44
W. N. G Fred. 10 0 44
Wokingham 414 42
Wollaston, Miss, Clapham S.L. 5 0 51
Wolverhampton, St. Paul 21 16 41
Wood, C. A. Esq. 9, Park-st. Westminst.Emi. 5 0 45
Mr. George (3) 10 45
Mrs. E. Rectory, Worthing S.L. 5 0 52
Mrs. W. P Fred. 5 0 43
Rev. J. R. Worcester Gib. 20 0 41
Rev. R. M. Aldbury, Tring 10 0 42
Sir W. P. 31, Great George-st. Westm.. 20 0 41
Ditto - 25 0 42
Ditto Fred. 20 0 43
Ditto 100 0 53
Woodall, John, Esq. Scarborough 5 0 41
Woodcock, Charles, Esq (10) 2 2 51
Henry, Esq. Wigan 5 0 42
Ditto Fred. 1 0 44
Ditto (4, 1 0 44
Ditto ' s a ja
Ditto ' 5 0 45
Miss M. E. Southampton 20 0 53
Woodhouse, Rev. G. Finningley S.L. 110 51
W. H. Esq. 33, Upper Bedford-place.... 25 0 53
Woods, L. Esq 2 0 41
Woodward, Miss, Uckfleld 10 0 41
Ditto 10 0 44
R. T. Esq. 1 1 45
Rev. W. Plumpton, Lewes SO 42
Woollcombe, Rev. E. C. Balliol Coll. Oxford.. 10 0 41
Ditto.... 15 0 42


£ I. £ f
Wollcombe.Rev.E.C.Balliol Coll. Oxfo. Fred. 15 0 43 Yardley, Rev. John, Shrewsbury 5 5 41
Fred • 5 0 45 Yate, Rey.G.L.Wrockwardine.Well. SaI.S.L. 1 0 51
Ditto . 20 0 50
Ditto Nat. 25 0 53
Woollcome, G. Torquay Fred. 2 0 44
Woolpit, Suffolk 1 6 41
Ditto 2 7 43
Ditto 212 44
Worcester 1 0 41
Lord Bishop of (Dr. Pepys) 100 0 41
Wordsworth, Rev. C. d.d. Cloisters, Westm... 50 0 46
Ditto Mont. 20 0 50
Ditto 60 0 53
Workman, Rev. W. Estrop Fred. 10 43
Worsley, Rev. J. H. So. Moreton, Wallingford 2 0 50
Worthington, J. D. Esq. Oldham... S.L. 10 51
Worting Fred. 5 0 43
Wrangham, Miss 1 0 49
Wrexham (9) 1 o 50
Wright, John Smith 52 10 41
Miss, Brighton 5 0 42
Mrs. Diddington, Huntingdon S.L. 3 0 51
Mrs. Gresford, Chester S.L. 1 0 51
Mrs. T. P. Tryon’s-place, Hackney..(2) 1 1 53
Peter, Esq 10 10 41
Rev. G. Bilham, Doncaster 10 0 53
Rev. T. P. Tryon’s-place, Hackney 33 51
Ditto (2) 2 2 53
Rev. W Mont. 5 0 50
William, Esq. Stanton St. Ives, Hunts.. 10 0 49
Wyett, Mrs. 5, Bentinck-terrace Maur. 110 53
Wyld, Miss M. C. Speen, Newbury Mont. 1 I 50
Rev. W. T. Woodborough, Pewsey 5 5 41
Wylde, Rev. L. D (3) 1 1 44
Wynne, Rev. H. Wexford 5 0 41
Wynter, Rev. Dr. Oxford 40 0 41
40 0 41
X. by Rev. C. Sparkes ! 3 0 42
X -A 10 0 61
X. X. by the Bp. of L0nd0n..... Cape 50 0 45
.Cape 50 0 45
Yarborough, Mrs. Campsall, Doncaster Mont. 2 2 50
Yard, T. Esq Fred. 5 0 45
Yates, Miss, Penshurst, Tunbridge Gib. 30 0 42
Ditto 5 0 53
Mrs. Penshurst, Tunbridge 50 0 42
Ditto io 0 53
Rev. S. W. Reading io 0 41
Ditto (8) 1 0 50
Rev.William,Eccleston,Blackburn Gib. 5 0 42
Yeadon, Mrs s.L. 50 0 52
Rev. W. Waddington, Lincoln 10 0 42
Y.E.N 5 0 52
Yeoman, Rev. H. York ...S.L. 1 1 52
Yonge, Rev. J. Newton Ferrers, Yealmpton... 10 0 41
Ditto io 0 50
Ditto G. Sr N. 5 0 53
York s.L. 200 4 52
Lord Archbp. of (Dr. Harcourt) 1,000 0 41
Lord Archbp. of (Dr. Musgrave)..S.i. 25 0 51
Ditto 200 0 53
Young, C. B. Esq. 4, Connaught-pl.-west. Fred. 5 0 43
Ditto 100 0 53
Ditto S.L. 50 0 51
Rev. Dr. Newdigate 5 0 41
Ditto Gib. 2 0 42
Ditto Fred. 2 0 42
Ditto Fred. 3 1 43
Ditto Mont. 1 0 50
Rev. R. G. Milbrook, Southampton 5 0 41
Ditto ' 5 0 42
Rev. W. Alter, Langport 5 0 42
W. B. Esq. Hastings 1 1 49
Y.X ] 0 52
Ditto 2 0 53
Z 2,000 0 49
Z- A 5 0 50
Zillwood, Rev. J. O. coll, by S.L. 616 52
Z. Z s.L. 5 0 51
PASTORAL LETTERS.
London, Bishop of 8,192 0 43
Ditto Viet. 8,690 0 44
Salisbury, Bishop of 1,107 0 44
R. CLAY, PRINTER, BREAD STREET BILL.


COLONIAL BISHOPRICS FUND.
ABSTRACT
RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS
For the Year ending 31st December, 1863,
NET ABSTRACT OF RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS FOR
TWENTY-THREE YEARS, ENDING 31st DECEMBER, 1863,
AND A BIST OP
DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS
Received in 1855—63.
THE RIGHT HON. W. E. GLADSTONE.
SIR WILLIAM PAGE WOOD.
Treasurers.
THE YEN. W. H. HALE, Archdeacon op London, and
JOHN G. HUBBARD, ESQ.
REV. ERNEST HAWKINS, Hon. Secretary.
MR. EDMUND R. FAYERMAN, Treasurers’ Clerk.
Office,
79, Fall Mall, London, S.W.


COLONIAL BISHOPRICS FUND.
Abstract of Receipts and Payments for the year ending Dec. 1868.
RECEIPTS.
PAYMENTS.
STIPENDS:
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
300 0 0
438 0 0
General Fund: —
Gibraltar, J year to 25 Dec. 1862
Capetown,
1 year to 30 Sept. 1863
Donations 268 0 0
Fredericton,
1 year to 4 Nov. 1863
1,000 0
Legacy 226 9 1
Newcastle,
(Endowment in full)
494 9 1
Melbourne,
1 year to 29 June, 1863
333 6 8
240 0 0
Adelaide,
1 year to 30 Sept. 1863
Special Funds:—
Tasmania,
(Endowment in full)
Goulburn : 1,000 0 0
1 year to 13 Oct. 1863 1,000 0 0
Victoria,
(Endowment in full)
Montreal,
Annual Subscriptions:—
Labuan,
1 year to 18 Oct. 1863 360 0 0
For 1861 50 0 0
Sierra Leone,
1 year to 30 Nov. 1863 402 0 0
1862 71 .o 0
Natal,
1 year to 30 Nov. 1863 662 10 0
1863 147 3 6
Graham’s Town
(Endowment in full)
1863 (New Zealand).... 20 0 0
Mauritius,
(Endowment in full)
475 1 6
New Zealand,
1 year to Nov. 1863 .. 400 0 0
Interest :
Christ Church, (Endowment)
Columbia, (Endowment)
Capital. Dividend.
Brisbane, 1 year to 15 June, 1863 200 0 0
£ s. d.
St. Helena,
July 62. 46,500 0 0 E. I. Stock 2,349 14 1
Jan. 63 43,200 0 0 Ditto 2,182 19 0
July 42,200 0 0 Ditto 2,150 17 8
Jan. 7,000 0 0 E.lndiaDeb. 134 15 0
July Ditto 135 18 4
Apr. 2,000 0 0 New3p. Cent. 30 0 0
Oct. Ditto 30 0 0
Apr. 7,000 0 0 Ditto 105 0 0
Oct. Ditto 105 0 0
Apr. 2,500 0 0 Gt. Western. 57 3 0
Oct. Ditto 57 12 11
Apr. 25,000 0 0 Lond.&N.W. 481 5 0
Oct. Ditto 485 8 4
Feb. 19,400 0 0 Turk. 8.4p.c. 373 9 0
Aug. Ditto 376 13 8
5,335 16
Columbia, Less repayment 66 15
5,269 1
Goulburn, Endowment (invested
in £l,OOO New So.
Wales sp. c. Deb.). 1,018 17 6
Columbia, Endowment 4,000 0 0
Brisbane, Endowment 5,000 0 0
St. Helena, Repairs 180 0 0
St. Helena, Repairs
15,467 19
9,055 16 0
Goulburn, Passage 500 0 0
Consecration Fees 27 3 4
Income Tax returned ■— 470 13 2
Seals 16 5 0
St. Helena, Passage 300 0
11,495-19 9
Orange River, Consecration Fees 25 17 10
Capital sold:—
Feb. 1,000 0 0 E. I. Stock 2,268 7 6
Aug. 200 0 0 Ditto 446 10 0
Aug. 800 0 0 Turk. B. 800 0 0
Oct. 1,500 0 0 Ditto 1,526 5 0
16,337 5 2
General Fund, Expenses 52 15 8
5,041 2 6
16,390 0 1
16,537 2 3
Balance in hand, 1 Jan. 1864 1,257 19
Balance of 1862 1,110 18 1
£17,648 0
£17,648 0 4


Natal
2,951
3
6
Mauritius
..30 Nov. 1854
6,252
0
6
Lahuan
...18 Oct. 1855
9,004
7
5
Christ Church.
..10 Aug. 1856
1,101
0
0
Perth
.25 July, 1857
3,005
18
2
Huron
,.28 Oct. 1857
Stocks.
£
S.
d.
2,000
0
0
New 3 p. c.........3.
1,868
0
0
7,000
0
0
ditto 3.
6,536
5
0
42,000
0
°i
Eastln.Stock.
( 1874, at £200) j
92,326
0
0
7,000
0
°l
[East India Debt
L (16 Aug. 1866).4.. J
6,849
6
9
17,100
0
0
Turkish Bonds ..4.
17,100
0
0
Net Abstract of Receipts and Payments for 23 Years,
ending 31s£
December
, 1863.
RECEIPTS.
£ s. d.
Donations tor Bishoprics erected: —
Bishopric Erected £ s. d.
New Zealand ...17 Oct. 1841 744 10 0
Tasmania 29 June, 1842 166 10 0
Gibraltar ditto 3,100 15 11
Fredericton 4 May, 1845 2,796 7 4
Colombo ditto 84 12 0
Adelaide 29 June, 1847 17,933 11 0
Melbourne ditto
Newcastle ditto 21 0 0
Capetown ditto 17,695 15 6
Rupert’s Land...29May,1849 366 13 8
Victoria ditto 21,953 7 11
Montreal 25 July, 1850 8,988 6 6
Sierra Leone ....30 May, 1852 11,714 3 6
Graham’s Town, 30 Nov. 1853 8,140 13 0
Columbia 24 Feb. 1859 15,010 0 0
Brisbane 14 June, 1859 2,692 10 0
Ditto (forlocal fund) 100 0 0
St. Helena 14 June, 1859 1 1 0
Goulburn 25 Mar. 1863 1,000 0 0
134,824 6 11
eneral Fund: —
Donations, Legacies, and Collections 100,909 8 0
235,733 14 11
Donations tor Bishoprics proposed:—
Kingston, Canada West ... 110 0 0
West Indian Africa 70 0 0
Melanesian 2J 9 0
India 75 0 3
Tinnevelly 31 18 0
Central Africa 590 0 0
Perth (See House) .... 10 0 0 g g
236,533 3 2
Interest on Capital, and
Annual Subscriptions 138,183 6 5
Profit on Investments 12,000 0 0
£386,716 9 7
PAYMENTS.
£ s. d.
Outfits, Passage moneys, fixtures, Patents,
Seals, Consecration fees and expenses 13,523 4 8
Endowments in the Colonies:
£ s. d.
Tasmania, in full 5,000 0
Adelaide, in part 13,240 0
Newcastle, in full 6,000 0 0
Capetown, in part 8,223 13 2
Montreal, in full 12,500 0 0
Victoria, for College 2,000 0 0
Natal, in part 500 0 0
~ (special don.) 600 0 0
Perth, in full 4,000 0 0
Graham’s Town 17,050 0 0
Graham’s Town (special) .... 479 4 6
Christ Church (N. Zealand).. 1,101 0 0
Mauritius, in full 6,150 0 0
Huron 1,000 0 0
Columbia 15,000 0 0
Brisbane 5,000 0 0
„ (special) 500 0 0
Goulburn 1,018 17 6
St. Helena 180 0 0
99,542 15 2
General Expenses (Public Meetings,")
Advertisements,Reports,Printing,Postage, 2,882 9 S
Law charges, Stationery, Clerk, &c.) J
115,948 9 6
Stipends 117,699 11 3
Capital (1 Jan. 1864) 151,810 9 4
Railway Bonds. Payable. Ini. £ s. d.
Great Western. 15 April,lB66 2,500 0 0
Lon.ifeNor.W. 15 April, 1867 4. 25,000 0 0
585,458 10 1
Balance in hand, 1 Jan. 1864... 1,257 19 6
£386,716 9 7


(
4 )
»
Bishopric.
Consecration of
the first Bishop.
Consecration
Fees and
Expenses.
Patents and
Seals.
Passage and
Outfit.
£ s. d.
£ s.
d.
£
8.
d.
SYDNEY
1836
—
8 13
6(47)
NEW ZEALAND
17 Oct. 1841
20 7 2
-
1,000
0
0
TASMANIA
29 June, 1842
Ditto
4 May, 1845
20 8 8
80 14
0
750
0
0
GIBRALTAR
20 3 0
95 6
6
500
0
0
FREDERICTON
24 10 1
-
650
0
0
COLOMBO
Ditto
29 June, 1847
ADELAIDE
28 7
2
750
0
0
| MELBOURNE
23 13
2
750
0
0
NEWCASTLE
23 13
2
500
0
0
CAPETOWN
52 18
10
750
0
0
RUPERT’S LAND....
29 May, 1849
16 13 8
-
350
0
0
VICTORIA
16 13 8
500
0
0
MONTREAL
25 July, 1850
30 May, 1852
13 14 2
18 5
6
500
0
0
SIERRA LEONE
-
500
0
0
; GRAHAM’S TOWN .
30 Nov. 1853
21 19 2
-
700
0
0
„
-
6 19 8(56)
-
350
0
0(56)
NATAL
30 Nov. 1853
21 19 2
19 16 8
198 17 4
700
0
0
MAURITIUS
30 Nov. 1854
350
0
0
LABUAN
18 Oct. 1855
18 15
3
150
0
0
CHRIST CHURCH ...
10 Aug. 1856
PERTH
25 July, 1857
28 Oct. 1857
23 7 2
HURON
COLUMBIA
24 Feh. 1859
ST. HELENA
14 June, 1859
/700
0
0
0
0
BRISBANE
Ditto
(300
350
0
0
WELLINGTON ....
23 14 0
27 3 4
25 17 10
9 15
16 5
0
o
GOULBURN
25 Mar. 1863
500
0
0
ORANGE RIVER ....
2 Feb. 1868
_
£502 4 9
£376 7 1
£11,600
0
0


( 5 )
Invested in
Endowments
in the Colony.
Remaining
Stipend.
1 Jan. 1864.
Furniture,
Fixtures, &c.
Original
Stipend.
Bishopric.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
SYDNEY.,
NEW ZEALAND
350 0 0
600 0
400 0 0
TASMANIA.,
350 0 0
400 0 0
5,000 0 0
GIBRALTAR.
1,200 0 0
1,200 0 0
FREDERICTON.,
1,000 0 0
1,000 0 0
COLOMBO
ADELAIDE
240 0 0
800 0 0
13,240 0 0
MELBOURNE
333 6 8
333 6 8
NEWCASTLE
333 6 8
6,000 0 0
CAPETOWN
800 0 0
8,223 13 2
438 0 0
RUPERT’S LAND ...
VICTORIA
1,000 0 0
1,000 0 0
MONTREAL
10 5 1
800 0 0
12,500 0 0
SIERRA LEONE
100 0 0
402 0 0
402 0 0
GRAHAM’S TOWN...
682 10 0
17,050 0 0
662 10 0
NATAL.
682 10 0
500 0 0
MAURITIUS
250 0
6,150 0 0
L ABU AN ~
360 0 0
360 0 0
CHRIST CHURCH
1,101 0 0
PERTH
4,000 0 0
HURON
1,000 0 0
COLUMBIA
600 0 0
15,000 0 0
ST. HELENA .
40 0 0
180 0 0
40 0 0
BRISBANE.,
200 0 0
5,500 0 0
WELLINGTON.
GOULBURN
50 0 0
50 0 0






