

DOCUMENTS REFEREED TO
IN THE
ANNEXED QUESTIONS AND FORMULA.
No. 1.
CLAIM, DECLARATION, AND PROTEST, BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OP THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
The General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, taking into consideration the solemn circumstances in which, in
the inscrutable providence of God, this Church is now placed, and that, notwithstanding the securities for the govern-
ment thereof by General Assemblies, Synods, Presbyteries, and Kirk-Sessions, and for the liberties, government, juris-
diction, discipline, rights, and privileges of the same, provided by the statutes of the realm, by the constitution of this
country, as unalterably settled by the Treaty of Union, and by the oath “inviolably to maintain and preserve the
same,” required to be taken by each sovereign at accession, as a condition precedent to the exercise of the royal
authority which securities might well seem, and had long been thought, to place the said liberties, government
jurisdiction, discipline, rights, and privileges of this Church beyond the reach of danger or invasion—these have bben of
late assailed by the very Court to which the. Church was authorised to look for assistance and protection, to an extent
that threatens their entire subversion, with all the grievous calamities to this Church and nation which would
inevitably flow therefrom, did, and hereby do, solemnly and in reliance on the grace and power of the Most High,
resolve and agree on the following Claim, Declaration, and Protest: That is to say
Whereas it is an essential doctrine of this Church, and a fundamental principle in its constitution, as set forth
Hi the Confession of Faith thereof, in accordance with the word and law of the most holy God, that “ there is no other
Head of the Church, but the Lord Jesus Christ;” 1 and that while “God, the supreme Lord and King of all the world,
hath ordained civil magistrates to be, under him, over the people, for his own glory and the public good, and, to this
end, hath armed them with the power of the sword ;” 2 and while “it is the duty of people to pray for magistrates, to
honour their persons, topay them tribute and other dues, to obey their lawful commands, and to be subject to their
authority for conscience’ sake,” “ from which ecclesiastical persons are not exempted ;” 3 and while the magistrate hath
authority, and it is his duty, in the exercise of that power which alone is committed to him, namely, “ the power of
the sword, or civil rule, as distinct from the “power of the keys,” or spiritual authority, expressly denied to him, to
take order for the preservation of puritv, peace, and unity in the Church, yet “ The Lord Jesus, as King and Head of his
Church, hath therein appointed a government in the hand of Church officers distinct from the civil magistrate ;” 4 which
government is ministerial, not lordly, and to be exercised in consonance with the laws of Christ, and with the liberties
of his people:—
And whereas, according to the said Confession, and to the other standards of the Church, and agreeably to the
Word of jrod, this government of the C lurch, thus appointed by the Lord Jesus, in the hand of Church officers, distinct
from the civil magistrate or supreme power of the State, and flowing directly from the Head of the Church to the office-
bearers thereof, to the exclusion of the civil magistrate, comprehends, as the objects of it, the preaching of the Word,
administration of the sacraments, correction of manners, the admission of the office-bearers of the Church to their
offices, their suspension and deprivation therefrom, the infliction and removal of Church censures, and, generally, the
whole “power of the keys,” which, by the said Confession, is declared, in conformity with scripture, to have been
“ committed” 5 to Church officers, and which, as well as the preaching of the Word, and the administration of the
sacraments, it is likewise thereby declared, that “the civil magistrate may not assume to himself:” 5
And whereas this jurisdiction and government, since it regards only spiritual condition, rights, and privileges,
doth not interfere with the jurisdiction of secular tribunals, whose determinations as to all temporalities conferred by
the State upon the Church, and as to all civil consequences attached by law to the decisions of Church courts in matters
spiritual this Church hath ever admitted, and doth admit, to be exclusive and ultimate, as she hath evei given and
inculcated implicit obedience thereto:
And whereas the above-mentioned essential doctrine and fundamental principle in the constitution of the Church,
and the government and exclusive jurisdiction flowing therefrom, founded on God’s word, and set forth in the Confession
of Faith and other standards of this Church, have been by diverse and repeated Acts of Parliament, recognised, ratified,
and confirmed ; inasmuch as, —
First, The said Confession itself, containing the doctrine and principles above set forth, was “ratified and established,
and voted, and approven .as the public and avowed Confession of this Church,” by the fifth act of the second session of
the first Parliament of King William and Queen Mary, entituled, “ Act ratifying the Confession of Faith, and settling
Presbyterian Church Government:” 7 to which Act the said Confession is annexed, and with it incorporated in the statute
law of this kingdom.
Second, By an act passed in the first Parliament of King James VI, entitled “Of admission of ministers ; of laic
patronages,”it is enacted and declared, “ That the examination and admission of ministers within this realm be only
in the power of the Kirk, now openly and publicly professed within the same ;” and while the “ presentation of laic
patronages” was thereby “reserved to the just and ancient patrons,” it was provided, that if the presentee of a patron
should be refused to be admitted by the inferior ecclesiastical authorities, it should be lawful for the patron “ to appeal
to the General Assembly of the whole realm, by whom the cause being decided, shall take end as they discern and
declare.”
Third, By an act passed in the same first Parliament, and renewed in the sixth Parliament of the said King James
VI, entituled “ Anent the jurisdiction of the Kirk,” 9 the said Kirk is declared to have jurisdiction “in the preaching of
the true word of Jesus Christ, correction of manners, and administration of the holy sacraments ;” 10 aDd it is further
declared, “that there be no other jurisdiction ecclesiastical acknowledged within this realm, other than that which is and
shall he within the same Kirk, or that Jlows therefrom, concerning the premises;” which act, and that last before
mentioned, were ratified and approven by another act passed in the'year 1581, entituled, “Ratification of the liberty of
the true Kirk of God and religion, with confirmation of the laws and acts made to that effect of before ;” u which other
act and all the separate acts therein recited, were again revived, ratified, and confirmed, by an act of the twelfth
Parliament of the said King James VI, entituled, “ Ratification of the liberty of the true Kirk,” &c. ; 12 which said act
(having been repealed in 1662) was revived, renewed, and confirmed, by the before-mentioned statute of King William
and Queen Mary. 13
Fourth, The said act of the twelfth Parliament of King James VI. ratified and approved the General Assemblies,
Provincial Synods, Presbyteries, and Kirk-Sessions,'“ appointed by the Kirk,” 14 and “the whole jurisdiction and
discipline of the same Kirk ;” cassed and annulled “ all and whatsoever acts, laws, and statutes, made at any time
before the day and date thereof, against the liberty of the true Kirk, jurisdiction and discipline thereof, as the same is
used and exercised within this realm;” appointed presentations to benefices to be directed to Presbyteries, “ with full
power to give collation thereupon, and to put order to all matters and causes ecclesiastical within their bounds, according
to the discipline of the Kirk, providing the foresaid Presbyteries be bound and astricted to receive and admit whatsoever
qualified minister, presented by his majesty or laic patrons” (the effect of which proviso and of the reservation in the
Act of the first Parliament of King James VI., above mentioned, 15 is hereinafter more fully adverted to); and farther
declared that the jurisdiction of the Sovereign and his courts, as set forth in a previous act 16 to extend over all persons
his subjects, and “in all matters,” should “ noways be prejudicial nor derogate anything to the privilege that God has
given ' to the spiritual office-bearers of the Kiik, concerning heads of religion, matters of heresy, excommunication,
collation, or deprivation of ministers, or any such like essential censures, grounded and having warrant of the Word of
God;” by which enactment, declaration, and acknowledgment, the State recognised and established as a fundamental
principle of the constitution of the kingdom, that the jurisdiction of the Church in these matters was “ given by God”
to the office-bearers thereof, and was exclusive and free from coercion by any tribunals holding power or authority
from the State or supreme civil magistrate.
Fifth, The Parliament holden by King Charles 11., 17 immediately on his restoration to the throne, while it repealed
the above recited act of the twelfth Parliament of King James and other relative acts, 16 at the same time acknowledged
the supreme and exclusive nature of the jurisdiction thereby recognised to be in the Church, describing the said acts, as
acts by which the sole and only power and jurisdiction within this Church doth stand in the Church, and in the general,
provincial, and presbyterial assemblies, and kirk-sessions, and as acts “which may be interpreted to have given any
Church power, jurisdiction, or government to the office-bearers of the Church, iheir respective meetings, other than that
which acknowledged! a dependence upon, and subordination to, the sovereign power of the king, as supreme.”
1 Ch 25, sec. 6.
2 Ch. 23, sec. 1.
3 Ch 23, sec 4.
4 Ch. 30, sec. 1.
5 Ch. 30, sec 2.
6 Ch. 23, sec. 3.
7 1G90, c. 5.
8 1567, c. 7.
9 1567, C. 12 (fol edit).
10 1579, c. 69.
11 1581, c. 99.
12 1592, c. 116.
13 1690, c. 5.
14 1592, C 116.
15 1567, C. 7.
16 1584, c. 129.
17 1662, c. 1.
18 1692, c. 116.


Sixth, The aforesaid act of King William and Queen Mary I —on the narrative that their majesties and the estates of
Parliament conceived “ it to be their bounden duty, after the great deliverance that God hath lately wrought for this
Church and kingdom, in the first place, to settle and secure therein the true Protestant religion, according to the truth
of God’s Word, as it hath of a long time been professed within this land; as also the government of Christ’s Church
within this nation, agreeable to the Word of God ; and most conducive to true piety and godliness, and the establishing
of peace and tranquility within this realm,” —besides ratifying and establishing as aforesaid the Confession of Faith,
did also “ establish, ratify, and confirm the Presbyterian Church government and discipline; that is to say, the
government of the Church by kirk-sessions, presbyteries, provincial synods, and general assemblies, ratified and established
by the 116 act of James VI., parliament 12, anno 1592, entituled, ‘Ratification of the liberty of the true Kirk.’ &c., 2 and
thereafter received by the general consent of this nation, to be the only government of Christ's Church within this
kingdom,” and revived and confirmed the said act of King James VI.
And whereas, not only was the exclusive and ultimate jurisdiction of the Church courts, in the government of
the Church, and especially in the particular matters, spiritual and ecclesiastical, above mentioned, recognised, ratified,
and confirmed—thus necessarily implying the denial of power on the part of any secular tribunal, holding its authority
from the sovereign, to review the sentences of the Church courts in regard to such matters, or coerce them in the
exercise of such jurisdiction; —but all such power, and all claim on the part of the sovereign to be considered supreme
governor over the subjects of this kingdom of Scotland, in causes ecclesiastical and spiritual, as he is in causes civil and
temporal, was, after a long-continued struggle, finally and expressly repudiated and cast out of tUe constitution of Scotland,
as inconsistent with the Presbyterian Church government, established at the Revolution, and thereafter unalterably
secured by the Treaty of Union with England ; by the constitution of which latter kingdom, differing in this respect
from that of Scotland, the sovereign is recognised to be supreme governor, “ as well in all spiritual and ecclesiastical
things and causes as temporal.” Thus :
First, The General Assembly having, in the year 1582, proceeded to inflict the censures of the Church upon Robert
Montgomery, minister of Stirling, for seeking to force himself, under a presentation from the king, into the
archbishopric of Glasgow, contrary to an act of the General Assembly discharging the office of Prelatic bishop in the
Church, and for appealing to the secular tribunals against the infliction of Church censures by the Church courts, and
seeking to have these suspended and interdicted —and having deposed and excommunicated him, notwithstanding of an
interdict pronounced by the privy council of Scotland, the then supreme secular court of the kingdom—and having at
the same time declared it to be part of the subsisting discipline of the Church, that any ministers thereof who “ should
seek any way by the civil power to exempt and withdraw themselves from the jurisdiction of the Kirk, or procure,
obtain, or use any letters or charges, &c., to impair, hurt, or stay the said jurisdiction, discipline, &c., or to make any
appellation from the General Assembly to stop the discipline or order of the ecclesiastical policy or jurisdiction granted
by God’s Word to the office-bearers within the said Kirk,” were liable to the highest censures of the Church ; —although
their sentence of excommunication was declared by one of the acts of Parliament of the year 1584, commonly called the
“ Black Acts,” to be void, yet ultimately the king and privy council abandoned their interference, Montgomery
submitted to the Church courts, and the statute of the twelfth Parliament of King James VI., already mentioned, cassed
and annulled “ all and whatsoever acts, laws, and statutes made at any time before the day and date thereof, against the
liberty of the true Kirk, jurisdiction, and discipline thereof, as the same is used and exercised within this realme;” 3 since
which enactment no similar interference with the discipline and censures of the Church was ever attempted till the
year 1841.
Second, It having been declared by another of the “ Black Acts” aforesaid, 4 entituled, “An act confirming the
king’s majesty’s royal power over all the estates and subjects within this realm,” that “his highness, his heirs, and
successors, by themselves and their councils, are, and in time to come, shall be, judges competent to all persons his
highness’ subjects, of whatsoever estate, degree, function, or condition that ever they be of, spiritual or temporal, in all
matters wherein they or any of them shall be apprehended, summoned, or charged to answer to such things as shall be
enquired of them by our sovereign lord and hip council,” it was by the said before-mentioned act of the twelfth
Parliament of King James VI., 5 declared that the said act last above-mentioned “shall no ways be prejudicial, nor
derogate anything to the privilege that God has given to the spiritual office-bearers of the Kirk, concerning heads of
religion, matters of heresy, excommunication, collation, or deprivation of ministers, or any such-like essential censures,
specially grounded, and having warrant of the Word of God.”
Third, It having been enacted, on the establishment of Prelacy in 1612,® that every minister, at his admission, should
swear obedience to the sovereign, as “the only lawful supreme governor of this realm, as well in matters spiritual and
ecclesiastical as in things temporal,” the enactment to this effect was repealed on the restoration of Presbyterian Church
government. 7
Fourth, A like acknowledgment, that the sovereign was “ the only supreme governor of this kingdom over all
persons, and in all causes ,” 8 having been on the second establishment of Prelacy, consequent on the restoration of King
Charles 11., required as part of the ordinary oath of allegiance, and having been also inserted into the “ Test Oath,” 9 so
tyrannically attempted to be forced on the subjects of this realm during the reign of Cbailes 11. and James II.; and the
same doctrine of the king’s «upremacy in all causes, spiritual and ecclesiastical as well as temporal and civil, having
farther been separately and specially declared by the first act of the second Parliament of the said King Charles 11.
(1669), 10 entituled, “ Act asserting his majesty’s supremrcy over all persons and in ail causes ecclesiastical,” whereby it
was “ enacted, asserted, and declared, that his majesty has the supreme authority and supremacy over all persons, and
in all causes ecclesiastical within this kingdom,” ll the estates of this kingdom, at the era of the Kevolution, did set forth,
as the second article ot the “Grievances” of which they demanded redress under their “ Claim of Bight,” “ That the
first act of Parliament 1669 is inconsistent with the establishment cf Church government now desired, and ought to be
abrogated.”
Fifth, In compliance with this claim, an act was immediately thereafter passed, 12 of which the tenor follows: “ Our
sovereign lord and lady the King and Queen’s Majesties, taking into their consideration, that by the second article of
the Grievances, presented to their Majesties, by the estates of this kingdom, it is declared that the first act of the second
Parliament of King Charles the Second, entituled, ‘ Act asserting his Majesty’s supremacy over all persons and in all
causes ecclesiastical,’ is inconsistent with the establishment of the Church government now desired, and ought to be
abrogate : Therefore their majesties, with advice and consent of the estates of Parliament do hereby abrogate, rescind,
and annul the foresaid act, and declare the same in the whole heads, articles, and clauses thereof, to be of no force or
effect in all time coming.” In accordance also therewith, the oath of allegiance above-mentioned, requiring an
acknowledgment of the king’s sovereignty “in all causes,” 13 was done away, and that substituted which is now in use,
simply requiring a promise to be “ faithful, and bear true allegiance” to the sovereign ; and all preceding laws and acts
of Parliament were rescinded, “ in so far as they impose any other oaths of allegiance and supremacy, declarations and
tests, excepting the oath defideli By the which enactments, any claim on the part of the sovereigns of Scotland to be
supreme rulers in spiritual and ecclesiastical as well as in temparal and civil causes, or to possess any power, by
themselves or their judges holding commission from them, to exercise jurisdiction in matters or causes spiritual and
ecclesiastical, was repudiated and excluded from the constitution, as inconsistent with the Presbyterian Church
government then established, and secured under the statutes then and subsequently passed, “to continue without any
alteration, to the people of this land, in all succeeding generations.” 14
And whereas divers civil rights and privileges were, by various statutes of the Parliament of Scotland, prior to the
Union with England, secured to this Church, and certain civil consequences attached to the sentences of the courts
thereof, which were further directed to be aided and made effectual by all magistrates, judges, and officers of the law ;
and in particular—
It was, by an act of the twelfth Parliament of King James VI., 15 enacted, “ that all and whatsoever sentences of
deprivation, either pronounced already, or that happens to be pronounced hereafter by the Presbytery, Synodal, or
General Assemblies, against any parson or vicar within their jurisdiction, provided since his highness’ coronation, is,
and shall be repute in all judgments, a just cause to seclude the person before provided, and then deprived from all
profits, commodities, rents, and duties of the said parsonage and vicarage, or benefice of cure ; and that, either by way
of action, exception, or reply; and that the said sentence of deprivation shall be a sufficient cause to make the said
benefice to vaike thereby
As also, by the fifth act of the first Parliament of King William and Queen Mary, 16 it was enacted, “ that whatsoever
minister being convened before the said general meeting, and representatives of the Presbyterian ministers or elders,
or the visitors to be appointed by them, shall either prove contumacious for not appearing, or be found guilty, and
shall be therefore censured, whether by suspension or deposition, they shall, ipso facto, be suspended from or deprived
of their stipends and benefices:”
As also, by an act passed in the fourth session of the first Parliament of King William and Queen Mary, l7 entituled,
an “Act for settling the peace and quiet of the Church,” it was provided .that no minister should be admitted, unless
he owned the Presbyterian Church government, as settled by the last recited act, “ to be the only government of this
Church“ and that he will submit thereto, and concur therewith, and never endeavour, directly or indirectly, the
1
1690, o. 5.
2 1592, c. 116.
3 1592, c. 116.
4
1584, c. 129.
5 1592, C. 116.
6 1612, c.
1.
7
1640, c. 7.
8 1661, c. 11.
9 1681, c. 6.
10
1669, c. 1.
11 Estates, 1689, c 18,
12 1690, c.
1.
13
1689, C. 2,
14 1706, c. 6. ,
15 1592, C. 117.
16
1690, C. 5.
17 1693, 0. 22.


prejudice or subversion thereof;” and it was statute or ordained, “that the lords of their Majesties’ Privy Council, and
all other magistrates, judges, and officers of justice, give all due assistance for making the sentences and censures of the
Church, and judicatories thereof, to be obeyed, or otherwise effectual, as accords .
As also, by an act passed in the fifth session of the aforesaid Parliament, entituled, an Act against intruding into
churches without a legal call and admission thereto,” on the narrative, “ that ministers and preachers, their intruding
themselves into vacant churches, possessing of manses and benefices, and exercising any part of the ministerial function
in parishes, without a legal call and admission to the said churches, is an high contempt of the law, and of a dangerous
consequence, tending to perpetual schism;” such intrusion without an orderly call from the heritors and elders the
right of presentation by patrons being at this time abolished, —and “legal admission from the presbytery, was
prohibited under certain penalties ; and the lords of the Privy Council were recommended to remove all who had so
intruded, and “to take some effectual course for stopping and hindering those ministers who are, or shall be hereafter
deposed by the judicatories of the present established Church, from preaching or exercising any act of their ministerial
function which” (the said statute declares) “ they cannot do after they are deposed, without a high contempt of the
authority of the Church, and of the laws of the kingdom establishing the same.”
And whereas, at the Union between the two kingdoms, the Parliament of Scotland, being determined that the
“true Protestant religion,” as then professed, “ with the worship, discipline, and government of this Church, should be
effectually and unalterably secured,” did, in their act appointing commissioners to treat with commissioners from the
Parliament of England 2 as to an union of the kingdoms, provide, “ That the said commissioners shall not treat of or
concerning any alteration of the worship, discipline, and government of the Church of this kingdom, as now by law
established;” and did, by another act, commonly called the Act of Security," and entituled, Act for securing the
Protestant religion and Presbyterian Church government,” “establish and confirm the said true Protestant religion,
and the worship, discipline, and government of this Church, to continue without any alteration to the people of this
land in all succeeding generations ;” and did “ for ever confirm the filth act of the first Parliament of King William
and Queen Mary, 4 entituled, ‘ Act ratifying the Confession of Faith, and settling Presbyterian Church government, and
the whole other acts of Parliament relating thereto ;” and did “ expressly provide and declare, That the foresaid true
Protestant religion, contained in the above mentioned Confession of Faith, with the form and purity of worship
presently in use within this Church, and its Presbyterian Church government and discipline, that is to say, the
government of the Church by kirk-sessions, presbyteries, provincial synods, and general assemblies, all established by
the foresaid acts of Parliament, pursuant to the Claim ot Right, shall remain and continue unalterable ; and that the
said Presbyterian Government shall be the only Government of the Church within the kingdom of Scotland ; and
farther, “for the greater security of the same,” did, inter alia, enact, “That after the decease of her present Majesty,
the Sovereign succeeding to her in the Royal Government of the Kingdom of Great Britain, shall, in all time coming,
at his or her accession to the Crown, swear and subscribe, That they shall inviolably maintain and preserve the foresaid
settlement of the true Protestant religion, with the government, worship, discipline, right and privileges of this Church,
as above established by the laws of this kingdom, in prosecution of the Claim of Right;’ which said Act of Security,
“ with the establishment therein contained,” it was specially thereby enacted, “ should be held and observed in all
time coming, as a fundamental and essential condition of any treaty or union to be concluded betwixt the two
kingdoms, without any alteration thereof, or derogation thereto, in any sort, for ever :” It being farther thereby provided,
that “the said act and settlement therein contained shall be inserted and repeated in any act of 1 arliament that shall
pass, for agreeing and concluding the foresaid treaty or union betwixt the two kingdoms ; and that the same shall be
therein expressly declared to be a fundamental and essential condition of the s id treaty of union in all time coming.
In terms of which enactment, this Act of Security was inserted in the Treaty of Union between the two kingdoms, as a
fundamental condition thereof, and was also inserted in the act 5 of the Parliament of Scotland, ratifying and approving
of the said Treaty, and likewise in the corresponding act of the Parliament of England, entituled, “An act for a union
of the two kingdoms of England and Scotland:”
And whereas, at the date of the said Treaty of Union, the right of patrons to present to churches stood abolished
by statute, after the following manner, viz.: By the act of King William and Queen Mary, 7 herein before-mentioned,
the act of James VI., 8 also herein before-mentioned, then standing totally repealed, was only revived, subject to the
express exception of “that ptrt of it relating to patronages,” which consequently remained repealed and unrestored
and “ which,” the act 1690, c. 5, farther bore, “is hereafter to be taken into consideration.” The part of the said act
thus left repealed and unrevived, was the provision that presbyteries “ be bound and astricted to receive whatsoever
qualified minister presented by his tnijesty or laic patrons,” a provision wl ich, while it subsisted, was held to leave the
Church free to proceed in the collation of ministers “ according to the discipline of the Kirk ;” and non-compliance
with which implied only a forfeiture of the fruits of the particular benefice, which it did by virtue of the immediately
succeeding statute 9 whereby it was enacted that “in case the presbytery refuses to admit any qualified minister
presented to them by the patron, it shall be lawful to the patron to retain the whole fruits of the benefice in his own
hands.” This subject having accordingly been thereafter taken into consideration in the sane session of Parliament,
was definitely settled by an act, 10 entituled, “Act concerning patronages,” whereby the right of presentation by patrons
was “annulled and made void,” and a right was vested in the heritors and elders of the respective parishes “ to name
and propose the person to the whole congregation, to be approven or disapprdven by them,” the disapproves giving in
their re sons “to the effect the affair may be cognosced upon by the presbytery of the bounds, at whose judgment,
and by whose determination” (as i 3 declared by the said act), “ the calling and entry of a particular minister is to be
ordered and concluded:”
And whereas the said act last mentioned, formed part of the settlement of the Presbyterian Church government
effected at tiie Revolution, and was one of the “ acts relating thereto,” and to the statute 1690, c. 5, specially confirmed
and secured by the Act of Security and Treaty of Union ; yet notwithstanding thereof, and of the said Treaty, the
Parliament of Great Britain, by an act passed in the 10th of Queen Anne, 11 repealed the said act, “in so far as relates
to the presentation of ministers by heritors and others therein mentioned,” and restored to patrons the right of
presentation, and enacted that presbyteries should be “ obliged to receive and admit in the same manner, such
qualified person or persons, minister or ministers, as shall be presented by the respective patrons, as the persons or
ministers presented before the making of this act ought to have been admitted.”
And whereas, while this Church protested against the passing of the above-mentioned act of Queen Anne, as
“contrary to the constitution of the Church, so well secured by the late Treaty of Union, and solemnly ratified by acts
of Parliament in both kingdoms,” and for more than seventy years thereafter, uninterruptedly sought for its repeal,
she at the same time maintained, and practically exercised, without question or challenge from any quarter, the
jurisdiction of her courts to determine ultimately and exclusively, under what circumstances they would admit
candidates into the office of the holy ministry, or constitute the pastoral relationship between minister and people, and,
genera 1 ly, “ to order and conclude the entry of particular ministers.”
And whereas, in particular, this Church required, as necessary to the admission of a minister to the charge of
souls, that he should have received a call from the people over whom he was to be appointed, and did not authorise or
permit any one so to be admitted till such call had been sustained by the Church Courts, and did, before and subsequent
to the passing of the said act of Queen Anne, declare it to be a fundamental principle of the Church, as set forth in her
authorised standards, and particu'arly in the Second Book ot Discipline, 12 repeated by the Act of Assembly in 1638, that
no pastor be intruded upon any congregation contrary to the will of the people :
And whereas, in especial, this fundamental principle was, by the 14th act of the General Assembly 1736, 13
re-declared and directed to be attended to in the settlement of vacant parishes, but having been after some time,
disregarded in the administration of the Church, it was once more re-declared by the General Assembly 1834, 14 who
established certain specific provisions and regulations for carrying it into effect in time to come:
And whereas, by a judgment pronounced by the House of Lords, in 1839, 15 it was for the first time, declared to be
illegal to refuse to take on trial, and to reject the presentee of a patron (although a layman, and merely a candidate for
admission to the office of the ministry), in consideration of this fundamental principle of the Church, and in respect of
the dissent of the congregation ; to the authority of which judgment, so far as disposing of civil interests, this Church
implicitly bowed, by at once abandoning all claim to the jus devolutem —to the benefice, for any pastor to be settled by
her, and to all other civil right or privilege which might otherwise have been competent to the Church or her courts ;
and anxiously desirous, at the same time 2 of avoiding collision with the civil courts, she so far suspended the operation
of the above-mentioned act of Assembly, as to direct all cases, in which dissents should be lodged by a majority of the
congregation, to be reported to the General Assembly, in the hope that a way might be opened up to her for reconciling
with the civil rights declared by the House of Lords, adherence to the above-mentioned fundamental principle, which
she could not violate or abandon by admitting to the holy office of the ministry, a party not having, in her conscientious
judgment, a legitimate call thereto, or by intruding a pastor on a reclaiming Congregation contrary to their will; and
farther, addressed herself to the Government and the Legislature for such an alteration of the law (as for the first time
1 1695, c. 22. 2 1705, c. 4. 3 1706, c.
6. 4 1690, c. 5.
5 1706, c. 7.
6 5 Anne, c 8.
7 1690, c. 5. 8 1592, c. 116. 9 1592, C.
117. 10 1690, c. 23.
11 10 Anne, c. 12.
12 Cb. 3, sec. 5.
13 Act ot Assembly, 1736, c. 14. 14 Act of Assembly,
1834, c. 9. 15 Auchterader Case, 1839.


mow interpreted), touching the temporalities belonging to the Church (which alone she held the decision of the House
of Lords, to be capable of affecting or regulating), as might prevent a separation between the cure of souls and the
benefice thereto attached :
And whereas, although during the century which elapsed after the passing of the said act of Queen Anne,
presbyteries, repeatedly rejected the presentees of patrons on grounds undoubtedly ultra vires of the presbyteries, as
having reference to the title of the patron or the validity of competing presentations, and which were held by the Court
of Session to be contrary to law, and admitted others to the pastoral office in the parishes presented to, who had no
presentation or legal title to the benefice, tho said court, even in such cases, never attempted or pretended to direct or
coerce the Church courts, in the exercise of their functions in regard to the collation of ministers or other matters
acknowledged by the State to have been conferred on the Church, not by the State, but by God himself. On the
contrary, they limited their decrees to the regulation and disposal of the temporalities which were derived from th@
•State, and which, as the proper subjects of “ actions civil,” were within the province assigned to the Court of Session
by the Constitution, refusing to interfere with the peculiar functions and exclusive jurisdiction of the Courts of the
Church: Thus,—
In the case of Auchtermuchty, l where the presbytery had wrongfully admitted another than the patron’s presentee,
the court found, “ That the right to a stipend is a civil right; and therefore, that the court have power to cognosce and
determine upon the legality of the admission of ministers, in liunc effectum, whether the person admitted shall have right
to the stipend or not;” and simply decided that the patron was entitled to retain the stipend in his own hands.
So also, the same course was followed in the cases of Culross, Lanark, and Forbes ; 8 in reference to one of which
(that of Lanark) the government of the country, on behalf of the crown, in which the patronage was vested, recognized
the retention of stipend by the patron, as the only competent remedy for a wrongful refusal to admit his presentee ;
the Secretary of State having, in a letter to the Lord Advocate of Scotland (January 17, 1752), signified the pleasure of
his Majesty, “ directing and ordering his lordship to do everything necessary and competent by law, for asserting and
taking benefit in the present case, of the said right and privilege of patrons by the law of Scotland, to retain the fruits
of the benefice in their own hands till their presentee be admitted.”
So farther, in the before-mentioned case of Culross, 3 the Court refused, “as incompetent,” a bill of advocation
presented to them by the patron, for the purpose of staying the admission by the presbytery of another than his
presentee.
So likewise, in the case of Dunse, 4 the court would not interfere in regard to a conclusion to prohibit the presbytery
“ to moderate in a call at large or settle any other man,” because “ that was interfering with the power of ordination or
internal policy of the Church, with which the Lords thought they had nothing to do.”
And so, in the same manner, in the case of Unst, 5 where the party concluded to have the presbytery ordained to
proceed to the presentee’s settlement, as well as to have the validity of the presentation and the right to the stipend
declared, the court limited their decree to the civil matters of the presentation and stipend.
And whereas, pending the efforts of the Church to accomplish the desired alteration of the law, the Court of
Session—-a tribunal instituted by special act of Parliament for the specific and limited purpose of “ doing an
administration of justice in all civil actions,” 6 with judges appointed simply “to sit and decide upon all actions civil” 1
—not confining themselves to the determination of “ civil actions,” -to the withholding of civil consequences from
sentences of the Church courts which, in their judgment, were not warranted by the statutes recognising the jurisdiction
of these courts —to the enforcing of the provision of the act 1592, c. 117, for retention of the fruits of the benefice in
case of wrongful refusal to admit a presentee, or the giving of other civil redress for any civil injury held by them to
have been wrongfully sustained in consequence thereof —have, in numerous and repeated instances, stepped beyond
the province allotted to them by the constitution, and within which alone their decisions can be held to declare the law,
or to have the force of law, deciding not only “ actions civil,” but “ causes spiritual and ecclesiastical”—and that, too,
even where these had no connection with the exercise of the right of patronage —and have invaded the jurisdiction and
encroached upon the spiritual privileges, of the courts of this Church, in violation of the constitution of Uie country,
in defiance of the statutes above-mentioned, and in contempt of the laws of this kingdom : as, for instance,
By interdicting presbyteries of the Church from admitting to a pastoral charge, 8 when about to be done irrespective
of the civil benefice attached thereto, or even where there was no benefice, no right of patronage, no stipend, no manse
or glebe, and no place of worship, or any patrimonial right, connected therewith. 9
By issuing a decree 10 requiring and ordaining a Church court to take on trial, and admit to the office of the holy
ministry in a particular charge, a probationer or unordained candidate for the ministry, and to intrude him also on the
congregation, contrary to the will of the people; both in this and in the cases first mentioned invading the church’s
exclusive jurisdiction in the admission of ministers, the preaching of the Word, and administration of sacraments,
recognized by statute to have been “ given by Gou” directly to the church, and to be beyond the limits of the secular
jurisdiction.
By prohibiting the communicants 11 of the Church from intimating their dissent from a call proposed to be given to a
candidate for the ministry to become their pastor.
By granting interdict against the establishment of additional ministers to meet the wants of an increasing population, 18
as uninterruptedly practised from the Reformation to this day ; against constituting a new kirk-session in a parish, to
exercise discipline ; and against innovating on its existing state, “as regards pastoral superintendence, its kirk-session,
and jurisdiction and discipline thereto belonging.”
By interdicting the preaching of the Gospel, and administration of ordinances, 13 throughout a whole district, by any
minister of the Church under authority of the Church courts; thus assuming to themselves the regulation of the
■“preaching of the Word” and “administration of the sacraments,” and at the same time invading the privilege, common
to all the subjects of the realm, of having freedom to worship God according to their consciences, and under the
guidance of the ministers of the communion to which they belong.
By holding the members of inferior Church judicatories liable in damages 14 for refusing to break their ordination
vows and oaths (sworn by them in compliance with the requirements of the statutes of the realm, and, in particular, of
the Act of Security embodied in the Treaty of Union), by disobeying and setting at defiance the sentences, in matters
spiritual and ecclesiastical, of their superior Church judicatories; to which, by the constitution of the Church and
country, they are in such matters subordinate and subject, and which, by their said vows and oaths, they stand pledged
to obey.
By interdicting the execution of a sentence of a Church judicatory prohibiting a minister from preaching or
administering ordinances within a particular parish, 15 pending the discussion of a cause in the Church courts as to the
validity of his settlement therein.
By interdicting the General Assembly and inferior Church judicatories from inflicting Church censures; as in one
•case where interdict was granted against the pronouncing of sentence of deposition upon a minister found guilty of
theft, by a judgment acquiesced in by himself ; 16 in another, where a presbytery was interdicted from proceeding in the
trial of a minister accused of fraud and swindling ; 17 and in a third, where a presbytery was interdicted from proceeding
with a libel against a licentiate for drunkenness, obscenity, and profane swearing. lB
By suspending Church censures, 19 inflicted by the Church judicatories in the exercise of discipline (which, by special
statute, all “judges and officers of justice” are ordered “ to give due assistance” for making “ to be obeyed or otherwise
effectual”), and so reponing ministers suspended from their office to the power of preaching and administering
ordinances ; thus assuming to themselves the “ power of the keys.”
By interdicting the execution of a sentence of deposition from the office of the holy ministry, pronounced by the
General Assembly of the Church ; 20 thereby also usurping the “ power of the keys,” and supporting deposed ministers
in the exercise of ministerial functions—which is declared by special statute to be a “ high contempt of the authority of
the Church, and of the laws of the kingdom establishing the same.”
By assuming to judge of the right of individuals elected members of the General Assembly to sit therein, 81 and
interdicting them from taking their seats; thus interfering with the constitution of the supreme court of the Church,
and violating her freedom in the holding of General Assemblies, secured to her by statute.
By, in the greater number of instances above referred to, requiring the inferior judicatories of the Church to disobey
the sentences, in matters spiritual and ecclesiastical, of the superior judicatories, to which by the constitution in Church
and State, they are subordinate and subject, and which, in compliance with the provisions of the statutes of the realm,
their members have solemnly sworn to obey; thus subverting “the government of the Church by Kirk-Sessions,
Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and General Assemblies,” settled by statute and the Treaty of Union, as “ the only
government of the Church within the kingdom of Scotland.”
1 Moncrieff v Maxton, Feb. 15, 1835.
2 Cochran, v. Stoddart, June 26, 1751.
Dick v. Carmichael, March 2, 1753.
Furbes v. Mac William, February, 1762.
3 Cochran, Nov. 19, i748.
4 Hay v. Presbytery of
Dunse, February 26, 1749.
5 Lord Dundas v. Presbytery ot Shetland, May 15, 1795.
6 1537, c. 36.
7 1532, c. 1.
8 1st Lethendy Case.
9 Stewarton Case.
10 Marnoch Case.
11 Daviot Case.
12 Stewarton Case.
13 Strathbogie Cases.
14 2d Auchterader Case.
15 Culsalmond Case.
16 Cambu8netlian Case.
17 Stranraer Case.
18 4th Lethendy Case.
19 1st and 2nd Strathbogie Cases.
20 3d Strathbogie Case.
21 5th Strathbogie Case.


By all which acts the said Court of Session, apparently not adverting to the oath taken by the Sovereign, from
whom they held their commissions, have exercised powers not conferred upon them by the constitution, but by it
excluded from the province of any secular tribunal; have invaded the jurisdiction of the courts of the Church ; have
subverted its government; have illegally attempted to coerce Church courts in the exercise of their purely spiritual
functions; have usurped the “ power of the keys”—have wrongfully acclaimed, as the subjects of their civil jurisdiction,
to be regulated by their decrees, ordination of laymen, to the office of the holy ministry, admission to the cure of souls,
Church censures, the preaching of the Word, and the administration of the sacraments ; and have employed the means
entrusted to them for enforcing submission to their lawful authority in compelling submission to that which they have
usurped—in opposition to the doctrines of God’s Word set forth in the Confession of Faith as ratified by statute—in
violation of the constitution—in breach of the Treaty of Union, and in disregard of divers express enactments of the
Legislature.
And whereas further encroachments are threatened on the government and discipline of the Charch as by law
established, 1 in actions now depending before the said court, in which it is sought to have sentences of deposition from
the office of the holy ministry reduced and set aside, 2 and minorities of inferior judicatories authorised to take on trial,
and admit to the office of the holy ministry, in disregard of, and in opposition to, the authority of the judicatories of
which they are members, and of the superior judicatories to which they are subordinate and subject:
And whereas the government and discipline of Christ’s Church cannot be carried on according to his laws and
the constitution of his Church, subject to the exercise, by any secular tribunal, of such powers as have been assumed
by the said Court of Session :
And whereas this Church, highly valuing, as she has ever done, her connection, on the terms contained in the
statutes herein before recited, with the State, and her possession of the temporal benefits thereby secured to her for the
advantage of the people, must, nevertheless, even at the risk and hazard of the loss of that connection and of these
public benefits—deeply as she would deplore and deprecate such a result for herself and the nation—persevere in
maintaining her liberties as a Cnurch of Christ, and in carrying on the government thereof on her own constitutional
principles, and must refuse to intrude ministers on her congregations, to obey the unlawful coercion attempted to be
enforced against her in the exercise of her spiritual functions and jurisdiction, or to consent that her people be deprived
of their rightful liberties :
THEREFORE the General Assembly, while, as above set forth, they fully recognise the absolute jurisdiction of the
civil courts in relation to all matters whatsoever of a civil nature, and especially in relation to all the temporalities
conferred by the State upon the Church, and the civil consequences attached by law to the decisions, in matters
spiritual, of the Church Courts, DO, in name and on behalf of this Church, and of the nation and people of Scotland,
and under the sanction ol the several statutes, and the Treaty of Union, herein before recited, claim, as of right, that
she shall freely possess and enjoy her liberties, government, discipline, rights, and privileges, according to law,
especially for the defence of the spiritual liberties of her people, and that she shall be protected therein from the
foresaid unconstitutional and illegal encroachments of the said Court of Session, and her people secured in their
Christian and constitutional rights and liberties. /
And they declare that they cannot, in accordance with the Word of God, the authorised and ratified standards
of this Church, and the dictate s of their consciences, intrude ministers on reclaiming congregations, or carry on the
government of Christ’s Church, subject to the coercion attempted by the Court of Session as above set forth ; and that,
at the risk and hazard of suffering the loss of the secular benefits conferred by the State, and the public advantages of
an Establishment, they must, as by God’s grace they will, refuse so to do; for, highly as they estimate these, they
cannot put them in competition with the inalienable liberties of a Church of Christ, which, alike by their duty and
allegiance to their Head and King, and by their ordination vows they are bound to maintain, “ notwithstanding
whatsoever trouble or persecution may arise.”
And they protest, that all and whatsoever acts of the Parliament of Great Britain, passed without the consent of
this Church and nation, in alteration of, or derogation to, the aforesaid government, discipline, right, and privileges of
this Church (which were not allowed to be treated of by the Commissioners for settling the terms of the union between
the two kingdoms, but were secured by antecedent stipulation, provided to be inserted, and inserted, in the Treaty of
Union, as an unalterable and fundamental condition thereof, and so reserved from the cognizance and power of the
federal legislature created by the said Treaty) ; as also, all and whatsoever sentences of courts in contravention of the
same government, discipline, right, and privileges, are, and shall be, in themselves void and null, and of no legal force
or effect; and that, while they will accord full submission to all such Acts and sentences, in so far— though in so far
only—as these may regard civil rights and privileges, whatever may be their opinion of the justice or legality of the
same, their said submission shall not be deemed an acquiesence therein, but that it shall be free to the members of this
Church, or their successors, at any time hereafter when there shall be a prospect of obtaining justice, to claim the
restitution of all such civil rights and privileges, and temporal benefits and endowments, as for the present they may
be compelled to yield up, in order to preserve to their office-bearers the free exercise of their spiritual government and
discipline, and to their people the liberties, of which respectively it has been attempted, so contrary to law and justice,
to deprive them.
And, finally, the General Assembly call the Christian people of this kingdom, and all the Churches of the
Reformation throughout the world, who hold the great doctrine of the sole Headship of the L ird Jesus over his Church,
to witness, that it is for their adherence to that doctrine, as set forth in their C mfession of Faith, and ratified by the
laws of this kingdom, and for the maintenance by them of the jurisdiction of the office-bearers, and the freedom and
privileges of the members of the Cnurch, from that doctine flowing, that this Cnurch is subjected to hardship, and that
the rights so sacredly pledged and secured to her are put in peril; and they especially invite all the office-bearers and
members of this Church, who are willing to suffer for their allegiance to their adorable King and Head, to stand by the
Church, and by each other, in defence of the doctrine aforesaid, and of the liberties and privileges, whether of
office-bearers or people, which rest upon it; and to unite in supplication to Almighty God, that he would be pleased to
turn the hearts of the rulers of this kingdom, to keep unbroken the faith pledged to this Church in former days, by
statutes and solemn treaty, and the obligations come under to God himself to preserve and maintain the government
and discipline of this Church in accordance with his Word; or otherwise, that he would give strength to this Church-
office-bearers and people—to endure resignedly the loss of the temporal benefits of an Establishment, and the personal
sufferings and sacrifices to which they may be called, and would also inspire them with zeal and energy to promote the
advancement of his Son’s kingdom, in whatever condition it may be his will to place them ; and that, in his own good
time, he would restore to them these benefits, the fruits of the struggles and sufferings of their fathers in times past in
the same cause ; and thereafter give them grace to employ them more effectually than hitherto they have done for the
manifestation of bis glory.
No. 11.
PROTEST BY THE COMMISSIONERS TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY READ IN PRESENCE OF THE ROYAL COMMISSIONER,
18th May, 1843.
We, the undersigned ministers and elders, chosen as commissioners to the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, indicted to meet this day, but precluded from holding the said Assembly by reason of the circumstances
hereinafter set forth, in consequence of which a Free Assembly of the Church of Scotland, in accordance with the laws
and constitution of the said Church, cannot at this time be holden, —
Considering that the Legislature, by their rejection of the Claim of Eight adopted by the last General Assembly of
the said Church, and their refusal to give redress and protection against the jurisdiction assumed, and the coercion of
late repeatedly attempted to be exercised over the courts of the Church in matters spiritual by the civil courts, have
recognised and fixed the conditions of the Church Establishment, as henceforward to subsist in Scotland, to be such as
these have been pronounced and declared by the said civil courts in their several recent decisions, in regard to matters
spiritual and ecclesiastical, whereby it has been held, inter alia—
-Ist, That the courts of the Church by law established, and members thereof, are liable to be coerced by the c’vil
courts in the exercise of tlieir spiritual functions; and in particular, in the admission to the office of the holy
ministry, and the constitution of the pastoral relation, and that they are subject to be compelled to intrude ministers
on reclaiming congregations in opposition to the fundamental principles of the Church, and their views of the Word
of God, and to the liberties of Christ’s people.
2d, That the said civil courts have power to interfere with and interdict the preaching of the gospel and
administration of ordinances as authorised and enjoined by the Church courts of the Establishment.
3d, That the said civil courts have power to suspend spiritual censures pronounced by the Church courts of the
Establishment against ministers and probationers of the Church, and to interdict their execution as to spiritual
effects, functions, and privileges.
4th, That the said civil courts have power to reduce and set aside the sentences of the Church courts of the
Establishment, deposing ministers from the office of the holy ministry and depriving probationers of their license to
preach the gospel, with reference to the spiritual status, functions, and privileges of such ministers and probationers;
—restoring them to the spiritual office and status, of which the Church courts had deprived them.
1 4th Strathbogie Case. 2 3rd Auchterader Case. 3rd Lethendy Case.


sth, That the said civil courts have power to determine on the right to sit as members of the supreme and other
judicato ies of the Church by law established, and to issue interdicts against sitting and voting therein, irrespective
of the judgment and determination of the said judicatories.
6th, That the said civil courts have power to supersede the majority of a Church court of the establishment, in
regard to the exercise of its spiritual functions as a Church court, and to authorise the minority to exercise the said
functions, in opposition to the court itself, and to the superior judicatories of the Establishment.
7th, That the said civil courts have power to stay processes of discipline pending before courts of the Church by
law established, and to interdict such courts from proceeding therein.
Btb, That no pastor of a congregation can be admitted into the Church courts of the Establishment, and allowed
to rule, as well as to teach, agreeably to the institution of ihe office by the Head of the Church, nor to sit in any of
the judicatories of the Church, inferior or supreme, and that no additional provision can be made for the exercise of
spiritual discipline among the members of the Caurch, though not affecting any patrimonial interests; and no
alteration introduced in the state of pastoral superintendence and spiritual discipline in any parish without the
sanction of a civil court.
All which jurisdiction and power on the part of the said civil courts severally above specified, whatever proceeding
may have given occasion to its exercise, is, in our opinion, in itself inconsistent with Christian liberty,—and with
the authority which the Head of the Church hath conferred on ths Church alone.
And further, considering that a General Assemb’y, composed, in accordance with the laws and fundamental principles
of the Church, in part of commissioners themselves admitted without the sanction of the civil court, or chosen by
Presbyteries composed in part of members not having that sanction, cannot be constituted as aD Assembly of the
Establishment without disregarding the law and the legal conditions of the same as now fixed and declared ;
And further, considering that such commissioners as ator -said would, as members of an Assembly of the E itablishment,
be liable to be interdicted from exercising their functions; and to be subjected to civil coercion at the instance oi any
individual having interest who might apply to the civil courts for that purpose;
And considering further, that civil coercion has already been in divers instances applied for and used, whereby
certain commissioners, returned to the Assembly this day appointed to have been holden, have been interdicted from
claiming their seats and from sitting and voting therein, and certain Presbyteries have been, by interdicts directed
against their members, prevented from freely choosing commissioners to the said Assembly, whereby the freedom of
such Assembly, and the liberty of election th reto, has been forcibly obstructed and taken away ;
And further’, considering that, in these circumstances, a Free Assembly of the Caurch of Scotland, by law established,
cannot at this time be holden, and that an Assembly in accordance with the fundamental principles of the C lurch,
cannot be constituted in connection with the State without violating the conditions which must now, since the
rejection by the Legislature of the Church’s Claim of Right, be held to be the conditions of the Establishment.
And considering that, while heretofore as members of Church judicatories ratified by law and recognised by the
constitution ot the kingdom, we held ourselves entitled and bound to exercise and maintain the jurisdiction vested in
these judicatories with the sanction of the constitution, notwithstanding the decrees as to matters spiritual and
ecclesiastical, of the civil courts, because we could not see that the State had required submission thereto as a condition
of the Establishment, but, on the contrary, were satisfied that the State, by the ads of the Parliament of Scotland, for
ever and unalterably secured to this nation by the Treaty of Union, had repudiated any power in the civil courts to
pronounce such decrees, we are now constrained to acknowledge it to be the mind and will ot the State, as recently
* declared, that such submission should and does form a condition of the Establishment, and of the possession of the
benefits thereof; and that as we cannot, without committing what we believe to be sin—in opposition to God’s law-
in disregard of the honor and authority of Christ’s crown, and in violation of our own solemn vows, comply with this
condition, we cannot in conscience continue connected with, and retain the benefits of, any Establishment to which
sucn condition is attached.
We therefore, the ministers and elders aforesaid, on this, the first occasion since the rejection by the Legislature
of the Church’s Claim of R ; ght, when the commissioners chosen from throughout the bounds of the Caurch to the
General Assembly appoinied to have been this day holden, are convened together, do protest, that the conditions
aforesaid, while we deem them contrary to and subversive of the settlement of Caurch government effected at the
Revolution, and solemnly guaranteed by the Act of Security and Treaty of Union, are also at variance with God’s
Word, in opposition to the doctrines and fundamental principles of the Church ot Scotland, inconsistent with the
free dom essential to the right constitution of a Church of Cnrist, and incompatible with the government which He, as
the Head of his Church, hath therein appointed distinct from the civil magistrate.
And we further protest, that any Assembly constituted in submission to the conditions now declai’ed to be law,
and under the civil coercion which has been brought to bear on the election of commissioners to the Assembly this day
appointed to have been holden, and on the commissioners chosen thereto, is not and shall not be deemed a free and
lawful Assembly of the Church of Scotland, according to the original ana fundamental principles thereof, and that the
Claim, Declaration, and Protest, of the General Assembly which convened at Edinburgh, in May, 1842, as the act. of a
lawful and free assembly of the said Church, shall be holden, as setting forth the true constitution of the said Church,
ano that the said claim, along with the laws of the Church now subsisting, shall in nowise be affected by whatsoever
acts and proceedings of any Assembly constituted under the conditions now declared to be the law, and in submission
to the coercion now imposed on the Establishment.
And, finally, while firmly asserting the right and duty of the civil magistrate to maintain and support an
Estibishment of religion in accordance with God’s Word, and reserving to ourselves and our successors to strive by all
lawful means, as opportunity shall, in God’s good providence, be offered to secure the performance of this duty
agreeably to the Scriptures, and in implement of the statutes of the kingdom of Scotland, and the obligations of the
Treaty of Union as understo id by us and our ancestors, but acknowledging that we do not hold ourselves at liberty to
return the benefits of the Establishment while we cannot comply with the conditions now to be deemed thereto
attactied — we protest, that in the circumstances in which we are placed, it is and shall be lawful for us, and such
other commissioners chosen to the Assembly appointed to have been this day holden, as may concur with us, to
withdraw to a separate place of meeting, for the purpose of taking steps for ourselves and all who adhere to us—
maintaining with us the Confession of Faith and standards of the Cnurch of Scotland, as heretofore understood—for
separating in an orderly way, from the Establishment ; and thereupon adopting such measures as may be competent
to us, in humble dependence on God’s grace and the aid of the Holy Spirit, tor the advancement of His glory ; the
extension of the Gospel of our Lord and Saviour, and the administration of the affairs of Christ’s house, according to
His holy Word; and we do now for the purpose foresaid withdraw accordingly, humbly and solemnly acknowledging
the hand of the Lord in the things which have come upon us, because of our manifold sins, and the sins of this Cnurch
and nation ; but, at the same time, with an assured conviction, that we are not responsible for any consequences that
may follow from this our enforced separation from an Establishment which we loved and prized—through interference
with conscience, the dishonor done to Christ’s crown, and the rejection of His sole and supreme authority as King in
His Church.
(O)
No. 111.
PROTEST READ IN THE SYNOD OF AUSTRALIA, IN CONNECTION WITH THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF SCOTLAND,
ON THE IOTH OCTOBER, 1846.
We, the undersigned ministers and elders, members of the Synod of Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland;
Considering that the Synod, having resolved to remain in its present connection with the Established Church of
Scotland, and to retain its present designation unchanged, does thereby declare its approval of the submission of the
said Church to toe encroachments of the Civil power on her spiritual independence and the liberties of her constitution,
and thus concurs in the renunciation of the doctrine of Christ’s sole and sovereign Headship, which that submission
involves;
And Further, Considering that, in virtue of the connection with the Established Church of Scotland which the
Synod has resolved to maintain, —asserted as that connection is, not only in the designation of the Synod, but also by
the bond of Union entered into by the ministers and elders who united in forming the said Synod, wherein it is set
forth, that they engaged, in every part of their future conduct towards each other to act in strict conformity to the
laws of Christ, and of the Scottish Church, declared anew their adherence to the doctrines of the Confession of Faith,
and promised that in the exercise of discipline they should follow the laws of that Church, so far as applicable in this
colony,—the unscriptural principles on which the government of the Established Church of Scotland is now
administered, according to which the civil courts are invested with power to coerce the judicatories and individual
members of that church in the exercise of their spiritual functions and duties, and otherwise to interfere authoritatively
in spiritual matters, and Presbyteries are authorised and empowered to disregard and overbear the voice of the people
in the formation of the pastoral relation, are virtually adopted by the Synod; and the government and discipline of the
Colonial Presbyterian Church under its superintendence are liable to be subjected to the operation of those principles.


We, therefore, the ministers and elders aforesaid, do protest, that the Synod, by its concurrence in the
renunciation of the doctrine of Christ’s Headship as aforesaid, has placed itself in a position at variance with the word
of God, and with the standards of the Church ol Scotland in their true and original import, and incompatible with the
discharge of its great duty as a witness to Christ.
And we Protest further, that, by the adoption of the principles aforesaid, the constitution of the Synod has
been so changed, that the government of the Church cannot be conducted in accordance with it. without violating the
laws of God, dishonouring the Great King and Head of the Church, and invading the rights of the Christian people.
And Finally, while we reserve any right, we, or any of us, or of such as may adhere to us, possess to the whole,
or any portion of the property, held in behalf of the Synod of Australia in connexion with the Established Church of
Scotland, we Protest that, the Synod occupying such a position, and having adopted such principles, it is, and shall
be lawful for us, and such other ministers and elders as may concur with us, to withdraw from the Synod, and take
such steps as may be competent to us and necessary for dispensing the ordinances of the Gospel, -.ind administering the
affairs of the Church in this land, agreeably to the mind of Christ, and to the standards and constitution of our Church;
and we do now withdraw accordingly.
(°)
QUESTIONS AND FORMULA.
No. 1.
Questions to be put to Probationers before Ordination (and also to a Minister already Ordained, at his
Admission to a Pastoral Charge).
1. Do you believe the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments to be the Word of God, and the only rule of
faith and manners ?
2. Do you sincerely own and believe the whole doctrine contained in the Confession of Faith, approven by General
Assemblies of the Church of Scotland, and commonly called the Westminster Confession of Faith, to be founded upon
the Word of God—and do you acknowledge the same as the confession of your faith ; and will you firmly and constantly
adhere thereto, and to the utmost of your power assert, maintain, and defend the same, and the purity of Worship as
presently practised in this Church?
3. Do you disown all Popish, Arian, Socinian, Arminian, Erastian, and other doctrines, tenets, and opinions
whatsoever, contrary to, and inconsistent with, the foresaid Confession of Faith ?
4. Are you persuaded that the Presbyterian government and discipline of this Church are founded upon the Word
of God, and agreeable thereto, —and do you promise to submit to the said government and discipline, and to concur
with the same, and not to endeavour, directly or indirectly, _the prejudice or subversion thereof, but to the utmost of
your power, in your station, to maintain, support, and defend the 'said discipline and Presbyterian government, by
Kirk-Sessiops, Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and General Assemblies ?
5. Do you believe that the Lord Jesus Christ, as King and Head of the Church, has therein appointed a
government in the hands of Church-officers, distinct from, and not subordinate in its own province to, civil government,
and that the civil magistrate does not possess jurisdiction or authoritative control over the regulation of the affairs of
Christ’s Church; and do you approve of the general principles embodied in the Claim, Declaration, and Protest, adopted
by the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1842—in the Protest of Ministers and Elders, Commissioners
from Presbyteries to the General Assembly, read in presence of the Royal Commissioner on the 18th May, 1843, and
in the Protest read in the Synod of Australia in connection with the Established Church of Scotland, on the 10th
October, 1846, as declaring the views which are sanctioned by the Word of God, and the standards of this Church,
with respect to the spirituality and freedom of the Church of Christ, and her subjection to Him as her only Head, and
to his W ord as her only standard ?
6. Do you believe that this Church is bound to retain and proclaim all the truth which God has revealed to her, and
is not at liberty to keep it in abeyance or to surrender it for any consideration ; and do you believe that unions formed
by keeping in abeyance all approbation of the contendings of a Church for the spiritual liberties of Christ’s house, and
all public disapprobation of the surrender of these liberties for the sake of worldly status or endowments are unwarranted
by Scripture; and that such compromises tend to the surrender of more truth in the worship and discipline of the
Church, and open a wide course of defection; and you therefore believe that this Church is justified by scripture and the
experience of the Church in past ages in maintaining the separate and distinctive position held in 1864 and in striving
to present to the people of this colony a pure, simple, and scriptural Presbyterian Church ?
7. Do you promise to submit yourself willingly and humbly, in the spirit of meekness, unto the admonitions of
the brethren of this Presbytery, and to be subject to them, and all other Presbyteries, and superior judicatories of this
Church, where God in his providence shall cast your lot; —and that, according to your power, you shall maintain the
unity and peace of this Church against error and schism, notwithstanding of whatsoever trouble or persecution may
arise, and that you shall follow no divisive courses from the doctrine, worship, discipline, and government, of this
Church ?
8. Are not zeal for the honor of God, love to Jesus Christ, and desire of saving souls, your great motives and
chief inducements to enter into the function of the holy ministry, and not worldly designs and interests ?
9. Have you used any undue methods, either by yourself or others, in procuring this call ?
10. Do you engage, in the strength and grace of Jesus Christ, our Lord and Master, to rule well your own family,
to live a holy and circumspect life, and faithfully, diligently, and cheerfully, to discharge all the parts of the
ministerial work, to the edification of the body of Christ ?
11. Do you accept of, and close with, the call to be pastor of this congregation, and promise, through grace, to
perform all the duties of a faithful minister of the Gospel among this people ?
No. 2.
FORMULA.
To BE SUBSCRIBED BY PROBATIONERS BEFORE RECEIVING LICENSE, AND BY ALL OFFICE-BEARERS AT THE TIME OF THEIR
Admission.
■, do hereby declare, that I do sincerely own and believe the whole doctrine contained in the
Confession of Faith, approver! by General Assemblies of the Church of Scotland to be the truths of God; and Ido own
the same as the confession of my faith, as likewise I do own the purity of worship presently authorised and practised in
the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, and also the Presbyterian government and discipline thereof—which
doctrine, worship, and Church government I am persuaded are founded on the Word of God, and agreeable thereto; I
also approve of the general principles respecting the jurisdiction of the Church, and her subjection to Christ as ,her only
Head, which are contained in the Claim of Right, ~and in the Protests referred to in the questions already put to me,
and I promise that through the grace of God, I shall firmly and constantly adhere to the same, and to the utmost of my
power shall, in my station, assert, maintain, and defend the said doctrine, worship, discipline, and government of this
Church, by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and General Assemblies, together with the liberty and $
j exclusive jurisdiction thereof, —and that I shall, in my practice, conform myself to the said worship, and submit to the
said discipline, government, and exclusive jurisdiction, and not endeavour, directly or indirectly, the prejudice or
subversion of the same; and I promise that I shall follow no divisive courses from the doctrine, worship, discipline,
government, and exclusive jurisdiction of this Church, renouncing all doctrines, tenets, and opinions whatsoever, contrary
to, or inconsistent with, the said doctrine, worship, discipline, government, or jurisdiction of the same.
TUCKER, GILLIES, AND THOMPSON, PRINTERS, “ MERCURY OFFICE,” HIGH ST., WEST MAITLAND.


B(6LiO
*****' ' - ■
Fl 6663 a.
fc
1508
< *■ s*
00010994
