

REVU
D’ETHNOGRAPIIIE
ET DE
SOCIOLOGIE
PURCIEE SOUS LA DIRECTION DE
M. A. VAN GEN NEP
Secretaire de la Redaction : M, H. BEUCHAT
PARIS
ERNEST LEROUX, ED IT EUR
28, RUE BONAPARTE, VI




DOES EXOGAMY EXIST IN AUSTRALIAN TRIBES?
By R. H. Mathews (Paramatta, Nouv. Galles da Sud).
I have read in this Journal, 1908 *, an article by the late D' A. W. Howitt in
which he endeavours to assail my statement that there is no absolute exogamy
among Australian tribes. In an article contributed to the American Antiquarian,
vol. 28, p. 87, l reported that in certain tribes of Victoria a Gamalch man married
a Guragitchgurk as his « normal » spouse, but lhat in some instances, according
to pedigree, a Gamatch espoused a Gamatchgurk as his « alternative » wife. In the
same article, at p. 86, I stated that in the Kamilaroi tribe of New South Wales a
Murri man married a Butha as his normal wife, but that he could in certain cases
take a Matha, as an alternative partner. At p. 83 of the work quoted, I likewise
detailed the normal and alternative marriages in the Kurnu tribe, which have the
same section names as the Kamilaroi, excepting a slight difference in the terminal
syllables.
M r Howitt ventures to state : « The second rule [the alternative marriage], on
which M l ' Mathews relies to prove the absence of exogamy among Australian tribes
is an innovation introduced since the breaking down of the tribal organisation ». The
marriages which I have distinguished as « normal » and « alternative » had been
reported by Rev. W m Ridley in the Kamilaroi and Turrubul tribes as far back as
the year 1866, or 43 years ago. M. Ridley again repealed his statements in 1875, or
34 years ago. M 1 ’ Howitt can scarcely expect his readers to be ignorant enough to
suppose that « the tribal organisation had broken down » so far back as either of
these dates, or that the alternative wife was at that time « an innovation » intro-
duced in consequence.
Let us see what Rev. W ,n Ridley says. In 1866 he reported that in the Kamilaroi,
Murri could marry Butha, his normal wife, or certain of the Mathas as the alter-
native. Kumbo could marry Matha as the normal, or certain Buthas as the alterna-
tive. Ippai and Kubbi could likewise marry normal or alternative wives 2 . In the
same year, 1866, M r Ridley likewise reported the organisation of the Turrubul
trjbe, which is the same in principle as the Kamilaroi. He gave two examples of a
Derwain man having a Derwain wife, which is the alternative partner; and one
example of a Derwain having a normal spouse 3 .
[t should be staled lhat 1 have resided ofV and on in the Kamilaroi territory
since 1868, my residence on each occasion extending over some years. When Rev.
W m Ridley’s book on the « Kamilaroi, Dippil and Turrubul » appeared in 1866 l
purchased a copy, so lhat I have all along been quite familiar with M r Ridley’s
conclusions regarding their marriage laws. When in the Kamilaroi territory I
always had one or more of the natives in my employ, so lhat 1 had exceptional
opportunities of studying their sociology, as well as their customs generally.
1. Revue des Etudes ELlinographiques et Sociologiques, n os 11 and 12, 1908, p. 481-482.
2. Kamilaroi, Dippil and Turrubul, (1866), p. 37. Kamilaroi and oilier Australian Languages
(1875), p. 161.
3. Op. cit., p. 38 and 163.


During the past 16 years, from 1893 to the present time I have had a good deal of
leisure, which I have devoted to the publication of what information 1 had already
collected, as well as to supplement my knowledge by several journeys at my own
expence among different native tribes.
In 1894 I confirmed M r Ridley’s report that a Kamilaroi man of any given sec-
tion (or class) could marry either a normal or an alternative wife *. Since that time
I have repeated the statement in various articles to different scientific societies in
Australia, Europe and America. I also confirmed M 1 Ridleys report respecting the
Turrubul tribe in 1898 2 and again in 1907 3 . I think enough has been said to prove
that neither in the Kamilaroi, nor in the Turrubul, nor in the Kurnu, can it be true
that the alternative rule of marriage « is an innovation introduced since the
breaking down of the tribal organisation ».
It is needless to inform my readers that when a man marries an alternative wife,
she is necessarily a woman of his own phratry, cycle, primary class, or whatever
term by which we choose to distinguish the bisection of a tribe. For example, when
a Kamilaroi man of the section Murri weds Matha, or a Turrubul man Derwain
marries Derwaingan, or a Kurnu man Murruri marries a Murrundyerra, he weds a
woman of his own phratry. As we have incontrovertible evidence that this kind of
marriage has been in vogue for at least 43 years, we can safely sav that there is no
absolute exogamy in any of the tribes mentioned.
Having placed the above facts before the readers of this Journal I shall be glad
to learn the views of Europen ethnologists in regard to this interesting subject
of Australian sociology.
1. Queensland Geographical Journal , vol. 10, p. 24.
2. Proc. Atner. Philos. Soc., vol. 37, p. 329.
3. Man (London), vol. 7, p. 167.




