

D OING WHAT YOU CAN WITH WHAT YOU'VE GOT
Colin F. Cave. Diector, Council of Adult Education
INTRODUCTION
’’Adaptation beconaa indispensable especially in the field of information#
news# etc,, (conveyed more and more tbi’oagh oral media such a a radio and
television;# the multiplicity of information of all kinds becoming so
intense that everyone needs to he sraod with tools for selection and
criticism# at the risk of being alienated by the overwhelming variety
of choice- offered* This infonaation# with its emotional impact through,
sound and vision# and its incessant renewal# docs in fact leave maa
"knowing" more and more things yet without truly "understanding 7 ’ thorn#
and without being able to situate them in a coherent context which alone
is capable of conferring a real meaning on them*
The individual must# similarly# be cad® capable of deciding for himself#
of being "inner-directod" in the world of consumer-buylng 5 where enter-
tainments# goods and services and publicity influence the people’s knowledge#
test© and behaviour# in a domain where "huyinfik-powor confers freedom of
choice"o
In social and political life,, citissns believe leas and loss that their
rights and the extent to which they are well-informed enable thorn to
act adequately in social affairs and to defend their interests affectively*
That authentic participation to which men aspire and for which they should
be trained ia today still expressed only through sporadic action# by
family planning associations# for example# or parents 1 schools# tenants 4
management committees sad district protection committees. Such bodies
do at the same tia» provide a palliative for the lack of personal relations
and true .group life in contemporary society. it ©ay b© admitted
that quantitatively speaking social relations are increasing as contacts
multiply, qualitatively they are changing from affective, emotional#; "primary**
relations to functional# affectively neutral, ” secondary" relations;,
The educational system must find an answer to thic isolation# and
it must do so quickly# sinee compensatory phenomena aa?o already .emerging l ,
in the form of passive resignation, asthenic withdrawal (in a-political
attitudes or the hippie way of life# for example) or various forms of
social or individual protest (ranging from delinquency to terrorism and
from claims for improved conditions to explosive# "wildcat" demonstrations)«**
JANJTE, H.a Educational Systems aad the New Demands of Industrialised
Societies.-, ,


DOING WHAT YOU CAN WITH WHAT YOU'VE GOT
The brochure which accompanied the invitation for me to open
this Conference states: "This Conference has been organized as
part of a growing awareness and interest In the community of the
processes by which we are governed” • It goes on to say, later, that
there will be a case study called "the Council of Adult Education,
a pressure group?" It is in the area between these two statements
that I would like to dwell for a moment or two.
It is extraordinary, when one thinks about it, that, despite the
thousands of years during which men have suffered or prospered under
rule and regulation, the awareness of and an interest in the politic-
al process are still growing, are not yet fully matured* Ken, it
would seem, have not yet come to grips with their political lives,
though it is difficult to think of any other facet of their
existence which so permeates day-to-day living.
Since his misty beginnings, Kan has always sought to organize
himself into groups of one kind or another. Always social animals,
men have never lived naturally apart - always in families, tribes,
olans, neighbourhood communities, villages, cities, states and
nations. His daily life is a constant movement in and out of one
group or another - family, work situation, peer group, lunch party,
training session, golf club, city council, neighbourhood community,
friendship group. In fact, it is impossible for him to live in any
other way than in a social structure. Each of these groups has been
able to exist and to perform only on some basis of regulated order;
and regulated order implies some kind of power structure, some kind
of government. Inside the power structure is a power struggle;
at least this is true of most power structures and most societies.
Koreover, in each of these groups each man, each woman, plays a
different role, exerts, that is, varying degrees and expressions of
leadership. Bach group has its own kind of political structure, anc
in each structure each person has his own role to play, whether a mi


plays a role of rigorous authoritarian leadership, at one extreme,
or passive, expressionless followership, at the other, he is
engaged, actively or passively, in the political process. Although
he is engaged, whether he is engagfee is the case at point.
For many men, this situation is a real concern. For many men
aniwomen are caught in the strange dilemma of the need for regulation,
authority, security, protection, order, foresight, relationship on
the one hand, and freedom, liberty, self-determination, personal
expression on the other} whether it is the benevolent despotism of
the Garden of Sden, or the quasi-democracy of modern "western"
society, the political structure under which men have allowed themsel-
ves to be regulated has been and will nlways be in a state of seige;
it is ambivalent, always at once a threat and a protection, always at
once a punishment and a rdward. Whatever authority sets itself up,
whatever its structure or Ideology, its mere existence will be a
force against which "free men" will strive* By "free men" I do not
merely allude to the larger souls who have implanted themselves on
the pages of history - the Sophocles, the Thomas Mores, the Martin
Luthers, the John Miltons, the Byrons, the Ralph Naders, of past or
present times - but to that body of men and women at all levels of
society who struggle to express their freedom by the opposition to the
excesses of authority. It is possible that it is lucky for the
stability of social structure and the life of authority that the body
of "free men" is small. The comparative stability, peace and
durability of society and its institutions is largely due to the fact
that most men are not "free men" -» that most are "tied men" for whom
the protection and security of authority, law and order hold fewer
threats and terrors than the freedom to determine one's own destiny.
It is thus that, except in cases of successful revolution, the
changes in the political structures of society are slow and small,
but they occur at all only because there are those groups of "free
people" who organize themselves against the excesses of authority.
That these groups are growing in number and size, that they are engag-
ing themselves in a greater variety of issues, is evidence of the


"growing awareness and interest" from which wo started. Whether
it is also evidence of growing excesses of authority I leave you to
decide.
And it is these groups of people that this Conference is about.
The particular form of government with which we are concerned is
participatory democracy. By this X presume wo mean some kind of
political structure in which each man and woman can equally exert
himself, that the opportunities are provided by its structure for any
man not merely to elect but to contribute to his own government, to
express himself, to be heard, to bring his own needs and wants to
bear on the social and political environment! that those in authority
are freely elected, that they are servants not masters, that the
common will which they express in their deliberations is open to
Influence from uncommon sectors of the community, that the unsilent
minority will be heard and not stifled by the suffocating blanket of
nonoommitment and nonentity woven by the silent majority. I gather
it is all these things which is meant by participatory democracy.
We have never lived in a truly participatory democracy which involves
the whole community, and it is highly unlikely that we ever will.
Probably the Greeks were closest to it of all people. The
democracy of the Greek city state, early in history though It was, is
possibly the closest we have ever been to a nation of "free men"
determining their own lives. But, the existence of such a political
structure - short-lived though it was - was aided by the small,
isolated, compact nature of the city state, and by the fact that two-
thirds of the population - the slaves - did not participate. In a
state of ieolation from outside influences, the development of a
sense of community, the possibility of a large and free participation
in what are essentially Internal decisions (what I would call
neighbourhood decisions) - decisions which stemmed from, and looked
towards the internal life, needs and wants of a clearly defined
neighbourhood, could clearly grow.


We ourselves, although we might appear to have had the opportunity,
never developed this participatory decision-making, even at that
level where it might have been appropriate - provincial local govern-
ment.
It has only been in comparatively recent years that we have
begun to develop anything like a genuine participatory democracy. When
all is said and done, Paterloo is only just over 150 years old next
month. But we appear now to be energetically setting about the task*
At last we are demanding a right of participation in our own government.
Whether wo are being democratic about it is another matter* Whether
we are not, in our more extreme dissent, in our moratoria, our
pickets, our street violence, our window-breaking, merely substituting
one form of excess of authority for another we have to consider care-
fully* Nevertheless, there are more and more people doing the best
with what they*ve got* This development is not, of course, an
Isolated factor in societyj it is part of zhe development of the whole
general fabric of society. It finds its roots in political and
economic, social, psychological, perhaps even biological and genetic
factors. It is one large, universal, reciprocal, social development
toward a more independent existence.
On the surface, it would seem that the development of participatory
democracy would be impossible in the complexity of modem urban
society, characterized as it is by a lack of a sense of community or
neighbourhood. There are just too many people; too many groups;
too many interests. Participatory democracy would seem to be essent-
ially a small group ©xercise, and would be defeated by fragmentation
of interests. Yet i® is no accident that it is our own modern society
which is the soil in *which the seed is growing* It is the very
complexity of urban society in which participatory democracy may best
flourish. Whilst the situation is very complex, I would like to
draw out one or two themes* (a)the emphasis on the individual;
(b)the growth of technology; (o)tha role of education; Because it is
largely upon these factors which, I believe, the development of the
new participatory democracy will depend.


(a) One of the features of modern society has been the emphasis
placed on the individual as the basic and most valuable social unit*
This is quite a modern phenomenon. Certainly the Greeks did not
know it, nor did the Middle Ages, nor did the Victorian era. It has
only been largely since the development of individual psychology,
since the writings of Proud in psychoanalysis, since the writings of
Shaw, Ibsen and Chekov for the stage, John Dewey for education, since
the late Romantics in poetry and the novel, since the ravages of the
First World War and the Depression of the 50*8, that the individual
has emerged in all his strength and weakness. We have been rather
belated in all this; but better late than never. What we now face,
what authority, government, law and order, and so on face is a
generation which has been raised according to Spock, a generation
raised on the principle of instant satisfaction, a generation of
which the belief in individuality amounts almost to a fetish. And
it is on the belief in individuality that participatory democracy
must ultimately be founded. The unsilent minoiSby may well be a group
of one. The particular dilemma of this situation, the weighing in the
balance of the needs and rights of the individual against those of
the group, you will no doubt be considering during this week-end,
(b) The growth of technology, particularly of communications technol-
ogy, increases immeasurably the possibility of the increased growth
of participatory democracy within the community. The reasons for
this are quite obvious to us all. Firstly, the population at large
has access to more knowledge, facts, opinions, ideas, ideologies,
attitudes, expression of values than it has ever had before in the
history of man. In a very short time indeed we have moved from the
Parlour of the Barretts, This knowledge may be presented with an
urgency, an Immediacy, a persuasive force and in a more readily
assimilable language than ever before. £vsrybcdy has access to it
through the media, particularly through the more pervasive television.
Secondly, we can cross distances more rapidly than ever before.
On the instant, we know what is occurlng in Belfast, Bangla-Desh,
Muratoa, Vietnam, the Mare Tranquillitatis, Mot merely does this


occasion the passing of information over extraordinary distances,
but it also facilitates the rapid cross-seeding of ideas. More people
now know how other people think than ever before, though as TV is one
of the main media for this cross-seeding, this knowledge may well be
superficial. Now, as never before, the campusses of Kent University,
the University of Tokyo, and Konash University are, as it were, one
campus. All our battlefields are one battlefield, as we move from
one to the other on the instant; they all look the same.
Thirdly, the communications explosion makes rallying calls over
large distances much easier and more rapid. One wonders Just how the
Koratorla could have been organized without the rapidity, urgency,
immediacy which television put at Jim Cairns’ disposal. The instant
public idol Is now a permanent feature of our tra.nsclent society.
The Hawke ascending provides a wonderful paradigm of the power of the
media in providing both focal points and rallying calls.
Again, our impressions of the world are more vivid than they have
ever been - the sight of swollen bellies in Bangla Desh, and of
barbed wire and bodies in Belfast, of the dead and the pillage in
Vietnam, of the sunken faces of poverty in Melbourne, of blood
and twisted metal on highways, of smoke, smog and pollution, have a
vividness that no newspaper, oven radio reports of earlier days
could give us. It is, in a sense, easier to arouse, our passions;
to got vis to take up arms.
But, the effects of technology go deeper than this. Technology
has brought to our society an extraordinary mobility - the movement
of people from place to place, Job to Job, home to home, thing to
thing, friend to friend. We live in an ago of increasing transcience.
As the world grows smaller and people more mobile, as we move about
the face of the earth, as we discard our parochialism, and our
devotion to neighbourhood, we become increasingly personally involved
in the social ramifications of problems within the larger society in
which we live -of drugs, poverty, war, illiteracy, pollution,
discrimination, prejudice; involved, that is, in problems which affect


whole societies, problems of larger and deeper
human consequence than many of our old neighbourhood problems. We
become part of what Mcluhan calls the global village. Sven now, on
the brink of this new social revolution, we find pronounced political
and social movements in our communities, bands of people, large and
small, taking up major socio-political Issues of great pitch and
moment. Vo are concerned about Bangla hash, Vietnam, 8.H.P.-Esso
pipelines, French H-Bomba, Aslan migration, American investment,
the women’s liberation, apartheid, equality of educational
opportunity, N the oppressor’s wrong, the proud man's contumely in a
way more vigorous, more active , more involved than we have done
before and in a way that could never have been without the technolog-
ical development of communications. lam not suggesting that the
whole of society is taking arms against a sea of troubles, or even
that moat people are politically activist - I aja saying that more
people are aware, more people are active, they are active about
greater Issues. Xam saying that never before have men, women, and
children so marched in the streets about issues that do not affect
their imm#iate purse or person as they do to-day.
Our personal neighbourhood Issues are, of course, still with us.
Minors, trammles, teachers, wharflas, still strike for "shorter hours
and better pay". Though their causes may be expressed In more accept-
able language than that of the roaring 30*s, the jargon of strikes
does not obscure their purpose. These struggles lam not really
interested in here* they do not involve the extrema difficulties of
SS>ilizatlon of forces, of rallying calls of communication and finding
focal What I am concerned with here Is that growing concern
of more and lore people with sooio-politico-oconomlc issues of much
greater breadth and depth than their own pay packets. These are the
important activists In our society? these are closer to "the free me
But we must also be awake to the principal danger of this larger
public Involvement Its openness to manipulation. It la open to
misuse by the half-information of the media, by the charisma of the
unscrupulous, by the skill of the opportunist, by the loquacity of
the demogogue, - if people are not properly and adequately informed.
If we are not informed - told by experts, read up on the subject - wel


be sold down the creek by the first charlatan with a winning smile*
It is our education which protects us from the false* If we are
going to be effective, active, participatory, expressive, felt in
society, we have to know it like it la as far as that is possible*
Shis is a very real danger; neither am I being histrionic nor
am 1 soaremongering, Least of all am I merely reacting in a middle-
aged and middle-class way to social factors* The dangers of the
manipulation of Ihe partially-informed are very real* We are used to
commercial advertising* through the media, playing upon the cupidity,
susceptibility, mendacity, ignorance, and the ftears and weaknesses
of the general population, particularly children, young people, and
women* We tend to acoopt this manipulation as part of the consumer
mystique; it is a kind of manipulation which we can rationalize in
the name of expanding econoi#, Its dangers are minimal and largely
merely economic* We can moat commercial TV advertising off as
a kind of entertainment, poor entertainment though it often is* I
am not suggesting that it is right or proper to adopt this attitude
- simply that it is easy.
But not so the dangers of developing a population with a smatter-
ing of knowledge which may fsol that it knows it all, whose Informat-
ion comes from the immediacy and the urgency of television combined
with its superficiality, its soaremongering, its rumour-mongering,
its sensationalism, and its nine-minute wonders, For it is difficult
to think of anything else which, discards so readily that is not
immediately important or sensational or which can fan a spark to a
flame quite so arbitrarily as TV news and current affairs magazines.
Given television as the major source of community information, we may
end up with a population whose knowledge of the world is based on
ignorance, superficial information and no background for judging
the value or tho validity of the information being presented. The
sense of immediacy, urgency and truth about television reporting is
itself a danger if the viewing audience are not equipped to make
judgements, to separate fact from opinion, truth from half-truth,
half-truth from plain lies*


Furthermore* there is little doubt that uninformed, under-educatec
young people of all ages are in danger of being manipulated - about
drugs* about education* about sex* about politics. They are being
manipulated in the sense that they are being activist without being
properly informed.
(o) It is in this situation that education at all levels* particularly
adult education* has an increasingly vital role to play* Certainly*
it will be agreed that* all modem developments taken into account*
the ainglem most important, most influencing factor in the quality of
our modem society has been the introduction* the growth and the cont-
inuous development of a system of popular eduction. No other factor
of modern society has wrought such change in our lives.
As I see it* the theory behind popular education is that it
enables men* or provides the opportunity for enabling men and women
to make sensible* informed and rational decisions about the lives thej
lead and the society in which they lead them. That is* it permits
of the possibility of self-determination* both individual and social
(which is, of course* every man’s right* though only recently have
we discovered this) • Whilst popular education may not provide man or
woman with all the answers* it at least provides the tools whereby
the answers may be fashioned for oneself. That at any rate, is what
the system should try to do.
Pop instance* popular education - and its by-product* vocational
training - allows for personal self-determination in the economic
field. A man can now (we hope) make a rational* informed and persona]
decision about his career* It was not very long ago that a man becanu
a miliar, or a cobbler* or a blacksmith, or a tailor because his fat lu
was one - not merely to carry on father’s work, not merely to keep
the family business alive; but because the only training, schooling
be could got was in his father’s shop,
What is more* popular education has emancipated the worker* and
to a great extent pared away the margins of social dinstinot ion. It
has provided the basis for a generally affluent society and a measure


of economic freedom, I believe it could be clearly demonstrated that
political participation may be directly related to economic freedoms.
Again, popular education provides for individual self-determinat-
ion in matters of morality. This is a very complex field, and its
complexities cannot be unravelled here. Suffice it to say that the
ordinary man is now faced with the responsibility for his own actions)
and that the decisions he must make about his own actions are now more
openly based on private ethics than public ones.
However | sore important to our conference is that popular
education also makes provision for individual self-determination in
the political field* It is, in fact, the very bedrock of the politic-
al democracy of which we are so proud. Political democracy demands
on the one hand an informed and active franchise and, on the other,
an intelligent and informed leadership for it to function.
Political democracy demands that its voting public be suffidsntly
educated and literate to understand the processes by which it exists)
it depends upon individuals being informed about the society in which
they live, to be politically aware and participating. It also depends
in theory, upon the general population not merely making laws but
understanding the principles upon which the law is based. It differs
from the police state, or the authoritarian government, in that normal
law and order is expressive of and based upon the social values of the
people rather than the arbitrary values of the ruler. Popular
education at least in theory makes the appearance of providing some
kind of basis for such an informed and aware public.
Again, it should materially have affected the quality of leader-
ship, both civic and national. In the first place, the administrator
has to knew more than he ever did, because the areas of his administ-
ration are not only wider but more complex. But, more Important,
civic and national leadership is now open to the intelligent, educated
and informed scrutiny of the common people themselves. No longer can
domestic leadership rely for its power on the fact that that which it
leads is uneducated. We no longer cross the drawbridge tugging at


oaf* forelocks* It is true, of course, that modern barons - public
servants - may seek to hide behind more sophisticated drawbridges -
the multiplicity of departments and bureaus} the sheer weight of
bureaucratic officers all accepting parts of responsibility but none
accepting complete responsibility; the warrens of passageways and
corridors and the multiplicity of glass doors, secretaries and other
guardians of the peases# the inbuilt mateship of the public service,
the endless possibilities of official secrecy. It is true that the
modem complaining citizen finds it often very difficult to discover
upon whose table to bang, and when he does find or.t, to locate the
table geographically. It may be true that the situation will not be
alleviated until we introduce the ombudsmen* But, the modern
administrator * be he town councillor or Federal Minister - knows w
that when hie table is finally banged upon, it may be banged upon by
an ordinary citizen who is as intelligent, as educated and as informed
as he; and who, by the devious processes of political democracy, may
toss him out of office. And this one fact alone is sufficient to
justify our system of popular education.
If, however, education is to give us the continuing opportunity
for self-determination and a continuing defence against manipulation,
then it must be a continuing education. Shis is due not only to the
faot that society is in a constant and accelerating state of change
which requires a continuous educational reinforcement, but also to
the fact that popular education, for one reason or another, has
never fulfilled its function in this respect* lam not convinced
that popular education has ever sought, nor at the moment seeks, to
provide opportunities for self-determination, political or otherwise*
Certainly until very recent times compulsory education ham been too
largely concerned with the transfer of knowledge, the assessment of
facts, with matter rather than manner, with the teaching rather than
the learning, to be concerned with the factors and skills relating in
any way really closely with self-determination* Moreover, it has
always shied away from any considerations of the political life of
the individual - either in practice or theory*
It is not without irony that the current unrest in schools
amongst students and teachers is largely political, has to do with


personal participation, with the processes of regulation, government
and decision-making and is itself am outward and visible political,
expression of a form of action for which those performing have never
been trained by the very Institutions against which it is being
exercised. This may well explain its extremism and its naievety,
which are characteristics of the political actions of teachers and
students alike.
When we talk then of doing the most with what we've got, I am
sure that one of the most Important things we have to have is a
thorough knowledge of what it is we want to do. If we don't know it
like it is, then we shouldn't be in it I If we are half-informed,
we go off half-cocked. If we allow ourselves to be persuaded, hood-
winked, won over, enraged, empassioned, drawn, led, overcome, rallied,
swept along, entranced, by the charisma, the blandishments and
demogoguery of those who give us half the Information, we will end up
sold down the river.
I think that one of the most serious dangers of our modern
society is that little knowledge which may lead us to extremes. Is
it altogether too conservative and reactionary to quote the most
rational of all men, Po^st
Trust not yourself; but your defects to know;
Kake use of every friend - and every foe.
A little learning is a dangerous thing;
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring.
There shallow draughts Intoxicate the brain,
And drinking largely sobers us again.
In those respects, adult education has a fourfold role in our
political life, in its narrow sense; and these are roles which the
Council of Adult Education assumes:
a) it must make available information and learning about the process-
es, machinery, structures of government. People who want it must have
access to knowledge about the democratic process itself. If they


are going to uae It, they need to understand It, It is the function
of the educational system to equip people with an intimate and
working knowledge of the processes by which they may become "free
men", may engage in their personal self-determination. It is
probably fair to say that schools rarely structure themselves to
give students a first-hand, developed and graduated working knowledge
of political systems and, by the time students are mature enough to
appreciate the potential of the political life, the school situation*
has so engaged them in discipline and studies that students rarely
have the time or the encouragement to engage themselves in political
studies. It is largely in colleges and universities that they first
take the hit in their teeth. But, with the maturity which comes
from community life come the need for political education.
This is a function of C,A,B.
b) it must provide the Impetus for an Interest in the political
life and in current social problems. Largely this may come by
providing an impetus toward education in general, toward life-long
learning# Adult Education, C.A.E., is always faced with the conflict
between needs and wants, between what the community displays as its
wants and what educators may decide are their needs. In the compelled
school situation, the teacher may freely build needs into his syllabus
iji education we can but lead the horse to water. At any rate,
adus£ education should be constantly stimulating the community to
an awareness of necessity for a universal Interest in the political
life if we are to have a healthy society j
c) it must provide a platform for the free, independent, exchange of
ideas, information, knowledge, attitudes, values; a platform for
objective debate, for the cross-seeding of ideas without vested
interests# It is the function and role of adult education to inform
in as much detail as possible, whilst, as far as possible, remaining
uncommitted#
d) it is also the function of adult education - a corollary of o)
above -to protect the individual from manipulation. The only
protection is in education#


Thus adult education in the narrowly political field must
stimulate, provide and protect the political life.
But, in the broader sense, adult education may have a much more
far-reaching goal* Early in this address 1 suggested that simply
to belong to a group is to be engaged in its political life. What
one brings to the political life of the group is one’s particular
leadership behaviour* This behaviour is largely related to the
knowledge of one’s personal value or worth to the group, is related
to an understanding of one's capacities* And this is what education
is all about, the understanding or realization of capacity } the
knowledge or appreciation of personal worth* All this all too often
gets mixed up with, mistaken for, replaced by. Geography, History,
Maths, French, Art, in our schools, and, regrettably, in adult educat-
ion also* But, these are not the real objectives of education, they
are means rather than ends, they are functions of the search for
capacity and value* It is just that, because they are more easily
assessable and because teachers tend to specialise, they have tended
to take over the shop* The present ferment in education is express-
ive of the desire to sort our objectives out.
Somehow, we have to unravel the tangled skeins of our educational
purposes. We have to look beyond the perennial complexities of the
Employers Federation about vocational readiness and the three R's,
which tend to trivialize our educational purposes? we have to look
beyond the desire to reconstruct the past, beyond the traditionallzint
and intellectualizing of the Dr, Justs; we have to look beyond the
desire to throw out babies with bathwater and the complete flsmantlin,
of the bathroom itself by the Illichs, Reimers, and Hannans; we have
to look quite clearly at the educational exercise which, of course,
is the political exercise also - surely the educational exercise
should be designed to enable us to do the most with what we’ve got -
to discover what we've got, all of it; to realize its worth; to
learn how to use it; to understand the purpose of having it. That is
what education is all about. That is what poll%ils is about also.
That's the role of the C.A.E,


I hope that you will all bring all you've got to this week-end
Conference in an endeavour to solve basic problems in our day-to-day
living, and I have pleasure in declaring the Conference open.
