

DOING GERMANY'S
WORK
There is at all times and in all communities an element
of discontent. There is a tendency on the part of many
worthy people to regard the spirit of discontent as vicious.
That is to take a somewhat narrow view of it. Content-
ment and discontent are, in fact, two characteristics
which may he regarded as virtues or as vices according
to the point of view and according to circumstances.
Contentment is, like faith, a very noble and beautiful
quality from the point of view of the religionist or the
supporter of existing institutions, hut it has all the
effect of vice in that it leads to a condition of fossildom,
to a state of acceptance of things that are altogether
evil. It may be very nice and proper not to repine at
one’s lot, but it is certainly not right to endorse things
wrong in themselves, simply because they exisu. Simi-
larly, a spirit of discontent is deplorable when it connotes
an inability to be satisfied with anything that happens ;
but it is only fair to remember that without it none of the
reforms in the condition of mankind which have marked
the history of the ages would ever have been effected.
Both evolution and revolution are the products of dis-
content, In the one case discontent does its work slowly


and methodically ; in the other it acts rapidly and with
violence. As is natural from a consideration of their
circumstances, evolution is favoured by the more cool-
headed and clear-headed members of a community ;
revolution by the wilder and more feather-brained. The
more ideas of steady advance spread the more evolution
becomes a possibility, while the increase of a spirit
of discontent among the unthinking increases the tendency
to revolution. The present is a time when the revolu-
tionary tendency grows apace. The country has been at
war. and war inevitably adds to the number of the discon-
tented. The disloyal, the cowardly, the selfish, and the
careless, are all added to the forces of potential revolt,
and grievance-mongers, panelerers to class prejudices,
the traitorous, and the ambitious, all find in the circum-
stances a magnificent opportunity for the furtherance of
their iniquitous designs. Every man who has not done his
duty to his country, whatever his reason for shirking, is
only too glad to be given an excuse for his conduct, and
consequently easily becomes an instrument on which
agitators can play at will. Such men are only too ready
to accept the most absurd doctrines if only they afford
them some pretext for the attitude they have seen fit to
adopt. These men are quite easily united to the forces
of those who are perennially discontented, and find
themselves carried along by the current of revolutionary
tendency to action of which in their hearts they do not
approve, and to which in more normal times they would
give no sanction.
While Australia has been engaged in a great war, all
our elements of discontent and of revolution have been
brought together. They may not all want the same
thing ; but it is only by working with other discontented
and revolutionary elements that they can hope to effect
anything. Pacifists, Sinn Feiners, Socialists, Anarchists,
Anti-Conscriptionists, Pro-Germans, Shirkers, and ad-


vocates of “ One Big Union” find themselves all in the
one boat, and are therefore ready to pull together. Some
of them know, some of them do not know, that the boat
they are in is a German boat, and that by bringing it to
the shore they are serving German interests ; but, whether
they know it or not, that is the case. It has been one of
the aims of Germany to bring these together. It is excel-
lent policy, and it has been carried out ruthlessly. At
German instigation all sorts of subjects likely to cause
dissension have been raised in Allied countries, because
the destruction of a sense of union is of great assistance
to Germany, which, is not unmindful of the adage “ United
we stand, divided we fall,” a motto with which it is
understood our Labour organisations are not entirely
unfamiliar. Two large advertising and press agencies,
with headquarters in Germany, has been engaged in this
work, and one of their principal objects of attack has
been the Labour Party in this and other Allied lands.
The headquarters of these agencies are understood to
have been in Berlin and Essen, and amongst the large
capitalists who have subsidized the movement, has
figured the firm of Krupp. This is, then, a capitalist’s
scheme —a German capitalist’s scheme —to win Labour
to the support of Germany with capitalists’ money.
There is a notorious English organisation through
which German ideas are ventilated, and by means of which
the accomplishment of German aims is forwarded.
This concern styles itself “ The Union of Democratic
Control.” One of its heads is Mr. Ramsay Macdonald,
M.P., the leader of the Independent Labour Party, a
strong Pacifist, and one who has displayed markedly anti-
national leanings ever since the war started. Its
secretary and treasurer is the notorious Morel, whose
real name is Deville. This individual has for years past
played the same game as “Norman Angell,”who also was
masquerading under a false name, his‘ real name being


Lane. As Morel did his best to embroil Britain with
Belgium;, doubtless with the intention of throwing
Belgium into the arms of Germany, so Norman Angell,
in his pacifist production (which ludicrously enough
treated Germany as the most pacific country of Europe,
and Britain as the most militaristic), did his utmost to
prevent Britain from making any of those preparations
for war that were so eminently necessary. With both
Angell and Devilie on his side, the Kaiser had, indeed,
every reason to hope for success. Angell was looked upon
by most people either as an inspired prophet or a well-
meaning crank ; but Morel showed himself always so
exceedingly anxious to effect a split in the entente between
France and Britain that he was regarded by many people
with the greatest suspicion. The Government, however,
took no action against him, not only before the war, but
for two or three years after the war started. Then, at
last, his premises were raided, his papers seized, and he
was tried as a German agent, and sentenced to a term of
imprisonment.
Such a man being the secretary of the Union of|
Democratic Control, it is not surprising that the publi-
cations of that organisation are one and all found to
advocate German objectives with British reasons. The
plan of operations is simple. Any statement made by an
Allied statesman calculated to divide the people is made
much of, and distributee! as widely as possible ; every
German move is supported more or less indirectly ; and
it is consistently advocated that every step taken by
Great Britain should be taken openly. One would like to
see some openness shown by the Union of Democratic
Control with regard to its own affairs. These pernicious
pamphlets, which it is not too much to describe as de-
liberately traitorous, have been circulated and used
her© very largely ; and the honest anti-conscriptionist,
the patriotic Labourite, and the genuine peace-lover, are


induced to believe that the views put before them are
British views, whereas they are, in fact, German views
appearing in British guise.
It matters not what the Union of Democratic Control
advocates, the course advocated is sure to be one favour-
able to Germany. Britain’s interests count for nothing
with the Union of Democratic Control. The interests
of Germany, though they are seldom, if ever, mentioned,
evidently count for everything, though the arguments
put forward are always advanced ostensibly in the
interests of other countries. In regard to no subject
is the attitude clearer than it is in regard to the freedom
of the seas. In one of the pamphlets published by .the
Union of Democratic Control occurs the following :
“ South and North American States and Scandinavia
are already protesting against the war’s interference
with their ocean trade. All nations that are not in
possession of satisfactory harbours on the sea demand
outlets, and cannot, and ought not, to be contented till
they get them.”
Further on the pamphlet says :
“ Cannot our sea law be revised, as our land law has
already been, towards protecting the interests of peaceful
commerce ? Cannot the ancient conception of the sea
as a wilderness where savagery still rules be changed to
that of a highway kept open and safe under international
sanction '? Such a policy would meet every legitimate
aim, of Germany and Great Britain. Its working would
accelerate the development of every port for the impartial
benefit of all who would need to use it, and thus serve the
interests of Russia, Austria, Belgium and the Balkans.
Panama, Suez, Gibraltar, the Dardanelles, Kiel, the
Sault, the Beit, the English Channel, and less important
straits,. might well be considered as the world’s inter-


national highways, through which commercial passage
shall always be maintained on equal terms for ail ships.”
This looks very simple, very straightforward and very
honest, but the fact remains that it is put forward because
Germany does not possess the keys to the world’s highways.
Not having them, it wants them to be made into national
highways for ships of all nations ; and, that being Ger-
many’s aim, it meets, of course, with the enthusiastic
support of the Union of Democratic Control. If Mr.
Macdonald and his aiders and abettors really suppose that,
if these keys to the highways of commerce were inter-
nationalised, Germany would respect their internation-
alisation, it can only be said that they are very blind to
the teachings of history, and to the light thrown on the
German character by her actions prior to and during the
war.
What does this precious demand for the “ freedom of the
seas” really mean ? The answer is given in a statement
made by Grand Admiral von Tirpitz in an interview
granted to a German newspaper representative last year,
when he said, “ X know of only one way of re-establishing
the freedom of the seas, namely, by removing from the
seas the British control of the ocean.” The Union of
Democratic Control’s scheme would not, therefore, satisfy
Germany. It would simply leave that country in a much
more favourable position for furthering its aims, would
leave it in the position it has long desired, of being free to
try to drive the British Navy from the high seas. The
Union of Democratic Control’s proposal would not, there-
fore, insure peace to the world, but would give Germany
a much better chance of achieving her purposes.
But, clear and unmistakable as is the Tirpitz utterance,
an even clearer and more definite statement was made
by Count zu Reventlow in March, 1917 -
“ What do we Germans understand by the freedom of
the seas ? Of course we dp not mean by it that free use of


the sea which is the common privilege of all nations in
times of peace, the right to the open highways of inter-
national trade. That sort of freedom of the sea we had
before the war. What we understand to-day by this
doctrine is that Germany should possess such maritime
territories and such naval bases that at the outbreak of a
war we should be able with our navy ready, reasonably to
guarantee ourselves the command of the seas. We want
such a jumping-off place for our navy as would give us a
fair chance of dominating the seas and of being free of the
seas during a war. The unalienable possession of the
Belgian seaboard is therefore a matter of life and death
to us, and the man is a traitor who would faint-heartedly
relinquish this coast to England. Our aim must be not
only to keep what our arms have already won on this
coast, but sooner or later to extend our seaboard to the
south of the Strait of Calais.”
What Germany wants, then, is not a mere inter-
nationalisation of vital straits, but their possession. If it
came to the peace by negotiation which some misguided
people are so anxious to see brought about, she would
quite readily agree to any such internationalisation pro-
posals, making mental reservation that when she was next
at war she would reserve to herself the right to act
entirely in her own interests in regard to vital communi-
cating channels.
Another of the demands made by the Union of Demo-
cratic Control is that there is to be an end to secret
diplomacy. This is a demand with which it is possible
to have much sympathy if it be put forward genuinely ;
but; when it is proposed by such disloyal bodies and
individuals as the Union of Democratic Control, and
the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Melbourne, the truly
loyal must hesitate to adopt it. Let it be noted that
there is much less secret deplomacy on the part of the


countries which have, been in the field against Germany
and Austria than there Iras been on the part of those
against whom they have been fighting. It is in the
very nature of things that that should be so, for in
democratic countries, where Governments are subject
to Parliamentary control, there is not the same possi-
bility of secret diplomacy as there has been in countries
like Germany and Austria-Hungary, where ostensibly
democratic institutions have existed only for the
strengthening of the monarchy. But, perhaps, what these
people desire is only that there should be secret diplomacy
on the part of those to whom they are at heart opposed,
and that the Central European powers should be left free
to follow their own methods.
mir Pass tills @n t© a Friend*
Issued by the Progressive and Economic Association,
34 Queen Street, Melbourne.
McCarron, Bird & Co., Printers, 479 Collins Street, Melbourne
