

1904.
QUEENSLAND.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC LANDS, BRISBANE.
NORTH QUEENSLAND ETHNOGRAPHY:
Bulletin No, 7.
AUGUST, 1904.
Domestic Implements, Arts, and
Manufactures.
BY
WALTER E. ROTH , B.A., M.R.C.S., Etc.
(Late Demy of Magdalen College, Oxford)
THE CHIEF PROTECTOR OF ABORIGINALS, QUEENSLAND.
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT BY COMMAND.
C. A. 56-1904.
BRISBANE :
BY AUTHORITY: GEORGE ARTHUR VAUGHAN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.
1904.


PREFACE.
Fault will probably be found with the inclusion in the present Bulletin of certain implements used for
fighting and hunting purposes : similarity of origin and workmanship are my excuses in the former case,
while omission from a previous Bulletin (No. 3 —Food; its Search, Capture, and Preparation) is all that I can
plead in the latter.
I regret the irregular sequence in which the separate branches of the subject have been treated:
workers in the Field of Primitive Culture will, however, appreciate the difficulties attendant upon any
attempts at obtaining logical order.
Of new tribes amongst whom enquiries have been made, I may mention the Gunanni (GUN), occupying
the coast-line between the mouths of the Mitchell and Staaten Rivers.
In the selection of the stone-flakes and splinters for illustration I have had the valuable assistance of
Professor Hermann Klaatsch, of Heidelberg, now on a visit to this country.
Through the courtesy of the Curator of the Technological Museum, Sydney, I have been furnished
with analyses of the various gum-resins, etc., by Mr. Henry G. Smith, F.C.S : all the specimens forwarded
to him were collected by myself.
Mr. Chas. Hedley, F.L.S., and Mr. F. M. Bailey, the Colonial Botanist, have continued to render
valuable help in the way of identifying molluscan and botanical specimens respectively.
Mr. R. Etheridge, Curator of the Australian Museum, Sydney, kindly undertook the task of revising
my manuscript: lam deeply indebted to him for the many suggestions and notes he has supplied mo with.
WALTER E. ROTH.
Ist August, 1904.


INDEX .
„ Pag®.
SICTIOK.
1. Wood-Work —Removal of Bark ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 9
2. Treatment of Timber 9
3. Trimming Up ... ... ... ... ... ... .«• •» ••• ••• 9
4. Morticing, Splicing, Wedging 9
5. Fire —Obtained by Twirling two Sticks of Similar Material and Shape 10
6. Obtained by Twirling two Sticks of Dissimilar Material and Shape 10
7. Method Described ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• •••
• • ii
ft Native Names ... ... ... .... ... ••• •«.
u 11
9. Obtained by Sawing
10. Tongs ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• *•• ••• ■"
11. Shell- and Bone-Work 11
12. Leather-Work 11
13. Gums, Resins, Cements—Vegetable
14 Animal... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 14
15 Mineral ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• •••
14
16. Smoothing-boards
17. Pigments —White, Red, Yellow, Black ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• •••
18. Media for Fixing 13
19. Stains, Dyes ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• •••
20. Uses of the Colours
21. Colour-sense ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• •••
22. Stone-Work, Flaking
23. “ Pot-lid ” Flakes '
24. “ Lancet ’’-Flakes
25. Stone-Celts 18
20
26. Scrapers —Stone : Chips and Splinters
27. Native-Gtouge ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 29
28. Shell 21
29. Snail-shell Slicer ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 2 *
30. Tooth "• 21
31. Iron 21
22
32. Knives, Saws-—Stone
33. Shell 22
34. Tooth, etc “
OO
35. Hand-Picks
23
36. Pounders
23
37. Hammers—Stone
38. Wood (Mallets and Anvils)
24
39. Digging-Sticks
40. Drills—Stone 2^
41. Tooth “J
42. Shell 25
43. Awls 25
44. Stilettos 25
25
45. Grinding-Stones
40. Prodder 26
47. Swabs 2(5
26
48. Fly-Flicks, Fans
° 26
49. Head-Pads
26
50. Netting-Needles
27
51. Spindles
52. Strainers, Colanders 2^
53. Dilly-Bags, Baskets 2 *
54. Variations in Different Districts
29
55. Water-Carriers—Shell
50. Skin f
57. Bark —Knot ... ... ... ••• •••
58. Pleat 30
U O* Q 0
5 9 Bi-cornual
OW. QQ
«0 Sewn-canoe
61.’ Punt 30
Q 1
02. Wood —“Koolamons
03. Leaves 3 j
64 Fruits
31
65. Packages
60. Harpoons
07. Fish-Clubs
33
08. Fish-Hooks
34
69. Throwing-Sticks t*


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Sections.
Plate I. Wood-Work, Fire. —1. Wooden wedge for splitting timber, Brisbane: 2. Special cap,
ornamentel with Aims seeds, for protecting “business” ends of fire-sticks, Embley Biver:
3. Ornamented with gastroliths of crab, Pennefather River: 4. Without ornamentation, and
formed of two pipes of wood, Laura: 5,6, 7,8, 9. Method of manufacturing the cap figured in
2 and 3: 10, 11 {lbid.), 12. Atherton, etc., fire-sticks Ito G
Plate ll.—Fire, Resins.—l 3. Method of obtaining fire by twirling; 14, 16. Horizontal stick:
15. Extremity of vertical stick: 17. Method of obtaining fire by sawing, Camoowea': 18. “Saw”
used in the process; 19. Fire-tongs, Bloomfield River: 20. Scraping “iron-wood” resin off an
underground root by means of a bark-strip ... ... ito 13
Plate lll.—Smoothing-Board, Stone-Work, Flaking.— 21. Smoothing-board, Cape Bedford:
22. Princess Charlotte Bay ; 23. Hammer-stone in the act of striking a core w ith a view to removing
a Hake : 24. Flake removed, and lying in palm of hand: 25. “Pot-lid” Hake, showing “ bulb ot
percussion” (bp) and “slope-surface” (ss) ; 26. Trimming the pot-lid to make a “ native gouge
of it: 27. Median section of such a pot-lid to show’ upper convex— i.e., last removed (««), and
lower concave — i.e., previously removed (cc), surfaces ; also to show direction of the blow’ (d b), the
area on which the blow is struck (b), and the lit eof cleavage (I v) as its result; 28. When the base
of such a flake is too thick this defect can 1 e remedied by flaking : 29a, 29i. The pot-lid is next
firmly fixed into a blob of cement at the end of a stick, etc , held by the left hand in one or other of
these two positions, and all irregularities and prominences flaked off by sharply striking with the flat
under surface of one of the heavier kinds of boomerang ; the pot-lid, afier removal, is now readj fox
IB to 23
use as the “ head ” of a native-gouge
Plate IV—Stone-Flaking, Cores, Hammer-Stones.- -30, 30 a {lbid.), 31, 3la {lbid.). Cores,
Barclay Downs; 32, 33, 34, 34a {lbid). (Central) Cores, O’Shannassy River: 35, 35a, 36, 36a.
Cores with their last removed (“ lancet ”) flakes, Headingley : 37,37 a {lbid). Hammer-stone, Gten-
ormiston, with which the pot-lid flakes (Plate V., 39a, 396) were manufactured into native-gouge heads 23
Plate V.—Stone-Flaking. Manufacture of Pot-lid Flakes into Native-Gouge Heads.—
The pot-lid (upper and lower surfaces) removed from the core, and roughly trimmed ; 38a to //.
Between Riversleigh and Camooweal: 38A. Gienormiston. After being carefully trimmed with the
hammer-stone: 39a, 396. Gienormiston : 39e. O’Shannassy River: 39 d. Barclay Downs: 39c, 39/
Camooweal: Carandotta: 396. Camooweal. After having been fixed in cement, and finely
flaked along its edges, it is removed, ready to be fixed into the native-gouge : 40a to d. Gienormiston 23
Plate Vl.—Stone-Flaking, “ Lancet ’’-Flakes —Spear-heads, 41 to 46a, from along the ranges up
the Western border north from Lawn Hills ...
Plate VII. — Stone-Flaking. —47 to 53 a. Splinters, chips, etc., obtained, from one and the same quarry
where knife- and spear-blades had once been manufactured, between Lawn Hills Station and Cobar
Copper Mine ...
Plate Vlll.—Stone-Flaking—s4a-d, 55. Unused chips, Splinters, and spear-head from neighbourhood
of Lawn Hills Stition
Plate IX—Stone-Celts—66, 57. The same celt may be used both as an axe or adze, Pennefather River :
58, 58a. Celt from Anakie : 59, 59a. Prairie ; 60, 60a. Hughenden : 61, 61a. Glengallan ; 62,
62a. Herberton : 63, 63a. Mapoon : 64, 64a. Endeavour River : 65, 65a. Atherton 25
Plate X.—Stone-Celts—66, 66a. From Pimpama : 67. Balnagowan, via Rockhampton : 68,68 a. Show-
ing slope-surface and bulb of percussion, Ipswich : 69, 69a. Glenroy, Upper Leichhardt River : 70.
Showing slope-surface and bulb of percussion, Lawn Hills : 71. Stradbroke Island : 72. Bower-bird
Gold Field, via Cloncurry : 74. Bloomfield River: 75, 75a. Ingham : 76. Prairie : 77. Bloomfield River 2u
Plate XI. Scrapers, Stone. —Primitive variety of scraper; a stone recently indiscriminately broken
so as to form a sharp edge; if this adjunct is not forthcoming it may be artificially produced by
chipping: 78,78 a. Palmer River :79 to 81a. Camp in neighbourhood of Moreton Telegraph Station 26
Plate Xll—Scrapers, Stone.—Secondary variety of scraper. Made of the actual chips or splinters
obtained in the process of flaking, even of the flakes or cores themselves : portions of its edges
may be trimmed for particular purposes, e.g., cutting, scraping : 82. On road between Gienormiston
and Roxburgh Downs: 83, 84. Walkerby Water-Hole (Georgina River): 85. Camooweal:
86. Riversleigh : 87. Walkerby Water-Hole : 88, 89 {lbid), 90, 91 {lbid) Barclay Downs .. 20
Plate XIII. -Scrapers, Stone.-92. Walkerby Water-Hole. 93. Riversleigh: 94 O’Shannassy River:
95 Camooweal: Other scrapers may show a trimmed concave edge {t c) for sharpening the tips of
wooden spears ; 96. Riversleigh : 97. Barclay Downs : 98. Between Riversleigh and Camooweal:
99. Camooweal ; 100 a. Showing two trimmed concave edges, Barclay Downs 2(j


Sections.
Plate XlV.—Scrapers, Stone and Shell.—lol. Curved variety of gouge, Boulia: 102, 103.
Showing scrapers fixed into its extremities with a comparatively large quantity of cement:
104. Diagram to show pad of cement between scraper and handle: 105. Mode of employment,
Glenormiston : 106. An extremity of the implement with the stone scraper replaced by an iron
blade: 107. Scraper fixed into base of leaf-shaped spear-thrower to make a gouge of it:
108. Straight variety of gouge, Rockhampton : 109. Donax valve used as a scraper (Brisbane) ... 27,28
Plate XV. —Scrapers, Shell and Tooth. —110, 111, 112, 113. Snail-shell sheer, method of
manufacture, Tully River: 114, 115. Method of use: 116, 117, 118. Kangaroo-tooth scraper,
Embley River, etc.: 119. Used as a scraper : 120. Used as a smoothing-board ... ... ... 29, 30
Plate XVI. —Scrapers, Tooth and Iron. —121,122. Half lower jaw of kangaroo used as scraper,
Embley River: 123. Opossum-tooth graver, Charters Towers: 124, 124 a. {lbid.) iron, Princess
Charlotte Bay: 125. Bathurst Head; 126. Palmer River: 127. Mitchell River: 128, 129.
Wellesley Islands: 130. Split distal extremity of spear for fixing stone-head, Burketown:
131. Method of using European knife-blade as a scraper ... ... ... ... ... ... 30,31
Plate XVII. —Knives, Saws. —132. Stone, showing simple main ridge, Georgina River: 134. Sheath
for same: 135. Knife with lengthened handle, Georgina River: 136. Knife employed for
introcisions,showing trimming for protection of fore-finger, Roxburgh Downs: 137. Blade obtained
from outside of a core; 138. Showing a composite ridge : 139, 140. Two main ridges, independent
of one another: 141. Peculiar “ pit” across main ridge : 142. Shell-knife fixed into split extremity
of wooden pencil, Pennefather River: 143. Tooth-knife, Mitchell River ... ... ... ... 32,33,34
Plate XVIII.—Hand-Picks, Pounders, Hammers. —144, 145, 146,147,148,149. Stone hand-
picks, Wellesley Islands : 150. “ Nardoo’’-stone, Boulia : 151. Stone hammer, Princess Charlotte
Bay ... M , iM im it< iit i(t M( , M ~, ... ... 35, 36, 37
Plate XIX. —Hammers.—ls 2, 153, 154. Palmer River; 155. Wooden Hammer (with 156, Anvil),
Batavia River: 157, 158, 159, 160. Bentinck Island : 161. Diagram to show removal of limb by
shell-cut: 162, Forsyth Island ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 37,38
Plate XX. —Hammers, Digging-Sticks, Drills. —163. Wooden Hammer, Forsyth Island;
164. Mornington Island : 165,166. Princess Charlotte Bay : 167. Bathurst Head : 168. Hammer-
anvil, Mitchell River: 169. Two-handed club, Batavia River: 170, 171. Digging - sticks:
172, 172 a. (Ibid.) Stone-drill, Keppel Island 38, 39, 40
Plate XXl.—Drills, Awls, Stilettos, Grinding-Stones.—l73. Tooth-drill, Princess Charlotte
Bay: 174 a, b. Method of manufacture: 175. Shell-drill, Batavia River: 176. Awl, Batavia
River: 177. Burketown: 178. Bloomfield River: 179. Batavia River ; 180 a to e. Method of
effecting mortice by means of the awl: 181. Stiletto, Atherton: 182. Cairns: 183. Mornington
Island: 184, 184 a. {lbid.) Grinding-stones, the movable rubber: 185. The fixed slab,
Glenormiston: 186. Normanton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41 to 45
Plate XXII. —Prodders, Swabs, Spindles, Colanders, etc. —187. Prodder, Princess
Charlotte Bay: 188. Swab: 189. Fly-flick, Bloomfield River: 190. Head-pad, Mitchell River;
.191. Netting-needle, made from wing feather, Boulia district: 192,193. Made from cabbage-tree
palm, Mitchell River : 194,195,196. Varieties of spindle : 197. Colander, Mitchell River : 198. In
use while stretched across the top of the trough ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 46 to 52
Pla 0 XXIII. —Dilly-Bags, Baskets. —199, 200,201. Method of weaving the netting-stitch variety
of mesh ; 202. “ Loop and twist:” 203. “ Loop and double twist:” 204. Basket, Batavia River:
205, 206. Navicular dilly-tags, Boulia dsstrict: 207, 207 a. {lbid.) Bi-cornual sieve-bag, Atherton :
208. Basket, Cairns: 209. Rockhampton ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53,54
Plate XXIV. —Water-Carriers.—2lo. “ Melon” shell, Bloomfield River : 211. Whitsunday Island :
212. Method of transport on Wellesley Islands: 213 Large “ Lamp” shell, Bentinck and Allen
Islands: 214. Portion of -Nautilus shell ground down as spoon, Cape Bedford: 215. Portion of
Tridacna used as cup or saucer, Mornington Island : 216. Kangaroo-skin water-bag, Glenormiston:
217. Mode of carrying it ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 55, 56
Plate XXV.—Water-Carriers, Troughs, “Koolamous.”—2lB. Made of bark, knot-type,
Princess Charlotte Bay: 219. Bloomfield River: 220. Pleat-type, Flinders Island: 221, 222.
Wellesley Islands : 223. Endeavour River : 224. Embley River : 225. Pennefather River :
226. Corpse packed in one of these carriers, Princess Charlotte Bay: 227. Bi-eornual type, Atherton:
228 a, b, c. Process of manufacture; 229. Sewn-canoe type, Tully River: 230. Punt-type, Cape
Grafton: 231,232,233. Made of wood, the “ Koolamon,” Upper Georgina River: 234. Stem of
tree being split to make two “ Koolamons ” : 235. Limb selected as near as possible to required
shape: 236. Made of leaf, etc., Ducie River: 237. Cape Bedford ... ... ... ... ... 57 to 65
Plate XXVl.—Harpoons, Fish-Clubs, Fish-Hooks, Throwing-Sticks—23B. Harpoon,
barbed head, Cape Bedford : 239. Keppel Island : 240. Batavia River: 241,242. Cape Bedford :
243. Keppel Island : 244. Tully River: 245 Head made of rod-iron, Cape Bedford : 246. Made
of three-cornered iron file, Batavia River : 247. Fish-club, lower Gulf coast: 248. Palmer River:
249. hish-hook, may be made from tendril of Uugonia, Tully River: 250,251. Pearl-shell, Cape
Grafton: 252. Tortoise-shell, Keppel Island : 253. Cocoa-nut, Keppel Island : 254. Iron wire,
Geraldton: 255. Bone-bearded wooden hook, Palmer River: 256. Princess Charlotie Bay:
257,258. Bent pin tortoise-shell hook, Pennefather River: 259 ato f. Manufacture of crescent-
shaped shell-hook, Cape Grafton : 260. Throwing-stick, Boulia: 261. Tully River ... ... 66 to 69
8
LIST OP ILLUSTRATIONS.


DOMESTIC IMPLEMENTS, ARTS, AND MANUFACTURES.
1. Wood-Work. —What with the introduction of scrap-iron and modern tools, and their consequent
trade and barter, the working of timber wholly by aboriginal appliances is so rare nowadays that it is no
easy matter to collect reliable information concerning the methods formerly, and sometimes still, employed.
The removal of hark from its tree is usually effected at the end of the wet season when the sap
is up and the bark slips. When a sheet of bark from the whole circumference of the tree is required, it
is of course only necessary to make two transverse incisions, with a longitudinal one joining them: the
removal is assisted by tapping upon the sheet with stones, stone-hammers, etc. At Keppel Island, to split
the Melaleuca bark from the subjacent tissues, the natives used a special implement made of mangrove
(balpan) in the form of a thinnish stick tapering to a point at each extremity, and called bungga, the
same name as the tea-tree from which it removed the bark: the procedure was to apply the implement
from above downwards in and along the longitudinal incision, and so peel off the sheet. ! urther treatment
of the bark— e.g., the picking off of its inner surface with stiletto, etc. —is necessary in connection with
the manufacture of blankets, some canoes, and certain water-carriers.
2. Treatment of Timber. —lt would appear that some kinds of timber, unless immediately tackled
after removal, become too hard to work upon, and accordingly had to be soaked for some two or three
days in water before anything further could be done (Batavia Biver). If the sapling or limb permitted
so far as required shape and size were concerned —it would be hacked with a celt or shell (sect. 28) and
then broken away: the mucronate extremities of the "W ellesley Island mallets may probably thus be
accounted for (sect. 38). When it was necessary to remove a length from out of the trunk or flanges,
transverse cuts were made above and below, vertical ones at the sides, and the intermediate portion split
off or slowly hacked away. Splitting of timber was practised on rational principles in that a wedge was
used: the Brisbane blacks (T. Petrie) employed a wooden one (Fig. I.) at the extremity of the log, while
the Tully River natives used a celt or celts driven along its sides. On the other hand, to pieient wood
from splitting, the Pennefather River aboriginals adopted a method of burying it underground for several
weeks. In order to lighten the weight as well as to prevent splitting, the tully blacks even to the present
day (E. Brooke) treat the timber for the manufacture of their shields as follows The defensive weapon,
in its rough state, is soaked for a few days in water, placed in the sun for half a day, slowly dried in a
shady scrub for two or three days longer, and immersed again: after the second immersion it is tied on
the flat, i.e., in a horizontal plane, to an overhanging bush, tree-fork, etc., about a foot above the water
surface, and left there for between one and two weeks. [lt would appear that certain of the local European
settlers have adopted this process of soaking and drying timber for purposes of boatbuilding, and in the
manufacture of mauls.] Wood can be hardened by charring in the fire, a great desideratum in the making
of digging-sticks and fighting-poles. The aboriginals practise various methods bending oi
straightening timber, either when already cut or in the rough. Thus, a dry heat in ordinary sand, a
moist heat from burning freshly-gathered leaves, or moisture in general, such as soaking in water, is
utilised for bending any of their wooden implements into shape as required. At Cape Grafton I have
seen boomerangs being immersed in water for weeks at a time, to allow of their being twisted into the
particular curves desired. With the alleged object, in some cases, of maintaining and preserving the
timber in the position attained by one or other of the preceding processes, the whole is covered thickly
with fat, saurian or mammalian. In the old Brisbane days (T. Petrie) the wooden troughs and shields
were, after completion, rubbed over with warmed bees’ wax, but whether for preservative purposes or not,
it is now impossible to say.
3 The trimming-up of a roughly-hewn piece of wood is effected with the agency of various shell-
fsect. 28) or stone-scrapers (sect. 26), and finally completed with one or other of the different polishers in
vogue throughout that particular district. Speaking of the Endeavour River natives, Captain Cook
[Hawkesworth Ed.] says, “For polishing their throwing-sticks, and the points of their lances, they use
the leaves of a kind of wild fig-tree ivhich bites upon wood almost as keenly as the shave-grass of Europe,
which is used by our joiners.” Even at the present day, the leaves of the Ficus opposite, Miq., are used
on the Bloomfield and Laura for “polishing” the spear-throwers, while those of the Ftcus orbicularis,
A. Cunn., are employed on the Pennefather for “smoothing-down” the ear-rings. On the Tully River
where, at its mouth and neighbourhood, pumice-stone is always met with, this article is employe or
“ polishing ” the wommeras and spear-tips. On Keppel Island I have seen the same effects produced by
rubbing the article across the front teeth.
4. Morticing , Splicing, Wedging. —When a concave surface is required, e g., dug out wa^® r
carriers (sect. 62), this is produced by first of all having the wood perfectly dry, an ten pic mg o\er e
area with a piece of hardened-pointed stick, a stiletto (sect. 44), or “ native-gouge (sect 27), with whicha
good deal of the wood, especially if soft—and it is for this reason that it is chosen—ncan be got away, some
red-hot cinders are next placed on the excavation, and after being blown upon an remove , e sur ac
is again picked out or gouged, and the process thus repeated until the desirec ep is
similar method was adopted in the manufacture of the socket-hole at the distal ex remiy o ■ e
River harpoon (sect. 66), in the sunk handle of the shields, and is still in vogue in emeo o mo £
between the shaft and barb of many spears: such a mortice (sect. 43) for these las-men mne w p
is, however, in some districts, e.g., portions of the Peninsula, replaced by a species o ).im , _
natural hollow of the stem is availed of- The Wellesley Islanders and certain Georgina nei na 1 ' „
a splice in the manufacture of their spears. Wedging is practised on the Eastern an u -coas
as on the Wellesleys (sect, 31),


5. Fire is obtained either by “ twirling ”orby “ sawing, one upon the other, two pieces of stick.
Twirling. —ln the Peninsula and far Western districts, the fire-sticks are in the form of two
similarly thin wands, extending to a length of from two to four or more feet. In the latter areas they
are generally thrown aside, discarded, after use: they are just made as they are wanted, and so are not
usually seen carried about. In the Peninsula, however, both on mainland and coast, where they aie
retained, their “business” ends are preserved and protected by a special cap or cover (Figs. 2, -5, 4).
On the Batavia, Pennefather, and Embley Rivers (Figs. 5,6, 7,8, 9) this cap is made of a piece of
paudanus leaf bent over the extremities of the two sticks, bound round with twine, and covered over
with warmed bees’ wax, which thus “ fixes ’ the cover after it has been moulded into shape: it is then
finally dabbed over with one of the local gum-cements or bees’ wax, with a knob at its extremity, into
which the Ahrus precatorius, Linn., berries or “ Jequirity seeds are stuck (Fig. 2). \\here available,
the use of these berries (NGG. do-anjinjin; KYI. bandir-bandir) is almost universal: on the Palmer
River they may be substituted by, or employed in addition to, the seeds of the Adenanthera ahrospermn s,
F. v. M. (KMI. rokowarra); on one occasion, at the Pennefather, I observed the use of the gastroliths
or “ crab’s-eyes ” (Fig. 3) of a large crab. The cap or “matchbox, as it is sometimes called by the
European settlers, can also be made of two pipes bound together (lig. 4), and closed at their distal
extremities with bees’ wax: these pipes are formed from a light pithy kind of wood, from out of which
the pith is removed by means of a bone pin or awl (sect. 43). Occasionally, two pieces of bamboo are
utilised for a cap; The material out of which these two similar wands are made is one or other ot the
following timbers: —
Xanthorrhcea arborea, R. Br., and other species of grass-tree: the most common of all, and utilised
wherever available. Along the eastern coast line, say, from Cairns to certainly as far south as the Fitzro}
River, there is a shorter form of fire-stick, both constituents being made of this material, but with one of
the wands replaced by a split length: furthermore, there is no “ matchbox in connection with it.
Premna Dallachyana, Benth., KYI. Ckn. taralka, KRA. mo-yil.—l ire-sticks made of this material
are said to withstand the moisture of the wet season far better than the ordinary grass-tree ones.
From the Endeavour River up to Princess Charlotte Bay.
Premna obtusifolia, R. Br., NGG. mo-odo ( cf. NGG. moa = fire), MAL. ngalki. Pennefather and
Tully Rivers.
C/erudendron inerme, R. Br., KMI. ochi-illa. —Pennefather River.
Clerodendron floribunda, R. Br.—Upper Cloncurry and other rivers (h. Palmer).
Psychotrio sp.—Mitchell River (ibid.)
Sesbania agyptiaca, Persoon.—Cloncurry (ibid.)
Ventilago viminalis, Hooker. —Cloncurry, etc. (ibid.)
The late W. T. Wyndham, the first settler on the Keppels, told me that the islanders often carried
about their grass-tree sticks alight, as they smouldered well and slowly, and thus saved the trouble of
making fresh tires. Women never carried the fire-slicks, the only exception known to me (on the
authority of R. Hi si op) being on the Bloomfield, in the old days, when the females might carry them on
the hunting expeditions.
6. There is another and shorter type of fire-stick in vogue throughout the area extending from
below the Endeavour to the Herbert Rivers, with its corresponding hinterland (Atherton, etc.): owing to
the advance of settlement within recent years, it is impossible to state with certainty its true southern
limits. Two peculiarities of these shorter forms of fire-stick are that the shape and material of the two
sticks are dissimilar (Figs. 10, 11, 12). The vertical piece is a thin wand up to 15 inches long, while the
horizontal one is of a flattened elongate-oval form from about 8 to 12 inches long; the former is made of
the “cotton-tree,” Hibiscus tiliaceus, Linn. (MAL. mancha), or of a wood known to the lower Tully River
blacks as kutchi, the latter of Mollinedia subfernata, Bail. (MAL. wonda), Cryptocarya Murrayi,
F. v. M. (MAL. kii-janguru), a split length of Calamus sp., or of a timber called by the Tully natives
pokarilla. For purposes of transport, these smaller varieties of fire-stick are wrapped round, parcel-
fashion, with Melaleuca bark, and so carried in the men’s dilly-bags.
7. To describe the process of obtaining fire by twirling, I cannot do better than first of all quote
the description which Captain Cook gives of this method ; —“ To produce it [fire] they take two pieces of
dry soft wood, one is a stick about Bor 9 inches long, the other piece is flat; the stick they shape into an
obtuse point at one end, and pressing it upon the other, turn it nimbly by holding it between both their
hands, as we do a chocolate mill, often shifting their hands up, and then moving them down upon it, to
increase the pressure as much as possible. By this method, they get fire in less than two minutes, and
from the smallest spark, they increase it with great speed and dexterity. . . . ” (Fig. 13). To make
a beginning, the horizontal stick may have a small excavation punched into it with a sharp stone, etc.
(Fig. 14), so as to give the extremity of the vertical one (Fig. 15) a firmer basis of support, it being very
liable otherwise to slip off the rounded edge. Indeed, partly to prevent this contingency, the horizontal
piece (unless specially cut out en bloc into its flattened shape) may sometimes be made, as already
mentioned, of a split length of lawyer-cane or grass-tree, so as to afford a flat surface upon which to
commence operations: in other cases, an old “ excavation ’ may be used several times over, until, in fact, a
hole is burnt completely through (Figs. 10, 11, 14, 16). What with the firm downward pressure, and
simultaneous twirling with the flats of the hands, a circular concavity very quickly results (Fig. 14): if
a fresh one, some charcoal dust may be placed in it. As the concavity is being formed, the finely
triturated particles removed from it collect like a miniature dust-heap around its mouth. Piled up on
the underlying leaf or ground, and covering over that portion of the edge of the horizontal piece
contiguous with the excavation, is a small pinch of fine dried-grass particles, pith-dust, bits of the prickly
tops from the grass-tree, etc., arranged in such manner as actually to touch the edge of the excavation:
on a windy day especially, and commonly to save labour, the pile of dried grass, etc. —the “ tinder ”
may be led up along an artificial nick extending from the excavation to the, edge. As the finely triturated


dust-particles from the horizontal piece become heated, blackened, smoked, burnt, and removed y e
simultaneous twirling and friction, a spark forms and comes into contact with the tinder. direct y is
takes place, the latter is quickly whipped up, usually with a bunch of dried grass, swung round an loun
in the air, perhaps blown upon, and so made to burst into flame.
8. Though fire-sticks are usually named from the timber out of which they are manufactured, the}
may have a special name applied to them: —KYI. burial (cf . burla = both, a pah), NGG.
(cf. moa = fire, mo-odo = timber utilised in its manufacture), PPi. turkinji, MAL. chi-man, vK. •
tchi-mal, B’s H. mannimbal, KUG. ko-kal, etc. Occasionally, in the dissimilar shorter forms, and
independently of the material of manufacture, the two sticks may be specialised by different terms. t us
at Cape Grafton and Atherton, the vertical and horizontal pieces are named KUG. gini, NGA. wunda, and
KUG. marku, NGA. marba respectively.
9. Sawing. —The only district in North Queensland where I have observed this method of
producing fire is on the upper Georgina River among the Workai-a aboriginals. The first occasion
saw it was in the neighbourhood of Camooweal. A dry piece of the Capparis umbonata, Lindl., known
locally as the “wild-orange,” usually an old piece of dead branch to 3 inches diametei, and from
U to 2 feet long, is split at one extremity and a small wooden chip or stone inserted, so as to keep the
wedge open. Into the clutch of the fork so produced, some fine dry grass, blankehshred, or other fonn o
“tinder” is placed (Fig. 17). This piece of timber, with the plane of the wedge vertical, is fixed in
position by means of the operator’s two feet pressing it against a small stake fixed firmly into t e
ground. The “ saw,” 7to 8 inches long, of similar material, is roughly shaped into a narrow spatulate
extremity (Fig. 18): its base is firmly gripped by one or both hands, which press the edge of this saw
over and across the wedge, and simultaneously rub it rapidly backwards and forwards. Owing to the
comparatively soft texture of the timber, a groove is soon formed, the timber becomes heated and
blackened, and in a very few minutes sparks fly, and the tinder catches alight. In no case, to make a
start, was the groove originally cut with a knife or other implement. The pieces are discarded after use.
At Monkira, on the lower Diamantina, in 1886, and in the Belyando district, between 1878 and
188 Q, Messrs. F. C. Trotman and R. Hislop respectively, tell me that they have seen natives obtaining
fire by identical means of sawing. [The same method was in vogue on the Lachlan River. an
authenticated specimen is in the Australian Museum, Sydney (R. Etheridge).]
10. Fire-tongs. —On the Bloomfield River fire-tongs are met with, made of a split piece of lawyer-
cane (Calamus) bent double (Fig. 19). Not only are they used for picking up hot ashes, but also stones
for baking purposes. The Cooktown blacks call these implements koragora, after the plant from which
they are manufactured.
11. Shell- and Bone-work. —An essential in shell-work is that the material must either be fresh
(sect. 55), or if “ dead,” that it must previously be soaked: in a dead shell, the line of fracture will not
follow true on that of the percussion.
Bone may be chipped or ground in the manufacture of awls (sect. 13), and ground in the making of
a stiletto (sect. 44): the grinding process can be effected both dry and wet. Bone, however, is usually
worked when comparatively fresh.
12. Leather-work.—Leather underwent certain operations in connection with the preparation of
opossum-cloaks and kangaroo-rugs. Thus, among the Brisbane blacks 1. Petrie says that the fresh hide
was removed with shell or stone by a vertical incision up the belly, connecting with a transverse cut below
the level of the arms, and with another above the level of the legs: an arrangement which allowed of a
squarish piece of skin being obtained. This was next pegged out in the sun, rubbed over repeatedly with
ashes, any flesh or dirt removed, and the hide finally dried. The Rockhampton aboriginals informed me
that the exposure to the sun and consequent rate of drying was and could be purposely modified,
according to circumstances, by shading over with fern-leaves. True tanning of the leather is practised in
the course of manufacture of skin-bag water-carriers (sect. 56) by means of “ coolibar gum moistened
with water.
13. Gums, Resins, Cements.— Gums, etc., of vegetable origin are obtained from the following
plants, generally have their own particular preparation, and are usually named after the tree whence they
are derived: —
Aleurites moluccana, Willd. “Candle-nut.’ —On the Bloomfield River (R. Hislop) the nut
provides the “ oil ” used in fixing the ochre for spear-painting, etc.
Alstonia scholaris, R. Br.—The sticky exudation on the bark is employed for smearing over the
body with which to affix the feather-down, for purposes of personal decoration. Tully River.
[Araucaria Cunninghamii, Ait.—The gum of this Moreton Bay Pine was warmed and worked up
with the fingers in the old Brisbane days (T. Petrie).]
Canarium australasiewm, F. v. M.—On the Bloomfield River, the dry lumps of gum are gathered
off the tree, known locally as “ brown cedar ” or “ Mackay cedar,” and are either wrapped in leaves and
baked, or just warmed before a fire, and then pounded between two stones till pliable and soft enough for
use. To prevent any sticking to the hands or stones, both are rubbed with grease of various kinds.
Used for fixing together the haft and shaft of spears, and in the old days (R. Hislop) was employed for
fixing the stone-celt into its handle. KYE., Bid. tchaln-ji. Though the tree is not growing in the
immediate vicinity of Cooktown and Cape Bedford, the local (KYI.) blacks know the gum as kun-dar.
On the Batavia, Pennefather, and Embley Rivers, the cement is prepared in two ways: — (a) That from
the outer bark is boiled with stingaree-fat in a Melon shell (sect. 55), and used for covering over the
twine, etc., fixing the wommera peg, or that tied on the junction of haft and shaft of a spear, or that
fixing its barbs, (b) The gum obtained from the inside of the hollow tree is roasted on the ashes and


hammered: it is only used for the handle of the wommera to prevent it slipping from the hand. The
tree is known as adambar (NGG.), whence the gum in the rough receives its name, though it may also be
described as its “fruit” (NGG. troka).
“ This resin is in large tears, is brittle, and readily powders: it has a bright fracture, and in
physical appearance resembles a dark colophony or resin of commerce. It readily melts, burns away with
a very smoky liame, and gives an odour of ordinary resin. It softens easily when rolled between the
fingers, and becomes quite soft at 40 degrees C. It consists almost entirely of a resin soluble in petroleum
ether (a very unusual occurrence with resins). It is entirely soluble in ether, but is largely precipitated
by the ethereal solution by alcohol. This peculiarity is only known to a few resins. ... It melts
readily in boiling water, emitting an agreeable aromatic odour. It is very indifferently soluble in
alcohol. . . . (H. G. Smith■).”
Ganarium Mue/leri, Bail. —The resin of this tree, known to the Bloomfield Hiver natives as yikari,
is largely traded and bartered. The prepared article is described as follows:
“ This resin consisted principally of small lumps coated externally with ligneous material, as if it
had existed originally filling fissures in the tree. When broken, the resin is semi-opaque, with a dull
fracture, except in the case of a few tears, which were perfectly transparent. That this semi-opaque
appearance is a physical character is shown by the fact that when the resin is melted and allowed to cool, it
forms a transparent mass like glass, showing that it contains no constituent causing this opaque
appearance. It is a soft resin, and easily melts: it can readily be moulded between the fingers. When
burnt it has an agreeable and persistent aromatic odour. It powders easily and is readily almost
completely soluble in alcohol, ether, and petroleum ether. There are at least two acid resins present, the
potassium salt of one being slightly soluble in alcohol. This resin would make an excellent cement, and
it would probably have a value commercially provided it could be obtained in quantity, and the dark
semi-decomposed portions discarded. . . . (H. G. Smith)."
Erythrophlceurn Labuucheni, F. v. M., “ Ironwood, probably the “ Leguminous Ironbark ”
frequently mentioned by Leichhardt (Maiden). —When a suitable tree —the younger the better —has been
found, its underground roots are cleared, and pieces of convenient length cut away. The outer sticky
covering is cleared with a bark-strip pulled steadily upwards (Fig. 20). A sufficient quantity of the sticky
mass having at last been obtained, it is lightly roasted over the fire, and hammered between two stones:
at Cooktown, the latter are greased with the oily nut of the Calophyllum inophyllum, Linn. It is then
roasted again and hammered, and so on alternately, until quite soft, when it is finally allowed to cool
and harden. Ironwood gum used to be manufactured on the Bloomfield: before the underground piece
was cut away, it would be tested by rubbing a fire-stick onto it, getting portions of the sticky covering
to melt off, and trying them between the closed teeth —if sticky there, the gum would be suitable for use,
and further pieces removed (Tt. Hrslop). A defect in this material is its liability to crack. I have seen
it in use among the natives of the Endeavour, Laura, and Palmer Rivers, along the Princess Charlotte Bay
coast line, and on the Gulf coast, between the Mitchell and Staaten Rivers. KMI. tchal-nga (named
differently to the tree, which is ariga): KYI. Ckn. gambar; GUN. aldenia “This sample of cement is
a tongue-shaped homogeneous mass, almost black externally; it has a dull fracture, and the surface of the
fracture is a vandyke-brown colour. In the mass the cement is very hard, and does not soften between
the fingers. At 50 degrees C. it softens, but hardens at once when removed from the water. At a higher
temperature it softens readily, especially in the flame. It burns readily, with a smoky flame, leaving 31.75
per cent, of a very fine, soft, ferruginous clay. It seems to be an excellent cement for the purposes for
which it was made. . . . The ash consists of a very fine clay, with scarcely any free quartz as
sand. . . . After the resin was entirely removed with alcohol, and the residue dried and afterwards
boiled with water, only a very small amount was dissolved. The residue contained some admixed organic
matter, with excess of carbon, which burns like tinder, and gives out an odour like burnt grass. Only
a small amount (1.38 per cent.) of a soft oily resin was soluble in petroleum ether. The principal resin is
of a dark-brown colour, and is somewhat brittle, and melts at a low temperature ; it ignites readily, and
burns with a smoky flame, leaving an excess of carbon. It is readily soluble in alcohol, but less so in
ether. It dissolves in concentrated sulphuric acid, with a crimson colour, best seen when the particles
are drawn through the acid, and is precipitated as a brown precipitate on addition of water. ... It
is remarkable how closely the resin agrees in every respect with the resin obtained from Spinifex. . .
The composition is—clay 31.78 per cent., brown resin 48.37 per cent, by difference, oily soft resin 1.80
per cent., soluble in water 1.75 per cent., admixed organic matter 16.30 per cent. . . . (H. G.
Smith.r
[Eucalyptus corymbosa, 8m. —This “ bloodwood ” gum was warmed for use, and mixed with spittle
to make it set, by the Brisbane blacks (T. Petrie).]
Ficus sp? (A comparatively rare species, which, owing to the incompleteness of the specimens I
forwarded him, the Colonial Botanist has been unable to identify.) The tree is very scarce now on the
Tully River, where it was formerly utilised as follows: —After removal of the bark the sticky mass is
scraped off from its inner surface with a shell, and collected onto the end of a small stick: the latter is
twirled round and round in the process, warmed over a fire and hammered —it is hardly touched with
the fingers. The article so prepared is used as a “ bird-lime.” Cockatoos can be caught by smearing it
along the branches on which they roost, while small parrots are trapped by rubbing it along the leaves
and branches in the neighbourhood of certain of their food-flow r ers. MAL. chimbun.
Grevillea striata , R. Br.—“ Bastard Beefwood.” The cement is obtained from the roots of young
trees only, that from the older ones not being removable. Convenient lengths, from 10 to 12 inches,
having been cut away from the underground saplings, they are heated over a fire, and their outer sticky bark
scraped off with a sharp-edged stone. These little scraped-off chips are now tied up in a sheet of tea-tree
bark, the bundle being next baked for some ten minutes or so, when it is opened and the sticky bits
removed and pressed together with the fingers and hands to render them sufficiently inter-coherent. The
mass so formed is then ready to be pounded between two stones, which, as in the case of the
Erythrophlceurn, are at Cape Bedford, Cooktowm, etc., greased with the Calophyllum nut. After the


hammering, the mass is stuck onto any convenient stick, whereby it is held over a fire: it is again
hammered and heated, and so on for some considerable time, until the required consistency is obtame .
The consensus of opinion among the natives is that it is the strongest and most durable ot all ttieir
cements. I have seen it employed along the same areas as the Erythrophhxum: at C « okt T °^ l ’ however,
it is getting very scarce now, all the trees in the close vicinity having been destroyed. KMi. otwaria,
KWA. KLA. aru-in, KRA. arau-ang, KYI. Ckn. mari-mari, GUN. 01-da. At Cloncurry, along the
Georgina, and on the Diamantina, a species of Grevillea is utilised as follows: Pieces from the msi e
core of a dead tree are collected and roasted over a tire, when the melting blobs of gum are allowed to
run out below onto a sheet of bark or into the sand: after cooling, these are collected, warmed up, and
hammered together, and, while still pliable, mixed with charcoal. The Cloncurry name for this cement is
tunggaro.
“ This specimen is a crudely manufactured cement consisting of a portion of a flattened finger-
shaped mass. It is of a vandyke-brown colour, and has a dull fracture. On heating, it readily melts,
soon io-nites, and burns with a very smoky flame, leaving a somewhat large amount of a ferruginous sandy
clay residue (17.08 per cent.). A slight heat is sufficient to soften the mass, which can then be moulded
into any form, but becomes hard on cooling: the heat of water at about 50 degrees C. is quite sufficient
to make it soft enough for moulding, but on removal it soon becomes_hard again . . . ihe greater
portions of the resin are soluble in petroleum ether (boiling below oO degrees C.), the dissolved resin
being soft, and of a dark colour. It is but slightly acted upon by concentrated sulphuric acid It is also
readily soluble in ether, but is mostly precipitated by alcohol. Alcohol had little action upon the oiigma
mass. A considerable amount of the carbonaceous matter was present together with the clay as an
admixture, and was removed by ignition, after removal of the resin (H. G. Smith). [Mr. Smith st e ,
however, that the specimen of resin forwarded him by me does not agree with the specimens m the
Technological Museum, Sydney.]
Levtospermum Fnbricia, Forst.—The outer bark is chipped off, and the pieces, which are full of
resinous material, rubbed over the spear, etc., that requires painting: the portions of the jeapons so
treated are warmed and well rubbed, the adherent particles forming the medium or vehicle foi the
pigment, which is next well warmed, rubbed in again, and so rendered permanent. 1 ennefather River.
NGG. bai. , .
Melicope australasica, F. v. M.—Can be prepared in a comparatively short time by removing the
-gum” exuding at the bottom of a one- or two-day-old split, warming, and then hammering between two
stones - to render it more tough for final use, it is mixed with charcoal and again heated and hammered.
Tulh- River, MAL. ngobi. This, the most generally used of the cements in the neighbourhood of the
Tully, affords a generic term for other kinds of cement locally obtained.
-This specimen was a flattened, dark-grey coloured mass, like button shellac; it e,
readilv powdering between the fingers; it also softens a little; it readily melts in boding water, emitting
an odour strikingly like that given by ordinary shellac under like conditions, but very brittle on cooling.
It burns away with a very smoky flame; it is only slightly acted upon by petroleum ether, and only a
very small amount is dissolved by ether. It is readily soluble in alcohoh leaving a small amount of deb .
It is a very good resin, and wmuld make a good cement (H. G. Smith).
Panax Murravi F v. M.— The “ Pencil-wood ”of southern New South Wales. Prepared in a way
similar m 3 but requiring much longer time: it can be got '
alternately warming and hammering, but no charcoal is purposely added, fully River. NGb •bi b •
“This cement is a portion of an irregularly rounded stick-like mass. . . • it is a mos ■ ac in
i o,j flltbnmrb soft it is not sufficiently so to become plastic between the fingers. It softens
cluriet and very’bright The malarial alto contained a good deal of carbonaceous matter, which
colour to the cement, as the resins are light-coloured. ...■•)
The luX
disintegrated and pounded with
h6ated No water, war. or other ingredients are
SS manufacture. ".I; td t£
iITZ. Known t ill aTIUa, Glenonniston, Roxburgh, Carandotta: as anggora at. Camooweal.
XanthorrJujea arhorea, R. Br., and other species. Ckn, C. Bd.
>J f . iotb ’ eenable
There is another cement, the Kalbuwur the appearance something
Butcher's Hill, and at Cooktown, under the same name,
but on the Bloomfield it is called chakki, the term applied to any gum. ,
“her«ments qU On'ignition, a large amount ot carbon was found to be present, and the amount


of inorganic constituents was only 2.47 per cent. Only a very small amount was soluble in petroleum
ether, but a resin was dissolving in ordinary ether which was yellow on evaporation. In
alcohol the whole of the resin was dissolved, having a deep red colour: the organic matter is
then left behind. This resin acted in every way like a Bed Grass-tree Besin, it formed a red
varnish, melted at exactly the same temperature, and when heated side by side with grass-tree resin
no difference could be detected in odour, etc. Its reactions with sulphuric acid and other reagents were
also those of grass-tree resin. Water also dissolved from the original material an acid liquid which
deposited microscopic crystals on evaporation. The resin thus bears a remarkable similarity to grass-tree
resin. . . . The organic matter consisted of a brown powder, and burnt like tinder, with a bumt-
grass odour. Particles of woody fibre were also detected. It seems probable that this organic material
is added to the resin to overcome the brittleness; but the quality of the cement would be improved if
inorganic constituents were present also (H. G. Smith).”
No cement is apparently used throughout the Wellesley Island group.
14. Cements, etc., of Animal Origin. —Bees’ wax is prepared for use by roasting it in the rough
over the fire, squeezing it a few times between the hands, and then alternately warming and hammering
it. It is employed for sticking articles on the hair, fixing it up in throms, for mending fibre-twine, cracks
in water-carriers, etc. Another use for it is as a vehicle for fixing pigments on the digging-sticks of
the Pennefather Biver women. NGG. andori.
Along the Pennefather and neighbouring districts, human blood is put to a similar use with the
pigments on the mens’ weapons and implements: in the far western areas, e.g., Boulia, upper Georgina
Biver, it is this which is employed for sticking the feather-down on the body for decorative purposes.
15. Cements, etc., of Mineral Origin. —A whitish clay was used by the Brisbane aboriginals in
the early days for mending cracks in the water-carriers, etc. When first dug out of the ground, this
material is said to be more or less pliable, but after working up with the hands, it soon becomes quite
hard, especially if water gets to it. Thus, on one particular occasion when T. Petrie was out near Bribie
Island with the blacks in a leaky boat, the cracks were all plugged with this material, the pieces of which
could ultimately only be removed with hammer and chisel, so hard had they become.
16. The Smoothing-hoard, the analogue of the European putty-knife, is a flat elongate thin piece
of iron-wood, etc., with rounded angles (Fig. 21), occasionally almost an oval, 5 or 6 inches long, and just
wide enough to be conveniently held in the hand. Employed only by men for smoothing over and levelling
the heated gum-cement fixing the twine or tendon over the mortice (between shaft and barb) of the
it often carries traces, sometimes even a blob, of the sticky substance. When in use, it is held in the
right hand, while the left one does the twirling ( see Pennefather tooth-scraper, sect. 30), and is always
greased with fore-head perspiration before use. The implement is met with on the Bloomfield and
Endeavour Rivers, along Princess Charlotte Bay, on the Palmer and Mitchell Bivers, and the lower Guli-
coast. The Endeavour Biver natives call it jo-ranga, the Cape Bedford ones dorunggor, and the Gunanni
blacks mala-alarara. The Princess Charlotte Bay natives, in addition, use another form of the implement,
differing from the type in that its shorter margins are straight and finely serrated for the purpose of
combing out a certain vegetable fibre during the course of its manufacture "into twine (Fig. 22). On the
Endeavour Biver and elsewhere I have often seen a small piece of pandanus leaf, face-greased in similar
fashion, doing duty for a smoothing-board when the latter is not to hand.
17. Pigments may be discussed according as they are white, red, yellow, or black:
T 1 hite. (1) Kaolin, pipe-clay, hydrous silicate of alumina, met with on the Keppels (where
the islanders spoke of it as tarkuli), on the Palmer (KMI. charba), on the Embley, Batavia, and
Pennefather Bivers (NGG. aro-a), at Cape Bedford and Cooktown (KYI. garmai), at the Bloomfield, and
on the Wellesley (Mornington and Forsyth) Islands. The Cooktown and Bloomfield natives eat it’as a
food and as a medicine. As a pigment, it may be used as found, without any special preparation
(Palmer, Pennefather Bivers), or else prepared by powdering it up fine by hammering between stones
mixing with water, and drying in the sun (Palmer Biver, Cape Bedford). (2) Carbonate of lime and
magnesia: found at Cape Bedford, and called by the same term as the kaolin. (3) “Gypsum,” sulphate
of lime. Met with throughout the far Western areas. Burnt, and subsequently immersed in a
comparatively small quantity of water, so as to make a viscid mass, which dries hard. (PPT. parta but
known to the settlers generally as “ ko-pai.”) ' ’
On the 1 ennefather and elsewhere a greyish mud (NGG. mbru-i) may be employed when white
pigment is scarce. The minggiina of the Gunjanni is a white pigment, bartered from the Coen district.
Red- (1) Oxides of Iron, (a) Haematite, obtained with an addition of burnt ferruginous clay on
the Palmer, where the Kokominni call it norda. Also along the Georgina and Boulia districts It is
again met with at Bathurst Head, and is most probably the material with which the paintings on Clack
Island are mainly depicted. It requires no special preparation before use. (6) Burnt ferruginous
sandstone. Found on the Mclvor River, used without special preparation, and called wo-ba by the Cape
Bedford natives, (c) Bed oxide of iron (NGG. po-to). Probably obtained by burning yellow ochre which
is found at the surface along the Pennefather Biver. ( d) Ochre, ferruginous clay with sand From the
Batavia and Pennefather Bivers (NGG. adeatalimi). (e) Bed ochre, ferric oxide mixed with clay •
Bentinck Island, (f) Siliceous red ochre, ferric oxide; Mornington Island. (2) “ Cinnabar ” sulphide of
mercury, was used by the old-time Brisbane blacks (T. Petrie).
There is a red pigment from the Batavia known to the Pennefather River natives as trallabotha
..ut I have not succeeded in obtaining specimens of it for identification. So, again, the Gunanni have a
red pigment, marela, which is said to be burnt preparatory for use.
Yellow.-—(V) Limonite, hydrous oxide of iron. From the Keppel Islands, Pennefather River, etc.
flie natives at the latter locality call it pama, and use it direct. (2) Ochre, clay, and sand. On the
I ennefather and at Bathurst Head. The Pennefather blacks call it parna, like the limonite, and roast
it, during which process it becomes red, this red pigment being now known as aru-imberi. (3) Yellow


oclire, with a little fine sand. Met with in the more northern districts, whence, in the course oftrad*. and
Irtirter it is brought to the Mclvor River and Cape Bedford, where it is known as barga. It is said to
dugm the salt pans, and dried in toe sun. (4) According to T. Petrie, amongst the now
defunct Brisbane blacks, there was a certain toadstool, purgunpallain invariably found growing; e g
ants’ nest, which supplied a source of yellow pigment: it was just rubbed on the body, etc., the dy.
Though not in itself a pigment, the yellow strips of the Dendrobiumhigi
from the inner bark after roasting), which are wound round wommera-handles, hi e-sticks, etc., on
Batavia, Pennefather, and other rivers, may be included here.
Black. —(l) Charcoal is used everywhere. (2) Pyrolusite (oxide of manganese) is employed on the
Upper Georgina and Rankin Rivers.
18 Media for fixing Pigments.— Occasionally, pigments are painted on in the dry, but if any
media an* linked Lose which are nearest to hand are, as might be expected, those most commonly
used I’ « re spittle and water! An individual may thus take one or other of these pigments in his mouth
.hew it and spit it over the object, himself, or his friend, to make a spotted pattern. On the Pennefathe
ivL Ls well as elsewhere in that district, pigments may be fixed with gum-cement, derived from the
Jevtosvernmm (sect 13), human blood (especially on the men’s weapons and implements), or honey (in
the’caseTof the At the Blocuneld, it is the (sect U) winch proves
the oil used for fixing the ochre in spear-painting. On the shields etc, from the Tully
human blood is utilised not only as a paint but also for fixing certain of the pigments. In the Boulia a
other western areas, snake- and iguana-fat are very common fixing media.
19 Stains, Dyes.— On the Bloomfield, etc, the colouring matter from the roots of the/ 1 blood-
root,” Hcemodorum coccineum, R. Br, is used for dyeing the string for of oertonrf*®
dillv-bacs In the Pennefather River and neighbouring districts, the roots of the Mormda reticula z,
Benth (NGG ada-a), are scraped into water, making of it a thick yellowish fluid with which the womens
apron-belts are stained. Throughout the same area the AlphUoma exxelsa, Heissek, the n Ash
“Red Ash,” “Leather-Jacket” or “Cooper’s Wood,’ is utilised as follows :—l he outer bark, after eg
scraped off is rubbed between the hands, and mixed with water: the mixture is then rubbed on h g
coloured spear-throwers, which are left to dry in the sun, whereby they become stained a leddish-br
colour.
20. Uses of the Colours.— White is essentially the colour of mourning, sorrow, and tribulation, and
i« met with during the ceremonies connected with burial, at certain of the initiations, etc. In the Boulia
and neiKhbouriug°areas, however, it is a " fighting ” colour, lied is par excellence the colour of envy,
hatred, and malice, of force, and energy, visible (tire) and invisible (spirits, etc.): a mant. colour, and
hence observable in the personal decorations of the warriors on their fighting expeditions and on the
fighting implements: at corrobborees, on their fire-sticks (decorated with the pretty A6r«.s n
connection with certain of their charms and articles of magic. The Bloomfield natives, by the exposure
of anything red, can ward off impending danger from those particular spirits, etc, whom they reckon as
friends. The only occasions on which red is observed in connection with mourning and d e a th ha been
on the Batavia, Pennefather, and Embley Rivers, with their corresponding hinterland: the subjective
sensations under such circumstances are indicated by a red flower or feather fixed to the forelock. J'
Petrie states that amongst the Brisbane blacks, red pigment was used by old men and women as a s g
of mourning. At Cape Grafton, in the early days of settlement, one of the two exogenous classes
distinguished by its being associated with everything red, the other being similarly intimately connecte
with everything white. Yellow is the colour for withstanding heat, an entire covering of yellow pigment
being used for the purpose in the height of summer along the Northern districts; this practice, howevei,
must not be confounded with the similarly coloured covering for mimicking ant-hills when out hunti g
for kangaroo. Yellow is rather, perhaps, a woman’s than a man’s colour. Black is employed not so much
as a colour but for out-lining and finishing-off designs, both on weapons and their own bodies: only on
one occasion, at one of the higher initiation ceremonies, at Princess Charlotte Bay, have I seen mdividua s
entirely covered with it, but as they were supposed to represent crows there may have been special reasons
for it. Blue is not met with as a pigment, etc, anywhere in North Queensland, though washiug-bi
has been introduced here and there by trade and barter from natives employed at the settlements.
21. Colour-sense. —Although possessing no general term expressive of colour in the abstract, the
aboriginal is able to appreciate primary colour-distinctions accurately. At Cape Bedford the Koko-ymn ir
speaking natives evidently recognise the following;—White, in the sense of colour, is bilbm, dmgga: in
the sense of light, clear, etc, especially in the case of water, kandal: as a particular garmai.
Red, in the sense of a colour, is dini, and is also expressed as woba-dir ht. with the ‘ woba (a reel
pigment); in the latter .case, the colour is still associated with the pigment, much in the same way as
we speak of the terms “raddle” and “raddled.” Yellow is barga, the name of the particular pigment. Blue
is dalon: the natives speak of purai-dalon, i.e., water-blue, to distinguish deep from shallow water. -There
is no name for green, the existence of which colour is certainly recognised, but has not been dissociated
from the objects, e.g., grass, leaves, with which it is ordinarily connected. Grey, although recognised, is
appreciated only in the term for grey-hair (pinga) as distinguished from the normal black-hair (moan).
Chestnut is yetchel, but applied to animals only. Auburn, in connection with the hair, either artificially
produced amongst themselves by the use of lime, or met with naturally amongst Europeans, is moan-
ngalan, i.e., hair-sun: we possess a corresponding simile in our expression of “sunny ringlets.” Black
in the sense of a colour, is muni.
On the Tully River, of the three main pigments employed by the Mallanpara, it is interesting to
note that the terms signifying them are independent of the colour sensations to which they give rise:
thus oba-oba and konggo, marchila, kalmoro, are red, white, and yellow pigments as distinguishable from
bumbara, dangkal, karan-karan, their respective colours. Any blue colour is chibul-chibul, while black,
brown, and green colours are knowm as ko-chu.


The Koko-olkulo blacks along Alice Creek, and the Kundara around Montana, Staaten River, speak
of brown, black, blue, and green under the one name of olpuno and kutoram respectively.
Amongst tribes (other than those at Cape Bedford and on the Tully, etc.), where the media of
communication are necessarily imperfect, I have found it impossible in most cases to be absolutely certain
that the colour is distinguishable from its corresponding pigment, and I, therefore, at present purposely
refrain from publishing the names so obtained: it is a matter for research to which I propose reverting on
some future occasion. My method of inquiry was naturally somewhat primitive. A small note-book, into
which the principal elementary colour papers are pasted on separate pages, is shown to the savage page
by page, and he is asked, “ What name 1 ” each is. This arrangement, notwithstanding its disadvantages,
was found less liable to error in comparison with the means adopted for dealing with more civilised
peoples. For instance, when coloured wools were shown him, it was subsequently discovered that the
aboriginal had supplied me with names indicative of various twines, animal and vegetable: when the
brown colour of his skin was pointed at, he gave the name of the integument, etc.: when I put before
him a red berry or seed, he favoured me with the name —so far as he could recognise it or any similarity—
of the plant. The various coloured papers pasted into a book are objects comparatively novel to him,
and certainly assist in dissociating in his mind the sense of a particular colour from the particular
pigment or other concrete object with which it is usually connected. Out of perhaps 200 savages,
examined on the above lines, I have not come across any cases where red was indistinguishable from
green, or yellow from blue.
22. Stone-work. Flaking.— The only stone-work which is practised within tire Queensland borders
is that connected with the manufacture of native-gouge heads (sect. 27), knife-blades (sect. 32), spear-heads
(sect. 21), scrapers (sect. 26), hand-picks (sect. 35), and, until less than seven years ago, drills (sect. 40).
There are still to be found in different portions of the State other implements, e.y., stone-hammers
(sect. 37), in the making of which a stone in its natural form is employed, but in no sense can it in such
cases be said to be “ worked.”
The process of flaking native-gouge heads, knife-blades, and scrapers, which I have witnessed
during the course of the last ten years, among the Workai-a, Yaro-inga, Walukara, and Wonkajara natives
of the upper Georgina waters, at Camooweal, Urandangie, Carandotta, and Glenormiston respectively, may
be described as follows: —The “ hammer-stone,” used for striking off the flakes, is a natural form, and
consequently of varying size and shape-—anything with a fairly good rounded prominence for striking
(Figs. 23, 28) —and is discarded after use. The particular material of which it is composed may be
identical or not with the rock about to be struck: Figs. 37, 37a, represent a pebble which I saw employed
at Glenormiston in the manufacture of the implements illustrated in Figs 39a, b, and Figs. 40 a, b, c, d.
Of late years, this hammer-stone may be here and there replaced by the top end of the back of an iron
tomahawk-head. Held tirmly in the right hand it is made to strike sharply in a direction fairly behind
the vertical onto the “core” or “nucleus," i.e., the stone from which the flakes are to be removed, resting in
the left hand (Fig. 23). The core is of andesite, quartzite, or chert, is loosely fixed by the digits in the left
palm dropped more or less backwards, and is thus provided, when struck, with a certain amount of resiliency.
This method of holding it allows of the surface, about to be struck, being conveniently held at the
necessary angle: another advantage is that the Hake which is removed, as will shortly be described, from
its under-surface is prevented falling to the ground, and so becoming accidentally fractured. The cores
upon which I have watched operations taking place vary from 2 to 7 or 8 inches in length, of proportionate
bulk, and naturally of every variety of shape (Figs. 30 to 36). Amongst necessary essentials for good
flaking is that the particular area of core to be struck must be comparatively flat, and held in such
manner that it is at an acute angle with the line of direction in which the blow falls: in cases where its
natural contour does not allow of its being maintained in the hand at the requisite angle, it may be
deliberately broken by indiscriminate tapping until the object in view is obtained. On examining the
bases of the completed native-gouge heads, knifedflades, or spear-heads, they will all bear evidence of this
weathered, water-worn, or artificially-fractured, comparatively-flat “slope-surface” (ss, Figs. 25, 27, 46a, 68,
70); it is this peculiarity, due of course to the angle at which they have been struck, that prevents them
being made to stand upright on a table. Another important point is that the special portion of core to
be properly struck must be along its lower edge so that, provided the blow be successful, a flake becomes
separated from its under-surface, and thus comes to lie in the palm of the hand (Fig. 24), the line of
cleavage being apparently at a comparatively open angle with the line of striking. Should the margin
of the core’s lower edge become too fine and attenuated, it is just trimmed with a light tap or two from
above. The most vital factor of all perhaps is that the core must be perfectly dry: if removed, for
instance, from out of the moist bank of a creek, etc., it has to be dried well for a day or so, before use.
The fact of the flakes being usually removed successively from the one, the lower, surface, may account
for the comparative rarity of a “ central ” core (Figs. 32, 33). As to the causes limiting the shape of the
Hakes—the short stumpy ones, or “ pot-lids ” for making native-gouge heads, Scrapers, etc., on the one
hand, and the comparatively long thin ones, or “lancets” for knife-blades, spear-heads, etc., on the
other—it is impossible for me to state anything definite: nor could the natives render themselves
sufficiently intelligible, even supposing they know, to enlighten me. At any rate, I have seen both shapes
derived from one and the same piece of stone (Figs. 47 to 53) : again, a piece of physically similar material
may give rise to no flakes at all, dry or wet. but just break up, on striking, into irregularly shaped pieces.
I he ( amooweal blacks maintain that pebbles from the neighbouring Nowranie Creek provide the best
native-gouge heads, while the stones lying along the bed of the Georgina River here (as compared with
those found on the Gregory River, at Lawn Hills, etc.), are too short and too full of flaws to manufacture
good knife-blades from. It was at Camooweal that, during the course of one afternoon, four of the old
men must have struck off in my presence quite 300 flakes before a passably suitable one for a <mod knife
was obtained. A large majority of the flakes and chips so produced could of course have been Utilised for
future use as scrapers, etc. (sect. 26). The stone employed for flaking from is known as ku-ya kambo
apputa, and ponngo to the Pitta-Pitta (Boulia), Maitakudi (Cloncurry), Yaro-inga (Headingley, Lake
JNash), and orkai-a (Camooweal, etc.), natives respectively.


23. “ Pot-lid ” .Flakes. —Let us consider that, in response to a smart blow, a comparatively short
stumpy flake, a “pot-lid,” has been removed, and is now lying on the artificer s palm. If the basal extremity
of its upper (last-removed) surface be carefully examined, there will be seen a convex pi eminence in
the form of a semicircle, limited circumferentially by some very fine concentric linear markings to
which more or less definite striae will occasionally be observed radiating from a centre situated on the
extreme edge of the slope-surface already referred to: this semicurcular convex prominence is known as
the “ bulb of percussion ” (Fig- 25 bp). The more complete and more distinctly marked this bulb, the
better: because upon it depends in large measure the applicability of the flake for the purposes intended, in
that it assists in the separation of the bulbous from the non-bulbous portion during the course of its
subsequent manufacture into a native-gouge head, and lends strength to the implement when completed.
The bulb-end of lire Hake, of course, always constitutes the butt-end of the finished article. The flake
may happen to be the first of the series struck, its under surface in such a case being a portion of the
natural face of the rock or stone: otherwise, its under surface will, of course, show a more or less concave
area or areas (Figs. 38 a to h), owing to the cleavage of the convex upper surface, or surfaces, of the
flake or flakes previously removed. The next process in tire manufacture is to remove the bulbous from
the non-bulbous portion of the flake. Should the thinness of the distal extremity admit of so doing, this
may be broken off by resting its edge on a suitable stone, and, by means of another, carefully tapping
bit off by bit: otherwise, it is removed by striking, without any support from underneath. So soon,
however, as the neighbourhood of the external limits of the bulb is reached, extra precautions have to be
taken to prevent untoward splitting of the stone. With this object in view, the base of the flake is held
between the left fore-finger and thumb (Fig. 26), its free edge being carefully flaked by gently striking
it from above with a comparatively small and light hammer-stone, in a direction similar to that which
has already been described as being essential, i.e., at an acute angle, with the surface to be struck. In
longitudinal median section, for instance, the action and its result may be illustrated diagrammatically in
Fig. 27, where ss = slope-surface, cv and cc = upper convex (lashremoved), and lower concave (previously-
removed) surfaces respectively, dh = direction of the blow, h = area on which the blow is struck, and
lc line of cleavage as its result. Again, although the general shape of the flake so far as the contour
of its future cutting margin is concerned —may be satisfactory, it is possible that its base may be too
thick, a defect which is remedied by holding it between the thumb and ball of the little finger, and
flaking away (Fig. 28) as before from the lower edge of the slope-surface. As might be expected, the
future cutting margin of such a flake at this stage, has a comparatively thick and serrated edge (Figs. 39,
a. to h). This is next improved upon by firmly enclosing its major portion, base downwards, and at an
acute angle, into a blob of gum-cement (sect. 13) at the extremity of a piece of wood, usually a curved
native-gouge handle, holding it in the left hand (Figs- 29, a, b), and then flaking off all irregularities and
prominences by sharply striking them with the flat under-surface of one of the heavier kinds of boomerang,
ireat care being taken that the blows fall along the requisite lines and axes, and that a commencement is
made at the sides, not at the centre, of the flake. Where the timber of the boomerang available is not
considered hard enough, the flat side of an iron tomahaw k-head may be brought into requisition. It may
be important to note that nowhere in connection with North Queensland stonework have I observed any
such thing as chipping the edges fine by means of steady pressure. When completed, as above (Figs. 40,
a to d), the “ pot-lid ” is utilised as the head of a native-gouge (Figs. 101, 108), or is attached to the base
of a leaf-shaped wommera (Fig. 107). The Workai-a name for a pot-lid flake is lamma, to distinguish it
from the lancet flake or walka: the Yaro-inga blacks similarly distinguish them as ilbilla and anggwardija.
24. “ Lancet ”-Flakes. —We will imagine now that the original piece of stone, upon being struck
in the orthodox fashion, gives rise to a comparatively long and thin flake, a lancet (Figs. 35a, 36a) : two
must at least be removed before one suitable for a proper knife-blade can possibly be obtained. It has
already been stated that some hundreds may have to be struck, and stone after stone broken, without a
suitable one resulting. The two main desiderata for such a weapon (Fig. 132) are length combined with
thinness, and a main ridge running to the extreme apex. Now, provided that a good core has been met
with, its under surface would give an appearance represented in Fig. 35, where the three facets show the
cleavage whence three flakes have been removed, after striking at the proper angle, etc., on the lower edge
of the slope-surface: the upper surface of the flake last removed is shown in Fig. 35a. The straighter and
longer the lines of junction of the facets —for descriptive purposes, these lines are called “ ridges the
straighter and longer will be the flake, which may possibly next be procured. Here, however, the special
skill of the artificer comes into play: namely, to strike with such nicety just on the lower margin of the
surface-slope between the angle of junction of any twm facets that a lancet is produced with the ridge
preserved to its very tip. Each of these knife-blade flakes thus presents on the upper, last-removed, surface,
a single facet (Figs. 35a, 36a), and, on the lower, at least two main facets (Fig. 132), divided by a main
ridge: its transverse section is, of course, under these circumstances, triangular, and the thinner the flake,
the sharper will be the cutting edge. The main ridge is either simple (Figs. 1-12, 135), or composite
(Figs. 136, 137, 138), but these are readily seen to be features dependent upon the number of flakes which
have been removed previously or subsequently to the cleavage of the blade from the core. Exceptionally
for knife-blades, there may be two main ridges, independent of one another (Figs. 139, 140), in which case
there will be three main facets, and, according to the length of the ridges, an abrupt (Fig. 140) or pointed
(Fig. 139) extremity; to produce such a flake, three flakes at least must have been previously removed.
The stone represented in Fig. 141 is interesting as showing a peculiar “pit” across the ridge, due
to the falling of a blow upon the flake before it was mounted, the mounting being carried down just so
far that the tool should not be weakened: this shows that stone available for good lancet-flakes was not
very common at the local place of manufacture, for inasmuch as hundreds, nay thousands, could be made
in a day, it would not be worth while to utilise a faulty one if the stone for making another was available,
an inference which is also borne out by the fact that this piece of chert is full of flaws. Sometimes, the
flake comes from the outside of the core (Fig. 137), so that one edge may show the weathered surface.
Another thing that requires notice in all these single-ridge knife-blades is that only such flakes are
selected that possess the main ridge preserved to the very tip, so as to ensure strength as well as sharpness.
This may also account for the edges being left untrimmed, an untrimmed one being always sharper.
Where the edge is therefore trimmed, there is probably good reason for it. For instance, in the flake,
mounted as represented in Fig. 139, one edge of it is trimmed, and shows considerable signs of use: it


is possible that the untrimmed edge has been purposely blunted at the back near, the base, so as not to
damage the top of the finger when projected beyond the handle-mounting. On the other hand, the
usual method of holding these lancet-flakes when mounted as knives (sect. 32) is to grasp the handle with
the blade down, the opei'ator cutting towards himself. Fig. 136 shows a similar trimming for protection
of the fore-finger, in this case undoubtedly for the purpose indicated, because it is one of those smaller
knives, with handle held between thumb and middle-finger, employed for introcision, where delicacy of
touch is so essential. The source of supply of these lancet-flakes for knives, and the trade routes which
they follow, are discussed elsewhere (sect. 32).
Spear-heads (Figs. 41 to 46), which are manufactured along the ranges up the western border
north from Lawn Hill, etc., are worked, according to the information supplied me by the blacks, on
practically identical lines as the stone-knives, save that they are thicker and longer, and often trimmed
at their sides: the smaller flakes may be retained and mounted as knives. Figs. 47 to 53 represent
splinters, chips, etc., which I obtained from one and the same quarry where knife- or spear-blades had
once been manufactured. Figs. 54 a, b, c, <7, illustrate similar unused chips. Spear-heads are flaked from
quartzite or andesite, and are to be met with, for purposes of barter, made up into small bundles rolled
up in tea-tree bark: they may measure up to over 74, inches in length.
25. Stone-Celts.—l am afraid that too much importance has been hitherto attached to the differenti-
ation of stone-celts into axes, adzes, wedges, scrapers, etc.: the savage most certainly does not recognise
the tine distinctions embodied on the labels attached to these articles in an ethnological museum. In the
absence of actual observation, is any one competent, for instance, to give a definite opinion as to
which of such implements the special use of any stone-celt under consideration most particularly conforms
to 1 Like the " reversible adze of New Guinea, the wedge-shaped celt of the Batavia and Pennefather
Rivers was used both as an axe, e.g., for cutting into trees, and as an adze, e.g., for hollowing out the body
of a canoe, tire handle in the latter case being unfastened and refixed at right angles to its previous axis
(Figs. 56, 57) : the aboriginal evidence of this reversibility for special purposes is enhanced by the fact
of iron axe-heads, used at Mapoon (Batavia River), at the present time, being made to serve this dual
purpose dependent upon their angle of fixation to a handle. Only two years ago the superintendent in
charge of this station, while engaged in some fencing, unearthed such a celt mounted as an adze. On the
Endeavour River, Captain Cook says, “ The only tools that we saw among them are an adze, wretchedly
made of stone, some small pieces of the same substance in the form of a wedge, etc.” In the Tully River
district, the natives undoubtedly used their axes as wedges (E. Brooke), while throughout the whole
Brisbane area, the evidence is equally positive (T. Petrie) that in splitting timber, the old-time blacks
never employed stones at all, but only wooden wedges (sect. 2). The celt figured in Fig. 58 is simply a
convenient-sized sub-angular rock fragment, scarcely water-worn, but somewhat weathered: in the absence
of any evidence to the contrary, it may have been utilised as a wedge, even, perhaps, as an axe or adze,
while the grinding may have arisen by using the tool as a scraper, the stone having originally been quite
un-worked.’ We are thus faced with a series of objects that may, at one time or another, have been
put to at least four different uses. The phrase “ stone-tomahawk ” seems for the most part to have been
a popular Australian misnomer, since it implied that these celts—even if their use as axes be taken for
granted—were employed mounted, an implication which was certainly not always necessarily the case.
Aboriginal evidence also points to the conclusion that these celts were not fighting implements, but
articles utilised for purposes of domestic use, especially in the way of cutting timber, either in the log or
tree, and particularly in the cutting of notches or toe-holes in climbing. Furthermore, to name any of
the larger kinds of celt, for want of a better term “ceremonial-stones” is, in my opinion, only to beg
the question. It also seems to me too much of an assumption to suppose that the definitive uses of such a
specialised implement as an axe, adze, chisel, wedge, etc., are, as a matter of course, known to the savage
by intuition. About nine years ago, a dugong-fishery station was for some months established on
Bentinck Island, and on its closure, an ordinary iron adze-head was either stolen or left behind: about six
years after, and again a twelvemonth later, I found this implement in one of the local camps, apparently
well cared for, but not a mark or chip on its edge to indicate that it had ever been utilised.
krom the organised system of barter along trade-routes defined since times immemorial, the skill,
patience, delicacy of manipulation, and other qualities requisite for producing a completed celt, do not
necessarily possess any claims on the local aboriginals in whose vicinity the stone under review may
happen to be found, lo take an extreme case, Fig. 61 is a type of celt well known in neolithic Europe,
and of which Mr. Skertchley, late Assistant Government Geologist, Queensland, gives the following
description“ A very beautiful, fine-grained, deep-green-banded, quartzite, which might be mistaken for
nephrite or jade. I have found a somewhat similar celt of the same stone in a tumulus at Edenham,
Lines., England, and have seen many broken as this is, and thought they were purposely broken when
deposited with the dead. Ido not suggest this with regard to the implement under consideration, for it
has evidently broken owing to a natural flaw near the butt end, and this before it had been much used.
It is made from a natural pebble, slightly trimmed by chipping, and not by flaking: afterwards, laboriously
ground down by movements in all conceivable directions, with a true artistic feeling for symmetry and
balance, an attempt having been made to secure bilateral symmetry (Fig. 61«) in spite of the somewhat
awkward shape of the original stone. . . . The stone I could match in Queensland in several places, but
the art-feeling exhibited is above the cult of the Australian native so far as I know T him : it is allied to that
of the adjacent Papuan or the more remote Polynesian and Maori. It is probably the result of barter, not
necessarily direct, but handed on from tribe to tribe : such barter goes far deeper than we suspect. . ! .”
On the other hand, Mr. Etheridge, Curator of the Australian Museum, Sydnev, considers this specimen
unquestionably Australian : celts finished with similar art-feeling, and more so, are found throughout
New South Wales.” Yet, this very celt was picked up on Glengallan (Central Queensland) some thirty-
three years ago by a blackboy in the service of the station-owner, who was then, for the first time, taking
up that portion of country, and whose wife subsequently gave it to me. At the same time, I readily admit
the existence of one or two types of celt more or less limited to special localities: thus, the large, oval,
slab-like, double-edged, centrally-grooved implement (Fig. 62) is almost characteristic of the Herberton
Ranges, while the small, square, wedge-shaped celt (Figs. 63, 64) appears to be peculiar to the Peninsula.


[With regard to the former type (Fig. 62), Mr. R. Etheridge saysSo far as my researches have
gone, celts of this description do seem to be more or less restricted to local areas. For instance, they
are met with along a zone between the Lachlan River to beyond the Darling River: I have figured one
from Lake Cudgellico (Proc. Linn. Soc. New South Wales, 1893, MIL (l), pi. XII., f. L pi- NHL, . )•
i have also figured a Queensland form (Loc. cit. 1891, VI. (2), pi. XXXI. £. 3 and 4 They are occasionally
met with in Eastern New South Wales, as at Cape Hawke (Loc. c%t. 1891, M. (2),, pi. XL, t. I and Z).
Again, grooved celts occur locally around Warnambool and other centres in South West Victoria: Smy i
figured one (“Aborigines of Victoria, 1878, 1., p. 389, f. 183; p. 372, f. 195). ]
Where celts have been manufactured from water-worn pebbles, and these apparently constitute the
majority of examples discoverable (as is also the case, according to Mr. Etheridge, m New South Wales),
it seems to me futile to base any rational classification upon the shape: the savage, other things equal,
will certainly not give himself the extra labour of altering the general contour of such beyond that
involved in producing a cutting edge. Fig. 65, for instance, has been formed from a flattish oval water-
worn boulder, selected from its being approximately of the desired shape, and so requiring a minimum ot
work to fashion it: Figs. 66 and 67 are other examples of this. From a systematic point of view, neither
does the material of construction prove of much value, rocks of similar origin undergoing not only varying
methods of manufacture, but developing alterations of contour upon completion. Amongst rocks in
(Queensland giving rise to celts may be mentioned diorite, basalt, argillyte, and serpentine; 1 know ox a
specimen, found in Victoria Park, Brisbane, which, most exceptionally for any tool, is made of volcanic
tufa.
The actual manufacture of a celt is now a lost art in Queensland, though the statements of some of
the older natives and a careful examination of specimens combine to throw a certain amount of hght on
the process adopted. The original celt in its simplest form is a water-worn pebble or xou er, an
adaptation of a natural form (Figs. 65, 66, 67) : otherwise, it is a portion removed from a rock, etc.,
in situ , either by fire, indiscriminate breakage, or flaking. The employment of fire for such a purpose as
thus, on the authority of Kalkadun natives (occupying the ranges N.W. of Cloncurry) been explained to
me: after lighting a large fire for some considerable time either upon or up against the rock from w hic i
the celt is to be obtained, it is suddenly extinguished with water, the ashes, etc., removed, and the stone
found to be broken and split. On the other hand, 1 can find no European evidence confirmatory ot such
a procedure. Where indiscriminately broken from the surface of the rock, the weathered external sui ace
can be recognised in Figs. 68a, 69 : in the latter example, the fiat side shows no trace of further
workmanship save on the edges. In thus hewing off the roughness of the original block as well as in the
flaking of the edges, it is possible that the stone-hammers, as used up to the present day (sect. 37) may
have been brought into requisition. That the celt used sometimes to be actually manufactured from a
large flake, as I have been informed by reliable Georgina River natives, is proved to be the case in that
here and there such an implement shows the “ bulb of percussion’ (sect. 23) and slope-surface (sect. 22)
in excellent preservation (Figs. 68, 70). When once the general contour has been obtained, the required
cutting edge was gradually acquired by grinding in all directions. So far, I have not come across any
concave rubbing-stones obtained from North Queensland either during my field-work, or in collections,
though my Carandotta aboriginal informants state that the harder kinds of fissile sandstone, similar to
that used for mealing-stones at the present day (sect. 45) was formerly employed for the purpose in their
district. In South Queensland, however, at North Pine, about 20 miles from Brisbane, Mr. T. Petrie has
pointed out to me in the river there a rock upon which, below water-level, the blacks used to giind their
celts. As already mentioned, the motion of grinding was sometimes in all directions, the final touches
roughly following the contour of the edge: the process, however, might only be carried as far as the
smoothing-stage, the scratchings being quite clear, although the material might admit of a high polish
(Fi<r. 71). The cutting-edge varied anywhere between straight and curved (Figs. 63, 69): it certainly was
not necessarily central (Figs. 58a, 6oa), neither was it limited to one end only ot the implement (I ig. 62).
A celt may show grinding, without any chipping or flaking (Figs. 66, 67, 71, 77): if flaked, but showing
no grinding, it will be incomplete (Fig. 72). From what my native Boulia friends told me, I learn that a
whole day 'would prove sufficient for hewing a boulder roughly into shape, while longer periods would be
occupied in grinding the necessary cutting-edge, a tedious process, sometimes said to be the work of the
women. Quarries whence these celts were originally obtained are none too common: there is one close to
Bora Creek on the Bower Bird Gold Field (Upper Leichhardt River), another at Rocky Creek, south of the
Staaten River, this side of Wambi’s selection, while others are said to be at Mount Elsie, about 100 miles
south of Charters Towers, on Molle Island, in the Whitsunday Passage, and at Culture Creek, or Happy
Valley, about 7 miles from the Proserpine, etc.
In the far western and northern districts generally, mounted celts were certainly used, the handle
consisting of a lath, bent at its middle so as to form two limbs, the stone being fixed with twine and bees
wax or cement-substance into the bend so formed. In these areas, from which specimens are still extant
(Fig. 74), the two limbs were bound into close apposition by twine, etc., firmly tied close below the
celt) as well as at the proximal extremity of the handle: (See similar fixation in the case of the stone-
hammer, Fig. 151.) [See Etheridge’s figures of this form of mounting in Proc. Linn. Soc. New South
Wales, 1891, VI. (2), pi. XXXIII. (Thornborough, Q.), and pi. XXXIV. (Herbert Gorge, Q.)] There
is no evidence to show that the celt, in Queensland, was ever fixed into the fork of a stick. In the
Peninsula, judging from models (Figs. 56, 57), manufactured by older natives from the Batavia and
Embley Rivers, the lath, made from the Coelospermum retieulatum, Benth. (NGG. pre) and “served” with
fibre-strand, was tied in close proximity to the stone only, with the result that the “ legs were crossed:
when, therefore, these divergent limbs were grasped, there was not only an increase of springiness in the
handle, but, owing to the position of the fulcrum, also a tightening-up of the celt very much after the
style of a modern pincers. Models similarly obtained as far south as Herberton and Atherton show
that the handles were evidently sometimes made on the same principle. The grooving of the celts from
these latter and adjoining districts, e.g., the Herbert (Figs. 62, 75, 76) necessarily bear inference to the
original existence of a haft. In those cases where the groove extends right round the celt, and the latter
is wedge-shaped, or anything but slab-like, there may be grounds for considering that such implements


were used both as axes and adzes, by a readjustment of the handle as already described from the Batavia;
it is impossible to believe that the extra labour of making the grooving complete would ever have been
entailed unless there was good reason for it. From Captain Cook’s observation of “ some small pieces
of the same substance in the form of a wedge ” —an extract already referred to—it seems to me highly
probable that on the Endeavour River, celts were used both with and without handles. I have obtained
similar evidence from the old Bowen blacks, as well as from the Brisbane ones (on the authority of
Mr. T. Petrie) that celts were employed both mounted and unmounted. On the other hand, at the Keppel
Islands, the late Mr. W. T. Wyndham, who was the first European resident there, told me that he saw
celts used, but that they were never mounted. In those celts, without a groove of course, where the
base or butt is markedly larger than the front (Fig. 59), the inference is that such stones were used
unmounted: otherwise, owing to the method of fixation of the handle, we should have to imagine a
condition of things where, with any extra heavy blow, the stone would always be tending to slip backwards
out of the haft. Inference, as borne out by general contour and finish, may thus often afford a clue
towards elucidating the methods of use and objects for which any of these celts may have been originally
employed: at the same time it must always be remembered that there is no evidence now to prove
whether the inference is right or wrong. For instance, it is possible that the implement illustrated in
Fig. 60 may, on the above basis only, have been used hafted as an adze. The Boulia and Glenormiston
people speak of the handle as chiri or warchama: they call the celt, as well as the whole implement,
wallangara or mar-ia. In other districts, the following are some of the local names for a stone celt: —
(KYI, C. Bd.) nambal = any and every stone, large or small: (KYE) jangkawabi: (KUN) wandang;
(KRA) ngo-mun: (KWA) ai-mu-an: (KUG) balku: (NGI) moi-in: (head of Alice Creek, Koko-olkulo
tribe) arnung: (MAL) wukara; (Nicholson River) nikana; (Camooweal) kolo-o: (Rockhampton) baluin,
ba-nganu: (Keppel Island) batiur; (Miriam Yale) willinara: (Gladstone) mo-gim.
26. Scrapers.—This term is used advisedly in a general sense to include a number of implements
which, according to the more or less interchangeable uses that we know they are put, are known as
spoke-shaves, gravers, adzes, gouges, chisels, scrapers, knives. The material of construction is either
stone, shell, or tooth, and the implement is invariably drawn towards the operator.
Stone. —The more primitive form of scraper is a small piece of stone, which has been recently
indiscriminately broken so as to form a sharp edge: if this adjunct is not forthcoming as a result of the
fracture, it may be artificially produced by chipping, as in the variety met with on the Palmer (Fig. 78)
and in the Peninsula (Figs. 79, 80, 81). Throughout the far western areas, on the other hand, scrapers
made of the actual chips or splinters obtained in the process of flaking, even of the flakes or cores
themselves, are to be found strewn about the discarded camps, or sometimes even carried in the dilly-bags,
though pieces of broken-bottle glass are now rapidly replacing them. This second variety of scraper may
have portions of its edges trimmed (Figs. 82, 83, 86, 92, 93) according to the particular purpose—cutting,
scraping, etc. —to which it is applied: the trimming may be on one or both faces of the edge, and examples
are to be found where, from signs of weathering, etc., it is evident that a trimmed scraper of previous
times (Fig. 94) has been re-trimmed in previous ones. Figs. 96 to 100 show scrapers with a trimmed
concave edge ( tc) for sharpening the tips of the wooden spears: Fig. 100 represents an implement with
two of such trimmed concave edges. The amount of trimming varies greatly: Fig. 82 illustrates a
medium case, and Fig. 86 an extreme one. So far as general shape is concerned, these scrapers may be
roughly divided into acicular (Figs. 85, 86, 87), polygonal (Figs. 92, 93, 96, 97, 98, 100), and oval
(Figs. 82, 83, 84, 89, 90, 94, 95, 99); it will be easily understood that many of these scrapers are used aa
Knives (sect. 32).
27. Throughout the far western areas there is a specialised form of scraper fixed into one or both
ends of a curved wooden handle, constituting an implement known as the “ native-chisel,” “ native-adze,”
or preferably as the “ native-gouge ” (Fig. 101). This scraper is a poblid (sect. 23) showing a smooth
convex surface, due to natural cleavage, and an uneven concave one, in that the face of the latter has
been flaked so as to form a single edge: the major portion of it (Figs. 102, 103) is attached to its handle
with Triodia-, sometimes perhaps Grevillea-, cement (sect. 13), care being taken that the wood does not
actually touch the stone (Fig. 104). The handle consists of a curved piece of wood up to 21 inches in
length, thick in proportion, circular or elliptical in section, and generally cut out of “ gidyea ” (Acacia
homalophylla, A. CunnJ. According to the size and shape of its pot-lid, the implement is a cutting,
shaving, or scooping tool, and is responsible for the fluting found on the “ koolamons ” (sect. 62), and
on some of the spears, boomerangs, and nullas, for the handle-marks on the two latter weapons, for
sharpening the tips of the spears, but especially for the excavation of the wooden troughs. In the latter
case the larger variety of native-gouge is rather for “ cutting in the rough,” the smaller more for
“ finishing off ”: it is used on the charred timber with one or both hands moving (Fig. 105) towards the
operator. As far as my investigations have led me, this completed implement never formed an article of
exchange or barter: on the other hand, there was always a traffic going on with the “ pot-lids ” in the
prepared state, i.e., ready for fixation, one of my most fortunate “ finds ” being a small line of these
which I intercepted and bought at Camooweal on their way down the Georgina. In recent years one or
both of the scrapers have been substituted by a portion of disused shear-blade, barrel band, or other form
of iron ground down and rounded off to the required shape, and with this modification, when met with at
all, the implement is most commonly now found: in these cases, however, it is noteworthy that the iron
blade, unlike that employed on the Wellesleys, Gulf, and Eastern coast-line (sect. 31) is fixed by splicing,
and strengthened with twine and cement-substance (Fig. 106). The Kalkadun, Cloncurry, and Boulia
blacks speak of the whole implement as kumpata, the Glenormiston ones call it pakka-ngi, the Yaro-inga
natives (of Camooweal and Urandangie) speak of the larger varieties as ilbilla (the local name for any
pot-lid flake), and of the smaller kinds as jorjera: the Lawn Hill name is gobija. Other districts in North
Queensland where the implement has been observed are in the Rockhampton and Dawson areas, but the
handle here is straight and tapering (Fig. 108), made of “ brigalow ” (Acacia harpophylla, F. v. MJ, or
“rose-wood” (Acacia, spj, and having a considerable portion of its length covered with bark, etc., under
a coating of black cement-substance, to form a handle: two scrapers are never attached to the
one handle. The Keppel Islanders used to speak of this tool as yellam (W. T. Wyndham): the Tarumbal


natives of Rockhampton called the scraper itself ba-10, and the whole implement iram, or kundolo, the
latter term signifying an emu, the leg-bone of which, subsequently replaced by wood, is said to have
originally constituted a handle. [Dawson (Australian Aborigines) says that in old times the tibia of a
kangaroo was used; there is an authenticated specimen of this in the Australian Museum, Sydney.] I have
every reason to doubt the locality of Cape Tork ascribed to one of these implements, labelled E. 150, in
the Brisbane Museum collection, no “ pot-lid ’ scrapers having, so far, been met with by me anywhere
throughout the Peninsula. Along the Georgina River and especially to the west of it, a similar specialised
form of scraper is attached to the base of the handle-end of the leaf-shaped spear-thrower, so as to make
a native-gouge of it (Fig. 107) for sharpening up the wooden spear-tip.
28. Shell. —The same remarks applied to any recently-broken piece of stone being used as a
scraper (sect. 26) hold equally good in the case of chips from any strong and convenient shell. Thus,
pieces of Donax australis, Lamarck, were used under the name of “ babba ’ by the Keppel Islanders as
scrapers, while a similar use was found for the broken shell of the Pedinogyra Cuminghamii, Gray, at
Miriam Vale (Ch. Hedley), for the Melo diadema, Lamarck, on Bentinck Island (Wellesley group), and
for the Gyrena Jukesii, Deshayes, throughout the entire north-eastern sea-board and Gulf-coast. A Donax,
Gyrena, or even a Mytilus valve may also be used as a scraper in its entirety, i.e., without breaking or
chipping, its lip or margin being sufficiently strong.
[ln the old Brisbane days, Mr. T. Petrie tells me that the blacks used to take a Donax valve,
make a hole in its centre, hold it with concave side inwards in the palm of the hand, and pressing the
upper edge of the artificial aperture against the spear-tip, scrape bit by bit away—the chips as they were
formed passing through the aperture in the shell—until the weapon was sharpened enough (Fig. 109).]
29. The snail-shell sheer, or kajiri, the Tully River name for the mollusc as well as for the completed
implement, is peculiar to the district and neighbouring islands, and requires further notice. It is
manufactured as follows:—An empty shell of the Xanthomelon pachystyla, Pfeiffer, is stuffed firmly with
grass, etc., and ground on the body-whorl behind the aperature (Fig. 110) over the sharp edge of a piece
of stone (Fig. 111). The grinding process is aided with a little water, and soon this particular portion of
the shell becomes so thin that it can be split across with the thumb-nail. When once this cut has been
made, the whole top or “ spire ” of the shell is removed by cracking it on a stone around the periphery,
with the result that there is obtained a remnant, represented in Fig. 112 from below, and in Fig. 113 from
above: in addition to the cracking on the stone, this removal is also assisted by a sharp tapping on it, and
sometimes even by biting it between the teeth. The remnant consists of the reflected aperture intact,
together with the base of the shell. To put it to use, it is held with the base up, in the right hand, by
means of the thumb, middle and ring-fingers, the fore-finger being free (Fig. 114). The top of the thumb
rests on the centre of the base, while its extreme tip meets and presses on the tip of the middle-finger,
passing through the “aperture” from underneath (Fig. 115): the top of the ring-finger pressing into the
concavity on the under-surface gives the wffiole implement more stability. The blade of this slicer is
thus constituted by the ground-down and broken edge behind the “ aperture,” with the result that, as each
slice of the particular nut, e.g., C astanospermum australe, A. Cunn. (“ Moreton Bay Chestnut,” or “ Bean
Tree ”), Cycas media, R. Br. (“ Nut Palm ”), is removed by the cutting edge pressing downwards, the
separated portion passes upwards between the thumb and shell-lip. In other words, this snail-shell
implement acts exactly like a spoke-shave, the thinness or thickness of each slice (for subsequent
preparation by soaking in water) being determined at will.
30. Tooth. —The kangaroo-tooth scraper (Figs. 116, 117, 118), of the Batavia, Pennefather, and
Erabley Rivers, of the Mac Donnell, Moreton, and Mein Districts, i.e., of practically the whole Northern
Peninsula, is in the form of a flat leaf-and-stalk shaped piece of “ ironwood ”: one side of the “ leaf ” is
generally rough, either left so or made so with gum-cement, the other smooth, the tooth being attached
to the “ stalk ”on the latter side. The tooth (NGG. rnbau-u), a kangaroo’s lower incisor, is fixed with gut,
or fibre-twine, and cement: its tip has been previously put into the edge of a flame and broken off
abruptly by well-directed and graduated pressure, so as to give a sharp cutting-edge to the enamel. The
implement (NGG forma) is employed for sharpening spear-tips, and, in some spears, for cutting the
groove into which the barb is fixed. For this purpose, the tool is held as in Fig. 119, the blob of “ gum ”
usually found on the rough side helping to prevent its slipping along the palm. The chipping, or rather
scraping, is, of course, made in a direction towards the operator. The smooth surface of the body or leaf
of the implement, greased with face-perspiration, etc., is employed as a “smoothing-board” (sect. 16):
this use of it is represented in Fig. 120, when the right hand is held fixed, the left one doing the twirling.
In the same districts where the above kind of scraper is found, half the lower jaw of the kangaroo,
with tooth in situ (Figs. 121, 122), is employed for similar purposes without any further manipulation
other than the preparation of the incisor by fire and pressure: it forms a staple article of barter, and is
known as no-ana on the Pennefather River. [Mr. Etheridge tells me that an identical implement is used
in the Collingwood Bay District of Eastern British New Guinea.] It is possible that the “ forma ” is
thus fashioned after a natural form.
The opossum-tooth graver of the Charters Towers, Boulia, and whole north-western districts, is
similarly made of an opossum’s half lower-jaw, with tooth identically prepared, but wedged into the split
extremity of a small stick (lig. 123), and bound with tendon. [An exactly similar implement is figured
by Smyth as used by the Yarra tribe, around Melbourne, in the old days (“ Aborigines of Victoria,” 1878,
1., p. 349, f. 164).] It is used mainly for the graving of the boomerangs, and occasionally for the special
and fine fluting met with on extra good spears or nullas: in its manipulation, the movement is always
towards the operator.
31. Iron. —As might have been expected, with the advance of European settlement, scrap-iron
filed or ground down is rapidly replacing stone for scrapers. Thus, on the Palmer, in the hinterland of
Princess Charlotte Bay, etc., a piece of iron from barrel-hoop or spade so treated is used for sharpening
spear-tips, and has special names applied to it, e.g., KLA. lahinu, KRA. telmemuka, KWA. kanina. The
handle here is interesting in that it is composed of two flat pieces of wood, with the blade in between, the
whole tied round with twine, and covered with cement-substance (Figs. 124, 125, 126).


On the Eastern and Gulf coasts as well as on the Wellesley Islands (certainly Mornington and
Forsyth), the iron may be wedged into the split extremity of a straight wooden handle. Such larger-sized
implements (Fig. 127) are certainly used as scooping tools for hollowing out canoes (Endeavour River,
Bloomfield River), and “ koolamons ” (Mitchell River), as well as for scrapers; they are generally gripped
with both hands, like the native-gouge (Fig. 105). The iron utilised may be anything from a piece of
barrel-hoop to a ground-down rasp, the sides of the split being tightened with twine and cement-substance.
The Gunanni call these large wedge-iron scrapers (up to a total length of 25 inches) baralge-mbina. In the
Wellesley group, as well as on the neighbouring mainland, there are similar implements (Figs. 128, 129),
but of comparatively small size (the handle may be up to 9f inches), and worked with the one hand only,
the hand-grip alone tightening the split into which the blade is wedged. The Mornington Islanders call
such a smaller weapon, as a whole, beram-beram, after the local term for iron, and the stone, which the
latter has replaced, riambi; they speak of the handle as wenba. This method of fixing an iron blade into
the split extremity of a handle is met with only in the Peninsula, along both its coast lines and on the
Gulf islands; reliable natives have assured me that the iron has replaced a stone of former times. That
this was indeed the case is rendered highly probable from the fact that the present-day stone spear-heads
of the Gulf coast, in the neighbourhood of Burketown, Point Parker, etc., are fixed into the shafts by
similar means (Fig. 130). The fixation of the stone in the Keppel Island drill (sect. 40) is also of
comparative interest. On the whole, lam inclined to the opinion that the iron scraper, with blade wedged
into the handle, should be regarded as a remnant of Papuan influences, i.e., a retrograde New Guinea
adze, rather than as a stage in the development of the native-gouge (sect. 27) with its stone scraper fixed
by cement, or its modern iron blade fixed by splicing.
Amongst aboriginals out of reach of European settlement, even sometimes amongst civilised ones,
an ordinary pocket-knife or table-knife is employed rather as a scraper (Fig. 131) than as a cutting
instrument.
[Mr. Etheridge figures a piece of a wheel-tire mounted as a celt or hammer, from North
Queensland (Proc. Linn. Soc. New South Wales, 1891, VI. (2), pi. XXXV.), and a portion of a horse-shoe
from the Walsh River, Queensland, as a kind of pick ( Loc. cit., pi. XXXVI.). There are several specimens
of these horse-shoe picks in the School of Arts Museum, Cooktown, the majority of them from the Palmer.
The late Hon. W. H. Browne, one of the early miners on this field, assured me that the reasons given by
the blacks for spearing the horses was solely in order to gain possession of the iron shoes.]
32. Knives, Saws. — Stone. —The stone knife in its primitive form is a piece of flaked quartzite or
chert, made as required, and discarded after use, as, for instance, in the removal of an emu- or kangaroo-
skin : some such implements are represented in the figures illustrative of sect. 26.
The stone knife for permanent use, as an article of trade and barter, is manufactured as follows
The necessary flake having been finally obtained by the process already described (sect. 24), its base is
fixed into a blob of cement-substance, usually Triodia or Grevillea (sect. 13), which is either rounded and
smoothed nicely off to fit the hollow’ of the hand (Fig. 132), or else lengthened by the addition of a piece
of wood (Figs. 135, 141). The knife is primarily a fighting implement, for jagging into the adversary’s
shoulder, buttocks, etc., but is also used for incising generally. Along with the implement there is
generally a sort of sheath (Fig. 134), made of longitudinally-placed strips of “ tea-tree bark wound round
and round with opossum twine, covered more or less with “ kopai (sect. 17), and enclosing at its apex
pome emu- or other feathers, which, projecting inwards, protect the flake-point. This flake, however, is
gradually becoming replaced by iron obtained from disused shear-blades, barrel-hoops, etc.: the handle is
also undergoing modifications, a fairly common form being its encasement in the testicle-pouch removed
from sheep, goat, or kangaroo. The stone from which the flake is manufactured is obtainable along the
heads of the Burke and Wills Rivers, the country around Lawn Hills, along the head-waters of the
Georgina as w r ell as the ranges west (Toko) and east (Selwyn) of this stream, but not on the Mulligan.
From the upper Georgina and Selwyn Ranges, the completed knife travels, for purposes of exchange and
barter:— (a) across to the Cloncurry and upper Flinders River, ( h ) to the middle Diamantina River via
Noranside, Boulia, and Marion Downs, or via Springvale, (c) to the upper Diamantina River via Kynuna.
In addition to this home-manufactured article of these North-Western districts, there is undoubtedly a
large import of these knives taking place from the Northern Territory, across the border from
Wollogorang southwards: the handles of these latter are more or less decorated with red, white, and black
pigments in the form of a spotted pattern. In the Boulia district, the handle of the implement is spoken
of as kanti-maro (i.e., cement-possessor), and the sheath as muntabilla: the weapon as a whole is
known by the same name as the blade —PPT. ku-ya, MIT. kanggari, KAL. wo-yen, etc. Descriptions of
some of these knife-blades are given in sect. 24.
33. Shell. —The edge of the valve of the Cyrena Jukesii, Deshayes, may be used for cutting bark,
etc., on both the Eastern and Gulf coasts, including the Wellesley Islands, and for splitting the distal
extremity of the wommera (for fixation of the peg) on the Batavia and Pennefather Rivers. In the
Moreton Bay district, the valve of the Donax was applied to similar purposes (T. Petrie). On the Keppel
Islands, the hair used to be cut off by a sort of sawing movement with the sharp edge produced by
splitting a “ cuttle-shell ” vertically down its centre. At Cape Grafton, the shell of Perna Cumingti,
Reeve (KUG. weta), has its edge ground down for slicing up certain nuts preparatory to cooking. Only
up in the Peninsula, on the Pennefather River, have 1 seen the whole valve of any shell fixed into a
handle: this is the implement (NGG. tchui) used for making the body-scars, before glass came into use.
The shell thus employed is that of Tellina pharaonis, Hanley (NGG. boranganama) fixed into the split
extremity of a small wooden pencil, with its anterior cutting end projecting (Fig. 142); occasionally, two
valves, not in natural apposition, are fixed similarly in the one extremity of a handle: the alleged reason
for having two shells attached was, that if one were to get broken during the course of the operation, the
other would be available, and so prevent the " patient making any valid protest for postponing the rest
of the agony to some future opportunity.


34. Tooth, etc. —The tooth-knife is made of an elongate ironwood lath with a slot on one side, into
the distal half of which some eight or nine sharks’ teeth are fixed with gum-cement (Fig. 143). There is
generally also some similar cement on both tip and butt, the latter having a looped twine attached to it.
When a man proposes attacking with this weapon, he hides it from his adversary’s view, either in his
left arm-pit, or hangs it by the loop from over his forehead, so as to lie behind his neck: at suitably close
quarters, the blade is suddenly brought to the front, seized by the butt-end, and made to hack the victim’s
flank or buttock. I have noticed these weapons up to Bor 9 inches in length. The first I met with was
on the Palmer, whence it had been obtained from the Kundara natives, at the mouth of the Mitchell, who
called it kulkong: the Koko-minni blacks speak of it as alng-wa, the term in both cases indicating a tooth.
It was said to be used as a knife for the “ hacking ” purpose already described, and never for sawing
meat. The Gunanni speak of it as kappatora.
[A similar implement w r as in use at King George Sound, W.A. (P. B. King: “ Intertropical and
West Coasts of Australia,” 1839, XL, p. 139 ; also, see Smyth, “ Aborigines of Victoria,” 1878, 1., p. 341, f.
151). Mr. Etheridge has also figured a specimen without locality in which the teeth are those of the shark
Garcharias lamia, Risso. (“ Records Australian Museum,” 1902, IV., No. 5, p. 207, pi. XXXVI).]
On the Tully River I have already reported (Bulletin No. 3, Food, etc.: sect. 12) the use of the
lawyer-cane as a cross-cut saw for getting certain edible grubs out of soft and rotten timber.
35. Hand-picks. — The picks or oyster-stones of Bentinck, Mornington, and Forsyth Island, in the
Wellesley group, are formed of pieces of quartzite (“billy”), jasper, or quartzite with jasper in part,
chipped fairly carefully to a point, but the actual manufacture of which was not observed. They are
more or less pyramidal, measuring up to sj| inches long, and wide in proportion (Figs. 144
to 149), clasped firmly at the butt for removing the oysters from off the rocks, their method of
action being very similar to that of a pick. On Mornington and Forsyth they are known as
riambi, the same name applied to the stone which the islanders told me has since been replaced
by the blade of the iron scrapers (sect. 31). [ln connection with these picks on Bentinck Island,
where they were first discovered, it may be mentioned that, although no punk was seen associated, I
originally suggested that, whatever else they might be, they acted the part of flints in raising fire: they
certainly gave rise to a spark when struck. Colour was lent to the suggestion by the fact that on each of
my visits here, all the members of my party carefully examined the camps for fire-sticks, but with a
negative result, and I am still puzzled to know how these islanders make fire. The timidity of the
Bentinck natives is such that only on one occasion, during the course of three visits, have I been able to
come into direct touch with them. They neither communicate with the mainland and neighbouring
islands, nor speak the same language as the Mornington and Forsyth blacks, which has been identified:
in fact, they appear to have been isolated from the outside world long prior to the time when the present
inhabitants first occupied the neighbouring islands of the group.]
36. Pounders. —The “nardoo-stone” (Fig. 150) of the Boulia and upper Georgina districts is a rolled
sandstone boulder, employed primarily, as its name implies, for pounding and breaking the hard shells of
the “ nardoo ” ( Marsilea Drummondii, Braun); its edges are more or less trimmed by the continued
pounding, so as to produce an oval implement with flattened upper and under surfaces, just big enough
to be clutched firmly with one hand. By the Pitta-Pitta tribe at Boulia, this stone is called murra-tuno
(cf. murra = hand, tau-e = to strike): at Glenormiston and Roxburg it is named porri (= rock, stone).
In other areas the pounder may be replaced by any basalt, diorite, etc., boulder-pebble conveniently to
hand, or by special mallets and hammers. In the Rockhampton district, and on the Keppels, it w r ould
almost seem that pounders were used in pairs, like mill-stones: the upper one was an oval flattened
pebble, the lower, of irregular shape and varying size, usually presenting a slightly hollowed surface.
The Rockhampton (Tarumbal) blacks, certainly distinguished these by name —kundala for the pounding,
and ke-wal or karain for the pounded, stone —but never carried them about when shifting camp: they
just planted them, when not in use, up in the fork of a tree. Besides being used for seeds and nuts,
pounders may be employed for breaking up pigments.
37. Hammers — Stone. —The head of the stone-hammer is made, without any signs of flaking—
certainly not of grinding—from a sub-angular pebble, the worn face often indicating the work that has
been done with it. The pebble is fixed into its handle on identical lines as a celt when used for an axe,
fixation being similarly secured by means of fibre-twine and cement (Figs. 151, 152, 153, 154). It is
employed for tapping on the bark when the sheet is being removed (sect. 1) and for breaking open some
of the harder nuts, e.g., pandanus: in the former case, its hammering helps to loosen the bark from the
subjacent tissues after the limiting incisions have been made. I found the implement in use throughout
the Princess Charlotte Bay hinterland, in 1898, and again on the Palmer, in the course of the following
year. I have already suggested that these implements may have been utilised in the manufacture of
stone-celts (sect. 25). Local names are KWA. ambianga, KRA. ngo-mon, KLA. wu-ru, KMI. no-ra.
38. Wood (Mallets and Anvils). —On the Pennefather, Batavia, and Embley Rivers, both hammer
and anvil (NGG. ko and ko-ri respectively) are in use: they are made of “ iron-wood,” and the hammers
are up to 16| inches long. There is no distinction between head and handle in the mallets (Fig. 155), the
one passing almost imperceptibly into the other: the extremities are irregularly truncated. The anvil is
a more or less rectangular block of wood, flat and elongate (Fig. 156), measuring up to inches long.
Another very primitive type of implement (Figs. 157, 158, 159) is met with on Bentinck Island, in the
form of a mucronate-pointed stick up to 2 feet in length: it is cut from a small limb of mangrove, the
bark removed, both ends sharply pointed, and may be uniformly covered with red pigment. Beyond the
natural tapering of the limb itself, there is no differentiation between head and handle. It is used for
hammering, digging, and perhaps also for knocking over birds, iguanas, etc. Evidence of the use of these
implements for hammering or pounding was afforded in the presence of adherent particles of vegetable
fibre and debris, the polished nature of some of the handles, certain of which bore handle-marks in the
form of shell-cuts, and the accompanying miniature-log anvils (Fig. 160), on which the worn surface
showed where they had been repeatedly struck : it is quite possible that the anvils had once been hammers.
That these same sticks were also employed for digging was shown by similar reasoning strengthened by


the fact that though several heaps of underground roots had here and there been gathered ready for
preparation, there was nothing whatever met with in the shape of the ordinary spatulate digging-stick
of the mainland. On the grounds that I had no actual proofs of their being used as throwing-sticks
(nulla-nullas), and that there are no dingoes, kangaroo, wallaby, etc., on the island to throw at, I have
purposely refrained from applying that term to them. Considering that the only cutting implement
(scraper) on this island is the valve of the Cyrena shell, and that such a hard timber as mangrove
would probably not be so peculiarly pointed without adequate reason, I would hazard the opinion that the
tips indicate the method whereby the implement has been cut away from the limb of which it once formed
a part: to bisect such a limb, for instance, transversely with a shell is impossible, but to scrape all round
from above and below r with the curved valve until the central attenuated portion is thin enough to be
snapped across, is a comparatively easy process (Fig. 161).
On Forsyth and Mornington Islands, where the hammer is called toanam, the flattish oval head is
certainly distinct from the handle, though the acual demarcation is incomplete (bigs. 162, 163, 164): it
is up to 15 inches long.
In the hinterland of Princess Charlotte Bay the mallet, also made of ’ iron-wood, bears resemblance
to the shape of a cricket bat: an elongate flattish head, and a shorter circular handle with the demarcation
complete (Figs. 165, 166). It is similar to the model of the implement made by an aged native in the
Atherton scrubs when showing me the old-time method of manufacturing a blanket by hammering a bark-
sheet. From 11 to 14 inches long, and of considerable weight, this mallet is employed for breaking up
nuts, pounding various food-stuffs, and other articles; it is not made as occasion requires, but is carried
amongst the impedimenta from camp to camp. As far as I could learn, it is essentially a woman s
implement in this district. KRA. angkurti-in, KWA. ngau-al, KLA. mulum.
Lower dowm the coast-line, at Bathurst Head, the shape of the implements, still made of iron-
wood,” was observed to be yet further modified: the head was much stumpier, and at the same time
circular (Fig. 167). One in my possession is about a foot long, and weighs close upon 7 lb. Captain Cook
speaks of a wooden mallet as among the few native tools found on the Endeavour River: there is none
there now.
Amongst the blacks at the mouth of the Mitchell River, I found a large flat hammer and anvil
combined (Fig. 168): it was made of “iron-wood,” and measured 17| inches long.
The two-handled club of the Pennefather, Batavia, and Enibley Rivers is now obsolete (Fig. 169).
It was made from an aerial root of the “ black-mangrove ( Rhizophora mucrouata , a limb being
chosen with a fair knee or bend in it, so that when cut away to a length of about feet, the implement
would include the markedly flattened portion beyond it, the latter constituting the head. After removal,
it was stripped of its bark, heated throughout over a fire, and finally painted red and white: the convex
edge of the enlarged distal portion was the striking surface. The implement was used for breaking up
fragments for fire-w'ood, for removing a tree-limb after it had been hacked round by a celt, and for
splintering up the rotten timber which contained the edible grubs. It was called au-nu by the Pennefather
River natives.
39. Digging-sticks. —These are essentially womens’ implements, carried about by them, and
employed for digging up “ yams,” roots, etc.; the almost universal pattern according to which they are
fashioned renders them admirably suited for the purpose. Made of some strong and heavy timber,
between 2 and 4 feet long, the attenuated spatulate extremity (Fig. 170) easily finds its way down when
stuck into the ground, and not only offers increased leverage in loosening the soil, but also assists in
shovelling it to the surface, when the operator exercises the usual to-and-fro movement. To harden the
extremity it is often charred with fire. In the neighbourhood of civilisation the spatulate extremity has
come to be replaced by a length of rounded scrap-iron, sometimes even a table-knife blade, firmly
cemented into a handle. On the Wellesley Islands (other than Bentinck), and very exceptionally
elsewhere, the extremity of the implement is acicular (Fig. 171). Similarly, a broken spear-tip may
occasionally be utilised as a digging-stick. The timber out of which digging-sticks are made comes from
the harder species of mangrove, and eucalpt, and from “ iron-wood where generally available: from the
Acacia Rothii, Bail. (NGG. lar), and Unona Wardiana, Bail. (NGG. niadoa), on the Pennefather River,
from the Scyphiphora hydrophyllncea, Gaertn. (KYI. yarokal), on the Endeavour River. The handle of
the weapon is often to be seen decorated with red and white paint in bands, or one colour alone may
just be smeared on indiscriminately: the Pennefather River women fix the pigment on the weapon
with bees’ wax. The local names for digging-sticks are apparently independent of the timbers employed:
NGG. kirtru, KYI. dirm-ba, gana, KYE. Bid. tchu-al, KRA.KMI. an-a, KWA. nggor, PPT. kallara (the
name of a “ yam ”), MIT. tande.
40. Drills. -Stone. —l saw the stone-drill used on Big Keppel Island in 1897, for piercing cocoa-nut
and turtle-shell in the manufacture of fish-hooks, and learnt that it was also employed for piercing the
units of nautilus-shell so as to string them into fore-head circlets. This tool (Fig. 172) was also observed
in use in this same island by the late Mr. W. T. Wyndham, the first white resident, in the early eighties.
A piece of white quartz was wedged into the split extremity of a piece of grass-tree (Xanthorrhoea)
peduncle, running up to a length of about 2 feet. In the two specimens I secured, “ the stone is of vein-
quartz, a natural slab showing its full thickness, and totally unworked: the edges are broken, but not
flaked, and there is no definite outline.” When in use, the implement is held vertically and twirled
between the flats of the hands, pressing downwards —just as in the ordinary form of fire-stick (sect. 7).
The Keppel Islanders spoke of the quartz as bu-ren, the fibre tying it round as ren, and the portion ol
Xanthorrhoea peduncle, which gives the name to the implement as a whole, as ralla.
41. Tooth. —The tooth-drill of the Princess Charlotte Bay district is made with an incisor, from
any of the larger species of kangaroo, w r hich is stuck into a short handle, and fixed in position with twine
and cement (Fig. 173). The exact method of fixation consists in splitting (with shell) the extremity of the
handle into four, by means of two cuts at right-angles, tying a piece of string around some little distance


beyond, to prevent the splits from extending (Fig. IMa), and inserting the base of the tooth in the
double wedge so produced (Fig. 174 b): the extremity of the handle is next firmlywound round with
strong twine, and covered with ‘iron-wood cement, while the stung W IIC1 > holes in the
required after once the resin has set, is finally removed. It >s wrth thrs tool that the holes m.the
spear-thrower (for fixing the peg) are drilled, as also the holes m the constituent pieces ol *ell forming the
necklaces; it is named after the term indicative of a tooth. On the coasWme w han
the Staaten the constituent pieces of the shell necklaces or tore-head circlets used to he pierced with a
opossum-tooth drill.
42. Shell.—The shell-drill of the Batavia, Pennefather, and Embley Rivers is manufactured with a
sharply-pointed chip broken off from the shell of the Cyrena Jukenz, Deshay e'c * s * lement
fibre and cement substance into the split extremity of a small woo en penu ( ig. )• name d f ter
is employed like the other drills for piercing the components of the shell necklaces, etc., and a
the shell utilised, e.g., NGG. onyi.
43. Awls.- The awl is a fairly common implement, n.et with wherever the TX^olTherX^he
of a distal (tip, shaft), morticed into a proximal (butt, halt), portion: indeed, thisi i. J
mortice is effected. It is always of bone, usually fro... a marsupial or avian leg-bone from 61 to 11 inches
long, and got into shape by chipping and by grinding: its distal ty vanes both ... » » 1 “ a l
(Figs. 176, 177, 178, 179), according to the particular work required ef it. c “" 6 p f thCT
Is if carried in the men’s dilly-bags. The method of employment tor spears as observed on the
River —a description which holds good for all other districts may e g iy cn (S' extremity the
some twine tightly round the proximal portion of the spear, about 4 or o inches a peg
operator splits it up with a piece of shell (Fig. 180, a, b), and keeps the wedge. open
(Fig. 180 c). With the help of the awl, the next process is to sciape an pic x [The
of the split so as to leave a circular aperture when the peg and twine are removed (big. 180, de) ifie
distal portion of the spear is now fixed in with cement-substance, and t' ITis"
either with vegetable-fibre twine or, preferably, kangaroo-tendon, wh c . - P
cement, and finally smoothed over with the “ smoothing-board.” In the ca B e.of fist : and a few <.the.
spears, where the distal portion is multiple, these separate pieces are morticed as °™’;^ rst f oe3j
■w.»- s-d jrsz :z.si "i™
there) prior to the concavity (NGG. ndd-a) being made by the awl for the reception of the w
The awl is here and elsewhere also used in excavating the socket of harpoons (sect. 6) l
charring (not splitting, as in the case of the spears), and on the Pennefather River efe te hollow g
the ear ring tubes. The implement has special terms applied to it:—KRA. tang, ALA. al pur, ixv*
an-gaina, NGG. rte-uma, KYI. C.Bd. pegur.
44 Stilettos.-! have borrowed this term from the similarly-shaped fou nd in a
civilised woman’s work-basket, for making eyelet-holes As met with among the
183), it is from 6to 8} inches long, and made either,o:bone * 1 J t ’ of J w stiletto has
implement lias' a f lbt Hedge-hog quills were used
as stilettos for making up opossum-cloaks by the Brisbane blacks (2. tttne).
45. Qrinding-Stones-Where, as,fa the North-Western
of vegetable diet, a special form of gi aiding- oi mea ing s on . former is bilaterally convex
stone or rubber, and a fixed slab upon which it is rubbed a ndpe B sed 11*™ e 7 lgi) .
on its under surface, more or less circular, and any ling) direction being accompanied with a
it is pressed with both hands backwards ant 01 waits, e- to yg inches long, and broad in
kind of initial half-circular movement at the wrist Die oval 8 ’ almost invariably shows two
proportion (Fig 185) lias a more or less * rre or rubber has been working: the degree
longitudinal shallow depressions along which tl e < g , amo unt of trituration to
of convexity on the under-surface of the latter is, of course, de P^ den Vhe material, a fissile
which it has been exposed in being groum a ong. found only (so far as this ethnographical
sandstone, from which the slabs are manufac me , n ree fc one Jf the western tributaries of the
district is concerned) in the country' aroum a ay. ( ’ the completed articles which
Georgina) and neighbouring Toko Ranges, where the natives work « in ™ J re moval
they bring for barter either to Carandotta or to Roxburgh The exact locality ana p
from out of the natural rock is said to be a secret among the old £ into the
detached by means of fire and then split with bone pe to • Leichhardt-Selwyn Ranges,
possession of the Kalkadun and other trF.es living along and nmth oj the for Carlo and
At Roxburgh they start on their journey down the Georginareach the middle
the upper Mulligan, or at Herbert Do™ or ou la, v e V should be traded such immense
jara-jara at Boulia.


. *he neighbourhood of Normanton I have seen a rubber of shell agglomerate used with an
inegulaify broken piece of grey-wacke, a very altered sandstone from the Devonian (Fig. 186). In
the uppei Peninsula and along the eastern seaboard it is comparatively rare to come across any specialised
funn of grindstone, a circumstance hardly to be wondered at, considering that, instead of grain, we meet
v ith a vegetable diet composed almost entirely of roots and fruits. There is evidence, however, that some
o these coastal natives, amongst whom these articles are no longer met with, used in former times to
possess them: the Cape Bedford aboriginals, for instance, speak of the fixed stone as dindi, and of the
rubber as mar-ngamai, although they have no examples to show me.
46. Prodder, ‘ Lawyer-feeler.” The prodder consists of a piece of lawyer-cane ( Calamus sp.) some
( or 12 feet long (with all its “ prickles ” removed), upon the extremity of which a bulbous knob of bees’
v.ax has been fixed (fig. 187). It is inserted into tree- or ground-holes, the cane being naturally well
ac apted for the purpose, when the waxed tip picks up any opossum- or bandicoot-fur, etc., against which
it may e pressed. It thus serves the double purpose of confirming the presence of some particular
ammai, and accurately gauging its situation in the log or hole, so far as distance is concerned, whereby
the labour ol cutting away or digging at the right spot is reduced to a minimum. For transport purposes,
the implement is bound round into a coil, so as to be slung on the shoulder, and is carried about by men.
It is met with in the Princess Charlotte Bay district, and named after the material, e.g., KWA. aru-ya.
do the giubs of certain moths out of the tree-butts, etc., in the Rockingham Bay district, “ The
blackfellow is armed with a ‘ lawyer-feeler,’ which can be obtained any length up to 10 feet. The feeler
is stripped of all its spikes (prickles) but one -the one is left at the'point—and is inserted in the hole
made by the grub, and gently pushed down. The pliability of the feeler enables it to follow the bends and
turnings o the hole until it reaches the grub, which is known to the blackfellow by the stoppage of the
feeler. He then continues pressing and turning the implement for a few moments, and then gently
withdraws it to find he has hooked ” his prize (R A. JohnstoneJ.
47> . Swabs. For mopping up honey, green-ant “mush” (Bull. No. 3, p. 17), etc., use is made of
tie .pm if ex Inrsutis, Labill. (“Spring Bolling Grass”) or Panicum semialatum, R. Br., as follows:
two or three handfuls of the grass, after removal of the roots, are well rubbed up between the hands,
v! i vater sometimes, and then left to dry, forming a small more or less intercoherent bunch. These
dried bunches are used throughout North Queensland, where very few intercepted dilly-bags would be
round.to be without one. They are named after the particular plant: in the case of the Panicum, NGG
o-thi, m the case of the Spinifex, KYI. bai-tchin, KM I. awa-ra, KWA. ni-aura, KUN. koradja, etc. At
tape tledtord, other grasses may be used, but the swab in any case is called bai-tchin.
bjn lp withe of the Malaisia tortuusa, Blanco ("Crow Ash”), is also employed throughout the
Aorth tor a similar purpose. Its extremity having been previously well chewed and dried, so as to become
frayed (tig. 188), it is poked up into the tree-hole after a bees’ nest, where it collects the honey, is pulled
out, and then sucked by the hunter, an operation which can be repeated ad lib. On the Pennefather
River, a species of bamboo (NGG. ngora), and at Cape Bedford, on the Bloomfield, and around Atherton,
the lawyer-cane (Calamus), are also similarly employed. Such withes are usually carried from camp to
camp and locally named after the plant, e.g., KYI. wot-yirin, KWA. ko-adam, ari-luar, KRA. dingalka,
KLA. ku-la, NGG. kai-muna. 6
[the Brisbane blacks used to take a sheet oft’ the inner bark from the underground portions of
certain fig-trees, as well as the local “ native stinging-tree,” and alternately hammer and chew it. This
sheet might be as much as 18 by 12 inches, and, acting like a flannel, could easily soak up the honey from
a bees nest; it was then wrung out into water, the sweetening of which was much relished. They also
employed the chewed end of the Calamus as a swab (T. Petrie).\
48. Fly-flicks. Fans.—ln most camps, during the hotter months, the wing of some comparatively
large bird, such as the “Native-Companion” (Crus australasianus, Gld. J or “Plain-Turkey” (Eupodotis
anstrahs , Gray) is often to be seen employed as a fly-flick, possibly as a fan. At Cape Bedford, on the
aimer, Mitchell, Nassau, and Staaten Rivers, fly-flicks are manufactured with Emu-feathers, somewhat after
the fashion of a feather-duster, the quills being bound together onto a short handle, the binding being
strengthened with gum-cement (Fig. 189) : these are made and used by men, generally the older ones, and
known to the Koko-ynmdir as wandaka, and to the Koko-minni as ata-angka (feather) or an'va- (emu)-
ata-angka. On the Bloomfield, specimens of similar design are made of Cassowary feathers. The Palmer
luyer women employ flicks (KMI. wai-yir) composed of human-hair twine tassels, each formed of a loop
twisted upon itself: these tassels are merely bound together at one extremity without any wooden handle.
flicl« eVer the deBper kmds ° f a P ron ‘ belt are ™et with, these may be rolled up and similarly used as
v .v, Inde P en< J entl y °f an J of the preceding articles, the nuisance of being pestered with flies is abated
by the smoke derived from burning the timber of Santalum lanceolatum, R. Br. (“Sandal-wood”) on
the 1 aimer River, or Xanthorrhcea stumps at Cape Bedford. ’
/tv I nn\ He ad-Pads.—Head-pads are formed of strips of Melaleuca bark bound round into a thick ring
lg; /n)’ and P la °f d on . th ® bead so as to distribute the weight when anything extra heavy is being
carried that way. It was in 1898 that I first saw these articles used—on the upper reaches of Birthday
Creek, a stream running into Princess Charlotte Bay. They were subsequently met with, made after the
same pattern and material (as well as of grass) at Cape Bedford, in the Palmer camps, and again at the
mouths of the Mitchell and Norman Rivers. KMI. oko-ana, KYI. C.Bd. mordi. g
50. Netting-Needles.—ln the Boulia district, and beyond it on the Georgina, the needle employed
in weaving the pit un-bags and other than netting-stitch bags was formerly made from the mid-rib of a
1 lain-Turkey s wing-feather, with a piece of twine attached to its proximal extremity (Fig 191)* as the
twine became used up, another piece was spliced into it, the original attachment of twine to needle when
once made not being interfered with. Some of the older Glenormiston blacks told me last year that
such a needle, the so-called tatti, might also be made out of other birds’ wing-feathers.


In manufacturing their fish- and emu-nets, the natives of the North-Western districts use
needle, over a foot long, with a small lump of cement-substance at either eu ,u wi the Peninsula
being just wound off and on as required: the Pitta-Pitta blacks call rt a karkambole the■Pem™'*
along the coast-line between the Mitchell and Staaten Krvers, the Gunarmr use a
netting-needle, the re-da, for making fish-nets and netting-stitch bags, inch a needle is either composed
of two pieces of stick (from some cabbage-tree palm, etc.), tied at a short distance from each crtrc-nity
(Fig. 192), or of one single piece split at the extremities, with a twine tied round each to the
splits enlarging (Fig. 193): the larger kinds, used for larger meshes, may be charred at their extreu
for hardness’ sake.
[At Brisbane, netting-needles were made of two pieces of wood tied together at, their middle, the
twine being rolled between the two (T. Petrie).]
51. Spindles. —The commonest form of spindle for manufacturing twine is a fine twig with
projecting bmnch cut off short (Fig. 194): there is reason to believe tha * «‘ property
particular shrub, etc., not liable to split, or else possessing some other compaia y P V V
in that, as at Barclay Downs, I have seen several of them tied up in bundles, a vrew^to
barter. On other occasions, if such a forked twig is not available, the 100 v . it " vi p
of cement-substance (Fig. 195) or fibre-twine (Fig. %^n
that the free end of the twine passes over the fork. In the Bouna district, me sp , M * e
a term applied to the fork of the fingers, toes, or a tree, any forked stick: the Morehead and Musgra
River natives call it nggai-aja.
52. Strainers, Colanders.-These articles (Fig. 197) are made of several 'according to
interwoven by means of two continuous strands (a i and u), mi theform of a
the type of bLketiy described as B (c)on p. 13 of my Bulletin No. 1, String f*. J h ' as
strands, however, are doubled over a " border-string (i*J attache to wo tit , border-
soon as the straight, basal strands are fixed in position by the first row of thchaintmst.
string is so-called because it constitutes the border of three out of the four sides ol the colanaer w
zs? a:
JSf t!rlS tS
applied to their pliable baskets or sieve-bags.
ro bae-s Baskets —From a structural point of view, pliable dilly-bags cannot always be
distinguished from nm,-pliable baskets: U the common between LTitehell
others only by women; particulars of these will he given as they y ll^ 1 yI « String, and other
“ oUgh ‘ t 0 7 d - dilly-bags (as well as the other articles
commenced 6 vvith - 'X* its being attached, to the basal strancL Thus
after fixation onto an upright (PI. XL, 1) the continuous strand «knottecl o« -nto “
nassed through. the top row of meshes (1 1. XL, *) and tied, ’ . , , . fu„j- inst
Cmels Already m'ade will thus become stretched ‘SaV
undergone, the netting process now proceeding from left to right m y
(PI. XL, 3). .
and the illustrations referred to in that same section under Pi.
by Figs. 199, 200, 201, in the present Bulletin. B.“i» District: these
types of basketry, etc., work have been discox ere m . }n gection \g G f that pamphlet under
K in Coot , a;
generally contains a lump or two of paint and resin. b o ,, liaments ”... In addition to being
baskets'may be'utilised as strainers or colanders in the
preparation of various nuts and yams, as nets for fish, etc.
54. Variations in Different DM*.- On the
(NGG. to-to, do-do) are woven on the A (u) n. and nL <A ' Cmm g i v i ng a white twine, and
which have been identified as I . n i**dn, mn n, • ... t are manufactured by the women, but
LdZly'byZfmfnT'thTtZZerarirele runs up'to a comparatively large size. The baskets, small


(NGG. ndo-re) and large (NGG. mbai), have a local peculiarity in that the mouths are comparatively wide
(big. 204): they are manufactured all on the B ( c ) type, from either the Heleocharis sphacelata, R. Br.,
Hoemodorum coccineum, R. Br., or Panicum semialatuin, R. Br. The smaller baskets, with handle-
string slung over the shoulder, and held in the armpit, are worn by the males. The larger varieties are
utilised by the women, either as colanders or as bags, in the latter case letting them hang down the back
from a handle supported across the fore-head: they are also often employed as cradles to rock the babies
in, by attaching the handle to an overhanging tree-limb. Further down the Gulf-coast, extending from
the Mitchell to the Flinders, and stretching right aci’oss the Peninsula to the eastern coast-line, dilly-bags
are constructed on the A (a) ii., iii., and iv. types, though the geographical distribution of the A (a) ii.
appears to be limited within this area to the country north of the Gilbert, and west of the junction of the
Mitchell and Palmer Rivers. Women alone make the A (a) ii. and iii. patterns, but use no netting-needle,
the finished bag, apparently named after the plant-fibre used, being known to the Gunanni tribe as omba.
Women also make the A (a) iv. bags, but with a netting-needle (sect. 50) ; the Gunanni call the completed
article kaljo-ma. The pliable baskets or sieve-bags, the tarbulanga of the same blacks, and made by
women on the B (c) type, from Pandanus and Livistona, are met with on the Gulf-coast, between the
Mitchell and Staaten, though they are often replaced here by true strainers or colanders (sect. 52).
In the Boulia, upper Georgina, and Camooweal areas, dilly-bags are made from human-hair,
Psoralea patens, A. Gunn., and other twine on the A (a) 1., A ( h) 1., and B (b) types: the last-mentioned
is always met with in the boat-shaped article (Figs. 205, 206) peculiar to the district. The Pitta-Pitta
name for these navicular bags is berdaje. I found no traces of baskets in these areas.
Coining now to the eastern portions of the State, in the country bordering around Princess
Charlotte Bay, dilly-bags are manufactured from twines derived from Livistona australis, Mart. (“ Cabbage
liee ), Acacia Jatij olia, Benth., Malaisia tortuosa, Blanco (“Crow Ash ), Sterculia caudata, Hew. (one
of the Marne trees ), Macaranga tanarius, Muell. Arg., and Ficus fasciculata, F. v. M., according to
types A (a) i., ii., iii., and iv. The reddish twine from A. latifolia is either employed wholly in weaving
the bag or, especially in the A (a) iii. pattern, may be used alternately with the Malaisia or Sterculia to
produce a horizontally-striped red and white appearance. The completed article has a comparatively
great depth. Perhaps the commonest method up here of carrying these dilly-bags is to slip the handle-
string over the fore-head, the bag hanging behind between the shoulders. Baskets from the Hoemodorum
coccineum are on the B (c) pattern. It is apparently the wmrnen who alone manufacture both baskets and
dilly-bags.
On the Palmer River, dilly-bags (KMI. an-6ra) are w r oven on the A ( a ) iii. and iv. types, the former
being know r n to the Koko-minni blacks as aln-yira, the latter as nu-ina. The fibre-twine employed is
obtained from Sterculia diversifolia, G. Don (“Black Kurrajong,” or “ Victorian Bottle-tree”), Livistona
australis, Mart. (“Cabbage-tree”), Acacia leptocarpa, A. Cunn., and Acacia lysiphloea, F. v. M. When
made of the A ( a) iii. “ pattern,’ the A. leptocarpa may be alternated with the Sterculia so as to produce
a horizontally-striped appearance. The baskets of the type B (c) are made from Pandanus sp., Spinifex
hirsutis, Labill. (“ Spring Rolling Grass ”), and Hoemodorum coccineum, and named, after the plant
utilised, anjo-ana, awii-ra, an-to respectively: they are employed almost solely for sieves or colanders.
The Endeavour River and Cape Bedford dilly-bags (KYI. burngga) are made from the Acacia
flavescens, A. Cunn. (a red twine), and the Hardenhergia retusa, Benth., on the A (a) iii. pattern of mesh,
either together or separately: in the former case we get the usual horizontally-striped red and white
appearance. Baskets, all on the B (c) type, are woven from twine derived from Hoemodorum coccineum,
Spinifex hirsutis, Imperata arundinacea, Cyr. (“ Blady Grass ”), etc., the local name of the last-
mentioned (K'i I. dirn-bur) giving the name to these articles in general. (In connection with these dilly-
bags and baskets from Cape Bedford, I would invite the reader's attention to some items on their
terminology in sect. 11 of ray Bulletin No. 2, “ The Structure of the Koko-yimidir Language.”)
I lie Bloomfield River dilly-bags (K\ E. ngon-yan), built on the A ( a ) iii. type, are made of various
Ficus (KYE. warur, tchul-bal, etc.) fibre-twines: the baskets or sieve-bags on the B (c) pattern are
manufactured from the Drymophloeum Normanhyi, F. v. M., when they are known as karkan, the name
of the plant itself, or from the Xerotes multiflora, R. Br., when they are called bal-ji, a term independent
of the material made use of.
I n C a i rns > Cardwell, Atherton, etc., districts, the dilly-bags (KUG. balkara) are of the A (a)
iii. type. The “ bi-cornual,” or as they are sometimes locally called, “ half-moon,” baskets (MAL. chau-au,
KUG. bundu, CHI. bokol) also used as sieve-bags in the washing of the Zamia and other nuts, are of a
shape (I ig. 207) peculiar to these areas, and though ut ilised by both sexes, are certainly manufactured
by men only: they are wmven on the B (c) pattern, with strips of Calamus. They are sometimes
decorated wu’th various pigments, sometimes with blood, but searching enquiry fails to discover any
satisfactory interpretation of the designs. Attention is drawn (sect. 59) to their remarkable resemblance
in shape to the local bark water-carriers. The round (Fig. 208) baskets (MAL. mindi) are made from
the Xerotes longifoha, R. Br., on a similar pattern as the preceding, but with a different arrangement in
the initial stages, by women only.
The Whitsunday Island dilly-bags are woven on the A (a) i. and A (a) iv. types.
On the coast-line between Gladstone and Broadsound, the dilly-bags, made from the Sterculia
rupestris, Benth. (“ Bottle-tree ” or “ Gouty-stem tree ”), are usually of small size, and woven on the
three types A (a) i., iii., and iv.: the two former I saw being manufactured in the North Rockhampton
and Yeppoon camps. Baskets are made on the B (a) pattern from a certain grass known to the local
Rockhampton natives as kindur, and to the Keppel Islanders as wanda: they are rounded, with bases
inclined to be pointed (Fig. 209), and are from a few inches to over a foot high.
[ln the Moreton Bay area, dilly-bags, woven with “ stinging-tree,” “ cotton-bush,” and other fibres,
were worked on the A (a) i. and A (a) iv. patterns. The baskets were made with the Schcenus
melanost achy us , R. Br., on the C (a) and D (a) types; and with the Xerotes longifolia on the B (a) type.
According to information derived from my friend Mr. Thomas Petrie, both bags and baskets were, in the
early days, called dilli by the Turrbal (Brisbane) blacks, and kuli by the Stradbroke Islanders, and each


variety of receptacle had its own special uses. Thus, the Schanm basket, manufactured by women alone,
was carried only by that sex: it was slung over the back by means of a handle-string attached to «PP os ‘
edoes of the rim [unlike those made for sale at Uunwich at the present dayj, and supported round
wearer’s neck, which was prevented being cut into in front by the opossum-cloak which was put on first.
This basket contained the food, and occasionally it held certain bones of people deceased. Similar remarks
apply to the A (a) i. type of dilly-bag. The A (a) iv. pattern of bag, on the other hand, was carried about
by men under the left arm-pit, with the handle slung over the corresponding shoulder: it might contain
one or other or all of the following articles; red pigment, dried skin of deceased friend or relative, tat,
magic crystal, kangaroo-bone stiletto (used as a hair-comb), honey-swab. Though manufactured by males,
the'A (a) iv. type of bag was used by both sexes, especially for carrying crabs and fish, often for soaking
various nuts and other food-products: in with the crabs were always placed leafy twigs of the mangrove,
which it was believed prevented these crustaceans nipping each other.]
55 Water-carriers, Troughs, “ Koolamons,” Etc.—Water-carriers may be classified according to
their source of origin, whether animal or vegetable: the former include shell-troughs, scoops, and skim
bags, the latter comprise the various vessels manufactured from the bark, timber, leaf, and f
respectively.
Shell. The large “ Lamp” (Megalatractus aruanus, Linn.j and “ Melon ’ (Melo diadema, LamkJ
shell is often used as a water-carrier. The latter, on the whole eastern coast-line north of Bowen, has
the ventral surface of the last whorl, the spire, and columella chipped away so as to form a basm (* ig.
210) If the shell be fresh, this removal may be effected straight away by means of a sharp piece of ha
stone, the line of fracture following the tapping: otherwise—and the same holds good for all
is soaked continuously in water for some three or four days previous to being manipulated The chipped
ed m may be subsequently ground down with a stone. At the Bloomfield and on the Batavia R verthe
melon shell is also used on the fire for boiling purposes. In the neighbourhood of
much of the ventral surface of the last whorl is removed as will admit of room for the hand to hold
columella as a handle (Fig. 211). From the eastern sea-board it finds its way, by trade an( t barte ,
considerable distances inland: as a carrier, it has no special name other thani its.ownKYl LBcL
dirakai KRA. dangara, KLA. wannam, KWA. rthu-anta, NGG. pera. Along the Gulf coast certainly
from the Batavia tols low down as the Mitchell Rivers, as also on the Wellesley Islands, the ventral: surface
of the last whorl of the melon shell is pierced for insertion of the thumb during transport 212).
On the Bentinck and Allen Islands, the last whorl of the Megalatractus (big. 213) was found to be
similarly treated.
Oval pieces of nautilus and melon shell are often used on the east-coast for spoons (Fig. 214):
indeed on tile Bloomfield and at Cape Bedford it is difficult to decide whether these should not rather
be classed primarily as ornaments, they being fixed sometimes with wax, sometimes by means ot a dnl e
hoirfo a s ring hanoing round the neck. Mussel-shells (Unio) without any manipulation (RYL
wtboparka) are also commonly utilised as scoops, both in coastal and inland districts. On Morning on
a piece chipped from the Tridacna (Fig. 215) was apparently used as a cup or saucer for mix g
pigment in.
56 Skin. —For the conveyance of water over long distances, skin-bags (Fig- 216) to be
manufactured whenever and wherever this commodity was scarce throughout the far Mestem districts.
What with the far better canvas water-bags and other utensils obtainable from the settlers, their
mamifacture eastwards of the Georgina River is now comparatively scarce. Made from Kangaroo,
Paddvmelon or Opossum, occasionally from Dingo, the skin is cut all the way round, high up m the neck
aggara at Glenormiston, norlo in the Kalkadun country.
57 Bark -Vessels made out of bark may be conveniently described under certain types—
the knot!’pleat, bi-clrnual, sewn-canoe, and punt-all of them, with the exception of the first, depend g
upon differences in the fixation of their extremities :
7 f 01 q oia\ another good example of a natural form, is made from
The foe(-type ot earner (Fig S . 218 iia), another Such a bulging knot, at
the gnarled excrescence met with on the bage a * oillted gtio k is used to loosen its edges, and
suitable season of the year, is hacked around . . > P scooped out by charring with fire
its bark shell thus bodily removed: the long messes, •> holes are mended with cement-substance.
and then scraping with shell or stone, w n e string passed through holes drilled on opposite sides
The vessel may be carried about by means of a handle-str 1 with along the coast-line
of its free edge. Comparatively rare nowadays, it has of re t y Judging from eight specimens, the
from the Bloomfield to the northern limits of Princess Cai ot | lied to t | is type of carrier
maximum height and width i. 16 andlBi inches KLA wlppam, KRA.
“ “ that
they were made by men, used for carrying honey, and called nyugam.]


58. The pleat- type of bark trough is made of an oblong sheet of bark folded up at its ends, which
are fixed in position either by tying, bracing, looping, or spiking. In the neighbourhood of Cooktown,
and on the Flinders group, 1 have thus seen a length of tea-tree (Melaleuca) and on the Tully River
and elsewhere another kind of bark, just tied up with string at either end, but without any supporting
sling-strap (Fig. 220) : Captain Cook, however, on the Endeavour River, speaks of “ a kind of oblong
vessel made of bark, by the simple contrivance of tying up the two ends with a withy, which, not being
cut off, serves for a handle ” ( cf. Fig. 224). Throughout the Wellesley Islands, the pleated ends of the
Melaleuca bark are maintained in position by a supporting loop of fibre-strip attached to the top corners
of the sides of the vessel: the bow-knot, acting the part of the toggle, on this strip is rove from the
outside in whence the fibre passes outside and below the bunched-up ends to be finally rove through the
opposite corner from inside out, and tucked under its own part (Figs. 221, 222). The size of these
particular Island troughs varies greatly according as the article is required to carry the larger fish-nets
and other impedimenta, or to lap up a mouthful or two of water from a native well. The spiked variety
of this type (Fig. 22-’5) is met with on the eastern coast-line, from the Bloomfield River to a good distance
north of Princess Charlotte Bay, on the Gulf coast from Pera Head to the Batavia, and in the Peninsula,
from the Palmer to as far north as the Moreton Telegraph Station. On the Endeavour River, I watched the
manufacture of one of these troughs, and found it to be as follows:—A sheet of bark (tea-tree or other), the
full size of the tree —so as to curl nicely—is removed, and its outer layer picked and peeled off with a
kangaroo-bone stiletto; the two extremities, where the pleating subsequently takes place, are especially
thinned and pared down with this implement, and finally warmed over a fire. Two superficial transverse
cuts are now made on the inner side at such distance from the extremities as to admit of the folds being
bunched up on a common basis: this being done, rhe ends are again heated and the pleats fixed in position
by skewering them through with a curved sharply-pointed “iron-wood” peg. The inner surface of the bark
constitutes the inner sui’face of the vessel. The Endeavour River natives speak of the folded ends as
itgollo, after the front of the instep which gives rise to wrinkles when the ankle is flexed. On the Embley
River, I have seen these spiked utensils supported by a fibre-twine sling-strap (Fig. 224), the terminal
loops of which pass under the skewers. Again, on the Batavia and Pennefather Rivers, there may be a
handle attached in the form of a stick, placed longitudinally, tied to the two ends of the trough (Fig.
225). [ln the pikki, a similar carrier that used to be made by the women of the Moreton Bay coastal
tribes, Mr. T. Petrie tolls me that the handle-stick, a pointed one, was pierced through both ends of the
vessel, the stick and bark being then tied together: it was employed for carrying water and honey.
Besides making the trough of tea-tree, the women also utilised a palm-leaf sheath-stalk, but when this
material was used, the two ends were skewered just below the handle-stick : it was also called a pikki,
and used for carrying the cobra.] The bark from which the spiked variety of pleat-type trough is
manufactured on the east coast is derived from the following timbers: Eucalyptus phcenicia, F. v. M.
(KYI. ngainggar) at Cape Bedford, E. resin if era, Srn., “Red” or “Forest Mahogany”, “Botany Bay
Gum,” “ Jimmy Low,” etc. (KMI. ro-angga) on the Palmer, E. corymhosa, Sm., “Blood-wood” (KYI. jin-jil),
E. tetradonta, F. v. M. (KYI. tungoi-i), and Tristania suaveoltns , Sm., “Bastard Peppermint,” “Broad-
leaved Water Gum,” or “Swamp Mahogany” (KYI. bu-jir, manga-manga), at Cooktown. In addition to
being employed for the transport of water or honey, and for the preparation of various foods, these
troughs, though of course on a larger scale, are used for carrying infants and other impedimenta across
creeks, by being pushed along in front of the swimmer. Again, the larger-sized ones on the Bloomfield,
Endeavour, Palmer, all round Princess Charlotte Bay, and in the Peninsula even north of the Coen, are
made for carrying corpses about (Fig. 226) during certain of the burial ceremonies. Local names for
these pleat-type carriers are the following: KYE. Bid tu-bal, KMI. jo-ara, KYI. C. Bd. gurlnggo, KRA.
an-du, KWA. kor, NGG. ano-a, GUN. bo-ata, and on Mornington Island (Karo-wa dialect) wor-de.
59. In the Cairns district, the bi-cornual type of carrier (Fig. 227) is manufactured from the inner-
bark of the Calophyllum tomentosum, Wight, the outer-surface of this inner-bark ultimately constituting
the inner surface of the vessel. A suitable length of bark-strip having ben secured, it is folded at its
middle (Fig. 228 a), the edges being pared down before they are overlapped and laced, the resulting shape
being such that the long axis of the mouth of the vessel is at right angles to its base (Figs. 2286, c).
Owing to the apposition of the two folds along the line of flexure, and the lacing along the sides, the base
of the carrier gives rise to two comparatively sharp corners or horns, whence the type-name of this utensil
is derived. On the outer edge of the mouth a thin piece of lawyer-cane (Calamus) is attached by over-
casting with a finer strand of the same material: on the handle-side, evidently to strengthen it, a second
piece is fixed just below it in similar manner. Roth the lacing and the over-casting are all retained still
more firmly in position by smearing over with Melicope- or Panax- cement (sect. 13) or bees’ wax. Handles
of lawyer-cane, split, .are next fixed close together on one side. These carriers, which are sometimes
smeared over with raddle, vary in size up to as much as 21| inches in height: they are used for Avater or
honey. I cannot help believing but that the shape of these utensils has given rise to the similarly-shaped
baskets (sect 54) Avhich are met with oidy in the same districts as these bark ones— i.e., Herbert River,
Cardwell, Cairns, Atherton, etc. Among local names are the following: KUG. du-bal, tokobil, NGL
tokobal, MAL. no-bar, CHI. nu-pa.
The sewn-canoe type. This is a large trough, sewn with lawyer-cane at the two extremities
(Pig. 229), made, in fact, on identical lines as the local single-sheet bark canoe, but in miniature, and called
by the same name of kukai: it is employed in the neighbourhood of the Tully River for washing certain
yams in. To describe this particular vessel as of a canoe-type pure and simple would be ambiguous in
that two or three varieties of the pleat-type of utensil (sect. 58) are similarly but small editions of canoes
used m former times on the Southern Queensland and New South Whiles coast-line: lam perforce calling
it the seivn-canoe type.
61. The punt type of carrier (Fig. 230) is constructed on an almost identical pattern as the paper
punts or trays of European children, with the addition that, both outside and in, the two smaller sides are
supported by means of sticks laced through them with a vine-strip; the folds at the extremities of the


smaller sides may be top-stitched in addition. This kind of trough is as much as four feet and more in
length, from 6to 8 inches deep, and is used for preparing a certain kind of sour yam in. It is met with a
Cape Grafton and around Cairns, where it is known as (KUG.) ku-lur, pitai.
62. Wood. —The elongate wooden trough or “ koolamon” (Figs. 231, 232, 233) with rounded
extremities, is, in the western districts, manufactured out of the same material and in the same loca i les
as the shield, and travels in exchange and barter along identical routes. W hen made from the Erytlirina,
the local “cork” or “coral” tree, they are split out straight away two (big. 234), three, or four at a time,
according to the size of the butt, the natural contour of the tree assisting in the final artificial contour o
the vessel. Where the timber does not lend itself to splitting, t.g., Eucalyptus bicolor, A Unn. ( blaty
Gum ” - Yellow Box,” “Grey Box” or “Bastard-box"), the local “ coolibar,” a trunk or limb is selected
as near as possible to the required shape (Fig. 235), with a slight bend in it, ultimately to become the
outer convex surface of the vessel. The suitable length of timber having been removed-split or hacked
away, as the case may be—its outer surface is trimmed down into the final shape required. Its concavi y
is produced bv picking, charring (sect. 4), and gouging with a native-gouge (sect 27): when roughly got
into shape it'is steeped in water, maybe for some days, then wound round with twine to fix it in its
permanent shape, and finally finished off with the gouge. Such wooden troughs are usually coloured red
or black, and often show a fine external longitudinal fluting, for ornamental purposes: the irregular
longitudinal flutes on the inner surface, indicating the action of the scooping-tool during the course ot
their manufacture, may either remain or be supplanted by regular ornamental ones. these carriers vary
oreatly in size from 13 or 14 to over 49 inches in length, and up to 13| inches wide, are either convex or
slightly fiat-bottomed, and deep or shallow, witn corresponding differences in the angles at which the ends
slope towards the centre. These variations are due partly to the natural contour and adaptability ot the
timber employed, and partly to the uses to which the vessel may be put: these latter include a basin for
carry hm water, food, or the baby in, a miniature canoe for transporting impedimenta across a stream, a
vessel for washing and soaking yams, etc. The koolamon is met with throughout the Western districts
and along the Gulf-coast, certainly as far north as the Mitchell River. The larger variety is carried
either on the head, or at the side or back of the body, in the latter cases, supported on about the level ot
the hip by a cord passed over the opposite shoulder, assisted, as often as not, with the wrist and hand
underneath: the spilling of the fluid is markedly limited, almost prevented, by laying small twigs of leaves
upon its surface. Koolamons are manufactured by men only. Some of the local names of these vessels
are the follow inf:—at Carandotta itango, Camooweal marra, Toko Ranges urtna, Glenormiston palla and
un-a Boulia takka (small variety) and kurdo (big variety) as specialising a kunpara (any koolamon in
oeneral), Diamantina Lakes kallapo, Upper Diamantina River wingara (for women) and umbo (for men)
Upper Flinders River yanggo, Cloncurry nangkur, Kalkadun-country cherto, and on the coast-line between
Mitchell and Staaten Rivers marija-anga.
63 Leaves Carriers made of leaves, strictly speaking, from palm-leaf sheath-stalks, are of two
varieties according as they are punt- or scoop-shaped. The first is met with amongst the Moreton and
Ducie River natives, and is peculiar in that the two smaller folded sides are top-stitched (rig. z3b). the
second derived from the Dryrnophloeus Normanbyi, Benth. and Hook., on the Bloomfield River, from
the Arch onto phoenix Alexandras, Wendl. and Drude., on the Tully, Bloomfield, and at Cape Bedford, is
very simply made: a certain length is cut off from the proximal portion of the sheath-stalk, the base ot
which forms the mouth of the scoop, while the cut end, pleated and tied round with twine, forms the
handle. Such scoops (Fig. 237) are met with on the Tully (MAL. ko-pangara, also the name of the plant),
Bloomfield (KYE. yu-al), and Endeavour River (KYI. bokol-bokol), at Cape Bedford (KYI. birla), on the
Starcke (KYI. kundari), and on the Palmer Rivers. As a temporary substitute for carrying a little water
a short distance, I have throughout North Queensland often seen any largish-sized leaf rolled into the
shape of a European child’s paper sugar-loaf.
64. Fruit*. —Gourds used to be employed on the Tully, in the Cairns district, at Cape Bedford
(KYI mai-al), and along the coast-line further north, for carrying water when canoe-mg to the adjacent
islands, on several of which no fresh water is to be found. Representations of gourds were discovered
among the rock-paintings on Clack Island, near the Flinders group. lam informed that on the iully,
the gourds used to be stoppered with grass. The plant utilised is the Lagenana vulgaris , ber.
65 Packages. —Apparently the most primitive form of package is the entire breadth of bark-
sheet from a comparatively small tree, with its free edges overlapping owing to its natural curl;
although such a parcel has open ends, a suitably long one, supported by a twine loop from the opposite
shoulder may be slung over the mother’s hip to enclose the baby. Another common method, pretty well
everywhere adopted for carrying and preserving small articles, especially those which are on transit for
purposes of trade and barter, t.g., pigments, stingaree-barbs, is to roll them up in bark, fold over the
edges, and wrap the bundle round with twine. Tea-tree appears to be the bark invariably used, budi
a package or parcel at Cape Bedford is spoken of as dangara, a term which, with the introduction of
civilisation, has since come to be applied to a woman s skirts.
66 Harpoons—The three parts of a complete barbed harpoon are barbed-head, shaft, and
connecting-line. The barbed-head (kuradan of Cape Bedford) is a circular-sectioned piece of wood, gradually
tapering from base to tip (Figs. 238, 239, 240), varying in length from 8 to over 14 inches. On the
Endeavour River, etc., Captain Cook, in describing the implement, speaks of a peg of wood [barbed-headj
v hich is about a foot long,” and on another occasion, when recording the killing of a turtle, says .
“ U pon opening which we found a wooden harpoon or turtle-peg, about as thick as a man s finger, near lo
inches long, and bearded at the end, such as we had seen among the natives, sticking through both
shoulders.” The wooden barb (danban of Cape Bedford) is single (Fig. 238) or double on the Keppel
Islands and adjoining coast-line, as far north as Whitsunday Passage, but single elsewhere: when two
barbs are affixed, their position is bilaterial and opposite (Fig. 239). The method of fixation of the barb


was usually into a slight longitudinal groove below the point of the head, binding firmly with tendon,
and covering with cement-substance: on the other hand, the Batavia River natives attached their bone
barb (the only locality, apparently, where this material was used) in such position that the bone
constituted the extreme tip of the implement (Fig. 240). Except on the Bloomfield and Endeavour Rivers,
and on the Flinders group, the base of the barbed-head is usually coiled around with fibre. The shaft
(kokoni of Cape Bedford, where it gives the name to the weapon as a whole) varies from 7 or 8 to as much
as 9 or 10 feet in length, is always “held in or hurled from” the hand, and gradually increases in
diameter from butt to tip, into the extremity of which a socket (diar at Cape Bedford, pallara at Dunk
Island) is picked and drilled. The Keppel Islanders used to excavate this socket with a bone awl: on the
Batavia River it was made by blowing upon a glowing cinder so as to char the subjacent timber, removing
the cinder, and scraping away the burnt surface, and repeating the process until the required depth is
obtained. The butt end of harpoons used between the Bloomfield and Flinders group is somewhat
flattened and bored through (Fig. 241) in the form of an elongate aperture (milkal of Cape Bedford).
When in use, the base of the barbed-head with its coil of fibre, specially moistened for the purpose, is
jambed fairly tightly into the socket. In the districts above mentioned, the coil of fibre may be replaced
by one or two wooden pegs, which wedge the barbed-head into position; so also, just above the base there
is a ring (3'oka at Cape Bedford) of cement-substance (Fig. 242), which not only prevents the head being
pushed too far into the socket, but also limits the chances of the attached rope from slipping. The
connecting-line, made of Sterculia quadrifida, R. Br. (a “ kurrajong ”), at Cape Bedford, of Hibiscus
liliaceus, Linn. (“ Cotton-tree ”), on the Pennefather, varies in diameter up to |-inch, and in length up
to fifteen or more fathoms, according to the animal which is to be hunted, a longer one for turtle than for
fish. One extremity of this line is tied direct on the base of the barbed-head (Fig. 243), the usual method,
but on the coast-line extending from the Bloomfield to the Flinders, it may be fixed into a special loop,
attached to file barbed-head by means of a clove-hitch (Figs. 241, 242). The disposition of the remainder
of the rope varies. Along the area of coast-line extending from Fitzroy River to Broadsound, it is wound
once or twice round the length of the shaft, and then hitched onto the extreme butt, whence it passes to
the throwing hand, which supports a few loops of it (Fig. 243): its remaining length is held in the free
hand, and finally attached to it or to the canoe. At Whitsunday Island, the rope is hitched onto the shaft
forward of midway. On the Tully River the end of the line is attached to the butt of the shaft, its main
portion being held in a basket hanging in front from around the thrower’s neck (Fig. 244). The thrower
will hold a few loops, sufficient to cover the distance he is striking from, round his thumb and hand, and,
directly the harpoon is let fly, bend forward so as to give scope for the line to get clear from out of its
receptacle, usually managing to secure it, however, before it is entirely played out: should he miss it he
has the extra labour of paddling after the floating shaft to pick it up again. Further north, in the Barron
River district, the hunter may sometimes find it necessarj' to disconnect the shaft after striking the
animal, wTien he will fix the connecting-line to a light shield, and, throwing it over-board, make it act as
a float (R. A. Johnstone). The Bloomfield and Endeavour River, Cape Bedford, and Flinders Island
natives, have the rope passing loosely through the aperture in the butt of the weapon, but no basket to
bold its main portion, which is partly looped round the thumb and hand, the remainder being attached
to the fore-part of the canoe. On the Batavia River, no harpoons have been used for many years past,
but judging from the models made for me, the method of attachment of the connecting-line to the shaft
was apparently identical with that met with on the Keppels. Both on the Batavia and Pennefather
Rivers, it is said that in the old days, when turtle-hunting with wooden-headed harpoons, it was no
unusual occurrence, after having struck the animal, for the hunter to recover the shaft and re-attach the
extremity of the line lately held in the free hand, or fixed in the canoe, and take a second shot: (an
identical method which I recently saw employed at Dunk Island with iron-headed implements). By this
means, two barbed-heads were made to pierce the soft tissues (neck, posterior, armpit, etc.), and their
liability to tear through the flesh when the animal dragged—and this might sometimes continue for as
much as nine or ten hours-—was reduced to a minimum. The Pennefather River natives assured me that,
until the introduction of the iron-headed harpoon, with its power of piercing the scutum and so obtaining
a firmer hold, there was always considerable skill required in securing this particular creature under these
conditions, that turtle-flesh was consequently always a comparative rarity in those days, and for that
reason tabu’d to all the females and young males of the tribe. It is almost safe to say that, at the present
time, a metal head has everywhere replaced the wooden one, an iron rod constituting the usual substitute,
after filing to a gradually-tapering point, sometimes accompanied with a filing along the sides (Fig. 245).
The most ingenious adaptation I have so far come across is an ordinary three-cornered iron-file, all three
edges of which have been filed into tooth-like projections pointing backwards (Fig. 246). Pointed metal heads
have the advantage of piercing the scutum of a turtle, but are at a disadvantage (owing to the absence
of a barb), in not allowing of any very great pull on the rope being possible: for this reason, when
employed by the Bloomfield, Endeavour River, Cape Bedford, or Flinders Island natives, the hunter dives
into the water, guides his movements by the line, and seizes hold of the animal as best he can. On two
or three occasions I have seen a European-manufactured typical iron-harpoon head employed.
Though mainly employed for hunting turtle, the harpoon was and is often used for the larger kinds
of fish ( e.g ., shark, trevally) and for dugong. For the last mentioned creature, however, there was a
modification of the implement (certainly on the Bloomfield, Endeavour, and Flinders group), in that the
barbed-head was multiple, consisting of three wooden components morticed into a basal piece after the
tashion of a “ fish-spear,” each of the three heads being provided with a single wooden barb pointing
inwards; these wooden barbed-heads are now replaced by three iron wires. With the dugong at Cape
Bedford, the hunter, after striking, clings to the rope, jumps overboard, and is dragged along: it is a case
tiow of the animal either being drowned, etc., in shallow water, or getting into deep water, and so tiring
the blackfellow out.
The term for a harpoon is ngatta on the Pennefather River, kokoni at Cape Bedford, and kanjo at
Dunk Island: the two latter names also express the shaft. The Tarumbal natives (Rockhampton) spoke
of the barbed-head as mirain, a term which often gave the name to the whole implement: the Keppel
Islanders called it banggari, the Tully Blacks changkari, the Pennefather natives ngoma, and the Cape


Bedford ones kuradan. The shaft was known as dallo or kanjo at the mouth of the Tully, yimli on the
Keppels, and kannai at Rockhampton. The connecting line was called yarul, yurul, gumbm, at Keppel
Island, Rockhampton, and Cape Bedford respectively.
67. Fish-Clubs. —Along the whole Gulf coast-line, from the Batavia to the Norman Hirer, a common
method of fishing is for the blacks to go into the water at night-time, and, holding a torch aloft, attract
the fish to the surface, and club them with a special implement as they rise. This wooden
spatulate club (Fig. 247) with sharpened edges, rounded at both ends, though wider at its distal than
proximal extremity, is as much as 30 inches long: it is coloured red and white. On the Pennefather River,
it is made from the timber of the Eugenia carissoidcs, F. v. M., and called te-ingkajana. ihe hand e o
such a weapon is often nicked or coated with cement-substance, so as to minimise the risk ot slipping, ihe
Koko-minni blacks of the Palmer have a somewhat similar implement, the an-gora, but with a
comparatively-squarish distal end and wider blade (Fig. 248) made from “ iron-wood.” Along the eastern
coast-line the ordinary throwing-sticks or nullas are often used, under similar circumstances, for clubbing
fish.
68. Fish-Hooks. —In a previous Bulletin of mine [No. 3: “ Pood: Its Search, Capture, and
Preparation.” Sect. 15 (/)] the various kinds of fish-hook met with in North Quensland have been
shortly described. In the present one, they are illustrated as follows: —the tendril of the Hugoma
Jenkinsii I" v. M. (Fig. 249), a natural form, sometimes replaced by the “ hook” of the lawyer-cane
(Calamus sp.J; the crescentic pearl-shell (Figs. 250, 251), tortoise-shell (Fig. 252), and cocoa-nut (Fig.
253) fish-hook of portions of the eastern coast-line; their modern imitations in iron wire (Pig- 2o4) ; the
angular bone-bearded hook (Figs. 255, 256) of Princess Charlotte Bay, etc.; the tortoise-shell “ bent-pm
hook (Figs. 257, 258) of the Batavia, Pennefather, and Embley Rivers on the Gulf coast, and ot the 1 aim
Islands on the east coast.
Particulars of one or two of these varieties, so far as actual manufacture is concerned, require
further notice.
I watched the making of the crescent-shaped shell-hook at Cape Grafton in 1898 : it was as follows.
Picking a fresh “ pearl” shell (Verna Gumingii, Reeve) the operator chipped round and round the valve
between two stones, until he at last succeeded in breaking it down to a more or less circular plate about
2 inches in diameter, with rough uneven edges. He next placed two pointed pieces of hardwood on the fire,
and as soon as their sharpened ends were burnt and charred, put the smouldering extremities close to the
centre of this shell-plate (Fig. 259 a), and blowing upon them with no inconsiderable force, caused the
fiame to play only upon its very centre, which was thus rendered comparatively brittle. But little
difficulty was then experienced in breaking through, at this spot, with a pencil of white coral. the hole,
once made, became gradually enlarged into the required oval (Fig. 2596) by filing backwards and forwards
with the coral, which at very frequent intervals was dipped into water to assist in the grinding. the
uneven outer edge of the oval ring so produced was next gradually ground into shape (Fig. 259 c) until the
desired width of hook was reached. The final processes consisted in very carefully grinding its middle
(Fi". 259 d, e, f) up and down on a sharp vertical edge of rock until a break was obtained, and then
finishing off with the rock and coral-file into the completed crescentic form, I learnt that these Cape
Grafton° blacks also manufactured hooks from a fresh-water shell, not yet scientifically identified by me,
with the local name of chiberi; they speak of the Perna shell as we-ta, the fishing-line as ko-mai, and the
hook as karkal. On the Lower Tully River, the hook is similarly manufactured from the Ferna, the only
difference being that no fire is used, the boring of the ring with the coral-pencil being commenced very
gently and carefully. Certain natives of the neighbouring Dunk Island told me that they used to make
their hooks from the “ black-lip” shell iMeleagrina margaritafera, Linne). The following are extracts
from Cook’s Voyages concerning fish-hooks on the Endeavour River, where such articles are now
unknown:....“ Their fish-hooks are very neatly made, and some of them are exceedingly
small bags containing some fish-hooks and lines, a shell or two, out of which hooks
are made ” . . . . and, in reference to their few tools, mention is made of “ some shells and
fragments of coral.”
During the course of the year 1897 I had observed the progressive stages in the manufacture of the
crescent-shaped cocoa-nut and tortoise-shell fish-hooks at Keppel Island: they were similar to those
already described at Cape Grafton and the Tully, save that the central aperture was commenced with a
quartz-drill.
In connection with these hooks, and their peculiarity of shape, “it is difficult to imagine that a
fish could be caught with such a contrivance, as, once hooked, the slightest slackening of the line would
allow the fish to escape: but I have often seen a blackfellow land a fish with this kind of hook, when we
could not with ours ” (R. A. Johnstone, Barron River district).
The “bent-pin” tortoise-shell fish-hook (Figs. 257, 258) of the Batavia and Pennefather River is
made as follows: A more or less irregularly outlined length of shell is wedged out of the scutum, ground
down on a piece of stone, and finally finished off with a shell-scraper, so as to produce a head-less pin
about 2to 2-4 inches long, tapering gradually from the blunt extremity to a fine point. This pointed end
is now firmly inserted into a small hole (natural or artificial) in a billet of wood which is placed vertically
into the ground. Resting upon the projecting pin is next placed another piece of wood, on the slant-
the one end resting on the ground, the other free—and prevented from slipping off by being loosely tied
to the vertical post with a loop or two of twine. A fire is then lighted, and, as the heat rises, the pin
softens, and, with the superincumbent weight of the slanting timber, becomes more and more bent into
a gentle curve: it is then removed, alternately dipped in water, heated at the fire, and bent with the


Price 3 s. 6d. ]
ringers until trie required shape is obtained. I cannot refrain from commenting here on the fact that
these hooks are not bent directly into the requiied shape by means of boiling water, for the process of
boiling, though uncommon, is certainly known to these natives: but the latter may have reasons.
On the Palm Isles, where the bent-pin form of tortoise-shell hook has also been met with, Mr.
Norris stated that he had seen them manufactured thus;—“ A round pebble was heated in the fire, and a
narrow strip of tortoise-shell bent across it, until the heat softened it, and the required curve was
obtained.”
69. Throwing-Sticks. —The manufacture of the throwing-stick, nulla-nulla, etc., is gradually dying
out throughout North Queensland. In the Boulia district (Fig. 2CO) it is made from the “gidyea”
{Acacia homalophylla, A. Cunn.), coloured black with charcoal grease, and met with up to over 33 inches
in length. The free end is enlarged, and tapers to a point: a good one is usually incised at the handle,
and is covered with a longitudinal fluting, which reaches either to the tip or ceases abruptly about an
inch from it. PPT. morro, MIT. maro. The implement is very similar at Princess Charlotte Bay: KUA.
kunbai-il, KWA. pa-ul. On the Tully, there is another, a two-pronged variety (Fig. 261) met with,
identical with that found lower down the coastline: MAL. wirka.
By Authority: George Arthur Vaughan, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane.


Plaice I
WERotK>, riel/
Printed at the Surwqjr Office, Dept, of Public Lands,Brisbane. July 1904


Plate H
K&fioths, (Lets.
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of Public Lands, Brisbane July 1904


Pleube HL
WJZJ&oths, dels.
Printed at the Survey Office, Dept of Public Lands,Brisbane, July 1904


PlaJbelV
Printed at the Survey Off ice. Dept of Puhlio Lands, Brisbane, July 1904


Plate V,


Platte VI
WR Roth;, cLeh
Printed at the Office,Dept of Public Lands,Brisbane, July 1904


PLsube YOL
WJ£. RatJ't , cLeh
Printed. at the Survey Office,Dept- of* Public Lands, Brisbane July 1904


PlaLteYDI
WMBothr. d^ly
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of Public Lands,Brisbane. July 1304


Pis doe ISC
WJS. Hoths, diets.
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of' Publio Lands,Brisbane, July 1904


IPlsube X
WE.JZOth/, cLely.
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of Public Lands. Brisbane. July 190-


■piscLe XI
Wjg.Jteths deb
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of Public Lands. Brisbane, July 1904


Plajte XU
WJZ.Jtoths, cLeL.
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of* Public Lands. Brisbane, July 1904


[PlscbeXlU
WB.dtLotdo, deL.
Printed at the Survey Of flee, Dept, of Public Lands, Brisbane. July 1904


Plate Xl\T
WK Roths, deL.
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of Public Lands. Brisbane. July 1904


Pla.'Le XV
WE. Roths, cLeh
Printed, at the Survey Office,Dept of Public Lands. Brisbane July 1904


Plaice m
WM Roths, cLeis
Printed at the Survey Offiae.Dept of Public Lands. Brisbane July 1904


PlajLe ZVH
WJU.RotK, cLely.
Prmted at the Survey Offlce.Dept of Public Lands,Brisbane July 1904


Flat/eXyHI
WE.lZoth', cLeO.
Printed at the Survey Office, Dept of Public Lands,Brisbane. July 1904


Plate JJXL
WJZ.J&oth;, dels-
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of Public Lands,Brisbane, July 1904


PlsubeXX
W..E. Roths, cLel-.
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of Public Lands. Brisbane, July 1904


PIsutDeZXI
WS.Rothy, dels
Printed at the Office. Dept of Public Lands, Brisbane .July 1904


Plajbe XXTL
TV^E.Roths-, dels.
Printed ax the Survey Offlee,Dept of“ Public Lands,Brisbane. July 1904.


PIaXeXXID-
WJZ.lSothy, cLeL.
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of Public Lands,Brisbane. July 1904


PlauLe XZTV
WIH.I&oiJv, cLeL.
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of Public Lands, Brisbane July 1904


PLaie XXV
WKRothy, cLeO-
printed at the Survey Of flee, Dept of Public Lands,Brisbane, July 1904


Pla,teXXVI
WE. Roth/, del;.
Printed at the Survey Office,Dept of Public I.ands,Brisbane. July 1904


