

Don’t Dream...
Build!
Your guide to building
beautiful NEW STYLE homes of
"ASBESTOLITE"
(REG'D TRADE MARK)
ASBESTOS-CEMENT SHEETS
ISSUE WITH THE COMPLIMENTS OF ASBESTOLITE PTY. ITD., "ASBESTOLITE" ASBE ST OS-CEMENTM BUILDING MATERIAL MANUFACTURERS


Sole Manufacturers
ASBESTOLITE PT Y. LTD.
Reg'd Office and Works; Largs Terrace, BIRKENHEAD,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Sales Office; 162 Halifax Street, ADELAIDE. ’Phone W 7035
G.P.O. Box 705 F, Adelaide, S.A. Telegrams: “AsbestoliteAdelaide
The soundest investment
This book is written for YOU to help you realise a dream—your own home!
Here are architects’ plans to fire your imagination; coloured illustrations to show you what others
have done; technical information to help you build wisely and well.
We leave it to the pages which follow to convince you of this fact; a beautiful, comfortable, durable home can be
yours for less when you build with Genuine “ASBESTOLITE” Asbestos-Cement Sheets.
Invest wisely
in a new style
“Asbestolite’' home
PLAN HFI: An L-shaped “Asbestolite” home for a
50-ft. block. Two bedrooms and generous living
area. AREAS: Home, 1,174 sq. ft.; Porch, 72
sq. ft.; Carport, 226 sq. ft.


Use these genuine “ASBESTOLITE” building materials
a n
f F I
r M i
L
i I
Ilf
FOR YOUR NEW HOME
"ASBESTOLITE" ASBESTOS CEMENT FLAT SHEETS
Strong, rigid and smooth-surfaced asbestos-cement building sheets for
covering exterior and interior walls, ceilings, partitions, gable-ends, eave
linings, etc. For use on homes and buildings of all types. The standard
thickness is fV' and sheets are available in a large range of stock sizes.
See page 27 for sizes, thicknesses and weights.
Cover and Angle Mouldings are available for use with “Asbestolite” Flat
Sheets. See pages 6, 17, 19, 20. 21, 22, 23, 24 and 27.
"ASBESTOLITE" CORRUGATED SHEETS
A rustproof, sea-air proof and permanent roofing for homes and buildings
of all types. Particularly suitable for modern, low-pitch gable and skillion
roofs. Supplied with large corrugations. * • • For further details see
pages 6, 27, 29, 30 and 31.
Gutters, Downpipes, Barge Mouldings, Ridge Cappings and other roofing
accessories are available for use with “Asbestolite” Corrugated Sheets.
See pages 6, 22, 23, 27 and 29.
"TILUX"
A marble-finished asbestos-cement wall panel with a smooth, highly glazed
surface. An excellent material for kitchens, bathrooms, toilets, laundries,
etc. Obtainable in two colours: “Meadow Green” and “Old Ivory.” See
pages 6,32 and inside back cover.
OBTAINABLE FROM LEADING HARDWARE AND TIMBER MERCHANTS


"ASBESTOLITE" HOMES ... All the beauty of
modern architecture at to-day’s lowest building costs
PLAN HF2: contemporary “ Asbestolite”
home which can be economically extended
for a growing family. Gallery of service
rooms grouped between living and sleep-
ing areas. Private outdoor living areas.
Home: 1,090 sq. ft.; Carport 240 sq. ft.;
Patio, 240 sq. ft.


Make substantial
savings ... build for less
with “ASBESTOLITE”
X
c.O^ S *
High building costs assume much more reasonable
proportions the moment you start planning for an
“Asbestolite” home. You save in every way and
sacrifice nothing. Beauty, comfort, durability
they can all be yours, for less, when you build
with “Asbestolite.”
LOW MAINTENANCE COSTS
Another definite advantage of building with "Asbes-
tolite” asbestos-cement sheets is that they contain
nothing to rot or decay. They are also impervious
to attack by white ants, borers and pests of all
types. Obviously these qualities substantially reduce
maintenance.
LOW INSURANCE PREMIUMS
“Asbestolite” is made of asbestos fibre and Portland
cement, both non-inflammable materials. When
used for walls, ceilings and roof, “Asbestolite”
greatly reduces fire risk. Insurance premiums are
therefore lower.
LOW FREIGHT COSTS
Light weight and ease of handling assure low rail,
road and sea freight costs. Country homes may
therefore be erected at costs not greatly in excess
of city and suburban homes. One ton of /V/' thick
“Asbestolite" covers an area of approx. 1,170 sq. ft.
We do not build homes. Any builder will quote for building
an “ Asbestolite" home to plans and specifications by your
architect. Plans published in this book may be used as
reference if desired.


"ASBESTOLITE"
is easily and
quickly erected
YOU SAVE TIME AND MONEY
The most costly factor in building to-day is labour. But that’s where
you really save when you build with “Asbestolite.” Once foundations
and frame are erected, big “Asbestolite” sheets are quickly nailed into
position. In next to no time your completed home is almost a reality.
By using “Asbestolite” for exterior and interior walls and ceilings you
save time and money; you’re in your home sooner and you actually give
yourself a building bonus. Money saved can build an extra room
or provide such expensive extras as a refrigerator, washing machine,
hot water service—or even a TV set!
IT'S EASIER FOR BUILDERS, TOO!
An “Asbestolite” home has advantages from the builder’s point of view.
“Asbestolite” is readily available, easy to transport, store, saw, nail
and erect. They’re used to handling it, appreciate the speed and ease with
which it can be erected, take pride in building a home they know
will last a lifetime.
By using “Asbestolite” for interior walls and ceilings, too, plus “Tilux”
for bathroom and kitchen, sub-contracting is minimised. Your
builder handles more of your job, saves time and saves you money!
INSIST ON GENUINE "ASBESTOLITE" ASBESTOS - C E M E N T


The home you build
NOW
will be yours for a
LIFETIME
“ASBESTOLITE” is inherently durable ... there’s nothing to rot or decay
YOU PAINT TO DECORATE NOT TO PRESERVE
Colour, inside and outside, is enjoying unprecedented
popularity. And how attractive your “Asbestolite” home can
look in your favourite colour scheme! Plastic and resin
emulsion paints are particularly suitable for use on
“Asbestolite.” Big, smooth “Asbestolite” sheets are so easy
to paint—and repaint. Yet, because of its weatherproof,
rotproof qualities, you paint “Asbestolite” to beautify, not
to protect.
It goes without saying that you want your home to be a good investment. It must provide
beauty, comfort and protection from all weathers and, above all, it must be durable.
Many “Asbestolite” homes, erected almost fifty years ago, are still in good condition. Remark-
able as it may seem, “Asbestolite” actually improves with age! Its main components, asbestos-
fibre and portland cement, are two of the most durable building materials known to man.
WHITE ANT AND BORER PROOF
“ Asbestolite” contains nothing to rot or
decay. Pests of all types, particularly
white ants and borers, will not touch it.
, What savings and peace of mind this can
x mean! “ Asbestolite” is also weatherproof:
\ dampness won't affect it.
An Asbestos-Cement home in a Sydney
suburb, N.S.W. Built in 1914, this home
is still in excellent condition.


"ASBESTOLITE" ... your key building material inside and out
“ASBESTOLITE" MINIMISES FIRE RISK...
“ASBESTOLITE” is a fire-retardant building
material. When used for external and internal walls
and ceilings it reduces the fire hazard. This fire
safety factor is of paramount importance, par-
ticularly for country homes or homes built in newly
developed, heavily wooded areas.
“Asbestolite” simply can’t burn. The main
ingredients, asbestos fibre and portland cement, are
both non-combustible materials. Asbestos fibres are,
in fact, the only natural fireproof fibres known to
man.
Interesting historical facts reveal that from the sth century
B.C. to the 19th century A.D. asbestos was a curiosity
understood by no-one. Ancient Greeks used its fibres in
wicks which would not burn and provided everlasting lamps
in the temples of their gods. Early Chinese believed it to be
the skin of the salamander, a legendary creature reputed to
live in fire.
To-day, “Asbestolite” offers you added security
against fire. Insurance companies realise this and
their insurance premiums are lowered accordingly.
WHERE TO USE "ASBESTOLITE" ON YOUR HOME
1 "Asbestolite" Flat Sheets fixed horizontally.
2 "Asbestolite" Flat Sheets fixed vertically.
3 "Asbestolite" Flat Sheets for Eaves Soffits, Gable
Ends.
4 Internal walls and ceilings of "Asbestolite^ 1 Flat
Sheets.
5 "Asbestolite" Internal Angle Moulding.
6 "Asbestolite" External Angle Moulding.
7 "Asbestolite" Horizontal Moulding.
8 "Asbestolite" Cover Moulding.
9 Corrugated "Asbestolite" Asbestos-Cement
Roofing.
10 "Asbestolite" Gutters and Downpipes (various
types).
11 "Asbestolite" Ridge Capping (various types).
12 External and Internal "Asbestolite" Ventilators.
13 "Asbestolite" Barge Mouldings, Stop-End Caps, etc.
14 "Tilux" Marble-finished Wall Panel for Bathroom and
Kitchen.


Beautiful, new-style homes of
"ASBESTOLITE"
PLAN HF4: An exciting plan for a T-shaped “Asbestolite” home
which looks attractive from any angle. For wide frontage or
corner block. A good choice for hot climates. AREAS: Home,
1,051 sq. ft.; Carport and Porches, 304 sq. ft.
New designs, new building methods are being
used in building “Asbestolite” homes —still the
best investment in the Homebuilding field!


New-Style "ASBESTOLITE" HOMES
combine the three factors most important
to home builders to-day...and to-morrow...
beauty, low cost, durability!
PLAN HFS: A contemporary visual-front
“Asbestolite” home planned for easy addi-
tion of third bedroom without internal
alteration. Area: 1,100 sq. ft.


Plans for homes
YOU CAN BUILD WITH
"Asbestolite"
ASBESTOS-CEMENT SHEETS
(Reg'd Trade Mark)
PLAN HF6: An “ Asbestolite ” home of popular
L-shape plan. Features include window wall to
lounge. Dual purpose fireplace provides for out-
door barbecue. Two bedrooms. AREA: 1019
sq. ft. Write for plan and further details.
10 SQUARES AND UNDER
The homes featured on this and the follow-
ing four pages are typical of modern design
trends in “Asbestolite” Asbestos-Cement
homes. Have your architect draw up plans
and specifications from any of these plans.
Ask any builder for a quotation.


WHATEVER YOUR PLAN...YOUR BEST INVESTMENT IS AN "ASBESTOLITE" HOME
PLAN HF 7: A strikingly contemporary “ Asbestolite”
home, planned for split-level construction. Note the
laundry, kitchen and living-dining area on the lower
level. Bedrooms, bathroom and toilet are on the
upper level. Generous use of glass and low-pitched
skillion roof of Corrugated “Asbestolite ” follow the
modern trend. AREA: 993 sq. ft.
PLAN HF 8: Another plan for an " Asbestolite” home
for those who enjoy indoor-outdoor living. Features
include kitchen courtyard, rear patio barbecue and
large living-dining area.
Use “Asbestolite” Flat Sheets for exterior and interior
walls and ceilings, Corrugated “Asbestolite” for the
low-pitched roof. AREA: 1002 sq. ft.


BEAUTIFUL HOMES COST LESS TO BUILD WITH "ASBESTOLITE"
PLAN HF 9: This ranch house type “ Asbestolite"
home is particularly attractive for bushland set-
tings. A large living room and two bedrooms
are included. Note generous cupboard space,
large kitchen with dinette. Separate shower
recess and toilet. Plumbing is economically
grouped. AREA: 978 sq. ft.
PLAN HF 10: An “Asbestolite” home specially
designed for indoor-outdoor living. Courtyards
are included outside living room and bedroom
sections. The kitchen gives easy access to
backyard through laundry and also to dining
area. AREA: 1008 sq. ft.


Here's a small 2-storied home
you'll build for less with "Asbestolite"
UPSTAIRS
DOWNSTAIRS
PLAN HF11: Believe it or not, this beautiful two-story “Asbesto-
lite” home has a floor area of 978 square feet —less than
10 squares—yet there’s room for a large living room, two
bedrooms, the usual service rooms and a separate toilet.
Whatever plan you choose, remember that you can combine
beauty, economy and durability if you use “Asbestolite”
Flat Sheets for external and internal walls and ceilings—
Corrugated “Asbestolite” for your roof.
PLAN HF12: This attractive “Asbestolite” home is specially
designed for future expansion. You could build first with
two bedrooms and, as the plan shows, two extra bed-
rooms may be added later with the minimum of structural
alteration. An interesting use of “Asbestolite” Flat Sheets
is shown in the chequer-board side to the carport. Note,
too, the smart, low-pitched Corrugated “Asbestolite”
roof. Areas: Two bedrooms, 915 square feet; four bed-
rooms, 1,175 square feet; carport, 185 square feet.


"ASBESTOLITE"
the only logical
building material for
your holiday home!
Escape from the realities of everyday life to a holiday
home of “Asbestolite.” You’ll build it for less and
spend next to nothing on maintenance.
“Asbestolite” is white ant and borer proof, unaffected by sea air, will not
rust and provides complete protection from all weathers. It’s
cooler in summer, too! Another point —“Asbestolite” is fire
retardant. Use the money you save
for extra “home comforts.”
PLAN HF13: “Asbestolite” holiday home
of only 660 square feet featuring one
bedroom.
PLAN HF13: Revised holiday home plan
featuring two bedrooms. Area: 732
square feet.
You build more for less more easily with “Asbestolite"
Use “Asbestolite” for exterior and interior walls and ceilings. Corrugated
“Asbestolite” for roof and “Tilux” for kitchen and bathroom. Supplies
are available from hardware and timber merchants everywhere.
“Asbestolite” is easy to handle and erect; it’s the ideal material for
week-end builders!


Leading lending institutions
approve "ASBESTOLITE" HOMES
With the post-war boom period behind us, we can look forward to an era of more stable
prosperity. Finance will be forthcoming to provide housing for our growing population.
As in the past, many beautiful, modern Asbestos-Cement homes are being approved and
erected by leading housing bodies and lending institutions throughout Australia. These
include:—
CO-OP. BUILDING SOCIETIES BANK HOMES DEPARTMENTS
STATE HOUSING COMMISSIONS WAR SERVICE HOMES DIVISION
STARR BOWKETTS INSURANCE COMPANIES


All the beauty
of contemporary architecture ...
all the cost saving
advantages of “ASBESTOLITE”
PLAN HF15
Stocked by Hardware and Timber merchants
throughout South Australia




Use “ASBESTOLITE” for walls and ceilings
Many people do not realise that “Asbestolite” Asbestos-Cement sheets can be
used for interior walls and ceilings, too! Nothing could be more simple! Big,
smooth “Asbestolite” sheets may be quickly nailed to wall studs or ceiling joists,
joints are covered, skirting and cornice fixed and your rooms are ready for
painting. Builders and owner-builders alike find “Asbestolite” the easiest,
quickest wall and ceiling material to use of all.
The beautiful rooms illustrated on this page are typical of effects which can be
obtained with “Asbestolite.” You can vary sheet layout and method of cover-
ing joints to form any pattern you wish. “Asbestolite” is unaffected by moisture,
economical, fire-retardant and extremely durable.
PLAN FOR BEAUTIFUL ROOMS AT A PRICE
YOU NEVER THOUGHT POSSIBLE
USE "ANAGLYPTA" COVER STRIP OR WOODEN
BATTENS FOR INCONSPICUOUS JOINTS
Interior walls are best lined with “Asbesto-
lite” by fixing the sheets vertically from
floor level to ceiling. Sheets should be fixed
across the ceiling to give rooms added
appearance of width or along the ceiling
for length. Your builder or architect will
advise on economical sheet layout.
Cover joints with inconspicuous
“Anaglypta” paper strip (which is simply
pasted over joints) or with small, neat,
wooden moulds.
Inside and outside build for less with
“Asbestolite.”
FIRE RETARDANT • WHITE ANT AND BORER PROOF • DURABLE • EASY TO FIX • DAMP-PROOF


Combine “Asbestolite” beauty
with “Asbestolite” economy...
easily fixed as interior walls and ceilings
“Asbestolite” may be quickly and easily
fixed to the walls and ceilings of every
room in your house.
“Anaglypta” Cover Strip practically
conceals sheet joints, or attractive verti-
cal or horizontal panel effects can be
obtained using small half-rounu
mouldings.
By using “Asbestolite” Asbestos-Cement
Flat Sheets for interior walls and ceilings
you eliminate outside labour. Your
building team handles more of the job,
saves time and money . . . passes the
savings on to you.


DIRECTIONS FOR FIXING
“ASBESTOLITE” FLAT SHEETS
TO EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR WALLS AND CEILINGS
“Asbestolite” Asbestos-Cement Sheets are extremely
easy to fix to external and internal walls and ceilings.
The many other uses of this versatile building material
include covering gable ends, under eaves partitions, etc.
The two main methods of fixing “Asbestolite” to
external walls are described on this page. First the
popular horizontal sheet lay-out and then the contem-
porary vertical sheet lay-out. This latter method,
employing closely spaced “Asbestolite” or wooden
cover moulds, reproduces the new popular American
board-and-batten style of building.
HORIZONTAL FIXING
The illustration above shows “Asbestolite” Sheets fixed horizontally to exterior
walls. Both sheets and mouldings have been correctly applied. Follow this
example: Select size of sheets to suit spacing of studs and to provide symmetrical
set out of sheets with a minimum number of vertical joints.
Make sure the horizontal lines formed by cover mouldings carry right around
your home at the same height. Today’s bigger windows make it difficult to line
up cover mouldings with top and bottom of window, but it is usually possible
to line up with one or the other. See page 27 for range of sheet sizes. Illustration
above shows:—
(a) “Asbestolite” Horizontal Cover Mould covering sheet joints.
(b) “Asbestolite” Vertical Cover Mould covering sheet joints under eaves lining
and on external walls.
(c) “Asbestolite” External Angle Mould covering sheet joints on corner.
(d) “Asbestolite” Internal Angle Mould covering sheet joints in corner.
VERTICAL FIXING
This method of fixing “Asbestolite” Sheets is usually employed on contemporary
homes of long, low design. It is particularly suitable for use in association with
low-pitched gable or skillion roofs of Corrugated “Asbestolite” A pronounced
shadow-line is cast by the vertically fixed cover moulds which are applied at
regular intervals.
See page 27 for sheet sizes. Use minimum number of horizontal joints.
Use 4 ft. wide sheets with studs and cover moulds at 16-inch centres pr 3 ft. wide
sheets with studs and cover moulds at 18-inch centres. If using cover moulds at
closer intervals additional noggings should be used to allow fixing of moulds.
“Lumex” Aluminium Mould may be used on horizontal joints or horizontal
joints otherwise flashed against water infiltration.
(a) “Asbestolite” or Wooden Vertical Moulds covering sheet joints.
(b) “Asbestolite” Internal Angle Mould covering joints in corner and junction
of wall sheeting and eaves lining.
(c) “Asbestolite” External Angle Mould covering joints at corner.


“ASBESTOLITE” FLAT SHEETS TO
EXTERIOR WALLS
HORIZONTAL FIXING
FRAMEWORK STUDS AND JOIST SPACING
When you wish to emphasise the horizontal lines of your home “Asbestolite” Sheets should
be fixed horizontally. Studs should be placed at a distance, centre to centre, as prescribed
by your local council or building authority. Size of sheets should be chosen carefully to
avoid waste and to minimise the number of vertical joints. Remember, you are trying to
emphasise the horizontal motif. Make sure that the timber frame is carefully erected and
that studs and/or joists are of equal thickness. Check that all noggings and battens are
flush with the outside and/or inside line of the frame. Check that all sheet joints are
backed by a stud, joist or nogging.
Drawing shows “Asbestolite” Sheets fixed
horizontally to studs and noggings. Bituminous
dampcourse strip , galvanised weatherstrip and
Horizontal Moulding are shown.
Section showing edge of two “Asbestolite ”
Sheets at joint. Galvanised weatherstrip and
Horizontal Cover Mould are shown in relative
positions.
When using the horizontal method ot fixing “Asbestolite Sheets to external walls it has
been general practice to divide the wall into three sections.
First (or lower) Section from bottom plate to window sill.
Second (or middle) Section from window sill to window head height.
Third (or top) Section from window head to top plate and or junction of eaves lining
and wall.
Current use of larger windows sometimes makes this spacing impractical, but the principle
applies. For further details see pages 22 and 23.
Details for flashing joints of sheets are clearly illustrated above and need little explanation.
Neat corners are obtained by mitre cutting the “Asbestolite” Horizontal Cover Mould
and neatly cutting in “Asbestolite” External or Internal Angle Mould above and below
mitred corner. Horizontal Cover Mould should be fixed with rustproof screws or galvanised
nails spaced 12 inches apart.
VERTICAL FIXING
FRAMEWORK STUDS AND JOIST SPACING
Current building trends indicate a swing to long, low homes with low-pitched gable or
skillion roofs. “Asbestolite” Sheets, fixed vertically, harmonise with this style of architec-
ture, particularly with regular spacing of vertical battens. These closely reproduce the
board-and-batten effect so popular in America today. When using vertical fixing sheets
should be 4 ft. wide with studs at 16-inch centres or 3 ft. wide where studs are at 18-inch
centres. Stud spacing should, of course, conform with local building regulations.
Cutaway drawing shows vertical methods of
fixing “Asbestolite” Flat Sheets. Note bitu-
minous dampcourse strip and “Asbestolite”
Vertical Cover Mould in position.
Looking down on vertically fixed “Asbestolite”
Sheets. Bituminous dampcourse strip is
between sheets and stud. Vertical Cover
Mould covers joint.
Where possible, select “Asbestolite” Sheets in lengths to suit the full height of the wall.
Where horizontal joints are unavoidable keep them all at the same height. Galvanised or
zinc flashing strips should be used for horizontal joints and, for perfect weatherproofing,
bituminous dampcourse strip should be used for vertical joints. This is clearly illustrated,
in position, in the drawings above.
For sound, weatherproof walls be sure that your frame provides for strong support behind
all sheet joints. “Asbestolite” is so easy to fix. A little extra care still saves you plenty of
time over other wall materials. If using cover moulds between studs insert extra noggings
to make sure moulds remain flush with wall.
Window size is not critical with vertical fixing. A good tip is the use of a horizontal sheet
under the windows. These panels, if painted a contrasting colour, provide a very attrac-
tive effect.


GENERAL INFORMATION
SUPPORT BEHIND ALL JOINTS AND EDGES
“Asbestolite” is a strong and exceptionally durable building material but, as with all
materials fixed to timber, frames, it should be fixed to a solid frame. Make sure that studs
and noggings of frame, whether for inside or outside walls, are in perfect alignment and
correctly spaced to receive the sheets. Timber used should be of even depth to form a flat
surface. Where the joints of sheets do not finish on a stud or joist, an intermediate batten
or nogging piece must be provided to give necessary support behind the edge of sheet.
STACKING SHEETS BEFORE USE
While awaiting use, “Asbestolite” Sheets should
be stacked on an even surface, and, if possible,
under cover. If left out in the weather place
weights on top of stack to avoid curling of sheets.
Avoid weighting with materials likely to leave
unsightly rust marks. These can be removed, but
unnecessary work is involved.
CUTTING “ASBESTOLITE” SHEETS
Where a large number of sheets are to be cut a special
“Asbestolite” cutting tool may be used. Relatively inex-
pensive, this tool saves time and effort and is obtainable
from most hardware stores. “Asbestolite” may also be
cut with hand saw or may be scribed deeply with a chisel
end or old knife. Scribe along a straight edge, then snap
apart over bench end or similar surface.
FLASHING AT JOINTS OF SHEETS
To be sure of completely weatherproof sheet joints it is advisable to use a flashing material.
Horizontal joints (external) should be flashed with zinc weather strip or galvanised
flashing. Use of bituminous dampcourse strip is also recommended for vertical fixing. In
addition “Asbestolite” or Wooden Cover Moulds are used as illustrated on previous page.
FIXING “ASBESTOLITE” SHEETS TO TIMBER FRAME
First make sure that frame is properly aligned and that studs and joists are of even thick-
ness to provide a flat surface. Make sure edges of sheets will be properly supported.
Beginning in the centre, nail “Asbestolite” Sheets to intermediate studs and nogging pieces
and then secure edges and ends. Space nails not more thaul2"apart and I" from edges
of sheets. Use special blunt point galvanised nails (1" xl4 gauge for sheeting—U" xl4
gauge for moulds). Punch nails through sheet with sharp blows then drive home firmly,
but not too tightly. Mouldings should be drilled prior to nailing or screwing.
SEE OUR NEW HALIFAX STREET SHOWROOM
Call into our new showroom and offices and discuss your Homebuilding problems.
The address: 162 Halifax Street. ’Phone W7035.
We can help you build more for less with “Asbestolite” and give you details of our
complete roofing service.
COVERING INTERNAL JOINTS WITH “ANAGLYPTA”
“Anaglypta” Paper Cover Strip is 2" wide and has a neat,
inconspicuous corrugated centre to allow for expansion or
contraction. It is used to cover “Asbestolite” sheet joints
when used for internal walls and ceilings. Fixing it is simplicity
itself. Simply cut to length, coat with a good wallpaper paste
and allow to absorb for 10 minutes. Then paste into position.
Trim with sharp blade when dry and paint over when painting
walls or ceiling. “Anaglypta” is available in rolls of 100 feet.
Joints covered with “Anaglypta” are barely visible.
Do not apply glue or paste to corrugations of “Anaglypta”.
ALTERNATIVE WEATHER STRIPS
External sheet joints are covered with “Asbestolite”
Cover Mould, but before doing so it is strongly
advised to flash joints against water infiltration.
Two satisfactory methods have been evolved for
flashing horizontal joints. Use with Galvanised
Iron Flashing (when available—in 6 ft. lengths) or
2 inch wide Zinc Strip—obtainable in 160 ft. rolls.
ARCHITRAVE MOULDING
When fixing “Asbestolite” Sheets to a timber frame occasions
arise where a sheet edge is left exposed, for example, at door
or window architraves. This applies either externally or
internally and such sheets may be covered neatly by using
“Asbestolite” Architrave Moulding. This moulding is easily
fixed by the same method used for all “Asbestolite” Mould-
ings, that is, with U" x 14-gauge blunt end galvanised nails.


DETAILS OF CONSTRUCTION & SHEET
,v £'' f J - -''V* T'-if wW.-'-' ? :
TYPICAL HORIZONTAL SET OUT
OF "ASBESTOLITE" SHEETS
AND WINDOW PLACEMENT
EXAMPLE 1. Showing position of sheets in
relation to window when using 3ft. and Aft-
wide sheets horizontally with 3ft.-wide sheet at
bottom.
EXAMPLE 2. Showing position of horizontally
fixed sheets in relation to window with 4ft.-wide
sheet fixed below window.
NOTE: Window size varies widely in
contemporary home design. No attempt has
been made to specify size in relation to sheet
set out. Windows shown are rapidly becoming
outmoded but the principle of sheet layout
remains the same.
Sheet joints should line up with top or bottom
of window. Where windows are too large joints
should, nevertheless, be kept at constant
heights around walls.
In the example shown above the width of top
sheets has not been shown. In all cases this
depends on the ceiling height and angle of roof
pitch.
-
DETAILS OF DOUBLE
HUNG WINDOWS


SET OUT FOR “ASBESTOLITE" HOMES
SKiLLION ROOF
DETAIL
VERTICAL SHEET SET OUT
Here a window is shown in relation to sheets fixed
vertically with cover mouldings or battens at close
intervals. Interval differs according to width of sheet. For
contrast a flat sheet may be fixed horizontally under the
window. Such panels can be painted in a colour different
from the surrounding wall.
WATER-PROOF REINFORCED
CONC. FLOOR CONST.
TYPICAL
SPECIFICATIONS
Note: The specifications listed below are
acceptable to most councils throughout
South Australia, but exceptions do occur.
Before planning any structure it is
advisable to check first with your local
Council or body to whom plans and
specifications will be submitted.
BASE STRUCTURES
EXTERNAL FOOTINGS: Two courses of
14" brick and one course of 9" brick or
CURTAIN WALLS of 4*" brick with 9"
bonded piers spaced at 6'o" centres on
12" x 6" reinforced concrete strip
footing or
STUMPS of 4" x 4" jarrah or red gum-
maximum spacing s'o" centres.
INTERNAL FOOTINGS: 9" x 9" sleeper
piers—maximum spacing s'o" centres or
STUMPS of 4" x 4" jarrah or red gum —
maximum spacings s'o" centres.
FRAMEWORK
BEARERS: 4" x 3" hardwood—maximum
spacing s'o" centres.
FLOOR JOISTS: 4" x 2" hardwood
maximum spacing I'6" centres.
STUDS: External 4" x U". Internal 4" x
H" or 3" x 2" —maximum spacing 2'o"
centres.
NOGGING: External 4" x U". Internal
4" x H" or 3" x 2". Heads and sills
to openings—4" x 2".
PLATES: Wall, 4" x 2".
RAFTERS: 4" x H". Maximum spacing
4'o" centres for corrugated "Asbesto-
lite". For tiles and slates 2'o" centres.
JOISTS: Ceiling 4" x 2". Maximum
spacing 2'o" centres with 2" x 1" ceiling
battens at maximum of I'6" centres.
FACIA: H" minimum thickness.
PURLINS: 3" x 2". Maximum spacing for
corrugated "Asbestolite" roofing 4'o"
centres.
EXTERNAL WALL INTERNAL WALL EXTERNAL WALL


INTERIOR WALLS AND CEILINGS, ETC.
VERTICAL OR HORIZONTAL
PANEL TREATMENTS
When fixing “Asbestolite” sheets
vertically to inside walls choose
sheets long enough to go right to
the ceiling and wide enough to
suit spacing of wall studs.
Sheets 4' wide where studs are at
2' or V 4" centres. Sheets 3
wide where studs are at 1 6
centres.
Be g m n mg m the centre na 1
Asbestolite sheets to inter
mediate studs and logging pieces
and then nail edges and ends.
Use galvanised nails and space
them approximately 12" apart and
f" from edges and ends of sheets.
“Asbestolite” sheets may be fixed
horizontally to internal walls.
Here again sheets should be
chosen to suit spacing of wall
studs and to height of noggings.
Use special blunt point galvan-
ised nails 1" x 14 gauge for sheet-
ing or 1i" x 14 gauge when used
through “Asbestolite” moulding.
As with vertical fixing start nail-
ing in centre of sheet then nail
around edges. Nails should be 12"
apart and I" from edge.
Punch nails through sheets with
good sharp blows; this is better
than tapping. Hammer home
nails firmly but not too tightly.
APPLYING WALLPAPER —Before applying wallpaper the surface of “Asbestolite”
sheets should be coated with wall size. Stop joints with plaster and cover with 2"
wide calico glued over each joint. Then cover the whole surface with paper-hanger’s
lining paper.
Apply wallpaper in the usual manner. If wallpaper is to be applied vertically, lining
paper should be applied horizontally. If wallpaper is to be applied horizontally then
lining paper should be applied vertically.
“ASBESTOLITE” MOULDS, WOOD BATTENS & “ANAGLYPTA”
When using “Asbestolite” sheets for walls or ceilings which are subjected to
constantly moist conditions, in kitchens, laundries, bathrooms, toilets, etc., it is
recommended that “Asbestolite” cover mould's be used to cover sheet joints. In
lounge rooms, bedrooms, living rooms, halls, etc., very neat joint covering can be
obtained by using “Anaglypta” paper cover strip or small wooden moulds.
FIXING “ASBESTOLITE” SHEETS TO CEILINGS “Asbestolite,” being
moisture-proof, is particularly recommended for ceilings of rooms where moist
conditions prevail. “Asbestolite” cover moulds are recommended for covering sheet
joints in such rooms, whilst “Anaglypta” and wood moulds may be used in others.
Battens should be used to act as noggings between ceiling joists. Sheets are nailed
into position in the usual way, working from centre of sheets to outside edges.
When fixing wall sheets vertically bear in mind that a better all-over effect is
obtained if sheets covering ceiling line up with those on walls.
PAINTING “ASBESTOLITE” INTERIORS—Before applying paint to “Asbesto-
lite” sheets see that the surface is thoroughly dry. Most plastic or resin emulsion paints
give highly satisfactory,' economical results if applied in accordance with
manufacturers’ directions.
Oil paints and enamels may be used, but, before applying these media, a priming
coat with cement sealer is necessary. Then apply according to manufacturers
directions.
“ASBESTOLITE” MOULDINGS AND ACCESSORIES
For walls covered entirely
with "Asbestolite"
For "Asbestolite" walls
with timber to sill height
For covering vertical
joints
For External Angles.
For Internal Angles.
EXTERIOR WALL VENTILATORS
INTERNAL WALL
VENTILATORS


YOU BUILD FOR LESS WITH " ASBESTOLITE "
INSIST ON GENUINE "ASBESTOLITE"
PLAN HF17: Long, low, ranch-type design for an
“Ashestolite” home providing two bedrooms,
step-in dressing area, separate toilet and shower
recess—all in 985 sq. ft. Ideal for narrow frontage.
PLAN HF16: Popular rectangular plan of “Ashestolite” home for long
50 ft. block or corner site. Two bedrooms. Service rooms grouped
in centre for economical plumbing.
AREAS: Home, 960 sq. ft.; Porch, 42 sq. ft.; Carport, 180 sq. ft.
NOTE: We do not build “Ashestolite” homes. Any of the
plans featured in this booklet may be drawn up by your
architect for submission to your Council . Any builder
will gladly tender a price for your “ Ashestolite” home.


PLAN HF18: A contemporary “Asbestolite ” home for a sloping block with a
view. Low-pitched butterfly roof, two bedrooms, economically grouped
plumbing, large living room, yet area is only 837 sq. ft.
Laundry under home, 64 sq. ft.
PLAN HF1: Three-bedroom “Asbestolite ” home for land with a 40-ft. frontage
and there’s still room for a carport. AREAS: Home, 1,141 sq. ft.; Porch,
20 sq. ft.; Carport, 240 sq. ft.


SIZES, THICKNESSES AND WEIGHTS
"Asbestolite" Flat Sheets
"Asbestolite" Corrugated Sheets
THICKNESS:
Standard thickness of “Asbestolite” Flat Sheets 3/16"
Thicker sheets may be manufactured to order.
SIZES:
4' wide x 3', 4', s', 6', 7', 8,9 , and 10' long; 3 wide x 6', 8 and 9' long
Sheets other than above stock sizes will be charged at size of sheet cut plus a small
cutting fee.
CURVED “ASBESTOLITE” SHEETS AND MOULDINGS:
Whilst not widely used today, “Asbestolite” Flat Sheets can be curved if required
for special effects for corners of buildings, etc. Manufactured to order. Particulars
and prices will be supplied on application.
STRIATED “ASBESTOLITE”* SHEETS:
An excitingly new asbestos-cement sheet with a finely grooved or striated suface.
Striated “Asbestolite” may be used for feature panels, feature walls, partitions,
furniture, etc., and is suitable for inside or outside use. Striated “Asbestolite” has
all the well known “Asbestolite” qualities and advantages. It is also specially cured
during manufacture to minimise shrinking. Smooth stone-cut edges butt together
making neat joints and eliminating cover strips.
FOR FULL INFORMATION INCLUDING ILLUSTRATIONS AND
TECHNICAL DATA SEND FOR COLOURFUL FREE FOLDER
“DEEP-SIX” SHEETS:
Large Corrugations s§" pitch (Nominal)
Thickness (Nominal) . Depth (Nominal) :..... 2"
Width of sheets ... 3' si" for fixing with nominal 7" side lap.
Lengths: 4', s', 6', 7', B', 8' 6", 9' and 10'
CURVED CORRUGATED SHEETS:
“Asbestolite” Deep-Six Corrugated Sheets can be supplied curved to various
radii on application.
DIRECTIONS FOR FIXING:
Directions for fixing “Asbestolite” Deep-Six Corrugated Sheets are obtainable from
your local “Asbestolite” stockist or direct from the manufacturer.
ROOFING ACCESSORIES:
A complete range of “Asbestolite” Gutters, Downpipes, Ridge Capping, Roof
Skylights, Roof Vents, Barge Mouldings, and other roofing accessories is available
from your “Asbestolite” stockist. Ask him for a free catalogue.
NOTE: At the time of publication the information contained in this booklet is
correct. However, “Asbestolite” Pty. Ltd. reserve the right to change sizes and
shapes or design. Before ordering any “Asbestolite” building material, check with
your local “Asbestolite” stockist or write for a current price list.
NAILS, SCREWS, SEALER, ETC
Special blunt pointed galvanised nails are available in various sizes for fixing
“Asbestolite” Flat Sheets and appropriate mouldings. There is a comprehensive
range of galvanised screws, galvanised and bituminous washers, hook and set bolts
for fixing Corrugated “Asbestolite”. Plastic roof sealer is also available to ensure
water-proof joints and fixings. Don’t forget to. order these essential items.
WEIGHTS:
Approximate number of sq. yds. per ton
Un era ted Crated
“Asbestolite” 3/16" Flat Sheets 130 sq. yds. 1 10 sq. yds.
“Deep-Six” Corrugated Sheets 90 sq. yds. 80 sq. yds.


“Asbestolite” is versatile
“Asbestolite” has been used with universal success on buildings
of all types. To-day, imaginative architecture and advanced
building methods are promoting more and more uses for this
versatile building material.
Aesthetically, “Asbestolite” has unlimited possibilities. For
purely practical reasons, for ease of building, speed of erection,
durability and economy. “Asbestolite” has no equal.
FLATS, SCHOOLS, FACTORIES
"ASBESTOLITE" IS WIDELY USED FOR ALL TYPES OF DOMESTIC, FARM AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS
THEATRES
SHOP AWNINGS
DAIRY SHEDS
CHURCHES AND HALLS
BOAT SHEDS
ENCLOSING VERANDAHS
GARAGES


DEEP-SIX CORRUGATED "ASBESTOLIIE"
EASY TO FIX • DURABLE • RUST PROOF • SEA AIR PROOF
MINIMISES CONDENSATION • WEATHERPROOF
has no equal for modern homes with
low-pitched gable or skillion roofs
Simplicity, long, low lines, large windows, low-pitched roofs these are the distinguishing features
of modern architecture.
Corrugated “Asbestolite” Asbestos-Cement is by far the best roofing material for modern homes
—for your home!
Corrugated “Asbestolite” is easy to fix, moderately priced and, being Asbestos-Cement, is extremely
durable. It will not rust, corrode, rot or decay. Gum leaves will not affect it.
Particularly suitable for low-pitched gable and skillion roofs, Corrugated “Asbestolite” always
looks attractive in its natural silver grey. Paint it and it’s really superb. A range of suitable
roofing paints is available with almost unlimited choice of colours.


CORRUGATED
"ASBESTOLITE"
is the perfect roofing material
for all types of modern homes
To-day’s design trends definitely dictate low-pitched gable,
skillion or butterfly roofs. Whether you’re building in
“Asbestolite,” brick, stone, timber or an adventurous com-
bination, there’s no better roof than Corrugated “Asbesto-
lite” Asbestos-Cement. Architects applaud its iesthetic
appeal. Builders like it for case of fixing. YOU will benefit
from its low cost, ease of maintenance and durability.
Blends perfectly with any
building material


"ASBESTOLITE"
CORRUGATED ROOFING
Adds permanent beauty
to any type of home
Rustproof, weatherproof,
cooler in summer,
reduces condensation
A roof of corrugated Deep-Six “Asbestolite” offers you many out-
standing advantages including low cost and durability. It will not
rust, rot or decay. It is weatherproof, fire retardant, cooler in
summer and unaffected by sea-air.
A Corrugated “Asbestolite” roof is economical, and easy to
fix and maintain. You paint to beautify, not protect.


TILUX
(REG’D TRADE MARK)
the marble-finished
wall panel
for bathroom and kitchen walls
A beautiful, luxurious bathroom ... a bright, modern, work-saving kitchen . . . you
can have both with “Tilux,” the best of all low-cost wall panels.
“Tilux” is a special “marble-finished” asbestos-cement wall panel with a glazed,
moisture-proof surface. “Tilux” is strong, durable and fire-retardant. It is particularly
suitable for timber-frame buildings but may also be applied to brick, stone or concrete.
For your new home or modernising your old, “Tilux” adds so much beauty for so
little cost. It is easily fixed and, with light, regular waxing, retains its beauty
throughout its long, lustrous life.


easy to erect economical & attractive easy to clean
the choice of 2 ever popular
aecorators' colours
Fixing “Tilux” is an easy matter for either trades-
men or the skilled handyman. “Tilux” is fitted into
groove of “Lumex” Aluminium Mouldings which
are nailed into position. Between these mouldings,
the sheets are simply screwed to timber studs or
noggings with niickel-plated brass screws and cup
washers. Fixing Instructions are available from us
or your local “Tilux” stockist.
When sheets are exposed to water or moisture
infiltration, it is important that edges of sheets be
coated and sealed with a waterproof mastic.
STRAIGHT JOINT
MOULDING
CAP MOULDING
EXTERNAL ANGLE
MOULDING
INTERNAL ANGLE
MOULDING
USE ONLY
"LUMEX"
ALUMINIUM MOULDING
It is recommended that you
insist on genuine “Lumex”
polished and lacquered alu-
minium mouldings when fixing
“Tilux.”
Four different section mould-
ings are available with grooves
specially manufactured to cor-
rect dimensions to suit the
thickness of “Tilux” sheets.
"LUMEX" SIZES
"Lumex” Aluminium Moulding
is supplied in lengths of 6 ft. and
8 ft. only.
OLD IVORY
MEADOW GREEN
After installation restore surface brightness by wash-
ing with warm soapy water and lightly apply a good
quality wax polish. “Tilux” is easy to keep clean
and waterproof. Clean and polish regularly; rub
over lightly with a damp chamois, then polish. Do
not use abrasive cleaners.
SIZES
"TILUX" PANELS: 5 ft. x 4 ft., 6 ft. x 4 ft., 7 ft. x 4 ft.,
and 8 ft. x 4 ft. (Availability of other sizes on
application.)
"TILUX" COVER MOULDING: Obtainable in lengths 2 ins.
wide x 6 ft. and 8 ft. long.
"TILUX" SKIRTING: Obtainable in lengths 6 ins. wide
x 6 ft. and 8 ft. long.
"T ILU X" HAS MANY USES
Apart from bathrooms and kitchens, “Tilux” has
many uses. It is also ideal for use in dining nooks,
laundries and toilets. Attractive partitions may be
made using “Tilux,” particularly when exposed to
water or moisture infiltration.
Wherever hygienic, durable and beautiful panelling
is required, “Tilux” can be used at moderate cost.


More and more popular
every day ...
This is really an exciting era for homebuilders! Australia is fortunate in
that the percentage of people owning or in the process of owning their own
homes is one of the highest in the world.
“Asbestolite” Asbestos-Cement is growing in popularity every day as a build-
ing material for homes which are beautiful and durable . . . economical to
build and maintain. During the past 11 years more than 183,000 Australian
homes were built of Asbestos-Cement.
We hope this book has been interesting, informative and helpful. We trust
it will give you new enthusiasm and confidence when you undertake the
wonderfully rewarding task of building your own home.
Finally, and it’s worth repeating, you’ll find you build more home for less
with “Asbestolite.”
Sole Manufacturers
ASBESTOLITE PTY. LTD.
PLAN HF20: This “ Asbestolite" home is suitable for
long, narrow blocks or across wide blocks. Three
bedrooms are included in an area of 1,050 sq. ft.
Ground plan available on written application.
162 Halifax Street, Adelaide, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Printed by Sungravure Ltd.,
21-29 Morley Ave.,
Rosebery. N.S.W. Australia.
