

Y'M('■ » ** love’s sweet way,
ini In 7 " ' Laughter and kisses for lovers’ lips are meet. f:
jf/li A; Kisses at twilight, sweetest of the sweet, M
ifiU Ay, ay. Gay!”
Vi/ “Bluebells, O bluebells, saw ye the arrows twain
Speed through the greenwood piercing heart and brain ?”
“ Ay, ay, O ay, tlie stricken lovers lay
Dead with the bluebells dabbled in their blood.
Dead witli the shadows stealing through the wood,
“Ay, ay, O ay !”
( 29 )


fT^
S"rJ^
.A- ;' ‘ ;<#
* " ' '' '*' '' '
"m- ' >•■
P*4ppj
THE DESOLATE LANDING-PLACE OF THE MODERN CRUSOES.
**made a brief survey of the immediate neighbourhood on landing, and were overawed by its repulsiveness. If we had been in search of a befittingly funereal place in
which to give up the ghost, we could not have picked a more mournful spot. The vultures in their circling overhead seemed to tell us that they hailed us as probable prey.”
( 30 )


DONALD MORRISON.
A MODERN ROBINSON CRUSOE
(IN TWO INSTALMENTS)
THE THRILLING AND AUTHENTIC STORY OF DONALD MORRISON, WHO
DRAGGED OUT A T&RRIBLE EXISTENCE, FIGHTING HUNGER, DESPAIR,
AND MADNESS FOR FIVE MONTHS ON AN UNINHABITED ISLAND IN
THE PACIFIC OCEAN
The only Englishman on board the ill-fated
barque “ Alexandra Oubis,” which had to be
abandoned by the crew, in the Pacific Ocean,
after being becalmed for six months, was
Donald Morrison. His romantic and fas-
cinating story deals with the most remark-
able seafaring adventure since the days of
“ Robinson Crusoe’s ” famous exploits. Having
been into a decision to quit the
barque, the crew endeavoured to find
succour on one of the inhabited islands in the
Galapagos Archipelago. One small craft had
the good fortune to reach Chatham Island, and
there their troubles ceased. The other—in
which Mr. Morrison was—endured for eleven
days the torment of agonised uncertainty, and
the pangs of hunger and the maddening effect
of thirst, only to find itself stranded on the
dismal Indefatigable Island, a place too terrible
even for the natives of the Galapagos Group.
The story of the privations on the uninhabited
island is full of human interest. The men were
driven to tragic expedients in order to stave
off starvation, and went through nearly every
grade of emotion, from black despair on the
island to the rapturous delight of their ultimate
deliverance.
PART I.
{Written for The London Magazine by Donald Morrison.)
The last voyage of the “ Alexandra
Oubis ” will surely find a place
high up amongst the thrilling ro-
mances of the sea, for she provided one of
the most memorable exploits it has ever
fallen to the lot of man to encounter.
I joined the boat at Buenos Ayres, whence
she proceeded to Newcastle, New South
Wales, took a cargo of coal aboard, and
put to with tw'cnty hands all told. Our
course lay across the Pacific Ocean, and
for the first two months w'e counted our-
selves lucky in having fair weather and
favourable winds; for, as sailors well
know, there is always a risk in attempting
to cross the line at the back end of the
year.
We were not in the least degree unmind-
ful of the good fortune that so far attended
us; and the Christmas festivities of 1908
were amongst the joiliest I have ever had,
especially remembering that our little crew
numbered in its rank Germans, Norwegians,
and Scandinavians.
We were just as jolly as sandboys, and
confidently expecting a good passage, when,
at the beginning of the New Year, we became
becalmed. It was annoying, of course,
but there was no immediate concern,
because the experience was not new, and
hitherto we had reaped the reward of
patience.
A week passed, and the sails were still
limp and motionless, while the old barque
just moved with the current and paid not
the slightest heed to the helm. A second,
third, and fourth week found us in just the
same predicament, and we began to get
on the impatient side a trifle. Each man
more eagerly than before for the
( 31 )


sight of a friendly sail or funnel on the
horizon. We endured a daily dose of dis-
appointment without ever going back on
the belief that a breeze was bound to
spring up presently.
Two months of exasperating calm, how-
ever, brought us to a serious pass. We
had drifted out of the usual route of shipping
traffic; the bottom of the vessel was getting
foul. If growth on the keel got much
worse it would take us all our time to
reach land—even with the aid of a gooxl
breeze —ere our food supply ran out.
Matters were thus becoming desperate.
How heavily and wearily the time dragged
on during the awful helplessness of that
lull ! The month of March carried us still
nearer the equator, but that was all it did.
We continued to ride aimlessly on the face
of the Pacific, and hoped for succour which
all knew was not likely to come.
Captain Pettersen issued orders that we
were to be put on half rations; and as we
still had three weeks’ food aboard the
precaution was full of tragic significance
to the older hands. Some of us began to
ask ourselves how it would all end ; and
I must confess that my mind was filled with
forebodings of trouble.
My father was buried at sea, and the
whole of my five brothers had been drowned.
Before leaving home, my eldest boy im-
plored me to give up the life of a seafarer,
remarking that I had already crowded
enough hairbreadth escapes into my thirty-
five years as a sailor, and that I might
tempt the P'ates once too often. I could not
get out of my thoughts the idea that he
must have had some premonition of calamity,
and that surely enough I was destined to
meet a lingering and sorrowful death.
We braved the situation unmurmuringly,
despite the utter wretchedness of the out-
look. At times, in the distance, we gained
new life by signs of an impending wind-
storm, but the elements simply toyed
with us and only served to show the im-
potency of us all. Hope and fear alter-
nately held sway; and by the time we
reached the end of April we were fast be-
coming victims of hunger and despondency.
In the first week in May, 1907, we sighted
land for the first time for six months.
It is not easy for anyone who has not
been in such a situation to conceive what
rapturous enthusiasm seized hold of us.
We seemed to cast off our gloominess with
as much ease as though it were born of
yesterday. We examined the official chart,
after ascertaining t he longitude and latitude,
and discovered that we were within view
of the famous Galapagos Islands, situated
about five hundred miles from the South
American Republic of Ecuador and im-
mediately below the equator. The island
we first saw was Albemarle, the largest in
the archipelago, being something like
seventy-five miles long. Our reference-books
TRACK OF THE ILL-FATED VESSEL “ALEXANDRA OUBIS.”
In.set is a rmp showing Gabip'igos Oro'.ip, DomUl Morris >n anJ his roinpinions were strm led for rive montlis. It will be
seen that when they ioned the vessel an 1 took to the boats the first landing was found to be impraciicable. When they
finally landed they had the misfortune to lose their boat, which was dashed to pieces on the rocks. Changes to the second and
third camps were effected by the dangerous ineliiod of swimming across the bays which intersect the shores.
32
THE LONDON MAGAZINE


THE FIRST SIGHT OF LAND: GALAPAGOS ISLANDS.
A ROBINSON CRUSOE
No. iis.-Vni.. XX. 31


made out that Albemarle was uninhabited,
and we instantly abandoned the idea of
landing there.
Presently another member of the group
was brought within the range of the tele-
scope, and, believing it to be Chatham Island
—which is occupied —we did out best to
bear in that direction. Another difficulty at
once beset our path. The Antarctic current,
which carried with it a welcome degree of
coolness, after following the barren coast of
Peru, as far as Cape Blanc, bears off to the
north-west, and in its course sweeps through
the Galapagos Islands. The result was
that we encountered a current which was
everlastingly setting against us. Try how
we would there was no making headway
against this stream.
An occasional puff of wind came along
with tantalising brevity, and then wholly
deserted us, as though sporting with our
feelings. We kept up the struggle for a'few
days longer, the uncertainty of the combat
providing an acceptable antidote to the
nerve-shattering monotony of the preceding
months. All of a sudden it was borne in
upon us that unless something was done, and
done very quickly, we should be swept away
by the Antarctic current into the middle of
the ocean. That meant certain destruction,
because at this period our food had nearly
given out, and the water was running short,
despite the severely limited quantity served
by order of the captain.
Hope had now reached the vanishing
point, and given place to grim despera-
tion. We held a hurried council of war, and
made up our minds that there was no help
for it but to abandon the old, barnacled
barque, equip her two small sailing-boats,
and pull for Chatham Island.
There was no time to be lost, and so we
bent to our task with all speed. We scraped
together every scrap of food —in the main,
maggoty biscuits —divided the fresh water
with scrupulous fairness, for it was very
precious indeed, and collected a few blankets
and other odd things which were likely to be
useful. We managed to raise a smile when
the carpenter entered the boat burdened by
a dozen or more of his tools, for there was
something irresistibly laughable in a man in
such a predicament troubling a jot about
carpenters’ tools. How providential his
action afterwards proved I will relate
later.
Splitting ourselves into two parties of ten
each, we took to the small boats on the Bth
of May last year. The captain joined the
section to which I belonged, and he arranged
that the two boats should remain pretty
close together. The main reason for this
was that we only had one map. It con-
tained an ocean-chart and a plan of the
Galapagos Islands. We kept the plan, and
gave the chart to the other fellows, so that
they really had the best of the bargain. So
long as we kept in touch with each other we
were confident that we should reach an
inhabited island all right.
The task was infinitely greater than we
ever dreamed of, though. The men were
weak, half starved, and worn out by the
most frightful form of fatigue. Against
that accursed current we could make but
little progress. Our boat was fitted with
air-chambers to prevent the possibility of
sinking, but the contrivance did not guard
against the dangers of leakages, and two
men had to work day and night to bale the
water out.
The two small craft remained in company
very well. Night came on, lamps were
lighted, and we tried to lend relief to the
dreadful solitude by singing. There was
no heart in the men’s voices, though, and we
once more lent our ears to the faint splashing
from the oars of feeble men. I almost think
we lost ground during the darkness. At
any rate, the night’s arduous labours did
not appreciably reduce the overnight dis-
tance from shore, and the failure revealed
by the dawn put us once more in a state of
dejection.
For days we were buffeted about at the
bidding of that unconquerable current, and
it really began to look as though we were
fighting against Fate in seeking to evade
destruction. By the end of the week we
got the shelter of the land, and then, for the
first time, began to make progress. We
made the island all right, but were quite out
of our reckoning.
Instead of Chatham Island, we were along-
side one of the larger members of the group.
It was little better than a black lava rock.
We pulled along the coastline without
detecting any signs of life, and were
driven to abandon the notion of landing.
However sorry our plight, matters could
only be made worse by refuge on a desert
island.
Another course was determined, and we
resumed our journey, the very embodiment
34
THE LONDON MAGAZINE


TAKING TO THE BOATS.
We made up our minds that there was no help for it but to abandon the old, barnacled barque, equip ber
two small boats, and pull for Chatham Island.
of human misery, for each felt that life
was spending itself, and the chance of
delivetanee small. During that night the
two boats parted company. We headed, as
we thought, for Chatham, but whether the
other people missed our light, or whether
they elected to place greater reliance on
their plan than our leadership, I cannot say,
but when daylight dawned they were no-
where to be seen. Not one of us could bring
himself up to the thought that they had gone
under in the great struggle, but their disap-
pearance had an unsteadying effect on the
spirits of an already highly strupg, starving,
cramped, and over-anxious crew.
The constant pulling at the oars, the
35
A MODERN ROBINSON CRUSOE


incessant baling, and the unceasing watchful-
ness were reaching a culminating point. In
the midst of our gloom, the plug fell out of
the water-tank, and the entire supply had
given out before we discovered the mishap.
We looked at each other with unspeakable
dismay, for surely there never was such
dogged misfortune in the world before.
We were now only a few miles from the
equator. The sun beat down more fiercely
than ever, and the blinding glare reflected
from the water added to our discomfort.
The last biscuit had been distributed, and
the pangs of hunger were intensified by the
torture of thirst. Words cannot convey
what it means to suffer from thirst under
such circumstances. Our throats passed
from the parched to the inflamed stage, and
finally seemed as though they were closing
up. Our eyes, bloodshot and distended,
seemed ready to start from their "sockets ;
the brain reeled. The ever-present sensation
was that we should inevitably go mad.
The only thing that preserved the balance
of our minds was the knowledge that there
was land ahead, and that we were lessening
the gap. We summoned up all our strength,
and worked as only desperate men can in
a struggle between life and death. Not a
word was uttered. Now and then an
American, during the recurring paroxysms
of suffering, cursed his unhappy fate, but,
for the rest, there was no heart to speak.
On the eleventh day we were close up to
land. Right ahead was a small bay, in
which the surf was beating amongst a
shoal of half-submerged rocks. We steered
the vessel straight for the beach. It was
a perilous thing to do, for every moment
we ran the risk of having the bottom
knocked in.
Fear, however, was a thing of the past.
The one thing to pray for was water. The
island promised to yield moisture, which
we prized more dearly than anything else
in the world.
With a jolt the boat struck the beach,
and those who were able got out. For the
most part the men could hardly stand.
Being eleven days huddled fo;ether in a
small boat had nearly put the finishing
touch to their exhausted physical state.
As soon as we were on dry land, a small
party was deputed to hunt for water.
Moisture of some sort was imperative if
we were to be saved from the most agonising
form of death. I dread to think what was
getting uppermost in some of the men’s
minds, but it would not have surprised me
if the weakest had gone to the wall. Human
blood would have given, at any rate, a
temporary respite. I am at a loss to
understand how the frenzied desire for
something to wet the lips had remained in
check so long.
It would require an abler pen than mine
to describe the fearful pass to which the
ten of us had been reduced. The captain,
perhaps, saved the situation by cutting up
some cactus-leaves which were close at
hand. He handed round the slices, and we
sucked out the juice.
The cool moisture transcended any form
of pleasure we had hitherto known. We
were delirious with supreme delight. Cactus-
juice is not a good thing to take, as we
afterwards found out at the cost of con-
siderable prostration, but as an urgent
expedient it was truly grand.
At the earliest possible moment we made
a brief survey of the immediate neighbour-
hood, and were overawed by its repulsive-
ness. If we had been in search of a befit-
tingly funereal place in which to give up
the ghost, we could not have picked a more
mournful spot. The vultures in their
circling overhead seemed to tell us that
they hailed us as probable prey.
However, we gathered together a quantity
of dead wood, and lighted our camp-fire with
one of the fifteen matches we mustered
among us. Like drowning men clutching
at straws, we still hoped that the flames
would be seen by someone. It did not
matter much by whom. For over six months
we had endured a living death, and, in
spite of it all, we yet hoped to find relief
from our sufferings.
Night fell, and as we gathered round the
fire a cool, drizzling mist fell. Our alert
imagination lent colour to the idea that we
could hear footsteps approaching. Once or
twice we started off a little distance to
ascertain whether there was really anyone
within hail, but nothing came in sight,
and, finally, stretching ourselves on the
ground, we sought release from anguish in
repose. After a night of fitful* rest, into
which a horde of uncanny phantasies
crowded themselves, we were astir next
morning early.
We were wet to the skin, but, having
undergone so much, our dripping condition
became a mere incident hardly worthy of
36
THE LONDON MAGAZINE


notice. The night had not entailed hard surface was lava-strewn, and in places the
work and a wearying vigil, and so all felt projections were as sharp as knives. The
the benefit of what slumber had been point we reached gave us a commanding
vouchsafed to us. view of a portion of the coast-line. We con-
We collected more wood for the fire, suited our map, and were almost staggered
appointed the American camp-tender, for by the news it conveyed,
he had succeeded in satisfying himself that Horror upon horrors ! We were actuallv
we were doomed, and that it would be just upon the Indefatigable Island—a place too
as well to await the end without any further terrible even for the natives of the archi-
show of resistance, and, having divided pelago! Not only was it uninhabited, but
ourselves up into small parties, we set out to it was also devoid of nearly every element
explore the island. needed for the sus-
The brilliancy of tenanceof the
the sun helped to human body. Were
brighten the dismal ever men so out-
loneliness of the '/W rageously unfortu-
island, which was M we ?
obviously of vol- .[ ] Returning to
canic formation. camp, we told of
In the centre, discovery, and
some ten or twelve the dead silence
miles away, towered iIA fell on us all
a forbidding moun- will live in my
tain. Maybe it memorv till the
was about three closing hours of
thousand feet high. reason. The scene
It looked like the ■f' /jeven now is almost
outcome of a long im painful to recall,
since extinct vol- \ sets up a
cano. The telescope |. b throbbing of the
revealed immense Av’s heart which can
folds of black lava almost be heard.
enveloping its J Although nearly
slopes. There did ‘ **'' • dumbfounded, we
not appear to be dared not trust
any vegetation ■ ourselves to ponder
growing about it; our
and the more we newest grief, and
tried to grasp it in westarted off again,
detail, the more it Coming across what
seemed to repel us looked very like
with its repulsive then an American, during the paroxysms of grab - apples, We
r suffering, cursed his unhappy fate, but, for the rest, i i
™wn. there was no heart to speak. tested them, and
Between our in a very short
camp and the foot while knew that
of the mountain the undulations of the we had made a serious mistake
island seemed clothed in a dense jungle of They appeared palatable enough, but,
dark, leafless, and thorny brushwood. The as a matter of fact, they were poisonous,
thicket extended to the right and left as far and in a few minutes we were all seized with
as the eye could reach. In the whole course nausea and acute internal pains. With some
of my thirty-six years’ seafaring I have of us the ill-effects quickly disappeared,
never looked upon anything so terribly un- and we continued our search. In one of the
inviting. small bays close at hand we espied gigantic
At first I wondered if what I pictured was turtles disporting themselves on the sandy
a reality or the brood of a distracted mind. beach. The carpenter had already been
I was not long in doubt. ascended to a busy with the tools he brought with him,
high rock. It was a hard climb, for the and we were armed with clubs which had


been cut from the boughs of trees. Pro-
ceeding cautiously along the water’s edge,
we cut off the retreat of the largest turtle
and beat it to death. Two more fell victims
to our clubbing, and so we secured our first
food.
The largest turtle measured over five feet
long and about four feet broad. It took
four of us to haul it back to camp, but I
do not recollect having participated in
hard work with so much keen delight.
Turtle soup would, indeed, have been a
luxury ; but, alas ! we had not yet been
lucky enough to find a supply of fresh
water. With the help of the cook we caught
the blood from the dead turtles, and served
it out in the few pannikins we had. It
certainly was a decided improvement on
cactus-juice, but it was hardly an ideal
drink for extremely thirsty mortals. In
almost less time than it takes to tell we
constructed an improvised stone fireplace,
into which we transferred some of the
bright embers from the camp-fire, and ten
very hungry men were engaged in cooking
pieces of turtle at the end of tree-twigs.
We ate ravenously, and with a zest that
few mortals have known. The meal inspired
new confidence, and we lay down to rest
that night comforted by the knowledge that
we might yet escape starvation.
On the second day we completed the
emptying of the boat of all our scanty
belongings ; and towards nightfall another
turtle —although defying the ability of the
cook to impart variety to the dish —satisfied
us for the closing meal.
With the gathering gloom of evening
came back the thought that we must make
a move to get away from a place which was
becoming more fearsome every minute we
stayed in it. The overpowering stillness of
the island was well-nigh impossible. There
were plenty of pretty birds, but not one of
them had a note; there was abundant
growth, but not the slightest suggestion
of a flower.
As we sat round the camp-fire in the dead
of night, the only sound that reached us
was the swirling of the Antarctic current
about the rocky coast cliffs. The hours we
spent staring out across the Pacific, in the
hope that a friendly vessel would come our
way, seemed like ages.
An alarm was given that a ship’s light
was to be seen ; and it was hard to
believe that it should be imagiiiary. Yet
it was so; and. after every newly born
phase of hope we relapsed into a deeper
depth of despair. Of all the varieties of
misery, nothing came within a long way of
the torture of silence. It became positively
unbearable, and seemed to lacerate the
senses. A thunderstorm, even if it had sealed
our doom, would have been infinitely
preferable to the awe-inspiring stillness
which prevailed everywhere. The fourth
day gave rise to the suggestion that if we
could only find water to fill our boat-tank,
and capture enough turtles to ensure food for
a week, we should do better to take to the
boat and seek out one of the inhabited
islands.
“ Let us get away at all costs from this
living tomb,” argued some of the men.
They were quite right to urge the claim
of early flight, but the absence of water
made that course wholly impossible. In
the forenoon we sallied forth in quest of
food and water, and came across some seals,
which swam up with the tide, beached
themselves as the water receded, and lay
on the sand, basking in the sun. There was
such a gap between the seals and the water
that we easily secured positions in the
intervening space, club in hand. Kealising
their danger, the sea-lions set up a screeching
wail, and came forward in a most menacing
manner. Just for a moment we wavered.
Then, taking our courage, or rather our
club, in both hands, we attacked the on-
coming seals about the head. The blows
which rained on the top of their skulls
should have sufficed to split them, but they
certainly did not. We ultimately succeeded
in stunning them, and finished them off by
cutting their throats. With much care
we caught the blood. We had no great
hope that it would be much of an improve-
ment upon turtle blood, but at least it
provided variety, and that was very accept-
able in the monotonous conditions in which
we were. On the way back to camp we
encountered a huge tortoise, or land turtle,
as we called him. The body part was about
the size of the largest turtle we had captured,
but the head vms more snake-like and
mobile, while, instead of' flippers, he' had
four short, stumpy legs, like what you would
have expected to see on a miniature elephant.
The tortoise made no bones about being
interrupted by an inquisitive crowd. He
occasionally hid his head, but otherwise
was as tame as though he had spent all his
38
THE LONDON MAGAZINE


life leisurely at the Zoo. Of course, his fate
was settled from the first moment we caught
sight of him, but he exhibited such be-
witching docility that we stared at him
studiously for some little time before adding
him to our limited larder. Both interest and
curiosity quickly vanished, and we pounced
on him with almost fiendish glee.
With seal and tortoise we made our way
back to camp. There was a good deal of
speculation as to the palatableness or other-
wise of our newest captures, and the cook
was commanded to prepare the next meal
from the three kinds of flesh. The experi-
ment enabled us to place the food in the
following order of merit—turtle first, seal
second, tortoise third.
Toasted turtle is not exactly a seductive
form of food, but at least it has the advan-
tage of possessing a flavour by no means
unpleasant. Then again there is a fleshy
connection between the two shells in which
it is encased, and this facilitates the process
of prepaiation. The tortoise, on the other
hand, was distasteful to a degree.
We were not by any means fickle-
stomached, as may be imagined, but it
needed the sauce of downright grim hunger
to tackle the flesh of the tortoise. Moreover,
he was infinitely more trouble than the
turtle. His horny covering had to be
chiselled before we could get at the flesh,
and a pretty tough job it was.
Hence we voted the land turtle an utter
failure. The seal was insipid, but not
objectionable; and the skin proved ex-
tremely serviceable, seeing that we stood
sadly in need of clothing and our feet were
almost bare.
Taking it altogether, our three-course
meal produced a real sense of enjoyment, the
only thing immediately missing being water.
The slaking of our thirst had to be done
with blood; and as we had two kinds on
hand we liad the privilege of exercising a
choice. One of the men had a somewhat
heavy draught of both. The effect was
surprising. began staggering about like
a man who had taken too much grog.
The seal’s blood, of course, is cold, while
that of the tortoise is warm, and it may
have been the mining that gave rise to the
apparent intoxication ; but, whatever the
cause, we interpreted the result as a grave
warning.
Next day we held a council of war, and
concluded that there must be water at the
foot of the mountain situated in the centre
of the island. Whatever clouds came our
way seemed to settle on the top of that
frowning monster; and at the dying of the
day the mists which hung about its slopes
were joined by the vapours which rose
from the valleys.
Surely there must be water at the foot
of the slopes. We were all convinced as to
the correctness of the surmise, and so the
natural thing to do was to make for inland.
The task was not a hopeful one. So far as
we could see, the mountain was completely
hemmed in by a thick jungle of thorny
and almost leafless brushwood. The bram-
bles were so interlaced as to defy all efforts
to disentangle them ; but we took it in
turns to apply the carpenter’s axe, and
made slow but steady progress.
I should think we made a passage about
two miles long, but the effort distinctly
discouraged us. The mountain seemed no
nearer, and the intervening jungle damped
our ardour by its very immensity. Sad
and dismayed, we returned to camp, and set
off in another direction in search of water.
We could scarcely contain ourselves as
we came across a cave, the bottom of which
was covered a foot deep. The captain,
still the leader of the band, proceeded to
taste it, and our hearts almost stood still
as we waited for the verdict. “ Slightly
salty, but drinkable,” he exclaimed. And
in less time than it takes to tell we were
held in the delirium of feeling cool water
passing over our parched palates. The first
drink of water for a week. With some
canvas, brought from the “Alexandra Oubis,”
I made a couple of canvas bags, and by
this means conveyed water to the camp.
AVe were suddenly endowed with a new
lease of life, and once more turned attention
to the desirability of again taking to the
small boat and trying our luck on another
island. This became the settled policy of
the camp ; and the next day we moved down
to the small cove, where we landed, to get
the boat ready. We had hitherto been so
busily engaged in concerning ourselves with
the pressing emergencies of the moment
that we had given practically no thought
to the vessel. Now, however, it was our one
hope of salvation. Picture, then, our horror
at finding that the incessant surf had
battered the frail craft to pieces! She was
utterly beyond repair.
{To be concluded neH month.)
39
A MODERN ROBINSON CRUSOE


THE CHAMPION OF LONDON’S ARMY OF HUNGRY CHILDREN
Mr. VV. Crooks, M.P., is one of the most
interesting figures in public life. Nurtured in
poverty, his career for the most part has been
one long struggle against the inroads of hardship.
His sympathy with the suffering poor has always
been his chief characteristic ; and the needy of
Poplar have long since learned to entertain for
him the profoundest feeling of gratitude and
affection. Veritably he has become their guide,
philosopher, and friend ; and his progress in
public esteem is marked by his election as
County Councillor, Mayor of Poplar, and
member of Parliament. In connection with the
article by Mr. Crooks, it is interesting to note
that in nearly every country in Europe provision
of some sort is made for ill-fed school-children.
The system, however, in most of the countries
is experimental.
(■4O )


DONALD MORRISON.
A MODERN ROBINSON CRUSOE
(CONCLUDING INSTALMENT)
THE THRILLING AND AUTHENTIC STORY OF DONALD MORRISON, WHO
DRAGGED OUT A TERRIBLE EXISTENCE, FIGHTING HUNGER, DESPAIR,
AND MADNESS FOR FIVE MONTHS ON AN UNINHABITED ISLAND IN
THE PACIFIC OCEAN
The only Englishnmn on board the ill-fated
barque “ Alexandra Oubis,” which had to be
abandoned by the crew, in the Pacific Ocean,
after being becalmed for six months, was
Donald Morrison. His romantic and fascinat-
ing story (commenced in last month’s issue)
deals with the most remarkable seafaring
adventure since the days of “ Pobinson
Crusoe’s ” famous exploits. Having been
starved into a decision to quit the barque, the
crew endeavoured to find succour on one of the
inhabited islands in the Galapagos Archipelago.
One small craft had the good fortune to reach
PART IT.
Chatham Island, and there their troubles
ceased. The other—in which Mr. Moriison
was—endured for eleven days the pangs of
hunger and the maddening effect of thirst, only
to find itself stranded on the dismal Indefatig-
able Island, a place too terrible even for the
natives of the Galapagos Group. As soon as
they realised their terrible position the men
started on the hunt for water. After four
days, during which they ipienched their thirst
with seals’ blood, water was found, and they
joyfully made their way to the boat, only to find
it had been smashed on the rocks by the surf.
(conclusion).
(Written tor The London Ma(;azine by Donald Morrison.)
The discovery (the loss of our only
boat) dazed our senses, and for a
time not one of us could speak.
Melancholy began to reign, and w'e must
have gone mad unless some form of
counter-distraction came to our aid.
The compensating element in human
nature asserted itself in the course of the
day. We applied ourselves to, hard M'ork,
and that dispelled the gloom. While some
went in quest of food, wood, and water,
others deputed to secure the airtight
tanks which still marked the spot where
the boat had been wrecked, and which, in
reality, were all that left of the vessel
Being the best swimmer of the crew, I
went out to fetch the tanks ashore, and
succeeded in doing so. By cutting them up
converted them into cooking utensils ;
and that night the camp watched with
added interest the preparation of turtle-soup.
It really was quite delicious, and by far
the most satisfactory meal m'C had made
for months.
That night we tried our best to forget the
hopelessness of our predicament. A heavy
and chilly mist drove us to seek shelter in
the passage cut in the brushw'ood. Rest
there was out of the question owung to the
activities of myriads of mosquitoes and
sandflies. Damp in the open was infinitely
preferable, and we returned to our old
quarters round the camp-fire.
The atmosphere at night was considerably
colder than we had expected it. The moun-
tain seemed to attract clouds to settle on
it directly daylight began to fade, and the
mist spread over the surface of the land.
( 217 )


Could we have secured any kind of shelter,
our lot would have been immensely improved.
An effort was made to find a cave amongst
such of the rocks as were accessible, but
nothing of the kind could be found. The
next morning we were infinitely happier
than we had been for many months past,
and prepared for the duties of the day
much refreshed by the night’s rest. I was
almost saying sleep, but, in reality, we did
not sleep for many hours at a stretch.
We thought of arranging for a round of
sentry-go. When, however, it became
apparent that each and all found long
spells of sleep impossible, we resolved to
dispense with the necessity of a special vigil
through the dark hours. Heaven knows
we had had enough of night-watches !
Wood-gathering was again the first order
of the day as soon as daylight came. We
could not afford to let the camp-fire die, no
matter how fierce the sun might beat down.
The remaining fourteen matches were trea-
sured like so many pricele.ss jewels.
Feeling a good deal refreshed on the
following morning—due, I believe, to the
satisfying influence of the turtle-soup—we
held another conference, for there were
many and urgent reasons why we should
now venture further afield along the coast-
line. In the first place, our camp was situ-
ated at a part of the island not likely to
attract notice, for there was not ground for
believing that any vessel would pass within
view. Another consideration was that the
brackish water from the cave might ulti-
mately levy its natural toll, and leave us
physical wrecks. The main motive, though,
was to get a more suitable place for the
finding of food.
As I have already said, the first turtles
fell an easy prey. For centuries, maybe,
the sandy beach had been a suitable place
for the laying of turtle-eggs, and long freedom
from interference made the place popular.
You may put it down to instinct, or what-
ever else you like, but lam convinced that
the turtles have some effective means of
communication. At any rate, all the time
we remained in the first camp the turtles
never came again on to the beach. They
regularly entered the bay to browse off the
green growth which they found in the some-
what shallow water, but they kept an alert
eye on the shore, and scurried off to sea
directly any danger threatened. This ab-
norriial wariness was most vexing, and
caused us to cudgel our brains for a way to
circumvent it.
And this is how we did it: Across the
entrance of an adjoining cove there was a
line of half-submerged rocks, upon which
some of the crew took up a position from
the extreme right and left of the bay, after
the turtles had entered. When all was
ready I entered the water, and, making as
much pother as possible, I rounded up the
affrighted turtles, and drove them towards
the reef. In the hurried use of their flippers
on the surface of the water, the turtles looked
like so many miniature paddle-boats.
Unaware of the trap, they sought to escape
at the points where the rocks were sunken;
and it was then that the watchers pounced
down on them, destroyed their cantre of
gravity, and tipped them on their backs.
Once turned over in this manner the turtles
were easy to land, but while the men were
in the inexperienced stage they had one or
two unpleasant adventures. If you grabbed
a turtle well under weigh, and did not upset
him instantly, he would dart to the bottom
of the sea, and, unless his would-be captor
was pretty adroit, he would be carried out
too. We failed to capture our quarry many
times, but we always got back to land safely.
In damp weather the turtles never came
out into the bay; and consequently it was
essential that we should do as much ex-
ploring as possible to provide against a
rainy season, if one should come along.
Carrying bags of food, and a quantity of
water, four of the party set out to trayerse
the east shore of the island. Travelling
was exceedingly difficult, and at times
dangerous. It was impossible to digress
from the coastline; and as some of the bays
were formed by lava rocks rising at right
angles from the water, the explorers either
had to wade or swim from one arm of the
bay to the other.
I did not accompany the expeditionary
party, but remained at the camp with the
captain and four other members of the un-
happy crew.
We started a second camp near our water-
supply, but only used it occasionally. It
served as a sort of outpost station. The
time seemed to hang more heavily than
ever since the explorers’ departure; and as
days went by without any tidings of them,
we were seized with fear of impending
misfortune.
The captain became as restless
218
THE LONDON MAGAZINE


UNAWARE OF THE TRAP, THE TURTLES SOUGHT TO ESCAPE AT THE POINTS
WHERE THE ROCKS WERE SUNKEN; AND IT WAS THEN THAT THE WATCHERS
POUNCED DOWN ON THEM, DESTROYED THEIR CENTRE OF GRAVITY, AND TIPPED
THEM ON THEIR BACKS.


caged lion, and insisted upon making a
voyage of discovery along the rocks in
quest of fresh water. Another man accom-
panied him; and at the end of the day’s
journey the captain, declining to acknow-
ledge another defeat, sent his companion
back to camp, saying that he would remain
there for the night and extend bis opera-
tions in the morning.
The next day we awaited the captain’s
return with some amount of anxiety,
because a single-handed venture was known
to be a dangerous thing to undertake.
We were all more or less weak and
emaciated, and scarcely a day passed
without some sort of mishap. One man
was struck in the eye with a leaf, and for
weeks was blind, the tree giving off some
form of vegetable poison at the tips of the
leaves.
Not only was our own strength failing,
but pur eyesight was also getting dim,
whether from strain or too much flesh-food
I cannot say. It was obvious, however.
that no man ought to venture out alone;
and consequently we were alarmed for the
safety of the captain.
Towards evening we started off to look
for him. Throughout the night we fancied
we heard his footsteps nearing the camp,
but daylight broke, and he was still missing.
Making a hurried breakfast, we set out
again, and in the course of an hour found
him, in a pitiable condition. He had scarcely
a vestige of clothing, and, bleeding from
a dozen wounds, he was crawling over the
lava rocks on his hands and
knees. He was completely lost to all sense
of pain; and his failure to recognise any of
us showed conclusively that he had gone
mad.
We carried him back to camp as carefully
as could be, and nursed him until his reason
returned. I think he was mentally unhinged
for nearly six weeks. When he recovered
he explained what had happened.
While alone he came across a cave con-
taining water. It appeared to him to be
220
THE LONDON MACr/JNE


only slightly brackish, and being very
thirsty, he drank heartily. A little while
afterwards his throat nearly closed up, and
his brain began to whirl. In his feverish
frenzy he just had enough sense left to
try and get back to camp, but his legs gave
way, and he had to crawl. Beyond that
his mind was a complete blank.
While the captain was being nursed back
to health, we had a very uncomfortable
time concerning the fate of the exploring
(luartette. They had been away two weeks;
and we began to let our minds run loose-
on all sorts of tragic possibilities. We
hardly knew what to do for the best, but
by common consent it was agreed that
.something would have to be done.
For days we had been without turtle,
seal, or tortoise, and had to make shift on
lizard. The Galapagos lizard is a hideous-
looking creature, about five length,
and eighteen inches or so in body-girth.
He has a row of spikes running from head
to tail, but is exceptionally timid when
approached. He has something of the weak-
ness of the ostrich for burying his head
and imagining he is safe when there is
danger at hand. We found a few of their
favourite haunts; and, directly we hove in
sight they darted into crevices, heedless
of the risk of leaving their tails exposed to
view.
Some of the smaller ones we managed to
drag out, but the bigger ones defied us;
and so we contented ourselves by lopping
off their tails —the only part that was
really eatable.
At best, lizards formed very poor fare;
and so hard were we pressed by hunger at
times that we tried pelican and carrion-
buzzard. They were not difficult to catch.
The buzzard was so tame that we could get
within striking distance, and knock it off
the bough of a tree with a club. The pelican
was a little more wary. We could approach
to, say, a dozen yards, and then there was
a flapping of wings. The pelican did not
always have the best of the bargain, though.
Some of the crew could throw stones with
tolerable accuracy; and had we wished we
might have secured lots of pelicans.
Like the buzzard, however, they were
as tough as leather, and nauseatingly dis-
tasteful.
We worked ourselves up into a state of
excitement over the finding of fourteen
pelican eggs, only to be correspondingly
disappointed. The white, when cooked,
refused to he masticated ; and the yolk
was fishy, and only eatable as a last resource.
The desire to make a move to another
part of the island began to grow on us
irresistibly. When the outlook seemed
at its blackest, the weather improved.
The turtles made a welcome visit to the
bays, and the general health of the camp
became better.
We were experiencing this sense of relief
when our lives were gladdened by the return
of the exploring party, who carried the
cheerful tidings that they had found fresh
water, and had established another camp
three days’ journey away to the east of
the island. The outward excursion had to
be attended by many privations; and
after finding the water they were compelled
to lie by for some days to regain their
strength.
What we had to decide was whether it
would be well to abandon the old camp
altogether, or whether we should split it
into two sections for a while. We talked
over the matter for a long time, and finally
resolved to keep two camps going—that
is, the first and the third. The only attrac-
tion the new camp had was that there was
fresh water, while by that time we had
become cpiite used to the brackish water
of the old camp. Perhaps we were influenced,
too, by the determination of the American
to remain in the old place.
The captain, still very ill, was taken
away to fresh-water camp, and we con-
tinued our customary career. At times
we dwelt in the regions of hopeful expec-
tancy that we should be delivered from
the desolation of that wretched island,
then again we were plunged into dark
despair.
To think of civilisation as we had known
it, to picture the faces of family and friends,
to recall the thousands of pleasant asso-
ciations, intensified the anguish of our lot,
and nearly drove us frantic. Our utter
impotency overpowered us, and made us
the sport of alternating emotions.
That we were getting more enfeebled was
plainly written on the pallid and drawn
features of the crew; and the question of
how much longer we could endure, even
under what we had so far regarded as favour-
able conditions, was entering tormentingly
into our thoughts. By the end of the second
month an inquiry came from the new camp
221
A MODERN ROBINSON CRUSOE


The vessel came on and on, until through the tears in our eyes we could detect the signals being
sent in answer to our own excited waving of whatever we could hold aloft.
as to whether we had seen anything of the
German, a man named Schaffer. He had
left the camp ten days previously, single-
handed, and had not since been heard of.
We in the old camp had seen nothing of him,
and concluded that some disaster had over-
taken him. A search-party was formed,
and two days out from camp we discovered
human bones, an old boot, and a skull.
The ever-present carrion had done his work,
and the sun had bleached the bare bones.
We had no doubt as to their identity.
We reverently gathered the remains together
and formally buried them, some distance
from high-water mark. The explanation of
the tragedy, probably, is that Schaffer was
endeavouring to wade through one of the
small bays, got out of his depth, and, being
unable to swim, drowned. The event cast
so much gloom over everybody that we
decided to quit the old camp forthwith.
The xlmerican, however, had quite aban-
doned all hope of rescue, and declined to
budge. We all did our best to induce him
to take a less despondent view. It was
useless.
“ I may as well stay here and die as to go
to the other side of the island and do it,” he
replied.
That was all we could get from him, and
perforce we left him. I went away from him
with a heavy heart, because he was the only
other English-speaking man in the crowd.
All the rest could keep up a running con-
versation in their own native tongue, and by
intercommunication help to bear the burden
of the solitude of that nerve-shattering
rock.
Months went by with leaden wings, and no
sign of sea-traffic ever came in view. Our
signal of distress—a towel fastened to a pole
—fluttered in a breeze which four months
222
THE LONDON MAGA7ANE


ago would have been our salvation, but
which now only seemed to mock our forlorn
condition.
“ Let us make a raft and put out to sea,”
said the captain. “ The infernal course of
the Antarctic current will carry us into the
middle of the Pacific Ocean, but we shall
stand as good, if not better, chance of being
picked up as staying longer on this ghastly
island.”
The idea was hailed with as much pleasure
as though it were a complete solution of
the tragic problem. We proceeded to collect
timber, and the carpenter did wonderful
things in the way of pegging the woodwork
together. Some timber from a shipwreck
was washed up, and likewise fourteen
cocoanuts. The tops of the shells were
carefully cut away, and we drank the milk
with the sweetest sensation ever inspired
by beautiful wine. The nuts provided us
with something to chew, and momentarily
allayed the-craving for bread. The
for bread had seized us as strongly as had
been the grip of thirst months before. We
came down to the last cocoanut; and our
thoughts reverted to the prospect that some
day another unfortunate crew might be
similarly stranded. A cocoanut tree in such
circumstances would be an unmixed blessing,
and so we solemnly planted the last of our
cocoanuts.
We had one old between
us, and its juice-stained condition was
an indescribable source of pleasure. We
tried all sorts of bark, leaves, and shrubs,
taking it in turns to have a whiff;
but by degrees the faint suggestion of
tobacco vanished, and the pipe completely
lost its charm. We were still pinning our
faith in the raft to secure us relief from our
sufferings, when on October 29th we espied
a small sloop bearing towards us. There
was not one of us who could sum up enough
courage to believe his own eyes, and yet we
were all too upset to doubt them. We had
deceived ourselves so often, however, that
we instinctively guarded against the bitter-
ness of disappointment. The vessel came
on and on, until through the tears in our eyes
we could detect the signals being sent in
answer to our own excited waving of what-
ever we could hold aloft.
It woidd be impossible to do justice to
the transports of joy which coursed through
every nerve in our system as the boat came
within hailing distance. We did not trouble
about our few belongings, but hastened on
board, and for the first time in our lives
realised the charm of bread, vegetables, and
coffee. We asked the captain of the sloop
to proceed to the south-west of the island
to search for the American, but he pleaded
that it would take him all his time to reach
Guayaquil, and any delay would be dan-
gerous. I think a search-party has been sent
to look for him, but I fancy he must have
been dead even before we were taken off.
I doubt if we would ever have been rescued
but for the captain’s cousin. A warship had
been sent out to search for us, after the
second portion of the crew had been picked
up at Chatham Island five months previously,
and returned with tidings that the “ Alex-
andra Oubis ” had been found wrecked on
one of the small Galapagos Islands, but that
there were no signs of the remainder of the
crew. The captain’s cousin, living in
Iquique, remained unshaken, bore the ex-
pense of hiring the sloop which set out to
search for us, and ultimately found us on
October 29th, 1907.
During iny seafaring career, most of it
sj)ent before the mast, I have encountered
nearly every peril and hardship that man can
endure» but all else in my life pales before
the glim terrors of the last voyage of the
“ Alexandra Oubis,” and its secjuel of long-
drawn agony on the Indefatigable Island.
Hunger, thirst, and despair formed a well-
nigh overpowering combination, but nothing
equalled the frightfulness of intense desola-
tion. It literally deprived us of the
sentiments of civilisation, and almost turned
us into savages. There was always a dread
of acute suffering, but death itself had no
terrors. Indeed, one of the most singular
effects of our continuous hardship was that,
night after night, we could close our eyes
and hope never to wake again. This feeling
grew- deeper as we realised that our eye-
sight was getting dim, owing to the glare of
the sun and too much ffesh-food, and that
there was a danger of becoming blind. It
is impossible to describe the exquisite
transport of joy which I experienced on
meeting with my wife and family, who had,
with good reason, for months believed that
I had perished. When I think of the
})leasure of that meeting and the sum total
of pain which j)receded it, I am more than
ever strengthened in my resolve never to
take to the sea again.
THK KNI).
223
A MODERN ROBIKmN CRUSOE


“ PRENEZ GARDE I LE VITRIOL!
ANNEI'Ti.
