

DONEGALL STREET
CONGREGATIONAL
CHURCH - BELFAST
ONE HUNDRED AND
THIRTY SEVEN YEARS
FROM 1798 TO 1935.




DONEGALL STREET
CONGREGATIONAL
CHURCH - BELFAST
PRINT HP AT Till-. CUU.I NT R 1- I-; PHI-SS
BE I. I : AST BY \VM. \V. (.T.Ki.AM). I, T I).


Formation 1798.
Original Church Built 1804.
Extended 1860.
Enlarged 1871.
Destroyed by Fire 1931.
Church Rebuilt 1934.


Donegall Street Congregational
Church, opened 8th December,
1934. Front elevation repro-
duced from Architect’s drawing.




LAYING OF FOUNDATION STONES
OF THE NEW DONEGALL STREET
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH
ON SATURDAY, 14th OCTOBER, 1933
The following report of the ceremony
is reprinted from the public press.
THE foundation stones of the new Congre-
gational Church in Donegall Street, Belfast,
were laid on 14th October, 1933, in the pre-
sence of a large and deeply-interested assemblage
of members and friends.
Since the old building was destroyed by fire in
March, 1931, the congregation had worshiped,
through the kindness of the Methodist Church at
Carlisle Circus, in the very commodious Carlisle
Memorial Hall.
Donegall Street Congregationalists have always
been a strong, vigorous and enterprising community,
and the zeal with which they are addressing them-
selves to the great task now on hands, is only in
keeping with their history since the commencement
of their church.
The resolve to rebuild was made soon after this
disaster, and the plans agreed upon provide for the
new structure standing a little further back from the
street in view of a contemplated widening of that
artery of traffic.


The proceedings were introduced with the singing
of the hymn, “Our God, Our Help in Ages Past,”
the reading of a portion of Scripture by Rev. J. M.
Calder, secretary Irish Congregational Union, and
the Lord’s Prayer led by Rev. Alexander Cairns,
M.A.
Mr. James A. Cleland, in a historical survey, said
in the years 1798 to 1880 there was a group who met
for devotional purposes in an upper room in Park’s
Entry, off High Street. They came from various
parts of the country where numerous Independent
or Congregational Churches had been formed as far
back as 1625 to 1658, largely by those who came
from Britain in the Cromwellian connection and
plantation. It might be noted that there were still in
existence three Congregational Churches older than
Donegall Street, founded in 1721, 1750, and in 1787.
A strong religious wave passed across Scotland and
Northern Ireland in 1799, and many became attached
to the group in Park’s Entry. While they respected
the sincerity of those who thought differently as to
Church government, they regarded authority as in-
herent in each local body of believers, and God as
ruling His people directly through Christ as the
Head of each congregation.
6


In 1801 their members had increased beyond their
accommodation, and they felt sufficiently encouraged
to take the ground in Donegall Street upon which
they stood at that moment. Steady success attended
the church in its first quarter of a century. By 1825
they required to increase their sitting accommodation.
Very earnest people they must have been, for there
were records that they met at 6-30 on each Monday
morning to start the working week with prayer.
By 1858 the church had so progressed that it was
decided to pull down the original building, and to
erect a larger church upon the site, which was
opened on March Ist, 1860. There followed this
enlargement the ministry of one of Belfast’s most
famous ministers —Rev. John White; as preacher
and pastor he caught hold of the hearts of the people
so that the church was again enlarged, the gallery
and a series of classrooms being added in 1871.


During Rev. John White’s ministry there were
several halls used to accommodate those who desired
at various times to hear so popular a preacher. He
was a man of great practical commonsense, pervaded
by earnestness, of ready wit, sound judgment, and
great perseverance. In 1875 so difficult had it be-
come to find accommodation for those desiring to
worship that a branch church was built in Clifton-
park Avenue.
Successive ministers in Donegall Street preached
an earnest Gospel, and the church still expanded so
that in 1894 the Tennent Street Mission was started,
and in 1897 the John White Memorial Mission Hall
and Schools were erected. In 1904 the present
church was built, and had since been enlarged and
improved: a very worthy work was being carried
on there.
In 1894 another mission in connection with the
church was started in Hanna Street, and grew so


steadily that a larger home in Mervue Street was
purchased in 1911, and enlarged in 1915. This
Mervue Hall Mission, under the honorary superin-
tendent, Mr. George Alexander, was most successful,
and is the spiritual home of increasing numbers.
In March, 1931, the great catastrophe of the com-
plete destruction of the church by fire took place. It
was feared that this sudden loss of a place of meeting
might be the cause of some members ceasing their
connection, but they were thankful to say that all
had remained very loyally by the church. They had
been very much indebted to friends of all denomi-
nations for their kindly sympathy in the disaster,
but very especially to the members of Carlisle
Memorial Church, who had freely offered the use
of their hall for worship until new arrangements
were made.
There were those who thought that instead of
rebuilding one central church they should move out
to areas more densely peopled and less well provided
with church accommodation, but others felt that the
old spot had sacred associations and that they still
had a place to fill and a work to do there, as well as
a duty to the denomination as a whole, to rebuild as
a central church. Fortunately perfect agreement
was reached on this point.
Much delay had been caused through negotiations
about the widening of Donegall Street, and ultimate
preparation of plans, but at last the structure has
begun to rise, and we are here to dedicate the
building. The funds at their disposal would not be
sufficient to leave them in as good a financial
position as before, and also to complete the church
as at present planned, but they were hoping by the
exertion and self-sacrifice of those of their own
people who could give, and of other friends, to
re-open the church without debt.


Rev. Alexander Cairns, M.A.,
Minister of Donegall Street
Congregational Church since
1928.


The architect, Mr. John Seeds, F.R.1.8.A., had
given much detailed care to the planning and ex-
ecution of the building. The builders, Messrs. C. &
W. McQuoid (the well-known firm of contractors)
had the work, as they saw, well in hands. They
were indebted to them for generously supplying the
souvenir trowels shortly to be used in the foundation-
stone laying ceremony. Occasion had been taken to
keep that ceremony entirely within the family of the
church.
Six foundations stones will be laid.
Mr. Thomas Moore, the secretary of the church
and a trustee, will lay the first stone. For a third
of a century Mr. Moore has been associated with
every activity of the church, and by his foresight
and vision, coupled with his mastery of details, had
laid the church much in his debt in this rebuilding
scheme.
In Captain Reid they had a senior member of the
congregation, who by his interest in many of the
departments—his encouragement and advice, his
genial presence, and generous help—had been a true
friend.
Miss Spence was a member of a family long con-
nected with Doncgall Street Congregational Church.
Ninety-one years ago her great-uncle (Rev. James
Hodgins) had been minister of the church. Her
father had been for almost two-thirds of a century
closely identified with its activities —for many years
he had been secretary. Miss Spence, herself a child
of Donegall Street, had given herself to the work of
Christ abroad. The interests of the church had always
stretched far beyond its immediate neighbourhood,
and it had been linked up with many activities, but
very closely with the London Missionary Society,
founded just a few years before the church in 1795.
Miss Spence was one of their members who had


DEACONS.
GEORE ALEXANDER.
GEORGE A. DICK.
H. W. GOODING, F.S.I
J. H. GEORGE.
JOSEPH E. HOLMES
C. W. LAUGHLIN.


early dedicated her life to service in the foreign
mission field, and for 34 years served in India as
missionary of the London Missionary Society. In
laying a foundation-stone representing the wider
interests of the church she hoped to be linked still
closer with the winning of all the world.
Rev. J. Bruce Wallace, M.A., an early minister of
Cliftonpark Congregational Church —an offspring of
Donegall Street—would lay a stone on behalf of that
deeply bereaved church, who had just lost their
pastor. Mr. Wallace had been an inspiration to
vast numbers by his wide and kindly sympathy, and
his deep and earnest conviction, fearlessly and
winningly expressed—a spirit they would desire to
permeate their future church.
Rev. W. J. Calvin this year worthily held the
highest honour their denomination had to offer —
the chairmanship of the Irish Congregational Union.
As minister of the John White Memorial Church
they were proud of his zealous work, which was
being carried on at Tennent Street, and glad to have
him associated with them on that occasion.
Mr. George Alexander, one of a family long and
closely associated with the church in the many
varieties of its activities, but especially in the mission
work in Mervue Hall, would lay a stone on behalf
of all their members and associates who were
striving to win souls to Christ within the city and
district, and especially of those working together at
Mervue Hall.
They hoped that within these walls an enlightened
Gospel would be preached, to the spiritual enrich-
ment of their people, and the uplift of the city of
Belfast.
The dedicatory prayer was then offered by Rev.
W. G. Davis, Coleraine, after which the foundation-
stones were placed by those named.


W. G. LAUGHLIN.
THOMAS MOORE.
ALAN D. NICHOLS.
WILLIAM REID.
JAMES SEEDS.
WILLIAM WILSON
DEACONS.


Rev. A. Cairns, M.A., in a brief address, said that
to God belonged the praise and the glory for all their
Church had been and continued to be. Let them
praise God for the men and women who, through
God’s grace and love in their hearts, had brought
their Church into, being. There were giants in those
days—giants in faith and courage, rich in those
graces which had kept the Church of Christ alive
for two thousand years. Let them thank God for 129
years of continuous service.
There in the midst of the city, from the time when
it was a small town, had been kept burning the
sacred light of a liberal faith, and of a vital religious
experience. From that holy spot young men and
women had gone out into all parts of the world to
bear witness to the Christian faith, and to carry on
the tradition of service in which they had been
nurtured.
Let them thank God for the continued witness of
the Church through that long period, to the unfailing
power, of the Gospel, to the perpetual presence of
the Spirit of God with His people, to the need and
hunger of the soul of man for the grace and fellow-
ship of God, to the beauty and joy of Christian
worship, and to the comfort of prayer and of the
Holy Scriptures. Let them thank God that in the
hour of calamity, when the material structure was
destroyed, the living Church was unharmed, un-
dismayed, and unanimous in the resolve to repair the
waste, and to continue in the path of obedience,
self-sacrifice, and service.
His simple and earnest hope was that their Church
would continue to stand for those things which were
distinctively Christian and Congregational, spiritual
worship, the real presence of Christ among His
followers, the saving of sinners, the upbuilding of the
people of God, and the free access of men to God
15


TRUSTEES.
JOHN ALEXANDER.
JAMES A. CLELAND, D.L.
JOHN M. LAUGHLIN.
ARTHUR H. MUIR, F.C.A
JAMES SHAW.
JOHN WILSON, J.P.


without priestly mediation, whether Catholic or
Protestant. His hope was that that Church would
continue to defend and exercise the great principle
of intellectual and spiritual freedom, which was a
most precious part of her heritage.
Congregationalism was broad enough to embrace
all types and grades of thought, not because it was
indifferent to truth, but because it refused to
identify Christianity with any particular system of
doctrine or Church policy. Truth, they held, was
larger than the creeds, and the love and service
of Christ more important than any theories they
might form regarding Him; and men and women
who were one in Christ could agree to differ in
matters of doctrine and policy. The motto of Con-
gregationalism was—“ln things essential, Unity; in
things doubtful, Liberty; in all things, Charity.’’
As they stood there they felt that they stood on
holy ground. They felt the pride of a glorious past,
and the call to make the future no less glorious.
There was no reason why it might not be more
glorious. In the kingdom of the Spirit the greatest
things could never belong to the past. The best had
yet to come. God was still at work in the world,
and the purpose of Christ was not yet fulfilled.
Greetings from other denominations were brought
by Rt. Rev. Dr. William Corkey, Moderator of the
General Assembly; Very Rev. W. S. Kerr, 8.D.,
Dean of Belfast: Rev. J. R. Wesley Roddie, repre-
senting the Methodist Church (and himself the
Minister of Carlisle Memorial Methodist Church,
which has hospitably housed the Donegall Street
congregation in its lecture hall).
Following the singing of the Doxology, Rev. W.
J. Calvin, Chairman of the Irish Congregational
Union, pronounced the Benediction.
17


At the Stone Laying Ceremony, the following
handed a silver trowel to each of those who laid a
foundation-stone—
Mrs. Laughlin, sen., for Ladies’ Working Party.
Mr. L. Martin „ Boy Scouts.
Miss Crawford ~ Sunday School.
Miss Aicken ~ Choir.
Miss Betty Holmes ~ Young Peoples Society.
Miss Violet Laughlin „ Young Worshippers’
League.
18


OPENING OF NEW CHURCH
ON SATURDAY, 8th DECEMBER, 1934
Extracts from press reports.
DONEGALL STREET new Congregational
Church taking the place of the old structure,
burned down in 1931, was reopened in the
presence of a large and deeply-interested assem-
blage by Viscountess Craigavon, supported by the
Right Hon. Viscount Craigavon, Prime Minister,
Northern Ireland.
The chair at the opening ceremony was occupied
by Mr. James A. Cleland, D.L., who was
accompanied on the platform by Viscount and
Viscountess Craigavon, Sir Charles Blackmore, Mr.
George Alexander, Mr. John Laughlin, hon secre-
tary; Mr. Thomas Moore, former hon. secretary,
who, having left Belfast nine months ago, had
travelled specially from the South of England for
the occasion; Mr. John Seeds, architect, and Mr.
Wm. McQuoid, builder. There were also occupying
the pulpit Rev. J. D. Jones, C.H., M.A., D,D.,
Bournemouth: Rev. James Gray, chairman of the
Congregational Union of Ireland, and Rev. Alexander
Cairns, M.A., who conducted the dedication service.
The hymn, “Our God, our Help in Ages Past,”
having been sung, prayer was offered by Mr. Cairns.
Mr. Cleland said throughout the long period of
45 months since the disastrous fire in their old
church, the trustees and building committee had met
and overcome many difficulties. The earliest and one
of the most serious arose because of a suggestion
which had previously been made in the Corporation
about the widening of Donegall Street. They were
loath to build out to their furthest boundary with the
possibility of a widening scheme being adopted, in-


(Front) Sir Charles Blackmore, C.B.E., Mr. McQuoid, Mr: William Reid, Mr. John Seeds, F.R.I.B.A., Mr. James E Archibald Mr John Laughlin,
Rt. Hon. Viscount Craigavon Rev. Alex. Cains M.A., Lady Craigavon, Rev. Dr. Jones, Rev. James Wylie, Mr. James A' Cleland, D.L.,
Mr. Alan Nichols, Mr. W. G. Laughlin, Mr. John Wilson, J.P., Mr. Thomas Moore
(Back) Mr. George A. Dick, Mr. H. W. Gooding, F .S I., Mr. James Seeds, Mr. James Shaw, Mr. Joseph E. Holmes, Rev. James Gray,
Mr. C. W. Laughlin, Mr. George Alexander, Mr. A. H, Muir, F.C.A.


volving a later rebuilding of their property. The
ultimate resolution of the City Council to proceed
with the improvement was a great source of satis-
faction to them. As a church they were glad to take
the opportunity of saying, that although they did
not get all they had expected, the Corporation treated
them throughout with courtesy and with fairness.
The destruction of the church’s home was un-
doubtedly a serious upset, but the trustees and the
building committee felt that Mr. Seeds had produced
for them a very beautiful building: the frontage to
Donegall Street was quite an additional architectural
ornament to the city of Belfast.
It was a consolation the rebuilding found
work for many men in varying trades at a time when
employment was specially needed. Their relations
with Messrs. McQuoid, the contractors, had been
very harmonious. To all concerned from the young-
est labourer to the most expert craftsman, directly
or indirectly employed on that building and its
equipment, the trustees would like him to express
their thanks.
That day, said Mr. Cleland, they gave thanks for
their church rebuilt, and in doing so he was glad to
record the very happy relations that had existed
among the members in all the arrangements. Their
first thought had been that that ceremony might be
in the form of the actual opening of the door, but
owing to the uncertainty of the weather it was felt
better that it should precede the dedicatory service
in the church itself. The whole Church desire that
he should express to Lady Craigavon their great
appreciation of her kindness in coming to open that
building, and they took it too as a special compliment
that the Prime Minister had accompanied Lady
Craigavon.
21


The architect, Mr. John Seeds, P.R.1.8.A., pre-
sented Viscountess Craigavon with a souvenir key
as a memento of the occasion.
Lady Craigavon expressed her gratitude at being
asked to declare open that magnificent building. Both
the Prime Minister and she had read with the
deepest possible regret the account of the burning
of the church that formerly adorned that site, a
disaster that must have occasioned the greatest
feelings of sorrow to the congregation. That day,
however, they were all delighted to be able to meet
in such a beautiful new church, and she wished to
congratulate the architect on the lovely structure
he had designed, and the builders upon the excellent
work they had put into it. She thanked Mr. Seeds,
the architect, for the beautiful memento he had pre-
sented her on the occasion, one she would always
treasure.
Formally declaring the church open. Lady Craig-
avon wished the minister and the congregation every
happiness and success in the future (Applause).
Viscount Craigavon said he was there to add a
word of special greeting to the congregation. He
was glad to be associated with his wife in the open-
ing of that fine building, as he was always glad to go
hand-in-hand with her in anything for the good of
the province.
After paying a high compliment to Mr. Cleland
for his public and private services to the community,
the Prime Minister went on to congratulate the con-
gregation upon retaining that central site for the new
church. There was nothing better for a congregation
than to have a fine church such as that, a church in
which they could take pride: and there was nothing
better for a capital city than to have splendid
buildings of that character. He joined with Lady
Craigavon in offering his congratulations to the
22


architect, whose fame had already spread far, and
to the builders for their share in producing such a
splendid building. He wished the church a very
happy and prosperous time in the New Year.
(Applause).
The hymn, “Light up this House with Glory, Lord"
was then most reverently sung, and an appropriate
portion of Scripture was read by Rev. James Gray.
Mr. John Laughlin, honorary secretary, said
Donegall Street Congregational Church owed its
origin to the great revivalist movement which swept
through Scotland and Northern Ireland at the end
of the 18th Century. In 1799 an earnest band of
Christians met in a loft in Park’s Entry and thus
was the nucleus of the Church formed. By 1801 they
were numerically strong enough to found a church,
so the ground on which the present building stands
was leased from the Marquis of Donegall.
Although Donegall Street Church could not claim
to be the first independent church in Ireland, for
Irish Congregationalism dated back to Oliver
Cromwell, it could claim to be the first independent
church in Belfast. It took its rise from a modest
beginning; the first building was one of Spartan
simplicity and cost £875. It had accommodation for
600 people and was known as the Tabernacle. Under
the ministry of the Rev. William Brown its success
was assured and its influence was widespread. So
successful did it become that 25 years later a gallery
was built, and still later a new building became
necessary. The old Tabernacle was demolished so
that a larger church might be erected, and on March
1, 1860, the new building was dedicated.
Then followed one of the most successful periods
in the whole history of the church —the ministry
of the Rev. John White —one of Belfast’s most
famous ministers. So greatly was he admired, and
23


so wide was the sphere of his influence that for
many years the church was known as John White’s
Church. Mr. White was a man of sound judgment,
great perseverance and a very popular preacher.
Great success crowned his efforts and it became
necessary to enlarge the new building. So a gallery
and classrooms were added.
By 1875 it had become increasingly difficult to
accommodate all those who desired to worship in
Donegall Street, and a daughter church came into
being—Cliftonpark Avenue Congregational Church.
Twenty years later, during the ministry of Rev.
James Wylie, the foundations for a second daughter
church were laid—the church they now knew as
John White Memorial Church, Tennent Street.
In 1894 a mission began its work in Hanna Street,
and so steady was its growth that in 1911 a new
building in Mervue Street was purchased, and en-
larged some four years later.
In 1921 the church organ was completely recon-
structed at a cost of £2,000, and was dedicated as a
War Memorial.
On Sunday morning, 15th March, 1931, the church
with its valuable Memorial Organ and Pulpit were
completely reduced to ashes in one of the most
disastrous fires in Belfast for many years.
They had the entire sympathy of all denomi-
nations, many of whom offered them the use of their
buildings, thus showing their sympathy in a practical
manner.
Almost immediately after the fire it was decided
to rebuild on the old site, and Mr. John Seeds,
F.R.1.8.A., was appointed architect. But owing to
prolonged negotiations with the Corporation over the
street widening scheme the rebuilding was greatly
delayed, and it was only in March, 1933, two years
after the fire, that the contract was placed with
Messrs. C. & W. McQuoid.


During their prolonged stay in Carlisle Memorial
Hall, under the ministry of the Rev. Alexander
Cairns, M.A., they had steadily increased in mem-
bership, although they had lost through death and
removal many old and valued friends. Mr. Cairns'
ministry during the past four years had been one of
exceptional difficulty, and it was greatly to his credit
that they were still as strong, if not stronger, than
before the fire. They felt a deep sense of gratitude
towards Mr. Cairns, and he would like to take that
opportunity to thank both Mr. and Mrs. Cairns for
their work during that time.
They felt the pride of a glorious past, and the call
to make the future no less worthy. They prayed that
men and women might feel the unfailing power of
the Gospel in that place.
On behalf of the trustees he offered the church
for dedication to the Glory of God and the service
of His Kingdom.
Rev. Alexander Cairns now offered the dedicatory
prayer, which was succeeded by the anthem “Send
out Thy Light” (Gounod).
Rev. }. D. Jones, C.H., M.A., D,D., of Bourne-
mouth, an ex-chairman of the Congregational Union
in England, ex-moderator of the Federal Council of
Free Churches, 1921-23, and Moderator of the
International Congregational Council in 1930, in
the course of an inspiring address, expressed his
thankfulness to God for having been privileged to
take part in that ceremony. He offered his greetings
to Mr. Cairns, the minister of the Church, and to
the congregation, and trusted they would find in
their beautiful new sanctuary a place in which many
souls would be won for Christ.
Recalling a visit he paid Belfast a quarter of a
century ago. Dr. Jones said the impression he re-
tained of the church of those days was that, although
a beautiful place, it was hot so fine a structure as
25


Rev. J. D. Jones,
C.H., M.A., D.D.,
who gave the
dedicatory address.


the new. Sharing with those present joy in the
opening and dedication of the church, he was also
the willing bearer of greetings from the Congre-
gational Union across the water.
Of the future of the Christian Church, Dr. Jones
said they had had in England a very considerable
decrease in recent years in the matter of church
attendances. There was on foot a good deal of
prophecy as to what was going to happen to the
Church of Christ in the future, but he was glad to
see that in Belfast they had no doubts, no misgivings,
and the erection of that building was an indication
of their great faith and their purpose to work on in
the interests of the Church of Christ.
He thought that the work of every social reformer
and of every statesman was going to be defeated
unless and until it was backed up by the work which
the Church of Jesus Christ alone could give.
They wanted new men to make a new world, and
the only thing that could make new men was the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. Education and
culture had failed tragically to make new men, and
they were thrown back on the great truth to-day,
as before, and as the world would be compelled to
own in the future, that it was the Gospel of Jesus,
the Christ Life, and that alone that made new
men, and that only men so made anew could make
a new world.
Rev. James Gray, chairman of the Congregational
Union of Ireland, also took part in the devotional
parts of the ceremony.
After the singing of the hymn, “Thou Whose
Unmeasured Temple Stands,” the Pastor, Rev.
Alexander Cairns, M.A., pronounced the benediction.
Captain C. J. Brennan. Mus.Bac., F.R.C.0., pre-
sided at the organ.
27


At the conclusion of the Opening and Dedication
Service the guests were entertained to tea in the
Schoolroom, after which a Public Meeting was held,
presided over by Rev. Alexander Cairns, M.A.,
when greetings were conveyed by Rev. James Wylie
(former Minister), Dr. Jones and Mr. James E.
Archibald (former Church Secretary), Rev. James
Gray (Chairman of Congregational Union of
Ireland), and Rev. J. I. Mac Nair (representing the
London Missionary Society).
At this meeting a very interesting ceremony took
place when Mrs. John Laughlin, on behalf of the
congregation, made a presentation to Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Moore and Miss Muriel Moore, their
daughter.
Mr. George Alexander, Senior Deacon, referred
to the devoted service Mr. Moore had rendered to
the Church for almost 20 years as Church Secretary,
he was also a Trustee and had taken a very active
part in the work entailed by the re-building of the
Church, before leaving for England in the begin-
ning of the present year. Mr. Moore had also taken
an active interest in the work of the Church. Mr.
Moore suitably replied on behalf of himself, Mrs.
Moore, and their daughter.
During the evening musical items were rendered
by Mrs. Thomas Watson, Miss B. McFarland, and
the Misses Sherry, and Mr. Howard Laughlin.
Dr. Jones was the preacher at the re-opening
Services on Sunday, 9th December, 1934, when
crowded congregations assembled to hear one of
the outstanding preachers in the British Isles. Dr.
Jones took as his text, in the morning, Heb. xi., 13;
"These all died in faith," and in the evening
his theme was the Parable of the Good Samaritan.
28


Mrs. John Seeds was the soloist at the morning
Service when Mr. Croft presided at the organ. The
organist at the evening Service was Captain C. J.
Brennan, and the soloist, Mr. James F. Newel.
Rev. J. C. Alexander, 8.A., from Bathgate, an old
boy of the Church, delivered the address in the
afternoon to a crowded congregation, and Mr.
Donald Cairns was the soloist.
On Monday, 10th December, Mr. Bernard Page
gave an organ recital, and solos and duets were
rendered by Miss Minna Woodhead (soprano) and
Mr. John Patterson (tenor).
Re-opening Services were continued on Sunday,
16th December, when two of our oldest and most
respected Ministers, Rev. J. Bruce Wallace, M.A.,
and Rev. W. G. Davis were the preachers, and
Miss Evelyn Gibb and Miss Bluebell McFarland,
L.T.C.L., were the soloists with Mr. W. G. Laughlin
at the organ.
Rev. Alexander Cairns, M.A., re-opened his
ministry in the new Church on Sunday, 23rd Decem-
ber. He was assisted at both Services by his son,
Rev. Kenneth W. A. Cairns. At the Morning
Service, after the opening Devotions, Mr. James A.
Cleland, D.L., in a few well-chosen words expressed
appreciation of Mr. Cairns’ ministry. He then called
upon Mrs. Nichols and Mrs. George Alexander,
who on behalf of the Ladies of the Congregation,
presented Mr. Cairns with a handsome pulpit gown
and M.A. hood. Thus, auspiciously, opened a new
chapter in the history of Donegall Street Congre-
gational Church. May the new chapter record the
Church's greatest glory and success.
29


New Organ replacing
the War Memorial,
which had so many
sacred associations
for the members.


THE NEW ORGAN.
IT is a Two Manual instrument containing 20
stops on the Manuals and 7 stops on the Pedal
Organ and 7 Couplers.
The action is electric throughout, of the most up
to date system incorporating the latest accessories
for facilitating the control of the various stops.
The Console is detached and placed in front of
the Pulpit so that the Organist is in close touch with
his Choir.
A “Discus” Blower, direct coupled to an Electric
motor supplies the wind, and a special low voltage
generator for the action current is driven by the
Blowing plant.
The Organ, which was built complete in Belfast
by Messrs. Evans & Barr, Ltd., of the City Organ
Works, is enclosed in a dark polished oak case of
handsome appearance designed by Mr. John Seeds,
F.R.1.8.A., the architect of the church.
Thanks are due to the Organ Committee and
especially to Mr. W. G. Laughlin, and Miss Isabel
Crawford for their infinite pains in the selection of
the organ and in the arrangement of details.




DESCRIPTION of the NEW CHURCH
Architect, Mr. John Seeds, F.R.1.8.A.
Building, Messrs. C. & W. McQuoid, Ltd.
Heating, Messrs. Musgrave & Co., Ltd.
Lighting, Messrs. Wm. Coates & Sons, Ltd.
THE front elevation is one of special beauty and
the congregation may well feel proud of the
new face of their church. It was their desire that
there should be no radical departure from the style
of the old building for which there was so much
affection, and Mr. Seeds has succeeded in putting
into his front a feeling of continuity, a sense of
memory or a gesture of respect for the past, and yet
has provided a front of fine proportions, distinctive
in style, admirable in taste, grace and beauty.
In the front the dominant feature is the large three-
light window above the main entrance. Both door
and window are ideally proportioned, and the
moulded stone work is of great beauty. In designing
these features, which influence the remainder of the
building, the architect adopted the perpendicular
style, which is extremely effective and appropriate
in all the circumstances. The window is filled with
plain leaded glass, a slight relief of subdued colour
being provided.
In planning the new accommodation efficiency
has been secured, combined with an admirable
simplicity and good taste in decoration and detail.
Mr. Seeds had to provide a new lecture hall on
the ground floor, a church on the first floor, and all
the other accommodation at least as commodious as
in the old building, find accommodation for the main


staircases inside the building—though they were
outside in the old building—and in addition to ensure
that there would be an ample amount of natural
lighting for the new buildings. The problem has
been solved in a most satisfactory manner.
The lecture hall is situated on the ground floor,
and attached to it are the classrooms, ladies’ room
and library, kitchen, lavatories and heating chamber,
all conveniently placed. Excellent use has been made
of roof lighting in some of the subsidiary rooms. This
hall has a very wide span, yet it is clear of columns
The heavy reinforced concrete floor of the church
has been carried on stanchions which take the
weight down to the girders below the building, so
that it is not carried on the side walls. The lecture
hall is decorated in primrose yellow, and its roof is
of ample height.
The church on the first floor is reached by spacious
staircases in the front wing blocks. These staircases
and the main vestibule and porches are paved with
marble terrazzo in charming subdued tones. The oak
handrails are carried on effective wrought iron
balustrading. The church has a gallery at the west
end only. The roof is of pitch pine in natural tones,
and is of the hammer beam type, the ends of the
hammer beams being boldly carved in varying
patterns to the architect's design. The carved ham-
mer beams add very much to the appearance of the
interior, and the clerestory dormers work in effec-
tively in the general scheme. The walls are a soft
shade of green, and the colour is repeated in the
floor coverings. The pulpit, choir, and communion
woodwork are of oak, handsomely carved, and the
oak organ case, also carved to the architect’s design,
is very beautiful.


The acoustic qualities of the building received the
architect’s special attention, and in frankly using his
acoustic correcting material as infilling between the
rafters a decorative as well as an acoustical success
has been achieved. The pews are of pitch pine and
walnut.
The church window glass has been kept as
translucent as possible to gain the maximum of day-
lighting, whilst permitting of a simple and effective
design. In the electrical lighting of the church and
lecture hall the position of the lamp units has been
so arranged that these perform their lighting
functions adequately without hurting the eye either
physically or aesthetically. The pulpit has special
standard lights on wrought brass standards and a
pair of oak lanterns adorn the wall at the organ
apse. All of these special lamps were locally made
to the architect’s design and reflect great credit on
the craftsmen concerned.
A pleasing feature of the building is that so much
of the work has been executed locally.
35


A COMPLETE LIST OF MINISTERS
OF DONEGALL STREET CHURCH.
Rev. William Brown 1800-1825
Rev, J. Wilson 1826-1830
Rev. James Carlisle 1830-1839
Rev. George Newenham Watson 1840-1841
Rev. James Hodgens 1842-1849
Rev. W. M. O'Hanlon 1849-1854
Rev. Edwin Davies 1854-1856
Rev. John Bagley 1857-1861
Rev. John G. Short 1862-1864
Rev. John White 1865-1881
Rev. John Fordyce, M.A 1881-1889
Rev. W. Tanner Hughes 1890-1893
Rev. James Wylie 1894-1903
Rev. Alexander Pollock, M.A. 1904-1909
Rev. T. S. Taylor. M.A., B.Litt 1910-1914
Rev. J. Q. Christian 1914-1921
Rev. David Hill, 8.A., 8.D., M.B 1921-1928
Rev. Alexander Cairns, M.A. 1928-
36
