

CL JERREMS.
BOOKBINDER & ACCOUNT-BOOK MAKER,
PRINTER, &c..
G. H. STEPHEN & CO.,
mum wises. H'i« towers gri ietrtMte, " ,1V ' m ' ES -
Shiraz } Dinner Wines, IDs.
jwi«) 16s ' 13 BRIDGE STREET. K,C'j 2 »*-
€arblnet, 255, Prize Hermitage, 255.
(8 years old) (Awarded 50 Medals and Certificates.) (Paris Medal, 1878).


ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Fortune and Princely Income for £l.
ART UNION,
To be Drawn Early in 1883.
FIRgiP JW 61M' ■ n D'/illtY NEWSPAPER
In Full Working Order, with Big Circulation.
UET PEOEIT, £1,500 A.
STEAM AND GAS MACHINES, SPLENDID PRESSES,
BIG JOBBING PLANT,
Lease of Premises, Goodwill, Book Debts (dGlOOO).
Everything required for a Daily Paper and Jobbing Business; both in full
swing, in one of the most prosperous cities in the Colony.
£3OOO ill Plant, and a Week for Life,
With Nothing to Prevent its being made £5O or £lOO a Week.
THE ABOVE IS ONE GIFT.
Besides, there are ART GIFTS value £lOO each (or cash),
£6O (or cash), and £25 (or cash), amounting to £2OOO.
5000 CONTRIBUTIONS AT £1 EACH.
Apply (by letter only) to “ CAXTONIUS,” Letter Box, Bulletin Hotel,
With 4d. for registration and 2d. for reply.
Sydney references to David Buchanan, Esq., M.L.A.; Harry Levien,
Esq., M.L.A.; Messrs. Batson & Atwater, 8 Bond Street; and Richmond
Thatcher, Esq., Bulletin Hotel.
DRAWING BY A COMMITTEE OE IRREPROACHABLE INTEGRITY,
And Full Publication of Result in Newspapers.


•SL-K - n
ADVERTISEMENTS.
C. FURSE
If natter,
AND
jUictttrq S mn V*
127 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
SYDNEY.
Old Frames Repaired and Re-gilt equal to new. Paintings Re-lined,
Cleaned, and Varnished.
Trade supplied. Country orders punctually attended to.
NOTED FOR
♦ CRICKETING FLANNELS.*
ZEai-A-G-OITT, TAILOR,
Pitt Street, Near Oompagnoni’s.
The Most Stylish Cricket and Football Garments from European
Patterns received by every mail.
Gentlemen's Suits of Irreproachable Quality of Stuffs
A Gigantic Assortment, and Immaculate Cut and Style.
UUMIL lilSi,
225 MACQUARIE STREET NORTH,
Is beautifully situated
NEAR KING STREET, THE GARDENS, AND PARK.
Visitors to Sydney ivill find first-class accommodation,
combined with moderate charges.
Letters or Telegrams will meet with promvt attention.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
COOLALTA WIIIS.
Cellars & Head Office: Mort’s Passaged
VSSIPARID - HRAUXTO'If.,
PRICE LIST :
RED WINES.
QUARTS. PINTS. PUR (JAL.
D. S. D. S. D.
COOLALTA HERMITAGE (Extra Quality) 30 O ... 17 6 ... IS 6
No. 1 COOLALTA RED 21 O ... IS 6 ... 8 0
No. S „ „ 16 O ... 9 6 ... 6 O
BURGUNDY 21 O ... IS 6 ... 8 0
PORT 21 O ... IS 6 ... 8 0
VIN ORDINAIRE 12 O ... 7 6 ... 4 O
WHITE WINES.
MUSCAT 30 O ... 17 6 ... IS 6
Do. No. S 21 O ... IS 6 ... 8 0
SHERRY 21 O ... IS 6 ... 8 0
No. 1 COOLALTA SI O ... 13 6 ... 8 0
No. S „ 16 O ... 9 6 ... 6 O
VIN ORDINAIRE * IS O ... 7 6 ... 4 O
. HGEORGE ATKINSON,G
skipping ano fairily Buießep,
145 Lower George Street, Opposite Queer’s Wharf,
AND 170 PRINCES STREET,
SUPPLIES THE PRINCIPAL HOTELS & RESTAURANTS IN SYDNEY.
CONTRACTS MADE.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
«T_ W. IR,. CLARKE.
BY D/IYID JJ.P.jM-
Political, Social, Literary, & Theological.
A NEAT VOLUME op 153 PAGES, SOLD by J. W. E. CLAEKE, Price, 2s
SAETOE EESAETUS, by Thomas Carlyle, 6d.
ON HEEOES AND HEEO WOESHIP, by Thomas Carlyle, Gd.
THE EULE OF THE MONK, by the late General Garibaldi, 6d.
ITALY'S LIBEEATOE, The Story of Garibaldi’s Life. This publication is
nicely bound and illustrated. Is. 6d.
GUY FAWKES, or The History of the Gunpowder Plot, by Knight George.
2d. each, or Is. 9d. per dozen.
CAPTAIN COOK’S VOYAGES, Illustrated, 6d.
PEOGEESS AND POVEETY : an Enquiry the Cause of Industrial
Depressions, and of Increase of Want with 'the Increase of Wealth. The
Eemedy. By K. George, Gd.
EMINENT PERSONS’ BIOGEAPHIES. Ee-printed from the Times. 2s.
THE TIMES’ EEGISTEE OF EVENTS op 1881. Is. 6d.
THE EOYAL EOAD TO GEAMMAE AND ANALYSIS, a Sublime School
Comedy in Forty-two Acts, with a Prelude and an Epilude, by Henry
Edelman, 2s. 6d. School Edition of the Eoyal Road to Grammar and
Analysis, by Henry Edelman, Is. 6d.
THE FAMILY MEDICAL GUIDE, with Plain Directions for the Treatment
of every Case, and a List of the Medicines Required for any Household, by
George Fullerton, C.M. and M.D., formerly Physician ter the Sydney
Infirmary and Benevolent Asylum. Third Edition, Revised and Improved.
Containing also the Newly-discovered Eemedy for Gout, Rheumatism, and
Neuralgia. Price, 12s. 6d.; post free, 14s.
BIBLES from Is. to 70s. each.
PEAYEE BOOKS, 6d. to 555. each.
HYMN BOOKS, 6d. to 7s. 6d. each.
BOOKSGLLGR * ADD * STATIOOGR,
3 and 6 Market Buildings,
GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY
OPPOSITE MARKET STREET.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
FOR HTJH/TS
ACQUIRED IN THE CRICKET FIELD,
NOTHING CAN EQUAL
For Acquiring & Keeping Condition
FOE
CRICKETING-, BOA.T-PITLLING,
AND
ALL OTHER MANLY SPORTS,
NOTHING COMES UP TO
FRUIT PILLS.
BOTH OF THESE SPLENDID MEDICINES
AEE
COMPOUNDED BY
PROFESSOR MOULTON,
AND
SOLD BY ALL CHEMISTS.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
G. L. CARTER,
Kauai, IHilifatu, ai(il Cltrical (Tailor,
HATTER,
Men’s Mercer and General Outfitter,
401, late 403, GEORGE STREET,
SYDNEY.
Opposite the Royal Hotel.
GOOCH &c CO.,
40 Hunter Street.
WILDERNESS WINE CELLARS.
SPECIALTE :
PORT AND MADEIRA FOR INVALIDS,
As recommended by the Medical Faculty.
J. W. WILLOUGHBY,
HnlililiSs
95 MARKET STREET, near Tram.
Manufacturer, Importer, and Fitter of Electric House Belis, Thief and Burglar
Alarms, Fire Alarms, Batteries, Insulated Wire, Telegraphic Stores, Lightning
Conductors, Medical and other Coils, Electro-Magneto Machines, Electric Gas
Lighting, &c., &c., &c.
Liberal discount to the Trade. Estimates free of cost.
Repairs faithfully executed on the premises.
N.B. —J. W. W. has no hesitation in saying that he has the Largest Stock
of Electrical and Scientific Apparatus in the colonies. Inspection and trial
solicited.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
SMITH & WALKER,
LAND, ESTATE, HOUSE, AND GENERAL AGENTS
And Valuators,
zo6 ELIZABETH STREET, SYDNEY.
Loans Negotiated. Estates Managed for Absentees.
Houses and Land for Sale in all parts of Sydney and Suburbs.
VALUATIONS MADE.
Particular Attention is given to all matters connected with the Govern-
ment Departments, and every kind of business
undertaken for Country Clients.
IPLJAISrS -A-ZEsTID TZRJVCXUSTO-S ZPXaZBXAAXaZEHD.
. F. DeCoorcy BROWNE,
Late Deputy Chairman of the Mining Board of New South AVales,
Ex-Member of Local Mining Court Victoria, New South Wales,
and Queensland; Ex-Mining Delegate, British Columbia; Author
of the “ Miner’s Handy Book,” &c., &c.,
DJiniijg Expert, Arbitrator, aqd I|inh]g Titled J^genis
MINERVA CHAMBERS,
126 PITT STREET, NEAR KING STREET,
Whore he can be consulted —personally or by letter* —on every description of
Mining business.
Mining Properties Reported upon and Sold to Syndicates
and Investors —but not floated.
Mining Arbitrations undertaken in Town or Country.
Mining Disputes advised upon.
Mining Companies’ “ Articles of Agreement & Memorandum
of Association” advised upon and drafted.
Mining Assays of all Minerals carried out promptly, and
results forwarded by Letter or Cypher Telegram.


DONKEY WORSHIP
HERO WORSHIP;
RICKET k BOAT-PULLING
AMONGST
AUSTRALIANS
DAVID BUCHANAN, M.P.
(of the middle temple).
BARRISTER-AT-LAW.
tSgbnco:
BATSON & ATWATER, GENERAL PRINTERS,
8 Bond Street.
1082.


PUBLISHER'S NOTE.
Some of these articles appeared as letters in the Sydney papers —
hence the allusions to replies.
It is only fair to the advertisers to state that they do not necessarily
endorse the opinions of the writer. In fact, most of them gave their
advertisements in the usual manner, to canvassers, upon the simple
assurance that the booh would circulate largely, and without being
aware of its purport or contents.


DEDICATION.
I dedicate this little work to the larrikins and donkeys of
New South Wales and their teachers and instructors or the
Press of Sydney, and even of the whole country, with some few
noble and honourable exceptions. Ido this in, possibly, the vain
hope that some sort of lucid interval may mercifully visit you
and your teachers, and open a way for the entrance of a little
plain, rational common sense into your foggy and confused
brains. Your teachers of the Press have instructed you, very
faithfully, that cricket and boat-pulling are the only recognised
roads to honour and distinction; no word has ever fallen from
those teachers in denunciation of the scandal and disreputable
misconduct of young men devoting five and ten days at a time —
to say nothing of a whole year —to the pitiful, delirious folly of
almost constant cricket. I advise you, poor, wretched larrikins
and donkeys, to turn your backs upon your teachers of the
Press, and listen to me. If any one of you could combine the
cricketing or boat-pulling power of the whole world in his own
person, he would still be a dolt and a donkey if he could do
nothing else. Larrikins! abandon all this idleness of cricket
and boat-pulling, save as regular exercise moderately indulged
in. Grive your whole minds and souls—if you have such things
about you —to your business, whatever it is ; work honestly and
faithfully at your trades or professions ; and, believe me, here,
and here only, lies true honour and distinction for you, if dis-
tinction is the least necessary. Turn on your teachers of the
Press, and tell them that they are charlatans and impostors of
the worst type, who care not a single straw what pit of bottomless
perdition you fall into so long as they may turn your ruin and
injury to their own gain. What is other men’s amusement can
never be any man’s business or profession. Let the idleness here
spoken of be an extremely secondary consideration with you,
notwithstanding your false teachers of the Press. Poor mis-
guided, helpless larrikin and donkey, I ask you, once more, to
turn away from your brother larrikin and donkey of the Press,
and read this publication attentively : it will help to clear your
mind of the thrice pernicious and demented folly that the daily
Press of Sydney has so systematically instilled into it, and may
probably bring you to the wholesome conclusion that there is
only one fate and one hope for all of us —and that is, faithfully,
honestly, and religiously to “ work and despair not.”
DAVID BUCHANAN.
Sydney, 1882.


PREFACE.
The contents of this small publication are called forth by the
insane folly of the people in running in droves after cricketers
and boat-pullers, and encouraging the devotion of so much time
to those very paltry pursuits. Matters continue to grow worse
and worse in this respect, and call loudly for some sort of
effective antidote. Eight days of time spent at cricket speaks
for itself, and affords such a picture of scandalous idleness,
neglect of duty, vacancy of mind, and unmanly incapacity for
any useful or higher occupation, that little hope can be formed
of any community so given up to aims so useless and abortive.
We are, indeed, a population of larrikins, or such things could
not “ overcome us like a deadly scourge without our special
wonder.” A larrikin Press, partaking most of that character in
the metropolis, has had much to do with this, and has contributed
largely to the moral deterioration of the people. Cricket and
boat-pulling being the grand objects of all human effort, ac-
cording to the prevailing teaching of the Press here, the crop
that this teaching will ultimately yield will tell its own tale in
due time, and will probably show itself in a population of idle
youths without aim or object, incapable of any useful effort, a
down-drag upon the country, and, ultimately, a trouble and, it
may be, a danger to the State.
DAVID BUCHANAN.
Ckambebs, 95 Eltzabeth-stbeet,
Sydney, 1882.


. -jsC I. Ik>.
A people is best known and estimated by wbat seems to
engage its interest most, by the men it hastens to honour, and
by the qualities, powers, and services of those whose genius and
prowess have conferred national benefits and elevated their
authors to a pedestal of heroism and to the loving and grateful
regard of the whole people. Thomas Carlyle, John Bright,
Garibaldi, and Mazzini are such men, and are worthy of the
highest regard and the deepest veneration of the people. The
nation that reserves its ovations for such men is as much an
heroic nation as the men themselves are worthy to be called
heroes, and the nation that honours such men does as much
honour to itself as to them. Show me the men whom any man
delights to honour, and I have little difficulty in deciding what
manner of man he is. would we think of that people
who would allow such a man as Shakspeare to pass by unnoticed,
but would run mad over, say, a victorious cricketer or boat-
puller ? Would we not say, with our whole souls, that such a
people was a contemptible people, an unworthy, ignorant, paltry
people, with a soul not one inch above cricket or boat-pulling,
or not very capable of effecting any higher purposes or objects,
if even capable of effecting those ? By way of illustrating all
this, I may be allowed to refer to the demonstration that took
place in Sydney over the last great boat-race, and the subsequent
elevation of the poor unfortunate victor to the position of a
hero. The scene that took place on this occasion was, to my
mind, about as melancholy and pitiable a thing as ever happened
before under heaven’s canopy. Sixty thousand people, surely
for the most part fools, rushing pell-mell to see which of two
men will propel a piece of wood fastest through the water, was
a spectacle calculated to excite the pity and commiseration even
of the unhappy inmates of the Asylum under the walls of which
the sorry exhibition took place. Of course, this boat-race, or
any boat-race, or boat-racing and cricketing in general, are
simply pleasant and useful enough exercises and sport; intrin-
sically they are nothing more, and the greatest adept at them is
merely a cricketer or boat-puller, worthy only the consideration
which is due to such a man, which, in strict arithmetic, would
be no consideration at all. But to make heroes of such men,
and cover them with honours and rewards, is to publish that the
nation which does so is a nation fallen into imbecility, hopelessly
delirious and incompetent. Are we in New South Wales a
nation of larrikins ? This worship of cricket and boat-pulling,
carried to the lengths they have reached here, is a pure emanation


from the larrikin mind ; it is about as much as the larrikin mind
is equal to; and the danger we incur by countenancing such
folly is that of being pronounced a nation of larrikins, with a
successful boat-puller or cricketer for our model man or hero.
If muscular power is what we worship, let us make gods of our
horses and bullocks, and so have a religion worthy of our boat-
pulling and cricketing heroism, and in harmony with our larrikin
nature and capacity. Is it not humiliating that whenever any
of those boat-pulling contests take place the whole city seems
to be taken by the head ? Can any one imagine anything so
utterly unhealthy and delirious as the crowds that struggle to
be present at these most puerile, commonplace, and in every
sense most ordinary and everyday exhibitions ? Ureat heavens,
what sort of a hero, to those swarming Sydney larrikins, would
the renowned James AVatt appear, whose mighty genius invented,
or rather applied, a power that drives thousands of tons through
raging and tempestuous seas to the uttermost ends of the earth,
carrying blessings and comforts to all lands ? Alas ! alas ! the
men who make a hero of a boat-puller or cricketer would
probably see nothing remarkable in the genius of AVatt. Their
beau ideal is so many thousand miles lower that the genius of
AVatt is invisible to them. There cannot be a doubt but that
the extremely secondary matters of cricket and boat-pulling are
raised to far too high a level here, and the danger is that they
are not, by-and-bye, considered as superior to the real business
and duty of life. It is a serious matter when we find our youths
asking leave from their duties for days together, to idle away
their time at some petty cricket match ; and as a result of this
idleness and neglect of serious duty, several of them have boat-
pulled and cricketed themselves out of their situations, and have
got fairly started on the broad and crowded road which leads we
all know too well where.
A native youth goes home to England and carries off the most
distinguished honours at Cambridge University ; but the people
here take no notice of this, and so the Cambridge hero passes
along unnoticed. If he had pulled a boat faster than some
London costermonger, the noise and hubbub of his so-called
fame would have deafened us. “By their fruits ye shall know
them” is as true of nations as of individuals.
Our colonial youths are in danger of being taught that there
are higher things than a faithful and true performance of duty
that cricket and boat-pulling will do more for them than
assiduous and never-flagging zeal in the prosecution of their
daily business; and that, in fact, their daily business is a
secondary affair compared to the first-rate matters of cricket and
boat-pulling.
This teaching has not been without a witness already, as many


a wretched wife and helpless family could testify; and if such a
state of things continues and increases, then we do not require
to be told that, although had as bad can be has already begun,
something appallingly worse remains behind, which will not be
long in making itself strikingly visible.
All nations have had, from time to time, their renowned men
or heroes, but they have been heroes in reality and worthy of
the honour and love of the people. The Newtons, Lockes,
Shakspeares, and Miltons are worthy of all human veneration
and never-ending hero-worship ; and this hero-worship is
inherent in human nature according to its capacity. While
other nations revere and worship such names as those mentioned
above, we, it would seem, cannot rise higher than a cricketer or
boat-puller ; and so we have our hero-worship too, and our hero
into the bargain. Whatever men justly venerate they honour
themselves by so doing, if the object is a worthy one. Of course
the reverse of this is strictly true. If, then, this extravagant
and exaggerated feeling towards successful boat-pullers and
cricketers is to continue, I would suggest that when next the
piece of wood is to be pulled through the water, and the fastest
puller of the stick proclaimed victor, let him, with all solemnity,
be installed as our king and hero amidst the hallelujahs of
larrikins and the delirious anthems of a purblind and wooden-
headed people, sunk and lost in the most contemptible trivialities
and incapable of a higher worship than is involved in the
elevating doctrines of their horse-aud-bullock religion.
I have noticed all that has been said in answer to my letter
on this subject, and I have to complain that I have not been
met in a fair and candid manner —in other words, I have been
misrepresented, so that my opponents might more conveniently
and easily answer me.
Every writer that offered a reply to what I said assumed that
I was opposed to cricket and boat-pulling entirely; indeed, they
argued from first to last as if I had said that both sports were
illegal and sinful, and ought to be prohibited forthwith. I think
I set out with the statement, in my last letter, that cricket and
boat-pulling were merely innocent and harmless amusement and
sport, and nothing more ; and if this had been borne in mind by
the various writers who have replied to me, perhaps they would
not have replied at all, but have agreed with me that the excess


to which we have gone in this direction, and are going, is not
only derogatory to our character as a sensible community, but
has already had, and most assuredly will have, in a larger degree,
the most mischievous tendency on the progress of our young
men in the serious business of life. I now again assert this,
with all the emphasis in my power, and leave time to decide
whether or not lam in the right. Cricket and boat-pulling are
harmless enough as long as no hour that should have been
devoted to business or duty is wasted for their sake; but can you
tell me how many young men have cricketed and boat-pulled
themselves out of their situations in their zeal and love for this
pastime which they have been taught is to do so much for them ?
I do not believe in the world before there has ever happened
such a thing as men in public offices asking leave of absence for
a twelvemonth to spend the entire time in playing cricket. How
these people obtained leave from their duties, for such a purpose
and for such a time, is to me entirely unaccountable, and testifies
to the amount of hidden vileness that lies at the bottom of our
present system of government. The men who deliberately leave
their duties for twelve months to spend all that time in playing a
series of cricket games will never Be good for much else in this
world. Ido not know which to despise most, the cricket-players
or those who permitted them to go. A more scandalous example
was never before offered to the youth of any country; and if our
newspaper writers think that any good can come of a people
given up to such arrant idleness and misuse of time and oppor-
tunity, they may some day get their eyes opened to the fact that
only beggary and wretchedness, if not worse, can spring from an
idleness so demoralising and degrading. In my young days we
played our cricket matches in the morning between 6 and 8, con-
tinuing the match every morning till it was finished. Saturdays
and holidaj’s were the only other days we had for cricket. We
were all learning some sort of business, and if any one of us had
the temerity to ask leave for a day to play a cricket match his
doom would have been sealed that instant. He probably would
have been told by ins employer, “ What, go away from Business
to phi}’ a cricket match ! Yes, you may go, and stay too. I will
see if I can't find some one, in your place, who will think more
of my interest and his own, and has other things in his head
than such idleness.” We have seen here frequently three days
at a time spent at a cricket match, and journeys made to Mel-
bourne to do the same, and this by men who have nothing to
depend upon but their steady application to some business, and
the characters they can earn for themselves as expert men of
business, reliable and devoted to the faithful performance of
duty. How many do yon think will succeed in gaining such a
character who hesitate not to desert their duty for three or six


days at a time, to say nothing of a twelvemonth, for no higher
purpose than a wretched cricket match ? Of course, there may he
isolated cases of men who, from having indulgent employers and
other causes, receive no visible harm from such things. But how
is it with the generality of young men who follow such courses ?
Where do they end ? Admitting that there is some truth in the
pitiful balderdash that we hear about quickness of eye, vigi-
lance, muscular power, &c., that cricket is said to give them, what
is the use of it if it is gained at the expense of the situation you
held and earning the character of an idle, worthless vagabond ?
This cricket or boat-pulling requires no encouragement from the
Press, or from any other quarter. There is idleness enough
among our youths to prompt them to cultivate those sports
unduly ; and I, for one, speak my own opinion when I say that
our newspapers have wellnigh become absolute nuisances from
the columns that we see constantly devoted to cricket and foot-
ball, and dry rot of this description, aiming at appeasing the
larrikin literary appetite, which 1 am sure is not worth the effort.
There cannot be a doubt that our colonial youth are being con-
stantly taught that man’s chief end is to be an expert cricketer
or boat-puller. Energy, devotion, and skill in business are quite
secondary matters, not worth talking about, and capable of con-
ferring no distinction on any one. Pest assured this teaching
will one day bear ample fruits, already patent in the astounding
fact that young men have been granted leave of absence from
their duties for twelve months to idle away that long time in a
manner that is simply disreputable. Ido not know for certain ;
but I am informed that some of those cricketers who have gone
home are in the public service here. If this is true, more shame
to those who allowed it. It may be said that they are entitled
to a twelvemonth’s holiday some time, and they are taking it
now. Even for a moment admitting this to be correct, the
devoting such a length of time to the idleness of cricket must
act most prejudicially on the business character of any man, I
care not how steady, punctual, and attentive he may be. I
mentioned in my last that a native youth had gone to England
and taken the highest honours at Cambridge University. So
little notice was taken of this truly worthy and splendid effort
that I did not, when I wrote last, know the young gentleman’s
name, nor did I know that a second native youth had done
the same. I now find that the first was Mr. Jacob and the
second was a son of Sir Gieorge Wigram Allen, the Speaker of
our Legislative Assembly. All honour to those two genuine
fellows. Their feat is a great one ; none the less great that our
people remain entirely silent about it —and our larrikins, of
course, cannot understand it. They may cheer, and roar, and
“ crack their cheeks” over their cricketers and boat-pullers, and


cover themselves with the contempt and derision of all rational
men by so doing ; but the victors of the University are the true
heroes who can well afford to despise the bellowings of larrikins
in the calm, serene contemplation of the greatness and inestimable
worth of their own high achievement.
Some time ago I addressed two letters to the Echo, pointing
out the danger to our rising youth of what threatens to become
a wholesale devotion of their time and lives to cricket; and I
illustrated this by a reference to the fact that a dozen of our young
men had gone to England to devote a whole year to the idleness
of cricket. Those young men were not men of independent for-
tune, but were apparently following some business, through their
energy and devotion to which they hoped to gain a reputable
living. How any business men employing young men in their
offices could for a moment have thought of allowing them leave
of absence for such a purpose, and for such a time, is in no way
to be accounted for but on the supposition that the masters were
as delirious as the servants.
These young men have now come back from their English
enterprise and inglorious occupation, and have been received here
as a species of heroes—certainly a contemptible species—and
overwhelmed with the plaudits of men whose frivolous thought-
lessness seems to be the most conspicuous quality they possess.
Has it escaped the observation of those shallow encouragers of
cricket in excess, or cricket as the main business of life, that those
English devotees, instead of returning to their various places of
business, and there devotedly labouring to make up the lee-way
which a whole year of flagrant idleness has produced, have here
set out on another, and perhaps a longer, cricketing expedition,
to the utter ruin of any hope or prospect of their ever doing any-
thing else? As things are going and have gone, I think it would
be as well for the Press and people to declare openly and at once
that all energy, steadfastness, and devotion to business is a weak-
ness and defect that no young man should allow to grow upon
him. The thing is obsolete. Honour and applause lie only in
the cricket-field. Follow cricket as a profession, and you will
gain the esteem of Governors and rulers, be crowned and wreathed
with laurel, and borne aloft, on the wild enthusiasm of mobs, to
Elysium. I put it to the common sense of the people—if any yet
remains—to say whether or not this delirious encouragement to


cricket and cricketers has not a most ruinous and demoralising
tendency as regards our young men. In all the palaver over the
return of those who went to England on this mission of idleness,
not one word fell from a single speaker about the ruinous waste
of time involved in a twelvemonth’s cricket, nor a hint as to the
necessity of redoubled application to business on the part of the
idlers. Let me ask, will that English Eleven ever do a hand’s-
turn at anything else but cricket in this world again ? And why
should they, since their cricketing is thought so much of ? It is
a most false teaching that has made those unfortunate youths
think that cricket is the grandest, if not the most righteous
occupation that man can engage in here below; and if some day
they are awakened from this wretched dream to find they have
no implement or weapon with which to fight the battle of life but
a contemptible cricket bat, they will also find how ruinous has
been the teaching that made them think that cricket was all in
all, and led them to subordinate the serious and real business of
life to it. I charge the Press of this country with grave blame in
reference to this matter. Cricket wanted no encouragement from
this, or from any, quarter. The inherent love of idleness in the
generality of youths would have done all, and a thousand times
more than was required, for cricket, without the Press aiding.
As it is, the unfortunate readers of newspapers here have to en-
counter column after column of space occupied with the details of
paltry cricket games, making both day and night hideous, as we
sit down in the expectation of reading something interesting or
instructive in our daily paper. Ido not wish to charge the whole
Press with this false and hollow teaching, because some country
papers quoted and copied my last letters to you on this subject,
with high approval; but I do say that the Press has given an
encouragement to this idleness—l speak of the wholesale devotion
of time such as is involved in a year’s cricket, which has not
escaped either observation or condemnation among the sane por-
tion of the community.
From my observation and experience, it is extremely difficult
for business men to get away from their duties for a week, even
when their health imperatively requires rest and change. But how
eleven men can get away from business for twelve months to play
cricket during the whole time —in one word, to do nothing else
but play cricket—speaks in thunder tones of the extent to which
this false teaching spoken of has demoralised and degraded the
community. It has been pointed out as the highest reach pos-
sible to our ambition to send home a horse to win the English
Derby. This ambition would be certainly worthy of us as a
cricketing and boat-pulling people ; but as a cultivated, well-
informed, intellectual community, it would be beneath our contempt
—worthy only of being handed over to our horse-jockeys and the
rabble of the turf.


I have never objected to cricket or rowing as line, exhilarating
exercises, and I hope I shall not be misunderstood. I should
never have written a line on the subject had those pastimes been
kept within proper bounds and in their proper places ; but when
I see young men devoting a whole twelvemonth to cricket, and
observe that it is a common thing for our youths to spend as many
as six days at a time in playing cricket matches, and, further,
when I find half the people run mad, overflowing in wonder and
the most extravagant applause of such achievements, I begin to
think I have fallen among a frivolous and contemptible people,
whose aspirations soar no higher than the pitiful struggles of a
cricket game, and whose model man and hero is he who makes
the highest score. I say again, as I have said before, that this
shocking waste of time at cricket, and the countenance it receives
from Press and people here, will yet bear its due and proper
fruits : as they sow so shall they reap ; and any man may as well
expect to reap a fine crop of wheat on sowing rusty nails as to
hope for the slightest prosperity or worldly advantage in becoming
as great a cricketer as Napoleon was a soldier. The time spent
at cricket, or any other pastime, over what is just and lawful, will
be looked back upon with repentance and remorse, and, it may
be, bitter and unavailing regret at chances of improvement gone
by and opportunities neglected. Can any one imagine the
vacancy of mind that could continue playing cricket all day long
for a whole year, or the effect that such a course would have upon
the mind and characters of young men intended for any useful
purpose in this life ? Could any course be adopted better calcu-
lated to ruin our youths for any higher or nobler purpose ? Let
those questions be answered faithfully by any person who opposes
the views of this letter. One year spent at cricket by young men
who have to work for their living, one would think, is a degree of
idleness worthy the loudest condemnation ; but some people think
it so praiseworthy that the heroes of an achievement so miraculous
are received as if they had “plucked the lightning from the thunder-
cloud, and wrenched the sceptre from the tyrant’s hand.” A very
extraordinary feat the first, but one which was literally and
actually done, for high purposes which the world will feel the
advantage of to the end of time, by a poor printer, Benjamin
Franklin by name, whose great character and heroic life I recom-
mend to the community around me as a hero worthy of their
regard when they are done worshipping their cricketing and
boat-pulling idols.


i A 7. rw.
Subelt Mr. Ironside does not mean his letter in Saturday’s
Echo as in the slightest degree an answer to me. I think I said
that cricket was a tine, exhilarating exercise, and as long as it
was used merely as au exercise, good and well. But this is a
mighty different thing from playing cricket all day for a whole
year, to the reckless and unprincipled sacrifice of time, duty,
business, character, and any hope of qualification for the true
business of life. I lament that, in this country, we seem to be
doomed to the worship of boat-pullers and cricketers as the
highest species of hero which we are capable of appreciating or
understanding, and I take the liberty of designating this worship,
very appropriately, I think, as donkey-worship, and so let it be
distinguished from hero-worship, which is the respect, reverence,
and love due from humanity to the great kings and leaders in
the realms of science, politics, literature, patriotism, and war.
Suppose a young Australian goes to England and ends a brilliant
career by reaching the woolsack, Lord High Chancellor of
England, would the people here make a tithe of the noise about
this that they would if he had pulled a boat faster than some
London publican or ratcatcher, or knocked the cricket-ball con-
siderably about the field ? I believe the victor over the ratcatcher
would absorb all our donkey-worship, while the brilliant Chan-
cellor would pass by unnoticed, not understandable by the
larrikin mind, but nevertheless a hero well worthy of the best of
our hero-worship. The state of things here imagined is far from
impossible. The present Lord Chancellor Cairns was, not so
many years ago, a poor, friendless Irish lad, seeking distinction
at the bar of England. Look at him now, ye larrikins and
leaders of the donkey-worship so lavishly bestowed u-pon boat-
pullers and the like. Erskine, Wedderburn, Brougham, and
Campbell, four very poor young Scotchmen, reached the same
high region of distinction and renown attained in these days by
Cairns. What, therefore, is there to prevent some gifted and
aspiring young Australian aiming at a goal so great and so
glorious ? If this ever occurs, we may take it as a certainty that
the hero of such an achievement would not be found playing
cricket every day for a whole year, or swelling the discordant
chorus of donkey-worship over it, inflating, flattering, and
puffing up the so-called heroes of such a feat with floods of
demented balderdash till their “ sublime heads strike the stars.”
And what was the outcome and moral of all this misplaced en-
thusiasm and sheer donkey-worship? No less than this —tostrain
every nerve and faculty in us to send home a horse to win the
Derby. What a pity we could not win it with an ass instead of
a horse, and then the donkey-worship which would, of course,


set in would at least have the merit o£ being har-
monious, and congenial, captivating every long ear and filling
the air with the incense of a worship which is more pitiful and
melancholy than even that of M!umbo Jumbo. A son, X believe,
of the late Mr. Justice Wise takes high honours at one of the
great English Universities, and this has been done before by two
Australian youths —namely, Messrs. Jacob and Allen ; but who
will banquet or notice them when they enter Sydney, the grand
cathedral of donkey-worship? But, never mind, the day is not
far distant when this hollow, meaningless, insane running in
crowds after boat-pullers and cricketers will die, as all sham,
humbug, and abortive nonsense are doomed to die, and our
population may then be seen to advantage clothed with common
sense and in its right mind.
The cricketers, it is said, made a good deal of money by this
English trip. Were it ten times as much as it really is, it would be
no compensation for timemis-spent and habits engendered that will
act as fatal barriers to progress, advancement, or prosperity in any
of the numerous avenues of honest, valued, and respected labour.
A cricketer by profession ! Is it coming to this, under the
breezes of adulation and encouragement from all quarters, high
and low ? Well, then, be it so ; go on and prosper as a man
will prosper who makes cricket the business of his life. They,
the cricketers, have done the State some service, it has been also
said. The State that thinks so is certainly not worth serving.
If the whole population were cricketers, and we sent home scores
of elevens to beat out of recognition every eleven they met in
England, how would they serve either the State or people here ?
Such talk as this about the country being served in any way by
the expedition of our cricketers is simply talk, and that is all
talk not unworthy of the worship I have already designated. A
citizen of Sydney goes home, and enters the political arena, and
almost at a jump reaches the front rank of eloquent debaters
and profound political philosophers. He stands almost unequalled
for his powers of eloquent and incisive speech, and he fills high
office with commanding ability, justifying all parties in pointing
to him as the Liberal Premier of England at no distant date.
When the feat of sending the horse to England to win the
Derby was suggested, did it not occur to any one to suggest the
far nobler and grander enterprise of sending a man to win the
Premiership of England. The Australian who achieves this
great purpose will indeed do the State some service, and be
worthy of a true and genuine hero-worship. Don’t let the want
of rank or title dishearten him. The last Premier of England,
the son of a toiling literary man, began life as an attorney’s
clerk ; and the present Premier of England, the son of a publican
who kept a publichouse in Leith, living at first by serving


whisky to coalheavers, began as a member of the English bar;
and now look at the heights and glories they have attained. If
the donkey-worshippers could only distract their devotion a little
from their boat-pulling and cricketing paragons to the contem-
plation of the greatness and grandeur of such heroes as Gladstone
and Disraeli, I have no doubt they would ultimately give up
donkey-worsliip and become true and genuine worshippers of
the real hero.
. . V. . .
Standing on such firm ground as I do in reference to this
most melancholy cricket insanity, which threatens to submerge
the land in deluges of humbug, triviality, frivolity, and all
manner of delirious absurdity, it is not the least likely that I
will allow such productions as Mr. Ironside’s and Mr. Manning’s
letters to you to be received as in any way a reply to me. How
surprising it is that no one can reply to me without misrepre-
senting me. My position is otherwise so impregnable and
unassailable that it cannot be touched, and is not touched, by a
single writer who has attempted to reply to me. Must I say,
again, that cricket is a most exhilarating and delightful amuse-
ment, and nothing more; and the greatest adept at it not worthy
a second thought. I have written only against the abuse of
cricket as exemplified in a lot of young men playing cricket for
a whole year, to the total neglect of everything else and the
complete destruction of business character or any hope of
advancement in the walks of useful industry that lead on to
fortune. Eancy any of those year-playing cricketers making
application for any situation of trust in a bank or mercantile
office; and on being asked “At what duty have you been
engaged for the last year?” just imagine, if you can, the look of
the accurate business man who asks this question, on receiving
the reply, “ Oh! I have been playing cricket for the last year;
and, moreover, I lost the situation which I held for the sake of
this year’s cricket-playing.” Well, my young man,” the
rejoinder would probably be, “ you had better continue playing
cricket to the end of the chapter, as I will take very good care
you will not lose the situation I have to give through your
neglecting its duties for a year’s cricket.”
I do not think it necessary to reply to Mr. Ironside, because
he says nothing that I don’t agree with. He seems to be simply


a donkey-worshipper. The other (Mr. Manning) is a donkey-
writer as well, and a donkey-writer without the slightest regard
to truth, which seems to be a failing of donkey-worshippers in
general. He (Mr. Manning) says “ that some time ago a letter
appeared in a leading Sydney paper from a person who after-
wards turned out to be Mr. Buchanan.” As I have never sent a
letter to the Sydney Press without my name in full at the end of
it, Mr. Manning must be under a delusion here. This letter,
Mr. Manning says, “ ran down the Australian team’s perform-
ances as being nothing at all, and stating that the elevens beaten
by them had simply been got together for the purpose of allow-
ing our men to win,” &c. Well, whoever wrote this letter, it
was not me. I did not know the name of a single man the Aus-
tralians played against in England, with the exception of Grace,
and this I merely heard by chance. I was too indignant at
valuable newspaper space being occupied with such pitiful, con-
temptible trifles as the accounts of those wretched cricket games
to read a word about them.
Mr. Manning says each member of the team cleared four times
more money than he would have done here. Still, Mr. Manning,
he was a loser, and a sad loser, if he was intended for any useful
purpose in this life. Qualification, character, capacity to per-
form duty, fidelity, trustworthiness, devotion to the interest of
employers, facility of managing and transacting business, and, as
a consequence of this, a widely extended respect and golden
opinions from all sorts of people —this, too, is valuable, Mr.
Manning—more valuable than a hundred times the money they
made. But this is not gained by spending a year at playing
cricket. No, Mr. Manning, it is generally lost by such idleness
and ruinous misconduct. What they derived from this year’s
unprincipled and wretched idleness was probably an entire dis-
relish for systematic duty, a hatred of honest labour, a distaste for
patient industry, an aversion to confinement, and an incapacity
to give attention to the routine of business, which opens the
door to advancement and success ; besides the contraction of a
variety of loose habits of inveterate idleness, enhanced and con-
firmed in them by the braying of innumerable donkeys whose long
ears w r ere incapable of hearing anything more important than the
child’s-play at some childish game at cricket. And so, according
to the donkey mind, it is heroic for young men, who have
nothing with which to win their bread in this world but their cha-
racters and their capacity to serve their fellow-man, to devote twelve
mortal months to the very flagrant idleness of cricket; and,
worse than this, the perpetrators of this donkey heroism are
received with wild enthusiasm and no end of bucking and braying
among the donkeys until the very atmosphere becomes polluted
with an incense, or rather a malaria, arising from the pestiferous
16


marshes of ignorance, idleness, and frivolity, poisoning all around,
and offering for the contemplation of the serious and sensible
spectator nothing but the delirious vagaries of sheer imbecility.
And I would just ask, in conclusion, where do these cricheting
and boat-pulling donkey-heroes generally end P As the keeper
of some fourth or fifth rate drinking-house, where they sink into
mere oblivion; second childishness they cannot attain, as they
never got out of their first childishness; and here, pursuing
them to the end of their useless and inglorious career, in nine
cases out of ten they fall victims to what they deal in—embarked
on a stream which, poisoning them as they go along, leads to only
one port that of certain and inevitable destruction.
And so beginning in idleness, and idleness accompanying them
through life, last scene of all in this pitiful history is generally
extreme poverty, extreme misery, and it may be a drunkard’s
doom and a drunkard’s grave.
The Sydney people have now witnessed the melancholy spec-
tacle, three or four times repeated, of a dozen youths going all
the way to England for no higher purpose than to play cricket,
day after day, for one whole year. Those youths have nothing
to depend on for a living but their characters and their ability
to labour at some useful and honourable occupation. They have
entered upon this deplorable idleness with the full approval and
high encouragement of the Sydney Press, which fails not to
chronicle their pitiful deeds in columns of dreary matter, to the
annoyance and despair of the sensible portion of their readers.
Every morning we had expensive telegrams telling us the result
of some wretched game at cricket. Surely this sort of thing
will some day come to an end, and that the Press will rouse itself
out of the sink in which it has so long grovelled, and try to offer
a more elevated teaching to the youth of the country. Those
youths, no doubt, all profess to be learning some business or
profession ; but I would ask, will they ever do much at anything
after one or two years of such culpable and ruinous idleness as
that in which they are now engaged day after day and every day ?
T ancy any of these youths attempting to settle down to any use-
ful labour after a year’s cricketing in England. Have they not
invariably done nothing, when they came back, but organise
another enterprise of the same kind, by which another invaluable
17


year of time was fooled away, and their own for in-
dustry in the pursuit of honest labour more and more injured,
while our silly, puerile Press glorified them, and raised them to a
pedestal only occupied by national benefactors ? The Press has
much to answer for in this matter, and has lent itself to the
demoralisation of our youth with an ignorance and unprincipled
levity little short of prostitution. According to the false and
fatal teachings of the Press, cricket and boat-pulling are the only
fields where honour and distinction are to be gained; and who can
doubt that the rampant larrikiuism of the country is largely to
be attributed to that teaching ? Let any one watch the career ot
those year-playing cricketers, and see where it will all end. When
age or inefficiency overtakes them, will the wretched Press, that
led them astray, come to their relief? When those youths, who
are so egregiously neglecting the main duties of life, are inca-
pacitated from further cricket-playing, or, it may be, displaced
by superior competitors, does it never occur to our enlightened
Press to hint to them that a life spent in cricket-playing is not a
very attractive recommendation in seeking honest employment
above that of a day labourer ? Let the Press look this matter
seriously in the face, and, if possible, try to reconsider itself.
It has done an infinity of harm already, and if ever there was a
duty laid at the door of the Press, it was surely, when the youth
of the country resolved to waste the flower of their days in the
idleness of constant cricket, to enter a loud and emphatic protest
against the scandal. Instead of which the Press encouraged the
thing with all its power and influence, and has never ceased to
glorify and applaud our returned cricketers, as if they had been
engaged in some great national work by which the happiness and
advancement of our own and future generations were, by their
means, achieved. The whole thing is, beyond measure con-
temptible, and will yet bear fruits that our small-minded, feeble
Press is probably not prepared for. W e may now look for the return
of our cricketers to be received by our swarming donkeys with
all manner of brayings and snortings, led on by the biggest
donkey of all, the daily Press of Sydney, while all sensible and
worthy men will see nothing to applaud, but much to condemn,
in the mighty feat of eleven young men spending a year of time
in running after a ball in an open field. And yet, to think of it,
our Press thinks it not beneath its dignity and function to devote
columns of its space to tell us who caught the ball and who
didn’t, and to speak of the actors in this contemptible child s-play
as heroes worthy of the enthusiastic regard of the nation. It
seems to me that the delirium of all this reached its climax the
other day, when their champion boat-puller returned, beaten,
almost beyond recognition; but notwithstanding this the donkeys
swarmed around him and brayed and snorted to such an extent


that a substantial reward was given to their champion in conse-
quence, I suppose, of his having become such an adept in illus-
trating the art of “ how not to do it.” Why don’t the donkeys
of Sydney give up all this donkey-worship—neither a boat-puller
or a cricketer are worthy even of donkey-worship. Honest, hard-
working men, be they stone-breakers or bullock-drivers, are
more worthy of respect than the best of boat-pullers or cricketers,
as such; and the donkeys of Sydney, if they must have heroes to
worship, and cannot rise higher than cricketers or boat-pullers,
let them try if they cannot see something healthier and more
ennoblingin useful, honest day labour—a thing far more worthy of
their respect and regard. But it would appear that mere brute
force is the object of their worship. If this is so, in the name
of pure absurdity, let them sing anthems to their bullocks and
dray-horses, and crown their two-legged donkeys with never-
fading laurels. An honest dray-horse that can pull three tons
is surely much more worthy of their respect than an insane boat-
puller who can only pull a bit of stick through the water, and
that two-footed animal largely partakes of the character of the
donkey who cannot see the superiority of the one to the other.
Cricket and boat-pulling, and all other pastimes or exercises, are
good only when moderately indulged in ; but when they come to
displace and supplant the real business of life, leading young
men to the loss of their situations, and the total shipwreck of
their prospects in life, then it is time for sensible people to step
in w r ith a stern denunciation of the delirious folly that seems to
have taken possession of the people of this country. When we
find our newspapers mainly occupied with the details of cricket
matches, football matches, &c., &c., it is about time we-enlarged
the premises at Tarban Creek, for this, almost universal, brain
softening is pretty certain to bear fruit. A poor blind, ignorant,
and frivolous people, instructed by an infatuated, if not a com-
pletely insane, Press, is a melancholy enough spectacle. Ten
times more melancholy is it to see young men who should be
learning some useful business, spending the best of their days in
an idleness and purposeless folly that will ultimately reduce them
to the level of the lower animals, while our delirious Press brays
out hallelujahs in praise of an idleness which points to the poor-
house as the goal of most of its unhappy votaries.
N.B.—The Sydney Horning Herald is a newspaper which, may
be credited in its utterances w r ith at least something approaching
to sanity. Well; this journal writes a leader, the o trier day, on
this cricketing balderdash, for the purpose of gravely informing
us that those cricketers who played lately at the Oval had not


G 25
conferred a national service equal to that rendered by the army
in Egypt. This sapient journal thinks it necessary seriously
to argue this. Is this so-called leading journal going mad, or
has it already reached that consummation ? An affirmative to
the last question is probably the correct answer. A donkey-
leading journal is in perfect harmony with the prevailing
worship. God help us !
Batson & Atwater, Printers, 8 Bond Street, Sydney.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
FORTUNE
AND
Princely Income
For <£l,
SEE ELSEWHERE
“ CAXTO23TCTS.”
Bulletin Hotel.


Advertisements.
MAXIMILIAN S. MEYEES,
CALIG-EAPHIST
BY APPOINTMENT TO THE QUEEN, THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH,
AND THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.
Illuminated Addresses to Eminent Champions of Sport
A SPECIALITY.
Lithographic Show Cards of Exquisite Designs.
IR,. .A.. O. ZB.
-X H E-
MYSTIC BROTHERHOOD
OF THE
MEET AT THE BULLETIN HOTEL,
MOTHER LODGE, No. 1, N.S.W.,
ifilf TVII.D4I XEf G.
COJJDITIOHS OF EUTEiyUG FI|OM THjITCHEfy CITY HOST.
Archibald Forbes tells of a British soldier who was on the point of being
assegei’d by a Zulu, when he gave the Buff fraternal sign. The Zulu
dropped his weapon, carried the wounded man to a kraal, and there
tended him. The soldier gave the Zulu a pair of trousers and took
him to England, where he married the Buff’s sister.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
HENRY BILLS,
BIBD DEALER,
CIRCULAR QUAY,
NOTIFIES THAT NOW IS THE TIME TO SECURE
BABY COCKATOOS AND PARROTS,
EIGHT FROM THE NEST.
BILLS has Agents throughout Riverina and Queensland,
rendering many an ornithological mother desolate.
&tjaara.;ltt:e:ejd talkers.
IR/TJIM: ZPTJ3STCH.
—OIF 1 —
“Queensland Punch,”
BY ALL THE
BEST AUTHORS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.
Order from Gordon & Gotch
ALSO, “QUEENSLAND FIOARO.”


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE
iiclucastk JEoniing Ijrralb
IS THE
GREAT ORGAN of the
NEWCASTLE, MAITLAND, MORPETH, and
LOWER HUNTER Districts generally.
CIRCULATES in Twenty Thriving Townships.
THE
Cumberland Times.
PVBUSHED EVERY SATURDAY,
In Parramatta.
CIRCULATES Largely throughout SYDNEY and
the Provinces.
To be READ at the BULLETIN HOTEL,
Castlereagh Street.
THE
Western Independent
BATHURST
The GREAT ORGAN
OF THE
WESTERN DISTRICT.
FILED at the BULLETIN HOTEL.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
111*111
AND
PfllMii
For <£l,
SEE ELSEWHERE
“ CAZTOUIUS,”
Bulletin Hotel*


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Registered Bookmaker, V. H. C.
Address, CLEMENT’S HOTEL,
SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE.
The longest market odds about any sporting event, especially Racing.
Commissions executed.
Drawers of Starters in Sweeps can rely on Allen laying off their money
so as to let them stand on velvet with great discretion. Information to
clients sent immediately. Telegrams must be prepaid, and reply paid.
Sydney Reference to Richmond Thatcher, and Sydney
Address, Bulletin Hotel.
KIRBY & FARRELL
(From the late Mr. JAMES CUKTIS’),
UNDERTAKERS,
84 HUNTER & PHILLIP STREETS.
FUNERALS NEATLY EXECUTED.
N.B. —Mr. Kirby has been in the employ of the late Mr. James Curtis
for the last sixteen years ; also, Manager for over ten years.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE
GREAT SPORTIIIG RGIIDGZVOUS
BuLLEmr Hotel.
Oastlereagli Street, Sydney.
RICHMOND THATCHER,
PRO PRIETO R
The BULLETIN HOTEL is on the Opposite Side of
Oastlereagh Street to the Dress Circle Entrance of the
Theatre Royal, and nearer Hunter Street.
From George Street it is reached by turning up the
Right-of-way alongside the General Post Office, and
continuing across Pitt Street up Moore Street, which
it nearly faces.
PATRONS OF EVERY KIND OF SPORT
ALWAYS ASSEMBLE HERE IN GREAT FORCE,.
SEE IVO BLIGH’S BAT AND OTHER TROPHIES.
NOTE. —DICK THATCHER ACCOMPANIED THE INVINCIBLE
TRICKETT TO ENGLAND ON THE OCCASION OF HIS FIRST PULLING
HANLAN.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
ROBERT ARMSTRONG,
CHEMIST,
4PITT STREET, SYDNEY,-^
Between the “ Evening News” Office and
the Compagnoni Catering Co.,
COMPOUNDS PRESCRIPTIONS ACCURATELY FROM THE PUREST
DRUGS, AND HAS A VARIETY OF PROPRIETARY MEDICINES.
Pectoral Cherry Balsam, Bilious and Liver Pills, Extract of Sarsaparilla, Sure
Pile Cure, Fragrant Mouth Wash, Infallible Eye Lotion, Worm Lozenges,
Toothache Tincture, &c., &c.
A Great Assortment of Scents, Toilet Requisites, Brushware, and Druggists’
Goods generally.
Why should you fume, and fret, and grieve,
When solace you can get from Eve ?
Mix all your cares with Eve’s grand weed,
up, and soon they’re gone indeed.
BIS#
KING STREET,
OPPOSITE STALLS ENTRANCE, THEATRE ROYAL.
EVE’S EXCELSIOR MIXTURE,
PRIME CIGARS, AND TOBACCONISTS’ GOODS.
UlliH t lIPWili
FROM LONDON,
At the SIGN OF “THE DUKE’S MOTTO,”
Castlereagli Street,
Nearly opposite the Theatre Royal.
W. & W.’s extensive experience guarantees their supplying nothing but
the best goods, and their pleasant little Lounge and Divan is always
frequented by “ Sports ” with the latest and most reliable information.
