

DOUBLE INCOME TAX
WITHIN THE EMPIRE.
REPORT
OF A
PUBLIC MEETING
HELD IN THE
Great Hall, Cannon Street Hotel,
MONDAY, 28th FEBRUARY, 1916.
The Right Honourable Lord Southwark, P.C.
(President of the London Chamber of Commerce),
IN THE CHAIR.
Also Report of carrying a Resolution on the same
subject at the Meeting of The Association of Cham-
bers of Commerce, in London, 2nd March, 1916.


DOUBLE INCOME TAX
WITHIN THE EMPIRE.
REPORT of a PUBLIC MEETING
held in the Great Hall, Gannon Street Hotel,
Monday, 28th February, 1916.
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD SOUTHWARK, P.C.
{President of the London Chamber of Commerce),
IN THE CHAIR.
PUBLISHED BY
THE ASSOCIATION TO PROTEST AGAINST THE
DUPLICATION OF INCOME TAX WITHIN THE EMPIRE.
Chairman —Frederick Dutton, Esq.
Hon. Treasurer— Henry Bull, Esq. Secretary —Hon. J. G-. JENKINS.
Offices— 27, Clements Lane, London, E.C.
ALL COMMUNICATIONS TO BE ADDRESSED TO THE SECRETARY.
Amongst those present were: —Sir Algernon F. Firth, Bart.
(President of the Association of Chambers of Commerce of the
United Kingdom), Mr. J. Annan Bryce, M.P., the Hon. Sir C. H.
Rason, Sir Charles Olivant, the Hon. Sir John McCall (Agent-
General for Tasmania), the Hon. B. R. Wise (Agent-General for
New South Wales), Mr. Fredk. W. Young (Agent-General for South
Australia), the Hon. Richard Reid (Agent-General for Ontario),
Sir Westby B. Perceval, K.C.M.G., Mr. Henry Bull, Mr. Fredk.
Dutton, Mr. Fredk. Anderson, Mr. Stanley Machin, Mr. C. C.
McLeod, Mr. Percy Arnold, Mr. J. A. Game, Mr. Claude Thirkell,
Mr. James Martin, J.P., Mr. Andrew Williamson, the Hon. M. L.
Moss, Colonel Sir J. Roper Parkington, J.P., D.L., Mr. A. Barton
Kent, Sir Edward L. Samuel, Bart., Sir Alexander Pedler, Sir John
Young, Sir William Fry, D.L., Mr. John E. Corby, Mr. Maurice
Ockenden, Lieut.-Colonel W. E. Reay, Lieut.-General Mylde, Major
H. H. Pounds, the Hon. Algernon Borthwick, Mr. A. G. Phillipson,
the Hon. J. G. Jenkins, Mr. Charles Musgrave (Secretary of the
London Chamber of Commerce), Mr. C. E. Town (Assistant Secre-
tary of the London Chamber of Commerce).


Representatives of the following firms, companies, etc.: —Reid
Brothers (Johannesburg), Ltd.; Hancock and Co (New Zealand),
Ltd.; Bewick, Moreing and Co.; Lever Brothers, Ltd.; Frances
Chapman, Sons and Peekes; Parke, Davies and Co.; Balfour,
Beatty and Co. ; The London County and Westminster Bank, Ltd.;
Octavius Steel and Co.; D. and D. Murray, Ltd.; I. and R. Morley;
The Natal Estates, Ltd. ;R. and W. Davidson, Ltd.; The Trust and
Agency Company of Australasia, Ltd.; Robert Brooks and Co.;
Fraser, Ransay Proprietary, Ltd. ; Waidi Grand Junction Gold Com-
pany, Ltd.; The Barnagar Jute Factory Company, Ltd., etc., etc.
The Chairman : Ladies and gentleman, as President of the
London Chamber of Commerce, I would like to say the Chamber
has convened this meeting in response to suggestions from many
of its members who are very much concerned by the fact of having
to pay Income Tax two or three times on the same income. The
subject is by no means a new one. It has been before the Chamber
of Commerce, and especially before the Congresses of Chambers
of Commerce, for many years. The effect of the present conditions
is to restrict investment in other parts of the Empire, and secondly
to divert British capital to foreign countries where Income Tax is
not paid. The matter is specially urgent at the present moment with
the greatly increased Income Tax. That we shall all agree. Under
the present system it is possible, especially in Australia, that as
much as 10s. in the £ shall be paid for Income Tax. A special
committee of this Chamber has been considering the matter for a
considerable time, and farther than that an Association represent-
ing Colonial interests in all parts of the Empire is also at work on
the subject to bring about some arrangement between the Home and
Colonial Governments which will lead to an equitable adjustment.
The coming visit of the Prime Ministers of Australia and of New
Zealand make it a very opportune time to discuss this matter and to
press upon the Government the necessity of an arrangement being
come to which will be acceptable to all. The matter is not free from
technicalities, and I am not going to deal with them, because on the
platform there are many gentlemen who thoroughly understand the
question and who will move resolutions, and I have no doubt will
place the case before you in a very clear and businesslike way. But
I rather gather we shall find before we conclude our proceedings
that there will be a request made for Imperial preference in taxa-
tion. I will now call upon my friend, Mr. J. Annan Bryce. M.P.,
to move the first resolution.
Mr. J. Annan Bryce, M.P. : Lord Southwark, ladies and gen-
tlemen, I am very sorry that Lord Milner is not here to move this
resolution. His well-known devotion to everything which concerns
the interests of the Empire would have given great weight to his
support to a resolution such as I am going to propose. But un-
happily he was not able to be present and the London Chamber of
Commerce has asked me, as I have lately taken an interest —in fact
for some years have taken an interest in this question in the House
of Commons —to propose the resolution which I am going to submit
to you. The resolution is ;


“ That in the interests of Imperial Trade and Commerce and
“ of the unity of the Empire, it is essential that such steps should
“ be taken by the British Government as will enable immediate
“ relief to be given from the imposition of Double Income Tax
“within the Empire.’ ’
Now, ladies and gentlemen, Lord Southwark has told you that this
is not a new matter. It has been under discussion between various
bodies and the Imperial Government for the last twenty years. In
1896 when Income Tax was first begun to be imposed in the
Dominions of Australia and what is now the Australian Common-
wealth, the question was raised by bodies in this country with the
then Chancellor of the Exchequer, Lord St. Aldwyn, and a memorial
was drawn up and replies were given to it on behalf of the Treasury.
The reasons given were really not convincing from the point of view
I think of any broad-minded person. The main reason which was
insisted upon was that the two authorities—the authorities of the
self-governing Dominions and the Imperial Authorities —were repre-
sentatives of two different States, which had nothing to do with
each other, so far as fiscal arrangements were concerned, and that
the principles upon which taxation was imposed in the United
Kingdom were different from those under which they were imposed
by the self-governing Colonies. The principle of the United King-
dom taxation is that Income Tax should be levied on all persons,
companies and businesses resident and domiciled in the United
Kingdom irrespective of the source from which the income is derived
or where the business is carried on. In other words, the taxation
was upon income which was received by persons, firms or com-
panies resident in the United Kingdom. Now, the principle of
taxation in the self-governing Dominions is different. There the
taxation is levied only upon property or businesses within the juris-
diction of the taxing authority. The Treasury of that time, through
Lord St. Aldwyn, emphasised the fact that Income Tax was not
levied upon income not received in the United Kingdom, and up to
that point and so long as that remained the case there was perhaps
some ground for the distinction made. But now that under recent
legislation, the Act of 1914, Income Tax is levied in the United
Kingdom on all income whether received in the United Kingdom or
not; whether allowed to remain out in the Colonies or Dominions
or not; the distinction ceases really to have any valid effect. This
matter is gone into with great detail in the admirable paper which
was read by Mr. Young, the Agent-General for South Australia,
before the Colonial Institute a few weeks ago, and as all of you have
got a copy of that I do not think I need dilate very long when so
many other speakers have to address you upon the arguments which
are advanced for or against this proposition. Really the main
reason for the Treasury’s opposition in remedying what is clearly
an absolutely inequitable double tax is that they want money. Now
we all know they want money, but the question is whether they are
not going (and this is a point I want to emphasise) to lose more by
this double taxation than they gain. (Applause.) And it is per-
fectly certain that whether the Treasury lose or gain, the Empire
as a whole is perfectly certain to lose by the imposition of this


double tax. It is of the greatest importance, ladies and gentlemen,
as you all must realise in these days, not only to the conflict of arms,
but to the economic conflict which is perhaps going to be even a
more serious and disastrous thing for the world than the conflict
of arms, that the Empire, that all the ties of Empire, shall be drawn
as close as possible. (Applause.) Now the imposition of this double
Income Tax cannot fail to have a disastrous effect upon this vital
question of the drawing together of the ties of Empire. After all
we are but human beings, and we all feel the pinch of pecuniary
considerations. It cannot be expected that the movement of the
population will not be affected by the severe strain which this
duplication of Income Tax is going to impose upon us. (Hear,
hear.) Lord Southwark told you that now many persons in
Australia have to pay as much as 10s. in the £. I believe it is
even more than that. (Hear, hear.) I believe it may even mean
13s. or something like that in the £. Well, it is perfectly clear that
however enthusiastic and Imperialistic anyone may be he cannot
disregard altogether the fact that it may be possible if this kind of
thing goes on that his income may altogether disappear. What is
he to do 1 ? He must either transfer his residence to some place where
Income Tax is either non-existent or does not weigh so heavily upon
him, or he may withdraw his investments from the countries where
they are affected by this double tax. Both these things are likely
to happen. We want, as Mr. Young so well pointed out in his
admirable paper, to encourage the residence of Australians in this
country and of Britons in the self-governing Dominions. We do not
want to interpose any obstacle to the free flow of population and of
residence between the different parts of the Empire. We both gain
by that interchange of population. We get to know each other
better. Our children get to know the conditions of Australia, and
Australians get to know the conditions of the Mother Country
better; and so far as capital is concerned it is perfectly certain that
capital, which is largely a fluid thing, will find an investment in the
place where it gives the best return. Various Chancellors of the
Exchequer apparently have not thought that a serious matter; but
it is a serious matter, and already there are signs that the imposition
of this double tax is going to drive certain industries and businesses
out of this country. A case has been alluded to, I think, in Mr.
Young’s paper, and you all know about it because it has been
alluded to in Parliament, of a large Indian company which has
already resolved to take away its head office from this country in
order to avoid the tremendous strain which is put upon it by the
imposition not only of the Indian Income Tax but of the Income
Tax of this countx'y. I know of another remarkable case. A very
large business carried on in Australia and various other places in
the world, with its head office in London, which has just now decided
that it must remove its head office from London and put it in New
York. Now that kind of thing will continue, and it is the kind of
thing we ought to oppose ourselves to by every means in our power.
The only way to do that is to put pressure upon the Chancellor of
the Exchequer. No doubt it might mean in the meantime a certain
sacrifice of income, but I do believe in the long run the advantages


to the Empire and to the United Kingdom itself would be very
much greater than any small advantage which will be got out of the
maintenance of the double Income Tax. There is an aspect of the
case which I have not yet seen presented, and it is an important one,
and that is that if the head offices of great firms and companies go
away from the United Kingdom the tendency will be for these
businesses to get their plant somewhere else than in the United
Kingdom. Ido not think, perhaps, that is so likely to happen with
regard to business in Australia, because Australia has shown us a
wonderful example of patriotism and Imperialism in the steps which
it has taken to get rid of the canker of German interpenetration.
(Applause.) I believe that in this country, too, there will be for
many many years after the war a prejudice against everything
coming from enemy countries, but still, after all, the temptation of
cheap prices and the impossibility often of testing what the origin
of any particular machinery or goods is, may make it probable that
still a very large quantity of plant and machinery and goods may
come from other countries which are at war with us at present aftei
the war is over. That tendency will be very much increased if the
head offices of these great businesses are removed from this country.
The natural tendency is for a man to place his orders in the country
either where he carries on his business or where his head office is
situated, and if the place in which he carries on his business is not
capable of supplying the particular things he wants, then he will
place his orders either in some neutral country or the country where
his head office is situated. I won’t detain you further, but I hope
you will be able, after subsequent speakers have spoken, to give
enthusiastic support to this motion which I conclude by moving.
(Applause.)
The Chairman : I will ask Mr. Stanley Machin, the Chairman
of the Imperial Council of Chambers of Commerce, to second the
resolution.
Mr. Stanley Machin : Lord Southwark, ladies and gentlemen,
I rise with much pleasure to second the resolution that has been
so ably moved by Mr. Bryce, and I may say at once that I do not
appear here as having any special interest beyond the interest that
all Britishers have in our Australian Dominions. I come here as
Chairman of the Imperial Council of Chambers of Commerce,
anxious to forward the resolution which demands fair play.
(Applause.) It is difficult, sir, to conceive how the inequality which
now exists has been allowed to go on for so long. It is true that
this burden of the double Income Tax has been emphasised and
has been brought to the light and has been made palpable by the
present deplorable war. Australia is taking a lead in this important
matter, but, Mr. Chairman, it is not merely an Australian matter.
This is an Imperial matter —(cheers) —in which the whole welfare
and development of the Empire is concerned. Mr. Bryce has
referred in detail to many strong cases, and I do not intend to
detain you at any great length, but I will point to one matter which
I think all will agree will show at once how grossly unfair this tax
is in its present form. We know that in this country every taxpayer


is being called upon to bear unheard-of burdens in the cause of war.
None of us complain, whether we be Australians or Britishers, of
any just taxation that may be necessary to bring the Germans to
their knees —(applause)—but surely it cannot be fair for Australians
or members of the Dominions in this country to contribute as they
are contributing largely to the expenses through our taxes here
and at the same time pay in Australia a War Tax as they are
paying to-day. It cannot be fair, ladies and gentlemen, that any
one class of men should be called on to pay for this War in two
different parts of the Empire. (Cheers.) It has been said that
the Chancellor of the Exchequer cannot bear the loss of a sum of
money which I believe some years ago was calculated at £2,000,000
a year; but what is the question of a few millions when justice is
at stake. (Hear, hear.) We are here to see that this injustice—
and I say with all conviction to my mind it is an injustice—is put
right. It may be said, and it has been said, that opportunity might
be taken by certain persons to avoid the heavy tax by having their
assessments made in the country where the Income Tax is at the
lower figure; but surely, Mr. Chairman, where statesmen exist
there can be no difficulty in adjusting this question. I believe
General Botha made the suggestion that there can be no difficulty
in an arrangement whereby if, say, Australia has an Income Tax of
6s. and we here have an Income Tax of 10s., instead of charging
an Australian 16s. he should be entitled to first deduct the Aus-
tralian tax and then pay the difference which exists in this country.
That seems to be a reasonable suggestion, and if it is properly
tackled, ladies and gentlemen, I ami convinced that some arrange-
ment can be made. We are told, and we all believe that the time
is coming when we shall encourage a closer relationship with our
Empire from one end to the other. (Applause.) We all know, we
business men know, that one of the great dangers and fears which
we have to face in connection with high taxation is the driving
of capital abroad. But where should that capital go if it does not
remain in our own country? It ought to go to our Dominions before
anywhere else. Is it to be imagined that will be the case if this
tax continues, and it appears to me it must become more aggravated,
because I question if there is a man in this room who seriously
thinks this War will end with the Income Tax at its present figure?
I fear not. Therefore it must become more aggravated as time goes
on. Is it to be thought that men will put their money into the
Dominions with the possibility and likelihood of the whole of the
profits being taken for taxation? Of courst not. How are we to
develop our Dominions? We know that we shall want them, to
produce for us a good deal more than they have done in the past.
We shall want them to provide more wheat; we hope they will be
able to provide for us sugar which has hitherto come from the
Continent of Europe. It is to be hoped they will be able to send
us more meat. And there is another very important question—that
of raw material, which we have never yet got in the quantities we
should from our Empire. I mean cotton, which they can and should
produce for us at the right time. This will all want money, and
that money should and would be provided if it is going to receive


fair play. It must be gratifying to the promoters of this meeting to
see the interest and enthusiasm that the question is now evoking,
and I do hope that this great meeting will speak with no uncertain
voice and say that it is time that this great injustice should be
stopped. It may interest those present to know that during the
next two or three days the same question is to be discussed, and
I believe I may say that your views will be supported at the great
gathering of the Associated Chambers of Commerce. In June next,
under the presidency of Lord Desborough, we arc expecting dele-
gates representing every Chamber of Commerce from His Majesty’s
Dominions, when this question is again on the programme, and will
I hope again, sir, be pressed before His Majesty’s Government by
those who come to our Conference. But nothing that anyone may
say can remove the feeling of injustice which the present state of
things brings about ; and that feeling of want of confidence which
exists in connection with the future; and until that doubt and want
of confidence is removed our Dominions cannot develop on those
broad and great lines which we all hope to see. I have much
pleasure in seconding the resolution. (Applause.)
The Chairman : I will ask the Hon. B. R. Wise, Agent-General
for New South Wales, to support the motion.
The Hon. B. R. Wise : My lord, ladies and gentlemen, this
meeting I think has a significance which cannot be ignored. It con-
sists, I take it, of two classes, or the representatives of two classes —
of those who having early associations or connection with India and
the Dominions have chosen to invest their savings in the securities
of those countries rather than in the securities of foreign countries.
No one who occupies the position as I do as the representative of
a State will ignore the fact that a large number of the subscribers
to our loans are persons of that class. Others who ai’e represented
in this meeting are those, many of them themselves founders of
great businesses in Australia or Canada, South Africa, or India;
men who by their energy made those businesses, and by making
them gave employment to the v.orkmen in Great Britain in the
manufacture of the machinery and the other things they required.
These two classes are the classes who complain to-day of the injus-
tice. The injustice is palpable. The subject is large and the time
is short, and I will speak only of the last injustice—that of the Act
of 1914, which has charged Income Tax on persons resident in
Great Britain who have never received a penny of the money in
Great Britain upon which they are paying Income Tax. That was
done not in time of war, but in time of peace. Unfortunately the
protest made against the injustice was inadequate. I suppose it
was the old, old story. People were willing to pay. After all, it
“was only a little one,” and so they let it pass. But now people
have realised that that small inroad is an inroad upon the consti-
tutional powers of self-government of the Dominion States which
is going to react very injuriously upon Great Britain itself. I speak
of Australia, not because it is exceptional, but because I know more
about it. Australia is not only contributing men to this country,
but money. (Applause.) It has raised a loan of £20,000,000, and it


has also indirectly raised an earlier loan of £20,000,000. That is
to say it obtained an advance from the Treasury of £20,000,000 to
relieve the States from coming on the London market in the ordinary
way as we would have been entitled to. You may, therefore, say
that £40,000,000 has been raised in Australia for the purposes of the
War, and it is quite certain that another £20,000,000 will be raised.
The people who find the money to contribute to this War expendi-
ture are the people of Great Britain living in Great Britain; people
who are specially inclined to regard with favour for the reasons I
have mentioned Australian securities. And yet they are taxed not
on what they receive, but on what they chose to leave in the country
to develop its resources further. If they had invested their money,
I won’t say in Germany, but if they had invested it in Sweden or
Norway, it is true they would have been taxed, but they would
have invested there merely to get the rate of interest. But I assure
you, and there are men here to-day who know it better than I do,
that there are thousands of investors in Great Britain who, feeling
a debt of gratitude to the Dominion in which perhaps they may have
made a fortune or in which they may have spent a good many
years, invest their money there from patriotism and with the
desire to develop the Dominion and make it great. (Applause.)
There may be something to be said for taxing people resident in
Great Britain on the money they receive here, but what can be said
in favour of taxing them on money they do not receive here, and
which they leave in the Dominions for the development of the
Dominions. I wonder if those who formulated this scheme have ever
realised the essential unity of the Empire; if they have realised that,
after all, there is not much more difference between Australia and
Canada as regards London than there is between London and
Yorkshire and Devonshire 1 ? If they had realised this then the pro-
posal carried into law in 1914 would have been impossible. Imagine
a man in Yorkshire paying Income Tax on what he received in
Yorkshire and then on coming to London paying again in London
on what he received in Yorkshire. If the Empire is really one there
must be a recognition of the essentially fiscal unity of the Empire.
We are not asking to be allowed to shirk: we do not want to shirk
our responsibilities, but we want to be on a fiscal equality with the
people of Great Britain and every other portion of the Empire.
(Applause.) I have great pleasure in supporting this resolution.
The Chairman : I am now going to ask the Hon. F. W. Young,
the Agent-General for South Australia, whose pamphlet was
referred to by my friend Mr. Bryce, to speak.
The Hon. F. W. Young ; Lord Southwark, ladies and gentlemen,
I am very pleased indeed to associate myself with this meeting and
its objects, and I am able to say that the Government of South
Australia feel the great importance of this question and the desir-
ability of having it settled in some form which will lead to a more
satisfactory situation than we have at the present. The subject has
been touched upon fairly broadly by the other speakers moving and
supporting the resolution, and I do not wish to traverse any un-
necessary ground, and as I understand from some remarks made


that the paper which I was able to give at the Colonial Institute
has been distributed there is less need again for me to reiterate
any points on the subject which occur to my mind. In meeting the
case one has to pay a little attention to what appears to have guided
the Imperial Government in the past and criticise them from an
Empire point of view. The reasons given publicly are rather extra-
ordinary as we look at things to-day. I take the first reason in the
official memorandum, which not only went from Department to
Department, but was submitted to the Premiers’ Conference in 1911,
and therefore is a memorandum which must be considered to be
one of first importance. It states as the reason for the existing
state of affairs that the taxpayer—that is the double taxpayer —
was pro tanto a citizen of two countries. I won’t read the rest
of it. Those four or five words convey an attitude which at the
present moment is hardly acceptable. (Cheers.) The second
reason is very much on the same principle—that the self-governing
portions of the Empire were distinct and independent for fiscal
purposes. We all look forward now to having something different to
an absolute fiscal independence. (Applause.) These are really
the two main reasons based on any principle for the present state
of affairs. Want of money of course is not a principle—(laughter)—
nor is it an unanswerable case to state that the British system of
taxation is different to that of the Dominions, because it is very
easy to make them the same without disturbing any real bed-rock
principle. It has been explained to you to-day that the British
Government lay it down as their system of income taxation to tax
income earned by a person in England anywhere throughout the
world. In the Dominions on the other hand the Income Tax is only
imposed on income actually earned within the borders of the par-
ticular Dominion. I would like just to indicate to you a very
scrupulous action taken by the Dominions in that respect. During
last year in the Commonwealth Parliament of Australia an Income
Tax Act was passed for the purpose of raising money to pay for
this War. It is a tax which runs up to ss. in the £. The ink on
the Statute was barely dry before it was discovered that there was
some degree of double taxation inflicted, and in the same session
the Government on its own initiative introduced an amending Act
to prevent the slight defect in this direction. In the first place they
decided to remit the Income Tax on Consuls in Australia, they
being considered persons holding more or less ambassadorial posi-
tions, on the assumption that these people paid Income Tax in their
own country on their salaries and that it is not right that they
should be called on to pay two Income Taxes. But they went
further and ascertained that there were a limited number of com-
panies in Australia who were conducting mining operations else-
where in the world. They desired to maintain the control of these
raining operations in Australia, and therefore in this amending Act
it is provided that they should not pay Income Tax on any incomes
earned by the company outside the actual borders of Australia. It
seems to me they were not only adhering to their principles but
were acting wisely in conserving that financial control in Australia
and not driving it abroad. The question io-day is one of great


acuteness owing to the very high taxation which is in operation not
only here but in some of the Dominions. Australia, as I have told
you, has gone up to ss. in the £. I notice in Canada, although they
have not adopted an all-round Income Tax Bill, they have intro-
duced some taxation measures which in effect impose an Income
Tax on persons and companies there, and in India and in South
Africa they have Income Taxes. But I think it is very safe to
assume that as a result of the War every part of the Empire will
in the very near future have a very considerable Income Tax in
operation, and therefore the question is one which is truly Imperial.
I do not propose to dwell on the facts which give rise to a greater
Imperial outlook at present any more than to say that the great
feature of the last eighteen months has been the splendid rallying
up of the Empire as a whole from every possible corner. (Applause.)
As I said in my paper, the great feature of England to-day is her
motherhood of all these great Dominions, each of which is doing
the Nation’s work, and we do not want to lose sight of that. We
want to translate the present sentiment and present state of affairs
into all our legislation and have a true Imperial outlook in every
possible direction. (Cheers.) And I think it is somewhat deserved
by the Dominions apart from what has been done in connection with
this War. As one who has had some amount of experience in a
Colonial Cabinet I can say (and I believe I can say it for practically
all the Dominions) that the various Colonial Governments in giving
huge orders for materials are always influenced in favour of what
can be manufactured in the United Kingdom. That is a very
valuable matter to the United Kingdom and should not be lost
sight of. In some degree in return for that I think we should look
to the Imperial Government to adjust what is a very palpable
injustice in connection with this tax. Ido not wish to repeat what
has been said any more than to emphasise the fact that the existence
of this double taxation can have no other result but to divert money
from the Dominions either by keeping it at home here in the United
Kingdom where it would possibly stagnate or else drive it to foreign
countries. It has been said that our chief aim at this moment, as
one of the great lessons of the War, should be the building up of
our Empire so as to make it inherently self-supporting in almost
every possible direction. We can only do that by using the wealth
of the Empire and organising it and keeping it wdthin the Empire
to the greatest possible extent, and you will only keep it wdthin
the Empire by giving it an easy and smooth How to whatever direc-
tion there is need for money. That to me is the greatest practical
aspect of the subject. I wdll only occupy your time by referring
to one other side of the question. It is only a temporary one, but
it is a case which rather points to the unimperial situation as we
now have it. At the present time there are thousands of people in
the United Kingdom who are here for no other reason but that they
have sent their sons to the Front, and very naturally these parents
have come home to be somewhere near the centre of action. These
people are spending their £I,OOO or £2,000 a year here for that
purpose, and that purpose alone will keep them here until the War
ends. The result is that they are paying, owdng to their patriotism,


this double Income Tax. This is, I think, a very striking case to
illustrate the anomalies of the present position. Now the whole
question as I have indicated in my paper comes back to this : We
have to realise that we are one Empire, or, to express it more
emphatically, that we are really one country. The welfare of any
part of the Empire should be of the utmost importance to every
member of the Empire. Anyone who looks on without regard to
any part of the Empire going down is in the somewhat benighted
frame of mind of the man who did not care that he was in a ship-
wreck because the ship did not belong to him. (Laughter.) Now,
if we accept the idea of one country, and, of course, one King, we
that have one Flag, it is no great stretch of imagination to realise
that we have only one Government. After all, the Government of
any State in Australia, the Government of South Africa, or of
Canada, is the Government of His Majesty the King—(cheers)—and
therefore it is a simple mental process to realise that you have, as
I said, one Government, and the Government of any particular part
is nothing more or less than a department of that one Government.
It follows, I think, very logically from the position, that one Govern-
ment ought not to inflict double taxation on one section of its people.
If one adheres to that idea, we have a fairly reasonable and scientific
principle upon which to base the case of those who are suffering
under the present double taxation system. I very heartily associate
myself with the resolution as moved and seconded this afternoon,
and I hope that from the Imperial point of view we shall get a very
satisfactory adjustment of this question in the near future.
(Applause.)
The Ciiaikmax : Before putting this resolution to the meeting I
desire to say that amongst the large numbers of apologies, letters of
regret and of sympathy with the objects of the meeting which have
been received are communications from Lord Milner, Lord Kintore,
Lord Ranfurly, Lord Darnley, Lord Sydenham, Lord Charles Beres-
ford, the Lord Mayor, Sir Albert Spicer, Sir George Reid, M.P., Sir
Charles Lucas, Chairman of the Royal Colonial Institute, Sir George
Perley, K.C.M.G., High Commissioner for Canada, the Right Hon.
Andrew Fisher, High Commissioner for Australia, Sir Thomas
Mackenzie, K.C.M.G.. High Commissioner for New Zealand, the
Hon. W. P. Schreiner, High Commissioner for South Africa, Sir
Peter Mcßride, Agent-General for Victoria, Sir Harry Wilson,
K.C.M.G., Sir Kenneth Anderson, K.C.M.G., Sir Edward Coates,
M.P., Sir Clement Kinloch-Cookc, M.P., Sir Charles R. Campbell,
Bart., Sir Ernest Clarke, Sir T. A. Coghlan, Sir Thomas Robinson,
Agent-General for Queensland, General Sir Newton Moore, Agent-
General for Western Australia, General Sir Edward Hutton, Sir
J. D. Rees, M.P., Sir George Wyatt Truscott, Bart. They very
much regret their inability to be here this afternoon or otherwise
they would no doubt support the resolution which I am going to
read to the meeting before putting it. I read it as a matter of
accuracy: “That in the interest of Imperial Trade and Commerce
and of the unity of the Empire it is essential that such steps should
be taken by the British Government as will enable immediate relief
to be given from the imposition of double Income Tax within the


Empire.” Those in favour of the resolution will hold up their hand.
On the contrary? Carried unanimously. I am now going to ask
Mr. James Martin, Treasurer of the London Chamber of Commerce
to kindly move the next resolution.
Mr. James Martin, J.P. : Lord Southwark, ladies and gentlemen,
although I move the resolution as Treasurer of the London Chamber
of Commerce, I have more than an academic interest in that ques-
tion as, although the tax does not affect my own pocket, I have
for many years represented an important interest in the Dominions
in this country, and therefore from practical knowledge I know and
I realise the injustice of this tax. At the Congress of the Chambers
of Commerce of the Empire held in the Guildhall in June, 1912, I
had the honour, on behalf of the London Chamber of Commerce, of
supporting a resolution which called upon the next Imperial con-
ference to consider whether some commonly accepted guiding prin-
ciple could not be adopted amongst the various administrations
in order to avoid the necessity for subjecting the Income Tax payers
to the hardship involved by the duplicated claim. At that Congress
I was greatly struck by the fervour and eloquence of the speeches
which were delivered by our fellow subjects from the great
Dominions, and it then occurred to me as it must have occurred to
many others who were present whether when the time of trial
and stress came, would these men make good these protestations
of devotion to the Mother Country? Ladies and gentlemen, they
have made them good. (Cheers.) They have been made good by
their blood in a manner which has thrilled the Empire from end
to end, and to-day they are asking in return for one little act of
justice. Shall we deny it? lam certain of this, whether it be a
large or a small sum which we are called upon to contribute, it
will pay the Empire best to see that justice be done. (Applause.)
I have much pleasure in moving:—
“That the London Chamber of Commerce in conjunction
“with other bodies represented at this Meeting be requested
“to convey the terms of the resolution just passed to the
“ Chancellor of the Exchequer and that he be requested to
“receive a Deputation; also that similar representations be
“made to the Premier of the Commonwealth of Australia and
“to the Overseas Governments.”
The Chairman : I am going to ask the Honourable Richard Reid,
Agent-General for Ontario, to second the motion.
The Hon. R. Reid : Ladies and gentlemen, as a humble
Canadian I wish to express my hearty sympathy with this agitation,
and hope that it will be productive of excellent results. Canada
is not labouring under the great disabilities I understand in Income
Tax as our sister Dominion on the other side of the world, but the
same principle has been introduced in some of the Provinces of
our Dominion, and I understand that the Dominion Government
itself is about to bring in a Bill in order to raise a War tax and to
introduce Income Tax. We in Canada look to the Motherland for


the money for the development of our resources and we are very
glad to say that she has poured out her wealth to us in an unlimited
and very generous manner indeed. But we wish to state that it
is not necessary for Canada to come to the Motherland to borrow
for the purposes of developing our great resources. We have at
the present moment a very wealthy country to the south of us,
speaking the same language as we do, and of the same origin, but
they are not within the Empire, and therefore it is a foreign country.
Canada prefers to borrow money from the Motherland, and we
wish if it were possible to introduce a new motto at the close of the
War, and that is “Invest under the Flag and thereby receive all
the protection of the Flag.” (Applause.) I have great pleasure
now in seconding the Resolution that has been read.
The Chairman : You have heard the Resolution read out by my
friend Mr. Martin. Those in favour signify the same by holding up
one hand. On the contrary 1 ? Carried unanimously.
Mr. A. Annan Bryce, M.P. : Ladies and gentlemen, the Chair-
man cannot call on the speakers to move the next Resolution, and
I have pleasure in doing so. But before doing so, I would like to
say just one word in addition to what has been said by myself and
other speakers. It is that if the agitation is sufficiently strong the
Chancellor of the Exchequer will be bound to give way to it.
(Applause.) So far, Chancellors of the Exchequer wishing to get
more money have, as Mr. Young said, paid very little attention to
reasoning, but all politicians are amenable to pressure. The
pressure exerted so far has not been sufficient, but I say that the
presence of this great audience to-day is a guarantee that sufficient
pressure is going to be exerted. Ladies and gentlemen, I call upon
Sir Westby B. Perceval to move a vote of thanks to the Chairman.
Sir Westby B. Perceval, K.C.M.G. (Chairman of the Double
Income Tax Committee of the London Chamber of Commerce) :
Ladies and gentlemen, as Chairman of the Special Committee
appointed by the London Chamber of Commerce to deal with this
question of Double Income Tax I am very pleased to ask you to
join with me in thanking our Chairman for presiding to-day.
Perhaps we owe him a large debt of gratitude because he doubtless
shares the reluctance which we all more or less feel in doing any-
thing which may be construed into a desire to avoid paying our
fair share of the burden of taxation necessary to carry on this War.
That we know is not our motive, and what has been said to-day
proves that conclusively. This fine meeting passed the Resolution
which our Chairman presented to you unanimously, and I will
venture to say this, that there is not an audience throughout Great
Britain which would not vote unanimously for a similar Resolution.
It is inconceivable to my mind that the people of Great Britain
want the men who have gone forth from this country to help to
develop the outlying Empire to pay twice as much to the War tax
as they do themselves. (Applause.) It is also inconceivable at a


time like this, when all our thoughts are centred on extending
British trade and increasing the resources of the Empire, that the
British people should want to tax British commercial enterprises
so that they are at a disadvantage with their foreign competitors.
And further, it is also inconceivable that the British taxpayer wants
to impose a system of taxation the effect of which must be to
retard the British Empire. (Applause.) This meeting, I venture
to say, has signed the death knell of this Double Income Tax. The
thing to my mind is an absurdity, and as Mr. Bryce has said, it
only remains for the people of this country to assert sufficiently
strongly their demands to force the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s
hand and make him give what is only a reasonable and sensible
redress. Unfortunately the House of Commons does not always
reflect the opinion of the people of this country, and in this par-
ticular instance it certainly does not do so, because as I said before
I am satisfied that the whole of the people of this country are with
us heart and soul in this movement. I have very great pleasure
in proposing this vote of thanks to the Chairman, and 1 think the
presence of such a large audience is the very best kind of apprecia-
tion which could possibly be shown to the Chairman. (Applause.)
Mr. Bryce, M.P. : I will ask Mr. Dutton to second the motion.
Mr. Frederick Duttox (Chairman of the Association to Protest
against the Duplication of income Tax within the Empire) :
Ladies and gentlemen, I think it would be wise at all events if
we make up our minds to this, that we may not be able to get full
effect given to the purpose for which this large meeting has been
called to-day immediately. The ancient Jericho walls of the British
Treasury have strong defences and they do not readily yield to
pressure unless that pressure is consistent and continued, and
therefore w e ought not to be too confident that the walls of Jericho
will fall at the first blast of the trumpet. What I mean is this, that
in order to deal with these matters we want organisation. Perhaps
it is the absence of what I am going to mention which accounts for
the fact that although the principle of this question was raised by
the Royal Colonial Institute as far back as 1896 we have not got it
accepted by the Treasury yet. It is due to the absence of organisa-
tion to see that the matter is continually and consistently pressed
upon the authorities. What we want to do is to develop public
opinion both of public men and of the public generally in regard
to this question. We want them to realise what is perfectly true,
that this agitation is not merely an agitation of a section of the
community who are asking to be relieved of a portion of taxation
but that it is an agitation of those wffio see in this question that it
raises principles of great importance and principles wffiich are going
to affect the welfare of our Empire in many ways, some of which
have been alluded to this afternoon. And, so you see, in looking
at it in this way, this question can call for support not only from
those who are affected by the taxation but from all those who wish
to see that right and justice is done, although they may otherwise
have no pecuniary interest in that matter at all. Now r , if we are


to develop on the principle of organisation it may become an
illustration of the old maxim that we have got to “Hammer,
hammer, hammer along the hard high road.” Therefore we must
look for hammers to help us, and I think we have already found one
weighty hammer in the London Chamber of Commerce, who have
convened this meeting to-day; and of their kindred Associated
Chambers in getting their support to this movement, convinced as
I am sure they are now that it has a wide Imperial impor-
tance behind it and that it is not a question affecting a mere
section of the community. We have also an organisation in the
shape of the Association which I represent here to-day, which is
formed simply and expressly for the purpose of pressing this ques-
tion upon the authorities and which will, I hope, never rest in its
labours until it achieves a satisfactory result. We are arranging,
and I hope we shall shortly be able to publish, a memorandum which
will, 1 think, completely and comprehensively explain all the many
aspects of the difficult and in some respects technical questions.
Those are the steps which we are taking. We will in these ways
I hope be able to show the Governments and show our public men
both in and out of Parliament, and I hope also the Press —because
we are hoping that we may be supported by the Press, for the Press
after all is one of the most potent hammers we can possibly have —
in the strength of our case. We hope in these various ways to be
able to bring pressure which will produce satisfactory results. Now,
if I may give a personal tone to that point, it is that our Chairman,
Lord (Southwark, is in himself a hammer of no inconsiderable
weight. He has given us the support of his presence in the Chair
to-day, and will, I have no doubt, give us his support in any future
action as we may require, and therefore it is for his presence in
the Chair to-day that we are asking you to give him a hearty vote
of thanks. And may I, before that is put, say just one word in
conclusion, that not only ought we to give him a hearty vote of
thanks, but we can also give him a very hearty vote of congratula-
tion, because I am told that his Lordship was not very far away
from perhaps not being able to be present with us to-day. He was
returning from France yesterday and was in the immediate neigh-
bourhood of the spot where we have heard this morning with
horror and regret of the great tragedy which has happened to a
P. and O. liner, and so we can certainly congratulate our Chairman
on being able to be present to-day, and I have much pleasure in
seconding the Resolution. The Resolution was carried with cheers.
The Chairman : Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you heartily not
only for your vote of thanks but for the concluding observations of
our friend Mr. Dutton. Perhaps I may say that it was a great
advantage to you that I had not the pleasure of calling on
(Sir Westby Perceval to propose this Resolution, because it gave
Mr. Bryce the opportunity of having another shot and of giving you
some practical advice. We were told just now by a speaker that
the House of Commons did not always reflect the opinion of the
people; well, Ido not belong to that body now, but I shall do all I
can in another place to assist you in your agitation. (Applause.)


DUPLICATION OF INCOME TAX
AND
IMPERIAL TRADE AND COMMERCE.
At the meeting of the Association of Chambers of Commerce of
the United Kingdom, held at the Hotel Cecil, in London, under the
Presidency of Sir Algernon F. Firth, Bart., on February 29th,
March Ist and 2nd, 1916, at which over 100 Chambers of Commerce
were represented by between 400 and 500 delegates from every part
of the Kingdom, the Hon. J. G. Jenkins (Australasian Chamber)
moved ;
“ That in the interests of Imperial Trade and Commerce
“and of the unity of the Empire, it is highly essential that
“ such steps should be taken by the British Government as
“will enable immediate relief to be given from the imposition
“of double Income Tax within the Empire. ”
He said there was an alteration from the Resolution on the
agenda, but that did not alter the effect. It was in accordance with
the Resolution carried at a very large meeting in the City of London
on the previous Monday. For twenty years Chambers of Commerce
and other institutions had urged the Government to do something
in relation to the matter, but the Resolutions had been treated
mostly as pious opinions and now the Government were requested
to do something immediately.
Until the Dominions passed an Income Tax Act for revenue
purposes some twenty years ago the double Income Tax was never
in force. Then it was found that they had to pay Income Tax on
their Dominion investments in this country on the same income on
which they had already paid in the Dominions if they resided here
or had their offices here.
The taxes at that time were not heavy, but the injustice of it
was immediately seen, and the Royal Colonial Institute made repre-
sentations to the Government on the subject. They repeated those
representations in 1896, and in 1905 Lord Strathcona, the veteran
statesman and Empire builder, with all the Agents-General repre-
senting every part of the Dominions in Great Britain, made represen-
tations to the British Government and urged for some redress.
The Congress of Chambers of Commerce of the Empire in London
in 1900, in Sydney in 1909, and again in London in 1912, and the
Associated Chambers of Commerce in 1913, the Australasian, Indian
and South African Sections of the London Chamber, and the Aus-
tralasian Chamber of Commerce in London had all made represen-
tations to the British Government, and the response had been


unsatisfactory. The reasons given for not entertaining the
representations were unworthy of any great statesman of the
present day. The principal reason appeared to be that those who
were living in two countries should pay two taxes on the one income.
The time had come to recognise that we were no longer six or seven
countries, but one country, and therefore should have one system of
justice.
The London Chamber of Commerce had appointed a strong
committee, and a separate Association had been formed in the
City to protest against the double taxation.
The injustice was not felt to such a great extent until the Finance
Act of 1914. A colonial with his head office in the City of London,
or resident here and £lOO,OOO invested in Australia, India or Africa,
making £lO,OOO profit, and spending £9,000 of the income in Africa,
India or Australia to develop the property had to pay an English
Income Tax on every penny of the £lO,OOO, although only £l,OOO
was spent in this country. It was penalising Colonial citizens, and
no more unfair Act had been in force since the time of the unjust
taxation 140 years ago by which the American States were lost to
Great Britain. There were thousands of people in this country who
felt the effect to such an extent that they would either have to
withdraw all their investments or leave the country, because they
were unable to live in comfort on their reduced incomes.
If a person had an investment in one of the Australian States
bringing in an income of £2,000, he had to pay by the time the
income came to him £556 in Income Tax, which left £1,444. That
was on a 3s. English Income Tax. If it were 3s. 6d. it only left about
£1,400. An income of £5,000 at 3s. 6d. left, after the double Income
Taxes were paid, £3,100, and an income of £lO,OOO left £5,528. Put
into percentages the Governments would take out of the £2,000,
30 per cent.; out of the £5,000, 38 per cent., and out of the £lO,OOO,
45 per cent.
To those who had investments in the Dominions and to thousands
of people who had come home to spend the remainder of their days
in the old country, the reduction of income owing to the double
taxes was such that it was impossible for them to continue to live
here unless their investments were removed from the Dominions.
He had had hundreds of letters and interviews from every part of
the Kingdom on the subject, one being from the widow of an
ex-Colonial Minister whose income had been so reduced that she
had to give up her house and go into lodgings. Another was from
a man who came here on business and on account of the War had
been unable to return to Australia; his son was fighting in the
British Army to-day, and his income was so reduced that he
would be obliged to go back to Australia, although he was between
eighty and ninety years of age. But there was a far more serious
aspect of the question than the personal one, there were British
Dominions containing millions of acres of uncultivated fertile land,


vast forests and rich mines, the products of which were needed for
the manufacturing and commercial interests of this country, but
unless some alteration was made in the Income Tax laws British
capital invested in those countries could not possibly earn a return
for the investor, or the head office now established in Great Britain
would have to be removed in order that business might be carried
on. Correspondence had, he understood, taken place between a
large company and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, but nothing
was done and the head office of that company had had to move from
London to New York. A company that invested a large sum of
money in India had resolved to move its head office from London to
Bombay on account of the duplication of the taxes.
Many of the leading business houses, years ago, for convenience
sake, established their head office in London. All their capital
was invested in the Dominions and all the work that gave a profit
was carried out in the Dominions. They might earn £20,000 in
connection with the business, and they had to pay an English
Income Tax on all their income. If their head offices were moved
out of Great Britain and their capital was obtained elsewhere, it
was very probable that their trade would be likely to go elsewhere
also. The people of the Dominions were loyal to the British Crown
and desired to get their capital in Great Britain, but if the Income
Tax laws were continued as they now were it must of necessity
mean friction amongst many of those who were interested in the
Dominions. They asked the Chancellor of the Exchequer for no
favours. They were willing to undergo any sacrifice so long as
that sacrifice was just and equitable. (Applause.)
Mr. G Palliser Martin (Bristol), in seconding the motion, said
it was a matter of most common justice, and he did not think
anyone could be against the Resolution. He hoped the Chancellor
of the Exchequer would treat the matter in a fair, equitable, and
honourable manner.
Mr. A. J. Hobson, J.P. (Sheffield), strongly supported the Reso-
lution, pointed out the deterrent effect the continuance of double
taxation was bound to have on the development of our Oversea
Dominions and the extension of our trade and commerce.
The resolution was put to the meeting and unanimously carried.
Jas Tuuscott & Sox, Ltd., London.




