

DOUBLE INCOME TAX
WITHIN THE EMPIRE.
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM.


This Memorandum has been prepared and is presented jointly by a Special
appointed to deal with this subject by The London Chamber of
and The Association to protest against the Duplication of Income
OF THE LONDON CHAMBEE OF COMMEECE COMMITTEE:
Sir Westby B. Perceval, K.C.M.G., Chairman.
Frederick Anderson, Esq., Far Eastern Section.
F. Faithfull Begg, Esq., Financial Section,
J. G. Colmer, Esq., C.M.G., Canadian Section,
Sir John A. Cockburn, K.C.M.G., British Empire League.
Frederick Dutton, Esq., Eoyal Colonial Institute.
Charles Dyer, Esq., South African Section.
Honourable J. G. Jenkins, Australasian Section.
Stanley Machin, Esq., British Imperial Council of Commerce.
James Martin, Esq., Commercial Law and Parliamentary Committee.
C. C. McLeod, Esq., East Indian Section.
William Soper, Esq., South African Section.
A. H. Sytner, Esq., South African Section.
Charles E. Musgrave, Esq., Secretary.
MEMBEES OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE ASSOCIATION TO PEOTEST
AGAINST THE DUPLICATION OF INCOME TAX WITHIN THE EMPIEE:
Frederick Dutton, Esq., Chairman, Eoyal Colonial Institute.
Henry Bull, Esq., Honorary Treasurer, Australian Merchant.
Honourable J. G. Jenkins, Secretary, Australasian Chamber of Commerce.
Gilbert Anderson, Esq., Colonial Merchant.
Percy Arnold, Esq., Bank of Adelaide.
Neville D. Cohen, Esq., Australian Merchant.
Frederick Dyer, Esq., South African Merchant.
Leslie Harris, Esq., New Zealand Merchant.
W. E. Hearson, Esq., South African Merchant.
W. E. Lane, Esq., Melbourne and Adelaide Electric Supply Companies.
P. D. Leake, Esq., Chartered Accountant.
Ernest Makower, Esq., Colonial Merchant.
C. C. McLeod, Esq., Indian Merchant.
Honourable M. L. Moss, Late Attorney-General, West Australia.
Sir Cornthwaite H. Eason, Bovril Australian Estates.
Eobert Eeid, Esq., Australian Merchant.
George Scales, Esq., Australasian Merchant.
George Slade, Esq., London Bank of Australia.
Andrew Williamson, Esq., Vice-President, British Australian Society.


DOUBLE INCOME TAX WITHIN THE EMPIRE.
EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM.
THE PRINCIPLES INVOLVED.
The object of this memorandum is to state the facts which justify the claim of those-
who are at present liable for the payment of Double Income Tax to press upon the Imperial
and the several Dominion Governments the need for such co-operation as will remove and
prevent the levying within the Empire of two, and as regards Australia, three Income Taxes
on the same income, and also to state some of the reasons in support of such objects.
The cause of such duplication arises chiefly from the difference in the principle on
which Income Tax is chargeable under the Imperial Statutes as distinguished from the-
Dominions Statutes and the Laws of India.
Under the Imperial Statutes Income Tax is chargeable as against companies, firms, and
persons, resident in the United Kingdom, in respect of all their income derived from property
or business, no matter where such property is situate, or where such business is carried on.
Under the Dominion Statutes and in India, per contra, Income Tax is charged
irrespective of residence, but only on income derived from property in, or from business-
transacted within the jurisdiction of the Taxing Dominions.
It follows, therefore, that if the same principle or basis of taxation existed in the
United Kingdom as in the Dominions and India, only one Income Tax would be imposed.
The principle appears to be sound, that the claim to tax income as between two independent
fiscal systems within the Empire is much higher on the part of the State where the property
is situate from which the income is derived, or the business is carried on, than it is on the
part of the State within whose borders the owner of such income happens for the time being to-
live.
The duplication of taxation did not arise until about the year 1893 when the Dominion
Parliaments first began to impose a tax on income for revenue purposes. Since then the
duplication has continued, although, owing to the fact that until recently the rates of taxation
both in the United Kingdom and such Dominions as imposed an Income Tax were of only
moderate amount, such duplication, although in principle wrong, did not in its practical
application raise factors seriously disadvantageous or harmful to Imperial interests or become
such a charge upon the companies, firms or persons affected as to give rise to any strong-
protest or agitation for reform.
Since the passing into law of the Commonwealth of Australia Acts Nos. 34 and 41,
respectively, of 1915, imposing and providing for the collection of a tax upon incomes and'
based upon the same principle as the Australian State Parliament Acts, the Double Tax has
now become a Treble Tax as regards companies, firms or persons liable thereto.
PREVIOUS PROTESTS.
Recognising the objection from an Imperial point of view of the same income being
taxed twice within the Empire, and the serious results to which in course of time such duplica-
tion would lead, the Royal Colonial Institute made a representation on this subject to the
then Chancellor of the Exchequer by a memorial dated the 15th April, 1896, and have followed
this up with the further communications on the same subject:—(l) 28th June, 1896, letter
to the Chancellor of the Exchequer; (2) 11th April, 1905, letter to the Secretary of State for
the Colonies; (3) Ist November, 1915, letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.


Tlie following further representations on the subject have also been made:—(4) 25th
April, 1905, letter from the High Commissioner for Canada, and the Agents-General for the
various Dominions, to the Secretary of State for the Colonies; (5) a recent extensively signed
memorial “ from persons within the United Kingdom called upon to pay Income Tax on
income derived from property previously taxed within the Empire ” addressed to the Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer; (6) a letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer dated Bth November,
1915, from the Committee representing leading Australian merchants and shippers.
The following is a summary of active steps also taken by the London and other Chambers
of Commerce:
(a) Resolutions adopted by the Congress of Chambers of Commerce of the British
Empire in 1900, 1909, 1912, copies of which resolutions were forwarded to the
Home and Dominion Governments.
( b ) Representations by the Bengal and Madras Chambers of Commerce respectively
to the Government of India, that the double impost levied under the existing system
on Moneys invested in India by persons domiciled in Great Britain was a hindrance
to development in India.
(c) Resolutions passed at a General Meeting of Chambers of Commerce held at
Adelaide, South Australia, to the effect that Income Tax should not be charged
either in British Colonies or Dominions or the United Kingdom, on income earned
or produced in other parts of the Empire outside their own borders, and that repre-
sentations be made to the Federal Government of Australia to urge the repeal of
enactments imposing Double Income Tax on British subjects by the laws of the
separate States and of Great Britain.
( d ) In 1912 the Association of Chambers of Commerce of the United Kingdom
adopted a resolution thereon, which was also communicated to the Authorities.
(e) In 1913 the Australasian section of the London Chamber passed a resolution
in favour of the principle of the difference only being paid in the United Kingdom.
This also was communicated to the Authorities.
(/) In 1914 the British Imperial Council of Commerce passed a resolution pro-
testing against Clause 5 of the Einance Act of that year, whilst a deputation from
the East India section (London Chamber of Commerce) interviewed Lord Crewe,
Secretary of State for India, but without any real result.
( g ) In 1915 a deputation from the South African section of the Chamber waited
upon the High Commissioner of South Africa, and once more protested against the
present situation in regard to Double Income Tax.
Double Income Tax was also discussed at the Imperial Conference held in the year
1911. At that conference a resolution to abolish Double Income Tax was moved on behalf
of the Colonial Premiers. In a statement made by the then Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Mr. Lloyd George, he referred to the fact that British investments in the Colonies were
growing very rapidly, that it was an advantage to the Mother Country, and helped trade, and
especially trade with the Colonies, that it was also an advantage to the Dominions because
it assisted them to develop the enormous resources of their various countries, but that he
could not afford to give up the revenue involved. On his representations as to the amount
which he estimated would be lost to the Imperial Exchequer, the Colonial Premiers did not
then further press the resolution, but it is interesting to note that a suggestion was made on
that occasion by General Botha as the representative of South Africa that the tax payer should
only be called upon to pay the difference (if any) between the Colonial and the British Tax,
and that Mr. Lloyd George, although impressed with the importance of the suggestion, declined
without further consideration to act upon it.
Double Income Tax was also the subject of a Paper read by E. W. Toung, Esq., the
Agent-General for South Australia, at a meeting of the Royal Colonial Institute held at the
Whitehall Rooms on the 25th January, 1916.
MATERIAL CHANGE OE CIRCUMSTANCES.
Although from these many different quarters the question has from time to time been
brought before the Imperial Government, it was felt that further action was not possible until
either material change of circumstances, or the expression of public opinion justified it. Such


material change of circumstances began with the passing into law of the Imperial Finance
Act of 1914, whereby the liability of any company, firm or person resident in the United
Kingdom to pay Income Tax, was extended so as to affect, not only income received in the
United Kingdom, but all income, whether received in the United Kingdom or not. A
further and very material circumstance arises from the great increases in rates of Income Tax
both in the United Kingdom and the Dominions which the huge war expenditures have
necessitated and will undoubtedly necessitate for many years to come.
The active and increasing expression of public opinion is evidenced not only by the
further written representations recently presented and previously referred to, but also by
the organisation of such opinion through the medium of a Committee specially appointed by
the London Chamber of Commerce and by the fact that an Association has recently been
formed expressly for the purpose of pressing for this much needed reform.
RATES OF TAXATION.
It is intended to supplement this Memorandum with a Schedule, the first part of which
will contain short details as to the rates of taxation which have been collated from the various
Statutes. In the second part of the Schedule it is proposed to give a series of illustrations
at different scales of income, and at the rates stated of the aggregate charge for Income Tax
which falls upon the owners, resident in this country, of incomes derived from different
Dominions. From these it will be found that such aggregates range, taking Australia as an
example, from 6s. in the £ on an income of £2,000 to 9s. in the £ on an income of £15,000
and higher rates on larger incomes. [A r o£e. —These aggregates do not include other local
and land taxes in Australia which, if added, would bring the total taxation in some cases to
as much as 14s. in the £.]
TREASURY ARGUMENTS AND REPLIES.
The Memorial presented by the Council of the Royal Colonial Institute in April, 1896,
was answered in detail, but the other representations made to the Imperial Treasury have not
been answered otherwise than to indicate that in their view the subject is one in regard to
which consultation with representatives of the Dominion Governments would be necessary
before the nature or extent of the relief (if any) which might be possible could be decided upon.
It may here be desirable to state shortly the principal arguments which have been urged by
the Treasury against any concession being granted and some answers to such arguments:
The Treasury Arguments.
1. That the proposals were incon-
sistent with the principle of the
Income Tax legislation in this
country which was to tax only the
income when received in the United
Kingdom, so that it should then be
taxed on the same basis as all other
income earned in or derived from
property within the United King-
dom, and great stress was laid on
the fact that unless such income was
received in the Kingdom it was not
taxed.
2. That it was not inequitable that
a person possessing property in one
country, and spending income in
another, should be taxed in both, as
he required the protection of two
Governments.
Replies thereto.
1. Tlie fundamental difference of principle has already
been stated at the commencement of this Memorandum
as the real cause of there being any duplication. But
by the Finance Act of 1914 this limitation of the taxation
was abandoned, and income is now taxed whether received
in the Kingdom or not. This in itself involves a serious
aggravation of the burden, calculated to prejudice the
development of the resources of the Dominions and
India upon the importance of which Mr. Lloyd George
laid such stress before the Imperial Conference in 1911.
Income derived from original investment is frequently
and often in large amounts left in the Dominions anil
India for furthering that very development instead of
the same being remitted to the United Kingdom.
2. It is not necessary to question this argument if it
were applied as between the British Empire as one
country and a foreign country as the other. But it is con-
tended that it does not justify double taxation of the
same propertv within the Empire.
The suggested protection of two Governments was
dealt with by Mr. F. W. Young, the Agent-General for
South Australia, in his recent address on Double Income
Tax to the Royal Colonial Institute, in the following
words:
tt “ The various Governments throughout the Empire
(e after all, the Governments of His Majesty the
“King; they are but departments of one vast
“ Government, symbolised by the Union Jack.”


The Treasury Arguments —continued.
3. Any concession would favour
those investing in Colonies where an
Income Tax was in operation, inas-
much as it must be assumed that
investors in other Colonies con-
tribute to the local revenue under
other forms of taxation.
4. That the question cannot be
settled without conference between
the Imperial and Dominion Govern-
ments.
5. That the concession asked for,
if granted, would cause considerable
loss of revenue to the Imperial
Treasury.
6. That Double Income Tax is
only one of the many points con-
nected with the Income Tax upon
which representations have been
made to the Treasury, and should
not be dealt with until the whole
question has been considered. The
Government has promised to set up,
after the war, a committee to en-
quire into the working of the Income
Tax Acts, and the question of Double
Income Tax should be considered by
that body.
Replies thereto —continued.
3. This argument is difficult to follow. If the prin-
ciple were conceded that income produced or earned
within the Empire should pay one Income Tax only, there
could be no advantage to an investor residing in the
United Kingdom in investing in one Dominion preferably
to another.
It is doubtful if, in the near future, there will be any
Dominions in which an Income Tax for revenue purposes
will not exist, but it may be observed that the nresent
system does undoubtedly favour the investment by a resi-
dent in the United Kingdom of his capital in a Dominion
where no Income Tax exists, as compared with another
where it does exist, as in the former case he pays only
one Income Tax on the resulting income, viz., to the
Imperial Government, whereas in the latter he has to pay
two, and if his investment is in Australia three Income
Taxes.
4. It is a matter of observation that this point was
raised in 1896 in the Treasury reply to the Memorial of
the Royal Colonial Institute, and is still being raised
in regard to the recent representations made to the
Treasury and the fact that hitherto no progress has been
made justifies the claim that steps should be taken to
secure co-operation between the different Governments, so
far as the same may be necessary, without further delay.
5. To this it may be replied that every abatement of
taxation necessarily, in the first instance, involves a loss
of revenue so far as that particular source is concerned,
but it does not necessarily follow that the revenue, as a
whole, will be diminished. An instance of this is to be
found in reduction of Postal rates, where a reduction
often leads to such an increase in the volume of business
transacted as to produce at the lower rate a larger revenue
than was obtained from the higher. In the case of
Income Tax it can be stated with confidence that the
Treasury in this country can form no calculation of the
amount of revenue they already lose, and will, under the
present system of taxation, lose much more extensively
unless relief is given, through persons ceasing to reside,
or avoiding residence, in the United Kingdom, or
through businesses being transferred to, or being estab-
lished preferably in, places other than the United King-
dom.
Quite apart from this, however, it is contended that a
form of taxation which presses unduly upon a limited
portion of the community is contrary to sound principles.
Taxation should be so framed as to spread the
burden, as far as possible, evenly over the whole
community. Where it is shown to be so heavy, and
burdensome, as to partake more of the nature of
a confiscation than of reasonable and equitable taxation,
the State loses all moral right to retain revenue
so obtained. While, therefore, allowing relief to that
portion of the community so affected, endeavour should
be made to find some fairer method of making good the
loss, if any, in another direction. There is no desire
on. the part of those who suffer from the present aggrega-
tion of Income Taxes to avoid paying their contribution
towards whatever taxation the present or any future
state of circumstances of the Empire may necessitate
so long as they are called upon to do so on an equitable
basis in common with the whole community.
6. The relegation of this question to the consideration
of a body which it is not proposed to create until after
the war, and which when created, from the complex
character of its enquiry, will take months before any
report can be made, and a further lapse of time before
legislative action follows, is postponing for a long and
indefinite period relief from an impost which is daily
causing serious injury to British trade, and imposing a
burden of taxation upon individuals so crushing in its
character, as to render a continuance of its collection im-
possible.


That a continuance of the present system is calculated to be detrimental to the highest
interests of the Empire regarded as a whole is, it is submitted, sufficiently demonstrated by
the following amongst other ’
REASONS. '
1. That the Dominions were founded and have since been developed by the free
migration of people and capital from the Mother Country, and that it is of equally great
importance in the future that the flow of persons and capital within the Empire shouldT
continue to be free and not be affected or diverted by any excessive form of taxation operating
in one part of the Empire more than another. *
2. That there is now no considerable variation between the value of money invested!
in the United Kingdom and in the Dominions. As a consequence the liability to
Double Income Tax where it now exists would be an influence which would deter an investor
residing in the United Kingdom from investing in the Dominions even when the amount of
resulting income was not sufficient to involve the higher scale of taxation. In cases of large
amounts carrying the higher rates of taxation this liability would become prohibitive. Thus
the tendency must be as regards investors residing in the United Kingdom to withdraw capital
invested in the Dominions and to avoid fresh investments there. The Dominions will thus
be shut off from this source of obtaining the capital so much needed for their development
which best promotes the unity and welfare of the Empire.
3. That the same causes will result in the transference wherever possible of undei^j
takings hitherto carried on in the United Kingdom to other places with resulting loss to thtr
Imperial revenue. The natural tendency is to place orders for manufactured goods in thei
country where the seat of a business is located. The removal of a business from the Unite®
Kingdom therefore involves almost of necessity a reduction in demand for the manufacture®
of the United Kingdom with consequent loss not only to the manufacturer but also to
Imperial revenue in many ways. Trade which would otherwise be retained within the EmpiJH
will thus be transferred to other countries. M
4. That British capital will then be driven to find outlets for investment in fqreigia
countries, notably in America, and the Dominions will be driven to obtain capital from
countries with the resulting development of trade and political influences which may be in tli®
future, as they have been in the past as regards Germany, turned to purposes seriously iniuJHH
to the future welfare and unity of the Empire.
5. That the economic interests of the United Kingdom will be more affected in i™
future than even in the past by the necessity of maintaining and expanding trade
Empire and by the development of the agricultural, pastoral, mineral and other
the Dominions as a source of supply of food products and of raw materials for her
and every means should be taken to encourage, rather than to impede, the investment of
capital in the Dominions for such purposes.
6. That the free flow of population from the United Kingdom to the Dominions®|J||
vice versa is essential to the retention and development of a true Imperial spirit and of Impqß
strength, and that this liability to Double Taxation involved in residence in tA
Kingdom must under the present law seriously impede such flow from the Dominions, TI?H
will cause considerable loss to the Imperial revenue by reason of the absence of tlfe
monetary expenditure which residence involves, because such expenditure in itself adds largely
to the revenue of this country from Income Tax. The money so spent goes towards creating
the incomes of those who supply the living requirements of persons so residing which
incomes the Imperial Exchequer derives revenue from Income Tax.
7. That the present high rates of Income Tax are caused by the war equally in the
Dominions as in the United Kingdom because of the great and patriotic share which the
Dominions have voluntarily assumed in providing and maintaining large contributions to the
fighting forces in defence of the Empire. These rates will almost certainly become higher
still during the war, and a high rate as compared with ante-war conditions will almost certainly
be found necessary long after the war comes to an end. Those residing in the United Kingdom
who have under the present system to pay a Double and Treble Income Tax, and who, compared
with the whole community, are comparatively few* in number, are thus making two contributions


the war expenditure while the bulk of the community are making one only, and to
maintain a system which involves such an injustice must be detrimental to the repute of a
people or Government which fails to remove it.
CONCLUSION.
The foregoing statements and reasons are necessary to show how oppressively the present
system of aggregation of Income Taxes charged on the same income bears upon the companies,
►firms and persons affected thereby, but the Imperial interests involved as resulting from this
system and affecting as they do the whole people within the Empire are of greater importance
► still. The aim and object of the Imperial Government, as well as of the Governments of the
Self-Governing Dominions, should surely be so to co-ordinate their respective Legislative
as to do everything that is possible to maintain unity, to avoid the clashing of
interests within the Empire, and to secure the development of the resources and industries of
all its parts with British capital, rather than that such capital or those who own it should be
forced, by reason of excessive taxation, to find employment for their capital, or themselves to
reside, in foreign countries.
It is contended that the altered conditions arising from the war, and the urgent need for
co-ordinat'ng the economic forces of the whole Empire, demand that immediate steps be taken
to relieve British industrial and commercial undertakings and persons from payment of double
fixation within the Empire, in order that they may be able successfullv to resist foreign
ompetition in British markets after the war.
ft The question is one of urgency, demanding immediate settlement, and any effort to
postpone dealing with it, until the existing systems of taxation imposed throughout the Empire
man be considered by a Committee after the war, must, if persisted in, cause irreparable injury
Eo British commerce and trade, and seriously retard fhe development of the resources of the
(Dominions.
Hf It is claimed that the closer relationship between all parts of the Empire which must
itollow the war, and the mutual effort and sacrifice demanded to conserve the resources of the
Ijomponent parts of the Empire for the benefit of the whole, demand that the adjustment of
borajnon burdens should be so arranged as not to press unduly on any portion, and that property
eer part of the Empire it may be situate, should not be subjected to dual taxation
Bor the same purposes.
HH The plea put forward that property or profits situated or created within the Empire should
Be* only taxed once where the property is situate or the profits created, is the logical sequence
closer consolidation and mutual support of the various portions of the Empire, but the
of the principle may necessitate a studied revision of the different methods of
tavaLon now in force and require time and consultation with the Dominions to carry out.
T»ri°us results to the trade and development of the Empire and the unequal distribution of
of carrying on the war, demand an immediate measure of relief, and it is therefore
the principle of one Income Tax within the Empire so far as the Imperial
is concerned could be largely carried into effect by adopting the suggestion
IjHPinall , made by General Botha at the Imperial Conference in 1911 subsequently reiterated
the representations previously referred to that the analogy of the reciprocal pro-
oncained in Section 20 of the Finance Act, 1894, whereby Double Probate Duties
the Empire on personal estates can be avoided should be followed. If income derived
Horn any part of the Empire elsewhere than in the United Kingdom, cannot immediately be
exempted altogether from the payment of Income Tax in the United Kingdom, then in all
cases in wldch it can be shown that such income has already been taxed in another part of the
Empire, such income has been derived, the amount so paid should be allowed as a
deduction om any tax in respect of the same income payable in this country.
31s£ March, 1916.
J as. liiu scoti & Sow. Ltd., London.
