

Pe c^- , RaHv&wt. Rdshc ,
3ov (•
DR. A. WERNICH’S ESSAY ON BERI-BERI IN JAPAN.
A Review translated by Baron Ferdinand von Mueller, K.C.M.G.,
M.D., Ph.D.
In Virchow’s “ Archiv fur Pathologische Anatomie und Physio-
logie,” Yol. LXXI., Part 3, appeared an essay by Dr. A.
Wernich, entitled, “ Klinisclie Untersuchungen iiber die Japane-
sische Yarietat der Beri-beri Krankheit.” This important
treatise became reviewed in the “ Klinisclie Wochenschrift ” of
Berlin, 1878, p. 497; .and it may be of some interest to add a
translation of that review to the account given by Drs. Suzuki and
Toyozumi, as specially written by them for the Medical Society of
Victoria, the review above alluded to bringing the main results of
Dr. Wernich’s special observations under notice.
‘•The Japanese variety of the much discussed disease which,
under the name of beri-beri, occurs on many of the islands and
coasts of Asia, as well as of South America and Australia, became
the object of discussion from Dr. Wernich’s personal observations.
His writing treats the symptomatology in an almost exhaustive
manner, and deserves, as the first essay on the subject based on
newer views and resources in medicine, particular attention.
The disease either runs a quick course under the features of
severe disturbances of nutrition, accompanied by oedematous and
frequently also paralytic affections, or it may pass on in a
protracted manner. In Japan the disease shows itself during
spring and summer, and seizes mostly on male natives, particularly
young and middle-aged men, whereas females, children and aged
persons are rarely attacked. There the malady is also known as
kak’ke, and developes in various forms. The acute form com-
mences suddenly with weakness of the legs and frequent vomiting ;
palpitations, objective and subjective dyspnoea follow, caused by
serous exudations into the pleural cavity and the pericardium ;


oedema arises in the face and in other parts of the body, and death
takes place in two or three days, or even earlier. A second
form of the disease runs on with less severe symptoms, and
terminates gradually in recovery. Among the most frequent
types of the beri-beri can be comprehended hydropic-marasmic
affections.
While these were analyzed by the author, he obtained an
insight into the whole variability of the disease, and got a clue
to the alterations in the organs of circulation. The latter become in
a high degree affected, so much so that their changes had already
struck former observers, without a correct interpretation being
arrived at. The blood-corpuscles are found to be smaller than
in their normal state, and they lack the power of forming
rows, indicative of a blood poor in serum, and insufficiently
regenerated by new elements. The circulation in the veins
proved tardy, while the sphygmographic examination of the
arteries offered important characteristics, which the author
explained on numerous tables of curvatures. Thus it is shown
that the pulse-curve very straightly ascends, forming with the
first part of the descension-line an acute triangle, while the
second part becomes strongly dicrotic ; therefore within various
modifications, the angle assumes forms which indicate laxness,
want of resistance, and imperfect elasticity of the arterial tubes,
further observations did prove that the just mentioned
abnormities of the pulse curve can be found to a small extent
also in numerous anaemic individuals in Japan, that such can last
through several years unaltered, that during the kak’ke season
this curve in slight cases of illness becomes changed, but in severe
cases assumes the above defined form. While re-convalescence
goes on, the curve approaches very gradually to the normal one,
just as gradually the blood ceases to be abnormal. As regards
the heart no inflammatory processes were observed by the author ;
the peculiar systolic as well as the rarer diastolic sounds are to be
regarded as caused by the amende state of the patient. All
the other symptoms, such as the marked decrease of the urine,
the strong development of hydrops anasarca, as well as ascites,
hydrothorax and hydrops pericardii, with the appearances caused


by them, further the giddiness, insomnia, cephalagia; furthermore,
the characteristic decrease of sensibility, which proceeds from the
lower extremities upwards, and which is accompanied by
paraplegic affections of a peculiar progress, all these symptoms
find their explanations, according to Dr. Wernich, readily in the
decomposition of the blood, and in that want of enei’gy of the
vascular system which leads to hydropic effusions, and which
manifests itself also in the cerebral and spinal organs and thus
causes the nervous symptoms. A small number of post-mortem
examinations, instituted by Dr. Wernich, as well as a critical
investigation of published results of necroscopic obductions have
demonstrated, that besides the hydropic affections and the serous
exudations, which in the spinal cord may reach even to mollification,
no essential or inflammatory changes take place in any organs,
above all not in the kidneys nor heart.
In reference to the strange subjective feeling of illness at the
outset of the disease and to the fever, which latter accompanies
it frequently but not always, we are to remark that the height of
temperature is very changeable. The mortality from beri-beri
amounted in India to 29 per cent., but in the beginning of
epidemic acerbations to even 40 per cent. In the Japanese variety
of the disease it came during the worst months to 15 per cent., but
over the whole year to not fully 8 per cent. The nature of the
malady is sought by the author in a decomposition of the blood,
through which the serum loses its faculty to maintain itself in the
organs of circulation, whereby partly the strong hydropic effusion
and partly the abnormal quality of the remaining blood are caused.
As far as the aetiology of the disease is concerned, Dr. Wernich
thinks that the mode of living predisposes to it, notably the want of
sufficient fatty and albuminous aliments, that the moist-warm
climate of Japan impaires nutrition also, and that increased
exertions, whether bodily or mental, augment the indisposition
to a real disease. It is not necessary to assume as the cause of
the beri-beri an infecting miasma. The author places this morbus,
as he explained in another journal (Deutsches Archiv fur
Klinische Medicin, vol. xxi., part 11, with pernicious anaemia,
chlorosis and scorbutus in so far together as all these arise from


disturbed nutrition, which for long periods can be latent, but by
increased tax on the system leads to cachexia, with frequent
exitus lethalis.” —So far this able review of an important medical
subject.
When Staff-surgeon Suzuki and Assistant-surgeon Toyozumi
were reading over to me their rough notes on the Beri-beri, I at
once remarked, that the origin of the disease seemed to me
malarian. This view may be quite reconcilable to Dr. Wernich’s
thoughts, inasmuch as ill-nourished individuals would be all the
more susceptible to the inroads of those subtle organisms which,
as we now know, are concomitant to miasmatic fevers. How
bacteria have evaded the most vigilant searches of pathologists
through long times has more recently been evinced by Dr. Koch’s
discovery of the bacillus connected with tubercular phthisis. The
sudden outbreak of the beri-beri in the hot season, and the
occasionally great vehemence of its appearance, would speak for
the presence of one of those infectious organisms, which only the
most perfect microscopes and the most careful chemical manipula-
tion can lay free to view. Indeed, cholera Asiatica, pestis nigra,
synochus icterodes, hydrophobia, and some other dreadful diseases,
the causes of which are yet more or less involved in obscurity, can
in our present state of science be only assumed to send forth their
deadliness through myriads of organic beings, as marvellous in
their minuteness as in the rapidity of their multiplication, but
doubtless destined to become subdued by the advancing strides of
rational medicine.
sth December, 1882.
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
