

DR. DE LION,
CLAIRVOYANT.
CONFESSIONS OF A VAGABOND
LIFE IN AUSTRALIA,
AS NARRATED
BY MAIBEN BROOK.
SAMUEL T. KNAGGS.


IN THE PRESS.
TUB man from Snawy River.
AND OTHER BALLADS,
IB'sr A. 18. Pateeson
(“ Banjo,” of the Bulletin).
Rolf Boldrewood, in the “ Review of Reviews,” 1894,
says : “Iregard ‘ The Banjo ' (Mr. A. B. Paterson)
as the best writer of hush ballads since the time of
Gordon
The “Daily Telegraph,” reviewing the “Golden
Shanty,” remarks : “ ‘The Banjo.' in ' Clancy of
the Overflow,' has touched an infinitely higher
note, and produced a poem which breathes the very
spirit of the happy vagabondage of a drover's life
at its freest and happiest."
Francis Adams, in “ The Australians,” after quoting
“Clancy of the Overflow” in full, writes :
“ Nothing more intimately Australian, nothing so
brimful of the sad, sweet charm of the bush and the
bush life, has been done since the man who wrote
‘ The Sick Slockdriver' went silent."
Sydney: ANGUS & ROBERTSON.


PREFACE.
T N this volume I treat upon the subjects of
Medical Clairvoyance and Quackery as
the pernicious outcome of certain defects in
medical legislation in the Colony of New
South Wales.
Every incident herein depicted is founded
on fact. The character of Dillon I have
idealized, and have made vastly superior to the
ordinary run of such pretenders. But in him
I portray a reality—a man of the highest
mental power and culture, who, having once
become the victim of a cruel wrong, pursues
a downward course, inspired by a desire for
vengeance which, when gratified, leaves him
no other object in life.
The baneful influence exercised by Merton
Dyke over Mabel Vane and others with
whom he came into contact is intended to
illustrate an insidious characteristic of
hypnotic suggestion not often recognised or
understood. It is a subject of instructive
speculation how one may be influenced for
good or evil by this most mysterious power,
which is as yet only partially comprehended.
SAMUEL T. KNAGGS.
16 College Street,
Sydney, June, 1895.




CONTENTS.
PAGE
I. WAYS AND MEANS .... 7
11. THE FIRST STORY OP DILLON’S LIFE 24
111. DILLON’S NARRATIVE CONTINUED
—PEARL FISHING, AND AN AD-
VENTURE WITH CANNIBALS ON
THE COAST OP NEW GUINEA - 34
IV. DILLON TURNS CLAIRVOYANT - 53
V. BUSINESS IMPROVES —A DEATH-
BED MARRIAGE ... - 69
VI. THE NARRATOR THINKS HE HAS
POISONED A PATIENT - 93
VII. DILLON RESUMES AN OLD HABIT,
AND IS POUND OUT. DILLON ON
MIND-READING; WE INDUCE A
CONTROVERSY - - - - 104
VIII. BIRDS OF A FEATHER - - - 114
IX. EPISODE IN AN OPIUM DEN - - 120
X. AN UNEXPECTED DENOUEMENT - 139
XL THE STORY OF MABEL VANE—
THE INFLUENCE OF A FATHER’S
PORTRAIT 150
XII. DILLON’S HISTORY REVISED AND
RETOLD—THE SECRET OP HIS
PAST LIFE 177
XIII. NEMESIS 192




CHAPTER I.—WAYS AND MEANS.
Notwithstanding our hopes for better
things, matters were becoming serious.
Walton, Dillon, and I the writer of these
confessions, had formed ourselves into a
committee in order to consider the state of
our finances. This is how it came to pass.
Three weeks previously we had arrived, I
shall not say from where. No doubt this
Journal may be eagerly read in all the Aus-
tralian colonies, and possibly also in that
place, in which case it may lead to the
discovery of our identity even at this
remote date. Anyhow, on our arrival, we
found ourselves with a united capital of
but thirty shillings. This allowed us
to pay ten shillings—cash down —


to secure our wretched room, with
one single iron bedstead, a sofa, two rickety
chairs, a doormat, and a hearthrug, as well
as the other necessary appliances, and a few
ornaments requisite to modestly furnish
our “suite,” as we called the one chamber
that did duty for sitting, dining, drawing,
and bed room.
We drew lots for the sleeping accommo-
dation. Walton, with his usual good luck,
won the sole right to sleep in the bed,
Dillon came in a good second and got the
privilege of utilising the sofa for his
slumbers, while to me was reserved the
distinguished honor of reclining on the
hearthrug with the doormat rolled up for
a pillow, such carpeting as was on the floor
becoming also mine for use as a covering.
So far we managed to eke out a week with
the pound that remained—one pound to
feed three hungry men for seven days.
When that was gone we had gradually to
dispose of such clothing as we could
dispense with, until at last it was found ex-
pedient that Dillon and I, being about the


same size, should alternately wear one suit
between us.
On the day that Dillon wore the
suit, or such portions of it as, when put
on. made it appear to he complete, I would
remain in bed—Walton’s bed, which, in con-
sideration of the inconvenience I was put
to by so doing, was assigned to me for that
day’s use. Next day Dillon and I changed
occupations; I wore the suit, consisting of a
collar, a tightly-buttoned frock coat, tweed
trousers, and a dilapidated pair of elastic-
side boots, while Dillon occupied the bed.
It need not be thought that we did not seek
employment, or that we neglected any
means of obtaining our livelihood in an
honest or dishonest way. In a future nar-
ration of my confessions I may have the
courage to relate in greater detail how I
pocketed my family pride and attempted
such occupations as bootblack, newspaper
vendor, and crossing sweeper—the broom
cost us a shilling. The Sydney people did
not understand, or were too busy to com-
prehend, that I expected to be paid for


making the pathway clean for their feet, so
after several days’ fruitless efforts to earn
money in this way I did not make a penny,
and could not even dispose of my broom,
which, in chagrin, I ultimately pitched into
the beautiful harbor.
During the first week I earned
a sixpence for holding a horse out-
side the Sydney Post-office. Ultimately, on
one eventful day, I persuaded an in-
jured cabman to let me charter his
cab and horse. The poor half-starved beast
had fallen and pitched the driver over his
cab on to his shoulder, injuring him so
seriously that he could not again mount
his seat behind the cab. My agility and
dexterity in getting his horse up again
completely won his heart. I drove him to
the Infirmary, where I left him for admis-
sion, and then began my brief career as
a cabman in Sydney.
Totally ignorant as I was of the
topography of the city and the traffic
regulations, I soon came to grief.
My first and only fare wanted to catch a


particular train in ten minutes. I drove
him for twenty minutes in a different
direction to that wherein was the railway
station. I trotted round corners, and was
pursued by a mob who mistook my fare’s
gesticulations for those of a madman. I
was arrested and taken in charge by a
transit commissioner and a policeman; in-
deed I should have been locked up for the
night were it not that Walton turned up
in the crowd. My story, incoherent and
apparently incredible, was confirmed by
the cabman, whom we found in the wait-
ing-room of the Infirmary three hours after
my leaving him there, his injuries not yet
attended to, it being the rule of the insti-
tution at that time that accident cases
should practically wait the convenience of
the house surgeon.
Walton, a stalwart fellow, about six
feet in height, was equally unsuc-
cessful, though not in so disastrous
a manner as myself, in obtaining employ-
ment. He haunted the wharves, trying
to get work as a lumper, but fail-


ed; firstly, because there was very
little employment to be procured,
secondly, in consequence of some trades-
union rule whereby he could not get a turn
until certain well-known laborers had had a
first chance. He tried drapers’, grocers’,
and hardware shops, as well as general
stores, for employment as porter, but all
his attempts failed, and he became tho-
roughly disheartened.
Dillon, the scholar of our party, adver-
tised as a teacher of languages as well as
to give lessons on the piano, guitar, and
flute, and offered to grind students up in
mathematics. He purchased pencils, paints
and paper, and made some clever sketches,
which he hawked all through the city, offer-
ing them for sale at private houses, print-
shops, stationers’ shops, and booksellers’
stores, with no pecuniary results. In des-
pair he gave them all—his work for the
whole week—to a kind-hearted shop assist-
ant in exchange for a box of colored crayons.
That night he stationed himself outside a
publichouse in one of the principal streets


of the city—a well-lighted thoroughfare—
and with his many colored chalks and
clever hand he rapidly drew upon the
pavement fishes, snakes, landscapes, ship-
wrecks, and sunflowers. He was a suc-
cess in drawing a crowd, much to the
profit and satisfaction of the landlord
of the publichouse, but did not receive a
penny for his trouble, simply, I believe,
because his pride prevented him from hold-
ing out his hand for the money. The land-
lord, however, treated him to whisky,
which rapidly affected his starving frame,
and he returned home to our lodgings in a
very dilapidated condition and gloriously
drunk, but, like Tam o’ Shanter, “o’er a’
the ills of life victorious,” at least pro
tempore.
We had outrun our common stock of
money now, and as a punishment for his
indiscretion in getting drunk Dillon was
confined to the bed during the daytime,
and doomed to the carpet, hearthrug, and
floor during the night. We found it poli-
tic to inform our landlady, a good, well-


meaning, nervous old soul, that he had
typhoid fever. This kept her out of the
room, while Walton and I were enabled
surreptitiously to dispose of all the port-
able articles of furniture and ornamenta-
tion in the room in order to provide for our
daily food.
This last act of flagrant dishonesty
sat but lightly on my conscience,
although a short time previously I would
have shuddered at the thought; hut hun-
ger, acute gnawing hunger, soon over-
came all scruples, and we felt that we
could go a step higher or lower than petty
thieving to support our wants should the
opportunity only present itself.
This source of supply soon came
to an end. The two rickety chairs,
the fender, flre-irons, and a few
tawdry china ornaments upon the chim-
ney-piece only brought the small sum of
seven-and-sixpence from the close-fisted
secondhand dealer, and this, with strict
economy, sufficed for three days’ rations.
We had no friends from whom we could


obtain the customary temporary loan; we
dreaded our landlady discovering the lar-
ceny of which we had been guilty; and the
only portable property left was a fairly
clean and decent pack of cards which we
had borrowed from the unsuspecting old
dame. It was when matters had reached
this crisis that we held the committee of
ways and means. Walton occupied the
chair, or rather bed; Dillon reclined
upon the sofa, while I squatted upon the
folded-up rug and carpet in oriental fa-
shion.
“Were there any races, I calculate I
could win something at monte,” said Dil-
lon; “you, Brook, and Walton could keep
an eye out for the police.”
“But there are no races, nor any crowds
to be collected for the next nine weeks—
we cannot think of that,” interposed Wal-
ton.
A long silence ensued, which was sud-
denly varied by Dillon reaching the pack
of cards from the mantelpiece and grasping
them firmly between the fingers and thumb


of his left hand, while he drew the Anger
and thumb of his right hand artistically
and rapidly across each end of the pack
with that peculiar cr-cr-crick that con-
jurers affect when exhibiting card tricks.
“I have it,” he exclaimed, ‘Til turn
medical clairvoyant, mental-healer, mind-
reader, and general philanthropist.”
“What do you mean?” both Walton and
I exclaimed at a breath.
“Look here,” he answered, “take this
pack of cards and shuffle it well, and he
careful I do not see the faces of any of
them.”
I did so, and handed the pack back to
him with the hacks of the cards upwards.
He received them with his eyes shut, or
apparently so, shuffled them, and said —
“Now, J. shall display each card in the
whole pack consecutively before your eyes.
I want you to think of one that you shall
see, make a mental not© of it, but say no-
thing that would indicate what card you
have selected.”
Holding the pack facing me, with the


backs of the cards to himself, he rapidly
passed the cards from the left hand to the
right, so quickly, indeed, that I had some
difficulty in fixing upon the knave of dia-
monds, feeling in my mind how utterly im-
possible it would be for him to guess which
card I had selected.
“Now,” said he, “I candidly confess I do
not know of which card you have thought;
but with equal candor I must tell you that
I shall make Walton find it out.”
“Here, Walton, carefully shuffle these
cards,” he calmly said, as he han-
ded the cards to Walton. With
an incredulous smile the latter slowly
did so, and returned them to Dillon.
“Now, Walton, draw a card, but don’t look
at it or show it.” This was done, the face
of the card being concealed from us all.
“Now name the card of which you
thought,” said Dillon.
“Knave of diamonds.”
Imagine my surprise when Walton turned
up the card he had drawn, and it proved
to be the very card I had mentally fixed


upon and now named. Attributing this to
chance, I twice repeated the same experi-
ment, but each time with a similar result.
Walton also tried, and once thought he had
outwitted Dillon. The cards being duly ex-
hibited to him. he thought of one. I then
drew the six of hearts. Walton said,
“That was not the card.” Dillon quietly
took it out of my hand and placed it face
downward in Walton’s hand, and requested
him to name what card he had selected.
“The queen of hearts,” said Walton tri-
umphantly.
“Look at the card in your hand,” said
Dillon, smiling.
“Jerusalem! so it is,” Walton ex-
claimed, startled.
The six of hearts appeared, while in his
hand, to have been transformed into the
queen of hearts. “Good heavens! Dillon,
this is wonderful,” uttered Walton.
“You have not acted fairly toward me,”
Dillon replied, “or else your indecision of
character misled you. I asked you to think
of one card. You first saw a portion of the


six of hearts, and subsequently you caught
a glimpse of the queen of hearts more pro-
minently. You thought of both cards, my
friend, and I found you out. Now, stop—”
Walton being about to interrupt.
“Let me explain the inward working of
your mind during this last experiment. Was
it not true that in seeing a portion of
the six of hearts you had doubts wheth-
er the card you saw was the six
or the seven of hearts? While you
were in doubt, the queen of hearts present-
ed itself unmistakably to your vision. You
discarded your first impression—a doubtful
one —for the more certain second one,
though you yet had not obliterated the first
completely from your mind. Now, is it not
true that what first appeared a partial fail-
ure on my part now becomes a most
assured success, and the more firmly
convinces you of my clairvoyant powers?”
It was true, and Walton admitted that
such had precisely been what he had seen,
and the chain of reasoning which he had
adopted.


This strange, erratic genius, with whom
we had consorted in our vagabond life for
the past six months, had always been a
puzzle to us. In all our difficulties he had
risen to each occasion, and had overcome
them, so that our faith in him had daily
increased.
When we first met, we had but
tolerated him as a very silent, mo-
rose, and commonplace kind of per-
son. Never boasting of any education
or accomplishments, he had gradually dis-
covered them to us without any ostenta-
tion or display. Thus did we gradually
and unexpectedly learn that he had a com-
plete and idiomatic knowledge of most
modern languages, was an artist of con-
siderable merit, as well as a musician of
great ability; yet we could not make out
how and why, with such evident talent
and knowledge of the world, he was penni-
less, and should associate himself with us
in our vagabond journeyings through the
colonies.
That he had some hidden object Wal-


ton and I often speculated. The fits of
gloom which periodically haunted him like
a shadow, and occasionally alternated with
intervals of moody reverie, indicated some
deep sorrow, some past remembrance, that,
apparently dogged him like a spectre, with
frequent recurrences of gaiety and happy
forgetfulness; and, again, times of restless
activity, acerbity, peevishness, and fits of
excitement, each of which moods formed a
strong contrast to the other, and yet en-
abled us to form no true estimate of his
character, or obtain an insight into his
object in life. The terrible history of his
life, and its tragic ending, when he sub-
sequently died in my arms, will form a
future chapter in these reminiscences.
He promised, at a future time, to ex-
plain the modus operand! of his card tricks.
Notwithstanding our disbelief, he asserted
that they were but clumsy performances,
and could be rationally explained. Another
surprise awaited us.
There was a large glass tumbler in the
room—cracked, it is true; but its trans-


parency seemed to preclude the possi-
bility of any deception in what followed.
He asked me to carefully clean it, and
then, holding it in his left hand, he
extracted, or, as he put it, appeared, to
extract, with his right hand, one after the
other, ten real sovereigns from the pockets,
buttons, and button-holes of our coats, and
dropped them, one by one, into the glass
tumbler, which he then placed upon the
table.
“Gentlemen of the committee of \vays
and means now assembled,” he ex-
claimed, “behold some new capital
wherewith we commence our new
departure. How and by what means
I obtained it, I cannot and will not now tell
you; rest assured that I have gotten it
honestly, and do not be duped into the
idea that I have extracted these coins
from your coat pockets, buttons, and but-
ton-holes. We have tried hard and honestly
to make enough to keep body and soul
together, and we have failed. We propose
now to prey upon the gullibility, super-


stitions, and ignorant fancies of our fellow-
oreatures, wherein we have a large field
and clear scope for a successful harvest.
Relying upon your patient hearing, I shall
now proceed to explain the manner and
means wherewith we shall, with our sword
of deception, open the shell of this succu-
lent oyster.”


CHAPTER II.—THE FIRST STORY OF
DILLON’S LIFE.
“I have travelled through various coun-
tries and many lands,” commenced Dillon,
addressing no one individually, but speak-
ing as though to himself, “but it was not
until I reached Paris that I realised the
truth of the saying that in that great
centre of civilisation, vice, and misery,
there were ten thousand people literally
starving for one very simple reason. Do
you know what that was?” he asked, inter-
rogatively, and for the first time appearing
to address us.
“Want of work,” suggested Walton.
“Want of brains,” I hazarded.
“A very simple reason,” he replied.
“They would not lead trumps in playing
cards.”


“You speak in an enigma,” said I, queru-
lously and disappointed.
“No, my friend,” lie answered in a kind-
ly tone. “I speak the solemn truth,
though perhaps somewhat figuratively. By
cards I mean the game of life; by trumps
I mean the opportunities that are fre-
quently offered but so often missed. Here,
in this city of Sydney, we have, say.
two hundred and fifty thousand adult souls,
each one with his or her fads, foibles, or
fallacies. They are our opponents in the
game of life. Our present necessity we
must make our opportunity, and we shall
play our trump cards against their fads,
foibles, and fallacies.
“Out of every hundred sane individuals
you will find, perhaps, ten good, know-
ledgable, worldly-wise units, and per-
haps fifteen others of moderate capacity,
while the remaining seventy-five will con-
sist of the foolish, superstitious, and gul-
lible. That is to say, if you perform a
slight sum in mental arithmetic, you will
find that out of the enormous population of


this city, three-fourths of them, roughly
stated one hundred and eighty-seven
thousand five hundred, will supply victims
for our depredations. Amongst this num-
ber you will find a large percentage
of superstitious, fanciful, and hypochon-
driacal enthusiasts, who take a perverted
pride in obtaining their various ends by ex-
traordinary and out-of-the-way means.
“Perhaps it would be well, now to take
you into my confidence, and give you a
slight sketch of my early career.
“I shall not say where I was born, who
were my parents, or what is my present
object in life.
“At the early age of twenty I was
taken from a Continental boarding-
school, and entered as a student
at one of the large hospitals and
medical schools of London, where, for three
years, as far as a restless disposition and
intolerance of restraint would permit, I,
with more or less success, followed the
curriculum that would train me for the
career of a medical practitioner. At the


termination of the third year, a wish for
change, which I could not conquer, took
possession of my soul.
“The great war between the North and
South States of America was then at its
height, and, having heard that there was an
opening for dressers in the Army Medical
Staff of the South, eight other students
joined me, and we left England. Before
many weeks we found ourselves accepted
as volunteers, and fighting on the side of
the Confederates. I shall not now detail
the reverses and exciting scenes through
which I passed for the few short months
that elapsed before I, the only living mem-
ber left of that small party of nine, was
made a prisoner by the soldiers of the
North, and incarcerated in the State prison
of New York, where I languished until I
was liberated at the termination of that
disastrous war. I then found myself free
and wandering in the streets of that great
city with the sum of one dollar and fifty
cents in my pocket.
“Economically as I lived, that sum only


lasted me for a Very brief period of time,
and I know not what I should have done
had I not hy the merest chance got an ap-
pointment as an advertising agent. A very
humble position; in fact, at the very lowest
step of the great ladder of fame. I be-
came a ‘sandwich.’ ”
“A what?” we exclaimed.
“A ‘sandwich,’ ” said he, coolly. “There
was a play produced at one of the leading
theatres: ‘Leah, the Forsaken.’ The cute
New Yorkers adopted a method of adver-
tising which has since become somewhat
out of fashion, though occasionally seen
even now. It was of employing a number of
men, each having a board on either side
of him. secured and slung on by straps
over the shoulders. Each board contained
a letter, so that the men, when in a line,
looked at from either side would spell out
a certain sentence. In this case I was the
last of fifteen men, carrying at my left
side a board with the letter ‘N,’ and on
my right side the letter ‘L,’ that is, I was


the last and the first letter of the title of
the play, ‘Leah, the Forsaken.’
‘For tuns advertising this play I obtained
the magnificent sum of one dollar per day.
This went on for about three weeks, when
one of the principal characters —the rene-
gade Jew —became seriously ill within half
an hour of the rising of the curtain.
“I was hurriedly sent in search of
his under-study, whom I found in
a low publichouse, hopelessly drunk.
Hastening back to the manager with
this unwelcome intelligence, I de-
livered it to him just as the orchestra com-
menced the overture. His distraction was
extreme, and he seemed inclined to vent
his temper upon myself as the bearer of
such tidings, when I suddenly turned his
wrath into amazement and pleasure by
volunteering to play the part myself.
“In addition to being a sandwich man, it
was also my duty to render help as an extra
stage hand and supernumerary. With a
ready memory, and having seen the play
over a score of times, I was letter perfect


in the part, and fully acquainted with the
stage business.
“The announcement that the favored
actor was ill, and that an unknown
Mr. Dillon was to take his part at a
moment’s notice, was received in dead
silence by the audience, and I must admit
that my first appearance before that enor-
mous and critical audience somewhat em-
barrassed me with nervousness.
“The part is not a favorite one
with audiences, being a most execrable
and thankless one, and the great-
est success achieved by the actor
playing it is generally met by groans and
hisses from the audience; so, judging by the
extraordinary demonstrations of catcalls,
jeers, and hisses showered at me towards
the end of the performance, I must
have been a wonderful success. The man-
ager met me as the curtain fell, and most
warmly and enthusiastically congratulated
me. The actor whom I replaced became
so seriously ill that my services were se-
cured for the remainder of the season dur-


ing which the play ran, extending over a
period of six weeks, when my engagement
ceased.
“Through the influence of the manager
I next obtained employment as a con-
ductor of a tramcar/ which I held for a
short time, when I was recommended for a
position as a warder in the very gaol •where
I had been incarcerated as a prisoner of
war. Somehow the scenes that I had to
witness in prison life were such as I would
not care to further endure, and having
again availed myself of the kind assistance
of the theatrical manager I obtained a situ-
ation as assistant to a travelling conjuror.
This man was, I believe, one of the most
clever men that I ever met at card tricks
and sleight of hand, and it was from Irm
I gained whatever facility I now have in
legerdemain.
“With him I travelled through nearly
every one of the cities in the northern
States, and became very expert in assisting
him and preparing the dummies and dupli-


cates for the tricks which he had to per-
form at night.
“Like many geniuses and other clever
men, he, alas, had his weaknesses, variable
moods, and tempers, and occasionally he
used to give way to intemperate habits.
Very often, on reaching a new town where
the advance agent had advertised him to
appear on a certain night, he would be so
drunk and incapable that it would be my
duty to carefully put him to bed, get ix,to
his conjuror’s suit, personate him on the
stage, and do all his illusions.
“Another man would have been grate-
ful for the kindness and considera-
tion which I displayed in his interest,
but he was the reverse; the greater
my success the greater was his in-
dignation and disgust—he thought it gross
impertinence on my part—and at last be-
came so insulting and abusive that I deem-
ed it necessary in self-assertion to give him
a sound thrashing, and discharge myself
from his service.


“At this time the Paraguayan war
broke out. I hastened there in hopes
of enlisting as a volunteer, but be-
fore I arrived the war had terminated,
much to my annoyance. So leaving there
in disgust, and having heard that hostili-
ties were about to commence between the
British troops and the natives of New Zea-
land, I managed to obtain a berth on board
a guano ship, and set sail for Sydney, New
South Wales, and from thence got tranship-
ped to New Zealand, where I enrolled as a
volunteer, and saw some service until the
termination of that outbreak. Thence 1
went to Queensland.”


CHAPTER III.—DILLON’S NARRATIVE
CONTINUED. -PEARL-FISHING, AND
AN ADVENTURE WITH CANNIBALS
ON THE COAST OF NEW GUINEA.
“Shortly after my arrival in Queensland,
not caring for employment on either sheep
or cattle stations, I picked up with an old
seafaring man, who had spent most of his
lifetime in pearl-fishing; and, fired by his
tales of adventure and stories of large
sums of money made by lucky pearl-fishers,
I determined to make an effort to join that
industry. By a strange coincidence, some-
thing befell me which furthered my views.
I went by steamer from Rockhampton to
Thursday Island, where I landed, and took
up my abode at the principal hotel there,
not having any definite views as to what
should be my next course of procedure. In


the drawingroom of the hotel there was a
fair-toned grand piano, at which I amused
myself by strumming some old and well-
worn airs.
“Glancing over the music stand, I saw
some old friends amongst the classi-
cal pieces, which I took up, and refreshed
my memory by playing them carefully over.
So intent was I in the occupation, trying
to overcome certain technical intricacies,
rendered more difficult by my hands having
been unused to such manipulation for a
long period, that I did not notice that an
audience had gradually collected around
me, which probably consisted of the prin-
cipal inhabitants of the town, as well as
habitues of the hotel, most of whom were
seated and listening in respectful silence.
Somewhat taken aback on observing this,
I ceased playing, and shut up the instru-
ment. One of the listeners, evidently a man
of influence in the place, stepped forward,
and cordially thanked me for the perform-
ance, and said that he was requested to
solicit my assistance at a concert which


was to be given in the public ball that eve-
ning.
“Anxious to make friends, I readily
assented, whereupon my newly-found ac-
quaintance insisted on my dining with him.
He was a dark-complexioned man, and my
first impression was that he had some
Malay blood in his veins; but subsequent-
ly I discovered he was of Spanish origin.
He had travelled over nearly every part of
the civilised and uncivilised globe, and his
conversation was most entertaining.
“His name was Pedro Girart, and he had
had some considerable experience in the
pearl-fishing industry. With him, the even-
ing passed very pleasantly, until the time
arrived for us to put in an appearance at the
concert. I need not enter into particulars
with reference to this concert, which pre-
sented all the characteristics usual to the
impromptu entertainments that are fre-
quently got up on board the large ocean
passenger steamers. The hall was crowded
to excess. I believe the concert was
given to raise funds on behalf of


some shipwrecked sailors who had been
cast away on some part of Torres
Straits, and left destitute. Songs
were sung, a zither solo was played,
Pedro gave a Spanish song, with guitar
accompaniment. I played two or three
pieces on the piano, and acted generally
as accompanist to the vocalists.
“At the conclusion of the entertain-
ment most of the performers adjourned to
the supper-room of the hotel, where we
spent a convivial time till the small hours
of the morning.
“Next day, about tiffin-time, Pedro
called on me. He again thanked me
for the assistance I had rendered on the
previous evening, which he greatly eulo-
gised, and then made a proposition to me,
which fell in with my plans.
“It appeared that he had been the
owner of a pearl-fishing smack, when
owing to some bad fortune, he
was compelled to raise money by
mortgaging his vessel, and through a
continuance of ill-luck had not been able


yet to release it. He told me that, fully
equipped, she was worth eight hundred
pounds; but if he could only raise the sum
of one hundred and twenty pounds he would
be able to release her, fit her out, and go
on another pearl and shelling expedition.
I readily entered into the project; was in-
troduced to the manager of a local bank,
to whom I presented securities and drafts,
the product of my labors in New Zealand
and elsewhere, upon which a sufficient sum
of money was advanced, and before a fort-
night had elapsed we were enabled to
set sail for the pearl-fishing station —a lo-
cality only known to Pedro, so that we had
a fair field and good prospects before us.
“In addition to Pedro and myself, we had
two islanders and a black woman, the wife
of one of them. She turned out very use-
ful, and helped to work the vessel as well
as any man. We had three months at this,
and very good luck; got several tons of
shells and a very fair quantity of pearls.
It had been gradually dawning upon us
that we were short-handed, and this was


particularly felt during those tropical
squalls that are of such frequent occur-
rence in these parts; so, in a weak mo-
ment, we decided to recruit from Monday
Island, to whence we sailed, and had no
difficulty in adding four of the islanders
as members of our crew. This led to one
of the most startling and impressive ad-
ventures of my life. We had returned to
our fishing ground, and had. resumed opera-
tions for about a week.
“It occurred one evening just about dusk,
as we were preparing to knock off for the
day. Telua, the black man, and Cora, his
wife, were assisting me in the bow of the
craft to adjust some fixings to the hawser,
when we were suddenly alarmed by hearing
two reports of firearms and a shriek.
Looking aft we saw Pedro emerge from the
after hatch, which led to the cabin, fol-
lowed by Goola, the other black man, and
hastily pursuing them the four Monday
Island boys, flourishing tomahawks and
knives, and wildly gesticulating. Before we
knew what to do both Pedro and Goola


were felled to the deck, and brained with
the tomahawks. We three in the bow, un-
armed, were utterly helpless, and in the
presence of those wild, armed savages,
would have little chance.
“ ‘Quick, quick! Follow me,’ said Telua,
scrambling over the bows and gliding into
the water along the hawser, rapidly fol-
lowed by his wife. Finding myself thus
deserted, I had no option but to follow.
The next moment I found myself in com-
pany with the two others, rapidly swim-
ming towards land. The sudden transition
from dusk to darkness usual in the tropics
must have favored us, and in their excite-
ment the Monday Island boys could not
have seen us go overboard, as we subse-
quently heard them shouting to one ano-
ther while they were searching for us
throughout the vessel.
“I have very little recollection of
that long and terrible night. I am sure
we must have been six or seven
hours in the water. Being a tolerably good
swimmer, I had not much trouble in di-


vesting myself of my boots, coat, and
superfluous clothing, but my powers of en-
durance would never have enabled me to
survive that eventful period had it not
been for the friendly, and, as it then ap-
peared to me, superhuman, assistance ren-
dered by my dusky companions. Swim-
ming on either side, they supported me
during the greater part of that memorable
night, and ultimately, when we reached
near the land, they dragged me, perfectly
unconscious, through the heavy surf that
lashed the shore. It was just daylight
when I revived, and found myself lying, all
but naked, beneath the friendly shelter of
a wide-spreading tree, with Telua and Cora
attending to me.
“Our respite, however, was not for long,
for as daylight advanced we were sud-
denly surrounded by a crowd of jabbering
savages, who instantly seized and bound us
with strips of the inner bark of the very
tree that sheltered us.
“It was not long before we discovered
that we were in a very serious predicament.


My geographical knowledge at once caused
me to conclude that we had landed on the
coast of New Guinea, and had intruded
upon the territory of a cannibal tribe.
“Fires were quickly lighted, and then
was enacted one of the most hor-
rible scenes I ever witnessed. Poor Telua
and his wife were in the cruellest man-
ner butchered before my eyes, while I,
in impotent rage, lay bound, and power-
less to succour them, The savages had not
even the humanity to kill them outright be-
fore commencing their fiendish orgie. With
Sharp knives, evidently the result of
barter with civilised people, huge quiv-
ering slices of flesh were hack-
ed from their bodies and limbs,
while the poor victims writhed and
shrieked in mortal agony; some of the in-
human wretches greedily devoured the flesh
in a raw state, and others, probably less
hungry, threw the lumps and slices on the
fire, and waited until they were partially
cooked before they attempted to enjoy the
ghastly meal.


“Even now, though years have elapsed,
the whole dreadful scene rises before my
eyes with startling vividness. The bril-
liancy of the tropical sunrise, the fires
around us, the dusky forms of the yelling
savages, and the mutilated remains of
my poor friends which lay within a short
distance of me, writhing in their deathly
agony, as they, through weakness, but
faintly emitted their moans of poignant
misery, gradually ebbed out their exist-
ence.
“My own utter helplessness either to ren-
der assistance or to avenge their sufferings,
combined with the ever-present uncertainty
of the fate that awaited myself, gave rise
to tumultuous and conflicting emotions
within me.
“Livingstone relates an instance of how,
during his travels in Africa, he was once
set upon by a lion, which held him beneath
him. This eminent explorer was enabled
to analyse his mental condition during that
trying period, which he very aptly com-
pares to the condition of a mouse under


the fascination of a snake before being
swallowed by the reptile, and which pro-
duced a quiet, calm, reasoning condition
of his mind —fear for the moment seemed
banished, while the situation appeared to
intensify the acuteness of his thinking
powers. This inspired Livingstone, on feel-
ing the brute’s heart thumping against
its chest-wall, to plunge his knife into it,
«,nd thereby save his own life. The same
calm reasoning power appeared to take pos-
session of me, and having recovered from
the first shock caused by the horror of tfie
situation, I found myself taking in all
the minutiae of my surroundings, with
the calm deliberation of an uninterested
onlooker. I watched, with curious interest,
the many details of the cannibal feast,
and noted various little incidents that
otherwise might have escaped my attention,
but which it is unnecessary to detail now.
I relate this change from one of abject
horror and terror to another condition of
apathetic indifference as being a matter
of curious psychological interest.


“ Having appeased their hunger, my
captors set one of their number
to keep watch on me, and passed
the day in either idleness or sleep;
a long s,nd dreary day for me, in a position
devoid of all hope of escape. The fastenings
which hound my wrists and ankles were
cutting painfully into the flesh, and
seemed to arrest the circulation through
my hands and feet, which became enor-
mously swollen and blue. Towards even-
ing the sensation of tenseness and pain in
my limbs gradually merged into a feeling
of numbness, which, somehow, seemed to
distress me even more than the pain. As
midday approached the pangs of thirst
came upon me very urgently, while the
sun slowly wended his way through the
heavens, with not even a cloud to temper
his scorching rays.
“I had frequently to painfully alter
my position so as to obtain the sparse
though friendly shelter of the overshading
tree. Fortunately, toward evening, a few
clouds rapidly accumulated, and burst in


a refreshing shower over my head; and I
still remember with emotion the grateful
feeling with which I craned my neck and
opened my mouth to catch a few of the
drops of heaven-sent rain that pattered
down for about twenty minutes, then as the
evening’s darkness came on I fell into a
troubled slumber devoid of dreams.
“I awakened with a start, feeling a hand
laid cn my naked shoulder, and found my-
self surrounded by four or five dark forms,
whispering among themselves in an un-
known tongue. A peeled banana was thrust
into my hands, and fettered though they
were, guided towards my mouth, while
another dark form held before me
what appeared like a half cocoanut shell,
used as a cup, and nearly filled with what
then seemed the most delicious cold water
I ever tasted.
“It was a bright, starlight night, and as
my eyes became accustomed to the dim-
ness, I saw that I was surrounded by fe-
males, possibly the womenkind of the
cannibals, who probably, without the know-


ledge of their male companions, had, out of
pity, come to relieve my pangs of hunger
and thirst. One of them also presented to
my notice a slice of half-burned, partly-
cooked flesh, which I instantly rejected,
prompted by an overpowering feeling of
nausea, as nothing could persuade me but
that it must have been some remains of
the cannibal feast.
“A sudden noise made my com-
panions glide away into the darkness
of the night, and presently one of
the sentinels told off to watch me came up
to examine the thongs that bound me, giv-
ing a grunt of satisfaction on finding that
all was right. He left me, and once more
I resumed my interrupted slumbers, some-
what relieved by the refreshment so unex-
pectedly given.
“My mental sufferings were resumed
at daylight. I found both my companions
were dead, and as yet sufficient flesh re’
mained on their mutilated bodies to satisfy
the hunger of their captors. I was now
somewhat puzzled to find that my presence


seemed now to be completely ignored, as,
during the whole day no one came to ex-
amine me, and see if my thongs were loosen-
ed or not, and the idea that I wanted any
water or food did not appear to occur to
my captors. So the day passed, also the
next night, during which, as on the pre-
vious night, I was afforded relief by the
friendly females, and I passed the remain-
der of the night in a series of fitful slum-
bers, interrupted by wakings, during which
periods certain anxious thoughts would in-
trude upon my mind concerning what might
possibly happen to me on the morrow.
“I instinctively felt that I must be
reserved for the next day’s sac-
rifice, and yet the weaker I got
from want of nourishment, and the more
hopeless my condition appeared to be, the
greater became the craving to have my
miserable life prolonged, and the more did
I dread the slow torturing and lingering
death which I felt confident awaited me in
the early morning.
“Morbid fancies would creep over


me; I wondered where would they
make the first cut, whether they
would open into an artery, the severance
of which might happily afford a ready es-
cape for my life’s blood. I could not re-
frain from exquisitely torturing my mind
by dwelling upon the different parts that
might be mutilated so as to cause a greater
pain; say the opening of the knee joint,
gouging out the eyes, even snipping off the
ears and nose.
“In the midst of these unhappy
reflections I again slept, and did not
awake until the sun was several degrees
above the horizon. Then I opened my eyes
with a start, and saw in front of me the
chief man of the tribe—at least so I judged,
as he appeared to have taken a principal
part in the slaughter of my two compan-
ions two days previously. He bent down
and turned me over on to my face, and to
my horror commenced feeling my ribs I
presumed with the idea of judging as to my
condition of fatness, and suitability for
feasting purposes.


“He rolled me over again on
my back, when he caught the
gleam of a handsome pearl ring, the only
ornament on my hands. Turning sharply
round, he got hold of my hand, and exa-
mined the ring—a present I had received
only a few weeks back from my ill-fated
friend, Pedro Girart —three large pearls
mounted on a thick gold band. He tried
to slip it off my finger, but failed, as the
ring was buried in the tissues of the enor-
mously swollen finger, so you can imagine
my feelings when he coolly withdrew his
knife from the girdle round his waist, and
critically examined my hand, with the deli-
berate intention of cutting off the finger,
ring and all; and was, I suppose, just cal-
culating in his mind where to make the
first incision when we were both startled
by the loud report of a ship’s cannon.
“He instantly dropped my hands and
ran to the top of a hillock over-
looking the sea, where what he saw
evidently engaged his earnest attention and
aroused his fears. He at once ran in the


direction of where a group of his fellows
stood, and along with them hurriedly made
off in a direction inland.
“Although , very weak, and every
movement I made caused me in-
tense agony, I managed to roll over
and over till I had tediously reached the
summit of the hillock which he had so
hurriedly left, and there, to my inexpres-
sible joy, I saw a sloop of war, which had
just anchored, and was in the act of lower-
ing a boat. The boat soon reached the
shore, and within a short space of time
I was discovered, released from my bonds,
and taken on board.
“The lieutenant in charge sent a boat’s
crew and had the remains of my unfortu-
nate companions accorded a Christian
burial. I found the sloop to be the ‘Alba-
tross,’ the officer in charge of which had
come across our ill-fated smack, and, his
suspicions being aroused by her appearance,
he boarded her and arrested the four men
on board, and was now searching for evi-
dence, little hoping to find any of us alive,


as he knew well the savage nature of the
inhabitants on the part of the coast where
we had landed.
“ I may add that I subsequently
learned why my life was spared. It ap-
peared that the whites who generally
fall into the clutches of the cannibals were
old salts and derelict sailors, who had
saturated their systems with the powerful
fumes of the strongest negrohead tobacco,
and whose flesh, in consequence, had a
nauseous flavor to the refined gastronomic
taste of the savages. Possibly it was the
knowledge of this fact that has since made
me the inveterate smoker I am. In due
course I reached that part of Queensland
where I met you, and here we are.”


CHAPTER IV.—DILLON TURNS CLAIR-
VOYANT.
We were very much impressed with Dil-
lon’s brief sketch of his adventures and
chequered career, the narration of which
explained many things which puzzled us
concerning him, though we were quite con-
vinced that much more yet remained un-
told.
We, however, saw clearly that he was a
man having resources within himself of an
inexhaustible nature, combined with dash
and energy which would enable him to
carry to a successful issue any project
that he might form, and therefore, it was
with great confidence that we entered
into his plans.
We engaged a suite of three rooms
in a quiet street, in the city.
The front, or outer room, we fitted


up very economically as a waiting-
room, with a round table in the centre,
and a tablecloth covering it, on which we
laid a few copies of the daily papers, the
English “Punch,” and some illustrated
periodicals; a horsehair sofa, and about a
dozen cane-bottomed chairs. An inner
room was reached from this waitingroom,
and was dignified with the name of “con-
sulting room.” Here was a desk, table, a
high couch, folding-up washstand, and a
few leather-covered chairs, while a dull-
colored oilcloth covered the floor. The
third room was upstairs, which we fitted
up as a bed, dining, and sitting room,
combined. Of course we had only the ten
sovereigns at our disposal, and we had
most judiciously and economically to utilise
our funds so as to make them go as far as
possible.
All of the furniture had been ob-
tained on the time payment system, in
accordance with which agreement a small
deposit of two sovereigns had been paid in
advance. The week’s rent of one sovereign


had also to be paid down, but the greatest
haul on our resources was the purchase of
a cloth suit for Dillon to wear while seeing
his patients. This, a fairly preserved
second - hand black coat. waistcoat,
and light colored trousers, cost us
the sum of four pounds ten shillings. In
addition to all this outlay of ready money,
in order to pacify our late landlady for the
loss of her furniture and other effects, which
we had purloined and sold, we had to pay
her the sum of thirty shillings, with a pro-
mise of three pounds more when what we
called “our next remittance” should arrive;
so we had only one pound left when we
started business, and out of this we had to
squander seven shillings for a week’s ad-
vertisement in an evening paper to the
following effect: —
Dr. de Lion, Medical Clairvoyant and Men-
tal Scientist. All cases treated. Hours, 9
a.m. to 6 p.m.
This advertisement appeared in Satur-
day’s issue, and was to be repeated the fol-


lowing week. We anxiously awaited the
result on the following Monday with palpi-
tating hearts.
I may here pause to mention our
proposed method of procedure, which we
had pre-arranged. Dillon, in his capacity
of clairvoyant, was supposed not to ask any
questions of his clientele concerning their
ailments. Seated on a chair, with his
back toward the light, so that his fea-
tures were somewhat shaded and ob-
scured from his patient, he would sit in
an apparently contemplative mood,
his eyes, to all appearances, shut, and
he, affecting a dreamy manner, would hold
out his hand and grasp that of the patient,
when, after a long pause, he would gradu-
ally detail to his victim the nature of his
or her case, and suggest such remedies or
treatment as he wished to be carried out.
It must not be imagined that he was so
dreamy or unobservant as he appeared to
be. Through the thin slit of his partially
shut eyelids, aided by his great knowledge


of the world, experience of human nature,
physiognomy, and assisted by other indica-
tions, he keenly scrutinised his patient,
and rapidly came to conclusions which were
at once most striking and amazing; in
fact, the amount of keen observation which
he threw into his rapid survey had a most
impressive result.
The manner in which the patient walked
into the room, whether hesitating, confident,
or toned down by temerity, was construed at
a glance. The way the patient became
seated on the chair, the attitude assumed
while sitting thereon, the facial expression,
the nervous, constrained, or offhand man-
ner, were little units in the sum total of
the way he interpreted each indivi-
dual’s characteristics. In the short space
of a minute, while he held the hand
of the patient, with an astonishing
grasp of power, he appeared, as though by
intuition or some higher kind of mental
induction, to read the thoughts and fathom
the very soul of the person who entered his
presence.


In addition, he was not above accepting
external aids, and he carefully instructed
us how to proceed so as to assist him, and
make the results obtained by him to appear
the more surprising.
“You see,” said he to us, “the patients
from whom we shall reap pecuniary bene-
fits are not bona-fide sufferers from bodily
ailments: they belong to the class of hy-
pochondriacs, valetudinarians, and selfish
misanthropes, persons whose ailments are
only in their imagination, who have wearied
out the regular practitioners of medicine,
who, in their turn, either from commend-
able pride or honesty, will not dupe them.
Such persons are ready to waste money in
seeking solace and comfort from any plaus-
ible charlatan who will hold out hopes of
cure. From continual introspection of their
supposed diseases and imaginary complaints,
they can think of nothing else, and are so
full of them that they overflow, as it were,
and they are never so happy as when they
have some friendly ear into which they
lavishly pour all their 'troubles. By enga-


ging them in conversation you can gradual-
ly become acquainted with what they deem
to be their ailments, which in due course
you can communicate to me.”
“■But what about the risk?” said I. “Are
we not liable to prosecution for fraud or
for illegally practising medicine?”
Dillon laughed in a quiet, cynical way, as
he replied:
“No! No risk whatever. In the colony
of New South Wales a merciful Legisla-
ture has passed most salutary laws
against fraud in matters of business and
unqualified practitioners in legal transac-
tions—that is, the business men and law-
yers are strictly protected as regards their
property and professional privileges, but
they and the general public are afforded no
protection whatever against ignorant pre-
tenders who tamper with the lives of her
Majesty’s subjects by their ignorant pre-
tensions in the healing art.
“Indeed, the law protects such persons,
for whereas if a qualified practitioner com-


mits a blunder and duly kills a patient
through malpraxis, he can be punished as
a criminal because he is supposed to know
his business, and should have done better.
The unqualified quack, who is not only
tolerated but encouraged, is let off scot
free, because, being ignorant of even the
ordinary rudiments of medical craft, he is
judged by the light of his want of know-
ledge and skill, and the judge will direct
the jury that he—the prisoner—having
acted for the best to the extent of his ig-
norant ability, is thereby entitled to a ver-
dict of ‘Not guilty.’
“Attempts have been made to protect
the gullible public from such frauds and
risks to life, but an enlightened Govern-
ment and Legislature will have none of it.
I could point my finger at magnates hold-
ing high judicial positions, lawmakers, bar-
risters. dignitaries of the Church, and
other enlightened citizens, who, with their
wives and members of their families, hold
such pronounced views upon Faith-healing,
Spiritualism, Homoeopathy, and other


frauds, that they deem it a form of blas-
phemy and to he flying in the face of Pro-
vidence to employ a legitimately qualified
doctor if a fraudulent. Heaven-born quack
healer can he obtained. We shall enlist the
sympathies of these foolish people, who will
be our warmest advocates and supporters!”
All preliminaries being now arranged to
our satisfaction, Dillon took his place on
his chair in the consulting-room. As pre-
arranged, Walton and I sat in the waiting
room and personated patients.
I may mention that on the strength of
our paying cash for Dillon’s suit of clothing
the obliging secondhand clothes-dealer had
supplied each of us on credit with a fairly
passable secondhand suit, so that we pre-
sented the appearance of well-to-do arti-
zans. such as would be very likely
to frequent the waiting-room of an
advertising quack, as our leader must
be assumed to have been.
A signal code was pre-arranged, so that
by certain knocks we could acquaint Dillon
of the arrival of a patient. We sat there


on Monday from nine in the morning till
six in the afternoon, and not a single vic-
tim entered the meshes of our net.
We were tired, disheartened, very hun-
gry, and getting very cross at the idea
of having to spend some of our remaining
capital, now reduced to thirteen shillings,
on our supper, when, to our delight, our
first quarry made her appearance. We
heard light hesitating footsteps walk-
ing up the passage, and before we
saw who was there the rustling of
a dress warned us that the new arrival was
a female, who presently came within our
view. She was of about medium height,
and dressed in a striped grey woollen walk-
ing dress. Over some wavy brown hair sat a
smart sailor hat. The face we could not see,
being partially hidden from our view by one
of those hideous veils having spots all
over it.
Seeing us seated on the chairs, she ap-
peared to be startled and inclined to retreat,
to prevent which I rose in a respectful


manner, mad© my best bow, and said, in
my kindliest tone of voice:
“Whom were you seeking, miss?”
This seemed to reassure her, and she re-
plied, in a timid manner:
“Is Dr. de Lion here?”
I answered:
“This is his waiting-room; he is at present
engaged, but you can see him presently, I
have no doubt. I think,” I said, glancing
in an assumed hesitating way toward Wal-
ton, “this gentleman won’t mind if you go
in next. There has been a great crowd here
to-day, miss; this gentleman and I are the
last of them, and we have been waiting
several hours.”
“Oh, thank you!” said she; “if you will
be so good as to do that I may be able to
see him, otherwise I couldn’t, because moth-
er will be wondering why I am out so late.”
I at once stepped forward to the door,
which was then opened by Dillon, who
said, in a loud voice,
“Next patient, please.”
I whispered to him;


“Young lady, sir. Can take our turn, sir.
Her mother anxious if she remains out
late.”
“Show her in,” he answered, and she dis-
appeared through the door, which he closed.
I shall now, in order to illustrate Dillon’s
method of procedure, relate what took place
between her and him in this interview in
his own words: —
“When I closed the door I walked over to
my seat and sat down, with my back to the
light, and beckoned to her to sit on a chair
near me, where her face could be plainly
seen.
“Through the small slit of my partially
closed eyelids I could observe every linea-
ment of her face and every move-
ment she made. I signed to her
to remove her veil from her face, which she
did, throwing it over the top of her hat.
Her left hand was ungloved, on the third
finger of which was an engagement ring.
On the end of the forefinger I noticed dark
little furrows, produced by the needle, such
as you see on the forefinger of seam-


stresses. The hands were small and well
shaped, and the nails closely cut. The face
was well formed. Her hair, of a dark
brown color, fell in loose fluffy curls over
a broad, white forehead. The eyebrows were
arched, and the soft brown eyes were shad-
ed by long black eyelashes. I noticed dark
rings round her eyes, outlining the lower
eyelids, which, combined with an anxious,
worried look, denoted some hidden care or
trouble.
“The well-formed features seemed drawn.
There was a fulness of the lips, behind
which occasionally gleamed teeth of pear-
ly whiteness. Her whole aspect denoted
horror, anxiety, and timidity. Seating her-
self on the chair, in her trepidation she
sat nearly on the edge of it, and when
seated I noticed her tremulous eyelids, and
lips almost pouting, as if she would burst
into tears, while with her hands she ner-
vously clutched the front lower edge of her
jacket. It was quite evident to me that
this was no case of bodily ailment, real


or assumed, but one of acute mental trou-
ble in an unsophisticated girl. I reached
my hand forward and grasped her left arm
at the wrist in such a manner that I could
feel her pulse, and thereby gaining time,
gradually thought out all the possibilities
of the case.
“The usual pause having elapsed, I said
‘You are not ill, my child; you’ve no pains
or aches. It is your mind that is worried.’
The tremulous motion of her wrist, the
widely-opened eyes and dilated pupils,
showed me that I was on the right track.
“This assumption was verified when she
burst into tears. ‘Yes, sir,’ she said, T
am in trouble; I want help and advice.
I have no one to guide me.’ ‘Don’t tell
me any more,’ said I, wishing to impress
her, ‘and I will tell you all I know. Just
wait a minute, and I will throw myself
into a clairvoyant trance.’ Still holding
her left wrist, I threw myself back in my
chair. I rested my forehead on my finger
tips, and assumed a dreamy manner and
resumed.


“ ‘You have had some struggles, and have
had to work hard with your needle, and
you are now in a position of difficulty, and
perplexed by uncertainties.
“A start of surprise rewarded me.
“ ‘There are two persons involved, a
young man whom you like’ —all this time
I was intensely watching her features,
whose very expressiveness only too readily
betrayed her thoughts— ‘ hut whom those
belonging to you do not care for, because
he has a lack of means; the other gentle-
man you do not like, but your friends wish
you to marry him, as he is wealthy.’
“ ‘Yes,’ said the girl, ‘but he is so
old’
“ ‘Take my advice, my child,’ returned I,
in a fatherly manner; ‘do not marry for
money, it is not meet for May to wed with
December. Your young admirer whom you
truly love has strength, energy, and talent,
which, combined with your frugality and
co-operation, will ultimately lead you both
to competence.’


“ ‘Oh, thank you, sir. How did you know
all this? My parents do urge me to marry
that odious auctioneer just because he is
rich, but I know that Tom, who loves me
dearly, will soon make way in his busi-
ness. And now, sir, I hope to follow your
advice, and thank you very much. I must
go now, or else I will get into trouble at
home. Is that enough, sir?’ and she
slipped hal£-a-sovereign into my hand.”
Thus we earned our first fee, the half-
sovereign which Dillon exhibited to us in
triumph, and which by common consent we
would not spend. Before he retired to rest
that night Dillon punched a hole in it, and
kept it as a talisman for future success.
I wear it now on my watchchain as a me-
mento of that remarkable man.


CHAPTER V.—BUSINESS IMPROVES.—
A DEATH-BED MARRIAGE.
No more patients presenting themselves
that evening we closed our consulting-
rooms, and spent the evening in taking a
stroll through the city. Next morning we
were at our posts as usual, and remained
the whole day without a single victim ap-
pearing, and so passed the following day.
However, on Thursday, about ten o’clock in
the forenoon, a very stout, elderly lady pre-
sented herself, and was shown into Dillon’s
room.
It appeared she was suffering from an
ordinary attack of indigestion, which by
some means Dillon recognised, and gave
her suitable advice. She demurred at
paying his fee, and a noisy alterca-
tion ensued. She offered him half-a-


crown, which he indignantly refused
to take, and finally he requested her to re-
tire, stating that if her means did not al-
low her to pay, he was only too happy to
afford her gratuitous advice. This incident,
trivial as it may appear, illustrates a happy
knack that Dillon had of making the most
even of adverse conditions.
His manner to the old lady was kind and
polite; all the angry words being on her
part, and she felt gratified and happy
at having got the better of him with refer-
ence to her fee, and promised him she
would send him other patients who could
pay him better should she have the oppor-
tunity; and, sure enough, she was as good
as her word, as the next day she brought
in with her a benevolent-looking, mild old
body, whom she introduced as her landlady,
and the owner of some house property, stat-
ing that if the doctor could do some good
for her complaint he would be well paid.
Dillon sent the old lady out to us in the
waitingroom, while he manipulated with
her friend in the consulting room. As pre-


viously arranged, we, by judicious cross-
questioning, found out from Mrs. Maher,
as she informed us was her name, that her
landlady had beeen already treated by nu-
merous doctors, each of whom had told her
she suffered from a different complaint.
Mrs. Maher was very garrulous, and once
she commenced there was no stopping her.
She informed us that Mrs. Moloney had
been treated by the first doctor for her
liver; no improvement taking place she
consulted a second doctor, who told her it
was her heart. The treatment adopted be-
ing unavailing, a third doctor told her it
was her lungs, and so on. Several other
doctors who were subsequently tried had
successively treated her for her nerves,
her brain, her spleen; and, in fact, every
other organ in the body, but afforded no
relief whatever to her sufferings. I left
the room hurriedly, scribbling all this
information on a piece of paper. M al-
ton, who knew what I was doing,
presently followed me, and then de-
liberately acted as my messenger, and


brought my manuscript to Dillon, knocking
at his door on the plea of inquiring when
he should come again, and slipping the
note into his hand. We subsequently heard
the result from Dillon.
“I was very much puzzled,” said he,
“but I couldn’t ask her any questions.
I noticed as she walked into the room that
she had a slight halt in her walk, and a
want of squareness about her shoulders,
the left shoulder being somewhat higher
than the other. Then when she sat down
she did so very quietly, and once seated
was inclined to support the weight of her
body by resting her hands on her knees.
I went through the usual performance
of getting into the clairvoyant condition,
told her she was a great sufferer, and
had numerous aches and pains, which
she bore with great patience and
tranquillity. Her face was very expres-
sive, and while talking in general terms of
her pains and sufferings I was enabled to
feel my way by watching the play of her
features. In this manner I was enabled


to ascertain and tell her the pain was
worse when actively engaged or undergoing
any exertion, and generally relieved when
at rest or lying down. I easily guessed
that she often lay down from her lethargic
manner, but I was pretty well In a fix
what else to say when Walton knocked at
the door and handed me your note.
“The fact of so many medical men having
many different opinions of her case afford-
ed me a clue to the finding of which I am
indebted to my early medical training.
Her peculiar gait, want of squareness of
shoulders, and bumpiness about the back
at once suggested spinal curvature. I
therefore told her that the other doctors
had only been treating her symptoms, but
they had not got at the seat of the disease,
which was all in her backbone. She was to
go to an instrument maker, and have a
support made, which would bear the
weight of her head and shoulders, and she
would soon be as well as ever. I also add-
ed that there was one symptom very pro-
minent, which she had probably not told


the other doctors, and that was when lying
down she was affected with twitching of
the legs and arms. She admitted such to
be the case, promised to go an instrument
maker, and report the result.”
From these two cases of Maher and Molo-
ney dated our success. Within a week Mrs.
Moloney returned, wearing a kind of corset,
to which was attached two crutch-like ap-
pendages, which, placed under the armpits,
elevated the shoulders and also supported
the upper part of the body. She declared her-
self perfectly free from pain, and presented
Dillon with five sovereigns, asking his per-
mission to publish his wonderful cure in the
daily papers.
After this both she and Mrs. Maher
were continually sounding Dr. de Lion’s
praises, and sending him patients, most of
whom one of them insisted on accompany-
ing, and detailed to us in the waiting-
room their symptoms and ailments, which
we now, by a new and improved method,
conveyed to Dillon through an aperture we
had made in the wall for the purpose


In order not to excite suspicion, and to ex-
plain our continual presence in the waiting-
room, Walton and I posed as grateful
patients, whose cases required special
manipulation every day. As fresh patients
arrived we used to enter into conversation
with them, and in this manner managed
to put into circulation many extraordinary
stories of the wonderful skill and numer-
ous cures performed by our clairvoyant
physician, and it was really wonderful with
what rapidity and zest they were published
throughout the city, some of them obtain-
ing a place as a paragraph in the daily
papers. Many obtained circulation through
being of a somewhat caustic or humorous
nature.
For instance, I told a grave-looking
patient, while he was waiting, of how
a well-known Sydney doctor, having heard
of the skill of our friend, and anxious to
test it, dressed himself up in shabby
clothes, and came as a patient. He was
shown into our doctor’s room, who first re-
quested that his fee should be paid; then


threw himself into the clairvoyant state:
held the patient’s hand for fully five minutes
until his patience was almost exhausted,
and then quietly remarked,
“You suffer from no complaint. Physi-
cian, go home and heal thyself.”
Another story I circulated was about
a wealthy lady who kept her carriage,
and lived at Darling Point, and having
heard of the great success of Dr. de Lion,
out of mere Idle curiosity went to consult
him, having nothing worse the matter with
her than the possession of more money
than brains.
After the usual clairvoyant performance,
our friend dismissed this lady with the
brief remark, “Madam, all that is wrong
with you is that in some part of your ap-
parel you have a pin where you should
have a button.”
Things went on so prosperously that by
the end of the third week Dillon’s waiting-
room was crowded with patients, and we
were in receipt of from ten to fifteen


pounds a day. It was at this time we
threw off our assumed characters as grate-
ful patients, and, dressed in sober black,
acted as Dillon’s assistants in his practice.
As a rule, the class of patients was such as
Dillon had expected, but occasionally some
would present themselves who were dan-
gerously ill, and had probably been given
up as hopeless cases by the regular practi-
tioners. To do Dillon justice, he was very
considerate and conscientious when such
people came to him, and insisted on sending
them to some well-known medical man,
stating that it was a case which he would
prefer being treated elsewhere.
In some instances embarrassment was
caused by patients who had interviewed
him at a remote period, and subsequently
died of some complaint which they had
contracted since he had seen them, and
meanwhile no medical man had been call-
ed in before death. Fortunately for us,
et hoc genus omne, the laxity of the
laws regarding registration of death in
the colony of New South Wales was so


great that a crossing-sweeper or a shoe-
black would be quite competent to sign a
certificate of death.
When Dillon had ascertained this fact he
became more daring, and never hesitated
to give a certificate of death in any cases
where he had seen the person within the
previous six months.
One of Dillon’s patients was a man of
the name of Sweet. He first consulted Dil-
lon out of curiosity, but, being impressed
with our friend’s manner and appearance,
took a great interest in him, and would
occasionally drop in after office hours and
have a friendly game of cards.
This caused an intimacy to spring up be-
tween us, and he very soon found out that
Dillon was a man of superior ability and
acquirements. Dillon, on his part, found
much to interest him in his patient, who
was of a very fanciful disposition, con-
tinually imagining that he suffered from
different complaints, for which he was in
the habit of drugging himself. He had
accumulated a whole library of medical


books, and was never weary of experi-
menting on himself with different drugs.
One evening he came as usual, and joined
us in a game at whist, in the course of
which Dillon drew him out by inquiring the
nature of his present ailment.
“Well,” said Sweet, “you should know I
have found out now what must prove a
panacea for all ailments. The source
of all life and vitality is oxygen, and
when a man hasn’t sufficient oxygen
in his blood the fire of life languishes.
He loses energy, literally runs down
like a clock, and all the vitality goes
out of him. Now, I have been reading
a book lately wherein it states that by
using chlorate of potash, into whose chem-
ical composition oxygen largely enters, a
proper supply of oxygen can be made to
circulate in the blood, and thereby keep up
the vitality of man. I have bought a quar-
ter of a pound of it in crystals, but find a
trouble in getting it to dissolve in water.”
“Have you ever tried boiling water?”
said Dillon.


“No,” returned Sweet, “I used cold wa-
ter. I didn’t think heating the water would
make any difference.”
“Try it,” said Dillon, “though chlorate
of potash is only sparingly soluble in cold
water, if you use boiling water you will
find that it will be soluble in twice its
weight of water.”
“Thank you very much, old fellow,” said
Sweet. Then the matter dropped, and in
due course we parted for the night.
Next day, about ten o’clock, Mr. Sweet
presented himself at the waiting-room,
looking somewhat ill, and requested a pri-
vate interview with Dr. de Lion, and as
soon as an opportunity offered I ushered
him into the consulting-room, and waited to
hear what he wanted.
“I have called in to tell you that I am
much obliged to you for your hint about
the chlorate of potash. The whole four
ounces dissolved very well in half a pint of
water, and, in order to ensure my blood
having a sufficiency of oxygen, I drank off
the whole.”


“My gracious!” exclaimed Dillon, starting
up and looking anxious. “Surely you did
not do that?”
“Oh, yes,” said the other smiling. “It
must have been precious strong, though. I
feel a little groggy on my legs; I suppose
it is the oxygen circulating.”
“I am afraid.” said Dillon, “you must
have taken more than is good for you, you
are looking wretchedly ill. For pity’s sake
go home, man, and send for a doctor.”
“Oh, nonsense,” replied Sweet, “I am all
right, but I think I will just go home and
lie down for a time. If I am not better I
shall send for you; this is my address,”
handing Dillon a card having on it his
name and address —Bourke-street, Surry-
hills.
About three in the afternoon a little
girl brought a note scribbled in female
handwriting;
“Will Dr. de Lion kindly come at once
and see Mr. Sweet, who is very ill?”


I brought the note into Dillon. He started
up, and, though the waiting-room was
crowded with patients, he sent out word
that he couldn’t see any more that day.
“Brook,” said he, “this is a serious mat-
ter, and you had better accompany me.”
So I hailed a cab, and we rapidly drove to
Sweet’s residence.
We were ushered into a parlor by a
bright, well-looking woman of about twen-
ty-eight years of age, who informed us
that she was Mrs. Sweet, and was very
anxious about her husband’s condition, who
seemed to be very ill, and was suffering
great pain. So we were at once shown up
to his bedroom, and both of us were greatly
shocked at what we saw.
Lying coiled up in his bed was
poor Sweet, his teeth chattering and
his lips compressed, as though in pain.
His features were drawn, and the co-
lor of his face a most ghastly yellowish
hue, with a tinge of green, and his lips
seemed to be perfectly blue. Dillon grasped
one hand while I seized the other. They


were cold and clammy with perspiration,
and his nails were of the same bluish color
as his lips.
“Poor fellow,” said Dillon; “how
ill you are; do let me induce you
to send for a doctor.”
“It is no use,” said Sweet, with a
faint smile illuminating his ghastly
face. “I feel I want a clergyman
more than I need a doctor. This wretched
potash has put too much oxygen into my
blood, and is driving the life out of my
body. I have suffered the most excrutia-
ting agony for the last hour, and feel I
cannot last much longer. All that is left
for me now is to make my peace for the
future. I have formed a very high opinion
of you, Doctor; I have made my will, and
have mentioned your name as being sole
executor.”
“Oh, but surely,” said Dillon, thrown off
his guard, “you know that I am not a
qualified doctor. Though I practice as a
clairvoyant, yet, I am not a member of the
regular profession, and some fuss may be


made if you die without a regular medical
man seeing you.”
“If you will consent to act as my exe-
cutor I can die happy.”
“Very well,” said Dillon; “if you will not
have a doctor you will at least allow me to
send you a clergyman?”
“I will think about that; call again in the
evening.”
Finding he was immovable on the question
of the doctor, we left him, promising Mrs.
Sweet we would look round after tea, and
cautioning her that her husband was dan-
gerously ill. Dillon also told her to try and
induce her husband to see a doctor, and,
failing to obtain his consent to that, to be
sure and send for a clergyman. We called
round about seven o’clock, and found he
was much worse.
His color was far more ghastly than
in the afternoon, and the spasms of
pain that racked him were more se-
vere; but fortunately there was a longer


interval between them. Mrs. Sweet inform-
ed us, with piteous tears rolling down her
cheeks, that she had sent for a clergyman,
who had had a very brief interview with
her husband, and had left saying that it
was impossible for him to administer the
Sacrament or to give any spiritual consola-
tion unless he wmuld comply with certain
stipulations. What those stipulations were
she was unable to say, but she added that
she was afraid that her husband had not
much respect for clergymen or religion;
in fact, he had often openly told her that
he had very little faith in God, the Church,
or the devil. He seemed to be somewhat
chagrined at the course of action taken
by the clergyman, but would not say
what was the cause of difference
though he admitted, when free from
spasms of pain, that he supposed the gen-
tleman in black must comply with certain
rules, and that he mustn’t blame him for
sticking up for his religion.
Finding that Sweet still persisted in
not having a doctor, Dillon prescribed


some sedatives to relieve his agony, and
we both bade him an affectionate farewell,
and left him with his wife and one or two
of her female friends.
It was about midnight when we
were all in a comfortable sleep that
we were awakened by a violent ring-
ing at the bell. This was a messenger
from Sweet, who stated that Dr. de Lion
and his friend Mr. Brook were to go at
once, without fail, so we hurriedly dressed
ourselves, and went off as quickly as pos-
sible in a cab.
When we entered his room a most
extraordinary sight met our view. The
room where he lay was an attic room,
with the ceiling sloping down until it
reached the wall three feet from the floor.
Sweet’s bed was in the middle of the apart-
ment at one end. so that the half-tester
bedstead had enough height to stand erect,
and thrown back over the top of it were
the mosquito curtains. Two candles light-
ed the room. On the bed lay our poor
friend, propped up by pillows, gasping and


writhing in agony. The flickering light of
the candles thrown on the pillows which
supported him threw out in strong relief
his greenish yellow-looking face, with his
dark blue lips, while the brilliancy of his
eyes was such that they almost seemed to
be protruding from their sockets, and
caused the whites of them to appear more
prominent, giving the whole scene a most
ghastly aspect. In addition to this, on one
side of the bed, was a clergyman dressed
in his surplice, while on the other side —
I could hardly credit my eyes when I saw
her —was Mrs. Sweet, dressed in her bridal
clothes.
“Some mad freak of a dying man,” I
whispered to Dillon. “I suppose we must
humor him.”
The clergyman overheard me.
“No,” said he “this poor man, so soon
going to meet his Maker, has been living
a life of sin. When I called this afternoon
and found that this lady was not his wife
I refused to administer the Sacrament. He
has, however, thought better of it and, hav-


ing repented, I am now going to perform
the marriage ceremony, and then will ad-
minister to him the most Holy Sacrament.”
“You had better be quick,” said Dillon.
“We will proceed at once.”
And then commenced the most extraordi-
nary, solemn, and heartrending ceremony
that I have ever seen in my life. The pa-
tient was propped up in his bed so as to
be within easy reach of the side of it, and
the clergyman commenced in that sing-song
intoning voice which no doubt he had ac-
quired in the Cathedral.
Calling us dearly beloved, and stat-
ing that we were gathered here in
the sight of God and in the face of this
congregation to join this man and woman
in holy matrimony, and so on. Notwith-
standing the urgency of the occasion, and
the rapidly dying embers of the bride-
groom’s life, he did not abbreviate one jot
or tittle of the marriage ceremony. When
the man had to answer “I will,” he was
just able, during a spasm of pain, to jerk
out the word “will;” and where he had to


say “he took her as his wedded wife,” It
seemed like an undistinguishable muttering
by which he vainly tried to follow and repeat
the words of the clergyman, the only intel-
ligible word being the last one “troth.”
His trembling hands had to be guided to
put the ring on the bride’s finger, and with
almost inarticulate babbling he followed
the words of the clergyman, stating that
with this ring he wedded her, with his
body he worshipped her, and with all his
worldly goods he endowed her. When he
gasped out the word “Amen” he fell back
unconscious. Undisturbed amidst all this,
the good clergyman proceeded with the cere-
mony, and prayed that Heavenly blessings
be showered down on these servants of
God; that, like Isaac and Rebecca, they
should live faithfully together, and should
faithfully keep this covenant they had
made, and ever remain in perfect love and
peace; and then joined their hands togeth-
er and said, “Those whom God had joined
together let no man put asunder.”
I can scarcely analyse -what feelings pos-


sessed me as I watched this most extraor-
dinary proceeding. The dying man
was now totally unconscious of his
surroundings, and looked more ghast-
ly than before. Next to him stood his
bride, with her tear-filled eyes and anxious
face. The flickering light from the candles
shed a dull gleam over the scene, while
the clergyman, in his canonical robe, appa-
rently unmoved by the piteous scene, pro-
ceeded with his monotonous voice to the
completion of the ceremony, and even
wound up with that long peroration de-
claring the duties of man and wife, stating
the opinion of St. Paul and other authori-
ties, and quoting such eminent examples
of obedience as Sarah and Abraham.
At the conclusion of the performance the
clergyman busied himself with a small
chalice and salver, and made preparations
for administering the Holy Communion.
We were all exhorted that if we truly and
earnestly repented of our sins, and were in
love and charity with our neighbors, to
draw near with faith, and take this Holy


Sacrament to our comfort, meekly kneel-
ing; but when we turned to look at poor
Sweet, the principal actor in this midnight
drama, we found that he was absent,
though his corpse lay upon the bed. When
those solemn words were said, “Those
whom God had joined together let no man
put asunder,” the Almighty had interfered
and separated them for ever.
The well-intentioned clergyman had sti-
pulated for the ceremony of marriage be-
fore that of Holy Communion. The cere-
mony of marriage was completed, but his
strict and conscientious adherence to the
Church ritual so delayed matters that time
did not allow Sweet’s first and last Sacra-
ment to take place.
Let us hope that poor Sweet was none
the worse.
Strange as it may appear, no trouble
whatever was experienced regarding the
death certificate, and should any person
curious in such matters take the trouble to
Inquire, and make a careful inspection of
the death register of Sydney, he may find


an entry of Adolphus Sweet as having died
on a certain date of leucocythemia and
chlorosis; very unusual causes of death in
a male subject. Whether Dr. de Lion, who
registered the death, obtained those unpro-
nounceable words from a dictionary, or re-
suscitated them from the memories of his
past medical training, I am at present un-
able to say.


CHAPTER VI.—THE NARRATOR THINKS
HE HAS POISONED A PATIENT.
I omitted to mention that It was Dil-
lon’s policy that we should keep as much
as possible to ourselves in all of our proceed-
ings, and this involved compounding our
own medicines. At first Dillon used to do this
during after hours in our bedroom, and the
patients would send for the stuff when
made up. I need not explain that the
chemicals and infusions used were few in
number and simple in their nature. In
course of time, however, as business in-
creased, and Dillon’s time was more fully
occupied, the compounding of his prescrip-
tions devolved upon me with occasional as-
sistance from Walton. Being of a some-
what anxious disposition, this, at first, was


a source of great discomfort to me, as I
always had a horror of giving somebody an
overdose, an example of which I am now
about to relate.
Dillon had one of his misanthropical at-
tacks on him for a few weeks. Walton and
I formed the impression that success had
not quite agreed with him. Occasionally,
during consulting hours, he would abrupt-
ly leave his room and retire to the bed-
room, where he used to sit in a moody,
meditative manner. This conduct occasion-
ed considerable loss to us; the people wait-
ing to see him would get tired of doing so,
and would go away, often not to return,
and when we expostulated with him he at
first merely answered, in a sulky way, that
it would do us good by showing that he
was independent of his patients. At last,
however, wearied by our importunity, he
suggested that I should occasionally either
personate him, or act on my own responsi-
bility with regard to seeing patients in
his place.


“You see,” he said, “you may not al-
ways have me with you, and you had bet-
ter begin to accustom yourself to the clair-
voyant usages”—adding, bitterly—“as we
practise them.”
It so happened that one afternoon, when
he had retired to his room in a fit of his
“tantrums,” as Walton used to call them,
those waiting to see him having left, a man
in seafaring costume staggered in, and
asked to see the doctor. Thinking this an
easy case to commence with, I said,
“I am the doctor; walk into my room.”
My patient staggered after me and fopped
himself into the chair that I had placed for
his reception. He didn’t wait for me to go
through the clairvoyant performance, hut
jerked out, in drunken gibberish, that he
was the captain of a coasting schooner —
felt very drunk —must be made sober at
once, to take his vessel to sea. Telling him
“All right; I will make up the medi-
cine,” I hurriedly ran up to Dillon and
asked him for a recipe to make the captain
sober enough to take his ship to sea.


“Very well,” said Dillon, “glad you have
commenced to practise. One wineglassful of
spirits of chloroform, color it with lavender
infusion, and add to it a wineglassful of sal
volatile. That will fix him up.”
I compounded the mixture as he directed,
and brought it to my patient in a small
bottle.
“I must take it now,” said he; “I can’t
get along; feel worse since you left me.”
The fact was, he was totally incapable of
getting off the chair.
“My God,” said he, in a helpless manner,
“if you don’t make me sober at once, I am
a ruined man; they’ll put the mate in
charge of the vessel, and I shall lose my
situation.”
“All right,” I returned, with perfect con-
fidence, “you take this, and you will be all
square.”
So I poured the stuff out in a tum-
bler, and added as much more water,
and gave it to him to drink. He look a
sip of it, which he instantly spat out again,


with an imprecation, laid the tumbler on
the table before me, and said, with drun-
ken gravity,
“Young man, do you know your business;
this isn’t poison, is it?”
Being my first attempt at doctoring, and
not quite confident whether I had mixed it
properly, I covered my confusion by as-
suming indignation, and replied, hotly,
“If I did not know my business, sir, I
would not hold the position I now do in
this establishment! That is not poison; it
is meant to do you good. It is strong, I
admit,” sniffing the strong fumes of the sal
volatile, “but you can reduce the strength
by adding more water.”
“All right, sir,” said he, meekly, and evi-
dently impressed by my tone and manner;
■“no offence; hand us the water,” and by the
aid of a couple of quarts of water, with
many sippings and sniffings, he managed to
swallow my potion, after which he quenched
his parching thirst by means of more water,
slowly swallowed. Five minutes afterwards
he was sufficiently revived to walk away


with steady steps, having paid me a sove-
reign—my first fee, which my partners
voted to me as a souvenir of the occasion.
Shortly after I went up to Dillon, and re-
ported what I had done. I said —
“That was rather strong, you know, Dil-
lon.”
“Oh no!” replied he “Of course you put
it in a bottle, and told him to take a
twentieth part every hour in a wineglass of
water?”
“Good heavens, no!” I answered in
alarm, “I gave it to him all at once.”
“What, alone?” said Dillon. “Non-
sense!”
“No, not alone, with two quarts of water
to shadow it down.” feeling a cold shiver
run up and down my back while I spoke,
and a cold perspiration breaking out from
every pore.
“Do you think that I have poisoned him?”
“Well,” said Dillon gravely, “I hope not;
it would be rather awkward. I have
known sal volatile in large unadulterated
doses to produce stricture of the gullet;


but that is a slow and lingering death,
and you pretty well diluted it; but the
spirits of chloroform is a more serious mat-
ter.”
He got up and walked over to a book-
shelf, from which he took a book on Ma-
teria Medica, which he consulted.
“Yes,” said he. “A wineglass of spirits of
chloroform contains exactly the quantity of
pure chloroform which killed a man in Mait-
land last week; but that, of course, was in-
haled, and we have no experience as to
what are the results of the imbibition of
the drug. It will be rather interesting,”
he continued in a dreamy tone, “to observe
whether this man dies or not.”
“Thank you,” said I. “I have no incli-
nation for scientific experiments of that
nature. Think of it, Dillon, if this poor
man’s life is in danger, don’t treat it light-
ly. What is to be done?” And I wrung
my hands in despair.
“Nothing,” said Dillon, calmly, “literally
nothing. The chances are no one saw the


man enter the premises, and no one saw
him depart. He simply drops dead, per-
haps, and there he is. The police pick him
up —an inquest; no traces of any poison
found; chloroform smell perhaps not de-
tected; if it should be, it has the twang of
the usual flavor of a dram-drinker’s breath;
and will pass unnoticed. Jury’s verdict,
‘Death from natural causes.’ Soon buried,
and all is over.”
I, however, did not accept any consola-
tion from Dillon’s specious logic, but be-
came terribly anxious and nervous. I re-
frained from the usual walk up town that
evening, fearing that at every corner or in
every gutter I would be confronted with the
dead body of my patient; so I retired to
bed early, but not to slumber. All kinds of
horrible thoughts occupied my mind. About
eleven o’clock a loud ringing at the door
caused me an attack of unreasonable alarm.
I at once assumed that the body had been
found, and the police had come for me.
It was only Dillon and Walton, who had
forgotten their latchkeys.


Later on an alarm of fire caused a
crowd to pass up the street. I could not
refrain from anxiously peeping out between
the blinds, expecting to see the corpse of
my patient carried on a bier to the door.
I inwardly vowed and protested that never
again would I compound physic; the very
next morning I would dissolve partnership
with my associates and seek some other
employment.
It was fully daylight before I fell
into a broken slumber, only to be
startled in half an hour by the cries of
newsboys passing beneath my window:
“Special edition morning papers.” It was
rather unusual to issue special editions so
early in the morning, so my morbid fancies
prompted the thought that this terrible
deed of mine was the cause of the commo-
tion.
Partially dressing myself in great haste,
I went out and purchased a copy of each.
When I reached the waiting-room I found
that I literally had not the moral
courage to open and look at the papers.


At last I overcame my foolish dread suffi-
ciently to enable me to glance over the pages
and discovered that after all my fears were
unfounded. No allusion whatever was made
to any tragic ending to my victim’s life.
A disastrous wreck had occurred outside
the heads; an ill-fated vessel was dashed
against the cliffs at the termination of her
voyage from England, and out of all on
board only one man was rescued.. This
feverish anxiety and worry lasted for about
a fortnight, and then gradually my mental
equilibrium was restored. I forgot all my
promises to myself about severing
my connection with Dillon and
Walton, and my resolutions against
compounding drugs, and drifted
along the daily routine, speedily getting
into the way of seeing patients myself dur-
ing Dillon’s absences from the consulting-
room, which now became very frequent.
About six weeks after this incident, to my
surprise, my inebriated sea-captain, who
had caused me so much anxiety, was
ushered into my presence alive and per-


fectly sober, and it certainly was a relief
to see bis smiling face, as he extended his
hand and shook mine heartily.
“I have just come back,” said he, “and
thought I would look you up, and
thank you for that splendid dose
you gave me about six weeks
ago. Why, man, it was grand. I had
hardly left you five minutes when I
thought I was in heaven.”
“ Well, yes, I am glad it did
you good ; in fact, I was sure
of it,” said I. “Especially about your be-
ing in heaven,” I grimly added. The real
cause of his visit I found was to obtain
the prescription, which I had much plea-
sure in handing to him in a modified
form, and for which he tendered me an-
other sovereign.


CHAPTER VII. —DILLON RESUMES AN
OLD HABIT, AND IS FOUND OUT.-
DILLON ON MIND READING—WE
INDUCE A CONTROVERSY.
Dillon now commenced to behave in a
very eccentric manner, which caused much
anxiety to Walton and myself. As I men-
tioned in an earlier part of this journal, he
was liable to moods of deep reverie, alter-
nating with periods of gaiety and happy
forgetfulness. At present the attacks of
sullen moodiness appeared to predominate,
and he was continually absenting himself
from his consulting room, throwing a lot
of responsibility upon my prentice shoul-
ders as well as causing considerable dis-
satisfaction amongst his patients, with
whom he was very popular.


Unfortunately any inquiries on our
part into the cause of these attacks
used to irritate him to an extraordi-
nary pitch of excitement, which made
things absolutely unpleasant. Ultimately
neither of us cared to approach him
on the subject. One morning matters
#
reached a climax. I knew that he was
awake most of the night, and when I
went to call him to breakfast I found that
he was in a deep slumber, breathing
very heavily, and his face greatly flushed,
so much so that I thought he was in
some kind of a fit. Finding that shak-
ing failed to rouse him, in considerable
alarm I dispatched Walton for a neighbor-
ing doctor, with whom we had become ac-
quainted. Fortunately the doctor was at
home, and he arrived almost immediately.
He carefully examined the unconscious
sleeper, smelt his breath, examined his
chest, and appeared somewhat puzzled.
“It’s not drink,” he said, “he is evidently
under the influence of some narcotic. What


I cannot tell, as I can detect no odor from
his breath.”
A thought seemed to strike him, and he
glanced over the shelves and around the
room.
“Let me see,” said he again. He then
bared Dillon’s arms and examined his legs
and thighs.
“Ah, here it is,” said he, discovering se-
veral red spots on the outside of his right
thigh.
“Therein lies the cause of his trouble.”
“What?” said I, “has he been bitten by
some venomous insect?”
“No,” answered the doctor, quietly;
“this man is a morphomaniac, and he has
been injecting morphia into his body, and
each of these punctures shows where he has
injected it. It has been going on for some
time, as I can count ten or twelve recent
punctures, and can feel the scars where nu-
merous old punctures have been made.”
This was quite a revelation to me, and I
inquired of the doctor what effect the in-
jections would have. He replied that that


entirely depended upon the strength of the
injection and the frequency of its admin-
istration, as well as upon the habits of the
patient. As a rule it acted as a powerful
stimulant, was capable of inducing the
patient to undertake great physical exer-
tion or mental work.
The habit once induced it became
■very fascinating, and it was almost
impossible for a person under its in-
fluence to voluntarily leave it off. He
added that the general effect of it was
to produce a very happy and contented
condition of the mind, followed by a corres-
ponding depression and irritation as the
effects wore off; so, dating back from the
time when the change took place in Dil-
lon’s manner to us, I calculated he must
now have been almost a month or five
weeks indulging in this practice. I told
the doctor so, and he strongly advised that
a powerful appeal should be made to Dil-
lon to induce him to discontinue the use
of the drug. However, he added that no-
thing could be done until he awoke


from his present condition of stupor, and
in the meanwhile he suggested we should
search his clothing and effects, in order to
deprive him of the little instrument used
for injecting, as well as the supply of mor-
phia. I at once went through the pockets
of his clothes, and beneath the lining of
his waistcoat, in a pocket evidently made
by himself, we found a small morocco-
covered case containing what the doctor
called a hypodermic syringe and a small
bottle of fluid, which he pronounced to he
solution of morphia.
Thanking the doctor for his kindness and
advice, we dismissed him, and he promised
to call the following day. About noon Dil-
lon woke up. I at once approached him on
the subject of his delinquencies. He lis-
tened to me patiently, frankly admitted his
shortcomings, and said it was an old habit
that he had renewed. He seemed very
penitent, but told me that he could not
possibly leave it off suddenly. He said
that if he discontinued the use of the drug
for twenty-four hours he would be utterly


helpless and unmanned, and twelve hours
more of abstinence would cause him to
suffer what he emphatically designated as
the horrors of the damned.
He, however, left the morphia syringe in
my possession, and requested that every
six hours I would let him have
half a syringe full of the fluid from
the bottle, and each time replace with
water the fluid I had taken out of the
bottle.
Next day, the doctor called, and quite
approved of the agreement we had come
to, but cautioned me to be careful that
he had no other syringes or supplies of
morphia secreted. He said that a man
or woman once possessed of the morphia
habit had neither conscience or truth-
fulness, and would even rather commit
murder than leave off the pernicious habit.
“But,” he added, “our friend the clair-
voyant appears to be a man of determina-
tion, and will probably keep his word
this time.”


His words proved true, and within a
week or ten days, during which Dillon
appeared to suffer keenly, the supply of
fluid became so attenuated by frequent ad-
ditions of water that ultimately I ceased
using it, and at Dillon’s own suggestion,
the bottle and syringe were thrown into
the trap of a gutter in front of the house.
Dillon became his own self again, and
our business kept on prospering. During
the evenings, lately, instead of wandering
aimlessly about the streets of the town,
as had been our wont, we used to retire
to our sitting room, and Dillon would
entertain us with his sleight-of-hand
tricks and dissertations on psychological
research; and, acting under his instruc-
tions, I soon became an adept in leger-
demain, physiognomy, and phrenology
(which, by the way, Dillon didn’t believe
in), but that which most interested me
after all were his peculiar views upon the
subject, which, for the want of a better
term, he called “thought-reading.” He
was a great admirer of the mystic works


and writings of Edgar Allen Poe, and
used to eulogise the great acuteness of
his reasoning in what he called mental
analysis, as exemplified in Dupin, one
of the personages depicted by Poe.
“Careful observation,” he said, “proves
to me that it is possible to interpret any
person’s thoughts from his unconscious
acts, and the so-called mind-reading is
nothing more or less than the actual in-
terpretation of certain muscular twitch-
ings, which it is impossible for the ma-
jority of people to control.” And he him-
self seemed to exemplify this theory by
the very shrewd manner in which he ap-
peared to interpret what was passing in
the minds of others.
Our extraordinary success as clair-
voyants by this time had. created con-
siderable discussion in Sydney and the
country, and a few judicious letters
written by Dillon under assumed names,
such as “Inquirer after Truth,” “Ob-
server,” and “One Who was Cured,”
which he by some means got inserted in


the daily papers, attracted general atten-
tion, and caused a lively correspondence
in the papers. Some of these letters as-
serted that most extraordinary and wonder-
ful cases, which had baffled the regular
practitioners, had been cured by the clair-
voyants; while others scouted the idea, and
classed us as unmitigated scoundrels and
swindlers; and some, again, would be par-
tially convinced of the genuineness of the
phenomena, and wrote asking the editor for
further information.
Then clergymen would interfere, and even
they were divided into two sections, one
part taking neutral ground and suggesting
careful observation and inquiry into each
case, while others advocated the theory of
Faith-healing as exemplified in the New
Testament. Dillon chuckled over all this,
as he looked upon the whole correspondence
as being a wonderfully cheap advertise-
ment of his skill.
Many of the medical profession also rush-
ed into the controversy, and in no measured
terms denounced our practices. But with


a certain class these denunciations were
looked upon as the outcome of professional
jealousy, and many advocates of this view
were weak-minded enough to encourage this
opinion expressed in such terms, and there-
by elevated us to a level with that of the
regular practitioners.


CHAPTER VIII.—BIRDS OF A FEATHER.
We soon discovered that there were many
others of our kind in Sydney, and with that
fellow-feeling—“that touch of nature which
makes all the world akin”—such persons
sought us out, evidently with a view of
comparing notes and exchanging confiden-
ces.
One man, whose name was Callendar
Shuttle, who had been many years in the
profession practising as a clairvoyant and
medical herbalist, struck me as being a re-
markable example of a misguided man, who
thoroughly believed in himself.
He was a slight, delicate man, about
thirty-three or thirty-five years of age,
of medium height, with a pale face
of a cadaverous aspect, long yellow
hair, which he wore in great profu-
sion, straw-colored whiskers and beard


somewhat closely trimmed, pale grey eyes,
and very light-colored silky eyelashes and
eyebrows, long white delicate fingers, and
a very cold, clammy hand. He used to
walk about in a quiet, cat-like manner,
and had a slight stoop in his shoulders.
His manner was very dreamy and pre-
occupied, though while with us he was
perfectly candid and open, as well as sim-
ple-minded.
In the course of conversation, he stated
that he had commenced life as a black-
smith, and by some sudden impulse, when
at the age of 20, he determined to become
a clairvoyant. This idea was first put into
his head by his mother, who declared that
he had a special gift for that purpose. He
had never attended a hospital or medical
school, and hadn’t the slightest idea with
reference to the constituents or use of
medicines.
Though born in Sydney, he had paid a
visit to relatives in England; did not go
home for the purpose of medical study, but
merely for the benefit of his health. Close-


ly questioned as to what he considered to
he the definition of the word “clairvoyant,”
he acknowledged he was unable to give it.
All that he knew was that he had the gift
of medical clairvoyance.
He had been practising eleven years,
and had acquired a considerable amount
of fame, and had made some money,
which he had invested in house pro-
perty Though he could not ex-
plain the word “clairvoyance,” he believ-
ed it was the common name for far-seeing,
under the influence of this power he diag-
nosed and treated people. He believed it to
be a kind of mesmeric influence. Could not
say whether it was a higher power or not;
some people thought and said he was in-
fluenced by the devil. How his influence
came he was unable to define, but he de-
clared that in his normal condition he was
not conscious of what he had said or done
while in the clairvoyant state. He occa-
sionally did read books on medicine, but
that was only for his own amusement, and
was not of any benefit to his practice. He


explained that he carried on two classes of
business —that of a claivoyant, and the
other in a shop for the sale of drugs, and
such desultory study as he followed in the
science of medicine was simply to enable
him to recommend certain herbs when pa-
tients elected to buy them in preference to
consulting him as a clairvoyant. He con-
gratulated himself that the laws of the col-
ony of New South Wales were such as en-
abled him to carry on this practice with
impunity. He informed us he could re-
main in his clairvoyant condition from nine
to twelve each day, and occasionally in the
afternoon.
He never became clairvoyant on Sundays,
and during that condition should the brain
become overstrained he could resume his
normal condition at will.
Dillon took great interest in this Mr.
Shuttle, who, to his mind, was interesting
psychological study. So on his departure
we discussed him.
“You see here.” remarked Dillon, “a
striking exemplification of that well-known


■saying that by continually repeating the
same falsehood the liar ultimately believes
it himself. This man in his early days
through the foolish fancy of his mother got
a notion into his head that he was gifted
with the science of healing. Though fool-
ish in this respect, she was probably a
strong-minded dogmatic woman, and im-
pressed this seeming truth upon her son’s
mind so forcibly that he implicitly be-
lieved it. As he proceeded on his down-
ward course he found other foolish and
weak-minded people whom he impressed
with the same belief. Like the snowball
as it rolls along and collects bulk, so did
this man’s belief in himself become fos-
tered and augmented by the belief and en-
couragement of others, and here we find
the most arrant humbug, who for years
has been humbugging others, and finally
succeeds in so far deceiving himself as to
have implicit faith in the bona-fldes of his
own acts. How far this man is responsible
for any possible injury he may have done
to the health, and even lives of his fellow-


creatures it is impossible for us to judge.
The fact of his having so far attained the
esteem of certain sections of the commu-
nity, and of having obtained in return for
his services a certain amount of wealth
and worldly possessions, but proves the
correctness of the hypothesis that I formed
when entering into our own disreputable
undertaking. If you remember, I then in-
formed you that I considered three-fourths
of the population of this city were foolish,
gullible, and superstitious people, who, by
their inane actions, form a grand field for
the depredations of the class of whom
Shuttle is a representative.”
At Dillon’s suggestion we cultivated the
acquaintance of other clairvoyants and
■quacks, and a very interesting study we
found such to prove. Probably at a later
period I may find it necessary to amplify
and publish the notes and comments that I
made at this time.


CHAPTER IX.—EPISODE IN AN
OPIUM DEN.
One night, past midnight, a cab drove up
to the door, and presently a loud knocking
reverberated throughout the house. As a
rule we paid no attention to night calls,
as Dillon did not care to encourage what
be called a visiting practice. On this oc-
casion we took no notice of the knocking
until at last it became so loud and persist-
ent that we were afraid the whole neigh-
borhood wouM be aroused, and general at-
tention be attracted to our house, so Dillon
said —
“Brook, old boy, you had better answer
that; possibly it may lead to some adven-
ture.”
So somewhat reluctantly and, I am afraid,
with much inward grumbling and bad


thoughts, I found my way downstairs, and
opened the door, with the knocker of which
someone was at the moment very busily
hammering.
This someone proved to be a fat China-
man, dressed in the loose clothing of his
country, who nearly tumbled on top of me.
Being low-sized and squat, he had to stand
on his toes in order to reach the knocker,
and when I swung the door inwards he,
for a time, hung on to the knocker, and
ended that gymnastic exercise by falling
on his face in front of me.
“Waugh,” he exclaimed, getting up as
quickly as possible. “You belly good doc-
tor? Come away at once; woman dying—
my rooms.”
“Oh!” I said; "no doctor here, John; go
away up town.”
“Oh, no,” said he; “you belly good doc-
tor; send here for Dr. de Lion. Come
away at once, now, woman dying,” con-
tinued he, getting very much excited.
“Wait a moment then.” And up I went
to consult Dillon, for the first time detect-


ing the fumes of opium on the Chinaman’s
breath and clothing.
I informed him a Chinaman want-
ed him to go to see a dying woman, and
stating that I thought it might possibly be
someone dying in an opium smoker’s sa-
loon—a kind of place as prevalent in Syd-
ney at that time as during the present
day.
“A little fat Chinaman,” cried Dillon, out
of breath and excited.
“Yes,” said I.
“I know him, Johnny Ah Look. You’re
right; ’tis an opium shop. Better go
Brook; I’ve been there. The misery, de-
crepitude, and depravity you will find there
will be a revelation to you. There’s no
risk; do go, they don’t want a regular doc-
tor; the likes of us will do for the likes of
them.”
So I rapidly threw on the rest of my
clothes, and presently was rattling along
the ill-paved streets of Sydney to some
address in Lower George-street, which the
Chinaman gave the cabman.


We presently pulled up at the entrance to
a lane which was between two houses —
two-storeyed houses, with balconies. Over
the windows were dark boards, having
large Chinese letters written in gold, the
of which appeared to reflect back
the light of a dim lamp on the opposite
side of the street.
“This way, doctor,” said my guide, lead-
ing me up the dark lane, where he present-
ly stopped at what proved to be a door,
but which I could not distinguish as such
owing to the gloom by which I was sur-
rounded.
He then gave a peculiar kind of knock,
which was promptly answered from within
by other, but not similar, knocks. He
again knocked, and I heard several bolts
being withdrawn, the lock shot back, and
the door was opened by some unseen per-
son.
My guide led me within the portal, and
the door then was carefully shut and lock-
ed. After a whispered consultation, a
match was struck, and I found myself in


a long, narrow passage, having a door at
each side, and another at the end—all
closed.
The person who admitted us was a gaunt
hollow-cheeked Chinaman, above the ave-
rage height of his race; his dusky skin and
cadaverous look contrasted strangely with'
the set of clean white pyjamas which he
wore, and thick-soled silk-covered slippers
which he had on his feet. He beckoned
us toward the door at the end of the pas-
sage, whither he led us, and again the
ceremony of knocking and replying was-
gone through, and we were ushered into a
room which presented a most extraordinary
sight.
A small room, not more than twelve feet
square, which was fitted up like a ship,
with bunks arranged in two tiers, occupied
three sides of the room—four hunks on
each of these sides—having bright, color-
ed chintz hangings in front of them, par-
tially hiding the occupants. I found that
in nine of the bunks were human beings
of all conditions and nationalities, and.


what appeared to me the more revolting,
in two of them were females. What would
have been gloomy silence was disturbed
only by the heavy breathing of the in-
mates, all of whom were in a heavy sleep,
all breathing more or less loudly, which in
some instances culminated in an occasional
snort or loud snoring. Before I had time
to take in completely the whole mise-en-
scene or “misery unseen,” as Dillon sub-
sequently interpreted the phrase, my guide.
Ah Look, directed my attention to what at
first appeared to me to be a heap of cloth-
ing in one corner of the room. On closer
inspection, however, It proved to be a fe-
male form partially dressed in dark cloth-
ing huddled on the floor, with the head and
shoulders supported against one corner,
where an angle was formed by the juxta-
position of two bunks.
Dishevelled, dark hair covered and con-
cealed her face, and was puffed out like
silken threads as she breathed in a la-
bored manner.
I stooped down and felt for her hand,


which I found to be cold and clammy.
This action seemed to arouse her, for
she withdrew the hand which I had touch-
ed, and placed it on the floor to raise her-
self, while with the other she brushed
back the tangled masses of hair, and for
the first time I beheld her face, a sight
which became indelibly impressed upon my
memory, and which I fear I shall never
forget to my dying day. A high, pale
forehead, arched eyebrows, dark, flashing
eyes, having in them an unearthly fire,
clearly-cut, small refined features, some-
what of a Grecian type, but the whole en-
dued with a most wretched, haggard ex-
pression of misery and horror. The eyes,
though dark and luminous, were deeply set
in the orbits, and surrounded by dark
rings, partly produced by the shadow of
the overhanging brows, and partly by a
deep ring of dark pigment, clearly defin-
ing the lower eyelids, and shading gradu-
ally into the texture of the face. The fea-
tures were drawn, and the very tightness
of the skin covering them, combined with


the dark halo around each eye, appeared to
add even a greater air of delicacy and re-
finement to her features.
She looked up at me in a dazed, almost
apathetic, manner, muttered, “Who are
you? What do you want? Why, oh, why
don’t they bring Lionel to me.”
She heaved a great sigh and sank back
into indifference. I tried to feel for her
pulse, an accomplishment I had learned
from Dillon, but was unable to detect it.
I noticed that her breathing appeared at
intervals to fail, and between times it be-
came loud and strong. All this, in addi-
tion to the death-like pallor of her face,
glassy brilliancy of the eyes, and cold and
clammy feeling of her hands, accompanied
by occasional jerkings of the limbs, made
me assume that her life was in imminent
peril.
Notwithstanding the unprincipled man-
ner by which I and my colleagues were
making a living, all feeling of what was
right was not entirely deadened within me.
I felt convinced that this poor creature


was in urgent need of skilful help, and I
decided that, at any risk, she should have
it. I bethought myself of the kind doctor
who had taken such an interest in Dil-
lon, and remembering his address, I told
Ah Look that this doctor was a friend of
mine, and that he must bring him.
“Waugh!” said he, “you belly good doc-
tor. Too far to go; cabman cost too much
money.” I shook my fist in his face, put a
half-sovereign into his hand, and told him
that if he did not do as I bid him I would
first break every bone in his body, and
then tell the police that he was killing his
wife by neglect.
Whether it was due to my threats or the
gold I had given him, he said, “Belly well,”
and disappeared through the door.
I now Lad leisure to take in more of the
surroundings.
On that side of the room where there
were no bunks was a small raised platform,
supported by trestles and covered with
matting, on which reclined two figures
facing one another. One was the tall.


gaunt Chinaman in white pyjamas who ad-
mitted us through the outer door, and fac-
ing him was a thin, haggard, and
decrepit-looking object—a hunchbacked
Chinaman, whose extraordinarily de-
formed shoulders supported a head
having the most wizened little face possible
to imagine. It was of a parchment color
and texture, and presented more wrinkles
than I ever saw in a human face before.
This creature I assumed to be the Cer-
berus who opened the inner door in re-
sponse to Ah Look’s mysterious knocks.
He contrasted with his gaunt companion
not only in form and feature, but also in
clothing, which was of a bluish color —a
kind of glazed linen, and consisted only of
a loosely-fitting blouse and trousers, which
were very wide and baggy in the legs; he
was barefooted. Both were reclining side-
ways on the platform, and facing one an-
other, each one having his head resting on
a raised box, on the top of which was some
folded clothing, acting as a cushion. There
was a small oblong tray between them,


and they were occupied in preparing their
pipes for opium-smoking. On the tray was
a small lamp, protected by an improvised
lamp-glass made out of the neck of a
brandy bottle, provided with a cotton wick,
and, as I subsequently learned, fed by com-
mon fat.
On the tray were also some little galley
pots containing the prepared opium, a
number of pipe heads, and some long knit-
ting needles.
The hunchbacked Chinaman seemed an
expert, and I watched his movements with
much interest. He scooped out of the
little pot a small piece of the prepared
opium, about the size of a bean, fixed it
upon the point of the needle, and held it
over the lamp while it spluttered and burn-
ed as he twisted the needle in various
directions, so as to expose all sides of the
morsel to the flames of the lamp. All this
time he held the pipe in the other hand,
and I may as well describe it here.
It consisted then of a piece of bamboo


nearly 2ft. long, and more than an inch in
diameter. At two-thirds its length from
one end projected the bowl, made of red
earthenware, about the size and appear-
ance of a squat penny inkbottle, fixed by
its mouth to the bamboo stem; there was
no cavity in the pipe head —merely a
minute hole in the bottom of the appar-
ently inverted inkbottle. The opium hav-
ing been sufficiently burned and softened—
“cooked,” os it is called —he now smeared it
over the surface of the pipe head, which he
then inverted over the lamp for further
burning, wffiile he applied the long end of
the bamboo to his mouth, and then drew
several long inspirations through the tube,
and, after a pause, slowly exhaled a quan-
tity of bluish-grey smoke from his nostrils.
Another lump of opium was then pre-
pared as before, and the whole process was
repeated several times.
As I watched the frequent repetition of
the lengthy operation of preparing the mor-
sel, and the comparatively short duration
of the whiffing proceeding, the whole thing


struck me as being a particularly trouble-
some business.
The thick, heavy air of the room was
commencing to have a deleterious effect
upon me; my breathing became gasping, my
face became burning hot, and my temples
throbbed with a feeling as though I had a
dozen s/ledge hammers working within my
skull. I felt as if the floor of the room
were rocking, and the bunks appeared to be
moving around me, and assuming all kinds
of weird and fantastic shapes. A heavy
weight oppressed my chest, just like a
nightmare. I felt it would be a relief to
scream out, to move—even to breathe; but
I was utterly powerless. The form of the
gaunt Ohinaman and his wizened little
companion multiplied Indefinitely, and com-
menced to waltz round me, assuming the
most grotesque and fantastic shapes, some-
times larger, sometimes smaller, circling
more and more rapidly, shrieking out at
one time in sonorous and metallic notes,
next harsh and loud, again in tones
soft, low, and musical. Suddenly


what seemed to he a deep oblivion took
possession of me, and I knew no more.
I was wakened from what must have
been a deep swoon by someone shaking me
vigorously by the shoulder. It took some
time for me to collect my wits, but gradu-
ally coming to my senses I saw standing
before me Ah Hook and my friend Dr.
Nickson.
“What!” exclaimed! the doctor, in a
cheery voice. “Surely you are not at this
kind of work?”
“No,” I answered, “if you mean opium
smoking, but the wretched vapor in the
room has permeated to my very inner self,
and I had unconsciously dropped off into a
heavy slumber.”
"Ah, yes, I see,” replied he. “On your
first visit to a shop like this, with its close
atmosphere, the fumes would be sure to
overpower you. Come, now, what have we
here?” and he proceeded to examine the
recumbent form on the floor. He unbut-
toned her dress in front, and listened to
her chest by means of his stethoscope, and


then felt her pulse. He examined her feet,
having first removed her shoes and stock-
ings, then scrutinised her eyes with much
care.
“This is not opium,” said he. “Why,
her pupils are widely dilated. Let me
see,” and here, hy means of a spoon which
was handed to him, he forced open her
mouth, and felt her tongue with his finger.
“As dry as a chip,” muttered he. Sud-
denly he turned to Ah Look, saying, in
stem tones,
“Now, Ah Look, as you value your lib-
erty, tell me what have you been doing to
this girl.”
“I do nothing,” replied the Chinaman,
assuming an air of injured innocence. “She
no smoke opium, but put belly little squirt
in her arm. Me can no stop her.”
“Ah, that’s it,” said Dr. Nickson. “We’ve
seen that before, haven’t we, Brook?”and
he commenced searching the pocket of her
gown.
“Look, here are the cursed things,” and
he produced a small square leather case.


which he opened, and there, sure enough,
was the little hypodermic syringe, with
two hollow needles, each fitted on a socket,
and several glass tubes, some of which were
partially filled' with tablets and some
empty. These he examined, speaking as
though to himself,
“Morphia sulph. half a grain, empty!”
said he. “Morphia sulph. a grain, atropine
one-fiftieth of a grain, pretty strong, also
empty! Ah, here’s another one, half-emp-
ty,” he continued; “What’s in this? Atro-
pine sulph. one-fiftieth of a grain. That
explains all,” he exclaimed. “By some
means she has got hold of a hypodermic
syringe with assorted tubes of tablets,
and having used up all the morphia and
morphia-atropine tablets, she has been
unwittingly poisoning herself with atropine.
Here, I’ll soon rouse her,” and producing
from his pocket a somewhat similar case
he selected a tube, from which he took a
tablet, which he dissolved in a little water
in a teaspoon, provided by the Chinaman.
“It’s the best at hand, and we must be


prompt,” lie remarked. “I think the in-
jection of some pilocarpine will bring her
round.”
He accordingly laid bare her upper left
arm, which to my inexperienced eyes ap-
peared all bleeding and sore with numerous
punctures.
“Poor thing, poor thing!” said he, pity-
ingly. “What a curse this wretched mania
is!”
He called for a basin of water, and care-
fully sponged the arm, drying it with his
own clean silk handkerchief, and then
deftly injected into the arm the fluid in
which he had dissolved the tablet.
“You’ll notice a wonderful change within
the next few minutes,” said he, and as if
by magic his words soon proved true.
Within five minutes the labored breath-
ing had become soft and regular, the jerk-
ing movement of the limbs almost subsided
while the harsh, dry skin gradually be-
came softened and moist; then, presently,
huge beads of perspiration seemed to issue
from every pore, and a flush suffused her


cheeks. She opened her eyes in a dazed
manner, and the widely-dilated pupils
seemed inclined to contract under the in-
fluence of the light. She looked up in-
quiringly, and muttered in a disappointed
tone,
“It’s not Lionel after all, and yet,” she
added, “I saw him the other day, but, oh,
so changed! I would not have known it
was he, even then, had it not been for the
start of recognition he gave before he fled
from me.”
Here she gave a little hysterical laugh,
and said,
“One would have thought he had seen a
spectre!”
Her eyes closed, and she commenced
muttering some unintelligible words, and
gradually fell into a quiet slumber.
“Where is her bedroom, John?” said the
doctor, stooping down, and taking her frail
figure in his arms.
“Lead on, I’ll follow.” Guided by the
Chinaman, he carried her out into the pas-
sage through which we had entered, and


turned into one of the rooms, off the side
of the hall, which was a comfortably-fur-
nished bedroom. He laid the girl gently
on the bed, saying to the Chinaman that
he must have her watched all night, and
see that every precaution was taken
against her using the syringe again.
Having given some further instructions
with reference to her nourishment, and
other matters, the doctor and I left, and
wended our ways to our respective homes,
he first wishing me a cordial good-night,
and expressing his willingness to take
charge of the case, at the same time telling
me, as it was a very interesting one, I
could call and see her whenever I liked.
Daylight was breaking when I reached
home; Dillon and Walton were in a deep
sleep, so I retired to bed, and it was not
long before I was also in a profound slum-
ber.


CHAPTER X—AN UNEXPECTED
DENOUEMENT.
It was fully ten o’clock when I woke. Dil-
lon was by this time busily engaged with
the usual crowd of patients, so I had no
chance of relating my adventure until we
met at luncheon.
He listened with some interest to my
narration, and seemed strangely agitated
when I related the sick woman’s muttered
utterances about Lionel. Something in his
manner struck me—a kind of constraint,
with an effort to appear calm. I had be-
come such an apt pupil of his in the art of
observing little things that I could not
fail to see that he was more deeply moved
by my narration of this incident of the
poor girl in the opium-smoking house than
he wished me to discover. Thinking the
matter over subsequently I thought that


probably the similarity of her case wuh
his own morphia experiences may have
struck home, and awakened a chord of
sympathy within his breast.
I, therefore, was not surprised when at
our evening meal he, in a forced, calm
manner suggested that he should accom-
pany me to see the girl.
“It’s a case of some interest to me,” he
explained, “not only from a medical point
of view, but its psychological aspect ap-
peals to me. These opium-smokers under-
go, mentally and bodily, what might be
called a retrograde metamorphosis, and
while their bodily strength diminishes,
their mental and moral tone also deterio-
rates in quality. You say this girl has an
appearance of refinement about her; pos-
sibly she may have been well educated and
once held her head high in polite or dis-
tinguished society. It would be interesting
if we could extract her history and trace
her downward course step by step from her
first error to her ultimate downfall.”
“Surely,” I exclaimed, “you are not go-


ing to cross-question this poor dying girl?”
“Ah, no/’ said ne in a cold tone; his
voice seemed to harden as he added—“lf
she be dying she may have some friend or
relative to whom a message might be con-
veyed. She may have some wrong that
may require redress —or revenge.” The
last word was almost lost in the hissing
manner in which it was uttered.
His manner was so stern and impressive
that I was startled.
No more was said on either side, and we
hailed a cab. and drove in silence to the
Chinaman’s house, where another surprise
awaited me.
Dillon walked rapidly up the passage,
and with an aptness that amazed me per-
formed the same series of knocks that my
Chinese guide had given the previous night,
with similar results, proving that he was
well acquainted with the locality and habits
of those therein.
Ah Look in person opened the door, and
saluted him with a servile greeting which
Dillon hastily checked by saying—


“All right. Ah Look; no fusS. I’ve come
to see this wife of yours that my friend
here has been attending.’’
“Belly good, doctor! Come ’long, this
way,” and he preceded us into the room
where we had placed her.
She was lying in the bed in such a posi-
tion that prevented us seeing her face as
we entered. Seated by the bedside was a
stout young European woman, dressed in a
loose print wrapper. Her face was bloated
and dissipated looking. It transpired she
was the wife of the gaunt Chinaman in the
white pyjamas, and was much addicted to
both drink and opium; in fact, she was
then in a half-besotted condition, and to-
tally unfit to fulfil the duties of a nurse.
The patient, we were informed, had had a
quiet sleep, waking at intervals of one or
two hours, when she was fed with beef-tea
or milk, according to the instructions of
the doctor.
Our voices seemed to rouse her, for she
made a movement, and uttered a low moan,
which to me seemed to resemble the word


“ Lionel,” and which caused Dillon to start
forward and lean over the prostrate form
on the bed with a look on his face betray-
ing agonising and conflicting emotions;
expectancy of something anticipated, yet
terrible horror at its realisation, and grief
for the object of his solicitude.
“My God! it is she,” he exclaimed, as he
turned her face to the light, and with ea-
ger eyes gazed upon her features.
“I thought her dead, and find her thus.
Why, oh, why did she not die?”
He turned fiercely on Ah Look, clutching
him by the collar of his shirt in a manner
that made the Chinaman’s yellow face
grow first livid and then pallid with
fear.
“Where did you get her, you dog? What
brought her here?”
Before the Chinaman could make answer
or make any effort to free himself, a voice
from the bed called in faint, yet distinct
tones —“It is Lionel come at last to see
me die.”
The girl raised herself into a sitting pos-


ture, and held out her arms in a beseeching
manner, her great staring eyes gazing
into his face, then, with a sighing groan,
she fell back on the pillows apparently
lifeless.
Dillon released his grasp of the China-
man’s collar, and rushed towards her,
while he gasped out,
“Fetch Dr. Nickson, for God’s sake.
Brook, and, oh, be quick!”
I instantly departed. Fortunately, the
doctor was at home, and we were both
back in about half an hour, when we found
Dillon seated on the bed, with the dying
girl’s head supported on his breast. The
doctor made a rapid examination, feeling
her pulse and listening to her heart. He
shook his head.
“I am afraid, my friend,” said he, “we
are grappling with a forlorn hope. Her
vital powers are rapidly failing, and her
time in this world can only be counted by
hours, if not minutes.”
“Doctor,” said Dillon, in a solemn ear-
nest voice, “can you not give her some-


thing to restore consciousness for a short
time. I know of this girl and her people,
and there are some things that I must
learn from her. I appeal to your sense of
duty for the sake of humanity.”
The doctor considered, and then said
gravely, “Yes, it will be possible to restore
consciousness, but the amount of energy
required will shorten the duration of her
life. Is it very important?”
“It is of such importance that I would
give all that I’m worth as well as my life
itself for her consciousness to be restored
to enable her to have half-an-hour’s ration-
al conversation.”
“Well,” said the doctor, “the position is
this —her vital energy is rapidly running
down, her system has been exhausted by
opium-smoking and morphia injections, the
influence of which has now departed from
her. She is suffering from the nerve ex-
haustion induced by the want of the drug.
That is killing her. A fair morphia injec-
tion will give her a brief span of conscious


vitality, but its repetition will be fraught
with risk. I think it’s safe to do it. Yes,
I will do it.”
As the kind doctor spoke his voice soften-
ed, became husky, and a film of moisture
seemed to suffuse his eyes. He gazed with
a look of sympathy and interest on the un-
conscious form on the bed. A moment
after, he produced his little case and in-
strument, again prepared the fluid, and in-
jected it, while we all awaited the result
with intense anxiety.
This time fully fifteen minutes elapsed
before any noticeable effect could be ob-
served; the breathing gradually became
steadier and quieter; she opened her mouth
and yawned; gave a second yawn, and
stretched out both her arms. She then
yawned a third time, renewed the stretch-
ings of her arms, then the legs, and finally
gave a heavy sigh. All this time Dillon
was seated behind her at the head of the
bed, and supported her semi-prostrate form


in a half sitting posture. Opening her
eyes, the girl looked up in his face, and
said:
“Do not tell me this is a dream —one of
those horrid, vivid opium dreams! Are
you not really Lionel come to see me die?
Die! Oh, so happy!”
Dillon’s well-shaped, clean-cut features
appeared to set in a defiant, stern look,
which expression was emphasised by the
strong shadows cast by the solitary candle
in the room. Dark rings surrounded his
eyes, and compressed lips, reminding me of
poor Sweet, which somehow brought vivid-
ly to my mind the death-bed marriage
scene at which we had once officiated.
Something within me seemed to tell me
that some dreadful tragedy was approach-
ing, and that I was soon to unravel the
dark mystery of Dillon’s life.
“Doctor, is she conscious?” asked Dillon
in a tremulous whisper. The doctot felt
his patient’s pulse.
“The morphia is doing its work,” said
he; “the pulse is resuming its tone —get-


ting steadier and fuller; in a few minutes
she will answer rationally any question
you may wish to ask her. Do not excite
her; the less energy she expends the longer
she will hold out.”
“Doctor, kindly call again in two hours.
You two leave the room!” This to Ah
Look and the woman friend.
“I want you, Brook, to remain with me.”
The doctor having departed, Ah Look and
his companion also left the room. Obeying
Dillon’s instructions, I locked the door;
then came over and sat down on the chair
beside the bed.
The following is the narrative of this
poor girl’s broken life, which Dillon eli-
cited from her, not fluently, hut patiently
and laboriously, amidst many interruptions,
painful breathings, sighings, and faintings.
The scene terribly impressed me, and even
now, without an effort, I can reproduce it
all in my mind’s eye; the light of the flick-
ering candle casting varying shadows in
every direction; Dillon with his strongly
set, expressive face; the dying girl col-


lapsed upon his breast, with earnest glances
and broken words, detailing the incidents
of her miserable life; and I, unused to
such scenes, almost overcome with emo-
tion. However, the potent drug injected by
the kind doctor did its work, and I now re-
produce in more collected form the dis-
jointed and often interrupted narrative told
by the dying girl.


CHAPTER XI.—THE STORY OF MABEL
VANE—THE INFLUENCE OF A FA-
THER’S PORTRAIT.
“I need not tell you, my dear Lionel,
what a blow it was to me when I received
your letter stating that you had suddenly
decided to give up your student career and
hurry off to the American War. Though
you were kind enough to say that you
were afraid that, should we meet, my en-
treaties against you going might make you
swerve from your purpose—perhaps prevent
you from going at all, and check your
prosperous career—my love for you was
such that any wish expressed by you was
my law. Perhaps it was thoughtlessness
on your part, but it was a terrible shock
to me when your letter said that you would
not write again for some time.
“You stated that you would devise means
by which an early intimation should be
conveyed to me in case of your death.


When I read that passage a chill seemed
to strike through me, and I felt so deso-
late that the thought uppermost in my
mind was how I should let you know, were
I to die. However, when you wrote that
you would leave me to the care of your old
fellow-student, Merton Dyke, I thought it
possible you would make some arrange-
ments with him for conveying messages to
me.
“You and Merton Dyke were the only
two lodgers that my grandmother had,
and though I liked you from the first mo-
ment I saw you I never could overcome a
certain repugnance I felt against Dyke,
and it was always a puzzle to me why
you and Dyke, men of such opposite dis-
positions and natures, should have become
such firm friends. You seemed to be so
open, generous, warm-hearted, and affec-
tionate, while Dyke, with his cold, grey
eyes, icy manner, cool and calculating
ways, seemed to repel me.
“Every action of his seemed to be promp-
ted by some subtle motive, and I could


not help noticing the influence that he had
obtained over you—an influence that was
not for good. I remarked how he used to
prey upon your generosity and good na-
ture, and take advantage of every weak
point in your character. I also discovered
that he had a powerful, masterful mind,
and the strength of will that carries all
before it, and he seemed to subjugate to
his influence the wills of others —indeed,
I myself often with trembling felt that
when he willed it he possessed a myste-
rious power over me; at the same time
knowing your goodness and trusting in
your love for me, I submitted to your de-
cision as one would submit to the decrees
of Providence, although my whole being
was filled with the greatest desolation at
your very extraordinary and unexpected
departure.
“The next morning Dyke appeared at the
breakfast table, and took possession of
your place. I resented bitterly his act of
sitting in your seat, and his formally invit-
ing grandmother to occupy his old one. He


explained to her in an offhand manner that
you had had an unexpected call to go to
America, or some place like it, over the
water, and would be absent for several
months. He said that both of us were
left in his charge, and he must look out
for another lodger to take your room.
“Now, I will tell you something that I
never mentioned to you before. You re-
member father’s likeness? It used to hang
on the wall opposite my seat at the dining-
room table. My mother died, as you are
aware, when I was a baby, and my father
lived until I was six years old. When he
died grandmother told me that he had gone
into the picture, which I, in my Innocence,
believed to be a fact. So, father being no
longer in the house for me to run and tell
him all my little troubles, and ask his
advice, I got into the way of going to the
picture, to which I used to pour out all
my infantile joys and sorrows.
“This went on, even until that period of
time when my own maturer sense might
have told me of the futility of the practice.


which, however, like other habits, clung
to me, and I daresay would have remained
still had not some things happened which
rendered it impossible.
“When you first came to lodge with us
I consulted father’s likeness about you,
and the picture seemed to smile back at
me in an encouraging way as much as to
say it was all right. When I commenced
to like you, and in the silence of the night
told the picture so, it seemed to smile
hack and nod in an approving manner.
When we had that explanation, and you
told me that you loved me, and said that
one day, when things should be brighter,
and you would be a doctor, and would have
made a practice, you would make me your
wife, I thought the time would not pass
quickly enough until you were all in bed,
so that I could privately and confidentially
convey the precious news to the picture,
which again smiled back at me, and I felt
encouraged, knowing that I was loved by a
man worthy of my respect and affection.
“The night I received your letter telling


me of your sudden determination not to
return to the house, but to go away with-
out kissing me or saying goodbye, I had a
very long and painful confidence with the
picture.
“I stood on the sofa, so as to be near it,
and read your letter to it, and asked what
it all meant. The face looked pained and
stern; then gradually the expression melted
into a sorrowful look, and for a moment
I believed that I saw tears trembling on
the lower eyelids, and when I asked what
he thought of Merton Dyke, the expression
so rapidly changed to one of anger and
horror that a supernatural terror took pos-
session of me, and I fled to my bedroom,
where I wept myself to sleep.
“No doubt this incident, possibly an illu-
sion on my part, made me feel a greater
repugnance against Dyke. From that
time he asserted himself as my adviser
and guide, and in a sympathetic manner
lamented your hastiness in leaving, but
told me it would be all right; he would
watch over me, and care for me just as


much as you would have done. Then com-
menced a series of arts and manoeuvres
which I little suspected then, but looking
back now on what has since occurred, I
can only too plainly see their aim and ob-
ject.
“He first commenced by flattering my
vanity, and on one occasion he brought
home a box containing a complete walking
suit of lady’s clothing, with a gay hat and
feathers. He explained to me they were a
present from his sister, whom he would
some day introduce to me. She was very
well off, and was anxious by this present
to show her appreciation and friendship
for me. This was followed by other pre-
sents of a similar nature, including even-
ing dresses, bonnets, and other costumes.
“I have since learned that these were the
dresses of his sister, who was a slight girl
of the same figure as myself. They were
not presents from her. She was dead, and
the clothing he presented to me he sub-
sequently confessed to have surreptitiously
obtained from her wardrobe the day after


her funeral, and the housemaid not only
lost her situation and her character, but
had her future life blighted through suspi-
cion having fallen upon her of having sto-
len the Clothes while the grief-stricken
family were attending the funeral.
“Having such nice clothing induced a wish
on my part to be seen wearing them, which
ambition Dyke fostered, and at such times
as he could do so he used to obtain invita-
tions for me to go out to dances and
theatres, but to this grandmother object-
ed, and in deference to her wishes I refused
to go, though often sorely tempted to do
so by his plausible sophistry.
“I could not fail to notice, however, how
gradually and imperceptibly his power and
will seemed to overmaster mine, so that
at last it was only necessary for him to
make a proposition in an authoritative
manner for me to feel impelled to meekly
acquiesce.
“All this was a matter of serious discus-
sion between me and my father’s picture,
and I was always conscious that whenever


Dyke’s name was introduced into the con-
versation the face of the likeness used to
assume a look of resentment and repug-
nance.
“About two months after you left me, he
one day made a proposal that I should ac-
company him to the opera, and suggested
that I should put a sleeping dose into
grandmother’s gruel, so that our departure
might be unobserved by her. It may seem
strange that, though I was overcome at the
idea of dosing poor old grandmother, yet
such was his influence over me that I
could not resist acceding to his Wishes. All
was, therefore, arranged, and the eventful
evening arrived —an evening fraught with
horrors that I even now dread to recall.
“Grandmother had not been very well all
day, and he, being a student of medicine,
prescribed that I should put some gin into
her gruel; he, with his usual astuteness,
knew that though Granny was a very tem-
perate woman, she was a great advocate
for the use of gin in all ills and ailments.
He also gave me a small bottle of fluid,


which he told me to mix up with her gruel,
and he cautioned me, should grandmother
complain of any bitter taste, I was to say
it was caused by a new flavor in the gin.
“The momentous time at length arrived.
Grandmother had her gruel at six o’clock;
she did not seem to like it; she complained
of its taste, and asked me if the groats I
made it from were sound. In fact, she
pushed it from her, and refused to take
any more. When I —oh! for the sorrow of
it! —Got cross with her, called her a nasty
old thing, and insisted on her taking it
against her will, though she appeared pa-
cified when I told her the taste was pro-
duced by the new flavored gin which Dyke
had ordered. About half an hour after
taking it she complained of headache and
giddiness, accompanied by extreme drowsi-
ness, and I had to help her to bed, and
within an hour she was in such a heavy
slumber that we could hear, her loud
breathing all over the house.
“With some trepidation I hurried to my
room, and with mixed feelings of sorrow


and pleasurable excitement, which I could
not explain, I nervously dressed myself
in the gewgaws and finery prepared for the
occasion.
“It was about twenty minutes to
eight when I was ready. Dyke was
already dressed, and had a cab
waiting at the door. I had one look at
grandmother before I left; she was still
noisily sleeping, so I put out the light in
her room, and the other rooms in the house,
leaving only one solitary candle in the
diningroom. While placing it on the table
an oppressed feeling of impending danger
took possession of me. Oh! how I felt in-
clined to consult my father’s picture; but,
prompted by a feeling that I was doing
something wrong and wicked, I dared not
look at the beloved face. For a moment I
stood irresolute, and felt that with no in-
herent power of my own could I do so; but
yet I instinctively felt that the picture
must be looking at me in sorrow, perhaps
with that appealing glance which I so often
had noticed of late when I consulted it


concerning Dyke—a glance that seemed to
implore me to have nothing more to do
with him.
I was interrupted by a hasty exclama-
tion from Dyke, asking me ‘What the
devil was keeping me?’ which shocked
me very much. I moved hastily towards
him, and then an irresistible impulse im-
pelled me to glance back at my father’s
portrait, and I was scared with horror to
find that it was apparently standing out in
relief from the canvas with an appealing
look on the face, as though imploring me
to come back. I really think now I would
have obeyed the mandate had not my com-
panion once more authoritatively, and with
an imprecation, commanded me to be quick
or we would he late for the play.
“He then somewhat roughly seized me by
the arm, and pushed, rather than helped
me into the cab, and, rapidly following, he
seated himself beside me. He seemed to
read my thoughts, and commenced talking
on all kinds of subjects, so as to engage
my attention and keep my wavering mind


from recurring to the foolish act that I was
now committing.
“We quickly passed through the brightly
lighted streets, and in due time we arrived
at the vestibule of the Opera House, and
we were soon seated in the dress circle
amongst a gay and fashionable audience.
“I can now recall but a vague idea of the
plot of the opera, and of my surroundings
there. I believe it was a performance
showing the sorrows of a love-lorn maiden
with whom all appeared to have gone well,
and she had almost reached the climax of
her happiness when, by some irresistible
power of evil fate, over which the lover
and his mistress had no control, they were
separated, and he had to leave her for ever.
She, tortured by adversity, beheld his de-
parture in a boat from beneath the over-
hanging leaves of the deadly upas tree,
where, overcome by its lethal emanations,
she sank into that slumber which brought
quiet and peace to her for evermore.
“The music, the brilliant lights, the gay
assemblage surrounding me, and the tragic


termination of the love story, all acted
powerfully on my emotions, and I was
deeply affected; indeed, I attracted atten-
tion by my violent sobbing and expressions
of sorrow —so much so, that I and my com-
panion became far more conspicuous than
suited his vanity. The play being over,
and the audience moving towards the
doors, I was requested to hurry on.
“Reaching the street, the cool air seemed
to revive me, and Dyke suggested ve
should walk home. The hour being late,
all the shops were closed, but at intervals
there were yet the hotels and gin palaces
brilliantly lighted up. Having walked some
distance, he paused before a quiet-looking
hotel, and suggested something about sup-
per. I remonstrated, stating that I had
arranged for a quiet little supper at home,
and also expressed my anxiety about grand-
mother. His will, as usual of late, gained
supremacy, and we entered.
“I shall not enter into any details of this
supper, or what followed, as I really re-
member nothing about it. I would that


this oblivion had then terminated my life.
The cowardly wretch must have drugged
me.
“It must have been daylight when,
wretched, miserable, broken-hearted, and
alone, I feebly wended my way towards
grandmother’s house. I found the latchkey
in my pocket, and with a terrible sense of
desolation, I opened the door.
“The air had an icy feel, which somehow
intensified the silence of the house as I
entered the hall —a terrible silence which,
in some mysterious way, weighed upon my
inner consciousness with a dismal forebod-
ing. I ascended the stairs that led to
grandmother’s room, and listened for the
loud breathing which I remembered to have
previously heard. Not a sound reached
me. I put my hand on the brass handle of
the door, the very coldness of which sent
a chill to my heart. Involuntarily my teeth
chattered, and I trembled all over. I felt
haunted by a terrible fear. Truly, indeed,
do coming events cast their shadows be-


fore. It may have been five minutes —it
may have been an hour, or even longer,
that I stood there, paralysed with fear,
and in a condition of helplessness, cling-
ing to that handle, unahle to open the
door, until, with a convulsive effort, I
seemed to pull myself together, and I
burst into the room. And then I thought
how foolishly weak and vacillating I was.
There lay grandmother, in a calm slumber,
the same smile playing over her features
which I used often to witness when I
brought her in her cup of tea before she
rose in the morning. I hastily retreated,
for fear I should waken her, and retired to
my own room, where I rapidly changed my
gay attire of the previous night for my or-
dinary house dress, and a very short time
elapsed before I re-entered the room with
her cup of tea. She lay exactly in the
same position as when I had previously left
her, and the morning having well ad-
vanced, I hurried forward to kiss her, hop-
ing thereby to waken her.
“Every atom of strength seemed to leave


my body, the tray with the tea on it
crashed to the floor, I sank trembling,
crying, and alternately shrieking with hys-
terical laughter. The cold, clammy fore-
head that I saluted proved to me that
grandmother was a corpse. The poor old
soul was dead. Oh, my God! poisoned
by the drug I had given her. The attack
which the shock had brought on must have
culminated in a fainting fit, for I seem to
have awakened out of oblivion to hear the
harsh grating tones of Dyke’s voice, as
he said,
“ ‘Hullo, what’s the row?’ I shrank
from him, put my hands to my eyes to
keep me from looking at him, and replied,
“ ‘This is your work, you villain —you
murderer! You have brought desolation
on me, and you have killed grandmother.’
“Hold your infernal tongue,’ cried
he, clutching me by the wrist. ‘lt
was you who killed her —you are
the murderer; but I will get you out
of this mess; leave matters to me for the
future. I shall be your protector-aye.


your guardian angel, if you like.’ The
latter words '.being accompanied by
a low, mocking laugh, which sounded
strangely out of place in that chamber of
death.
“What reply I made, I know not. Urged
on by some vague and shadowy recol-
lection of the proceedings of the pre-
vious night, almost demented by the
shock of my grandmother’s death, and
harrowed to the soul by the thought of
the sinister influence that my tormentor
had acquired over me, I must have spoken
strongly, and to the point, and raised my
voice to such a pitch that he in turn be-
came cowed and alarmed.
“ ‘For heaven’s sake,’ said he, ‘be quiet
or you will undo us both. For your grand-
mother’s death we are both equally guilty,”
and then he attributed all that he had
done to what he called his love for me.
“So awakening to the critical position in
which we were both placed, and overcome
by his mastery of my will, I became tract-
able, and did as he bid me. Through the


management of Dyke, when the inquest
was held, a verdict of natural causes was
returned. The doctor gave evidence that
she was aged and feeble, and passed away
during her sleep. The Coroner and jury
were satisfied, and one more murdered
body was buried, and the crime unde-
tected
“Being grandmother’s sole heiress, the
house and such other belongings as she had
possessed, came to me. Dyke remained
living in the house, and in due time intro-
duced me to his friends as his wife. I need
not tell you how matters would go with an
unprincipled villain like Dyke. He squan-
dered all my belongings; sold the house;
ultimately grew tired of me, and then
deserted me.
“When things came to the worst some
benevolent ladies took an interest in my
case. I think they called it a charitable
interest, if I mistake not.
“They supplied me with an outfit. I was
placed on board an emigrant ship, and in
due time landed in Sydney. By this time


I had acquired a taste for alcoholic stimu-
lants. I do not think it was for love of
them; at first they used to sicken and
nauseate me, hut I used them because at
times they would help me to forget, and at
other times they used to make me think of
you, Lionel, and the happy days we had to-
gether.
“One day a friend—at least she used to call
herself hy that sacred name—initiated me in-
to the intricacies of opium smoking. She
used to buy the crude opium at a chemist’s
shop, and had a way of making it into a
semi-fluid form, after the manner in which
the Chinese prepare it. This habit seemed
to bring me fresh comfort; after a few
whiffs a new life seemed to open before
me. I forgot the past and the present,
and revelled in a future, surrounded by
a halo of beautiful dreams.
“As I grew more accustomed to the drug
I had to use it in larger quantities, but as
my capacity for using it increased, so did
also the potency of its mystic spell. My
dreams appeared to be the brighter, and the


sensation of exalted happiness the greater.
As my funds decreased, my conscience and
moral stamina grew weaker, and at last,
so long as I got the money to buy the
opium, how I obtained that money was a
matter of very little moment to me.
“One night—it must have been when un-
der the influence of the drug—l was found
lying in the gutter of a back street, near
the Chinamen’s quarters, by Ah Look, who
hailed a passing cab, and had me conveyed
to a hospital. A violent attack of inflam-
mation of the lungs—pleurisy, they called
it —ensued, and to alleviate the pain, a
method was adopted which ultimately led
to a new folly. It was by this means that
I first learned the use of a hypo-
dermic syringe and morphia. Fully
three months elapsed before I was
discharged from the hospital with a
permanently damaged constitution, and
mere strongly than ever endowed with a
love for opium and morphia, which ap-
peared to me the solace for all ills.
“Ah Look, when he picked me up in the


streets, was a perfect stranger to me. What
his motive was in rescuing me from the
certain death which was impending, I
never cared to inquire. I found out since
that he paid for my maintenance in the
hospital the whole time I was there. He
called in to see me on visiting days, and at
first I was ungrateful enough to resent
this attention, and shrink from his inqui-
ries about my sufferings, until I found in
him a very useful agent in smuggling in
to me supplies of opium, which I now felt
I much needed for producing temporary
comfort and oblivion. In fact, he became
■ essential to me for this purpose, and for
some ends of his own he most craftily made
use of it, and so regulated the supplies
that they used only to last for such a pe-
riod of time that I eagerly looked forward
to his visits.
“It may seem strange, but by the usage of
the hospital I was addressed by the num-
ber of the bed, and 1 not by my name. It
was only on the day when Ah Look came
to fetch me away in a cab that I found


that in the case paper at the head of my
bed I was ticketed as Mrs. Ah Look, and
subsequently I learned that I was generally
known in the ward amongst the patients
and nurses as the Chinaman’s wife. How
ever, by this time my moral sense and my
feelings were rendered so callous by the
use of opium that it made very little mat-
ter to me. So long as I had my craving
for the drug satisfied I cared very little
what happened. At times, however, by
some irresistible impulse, I used to see in
my dreams grandmother’s diningroom and
father’s likeness in a most vivid manner,
looking at me in such a sorrowful, yearn-
ing way, that my dulled conscience seemed
really awakened within me. I would make
an earnest, yet futile, attempt to arrest my
downward course.
“I would refrain from the drug for as
many as three or four days, and uncom-
plainingly suffer the terrible depression and
agonising sensations of the opium smo-
ker’s awakening.
“I even loved to torture myself by doing


this. Perhaps it was as gratifying to me
to do so as it used to be to the penitents
of old who inflicted lashes on themselves
in hopes of obtaining salvation. These at-
tempts so enfeebled me as to bring me
almost to death’s door. It was the pros-
tration induced by such an effort of ab-
stention from opium that in the present in-
stance has produced this —what I feel to be
my last illness, for I feel lam dying. I re-
fused the drug as long as I could possibly
bear to do so, notwithstanding that every
nerve in my body was raising an agonising
cry for the cursed thing. Then my tor-
tures increased so much that I could en-
dure them no longer, and resorted to in-
jections of morphia.
“Unfortunately, the morphia tablets had
become exhausted, and I unwittingly used
the atropine, which had also been placed
in my box. The dryness of my mouth,
with the creepy, hot feeling that flushed
over my body, convinced me that I must
have used a more deadly drug than that to
which I had been accustomed.


“Then I thought why should I struggle
any longer against fate. Impious thoughts
arose in my mind. Why did the Almighty
place me in this position, to be a victim
buffeting against an adverse fortune? I
wondered was God really good; if He were
good, would he punish me for the crime of
self-murder? Actuated by these thoughts,
and upon the impulse of the moment, I
dissolved several of those tablets, and in-
jected the solution into my arm. It must
have been the symptoms produced by this
dose that frightened Ah Look and caused
him to bring assistance. I don’t remember
your friend or the doctor. I only remem-
ber seeing you leaning over me, and as I
had been previously told by that villain
Dyke of your death during the American
war, I thought I had awakened in Heaven,
and that you were there to meet me.”
Here a convulsive shiver shook her frame,
and she lapsed into a low muttering de-
lirium. Her thoughts seemed to wander
back into the past, and, judging more by
her actions than by the actual words she ut-


tered, some idea might be formed of what
was passing through her disordered brain.
I saw her clinging to her lover, mutter-
ing terms of endearment. I saw her again
looking at her father’s portrait, and with
staring eyes watching the picture as it
must have appeared to her in empty space,
scanning its features either for a smile of
encouragement when she spoke of her
affection for and engagement to Dillon, or
shrinking back in imaginary horror as
some mention of Dyke brought a repugnant
look into the linaments of her father’s
face.
Gradually the animation left the face,
the fire died out of the eyes, and the girl’s
whole form seemed to shrink back into
Dillon’s grasp; the breathing became weak-
er, the delirium less demonstrative, and
the words seemed imperfectly uttered, so
that it was evident to us that the end was
approaching, and it was a satisfaction to
us when a knock at the door announced the
doctor’s return. He walked in very quiet-
ly, almost on tip-toe, and his practised eye


soon grasped the situation. Before an hour
had elapsed Dillon, with compressed lips,
tightly drawn features, and glassy, staring
■eyes peering from their sockets, held
grasped in his arms the dead body of the
girl that he had loved.
Thanks to the kind assistance of the doc-
tor, who called and explained all the cir-
cumstances of the case to the coroher, no
inquest was held, and one cold grey win-
ter’s morning a hearse, followed by two
cabs, slowly wended its way to the ceme-
tery, where the remains of Mabel Vane
were reverently interred.


CHAPTER XII.—DILLON’S HISTORY RE-
VISED AND RETOLD—THE SECRET
OF HIS PAST LIFE.
That evening Dillon, Walton, and I held
another council meeting—far more solemn
and sad than that one mentioned in the
opening chapter of this narrative, when we
were in destitute circumstances and had
our meeting to consider ways and means,
and which culminated in our decision to
practise as clairvoyants.
Upon the whole, Dillon seemed to take
the death of Mabel Vane far more coolly
and philosophically than I should have im-
agined; but I knew little even then of the
immense power of that man’s indomitable
will, which enabled him to preserve an
outward calm, and control the workings of
his mind.
Dillon said, “This sudden and unexpected


event connected with my past life renders It
imperative for me to give some explanation
to you both; not that I admit the necessity
of any explanation, but events may yet hap-
pen of an unexpected character, which, in
case of disaster coming upon me, may prove
of some satisfaction when it will have been
understood that I have voluntarily initiated
you into the secret of my past life.
“I am perfectly conscious that when some
time ago I told you the history of my early
career you felt that I had not told you all.
I shall now fill up the gaps,
“Merton Dyke and I were fellow-students
in the same Hospital and School of Medi-
cine. We lodged in the same house, with
old Mrs. Vane and her granddaughter. Some
few things we had in common; in other
matters we agreed to differ. I knew him to
have an overmastering mind, and that in-
tense power of will which enabled him to
control and influence others —not always for
their own good, but invariably in forward-
ing the gratification of his own vices and
pleasures.


“I often felt that he exercised, to a very
great extent, an influence over me, which I
tried to resist, but failed, and in any
struggle in will-power that occurred be-
tween us, he always conquered. This may
explain how, in some oases, he influenced
me for evil. Consequently, though I was
of studious and artistic habits, a bookworm,
and an enthusiast in medical pursuits, he
used often to take me “from within my-
self,” as he called it, and suggested certain
pursuits, not as pleasures, but as recrea-
tions from work. It was at his instigation
that I first attended a racecourse. It was
when first prompted by him that I made my
first bet, which, most unfortunately for the
success of my future career, I won. Thus,
he gradually led me away to other recrea-
tions, as he suggested them to he, which
were of a somewhat expensive nature, so
that I soon outran the allowance made to
me by my guardian under the will of my
father.
i “But before relating to you any more of
my foolish acts, it may be some extenuation


to say that I was left an orphan at the
early age of six years, and never had known
what it was to have the privilege of home
influence and home associations. I did not
know what it was to have a sister or a
brother.
“I was an only child, and when I became
acquainted with Mabel Vane, and appre-
ciated her worth, I realised what it was to
love and be beloved. My first acquaintance
with her was like opening up the vista of
a new and brighter epoch in a dreary and
desolate life.
“Being of an intense, though silent dispo-
sition, I loved with all the ardor of impul-
sive youth, and found my passion returned
in an equally sincere manner. Having ob-
tained the sanction of the grandmother,
and the congratulations of the apparently
warm-hearted Dyke, my earthly happiness
seemed to be consummated. Everything
appeared bright and promising to me, when,
suddenly, a cloud hovered on the horizon.
“My extravagance, encouraged by Dyke,
and an unfortunate ‘plunge’ in betting on


a horse which I was told by him was to be
a sure winner, landed me, without means,
into a debt of honor to the amount of three
hundred pounds, which had to be paid
within a certain period, or what I deemed
to be unfathomable disgrace would ensue.
The trustee under my father’s will, my
guardian, was appealed to, but sternly re-
fused to make any advance, unless some
rational explanation were given to justify
my requiring such a large amount.
“At Dyke’s suggestion, I did give a rea-
son, not the horse-racing one, but my guar-
dian demanded such proofs as I could
not supply, and thus my attempt at raising
means to pay my debt fell through.
“Dyke then made a suggestion which ap-
peared very feasible, particularly as my
guardian, on my failing to send him the
proofs, and probably to avoid further im-
portunities on my part, left for the Con-
tinent.
“ ‘You know your guardian’s signature,’
said Dyke, ‘why not forge a cheque for the


amount? We are sure to recover the money
on the next Doncaster Handicap. I can get
the cheque cashed for you.’
“ ‘Now the governor has gone off to the
Continent we can manage that he
nothing about it; besides, if he did, the
soft-hearted old fool would never prosecute
you—his ward —for forgery.’
“I indignantly refused at first, but he
persuaded me, and the impending disgrace
and loss of my good name amongst betting
men on the racecourse seemed to have more
weight with me than the possibility of
social ruin consequent on becoming a con-
victed felon for forgery. Dyke exerted
himself to overcome my scruples by every
art at his command. He contended, with
ingenious sophistry, that the money was
mine.
■CI
“ ‘What business has a guardian to keep,
it from you, when you want it?’
“At last I committed the forgery, and
gave Dyke the cheque.
“Next day he hurriedly communicated to


me the fact that the Jew to whom he han-
ded the cheque for the purpose of getting
it cashed had discovered the forgery. No-
tice had been given to the police, and Mrs.
Vane’s house was at that very moment
being watched; my arrest was certain were
Ito return there. He also imparted to me
the information that a number of students
were to leave that night for Cork, where
they would be shipped on board an Ameri-
can liner, to go out as assistants to the
surgical staff of the Confederate Army,
then taking part in the Civil War in Amer-
ica.
“In vain I expostulated, plotted, and
planned for one farewell interview with
Mabel; every device I thought of, every
suggestion I put forth, was opposed by
Dyke. He said he was implicated in the
affair as the utterer of a forged cheque. If
he were to get off he would have to give
evidence against me. My guardian had un-
expectedly returned, and was furious. The
only hope of escape lay in my leaving the


country at once, without letting a soul
know where I had gone.
“The appearance of a policeman at that
moment, who was evidently watching our
movements, turned the scale, and his argu-
ments conquered.
“A hurried letter was written to Mabel,
which I entrusted to Dyke. That evening
he met me at Charing Cross Station with
such of my clothing as he could obtain
from my rooms, and I, with the other stu-
dents, left for that expedition to America
which proved so fatal to all my compan-
ions.
“It was while imprisoned in New York
that I learned of my false friend’s perfidy.
I wrote to my guardian a letter making a
full confession of my crime in forging his
name, and explained the meaning of my
hurried departure from England. I told
him of the vicissitudes, struggles, and dan-
gers through which I had passed, men-
tioned the death of all who had accom-
panied me to America, and finally appealed


to his feelings as the father of a family to
forgive me my first error, and recoup him-
self double or treble the amount of the
forged cheque, and pardon me the wrong
I had done him.
“This letter I posted to him from the
prison, and in due time I received his an-
swer. He expressed his surprise at my sud-
den and mysterious departure; he stated
that no cheque for three hundred pounds
had ever been presented at the bank, that
he had never heard of its existence, and
therefore had never threatened to prosecute
me. He said that as my guardian he had
lodged every penny of my fortune, in addi-
tion to all his own money, in a bank which
had failed. He pointed out, therefore, that,
instead of my being liable to a prosecution
for forgery, he was the one who had com-
mitted an error by wrongfully placing trust
money in an unsafe investment, adding
that he had ruined himself as well as me,
and in addition had rendered himself liable
for a prosecution in making away with my
money, and he in his turn became a sup-


pliant to me for pity and mercy. In con-
clusion my guardian promised on his honor
that, should the cheque ever he presented,
measures for my safety from punishment
should he adopted.
“In consequence of this letter, I made fur-
ther inquiries, which resulted in fully ex-
posing the perfidy of my quondam friend;
I learned of the ardent intimacy that had
sprung up between him and Mabel, of the
death of the grandmother, and what I was
led to believe to be their marriage.
“Further inquiries at a later period eli-
cited the fact of his neglect and desertion,
as well as her downfall, and by piecing all
those circumstances together, by an effort
of mental synthesis, I formed a very accu-
rate estimate of what had occurred, and
since proved to he correct.
“With such money as I could spare I had
Dyke tracked, and learned of his departure
for America, and It was while acting as
assistant to a travelling conjuror that I
once or twice got clues as to his where-


abouts. Having separated from my conjur-
ing employer, I traced Dyke to Paraguay,
from thence to New Zealand, and again to
Queensland, and ultimately to the fishing
station at New Guinea, where I heard he
was also engaged in a similar pursuit to that
which I there adopted. He, however, al-
ways appeared to have eluded my vigilance,
and subsequently, through the episode of
the cannibals on the coast of New Guinea,
I lost trace of him, but again picked up a
clue to his movements on my return to
Queensland, when I met you.
“By this time most of my funds were ex-
hausted. In fact I was reduced to about
forty pounds, and it behoved me to husband
my resources. This explanation is due to
you as, while I was apparently a pauper,
I had money concealed about my person,
which enabled me on several occasions to
mysteriously assist our joint stock funds
when on the verge of insolvency or on the
brink of starvation, and it was my last ten
sovereigns that I apparently so mysterious-
ly conjured from your clothing, which en-


abled us to commence our clairvoyant ad-
ventures.
“I need not say that Dyke never got
qualified as a medical practitioner; his de-
praved and dissolute habits proved too
great a bar to his advancement in his stu-
dies to enable him to pass the necessary
examinations, and I always had a feeling
that the lax laws in New South Wales
with reference to medical practice would
cause him to finally gravitate towards Syd-
ney, in order to enable him to make a live-
lihood by illegal practice.
“My surmises proved to be correct. Dyke
is in Sydney, and is running a large ad-
vertising quack business under an as-
sumed name. The reason why I have never
been able to see him is that he carries on
his practice by means of correspondence,
and invariably declines to see any patient
or make any examination of his victims.
He has printed forms which he sends to pa-
tients to fill up, detailing particulars as
to their age, business, habits of life, symp-
toms, etc., which were to be carefully filled


in and enclosed to his address, with the
sum of one pound, which was his first con-
sulting fee. He then sends a letter explain-
ing how he can cure them without fail for
a certain sum, say five, six, eight, ten, or
twenty pounds which must be sent to him
before he can have any further interest in
the case, or send the necessary supply of
medicine, which he guarantees will effect
a certain cure.
“I hear that he is doing an enormous cor-
responding practice of this kind, and has in
his employ numerous clerks, who are all
day engaged in writing letters after a cer-
tain fixed formula, and has several men
constantly employed in concocting various
medicines and preparations, which are
packed up in bottles and boxes of different
kinds, and sent to all parts of the colony.
“About three weeks ago, by the merest
accident, I met him in the street. Fortu-
nately, he did not recognise me, so I was
enabled to track him to his place of busi-
ness. Upon inquiry, I was informed that
he was the celebrated advertising doctor,


whose brass plate was upon the door, with
numerous bogus titles appended to his
name. I disguised myself as a well-to-do
patient, and knocked at the door and in-
quired if I could see him, hoping to meet
him face to face; but my plan failed. I
was informed that under no circumstances
would he see anybody, as all transactions
between him and his patients were invari-
ably conducted by correspondence.
“I presume he has some good reason for
this course of action. He has probably
swindled many sturdy bushmen and others,
so he is now frightened to face them for
fear of meeting with his deserts. I have,
however, devised a plan by which I hope to
inveigle him to this house to-night, and
as what I am going to do will take the
form of a terrible vengeance, I mean to
have no witnesses here. I want you and
Walton to find some reasonable pretext for
not coming home to-night or to-morrow.”
There was something ominous in the set
determination of his features as he made
this request which made me urge him to


abandon his project of revenge; to point
out that sooner or later Dyke would meet
his fate without Dillon taking any active
part in bringing about a climax; but all to
no purpose. He was not to be moved, and
abruptly begged of us both to be gone, and
as we valued any services he had rendered
us, we were not to reappear at our resi-
dence for the next forty-eight hours.
I had not much difficulty when I talked the
matter over with Walton to induce him to
accompany me on a Ashing excursion, and
within two hours we were in a large
open boat, in charge of a boatman, and on
our way to the Ashing ground outside the
Sydney Heads.


CHAPTER XIII.—NEMESIS.
It was on a Thursday afternoon, and we
had arranged to camp each night in the
boatman’s hut on the shores of Middle
Harbor. Notwithstanding the beautiful
weather and plenty of sport, neither of us
enjoyed the trip, our thoughts continually
dwelling on the dreadful tragedy that we
feared would be enacted at our rooms in
the city. However, we had a part to play
before the fisherman, who might possibly
be a future witness on our behalf to prove
an alibi should a last scene of bloodthirsty
revenge have been enacted.
On Saturday, about dusk, we approached
our rooms with feelings of mingled curio-
sity, excitement, and apprehension. The
windowblinds were all down, and the door
closed. This, however, was soon opened
with the aid of our latchkey. We walked
through the long passage leading into the
waiting-room, where we found everything
in order. We next went into the consult-


ingroom, which was in a similar condition,
and we drew our breaths in happy relief —
our hopes brightening, and our fears be-
coming abated so as to cheer us with the
idea that our anticipations of evil might
not after all be realised. We ascended the
narrow staircase leading up to our com-
bined sitting and sleeping room, where, to
our horror-stricken gaze was presented a
scene of the greatest confusion. Chairs
were overturned and broken, bed clothes
strewn about, and the contents of all the
boxes seemed to be mingled in a tangled
mass all over the floor. Several panes of
glass were broken in the windows; in fact,
as Walton expressed it, the whole place ap-
peared as if there had been a faction fight;
but not the slightest sign of Dillon could
we discover. Walton and I ruefully selec-
ted such of our garments as we could
recognise from amongst the confused heap
on the floor, and put them back in their
respective boxes. In doing this we noticed
that Dillon’s sea-chest was missing, and
the whole of the floor had been recently
scrubbed. And now became evident to my


senses the same dull, heavy odor which I
had noticed in the opium saloon. Darkness
now set in, and the pangs of hunger having
attacked us, we adjourned to the coffee-
room which we usually frequented for our
evening meal.
We tried to puzzle the matter out. and
probably the odor of opium which I had
noticed suggested the possibility of finding
Dillon at Ah Look’s house; thither we
drove directly after our repast. We had no
difficulty in obtaining admission; in fact,
Ah Look seemed rather pleased to see us.
He said:
“Waugh! You belly welcome. Want
you see Dr. Do Lion; him here.”
He led us along the passage, and ushered
us into the opium-smoking den at the end,
where we found our poor friend Dillon ly-
ing prostrate on the matted platform at one
end of the room; the opium pipe and all
the paraphernalia were in the small tray
beside him, whilst he was reclining in a
semi-recumbent position, with his head
resting on the padded box which formed
a kind of pillow.


He appeared to be perfectly unconscious,
his features were red and bloated, his
breathing loud and snorting, and each ex-
halation of breath seemed to blow out his
cheeks and nostrils. He appeared to me
to be in a terrible .condition, brought on
by excessive drink and indulgence in opium
smoking.
We found it impossible to arouse him,
so once more sent the unwilling Ah Look
in quest of our friend Dr. Nickson. Mean-
while, Walton and I bathed Dillon’s head
with cold water. Fortunately the doctor
was at home, and arrived within half an
hour. He at once divined what was wrong.
“This is not opium,” said he, “nor is it
drink.
'“What has he been taking, Ah Look?
What have you been doing with him?”
“He drink his own tea, made by him-
self,” said Ah Look. "He bring packet with
him; he drink that stuff,” and handed an
old teapot secured in a wicker basket in the
usual Chinese style.
The doctor smelt its contents, and pulled


some large, moist leaves out of the pot,
which he tasted with the tip of his tongue.
Upon examining Dillon’s pockets, he drew
forth a packet containing some dry and
broken brownish-green leaves.
“I see.” said the doctor, “these are the
dried leaves of the Erythroxylon coca, the
coca plant of Central America. I did not
know this drug was procurable in Sydney.
This is a most serious matter; the essen-
tial principle of this leaf is a more deadly
sedative than that of the poppy; but I’ll
try my best to resuscitate him.” He again
had resource to his hypodermic syringe-
case, but without effect; so he advised leav-
ing Dillon to sleep off his stupor, and the
four of us, Ah Look assisting, carried him
into the same room and placed him on the
very same bed where, a few days ago, had
expired the ill-fated Mabel Vane. Walton
and I watched him all night, and gradually
as the loud breathing became softened and
symptoms of consciousness returned, it was
painful to notice the play of his features,
which betrayed the current of his thoughts.
One time the eyes would open, and a


gleam of triumph would light up the whole
face; the next moment, by a rapid tran-
sition, the teeth would gnash, and a look of
the fiercest hate would cloud his hand-
some face; the arms convulsively moved as
if tearing or rending something or some-
one to pieces. Then an unearthly maniacal
laugh would ring through the room. After
which exhibition Dillon would sink into an
uneasy slumber.
Several repetitions of these scenes took
place, and before the early dawn he had
sunk into a doze more quiet than usual,
which lasted about half an hour.
When the doctor arrived he shook his
head dubiously, and said —“Our friend is no
better.” Then Inquired how he had spent
the night. He felt Dillon’s pulse and ap-
plied his stethoscope over the region of
the heart.
“I am afraid,” said he, “this is the be-
ginning of the end.”
He had hardly uttered the words when
Dillon’s eyes opened.
“The end?” said he, calmly. “Who
speaks of the end? Ah, Brook! you and


Walton come back?” A smile of triumph
played over his face, and he beckoned to
us to move nearer him.
“Hist! lads, whisper. I don’t mind the
end now. Come closer,” and here he low-
ered his voice to a hissing whisper only
heard by us two. “I’ve avenged her, lads.
I won’t tell you how; but I can die happy
now—here on the very spot where she
died.” Suddenly his strength appeared to
fail him. I at once got behind him, knelt
down and raised his head on to my breast,
exactly as he had held poor Mabel, while
Walton and the doctor looked on sympa-
thetically.
His breathing rapidly failed. Once more
his senses wandered; yet again his strength
seemed to return to him—he wrestled with
and rended an imaginary enemy, at whom
he hurled imprecations and curses.
So violent, indeed, were his actions that
it took the four of us to hold him down.
Once more did his strength fail, and sud-
denly he ceased breathing, and Dillon was
dead.
How and by what means he attained his


revenge was never known to mortal man;
but two remarkable things happened about
this time in Sydney.
On the Saturday on which Walton and I
returned from our fishing excursion a
well-known advertising quack, who had
done a most lucrative practice in his line
of business, and had a large sum to his
credit in a local bank, suddenly disappear-
ed, and his whereabouts have never since
been ascertained. The other incident oc-
curred three weeks later, when a great
deal of excitement was caused by the dis-
covery in a deserted hovel in Surrey-street,
Sydney, of a seaman’s chest.
An unpleasant odor pervading the neigh-
borhood, its origin was traced to the house,
where it was found to emanate from the
box. On the lid being prized open it was
found to contain the mutilated remains of
an adult male. The features were not re-
cognisable; but the surgeon who conducted
the examination of the remains gained a
considerable amount of fame by the very
careful and methodical manner of his pro-
ceedings and the astute deductions which


he made therefrom. He positively asser-
ted that the mouth had been gagged with
some violence prior to death; that the mur-
derer showed considerable anatomi-
cal knowledge by the manner in which he
dismembered the body. Furthermore, he
suggested that the motive for the crime
must have been prompted by a most dia-
bolical desire for revenge, because under-
neath each nail during life had been in-
serted a small sharp spicule of wood, half
an inch long, made out of ordinary wooden
matches. The ears and nose had been cut
off, and the body otherwise mutilated. The
reputation of the surgeon was made, and
his practice largely increased in conse-
quence cf the ability he displayed and the
shrewdness of his conclusions; but to this
day the mystery of the “Surrey-street mur-
der,” as it was called, has never been un-
ravelled.
(THE END.)
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, SYDNEY.
