

DR. KENNEDY
INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC




DR. KENNEDY
INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC.
35b:> jfno 7^
zr-s-rr
Sir,
The Committee appointed by the last General Assembly
of the Free Church to consider the question of the propriety of
introducing the use of instrumental music in the service of praise;
have arrived, after ten months’ deliberations, at three con-
clusions : —(1.) That it is not unscriptural , or that it is scriptural ,
to sanction the innovation ; (2.) That it is not unconstitutional ,
or ecclesiastically illegal, to give liberty to congregations, when
virtually unanimous, to adopt the use of sounding brass, or
tinkling cymbals, or a “ kist of whistles,” in conducting the
praises of the sanctuary; and, (3.) That it is expedient to grant
liberty to Free Church congregations at once to have instruments
if, with virtual unanimity, they so incline.
I know not on what grounds they base their first conclusion.
But having made an independent study, to some extent, of the
question, I am anxious to state the conclusion to which I myself
have come, and the grounds on which I am prepared to support
it. Ido so now, because it is not likely that before the
Assembly meets the tenor of the Committee’s report can be known ;
and I am anxious before then to furnish what I can in the way
of aid to those who are interested in the question, in attaining
acquaintance with the information, to be derived from scripture,
bearing on the subject.
I can conceive three grades of opinion, regarding the relation
to scripture, in which the question of instrumental music stands.
Some may hold it to be scriptural to use instrumental music in
the service of praise, contenting themselves with referring to the
use of it in the service of the temple under the Old Testament


dispensation. Others may hold it to be not unscriptural, meaning
that if it is not directly sanctioned as an adjunct of praise in New
Testament times, it is not forbidden, and may therefore be
introduced. Others still may hold that the use of it is anti-
scriptioral, as a thing forbidden by the Word of God. Among
these last am I, and I am now to state the grounds on which I
hold that opinion.
These grounds are these two. (1.) That the use of it was,
by divine appointment, introduced into the symbolic service of
the temple. And (2.) That in the directory given in New
Testament scripture, for New Testament worship, it is not only
omitted but excluded.
(1.) It must at once be conceded that instrumental music
was used in the temple service. But as to the mode of its
introduction, and as to the authority for the use of it, there is a
division of opinion. There are some who insist that the use of it
was introduced by David, merely because he himself was a great
musician, and judged that the use of instruments would make
the service of praise more impressive ; but that God sanctioned
the introduction, though He did not originate it. From this
baseless assumption an argument is drawn in favour of the
adoption of instrumental music now. Even supposing, they say,
that the Lord did not propose the use of instrumental music in
New Testament service, may He not be expected to do as He did
before, in sanctioning the introduction of it by those who desire
it. There are others who think that the introduction of instru-
mental music into the temple service was suggested to David by
God, that it became part of the stated ritual, according to divine
authority, as surely as the offering of sacrifice, and that as all the
temple service was typical, this was so, as all besides, and was,
therefore, one of “ the carnal ordinances,” which were to continue
only to “ the time of reformation.” The proof of this latter
position is not difficult, and is furnished by those passages of the
Old Testament scriptures which refer to the introduction of the
use of instrumental music, and to the relation in which it stands
to David and to God,
In 2nd Sam. xxii. 1, David is declared to be “ the sweet
Psalmist of Israel.” This designation indicates his position in
relation to the service of praise in the temple, and belonged to


him as that of the Law-giver of Israel belonged to Moses. The
connection of the former with the temple service of praise is
placed on the same footing of authority as the connection of
Moses with the service of sacrifice, in 2 Chron. xxiii. 18 :
“ Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the Lord by the
hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in
the house of the Lord, to offer the burnt offerings of the Lord, as
it is written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing,
as it teas ordained by David.” And it is evident, from 1 Chron.
xxviii. 12-13, that David ordained the “rejoicing and singing ”
as an accompaniment of the sacrificial work, under divine
guidance. For it is there declared that “David gave to Solomon
the pattern of all that he had by the spirit
for the courses of the priests and the Levites, and for all the work
of the service of the house of the Lord, and for all the vessels of
service in the house of the Lord.” If he had “by the spirit ” a
pattern according to which he arranged the courses of the priests
and Levites, that pattern extended to the appointment of a
course of Levites for the use of instrumental music. This, with
all besides, connected with the temple service, “ the Lord,” said
David, “ made me understand in writing by his hand upon me.”
And the very instruments, to be employed by these, are
repeatedly declared to be “ of God,” as surely as they are said to
he “of David ” —1 Chron. xvi. 42, 2 Chron. vii. 6. There is,
therefore, no reason to doubt that the use of instrumental music
was ordained by David according to the command and under the
direction of God.
But it is quite as evident that it was introduced into the
temple service as a part of its symbolical ritual. We cannot
wonder that, in the immediate view of the erection of the temple,
and by David the King, whose son Messiah was promised to be,
there should have been appointed by God, and given to Israel, a
pronounced form of praise and thanksgiving. Appended to
sacrificing there, we might expect a special service of praise, the
matter of which in the “ everlasting kingdom ” of Messiah “ the
Prince of Peace,” was to find its fullest illustration in the reign
of Him by whom the temple was to be built. Can we wonder*
then, that Messiah’s first crowned ancestor, who was also to be his
type, should have been appointed the Psalmist of Israel, and should


have been honoured to provide both for the building of the temple
and for the service to be conducted within it 1 But he received
authority from God to act in this matter only in connection with
the service of the temple. Therefore, we find that only Levites
were appointed to the service of praising by the use of instru-
ments, and their work, according to that appointment, was
associated with the sacrificial service of the priests. This form of
praise was to accompany the offering of sacrifice according to the
law of Moses. It was therefore part of the symbolic ritual which
embraced all temple service, and formed, therefore, one of the
“ carnal ordinances” which were to continue only “ till the time
of reformation.” This, with all types and shadows besides, was
done away in Christ, As well, therefore, introduce into the
worship of the New Testament the shedding and the sprinkling
of blood, and the burning of slain victims on an altar, as the use
of instrumental music in the service of praise.
Let no one venture to say that the use of a musical instru-
ment is a matter of no moment. It was introduced for a
temporary purpose by a special revelation from God, and ought
not thereafter to be regarded as a matter of indifference : and the
more certain we are of its having been divinely appointed as a
symbol, and “ till the time of reformation,” the more guilty they
appear who, after that time has passed, and God has laid it aside,
attempt to find for it a place in the worship of the New Testament
Church.
There is no force in the objection that instrumental music
was occasionally used before the temple was built, and specially
that it was used by David himself before he received the pattern
of the temple and of its service from God. This was quite as
true, yea more abundantly true, of sacrifice, and yet there can be
no warrant for going back to the antediluvian and patriarchal
instances of offering sacrifice to justify the slaying of victims now.
No more can the occasional use of instrumental music, before its
authorised introduction into the temple service, furnish any
warrant for the use of it now. Both the occasional sacrifice
and the occasional musical performance had a symbolical meaning
and without this neither had ever found a place in the ritual of
the temple-worship. And the previous use of it by David, in
connection with worship, associated it with the ark of the covenant


and with sacrifice , and thus made it such that it cannot be a
precedent which may be followed in New Testament times. And
David’s way of responding to the musical performance, on the
occasion of bringing up the ark, must he adopted along with the
use of an instrument, if we are to follow the example then set.
We can have no right to introduce the organ, without the
accompaniment of the dance , if the use of musical instruments by
David, before its authorised intioduction into the temple service,
is the precedent by which we are to be guided.
Thus, the more certain it is that instrumental music was part
of the temple service, and that its introduction was by divine
appointment, the more manifestly illegitimate is the attempt to
introduce it into the service of praise in the New Testament
Church.
(2.) What says the New Testament Scripture on the subject
of instrumental music 1 Is there anything there which seems to
be in favour of it 1 Or is there any principle there laid clown
with which it would be utterly inconsistent, or according to which
it may be regarded as legitimate 1 And what instruction may be
derived from all these which is relevant to the subject ?
There have been a few adventurous enough to affirm that
there are some things in the New Testament Scripture that seem
to favour the introduction of instrumental music. And the two
somethings are ; —(1.) That there is a word used to describe the
exercise of praise which means to play on a musical instrument t
The word referred to occurs in Eph. v. 19, and is rendered
“making melody,” and that this is a legitimate translation is
evident, for if the literal rendering were adopted, we would have
to read the passage thus—playing on an instrument “in your
heart to the Lord.” That sane men should use an argument of
this kind is sufficient proof of the desperateness of the cause
which they advocate—if the men are sane who have recourse to a
thing like this, that must be more than can be said of what they
desire to establish. (2.) The second something is, that, in the
Apocalypse, some of the inhabitants of heaven are described as
“ harpers harping with their harps.” If I had not indubitable
proof of the fact, I could not believe that any minister of any
Church in Christendom could use this as an argument for the use
of instrumental music in the Church on earth. But so it is ; and


what more can be needed to show that there can be nothing found
in the New Testament to justify the insane clamour for organs.
The truth is that these passages teach this, and only this—
that in the New Testament Church on earth, there should be a
service of praise, having in it the spiritual import of the symbolical
service of the temple, and that this spirituality of praise shall be
perfectly realized in heaven.
2. Is there any principle there laid down with which the
use of instrumental music would be utterly inconsistent, or
according to which it may be regarded as legitimate ? It is to
me utterly inconceivable how any one can pretend to find any
general principle enunciated, or implied, in New Testament
Scripture, which admits of the introduction of instrumental
music. Some one, in trying to find an argument in favour of
this innovation, after resolving to do what he could to secure its
adoption, laid down the principle as one that could admit of no
dispute regarding its validity, that as the Lord should be served
in the best possible way, the use of aught that tended to make
the musical performance in the service of praise more perfect, was
perfectly legitimate. But this principle was found among the
cobwebs of his own brain, and not in the record of the New
Testament. If the service of praise were an altogether heartless
and graceless thing, if it consisted entirely in what reached the
ears of men, one could quite understand that there was an
approach to common sense in the statement and application of
such a principle. But if the service of praise be rendered to God,
and rendered from grace in the heart, then it is manifest that all
that tends to distract attention from the state of the heart, and
to interfere with the aim of pleasing God, is a hindrance rather
than a help. Will any one say that it is to perfect or increase
his ability to render service that would be acceptable to God, he
seeks the help of an organ, or that he can accept “ the kist of
whistles ”as an answ r er to his cry for help to praise the Lord ?
And yet this is the one general principle which can be stated as
bearing favourably on the use of organs. But where is there one
syllable in New Testament Scripture of direction to take help
from whistles and bellows in the worship of God, or any principle
stated according to which this would be legitimate.


But there is a principle, laid down in the New Testament
Scripture, with which the use of instrumental music in the
worship of God is altogether inconsistent—the spirituality of the
New Testament dispensation. The whole Old Testament ritual
is declared to consist of “ carnal ordinances imposed on them ” of
old, “until the time of reformation.” In its spirituality the New
Testament form of worship must present a contrast. Indeed, it
is in the mode of worship the great revolution was to be effected.
All that merely constituted shadow was to pass away, because He
who was the “ truth and the life ” had come, and had finished the
work given Him to do. But all was shadow that was symbolic
or typical in the former mode of worship, and was therefore
utterly done away in Christ. Nothing but the spiritual import
of the temple service was to remain ; the whole form or mode of
it passed utterly away. Can it be disputed that this was the
result of the death of Christ, and can there, without reproach
being cast on Him, and exception being taken to the work which
He finished, be a retention or restoration of aught of what it was
His design to displace, by His glorious self, and by the ministra-
tion of the Spirit, and by worship “ in spirit and in truth 1 ”
3. What instruction may be derived from all that is relevant
to this subject in the New Testament Scripture ?
Of course it is in New Testament Scripture we must find the
directory for New Testament worship. The worship regarding
which minute instructions were given in Old Testament Scripture,
was that of the temple, which was throughout symbolic or typical,
and which was therefore entirely displaced. For the new worship,
with its spiritual simplicity, we must therefore have a new
directory. This can only be given us in the inspired record. It
is there, and only there, that there is any authoritative guidance
in worship. The Lord is not less careful now than of old, as to
how his service is to be performed. True, we may not expect the
same prominence, and extent, and minuteness of instruction
regarding the mode of conducting service as of old. In those days
the teaching was done by the service, and was addressed to the
eye rather than to the ear. The typical character of the worship
involved this, and therefore there must be the most minute
directions given as to how it is to be conducted. Hence the large
portion of the Old Testament Scripture covered with the rules of


the service, as well as with the specification of the structure in
which the service was to be performed. All this was the preaching
of the gospel to the men of old, and contained a symbolic repre-
sentation of the spiritual attainments and exercise of the saints.
They were taught through the eye how alone a sinner can be
justified, and shown how the justified must be the saints of God.
A ritual with so ample and gracious a design, must be most
minutely indicated. It represented the God of Israel and His
Lamb ; it told how he could be the God of salvation, it instructed
His people as to how they could be justified, and it directed them
how, as saints, they should walk in the fear of the Lord. Let us
not, therefore, approach to think that there is too much in the
Old Testament regarding the way in which tabernacle or temple
service was to be conducted. Under the New Testament dispen-
sation there is to be no preaching in the mode of conducting
worship. The teaching is all done hy the word. Epistles after
gospels, one gospel after another, and one epistle after another,
we have for the instruction of the Church, but in these we have,
amidst much spiritual doctrine, sufficient direction as to the simple
worship of New Testament times.
As to the service of praise, we are taught with sufficient
distinctness, and in repeated declarations, that it was to be
singing. Again and again this is plainly indicated. This is the
simple form of expressing praise in the New Testament Church,
according to New Testament Scripture. Regarding this there
need be no dubiety—“ he may run that readeth ” this. What
words can be more explicit than these—“ By Him therefore let
us offer the sacrifice of praise continually, that is, the fruit op
our lips, giving thanks to his name ?” If any man asks the
question, What is the sacrifice of praise in New Testament times?
the plain answer of inspired Scripture is, “the fruit op our
lips.” And this really settles the whole question. The Lord
hath spoken, and how distinctly, and this should be enough to
every Christian man and to every Christian Church.
This plain directory is in exact accordance with the example
of the Lord, who, by His Spirit, gave it to His Church. We
know that He by His presence countenanced, and by His voice
took part in a service of praise. Though His fellowship in the
song is matter of inference, His presence, while His disciples


sung, is directly stated. Such is the example of our Lord, con-
firming His instruction, and, putting both together, surely we
have in these enough to assure us that the practice of the
Presbyterian Church in Scotland for three centuries, in conducting
the service of praise, was well founded, and cannot be abandoned
without our turning aside from both the precept and example of
Him whom we profess to be our King.
With the example of their Master accorded the practice of
the Apostles. This no one can deny. If they were sent “ two
and two,” one of them was not appointed to be a musical
performer. They had, in the word of God, the gift of speech, the
grace of God in their hearts, and their Master’s gracious presence,
and water, bread, and wine—all that was required in any place,
and at any time, for performing the whole work of the ministry
to which they were appointed.
And with the example of Christ and with the practice of
His apostles accorded the mode in which the service of praise was
conducted in the early Christian Church. There were among
the Jewish converts some who wished to continue the rite of
circumcision and to “ observe days, and months, and times, and
years,” but no one among them, so far as we can know, proposed
either the continuance of sacrifice or of instrumental music.
Both these had been so connected, and had been carried on so
exclusively by the officials of the Jewish Church, that the idea of
continuing either, or of resuscitating the one without the other,
seems never to have been entertained.
It required a course of decline extending over centuries to
produce the corruption out of which the desire for instrumental
music could spring up in the Church. It arose like a fungus,
which is propagated out of decay. It was the influence of the
social festival, and of the concert, and of the theatre, introduced
through unfaithful discipline into the Church, and allowed to
spread its blighting chill throughout it, which procured the decay
that furnished the soil out of which this carnality in worship
sprung. The practice thus introduced, continued till another
“time of reformation ” came—the reformation from popery. No
thoroughly reformed Church adopted the use of instrumental
music. Some so-called reformed Churches which retained some
of the doctrine and government and ritual of the Roman Church,


retained the use of organs, but they did so only because they were
but half reformed. Thus was it with the Church of England.
How could she, with her bishops and archbishops, and baptismal
regeneration and saints’ days, and surplices and altars, be without
her organs ? This was a natural appendage to all that carnal
stuff which she carried into her new position. The instruments
and the altars must go together, as they did of old.
But no sound of an organ was heard for three centuries in
the Reformed Church of Scotland, nor in any other Church in
Christendom that deserved that name, till a process of decline
had commenced. What would, in the best days of the Church of
Scotland, have been thought of the proposal to introduce organs
into her places of worship? What would Knox, Henderson,
Melville, Guthrie, Rutherford, Gillespie, Dickson, John Love,
Andrew Thomson, Thomas Chalmers, William Cunningham,
James Buchanan, John Duncan, Robert Candlish, have done, if
such a proposal had been mooted in their days ? Grant liberty to
congregations to have organs, if they so inclined. As soon, said
the last of these, and he spoke for all the others, allow the slaying
and offering of sacrifices in our Churches. No, it required a very
different class of men to make and to countenance such a
proposal—men to make it, who desire the aesthetic rather than
the spiritual, and men to countenance it who are guided by policy
rather than the word of God, who are ambitious of pleasing men
that they may lead them, rather than anxious to please God that
they may not cease to walk in the light of His face.
I am, &c,,
John Kennedy.
Dingwall, March 31st, 1883.
A. W, BEARD, Printer, 319 George Street, Sydney.
