

1852.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
DR. LEICHHARDT AND PARTY.
Laid upon the Council Table by The Colonial Secretary, and Ordered, by the Council,
to he Printed, 12 'Ji August, 1852.
COPY op a Letter from Hovenden llely, Esquire, to The Colonial Secretary.
Camp at Surat, Balonne River,
22nd July, 1852.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to inform you of my return with my party from our
late journey to the north-western interior, for the purpose of gaining intelligence from the
natives frequenting the earlier parts of Dr. Leichhardt’s exploration, relative to the fate of
that Gentleman and his companions; and to lay before you, for the information of His
Excellency the Governor-General, an account of my journey and its results.
In accordance with your instructions directing me to proceed to Peak Range, via the
Dawson, and thence to the westward in search of Sir Thomas Mitchell’s track, in hopes
of thereby falling in with that of Dr. Leichhardt, I had left Darling Downs, and was pro-
ceeding on that route, when being encamped in the vicinity of Dog-wood Creek, I
received an express communication from Mr. Commissioner Whitty, of the Maranoa District,
to the effect that a man named Walker, who had been out collecting cattle in the Mount
Abundance country had just come into Surat, bringing in a report received by him from
the natives, of the murder of a party of white men with horses, &c., on a creek distant ten
days journey from Mount Abundance ; and that some of these natives had seen the remains,
and had offered to guide him thereto. Under these circumstances I deemed it advisable at
once to change my route and proceed to this place, and test the truth of the rumour.
Of my proceedings after this; of having engaged Walker, in order, through him, to
procure the services (if possible) of the two natives; and of my having started from this
place, and been compelled to return from Mount Bindango by the scarcity of water; and of
having dispatched Captain Anderson, with Walker and another man, to bring out more
rations and other mules, and if possible to procure two other natives as guides or interpreters;
I have already informed you by my letters, dated Surat, 22nd April, and Uckabilla, May Bth.
I shall therefore proceed to a detail of my proceedings from the latter date up to tlie period
of my return here, on the 20th instant.
A heavy fall of rain immediately after his departure, delayed the return of Captain
Anderson for a week; and I was in hopes that it had extended so far to the north-west, as
to fill all the creeks and water-courses in my probable route; in this expectation, however, I
was disappointed, as I afterwards found that the rain had not extended beyond Mt. Bindango,
the very spot from which I had been previously driven back.
When Captain Anderson returned, bringing with him extra mules and rations, I
found that Walker had succeeded in obtaining the services of two natives; one a “ Combo,”
a leading man amongst the Balonne and Mount Abundance tribes, as interpreter, and the
other a “ Coppi,” a young man who had just come into stations for the first time, from a
long distance to the north-west, and who professed to know all about the murder of the
147 —a white


tvhite men, and said that he had seen the very place, and the remains of bones, guns,
saddles, &c.; that it was twelve days’ journey, and on a creek this side of Bunderabrilla.
They had both stipulated that they were to receive rations and ride on horseback, and on
the return of the party be rewarded each with a tomahawk, shirt, and tobacco.
I accordingly once more left Uckabilla, and proceeded towards Mount Abundance;
but after one day’s journey I was again detained for three days by another heavy fall of
tain, which made the ground too heavy for the loaded mules to travel; but I finally reached
Mount Abundance on the 29th May.
It is here worthy of remark, as proving that the natives must, from the very first
have in some manner known of every movement of this party, which they afterwards killed,
that in riding across the Fitz Roy Downs, and in sight of the Grafton Range, “ Coppi”
informed me, through the medium of “ Combo,” (the former not knowing one word of
English,) “ that the whitefellows whose remains we were going to see had not come this way,
“ (meaning the way we were pursuing,) but had left the river and gone up the Yeulba Creek
“ to those hills, (pointing to the Grafton Range,) and thence across the Downs to Mount
“ Abundance.’*’ This was voluntary information on his part, as I was riding a-head at the
time, not speaking to either of them, and I know it be correct, having heard on Darling
Downs that Leichhardt had run up the Horse Track Creek (Yeulba) to the Grafton Range,
and thence due west to Mr. Macpherson’s station at Mount Abundance, whence he took his
final departure.
On the following day we remained in camp, in order to mend hobbles, of which
nearly every pair had been broken during the late wet weather; and the next day made
our final start, under the guidance of “ Coppi,” v?bo took the same direction round to the
northward of Mount Bindango; and on the third day we encamped on the Amby or Tina
Montil Creek. Here the two blacks began to show signs of having gone far enough, telling
us that there was no more water between us and the Culba, and that blackfellows would
kill us, and so forth. I could very easily believe the former statement, as there had evi-
dently been no rain at all in this direction, and we were then encamped on a small isolated
waterhole in the creek, to which we had that day been compelled to retrace our steps,
having found that another creek farther on was perfectly dry. However, knowing that we
could not be at most farther than thirty-five miles from Sir Thomas Mitchell’s old Depot
Camp, on the Maranoa, I determined to reach that, oven if we should have to pass one
night without water ; first determining to leave the party in camp for one day, and recon-
noitre. This I did, but unsuccessfully; so we all moved on the next day, travelled thirty
miles, found every creek and watercourse dry and overgrown with grass and weeds; en-
camped without water; and finally, on the sth June, reached the Maranoa, and encamped
about a quarter of a mile below the Depot, on a reach described by Sir Thomas as being full
of water and large fish, but where we now saw nothing but a deep dry sandy bed, full of
long reeds, with a small shallow pool of brackish water, out of which, to avoid dirt and
sediment, the buckets had to be filled by moans of a pint pot.
Much to my surprise, “ Coppi” now said that we were near the place, and going up
to the old DcpQt, whither I and Mr. Drysdale accompanied him, he commenced picking up
Sheep’s bones, old pieces of powder canisters, &c., showing them to us. I knew very well
that all tjicse things had been thrown about and left here by Sir Thomas Mitchell’s party,
but I made signs to him to enquire where were the white men’s bones, horses’ bones, guns,
saddles, &c. He told me by signs that everything had been thrown into the water and
carried away in a flood. However, in the absence of Old Billy (Combo), whom I had sent
with Walker in search of a stray mule, I could make nothing of him, so returned to the
camp. He hbd, on first joining us, given a very clear account of the whole affair, saying
that he was only a young boy when it happened, (he being now apparently about sixteen years
old.) He told us how the blacks had followed the party for some days, and at last surprised
them all when asleep;. that they had driven off all the horses and mules and killed them;
that only one shot had been fired by the whites, which killed one blackfcllow; and that
some of the bullocks had escaped, and were now running about, higher up the Culba; and
had also assigned as a reason for the murder, the ill-treatment of some gins, by the two
blackfellows attached to the white party, when riding about the bush in search of the
horses


horses and bullocks ; and he further said that one of these blacks had large bushy beard
and whiskers, like my man Brown, and the other smooth face like him. This I also know
to be correct. One of Leichhardt’s blacks, “ Flash Billy,” whose brother is now with me,
having had a very large beard, and the other, “ Wommai,” as I knew myself, was almost a
boy, without either beard or whiskers..
Walker and “ Combo,” with another (Mr. Edgar), being away all night in search of
this mule, it was necessary to reduce each watch from two men to one, giving each one hour
and a half. The night of the 6th was very dark; and our guide, “ Coppi,” escaped. I had
had not the slightest idea that by himself he would have attempted it, or I should have
taken measures to prevent his doing so. I very much suspected that he had arranged
with the other that he too should run away, and meet him at some appointed place; and
was rather surprised, next day, when they returned with the mule, to see Billy with them.
He had, at any rate, got the same story from “ Coppi,” and we were, consequently, for the
next five days, examining the river side, the Dcp6t Camp, and every angle and bend in the
river, for some miles both up and down, to try and find some indication of Leichhardt’s
having been there; but nothing could we find, not even a marked tree, to show that he had
gone that way. My blacks indeed thought that in some places they could see tracks as if
a large lot of cattle and horses had been driven either up or down the river, but these were
only partial, and could not be kept by them for any distance. On the fifth day, Billy told
Walker that “ Coppi” had only been telling us “gammon” about this being the spot, that it
was a good way further; that we should leave the Culba, and cross a range to another
large creek, the country of the “ Niemin” or Pisant Blacks, who were the people that had
killed the white men. He said that Coppi was afraid to take this white party out amongst
his own people, as we would shoot both him and them when we saw the bones, and that he
had consequently determined to tell us a lie and leave us; but that he (Billy) would go
with us, and talk to the blacks for us, provided wo made good haste, as he was afraid
we would all be killed if we delayed. I accordingly promised him a double-barrelled
gun, knife, tomahawk, &c., on our return to Surat, as a reward for his services, if we could
fall in with natives who would lead us to the desired spot.
The 14th and 15th June we travelled up the Maranoa, being fortunate enough to
find water in the bed of the river at which to encamp on both days, in Lat. 26° 4' 0" S. I
thought it advisable to leave the party and find water ahead before again moving it; this I did
after following the course of the river for some miles, though in a very small and dirty pool;
moved on here next day, andleavingthem to form the camp, went on again with Walker, Brown,
and Billy, to look for more water, and also in hopes of falling in with natives. During this
ride of reconnaissance we saw fresh cattle tracks, apparently of not more than four or six
head of very large bullocks, these tracks were not more than a day or two old, and Billy
said belonged to the cattle which had got away from the blacks when they killed the white
men.
Finding water, I moved the camp on next day, and on the 19th left the river and
followed a tributary from the westward, in which, at about ten miles we found water and
encamped. Here was the first native camp we had seen, apparently of one black fellow and
his gin; after encamping, I sent Walker and Billy out in. search of them; they returned
just after sunset with a “ picaninny,” a boy about ten years old, who it appeared had been
there with an old gin, and who said he knew all about the murder of the white men, and
volunteered to come with us.
Next morning, having the boy mounted on a led horse, we started under his guid-
ance, but it soon became apparent that he knew nothing of the direction we ought to take
to reach this place stated by him to be five days journey distant. On questioning him
through old Billy, he said that he had never been there, but that he had heard the story
from all the black fellows, he told us the same as Coppi had formerly, and even on this very
morning when our horses and mules were driven up to the camp in hobbles, he shouted and
laughed and repeatedly said something in the Coogi language, repeating the word “ Bunder-
abulia,” and on my asking Billy what be was saying, he told me it was “ that the mules
and horses were jumping in the hobbles in the same way that the black fellows described
those to have done which they had driven off and killed.”
However,


However, I followed the same tributary for some distance to the north-west, and then
left it and crossed another deep creek running to the north-west; seeing a fire, as of a gin
burning the reeds in the bed of the creek, I sent Billy with Walker down to endeavour to
obtain some information from her ; they returned accompanied by a gin with a child on her
shoulders. She camo towards us without much apparent trepidation, and a long conversa-
tion ensued between her and Billy, the substance of which was that the white men were
killed on a creek this side of the Bunderabulla, to which she pointed W. N. W., that it was
seven days journey, and then pointing to saddles, guns', pots, &c., said that plenty of those
were there; she pointed N. W. as the direction we should take, and told Billy there was
plenty of water.
Leaving her, wo proceeded in a general N. W. course for about five miles, gradually
ascending a scrubby pine ridge—the creek running from N. W. away to S. and S. W.;
crossing this ridge we descended a grassy valley which led us to a creek or river in very fine
open forest country, coming from N. and N. E. and running here E. to W. The broad
sandy bed was however perfectly dry, and though we followed every bend and turn for up-
wards of sixteen miles in a general N. W. course, not one drop could we find. Long after
nightfall we fortunately fell in with about two buckets-full of water in a hole in a rock, —
upon which we encamped, having enough to make some tea for ourselves, though the horses
and mules could get none—this deprivation however, being in some measure alleviated by
the abundance of green feed, particularly wild carrots and geranium which was springing
in all directions.
On the 21st, the horses not having wandered far, I went off down the river attended by
Brown and old Billy to look for water. This we found after having followed its course about
eight miles, in a small deep pool, to this I removed the camp, and here we were detained
next day by heavy rain, which however had no effect on the sandy bed of the river, for the
next two days I had to reconnoitre for watdt before moving the party.
On the 25th, leaving the party at camp XIX, in Lat. 25° 38' 23' S., I again went
out attended by Walker, Brown, and Billy, to look for water and also in hopes of meeting
some other natives from whom we might obtain intelligence. The river, which had for the
last twenty miles been gradually taking a S. W. course, hero turned almost due south, and I
accordingly took a west course in hopes of falling in with some other creek leading in the
direction I wished for; after riding some miles, we came upon a broad deep creek, dry, but
which by the flood-marks we could tell ran from W. to E. and S. E., apparently to join the
river we had left, and which I now assumed from its course and position to be the Warregi;
riding up this for some distance, we saw a native fire, and hastening up to it, saw a wretched
looking infant sitting on the ground with no one else near it. I left Brown to watch there,
while we searched the bush round about, could find no natives, and returning to the fire,
saw, perched in a tree over Brown’s head, the mother of the child. She was very
frightened, but on Billy speaking to her in Coogi, and assuring her we meant no harm, she
came down. A long conversation then ensued, and as the interpreter informed me, the
substance of it was, that she knew all about the murder of these white men, saying that it
was four days journey thence, she also pointed out guns, saddles, &c., as having been scat-
tered about; we accompanied her to her camp on the other side of the creek, where was a
very old, withered gin ; on our coming up, and before the first one spoke, the old woman
corroborated the story, saying that the creek upon which we now were, was the one upon
which the white men were killed, that the name of the “touri” or place, was'“Ballour,”
and of the creek “Berando,” and that of the river behind us “ Bialing.” The old woman
told us that she would remain where she was until next day, and that when we came up
she would go with us and guide us to some black fellows who would show us the place; we
then returned to camp.
Next day the whole party moved on, and in order that these two gins might not be
alarmed at the sight of so many men and animals, I sent Walker and Billy ahead to keep
them there until we should get up. On arriving at the creek, however, the gins were gone, nor
were there any signs of the other two ; presuming that the gins had decamped, and that
Walker had followed them, I halted the party on the other side of the creek to wait for his
arrival. He did not come in till nearly 11 p. M., bringing the two women with him; he re-
ported


ported that not finding them at the camp, he had followed them, Billy tracked them many
miles, and they at length came up with them in a pine scrub.
I now told them that they must stay with us and take us to the place we were look-
ing for, that I would give them plenty to cat, and a tomahawk each when we should have
seen these remains; they agreed to go, and on the following morning we started under their
guidance. Wc had not gone many miles when the old gin suddenly told us “ that she
“ would take us a short cut to the spot where the white men were killed, that it had taken
“ them four days to run up a creek that way, (pointing cast) but that by going through
“so mo brigalow, we could make a very short cut, and that by sunset wc should reach the
“ very place.” She accordingly took us a general W. N. W. course through some brigalow
and pine scrubs, and just before sunset brought us up to a water-hole, which I at first took
to be the head of the crock we had left in the morning, especially as we had been ascending
ridges all day, and the barometer showed that we had an increased altitude of nine hundred feet.
Here the old gin sat down, and told us this was the spot. There were no relics to
be seen, and on.cnquiring of her where such were, she replied that “ big water carried them
“ all away.” I was far from satisfied with this reply, but as we had made a long stage of
about 1G miles, over very heavy sandy country, I determined to encamp, and remain a day
or two if necessary, and examine the neighbourhood.
On the following morning, the 28th, I again spoke to these two gins, through the
medium of the interpreter. The old woman still adhered to her story, and said that she
knew this was the place, though she had never seen the remains, as the blackfellows would
not allow any of the women to approach it, telling them “ that whitemens ‘ debil debil ’
“ always walked about.” She again said that she had been there present at the murder, or
rather, as the women and children always are in such cases, in the background; she even
pointed to the ridges behind, as having been their position at the time ;—that the black-
fellows had followed these white men for many days;—that they were in countless numbers,
like “ niemcn” (pointing to a large ant bed near her) ; —that they formed a very large circle
and gradually closed up upon the white camp;—that just at day dawn, all the white men
being asleep, the blacks rushed on them and speared them as they lay;—that only one white
man, who was sleeping at some distance, awoke, and fired his gun once, shooting one black-
fellow, but that he was immediately killed, and that the blackfellow who was wounded went
away and died in the bush ; —that previous to this the blacks had, in the early part of the
night, driven away and killed all the horses and mules, and that they afterwards eat them,
having a great feast; when they were very full, lying down and sleeping till again hungry;
—that they also killed a few of the cattle, but that the rest got away from them; —that for
a long time afterwards there were quart pots, pint pots, red shirts, axes, and other things in
the blacks’ camps, but that now they were all gone. She also assigned as a reason for this
act, the ill usage of some gins by the two blackfellows attached to the party. She then told
me that up that way (pointing cast) was an old Camp and marked tree of this party, and
that away westward there was another. On my asking her “ how it could be that they had
“ been killed here if they had a camp further on,” she said that they had gone from the
eastward camp to the westward, and thence returned and encamped at this waterhole.
I mounted my horse, and attended by Walker and Brown, rode out to the eastward; found a
creek running in that direction, and about 10 miles down it found for the first time one of Leich-
hardt’s marked Camps. It was in an angle of the creek, now perfectly dry; there was the mark,
thus —the letters probably intended for 15th April; the tent poles and forks—
the heavy saplings on which he had placed his packs (showing that the
ground must have been very wet and damp); and even the forked
J sticks and cross piece in front of the fire, on which they had most
probably roasted part of a kangaroo, the bones of which were lying about. There was also
in one place a large quantity of cattle dung, showing where the bullocks had been bedded; but
though Brown and Billy, who was also with me, looked carefully for tracks either coming to
or departing from this camp, they could find none, the soil being as we had found it ever
since we reached the Maranoa, loose and sandy. The most probable reason for our never
having seen any of his camps before is, that at the time he left Mount Abundance, the whole
country was in a state of inundation, consequently he could travel in any direction, always
147—b sure


sure of plenty of water, whereas it has been so scarce since I have been out that we have
been compelled to follow water courses, and even then have had to encamp more than once
without any.
Returning to the camp we fell in with natives’ tracks and followed them, and about
sunset came up with an old gin with a child and two young girls of nine or ten years old.
They were very frightened, but we called out as usual “ ara-wabbe,” which means in Coogi
that we would not hurt them. They then came up to us, and the old woman told us that
the white men were killed eight days journey hence; that there were very large plains to
cross, three days journey, without water, &c.; but she also pointed to saddles, guns, &c.
We brought them also to the camp, and found that during my absence they had secured
another gin, who was passing near without perceiving them. We had now nine women and
children in camp, whom I was determined to detain until I could find some of the black-
fellows ; had I allowed the others to go, of course the blacks would soon leave the neighbour-
hood. I gave them all plenty of flour and sugar, and they were soon perfectly at home.
The gin who had been detained during my absence told me that the bones, &c., were
to be seen at a place four days journey away, and that her son, a “ Copjfi,” was camped a
short distance away ; that she would in the morning go with me to his camp, and prevail
upon him to accompany us to the spot, as he had seen the remains, &c., and knew all about
the whole affair. Accordingly, at daylight on the 29th, I went on horseback with the same
attendants as on the previous day, and taking also the old gin, who had volunteered, and one
of the little girls. About four miles N.E. of our camp, and on the borders of a pine scrub,
we found the blacks’ camp. On going up to them, assuring them through Billy of our
peaceable intentions, we saw two fine athletic young men, of which one was “ Coppi,” the
other “ Marri.” They repeated the same story that we had so often heard before, pointing
also to guns, &c.; said the place was three days’ journey thence, and was due west, at least
so they pointed. They agreed to come with us; they told us they were two of the
“ Nicmcns,” but that it was other blacks who had killed the white men, whereas, at Mount
Abundance, the natives accused the “ Niemens.” “ Coppi” was a good countenanced man,
but the other as villainous a looking scoundrel as I ever saw. I would have preferred taking
the former alone, but they said they must both go.
I brought these back to the camp (XXI), and prepared immediately for proceeding
on our journey. We left at about half-past one o’clock, leaving all the gins and children to
go about their business. We travelled about ten miles in a general W.N.W. course, and
encamped on a waterholc, or rather chain of ponds, in lat. 25° 30' S., and long., by account,
from lunar observations of Capt. Anderson at Camp XVIII., 140° 35' E. On the following
morning I presented each of my guides with trousers and shirt, and gave them many pro-
mises of tomahawks and knives when they should have performed the service required of
them. We again proceeded, under their guidance, W.N.W., and in about five miles reached
a large deep creek, half bank high, with water discolored, as if from recent floods; this they
informed me was called Alpomdulla Creek. The country here was magnificent, open forest,
or rather plains, with clumps of apple tree, well grassed, and altogether the finest I have
ever seen.
From this creek they turned off at a tangent, and much to my surprise led us all the
day until nearly sunset, in an E. N. E., and N. N. E. course, finally causing us to encamp
on a very muddy waterholc.
During the first watch, Walker informed me that Billy had just told him these
natives were leading us to the bones of blackfellows, and not to the place where the white
men had been murdered.. On speaking to them about it, they said they were afraid to take
us there, as they knew we would shoot them directly. I assured them that they were
perfectly safe, and that so far from shooting them, I would reward them. Walker suggested
to me the propriety of putting handcuffs on them, but this I would not listen to ; and I also
gave strict orders, that should they get away in any of the watches, that no shot should be
fired on them, even if they could not bo re-captured. I had no authority to permit anything
of the sort, and it would have been in the highest degree injudicious.
These two men had accompanied me of their own free will, and on my assurance of
their safety; they didnot consider themselves prisoners, but thought, no doubt, as they came
to
6
LETTER RELATIVE TO DR. LEICHHARDT AND PARTY.


so they might go; and I was convinced, that if by fair means they would not shew us that
of which we were in search, force would be of no avail; and I determined rather to let them
go if they felt so disposed, and stand my chance of finding others who might give me in-
formation, than attempt any restraint or threats with them. Had I used the latter, had I
tied them up and threatened to shoot them if they did not lead me to this place, they might
have immediately denied all knowledge of it; and as I would not be justified in shooting
them, I should then have had to let them go, with a very poor opinion of the courage of the
white men.
Our guides did not however desert us this night, hut the next morning said they
would take us to the place, but that it was now 8 days journey, W. by S. They accordingly
led us about 12 miles, as we did not leave the camp until 1, p. m., in order to obtain the
sun’s meridian altitude, which gave our latitude 25° 21' O' S.; the direction we pursued
to-day, was to the north of west; and it was not until after the moon rose, that we encamped
on Alpomdulla Creek, much higher up than when we had met it yesterday. The flood at
this part of the crock had passed away, leaving only various small streams of muddy water
meandering along the various channels it had formed for itself in the sandy bed.
Here at length our two guides deserted us; they sneaked away as only blackfellows
can; during my own (the morning watch), and three of us standing intently watching their
fire where they were one instant, and from which in another they were gone. Billy, who
had been getting very uneasy for a day or so before, told me that these two natives were too
much afraid of being shot, to shew us the bones; but that they had told him we must cross
4 crocks, then a large plain for 3 days, and then 3 more creeks before we should find the
spot.
J determined, however, to proceed further up this creek, in hopes of falling in with
some other natives from whom I might gain intelligence, and perhaps a guide; followed it
in a general north course for 12 or 14 miles; saw neither natives nor tracks, and encamped.
We were now on the Nive or Nivclle, of Sir Thomas Mitchell, much lower down
than that Gentlemen had been. Our position was 25° 9' 0" S. latitude, and longitude by
account from lunar observations, 140° 29', E., considerably to the south, and far to the west
of the head of the Victoria ; and yet when even more to the southward, these guides had
pointed to W. by S., as the situation of the creek upon which the whites were killed.
At 9, p. m., this night, our interpreter deserted. This was a thing I nor any body
else, who has the slightest knowledge of the natives, would never for an instant have dreamed
of. Wo were now nearly three hundred miles from the nearest part of the Balonnc, his
own country; and the idea of his leaving us to go in by himself, and run the gauntlet of all
the tribes in his route, I should have scouted as ridiculous; but it was, nevertheless, true ;
he had gone, and with him taken our best tomahawk, leaving in exchange some of his clothes.
I could not help thinking that this had been done by him in pursuance of an arrangement
entered into between him and the guides who had previously deserted. As Billy was known
as one of the greatest scoundrels in the Mount Abundance country, and as the head and
prime mover in all the murders and disturbances which had at at last driven Mr. MTherson
from the Fitz Roy Downs, I thought that he might, perhaps, have made a commencement
by driving away our horses, &c., so I sent two men mounted, by the light of the moon, to
drive them all up to the camp, whore the watches kept them about until daylight.
No other course was now left open to me but to return at once to camp XXI, and
endeavour to find the other camp of Leichhardt, of which the old gin had told me as being
to the westward. We accordingly, on the 3rd instant, retraced our steps, and arrived at
this camp on the evening of the sth. Here the party remained the following day, while
I went out, attended by Edgar, Walker, and Brown, in search of this camp. Riding due
west, I came upon a creek, from S.W. to N. and N.E., followed it down some miles,
and at length crossed our own track to camp XXII, under the guidance of the two
natives. Within a quarter of a mile of this I found, in an angle of the creek, the
other camp marked L, of which she had told me; the same mark— r~~j
large and heavy saplings for packs, tent poles, bullock dung, &c,; but no tracks; / /
and the crock itself, with a shallow bed, dry, and overgrown with long grass and / —,
weeds. Even about the camp Brown could not sec a track. I was now aware that )
i*
7
LETTER RELATIVE TO DR. LEICHHARDT AND PARTY.


it would be useless, or worse than useless, to remain any longer searching about for his racks.
We had been beyond this upwards of 45 miles—west, east, and north—without seeing any, and
I thought the wisest plan I could pursue would be to return to Surat with all speed, and, if
possible, obtain another interpreter, and return, though not with the hope of gaining more
information than I have hitherto obtained. In this matter I consulted some of my party, and
their opinion coincided with my own, and all expressed their readiness to come out with mo
again. I was the more induced to pursue this course on account of the severe illness of
one of my companions, Mr. Horsburgh, who had for some time past been seriously indisposed,
and was daily growing worse.
I accordingly retraced my steps, and knowing exactly where I should find water,
I regulated the stages accordingly, and arrived here on the 20th instant, exactly seventeen
days from the date of our interpreter’s desertion, and four months from the day we first
loaded the mules to leave Darling Downs. For the last week Mr. Horsburgh has suffered
much from an attack of acute rheumatism, having had to be lifted on and off his horse,
raised up and laid down, and even assisted to walk a few steps. He is now under the care
of Mr. Drysdale, the Surgeon, considerably better, but very weak and unable to travel.
On our return, I found that Billy was already here, having arrived on the 14th ;
thus making the journey in twelve days, or at the rate of nearly twenty-five miles per day.
Ho tried to evade me; but I called to him as he was running off, and he unwillingly carac.
He excused himself by saying that he feared we would shoot him; then that he thought
the blacks would kill us all, and go forth; but on my asking him if he were willing to come
with me again, he said he would. He also told me that those blackfellows “ too much
“ gammon;” that they had taken us past the place, and would never show us; that they
feared too much we were going to kill them in revenge; and then said that they Ijad told
him a fire had burned everything.
Of course I know it would be folly to believe all he says; but at the same time I
am now fully convinced that the chances of success would be very dubious, even were Ito
return. I might find natives who would pretend to take us to the spot, and shew us where
Leichhardt was killed, and tell us that everything had been burned, or carried away in a
flood, as the old woman has already done. She certainly may have told the truth, though
I doubt it; but she could at all events show us, or tell us where to find old camps of this
very party. lam much disposed to believe that the natives, now that we have been amongst
them, and fearing another visit, will put out of the way everything that has already not
been destroyed, as they firmly believed, notwithstanding our assurances, that we intended
shooting them in revenge for the death of our countrymen by their hands. Of the truth
of the report I have not now the slightest doubt. The manner and cause of the murder
has been told and corroborated in every particular by so many, that there can now be but
one opinion on the matter.
After mature consideration, therefore, I have determined to return to Sydney with
all dispatch, the rations I have now remaining, that is the flour, will barely suffice to carry
me there, and in the event of going out again, I had depended upon replenishing my
stock here or at the neighbouring stations; but in consequence of the late floods at Morcton
Bay, the teams have been detained, and every establishment on the river is short of
rations.
With regard to my own, I must observe, that I had in the outset calculated the quantity
with the greatest care, as a limited ration of 5 lbs. flour and ‘l\ lbs. meat for nine men and
nine mouths. By the subsequent alteration of my arrangements (my party originally con-
sisting of ten instead of nine,) I have been for the last three months feeding never less than
eleven, sometimes twelve, sometimes fourteen, and on one occasion twenty-two. I never
limited the natives, giving them as much as they could cat to prevent them leaving, and as
for my own party, I found that short rations for nine men would not serve ten who had to
work hard, live in the open air, and keep from two to three hours watch every night in a
temperature averaging ten degrees below freezing point. The meat which I took with me
originally, 420 lbs., though excellent, lost in weight at least 25 per cent., and as for game,
wo could not depend upon it, having been twenty-eight days without even seeing a pigeon;
on,other occasions we obtained abundance, but at any time the allowance of meat from the
stores
8
LETTEII RELATIVE TO Dll. LEICHHARDT AND PARTY.


stores did not exceed 3 lbs. per diem amongst the whole party, blacks and all. For the last
week we had none. I merely mention this to account for the rations not having lasted as
long as I had anticipated, and as most probably would have been expected. We have now
been using them since the 3rd March, and they will last about seven weeks more, which will
altogether make a period of about o{ 7 months.
I had almost omitted to report, that amongst the gins whom we had collected at
Camp XXI. there were three tomahawks, apparently rudely fashioned from the plates of
saddle trees : these they acknowledged to have been part of the spoil of the white men, and
said that the blackfellows had given them to them. They appeared to have been made by
’ doublingandhammeringtogetherthe gullet plates of saddles, and were sharpened at one end and
fastened with gum into cleft sticks, as are the common stone tomahawks. I should have
taken one of these, but had none to spare in exchange for it, and taking it away from them
would have been much at variance with our professions towards them; besides, I had just
then obtained the two guides, and was in hopes of soon finding other and stronger proof.
The boy who joined the party beyond the Maranoa, and who has since remained with
us, I intend taking to Sydney. He will soon become sufficiently acquainted with our
language to tell all he knows of this sad business, and in the event of any future expedition
going in that direction would prove most useful as an interpreter, his language—the Coogi—
being the furthest known northern dialect.
I cannot conclude this report without thanking my party, generally, for their as-
sistance, and zealous co-operation on all occasions; to Messrs. Anderson, Ilorsburgh,
and Drysdale, these are especially due; Mr. Edgar, though newly arrived in the Colony,
and utterly unused to such a life, proved useful; Walker was most anxious for the successful
termination of the journey, and did his bert to promote it; and Jefferson proved an active,
hard working man, and particularly fitted for this sort of thing. My two natives, Brown
and Jackey (the former particularly) could not be excelled; and the half caste boy was also
very useful, especially in the catching and loading of the mules, &c.
Mr. Drysdale, in addition to his share in the general duties of the camp, has made a
valuable and interesting collection of birds and insects for the Museum; and in all cases
where his medical aid has been required, particularly in that of Mr. Horsbrugh, his unwearied
attention has been beyond all praise.
To the squatters on my outward route, particularly to H. Hughes, Esquire, M. L. C.
of Darling Downs, lam under great obligations for their kindness; to that Gentleman
especially, at whose stations we were encamped for upwards of four weeks, and on whose
run our sick and knocked up horses recovered their strength and vigour, are my thanks due.
Hoping that what has been done may meet with the approval of His Excellency the
Governor-General.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
HOVENDEN HELY.
The Honorable Tub Colonial Secretary,
&e. ; &c., &c,
147—c
9
LETTER RELATIVE TO DR. LEICHHARDT AND PARTY.
