

r /
Bio
. 4 " .U--Q
Dr. MELVILLE BIRKS
And because right is right to follow right
Were wisdom in the scorn of consequences
Tennyson.
BORN 30th JANUARY, 1876
PETERBOROUGH 1908-1913
DENT BROKEN HILL HOSP
DIED 27th APRIL. 1924
g SUPERINTENDENT BROKEN HILL HOSPITAL 1913-1923
, llllllllt:illllllllll!C3llllllllllllt]llllllllllllt3IIIIIIIIIIIIC:illllllll'^


AN HEROIC LIFE
DEVOTION TO SERVICE FOR OTHERS
(Reprinted from “The Daily Herald April 29th 1924)
The passing of Dr. Birks is a national as well as a private
loss —the State and the medical profession are the poorer
by his death. Such men as he are rare and can ill be spared,
men who unite in both theory and practice a fine skill with a
profound sense of responsibility, earnest humanitarianism, and
clear unbiassed judgment.
Dr. Birks was born in Adelaide in the year 1876. His father
was the late Walter Richard Birks; his mother, who survives
him, is a member of the Crooks family. Dr. Birks received
his early education at the State Schools and later went to
Way College. He took a course in agriculture at Roseworthy
college where he distinguished himself, gaining the silver
medal as dux of his year in 1894. Medicine was his
ambition and after leaving Roseworthy in 1895 he began his
studies in that profession at the Adelaide Universty. After
gaining his medical degree in 1902 and serving for a year at
the Adelaide Hospital as House Surgeon, he proceeded to
England spending three years there and on the Continent of
Europe, and obtained the Fellowship of the Royal College of
Surgeons (F.R.C.S.) London.
While in London he met Miss Maclntyre, a daughter of
P. B. Maclntyre, Esq. of Findon, Roseshire of Crofters’
Commission fame and they were married shortly afterward.
Dr. Birks returned to Australia in 1908 and practised in
Peterborough from 1908 to 1913. He then proceeded to
Broken Hill as superintendent of the Broken Hill Hospital.
Here his efficiency and broad sympathy have won him a
lasting place in the affections of the people.
Dr. Birks was too straightforward a man to fail in
arousing opposition in some quarters when such grave
issues were at stake as those brought to light by the long


industrial conflict at Broken Hill, but he brought a clear
vision and unbiassed judgment to bear on these questions.
There was no ‘trimming’ in his attitude and consequently
those of both sides often found themselves in opposition to
him. But whether agreeing with or differing from Melville
Birks all respected and loved him.
During the war he came to Adelaide three times to
volunteer for active service but owing to the urgency of
his work at the hospital he was not accepted. In the
meanwhile he carried out genuinely heroic war service for
which he has now paid the price and won the reward. For
months he carried on the work of the hospital alone —work
which otherwise would have required the service of three or
four qualified men. Day after day he worked continuously
for long hours in the operating theatre with the assistance
only of the nursing staff, even when fighting himself against
ill health and in great pain. These years of devoted service
ultimately brought on the illness which has now proved fatal.
Six months after the close of the war he was granted
a year’s leave and proceeded with his family to Great Britain
and America where he made a special study of the industrial
diseases prevalent in Broken Hill. Returning in 1920, he
continued his work till August, 1922, when illness overtook
him. Subsequently he managed to reach Melbourne and
was in a private hospital for eleven months and then in
the Melbourne General for three months. Here he received
the greatest help and kindness from many of his fellow
practitioners. In December he was sufficiently recovered
to be brought home to Adelaide, but the recovery was only
temporary and he passed away on Sunday, April 27.
His long weary illness was borne with exemplary forti-
tude —a fitting close to an heroic life of devotion to the
service of others. Great sympathy is felt for his devoted
wife as well as for all his family under the long strain. He
leaves two sons and one daughter.
Sister Graham, who was trained under Dr. Birks at Broken
Hill and was later matron of that hospital, nursed him during
the last weeks of his life. Speaking of his work and character
she says, “No one can estimate the work of Dr. Birks at Broken
Hill both in bringing the hospital up to a high state of efficiency
and in establishing a fine training school for nurses. The
idealism, the fine sense of honor, the devotion to duty of our


“Head” could not fail to make the nurses under him regard
their work as a high calling. Though the professional side
came first it never overshadowed, or blotted out the human
side. We were taught to regard our patients as beings
whom all our skill and care must be called on to relieve.
He never sanctioned anything perfunctory in our mental
approach or professional handling of patients. To have
one’s first impressions of her work directed by such a man
is a gacious advantage for which a nurse can never he
sufficiently grateful.”
AN APPRECIATION.
One who was closely associated with much of the work
of the deceased writes: —“Dr. Birks’s two main interests
during his life at Broken Hill were his surgical work at the
hospital, and the study of social and economic problems as
revealed by his close association with the workers. With
regard to the first, there is no question that the high level
of surgical work which Broken Hill now enjoys was due
first and last to Dr. Birks. He was a thoroughly sound,
although slightly conservative surgeon, and was a master of
asepsis, with the result that aseptic measures were, and still
are carried out at Broken Hill in a manner at leaM equal
to that of any hospital in Australia. A paper which he read
before the South Australian branch of the British Medical
Association, entitled “The treatment of mine injuries at
Broken Hill,” was evidence of the remarkable results which
he was able to obtain in many serious and mutilating
conditions His interest in the working class was shown
by the frequent lectures which he gave before the various
Unions and the local branch of the Workers’ Educational
Association. These were usually on some topic such as
public health, with special reference to conditions at the
Barrier, as he knew them.” Dr. Birks was particularly
interested in the subject of lead poisoning, and during his
last trip abroad he took the opportunity of conferring with
Sir Thomas Oliver, who is probably the foremost authority
on that subject. With the removal of Dr. Melville Birks, the
Broken Hill Hospital lost an able administrator and sound
surgeon, and the workers of that city a frfepd who ever had
their welfare at heart,


HEROIC DEVOTION
TO THE SERVICE OF OTHERS
(Leading Article Jrom “The Daily Herald ,” April 30th, 1924)
In a world in which the evidences of selfish greed for
gain seem to be the first consideration, where personal
interests appear to predominate over thoughts of public
welfare, an instance that controverts this point of view comes
like a welcome shower that presages the break up of a
summer drought. Such an instance also indicates that the
heart springs of mankind are not altogether drought-stricken
with regard to the higher and nobler emotions of life, and
that there is yet hope for humanity.
Any instance that illustrates this point deserves to be
given as much prominence as possible, in order that the
example set may be followed by others, with the ultimate re-
sult of bettering the human race. Any man who by his life and
work has done something towards making the world a little
better than he found it, no matter in how humble a way it
may have been, has not lived in vain.
This much and a great deal more may be said in reference
to the career of the late Dr. Birks, of Broken Hill. No
greater tribute could be paid to the memory of any man
than to say, as has been said truly of this well-loved and
deeply-mourned medical man that his life was one of heroic
devotion to the service of others. His chief work lay in
the direction of championing the cause of the workers in
their predisposition to industrial diseases, when they were in
great need of some medical authority to look after their
interests.
In consequence, his name will be revered as an honored
by-word in Broken Hill for many years to come. As an
authority on industrial diseases, Dr. Birks made a name for
himself that has become famous afar from the field of his
operations. In the work he performed he did not consider
himself. Thus he doubtless shortened a life which would
have been of inestimable value to the community had it been
prolonged,


But the lesson of a life cheerfully sacrificed for the
general welfare of the people remains. That lesson is an
inspiration and an incentive in the encouragement of all that
is highest and best in the human race. Like many another
man who lived more for others than himself, Dr. Birks did
not lay up a store of riches on earth. According to all
accounts he died a comparatively poor man. In this respect
his life is by no means singular. The best work done on
earth has always been done for nothing, or, rather for the
love of doing good unto others, and for the supreme
satisfaction that unselfish action alone can give.
Bossibly no other profession provides a finer record in
this respect than that of surgery and medicine. One has
but to think of the names of Harvey, Simpson, Lister, and
many others, who, although poor in this world’s goods,
acquired among the richest gifts that have ever fallen to
man. These gifts they freely distributed to the world at
large without thought of personal gain. Dr. Birks, in a
humble way, did something similar. He thus earned the
respect of his fellow-men, and particularly of the workers,
all of whom will raise their hats in reverential respect to
his memory.
WORKERS’ GRATITUDE
A very handsome appreciation of the work of the late
Dr. Melville Birks has been presented to his widow by the
workers of Broken Hill, in the form of a beautiful leather
wallet, containing a cheque for £5OO. The inscription reads:
“Dr. Melville Birks. This wallet of £5OO is presented as
a token of respect and esteem from your many admirers at
Broken Hill.”
The cheque is signed on behalf of the subscribers by
Mr. E. B. O’Neill as President, Mr. W. P. Campbell as Trustee,
and Mr. Wm. E. Euksen as Secretary. The presentation
was made to Mrs. Birks at her residence, 7 Kensington Road,
Norwood, by Messrs. Lamb and Pearce, of Broken Hill.
The presentation was arranged some little time ago,
and on the death of Dr. Birks, it was decided to hand the
wallet and contents over to his widow. Mrs. Birks
expressed the utmost gratitude for the kindly thought which
prompted the action, and wishes to extend her personal
thanks and appreciation towards each and all who contributed.
She says that the money will be devoted to the education of
her children, as she feels that this would be in compliance
with her late husband’s dearest wish.


COPY OF ILLUMINATED ADDRESS PRESENTED BY THE
WORKERS OF BROKEN HILL, APRIL 1924
Dear Dr. Birks,
We the undersigned on behalf of the workers of Broken
Hill desire to convey to you, and hereby place on record our
respect and admiration of your skill and training as a
Medical Practitoner and our appreciation of your efforts in
the cause of Adult Education and the dissemination of
knowledge and our affection and esteem for you as a friend.
During your ten years’ residence in Broken Hill as
Surgeon Superintendent of the Broken Hill and District
Hospital you were uniquely placed to gain first hand informa-
tion of the conditions under which the workers of Broken
Hill lived and toiled. Your intense humanity and strong
regard for Truth and Justice made you a friend and advocate
of the needy and suffering and no appeal on their behalf
was made in vain.
When ill health compelled you to leave the Barrier we
knew we had lost a true and sympathetic friend and a strong
and able advocate.
We record, too, our appreciation in your efforts to banish
ignorance by your Presidency of the “Workers’ Educational
Association” (Barrier Branch) and your willingness to lecture
in the cause of national and individual health and well being.
While occupying the positon of Medical Referee under
the Workers’ Compensation Act, the workers felt assured that
they would receive equitable treatment. It was with genuine
regret that they learned of your retirement from the position.
Our grief was deep and genuine when it was known that ill
health compelled you to resign the Surgeon Superintendentship
of the Broken Hill and District Hospital, and our heart-felt
wishes were for your complete restoration to health. If
this is not to be, we ask you to accept this evidence of our
affection and esteem, realising that your sojourn on the
Barrier made for the physical and spiritual enrichment of
the people. Your efforts have not been in vain and there,
has been engendered a deep and abiding affection, which
time will not efface.
The Great Living Heart of Broken Hill goes out to you
in your suffering, and to your devoted wife and help-mate.
From the Industrial Unionists of the Barrier.


“EXTRACT FROM A LETTER FROM BROKEN H i LL.“
“Hundreds have felt real grief because of his illness —
treading more softly and speaking low because this man lay
sick. He has done untenable good and through those who
have trained under him, is still doing good. Nurses now
Matrons of country hospitals have told me that they bless
the day they came to Broken Hill to train. They were
given an ideal and the dignity of the work impressed upon
them. The sick still benefit through the work of this good
man. Broken Hill is a better town because Dr. Birks has
lived here. We are stronger because this man, who dared
to do right, has given us an example of doing right because
it is right, and we, the common people, mourn a friend who
has passed out of sight, but will live on in many hearts here.”
