

m IPAT®M
asj® too
HEW IE©EI®ES
BY
MARGARET M. THATCHER




DR. PATON
AND THE NEW HEBRIDES


. . ;


Dr PATON
AND THE NEW HEBRIDES
REGISTERED BY
ERAL FOR THaNoiVUwo.w.* ...
POST AS A BOOK.
MARGARET M. THATCHER
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED
IN AUSTRALIA 1924.
BROWN PRIOR & CO„ PRINTER
CMJfc&U ST. MELBOURNE
Issued by the Foreign Missions Committee,
Presbyterian Church of Victoria,
in connection with the John G. Paton Centenary.




CONTENTS.
Chapter. Page.
I.—Preparation for Life Work 9
11.-—Mission Work on Tanna 14
lll.—The Winning of Aniwa 23
IV.—Namakai, Litsi, Nelwang 32
V.—“ Faithful to the End” 39
Vl.—The New Hebrides To-day 49
Appendix—Suggested Questions for Circle Leaders.


THE REV. JOHN G. PATON, D.D.


CHAPTER 1.
PREPARATION FOR LIFE WORK.
On May 24, 1924, the Presbyterian Churches of Australia
and New Zealand, as well as those of other lands, will celebrate
the centenary of one of the noblest of missionaries, viz., the
late Dr. John G. Paton, of the New Hebrides.
The name of Dr. Paton is of world-wide fame. Not only in
Victoria are we thinking of him with special gratitude and
reverence this centenary year, but in England, Scotland, Ireland
and America, not to mention other countries where his Auto-
biography has made his name well known, will fitting remem-
brance be made. >
In Great Britain, a special “Life” has been written to-
honour his memory, and to revive old enthusiasms for the scenes
of his labours. In America, as we are told by one of our
missionaries, who has been lecturing recently in that country.
Dr. Paton’s memory is still green, and his name enshrined in
the heart of the Christian Church, while a leading American
writer has declared that he regards Abraham Lincoln and John
G. Paton as being the two greatest men he ever met. The
Victorian Presbyterian Church is proud to remember that Dr.
Paton was her first missionary to the New Hebrides.
The short account of his life given in this booklet is intended
more especially for the young people of our Church, but to
young and old alike, deeds of heroism and self-sacrifice appeal,
and Dr. Paton was a hero of the finest type. In studying
his hfe, let us try to understand the secret of the wonderful
success of his work in the extension of the Kingdom of God.
John G. Paton was born on May 24, 1824, in a little
Scottish village in the county of Dumfries. Both of his parents
were people of strong individuality. Some of his near
ancestors had fought and suffered in Covenant days, while
others had had exciting experiences in connection with press
gangs and pirates.
Dr. Paton sometimes spoke of the romantic careers of these
forebears, but what he most loved to dwell on was the simple,
earnest piety always found in the home of his boyhood. The


memory of his father’s early prayers helped him over many
a rough road, and in this connection, it is interesting to know
that when he, their first-born son, was given them, both parents
hoped that, if God saw fit, the child might be a missionary
of the Gospel.
He was one of a large family, having four brothers and
six sisters. The home was a humble one, with no luxuries, but
much love and simple happiness. All the children attended
the parish school, where rich and poor met on an equal footing,
and where the Bible and catechism were taught as thoroughly
as geography, Latin, mathematics, etc. His school life was
not very happy, as his schoolmaster was rough and over-
bearing, but he had to give up his regular studies at eleven
years of age, in order to learn his father’s trade of stocking-
making, and thus help in adding to the family income. His
working hours at this time were from six in the morning until
ten at night, with half an hour for breakfast, half an hour
for supper, and one hour for dinner. These spare times were
used mainly for study, for already he had resolved to aim at
being a minister of the Gospel, either at home or abroad.
Although these early years were strenuous ones for a lad,
what he learned at stocking-making was not thrown away, for
the knowledge of how to use tools and keep machinery in order
was of great value to him in the mission field.
After some years at his trade, longing to get an opportunity
for more learning, he took up office work, and, later on, teach-
ing, in connection with a school at Maryhill, for young fellows
from the mills and coal pits. His early experiences in teaching
were full of variety, as his pupils were mostly rough, rebellious
lads, more intent on giving trouble than learning lessons. John
G. Paton, however, was determined not only to keep discipline,
but to lead his pupils to think of higher things, and in both of
these aims he was successful.
Shortly before taking up teaching, he had been doing a little
work in connection with the Reformed Presbyterian Church
at Glasgow, and when changes were made in the Maryhill
school, he applied for, and obtained, the position of city
missionary in that great town. No better preparation for
work on the foreign field could have been given him than such
a position afforded, as the following short account will show.
The district allotted to him was a very degraded one, con-
taining some of the worst slums in the city. The first year


was uphill work. The only place in which his week day
meetings could be held was a small room in a little shop,
while Sunday services were held in a hay loft. These services,
for many months, were attended by only about half a dozen
people, and the committee of the mission began to talk about
removing Mr. Paton to another part of the city. He, how-
ever, begged for a longer time, and, in spite of opposition and
many discouragements, in a couple of years, he had gathered
around him some hundreds of poor people, many of whom, in
the early days, were too poor to wear shoes, stockings or
headgear. A commodious set of buildings was now purchased
by the mission authorities, and the work was greatly enlarged.
Mr. Paton never spared himself in any way, and this was
one of the reasons of his success. On Sundays, he commenced
his work for the day at 7 a.m. with a Bible Class, and, in
order to make sure that the members would be there in time,
he used to go to many of the homes at 6 a.m., knocking at
their doors, to remind them of the meeting. This Bible Class
was attended by from seventy to a hundred of the very poorest
young men and women of the district, and many of its mem-
bers became, in time, earnest and useful followers of Jesus
Christ. The rest of the day was equally strenuous, for there
were services for both young and old, while the sick were
regularly visited. On week days, there were meetings for
prayer, singing classes, mutual improvement and total abstinence
meetings, and special meetings for the Glasgow police. Mr.
Paton was always a strong believer in total abstinence, and,
in consequence, many of the hotelkeepers in the slums hated
him, and tried to do him harm. On several occasions, stones
were thrown at him, and boiling water poured from the
windows under which he was walking, but he always escaped
serious injury, and was never daunted by persecution.
While working hard at his mission duties, he was also
carrying on his studies, first at Glasgow University, then at
the Reformed Presbyterian Divinity Hall, and later, for three
years, he attended medical classes.
After he had been connected with the Glasgow mission for
nearly ten years, his thoughts began to turn strongly to the
foreign field. For a long time he had had desires in that
direction, and in 1836, hearing of the great need for more
workers in the New Hebrides, he and a fellow-worker were
led to offer themselves as candidates for work there.


At that time, there were few missionaries on those islands.
Of those who had gone, several had been murdered by the
natives, and the outlook was not promising. But that did
not daunt the heroic men who now volunteered to lake their
places. They were willing to risk all for Christ s sake.
It was not easy for Mr. Paton to leave his work in
Glasgow. Many of his people pleaded with him to stay where
workers were still so urgently needed, but he knew that other
helpers could be found for the home field, while few were
willing to go abroad. It was a great joy to him to see the
unselfishness of so many of his poor people when once they
realised his determination to take the Gospel to the islanders.
Many of the boys and girls in the mills saved their pennies
to buy calico and print for dresses for the natives, and, not
only did they provide him with a great box of these to take
with him, but after he had left, they continued to send these
articles, that were to prove such a help in his work.
In March, 1858, he and his fellow-student (Mr. J. Cope-
land) were ordained, and set apart as missionaries to the New
Hebrides, and the following month, with Mrs. Paton, they
set sail for their new field of labour.
God had brought His servant so far, and in perfect con-
fidence in His leading, he went forth, knowing that His promise,
“I am with you alway,” would never fail, but sustain him in
all his undertakings.


PUBLISHED BY THE FOKLION MISSIONS COMMHTEE PHtSBrTEHIAN CHURCH Of VIOOHIA


CHAPTER 11.
MISSION WORK ON TANNA.
Mr. and Mrs. Paton and their fellow-missionary having
left Scotland in April, 1858, arrived in Melbourne in August
of that year, and there transhipped for the New Hebrides.
Before taking up definite missionary work on the Islands,
they spent a few weeks with Dr. Geddie, one of the heroic
early missionaries, at his station on the island of Aneityum.
There, the men folk took practical lessons in house-building, a
lesson that every pioneer missionary had to learn.
It being decided that Mr. and Mrs. Paton should settle at
Port Resolution, on Tanna, while Mr. and Mrs. Mathieson,
new missionaries from Nova Scotia, should be placed further
south on the island, and Mr. Copeland at first help wherever
he was most needed, the party set sail for Tanna. On arrival
there, the necessary land was bought from the natives, and,
with the help of the Aneityumese native teachers, of whom
something will be said presently, the building of mission houses
was commenced.
As this little book is to deal principally with John G. Paton,
we shall now follow his work on Tanna. Let us try, first, to
see the natives of that island as they were when he landed there.
The Tannese at that time were wild savages, many of
them being cannibals. They were ignorant, revengeful and
superstitious. Numerous tribes, speaking different languages,
lived on the one island, and they were nearly always at war
with each other. They lived in villages, consisting of low,
untidy, one-roomed huts, covered with thatch. The men and
boys often shared one large hut, but the chief of the tribe
lived alone. The women were quite apart, and were treated
as slaves and beasts of burden. They could be beaten, or
even killed, by their husbands without anyone thinking wrong
was being done. Girls were never welcome at birth, but
sons were wanted by both parents.
It was quite easy, as a rule, for the Tannese to make a
living, for the soil was rich and fertile, and it was only when


there were times of drought that they ran short of food. 1 heir
main articles of diet were yams, taro, cocoanuts, breadfruit,
bananas and fish.
There was much to make the natives happy, for theirs was
a land of sunshine and beauty, but they lived a life of super-
stitious fear. They had no idea of a Heavenly Father, Who
cared for them, but were always in fear of evil spirits. Some
of their chiefs were called sacred men, and they pretended to
have influence with the spirits, and to be able to cause hurri-
canes, droughts, diseases, and so on. They professed, also,
to have the power of “nahak”—that is, they said that, if they
could get hold of anything belonging to a man, or any food
he had touched, they could bewitch him and bring about his
death. The result was that, if a man in a certain village
or tribe became ill and died (and frequently he died of
terror), the other members of the tribe declared he had been
bewitched by one of the sacred men. At once revenge was
sought, and war, with its scenes of cruelty and horror, fol-
lowed. The Tannese also worshipped numbers of stone images
and charms, but these brought them no happiness. The great
object of the natives was to avoid giving their idols any cause
to do them harm, and they were continually fearful lest they
should offend them, and so bring down on themselves anger
and punishment.
White men were not strangers to these natives. For many
years they had been used to trading vessels calling at their
ports, in order to obtain sandalwood, which grew plentifully
on some of the islands. They had suffered many things
from these traders, who often not only forced them to work
on their boats, but shot down both men and women when they
refused to do as they were ordered.
As early as 1 842 English missionaries had landed on Tanna,
but the natives did not know the difference between the aims
of the missionaries and those of the traders, so in a short time,
after terrible hardships, the missionaries had had to flee for
their lives.
Near to Tanna is the little island of Aneityum, and in
1848, missionaries settled there, and succeeded, after some
years’ strenuous work, in leading all the natives of that island
to become Christians. These Aneityumese Christians were
like the earliest followers of Christ. They were not willing
to keep the Gospel message to themselves, but felt they must
15


pass it on to others. Numbers of them went as “teachers” to
the islands near by, and, although several were murdered by
the savages, others immediately took their places. There
were twelve of these Aneityumese teachers on Tanna when Mr.
Paton landed there. They had not been able to accomplish
much, as they knew little of the language spoken on that
island, but they had kept bravely to their posts. They wel-
comed Mr. Paton with great joy, and helped him in the build-
ing of his house. During the whole of his stay on Tanna they
were devoted and loyal, some even giving their lives for the
work’s sake.
As can be easily understood, one of the first needs of any-
one living in a foreign land is to know enough of the language
to be able to carry on conversation with the people there. The
Tannese had no written language, so it was difficult for Mr.
Paton to make himself understood, or to understand what was
said to him. By carefully watching and listening, however,
he soon learnt a few words, and then used those as a foundation
for many more. For instance, he, one day, noticed one native
saying to another, while pointing at Mr. Paton, “Se nangin?”
At once Mr. Paton guessed the man was asking his name;
so he himself pointed to another man, and said, “Se nangin?”
at which the man smiled and gave his name. In this way
Mr. Paton learnt a number of words, and in a comparatively
short time could not only speak freely with the natives, but
also could begin to translate some of the Bible into the principal
Tannese language.
A great sorrow came to him a few months after settling
on Tanna, for his wife and baby boy both died, and he was
left alone in the little home. He himself was very ill with
ague and malaria, and had it not been for the devotion of one
of the Aneityumese teachers named Abraham, he, too, would
most likely have died.
Just about this time, some of the Tannese began, like Nico-
demus of old, to come to him at night to learn something of
the new religion he talked about. They were afraid at first
to come in the daytime, for fear their people would kill them,
but after Mr. Paton had been on the island for nearly a
year, about forty of them would sometimes come to the ser-
vices held on a Sunday. With the help of these natives and
the Aneityumese teachers, a simple little church was built,


and it was a great joy to Mr. Paton to have a building in
which he could hold worship.
We must not think, however, that many of the natives were
glad to see the new church. Only about five or six of them
ventured to the opening services, and all the time it was being
built, Mr. Paton’s life was threatened. The Tannese were
a fickle people. Some of the chiefs were quite friendly when
alone with the missionary, or when a British or French man-
of-war happened to call, but when there was danger of per-
secution or trouble of any kind, they were quick to leave him,
and some even joined with the worst savages on the island in
attempting to take his life. Over 1 and over again the little hut
in which he lived would be surrounded by armed savages.
Sometimes one of these would level his musket ready to shoot,
or poise his club or tomahawk ready to strike, and Mr. Paton
would have to wrest the weapon from the very hands of the
savage. He has told us that at such times he would pray that
God would either speedily deliver him from their hands, or
take him at once to Heaven. When a British man-of-war
called at the island, the captain would urge Mr. Paton to
leave Tanna, but his determination and courage never failed.
He felt it his duty to stay where he was, until God showed
him plainly he was to go elsewhere.
Not only did he continue steadily with his work in the
midst of constant danger, but many a time he made peacq be-
tween warring tribes. Frequently he would visit the different
villages, and tell the chiefs how wrong were many of their
customs, such as war. He told them that to fight and kill one
another, to ill treat their wives, to bury alive their old parents,
was not what the great Father would wish them to do. Some-
times the natives listened willingly to the “missi,” as they
called him, for they knew he loved them, but, sometimes,
directly his back was turned, they would plan ho\y they could
murder him, and once more do as they pleased without being
rebuked.
A great event in Mr. Paton’s life at this time was the
printing of his first book in Tannese. He had been given a
small printing press by a friend in Glasgow, but had never
learnt how to use it, so it was only after a great deal of experi-
menting that he had any satisfactory results. He has told
us how he found the printing of a book much more difficult
than the building of a house, and the description of his ex-


citement when he found he really could print the Gospel
story in the natives’ own language is best told in his own
words. He wrote:—
I confess that I shouted in an ecstasy of joy when the
first sheet came from the press all correct. It was about one
o’clock in the early morning. I was the only white man then
on the island, and all the natives had been fast asleep for
hours. Yet I literally pitched my hat into the air and danced
like a schoolboy round and round that printing press. Then
over that first sheet of God’s word ever printed in the Tannese
tongue, I went on my knees and pleaded with God to carry
the light and joy of His own Holy Bible into every dark
heart on Tanna.”
Mention has been made of Mr. Baton’s courage when
amongst warring tribes; this same courage was shown when his
fellow-missionary needed help of any kind. There were
times when, owing to the long intervals between the calling
of ships with provisions, the missionaries ran short of European
food; this, especially for the missionaries’ wives, was some-
times a serious matter. At one such time, Mr. Baton heard
that Mr. and Mrs. Mathieson, on the south-west coast, had
little food left, and were in great need of some flour. A
war was then going on between some of the inland tribes, so
it was impossible to make the journey overland. A strong
wind and a high sea prevented him from taking out his own
little boat, so he pleaded with some of the friendly natives
to take him in one of their strong canoes, and this they con-
sented to do. The flour, enclosed in a great iron pot, was
placed in the centre of the canoe, and the little party set off.
They were constantly in danger of the great breakers on the
coral reef, and were frequently drenched through by the foam
of the surf. When they were within two miles of their desti-
nation, the sea became so dangerous that they decided to go
no further, but beach the canoe, riding it in on the crest of a
wave. The canoe was swamped, and all its occupants were
thrown into the sea, but the natives were good swimmers, and
one of them helped Mr. Baton ashore, while others held on to
the canoe and succeeded in getting it safely beached. The
flour, much to Mr. Baton’s delight, was uninjured by the
water, and was carried safely to the mission station where it
was so badly needed. The men who accompanied Mr. Baton
decided to stay with their friends in that part of the island


until there was a favourable tide, but he, himself, was afraid
to remain long away from his own station, in case it should
be broken into by the hostile natives, so after a few hours’
rest, he started back on his journey overland.
As it was getting dark, and the natives were afraid to be
out after sunset, no one would go with him to show him the
way, but he set out by himself, and after climbing up almost
perpendicular paths, crawling over great rocks, and walking
in the darkness for nearly twenty miles, he reached his home,
thoroughly exhausted, but full of gratitude to God for His
protecting care.
In 1860, he had the great joy of welcoming to Tanna the
Rev. S. F. Johnston and his wife as fellow-missionaries. They
lived with him until they had learnt a little of the language
and a small additional house could be built.
There was an epidemic of measles among the natives about
this time, and the missionaries devoted all their energies to
helping the people in their sickness. Medicine and food were
taken to them, and everything possible done to lessen their
sufferings, but great numbers of them died. It is sad to have
to relate that this epidemic had been deliberately spread among
the natives by some wicked white traders, and, in consequence,
the remaining natives thirsted for revenge on the white man,
whether missionary or otherwise.
One evening Mr. and Mrs. Johnston were leaving Mr.
Paton’s house to go to their own just near at hand, when
two natives, armed with great clubs, appeared, and asked
for medicine for a sick boy. Mr. Paton prepared the medicine,
but being suspicious of the men, told them to take it and leave
the house. They did so, but one of them, as he moved off,
aimed a blow with his club at Mr. Johnston, and then both
of them attempted to club Mr. Paton. Had it not been for
the dogs leaping up and so baffling their aim, both missionaries
would have been murdered.
Mr. Paton had become accustomed to such scenes on Tanna,
but the shock told on Mr. Johnston. A few days later he
was taken ill with fever, and after a short illness, he passed
quietly away.
There is only room left in this chapter to tell briefly of Mr.
Paton’s remaining twelve months on Tanna. After Mr. John-
ston’s death, and Mrs. Johnston’s removal to another Island,
life was very lonely for him, but he persevered in his work.


Often he was greatly cheered by the devotion of some of the
chiefs and other natives, who were becoming interested in
Christianity, but the enmity of most of them increased as the
months went on.
Whenever there was sickness or death amongst them, the
natives declared that these were due to the white man. A
terrible hurricane did great damage to the island in March,
1861, and this made the natives determined to put Mr. Paton
to death.
For four days they surrounded the mission premises, killed
the fowls and goats, destroyed the banana trees, and tried
to burn down the house itself.
One of the chiefs, Nowar by name, stood by Mr. Paton
and tried to protect him, but his own faith was not very strong,
and he was afraid to do too much, in case his people should
turn against him.
The Aneityumese teacher, Abraham, was absolutely loyal,
and cheerfully faced death with his missionary; the other native
teachers were equally brave.
As long as there was a gleam of hope of overcoming the
enmity of the people, Mr. Paton remained at his post, but
when he saw that none of the chiefs could really be relied on,
he gathered the teachers together, and with them escaped
to Nowar’s village.
Immediately after he had left his house, the natives broke
into it and stole or destroyed all his furniture, his piano, books,
cutlery, etc. He lost everything except his Bible, the few
translations he had made into Tannese, a pair of blankets,
and the clothes he was wearing.
He took refuge at first in a little hut belonging to Nowar,
and then one night, when that was no longer safe, because
of the cruel natives getting on his track, he climbed up into
a great chestnut tree in Nowar’s plantation in the bush, and
was forced to remain there for several hours, hearing the yells
of the disappointed natives. The next day, an opportunity
of borrowing a canoe arising, the whole party set off by sea
for Mr. Mathieson’s station, but, owing to a heavy storm,
they were forced to turn back, land again, and walk overland.
In spite of incredible dangers, they succeeded in reaching Mr.
Mathieson’s house, where they were all warmly welcomed.
For a short time they rested, and then commenced to work
amongst the natives in that district, but soon their enemies,


who had followed them, arrived, and fresh attempts were made
to murder them all. Several times in the dark night-watches
Mr. Paton’s little dog gave the alarm, and so saved their lives.
Just when it seemed as if the missionaries’ strength could last
no longer, a vessel sailed into view. Missionaries on another
island had asked the captain to rescue the party, if yet alive,
and it was a great relief to them to find that the boat was
not too late. '
It was a terrible grief to Mr. Paton to leave Tanna, but
he knew that God was directing him, and that “it was better
to live and work for Jesus, than to die as a self-made martyr.”
Another stage of his journey was finished, and he faced
bravely whatever next step God had in view for him.
21


<
z
<
z
UJ
o
X
cn
z
o
H
<
Oh
cd
Q


CHAPTER 111.
THE WINNING OF ANIWA.
Mr. Paton left Tanna in 1862. It was not un,til four
years later, that he returned to the New Hebrides, to take up
work, not on Tanna, but on the little island of Aniwa.
Before giving an account of the fifteen years spent there,
something must be said about his movements during the interval.
After leaving Tanna, he was sent by the mission authorities
to Australia, to rouse interest in the mission work being carried
on so close to her doors. Mr. Paton was not then known to
many people in our land, but he soon won the hearts of all
with whom he came into contact, and especially did his work
appeal to the men, women and children of the Presbyterian
Churches.
He had set his heart on carrying out a great scheme. From
his own experience, he knew how badly the New Hebrides
Mission needed a ship of its own that would visit each island
and take regularly to the missionaries there, not only the much-
needed provisions, but also the longed-for letters that helped
to keep them in touch with their loved ones in other lands.
As matters then were, they were dependent on any vessel that
might chance to call in at these ports.
Mr. Paton had thought this matter out very carefully, and
had decided on a plan by means of which the children of the
churches could take a practical and live interest in a mission
ship. Every child who gave sixpence or more towards the
ship was to be called a shareholder, and receive a printed
form showing the number of shares of which he or she was the
owner. He put this plan into action, and thousands of shares
Were taken up by the children, who formed, what Mr. Paton
called, “a great shipping company for Jesus.”
In the carrying out of this scheme, he travelled over New
South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania, and
at the end of his tour, had succeeded in raising £5OOO. £3OOO
of this was set apart for the mission ship, the future ‘ Day-
spring, and it was decided that the remainder should be
used in connection with additional missionaries.


In order to obtain the missionaries needed, Mr. Paton was
then sent to Scotland, and eighteen months were spent in visit-
ing the Churches, Sunday Schools and Theological Colleges
there. In Scotland, as in Australia, the children of the Presby-
terian Sunday Schools gladly took up the shareholder scheme,
and about £230 a year was assured from them. The chil-
dren in Nova Scotia also contributed the same amount for
many years, Nova Scotia being always greatly interested in. the
New Hebrides Mission. Four new missionaries volunteered for
service from Scotland, and three from Nova Scotia, so Mr.
Paton was able to turn back to Australia with a glad heart.
While in Scotland this time, he married Miss Margaret
Whitecross, who was to share all the perils and joys of his
long labours on Aniwa, and who brought so much happiness
and practical help into his life.
Mr. and Mrs. Paton arrived in Australia early in 1865.
Some time had to be spent there making final arrangements
for the support of the “Dayspring,” and it was at this period
that Mr. Paton was officially transferred from the Presby-
terian Church in Scotland to the Victorian Presbyterian Church,
to become her first missionary to the New Hebrides. This
was an important step, for it gave to our Church that close
connection with the Islands which we have never lost, and
which it is hoped will grow ever closer as the years pass.
At the Synod, as the great annual business meeting of mis-
sionaries in the New Hebrides is called, it was decided that
Mr. Paton should not return to Tanna, which was still unsafe,
but should settle on Aniwa; the other missionaries who had
accompanied him being placed on various other islands.
On the voyage to Aniwa, the “Dayspring” called in at
one of the ports of Tanna. There Nowar, the old Tannese
chief, tried to persuade Mr. Paton to once more live amongst
them. He would willingly have done so, but knew that it
was best that he should first take up work elsewhere, so,
rather sorrowfully, he and his party continued on their way
to Aniwa.
Aniwa, the home of Mr. Paton and his family for so many
years, is a small island. It is low-lying, having no high hills;
the atmosphere is moist and heavy, and the people have suffered
greatly at times for want of good rain.
When Mr. and Mrs. Paton first landed, they were received
quite kindly by the natives, who willingly sold the land re-


quired for the mission-house. But they had not been there
very long before it was realised that most of the natives were
not unlike those of Tanna. They were quick tempered,
greedy, dishonest, and much given to fighting. They were
quite ready to help the missionary in his house building, pro-
vided he paid them well in fish-hooks, calico, medicine, etc.,
but if he did not give them exactly what they wanted, up
would go the tomahawk or club. Many a time Mr. Paton
had to seize and hold on to the upraised weapon until the
wrath of the native had cooled down. The same superstitions
and fear of evil spirits were found on Aniwa as on Tanna.
Infanticide and wife-murder were sometimes practised, and
no pity was shown for either the old or the sick.
The language spoken was different from that on Tanna,
although, fortunately for Mr. Paton, a great many of the
Aniwans understood and spoke a little Tannese; because of
this he was able to learn Aniwan more quickly than he would
otherwise have done. ,
The Aniwans showed great curiosity when they first saw
words written down, and realised that they conveyed practical
meaning.
Mr. Paton has told an interesting story illustrating this fact.
One day when he was busy at his house-building, he found
he had left one of his tools in the native hut where his wife
was, so, taking up a small piece of wood, with a pencil he
wrote on it a note to his wife, telling her what was needed.
He requested one of the friendly chiefs, who happened to be
standing by, to take this piece of wood to Mrs. Paton, saying
that she would then give him the tool. The man at first
strongly protested, thinking the missionary was laughing at him,
but at last he did as he was asked, and great was his amaze-
ment when, on handing the wood to Mrs. Paton, she imme-
diately gave him the tool required. Namakei, as the chief
was called, hurried back with it, and then asked Mr. Paton to
explain just what the words meant. Mr. Paton did so, and
told Namakei that if he tried very hard he could learn to
read, and he would then be able to hear the great God speak-
ing from a book, as Mrs. Paton had heard her husband from
a piece of wood. The chief was delighted at the thought
of being able to read his own language, and at once began
to help Mr. Paton to learn new Aniwan, words. When some
time later a part of the New Testament had been translated


into Aniwan, and he could read a little of it, his joy knew
no bounds.
Mr. Paton did not wait until he could speak the language
fluently before commencing work. After he had been on
the island some little time, a bell was rung every day after
dinner at the mission-house, and any natives who were sick
and wanted medicine were carefully attended to; if any were
old or weak, they received a cup of tea and some bread. Un-
fortunately their own doctors, or sacred men, professed not
only to cure, but to cause sickness, so, when there was illness
on the island, as on Tann’a, the missionary was blamed for
it. Mr. Paton’s life was often threatened and plotted against,
but his love and courage never failed.
The first Aniwan to become a follower of Christ was
Namakei, the chief. He and his people had always been
inclined to be friendly with the missionary. Another chief and
his wife were also greatly interested, and these three were the
first Aniwan converts from heathenism.
The Sunday services first held on the island were very dif-
ferent from what we are accustomed to in our own land. Before
a church was built, worship was held either in the shade of
a great banyan tree or in a native hut. Many of the natives
came simply from curiosity, or for what they could get, and
all at first came fully armed. Most of them made no attempt
to listen to what was said, but lay on their backs, smoking, talk-
ing, or even sleeping. By degrees, however, as they came to
know and love their missionary and see all the different things
he could do, they became more interested in his message; strange
to say, one of the chief means of seriously breaking up heathen-
ism on the island was his sinking of a well, by means of which
fresh water could be obtained. This incident is so interesting
that it is well worth relating.
Mr. Paton and his family, as well as the natives, had often
suffered from the want of any permanent supply of fresh
water on Aniwa, so he determined to sink a well near the
mission-house. He had done something of the kind on Tanna,
but when he told two of the chiefs that he intended to dig
deep down into the earth to see if God would send fresh water
up from below, they looked at him in astonishment and pity,
thinking the good missionary was going wrong in the head.
Mr. Paton, however, began digging, and with his pick and
spade and bucket, laboured until his strength gave out. When


lie could go on no longer, lie persuaded some of the natives
who were looking on to take a turn, promising some large
fish-hooks to every man who would fill and turn out three
buckets of earth from the hole. 1 his went on day after day.
The natives grew tired, but the faith and determination of Mr.
Paton never flagged. He managed to dig down about thirty
feet, when, to his joy, he noticed that the earth was getting
damp. He himself has told how one morning, at daybreak,
to the amazement of all the chiefs and natives standing by,
they saw the water rushing up and filling the hole. A jug
was let down, and soon everyone wanted to taste the fresh
water provided by God for His thirsty children. When all
had seen and tasted, the old chief exclaimed, “Missi, wonder-
ful is the work of your Jehovah God. No god of Aniwa
ever helped us in this way.”
The chief then asked Mr. Paton if he could preach a ser-
mon about the well the following Sunday; permission was
given, and when the day arrived, a great crowd gathered
to hear what their chief had to say. He told the people that
he intended from that day to be an open follower of the mis-
sionary’s God, and he invited all who felt as he did to go
and fetch their idols, that they might be burnt. Several of
the natives that very day went off and brought their idols,
which were at once destroyed; and for many weeks after that,
numbers of the natives would come laden with their gods of
wood or stone, and pile them up in heaps outside the mis-
sionary’s door. Some were burnt, others were buried twelve*
or fifteen feet deep, while others were cast far out into the
sea.
A great number of the natives not only cast away their
idols, but now began to attend the services regularly, and soon
many of them became humble followers of Jesus Christ.
The first communion service was held in 1 869, when twelve
of the natives, after careful teaching, were admitted as mem-
bers of the Church. This was one of the greatest days in
Mr. Paton’s life, for, to see men who had been the wildest of
savages coming to the Lord’s Table, and showing by their
conduct, their love and devotion to their Master, was a miracle
as great as any in New Testament days.
As the years passed, progress became increasingly satisfac-
tory. There were often disappointments, as there are among
ourselves, but the Christianity of most of the natives, if of a


simple character, was earnest and sincere, and their conduct
in the face of temptation and provocation was worthy of
admiration and respect.
It will be helpful to now consider some of the changes
made in their lives after they had become Christians.
In heathen days, thefts and crimes resulted in revengeful
fighting and slaughter, but now the chiefs and people agreed that
fines and other reasonable punishments should take the place
of fighting.
Honesty also became their rule of life. At the
services first held on the island, the natives who
attended did not dare to leave anything in their homes while
away, with the result that, during the worship, the chirping
of chickens, the barking of puppies, the squealing of pigs would
often be heard. In later years all this was changed: the
natives could leave their belongings in their huts and worship
with a free mind.
Education made a great difference in the lives of the natives.
Before the missionary went to them, they were ignorant and
lazy, but when they began to meet each day at school and to
learn simple lessons, they had something to occupy their minds.
The precepts of Christ taught them not only love to God, but
love to one another, and it was through this new love that
the desire to be trained as teachers entered their minds.
One of the greatest changes was the establishment of home
life. Amongst the heathen there had been no such thing as
a home, as men and women lived in separate dirty huts. But
when the power of the Gospel entered their lives, there was a
new thoughtfulness between the members of the family; afl
lived together in a clean, tidy hut, and a happiness previously
unknown was seen amongst them.
Family worship was a feature of the new life. The know-
ledge that God was their Father, and was interested in all the
details of their lives led them to pour out their hearts to Him
in prayer. Any native hut, where daily prayer to God was
not offered, was known to the Christians as a “heathen home.”
Mr. Paton always encouraged the native church to be, as
far as possible, self-supporting. When the church itself was
to be built, it was explained to the people that no one would
be paid for his work, for the church was to be for the natives
themselves, and everyone who helped in the building of it
must do it for the love of Jesus. This was thoroughly under-


MRS. JOHN G. PATON


stood by the natives, and no church was ever built in a better
spirit than that on Aniwa. The faith and courage of the
natives in connection with this matter were soon put to a severe
test, for, only a short time after the completion of their little
church, a terrible hurricane levelled it to the ground. Not
at all daunted, they at once decided to build another larger
and stronger one, and this work was successfully carried
through.
We have spoken so far chiefly about the work of Mr.
Paton, but even the smallest book would be incomplete with-
out a few words about Mrs. Paton, who not only helped her
husband in every way, but by her courage, sympathy and cheer-
fulness won the hearts of all the women and children. She
was gifted in many ways, and by her playing of the organ, she
attracted many of the wilder native women, who at first were
too shy to come to church or school. Men, women and chil-
dren spent many hours round the organ; they were passionately
fond of music, and singing hymns became one of their favourite
occupations during work and play. Mrs. Paton had also a
great sense of humour, as had the natives, and many a time,
seeing the lighter side of things, saved them all from an awk-
ward situation. Hurricanes and earthquakes often made her
life a great anxiety, for frequently, without a moment’s notice,
the whole family would have to jump from their beds and take
refuge in the cellar, and, on emerging, they would not find
a dry spot in the house.
Phe children formed a great bond between Mrs. Paton and
the natives, for all the Aniwans loved children, and were very
proud of the little ones born to the missionaries on their island.
When a little daughter was born, the native women began to
sympathise with, and pity, Mrs. Paton for having a girl, but
when they saw how delighted she was with her little daughter
and how much love was lavished on her by both parents, they
began to understand that the Heavenly Father loved equally
both girls and boys, and that both were wanted in His King-
dom. Parting from her children when the time came for them
to go to Australia for their education, was the supreme trial
for Mrs. Paton, for she loved her children as she herself said,
with “ a white heat of love.”
In 1873 both Mr, and Mrs. Paton were very ill, and
their youngest child died. A change of scene was necessary,
so Australia and New Zealand were visited. John G. Paton,


however, never allowed private sorrow to hinder his work,
so a great part of this supposed rest was spent in travelling
in Australia, to collect funds for the new mission ship, the
first “Dayspring” having been wrecked. After the necessary
money had been collected, work on Aniwa was again resumed,
and carried on until 1881, when, mainly owing to the state
of Mrs. Paton’s health, it was necessary for them to leave the Islands.
This period, from 1873 to 1881, had been full of impor-
tant happenings. The orphanage and school work had
developed in such a way that some of the leading natives
gladly brought even their treasured sons to be trained by the
missionaries, while the girls were so happy in their mission
home that often they were unwilling to leave it to be married.
The people generally had become so anxious for education,
that, in addition to the little school in each village, school was
held also three times a day at the mission-station. Strange to
say, what the girls and boys most enjoyed was the writing
of essays!
A most interesting event of this period was the arrival at
Aniwa of a shipload of Tannese, who had been driven from
their own island through civil war. It had always been a grief
to Mr. Paton that he had been unable to return to Tanna, but
he had never thought that natives from Tanna would come to
Aniwa, and when he found that the old chief, Nowar, was
among them, his joy was great. These Tannese caused a
great deal of trouble on Aniwa, for most of them were wild
and quarrelsome, but Mr. Paton revised his Tannese, and
was soon able to preach the Gospel to them. Many of them
were then led to think of the claim of Christ upon them, and
Nowar openly professed himself a follower of Jesus Christ.
Leaving Aniwa was a great wrench for both Mr. and Mrs.
Paton, but their hearts were full of gratitude to God for all
He had enabled them to do on that island. When they had
landed there in 1 866, the whole population was heathen, but
when they left it fifteen years later, every native on the island
was an open follower of the Christ.
It was only the knowledge that the work God was now
calling him to undertake was to be another means of helping
his loved Islanders, that enabled Mr. Paton to bear the pain
of separation from them.
For the natives, there could be no forgetting of their beloved
missionaries, for in them they had seen the love and tenderness
of Jesus Himself. j


CHAPTER IV.
NAMAKEI, LITSI, NELWANG.
In this chapter, which may be of special interest to young
children, a short account will be given of three Aniwan natives
who were won for Jesus Christ through Mr. and Mrs. Paton’s
loving and faithful work. The three were entirely different
one from the other, yet each showed strongly how love can
change character. Their names were Namakei, Litsi and
Nelwang.
Namakei has been mentioned in a previous chapter, but he
was such an interesting man that it will be well to know more
about him.
He was one of the leading chiefs on Aniwa, and although
in his early days he was a great fighter, and even a cannibal,
this was simply because he had never been told of any better
way of living.
Some years before Mr. Paton went to the Islands, two
native Christian teachers from Aneityum had gone to Aniwa
to tell the people there about the Gospel. They knew that
the Aniwans were very fierce and might kill them, but they
had heard of Namakei, and thought that if he would only
promise to protect them they would be quite safe, and able
in time to teach the people. They managed to send word
to the chief about their coming, and he promised to do what
he could to help them. When they arrived, they were treated
quite kindly until it was discovered that they belonged to a
tribe that had once, long ago, murdered some Aniwans. This
discovery made the Aniwans very angry. They knew that
a promise had been given to protect these men, so they would
not murder them themselves, but they hired men from Tanna
to waylay and shoot them. Ihe guns used were not in good
order, so did not go off, but the murderers managed, with
their clubs, to kill one man and leave the other nearly dead.
When Na makei heard of this, he went to where the wounded
man was lying, and carrying him to his village, he nursed him
with his own hands. He then told his people that they had
done quite enough to satisfy their desire for revenge, and that
I he man still living should be allowed to go back to his own


island. The natives listened to what was said, and followed
the advice given, so the Aneilyumesc teacher returned safely
home.
Some time after this, Namakei thought that it would be
a good thing for his people if they were on friendly terms with
the natives of Aneityum. Trading vessels could not call
regularly at Aniwa, because there was no good harbour there,
but they called at Aneityum, and, in consequence, the Anei-
tyumese were able to buy blankets, iron tools and other desir-
able things that the Aniwans also wanted. As a beginning,
Namakei sent word to Aneityum that he would like some
more teachers on Aniwa. He had not forgotten how badly the
Aniwans had treated the two Aneityumese teachers who had
come previously, but neither had he forgotten how good and
kind those men had been. He pledged his word that if any
fresh teachers came they would be kindly received and well
protected. Two Aneityumese teachers and their wives did
come over, and although the other Aniwans made them work
hard for them, Namakei saw to it that their lives were safe.
He did not encourage them in their attempts at preaching the
Gospel, but he could not help noticing how very different
their lives were from those of his own people. They were kind
and gentle and willing to help every way; even when treated
badly, they never sought revenge, but remembered Jesus’
words about forgiving one’s enemies.
When Mr. and Mrs. Paton came to Aniwa, Namakei was
quite willing to sell them some of his land on which to build
a mission-house. It was land that was supposed to be sacred
to their gods, and Namakei confessed, some years later, that
when he sold the land, he thought the gods would soon kill
the missionary and then he and his people could share the
blankets, calico, axes and knives that Mr. Paton had brought
with him.
Namakei, however, very soon learnt to care for Mr. Paton
himself, and by the time house-building was commenced, he
was only sorry that he was not strong enough to help in the
work. He used to go and see the missionaries very often,
and was very pleased when they would give him a cup of tea
and a piece of soft bread. To show his gratitude for their
kindness, he frequently used to go out at night to catch flying-
fish, and then early the next morning he would visit the mission-
house and give the fish to the cook, telling her exactly how


to cook it. He loved to look on while the missionaries had
their breakfast, and when he thought they were really enjoy-
ing the fish he was as happy as could be.
He was an intelligent man, and often taught Mr. Paton
new words, so that he might be able to translate part of the
Bible into the Aniwan language.
It was told in another chapter how Mr. Paton s success
in making a well had a great influence on Namakei, and that
he was the first Aniwan to openly declare himself a Christian.
He always used his influence to bring as many people as
possible to the worship, and was very helpful to the missionary
in numbers of ways. At the Sunday services and the Wednes-
day night prayer-meeting he always walked into the church
first to place Mr. Baton’s Bible on the reading-desk, and
thoroughly enjoyed acting as verger.
It will be told more in detail presently how he brought his
little daughter, Litsi, to be trained by the missionaries.
He had no son of his own, but dearly loved the missionary’s
little son, who was born on Aniwa. Often one would see the
big black native walking hand in hand with the little child,
who was equally happy to be with him.
When he was a very old man, he had a great longing to
go to one of the annual business meetings of the missionaries
and see for himself all the white men who had left their own
homes to come and help the black people. The meeting he
wished to attend was to be held that year on Aneityum.
Neither Mr. Paton nor the relatives of Namakei wanted him
to go, as it meant his taking a sea trip, and often the weather
was stormy and the sea rough. He was so frail that they
feared he might not live to return home. He, however, begged
Mr. Paton to take him, and when consent was given, the old
chief joyfully packed up his few belongings and went on
board. He stood the voyage well, and attended the meetings
for a few days, but on the fifth day he had to give in to his
weakness. When he was dying he asked Mr. Paton to tell
his daughter, his brother and his people to go on pleasing Jesus,
and that he would meet them again in Heaven. He passed
away quite happily, knowing that he was going to be with
his Saviour.
Litsi was the only daughter of Namakei. Her mother had
died when she was very young, and she was rather a lonely


little girl. When her father became a Christian, he was
anxious that his child should also learn to love Jesus, but he
felt that he did not know enough to teach her properly, so
one day he took her to the missionary’s house, and said to Mr.
and Mrs. Paton: “I want to leave my Litsi with you. I
want you to train her for Jesus.” Mr. and Mrs. Paton were
quite willing to take her, and she was the first of many native
children—girls and boys— to be trained by them.
Litsi was very intelligent. She learnt lessons just like any
white child, and enjoyed doing them. She was a great help
to Mrs. Paton in numberless ways, for she was always delighted
to play with, and look after, the children, and she learnt to
sew and do housework extremely well.
When Namakei’s brother saw his niece nicely dressed, and
able to do so many useful things, he thought he would like
his little motherless girl to have the same training, so he took
her to the mission-house, and the two cousins were brought
up together. These children, and others like them, who lived
with Mr. and Mrs. Paton, were real little missionaries, for,
when they went to see their guardians and friends in the vil-
lages, they used to tell them all they had learnt, and this
helped to make the people more willing to listen to the preach-
ing of the Gospel. They were also very helpful to Mr. Paton
in other ways. Often when they were out visiting, they would
hear of plots being formed against the missionaries by revenge-
ful natives who wanted to get rid of them. Once they were
able to report that some natives had planned to set the mission
premises on fire in the middle of a dark night. Another time
they heard that the mission-house was to be attacked while
many of the friendly natives were away. The conspirators
often wondered how it was that they nearly always found Mr.
Paton on the watch for them; they did not know that God
was using the children to save the lives of His faithful servants.
Some years later, when Mr. and Mrs. Paton came to Aus-
tralia on furlough, Mrs. Paton brought Litsi with her. Litsi
had never been outside Aniwa before, and she was very much
interested in everything she saw. She was greatly excited when
Mrs. Paton brought her a pair of shoes to wear, for in Aniwa,
of course, they went about barefooted. Poor Litsi, however,
found it very difficult to walk in shoes, and could scarcely
keep her balance going along the street; she was not sorry
to leave shoes behind when she returned to Aniwa.


■ | »|\| * % XHHilEi^
jjf j y jum n^H
■pr
Bi5i qt~ »Wy r f^JpEP^
sNsi
**f :i.3L. V ,/.r
rfB
il
mmr.gmz ..
j®g£ v h.& . » -|H
K f *
’ v " 1 \ *■— •
flS Ml i ®
\k g
||
t \; f 9 0.
JhMnpnBpfp{
mz •■TrMgTrTTiTfirr- - ms^
DR. J. G. PATON AND
CHILDREN ON ANIWA.


She was a wonderfully thoughtful girl. Once when Mrs.
Paton was staying with her mother in Adelaide, on going to
her room, she 1 found Litsi sitting on the floor sobbing. She
anxiously asked her what was the matter, and Litsi replied:
“Missi, I never knew what you had given up to come
to our Dark Land. I never knew you had given up a mother
like that or such a sister and brother-in-law. We did not
know you lived in such beautiful homes. I fear; I fear you
will never go back to our Dark Land again.”
She once gave an unconscious rebuke, for she asked Mrs.
Paton if the Adelaide people had all quarrelled, as hardly any
of them spoke to each other in, passing. When told that they
had to wait for introductions before speaking, she said: ‘‘ls it
not enough that they know each other as Christians?” She
thoroughly enjoyed her stay in Australia, for she was so
lovable and warm-hearted that everyone liked her and wanted
to show her kindness.
After she was married, she had a great deal of trouble,
but she was always patient and gentle. At one time, great
sorrow came to her and her family through the actions of a
wild native from Tanna. This caused her to think about the
Tannese people and to long that they might know about
Jesus. She prayed often that missionaries might be sent to
them, and when one of Dr. Paton’s sons, whom she had
nursed as a baby, was appointed, Litsi and her husband, with
some other Aniwan Christians, offered to go too. The offer
was accepted, and instead of living in comfort in her own
home in Aniwa—for Litsi was the Queen of her race—she
spent the rest of her days helping to win the heathen on Tanna
for Christ.
Nelwang is the name of the third Aniwan to be spoken about
here; only a very short account of him will be given.
He was quite different from the other two, but is an
example of how a rough and wild savage could be won by
love and kindness.
Mr. and Mrs. Paton met Nelwang soon after they landed
on Aniwa. One day when Mr. Paton was busy working at
his new house, and Mrs. Paton, with her baby, was in the
native hut about half a mile away, she heard a rustling among
the boxes behind the curtain. She felt very much frightened
when, on looking up, she saw a black face peering out at


her, and heard the man say angrily, in broken English, “What
for you look me? You fraid me se- teal; me no se- teal,
me come worship.” Mrs. Paton tried to make him under-
stand that she did not think he was stealing, but he ran off
in a great rage to the village, and brought back other natives
armed with clubs; all of these stood shouting at Mrs. Paton
until it began to get dark, when she managed to slip away
with her baby to her husband.
This excitable native was Nelwang, and it was no wonder
that Mrs. Paton was frightened of him, for in those days, he
used to paint one side of his face white, and polish the black
side, and he was not only a thief, but a well-known murderer.
Some time after this, Mr. Paton was busy working at some
new rooms he was adding on to his house, when he noticed
that this Nelwang was hanging round every day with a toma-
hawk in his hand. Mr. Paton at length asked him what he
wanted, and Nelwang then told him that he wanted his help
in regard to his marriage with a native woman whom he loved,
but who was such a favourite, that he was afraid if he married
her, all the other men, who also wanted to marry her, would
kill him. Nelwang went on to say that if Mr. Paton would
help him about this, he would be his friend for ever. Mr.
Paton talked the whole matter over very seriously, and saw
that Nelwang really was in earnest; so he did all he could
to advise and help, and before very long Nelwang was happily married.
He brought his wife to live at the mission-house until it
was safe to go to a home of their own, and from that time
he was a most devoted friend of the missionary, and his wife
was a great help to Mrs. Paton.
What gave the greatest satisfaction was that, in time,
Nelwang and his wife became earnest, sincere Christians.
When Mr. Paton made tours inland to preach the Gospel to
the heathen tribes there, Nelwang nearly always accompanied
him, and whenever there was any danger besetting the mis-
sionary, Nelwang was instantly on the spot. His wife not
only learned to read and write, but became a teacher in the
Sunday School, and was even able to lead the singing in church
when Mrs. Paton was not able to be present.
Were not these three—Namakei, Litsi and Nelwang—
striking witnesses of the great work done by Mr. and Mrs.
Paton, and does it not make us glad to know that missionaries
have done, and are still doing, such fine work?


CHAPTER V.
“FAITHFUL TO THE END.”
Although John G. Paton had been obliged to give up active
work on the Islands in 1881, the remaining twenty-six years
of his life were devoted to the cause of missions there. His
work in the New Hebrides had been heroic; his work in plead-
ing the cause of the Islanders, at home and abroad, in sickness
and in old age, was magnificent beyond words.
At the end of this chapter we shall sum up some of the
qualities of head and heart that gave him such unbounded
success. At present, we shall simply try to follow him in his
unceasing travels and deputation work.
During his last years on the New Hebrides, he had had the
joy of seeing new openings for the extension of the mission,
especially on some of the northern islands. He realised hat
to make any permanent advance in that direction, there needed
to be improved means of communication between the islands.
The Dayspring’’ in use was only a sailing vessel, and had to
lie up during the hurricane season, therefore, he urged upon
the mission authorities in Victoria the need for a new vessel
that would not only be larger, but would have steam power.
The Victorian committee was quite wiling that a new ship
should be built, but the trouble was—where was the necessary
£6OOO for its building to be found? It was felt that there
was one man who might be able to raise this money, and this
was John G. Paton, so, immediately after the decision was
made, he set out for Great Britain on his gigantic task.
For over eighteen months he visited churches, Sunday
schools and Theological Colleges in Scotland, Ireland and Eng-
land. During all that time his efforts were untiring and un-
ceasing. Wherever there was an opportunity of speaking of
his beloved Islanders, he was eager and ready to take it,
whether it meant travelling in discomfort, facing extremes of
cold and heat, or, what was even more trying, opposition from
those who were not in sympathy with his mission. His great
effqrts were abundantly rewarded, for, in 1885, he returned
to Melbourne, not merely with the £6OOO, but with a total




of £9OOO. He had also induced three additional missionaries
to volunteer for the work.
His visit had another great and unexpected result that was
to have a permanent influence on the future work on the Islands.
While in Scotland, he was persuaded by his brother, the Rev.
James Paton, of Glasgow, to promise to write an account of
his adventures, trials and joys on Tanna and Aniwa. When
this was first proposed to him he gave a decided refusal. He
was always a most humble-minded man, and would never take
any credit to himself for what he had done. His brother,
however, argued that the book could be written in such a
way that there need be no self-praise, but only a testimony of
what the power and love of Jesus Christ could achieve
amongst men. John G. Paton was at last persuaded of this,
and undertook to write the famous “Autobiography,” which,
no doubt, all readers of this little book have read. The “Auto-
biography” was written during his return voyage to Australia,
in spare minutes on railway stations, in trains, and at his own
home. It was sent back in instalments to his brother, who care-
fully put them together and prepared the whole work for the
press.
On its publication, the book had an immense welcome
everywhere. Edition after edition was called for, and it was
translated into French, German, Italian, Welsh, Japanese,
and other languages. It had not been intended as an appeal
for funds for the mission, but at once readers began to send
in donations, with, what John G. Paton valued even more
highly, promises of regular prayer for the work. All this
gave him complete assurance that he had been guided aright
in undertaking the writing of the book.
One outstanding result of its publication must now be
mentioned. In 1 889, a young Englishman, who was going away
for a holiday, asked a friend to recommend an interesting book
to take with him. The “Autobiography” was suggested, and
the young man was so thrilled by the reading of it, that when
he returned to London, he gave a short account of it before
the Y.M.C.A., of which he was secretary. After his “talk,”
a small gift was sent to Mr. Paton for the work of the mission,
and a correspondence followed between the secretary and the
missionary. The young man was Mr. A. K. Langridge. He
was then only a clerk in the civil service, but he felt drawn
irresistibly to the writer of the “Autobiography” and his work,


and also felt that God meant him to take some active part
in it. After much prayer and thought he decided, with the
approval of the Rev. James Paton, to open a John G. Paton
Mission Fund” for the development of work in the New
Hebrides. It was meant primarily to be a for gift?
from those who had read and been helped by the Autobio-
graphy,” and in less than a week after it was opened, over
a thousand pounds had poured into it. The scheme further
developed under the guiding hand of Mr. Langridge, with
the assistance of the Rev. James Paton, and of Mr. William
Watson, of Ireland. Mr. Langridge now gave up all his
spare time to lecturing and showing lantern views, illustrating
the work. It was resolved that the “John G. Paton Fund
should support a missionary of its own, and Mr. Paton s son,
the Rev. F. H. L. Paton, our own Victorian Foreign Mission
Secretary, was appointed as its first missionary, and, with his
wife, settled on Tanna. We can imagine the father’s joy
when one of his own sons went as a missionary to the island he
himself had laboured on, and had prayed for, for so many
years.
At the present time, the John G. Paton Fund supports
three ordained and three unordained missionaries in the New
Hebrides, and Mr. Langridge is still its untiring supporter
and now devotes the whole of his time to this work. One can
but revere such men, and trust that many more may be raised
up to continue their work.
In 1 890, the University of Edinburgh paid a tribute to the
great work of John G. Paton by conferring upon him the
title of Doctor of Divinity. It was a title well deserved, and
was valued by Dr. Paton’s relatives and friends, although
he himself always shrank from anything that directed attention
to himself rather than to the object of his work.
An important event in his later years was his visit to America
in 1892. It was a great grief to him at this time to find
that so much of the good work done on the different islands
was being hindered, and sometimes destroyed, by the natives
indulgence in intoxicating spirits, and in the use of firearms
bought by them from visiting traders.
Great Britain had decided some time previously that traders
sailing under the British flag should not be allowed to sell either
of these commodities to the natives, but the United States,
France and Russia gave their traders a free hand.


It was suggested by the High Commissioner for the West
Pacific that the best way to remedy matters would be to send
a deputation to America to let the people there know the real
state of affairs. Dr. Paton was then sixty-eight years of age,
but everyone concerned felt that no more suitable delegate
could be found. He thoroughly understood the situation, and
could speak with power and convincing energy.
He left Australia in July, 1892, >and for two years he
travelled through Canada and the United States, addressing
meetings wherever there was an opening. * His meetings in the
great cities were often attended by thousands of people, who
had learnt to know and admire him through his book. He
spoke before two Presidents of the United States, and laid
before them and other outstanding public men the condition
ot affairs in the New Hebrides, but, to his sorrow, nothing
definite was achieved. Great Britain and the United States
were of one mind as to the advisability of prohibition on the
Islands, but when France and Russia refused to agree with
them, the United States decided not to take any steps in the
matter. It was not until 1902 that Dr. Paton’s heart was
gladdened by the news that America had at last decided to
forbid her traders to sell strong drink or firearms in the New
Hebrides.
Dr. Paton’s visit to America was not without results. Pre-
vious to his visit, the Canadian Church, which had been in-
terested in the New Hebrides Mission since its earliest days,
had practically decided to give up its share of the work, but,
owing to the impassioned pleadings of Dr. Paton, it resolved
to continue its support.
In the United States, he roused thousands of people to fresh
interest and enthusiasm in the cause of Foreign Missions. His
own simple faith and whole-hearted devotion to Christ spoke
even more than his words.
After leaving America, he went to Great Britain and Ire-
land, where he had a most enthusiastic reception. However,
tired and worn he might be, he was always ready to speak
on behalf of his work, and he would always plead with deep
earnestness that his hearers might all become true followers
of Jesus.
What touched him most was the love showered on him every-
where by the children. He loved all children, black or white,
with a very tender love, and in every home where there was


DR. PATON AND HIS GRANDCHILD.


a little child his heart was full of joy. All children took to
him at once, and it was quite a usual sight to see the white-
haired missionary with a child on his knee and others on each
side of him.
One of the most beautiful features of Dr. Paton’s character,
so remarked on during this visit, was his unfailing courtesy to
people of all classes. AVhether it was the coachman of a
friend s carriage that had taken him to a meeting, the engine-
driver of a train that had brought him a long journey, a high-
born lady, or a little child, to all alike he was the Christian
gentleman, thinking ever, not of himself, but of others.
The strain of speaking at so many meetings in Great Britain
was great, and often he was so worn out that he could scarcely
speak for days at a time, and yet, during this time, he was
also working hard by written and spoken word, in connection
with the Kanaka traffic. He knew all the evils of the traffic,
and before leaving Australia he had laboured hard to persuade
the Queensland Government to forbid the recruiting of natives
for work on the Queensland plantations. In spite of his efforts,
both in Australia and Great Britain, this trade went on until
1901, when the White Australia policy caused it to cease.
When he left London in August, 1894, Dr. Paton was
physically tired out, but he was full of joy and gratitude
for all that God had permitted him to do.
On returning to Australia, after a short rest, he once more
engaged in deputation work there. The mission work on the
Islands was constantly being enlarged; new missionaries were
being established, and, in consequence, increased funds were
required.
Two of Dr. Paton’s sons were now missionaries in the
New Hebrides—the Rev. Fred. Paton on Malekula, and, as
has been mentioned before, the Rev. Frank Paton on Tanna;
while his only daughter was married to another missionary,
the Rev. John Gillan. His other sons, the late Rev, Robert
Paton, Dr. James Paton, and Mr. J. W. Paton, all found
spheres of useful service in Australia.
Just before his seventy-first birthday, Dr. Paton paid a
visit to his missionary sons. He had been to Aniwa more than
once since leaving it in 1881, and every time he went there,
he received a royal welcome from the natives, who loved him
devotedly and looked upon him as their father in God.
In 1893, the third “Dayspring,” which had been specially


built for work round the Islands, arrived in Melbourne, but,
sad to relate, on her fourth trip she struck an uncharted
rock and was totally wrecked. This was a great blow to
the now aged missionary, but almost immediately he faced
the possibility of having to do fresh deputation work in ordef
to get funds for a new ship. The Synod decided, however,
that it would be wiser not to build another ship, but to make
use of the line of steamships that now visited the Islands
regularly.
Dr. Paton considered that this was not so good as the mis-
sion owning their own vessel, and he tried to persuade his fellow-
missionaries to alter their decision, but when he saw they con-
scientiously believed it was better not to do so, he loyally
accepted their decision, and agreed that the money that had
already come in for a new ship should, with the permission
of the donors, be used to pay the salary of a new medical
missionary.
For some years Dr. Paton had been busy working at the
translation of the whole of the New Testament into the Aniwan
langua-ge, and it was a great joy to him, when, in 1 899, he
was able to take the complete work to Aniwa. Like the
“Autobiography,” it had been written in trains, in railway
waiting-rooms, and at such spare times when most people
would be resting.
It is interesting to read what the Rev. Frank Paton wrote
about this visit of his father:—
“To see the del ght of the Aniwans at getting the whole of
the New Testament in their own tongue, and my father s over-
flowing joy as he went from village to village, followed always
by a crowd of happy children, and to watch the growing spirit
of earnestness among the people, was surely a reward worth
all the toil of the long years past.”
In this same year, Dr, Paton, now aged seventy-five years,
set out on a second visit to America, this time as a represen-
tative of the Victorian Presbyterian Church to the World’s
Presbyterian Council at Washington, U.S.A. In America,
he addressed meetings, day after day, week after week, until,
utterly worn out, he took ship for Glasgow. After a short
visit, he engaged in fresh work in Scotland and Ireland;
wherever he went he deepened interest in Foreign Missions.
When he returned to Australia, he was able to hand to the
Foreign Missions Committee of our Church a cheque for over


£13,000, representing gifts from people of all classes interested
in the extension of the Kingdom of God. No other man has
surely ever had such power of rousing practical interest in
missions.
We must pass briefly over his closing years. In 1904, he
paid his last visit to Aniwa. The Aniwans were delighted to
see him, and men, women and children gathered in crowds
around him. Twenty-five of the islands of the New Heb-
rides were now occupied by missionaries; 1 7,000 of the
natives were open followers of Jesus Christ, 330 of these
being teachers and evangelists. Can we wonder that Dr.
Paton’s heart glowed within him as he contrasted present con-
ditions with those of 1858, when he first landed on Tanna?
In May, 1905, Mrs. Paton, whose health had been fail-
ing for some time, passed away, and Dr. Paton was left to
face the remaining years without the one who had shared sor-
rows and joys alike. These years were spent bravely m
visiting the different Australian Churches, and there telling
anew the story of all God had permitted His servants to do
on the Islands. He took long and tedious journeys and faced
many hardships, but even his strong will was unable to with-
stand the growing weaknesses of age. He persevered with
his work as long as he could stand; for some weeks he lay in
suffering, and then his spirit passed to the immediate presence
of God.
In concluding this account of the life of our beloved mis-
sionary—and surely every Presbyterian is proud to be able to
thus claim him—we cannot do better than quote from an ap-
preciation of him written by one who knew and loved him
well.
“John G. Paton died in a good old age. And he could
truly have said of himself as did the greatest missionary who
ever lived, ‘I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, and I have kept the faith.’
“His was one of the most faithful and fruitful lives ever
lived. What Carey and Martin did for India, Brainerd for
the North American Indians, Morrison and Hudson Taylor
for China; what Judson did for Burma, and Moffat and
I avingstone for Africa, that John G. Paton did for the
islands of the South-west Pacific, and for the cause of
Foreign Missions in general. He had the boldness of a lion
and the heart of a little child—a rare combination of courage


and meekness, of strength of will and gentleness of disposi-
tion, and, rarest of all, Christlike humility in the midst and in
spite of world-wide popularity.
“Courage and perseverance were conspicuous characteris-
tics of his career, but the glory of John G. Paton’s life will,
ever be the possession of the rare flower of a meek and lowly
spirit. He was at one and the same time the humblest and
meekest of men and the most strong-willed and heroic of men —
a unique combination that made him great and lifted him
above his fellows.
“Probably no missionary of modern times has made so
many young men missionaries as Dr. John G. Paton. He
regarded the work of Foreign Missions as the one great over-
whelming need of the Church of God. His proudest title
was the name of missionary. He regarded no title equal to it
on earth.
“No one ever guarded more sacredly money entrusted to
them than he. It was God’s money, the consecrated gifts of
His dear people, and to be used solely and only for His
cause. To keep down the expenses of the mission, as he
went from place to place, he would walk miles rather than
spend a penny of the mission money upon a vehicle.
“In the thousands of meetings that he addressed, he was
never once late, except through unavoidable accident in travel-
ling. Be the meeting small or large, influential or the reverse,
he regarded his promise to keep his appointment binding, and
as much his duty to God as his honour towards his fellows.
“ ‘This one thing I do,’ was the motto of his life. His
last letter, written from what proved to be his dying bed, was
characteristic. His complaint was, ‘Here am I lying, unable
to work, and there is so much work to be done.’
“To the very last, he would be serving the Master whom
he loved.”


CHAPTER VI.
THE NEW HEBRIDES TO-DAY.
The New Hebrides occupy a very different position to-day
from what they did when Dr. John G. Paton arrived there.
It will help us to understand the present condition of our
mission work if we first look briefly at the geographical and
political situation of the Islands. The New Hebrides com-
prise a chain of eighty islands, situated between Australia and
Fiji. They lie about 1400 miles from Sydney, and about
1 000 miles from New Zealand, and are equally near to im-
portant British and French possessions in the West Pacific.
They have four excellent harbours, in two of which a fleet of
ships might anchor.
The islands vary greatly in size and importance. Some are
mere coral islets, others have a coastline of nearly two hun-
dred miles. Some are flat, with no hills to redeem their
monotony of outline; others possess active volcanoes, which,
at times, cause devastation for many miles around. At cer-
tain times of the year, storms and hurricanes prevail, making
shipping dangerous and life on land full of anxiety.
The soil on most of the islands is rich and productive.
Cocoa-nuts, coffee, maize, bananas, pine-apples and all kinds
of tropical fruits grow abundantly; the sugar-cane equals that
of Queensland, and cotton grows well there. The climate is
tropical, being warm, equable and humid. Malaria is very
prevalent.
The principal islands in the Group, beginning at the
northern end, are Santo, Malekula, Ambrim, Paama, Lpi,
Tongoa, Nguna, Efate, Erromanga, Aniwa, Tanna, Futuna
and Aneityum.
Their political situation is of great importance. They were
first discovered in 1 606, by the Spaniards, who believed that
they formed part of the southern continent. Captain Cook
was the first to explore them, and it was he who, in 1774, gave
them their name. He did not annex them, although up to the
year 1840, British supremacy was unquestioned, and in that


MARGARET WHITECROSS PATON MEMORIAL CHURCH. VILA.
t-A
T J>"' ' ~ ""'I
pr-' ,<,lll^ i l^
Kj
Vf Ijj
m- ■ 1 :
r |
iii JLl ■
THE HOSPITAL. LENAKEL, TANNA.


year “the Islands were included as British territory in the
New Zealand charter.”
France, however, a few years later, began to take an in-
terest in them. She owned other islands, such as New Cale-
donia, near by, and her traders, like those of Great Britain,
began to visit and make a fortune out of the Islands, where
sandalwood trees grew in abundance.
In 1878, the New Hebrides were declared neutral by both
Great Britain and France; but this was unsatisfactory, and
France, a few years later, made a move to extend her in-
fluence, and would most likely have annexed the whole Group
had not Australia and New Zealand protested strongly to the
British Government.
In 1887, a joint Naval Commission of British and French
officers was appointed to patrol the Group, and act for the
protection of settlers there. A little later, a further step
was taken, when two Resident Commissioners, one French and
the other British, were appointed by their respective Govern-
ments to control their own people. These measures also
proving insufficient, as they did not provide any authority to
decide land claims, or to protect native rights, in 1906, the
present system of dual control, called the Condominium, was
established. This extended over the New Hebrides, Banks
and Torres Islands.
By this arrangement, British and French subjects were to
have equal rights in every respect, and to be under their re-
spective Residents; members of any other nationality could
choose under which Power they would place themselves.
In addition to all this, the Condominium Court, con-
sisting of a Spanish president, a British and a French judge,
with minor officials, was appointed. This Condominium
Court had, and still has, to deal with all land claims, and to
settle cases between British and French settlers, and between
natives and Europeans.
It may be remarked here that this Court went into recess in
December, 1919, and has only recently resumed its sittings.
To go back a little. Before 1882, there were few French
settlers on the various islands, but after that time, a few French
companies took up land here and there and the French began
definitely to seek to obtain commercial supremacy, steam-
boats being run between New Caledonia and the Islands.
English traders were then doing little in this direction, but in


1888, several commercial men in Melbourne and Sydney at-
tempted to promote trade between Australia and the New
Hebrides, and boats were run between Sydney and the
Islands with varying success.
When the Commonwealth was inaugurated, a further step
was taken. A monthly shipping service to the Islands was
arranged for, and people were encouraged to take up land
on some of the more attractive Islands.
The French Government, however, made things much easier
for her settlers than the Commonwealth did for hers; so at
present there are comparatively few Australians who have
found it worth while to remain on the Islands.
The result is that, whereas forty years ago the French
were a mere handful, now they number three to one over the
British.
To return to our former subject—the Condominium. For
some years, there has been great and growing dissatisfaction,
especially on the part of the Presbyterian Churches in Aus-
tralia and New Zealand, in regard to this arrangement. The
Churches have the moral and spiritual welfare of the natives
strongly at heart, and they know that the Condominium, with
its divided powers, does not foster these. Mention has been
made in an earlier part of this booklet of the serious harm
done among the natives in Dr. Paton’s day by the sale of in-
toxicating drinks and firearms, and by the kanaka traffic; also
of the measures taken by Great Britain, America and Aus-
tralia to put an end to these evils. Regulations have also
been made by the Condominium Court concerning these mat-
ters, and judgments against offending traders or settlers have
frequently been given; but, unfortunately, this Court has no
power to carry out its own judgements, but hands them over to
either the British or French Resident Commissioner, according
to whichever nationality the offender may belong. We are
told, on the most reliable authority, that the British Court is
prompt in carrying the sentences into effect, but that the other
persistently fails to do so. It is acknowledged that the moral
standards of the two nations concerned are somewhat different;
therefore, dual control makes justice to the natives impossible.
Perhaps this will be made plainer if we speak a little more
in detail of the kanaka traffic. On the cotton and other plan-
tations on the various islands there is great need of native
labour. It is good for the natives to do such work when the


hours and conditions are properly regulated. According to
the Condominium regulations, every recruiter must have a
licence; all engagements made with the natives must not be
binding for more than three years, unless special permission
be given; women must be recruited only by consent of the
husband, if married; or, if unmarried, by the consent of the
head of the tribe.
These rules are openly flouted by the French. Wives are
separated from their husbands, men and women are detained
long beyond the legal period, and conditions of labour
generally are often unfavourable.
This is not the place for declaiming against the people of
another nation. A better understanding of each other is
what we aim at in these unsettled days; but, at the same time,
we cannot fail to draw the attention of our readers to the
accounts, given so frequently by our missionaries and others
on the islands, of the unhappy state of affairs prevailing there
owing to the Condominium.
Different solutions of this problem have been suggested,
three of which may be mentioned: —that there should be a
partition of the islands between France and Great Britain, the
one country taking the northern and the other the southern
Group; that the French should take sole control, making suit-
able compensation to Great Britain; or, that Great Britain
should take whole control, with similar compensation to
France. The last-named is the solution favoured by the
Churches and missionaries concerned, but so far (at the time
of writing this booklet) nothing definite has been achieved.
We can only pray that those concerned may be guided aright
in their deliberations as to the better government of the Islands,
and that the work of God already done there may be
strengthened and deepened, not hindered.
There is room to give only a short account of the mission
work now being carried on, on this field.
Representatives of the Churches in Scotland, Australia,
New Zealand and Tasmania, and of the John G, Paton Fund,
all work there in perfect harmony. The work is evangelistic,
educational, industrial and medical.
There are still parts of certain islands, such as Malekula
and Santo, which are inhabited by wild savages, and even
cannibals, who need the Gospel preached to them as simply as
in the days of Dr. Paton.


UJ
O
<
h-H
>
Lx]
H
D
H
H
CO
Z
O
z
z
H—(
<
£
H
CO
£
Lx]
X
u
<
Ul
H
<
O
O
z
<
H


Willi so many faithful missionaries, II would he invidious
to choose out one, and yet it is only natural, considering the
subject of this booklet, to mention, as an example of the
evangelistic worker, Dr, Paton’s second son, the Rev. Fred.
J. Paton, who for thirty years has been doing such heroic
work on Malekula. He still has much work of a pioneer
kind, and is friend, counsellor and teacher to natives, many of
whom have been thieves and murderers, but who now show
in their changed lives the power of the Gospel. The Rev.
Fred Paton has that deep love for the natives possessed by
his father, and he is roused to fiery indignation at the present
injustices meted out to them. His work on Malekula calls
for tact and wisdom, as well as for the other heroic attributes
that belong to his character.
The educational work is carried on at every mission station,
and, although it is under the supervision of the missionary,
much of the actual work is done by the natives themselves.
There is a fine Training College at Tangoa, Santo, at the head
of which is the Rev. F. G. Bowie, of the U.F. Church of
Scotland. The most promising converts on the different
islands are sent there for a four years’ course, and, apart from
the training received, it is an excellent thing for the different
natives to meet in this way, and so do away with any possible
island prejudices. Some of these native teachers, when
settled at their stations, are supported by outside help, but the
aim is that the native Church should support her own teachers,
and that aim is being increasingly realised. A whole book
could be written about the devotion and self-sacrifice of these
native teachers, many of whom have given their lives for the
sake of Jesus Christ. There can be no nobler work than that
of training such men to win their own people for the Master.
The industrial work has been mentioned elsewhere. It is
not developed on any great scale as far as the mission is con-
cerned, as so many of the natives work on the plantations, and
some even own plantations themselves. But they have two
kinds of work by means of which they raise money for helping
in the support of their own mission.
The one is by making arrowroot, and the other by making
copra out of cocoanut. The arrowroot is sent to Australia,
New Zealand and Great Britain, and the money gained by
the sale of it is expended in paying for the printing of the
Scriptures in their own language, the building of schools and


churches, and the support of native teachers. Hundreds of
pounds are raised each year in this way.
Copra is the hard white inside rind of the cocoanut, dried
in the sun. It is sold to traders, who, in turn, sell it to Lever
Brothers in Sydney, to be used in the manufacture of soap.
The medical work, as on every mission field, is of immense
importance. Every missionary, to a certain extent, is a
medical man, but the outstanding work of this description is
carried on at the famous John G. Paton Memorial Hospital
at Vila, where the present medical missionary is Dr. Vernon
Davies, D.S.O. This hospital has a fine nursing staff, con-
sisting of a matron and two Sisters. There are wards in it
for natives and for white people, and the work done there is
a means of drawing many nearer to the Great Physician.
There is also another hospital, on Tanna, where Dr. F. J.
Williams is at present in charge
It must be mentioned here that at Vila, is also the Margaret
Whitecross Paton Memorial Church, erected in loving
memory of Mrs. Paton, in connection with which Church the
Rev. E. M. K. Raff works amongst European residents and
the natives of Efate.
One would like to mention the work of every missionary on
the field when all alike are rendering faithful service to the
Master, but space forbids.
As may be seen even in this outline, the work has grown in
size and importance during the sixteen years that have passed
since Dr. J. G. Paton left us; and yet one asks:—Are we as
Interested to-day in the work in the New Hebrides as when
Dr. Paton was here, or has the glow of enthusiasm departed?
It was thrilling in the early days to know one was helping
to bring hundreds of wild savages out of darkness into light,
and to meet one who had gone through marvellous ex-
periences and could tell of them in such a way that the heart
burned, the eyes glistened, and enthusiasm rose to practical
action.
But our present missionaries are also men of unselfish,
heroic character. Man after man amongst them has had to
face loss of wife and child through the ever-prevalent malaria,
while they themselves are frequently prostrated from the same
cause; yet, not one word of complaint is ever heard from
them. They and their wives have risked all for Christ’s
sake.


r ~ ■
; . v * v gj£* % ; _.. p®^ 5 ® | —" fjjjfi? v AfkTi
THE JOHN G. PATON MEMORIAL HOSPITAL, VILA.


The natives, too, need our help to-day every whit as much
as in former times. For many of them, perhaps, the early
glow has departed, or is in danger of departing; temptation
is strong, and the call of old sins is insistent. Can they feel
assured that we, their brothers in the home Church, are still
praying and actively working for them?
Do not let us fail our brethren in these Islands, At the
present time, there are mission stations that have no mis-
sionary; the natives themselves have to carry on the work until
we send someone to take charge. Would we like to be left
for months, even years, without a resident minister —we, who
have not only had the light of the Gospel from our earliest
years, but have also inherited the Christian ideals of our fore-
fathers ?
Dr. Paton, in pleading the cause of Foreign Missions, put
the New Hebrides first, but never forgot work elsewhere. We,
in the Victorian Presbyterian Church, are being called to do
a great work for Korea, a work which demands devotion
and self-sacrifice, but let us not forget that the New Heb-
rides are also our field, and that, if we fail there, we are fail-
ing the Master, who entrusted that work to us.
May we determine that the work of John G. Paton shall
not go back; that difficulties that arise shall be met in his un-
daunted, courageous way, and that our spoken gratitude and
reverence for him, this centenary year, shall not be mere lip
service, but a paying of our vows to the Lord, a fulfilling of
the trust committed to us.


APPENDIX.
SUGGESTED QUESTIONS FOR CIRCLE
LEADERS.
CHAPTER I.
How did the early years of Dr. Paton’s life influence
his work as a foreign missionary?
Discuss the following statement: —“Helpers could be
found for the home field while few were willing to go
abroad.” Is this true to-day?
Should every follower of Christ be conscious of having
a life work?
CHAPTER 11.
State some of the difficulties which a missionary to
Tanna had to encounter.
Can you name and illustrate any points of contact be-
tween the Tanna natives and the missionary?
Would you consider that Dr. Paton’s work on Tanna
was worth all the sacrifices made?
2.
3.
CHAPTER 111.
What was the “Shipping Company for Jesus?” Have
we anything to compare with it now, in our Church’s
work?
2.
3.
How did the Victorian Church become interested in
the New Hebrides?
Give some of the most important events in Dr, Paton’s
life on Aniwa. If possible, compare with those of a
missionary in Korea.
CHAPTER IV.
1.
2.
3.
Why was the conversion of Namakei so important?
Is it an advantage or disadvantage for natives from
heathen lands to visit our own country? Give reasons.
Read John 14, 12. Show its application in regard to
Dr. Paton’s work in the New Hebrides.


CHAPTER V.
1. What was the secret of Dr, Raton’s success in deputa-
tion work?
2. Tell all you know about the “John G. Paton” Fund.
3. What lessons can we learn from a study of the last
twenty-six years of Dr. Paton’s life?
CHAPTER VI.
1. Give an account of the political situation of the New
Hebrides, with suggestions as to its improvement.
2. Describe the main features of mission work in the New
Hebrides.
3. How can we make this centenary year of Dr. Paton a
memorable one?
Brown, Prior & Co. Pty. Ltd., 167 Queen St., Melbourne.


■


