

Dr. TALMAGE’S
GREAT SERMON
ON
Preached in Sydney on Sunday, July 3, 1894.
With Beautiful Portrait by Falk.
Sixteen Pages.
Price Threepence.




DR. TALMAGE’S
Great Sermon on The Bible
(WITH SPLENDID PORTRAIT),
As Preached at St. Stephen’s Presbyterian
Church, Sydney, on Sunday,
29th July, 1894.
PRICE THREEPENCE.
To be had at the Railway Bookstalls and from any of
the following Booksellers:
The N.S. Wales Bookstall Co.
Messrs. Turner and Henderson, Hunter Street.
Messrs. E. A. Petherick and Co., George Street.
The Wesleyan Book Depot.
The Stationer’s Hall Co. (formerly C. E. Puller and Co.)
Messrs. Angus and Robertson, Castlereagh Street.
Mr. Charles E. Mihell, T.M.C.A. Buildings, Pitt Street.
Wholesale : Robert A. Thompson, Pitt Street.


PUREST AND BEST.
My pastry is nice, I assure you, For scones, puddings, cakes,
because Ladies take good advice,
Never Baking Powder 1 buy Use Waugh’s Baking Powder,
but Waugh’s. h ave them nice.
/MV
lISC
///%
fec
-
V'\v- »lv
=3-Fp^
T- ANP
UR
Our praise bursts forth—louder,
yet louder,
The more we know
Waugh’s Baking Powder.
As sure as the sun comes from
the east,
Waugh’s Baking Powder is better
than yeast.
PUREST AND BEST.


The Rev. T. de Witt Talmage, D,D.
(From Photo by Falk, of Sydney).




DR. TALMAGE’S
GREAT SERMON ON THE BIBLE.
“ The Statutes of the Lord are right.” —Psalm xix. 8.
Old Books go out of date. When they were written they dis-
cussed questions which were then being discussed; they struck
at wrongs which have long since ceased. AVere they books of
history, the facts have been gathered from the imperfect mass,
better classified and more lucidly presented. Were they hooks
of poetry, they were interlocked with wild mythology and
obscure facts, which have gone up from the face of the earth
like mists, at sunrise. Were they books of morals, civilization
does not want to sit at the feet of barbarism; neither do we
want Sappho, Pythagoras, and Tully to teach us morals. What
do the masses care now for the pathos of Simonides, or the
sarcasm of Menander, or the gracefulness of Philemon, or the
wit of Christophanes P Even the old books we have left, with
two or three exceptions, have but very little effect upon our
times. Books are human. They have a time to be born, they are
fondled, they grow in strength, they have a middle-life of useful-
ness, then comes old age, they totter, and they die. Many national
libraries are merely the cemeteries of dead books. Some of
them lived flagitious lives, and died deaths of ignominy. Some
were virtuous, and accomplished a glorious mission. Some
went into the ashes through inquisitorial fires. Some were
neglected, and died as foundlings at the door of science. Some
expired in the author’s study ; others in the publisher’s hands.
Sometimes there comes into our possession an old, book, its
author forgotten, and its usefulness done, and with leathern lips
it seems to say, “ I wish I were dead.” Monuments have been
raised to poets, orators and philanthropists; would that some


tall shaft might be erected in honor of the world's buried books.
The world’s authors would make a pilgrimage thereto, and
poetry and literature, and science, and religion would consecrate
it with their tears.
It is not so with one old Book. It started in the world s
infancy: It grew under theocracy and monarchy. It withstood
the storms of fire. Tyranny warred against it, and infidelity
curled the lips in scorn at the mention of it. In Rome and
Ephesus and Jerusalem, and Patmos tyranny issued edicts
against it. The papacy from its monasteries, and Mohamme-
danism from its mosques hurled their anathemas; but the old
Bible lived. It crossed the British Channel, and was greeted
by Wickliff and James I. It crossed the Atlantic and struck
Plymouth Rock, until like that of Horeb it gushed with
blessedness. Churches and asylums have gathered all along its
way, ringing their bells and stretching out their hands of bless-
ing, and more than a hundred thousand ministers of religion
have stood with their hands on the open, grand, free old English
Bible. But it will not have accomplished its mission until it
has climbed the icy mountains of G-reenland, until it has gone
over the granite cliffs of China, until it has scattered its gems
among the diamond districts of Brazil, and all thrones
shall be gathered into one throne, and all crowns shall
be melted into one crown, and this book shall at the very gate of
heaven have waved with the ransomed empires. Not until then
will the glorious Bible have accomplished its mission.
Some years ago, travelling on an American railway between
New Orleans and Nashville, I saw a gentleman in the car take
out a Bible, read it, kiss it, close it, and put it back into his
pocket. In the law courts, hundreds of men, more or less
kiss the Bible daily; but I am glad to know that
there are here this afternoon those who, knowing all the Bible
has been, can press it to their lips in an outburst of reverence
and thankfulness and love. When my parents died, the chief
part of the legacy which came to me was the old family Bible
the most valuable book I ever owned. Here and there I can


find a page completely worn out by constant perusal—here and
there are the marks of tears. In that book, my dear ones wrote
their names on the marriage day. It consoled them when their
children died. Dear old book ! How well I remember, as a
child at my mother’s knee, looking at the pictures while she
studied the promises ! When I cease to honour that Book let
a!l joy fly from me, and my sight go out into the blackness of
darkness; let all sweet sounds become mute in my ears, and let
me be accursed in the land!
But I want to show you that “ the Statutes of the Lord
are right ”
Bight in Authenticity.
Bight in Style.
Bight in Doctrine.
Bight in Effects—
absolutely right! gloriously right! eternally right! The Bible
is authentically right. There is not so much evidence that
Walter Scott wrote “ Marmion not so much evidence that
Shakespeare wrote “Hamlet;” not so much evidence that
John Milton wrote “Paradise Lost;” not so much evidence
that Tennyson wrote the “Six Hundred,” as there is
evidence—positive and tremendous, mathematical and over-
whelming evidence—that the Lord God Almighty, by
the hands of the Apostles, Prophets and EvangelistSj
wrote this Book. Suppose a book, which crashed into all the
prejudices of the world, were now to be written by bad men or
impostors ? It would be unhesitatingly cast out because of the
character of those who wrote it. If the Bible had been an im-
position if it had not been written by the men who said they
wrote it if it had been a mere collection of falsehoods—do you
not suppose it would have been immediately rejected by the
people P If Job, and Isaiah, and Paul, and John, had been
impostors, they would have been scouted and the Bible
unhesitatingly cast out as worthless. Do you know how
near violent hands went to destroying the Bible? When
it was first assailed only 400 copies of it existed; now there are


400,000,000. Notwithstanding opposition the Bible has gone
into all languages—into the philosophic Greek., the flowing
Italian, the graceful German, the passionate Frenc t e
picturesque Indian, and the exhaustless Anglo-Saxon. Under
the painter’s pencil the Birth and the Crucifixion and the
Besurrection glow on the walls of palaces; or under the
engraver’s knife speak from the mantel of the mountain caverns :
while stones touched by the sculptor’s chisel, start up into
preaching apostles, and ascending martyrs. Do you not suppose
then that if that Book had been an imposition and a falsehood
it would have gone down under the ceaslessfires of opposition?
If there was a great plague going over the earth, and
hundreds of thousands of men were dying of that plague, and
some one should find a medicine that in one day cured ten
thousand people, would not everybody acknowledge that
that must be a good medicine? I simply state the fact that
there have been hundreds of thousands of Christian men and
women who say they have felt the truthfulness of this Book, and
its power in their souls. There is a great plague of sin and
sorrow, and millions are dying of it; and if I can point you to
multitudes who say they have felt the power of that cure, are
you not reasonable enough to acknowledge the fact that there
must be some power in the medicine? Will you take the
evidence of millions of patients who have been cured; or will you
take the evidence of those who stand aloof and confess that they
never took the medicine ? To-day the most popular institution
on earth is the Church; the most popular book is the
Bible; the most popular name is Jesus! Those who scoff at
Bible stories are being daily set right by scientists and explorers.
The Bible says that there was a city built out of solid rock.
Infidelity says “absurd.” But Buckhardt and Laborde
went forth on their explorations, and they came upon
that very city. The mountains stand around like giants
Guarding the tomb where the city is buried. They found a
street in the city six miles long, where once flashed imperia
pomp, and which echoed with the laughter of light-hearted
mirth on its way to the theatre. On temples, fashioned out of


coloured stones, some of which blushed into the crimson of the
rose, some of which darkened into the blue of the sky, and some
of which paled into the whiteness of the lily. Aye, on column,
and pediment, and entablature, and statuary, God writes the
truth of the Bible. The Bible says that Sodom and Gomorrah
were destroyed by fire and brimstone. “ Absurd, says infidelity.
But Lieutenant Lynch went out to explore, and came to the
Dead Sea, beneath whose waters lay the ruins of the Cities of
the Plain, and he sunk his fathoming line, and brought up from
the bottom of the Dead Sea masses of brimstone , I, myself
the summer before last, picked up remnants of the \ eiy tempest
that swept Sodom and Gomorrah to ruins. Who was right. the
Bible or infidelity ?
The Bible says there was a city called Nineveh, and it was
three days’ journey round it, and that it should be destroyed by
fire and water. “Absurd,” says infidelity, “no such city was
ever built, and if it ever was, it could not be destroyed by fire
and water, which were antagonistic elements. But Layard,
Botta, Bono mi, and Keith went out, and from their explorations
they found that city of Nineveh, and they have told us that it
was three days’ journey round the city, according to the ancient
estimate of a day’s journey, and that it was literally destroyed
by fire and water —a part of the city having been inundated by
the river Tigris; while, in other parts they found the remains of
the fire in heaps of charcoal that have been excavated,
and in the calcined slabs of gypsum. Who was right? the
Bible or infidelity ? Again the Bible says there were grapes in
Egypt. “ Absurd,” says infidelity, “ you can’t raise grapes in
Egypt.” But the explorer has found painted on the wall in the
underground vaults at Eilithya all the process of tending the
vines, and treading out the grapes; and there were also found
vases still encrusted with the settlings of the wine. Who was
right ? The Bible or infidelity ? Thus you see, that while God
wrote the Bible, at the same time He wrote this commentary,
that “ the statutes of the Lord are right,” on leaves of rock and
shell-bound clasps of metal, and lying on mountain tables, and
in the jewelled vase of the sea. In authenticity and in


genuineness the statutes of the Lord are right—gloriously right!
Eternally right!
... I knOW that there are people eminent in science who do not
e ieve m the Bible, but for every half-dozen of such I can
. a ozen equally eminent who take the directly opposite
view. In America we never had a more eminent scientist than
Joseph Henry. Henry knew all the facts of geology, and yet
believed in the Book of |Genesis-he knew all the facts of
ronomy, and yet believed that the sun and moon stood still—
mew all that there was to be known concerning the anatomy
o± man and fish, and yet believed the Book of Jonah. The
brain of the world is on the side of Christianity, as well as the
eart of the world. When I was in England Mr. Gladstone
wrote—“ Pray come to Hawarden to-morrow.—Gladstone.”
o I went, and made up my mind to get a testimony from Mr.
Gladstone as to religion. As we rushed up and down the park
I never found a man who could walk fast enough for me un-
til I met Mr. Gladstone—he’s as fleet as a deer—l said to him
' aS y ° U g ° on in life does yo.ur faith in Christianity increase or
ecrease ? ” And Gladstone stopped at once, and replied, “ Dr.
Talmage, there is only one great question in the world, and that
ow to bring the Gospel of Jesus Christ into contact with the
people. I have been for 40 years now connected with the
administration of the British Empire, and I have been closely
associated with 60 of the greatest geniuses of the time.
those 60, 55 were consistent professors of religion,
and the other five respected religion. Why, here in
this country, most of our great doctors are Christians,” and
e named some of the greatest physicians known to science,
including his own physician, Andrew Clark. “ Ho, doctor, my
aith increases all the time. And yet I have found in America
ome young scientists who well, who simply make me sick.
I have seen them going around, as soon as they knew the differ-
ence between the horns of a beetle and the sting of a wasp, with
-Garwm under one arm and a case of transfixed grasshoppers
under the other, chipping rocks, patronising the Almighty, and
ung a out culchah. I have two wonders concerning such


people : First, how the Lord got along-without them before they
wereborn; and, secondly, how He is going to get along without them
after they are dead. The Bible is as true and unalterable as any
mathematical illustration—it is G-od’s Word—right, absolutely,
unquestionably, supremely, blessedly right! I cannot think of
anything meaner than the desire of some people to take away my
Bible and give me no substitute. I have been willing these forty
years to give up my Bible if anybody will give me something
better. Meanness! Take away this consolation and you go
down a thousand feet in meanness. When you get to the
bottom you will find yourself at the top of a ladder two thousand
feet deep. Descend that ladder and you will find yourself at
the top of a staircase four thousand feet deep. Descend those
four thousand stairs and you will find yourself at the top of a
precipice ten thousand feet deep. And now jump! and when
you come to the bottom you will have reached the head-quarters
of that meanness that would take away all I have got in my
Bible, and give me nothing in return.
Again, the Bible is right in Style. A great many people
think differently. They think it is merely a collection of genea-
logical tables and dry facts. That is because they do not know
how to read it. Take up the most interesting novel ever written,
and if you commence at the four hundredth page to-day, and to-
morrow at the three-hundredth, and the next day at the first
page, how much sense or interest will you gather from
it? Yet that is the very process to which the Bible is sub-
jected everyday. An angel from Heaven reading the
Bible in that way, could not understand it. The Bible, like
all other palaces has a door by which to enter, and a door by
which to go out. G-enesis is the door to go in, and Bevelation
the door to go out. Do you read other letters the way you read
Paul’s letters? Suppose you get a business letter, and you
know that in it are important financial propositions, do you read
the last page first, and then one line of the third page, and
another of the second, and another of the first? No! You
begin with “Dear sir,” and end with “ Yours truly.” Now here
is a letter 1 written from the throne of Hod to our lost world; it is


full of magnificent hopes and propositions, and we read here and
there, and we know nothing about it. People read the Bible
when they can do nothing else. While the Bible is to be read
on stormy days, and while your head aches, it is also to be read
in the sunshine, and when your nerve, like harp strings, thrum
the song of health. lam fascinated with the conciseness of this
Book. Every word is packed full of truth. Every sentence is
double-barrelled. Every paragraph is like an old banyan-tree,
w ith a hundred roots and a hundred branches. There has never
been a pearl diver who could gather up one half of the treasures
in any verse. John Halsebach, of Vienna, for 21 years, every
babbath, expounded to his congregation the first chapter of
Isaiah, and yet did not get through with it. The greatest books
of the age are merely the Bible diluted. The Bible is the lamp
from which all torches are lighted. Carlyle is only a magnificent
distortion of Ezekiel. The great characters of Walter Scott are
but Bible men and women re-named. Meg Merrilies, the witch
of Endor ! Lady Macbeth, Jezebel !
I am amazed too at the variety of the Bible. If God
had inspired men with the same temperament to write
this Book it might have been monotonous ; but David, and Isaiah,
and Job, and Ezekiel, and Paul, and John, were
men of very different temperaments, and so, though God
inspired them to write, they wrote m theii* own style. God
knew that little children would read the Bible, and so he allowed
Matthew and Luke to write sweet stories about Christ in the
manger, and Christ with the doctors of the law. God knew that
the historian would want to read it, and so he allowed Moses to
give the plain story of the Pentateuch. God knew that the poet
would want to read it, and so he allowed Job to picture the
heavens as a curtain, and Isaiah the mountains as weighed in the
balance,and the waters as held in the hollow of the Omnipotent
hand; and he touched David, until in the latter part of the Psalms,
he gathers a great choir, standing in galleries above each other-
beasts and men in the first gallery ; above them, hills and moun-
tains ; above them, fire and hail and tempest; above them, sun and
moon and stars of light; and then, standing before this great


choir, reaching from the depths of the earth to the heights of
Heaven, like a leader of a great orchestra, he lifts his hands, cry-
ing: “Praise ye the Lord! Let everything that hath breath praise
the Lord !” God knew that the lovers of the wild, the romantic,
and the strange would want to read it, so he let Lzekiel write of
the mysterious rolls, and winged creatures, and flying wheels of
fire. God prepared it for all zones —for the arctic* and the
tropic, as well as for the temperate zone. Cold-blooded Green-
landers would read it, and the herdsmen of Holland guarding the
cattle in the grass, and the Swiss girl reclining amid the Alpine
crags ; and when I see that the Bible is thus suited in style to all
ages and conditions and lands, I cannot help repeating the con-
clusion of my text: “ The statutes of the Lord are right ”
gloriously right! eternally right!
You may think it didactic when I say again that the Bible
is right in doctrine. The doctrine is plainly and simply stated
man a sinner ; Christ a Saviour. Man must come down—his
pride, his self-righteousness, his worldliness. Christ the
Anointed must go up. My next sentence will be the most
wonderful ever written : “ This is a faithful saying, and worthy
of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners,” even the chief. Here’s a sentence, every word of
which weighs a ton: “ God so loved the world that He gave
His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on Him should
not perish, but have everlasting life.” lam not surprised that
when Christ was born the music of the angels flowed over the
battlements of Heaven, and fell on the ears of the shepherds :
“ Glorv to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill toward
men.” If I had to crowd the Bible into one word I would
choose “ Mercy.” But oh! there is more mercy in the tongue
of a rattlesnake, or in the tooth of a hyena than in the hearts of
men and women for those who have gone astray.
The statutes of the Lord are right too in their effects. Like
flowers, put it wherever you like the Bible is always appropriate.
Put it in the hand of a man seriously concerned about his soul-
He reads the commandments and pleads guilty to the indictment.


He takes up the Psalms and says : —“ They just describe my
feelings.” He flies to good works ; but Paul starts him out of
that by the announcement —“ A man is not justified by works.”
Then in despair the man cries out, “ What shall Ido ? Where
shall I go ?” and a voice reaches him, saying : “ Come unto me,
all ye who are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest.”
Is there anybody here in trouble ? Ah ! I might better ask,
are there any here who have never been in trouble ? Put that
book in the hands of any man who has trouble. He thought
God was after him with a rod. How different now it seems.
Just as you pick the sweetest berries off the sharpest thorns, so
some of the most luscious promises grow on the sharpest sorrows.
The Cross of Christ is the lightning rod, which takes the bolt
out of the heaviest thunder-cloud.
Put the Bible into the schools and colleges. Palsied be the
hand that would take the Bible from our schools. An educated
mind without religion is like a ship without a helm —it is a rush-
ing mail-train without breaks or reversing rod to control the
speed. Educate only a man’s head, and you make him an infidel.
Educate only a man’s heart, and you make him a fanatic. Edu-
cate them both together, and you have the noblest work of God.
They all die well who have the Bible for their pillow. A
widowed mother was watching at the bedside of her boy as he
lay dying. The sight of his motionless form and closed eyelids
overcame her, and bending to his ear she whispered : “ Charlie,
don’t you know me ?” But no answer came. “ Charlie, don’t
you know me?” (still more imploringly). Still no answer came.
Presently Charlie’s eyes slowly opened : “ Why did you call me
back mother? I was half-way up the stairs.”
The preacher closed with an earnest appeal to the congre-
gation to —
“ Say, will you to mount Zion go ?
Say, will you have this Christ, or no ?”
“ The door of Heaven is so wide that the sixteen hundred mil-
lions of the human race can go in abreast.”


Quaker Bread.
The use of Malt Extract is recommended by the best
Physicians of the day for persons in good health as well as for
those who are delicate, or whose constitutions are in an impaired
condition from sickness or overwork.
Realizing this fact, we have decided to incorporate or
introduce a Pure Extract of Malt as one of the ingredients of
our Quaker Bread , thus producing a Maltine Bread , which will
at once gain favour with lovers of Pure , Wholesome Home-made
Bread.
The use of Pure Extract of Malt in making this Bread
renders it more digestible as well as more nutritious ; it also
imparts a Sweet (Nutty) flavour to the Bread, and helps to keep
it moist for a longer time.
QUAKER BREAD.
Manufactured by
wnxiAM wiiti
GREAT SOUTHERN BAKERY,
BBDPBBIT, STTlDlsnEiir.
ts__ j t
cri... . o
E—
|Bread delivered in City and Suburbs daily. Wheaten
Bread a specialty —recommended by the Medical Faculty.


A Welcome Visitor in every Home.
A Journal of Sociai and Religious Progress
Crisp Articles by Capable Writers.
Tbe news of all the Churches in all the Colonies
Published Weekly. Price 3d.
Ask your News Agent for it.
COLEBROOK & TROWBRIDGE.
'
Leading Suburban Printers,
.IBRA R
O*
"573
3 PARRAMATTA ROAD,
LEICHHARDT.
Prices, and at the same time equal to that of
any city house.




By Special Ap-
pointment
LIMITED
“ Ik^_A_IECITIj_fcrC!EE> 7 * s^s~*
To Her Majesty
the Queen.
rUI >.
Largest Sale of any Soap in the World.
Use Sunlight Soap
And your Clothes will wear longer.
Use Sunlight Soap
And your Hands will retain their
Softness and Beauty.
Use Sunlight Soap
For the Finest Fabric or upon the
Most Delicate Skin.
Use Sunlight Soap
For the Farm and Dairy; it cleanses
and Sweetens.
Use Sunlight Soap
Because it is the CHEAPEST by
EESULT.
Sold by all Storekeepers at
Is. per BOX of THREE BARS
