

DRAFT
or TUB
PROPOSED
“COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
CONSTITUTION ACT.”


)
lofxirn
jHlifK
*a']r.
,b r,


Copy of Federal Constitution under the Crown, as finally adopted by the Australasian
Federal Convention, at Melbourne, in the Colony of Victoria, on the 16th March®
1898.
E. O. BLACKMORE, €. C. KINGSTON,
Clerk. President.
ANNO SEXAGESIMO ET SEXAGESIMO PRIMO
VICTORIA REGIN
A.D. 1898.
DRAFT OF A BILL
To Constitute the Commonwealth of Australia
Preamble.
WHEREAS the people 0 f [here name the Colonies which have adopted tin
Constitution ], humbly relying on the blessing of Almighty God, have
agreed to unite in one indissoluble Federal Commonwealth under the Crown of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and under the Constitution
hereby established: And whereas it is expedient to provide for the admission
into the Commonwealth of other Australasian Colonies and possessions of tha
Queen: Be it therefore Enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty, by
and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, in the present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the
tsame, as follows:
Short Title.
I. This Act may be cited as The Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act.
Act to bind Crown, and extend to the Queen’s Successors.
11. This Act shall bind the Crown, and its provisions referring to the Queen shall
extend to Her Majesty's Heirs and Successors in the Sovereignty of the United
Kingdom.
Proclamation of Commonwealth.
111. It shall he lawful for the Queen, with the advice of the Privy Council, to
declare by Proclamation that, on and after a day therein appointed, not being Later
than one year after the passing of this Act, the people of f here name the Colonies
which have adopted the Cunsti shall be united in a Federal Commonwealth
under the name of “I he Commonwealth of Australia. But the Queen may, at any
time after the Proclamation, appoint a Governor-General for the Commonwealth.


Commencement of Act.
IV. The Commomvcalth shall he established, and the Constitution of the Common-
wealth shall take effect, on and after the day so appointed. But the Parliaments of
the several Colonies may at any time after the passing of this Act make any such laws,
to come into operation on the day so appointed, as they might have made if the
Constitution had taken effect at the passing of this Act.
Operation of the Constitution and Laws.
V. This Act, and all laws made by The Parliament of the Commonwealth under
the Constitution, shall be binding on the Courts, Judges, and people of every State,
and of every part of the Commonwealth, notwithstanding anything in the laws of any
State; and the laws of the Commonwealth shall be in force on all British ships, the
Queen’s ships of war excepted, whose first port of clearance and whose port of
destination are in the Commonwealth.
Definition.
VI. “ The Commonwealth ” shall mean the Commonwealth of Australia as
established under this Act.
“ Colony” shall mean any colony or province.
“ The States ” shall mean such of the Colonies of New South Wales, New Zealand,
Queensland, Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia, and South Australia, including
the Northern Territory of South Australia, as for the time being are parts of the
Commonwealth, and such Colonies or Territories as may be admitted into or
established by the Commonwealth as States; and each of such parts of the Common-
wealth shall be called a “ State.”
“Original States” shall mean such States as are parts of the Commonwealth at iti
establishment.
Repeal of Federal Council Act.
VII. The Federal Council of Australasia Act, 1885, is hereby repealed, but so as
not to affect any laws passed by the Federal Council of Australasia and in force at
the establishment of the Commonwealth.
Any such law may he repealed as to any State by The Parliament of the Common-
wealth, or as to any Colony not being a State by the Parliament thereof.
Application of Colonial Boundaries Act.
VIII. After the passing of this Act the Colonial Boundaries Act, 1895, shall not
apply to any colony which becomes a State of the Commonwealth ; but the Common-
wealth shall he taken to be a self-governing colony for the purposes of that Act,
Constitution and its Divisions.
IX. The Constitution of the Commonwealth shall be as follows
THE CONSTITUTION.
This Constitution is divided as follows: —
CHAPTER I.—THE PARLIAMENT;
Part I. —General:
Part H.-fljl Senate: To '
ut 1 d Sfl . or
|>art Hl.—The House of Representatives;
Part IV. —Both Houses of The Parliaments
Part V. —Powers of The Parliament;


CHAPTER lI.—THE EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER lII.—THE JUDICATURE;
CHAPTER IV.—FINANCE AND TRADE
CHAPTER V.—THE STATES: ’
CHAPTER VI.—NEW STATES :
CHAPTER VII.—MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER VIII—ALTERATION OF THE CONSTITUTION.
THE SCHEDULE.
CHAPTER I.
THE PARLIAMENT.
Part L— -General.
Legislative Power.
- . The Legislative power of the Commonwealth shall he vested in a Federal Parlia-
ment, which shall consist of the Queen, a Senate, and a House of Representatives,
fend which is hereinafter called “ The Parliament,” or “ The Parliament or the
Commonwealth. ’ ’
G o vernor - Gene ral.
2. A Governor-General appointed by the Queen shall be Her Majesty’s represen-
tative in t'ne Commonwealth, and shall have and may exercise in the Commonwealth
during the Queen’s pleasure, but subject to this Constitution, such powers and
functions of the Queen as Her Majesty may be pleased to assign to him.
Salary of Governor-General.
3. There shall be payable to the Queen out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund ot
the Commonwealth, for the salary of the Governor-General, an annual sum which,
until The Parliament otherwise provides, shall be ten thousand pounds.
The salary of a Governor-General shall not be altered during his continuance in
office.
Provisions relating to Governor-General.
4. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the Governor-General extend
and apply to the Governor-General for the time being, or such person as the Queen
may appoint to administer the Government of the Commonwealth; but no such
person shall be entitled to receive any salary from the Commonwealth in respect of
any other office during his administration of the Government of the Commonwealth.
LET./ .1
Sessions of Parliament. Prorogation and Dissolution.
•5. The Governor-General may appoint such times for holding the Sessions of Tire
Parliament as he thinks fit, and may also from time to time, by Proclamation Or
otherwise, prorogue The Parliament, and' may in like diianner dissolve’ the House of
Representatives. Ut UmT s ; t( ,


Su m a .oninpr I ‘arliament.
After any general election The Parliament shall he summoned to meet not later,
than thirty days after the day appointed for the return of the writs.
First Session.
The Parliament shall be summoned to meet not later than six months after the
establishment of the Commonwealth.
Yearly Session of Parliament.
G. There shall he a Session of The Parliament once at least in every year, so that
twelve months shall hot intervene between the last sitting of The Parliament in one
Session and its first sitting in the next Session.
Part IT.— The Senate.
The Senate.
7. The Senate shall he composed of senators for each State, directly chosen by the
people of the State, voting, until The Parliament otherwise provides, as one electorate.
Until The Parliament otherwise provides there shall he six senators for each
Original State. The Parliament may make laws increasing or diminishing the
number of senators for each State, hut so that equal representation of the several
Original States shall he maintained and that no Original State shall have less than
six senators.
The senators shall he chosen for a term of six years, and the names of the senators
chosen for each State shall be certified by the Governor to the Governor-General.
8. The qualification of electors of senators shall be in each State that which is pre-
scribed by this Constitution, or by The Parliament, as the qualification for electors
of members of the House of Representatives; hut in the choosing of senators each
e’cctor shall vote only once.
Method of Election of Senators,
9. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may make laws prescribing the method
of choosing senators, hut so that the method shall be uniform for all the States.
Subject to any-such law, the Parliament of each State may make laws prescribing
the method of choosing the senators for that State.
Times and Places.
The Parliament of a State may make laws for determining the times and places of
elections of senators for the Stale.
Application of State Laws.
10. Until the Parliament otherwise provides, but subject to this Constitution, the
laws in farce in each Sta|c, for the time being, relating to elections for the more
numerous House of the Parliament of the State, shall, as nearly as practicable, apply
to elections of senators for the State.
IS 3"
Failure taChoose Senators.
. > nit m hi ,v ■ . . . .
11. Thf Senate may pr.qcccd to the dispatch of business, notwithstanding the.
failure of any State to provide for its repiesentation in the Senate.


Issue of Writs.
lk® Governor of any State may cause writs to be issued for elections of senators
for tne State. In case of the dissolution of the Senate the writs shall bs issued within
ten days from the proclamation of such dissolution.
hotation of Senators.
13. As soon as may be after the Senate first meets and after each first meeting of
the Senate following a dissolution thereof, the Senate shall divide the senators chosen
for each State into two classes, as nearly equal in number as practicable: and the
places of the senators of the first class shall become vacant at the expiration of the
third year, and the places of those of the second class at the expiration of the sixth
year, from the beginning of their term of service ; and afterwards the places of
senators shall become vacant at the expiration of six years from the beginning of
their term of service.
Iho election to fill vacant places shall be made in the year at the expiration of
which the places are to become vacant.
For the purposes of this section the term of service of a senator shall be taken to
begin on the first day of January following the day of his election, except in the
eases of the first election and of the election next after any dissolution of the Senate,
when it shall be taken to begin on the first day of January preceding the day of his
election.
Fuither Provision for Rotation.
14. Whenever the number of senators for a State is increased or diminished. The
Parliament of the Commonwealth may make such provision for the vacating of the
places of senators for the State as it deems necessary to maintain regularity in the
rotation. ° J
Casual Vacancies.
15. If the place of a senator becomes vacant before the expiration of his term of
sen ice, the Houses of Parliament of the State for which he was chosen shall, silting
and ■voting together, choose a person to hold the place until the expiration of the term,
or until the election of a successor as hereinafter provided, whichever first happens.
But if the Houses of Parliament of the State are not in Session at the time when the
vacancy is notified, the Governor of the State, with the advice of the Executive
Council thereof, may appoint a person to hold the place until the expiration of
fourteen days after the beginning of the next Session of the Parliament of the State,
or until the election of a successor, whichever first happens.
At the next general election of members of the House of Representatives, or at
the next election of senators for the State, whichever first happens, a successor shall,
if the term has not then expired, be chosen to hold the place from the date of his
cdection until the expiration of the term.
The name of any senator so chosen or appointed shall be certified bv the Governor
of the State to the Governor-General.
Qualifications of Senator.
16. The qualifications of a senator shall be the same as'Those of a member of the
House of Representatives. ■ old
Election of President. 5
17. The Senate shall, before proceeding to the dispatch of any other business,
choose a senator to be the President of the Senate; and as often as the office of
Pi si dent becomes vacant the Senate shall again choose a senator to be the President.


The President shall cease to hold his office if he ceases to be a senator. He may
be removed from office by a vote of the Senate, or he may resign his office or his
scat by writing addressed to the Governor-General.
Absence of President.
18. Before or during any absence of the President, the Senate may choose a
senator to perform his duties in his absence.
Resignation of Senator.
19. A senator may, by writing addressed to the President, or to the Governor-
General if there is no President or if the President is absent from the Commonwealth,
resign his place, which thereupon shall become vacant.
Vacancy by Absence.
20. The place of a senator shall become vacant if for two consecutive months of
any Session of The Parliament he, without the permission of the Senate, fails to
attend the Senate.
Vacancy to be Notified.
21. Whenever a vacancy happens in the Senate, the President, or if there is no
President or if the President is absent from the Commonwealth, the Governor-
General, shall notify the same to the Governor of the State in the representation of
which the vacancy has happened.
Quorum.
22. Until The Parliament otherwise provides, the presence of at least one-third of
the whole number of the senators shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the
Senate for the exercise of its powers.
Voting in Senate.
23. Questions arising in the Senate shall he determined by a majority of votes, and
each senator shall have one vote. The President shall in all cases be entitled to a
vote; and when the votes are equal the question shall pass in the negative.
Part lll.—The House of Representatives.
Constitution of House of Representatives.
24. The House of Representatives shall be composed of members directly chosen
by the people of the Commonwealth, and the number of such members shall be, as
nearly as practicable, twice the number of the senators.
The number of members chosen in the several States shall he in proportion to the
respective numbers of their people, and shall, until The Parliament otherwise pro-
vides, be determined, whenever necessary, in the following manner :
x. A quota shall be ascertained by dividing the number of the people of tire
Commonwealth, as shown by the latest statistics of the Commonwealth, by
twice the number of the senators.
ii. The number of members to be chosen in each State shall he determined by
dividing the number of the people of the State, as shown by the lutes;
statistics of the Commonwealth, by the quota ; and if on such division there
is a remainder greater than one-half of the quota, one more member shal
be chosen in the State.


But notwithstanding anything in this section, five members at least shall be chosen
in each Original State.
Provisions as to Races Disqualified from Voting.
25. For the purposes of the last section, if by the law of any State all persons of
any race are disqualified from voting at elections for the more numerous House of
the Parliament of the State, then, in reckoning the number of the people of the State
or of the Commonwealth, persons of that race resident in that State shall not be
counted.
Representatives in First Parliament.
2G. Notwithstanding anything in section twenty-four the number of members to
be chosen in each State at the first election, shall be as follows: [7b he determined
according to latest statistical returns at the date of the passing of the Act , and in
relation to the quota referred to in previous sections .]
Alteration of Number of Members.
27. Subject to this Constitution, the Parliament may make laws for increasing or
diminishing the number of the members of the House of Representatives.
Duration of House of Representatives.
28. Every House of Representatives shall continue for three years from the first
meeting of the House, and no longer, hut may be sooner dissolved by the Governor-
General.
Electoral Divisions.
29. Until the Parliament of the Commonwealth otherwise provides, the Parlia-
ment of any State may make laws for determining the divisions in each State for
which members of the House of Representatives may be chosen, and the number o£
members to be chosen for each division. A division shall not be formed out of
parts of different States.
In the absence of other provision, each State shall he one electorate.
Qualification of Electors.
30. Until the Parliament otherwise provides, the qualification of electors of member,
of the House of Representatives shall be in each State that which is prescribed by
the law of the State as the qualification of electors of the more numerous House o|
the Parliament of the State ; but in the choosing of members each elector shall voir)
.-only once.
Application of State Laws.
31. Until the Parliament otherwise provides, but subject to this Constitution, th*
laws in force in each State for the time being relating to elections for the more
numerous House of the Parliament of the State shall, as nearly as practicable, apply
to elections in the State of members of the House of Representatives.
Writs for General Election.
32. The Governor-General in Council may cause writs to be issued for geneiai
elections of members of the House of Representatives.
After the first general election, the writs shall he issued within ten days from the
expiry of a House of Representatives, or from the proclamation of a dissolution
thereof.


s foi’ Vacancies.
33. Whenever a vacancy happens in the House of Representatives, the Speaker
shall issue his writ for the election of a new member, or if there is no Speaker, or if
he is absent from the Commonwealth, the Governor-General in Council may issue the
writ.
Qualifications of Members.
34. Until The Parliament otherwise provides, the qualifications of a member of the
House of Representatives shall be as follows :
i. He must be of the full age of twenty-one 3 ears, and must be an elector entitled
to vote at the election of members of the House of Representatives, or a
person qualified to become such elector, and must have been for three years
at the least a resident within the limits of the Commonwealth as existing at
the time when he is chosen ;
ti. lie must be a subject of the Queen, either natural-born or for at least five
3'ears naturalised under a law of the United Kingdom, or of a Colon}' which
has become or becomes a State, or of the Commonwealth, or of a State.
Election of Speaker.
35. The House of Representatives shall, before proceeding to the dispatch of an}'
other business, choose a member to be the Speaker of the House, and as often as the
office of Speaker becomes vacant the House shall again choose a member to be the
Speaker.
The Speaker shall cease to hold his office if he ceases to be a member. He may
be removed from office by a vote of the House, or he may resign bis office or bis seat
by writing addressed to the Governor-General.
36. Before or during any absence of the Speaker, the House of Representatives
may choose a member to perform his duties in bis absence.
Absence of Speaker. Resignation of Member.
37. A member may by writing addressed to the Speaker, or to the Governor-
General if there is no Speaker or if the Speaker is absent from the Commonwealth,
resign his place, which thereupon shall become vacant.
Vacancy by Absence.
38. The place of a member shall become vacant if for two consecutive months of
any Session of The Parliament be, without the permission of the House, fails to
attend the House.
Quorum.
39. Until The Parliament otherwise provides, the presence of at least one-third of
the whole number of the members of the House of Representatives shall be necessary
to constitute a meeting of the House for the exercise of its powers.
Voting in House of Representatives.
40. Questions arising in the House of Representatives shall be determined by a
majority of votes other than tint of the Speaker. The Speaker shall not vote unless
the numbers are equal, and then he shall have a casting vote.


Part IV. —Both Houses of The Parliament.
Tight of Electors of Stales.
41. Xo adult person who has or acquires a right to vote at elections for the more
numerous House of the Parliament of a State, shall, while the right continues, be
prevented by any law of the Commonwealth from voting at elections for either House
of the Parliament of the Commonwealth.
Oath or Affirmation of Allegiance. Schedule.
42. Every senator and every member of the House of Representatives shall before
taiving his seat make and subscribe before the Governor-General, or some person
authorised by him, an oath or affirmation of allegiance in the form set forth in the
Schedule.
Member of one House ineligible for other.
43, A member of either House of the Parliament shall be incapable of being
chosen or of sitting as a member of the other House.
Disqualification.
44. Any person who—■
i. Is under auj acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience, or adherence to a
foreign power, or is a subject or a citizen or entitled to the rights or
privileges ot a subject or a citizen of a foreign power ; or
it. Is attained of treason, or has been convicted and is under sentence, or sub-
ject to he sentenced, for any offence punishable under the law of the
vxmiinonwealth or of a State by imprisonment lor one year or longer: or
m. Ts an undischarged bankrupt or insolvent: or
it. Holds any office of profit under the Grown, or any pension payable during
the pleasure of the Crown out of any of the revenues of the Common-
weal: h; or
t. Has any direct or indirect, pecuniary interest in any agreement with the
public- service of tnc Commonwealth, otherwise than as a member and in
common with the other members of an incorporated company consisting
of more than twenty-five persons:
shall be incapable of being chosen or of sitting as a senator or as a member of th,
H ouse of Representatives.
But sub-section iv. docs not apply to the office of any of the Queen’s Ministers of
State the Commonwealth, or of any of the Queen’s Ministers for a State, or to the
receipt of pay, half-pay, or a pension by any person as an officer or member of the
Queen s navy or army, or to the receipt of pay as au officer or member of the naval
oi mnitaiy forces of the Commonwealtn by any person whose services are not wholly
employed by the Commonwealth.
acancy on happening of Disqualification.
45. If a senator or memuer of the House of Representatives—
i. Become subject to any of the disabilities mentioned in the last preceding
section : or
51 i ' i>es Die benefit, whether by assignment, composition, or otherwise, ol
au} lii« relating to bankrupt or insolvent debtors : c j


!U Directly or indirectly takes or agrees to take any fee or honorarium for
services rendered to the Commonwealth or for services rendered m the
Parliament to any person or State :
his place shall thereupon become vacant.
Penally for Sitting when Disqualified.
46. Until The Parliament otherwise provides, any person declared by tins Consti-
tution to be incapable of sitting as a senator or as a member of the House oi Repre-
sentatives shall, for every day on which he so sits, be liable to pay the sum 0.. one
hundred pounds to any person who sues for it in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Disputed Elections.
47 Until the Parliament otherwise provides, any question respecting the qualifica-
tion of a senator or of a member of the House of Representatives,_or respecting
vacancy in either House of The-Parliamcnt, and any question of a disputed clcctioi
to either House, shall be determined by the House in which the question arises.
Allowance to Members.
48. Until The Parliament otherwise provides, each senator and each member of
the House of Representatives shall receive an allowance of four hundred pouncs a
year, to be reckoned from the day on which he takes his seat.
Privileges, See., of Houses.
49. The powers, privileges, and immunities of the Senate and of tne House of
Representatives, and of the members and the committees of each House, shall he
such as are declared by The Parliament, and until declared shall be those of the
Commons House of Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members and
committees, at the establishment of the Commonwealth.
Rules and Orders.
50. Each House of The Parliament may make rules and orders with respect to—
I. The mode in which its powers, privileges, and immunities may he exercised and
upheld:
n. The order and conduct of its business and proceedings either separately or
jointly with the other House.
Part V.— Powers or The Paei.iamext.
Legislative Powers of The Parliament.
51. The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have power to make laws
for the peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth, with respect to
q nu.e and commerce with other countries, and among the Stales :
ir. Taxation; but so as not to discriminate between States or parts of
States :
in. p ounties on the production cr export of goods, but so teat such counties
shall he uniform throughout the Commonwealth ;
iv. Borrowing money on the public credit of the Commonwealth;


Postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and other like services ;
The naval and military defence of the Commonwealth and of the seunaj.
States, and the control of the forces to execute and maintain the laws
of the Commonwealth:
Lighthouses, lightships, beacons, and buoys:
Astronomical and meteorological observations:
VIII.
Quarantine :
Fisheries in Australian waters beyond territorial limits:
■%
Census and statistics:
XI.
xir.
Currency, coinage, and legal tender :
Xin. Banking, other than State banking ; also Slate banking extending
beyond the limits of the State concerned, the incorporation of banks,
and the issue of paper money :
xiv. Insurance, other than State insurance; also State insurance extending
beyond the limits of the State concerned.
xv. Weights and measures :
xvi. Bills of exchange and promissory notes
xvii. Bankruptcy and insolvency :
xviii. Copyrights, patents of inventions and designs, and trade marks
xix. Naturalization and aliens :
xx. Foreign corporations, and trading or financial corporations formed
within the limits of the Commonwealth ;
Marriage :
xxii. Divorce and matrimonial causes; and in relation thereto, parental rights
and the custody and guardianship of infants:
xxin. Invalid and old-age pensions ;
exit. The service and execution throughout the Commonwealth of tnc civil
and criminal process and the'judgments of the courts of the States :
Xxv. The recognition throughout the Commonwealth or the laws, the public
acts and records, and the judicial proceedings of the States :
sxvi. The people of any 7 race, other than the aboriginal race in any State, for
whom it is deemed necessary to make special laws :
xxvii. Immigration and emigra.ion:
xxni l. The influx of criminals :
xxix. External affairs:
xxx. The relations of the Commonwealth with the islands of tftc Pacific;
xxxr. The acquisition of property on just terms from any State or person for
any purpose in respect of which The Parliament has power to make
laws;


xxxii. The control of railways with respect to transport for the naval and
military purposes of the Commonwealth :
xxxxii. ihe acquisition, with the consent of a State, of any railways of the
State on terms arranged between the Commonwealth and the State :
xxxiv. Railway construction and extension in any State with the consent of
that State:
xxxv. Conciliation and arbitration for the jorevention and settlement of
industrial disputes extending beyond the limits of any one State :
Xxxvi. Matters in respect of which this Constitution makes provision until The
Parliament otherwise provides :
xxxvn. Matters referred to The Parliament of the Commomvealth by the
Parliament or Parliaments of any Slate or States, but so that the
law r shall extend only to States by whose Parliaments the matter is
referred, or which afterwards adopt the law:
Xxxvm. The exercise within the Commonwealth, at the request or with the con-
currence of the Parliaments of all the States directly concerned, of
any power which can at the establishment of this Constitution be
exercised only by the Parliament of the United Kingdom or by the
Federal Council of Australasia:
xxxix. Matters incidental to the execution of any pow'erjested by this Con-
stitution in The Parliament or in either House thereof, or in the
Government of the Commonwealth, or in the Federal Judicature, or
in any department or officer of the Commonwealth.
Exclusive Powers of The Parliament.
62. The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have exclusive power to
leake law's for the peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth with
leepect to —
i. The seat of Government of the Commonwealth, and all places acquired by
the Commonwealth for public purposes :
ii. Matters relating to any department of the public service the control of which
is by this Constitution transferred to the Executive Government of the
Commomvealth:
in. Other matters declared by this Constitution to be vathin the exclusive power
of The Parliament.
Powers of the Houses in respect of Legislation.
63. Proposed laws appropriating revenue or moneys, or imposing taxation, shall
uot originate in the Senate. But a proposed law shall not be taken to appropriate
revenue or moneys, or to impose taxation, by reason only of its containing provisions
for the imposition or appropriation of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the
demand or payment or appropriation ct jees for licences, or fees for services under
the proposed law.
The Senate may not amend proposed laws imposing taxation, or proposed laws
appropriating revenue or moneys for the ordinary annual sendees of the Government.
The Senate may not amend any proposed law so as to incicase any proposed charge
n burden on the lieonle.


Commonwealth of Australia Constitution. W
The Senate may at any stage return to the House of Representatives any proposal
law which the Senate may not amend, requesting, by message, the omission of amend#
ment of any items or provisions therein. And the House of Representatives may H
it thinks fit make any of such omissions or amendments, with or without modifica-
tions.
Except as provided in this section, the Senate shall have equal power with ths
House of Representatives in respect of all proposed laws.
Appropriation Bills.
54, The proposed law 'which revenue or moneys for the ordinarj
annual services of the Government shall deal only with such appropriation.
Tax Bills.
55. Laws imposing taxation shall deal only with the imposition of taxation, and
any provision therein dealing with any other matter shall be of no effect.
Laws imposing taxation, except laws imposing duties of Customs or of Excise, shall
deal with one subject of taxation only; but laws imposing duties of Customs shall
deal with duties of Customs only, and laws imposing duties of Excise shall deal with,
duties of Excise only.
B,ecommendation of Money Votes.
56. A vote, resolution, or proposed law for the appropriation of revenue or moneys
shall not be passed unless the purpose of the appropriation has in the same Session
has been recommended by message of the Governor-General to the House in which
the proposal originated.
Disagreement between the Houses.
57. If the House of Representatives passes any proposed law, and the Senate
rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it with amendments to which the House of
Representatives will not agree, and if after an interval of three months the House of
Representatives, in the same or the next Session, again passes the proposed law with
or without any amendments which have been made, suggested, or agreed to by the
Senate, and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it with amendments to
which the House of Representatives will not agree, the Governor-General may
dissolve the Senate and the House of Representatives simultaneously. But such
dissolution shall not take place within six months before the date of the expiry of the
House of Representatives by effluxion of time.
If after such dissolution the House of Representatives again passes,the proposed
law with or without any amendments which have been made, suggested, or agreed to
by the Senate, and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it with amendments
to which the House of Representatives will not agree, the Governor-General may
convene a joint sitting of the members of the Senate and or the House of Repre-
sentatives.
The Members present at the joint sitting may deliberate and shall vote together
upon the proposed law as last proposed by the House of Representatives, and upon
amendments, if any, which have been made therein by one House and not agreed to
by the other, and any such amendments which are affirmed by tbree-fiftbs of the
members present and voting thereon shall be taken to have been carried, and if the
proposed law, with the amendments, if any, so carried is affirmed by three-fifths
of the members present and voting thereon, it shall be taken to have been duly passed
bv both Houses of the Parliament, ana shall be presented to the Governor-General
for the Queen’s assent.
, ■ S


.Royal Assent to Bills.
68. When a proposed law passed by both Houses of the Parliament is presented
to the Governor-General for the Queen’s assent, he shall declare, according to his
discretion, but subject to this Constitution, that he assents in the Queen’s name, or
that he witholds assent, or that he reserves the law for the Queen’s pleasure.
Recommendations by Governor-General.
The Governor-General may return to the House in which it originated any
proposed law so presented to him, and may transmit therewith any amendments
which he may recommend, and the Houses may deal with the recommendation.
Disallowance by tie Queen.
69. The Queen may disallow any law within one year from the Governor-General's
assent, and such disallowance, on being made known by the Governor-General by
ipeech or message to each of the Houses of The Parliament, or by Proclamation,
•hall annul the law r from the day when the disallowance is so made known.
Signification o£ Queen’s Pleasure on Bill reserved.
60. A proposed law reserved for the Queen’s pleasure shall not have any force
unless and until within two years from the day on which it was presented to the
Governor-General for the Queen’s assent the Governor-General makes known, by
•peech or message to each of the Houses of The Parliament, or by Proclamation,
that it has received the Queen’s assent.
CHAPTER 11.
THE EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT.
Executive Power.
61. The executive power of the Commonwealth is vested in the Queen, and is
exercisable by the Governor-General as the Queen’s representative, and extends to
the execution and maintenance of this Constitution, and of the laws of the Common-
wealth.
Federal Executive Council.
62. There shall bea Federal Executive Council to advise the Governor-General in
the government of the Commonwealth, and the members of the Council shall be
chosen and summoned by the Governor-General and sworn as Executive Councillors,
and shall hold office during his pleasure.
Provisions referring to Governor-General.
63. The provisions of this Constitution referring to the Governor-General in
Council shall be construed as referring to the Governor-General acting with tha
advice of the Federal Executive Couryjjl.
Ministers of State.
64. The Governor-General may appoint officers to administer such Departments of
State of the Commonwealth as the Governor-General in Council may establish.
Such officers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor-General. They
shall be members of the Federal Executive Council, and shall be the Queen’s
Ministers of State for the Commonwealth.


Ministers to sit in Parliament.
After the first general election no Minister of State shall hold office for a longer
period than three months unless he is or becomes a Senator or a member of the
House of Representatives.
umber of Ministers.
65. Until The Parliament otherwise provides, the Ministers of State shall not
exceed seven in number, and shall hold such offices as The Parliament prescribes, or,
in the absence of provision, as the Governor-General directs.
Salaries of Ministers.
66. There shall be payable to the Queen, out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of
the Commonwealth, for the salaries of the Ministers of State, an annual sum which,
until The Parliament otherwise provides, shall not exceed Twelve Thousand Pounds a
year.
Appointment of Civil Servants.
67. Until The Parliament otherwise, provides, the appointment and removal of all
other officers of the Executive Government of the Commonwealth shall be vested in
the Governor-General in Council, unless the appointment is delegated by the Governor-
General in Council or by a law of the Commonwealth to some other authority.
Command of is'aval and Military Forces.
68. Ihe command in chief of the naval and military forces cf the Commonwealth
is vested in the Governor-General as the Queen’s representative.
Transfer of Certain Departments.
69. On a date or dates to be proclaimed by the Governor-General after the estab-
lishment of the Commonwealth, the following departments of the public service iu
each State shall become transferred to the Commonwealth ;
Posts, telegraphs, and telephones:
Naval and military defence:
Lighthouses, lightships, beacons, and buoys;
Quarantine.
But the departments of Customs and of Excise in each State shall become trans-
ferred.to the Commonwealth on its establishment.
Certain Powers of Governors to vest in Governor-General.
iO. In respect of matters which, under tills Constitution, pass to the Executive
Government of the Commonwealth, all powers and functions'which at the establish-
ment of the Commonwealth are vested in the Governor of a colony, or in the Governor
of a colony with the advice of his Executive Council, or in any authority of a colony,
shall vest in the Governor-General, or in the Governor-General iu Council, or : ‘he
mnnoiuj exeicising similar powers under the Commonwealth, as the case rec^uirco.
CHAPTER 111.
THE JUDICATURE.
Judicial Per* or and Points,
7* The judicial power of the Commonwealth shall he vested in a Federal Supreme
Court, to be called the High Couit of Australia, and iu suca other federal comts'as


The Parliament creates, ana in such other courts as it invests with federal iyisdio-
tion. The High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice, and so many other Justices,
not less than two, as The Parliament prescribes.
Judges’ Appointment, Tenure, and Remuneration.
72. The Justices of the High Court and of the other courts created by the
Parliament —
i. Shall he appointed by the Governor-General in Council:
ii Shall not be removed except by the Governor-General in Council, on an
address from both Houses of The Parliament in the same Session praying
for such removal on the grounds of proved misbehaviour or incapacity :
in Shall receive such remuneration as The Parliament may fix; but the
remuneration shall not be diminished during their continuance in othce.
Appellate Jurisdiction of High Court.
73 The Hioh Court shall have jurisdiction, with such exceptions and subject to
such regulations as The Parliament prescribes, to hear and determine appeals from
all judgments, decrees, orders, and sentences .
i. Of any Justice or Justices exercising the original jurisdiction of the High
Court:
n. Of any other federal court, or court exercising federal jurisdiction; or of the
Supreme Court of any State, or of any other court of any State from which
at the establishment of the Commonwealth an appeal lies to the Queen in
Council:
in. Of the Inter-State Commission, but as to questions of law,only :
‘and the judgment of the High Court in all such cases shall be final and conclusive.
But no exception or regulation prescribed by The Parliament shall prevent the
Hio-h Court from hearing and determining any appeal from the Supreme Court of a
State in any matter in which at the establishment of the Commonwealth an appeal
lies from such Supreme Court to the Queen in Council.
Until The Parliament otherwise provides, the conditions of and restrictions on
aupeals to the Qu- eu in Council from the Supreme Courts of the several States sua,i
be applicable to appeals from them to the High Court.
Appeals to Queen in Council.
74 No appeal shall be permitted to the Queen in Council in any matter involving
the interpretation of this Constitution or of the Constitution or a State, unless the
puhli: interests of some part of Her Majesty’s Dominions, other than the Common-
wealth or a State, are involved.
Except as provided in this section, this Constitution shall not impair any right
whichte Queen may be pleased to exercise, by virtue of Her Royal Prerogative o
grant special leave of appeal from the High Court to Her Majesty m Council. Li t
The Parliament may make laws limiting the matters m which such leave may be as*ed.


Original Jurisdiction of High Court.
75. In all matters—
I. Arising under any treaty:
n. Affecting consuls, or other representatives of other countries;
in. In which the Commonwealth, or a person suing or being sued on behalf of
the Commonwealth, is a party :
it. Between States, or between residents of different States, or between a State
and a resident of another State :
y. In which a writ of mandamus or prohibition or an injunction is sought
against an officer of the Commonwealth :
the High Court shall have original jurisdiction.
Additional Original Jurisdiction.
76. The Parliament may make laws conferring original jurisdiction on the High
Court in any matter —
I. Arising under this Constitution, or involving its interpretation:
ii. Arising under any laws made by The Parliament:
in. Of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction :
iv. Relating to the same subject-matter claimed under the hrws of different States.
Power to Define Jurisdiction.
77. "With respect to any of the matters mentioned in the last two sections, The
Parliament may make laws—
i. Defining the jurisdiction of any federal court other than the High Court:
ir. Defining the extent to which the jurisdiction of any federal court shall be
exclusive of that which belongs to or is vested in the courts of the States:
Hi. Investing any court of a State with federal jurisdiction.
Proceedings against Commonwealth or State.
78. The Parliament may make laws conferring rights to proceed against the
Commonwealth or a State in respect of matters within the limits of the judical
power.
Number of Judges.
79. The federal jurisdiction of any court may he exercised by such number of
judges as The Parliament prescribes.
Trial by Jury.
80. The trial on indictment of any offence against any law of the Commonwealth
shall he by jury, and every such trial shall be held in the State where the offence was
copimitted, and if the offence was not committed within any State the trial shall be
held at such place or places as The Parliament prescribes.


CHAPTER IY.
FINANCE AND TRADE.
Consolidate! Revenue Fund.
81. All revenues or moneys raised or received by the Executive Government of
the Commonwealth shall form one Consolidated Revenue bund, to be appropriated
for the purposes of the Commonwealth in the manner and subject to the chaiges and
liabilities imposed by this Constitution.
Expenditure Charged Thereon.
82. The costs, charges, and expenses incident to the collection, management, and
receipt of the Consolidated Revenue Fund shall form the first chaige theieon , and
the revenue of the Commonwealth shall in the first instance be applied to the pay-
ment of the expenditure of the Commonwealth.
Money to he Appropriated hy Law'.
83 No money shall be drawn from the .treasury of the Commonwealth except
under appropriation made hy law.
Rut until the expiration of one month after the first meeting of The Parliament the
Governor-General in Council may draw from the Treasury and expend such moneys
as may he necessary for the maintenance of any department transferred to the
Commonwealth and for the holding of the first elections for The Parliament.
Transfer of Officers.
84. When any department of the public service of a State becomes transferred to
the Commonwealth, all officers of the department shall become subject to the control
of the Executive Government of the Commonwealth.
Any such officer who is not retained in the service of the Commonwealth shall,
unless he is appointed to some other office of equal emolument in-the public service
of the State, be entitled to receive from the State any pension, gratuity, or other com-
pensation payable under the law of the State on tne abolition of his office.
Any such 'officer who Is retained in the service of the Commonwealth shall preserve
all his existing and accruing rights, and shall be entitled to retire from office at the
time, and ou the pension dr retiring allowance, which would be permitted by the law
of the Stale if bis service with the Commonwealth were a continuation of lus service
with the State. Such pension or retiring allowance shall be paid to him by the
Commonwealth : but the State shall pay to the Commonwealth a part thereof, to be
calculated on the proportion which his term of service with the State bears to his
whole term of service, and for the purpose of the calcination his salaiy shah be taxen
to be that paid to him b) T the State at the time of the transfer.
Any officer who is, at the establishment of the Commonwealth, in the public service
of a State, and who is, bv consent of the Governor oi the State witn the advice of tne
Executive C ouncil thereof, transferred to the public scivice of the Commonwealta,
shall have the s.me rights as if he bad been an officer of a department transferred to
the Commonwealth and were retained in the service of tne Commonwealth.
Transfer of Property of State.
85. When any department of the public service of a State is transferred to the
Commonwealth. —


i. All property of the State, of any hind, used exclusively m connection with
the department, shall become vested in the Commonwealth; but, in the
case of" the departments controlling Customs and Excise and Bounties, tor
such time only as the Governor-General in Council may declare to 00
necessary.
11. The Commonwealth may acquire any property of the State, of any kind, used,
but not exclusively used, in connection with the department; the vauie
thereof shall, if no agreement can be made, he ascertained in, as nearly as
may he, the manner in which the value of land, or of an interest in land,
taken by the State for public purposes is ascertained under the law of the
State in force at the establishment of the Coinnionwcaltu.
m. The Commonwealth shall compensate the State for the value of any property
nassim* - to the Commonwealth under this section; if no agreement can be
made as to the mode of compensation, it shall be determined under laws to
be made by The Parliament.
it. The Commonwealth shall, at the date of the transfer, assume the current
obligations of the State in respect of the department transferred.
On the establishment of the Commonwealth, the collection and control of
duties of Customs and of Excise, and the control of the payment of bounties, shall
pass to the Executive Government of the Commonwealtn.
87. Of the net revenue of the Commonwealth from duties of Customs and ot
Excise, not more than one-fouith shall be applied annually by the Commonwealth
towards its expenditure.
The balance shall, in accordance with this Constitution, be paid to the several
States, or applied towards the payment of interest on debts ot the several States
taken over by the Commonwealth.
Uniform Duties of Customs.
88. Uniform duties of Customs shall he imposed within two years after the estau-
lishmeut of the Commonwealth.
Payment to Slates before Uniform Duties.
19. Until the imposition of uniform duties of Customs—
1. Tire Commonwealth shall credit to each State the revenues collected therein
by the Commonwealth.
IX. The Commonwealth shall debit to each State
(a) Tim expenditure therein of the Commonwealth incurred solely'’ for
me maintenance or continuance, as at the time of transfer, of any
department transfer!ed from the Stale to the Commonwealth:
(£) The proportion of the State, according to the number of its people,
in the other expenditure of the Commonwealth.
111. The Commonwealth shall pay to each State month by month tne ualanot.
(pf any! in favor of the Slaw.


Exclusive Power over Customs, Excise, and Bounties.
90. On the imposition of uniform duties of Customs the power of The Parliament
to impose duties of Customs and of Excise, and to grant bounties on the production
or export of goods, shall become exclusive.
On the imposition of uniform duties of Customs all laws of the several States
imposing duties of Customs or of Excise, or offering bounties on tlie production or
export of goods, shall cease to have effect; but any grant of or agreement fur any
such bounty lawfully made by or under the authority of the Government of any
State shall be taken to be good if made before the thirtieth day of June, one
thousand eight hundred and ninety-eight, and not otherwise.
Exceptions as to Bounties.
91. Nothing in this Constitution prohibits a State from granting any aid to or
bounty on mining for gold, silver, or other metals, nor for granting, with the consent
of both Houses of 'lhe Parliament of the Commonwealth expressed by resolution,
any aid to or bounty on the production or export of goods.
Trade within the Commonweafth to be Free.
92. On the imposition of uniform duties of Customs, trade, commerce, and inter-
course among the States, whether by means of internal carriage or ocean navigation,
shall be absolutely free. I
But notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, goods imported before the
imposition of uniform duties of Customs into any State, or into any colony which,
whilst the goods remain therein, becomes a State, shall, on thence passing into
another State within two years after the imposition of such duties, be liable to any
duty chargeable on the importation of such goods into the Commonwealth, less any
duty paid in respect of the goods on their importation.
Payment to States for Five Years after Uniform Tariffs.
93. During the first five years after the imposition of uniform duties of Customs,
and thereafter until The Parliament otherwise provides—
I. The duties of Customs chargeable on goods imported into a State and after-
wards passing into another State for consumption, and the duties of Excise
paid on goods produced or manufactured in a State and afterwards passing
into another State for consumption, shall he taken to have been collected
not in the former but in the latter State:
li. Subject to the last sub-section, the Commonwealth shall credit revenue, debit
expenditure, and pay balances to the several States as prescribed for the
period preceding the imposition of uniform duties of Customs.
Distribution of Surplus.
94. After five j’ears from the imposition of uniform duties of Customs, The
Parliament may provide, on such basis as it deems fair, for the monthly payment to
the several States of all surplus revenue of the Commonwealth.
Customs Duties of Western Australia.
95. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Parliament of the State of
YVestern Australia may. during the first five years after the imposition cf uniform
duties of Customs, impose duties of Custom- on goods passing into that State and net


originally imported from beyond the limits of the Commonwealth; and such duties
shall be collected by the Commonwealth.
But any duty so imposed on any goods shall not exceed during the first of such
years the duty chargeable on the goods under the law of Western Australia in force at
the imposition of uniform duties, and shall not exceed during the second, third,
fourth, and fifth of such years respectively, four-fifths, three-fifths, two fifths, and
one-fifth of such latter duty, and all duties imposed under this section shall cease
at the expiration of the fifth year after the imposition of uniform duties.
If at any time during the five years the duty on any goods under this section is
higher than the duty imposed by the Commonwealth on the importation of the like
goods, then such higher duty shall be collected on the goods when imported into
Western Australia from beyond the limits of the Commonwealth.
Audit.
96. Until The Parliament otherwise provides, the laws in force in any colony which
has become or becomes a State with respect to the receipt of revenue and the ex-
penditure of money on account of the Government of the colony, and the review and
audit of such receipt and expenditure, shall apply to the receipt of revenue and the
expenditure of money on account of the Commonwealth in the State in the same
manner as if the Commonwealth, or the Government or an officer of the Common-
wealth, were mentioned whenever the colony, or the Government or an officer of the
colony, is mentioned.
Trade and Commerce includes Navigation and State hail ways.
97. The power of The Parliament to make laws with respect to trade and commerce
extends to navigation and shipping, and to railways the property of any State.
Commonwealth not to give Preference.
98. The Commonwealth shall not, by any law or regulation of trade, commerce, or
revenue, give preference to one State or any part thereof over another State or any
part thereof.
Nor abridge Eight to use Water.
99. The Commonwealth shall not, by any law or regulation of trade or commerce,
abridge the right of a State or of the residents therein to the reasonable use of the
waters of rivers for conservation or irrigation.
Inter-State Commission.
100. There shall he an Inter-State Commission, with such powers of adjudication
and administration as the Parliament deems necessary for the execution and main-
tenance, within the Commonwealth, of the provisions of this Constitution relating to
trade and commerce, and of all laws made thereunder.
Parliament may forbid Preferences by States.
101. The Parliament may by any law' with respect to trade or commerce forbid,
ns to railways, any preference or discrimination by any State, or by any authority
constituted under a State, if such preference or discrimination is undue and unreason-
able, or unjust to any State; due regard being bad to the financial responsibilities
incurred by any State in connection with the construction and maintenance of its
railways. But no preference or discrimination -shall,.within the meaning of ibis
section, be taken to be undue and unreasonable, or unjust to any State, unless so
adjudged by the Inter-State Commission,


Commissioners* Appointment, Tenure, and -Remuneration.
102. The members of the Inter-State Commission—
i. Shall be appointed by the Governor-General in Council:
ti. Shall hold office for seven years, but may be removed within that time by
the Governor-General in Council, on an address from both Houses of The
Parliament in the same Session praying for such removal on the ground
of proved misbehaviour or incapacity :
ni. Shall receive such remuneration as The Parliament may fix ; but such
remuneration shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.
Saving of certain Rates.
103. Nothing in this Constitution shall render unlawful any rate for the carriage
of goods upon a railway, the property of a State, if the rate is deemed by the Inter-
State Commission to be necessary for the development of the territory of the State,
and if the rate applies equally to. goods within the State and to goods passing into
tiie State from other States.
Taking over Public Debts of States.
104. The Parliament may take over from the States their public debts as existing
at the'establishment of the Commonwealth, or a proportion thereof according to the
respective numbers of their people as shown by the latest statistics of the Common-
wealth, and may convert, renew, or consolidate such debts or any part thereof; and
the States shall indemnify the Commonwealth in respect of the debts taken over, and
thereafter the interest payable in respect of the debts shall be deducted and retained
from the portions of the surplus revenue of the Commonwealth payable to the several
States, or if such surplus is insufficient, or if there is no surplus, then the deficiency
or the whole amount shall be paid by the several States.
CHAPTER V.
THE STATES.
Saving of Constitutions.
105. The Constitution of each State of the Commonwealth shall, subject to this
Constitution, continue as at the establishment of the Commonwealth, or as at the
admission or establishment of the State, as the case may be, until altered in
accordance with the Constitution of the State.
Saving of Powers of State Parliaments.
106. Every power of the Parliament of a colony which has become or becomes a
State, shall, unless it is by this Constitution exclusively vested in the Parliament of
the Commonwealth or withdrawn from the Parliament of the State, continue as at the
establishment of the Commonwealth, or as at the admission or establishment of the
State, as the case may he.
Saving of Slate Laws.
107. Every law in force in a colony which has become or-becomes a State, and
relating to any matter within the powers of The Parliament of the Commonwealth,
shall, subject to this Constitution, continue in force in the State; and, until provision
is made in that behalf by The Parliament of the Commonwealth, the Parliament of
the State shall have such powers of alteration and of repeal in respect of any such
law as tiie Parliament of the colony had until the colony became a State.


Inconsistency of Laws.
108. When a law of a State is inconsistent with a law of the Commonwealth, t' e
latter shall prevail, and the former shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, he invalid.
Provisions referring to Governor.
109. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the Governor of a State extend
and apply to the Governor for the time being of the State, or other chief executive
officer or administrator of the government of the State.
States may Surrender Territory.
110. The Parliament of a State may surrender any part of the State to the
Commonwealth; and upon such surrender, and the acceptance thereof by the
Commonwealth, such part of the State shall become subject to the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Commonwealth.
states may Levy Charges for Inspection Laws.
111. After uniform duties of Customs have been mposwd, a State may levy on
imports or exports, or on goods passing into or out of the State, such charges as may
be necessary for executing the inspection laws ot the State; but the net produce of
all charges so levied shall be for the use of the Commonwealth ; and any such inspec-
tion laws may be annulled by The Parliament ot the Commonwealth.
Intoxicating Liquids.
112. All fermented, distilled, or other intoxicating liquids passing into any State
or remaining therein for use, consumption, sale, or storage shall be subject to the
laws of the State as if such liquids had been produced in the State.
States may not Raise Forces. —Taxation of Property of Commonwealth or State.
113. A State shall not, without the consent of The Parliament of the Common-
wealth, raise or maintain any naval or military force, or impose any tax on property
of any kind belonging to the Commonwealth : nor shall the Commonwealth impose
any tax on property of any kind belonging to a State.
States not to Coin Money.
114, A State shall not coin money, nor make anything but gold and silver coin a
legal tender in payment of debts.
Commonwealth not to Legislate in Respect of Religion.*
115. The Commonwealth shall not make any law for establishing any religion, or
for imposing any religions observance, or for prohibiting the free exercise of any
religion, and no religious lest shall be required as a qualification for any office or
public trust under the Commonwealth.
Rights of Residents in States.
116. A subject of the Queen, resident in any State, shall not be subject in aoy
other State to any disability or discrimination which would not be equally applicable
to him if he were a subject of the Queen resident in such other State.
Recognition of T aws, of Slates.
117. Full faith and credit shall be given, throughout the Commonwealth, to the
laws, the public acts andpecords, and the judicial proceedings, ot everv state-.


Protection of States from Invasion and Violence.
118. Phe Commonwealth shall protect every State against invasion and, on the
application to the Executive Government of the State, against domestic violence.
Custody of Offenders against Laws of the Commonwealth.
119. Every State shall make provision for the detention in its prisons of persons
accused or convicted of offences against the laws of the Commonwealth, and for the
punishment of persons convicted of such offences, and The Parliament of the Common-
wealth may make law's to give effect to this provision.
CHAPTER VI.
NEW STATES.
New States may he admitted or established.
120. The Parliament may admit to the Commonwealth or establish new States,
ana may upon such admission or establishment make or impose such terms and con-
ditions, including the extent of representation in either House of The Parliament, as
it thinks fit.
Government of Territories.
121. Phe Parliament may make laws for the government of any territory
surrendered by any State to and accepted by the Commonwealth, or of any territory
placed by the Queen under the authority of and accepted by the Commonwealth, or
otherwise acquired by the Commoxrwealth, and may allow the representation of such
territory in either Plouse of Ihe Parliament to the extent and on the terms which it
thinks fit.
Alteration of Limits of States.
122. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may, with the consent of the Parlia-
ment of a State, increase, diminish, or otherwise alter the limits of the State, upon
such terms and conditions as may be agreed on, and may, with the like consent,
make provision respecting the effect and operation of any increase or diminution or
alteration of territory in relation to any State affected,
Formation of New States.
123. A new State may be formed by separation of territory from a State, but only
with the consent of the Parliament'thereof, and a new State may be formed by the
union of two or more States or parts of States, but only with the consent of the
Parliaments of the States affected.
CHAPTER VII.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Seat of Government.
124. The seat of Government of the Commonwealth shall be determined by The
Parliament and shall be within territory vested in the Commonwealth.
Until such determination The Parliament shall he summoned to meet at such place
within the Commonwealth as a majority of the Governors of the States, or, in the
event of an equal division of opinion among thi Governors, as the Governor-General
shall direct.


Power to Her Majesty to authorise Governor-General to appoint Deputies.
125. The Queen may authorise the Governor-General to appoint any person, or
any persons jointly or severally, to be his deputy or deputies within any part of the
Commonwealth, and in that capacity to exercise during the pleasure ox the Governor-
General such powers and functions of the Governor-General as he thinks fit to
assign to such deputy or deputies, subject to any limitations expressed or directions
given by the Queen ; hut the appointment of such deputy or deputies shall not affect
the exercise by the Governor-General himself of any power or function.
Aborigines not to be counted in reckoning Population.
125. In reckoning the numbers of the people of the Commonwealth, or of a State
or other part of the Commonwealth, aboriginal natives shall not be counted.
CHAPTER VIII.
ALTERATION OF THE CONSTITUTION.
Mode of Altering the Constitution.
127. This Constitution shall not be altered except in the following manner
The proposed law for the alteration thereof must be passed by an absolute
majority of each House of The Parliament, and not less than twm nor more than
six months after its passage through both Houses the proposed law shall be
submitted in each State to the electors qualified to vote for the election of members
of the House of Representatives.
The vote shall be taken in such manner as The Parliament prescribes. But until
the qualification of electors of members of the House of Representatives becomes
uniform throughout the Commonwealth only one-half the electors voting for and
against the proposed law shall be counted in any State in which adult suffrage
prevails.
And if in a majority of the States a majority of the electors voting approve the
proposed law, and if a majority of all the electors voting also approve the proposed
law, it shall be presented to the Governor-General for the Queen’s assent.
An alteration diminishing the proportionate representation of any State in either
House of the Parliament, or the minimum number of representatives of a State in the
House of Representatives, shall not become law unless the majority of the electors
voting in that State approve the proposed law.
crop
Min no
xfiißOv
mim
ora Ii :
: 9/11
m


THE SCHEDULE.
OA TH.
f, A. 8., do swear that I will bo faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Victoria,
Her heirs and successors according to law. So help me Goo !
AFFIRMATION.
I, A.B , do solemnly and sincerely affiim and declare that I will he faithful and hear true allegiance
to Iter Majesty Queen-Victoria, Her heirs and successors according to law.
(Note. — The name of the King or Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland for
the time being is to be substituted from tune to time.)
Adelaide: By authority, C. E. Bmsxow, Government Printer, North-terrace.




