



DRAFT BILL
>
i ‘*t
TO CONSTITUTE THE
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
AS FINALLY ADOPTED BY THE
AUSTRALASIAN FEDERAL CONVENTION, AT MELBOURNE,
ON THE 16th MARCH, 1898;
TOGETHER WITH
AN EXPLANATION OF ITS PROVISIONS
ROBERT RANDOLPH GAR RAN, B.A.
(barrister - at- l aw) .
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1898.
21326 — (a)


*
'
jt *


TO THE READER.
The Constitution, as submitted to tlie electors, is printed in the left-hand column
of each page; the Explanation in the right-hand column.
In the Explanation, no attempt lias been made to present the arguments for
or against any of the provisions of the Constitution. All that has been done is
to summarize the several sections, and to explain, as shortly and clearly as
possible, their meaning and purpose.
E.E.G.
N.B.—The Vote will Ee taken on Friday, June 3.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
Between December, 1895, and October, 1896, Enabling Acts were passed by tlie Parliaments of
the five colonies of New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia, and Tasmania,
to enable those colonies to take part in the framing, acceptance, and enactment of a Federal
Constitution for Australasia.
In accordance with those Acts, each of the colonies elected ten representatives to a
Convention charged with the duty of framing a Federal Constitution for Australasia. The
Convention sat in Adelaide from the 22nd March to the sth May, 1897, and framed a draft
Constitution, which was then submitted for consideration to each House of Parliament in each of
the five colonies. The Convention sat again in Sydney from the 2nd September to the 24th
September, 1897, and in Melbourne from the 20th January to 17th March, 1898, and reconsidered
the draft Constitution, together with the amendments suggested by the various Legislatures.
The Convention finally adopted a Federal Constitution on the 16th March, 1898.
Under the Enabling Acts, the Constitution is now to be submitted to the electors of the
five colonies for acceptance or rejection by direct vote. If three or more colonies accept the
Constitution, the Houses of Parliament of those Colonies may adopt addresses to the Queen,
praying that the Constitution may be passed into law by the Imperial Parliament.
If the Constitution is rejected in any colony, no further action is to be taken in that
colony under the Enabling Act.
The majority of votes is to decide the question ; but in New South Wales the Constitution
is to be taken to be rejected if there are less than 80,000 affirmative votes; in Victoria, if there
are less than 50,000 affirmative votes; in Western Australia and in Tasmania, if there are less
than 6,000 affirmative votes.
The Constitution is framed in the form of a Bill to be passed by the Imperial Parliament,
and in this Bill the Constitution itself is preceded by nine “ covering clauses,” which provide for
all the steps necessary to bring the Constitution into force.


S/ m /7U*o / a**/
Copy of Federal Constitution under the Crown, as finally
adopted by the Australasian Federal Convention, at
Melbourne, in the Colony of "Victoria, on the 16th
March, 1898.
C. C. KINGSTON,
E. G.
BLACKMOEE,
Clerk.
President.
anno sexagesimo et sexagesimo peimo
VICTORIA REGUSLE
A.D, 1898.
**************************** * * * *********** *
LEAPT OE A BILL
To Constitute the Commonwealth of Australia.


DRAFT BILL
TO CONSTITUTE THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
The Constitution Bill.
Preamble. WHEREAS the people of [here name the Colonies
which have adopted the Constitution^, humbly re-
lying on the blessing of Almighty God, have
agreed to unite in one indissoluble Federal Com-
monwealth under the Crown of the United King-
dom of Great Britain and Ireland, and under the
Constitution hereby established : And whereas it
is expedient to provide for the admission into the
Commonwealth of other Australasian Colonies
and possessions of the Queen : Be it therefore
enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty,
by and with the advice and consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in the pre-
sent Parliament assembled, and by the authority
of the same, as follows :
Short title. I. This Act may be cited as The Commonwealth
of Australia Constitution Act.
Crown,'and ex- 11. This Act shall bind the Crown, and its
tend to the provisions referring to the Queen shall extend
Successors. to Her Majesty’s Heirs and Successors in the
Sovereignty of the United Kingdom.
Proclamation of jjj It shall be lawful for the Queen, with the
Commonwealth. ~ .. , r. /
advice of the Privy Council, to declare by Procla-
mation that, on and after a day therein appointed,
not being later than one year after the passing
of this Act, the people of \_here name the Colonies
which have adopted the Constitution ] shall be
united in a Federal Commonwealth under the
name of “ The Commonwealth of Australia.”
But the Queen may, at any time after the Proc-
lamation, appoint a Governor-General for the
Commonwealth.
Commencement JV, The Commonwealth shall be established,
and the Constitution of the Commonwealth shall
take effect, on and after the day so appointed.
But the Parliaments of the several Colonies may
at any time after the passing of this Act make
any such laws, to come into operation on the day
so appointed, as they might have made if the
Constitution had taken effect at the passing of
this Act.
operation of the y > This Act, and all laws made by The Par-
and laws. Lament of the Commonwealth under the Con-
stitution, shall bo binding on the Courts, Judges,
and people of every State, and of every part of
the Commonwealth, notwithstanding anything
in the laws of any State; and the laws of the
Commonwealth shall be in force on all British
ships, the Queen’s ships of war excepted, whose
first port of clearance and whoso port of desti-
nation are in the Commonwealth.
Explanation.
Preamble. —The Preamble states that the
people of [the federating Colonies] have agreed
to unite in a permanent Federal Commonwealth,
under the British Crown, and under this Con-
stitution.
I. Title. —This Act is to be called “The Com-
monwealth of Australia Constitution Act.”
11. The Crown . —This Act is to be binding
on the Crown. References to “the Queen”
extend to the King or Queen for the time being.
111. Establishment of the Commonwealth.—
IV. j The Queen is to make a Proclamation
fixing a day for the Federal Constitution to come
'into force. The day so fixed must not be later
than one year after the passing of the Act.
On the day so fixed the people of the Colonies
which accept the Constitution will become united
in a Federal Commonwealth.
But before that day [in order that everything
may be ready] the first Governor-General may
be appointed, and the federating Colonies may
pass any laws which the Constitution gives them
power to pass [see, for instance, sections 9 and
29].
V. Laws to be binding.— This Constitution,
and the laws of the Federal Parliament, are to
be binding on the Courts, Judges, and people of
every part of the Commonwealth ; and are to bo
in force on all British ships (except ships of war)
voyaging wholly between ports of the Common-
wealth,


The Constitution Bill.
VI. “ The Commonwealth ” shall mean the
Commonwealth of Australia as established under
this Act.
Definition.
“ Colony ” shall mean any colony or province.
“ The States ” shall mean such of the colonies
of New South Wales, New Zealand, Queensland,
Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia, and
South Australia, including the Northern Terri-
tory of South Australia, as for the time being
are parts of the Commonwealth, and such
Colonies or Territories as may be admitted into
or established by the Commonwealth as States;
and each of such parts of the Commonwealth
shall be called a “ State.”
“Original States” shall mean such States as
are parts of the Commonwealth at its establish-
ment.
Repeal of VII. The Federal Council of Australasia Act
ral Council 1885 is hereby repealed, but so as not to affect
any laws passed by the Federal Council of
Australasia and in force at the establishment of
the Commonwealth.
Any such law may bo repealed as to any
State by The Parliament of the Commonwealth,
or as to any colony not being a State by the
Parliament thereof.
Application of VIII. After the passing of this Act the Colonial
Boundaries Act Boundaries Act 1895 shall not apply to any
colony which becomes a State of the Common-
wealth ; but the Commonwealth shall be taken
to be a self-governing colony for the purposes
of that Act.
Constitution IX. The Constitution of the Commonwealth
and its Divisions. , , > p i,
shall be as follows :
Th.e Constitution.
This Constitution is divided as follows : —•
CHAPTER I.—THE PARLIAMENT:
Part I.— General ;
Part IT. — The Senate:
Part 111. —The House of Represen-
tatives :
Part IV. — Both Houses op The
Parliament :
Part Y. —Powers of The Parliament :
CHAPTER lI.—THE EXECUTIVE GOV-
ERNMENT :
CHAPTER lII.—THE JUDICATURE;
CHAPTER IV.—FINANCE AND TRADE :
CHAPTER V.—THE STATES :
CHAPTER VI.—NEW r STATES:
CHAPTER VII.—MISCELLANEOUS ;
CHAPTER VIII.—ALTERATION OF THE
CONSTITUTION.
THE SCHEDULE.
Explanation.
VI. The States. —The federating Colonies will
become “ States ” of the Commonwealth ; and
so will any colonies which are afterwards
admitted on the footing of States. The States
which join at first are called “ Original States ”
[see sections 7 and 24].
VII. 1 Imperial Acts affected.— The Federal
VIII. J Council Act of 1885 is to bo repealed,
but the laws passed by the Federal Council are
to remain in force in the States until dealt with
by the Federal Parliament.
The Colonial Boundaries Act of 1895 is to
apply to the Commonwealth as a whole, and not
to the States separately. [The effect of this is
that the boundaries between the States can only
be altered as provided by the Constitution ; see
section 122.]


The Constitution.
Chapter I.
Chapter I.
The Parliament
Part I.
General.
THE PARLIAMENT.
Part I.— General.
Legislative 1. The legislative power of the Commonwealth
shall be vested in a Federal Parliament, which
shall consist of the Queen, a Senate, and a House
of Representatives, and which is hereinafter
called “ The Parliament,” or “ The Parliament
of the Commonwealth,”
Governor-
General.
2. A Governor-General appointed by the Queen
shall be Her Majesty's representative in the
Commonwealth, and shall have and may exercise
in the Commonwealth during the Queen’s plea-
sure, but subject to this Constitution, such powers
and functions of the Queen as Her Majesty may
be pleased to assign to him.
salary of 3. There shall be payable to the Queen out of
General. the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the Common-
wealth, for the salary of the Governor-General,
an annual sum which, until The Parliament other-
wise provides, shall be ten thousand pounds.
The salary of a Governor-General shall not be
altered during his continuance in office.
Provisions 4. The provisions of this Constitution relating
(Governor 0 to the Governor-General extend and apply to the
General. Governor-General for the time being, or such
person as the Queen may appoint to administer
the Government of the Commonwealth ; but no
such person shall be entitled to receive any
salary from the Commonwealth in respect of any
other office during his administration of the
Government of the Commonwealth,
Sessions of 5. The Governor-General may appoint such
laihamcnt. times for holding the sessions of The Parliament
as he thinks fit, and may also from time to time,
prorogation and by Proclamation or otherwise, prorogue The Par-
dissolution. ~ . A °. ■. ~
Lament, and may in like manner dissolve the
House of Representatives.
smiHuoniiig After any general election The Parliament
a -1.11111. gLall be summoned to meet not later than thirty
days after the day appointed for the return of
the writs.
First session. The Parliament shall be summoned to meet
not later than six months after the establishment
of the Commonwealth.
There shall be a session of The Parliament
once at least in every year, so that twelve months
shall not intervene between the last sitting of
The Parliament in one session and its first sitting
in the next session.
Explanation.
Chapter I.
THE PARLIAMENT.
Part 1.-— General.
1. The Federal Parliament.— The Parliament
is to consist of the Queen and two Houses, to bo
called the Senate and the House of Represen-
tatives, f
2 ) Governor-General —There is to be a
3. r Governor-General appointed by the Queen
4. .) as her representative in the Common-
wealth. He will have the usual duties of a
Colonial Governor, subject always, however, to
the provisions of the Constitution.
His salary is at first to be £lO,OOO a year, but
may be altered by The Parliament at the end of
any Governor-General’s term of office.
No person, while acting as Governor-General,
may receive any salary from the Commonwealth
for any other office.
5.1 Sessions of Parliament —The Governor-
6. j General is to have the usual power to
summon and prorogue Parliament, and to dissolve
the House of Representatives. After a general
election The Parliament must meet within
30 days from the return of the writs.
There must be at least one session a year, and
the first Parliament must meet within six months'
after the Commonwealth is established.


The Constitution.
Chapter I.
The Parliament
Part 11.
The Senate.
Part II. — The Senate.
The Senate. 7, The Senate shall be composed of senators
for each State, directly chosen by the people of
the State, voting, until The Parliament other-
wise provides, as one electorate.
Until The Parliament otherwise provides there
shall be six senators for each Original State.
The Parliament may make laws increasing or
diminishing the number of senators for each
State, but so that equal representation of the
several Original States shall be maintained and
that no Original State shall have less than six
senators.
The senators shall be chosen for a term of six
years, and the names of the senators chosen for
each State shall be certified by the Governor to
the Governor-General.
8. The qualification of electors of senators
shall be in each State that which is prescribed
by this Constitution, or by The Parliament, as
the qualification for electors of members of the
House of Representatives ; but in the choosing
of senators each elector shall vote only once.
Method of elec- 9. The Parliament of the Commonwealth may
non of senatoib. ma^o ] aws prescribing the method of choosing
senators, but so that the method shall be uniform
for all the States. Subject to any such the
Parliament of each State may make laws pre-
scribing the method of choosing the senators for
that State.
Times and The Parliament of a State may make laws for
places. determining the times and places of elections of
senators for the State.
Application of 10. Until The Parliament otherwise provides,
state laws. p ut su bj ec t to this Constitution, the laws in forco
in each State, for the time being, relating to
elections for the more numerous House of the
Parliament of the State shall, as nearly as
practicable, apply to elections of senators for
the State.
Failure to choose 11. The Senate may proceed to the despatch
Senators. 0 £ p us i nesSj( notwithstanding the failure of any
State to provide for its representation in the
Senate.
Issue of writs. jg. The Governor of any State may cause
writs to be issued for elections of senators for
the State. In case of the dissolution of the
Senate the writs shall be issued within ten days
from the proclamation of such dissolution.
senators! °* 13. As soon as may be after the Senate first
meets and after each first meeting of the Senate
following a dissolution thereof, the Senate shall
Explanation.
Part ll.— The Senate.
7. The Senators. —The senators for each State
are to be directly chosen by the people of the
State. The Federal Parliament may make
electoral divisions in each State; but until it
does so, each State is to be one electorate.
Each Original State [see section vi] is to
have an equal number of senators. This number
is at first to be six, but may be increased by Hie
Parliament. [States which come in afterwards
will not necessarily have equal representation,
as that is a matter to be settled by the terms of
admission; see section 120.]
The senators are to be chosen for six years.
8. 4 Elections of Senators. —In each State,
9. ?• senators are to be elected on the same
10. ) franchise as members of the House of
Representatives [see sections 30 and 41] ; and
each elector may vote only once.
The Parliament may prescribe a uniform
method of election; but until it does so, each
State may adopt a method of its own. [The
States may pass laws for this purpose before the
Constitution comes into force; see section iv.]
The times and places of the elections are to be
fixed by each State for itself.
Until The Parliament makes electoral laws,
the laws of each State are to apply as nearly as
practicable.
11. Failure to choose.— The Senate may pro-
ceed to business, though any State may have
failed to choose senators.
12. The Writs. —The writs for the elections
are to bo issued by the Governors of the States.
After a dissolution of the Senate, they must be
issued within ten days.
13.1 Rotation of Senators.— Senators are to
14. J retire by rotation, one-half every three
years. In order to start the rotation, the Senate


.STiSSJ™ The Constitution.
The Parliament ui u va.'wa.x.
Part 11.
the senate, divide the senators chosen for each State into
two classes, as nearly equal in number as prac-
ticable : and the places of the senators of the first
class shall become vacant at the expiration of the
third year, and the places of those of the second
class at the expiration of the sixth year, from
the beginning of their term of service; and
afterwards the places of senators shall become
vacant at the expiration of six years from the
beginning of their term of service.
The election to fill vacant places shall be made
in the year at the expiration of which the places
are to become vacant.
For the purposes of this section the term of
service of a senator shall be taken to begin on
the first day of January following the day of
his election, except in the cases of the first
election and of the election next after any
dissolution of the Senate, when it shall be taken
to begin on the first day of January preceding
the day of his election.
provision 14. Whenever the number of senators for a
for rotation. State is increased or diminished, The Parliament
of the Commonwealth may make such pi-ovision
for the vacating of the places of senators for
the State as it deems necessary to maintain
regularity in the rotation.
Casual vacancies 15. If the place of a senator becomes vacant
before the expiration of his term of service, the
Houses of Parliament of the State for which he
was chosen shall, sitting and voting together,
choose a person to hold the place until the
expiration of the term, or until the election of a
successor as hereinafter provided, whichever
first happens. But if the Houses of Parliament
of the State are not in session at the time when
the vacancy is notified, the Governor of the State,
with the advice of the Executive Council thereof,
may appoint a person to hold the place until
the expiration of fourteen days after the begin-
ning of the next session of the Parliament of
the State, or until the election of a successor,
whichever first happens.
At the next general election of members of
the House of Representatives, or at the next
election of senators for the State, whichever
first happens, a successor shall, if the term has
not then expired, be chosen to hold the place from
the date of his election until the expiration of
the term.
The name of any senator so chosen or ap-
pointed shall be certified by the Governor of the
State to the Governor-General.
Qualifications of 10. The qualifications of a senator shall be the
senator. same as those of a member of the House of
Representatives.
Explanation.
when it first meets is to divide the senators for
each State into two equal classes ; and senators
of the first class are to retire after three years,
while the others keep their seats for the full term
of six years. Afterwards the rotation will work
of itself, the terms of half the senators expiring
every three years ; but after any dissolution of
the Senate [see section 57] a division into
classes must again be made.
The periodical elections are to take place
before the terms of the retiring senators expire,
so that there will be no actual vacancy.
Whenever the number of senators is altered,
The Parliament may make such provision as is
necessary to keep up the rotation.
15. Casual vacancies. —When a casual vacancy
happens, a successor is to be chosen to hold the
seat for the rest of his predecessor’s term. To
save the expense of a bye-election, the Houses of
Parliament of the State concerned are to sit
together and choose a person to fill the vacancy
until the next federal election for either House,
when a successor, for the rest of the term,
will be chosen by the electors. If the State
Parliament happens not to be sitting, the
Governor of the State, with the advice of his
Executive Council, may appoint a person to fill
the vacancy until the State Parliament meets.
16. Qualifications of Senator— The qualifica-
tions of a senator are to be the same as those of a
member of the House of Representatives [see
section 34].


,eparl?aJent The Constitution. Explanation.
The Parliament
Part II •
The SENAm 17. The Senate shall, before proceeding to the 17. The President— The Senate is to choose
Election of despatch of any other business, choose a senator to its own President, and may remove him.
President. p e the President of the Senate; and as often as the
office of President becomes vacant the Senate
shall again choose a senator to be the President.
The President shall cease to hold his office if
he ceases to be a senator. He may be removed
from office by a vote of the Senate, or he may
resign his office or his seat by writing addressed
to the Governor-General.
Absence of 18. Before or during any absence of the 18 h Miscellaneous. —These are sections of
president. President, the Senate may choose a senator to to r minor importance, providing for the
perform his duties in his absence. 23 ) absence of the President, the resignation
Resignation of 19. A senator may, by writing addressed to of senators, vacancies by absence, the notification
the President, or to the Governor-General if of vacancies, a quorum of the Senate, and Toting-
there is no President or if the President is absent ie Senate.
from the Commonwealth, resign his place, which
thereupon shall become vacant.
Vacancy by
20. The place of a senator shall become
vacant if for two consecutive months of any
session of The Parliament he, without the per-
mission of the Senate, fails to attend the Senate.
notified’ t 0 >J6 21. Whenever a vacancy happens in the
Senate, the President, or if there is no President
or if the President is absent from the Common-
wealth, the Governor-General, shall notify the
same to the Governor of the State in the repre-
sentation of which the vacancy has happened.
Quorum. 22, Until The Parliament otherwise provides,
the presence of at least one-third of the whole
number of the senators shall be necessary to
constitute a meeting of the Senate for the exer-
cise of its powers.
Voting in Senate. 23. Questions arising in the Senate shall be de-
termined by a majority of votes, and each senator
shall have one vote. The President shall in all
cases be entitled to a vote; and when the votes
are equal the question shall pass in the negative.
part in. Part 111. — The House op Representatives. Part 111. — The House op Representatives.
House of Repre-
sentatives. Th e jj ouse 0 f Representatives shall be 24 b Members of the House.— The members of
Housed Re °re composed of members directly chosen by the to > the House of Representatives are to be
sentatives. eprc people of the Commonwealth, and the number of 27 ) directly chosen by the people of the
such members shall be, as nearly as practicable. Commonwealth, in proportion to population,
twice the number of the senators. The number of members of the House is to be.
The number of members chosen in the several a s nearly as possible, twice the number of all the
States shall bo in proportion to the respective senators ; and with a view to this, the number of
numbers of their people, and shall, until The members for each State is to be found (until The
Parliament otherwise provides, be determined. Parliament provides a different method) as fol-
whenever necessary, in the following manner:— lows :—Divide the population of the Common-
i. A quota shall be ascertained by dividing wealth by twice the number of the senators ; the
the number of the people of the Com- result —the “ quota,” as it is called is the num-
monwealth, as shown by the latest her of people to each member; and each State is
statistics of the Commonwealth, by to have a member for each quota of its popula-
twice the number of the senators. tion. If a fraction greater than one-half the


The Parliament The Constitution.
Part 111.
“SSSS"- IT * ie number o£ members to be chosen in
each State shall be determined by divi-
ding the number of the people of the
State, as shown by the latest statistics
of the Commonwealth, by the quota;
and if on such division there is a
remainder greater than one-half of the
quota, one more member shall be chosen
in the State.
But notwithstanding anything in this section,
five members at least shall be chosen in each
Original State.
races'disqualified 25. For the purposes of the last section, if by
from voting. t] ie ] aw 0 f an y gtnte all persons of any race are
disqualified from voting at elections for the more
numerous House of the Parliament of the State,
then, in reckoning the number of the people of
the State or of the Commonwealth, persons of
that race resident in that State shall not be
counted.
Representatives
in first Parlia-
ment.
26. Notwithstanding anything in section
twenty-four the number of members to be chosen
in each State at the first election shall be as
follows : [ To he determined according to latest
statistical returns at the date of the 'passing of the
Act, and in relation to the quota referred to in
previous sections. ]
Alteration of
number of
members.
Duration of
House of
Representatives.
Electoral
divisions.
29. Until The Parliament of the Commonwealth
otherwise provides, the Parliament of any State
may make laws for determining the divisions in
each State for which members of the House of
Representatives may be chosen, and the number
of members to be chosen for each division. A
division shall not be formed out of parts of
different States.
In the absence of other provision, each State
shall be one electorate.
27. Subject to this Constitution, The Parlia-
ment may make laws for increasing or dimin-
ishing the number of the members of the House
of Representatives.
28. Every House of Representatives shall con-
tinue for three years from the first meeting of
the House, and no longer, but may be sooner
dissolved by the Governor-General.
Explanation.
quota remains, the State is to have one more
member. Bet notwithstanding these provisions,
each Original State [see section vi] is to have at
least live members.
In reckoning population, pei’sons disqualified,
by reason of their race, from voting in their own
State, are not to be counted [nor are aboriginals;
see section 126].
The number of members to be chosen at thf
first election is to be settled in tbe Constitutor
according to the latest estimate of population.
The Parliament may increase the number of
members to any extent; provided that it also in-
creases the number of senators, so as to keep the
proportion between the two Houses.
[To illustrate these provisions, suppose the
Commonwealth comprised the five colonies repre-
sented at the Convention. Then the popula-
tion of the Commonwealth (according to esti-
mates for the end of 1897) would be 3,196,368.
There would be 30 senators ; therefore the
quota entitled to return a member would be
3,196,368 -4- 60 —that is, 53,272, The estimated
population of New South Wales is 1,323,460,
which contains 24 quotas ; and there being a re-
mainder of 44,932, or more than half the quota,
New South Wales would have 25 members.
The figures for the several States would be as
follows :
State. Population. Members.
New Boath Wales 1,323,460 25
Victoria 1,176,238 22
South Australia 363,014 7
Western Australia 161,908 5
Tasmania 171,718 5
T0ta1.... 3,196,368 64
Western Australia and Tasmania, owing to the
“ minimum ” provision, would each have two
more members than their present population
would give them ; and thus the whole number of
members would be 64 instead of 60.]
28. Duration of House.—Every House of Re-
presentatives is to continue for three years,
unless dissolved before that time.
29. Electoral Divisions. —The Federal Par-
liament may make electoral divisions in the
States. Until it does so, the States may make
their own electoral divisions [and may pass laws
for this purpose before the Constitution comes
into force ; see section iv]; and failing this, each
State will be one electorate.


The Constitution.
Chapter I.
The Parliament
Part 111. . . . ,
House of Repre- 30. Until The Parliament otherwise provides,
bentativls^— the qualification of electors of members the
ation ° f House of Representatives shall be in each State
that which is prescribed by the law of the State
as the qualification of electors of the more
numerous House of the Parliament of the State)
but in the choosing of members each elector
shall vote only once.
Application of 31. Until The Parliament otherwise provides,
but subject to this Constitution, the laws in force
in each State for the time being relating to
elections for the more numerous House of the
Parliament of the State shall, as nearly as prac-
ticable, apply to elections in the State of
members of the House of Representatives.
Writs for general 32. The Governor-General in Council may
election. cauge wr i ts to be issued for general elections of
members of the House of Representatives.
After the first general election, the writs shall
be issued within ten days from the expiry of a
House of Representatives, or from the proclama-
tion of a dissolution thereof.
Writs for 33. Whenever a vacancy happens in the House
vacancies. of Representatives, the Speaker shall issue his
writ for the election of a new member, or if there
is no Speaker, or if he is absent from the Com-
monwealth, the Governor-General in Council
may issue the writ.
Qualifications of 34. Until The Parliament otherwise provides,
members. the q ua iifi ca ti o ns of a member of the House of
Representatives shall be as follows :
i. He must be of the full age of twenty-one
years, and must be an elector entitled
to vote at the election of members of
the House of Representatives, or a
person qualified to become such elector,
and must have been for three years at
the least a resident within the limits of
the Commonwealth as existing at the
time when he is chosen :
ii. Ho must be a subject of the Queen, either
natural-born or for at least five years
naturalized under a law of the United
Kingdom, or of a Colony which has
become or becomes a State, or of the
Commonwealth, or of a State.
Election of 35. The House of Representatives shall, before
Speaker. proceeding to the despatch of any other business,
choose a member to be the Speaker of the House,
and as often as the office of Speaker becomes
vacant the House shall again choose a member
to be the Speaker.
The Speaker shall cease to hold his office if
he ceases to be a member. He may be removed
from office by a vote of the House, or he may
Explanation.
30. The Franchise. —The Parliament may
make a uniform franchise; hut until it does so,
members of the House of Representatives are to
be elected in each State on the franchise of
that State. Each elector, however, may vote
only once. [When The Parliament makes a
uniform franchise, it must not disqualify any
State elector ; see section 41.]
31. Electoral Laws. —Until The Parliament
makes electoral laws, the laws of each State are
to apply as nearly as practicable.
32. f The Writs. —Writs for general elections
33. are to be issued by the Governor-General;
writs for vacancies by the Speaker (if he is in
the Commonwealth).
34. Qualifications of Member— The Parlia-
ment may define the qualifications of a member;
but until it does so, the qualifications of a
member are to be as follows : —He must be 21
years of age, must be qualified to be a federal
elector [see section 30], must have resided for
three years within the limits of the Common-
wealth, and must be a British subject, either
natural-born or for five years naturalized.
35 h Miscellaneous. —These are sections of
to [■ minor importance, making the usual
40 ) provision for the election of a Speaker,
the absence of the Speaker, the resignation of
members, vacancies by absence, a quorum of the
House, and voting in the House.


The Constitution.
Explanation.
Chapter I.
The Parliament
Part 111.
house of kepre- resign Iris office or his seat by writing addressed
SBNTATIVES. ® J °
to the Governor-General.
speaker 36. Before or during any absence of the
Speaker, the House of Representatives may
choose a member to perform his duties in his
absence.
Resignation of 37. A member may by writing addressed to
the Speaker, or to the Governor-General if there
is no Speaker or if the Speaker is absent from
the Commonwealth, resign his place, which
thereupon shall become vacant.
Absence by 38. The place of a member shall become vacant
if for two consecutive months of any session of
The Parliament he, without the permission of
the House, fails to attend the House.
Quorum. 39. Until The Parliament otherwise provides.
the presence of at least one-third of the
whole number of the members of the House of
Representatives shall be necessary to constitute
a meeting of the House for the exercise of its
powers.
House* o? 40. Questions arising in the House of Repre-
Representatives. sentatives shall be determined by a majority of
votes other than that of the Speaker. The
Speaker shall not vote unless the numbers are
equal, and then he shall have a casting-vote.
Part IY. — Both Houses of The Parliament. Part IV.— Both Houses of the Parliament.
Part IV.
xhb'paruament 41. No adult person who has or acquires a 41. Federal franchise.—The Parliament, if it
y —right to vote at elections for the more numerous makes a federal franchise [see section 30], must
of states. ekctors House of the Parliament of a State, shall, while not disqualify from voting at federal elections any
the right continues, be prevented by any law of adult person who has a right to vote at elections
the Commonwealth from voting at elections for for the Legislative Assembly of his State. [Nor
either House of The Parliament of the Common- may it give any elector more than one vote; see
wealth. section 30.]
oath or 42. Every senator and every member of the 42. Allegiance, —Members of both Houses
aUegilfnce” ° f House of Representatives shall before taking his must take an oath or affirmation of allegiance,
seat make and subscribe before the Governor-
General, or some person authorized by him, an
oath or affirmation of allegiance in the form set
schedule. forth in the Schedule.
Member of one 43. A member of either House of The Parlia- 43 h Disqualifications of members. The dis-
for'other. eli^ible ment shall be incapable of being chosen or of to > qualifications of members of both Houses
sitting as a member of the other House. 46 ) are substantially the same as the dis-
qualifications of members of the Legislative
Disqualification. 44. Any person who Assembly under the present Constitutions of the
i. Is under any acknowledgment of alle- several Australian colonies ; except that there are
giance, obedience, or adherence to a additional provisions that a bankrupt is to be
foreign power, or is a subject or a ineligible until he gets his discharge, and that the
citizen or entitled to the rights or seat of a member shall become vacant if he takes,
privileges of a subject or a citizen of a 0 r agrees to take, any fee or honorarium from
foreign power; or the Federal Government, or for Parliamentary
services rendered to any person or State.


. The Constitution.
The Parliament * X xxt/ wwxxta uiuuui.UJ.l.
Part IV.
both Houses o? jj. j s attainted of treason, or lias been con-
Tiie Parliament , , , •
victed and is under sentence, or su tqect
to be sentenced. for any offence punish-
able under the law of the Common-
wealth or of a State by imprisonment
for one year or longer : or
in. Is an undischarged bankrupt or insol-
vent; or
iv. Holds any office of profit under the
Crown, or any pension payable during
the pleasure of the Crown out of any of
the revenues of the Commonwealth: or
V. Has any direct or indirect pecuniary
interest in any agreement with the
public service of the Commonwealth,
otherwise than as a member and in
common with the other members of an
incorporated company consisting of
more than twenty-five persons :
shall be incapable of being chosen or of sitting
as a senator or as a member of the House of
Representatives.
But subsection iv does not apply to the office
of any of the Queen’s Ministers of State for the
Commonwealth, or of any of the Queen’s Minis-
ters for a State, or to the receipt of pay, half-pay,
or a pension by any person as an officer or
member of the Queen’s navy or array, or to the
receipt of pay as an officer or member of the
naval or military forces of the Commonwealth
by any person whose services are not wholly
employed by the Commonwealth.
vacancy on 45. If a senator or member of the House of
liappening of _ .
disqualification. Representatives —■
i. Becomes subject to any of the disabili-
ties mentioned in the last preceding
section : or
ii. Takes the benefit, whether by assign-
ment, composition, or otherwise, of
any law relating to bankrupt or in-
solvent debtors: or
in. Directly or indirectly takes or agrees
to take any fee or honorarium for
services rendered to the Common-
wealth, or for services rendered in
The Parliament to any person or
State:
his place shall thereupon become vacant.
Pena’ty for 46. Until The Parliament otherwise provides,
disqualified? any person declared by this Constitution to be
incapable of sitting as a senator or as a member
of the House of Representatives shall, for every
day on which he so sits, be liable to pay the
sum of one hundred pounds to any person who
sues for it in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Explanation.
The provision which disqualifies persons who
hold offices of profit under the Crown does not
apply to the Ministers of State for the Common-
wealth [see section G4], nor to the Ministers of
any State, nor to officers or members of the
Queen’s navy or army, nor to officers or members
of the partially-paid naval or military forces of
the Commonwealth.


The Parliament The Constitution. Explanation.
Part IV.
®£p?rulmeS 4 ?. Until The Parliament otherwise provides, 47.—Elections and qualifications— Until The
any question respecting the qualification of a Parliament otherwise provides, all questions of
elections senator or of a member of the House of Repre- disputed elections, or qualifications, or vacancies,
sentatives, or respecting a vacancy in either are to be tried by the House in which the
House of The Parliament, and any question of a question arises,
disputed election to either House, shall be deter-
mined by the House in which the question arises.
Allowance to 48. Until The Parliament otherwise provides, 48. —Payment of members. —Until The Par-
each senator and each member of the House of liament otherwise provides, members of both
Representatives shall receive an allowance of Houses are to be paid £4OO a year,
four hundred pounds a year, to be reckoned from
the day on which he takes his seat.
of Houses &c ’’ 49. The powers, privileges, and immunities of 49. — Privileges of Parliament. —The privi-
the Senate and of the House of Representatives, leges of both Houses are to be those of the
and of the members and the committees of each House of Commons, until The Parliament other-
House, shall be such as are declared by The wise declares.
Parliament, and until declared shall be those of
the Commons House of Parliament of the United
Kingdom, and of its members and committees,
at the establishment of the Commonwealth.
order 3 and 50. Each House of The Parliament may make 50.—Rules and orders. —Each House may
J Vv. j Wllvl VX UV/i Ol JJUOIi JLXVUOU 11J (IJ
rules and orders with respect to— make Rules and Orders for the exercise of its
i. The mode in which its powers, privi- privileges and the conduct of its business.
leges, and immunities may be exer-
cised and upheld.
ii. The order and conduct of its business
and proceedings either separately or
jointly with the other House.
Part Y. —Powers of The Parliament.
Part Y.—Powers of The Parliament.
Part V.
Powers op
the parliament 54, The Parliament shall, subject to this Con- 51. —Powers of The Parliament. —The Federal
Legislative stitution, have power to make laws for the peace, Parliament is to have power to make laws on a
f°"namenL he order, and good government of the Common- variety of subjects set out in the 39 subsections
wealth, with respect to
of this section. Most of these powers are “ con-
current ” powers ; that is, the Parliaments of
the States may also continue to make laws on
these subjects, provided such laws do not conflict
with the laws made by the Federal Parliament
[see sections 106, 107, 108] ; and on many of
these subjects the laws of the States will for
some time continue undisturbed, as the Federal
Parliament cannot attend to them all at once.
Some of the powers are from their nature
exclusive. The other exclusive powers are those
mentioned in sections 52 and 90.
The following subsections may need some
explanation :
J. Trade and commerce with other countries,
I. Trade and commerce with other countries.
and among the States :
and among the States : [This does not
include trade or commerce wholly within
the limits of one State. For the further
definition of this power, see sections 97
to 99, 101, 103.]


Chapter I
The Parliament
Part V.
Powers of
The Parliament
The Constitution.
ii. Taxation ; but so as not to discriminate
between States or parts of States :
in. Bounties on the production or export of
goods, but so that such bounties shall
be uniform throughout the Common-
wealth :
iv. Borrowing money on the public credit
of the Commonwealth :
v. Postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and
other like services :
vi. The naval and military defence of the
Commonwealth and of the several
States, and the control of the forces
to execute and maintain the laws of
the Commonwealth :
vn. Light-houses, light-ships, beacons, and
buoys:
viii. Astronomical and meteorological obser-
vations ;
ix. Quarantine :
x. Fisheries in Australian waters beyond
territorial limits :
xi. Census and statistics :
xii. Currency, coinage, and legal tender :
xni. Banking, other than State banking;
also State banking extending beyond
the limits of the State concerned, the
incorporation of banks, and the issue
of paper money:
xiv. Insurance, other than State Insurance;
also State Insurance extending be-
yond the limits of the State concerned:
xv. Weights and measures :
xvi. Bills of exchange and promissory notes:
xvii. Bankruptcy and insolvency :
Explanation.
ii. Taxation ; but so as not to discriminate
between States or parts of States :
[After uniform duties, the Common-
wealth alone will have power to impose
duties of customs and excise (see section
90) ; but both the Commonwealth and
the States will have power to impose
any other taxation.
in. Bounties on the production or export of
goods : [After uniform duties, the
power to grant these bounties will be-
come exclusive ; see section 90 ; with
the exceptions mentioned in section 91.]
iv. Borrowing money on the public credit
of the Commonwealth : [This will not
prevent the States from borrowing on
their own credit.]
v, vi, vn, ix. Posts, telegraphs, and tele-
phones ; naval and military defence ;
lighthouses, &c.; quarantine : [These
powers will become exclusive on the
transfer of the several departments;
see section 52.]
In addition to the powers expressly given to
The Parliament by this and the following section,
other legislative powers are given in different parts
of the Constitution by such words as “ until The
Parliament otherwise provides ” or “as The
Parliament prescribes.”
[The Parliament has no other power to make
laws than is expressly given to it by the Consti-
tution. On a large number of subjects, there-
fore, the legislative powers of the State Parlia-
ments cannot be interfered with, except so far as
they over-lap upon some subject within the power
of the Federal Parliament. Among the matters
thus left to the States may be mentioned the
following-Lands ; railways; non-federal public
works ; mining, agriculture, and industry gener-
ally ; local government and police; property and
civil rights ; education ; administration of justice
within the State; direct taxation and the borrow-
ing of money for State purposes; and the in-
ternal government of the State generally.]
xviii. Copyrights, patents of inventions and
designs, and trade marks :
xix. Naturalization and aliens :
xx. Foreign corporations, and trading or
financial corporations formed within
the limits of the Commonwealth;
xxi. Marriage :


Chapter I.
The Parliament
Part V.
The Constitution.
Explanation.
Powers of
The Parliament
xxii. Divorce and matrimonial causes ; and
in relation thereto, parental rights,
and the custody and guardianship of
infants:
xxm. Invalid and old-age pensions :
xxiv. The service and execution throughout
the Commonwealth of the civil and
criminal process and the judgments
of the courts of the States:
xxv. The recognition throughout the Com-
monwealth of the laws, the public
acts and records, and the judicial pro-
ceedings of the States:
xxvi. The people of any race, other than the
aboriginal race in any State, for whom
it is deemed necessary to make special
laws :
xxvii. Immigration and emigration :
xxviii. The influx of criminals :
xxix. External affairs :
xxx. The relations of the Commonwealth with
the islands of the Pacific :
xxxi. The acquisition of property on just
terms from any State or person for
any purpose in respect of which The
Parliament has power to make laws :
xxxn. The control of railways with respect to
transport for the naval and military
purpos-es of the Commonwealth :
xxxiii. The acquisition, wdth the consent of a
State, of any railways of the State on
terms arranged between the Common-
wealth and the State :
xxxiv. Railway construction and extension in
any State with the consent of that
State :
xxxv. Conciliation and arbitration for the pre-
vention and S' tlement of industrial
disputes extending beyond the limits
of any one State :
xxxvi. Matters in respect of which this Consti-
tution makes provision until The
Parliament otherwise provides :
xxxvii. Matters referred to The Parliament of
the Commonwealth by the Parliament
or Parliaments of any State or States,
but so that the law shall extend only
to States by whose Parliaments the
matter is referred, or which after-
wards adopt the law :
xxxviii. The exercise within the Common-
wealth, at the request or with the
concurrence of the Parliaments of
all the States directly concerned, of
any power which can at the establish-
ment of this Constitution be exercised
only by the Parliament of the United
Kingdom or by the Federal Council
of Australasia:


Explanation.
The Constitution.
P r'l' #
powers of xxxix. Matters incidental to tie execution of
the i aruameni an y power vested by this Constitution
in Tne Parliament or in either House
Exclusive
powers of The
Parliament.
Powers of the
Houses in
re>pect of Ifgis-
lation.
Appropriation
Bills.
thereof, or in the Government of the
Commonwealth, or in the Federal
Judicature, or in any department or
officer of the Commonwealth.
52. The Parliament shall, subject to this Con-
stitution, have exclusive power to make laws for
the peace, order, and good government of the
Commonwealth with respect to —
r. The seat of Government of the Common-
wealth, and all places acquired by the
Commonwealth for public purposes :
ii. Matters relating to any department of
the public service the control of which
is by this Constitution transferred to
the Executive Government of the Com-
monwealth :
in. Other matters declared by this Consti-
tution to be within the exclusive power
of The Parliament.
53. Proposed laws appropriating revenue or
monevs, or imposing taxation, shall not originate
in the Senate. But a proposed law shall not be
taken to appropriate revenue or moneys, or to
impose taxation, by reason only of its containing
provisions for the imposition or appropriation of
fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the
demand or payment or appropriation of fees for
licenses, or fees for services under the proposed
law.
The Senate may not amend proposed laws
imposing taxation, or proposed laws appro-
priating revenue or moneys for the ordinary
annual services of the Government.
The Senate may not amend any proposed law
so as to increase any proposed charge or burden
on the people.
The Senate may at any stage return to the
House of Representatives any proposed law
which the Senate may not amend, requesting,
by message, the omission or amendment of any
items or provisions therein. And the House of
Representatives may if it thinks fit make any of
such omissions or amendments, with or without
modifications.
Except as provided in this section, the Senate
shall have equal power with the House of Repre-
sentatives in respect of all proposed laws.
54. The proposed law which appropriates
revenue or moneys for the ordinary annual
services of the Government shall deal only with
such appropriation.
52. Exclusive Powers.— On the following sub-
jects The Parliament is to have exclusive power
[that is to say, the States will not be able to
make laws on these subjects] : —•
i. The seat of Government [see section 124],
and all places acquired by the Com-
monwealth for public purposes :
it. Matters relating to the Departments
transferred to the Commonwealth [see
section 69] :
in. Other matters in which the Constitution
gives exclusive power [see section 90] ;
53 1 Money Bills— Neither Appropriation
to [■ Bills nor Taxation Bills may originate in
50 j the Senate. But a Bill does not come
under these heads merely because it provides for
penalties, or license fees, or fees for services.
The Senate may not amend Taxation Bills,
nor the annual Appropriation Bill; and it may
not amend any Bill so as to increase any burden
on the people.
Any Bill which the Senate may not amend
may be returned by the Senate to the House of
Representatives with a suggestion of amendment
[not embodied in the Bill, but in the accom-
panying message] ; and the House of Repre-
sentatives may either make or refuse to make
any amendment so suggested.
In other respects the powers of both Houses
are to be equal.
“ Tacking” is forbidden by a provision that
the annual Appropriation Bill shall deal only
with appropriation, and that Taxation Bills shall
deal only with the imposition of taxation, and
with one subject of taxation only.
There is also the usual provision that votes or
Bills for appropriation shall not be passed unless
recommended by the GovernorTGencral.


thk The Constitution.
Part V.
tiik raruambkt .55. J<aws imposing taxation stall deal only
with the imposition of taxation, and any provi-
sion therein dealing with any other matter shall
be of no effect.
Laws imposing taxation, except laws imposing
duties of customs or of excise, shall deal with
one subject of taxation only; but laws imposing
duties of customs shall deal with duties of cus-
toms only, and laws imposing duties of excise
shall deal with duties of excise only.
money 56. A vote, resolution, or proposed law for the
votes - appropriation of revenue or moneys shall not be
passed unless the purpose of the appropriation
has in the same session been recommended by
message of the Governor-General to the House
in which the proposal originated.
iVetw^iuho' 1 57. If the House of Representatives passes any
Houses. proposed law, and the Senate rejects or fails to
pass it, or passes it with amendments to which
the House of Representatives will not agree, and
if after an interval of three months the House
of Representatives, in the same or the next
session, again passes the proposed law with or
without any amendments which have been made,
suggested, or agreed to by the Senate, and the
Senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it with
amendments to which the House of Representa-
tives will not agree, the Governor-General may
dissolve the Senate and the House of Represent-
atives simultaneously. But such dissolution
shall not take place within six months before the
date of the expiry of the House of Representa-
tives by effluxion of time.
If after such dissolution the House of Repre-
sentatives again passes the proposed law with or
without any amendments which have been made,
suggested, or agreed to by the Senate, and the
Senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it
with amendments to which the House of Repre-
sentatives will not agree, the Governor-General
may convene a joint sitting of the members of
the Senate and of the House of Representatives.
The members present at the joint sitting may
deliberate and shall vote together upon the pro-
posed law as last proposed by the House of
Representatives, and upon amendments, if any,
which have been made therein by one House and
not agreed to by the other, and any such amend-
ments which are affirmed by three-fifths of the
members present and voting thereon shall be
taken to have been carried, and if the proposed
law, with the amendments, if any, so carried is
affirmed by three-fifths of the members present
and voting thereon, it shall be taken to have been
duly passed by both Houses of The Parliament,
and shall be presented to the Governor-General
for the Queen’s assent.
Explanation.
57. Deadlocks . —To decide disagreements be-
tween the two Houses, provision is made for a
double dissolution and a joint sitting*.
If a bill is twice passed by the House of
Representatives, and each time the Senate rejects
it, or shelves it, or makes amendments to which
the House of Representatives will not agree, the
Governor-General may dissolve both Houses at
the same time ; and if after re-election they still
disagree, he may convene a joint sitting of both
Houses. The members present at the joint
sitting may debate the bill, and must vote on it;
and if it is carried by three-fifths of those voting,
it will be presented for the Queen’s assent as if
it had been passed in the usual way by both
Houses.
The House of Representatives, throughout
this process, may, if it so desires, accept any
amendments made or suggested by the Senate;
but at the joint sitting no amendments can be
considered except those actually made by one
of the Houses; and these can only be carried
by a three-fifths majority. [ln the case, there-
fore, of a bill which the Senate cannot amend (see
section 53), no amendments can be considered
at the joint sitting.]


tuepaZaJent The Constitution. Explanation.
poweL'oe 58. When a proposed law passed by both 58. ) Assent to Bills —There are the usual
The Parliament jj ouses of The Parliament is presented to the 59 provisions as to the Royal assent to bills.
Royal assent to” Governor-General for the Queen’s-assent, he shall gOJ and as to the Queen’s disallowance of
Bllls - declare, according to his discretion, but subject bills assented to by the Governor-General;
to this Constitution, that he assents in the exce pt that the time for disallowance, instead of
Queen’s name, or that he withholds assent, or being two years from the receipt of the bill by
that he reserves the law for the Queen’s pleasure, hhe Secretary of State, is shortened to one year
Kecommenda- The Governor-General may return to the from the Governor-General’s assent.
Governor- House in which it originated any proposed law There is also a provision that the Governor-
General. so presented to him, and may transmit therewith General, when a bill is presented for his assent,
any amendments which he may recommend, and may re t urn it to The Parliament with a recom-
the Houses may deal with the recommendation. mendation for amendment; which recommenda-
t n 1 -n • tion the Houses mav deal with as they think fit.
Disallowance by 59. The Queen may disallow any law within . . ..-in j. Government to
ono year from the Governor-General’s assent, [This is intended to enable the Government to
.. v ~ n i Divr correct mistakes discovered in bills, it is simiiai
and such disallowance on being made known by Victorian and South Australian
the Governor-General, by speech or message to a
each of the Houses of The Parliament, or by Constitutions.]
Proclamation, shall annul the law from the day
when the disallowance is so made known.
Signification of 60. A proposed law reserved for the Queen’s
Queen’s pleasure „] easure s hall not have any force unless and
on Bill icsei\ed. two y ears f ro m the day on which it
was presented to the Governor-General for the
Queen’s assent the Governor-General makes
known, by speech or message to each of the
Houses of The Parliament, or by Proclamation,
that it has received the Queen’s assent.
Chapter 11.
Chapter 11. CHAPTER 11.
The Executive
THE EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT.
the executive government.
Executive 61. The executive power of the Commonwealth 61. ) Executive Power.-d The Queen «*o be
power - is vested in the Queen, and is exercisable by the 62. [ the executive head of the Commonwealth
Governor-General as the Queen’s representative, 63. ) [ as s^e 18 ev ® r y ier P a^
and extends to the execution and maintenance Empire] ; and the executive power will be exer-
of this Constitution, and of the laws of the c.sed b y the
Commonwealth. tive Councilj whose members will hold office
Federal 62. There shall be a Federal Executive Council duri his pleasure. The executive power is to
CouncU. ve to advise the Governor-General in the govern- extend oldy to carrying out the Constitution and
raent of the Commonwealth, and the members of j aws 0 f the Commonwealth, and will not
the Council shall be chosen and summoned by otherwise interfere with the Executive Govern-
the Governor-General and sworn as Executive men t s of the States.
flminmllors and shall hold office during his , , . „ ~ „
Councillors, ana b « The Governor- General in Council” means
p easure the Governor-General with the advice of the
Provisions 63. The provisions of this Constitution refer- federal Executive Council.
Governor-' 0 ring to the Governor-General in Council shall be
General. construed as referring to the Governor-General
acting with the advice of the Federal Executive
Council.
64. TheGovernor-Geiieralmavappointofficers : 4 £
to administer suoli Departments of State of 65. t Governor-General, and
the Commonwealth as the Governor-General in 68 J the Federal Executive
Council may establish.


Chapter 11.
The Executive
Government.
Mni«ters to sit
in Parliament.
Number of
Ministers.
Salaries of
Minioters.
Appointment of
civil servants.
•Command of
naval and
military forces.
Transfer of
certain depart-
ments.
Certain powers
of Governors to
vest in Governor-
General.
The Constitution.
Such officers shall hold office during the pleasure
of the Governor-General. They shall be members
of the Federal Executive Council, and shall be
the Queen’s Ministers of State for the Common-
wealth.
After the first general election no Minister of
State shall hold office for a longer period than
three months unless he is or becomes a senator
or a member of the House of Representatives.
65. Until The Parliament otherwise provides,
the Ministers of State shall not exceed seven in
number, and shall hold such offices as The Par-
liament prescribes, or, in the absence of provision,
as the Governor-General directs.
66. There shall be payable to the Queen, out
of the Consolidated Revenue Fund of the Com-
monwealth, for the salaries of the Ministers of
State, an annual sum which, until The Parliament
otherwise provides, shall not exceed twelve
thousand pounds a year.
67. Until The Parliament otherwise provides,
the appointment and removal of all other officers
of the Executive Government of the Common-
wealth shall be vested in the Governor-General
in Council, unless the appointment is delegated
by the Governor-General in Council or by a law
of the Commonwealth to some other authority.
68. The command in chief of the naval
and military forces of the Commonwealth is
vested in the Governor-General as the Queen’s
representative.
69. On a date or dates to be proclaimed by
tho Governor-General after the establishment of
the Commonwealth, tho following departments
of the public service in each State shall become
transferred to the Commonwealth :
Posts, telegraphs, and telephones :
Naval and military defence :
Light-houses, light-ships, beacons, and
buoys:
Quarantine.
But the departments of customs and of excise
in each State shall become transferred to the
Commonwealth on its establishment.
70. In respect of matters which, under this
Constitution, pass to the Executive Government
of the Commonwealth, all powers and functions
which at the establishment of the Commonwealth
are vested in the Governor of a colony, or in the
Governor of a colony with the advice of his
Executive Council, or in any authority of a colony,
shall vest in the Governor-General, or in the
Governor-General in Council, or in the authority
exercising similar powers under the Common-
wealth, as the case requires.
Explanation.
Council. They must not hold office for more
than three months without a seat in one of tho
Houses of The Parliament. Until The Parliament
otherwise provides they are not to be more than
seven in number, and their aggregate salaries
must not exceed £12,000 a year.
[These provisions are intended to ensure the
adoption of the system known as “ responsible
government.”]
67. Civil servants. —The appointment and re-
moval of civil servants is vested at first in tho
Governor-General in Council, but any part of
this power may be given by him or by The Par-
liament to some other authority.
68. Command-in-chief of forces. —The Gover-
nor-General is to be the Commander-in-chief of
the naval and military forces.
69. Transfer of Eepartments.— The depart-
ments of customs and excise are to become trans-
ferred to the Commonwealth immediately; and
the following departments are also to be taken
over as soon as convenient: —Posts, telegraphs
and telephones ; naval and military defence :
light-houses, light-ships, beacons and buoys :
quarantine.
70. Transfer of powers. —ln respect of matters
which pass to the Executive Government of the
Commonwealth, all powers which now belong to
any authority in a colony are to belong to tho
authority exercising similar powers in the Com-
monwealth.


The Constitution.
Chapter 111.
The Judicature.
Chapter 111.
THE JUDICATURE.
judicial power 71. The judicial power of the Commonwealth
and courts. be vested in a Federal Supreme Court, to
be called the High Court of Australia, and in
such other federal courts as The Parliament
creates, and in such other courts as it invests
with federal jurisdiction. The High Court shall
consist of a Chief Justice, and so many other
Justices, not less than two, as The Parliament
prescribes.
judges’ appoint- 72. The Justices of the High Court and of the
ment, tenure, other courts created by The Parliament:
and remunera- *
tlon ’ I. Shall be appointed by the Governor-
General in Council:
ii. Shall not be removed except by the
Governor-General in Council, on an
address from both Houses of The
Parliamen t in the same session praying
for such removal on the ground of
proved misbehaviour or incapacity :
in. Shall receive such remuneration as The
Parliament may fix; but the remuner-
ation shall not be diminished during
their continuance in office.
Appellate
jurisdiction of
High Court.
i. Of any Justice or Justices exercising the
original jurisdiction of the High Court:
H. Of any other federal court, or court
exercising federal jurisdiction : or of
the Supreme Court of any State, or of
any other court of any State from
which at the establishment of the
Commonwealth an appeal lies to the
Queen in Council:
hi. Of the Inter-State Commission, but as
to questions of law only :
and the judgment of the High Court in all such
cases shall be final and conclusive.
But no exception or regulation prescribed by
The Parliament shall prevent the High Court
from hearing and determining any appeal from
the Supreme Court of a State in any matter in
which at the establishment of the Commonwealth
an appeal lies from such Supreme Court to the
Queen in Council.
Until The Parliament otherwise provides, the
conditions of and restrictions on appeals to the
Queen in Council from the Supreme Courts of
the several States shall be applicable to appeals
from them to the High Court.
73. The High Court shall have jurisdiction,
with such exceptions and subject to such regu-
lations as The Parliament prescribes, to hear and
determine appeals from all judgments, decrees,
orders, and sentences:
Explanation.
Chapter 111.
THE JUDICATURE.
71. The Courts. —The Constitution creates a
Federal Supreme Court, to be called the High
Court, and to consist of a Chief Justice and not
less than two other Justices. The Parliament
is empowered to create other federal courts, and
to give federal jurisdiction to the courts of the
States.
72. Independence of Judges.— The indepen-
dence of the Federal Judges is secured in the
usual way. They are to be appointed by the
Governor-General in Council, and may not be
removed except for misbehaviour or incapacity,
and then only on an address from both Houses
of The Parliament; and their salaries are not to
be reduced while they continue in office.
73. Appeals to High Court.— The High Court
may hear appeals from all decisions of federal
courts, courts of federal jurisdiction, and the
Supreme Courts of the States; and also (but on
questions of law only) from all decisions of the
Inter-State Commission. [See sections 100, 102.]
The Parliament may limit this right of appeal,
but cannot prevent the High Court from hearing
an appeal from the Supreme Court of a State in
any case in which an appeal now lies to the
Privy Council.
The decision of the High Court is to be final,
except as mentioned in the next section.
o ’)
Jk. J
.0 ,7


Chapter 111.
The Judicature.
The Constitution. Explanation.
Appeals to
Bueen in
ouncil.
74. No appeal shall be permitted to the Queen 74 Anneals fn Priw ti -at,
in Council in any matter involving- the interpre- no n A p I Council.-There is to bo
tation of this Constitution or of the C nstitution meSg of the ?*** W }™ the
of a State, unless the public interest of some ■ g V o. : Constitution or the Con-
Except as provided in this section, this Con- °I the High Court will be absolutely final
n r‘ j Tr “ y righ i w ¥ ch the In other cases the decision of the High Court
Her RovpTp plea f sed exe r«se, by virtue of will usually be final ; but the Privy Council mav
Her Royal Prerogative, to grant special leave of grant special leave to anneal +r> if^
Council fr °But h Th Hi p 1 r oUrt 1° Her Ma ,j in u,ar case - Bat The Parliament
P’jy 1 '- But Parliament may mafee laws matters in which such leave may bo ajked
limiting the matters in which such leave may ri7 . . 7
be asked. J [Except in the constitutional cases above-
Original
jurisdiction of
High Court.
Additional
original jurisdic
tion.
Power to define
jurisdiction.
75. In all matters—
i. Arising under any treaty :
11. Affecting consuls, or other representatives
of other countries :
in. In which the Commonwealth, or a person
suing or being sued on behalf of the
Commonwealth, is a party :
iv. Between States, or between residents of
different States, or between a State and
a resident of another State :
v. In which a writ of mandamus or prohibi-
tion or an injunction is sought against
an officer of the Commonwealth :
the High Court shall have original jurisdiction.
76. Ihe 1 arliament may make laws conferring
original jurisdiction on the High Court in any
matter— J
1. Arising under this Constitution, or involv-
ing its interpretation:
11. Arising under any laws made by The
Parliament:
in. Of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction :
iv. Relating to the same subject-matter
claimed under the laws of different
States.
77. With respect to any of the matters men-
tioned in the last two sections, The Parliament
may make laws—
J. Defining the jurisdiction of any federal
court other than the High Court :
11. Defining the extent to which the jurisdic-
tion of any federal court shall be
exclusive of that which belongs to oris
vested in the courts of the States :
in. Investing any court of a State with federal
jurisdiction.
mentioned, appeals from the Supreme Courts of
the States direct to the Privy Council are not
forbidden ; and there will therefore be a choice
of appealing either to the High Court or direct
to the Privy Council.]
75. Original Jurisdiction. —The High Court
76. > is to have original jurisdiction [that is,
77. J a right to hear cases in the first instance]
in five kinds of cases, of a specially federal or
inter-State character.
The Parliament is empowered to extend the
original jurisdiction of the High Court to four
other kinds of cases.
The Parliament may give similar jurisdiction
to other federal courts or State courts, and may
determine how far the jurisdiction of any federal
court shall exclude that of the State courts.


Chapter 111.
The Judicature,
The Constitution.
Explanation.
Procecdins 3 78. The Parliament may make laws conferring 78. Suits against Crown— The Parliament
Coimnonwcßiih rights to proceed against the Commonwealth or may regulate the right of suing the Common-
a State in respect of matters within the limits of wealth, or a State, in the courts of federal
the judicial power. jurisdiction.
S ro ' 79 - The federal jurisdiction of any court may 79. Number of Judges. —The Parliament may
be exercised by such number of judges as The prescribe the number of judges who may exercise
1 arliament prescribes. the federal jurisdiction of any court.
Trial by jury. 80. The trial on indictment of any offence go. Trial by Jury. —The trial by indictment
against any law of the Commonwealth shall be 0 f an y offence against the laws of the Common-
by jury, and every such trial shall be held in the wealth is to be by jury, and must be held in the
State where the offence was committed, and if State where the offence was committed,
the offence was not committed within any State
the trial shall be held at such place or places as
The Parliament prescribes.
Chapter IV.
Chapter IV.
Finance and
Trade.
Chapter IV.
FINANCE AND TPADE.
FINANCE AND TRADE.
Revenue Fund.
All revenues or moneys raised or received gl. Consolidated Revenue Fund.— All the
by the Executive Government of the Common- 82. I revenues of the Commonwealth are to
wealth shall form one Consolidated Revenue 83. J form one Consolidated Revenue Fund,
I und, to be appropriated for the purposes of which is to be applied in the first instance to the
the Commonwealth in the manner and subject payment of the expenditure of the Common-
to the charges and liabilities imposed by this wealth. No money is to be drawn from the
Constitution. Treasury except under appropriation made by
chargedtliercou The costs, charges, and expenses incident aw ‘
to the collection, management, and receipt of But until the first Parliament meets, and for
the Consolidated Revenue Fund shall form the a month afterwards, the Governor-General in
first charge thereon; and the revenue of the Council may draw money for necessary expendi-
Comraonwealth shall in the first instance be ture.
applied to the payment of the expenditure of the
Commonwealth.
appropriated by 83. No money shall be drawn from the
IPW - Treasury of the Commonwealth except under
appropriation made by law.
But until the expiration of one month after
the first meeting of The Parliament the Governor-
General in Council may draw from the Treasury
and expend such moneys as may be necessary
for the maintenance of any department trans-
ferred to the Commonwealth and for the holding
of the first elections for The Parliament.
officers!' ° r ben an 7 department of the public service 84. Transfer of officers.— Officers of the trans-
of a State becomes transferred to the Common- forred departments [see section 69] are to become
wealth, all officers of the department shall become servan t s of the Commonwealth,
subject to the control of the Executive Govern-
ment of the Commonwealth,
it not retained in the service, they are to
Any such officer who is not retained in the receive, from the State concerned, any pension
service of the Commonwealth shall, unless he is or gratuity payable under the law of the State
appointed to some other office of equal emolument on abolition of office,
in the public service of the State, be entitled to
receive from the State any pension, gratuity, or If retained in the service of the Commonwealth
other compensation payable under the law of the all their existing and accruing rights will be
State on the abolition of his office. preserved, as if they had continued in the service


Chapter IV,
Finance
The Constitution.
Explanation.
and Trade
Any such officer who is retained in the service
of the Commonwealth shall preserve all his exist-
ing and accruing rights, and shall be entitled to
retire from office at the time, and on the pension
or retiring allowance, which would be permitted
by the law of the State if his service with the
Commonwealth were a continuation of his service
with the State. Such pension or retiring allow-
ance shall be paid to him by the Commonwealth;
but the State shall pay to the Commonwealth a
part thereof, to bo calculated on the proportion
which his term of service with the State bears to
his whole term of service, and for the purpose of
the calculation his salary shall be taken to be
that paid to him by the State at the time of the
transfer.
of the State, and any pension or retiring allow-
ance to which they may become entitled will be
contributed by the Commonwealth and the State
in proper proportions.
Officers not belonging to a transferred depart-
ment, but who are handed over by a State to the
Commonwealth, are to have the same rights as
officers of transferred departments.
Any officer who is, at the establishment of the
Commonwealth, in the public service of a State,
and who is, by consent of the Governor of the
State with the advice of the Executive Council
thereof, transferred to the public service of the
Commonwealth, shall have the same rights as if
he had been an officer of a department transferred
to the Commonwealth and were retained in the
service of the Commonwealth.
Transfer of pro-
perty of State.
85. When any department of the public service
of a State is transferred to the Commonwealth —
85. Transfer of property. —Any property of a
State used exclusively in connection with a trans-
ferred department is to belong to the Common-
wealth ; and any property used 'partially in
connection with a transferred department may
be taken over at the option of the Commonwealth.
i. All property of the State, of any kind,
used exclusively in connexion with the
department, shall become vested in
the Commonwealth; but, in the case of
the departments controlling customs
and excise and bounties, for such time
In either case the State is to be compensated
for the value of the property.
only as the Governor-General in
Council may declare to be necessary.
The Commonwealth is also to take over the
current obligations of the States in respect of
the transferred departments.
11. The Commonwealth may acquire any
property of the State, of any kind,
used, but not exclusively used, in con-
nexion with the department; the
value thereof shall, if no agreement
can be made, be ascertained in, as
nearly as may be, the manner in which
the value of land, or of an interest in
land, taken by the State for public
purposes is ascertained under the law
of the State in force at the establish-
ment of the Commonwealth.
in. The Commonwealth shall compensate
the State for the value of any property
passing to the Commonwealth under
this section; if no agreement can be
made as to the mode of compensation,
it shall be determined under laws to
be made by The Parliament.
iv. The Commonwealth shall, at the date of
the transfer, assume the current
obligations of the State in respect
of the department transferred.


Chapter IV.
Finance
and Trade.
Tlie Constitution. Explanation.
~ sss.
'2, and until then the duties so collected will be
according to the tariffs of the States, and the
.Parliaments of the States may continue to alter
their tariffs.]
87. Of the net revenue of the Commonwealth 87. Application of customs and excise -Of
me balance shall, m accordance with this states or (if it takes over any of the State debts
Constitution, be paid to the several States, or under section 104) apply it to the payment of
applied towards the payment of interest on debts “Merest,
of the several States taken over by the Common-
wealth.
Uniform duties
of customs.
88, Uni f ol m duties of customs shall be im- oo TTwir ti a* tt ~
posed within two years after the establishment • 88 ' U ® ut ies.—Uniform duties must be
of the Commonwealth. estamisUment imposed within two years ,
89. Until the imposition of uniform duties of on -n
customs— Payments before uniform duties.— Before
i. The Commonwealth shall credit to each Commo * wealth is to return
State the revenues collected therein i h ' ate t J e rev ? nue collected in that State,
by the Commonwealth. IeSS a proper sW of the federal expenditure,
ii. The Commonwealth shall debit to each Expenditure is charged against the States in
State— two ways: Expenditure incurred for a trans-
(a) the expenditure therein of the ±err . ed department [see section 69] is charged
Commonwealth incurred solely for against the State in which the expenditure
the maintenance or continuance, as T a PP ened ; and other federal expenditure [for
at the time of transfer, of any in stance, the salaries of federal judges and
department transferred from the a ud the interest on federal loans] is
State to the Commonwealth. charged in proportion to population.
(b) the proportion of the State, ac-
cording to the number of its people,
in the other expenditure of the
Commonwealth.
in. The Commonwealth shall pay to each
State month by month the balance
(if any) in favour of the State.
Payment to
States before
Uniform duties.
over wstoms) tr On the imposition of uniform duties of 90 4 After uniform dn+iac • ovel
all State laws imposing such duties, or offering
Un the imposition of uniform duties of customs bounties, will come to an end. But any agree-
all laws of the several States imposing duties ment for a bounty made by a State Government
0 customs or of excise, or offering bounties on under any such law will be good if made before
the production or export of goods, shall cease tae 30t b June > 1898, and not otherwise.
° , a T° effect; p ut an 7 g ra nt of or agree- Nevertheless, a State may, at its own expense
it for any such bounty Wfully made by or grant bounties on mining for gold silver or
unc er the authority of the Government of any other metals; and may grant any bounties with
*? be “ made befora the .««"»»* °l both Houses of ZXw
1 thirtieth day of June, One thousand eight Parliament,
hundred and ninety-eight, and not otherwise.


Finance The Constitution.
and Trade.
Exceptions as to 91* Nothing in this Constitution prohibits a
bounties. State from granting any aid to or bounty on
mining for gold, silver, or other metals, nor from
granting, with the consent of both Houses of
The Parliament of the Commonwealth expressed
by resolution, any aid to or bounty on the pro-
duction or export of goods.
Trade within the r\ n <. -n -> , • n
commonwealth 92. Un the imposition of uniform duties of
to be free. customs, trade, commerce, and intercourse among
the States, whether by means of internal carriage
or ocean navigation, shall be absolutely free.
But notwithstanding anything in this Consti-
tution, goods imported before the imposition of
uniform duties of customs into any State, or
into any colony which, whilst the goods remain
therein, becomes a State, shall, on thence passing
into another State within two years after the
imposition of such duties, bo liable to any duty
chargeable on the importation of such goods
into the Commonwealth, less any duty paid in
respect of the goods on their importation.
93. During the first five years after the
imposition of uniform duties of customs, and
thereafter until The Parliament otherwise pro-
vides :
Payment to
States for five
years after
uniform Tariffs.
i. The duties of customs chargeable on
goods imported into a State and after-
wards passing into another State for
consumption, and the duties of excise
paid on goods produced or manufac-
tured in a State and afterwards passing
into another State for consumption,
shall be taken to have been collected
not in the former but in the latter
State :
ii. Subject to the last sub-section, the Com-
monwealth shall credit revenue, debit
expenditure, and pay balances to the
several States as prescribed for the
period preceding the imposition of uni-
form duties of customs.
Distribution of
surplus.
Customs duties
of Western
Australia.
94. After five years from the imposition of
uniform duties of customs, The Parliament may
provide, on such basis as it deems fair, for the
monthly payment to the several States of all
surplus revenue of the Commonwealth.
95. Notwithstanding anything in this Consti-
tution, the Parliament of the State of Western
Australia may, during the first five years after the
imposition of uniform duties of customs, impose
duties of customs on goods passing into that
Explanation.
92. Freetrade between States.— After uniform
duties, trade between the States is to be abso-
lutely free.
But goods imported into any State before
uniform duties must, if they pass into another
State within two years afterwards, pay the
difference between the federal duty and that
which they originally paid. [This is to prevent
goods from being “ loaded up ” in a State where
the duties are light, and then becoming free of
the whole Commonwealth when the inter-State
duties are removed.]
93. Payments after uniform duties.— For five
years after uniform duties, and afterwards until
The Parliament otherwise provides, revenue is
to be returned to the States in the same way as
before uniform duties [see section 89], with
one difference : duties of customs and excise are to
be credited, not necessarily to the State in which
the duties are collected , but to the State in which
the goods are consumed. If, therefore, goods have
paid duty in one State, and afterwards passed
into another State for consumption, the duty
is to be credited to the second State, and not to
the first. [The reason for this is that the duty
is presumably paid by the consumer, and should
therefore be returned to his State.]
94. Payments after five years. —After the five
years, The Parliament may provide for the return
of surplus revenue to the States on such basis as
it thinks fair.
95. West Australian duties. —Notwithstand-
ing the provision for inter-State free trade,
Western Australia has special permission, for
five years after uniform duties, to impose certain
customs duties on goods from the other States.


Chapter V.
Finance
and Trade.
The Constitution.
Explanation.
Audit.
Trade and com-
merce includes
navigation and
State railways.
Commonwealth
not to give
preference.
Nor abridge
right to use
water.
Inter-State
Commission.
State and not originally imported from beyond
the limits of the Commonwealth; and such duties
shall be collected by the Commonwealth.
But any duty so imposed on any goods shall
not exceed during the first of such years the
duty chargeable on the goods under the law of
Western Australia in force at the imposition of
uniform duties, and shall not exceed during the
second, third, fourth, and fifth of such years
respectively, four-fifths, three-fifths, two-fifths,
and one-fifth of such latter duty, and all duties
imposed under this section shall cease at the
expiration of the fifth year after the imposition
of uniform duties.
If at any time during the five years the duty
on any goods under this section is higher than
the duty imposed by the Commonwealth on the
importation of the like goods, then such higher
duty shall be collected on the goods when im-
ported into Western Australia from beyond the
limits of the Commonwealth.
96. Until The Parliament otherwise provides,
the laws in force in any colony which has become
or becomes a State with respect to the receipt of
revenue and the expenditure of money on account
of the Government of the colony, and the review
and audit of such receipt and expenditure, shall
apply to the receipt of revenue and the expen-
diture of money on account of the Commonwealth
in the State in the same manner as if the Com-
monwealth, or the Government or an officer of
the Commonwealth, were mentioned whenever
the colony, or the Government or an officer of
the colony, is mentioned.
97. The power of The Parliament to make
laws with respect to trade and commerce extends
to navigation and shipping, and to railways the
property of any State.
98. The Commonwealth shall not, by any law
or regulation of trade, commerce, or revenue,
give preference to one State or any part thereof
over another State or any part thereof.
99. The Commonwealth shall not, by any law
or regulation of trade or commerce, abridge the
right of a State or of the residents therein to
the reasonable use of the waters of rivers for
conservation or irrigation.
100. There shall be an Inter-State Com-
mission, with such powers of adjudication and
These duties are to be collected by the Common-
wealth, and credited to Whstern Australia; and
they are to be gradually reduced till they vanish
at the end of the five years. [So much of the
revenue of Western Australia is derived from
customs, and especially from intercolonial duties,
that it was feared that the sum returnable to
that State as the result of uniform duties would
be altogether insufficient. This provision enables
the West Australian Treasury to meet the
deficiency, at the cost of the West Australian tax-
payers, by inter-State customs duties,]
If this inter-State duty happens to be higher,
at any time, than the Commonwealth duty on
similar goods imported from abroad, such goods
imported from abroad into Western Australia are
to pay the higher duty. [This is to prevent
goods from places outside the Commonwealth
having an advantage over goods of the Common-
wealth.]
96. Audit . —The Parliament may make laws to
regulate the receipt and expenditure of
and the audit of federal accounts ; but until it
does so, the laws of tho States are to apply.
97. Trade and Commerce.— The power of
98. r- The Parliament to make laws with respect
99 J to foreign and inter-State trade and com-
merce [see section 51] is explained and limited
as follows:
The power extends to navigation and shipping,
and to State railways.
The Commonwealth must not, in exercising
the power, give preference to one State over
another; nor must it deprive the people of a
State of the reasonable use of rivers for water
conservation or irrigation.
100.11nter-State Commission.— There is to
102. / be an Inter-State Commission to carry
administration as The Parliament deems necessary out the provisions of the Constitution, and of
for the execution and maintenance, within the federal laws, relating to foreign and inter-State
Commonwealth, of the provisions of this Gonstitu- trade and commerce.
tion relating to trade and commerce, and of all The members of the Commission are to be
laws made thereunder. appointed for seven years, and during that time
their independence is secured in the same way as
that of the federal judges. [See section 72.]


Finance 11. The Constitution.
Trade.
Parliament 101* Ths Parliament may by any law with
preferences respect to trade or commerce forbid, as to
by states. railways, any preference or discrimination by
any State, or by any authority constituted under
a State, if such preference or discrimination is
undue and unreasonable, or unjust to any
State: due regard being had to the financial
responsibilities incurred by any State in connexion
with the construction and maintenance of its
railways. But no preference or discrimination
shall, within the meaning of this section, be
taken to be undue and unreasonable, or unjust
to any State, unless so adjudged by the Inter-
State Commission.
Commissioners 102. The members of the Inter-State Com-
nppointment, . .
tenure, and miSSlOn
remuneration.
I. Shall be appointed by the Governor-
General in Council:
ii. Shall hold office for seven years, but may
be removed within that time by the
Governor-General in Council, on an
address from both Houses of The Par-
liament in the same Session praying
for such removal on the ground of
proved misbehaviour or incapacity :
in. Shall receive such remuneration as The
Parliament may fix ; but such re-
muneration shall not be diminished
during their continuance in office.
Saving of certain 103. Nothing in this Constitution shall render
unlawful any rate for the carriage of goods upon
a railway, the property of a State, if the rate is
deemed by the Inter-State Commission to be
necessary for the development of the territory
of the State, and if the rate applies equally to
goods within the State and to goods passing into
the State from other States.
Taking over 104. The Parliament may take over from the
states. dcbts States their public debts as existing at the
establishment of the Commonwealth, or a pro-
portion thereof according to the respective
numbers of their people as shown by the latest
statistics of the Commonwealth, and may convert,
renew, or consolidate such debts, or any part
thereof; and the States shall indemnify the
.Commonwealth in respect of the debts taken
over, and thereafter the interest payable in
respect of the debts shall be deducted and re-
tained from the portions of the surplus revenue
of the Commonwealth payable to the several
States, or if such surplus is insufficient, or if
there is no surplus, then the deficiency or the
whole amount shall be paid by the several
States.
Explanation.
101. ") Railway rates.— The power of The Par-
-103. j liament, by means of the trade and
commerce clause, to interfere with railway rates
in the States is further defined as follows :
The Parliament may forbid any preference or
discrimination by a State which is undue and
unreasonable, or unjust to another State; but
i. Due regard must be had to the financial
responsibilities incurred by a State in
connexion with its railways ;
ii. No preference or discrimination shall be
held to be undue, unreasonable, or
unjust, unless the Inter-State Commis-
sion decides that it is so;
m. No rate shall be unlawful if the Inter-
State Commission think it necessary
for the development of the State, and
if it applies equally to goods within the
State and goods coming from other
States.
104.—Consolidation of debts.— The Parlia-
ment may take over the public debts of the
States, or a proportion of such debts. The States
are to guarantee to the Commonwealth the
amount of such debts; and the interest paid on
behalf of each State is to bo deducted by the
Commonwealth from the portion of surplus
revenue returnable to that State. If such por-
tion is not sufficient, the State is to pay the
balance.
[The Commonwealth may apply to the payment
of interest any part of the three-fourths of its
customs and excise revenue, which would other-
wise have to be returned to the States : see
section 87.]


Chapter V.
The States.
The Constitution.
Explanation.
Chapter V.
Chapter Y.
the STATES. the stat&
skl. co^on^r:^z^Lr:oZ a %ol!t of T-i ute Co
hon, continue as at the establishment of the f! lhe ,® tates arG J° continue as before, except so
Commonwealth, or as at the admission or estab- f tp67 affected tllls Constitution,
lishment of the State, as the case may be, until
altered in accordance with the Constitution of
the State.
KEr r* colony which has become or becom“ a State li 106 A° wers f State Parliaments.-The Par-
shall, unless it is by tins Constitution excMyeh u” , wluct becomes » State is to
vested in The Parliament of the Commonwealth with; “ I ? ld - P ° WerS e “ e P‘ as to
or withdrawn from the Parliament of the Stafp within the excluf nve power of the Federal Parlia-
continue as at the establishment of the Common- State & e V eCtl °, n or withdrawn from the
wealth, or as at the admission or establisCent Ctions ll3 > 114 J‘ As
of the State, as the case may be t? i tte L s within the concurrent power of the
J ' % 6 i era i 1 arliament [see section 51], the powers
ot the State Parliaments will continue, subject to
Saving of state n 7 17™. i ■ * ■ , the next two sections,
laws. 107. Pveiy law in force in a colony which has p ,
become or becomes a State, and relating 1 to any 1- ®tate Laws. Every State law on a sub-
matter within the powers of The Parliament of -p 3 ect within the concurrent power of the
the Commonwealth, shall, subject to this Con- Federal Parliament [see section 51] is to con-
stitution, continue in force in the State ; and, tirme in force until superseded by a federal law.
until provision is made in that behalf by The But when a federal law (on a subject within
Parliament of the Commonwealth, the Parlia- the legislative power of the The Parliament)
ment of the State shall have such powers of conflicts with a State law, the federal law will
alteration and of repeal in respect of any such P reva il.
law as the Parliament of the colony had until
the colony became a State.
incoHS Hcv 108. When a law of a State is inconsistent
with a law of the Commonwealth, the latter shall
prevail, and the former shall, to the extent of
the inconsistency, be invalid.
Provisions refer- _ rp . . .
ringtoGovemor. 109. the provisions of this Constitution 10Q „ . , ,
r'tfo t ttv? Ter T ro p t stat r xte " d /“ d p— -”~ve™r or mcludes any
apply to tiie Governor for the time being of the
State, or other chief executive officer or adminis-
trator of the government of the State.
Sir any l rf P the lia sbTp t \l'*r mxta i** r m of Territory—A State may
P p on °sucb e surrender, of its territory to the Common^
thereof by the Commonwealth, such part of the
State shall become subject to the exclusive juris-
diction of the Commonwealth.
fnSonUws. al f CUS [ on,s * iave _ 11L Inspection Charges.-After uniform
™ « a * 7 levy ° n im P orts or duties ; a Btate may W such charges, on goods
goodBpaSSmg \ nt 0 oroutof the passing into or out of the Stat| as may he
exprnti no- H ° mrges as , necessary for necessary for inspection purposes; but the net
a, , -, 10 1B spec ion avs of the State; but receipts are to go to the Commonwealth, and the
the net produce of all charges so levied shall be Federal Parliament may annul the charges,
tor the use of the Commonwealth ; and any such
inspection Laws may be annulled by The Parlia-
ment of the Commonwealth.


The Constitution.
Chapter V.
The States.
i r iquids C . ating 112. All fermented, distilled, or otlier intoxica-
ting- liquids passing into any State or remaining
therein for use, consumption, sale, or storage
shall be subject to the laws of the State as if such
liquids had been produced in the State.
raise forces not 113. State shall not, without the consent of
The Parliament of the Commonwealth, raise or
Taxation of maintain any naval or military force, or impose
property of * *. •* •
commonwealth any tax on property of any kind belonging to
or state. the Commonwealth; nor shall the Commonwealth
impose any tax on property of any kind belonging
to a State.
states not to 114. A State shall not coin money, nor make
com money, anything but gold and silver coin a legal tender
in payment of debts.
Commonwealth 115, The Commonwealth shall not make any
not to legislate , n , ~ , . . e • • J
in respect of law for establishing any religion, or tor imposing
religion. any re ligious observance, or for prohibiting the
free exercise of any religion, and no religious test
shall be required as a qualification for any office
or public trust under the Commonwealth.
Rights of resi- 116. A subject of the Queen, resident in any
dents m states. s h a |i no t subject in any other State to
any disability or discrimination which would not
be equally applicable to him if he were a subject
of the Queen resident in such other State.
Recognition of 117. Full faith and credit shall be given,
states. c ’’° throughout the Commonwealth, to the laws, the
public acts and records, and the judicial proceed-
ings, of every State.
stTteTfrom° f 118. The Commonwealth shall protect every
invasion andj State against invasion and, on the application of
the Executive Government of the State, against
domestic violence.
ll9. Every State shall make provision for the
laws of the detention in its prisons of persons accused or
Commonwealth. ™ 1 . , .. , e.l
convicted ox offences against the laws ot the
Commonwealth, and for the punishment of per-
sons convicted of such offences, and The Parlia-
ment of the Commonwealth may make laws to
give effect to this provision.
Explanation.
112. Liquor Traffic . —A State may regulate
the disposal of intoxicating liquors brought into
the State. [That is, though it cannot impose
duties on importation, it can regulate the con-
sumption and sale, within its own territory, of
imported liquor.]
IIS') Powers withheld.— No State may (ex-
-114 j cept by consent of the Federal Parlia-
ment) raise any naval or military force, or tax any
property of the Commonwealth. The Common-
wealth may not tax any property of a State.
No State may coin money, or make anything
but gold and silver coin a legal tender.
115. Religious freedom.— The Commonwealth
may not make any law interfering with religious
freedom.
116. Equality of rights. —No State may dis-
criminate against the residents of another State.
117. Recognition of laws, etc.— The laws,
public records, and judicial proceedings of every
State are to be recognised throughout the Com-
monwealth.
118. Invasion and violence.— The Common-
wealth must protect every State against invasion;
and also, if requested by the Government of the
State, against domestic violence.
119. Gaol accommodation. —The States must
find room in their prisons for offenders against
the Common wealth.
Chapter VI.
New States.
Chapter VI.
Chapter VI.
NEW STATES.
NEW STATES.
120. The Parliament may admit to the Com- 120. New State?. —The Parliament may admit
he admitted 01 J 1
established. monwealth or establish new States, and may new States, on such terms, and with so many
upon such admission or establishment make or members in each House of The Parliament, as it
impose such terms and conditions, including the thinks fit.
extent of representation in either House of The
Parliament, as it thinks fit.


nkw states. Tlig Constitution. Explanation.
territories. * 10 arliament may make laws for the 121, Territories. —The Parliament may make
government of any territory surrendered by any laws for the Government of any territory
btate to and accepted by the Commonwealth, or acquired by the Commonwealth, and may allow
of any territory placed by the Queen under the such territory to be represented in The
authority of and accepted by the Parliament*
or otherwise acquired by the Commonwealth,
and may allow the representation of such terri-
tory in either House of The Parliament to the
extent and on the terms which it thinks fit.
iimuTof°statea 122. The Parliament of the Commonwealth 122. Boundaries of States.— The Parliament
may, with the consent of the Parliament of a may alter the boundaries of a State, but only
State, increase, diminish, or otherwise alter the with the consent of the Parliament of that State,
limits of the State, upon such terms and condi-
tions as may be agreed on, and may, with the
like consent, make provision respecting the effect
and operation of any increase or diminution or
alteration of territory in relation to any State
affected.
new n stat°es. of 123. A new State may be formed by separation 123. Division or union of States. —New States
of territory from a State, but only with the con- may be formed by the division or union of
sent of the Parliament thereof, and a new State States, but only with the consent of the States
may be formed by the union of two or more affected.
States or parts of States, but only with the con-
sent of the Parliaments of the States affected.
Chapter A r IF, CHAPTER VII. CHAPTER YII.
Miscellaneous.
MISCELLANEOUS. MISCELLANEOUS.
Govern ‘ 124. The seat of Government of the Common- 124. The Federal Capital. —The Federal
wealth shall be determined by The Parliament, Capital, or “ Seat of Government,” is to be fixed
and shall be within territory vested in the by The Parliament, and is to be within territory
Commonwealth. belonging to the Commonwealth.
Until such determination The Parliament shall Until the site is chosen, The Parliament is to
be summoned to meet at such place within the meet at a place fixed by a majority of the State
Commonwealth as a majority of the Governors of Governors—or, if they are equally divided, by
the States, or, in the event of an equal division the Governor-General,
of opinion among the Governors, as the Governor-
General shall direct.
Majc < s r tv to to Ter , 125, Tlie Q ueen ma y authorize the Governor- 125. Deputies.— The Queen may authorize the
authorize General to appoint any person, or any persons Governor-General to appoint deputies in any part
Generai°to jointly or severally, to be his deputy or deputies of the Commonwealth,
deputies within any part of the Commonwealth, and in
that capacity to exercise during the pleasure of
the Governor-General such powers and functions
of the Governor-General as he thinks fit to assign
to such deputy or deputies, subject to any limita-
tions expressed or directions given by the Queen,
but the appointment of such deputy or deputies
shall not affect the exercise by the Governor-
General himself of any power or function.
126. In reckoning the numbers of the people 126. Aboriginals. —ln reckoning the popula-
reckoning of the Commonwealth, or of a State or other tion of the Commonwealth or of a State [to
population. part of the Commonwealth, aboriginal natives determine either its representation in The Par-
shall not be counted. Lament or its share of the surplus revenue]
aboriginals are not to be counted.


Explanation.
The Constitution.
Chapter VIII. CHAPTER VIII. CHAPTER VIII.
Alteration of
Constitution. — ALTERATION OF THE CONSTITUTION. ALTERATION OF THE CONSTITUTION.
Mode of altering , ...
the Constitution. . This Constitution shall not be altered 127. Alteration of the Constitution.—Any bill
except in the following manner : —■ for altering the Constitution must be passed by
The proposed law for the alteration thereof an “ absolute majority ”of each House of The
must be passed by an absolute majority of each 1 arliament ; that is, by a majority o
House of The Parliament, and not less than two members, not merely of those who \ ote.
nor more than six months after its passage It will then be put to a referendum, and must
through both Houses the proposed law shall be be approved by a majority of all the electors
submitted in each State to the electors qualified voting, and also by separate majorities in more
to vote for the election of members of the House than half the States. If so approved, it is to be
of Representatives. presented to the Governor-General for assent.
The vote shall be taken in such manner as In any State where women have votes (as long
The Parliament prescribes. But until the quali- a s women have votes in some States and not in
fication of electors of members of the House of others), only one-half of the votes, both for and
Representatives becomes uniform throughout the against the alteration, are to be counted. [This
Commonwealth only one-half the electors voting i s to prevent those States from having a double
for and against the proposed law shall be counted influence, as they have about twice as many
in any State in which adult suffrage prevails. voters in proportion to population.]
And if in a majority of the States a majority An alteration which reduces the proportionate
of the electors voting approve the proposed law, representation of a State in either House of The
and if a majority of all the electors voting also Parliament, or its minimum number of members
approve the proposed law, it shall be presented i n the House of Representatives, may not become
to the Governor-General for the Queen’s assent. law unless it is approved by a majority of the
An alteration diminishing the proportionate electors voting in that State,
representation of any State in either House of
The Parliament, or the minimum number of
representatives of a State in the House of Repre-
sentatives, shall not become law unless the
majority of the electors voting in that State
approve the proposed law.
THE SCHEDULE.
OATH.
I, A. 8., do swear that I will be faithful and
bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen
Victoria, Her heirs and successors according to
law. So help me God !
AFFIRMATION.
I, A. 8., do solemnly and sincerely affirm and
declare that I will be faithful and bear true
allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Victoria, Her
heirs and successors according to law.
(Note. —The name of the King or Queen of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland for
the time being is to be substituted from time to time.)


Sydney:
William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.
1898.




3 1508 00063770


