

DRAFT FEDERATION BILL.
SPEECH
BY
THE HON. J. H. WANT, Q.C., M.L.C.,
DELIVERED IN THE
LEGISLATIVE -COUNCIL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
ON
21 JULY, 1897.
8537




DRAFT FEDERATION BILL.
SPEECH
BY
THE HON. J. H. WANT, Q.C., M.L.C.,
ON MOTION BY THE HON. E. BARTON, Q.C., M.L.C.
“That in pursuance of section 26 of the Australasian Federation Enabling Act, 1895, thi
House do, on its next day of sitting, resolve itself into a Committee of the Whole for th
consideration of the Draft Constitution framed under the provisions of the aforesaid Act.”
From the “Parliamentary Dehates,” 21 July, 1897.
The Hon. J. H. WANT : I think I only
voice the feeling of the whole of the mem-
bers of this House when I say that our
thanks, individually and collectively, are
due to my hon. and learned friend, Mr.
Barton, for his very exhaustive and in-
structive speech. At the same time, I
think it only right I should say that, as
one of the recognised opponents—l might
almost say the arch-destroying angel—of
federation, I feel deeply indebted to the
hon. and learned member, because we now
stand in this position : that a gentleman
of known ability, occupying a very high
position in his profession, and deservedly
respected, has been placed in a position
where he has been able to advocate the
cause, to say everything that could pos-
sibly be said for it; yet, during a very able
speech of three and a half hours, he left
us without giving us one solitary reason
for adopting his views. Therefore, with
the perfect knowledge which the public
have outside this Chamber, and with the
knowledge which we have inside, that
during the whole of these three and a
half hours he was unable to say one soli-
tary word in its favour, I think we may
rest perfectly assured that any danger to
our Constitution has been averted, and
that for the future, at all events, this colony
is safe from those right-minded but wrong-
thinking enthusiasts who are trying to
force federation down our throats. It may
be thought that some of the few remarks
1 may have to make—addressed as they
will be to my hon. and learned friend, who,
I hope, thoroughly understands the spirit
in which I make them—have not much to
do with the question of federation; but I
want hon. members to recollect that my
hon. friends, Mr. Barton, Mr. R. E. O’Con-
nor, and Mr. McMillan, are three men who
have occupied the highest positions in our
public life; and when they have gone, as
they have, to the people of this colony,
and have made charges against the mem-
bers of this and the other House because
they disagree with them, it may be said
that if those attacks are tolerated and
quietly submitted to, they are right and we
are wrong. Therefore, in whatever I may
have to say in respect to those gentlemen
who are so ably advocating federation, I
hope they will understand that I say it
without any personal feeling. I say it,
however, because I want the people out-
side the Chamber to understand that we
do not accept all they say for gospel. The
first things I object to are these little lec-
tures which are delivered to us outside and
inside the Chamber. If that kind of thino-
is to be tolerated, it would have been fai-
better for my hon. and learned friend, when
he made his speech in this House, to have
begun it by telling us, “ When I ope’ my
mouth let no dog bark.” On one occasion
outside this Chamber my hon. and learned
friend said, and said it publicly, that all
those who were opposing federation were


those who had been defeated at the elec-
tion or those who were afraid to face the
electors.
The Hon. E. Barton : I never said that
of those who are opposing federation gener-
ally ; but of certain persons who are oppos-
ing it in another place !
The Hon. J. H. WANT: Of course I
accept my hon. and learned friend’s state-
ment at once ; but he is reported as having
said that was the case, and unless that is
answered in some way, it may be taken
as though we were submitting to it. But
my hon. and learned friend went a little
further than that; and Ido not suppose
he will contradict me when I read from the
Hansard report of his address. When I
told him that I, as well as others, had always
pronounced myself as an anti-federationist
pure and simple, my hon. and learned friend,
no doubt in the warmth of his arguments,
and carried away by his enthusiasm for this
marvellous and mystic thing called federa-
tion, said :
The hon. and learned member is. arrogating
too much to himself. lam not saying the At-
torney-General is the only person who takes this
attitude. He has lots of company ; whatever
is provincial, whatever is selfish, is behind him,
and there is plenty of that.
Those are two serious charges to make
either against those whom he alludes to as
being afraid to go up for election, or those
who were defeated at the election —even
if he refers to the other Chamber. But
there can be no doubt that the reference
to us here is plain enough—that is, to say
that I, who oppose federation, am arro-
gating too much to myself, and that those
who are in the same boat with me are
simply doing so from a spirit of selfish-
ness and provincialism. I do not think
my hon. and learned friend ought to in-
dulge in these little attacks upon those
who simply differ from him. I suppose we
are all looking at this question according
to the light in which we see it, and as my
hon. and learned friend claimed the right
to form his opinion, surely there are others
who should have the right to form a dif-
ferent opinion from him. It seems to me an
uncalled-for charge, and certainly a charge
which ought not to remain unchallenged,
to say that we who are doing this are doing
it from a pure spirit of provincialism and
selfishness. We were also told by my hon.
and learned friend that we had accepted
federation, and that we were not to talk
about it. I have taken the trouble to look
into the act which my hon. and learned
friend says pins us down to the four corners
of that argument; and I find that, so far
from that being the case, the act provides,
what ? That it is proposed that there
should be legislation for the federation of
the colonies. Then the act goes on to say,
“ that it is desirable that we should be
represented at the convention and lam
sorry to say we were not represented by
someone who would have looked a little
more after our interests. lam sorry to
have to include in that remark those of
my colleagues in the present Government;
but of course even they cannot always do
what is right, and it is the exception which
proves the rule. lam afraid, getting into
bad company, they were led a lit tie bit astray
with regard to the question of federation,
and I regret there was not someone there
who did not stick up a little more for our
interests. The gentleman who seemed to
stick up for those interests most was the
leader of the Opposition, Mr. Lyne. "We
are told, now, that we cannot discuss the
question here. Mr. President, I hope no
ruling of yours will bring us under such
narrow circumstances as those, because I
find my hon. and learned friend, Mr.
Barton, himself says:
I trust we may rely upon your ruling to say
that we have full power in this House, before
going into Committee, to discuss the subject
within the limits assigned to us by the Feder-
ation Enabling Act.
The Federation Enabling Act provides,
amongst other things, that it was simply
a proposal to federate, and that we were
then to say whether we would send repre-
sentatives to a convention. One of the
first amendments I intend to move in the
bill, in order to place the matter beyond all
doubt, is the elimination of certain words.
The first portion of the bill says :
Whereas the people of
have agreed to unite in one indissoluble federal
commonwealth.
I intend to move the omission of the word
“ federal,” and then we shall see what we
can make of the bill. I claim for myself,
and for others, the right to discuss this
question of whether we should, at this
stage, allow my hon. and learned friend to
go into Committee at all, as he proposes
to do. I propose under that right to show
that we ought not to do any such thing.
I propose to show under that right that


the whole question of federation can be
touched in discussing this bill. Then the
people outside will know what they have
never known before. We will strip the
question of its big drum ;we will take
away all its trumpets ;we will pull down
the tinselled flag which has been hoisted,
and let the people hear the honest truth
without all these decorations with which
it has been surrounded, those itinerant
lectures which have been delivered, and in
connection with which the people have
heard nothing as to what we are to get, and
nothing as to the sacrifices we are to make.
Indeed, federation has been held up as a
sort of paradise, and God knows when we
get it what kind of paradise it will be !
My hon. and learned friend has asked us
to federate. I venture to say he will see
a federation in this House which he little
contemplates. I venture to believe he will
find that those who have been political
enemies, and who have been fighting one
another, who, if I may use the expression,
have been at one another’s throats, will
be upon this question like the lion and
the lamb. He will find they will forget
all their animosities. If I can judge the
temper of hon. members he will find that
he will get a federation brought about by
that greater federator of all federators—
danger to the constitution. He will find
a federation of those who, having been
enemies before, will now stand shoulder
to shoulder and fight side by side to brush
away this interloper upon our Constitution,
to destroy this fashionable vermin, and to
leave this country untrammelled, unfet-
tered, free, and independent, and far above
all those “fal-lals” of federation which, by
its proper name, ought to be called “ fed-
eration.” I should like to know what
reason there is for bringing federation
about
[A point of order having been taken by Dr.
Cullen, and overruled, Mr. Want continued .]
The Hon. J. H. WANT: lam indebted
to my hon. and learned friend, Dr. Cullen,
for having raised this point of order, be-
cause, although it has resulted in a certain
amount of interruption, it has justified the
opinion which I formed that the question
of federation would be answered by this
House in a way in which my hon. and
learned friend did not anticipate, and that,
as I said before, would be the federation of
those who were determined to protect and
not to destroy the constitution. I think
I may perhaps say at the same time that
I am indebted to you, Mr. President,
and I am sure the whole House is, be-
cause your decision enables us for the first,
the only and the last time to let the whole
country know what the members of this
House think about federation. Hon. mem-
bers, in discussing this point of order, have
suggested that because we agreed to pass
a bill providing that this country should
be represented by a certain number of gen-
tlemen at the convention that w r as going
to be held, that therefore we pledged our-
selves to federation. What we did was
to say “We will send ten of our best
men,” all parties agreed to this—those who
were for federation and those who were
against. My idea was : let us send ten
men and see what they can do. If they
can suggest something beneficial to this
country, let them. Let them try and
bring up a constitution acceptable to the
House and the people. That is why we
sent those gentlemen to the convention.
It would have been dishonorable for me
or any other man to have gone to the
country to oppose the election of repre-
sentatives to this convention. We did
not object to their going; we do not ob-
ject to their having been there. I object
to what they have done, and if I have not
an opportunity of expressing that objec-
tion now, as we have been told, and told
properly, for ever more we must hold our
tongues on the question of federation. If
it is the popular belief outside that we
have sold ourselves into slavery and bond-
age upon the question of federation, if it
is the opinion that we have rushed with
open arms into federation, then to-night’s
voice will tell the people in no uncertain
tones that they have been grossly deceived.
They will be, if it is the first time, happily
told at last that, so far from having em-
braced this doctrine, the majority of us are
absolutely opposed to it.
The Hon. E. E. O’Connor : What doc-
trine 1
The Hon. J. H. WANT: This doctrine
that we have given way on the question of
federation—that we have sealed our doom,
signed the death-warrant of New South
Wales; that is what I mean. Hon. mem-
bers may laugh. If it is a provincialist
who is speaking, it is a provincialist who
worships at the throne of the honor and


Welfare of his country, and who is not
going to sell it at the sound of the drum
to those who come and beat it in the ranks.
I am here to protect New South Wales,
not to sell it into bondage. It is just as
well that the outside people should be dis-
abused of this idea that we have sold our-
selves body and soul to these federationists.
When I was interrupted I was drawing
attention to the question, who has asked
for this federation ?We have known cases
in which the public have taken a deep in-
terest. Take the Costa Rica Packet case,
where the honor of the country was at stake.
A spontaneous meeting of the people was
held in the Sydney Town Hall, and they told
the whole world what they wanted. An
act of heroism was done on an Orient line
‘Steamer, a brave rescue being effected,
whereupon another enthusiastic and spon-
taneous meeting of the citizens was held,
the Town Hall being crowded from floor
to ceiling with people anxious to express
what they felt. But what have we heard
about fedei’ation ? I hope Ido not offend
my hon. and learned friends when I ask
what we have heard about it. Not one of
them has ever dared to call a meeting of
the citizens of the city of Sydney on the
subject. What has taken place 1 ? Why,
the great champion of all champions, and
all honor be to him if he thinks he is right
for sticking to his guns
The Hon. W. R. Campbell : What
about the 100,000 who voted for him?
The Hon. J. H. WANT: If my hon.
friend wants to make one of those brilliant
addresses of his, we will listen to him. My
lion, and learned friend, Mr. Barton, will
forgive me for alluding to it; but where
-have we heard speeches in which my hon.
and learned friend gave utterance to his
views ? At a fashionable locality called
Glebe Point —the only thing I have heard
that it is noted for is its propinquity to
the abattoirs. My hon. and learned friend,
Mr. R. E. O’Connor, addressed an audience,
not in the Town Hall, not in the city of
Sydney, but some company with an unpro-
nounceable name, the Toynbee Guild or
something of that sort. My hon. friend,
Mr. McMillan, who is reported_ to have
never known what fear was, shirked the
city of Sydney, and selected his own special
audience in the Chamber of Commerce. I
want to know where all these champions
have been with regard to the city of Sydney?
The Hon. E. Barton : I addressed the
citizens of Sydney in the new Masonic Hall
soon after I came back from Adelaide!
The Hon. J. H. WANT: It was so small
a meeting that no one ever heard of it.
The Hon. E. Barton : It would have
been if the hon. and learned member had
been there!
The Hon. J. H. WANT: I never read
anything about it !
The Hon. E. Barton : It is like most
other things!
The Hon. J. H. WANT : Well, I do
not think it had much effect, at all events.
But there are meetings and there are meet-
ings. When I speak of a meeting Ido not
mean a man and a woman and a yellow dog
under the cart. I mean a representative
meeting of citizens such as we saw on the
other occasions I have spoken of, when
there was a spontaneous outburst of popu-
ral feeling. It may be said, why have we
not gone forth and addressed the people
ourselves on the question'? Because I say
fairly enough that we wanted to see what
our representatives would bring back ; it
would be time enough for us then to take
action, or when this bill goes, if ever it
does, to the people. We shall then have
to go and explain it. The people will then,
fortunately, have been educated by the
speeches made in this House. It was no
time for us to go forth and fight about
federation before. Federation was then,
and until lately, has been like Mahomet s
coffin, which suspended in the air, has been
the subject of reverent adoration, respect,
and worship, and because it was taken for
oranted that there was something marvell-
ous inside it. People had not the most re-
mote idea what was in it. For all they knew
it might be full of peanuts; and so with
federation, they accepted it, taking every-
thing for granted while it was suspended
in the air. No one knew what it was,
though they bowed down to it; but now it
has come down, and we have it on the
earth, and it has now come down with
what my hon. and learned friend, Mr. R.
E. O’Connor, once described one of my bills
as doing, a dull sickening thud. Now we
see it in all its nastiness ; now we see it in
all its nakedness, stripped of its glamour ;
as an old friend of mine, the late Mr.
David Buchanan, once said, “the people
have seen that they have been worship-


ping a scoured tankard in mistake for a
celestial being.” The people will now see
that this thing which they have been ador-
ing so long has come among them in all its
naked nastiness. We have at last dis-
covered that this thing which was so long
suspended over our heads, has come down
to the solid earth, and we are able to know
what it is. One of the utterances of my
hon. and learned friend, Mr. Barton, the
other day was that the whole of those who
were following me were those who were
guilty of selfishness and provincialism.
The Hon. E. Barton : I did not say so.
I never said they all were. I said there
was plenty of provincialism and selfish
people behind those who took that atti-
tude. I expressly excepted the hon. and
learned member, a matter which his fair-
ness does not induce the hon. and learned
member to state.
The Hon. J. H. WANT : Hansard is
better than fairness. You cannot get out
of it. The hon. and learned member said :
“ He is against federation ; if so, why has
he not the courage to say it like a man !”
I then interrupted, and I said, “ I have
always said so ; I say it now.” Then the
hon. and learned member says, “ The
hon. member has not said so.” He said
he recollected an emphatic declaration of
mine in favour of federation. He was
wrong there.
The Hon. E. Barton : No, I have the
passage; will the hon. and learned mem-
ber have it read now?
The Hon. J. H. WANT : What I said
was, and I am coming to the quotation —-
The Hon. E. Barton : The hon. member
said it did not exist!
The Hon. J. H. WANT : What does the
hon. member call a quotation 1 What I
said was that I would never assent to feder-
ation on the lines of the bill of 1891, and
if you could not have the bill of 1891 you
could not have federation.
The Hon. E. Barton : The hon. and
learned member said distinctly that he
was in favour of federation, and moved a
motion in favour of federation !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : The hon. and
learned member cannot show anything of
the kind. If he does, I will admit that I
am wrong. What I said was this, “If we
cannot have federation except on the lines
of the bill of 1891 I will not have feder-
ation at all.” My lion, and learned friend
then interrupted me and said :
The hon. member is arrogating too much to
himself. lam not saying the Attorney-General
is the only person who takes that attitude. He
has lots of company. Whatever is provincial,
whatever is selfish, is behind him, and there is
plenty of that.
I may have made a mistake in the quota-
tion I made use of just now ; but I make
no mistake in the quotation of Hansard.
Some people may ask, “ What has that to
do with the remarks of my hon. and
learned friend V I want the country to
know that certain gentlemen who have
been advocating federation have allowed
their enthusiasm to carry them over the
mark, and that their utterances cannot be
relied upon. If I can discount the re-
marks made by my hon. friends, and de-
stroy their power outside this House, and
prevent the people being dragged at their
chariot wheels to their destruction, I shall
draw no line as to the way in which I
shall do it. My hon. and learned friend
has said that those who are provincial and
those who are selfish are behind me. I
want to know something with regard to
those who have gone before me. I know
I am a strongly opinionated man ; but
I have a certain amount of reverencej.
which has taught me to respect the opinions
of those much older than myself. There
are those who have shown themselves to
be statesmen in this country, who have
watched its interests, guarded its welfare,
protected its Constitution, and have made
a name for themselves as patriots. I want
the people outside to see where this fed-
eration was born, where it came from, and
where it has to go. I want to show that
from the beginning to the end all the best,
the ablest, and foremost statesmen of this
country have opposed federation. They
have shown that it is absolutely impossible,,
that it is uncalled-for, and that it will be for
the destruction and not for the welfare of
the country. My hon. friends, carried
away by the enthusiasm of the late Sir
Henry Parkes, have attached themselves
to him as his aids-de-camp until they lost
their heads. I use the words advisedly—
that all the ablest talented men in the
country were opposed to federation as bit-
terly as they could be. An interesting
document has come into my possession. It
was written as far back as the time when.
Sir William Denison was governor.


The Hon. Dr. Cullen : Federation is
an older question than that!
The Hon. J. H. WANT: I know it is
an old question, and I hope it will be a
good deal older, and a good deal more
musty before we have done with it. Ido
not think, however, there will be much of
it to be either old or musty when the
House has done with it. Old as it may be,
I want to draw attention to it because
it is rather a curious matter. I find an
allusion was made to this document in a
speech in which the hon. and learned
member, Mr. Barton, referred to the other
night—l mean the speech of Sir Henry
Parkes in 1890. I find that Sir William
Denison, a former governor of this country,
one of our ablest and most constitutional
governors, and a man who took as much
interest in the country as any man who
has ever represented loyalty here, made
use of certain utterances to a friend of his
—the late Sir William Manning.
The Hon. R. E. O’Connor : What is the
date of it ?
The Hon. J. H. WANT : 1858 ; and if
I could only get the first utterance of Go-
vernor Phillip when he landed on these
shores, I have no doubt it would be, “Pre-
serve us from federation in this great
country.” There is, however, no official
record of that. I cannot go back to the
utterances of the first Governor ; but I can
go back to the utterances of the one of
whom I have a record in 1858. These are
strange words; they are prophetic words ;
they are words of wisdom, and they are
words to which I can see the hon. and
learned member, Sir Julian Salomons, will
give his expression of approval, because I
may say I have had the pleasure of read-
ing a speech made by that hon. gentleman
in this Chamber, which has been published
in pamphlet form, which ought to be pub-
lished again—and I hope it will be so
published before this question again goes
before the public. The conclusion which
has been drawn by that eminent statesman,
Sir William Denison, is almost identical
with the conclusion drawn in the pamphlet
which I have had the honor of reading
to-day. The words were :
Mr. Gavan Duffy has taken the lead in a move-
ment in favour of federation among the Austra-
lian colonies; but although it has been re-
sponded to by the Legislative Coimcil here, Ido
not think that the Assembly will indorse the
bill. lam altogether opposed to it as a very
useless and cumbersome expedient for gaining a
few simple objects, most of which, by the way,
have already been obtained by mutual agree-
ment among the colonies. The postal question
has been settled; the lighthouses have been
arranged ; the Murray River navigation has been
amicably dealt with ; and although it is quite
true that it is open to any of the colonies to
break through all or any of the agreements which
have been entered into, yet they are more likely
to remain intact than if there was a sort of force
in the shape of a federal government to maintain
them.
The report of Duffy’s committee led me at
once to his object, which was separation from
England.
Let me warn my hon. and learned friends
that though that is not their intention,
and though nothing may be further from
their thoughts, that will inevitably be the
result. This' is the first step towards it,
and no one can deny it. As farback as 1858
this gentleman, who was then the Gover-
nor of this country, was wise enough to see
it in the same light in which we see it
now. He said :
And I quite admit that when this does hap-
pen federation will be necessary to save the colo-
nies from external enemies and from their own
internal divisions.
I find that in the course of events —from
that time to 1894—this coffin was in the
air, and it was kept there. I am talking
now of the bald question of the federation
of these colonies, as suited to the time and
place —not of the bare question of union.
Does anyone suppose that if we could get
federation in which we should have the
preponderating voice, in which we should
have the control of the revenues and rail-
ways, and the control of the parliaments
of all the other colonies, I would not, under
those circumstances, be a federationist ?
Why, if I were a Tasmanian I should al-
most break my neck to get into such a
federation. If I were a “Victorian ora
South Australian, of course I should try
to get into such a federation, and no one
could blame me for it. But the question
is, “ are we going to let those colonies have
federation at our expense V’ I was about
to quote from a speech of the late Sir Henry
Parkes, delivered on the 30th October,
1884; and although some hon. members
may say that that speech was delivered
some years ago, nevertheless a few years
in a question of this kind do not go for
much. At the same time it is not so very
long ago when we come to look at it, but
whether it is or is not the reasons apply


to the present. I find that the late Sir
Henry Parkes is reported to have said :
At the same time there is still a great conflict
of opinion ; that the question is surrounded by
perplexities which have in no sense yet been
mastered. Take our own population. My hon.
friend, Sir John Robertson, who has had so
much to do with the government of this country,
and who has sat through all our parliaments, is
evidently opposed to federation altogether.
Sir John Robertson: Hear, hear !
Sir Henry Parkes: And perhaps throughout
the population of this colony there is no man of
more powerful intellect, of more capacity to
grasp large questions, than the present Chief
Justice, and Sir James Martin has made no
secret of the fact that he is altogether opposed
to federation.
That bill was one of these sneaking bills
to induce us to sell our birthright for a
mess of potage—for this flag, this drum,
and these banners.
The Hon. R. E. O’Connor: This bill
was introduced by the Government of
which the hon. and learned member was a
member !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : It was not.
If this bill had been introduced by this
Government, does the hon. and learned
member suppose I could have sat with
them 1
The Hon. R. E. O’Connor : I am refer-
ring to the enabling bill !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : The enabling
bill was passed to enable you gentlemen to
go to Adelaide and to use your brains in
order to do something for us, and with all
your ability you could not do it; you left
the country stranded. You have left us,
to use the words of the late Sir Henry
Parkes, a laughing-stock.” Not even the
hon. and learned member’s ingenuity and
ability, and the combined intelligence of
those who accompanied him—and we were
represented by as good men as any coun-
try could send to the convention—has done
anything for us. What did they bring back ?
The Hon. Sir Julian Salomons : An
abortion !
The Hon. J. PI. WANT: Worse than
that. The late Sir Henry Parkes went on
to say :
He believes that federation would be a great
injury instead of a good to these colonies. I
know that that is his opinion ; I have heard it
expressed times out of number. Here, then,
are two instances of men who have occupied
very conspicuous positions in the country—who,
by their large influence, are calculated to lead
public opinion, and who are entirely opposed to
federation.
That is the speech of a gentleman whose
lieutenants my hon. friends are; that is
the speech of the late Sir Henry Parkes
in 1884. It is quite true that, when some
gentleman named Edwardes—a general in
the army—prophesied a Chinese invasion
and frightened the late statesman out of
his life by telling hinr we would have to
look out for the Chinese fleet, he, when on
his road to Queensland, without consulting
his colleagues,.announced to the press that
he thought the time was opportune to
federate. The Japanese, however, have
settled the question of the Chinese invasion.
Personally, I do not think there was ever
very much to trouble ourselves about with
regard to it; but whatever little there was
in it, the Chinese difficulty has gone, and
I am in hopes that federation will go with
it. The late Sir Henry Parkes was an
authority on, and as careful a guardian of
the Constitution, as it was possible to
find
The Hon. Sir Julian Salomons : And
a lover of the country !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : At any rate,
he was one of those who gave his life, so
to speak, to the country. Let me again
point out where we shall be if we accept
the Constitution Bill, and I will do it in the
words of the late Sir Henry Parkes him-
self. This was his conclusion :
Depend upon it the best way, considering in
what a proud position we stand now—as free as
any country in the world, with power to govern
ourselves, with power to maintain an attitude
which commands the respect of great nations—
considering the proud position in which we
stand, we had better avoid joining in making a
spectacle before the world which will cover us
with ridicule if we adopt these resolutions.
Could I speak in language stronger than
that ? I am sorry that I have not the same
command of language that that statesman
had. Although the question then was as to
the acceptance of resolutions to go into a
federation, and to form a federal council,
these utterances were not with regard to the
Federal Council, but with regard to federa-
tion itself. My hon. and learned friend may
try and make something out of what I am
saying by alleging t.liat that was only a slip-
shod kind of federation. The principle, how-
ever, was to give up self-government, to lose
our independence, to sell our freedom, to
cast ourselves into bondage, and to place
the management of our affairs in the hands
of what I might call a mob compared with


what we are ourselves. These [are the
utterances of four men —Sir William
Denison, Sir Henry Parkes, Sir John
Robertson, and Sir James Martin, and
they are certainly as good men as we have
in this House. Now, let me draw the
attention of hon. members to another
matter, and it is this: I have taken the
trouble to go through the Times, and the
American Review, which I intend to quote
to show what are the opinions of abler men
—at all events men with more command of
these matters—than any of those whom I
have quoted on the question of federation.
I desire to refer to a speech which Lord
Rosebery made when he was endeavouring
to bring about a federation of the unions
of England. I find that the Times com-
mented on that speech, and also upon the
question as to whether there could be any
federation of the empire. In doing so it
pointed out, as lam going to point out to
hon. members, that before we get feder-
ation, before there is any necessity for it,
there must be a danger; before we get it we
must show that there is a common interest
and a common advantage. We cannot get
it as a pure matter of rhapsodical talk,
and by allusions to the crimson thread of
kinship, the thin red line, and all that kind
of nonsense. I will ask the attention of
hon. members whilst I give them, in lan-
guage about which there is no mistake, and
which commends itself to our intelligence
and common-sense, and which I hope will
bear fruit in the memory of my hon. and
learned friends, something to think about
before they go back to the country and
again advocate federation. At any rate if
they do advocate it, let us hope it will not
be upon the lines of this bill. Perhaps
they could not prevent the bill coming
here; perhaps they were not strong enough.
They certainly seem to have given in upon
some things; but Ido ask them to remem-
ber the words used by such a high author-
ity as the Times, as follows :
It may be said, perhaps, that the existence of
a common aspiration and the recognition of a com-
mon desire are in themselves steps towards the
attainment of the end in view.
There is a common aspiration here, no
doubt, on the part of a number of gentle-
men who like to hear their country spoken
of as a nation, and who talk about one
flag, one people, and one destiny. Well,
instead of one flag it will be one folly;
instead of one people it w ill be one poor-
house ; instead of one destiny it will be one
damnation for the whole of the colony.
Instead of talking all this rubbish about
our aspirations and the recognition of a
common desire, let us see what the Times
has to say :
The argument is sound, as far as it goes ; but
it does not, perhaps, go very far. A common
sentiment, even if it is one so potent and so per-
vading as that of nationality and imperial union,
is not of itself sufficient to bind peoples together ;
there is needed a common interest as well.
Where is our common interest ?
A premature attempt at federation would be
fatal.
I hope it will be here :
At present it is only an idea, grandiose, sub-
lime, and attractive, but shadowy, vague, im-
palpable, and deficient in practical consistency.
Was there ever such an indictment against
this bill as was written in the Times of 18941
We have said that federation must be based,
not merely on a common sentiment, but on an
active sense of common interest.
What is this movement based on but senti-
ment! When you see strong-minded men—
men of intelligence—being carried away by
sentiment, watch them. A strong-minded
man governed by sentiment is more danger-
ous than an hysterical woman. There is
no accounting for what he may do. He
seems to lose control over himself. He
forgets who he is and what he is doing.
The Hon. E. Barton : That seems to be
just what is the case now !
The Hon. J. H. WANT: I am glad to
hear my hon. and learned friend say that
that is the case now. He is so carried
away by sentiment that he has come to the
conclusion that that is the case. If ever
there was an hysterical movement in this
country it has been shown by my hon. and
learned friend and others who have gone
round the country delivering lectures. My
hon. and learned friend, Mr. R. E. O’Connor,
will, no doubt, follow me. My hon. and
learned friend, Mr. Barton, has left us
without one word being said except senti-
ment. He has not said one word to show
that we shall get any advantage from this
federation.
The Hon. Sir Julian Salomons : Nor
how it will work !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : Nor how it
will work, nor what advantage we shall get.
But he has, on the other hand, openly ad-
mitted that we shall have to make sacn-


fices. He has shown the dangers which
we will encounter by entering into this
federation, butinalltheir speechesthrough-
out the country neither Mr. McMillan nor
my hon. and learned friend, Mr. R. E.
O’Connor, has shown one solitary item of
advantage we are going to get, except this
sentiment of calling ourselves a nation. I
challenge my hon. and learned friend, Mr.
R. E. O’Connor, to drop sentiment, and
tell us what New South Wales is going to
gain from this federation. We know what
we are going to lose. We know the dan-
gers that threaten us, because my hon. and
learned friend, Mr. Barton, has told us of
them. We know from the speeches made
by Mr. McMillan what shall have to
suffer, but not one word have we ever
heard as to what we are going to gain. I
do not ask my hon. and learned friend,
Mr. R. E. O’Connor, to give us any senti-
ment. I want to put it on one side. The
Times puts it on one side, and every rea-
sonable man puts it on one side. Let hon.
gentlemen tell us what we are going to
gain from this federation. Do not lecture
me about provincialism, or charge me with
being selfish. I am willing to say in the
interests of this country that lam both.
If I have a solemn trust reposed in my
hands, I am not going to give that away
for sentiment. In reading the convention
debates on this question, I found that on
some of the most momentous questions
some of the smallest states said, “We gave
in to you yesterday ; you give in to us to-
day.” That is all very well for a man who
is dealing with his own private affairs.
But when a man is a trustee for his coun-
try, he should know no such word as com-
promise. Any one who represents us at the
convention should adhere to his opinions,
and to what we send him there to pre-
serve. No member of the convention, no
matter how anxious to see federation be-
come an accomplished fact, is justified,
clothed as he is with the trust we have re-
posed in him, to go there and say, “We
gave away yesterday; you give away to •
day” These gentlemen see the sacrifices
that we shall have to make. In a pamphlet
which Mr. McMillan was good enough to
publish, and which I have had the advan-
tage of reading, that gentleman said :
But, unfortunately in this question, we have
to deal with absolutely unknown quantities.
We have to deal, not with the tariff of the pre-
sent, but with the tariff of the future, and no
man can tell what that tariff will be. Here
comes the question, not so much of compromise,
but of absolute and essential sacrifice on the part
of New South Wales.
Could language be plainer than that? Here
is a gentleman who is one of the cham-
pions of this question of federation, and
he tells us in so many words “ this is not
a question of compromise at all, do not
deceive yourselves about this, you have
got to make sacrificesand in another
speech he said we should never know what
those sacrifices were. Again, these sacrifices
were admitted by the hon. and learned mem-
ber, Mr. Barton, last Wednesday. We have
never heard one word of what we are going
to get in return for those sacrifices—they
have not even been foreshadowed in any
form. I should like to draw hon. members’
attention to the way in which this matter
has got on between the time when Sir
Henry Parkes had finished with it, and the
time when it now comes up again before
us. I well remember that, when it was
brought forward in 1890, allusion was
made to my dear old friend, Sir John
Robertson, and myself, as being two lone
men on a plank on the ocean. Well, no
plank in this world was ever made big
enough for those people to scramble on who
now want to get on that same plank. No
plank is large enough now that the glamour
is removed and their eyes are opened.
The Hon. Sir Julian Salomons : The
honeymoon is over!
The Hon. J. H. WANT : Yes, and fed-
eration has gone with the honeymoon. The
thing was allowed to drop. But all of a
sudden Major-General Edwardescamealong
and Sir Henry Parkes was carried away
with the idea that there might be a wonder-
ful invasion, and then these federation
proposals were made. From 1850 until
the present day this question of federation
has never been submitted to the people of
this country except once, and then what
was the result ? When this was a burning
question, a seat for East Sydney became
vacant several years ago, and I and Mr.
McLaughlin, the solicitor, who was trying
to help me to block this thing altogether,
made up our minds that at all risks
would find out what the people thought
about it. I hope I may not be considered
egotistical for referring to myself so much.
On that occasion we determined to try to


ascertain in East Sydney what the feeling
of the people was upon this question, and
I hope that I shall now draw back the
memory of the people of the colony to the
expression of opinion then given. East
Sydney was a free-trade electorate. Mr.
McLaughlin and myself brought out Walter
Bradley, a protectionist to the backbone,
and ran him in that free-trade constituency
on the sole question of federation or no
federation. We put him up as an anti-
federationist, and he came in with flying
colours at the head of the poll. .
The Hon. E. Barton : A strong argu-
ment !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : I am entitled
to point out that the only time at which
the question was put before the people
they repudiated federation, and I believe
that if it went before them again the same
course would be taken. We have sent
some gentlemen to the convention and
they have come back, and now we have to
say whether we approve of their doings.
What is the bill they have brought back
with them? In the first place, let me
point out the objections I have to it.
There is, first of all, the question of equal
state rights in the senate. To show how
my hon. and learned friend, Mr. Barton,
could be carried away, I will point out
that he told us the other night that if he
had his way we should have no federation
unless we had equal state rights in the
senate. If we make the same suggestion
as hon. gentlemen in the other Chamber
have made—God bless them for it—by
striking out this provision for equal repre-
sentation of states in the senate —there can
be no federation at all.
The Hon. Dr. MacLaurin : A good job
too !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : My hon. and
learned friend, Mr. Barton, said it was
right there should be equal state represen-
tation, and that he would never agree to
federation unless there was.
The Hon. E. Barton: I did not say
that—that is as true as every other state-
ment the hon. and learned member has
made—l said I will continue to advocate
it, and I will!
The Hon. J. 11. WANT: Well,continue
to advocate it—that is mere hair-splitting.
I should like to point out the view which
I ask the House to adopt in regard to
equal state representation. In the first
place, we are told that this bill was based
on the same idea as the Canadian federa-
tion to a great extent. Let me show what
somebody has told us about the Canadian
confederation, supposing this to be a copy
of it, or anything like it :
Now we will turn to the Dominion of Canada.
Much has been said of the example of the feder-
ation of Canada, and I have said on former occa-
sions that it was not such a great success as
people at a distance supposed that it was. I
hold in my hand a copy of the North American
Review, for July last. The ability of that Re-
view is pretty w r ell known, and the fairness of its
articles is generally admitted. There is an article
is this number of the Review which shows us how
very far from successful is the confederation of
Canada.
And yet we are asked to adopt a constitu-
tion prepared somewhat on the same lines.
The Hon. E. Barton : What is the hon.
and learned member quoting ?
The Hon. J. H. WANT : I am quoting
from a speech made by Sir Henry Parkes,
in 1884. But, to be more correct, perhaps,
as he might not be taken as an authority,
because he was a seceder from the anti-
federal movement, and afterwards led the
opposite army, it is better to refer to the
authority to which he referred, and which
correctly shows the position we shall be in
if we adopt the Canadian confederation
and give equal state rights in the senate.
The discontent existing in several of the pro-
vinces despite the great expenditure in them to
develop their resources, and render their inhabi-
tants contented, loyal citizens, is daily assuming
more serious proportions. Only a year or two
ago British Columbia was deafening her sister
provinces with the cry of annexation, that demand
ceasing only with the rapid construction of the
Canadian Pacific Bailway from the Pacific coast
eastward at an enormous expense to the Do-
minion. The disallowance of the Anti-Chinese
Bill the other day is another source of dissatis-
faction to her. In Manitoba, for some time past,
men in private and in public have manifested
great indignation, threatening secession and an-
nexation in consequence of the Ottawa Govern-
ment having refused to remove the high duties
upon agricultural implements ; also on account
of the locking up of Alanitoba lands in some
cases, and in others the prodigal disposal of them
to speculators
The Hon. E. Barton : Is that written
by Goldwin Smith ?
The Hon. J. H. WANT: No; it ap-
pears in the North American Review at
page 47 of volume 139.
The Hon. Dr. Cullen : It is thirteen
years old !


The Hon. J. H. WANT : Well, my hon.
and learned friend is more than thirteen
years old, and can surely afford to listen
to somebody else’s wisdom besides his own.
The next passage is this : lam reading
this because the question before us is one
of copying Canadian confederation, and,
surely, it is some advantage to us to know
this :
The province of Quebec has been restless, dis-
satisfied, and anxious under the heavy debt ac-
cumulated of late years. Starting in 1807, free
of debt, with a respectable balance to her credit,
her rulers, conservatives during the whole of the
period, except for a few years, from say 1875 till
1878, have managed to roll up a debt aggregat-
ing, some authorities say fl 1,000,000, and others
$15,000,000
Avery serious matter is the dissatisfaction and
alarm excited in the province of Ontario, the
backbone of the Dominion, by the centralising
policy of Sir John Macdonald’s administration.
The article goes on to point out the diffi-
culties which surround the question of
states representation. If any one has any
doubt as to the wisdom of giving the states
equal representation, let us look at what
took place the other day. The American
House of Representatives almost with one
voice accepted a bill that was to put an
end to all troubles, wars, and difficult ques-
tions between England and the United
States. It was passed almost unanimously,
and it was sent up to the Senate, and a
few of the jingoes there, in dealing with a
bill of that character, passed by the whole
of the representatives of the people, were,
by reason of the equal representation of
the states in the Senate, enabled absolutely
to prevent the carrying out of the will of
the whole of the people of America.
The Hon. Sir Julian Salomons: And
of England !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : And of Eng-
land, of course—at all events, of the
American people and their own represen-
tatives. The consequence was that what
would have put a stop to all questions
of.hostility between two English-speaking
peoples, and would have bound them to-
gether as brothers, instead of their re-
maining as they now are, merely cousins,
was thrown out at the sweet will of the
small states by reason of their having
equal power with the other states to vote
in favour of or against the bill. What is
to stop the same kind of thing from hap-
pening here ? My hon. and learned friend,
Mr. Barton, the other night said that in
Germany they managed things all right, and
there was no difficulty. But I find that in
the German Federation, Prussia has a popu-
lation of 29,000,000, and has seventeen
senators, and Bavaria, which has only a
population of 5,000,000 has six senators.
The Hon. Sir Julian Salomons : And
some have less !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : Saxony, which
has a population of only 3,000,000, has
four senators ; and, therefore, this much
praised and much extolled German idea,
in which my hon. and learned friend, Mr.
Barton, certainly led me to believe there
was equal representation of states, I find
does not go a very long way towards it. I
do not know whether I misunderstood my
hon. and learned friend when he was allud-
ing to Germany.
The Hon. E. Barton : All I say is that
the opponents of equal state representation
laid great stress on that federation !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : My hon. and
learned friend quoted Germany the other
day as affording us an example which we
ought to follow.
The Hon. E. Barton : I did not say so
at all!
The Hon. J. H. W T ANT : So I under-
stood my hon. and learned friend. Now
take Canada. We are supposed to follow
Canada. What does Canada do 1 I find
that Quebec has a population of 1,400,000,
and has twenty-four senators, and that
Nova Scotia, with a population of only
450,000 has ten senators ; and Manitoba,
with a population of 152,000, has four
senators. Which are we to copy 1 If we
are to have federation at all, we surely
might copy those who have had experience
of these matters, unless my hon. and
learned friend, Mr. Barton, is prepared to
say that these things have worked disas-
trously, and that we are likely to get some-
thing better from what he proposes to give
us. Let me for a few moments point out
what the result would be in our case.
New South Wales, with a population of
1,300,000, would have eight senators, and
Tasmania, with a population of 160,000,
would also have eight senators.
The Hon. E. Barton : That is not the
number mentioned in the bill—it is six.
The hon. member is wrong every time !
If. The Hon. J. H. WANT : I do not care
whether it is six, eight, or ten, it is a
case of equal numbers. A country with


1,277,000 people is to have no more power
than a country with only 160,000 ; and,
more than that, as has been pointed out
before, New South Wales and Victoria,
with a population of 2,300,000 are to be at
the beck and call of the four other colonies,
with a population of something like 700,000
altogether.
The Hon. Sir Julian Salomons : That
is twenty-four members against twelve !
The Hon. J. 11. WANT : And if a
question comes up which affects the in-
terests of Western Australia, South Aus-
tralia, and Tasmania, where are New South
Wales and Victoria going to be ? Or, if
the case affects the interests of Western
Australia, South Australia, Victoria, and
Tasmania, where is New South Wales
going to be ; and, even if we had Queens-
land at our back, where would New South
Wales and Queensland be as against the
otherfourcolonies? Letthehon. andlearned
member, Mr. Barton, take an object lesson
from what took place before we got into this
convention. What was the first thing that
the representatives of the other colonies did,
they having equal voting power? I was with
our Premier in Tasmania at the time when
he was attending a conference of Premiers,
and what did they do behind his back ?
Whilst we were on the spot the members of
the convention fixed the convention to be
held in Adelaide without saying a word to
those representing this colony. It was all
cut and dried that the convention should
be held in Adelaide. That was the first
dose we had of equal voting. The next
thing that was cut and dried was the elec-
tion of the president. They were not satis-
fied with that. One day a very important
matter cropped up at the convention and
the Western Australian representatives
were anxious to get home. I read—l do
not know whether it is true; I hope it is
not true—that without the slightest word
of warning, and whilst two members, Mr.
Reid and Mr. Wise, were away in another
colony, the Western Australians being
anxious to get back, and not only anxious
to get back but to carry a resolution if
they possibly could which would suit them,
actually turned the whole business topsy-
turvy, brought forward one of the clauses
of the bill which they wanted to be success-
ful upon, and took a snatch vote. That was
done while two of our representatives were
absent.
The Hon. E. Barton : The division on
that question was taken in a full conven-
tion, and notice had been given !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : They, tried to
snatch a vote. The hon. and learned mem-
ber said that it showed what a patriotic feel-
ing there was amongst them, because in the
end some of the representatives of the states
that we thought would go against us turned
round and voted in favour of a resolution
which was advantageous and which this
colony wanted. lam not going into detail,
hut why did they vote in that way? I re-
member reading at the time that it was
because they wanted federation. And when
they have got it and we are manacled and
shackled, when we are tied by the leg and
cannot move, then they will show you how
they will vote. Then we shall see whether
they will vote for the enemy. It is all
very well to talk about patriotism, and how
they vote. I remember what they said.
They said that they did it sooner than lose
federation. Of course they would do it.
Yes, they say we will do this, we will vote
for this, and some actually voted against
their own colony, and justified their action
afterwards in speeches they made in that
colony. When charged with having sold
their country, they said, “ If we had not
done it we should have been out of the
federation. We should have had Victoria,
New South Wales, and Queensland feder-
ated, and we should have been left out in
the cold.” If we had been behind the
scenes we might have heard them say,
“ Wait till we get equal representation in
the senate, no matter what Parliament
may do we have our majority, and though
we hoodwinked them into believing we
were going to be patriotic, when the push
comes we will show them better. We will
put leg-irons on them.”
The Hon. C. G. Heydon: Will you walk
into my parlour said the spider to the fly ?
The Hon. J. H. WANT : And when the
fly gets there
The Hon. Sir Julian Salomons : It is
not a parlour, it is a prison !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : There is an
advantage my hon. and learned friend tells
us in this sort of thing. He tells us the
things which we are to do. In other words,
we are to hand over to these small colo-
nies the right to do whatever they please.
Then, my hon. and learned friend tells us


that we are perfectly safe, because in the
senate they have no right to mangle money
bills. My hon. and leaimed friend, Mr.
Barton, says, “I shall be no party to taking
away the equal representation of the states
in the senate.” He will be no party to a
federation that does not give equal rights
to the senate. He would vote for giving
the states equal representation.
The Hon. E. Barton : So I shall!
The Hon. J. H. WANT : Then we are
told that we are perfectly safe. Tasmania
is a nice country ;I go there to enjoy my-
self ; but at the best it is only an under-
sized sheep run. We are asked to hand
over, perhaps, really the right to alter an
appropriation bill. They may control it.
They tell us we are perfectly safe because
they have only given to the senate certain
powers. They have handed over to these
states the whole of our liberties, freedom,
and independence, yet they cannot do any-
thing but make suggestions. Well, if
the upper chamber makes a suggestion
of it, says, “ This must be put in the bill
or that must be knocked out,” and if the
lower chamber will not accept the sug-
gestion, do you think the small states are
going to drop the matter % You will find
nothing of the kind. They will stand upon
their hind legs and say, “We have got
equal rights in the senate, we have got the
right to suggest this kind of thing.” That
suggestion is like the boot of a man who
suggests that the other man should go down
stairs. When you suggest that a man shall
go down stairs you suggest it in such a way
that there cannot be any mistake about it.
So much for these state rights. What is
the next thing that we come to sWe come
to this question of the division of our sur-
plus, to the financial question. Not one
man of all the ten that went to that con-
vention dared for one moment to suggest
that the financial scheme which has been
proposed, brought to light, created, and
rushed into existence by all the talent of
all the treasurers of these different colonies,
not one of them, aided by my hon. friend,
whose abilities we all recognise and admire
—Mr. McMillan—could attempt to argue
that the financial provisions of this Federa-
tion Bill could be tolerated for a moment.
One of our best citizens, one whom we
can rely upon, a prominent head of one of
our financial institutions—the Australian
Mutual Provident Society—Mr. Teece, who
is quite an authority, lias expressed his
opinion. The other day the hon. member
quoted him as an authority.
The Hon. E. Barton : I did not quote
him as an authority; I said I did not agree
with his views!
The Hon. J. H. WANT : The hon. and
learned member gave Mr. Teece as an
authority. I was waiting to hear what he
said, and I find that Mr. Teece, who is an
authority on finance, is reported to have
condemned the financial scheme in the
presence of several gentlemen advocating
federation, viz., Mr. McMillan, Mr. Walker,
and Mr. Nash, the latter a gentleman who
has written some able and most lucid arti-
cles on the question of federal finance, and
who has shown the financial difficulties of
federation; yet, notwithstanding all the
difficulties shown to exist, these federa-
tionists, in an airy, fairy kind of style, at
the convention “chucked” headlong into
the Constitution Bill the provisions as to
the way in which the surplus is to be
divided, and handed us over to what I can
only call a band of political robbers. What
did Mr. McMillan tell us 1 These kind of
things are not in my line, and I prefer to
take the opinions of those who understand
them. I like to go into the enemy’s camp
and find out what they say about it. I find
that Mr. McMillan says, speaking on this
question of finance, which we are asked to
swallow :
Under the Victorian tariff, New South Wales
would have duties equal to—these are very start-
ling figures—£3,3l4,ooo. Victoria,under the same
tariff, would have £1,704,000. New South Wales
and Victoria have almost exactly the same popu-
lation, yet under her present tariff Victoria
would only get through her customs in duties
£1,704,000, while New South Wales would get
£3,314,000. In other words, Victoria would
have £1 9s. per head in duties, and New South
Wales £2 13s. 7d. per head. Now if this surplus
were distributed on a per capita basis, the result
of that would be this, that New South Wales
would lose £668,000, and Victoria would gain
£812,000.
An Hon. Member : Per annum !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : Per annum.
Yet we are asked to swallow that. Are
we not entitled to have from my hon. and
learned friends some information as to
what we are going to get 1 Are we going
to be led blindfold into this battle ? If they
had come and said, “We know nothing,
and cannot tell you anything; suggest
something,” that would have been all right;


but when they come with a cut-and-dried
scheme, what right have they to ask us to
discuss it, and make suggestions? If it
goes back without explanation, and with-
out a word of disapprobation from my hon.
and learned friends, or from others, what
can we expect from the convention, but
that they will say, “ It has been before the
two houses of Parliament, those who re-
presented you in the convention have not
uttered a single word against it; you admit
that New South Wales has to make these
enormous sacrifices, you knew what you
were going to lose and what you were going
to gain, yet no man’s voice has been lifted
up, but they have stood silently by and
said, “Let it go on.” We have not heard
from the hon. and learned member, Mr.
Barton, what he proposes to do. I ask my
hon. and learned friend what benefit, what
advantage this colony is to obtain ? I also
ask him what he proposes to do in regard
to the question to which Mr. McMillan
has pointed so strongly ? The only gentle-
man who has given us any assistance is the
Attorney-General of Victoria, Mr. Isaacs.
He was kind enough to say that on this
basis of calculation :
It has been estimated that the commonwealth
will require to impose duties which will realise
£2 per head of the population, and this sum is
abnormal.
I should think it was.
The Hon. Sir Julian Salomons : Only
for the federal government!
The Hon. E. Barton : Including all the
returns !
The Hon. J. H. WANT :In order to
work out this scheme of federation, as
pointed out in the Daily Telegraph this
morning, I find that, at the present moment,
our taxation for the government of this
colony amounts to £1 per head, but when
federation is carried out we shall have to
pay £2 per head. That is an answer from
the Attorney-General of Victoria. Now, I
want an answer from my hon. and learned
friends here. I want them to tell me what
they are going to do ? Mr. McMillan also
says this :
But the period which we have put in the
federal bill is five years, and does anybody in
his senses think that in five years the differences
represented by £2 13s. 7d. and £1 9s. per head
of population would be brought into line ?
This five years’ business is a myth, it is a
delusion and a snare. I have been told
by those who are cognisant of these mat-
ters that ten years will not be sufficient to
work this thing out. During that ten
years, as worked out by Mr. McMillan and
others, this colony will suffer a loss of from
£400,000 to £500,000 a year. And for
what? So much for this question of finance.
I have dealt with equal state rights, and I
have shown how we shall be surrendering
everything that we have got and every-
thing that is dear to us, if we consent to
it. I ask my hon. and learned friends how
they are going to get rid of these insuper-
able difficulties which Mr. McMillan has
pointed out ? I ask them to j ustify their
inclusion in the bill, because, as sent there
by us, they are delegates having a solemn
trust to protect this country ? I ask them,
in justice to the House, in justice to the
number of men who put my hon. and learned
friend, Mr. Barton, in his dignified position
at the head of the convention—l ask them
to give us some information with regard
to the difficulties to w T hich I have alluded,
to dispel, if they can, the fear that we are
going to be sold, to point out how these
sacrifices are to be avoided, and to show
us what advantages we are going to get
beyond the mere question of sentiment ?
Mr. Teece, following in the footsteps of
Mr. McMillan, told us :
In no part of the discussion at the Adelaide
Convention was the spirit of provincialism, even
of selfishness, so marked as on that of the finan-
cial problem. And in the effort to please every-
body, to make everybody rich at nobody’s ex-
pense, the convention, of course, failed to please
anybody, with the result that the financial
scheme submitted was one which was impossible
of acceptance.
And yet they dump it down on the table
in this bill and ask us to swallow it, and
now try to throttle discussion. Then the
people would have said, “ There has been
no objection to these matters,” and our
delegate wmuld have gone back to the con-
vention with a projectwhich it is impossible
to perform, saying, “No question was asked
about it in the House,” and the cool result
would be that we should be adopting a sys-
tem by which we should lose from £400,000
to £500,000 a year for five years, perhaps
ten years, and which would place on our
backs taxation to the amount of £2 instead
of £1 per head. I come now to another
question which is equally important, and
that is the question with regard to our rail-
ways. I find in the Daily Telegraph of
to-day—in which I shall not get favourable


mention in the morning—a communication
from Mr. Matheson, the Chief Commis-
sioner for Victorian Railways, on this sub-
ject. He says that the condition should
be made absolute that the whole of the
railway system or no portion of it should
be handed over. What would become of
our railways from here to Cootamundra ?
Between here and Cootamundra there is
mountainous country, but there is level
country on the Victorian side, and all the
trade would be swept to Melbourne. The
geographical position settles that at once,
and if you hand over the railways what
is to become of Broken Hill, the Riverina,
and the Tweed country 1 Hear what Mr.
Matheson says as stated in the Daily
Telegraph :
The conditions should be made absolute, that
neither the whole system or no portion of it
should be handed over. In his opinion, too, the
railway system should be transferred only at
their capital cost, and authority with regard to
the construction of new lines should not be placed
in the hands of the commonwealth until the rail-
ways of the states concerned are taken over. He
mistrusts the inter-state commission, and even
suggests an alteration of state boundaries and
railway matters.
Listen to the next line :
Of course New South Wales would never agree
to that.
I hope not. I happen to know, from conver-
sation with one whose loss we all deplore,
and who I am proud to say was a personal
friend of mine—l refer to Mr. Eddy—l
happen to know, and the hon. and learned
member, Mr. Barton, knows, that Mr.
Eddy’s opinion was that under no circum-
stances could we hand over our railways.
Ido not suppose it required a man of
the position of Mr. Eddy to tell us that.
Nevertheless, we find that Mr. Matheson,
speaking, of course, for Victoria, suggests
that we should have an alteration of the
boundaries of our railways. If, before
this, they should get equal state repre-
sentation at any time, and if, by-and-by,
the whole of these matters were taken from
our control
The Hon. E. Barton : That is impos-
sible !
The Hon. J. H. WANT :It is not im-
possible. We do not know what will
happen when we once give up our freedom
and independence. There is a provision
for an alteration of the Constitution. We
know that history repeats itself. What
has happened in the United States and
other places 1 Go to Canada to-morrow,
and you will hear them groan under feder-
ation. Go to America, and they will tell
you that they wish to God they could get
rid of federation.
An Hon. Member : Oh !
The Hon. J. H. WANT : Hon. mem-
bers may say “ oh ” as much as they like.
People who go there and see for themselves
will tell you that the way they are feder-
ated is the curse of the country. We should
then be in this position : we should, as
Mr. Matheson says, have to hand the rail-
ways over altogether or not at all, and it
would not be the “ not at all,” but the
“altogether.” The next thing would be
that we should have a railway boundary —
“ state boundaries in railway matters,” to
use his own words. Are we prepared to
do that ? What is the makeshift in the
bill with regard to the railways ? Cannot
we see that it is only delaying the evil
hour and shirking the question, and that
sooner or later the time will come when
the “ grab ” will be put on all these mat-
ters 1 It is all very well to say we are not
doing it now. The members of this House
are not going to live for ever. We have
to legislate now for those who come after
us, and I should be sorry for it to be said
that my name stood on the list of those
who sold our birthright, independence,
and freedom simply for the idea of be-
coming one people, one nation. I will ask
hon. members to give me an answer to the
question with regard to the railways, and
to show me how we are going to defend
ourselves when the pinch comes. Leaving
the railway question, let me ask why this
country should go to the expense of main-
taining a federal court of appeal 1 Why
should the right which has been the in-
variable and inviolable right of all English
people, and which they claim to be most
dear to them, betaken awayfrom us—lrefer
to the right of going to the greatest tribunal
in the world—a tribunal which commands
universal respect, which is free from all
bias, prejudice, clique, or party feeling—a
tribunal which knows not what we are nor
whom we are, which can have no interest
or tortured mind in regard to us, and to
which we know we can appeal at a nominal
cost. Instead of that we are asked to take
away from the people this right of appeal
to the Privy Council. We are asked to
set up a court of appeal here, constituted


amongst ourselves, with all the feelings
and all the knowledge which humanity
always dictates, and which no one can
avoid, to a certain extent, feeling. What
is the reason for it, and who has asked for
it 1 What is the benefit of it 1 Is there
anything in this question of federation
more than a mere fad 1 Is there anything
in it but vain glory, bombast, and trumpet-
ing 1 Why are we to give away the sub-
stance and hang on to this mythical shadow
we hear so much about 1 There is still one
other thing. What about the expense of
all this business 1 I have no hesitation in
saying—and I believe many hon. members
and the colony generally will agree with
me—that the expense of the government
of these colonies at the present time is a
crying sin and disgrace. Take Tasmania,
with its small number of inhabitants. I
believe the cost of government there is
£700,000. I may say that my personal
friends are in that island. There are men
there of great ability ; and it is a place to
which we go for our recreation. It is, in-
deed, a bright little island. But can any
one doubt that the proper position for that
island is as a municipality of Victoria,
governed by a mayor ? What is to hap-
pen ? Why, forsooth, this colony, not
much bigger than a sheep-run, is to con-
trol our affairs, and we are to be saddled,
as we will be, with its government, when
a mayor and five aldermen ought to be
sufficient to govern the whole place. Let
hon. members look at our own affairs.
Does any one suppose for a moment that
this country could not be well governed
with half the number of ministers and half
the departments 1 We have no state ques-
tions here; we have no foreign matters to
deal with ;we have only domestic legisla-
tion ; and for all the danger there is, we
might be governed almost as a munici-
pality. But, forsooth, what are we asked
to have 1 We have at the present moment
municipal government. We have our par-
liamentary government. In the course of
time we shall have local government. We
have Imperial government, to a certain
extent, and now all this is to be capped
with federal government—no less than
five governments for five small colonies,
numbering together about 4,000,000 people.
Would it not be a crying disgrace, if, not
satisfied with the present Parliament, we
are to have another one 1 ? And all this
expense for what ? If the time comes
when we are separated from Great Britain;
if the time comes when we go from her
protection; if any danger threatens us, as
threatened America and Canada, through
racial disputes, or there being an enemy
at our doors; if we are threatened with
the danger which threatened Prussia, when
she had to join arms with the other German
states against France ; if, as in Switzer-
land, we are surrounded by those whom we
know not whether they are friends or foes
—if that time comes, then will be the time
for us to swallow this bitter pill : to give up
rights, freedom, independence, and every-
thing else. But until that time comes, let
us stand as we are —the freest and the
most independent of any nation of the
world. Why on earth should we, for no
cause at all, go into this question of
federation ? When the danger comes, let
it come. Until it comes, let us save all
this expense and all this enormous num-
ber of governments. Let us save the ex-
pense which will necessarily be entailed.
The £300,000 which they allow for a
federal government, in addition to what
we spend at present
The Hon. J. Hoskins : They are not
bound to that; they maymake it £500,000!
The Hon. J. H. WANT : From the rate
at which they are going, the chances are
that it will be nearer £1,000,000 than
£300,000. It is like the building of a
house ; we have to wait until we come to
the extras. lam willing to admit that I
have not gone through all the details of
the bill, as the hon. and learned member,
Mr. Barton, has done. If he will forgive
me for saying so, it was a solemn duty on
his part to go through the bill and explain
it. He did it well, honestly, and faithfully,
and the House is indebted to him for it.
But we want something more than an ex-
planation of the bill j we want a reason
for taking it. We want a reason for adopt-
ing federation ; and if my hon. and learned
friends object to going into the abstract
question of federation, let them give us a
reason for swallowing this bill.
The Hon. Dr. MacLaurin : This pill!
The Hon. J. H. WANT : This bill, or
pill, which is called federation. We are
entitled to treat the bill as a whole. We
are entitled to say, “There is a way in
which you propose we shall federate; give
us a reason why we should federate on the


basis of this bill.” I hope my hon. and
learned friends will forgive me if I have
said anything which has apparently been
offensive. I have not meant it. We are
too old friends, I feel sure, to make any
personality about the matter. We have
different ideas. They take one view of
the matter, and I take another. I regret
to find them in the front rank of federa-
tion, because they are difficult and tough
customers to deal with. At the same time,
I rejoice in the fact that I think they have
lost a good deal of their power by allowing
sentiment to run riot with their reason.
They are, in my opinion, something in the
shape or form of men who have hitherto
been living wholesome lives. They have
been living on good food, and they have
thrived upon it. They have been loyal to
their country ; they have done good ser-
vice ; but they have got hold of this senti-
ment. They have loathed their good food
—they have turned epicures, and they are
looking for some mystic luxury, and they
do not know what it is, they know nothing
about it.
The Hon. Sir Julian Salomons : And
they want us to take it!
The Hon. J. H. WANT : I venture to
say that when they have got it, when they
have thrown away the substance for the
shadow, and sit down to partake of this
luxury, they will find they are seated at a
Barmecide feast. I almost regret that I
cannot join their band, because I should
like to be a little behind the scenes and
discuss quietly with them what it is they
are going to hold out to us as a bait. I
have taken up this position all along:
Whether T am right or whether I am
wrong, no one can say, at all events, that
I have not been consistent. I have nothing
to gain by opposing federation. lam out
of the fashion rather than in it; but I care
not whom I displease, whether they are
persons in high places, or clothed in rich
garments. I feel I have a duty to per-
form, and, as I say, my duty lies to the
colony. Our duty lies to it. It is our
duty, if we can, to avert the destruction
of our Constitution, to maintain unbroken
our liberties, and to keep this colony where
it has always been—the freest of the free,
unfettered and untrammelled by all these
difficulties. The only way in which we
can do that is by letting the people know
that the majority of this House say, and
say it in no mistaken language, that we
will have none of this creature called
federation.
B




