

VRMADFVL SHIPWRECK
Of the Flora Transport, on her ¥ojage from Mew South Wales, in the Great South Seas,.
Horrible Sufferings by Starvation of Two Hundred Men, Women, and Children, Ninety of whom perished.
With an account of calamities which befel Mrs C'ardonncll of Lambeth, and her Husband, who
expired on the Wreck, from whence she v.as taken, having committed Murder in
a state of Madness, and is now’ confined in Bedlam.
Hearken to a tale of sorrow,
Such as ne’er was told before.
Feeling souls the case will harrow,
Christian hearts will it deplore
Henry Welsh, a baker’s foreman.
Courted Jean Cardonnell fair,
Her father was a famous surgeon.
Who resign’d her to At* c ar«.
SlcwirH. bi« conduct CO
'Though, alas •he pf ov d too gay.
".’his at first a happy rnaf na ge,
Ended in a tragic way.
He took to the gaming table,
Unexperienced and unfit,
Spending more than he was able,
Made him forgery commit.
Narrowly he 'scap’d the
But transported was for life.
Pure affection feeling hallows—
O’er seas with him went hie wife.
Quitted a fond parent’s shelter,
Launch’d upon the watery way,
Sufferings by her body felt were,
Till they came to Botany Bay,
He a convict heavily iron’d,
Carrying loads was forc’d to tread, Make all snug to meet the night. Burst ihecoid by which secur’d,
She with many ills environ’d, Luff, and under-wreath the try sail, Pen her feelings cannot tell.
By her needle earn’d her bread. Brave the howling tempest’s spue. None conceive what she endur'd.
Sundays, being a day of leisure, Restless as the rolling billow, I*ranticly she beat her bosom,
Were together by them pass’d, Was the breasi of lovely Jane, Tore her cheeks and auburn hair,
Small indeed the hard earn’d treasure, Sleep had fled her sorrowing pillow, As the billows round enclos’d him,
Which procur’d them a repast. Horrid dreams afflict her brain. W bo was so late her joy and care.
Something better than the ration, In the morning dangers thicken, After him poor Jane was springing.
Bread and water which they had, Prayers could not the storm appease, From her eyes tears fell in rills.
That with pork upon occasion. And the Captain sighs to reckon But the Captain to her dinging,
If not rotten —very bath He is on the great booth beas ; bav’d her to endure more ills.
Sadly thus a year went over, Where there is no sheltering harbour, Past her eyes as lightnings glare,
When he got a heller place, And the ship must lay ami strain, Undisrnay’d she stood alone,
He was alter'd—she moreover Sheltering lands no calm affords her, Like the blank statue of despair.
Hop’d he would rise o’er disgrace. All’s a wide and dreary main. Hr madness carv d in stone.
Made a kind of overseer
Over those who might be worse.
She, by favour of the governor.
To the sick was made a nurse.
Belter fortune still attended.
He arose a clerk to be,
His loose morals were amended,
Sober and attentive he.
Ladies mark’d his spouse’s suffering,
Which unmurmuring she bore,
Plenty came in friendship's offering,
Peace smil’d at their cottage door.
Oft she thought upon her parent.
Far away across the main.
Praying every bunday fervent.
She might see him once again.
To behold her husband duly,
Treading in a righteous path,
And by actions good and truly
Make all happy at Lambeth.
They one hundred pounds had laid up
In the space of five long years.
Fortune made their spirits aheer up
Smiling hope once more appears.
Mercy to him was extended. Save a score of helpless wretches, I.'extraction's s.ngel from on high, Another one now gains the wreck.
With the governor’s pardon free, Kill’d upon the gory deck, * Lash'd with garment dy’d in blood. The officer for Jane can mourn.
And permission, if so minded. None a hand to sei ve their stretches. The deep where helpless wretches lie, He lowers from the gory deck.
Home again to cross the sea. All the ship’s a slumbering wreck. Victim* to the sounding flood. Into the beat, safe in the stern.
Farewell to their noble patron, Guns and boats they now are throwing, T<> all about is Jane unconscious, She looks to be at life’s last gasp,
Gratefully both kindly gave. No relief from that they know, Ac her feet he meets his end, yhe tries to sacrifice her life,
In the FLOR A, from Port Jackson, Yawning sides, waves last n flow ing, The Captain at the last so anxious, For clench’d in her convulsive grasp.
They embark’d on ocean’s wave. All between decks oveifl >w. i’o appear her sootning friend. Remains the murderer’s gorv
Light end gay with heart o’erflowiug, Many by affection cherish’. . Four long days with nought to feed on, Bgt th from her „ > tig wren , n ..
Soon arose much fresner gales, Who afflictions never knew. Human strength can stand no longer } The saving ship came not in vain • *
From the land now stronger blowing, In their hammocks now have perish’d, Famine, and destruction lead on Life’s spark is not entirely quench’d'
They lost sight of New South Wales. And amongst them half the crew. To a painful dtath by hunger. Attention makes it rise a"ain *
Many now the deck was treading, In his arms up to the main deck, Now Jane on her father calls, , , , , ,
listening to the ocean’s roar, Jane is by her husband borne, I hen upon her Henry’s name; u scarce la tey t e ora left,
Little at the moment heeding, Nothing now the storm can check. In tones the bursting heart appals, en ™ ,nu ™ no , more »
Land or friend they’d see no more. All is hopeless and forlorn. But deepest misery has no claim. a , e , ln< ’°. ! . e ar .® re , ’
J ‘ bhe sinks beneath the billow’s roar.
Leagues, three hundred by the log-line, Hark ! the vulture flaps his broad wing, lo sympathy, for dead is feeling,
They had run before the wind. Louder now the sea-mew screams, Only tor self-suffering there ; Full ninety souls to seek their home.
When the weather ceas’d to be fine, Round ruin’s neck sea misery cling. Some to heaven are appealing. Sail d from Port Jackson all at ease.
And the elements unkind. And horror’s eye with frenzy gleams. borne with curses rend the air. But three weeks after found a tomb,
Over head the dark sky thickens, Jane is lash’d beside the tr.Tten, Jane has no hope, grief lo assuage, beneath the great Jouth Sea.
Clouds and wet the day deform, Lo, there comes a furious wave, A skeleton unshrouded goes, Jane’s senses had for ever flown,
Round them Mother Carey’s Chickens, And her husband from her driven. Now breaking out in impious rage, By day and night she pours tills strain
Are the heralds of a storm, tru no^ ln B finds a watery grave. 1 hen calm and tranquil in her woes. “ My Henry is to heaven gone,
Reef the top-sails, down with stay-sails, Loudly shriek'd poor Jane Cardonnell, Chang’d in oil her gentle nature, At.d I his murderer have slain.’
Fury from her sunk eye gleams, Once more in Lambeth she’s arriv’d.
And in each once lovely feature, No f ather nor re ) at j ons knew
She a vile demoniac seems. No chn ,f ort f rom their care deriv’d,
Her hair is scattered to the wind. All nature was a blank to view.
Her feet are cut, and bleeding bare; t n n . T . ~
Nothing now her madness minds, In N l now IS e
For nothing has a moment’s care. n 'tj cr ® aroun er memory brings,
" Her Henry s (ate unto her mind.
Fainting with weakness, on the poop, And franticly her hands she wrings,
An officer lays down to die, ’
Jane on her knees is seen to stoop, always unto strangers she
Then utter forth a yelling cry. _ Recounts her sufferings in sad strain,
~r . , „ , i.i r ,■ -r Saying, “ Henry sleeps in the South Sea,
" f I ; i , he ’’ e * thui f d the raiU,c w ; lfe ’ „ O God protect his wretched Jane.’’
“'ll* he that slew my ricHry dear.
Then snatching up a seaman’s knife, B.hold, oh reader, how one crime
rlis throat she cut from ear to ear. L> Henry Welsh brought many more,
Hark ! the sea-mew loudly shrieking, “ He is gone to heav'n” she cried, Behold her, Reader, in the plate, ' .£ X rv.Pr*] ° r . e J°P. c '™ e '
The sea-vulture flaps his wing, “ But our souls there’s none can sever.” Where stretching forth her arms she stands, 8 uWI e 18 ®}' cs core.
O'er the white foam furious breaking, Impetuous burst the whizzing tide, The knife she in a frantic state. Her constancy in dire distress,
Hideous sharks are seen to spring. Her sense and reason fled for ever. btill brandish’d in her gory hands. Shews what in plenty she would be,
Creaking timbers now are lashing. The vessel gradually sinks. Behold! and fancy that you hear, but lo ! there hastens deep distress.
For the ship has sprung a leak. Booms and spars a while support her, Her cry, “ the deed of vengeance past, And death and murder on the sea.
From the clouds the lightning’s flashing, Gushing through a thousand chinks, My husband now demands a tear. Behold and study well the olate
Thunder peals tremendous break. Her deck is level with the water, 1 wish that it may be the la»t.” Thank God such horrors were not thine
Yards and top masts now are clearing, On the floating weary prison, “ The roaring seas and murderous men, Repentance never comes too late.
Cracks the keel as on she rolls, None his fellow’s form caw trace, Have wreck’d the hopes of hapless Jane, No bow to heaven, and don’t repine.
No utraight course the helmsman steering. Lost below is all provision, Her days are number’d, fix’d her span, Shun hi' . , ...
Scudding under low bare poles. Famine stares in every face. Peace she’ll never know again. *" , . F’ car sa , (>ce st “‘
b r r _ ' . . „ VVliich leads to punishment and pain;
Jane beholds no prospect clearing, Without rudder—wheel’d by currents — The shout is now “ a sail, a sail,” And learn a lesson from the fate,
And her husband nought can do. Vengeance seems to do his wortt, Behold upon the faithful plate, Of Henry, and the maniac Jane
Even the Captain seems despairing, Tropic rains descends in torrents. Beckoning and shouting through the gale,
And di.-pirited the crew. Firing and not quenching thirst. Frantic with joy appears the mate. riope is on earth from vice debarr’d,
v , , , I*. - i , . , T U I . U . u. ■ • But mercy succours and can save,
beven long days and nights of sadness, Jane a maniac roams around, Jane heeds not, hears not what inspires For virtue meets a sure reward
Never seeing moon or sun, Mingling with the storm her cries. With hope, the enchanted prostrate few j j n wor j dg beyond the silent crave
Not a star appear’d in gladness. Quite indifferent to the sound. Within her breast life’s smother'd fires, „ * , *
Hope appear’d their baik to shun. Of him who by self murder dies. Can never be reviv'd anew-
At last alongside comes a boat,
Crowds just releas’d from bkek despair,
Rush in, no longer can it float.
But sinks, and many perish there.
Midnight brought a heavy squall on, All her solace seems to be
Ihundering—crashing fails each mast. That her husband is forgiven,
Death seem certain and appalling, Calling to the troubled sea,
Every one appears aghast. There ray Henry went to heaven
EDINBURGH:
R. Menzies, Printer, SO Bank Street
