

DRESS,
J\f ire Reference to ;
BEING A LECTURE WRITTEN FOE, AND PUBLISHED
BY THE
AUSTRALIAN HEALTH SOCIETY.
WALTER BALLS-HEADLEY,
M.D., MELBOURNE ;
Master of Arts, Doctor of Medicine, and Master of Surgery of the University of Cambridge ;
Member of the Eoyal College of Physicians of England; Fellow of the Cambridge
Philosophical and Obstetrical Societies, &c.; Hon. Physician to the Alfred Hospital
and Hebrew Ladies’ Benevolent Society; Late Hon. Physician to the
Warwick Hospital, Queensland; Sub-Physician to the Children’s Hos-
pital, Great Ormond-streot, London ; Resident Obstetric Physician
and Accoucheur to St. Bartholomew's Hospital; Acting
Physician-Accoucheur to the St. George’s and St. James’
Dispensary; Travelling Physician to the Most
Honorable the Marquis of Bute; &c., &c.
AUTHOR OE “ INTERNAL TUMOURS; THEIR CHARACTERISTIC DISTINCTIONS AND
DIAGNOSIS.”
MELBOURNE:
J. & A. M‘KTNLEY, PRINTERS, 61 QUEEN STREET.
1 8 7 6.


yVo. A? 314


PREFACE.
The following lecture is divided into two parts : The first
treats of the theory of the subject; the second contains
some plain directions for guidance in dreifs. It is hoped
that the paper is not of excessive length.
W. BALLS-HEADLEY,
M.D., Melbourne ; M.A., M.D., Cambridge, &c, &c.
120 Collins Street East,
Melbourne.




stress, foifb Reference to ||eai
It is, perhaps, not so well known as is desirable, that the
temperature or heat of the human body in health is uniform ;
that is, that, whether heated by exercise, or chilled by cold on a
frosty morning, so long as we are in health, our heat as taken by
the thermometer is practically always the same, and is quite
independent of our sensations of cold and heat. Our natural
temperature, which may be called our normal blood heat, is
98', deg. ; and in health, under no circumstances practically, do
we go more than one single degree above or below this point. It
seems surprising that the body heat of the Greenlander in his
Arctic winter is the same as that of the Central African or the
Australian aboriginal in a tropical smnmer ; yet so it is.
The extent of the range of heat of the human body, consistent
with life, in health and disease is 15 deg. ; and it is but in rare
cases that such extreme ranges as these are met with. Personally,
though for 10 years I have paid great attention to the subject of
medical thermometry, I have never known the temperature of the
human body to sink lower than 95 deg.,That is 3J deg. below the
normal, and that in only one case; nor to rise higher than
107 deg., that is BJr deg. above the normal; both of which cases
ended fatally. This is a range of only 12 deg., and that in
extreme illnesses.
Similarly among the lower creatures : birds have a higher blood
heat than man ; and among them is a great difference of heat, the
cock having a temperature of 104 deg., and the Guinea fowl
of 111 deg.


Among the mammifers, or animals which suckle their young,
the horse has about 97 deg. of heat; the she-goat, 104 deg.; the
porpoise, from 97 deg. to 100-| deg. ; and the sea-cow, from
102 deg. to 104 deg. It will be remarked that the porpoise and
sea-cow inhabit water.
Again, among reptiles, the viper is 9 deg. hotter than the
surrounding atmosphere ; the lizard 2 deg. ; and the turtle is
about 6 deg. hotter than the water it inhabits.
Of fish, the eel is 2 deg. hotter than the water ; and the shark
rather more, being 21 deg.
Now the temperature of the atmosphere in the shade during
the day at the present time is about 60 deg., and in the sun about
85 deg.; while the sea has a heat of about 52 deg.
Thus we find that birds are about 40 deg. hotter than the air,
when its heat is 70 deg., which we call temperate; suckling
animals, inhabiting the land, about 30 deg. ; those of the sea,
50 deg. above that of the water; while lizards, snakes, and
turtles range from 2 deg. to 9 deg. of heat greater than their
surrounding medium ; man being about 30 deg. hotter than a
lecture-room, or the shade on a temperate day in summer.
It having been now shown, that animals of various kinds are
hotter than the element in which they live, it follows that they
must have some internal arrangement, by which this additional
heat is produced.
Those who lecture on the subject of food will tell you, that food
is, roughly speaking, of two kinds; the Ist, that which provides
material for the repair of the higher structures, as the brain,
nervous system, muscles, bones, skin, &c. ; and the 2nd, composed
of fat, starch, and sugar, which conduce specially to the
production and preservation of heat. Now these substances
consist largely of carbon and hydrogen, which, when combined
with oxygen, effect a chemical combination with production of
heat. This process is in action with every altering condition of
our bodies; in the action of our brain, as in thinking ; in our
muscular action, as when we walk ; in the muscles of our chest
and internally, as when we breathe, and our hearts beat; every


rsuch act causes destruction of a definite quantity of tissue, and
every such destruction causes the simultaneous production of a
definite amount of heat. The appetite for these kinds of food is
regulated by the demand of the climate for heat production.
Again, as these used up materials are eliminated by the lungs,
heal is produced ; and the colder the air breathed, the greater is
the formation of heat : for the oxygen therein present, occupying a
smaller space, is in larger quantity, and therefore can enter into
chemical combination with a larger quantity of effete material,
with simultaneous production of heat. In summer the oxygen,
being in more expanded form, is in less quantity, and less heat is
formed. Most heat is thus formed, when most is required.
Without doubt, however, the heat of the body is regulated to
some extent by nerve influence. Thus, if the brain be cut off
from the body, or be under the influence of a narcotic, the body
cools more rapidly than it would, were the creature killed, or
animation were suspended in some other way. Again, a paralysed
limb is usually cooler than the corresponding sound one. On the
other hand, if the spinal cord in the back be divided, the parts
below the seat of injury are usually increased in temperature.
Such increase or decrease in temperature appears to be due to the
kind of nerves divided ; greater heat resulting if they have been
of the kind which presides over the dimensions of the arteries,
which thus become dilated. The effect of nerve influence over the
size of the smaller blood-vessels is not uncommonly seen in
■“ blushing.”
The effect of food in heat production, and of nerve control, is
illustrated by experiments made on birds. When kept without
food or drink, they showed their diminished capacity for heat
formation, not so much by a sudden fall in their temperature, as
by a greater and daily progressive rate of variation. Thus,
whereas in health their heat would vary at different times I t deg.,
when starving the daily variation was 6 deg., and in such a
manner that the average heat was 4 L deg. lower than the natural.
On the last day, when the bird died, its heat rapidly fell 25 deg.,
making in all 291 deg. from the commencement of the starvation.


This sudden fall of heat, or absence of capacity for heat formation,*
was the immediate cause of death.
But if the bird be fed three or four hours before it would have
died, its heat is not increased, till it have digested and absox-bed such
food ; and, in consequence of excessive weakness, this process may
take many hours, during which time the creature may die.
While, however, by experiment, the bird, dying from the-
cooling of its body from inability to form heat from previous-
starvation, does not for many hours receive the benefit from the
food thus supplied, in the form of increased heat formation, the
application to it of artificial heat at once restores it ; and,
previously at the point of death, it is when thus warmed able to
fly about and take food; ultimate recovery depending upon
whether the artificial heat be maintained, until the creature has had
time to digest the food taken. If artificial heat be so maintained,
the creature lives ; if not, it presently dies.
It thus seems, that artificial heat is of more immediate value to
the starved man at the point of death, than food; since he dies at
the moment, not of want of food, but of inability to make the heat
necessary for the continuance of life ; while food is essential, that
the internal heat formation may presently be in progress.
From previous considerations it will be seen, that, assuming the
supply of food to be sufficient, the amount of heat formed is apt to
be regulated by the amount of exertion, and therefore of chemical
change in the tissues. Whence it results that, under many
circumstances, as in the very young, and, to a less degree, in the
old, the heat production is much below what is necessary to
existence. We recognise this fact, of the necessity of external
heat to life, in the cooling and dying of tire life in the egg, when
the hen ceases to keep it warm with her body; yet, when artificial
heat is supplied, as when the egg is placed in a suitably con-
structed and heated oven, not only will the egg hatch, but the
young thrive and grow. Similarly, young birds and animals, many
of which indeed seem to be almost entirely without independent
power of heat production, die, if deprived of their mothers before
they have arrived at an age to produce their own heat. To a


■considerable extent the same is the case with young children, in
whom it is interesting to note that the average heat of sixteen
puny children, from one to seven days old, was only 98 deg.,
while that of seventeen strong children of the same age was
OOg deg., which is a difference of a degree and one-third. On the
other hand, we find that in those young animals which run as soon
as born, as in the Guinea pig, there is a proportionate formation
of heat. In the old, too, the same deficient power of heat pro-
duction occurs ; so that the effects of a cold season upon them, is
that they die much more extensively.
The result of this deficiency of heat formation in the young and
-old is, that in Brussels it was found that, of children not more than
.a month old, 700 died during the six winter months, compared
with 520 during the six summer months; which is more than
a quarter more during the cold weather. The excess of
deaths in cold weather diminishes, till we come to those between,
twenty-five and thirty years of age, when the numbers are nearly
even; while, from 50 to 65 years, the death rate is nearly as
•excessive in winter as in the young babies, 680 dying in the
winter months against 519 in the summer, which is nearly a
quarter more ; and, in those over ninety years of age, the dehtlis
in January are more than two to one of those in July.
I have troubled you with these figures to show you, how com-
paratively incapable the young and old are of producing sufficient
heat in their bodies to maintain life, in comparison with those who
are in the perfection of their muscular vigour.
While then heat is thus produced, and in quantities propor-
tionate to the vigour of the age, it is evident, since we live in a
medium of air which is usually much colder than ourselves, that
we must be constantly losing our heat to the air which is about
us : that is, that our production of heat must be such, that we
may be enabled to lose as much as the air about us takes, and still
maintain our bodies at 98| deg. Again, it has been shown that
heat is produced, among other modes, by muscular exercise; when
we run, or otherwise exert ourselves vigorously, we form an
increased quantity of heat; but our bodies never in health exceed


the normal temperature, so that the superfluous amount must be
rapidly disposed of.
This is effected by exhalation and evaporation, and happens
thus : When we breathe, we draw in a certain quantity of air at
a temperature say of 70 deg. on a temperate day; this air we
breathe out at an additional heat of 30 deg. ; a process which
occurs about 20 times a minute, when we are at rest. This is
exhalation.
Again, our skins are constantly forming and sending to the
surface perspiration, composed mainly of water; and, in the
process of conversion of water into vapour, a great deal of heat
is absorbed in the form of what is called latent heat—that is, heat
which is really present in that vapour, and by which its form of
vapour is maintained; but it is not discernible, except in the
transition back to water. We avail ourselves of this action, when
we cool butter or water by evaporation. Thus the butter is put
in an empty basin, the bottom of which stands in a shallow dish
of cold water ; a wet cloth is laid over the basin, its ends dipping
into the water in the dish, which it constantly draws up by
capillary attraction. Evaporation now occurs ; which can only
be effected by the appropriation of additional heat, which is thus
taken from the basin and butter, which latter thus becomes cooler
and harder. Similarly with water coolers, the degree of coldness
is dependent upon the rapidity of evaporation : thus in such as are-
made of canvas, through which moisture can rapidly ooze, the
water becomes much colder, if the bag be hung in the sun. The
heated head too is cooled on the same principle, when a single
layer of wet cotton material is laid over it, and a few drops of
water frequently spilt on it.
Similarly the perspiration, provided on the surface of the
body, evaporates ; and in this vaporization a large quantity of the'
heat of the body is consumed and removed. This is evaporation.
So too in the breath, which is laden with the vapour of water
removed from the body. We can see something of this process on
a cold day ; for when, after sharp exercise which has made the skin
perspire, the clothes are taken off, the body appears to steam.-


What has happened? The perspiration has been supplied to
the surface of the skin; the heat of the body has evaporated
1 t; and the cold air without has removed so much of the heat,
that the vapour is unable longer to maintain that form, and
returns to the form of water ; which in our breath, under similar
circumstances, we find deposited in drops on the moustache
or muffler.
With regard to the quantity of heat so removed, it is a matter;
of great importance, whether the outer air be dry or moist • that is,
whether it already contains a considerable quantity of vapour or
not; for, if saturated, it can receive no more, and evaporation
ceases. This condition is well known to laundresses, since, when
the air is thus saturated, though it be hot and rapidly
as in a wind, wet clothes on a line will not dry; that is, their
moisture will not evaporate. So on a hot-wind day, when the air
is full of moisture the perspiration cannot evaporate, and we sit
in wet clothes, and are greatly oppressed by want of removal of
our superfluous heat.
On the other hand, so long as heat be perfectly dry, we are able
to sustain an enormously high temperature. Thus iron founders
have, in the ordinary course of work, entered a furnace at a
temperature of 350 deg., of which the floor was red-hot; and
Chabert, the “ Salamander,” at a temperature of from 400 deg. to'
600 deg. ; it being remembered that water boils at 212 deg. The
safeguard in all these cases was the dryness of the air, and
consequent capacity for evaporation from the body.
The condition of rest or motion of the surrounding air much
influences our sensations and capacity of endurance. Thus, if the
air be still, we can endure a temperature much below what
otherwise would affect us greatly to our inconvenience. Thus, in
Norway I was able in winter to sleigh with comfort in a
temperature 45 deg. below the freezing point, so long as the air
was still : but if there were wind, even above this heat one lost
sensation in one’s extremities, though clothed in furs. So if
suitably dressed, we are warm in a still, open air temperature 20'
or 30 deg. below that of the room we have just left; but are


.chilled by a wind, which, in fact, is not so cold : because it is
constantly carrying away additional heat.
While the admirable arrangements of evaporation and
■exhalation enable ns to dispose of our extra heat, formed by
exertion, so rapidly that the temperature of the body is not
increased thereby, it is to be remembered, that, comparatively
speaking, we are but seldom in such excessive exercise as to
produce such extra heat; and, to go still farther, we are generally
in such cold, that it is necessary to life, that some means should
exist, by which the heat formed may not be removed too rapidly
by the colder medium about us ; and especially at times of sudden
changes of the temperature of the air, as from the heat before a
thunderstorm, and the coolness succeeding it; between changes of
wind from a hot to a cold, when the thermometer may fall 40 or
50 deg.; between the day and night; between, the heat we
experience in the sun, and that in the shade; and particularly in
leaving a hot room at night, and going out into the cold air.
To this end nature has provided what are called non-conductors.
A non-conductor of heat is a material more or less incapable of
conducting heat from the part on one side of it, to that on the
other side. The most universal non-conductor of heat in the
animal kingdom is fat. Thus in those suckling animals which
inhabit the water, whose temperature is some 50 deg. higher than
the sea, as the whale, the porpoise and the sea-cow, a dense layer
of fat, known as the blubber, lies within the skin ; and, it may be,
is also incorporated with the other tissues of the body. Through
this non-conductor the heat cannot pass more rapidly than the
body can, in a state of health, form it.
Among land animals we still find that fat is a most important
element. The bear, which lays itself up in a half insensible state
for, and does not eat during the winter months, is at the
commencement of his sleep laden with thick fat : but by the
spring he is lean and scraggy; having, during the interval
subsisted and maintained his heat by the use and consumption of
his fat. So also the dormouse, the horse, the sheep and cattle, in
the summer, eat more than sufficient fattening matter ; so that, in


cold weather, their loss of heat is restrained ; and, when greater
necessity for heat formation occurs by increased cold, supply is
there afforded.
So in man: in the colder countries we find a thicker layer of
fat under the skin, as in the Esquimaux ; and indeed a generally
fatter state of the whole system. By their appetites too this
necessity is evidenced • for these people take it as a great luxury
to drink seal or whale oil ; and a scandal was commonly reported
of certain Russians, who visited England in the days before the
invention of gas, that after a State dinner, they climbed the posts,
and drank the oil from the street lamps.
While we thus find, that man is protected by a layer of fat next
his skin and fatty deposit in his structures, he farther uses oil or
fat as a non-conductor of his heat, by rubbing the surface of his
skin therewith ; so that a series of layers intervenes between the
outer colder medium and his body. This cooling of the body has
always been the main cause of the failure of man to remain alive
long in the water; and it remained for Captain Webb to be the
first to swim across the English Channel, a distance, as he went,
of about 43 miles. He is a man with a considerable fat develop-
ment ; but, in addition, be rubbed himself over with a thick layer
of porpoise grease, which, being of a dense and gluey character,
forms a peculiarly suitable medium for the prevention of the
outward passage of heat. In this case the exertion is compara-
tively small in comparison with feats on shore, where the heat is
not so readily abstracted : for, whereas Captain Webb swam 43
miles in 211 hours, Weston walked 435 miles in 144 hours.
From these considerations we may derive the axiom, that, in ship-
wreck, a man is wise to rub his skin over with much oil.
Air, when motionless, is an admirable non-conducting’ medium,
with which the insterstices of our clothes are filled: thus it
happens, that a very close fabric does not convey the same degree
of warmth as a looser cloth of the same weight. My feet have
been frozen when wearing two pairs of thick worsted stockings
inside a pair of thick boots, whereby the material was compressed,
to the exclusion of much intervening air; but no such trouble


occurred, after one had put on the second pair of stockings outside
the boots, whereby much air could be included. Again, in Captain
Boyton’s swimming apparatus a bag of Indiarubber, or other
water-proof material, includes a quantity of air in a state of perfect
rest; which intervenes between the body and the colder water,
preventing loss of heat by the man.
Besides fat, animals have various kinds of hair or fur, dense in
proportion to the climate they inhabit and their requirements:
being hair in various grades of development. Of such may be
mentioned the hair of horses, the wool of sheep and such like,
which increase in length and thickness as the cold affects them,
and fall off in the spring. Those animals which live in very cold
climates, as the sable, and the seal, which inhabit the Arctic Seas,
have a secondary, densely developed coat nearer the skin, which
we call fur. Birds have a form of hair development, which we call
feathers; different from that of mammals in being larger and
longer; but the transition is gradual, as in the apteryx, the
cassowary, the emu, the ostrich and the penguin. The feathers of
birds, when lying closely one upon another, are admirable non-
conductors, or media for retention of heat; and this is increased,
as in hair and fur, by the presence of minute quantities of still air,
which are retained between them. Water birds still farther
supplement this power by thoroughly, frequently and carefully
dressing them with oil; whereby heat retention is still more
increased.
In some countries too, in which the cold is very excessive,
where the surface of the earth is covered with snow, and is thus
uniformly white, animals in winter change the colour of their
coat and become white, as the hare, the fox and the ptarmigan;
which again, as the summer approaches, become of some kind of
brown colour. Similarly, we find that the peoples who are
descended from those of the Northern countries, as ourselves,
are, comparatively speaking, whiteand that, as you gradually
approach the equator or tropical regions, you find the colour of the
skin assume a darker hue. Graduations of this kind may be noted
in the Swede, the Norwegian and the Saxon, who are fair; in the


people of the south of France, who are dark-haired ; in those of
Italy, who are dark-complexioned, so that a red-haired girl is a
* °
curiosity to them ; while the Spaniards are olive-complexioned ;
the Moors, Asiatics and American Indians more or less copper-
coloured ; and the Central Africans, Australian Aborigines and
Samoans tolerably black. The cause of this appearance is due to
the production in the skin of a more or less thick layer of pigment
cells, in character resembling those of the eye ; where the iris of
the Albino is without colour, and of another person black.
Why is it, that the animals of a very cold climate turn white in
winter, while indeed some, as the men and Polar bears, are always
white ; and that those people and creatures, which inhabit a hot
climate, are dark ; while creatures inhabiting the Northern seas are
not white, nor change their colour? The answer is I think
obtained from a consideration of two points. The first is the action
of the pigment of the eye. This membrane lines the interior of the
eye, and its function is to absorb all rays of light, not otherwise
required. Accordingly we find that Albinoes, who have pink eyes,
being without this pigment, see best in a dull light. Now, by the
correlation of forces, light is equivalent to heat; as, for example, we
know that, when we have most light from the sun, we have most
heat. Thus black or darker colors are capable of absorbing an
amount of heat much greater than white or lighter colours. The
second point is derived from the experiment of placing a thermo-
meter under and touching a piece of black flannel, exposed to the
sun’s rays. In one such experiment, which may be taken as a fair
sample, the temperature in the sun was 86 deg. ; but when the
black flannel was placed over and close upon it, the heat was found
to be 98 deg., that is 12 deg. higher : while, if an interval of air
was left between the two, it fell to 83 deg. Now taking man in
the cold climate ; if his body, or, in the case of the animal, its fur,
which is part of itself, were black, from immediate contiguity a large
amount of heat would be drawn from the body, and at once absorbed
by the colouring matter of the skin : but evaporation, as has been
shown, is constantly in process; and it would follow, from the
moisture attracted to the surface by this heat, that a constant and


considerable current of perspiration would be continually evaporated,
and the body would thus be deprived of heat, beyoild what is com-
patible with life. This however is not so ; and the evaporation is'
small, since the heat of the body is not especially attracted to the
surface.
Similarly with the black man of Northern Australia, his heat is
attracted to the surface from the interior of his body ; and, as
superfluous light is absorbed by the pigment or colouring matter of
the eye without discomfort, so heat is absorbed by the pigment of
the black skin ; perspiration is constantly in progress, and evapora-
tion rapid, whereby large quantities of heat are removed from the
surface and interior of the body. The black man, however, takes
care to anoint his body regularly with oil, whereby another element
in the argument is introduced ; for this oil, being a non-conductor,
prevents the blackness of his skin from absorbing so much heat
from the hot external air, and from cracking from the constant
evaporation of perspiration ; while it in no way interferes with the
exudation and final evaporation of moisture from the pores of the
skin.
This argument of the colour of skin, feathers, or other organs
forming part of the body, does not in the same way apply to the
colour of clothes ; for here it is to be borne in mind, that more or
less layers of still air, as well as of materials, intervene between
the skin and such outer covering ; and that by these non-conductors
the heat of the body is prevented from passing to the outer surface
of the clothes ; at the same time that nothing prevents such outer
clothing from absorbing heat from without in proportion to its
colour. Thus the temperature of a thermometer immediately under
and touching white flannel was 87 deg. ; while that, similarly
placed under black flannel, was 98 deg. Now, were the body in
the place of the thermometer, it is evident, that it would be
proportionately heated, as well as what layers of clothing and still
air intervened • while, from the difficulty of the passage of air
through wool, evaporation would be slow; and therefore the
inherent heat of the body would be maintained, and not
diminished.


Thus we find, that in cold climates people are white, and are
■clothed with the strongest non-conductors, that evaporation from
the surface of their skins may he as slow as possible; and that
they wear dark clothing, that as much heat as possible may be
absorbed from the outer air: while in hot climates, the people are
black, that as much vapour, and therefore heat, may escape as
■quickly as possible ; and that if they are clothed, they wear white
or light-coloured clothing, that as little heat as possible may be
absorbed from the outer atmosphere; while, in texture, such
.cloth must be so thin as not to interfere with the process of
evaporation.
To show the effect of the presence and absence of light, which in
the case of the sun may be held, by the correlation of forces, to be
strictly equivalent to heat, one may quote an extraordinary instance
of change of color in a negro, related by Dr. Hutchinson in the
“American Journal of Natural Science,” the truth of which seems
to be strictly reliable. A negro slave in Kentucky, up to the age
of 12, was perfectly black, being born of black parents. At that
time a portion of the skin an inch wide all round the head, but just
within the edge of the hair, gradually changed to white; and
the hair also, which grew therefrom. A white spot next appeared
near the inner corner of the left eye; and_ from this, the white
.colour gradually extended over the face, trunk and extremities,
until it covered the entire surface. The complete change from
black to white occupied about 10 years; and but for his hair, which
was crisped or woolly, no one would have supposed at this time,
that his parents had been, or shown any of the characteristics of
the negro; his skin presenting the healthy vascular appearance of
that of a fair complexioned European. When he was about 22
years of age, however, dark copper-coloured or brown spots began
to appear on the face and hands ; but these remained limited to
the portions of the surface exposed to light.
Similarly, in process of generations, we may constantly notice,
that different tribes or even families of the same original stock
vary in colour, according to the nature of the climate of the land in
which they live, and the degree and mode of their dress; that is


tlie extent to which their skins are protected from the sun and
heat.
Freckles are of the same character as the coloured skin.
From the above considerations it appears, that fair people are
adapted by colour to a.cold climate; and it follows, that, if they
choose to inhabit a hot one, the character of their dress may and
should be regulated by the degree of change of colour, which their
skins individually undergo, a condition which we familiarly know
as being “tanned;” but should regard as the degree of adaptibility
of the individual to become acclimatized. Thus the bronzed bush-
man bears the hotter climate far better than he who will not tan ;•
and may therefore be differently dressed.
And now with regard to the artificial dress of man ; and from a
consideration of the various modes of dress worn by those inhabit-
ing different climates, which we may call natural, as distinguished
from those which are governed by fashion, as among ourselves, we-
may most conveniently judge the special characteristics of each.
In the far north, as in Greenland, we find the Esquimaux wear
loose clothes of tur. The hair with its still air, being a non-conductor
prevents excessive escape of heat; while the skin of the animal
bars the passage through it of the icy cold wind. Such garments-
it is usual to line on the inner side with wool or fur; or to stitch
together the bare surfaces of two fur skins. Such a garment then,
counting from without, affords a non-conductor in the hair, two
layers impermeable to air or wind in the skins, and a dense non-
conductor again in the hair within. When the individual is out-
side in the cold, his extra heat escapes in the vapour of his breath;
but within his heated house, he must remove his skin coat, else the
moisture, evaporating from the surface of his body, would soon so-
impregnate the layers between his own skin and that of his coat,
that he would be in a vapour bath. This condition of things will
be recognised by those, who have worn a waterproof macintosh coat
on a hot day, or waterproof non-ventilating boots.
Travelling a little south, the Highlander weaves the wool of the
sheep into a dense fabric; soft, from the fact that the fibres are
not too closely matted together; but shedding the rain, and an


admirable non-conductor of heat by the thickness of the material.
This material protects him alike from cold wind and searching
rain ; yet in a manner much less effectually than would the furs of
the Esquimaux, which however would be to the Highlander
unsuitable, since his employment about his native mountains
requires of him much muscular exertion, and consequent increase
of formation of heat; which finds its direction of removal chiefly
through the pores of the skin. Such evaporation is hindered by
the Scotch or Irish frieze much less, than if the skin of the animal
were worn attached to its wool. Moreover he carries with him his
woollen plaid, which he can put on or off according to the degi'ee
of comfort or discomfort produced by too great evaporation and
loss of heat from insufficient clothing ; or too little evaporation of
the extra heat formed by his exertion, from the thickness of the
non-conducting cloth. The name of this frieze is derived from
Friesland, a province in the north of Holland .whence it was first
imported ; of which the make, as well as name, was afterwards
adopted.
In the colder countries the head is warmly protected ; whence
it probably follows that the hair is thin and straight, compared
with the dense crisp curly mat of hair of the uncovered heads of
the natives of hotter climates. Thus fur skins are usually worn as
caps or hats, whereby the popular use of seal skin was first intro-
duced from the North. Beaver hats were much in use, and were
very heavy and warm ; until, from the demand upon the beavers,
they became scarce, and our black silk hat was introduced as a
substitute ; which, while admirably adapted by its shape and
c olour to a cold climate, we colonists have introduced, as the
proper wear of a gentleman, into the hottest lands of the earth.
Through all mountainous countries we find the same kind of
clothing in use ; but as we travel south, those who live in hotter
climates adopt a lighter foi'm of dress. In Turkey the dress is
xxnique, but admirably suited to the clixnate. The head is encircled
by long rolls of white calico arranged in a coil called a turban ; a
shix't and loose trousers of calico cover the body ; while around
the waist is rolled a woollen scarf. Thus while the mass of the


body is cool, and ample opportunity is given for evaporation of
perspiration, considering the idle life these people habitually lead,
the great nerve centres are well protected ; the brain being well
shielded from the sun, and the great solar plexus of nerves, which
preside over the functions, and regulate the actions of all the
viscera of the abdominal cavity, protected by the waist scarf.
Now we have already seen, how much influence the nervous
system has in the production and expenditure of heat; and there-
fore the careful protection of the situation of these most important
nerves is a jwint of greatest necessity.
These nations however do not always manufacture their own
woollen scarves ; for when in Smyrna, I searched in the Persian
Bazaar for such a cloth, and selected one from a bale having the
true Persian pattern and style of make, while the camels outside
were yet groaning and roaring, as far-brought goods were unloaded.
On after examination, however, my Persian scarf was found to
have a Glasgow ticket in the corner.
While the Turk wears these cotton garments, it is to be remem-
bered that he does not work ; or if he should, he presently takes a
bath, of which there is such ample provision, and dries or changes
his clothes. The real workers are more or less dark skinned and
uncovered.
The swarthy Bedouin is similarly dressed ; but, being more
exposed to variations in the temperature of the air, he always has
with him his woollen Burnoose or scarf, as an additional protection.
Being always on horseback, he takes much exertion ; whereby
much heat is produced, equally quickly removed by his rapid
motion through the air, which, separating his clothes from close
contact with his skin, favours evaporation.
The central African and the Australian, alike black, have their
heads protected from the sun by a dense cluster of curly hair ;
which some races, as the Fiji mountain cannibal tribes, strange to
say, increase in size by interweaving with their own hair that of
other people. I fancy false hair so worn, though people have
usually plenty of their own, is called “pads.” It is probable that
this fashion of the Fijian cannibals is of very ancient date, and


that the false hair so worn was that of their enemies, whom they
.had slain and eaten. It is said, that some European nations have
followed the fashion of these cannibals to the extent of wearing
other people’s hair. These blacks cover their bodies with oil, as
.has been before mentioned ;• and in warm weather wear little
beside. For change of temperature, however, they have the skins
■of various animals, which they sew together as opossum or other
rugs ; these have the qualities of the fur coats of the people
inhabiting the coldest regions of the earth. Others of them make
woollen cloth, which they use in the same mariner. These races
.are all very susceptible of cold.
We now come to the consideration of ourselves. We are a
mixed people of various nations. We are white, and therefore,
by our colour, adapted to a cold climate : but we inhabit a country,
which the natives are black, and who, in their natural state,
having had no fixed place of abode, were able to move from place
to place as varying temperature indicated ; while they were always
provided with fur rugs, which have been shown to be in use among
the inhabitors of the coldest Arctic regions, and therefore of the
most heat-retaining kind. Now the climate of this country is
remarkable for two things : one is the extent of its heat; and the
•other its sudden fall of temperature. Let us see what action these
two conditions have upon our bodies.
On a hot day when the air is dry, the extra heat of the body,
in a state of rest, is rapidly removed by the evaporation of the
perspiration, as before described. Now if the body be naked, this
moisture passes into the surrounding air, and is thus dissipated.
Not so to the same extent however when clothes are worn. If a
calico shirt only cover the body, the vapour from the body is con-
densed on its inner side, and is again evaporated from the outer
suface by the external heat. This process is so rapid, where the
calico is single and thin, that no discomfort is experienced, if the
moisture of the body be small in quantity. Not so, however?
where folds occur • or where adjacent surfaces of the body are so
•closely in contact, that evaporation does not readily ensue. The
calico thus becomes saturated with moisture. This condition


exists as long as the heat; but presently, from the decline of the
sun or change of wind, the temperature falls, and the requirement
of evaporation, for the regulation of the necessaxy health tempera-
ture of the body, ceases. Yet now, under the same clothing, since
the external temperature of the air is much less than that of the
body, the heat given off is proportionately mxxch greater; that is,,
the drain of heat from the body is, proportionately, much greater.
At the same time the wet pax-ts of the clothing can only be dried
by conversion of the water therein present into vapour : but this-
process can only be effected by the addition to the water of a
quantity of heat, called latent in the vapour, which must be-
derived from some source ; and, since the body has the highest
temperature at hand, this heat for the conversion of the water into-
vapoui’, is drawxx from the body.
Again, during the hot term the body was weakened and
depressed by the difficulty of gettixxg rid of its superabundant
heat, demonstrated by the damp lixxen ; but xiow, with the sudden
chaxxge on the thxxs exxfeebled system, xxot only is the heat supplied
at once removed in the ordinary manner ixx the evapox-ation of
perspiration, but also a drain of heat is on the system to evapox-ate
the moisture presexxt in the calico : thxxs the body, previously
chilled by damp linen, is apt to be over-chilled by its evaporation.
But such changes generally occxxr in the latter part of the day,
When the sun is at least begixxning to get low, and the colder time
of the day coxxxmences : so that not oxxly is the body then
subjected to the drains on its beat above mentioned, bxxt, still
more, to those resulting from this additioxxal heat drain. Is it
wonderful thexx, that the system shoxxld find itself unable to cope
with such a suddexx demand for heat, and that secondary
consequences of a character adverse to health should result!
The next process is such a removal of the heat fx-oxn the sxxx-face
of the body, that the blood-vessels there situated are chilled.
Now the result to any blood-vessel, when cold is applied to it, is
to produce contraction of its muscular coat. The muscular coats-
however of the arteries, or blood-vessels coming fx-oxn the heart,
are much stronger than those of the veins, or vessels which cax-ry


the blood back to the heart ; which indeed are unable to maintain
their contracting power for more than a short period at a time,
when dilatation ensues : these arteries and veins communicate by
means of very delicate vessels called capillai'ies, having no
muscular coat at all. It is not therefore to be wondered at, that
the heat withdrawn as above described should produce such an
effect by its absence, which we call cold, .that the powerful
muscular coat of the surface arteries drives the blood out of
themselves through to the capillaries and veins ; the. blood in
which latter vessels, being always blue as seen on the backs of the
hands, gives the colour to parts chilled. Thus we speak of a
man’s nose as blue with cold. The excess of this kind of blood in
a frozen or mortified part is the cause of its appearing black.
Now the proper course of this blue blood in the veins is onward to
the heart: by the heart it should be forced into the arteries of
the lungs, to receive oxygen and be deprived of its carbon,
forming heat in the process, by chemical change : thence back
into the heart in a perfect state, to be by it forced through all the
arteries of the body. Now, supposing the arteries of the surface
of the body to be chilled by the removal of heat, and therefore
contracted as before mentioned, and, similarly, that the vessels in
the lungs be at the same time subjected to chill by breathing
cold air, and to contract, it is evident that it must be somewhat
difficult for circulation to continue in the same regular mode as
before; for-, while the arteries are forcing blood into the veins
from behind, these tubes are, by dilatation of weariness after
previous contraction, unable to maintain the onward current of
the blood : thus they become clogged, and the capillaries behind
them engorged. This condition may be likened to that of a
thoroughfare, when the traffic is suddenly hastened in one part,
but stopt in front; it is evident that a block must result.
Medically, we call such a blocking of the blood-vessels a
congestion ; and it depends upon the situation where this happens,
as to the effect thei’eof. For instance, if it be in the blood-vessels
about the nose, we call it a cold in the head ; if in the large air
tubes of the lungs, we say we have a cold on the chest; if in the


finer tubes, we call it bronchitis ; if on the walls of the delicate
chambers of the lungs, where the chemical changes are effected, it
is inflammation of the lungs; similarly in the bowels or
elsewhere, to each individual in the part which in him is
peculiarly his somewhat more delicate, or less strong situation;
and this is first congestion, and presently inflammation of this or
that particular part.
Now all this misery and more or less dangerous illness result
from the removal of a little too much heat from the body : that is,
the system spent a little more heat than it was able to afford : now
this kind of extravagance in our heat, that is, in our strength of
body, like some others we are very disposed to indulge in, and for
the same reason, that it is very agreeable, is apt to turn to our
loss ; but there is this difference ; that if our extravagance in money
is beyond what we are able to afford, we may always have at least
the chance of repairing our loss by making more ; whereas, in the
matter of health, the very loss is by disease the cause of increased
expenditure, and, from our beds of sickness, we never rise so young
or so strong as we were before. It therefore becomes us, if we
have any appreciation of corporeal economy, not to risk such waste ;
but to dress in such a manner that, while in our precaution we are
only following the example of the aboriginal of the country, we
may serve to reduce in our own persons the death rate of the colony.
It is not the custom of the blackfellow in his native state to wear
•calico fitting so closely to adjacent parts of his body, as that it
becomes saturated with perspiration ; he may have a piece of calico
wrapt round him, but not fitting into all his corners. Next when
•change of temperature occurs, or, which is practically the same
thing, when he ceases to make an increased quantity of heat by
•exertion, he either makes a fire and sits by it, or wraps around him
his opossum rug, and he generally does both : by these means he
•either again increases the temperature of the external air, so that
his body heat shall not be removed from him, when his nervous
system is enfeebled and his capacity for heat formation is reduced;
or he puts a powerful non-conductor, in the form of his rug, between
him, the warm object, and the cold outer air. Thus the wild man


wears little clothing, when the air is warmer, or exercise is more
vigorous ; and covers his body with furs, or lights a fire, when the
air is cooler. The difference between the condition of man in his
wild state, and the same man in a state of more or less civilization
may be seen at Corranderk ; where the normal conditions of
aboriginal life being absent, and the required habits of care in dress
against taking cold not having been acquired, the mortality is
increased, and deaths occur from diseases formerly unknown or rare.
But the colonist in Australia rarely takes the precautions of the
wild aboriginal. The workman, who has toiled in a factory, comes
out in his shirt sleeves from the heated close air of the building, to
sit in the shade outside, and eat his dinner; rejoicing in the plea-
sure of the cold air, neglecting the hint given him to cover himself
from the increasing chilliness of his body, from his unwillingness
to take the trouble to rise and fetch his coat: the man who drives,
starts on a hot-wind day, when the clothes he wears seem too much ;
neglecting to regard the prospect of change of wind, or fall of day;
and only regrets the fact, when he feels the keen wind eat into his
very marrow at perhaps 3 p.m.; when it is not so much that the
temperature is low, as that a change of from 30 to 40 degrees has
suddenly occurred : so he, who walks in warm weather, reaches his
destination hot and tired; he sits down in the shade in a pleasant
breeze or draught, and has a long drink of something cold or iced,
which of itself absorbs from him much heat; the passing air rapidly
removes such superabundant heat as has been formed, while the
cessation of exertion at once stops his increased heat formation,
and chill results. Similarly with the cricketer ; and still more
with the rower; in whom the exertion and subsequent nerve de-
pression are so much the greater : the shopman after his weary
work in a close shop oil a hot day, damp with perspiration, gladly
rests himself in the cool evening breeze: the labourer lazily retains
through the evening his wet shirt; or on a rainy day neglects to
change his wet clothes, boots and socks. What however shall
we say of the young girl, from her earliest childhood protected
from every chill; and much more susceptible to the effects of cold
than man, who, half clad in thin muslin, goes to a ball 1 On her


way from her home she is usually well covered by her cloak, and
the room she enters is perhaps more or less warm ; presently she
dances, going through such exertion, that she is thoroughly heated ;
she takes an ice, and seeks the draught of an open window,
a cosy staircase, a cool conservatory, or draughty verandah ; despis-
ing her mother’s directions to put on her cloak or be careful. But
we doctors know of the frequent results; but say nothing of our
patients’ troubles, for doctors are, or should be like dead men, who
tell no tales; and whereas women should, from the nature of their
protected life, be the most healthy part of the nation, as they are
the longest lived, they form the mass of the doctors’ patients.
Similarly with the child : he goes out, runs unceasingly, so that
he is wet with his heat; and, returning home, bathes in the river,
sits gossiping on the stone door step, or chills himself pleasantly at
the open window ; what wonder that he is restless and feverish at
night, and is found to have taken cold 1 Or the half-naked child,
whose mother so clothes him, delighting in his chubby legs:
perhaps too hot at midday, yet, with change of wind, his bare
limbs are chilled ; the blood is driven to his body, and he has an
attack of such disease as he may be disposed to, whether croup,
diarrhoea, rheumatism, convulsions, or other.
The only wonder is that the system is so frequently able to
sustain these manifold strains by its natural elasticity and tendency
to maintain the balance of health : but the aboriginal inhabitants
of a countiy do not risk so much for an hour’s pleasure, when the
trifling precaution is so easy.
Nor are old people so careful as they should be; especially as it
has been already shown, that more than twice as many deaths
occur among them in the coldest month of the year, as in the
warmest. They go out on cold nights ; the old gentleman stays in
the garden, smoking his pipe, after the sun has set, or a cold wind
has sprung up ; and the old lady goes out without her bonnet; or
presently leaves a public room at a temperature of 70 deg., and
goes into the cold outer air, which is perhaps 25 deg. colder,
without having an extra shawl to wrap round her shoulders ; and
to-morrow will complain of growing pains in her bones, which


.some people call rheumatics ; indeed, she is fortunate, should she
-escape an attack of bronchitis, or something worse.
Now, when we undergo such sudden changes of temperature as
have been above mentioned, one of three things must result.
Fii’stly. We may rapidly lose heat to the colder outside air. In
many of the cases supposed, the person, having made an excess of
heat by extra exertion, allows it by after inaction to be evaporated,
and so removed as before described ; and this is well enough,
provided the abstraction of heat is stopt at the right moment,
when just enough is lost. This however is often not the case, and
more is removed than can be afforded : but exertion is followed by
a proportionate depression, and the body is not in a condition to
x-ally and make additional heat. This being so, the system is
weakened ; and some kind of cold or inflammation, in such part
: .as is weakest in the particular individual, results.
Secondly, on going out into the colder air, we may by exertion
produce heat in proportion to what is taken away by the outer
air. The person may be supposed to have been heated in a warm
room, and then to have gone out into the cold air; and it is
possible for him to make much additional heat by exertion. The
result depends upon whether he can make additional heat, as fast
as it is removed : and this again is regulated by various conditions,
Ist, if the air be dry and still, as well as cold, and he walks fast,
it is probable that, without extra covering, he will not suffer; for
he makes by his exertion new heat, which is evaporated from his
body proportionately. 2nd, if however there be a cold wind, the
air, rapidly passing by him and penetrating his clothes, takes
large quantities of heat from him; so that he feels, as he says, the
cold eat into his marrow. This man will probably feel after
results of such chill according to the locality of his special weak-
ness. 3rd, but if the outer air be moist, evaporation is more
difficult, the clothes become more or less saturated with perspira-
tion, chilling him at the end of his walk by their dampness : a
condition increased by the extra production of heat from the
rapidity of the breathing from want of due removal of heat formed,
■evaporation and exhalation being insufficient.


In the third case an additional protection, as an overcoat or
shawl, which may be called clothes of emergency, is worn,
whereby the heat of the body is less easily removed ; and no
sudden or excessive heat drain occurs.
Now, in the cases before mentioned, it is much safer not to run
risks; for be it always remembered, that a man may have a
dozen fortunes ; but whoever he is, he has but one life ; and if he
be unhealthy, his life has lost its charm. Such risks may be
greatly avoided by dressing ourselves suitably with non-conductors-
of heat. All kinds of clothes are non-conductors, and may be
classed in two divisions : those we habitually wear, and those we'
put on in emergencies.
Generally speaking we may say that our , clothes are composed*
of calico and of wool; and between them there is a great
difference. Calico is made of cotton ; and cotton is a vegetable
fibre, composed of a number of small cells, capable, as are all its
congeners, of absorption of water in its every part. Moreover
calico is made close ; or if not so made, it soon becomes so by use
thus the quantity of minute globules of air enclosed in its meshes,,
which are powerful non-conductors, is less than if the texture
were more open; in which case, however, the fibres would break,,
and the cells separate more readily, whereby the material would
be destroyed.
On the other hand, woollen materials are composed of a kind of
hair, and therefore are derived from the animal kingdom. A
hair is a tube formed of animal matter ; it does not absorb water,
nor become saturated with it; the utmost of which it is capable-
being, that fluid may enter the tube ; which, however, is probably
rare. The textures into which it is made are more or less loose,
and therefore contain much air. A piece of dry flannel is
therefore an animal substance, having air in the tube of each
hair, and enclosing much air in its meshes ; and, if wetted, the
hairs cannot become saturated; but such water can only be
retained in the meshes, where previously were globules of air.’
Whereas calico can be saturated in its every fibre, as well as water
held in its meshes; whence it follows, that woollen fabrics can


never be so chilling to the surface as calico, for all their material is
always dry; and moisture can only exist in the interstices.
Silk is in character similar to wool, but very much finer; and,
being far more valuable, is used more sparingly, and the fabric is
made closer, thinner, and harder. Its own non-conducting powers
.are not largely increased by the presence in the texture of so much
finely divided air.
When then we wear woollen fabrics, we use a material specially
adapted by nature for retaining the heat in animals similarly
situated in this particular to ourselves ; of which, to some extent,
the same may be said of silk : and when we wear cottons, we are
using an artificial material of very inferior heat-retaining power,
and very absorbent of moisture.
The effect of these differing conditions of wool and calico is that
different results accrue in experiments. Of course their original
temperature in the same air, is the same.
For instance, if you wring a piece of calico and a piece of flannel
together out of hot water, and then, as quickly as possible and at
the same moment, take their respective heats, you get different
temperatures. In such an experiment, the hot wet calico was
90 deg., and the hot wet flannel only 83 deg.; that is, the fibres of
the calico were at once saturated throughout, whereas the hairs o 1
the flannel were only somewhat warmed by the immersion in water,
and therefore did not rise so rapidly in heat. Nor did the flannel
cool so quickly as the calico ; for in 30 minutes the heat fell only
16 deg. in the flannel, in comparison with 27 deg. in the calico ;
which commenced cooling at 7 deg. higher, and in this time fell to
4 deg. lower. Now had the body been inside, the shock to the
.system, from withdrawal of its heat, would have been represented
by 11 deg. less in the flannel than in the calico.
Again, in an experiment where one thermometer was placed
between two layers of flannel, and another between two layers of
calico, and then both subjected to the steam rising from the
same source, the heat of the . flannel thermometer was 84 deg.,
.as compared with 78 deg. of the calico thermometer; showing
.that a heat of 6 deg. was retained by the flannel more than by


the calico ; and even after three hours of cooling, it was 3 deg.
in excess.
From such and many other experiments it is evident, that wool
is a much better non-conductor than calico, and that, from wool not
being liable to be saturated, it is far less likely to chill the surface.
It therefore becomes desirable, that woollen materials should always
be worn next the skin in a climate, where the temperature is
subject to rapid and frequent changes; or where the body is, by
the nature of the employment or otherwise, so exposed.
A modification of a material composed entirely of wool, is merino,
which is made of a mixture of cotton and wool. Soakage of the
cotton fibre is much less liable to occur when so mixed with wool,
than when it is all cotton; for the effect of juxta-position is not so
decided. Merino being made in various thicknesses is particularly
suitable to those, whose habits of life do not induce so muchmoisture
of skin; or who cannot bear the sensation of wool touching and
tickling them ; or who, wearing other clothes, do not find it necessary
to work only in their shirts.
Macintosh and other waterproof materials, being impermeable to-
moisture, prevent evaporation of the moisture of the skin ; which,
being thus retained, collects in the clothes ; and, on removal of the
coat, is evaporated at loss of great heat to the body, when it can
perhaps ill spare it.
The colour of the external garment has a strong bearing upon
the effect produced by the sun. Thus in the sun at a temperature
of 83 degrees, while in a quarter of an hour the heat under
white flannel was 87 degrees; under red it was 92 degrees?
and under black 97 degrees; that is, 10 degrees hotter than under
white flannel. Similarly with calico; an unglazed surface of
black calico was 9 degrees hotter than that of glazed white calico-
Again an unglazed material, as unbleached calico, absorbs much
more heat than a glazed; so that in an experiment I found the dif-
ference to be 7 degrees : and on exposure to the sun of the same
piece of black calico, of which in the one case the glazed side was
outside, and in the other the unglazed, the former registered only
84|- degrees, in comparison with 89 degrees of the latter. On.


removal from tlie sun to the shade, the temperature falls to
the same level. The results here detailed as to colour are similar
in the case of various materials.
PART 11.
Having now discussed the conditions of heat under which we
are placed; nature’s natural mode of dressing peoples, or of pro-
tecting animals unable to clothe themselves ; as well as the effects
of exposure to heat and moisture on the materials most available
for our use; we may proceed to the practical result, that may be
derived therefrom.
First, of the rational clothing of the child. During its earliest
days, being incapable of any but the smallest exertion, its power
of producing heat is small; and the fact before mentioned, that
puny children were Ideg. colder than strong childi’en, all being
under the age of seven days, shows the necessity of preserving to
them what heat they do make. Thus they should first be clothed
in a layer of well-washed fine flannel next the skin, the binder being
of the same material : the feet and hands should always be kept
warm. The remainder of the dress depends upon the season ; but
when not being nursed and so receiving warmth, and in exercise,
a shawl or other warm covering should be thrown over the young
baby as an additional protection.
However, babies, when in long clothes, are tolerably well looked
after : but it is when they are just commencing to walk and are-
put into short clothes, that ignorance of the warmth necessary to the
young animal is most shown : and when we remember that one child
out of every three dies under the age of five; that the young child has
a comparatively small power of heat production; that it is peculiarly
subject to the effect of cold; and that yet it is clothed in such a
manner as no grown person could bear, the necessity of the
instruction of mothers in the dress of their children becomes a
matter of political economy.
It seems a popular idea, that, to half clothe a child, hardens him,


and the children of northern countries and of the poor, of which
the grown up men and women are apt to be so robust, are quoted
as examples : but who can tell the proportion of deaths resulting
from this hardening process; for it is only the strong that survive.
When then the child is taken out of long clothes, he should be
carefully preserved from the chills and changes to which he is now
liable. In winter, he should wear a well-washed fine flannel shirt
next the skin ; then his linen, a flannel petticoat, and a dark-
coloured woollen dress over all. Drawers of flannel should be
worn as soon as may be. His legs, being specially subject to chill,
should be clothed with red or dark coloured worsted stockings, and
warm, strong loose boots ; or in woollen socks and worsted gaiters.
The feet should be felt to be always warm. The head, which it is
never necessary to heat, is always to be well protected alike from
cold wind, and warm sun : and thus, in winter, the hat should be
of felt or some other material not easily penetrated by the wind ;
and in colour, in our uncertainty of the sun, need not be dark.
In the summer, a thin woollen material, as merino, should be
worn next the skin, to prevent chill in the evaporation of
perspiration, when a cold change occurs; the rest of the dress
being lighter, but the legs well covered for the same reason, and
O O ’ <Ti
■extra clothing used on cold days. Drawers of unglazed calico or
thin flannel are always desirable when possible, that chill from
wind may not affect the bowels. A hat of several layers of thick
white calico or other cotton material, and broad in the brim is
most suitable ; for the nape of the neck is thus protected from the
sun’s rays, should the head fall on one side in the perambulator,
or the child sleep. Excessive sun should be kept from the head
by a hood to the perambulator, or by not going out till its
violence is abated. The parts of a child specially to be protected
from chill are the bowels and feet; and from heat, the head and
neck.
Children, that have played and become wet with perspiration at
the decline of day or before prolonged rest, should be undressed
■quickly, wiped over with a sponge squeezed out of cold water,
rubbed dry and put into dry clothes; a woollen material being


next tlxe skin. It is undesirable for boys to become heated with
perspiration just before going into school: to counteract this risk,,
they should wear flannel shirts.
Boys and men in their games in summer should wear white
flannel shirts and trousers; a coloured scarf of silk or wool may
with advantage be worn round the waist; and the head and neck
should be protected by a thick cotton material. Puggarees
composed thereof, arranged round and over the crown of a straw
hat and hanging down behind, are admirably suited for cricket in
this climate ; but, whatever be the material of the hat, it should
have a hole or holes, through which the hot air generated inside-
may escape. This is most advantageously placed at either side, an
inch below the top of the crown, and should be as large as the tip-
of the finger; the common wire-covered ventilators are inadequate
to effect a sufficiently rapid change of air. In rowing, the neck
should be carefully protected from the sun. In all cases,.
immediately on the cessation of active exercise, an outer coat
should be put on ; and, as soon as convenient, the damp shirt, &c.,
exchanged for dry flannel.
In winter, such playing clothes, while of the same material, may
be of darker colour ; and caps may be worn instead of hats.
Similarly men who labour in the sun, or in the heat under cover,
should wear light-coloured woollen, as Crimean shirts &c. in
summer, and dark in winter. At the end of the day’s work the
clothes should be taken off, the body sponged and rubbed, and a
dry flannel shirt put on. That which is taken off may be aired
and dried, and will do for the following day’s work : similarly with
the evening shirt. In this way risk of chill and illness is much
reduced. Their heads should be thoroughly protected from heat
and sun • and particularly the nape of the neck. Caps are therefore
entirely unsuitable in the sun ; but some kind of light-coloured,,
well ventilated wideawake with a curtain hanging down behind
answers well. A cabbage leaf introduced into the crown is an
excellent non-conductor ; and indeed a few layers of anything,
whether calico or paper, serve to give additional protection from
the passage downwards of the direct heat of the sun’s rays. In the


shade in summer a cap of cotton or paper is useful, and in winter
of flannel or cloth. Those who feel their heads affected by heat
should wear one of the hats presently to be described.
Policemen and soldiers, who are so much exposed, should wear
in summer Crimean shirts, loose light-coloured outer clothes, and
have an easily available outer woollen jacket or coat. Their hats
should be large and light-coloured, with free ventilation, and little
white curtains for the neck. In winter they should be similarly
dressed in dark and warmer clothes, the hats being darker and less
ventilated.
Those whose business calls them about the streets, or walking,
riding, or driving in the country, should wear in summer some
kind of woollen fabric next the skin ; since, if exertion be used,
they will with change of wind be liable to chill ; and perhaps still
more so if inactive, and especially if driving. For this purpose a
merino vest is most suitable, and may be got very thin ; over which
a white shirt may be worn. The clothes, or outer coat at least
should be of a light colour; and, if not of wool, some light overcoat
should be at least available ; for he who is dressed in calico for a
hot wind and perspires, runs great risk as he drives home in a
southerly breeze ; in such case he had better walk.
Perhaps, of all absurdities, the wearing of a tall black hat in a
hot sunny country in summer is among the greatest : for this is the
introduction of a head covering used with good reason in cold
countries. It is most conducive to sunstroke, and heat affection-
The hat worn by those who tend toward this kind should have the
advantages of the black hat without its noxious influences. Firstly ?
It should contain a considerable quantity of air. Secondly,
This air should be in constant circulation. Thirdly, The hat
should not fit too closely around the sides of the head. Fourthly,
Its shadow should protect the neck. Fifthly, Its weight should
be small ; and Sixthly, Its colour should be light.
The Chinese cork hat, in shape much like an oval dish cover
without a handle, meets all these requirements ; and, with a light
calico curtain stitched on and hanging down behind, is the very
best hat in a hot sun that can be got. The head fits into a narrow


band, which is an inch distant from the outer hat : thus circulation
is assured. Those, who have worn this hat, will agree that it is
the perfection of a heat protector for the head and neck : and it
should be used by those, who are susceptible to the sun’s influence.
If white pot-hats be worn, a hole as large as the tip of the finger
should be cut on either side below the crown for ventilation; and
a puggaree should cover it and hang down behind.
A white hat of the shape of the common black one is also made,
with a head band separated from the hat itself. Two good venti-
lating holes are wanted high up. These hats are as a rule heavier
than is desirable.
If in summer a man will wear a black hat, let him by all means
remember, that a shiny hat is not quite so hot as a dull or cloth
material; and that he will be wise to use an umbrella. Of um-
brellas, a lighter colour again is to be preferred; and if it have an
inner lining, separated by an air passage from the outer cover, it is
anuch cooler.
In winter, gentlemen will be wise to wear thicker woollen shirts
under their white ones ; woollen clothes; and to take care that
their feet and legs always keep warm. A greatcoat is required,
to be prepared for cold changes.
The above precautions are specially required by the old, whose
heat should be carefully guarded. Besides flannel drawers, it may
be necessary to protect their feet from getting cold, when sitting’ or
• driving, by the use of a hot water tin or fur foot muff; even beside
a warm rug.
We now come to the consideration of most dangerous ground,
that of woman’s dress; of which lam sorry to say, whether in its
■changing fashions, its style of evening dress, or even in its compo-
sition, one can commend little but the effect produced. Nor is it
less necessary for ladies than for men to take heed to the occurrence
of chill, which their careless negligence so often induces; whereby,
as a class, they are so much more frequently ill or indisposed than
men. Most of their ailments result from improper dressing.
The most desirable dress in our style for a woman in summer is
a thin merino vest; then her linen; very loose stays, with very


little support in them, and a light coloured thin dress; other un-
derclothing of calico; stockings not too thin, and good sound boots.
In winter, well washed flannel all over next the skin ; other clothes
as before mentioned, but a warm dark-coloured woollen dress ; wor-
sted stockings, and thicker boots. Women, who work with their
muscles and get damp from perspiration, should change their
inner clothes on reaching home after the day’s work.
Women are wise in the fact that they wear their hair long ; for
this is the natural covering to the head, which we find prevailing
among all native races : and, however dressed, it must protect
some part of the head. Pads are said to increase this protection.
Since the colour of woman’s hair seems in some instances to be
capable of varying, it may be as well to suggest that, scientifically,
a dull yellow or light shade is desirable in winter, a dark brown
or black in summer ; while, during the spring and autumn, inter-
mediate shades might be worn. If worn low down at the back of
the head, the nape of the neck is protected.
If no parasol be used, the bonnet or hat should be in summer
light-coloured and large ; so as to cover the head, and shade the
neck. It may be composed of several layers of material, and
should be freely permeable to air. Large feathers of a light colour,
if put in the right place, are excellent non-conductors. It is
however certain that the wholesale destruction of small birds of
beautiful plumage to be worn in the head dress is of no advantage
from a health point of view. On no account in summer should
black bonnets or hats be worn, which are well suited to winter.
Sun shades in summer are better than parasols, as being larger.
The colour should be light, and they should be lined inside. When
a sun-shade is used, the form and colour of the bonnet matters
less.
No woman should ever go out in a changing climate without
being provided with a shawl, or other outer wrap.
Points specially to be avoided by women are, Istly, tight lacing.
You are aware that the chest, enclosed by the ribs, may be
roughly described as of the form of a triangle, of which the apex
or point is at the top ; this cavity is there closed, but open at


the bottom; so that, if it be in any way diminished in size or
its walls contracted, such moveable organs, as it encloses or
shelters, can only be compressed, or forced downwards where
the outlet is. Thus the effects of tight lacing are, firstly, to
press in and deform the ribs. Secondly, to press on the lungs
and contract them, limiting their expansibility; such pressure is
apt to induce inflammation thereof, when opportunity from chill
occurs : or if there be an hereditary blood taint, consumption is
apt to ensue. Thirdly, the heart is forced downward, and
palpitation and shortness of breath result. Fourthly, the
diaphragm, which is the great muscle across the cavity of the
chest, separating the lungs and heart from the liver and
intestines, is forced downwards; and consequently the liver,
stomach, spleen, and intestines have to find room for themselves
lower than their normal situations, to the injury of themselves,
and inconvenience of other organs ; which thus become jostled.
Varicose veins are frequently produced by the interruption to
the circulation caused by the pressure of tight stays on the
organs of the body. What wonder, that girls who lace tightly,
do not eat much, for they have no room for food ; or that they do
not well digest what they do eat: Doctors know how much they
suffer for it; and that man is unwise, who marries a girl who can’t
eat. Fifthly, if the stays be worn tight, they take from the force
and action of the muscles, being to some extent a substitute ; but,
whenever a muscle is brought into action less fully or freely than
is natural, it wastes and loses power : thus the muscles of the bodies
of tightly-laced women are apt to be deficient in power; a matter of
s erious importance.
While it is convenient that the figure should be supported, it is
injurious, and certainly not elegant, to contract the waist beyond
the natural. Stays are of advantage to a woman from the
closeness of their material; for therein they partake of the
character of the skin of a fur, the wind cannot readily pass through
them. For the same reason moisture does not evaporate from the
skin so rapidly as otherwise. A woolly material next the skin in
woman is therefore the more necessary to prevent chill; which


may however be very thin, because the stays are impermeable
to wind.
2ndly, in our list of things to be avoided are tight garters; for
they prevent the return of the blood to the body from the feet,
and induce varicose veins in the legs, and swelled feet at a later
period.
3rdly, Few things are more injurious to a woman than wet
clothes, and especially wet feet. In summer, the stockings
should not be too thin ; and in winter, of good worsted or wool.
The boots at no time should have a very thin sole; or, if
that be held to be necessary for fashion’s sake, a sock may be
worn on its inner side. Every woman should be provided with
a pair of thick soled boots to walk in, and especially for wet
days ; long Balmoral or lace-up boots are perhaps the best for
this purpose, and may be made very neatly; such should
always be worn in winter. On coming in from the wet or
damp ground, boots and stockings should be at once changed;
and the feet, if cold, warmed. Goloshes, being air-tight, are apt
to prevent evaporation, and thus the stockings are damp;
therefore it is often as necessary to change the stockings after a
walk in goloshes, as if the water had penetrated the boots. Under
no circumstances should a woman needlessly go out without
proper protection to her feet.
It is, I hope, unnecessary for me to speak of the danger of
damping the petticoats, when it is the fashion to tie back the
dress ; or of wearing so few, that the surface is chilled. Again,
while an ice does not hurt a girl warm after a dance, nor a short
stroll on an enclosed verandah, it is unwise for her, so lightly clad,
to sit or walk in draughts or a damp or cold air; and a cloak or
shawl, not formed of lace, should always be at hand.
. While we should be thus habitually dressed in a manner calcu-
lated to protect us from current changes of the temperature, we
should be careful to provide ourselves with clothes of emergency
formed of wool or furs, to guard us from sudden chill when leaving
hot rooms for the cold outer air; or other such shock.
Those, who go to sea, should always wear flannel, thick and of


many layers in colder weather; furs, since they exclude wind, are
a special protection on board ship. In the tropics, the non-
evaporated perspiration necessitates wool next the skin, which the
oppression of the heat indicates should be very thin : thus merino
is suitable.
Swimmers of long distances, or people in time of shipwreck,
when about to trust their chances to a life buoy, or voyage in an
open boat, should coat their skins with the densest and most
adherent oil to be got : or some kind of air-tight dress may be
worn, affording the protection of a layer of non-conducting air
between themselves and the water.
There is one thing more with reference to dress it is desirable to
mention, namely, Corns. The skin is formed of a number of minute
papilhe standing up like a bundle of needles, or the tops of a bunch
of asparagus : when one of these is specially irritated, as by friction
or pressure, it is compressed for the time being ; but, presently, on
removal of the pressure, as when the boot is taken off, an increased
How of blood to the part occurs, and it grows faster than the
adjacent papilhe; the cuticle on the_ surface also similarly increas-
ing. This we call a Corn.
The boots, of those, who are subject thereto, should never be
tight; but neither should they be too loose; they should fit. The
leather, of which they are made, should be soft and pliable.
I have endeavoured to lay before you the question of dress from
a scientific point of view; considering, first, the circumstances
under which our bodies are placed with reference to external condi-
tions ; what nature for the maintenance of health requires to be
effected ; how nature herself, as in the aboriginal and unfashion-
able tribes, as well as in various kinds of animals, effects this end;
in what manner their various kinds of non-conductors of heat act;
and, finally, how we, as an artificially dressing race, living in a
country different in climate from that to which our system has for
generations been accustomed, may best dress for the preservation
of our health : for I thought that the intelligent reader would wish
rather to know the reason for the advice given, than only to hear
an expression of dogmatic opinion.


fAff
& lie CO
hi C^XKf
BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
INTERNAL TUMOURS:
Crown octavo. Handsomely bound iu cloth.
Price ss.
F. F. BAILLIERE, Publisher.
THEIR CHARACTERISTIC DISTINCTIONS AND DIAGNOSIS,
