

D
E AN ■ CU RLEWIS




DROWNING MAZE


SJe tbe same Butboc
THE SHIP THAT NEVER SET SAIL;
The “ Melbourne Age ” says :
“ The writer steps into a foremost
place among the contributors to
Australian literature. She has not
only written an enjoyable story;
she has embodied a very vital piece
of life’s philosophy.”
The “ Bookman ” says :—
“ Miss Curlewis’s story has all the
charm, all the wistfulness, convey-
ed in its title; an originality that
sets it apart as a book of unique
quality, which not only girls, but
anyone who has known the joy of
pretending and has felt at some
time or other the thrilling call of the
tide, will read with unbounded
pleasure.”


i w \
|*v J
v
p|»^
jjjL. twmi ,
m<. J * v ■ * JFI
■Mil*' £ * .- 5%g J)| ” : * I
f ■Blil'
HP'S Mr % ■ i|' 4 n|
V ' i ; Jp*| j .'jjl
■ ,K I r M % f J
ifir k : ■ JM I |. f
f s^$* T un * * *" w * : wyfcdtejj-./. i[
“ ‘On your hands and knees,’ whispered Streaker, ‘follow me
and don’t fall off.’ ” (Chapter X.)
Drowning Maze] iFromisptece




drowning
MAZE
JEAN CURLEWIS
Author of ” The Ship that Never Set Sail.’'
WARD, LOCK & CO., LIMITED
LONDON AND MELBOURNE




// / /O h f /
7-3n /
L. C




CONTENTS
CHAP.
I. —" BECAUSE ” II
II. —THE CYNIC RECEIVES AN INVITATION 17
111. —" AS I WENT DOWN THE WATERSIDE ” 28
IV. —SEALED ORDERS . . . . 40
V. —THE HOUSE WITH THE TWISTED
CHIMNEYS 46
VI. —WHAT HAPPENED IN THE DRAWING-
ROOM 51
VII. —THE SEVEN-YEAR AGAVE ... 58
VIII. —CONCERNING A POTATO ... 66
IX. —STREAKER SWEEPS A CHIMNEY . . 76
X. —MOONSHINERS .... 86
XI. —DROWNING MAZE .... 95
XII. —THE PURPLE SLIPPER . . . 104
XIII. —THE HOLE IN THE WALL . . . 118
XIV. —JOHN KING’S SON .... 128
XV. —STREAKER IS CONVERTED . . 137
XVI. —WANTED, POSITION OF TRUST . . 145


CHAP.
XVII. —IN COMIC-OPERA COUNTRY . . 147
XVIII, —THE BANGLE OF THE FAIR-HEADED
WAITRESS 154
XIX. —A GRAMOPHONE RECITAL . . . 162
XX. —TREE TOP ROAD .... 169
XXI. —BY BOTTLE POST .... 179
XXII. —TWO PLAIN, TWO PURL . . . 188
XXIII. —BACK TO THE MAZE . . . 193
XXIV. —REGATTA ! 204
XXV. —INSIDE AN ENVELOPE . . . 213
XXVI. —THE SIEGE OF TWISTED CHIMNEYS . 227
XXVII. —IN WHICH EVERYBODY TALKS AT ONCE 239
XXVIII. —THE ORDER OF THE RAINBOW . . 251


f




DROWNING MAZE
CHAPTER I
“ BECAUSE ”
IN his study “ Streaker ” Brooke, Captain
of the School House, Captain of the
First Ffteen, Stroke of the First Crew,
Holder of the 220 and 440 yards Champion-
ship (hence his nickname “ Streaker ”), Vice-
Captain of Shooting, sat at ease.
From the study walls photos of School
House captains, his predecessors in the high
office, gazed down at him ; on the shelf half a
dozen silver cups gleaming in the gaslight
bore witness to his prowess ; outside in the
passage the clatter of boots died down a
decorous second as they passed the door
behind which the Head of the House kept
his state, and on his wrist the gunmetal watch
with every steady tick brought the holidays
closer.


It was a good world —a very good world.
Streaker stretched his long limbs luxuriously,
picked up a Livy (even captains have to
prepare their Latin occasionally), found his
place, opened a dictionary, sharpened a pencil
—and fell into a pleasant meditation as to
which of his four holiday invitations he should
accept.
His parents being on a visit to England,
he was free to please himself entirely in his
choice between the tennis, riding, and dancing
offered him by one school friend from a
north-west station, the golf on the mountains
proffered by another, the
There was a quick, light footfall in the
passage—too light to be the tread of a senior,
too decisive to be the step of a junior tres-
passing in the prefects’ passage.
There was a quick, light tap at the door.
“ Come inski,” said Streaker. “ Hallo, it’s
King, isn’t it ? ”
It was a boy from the Middle School who
had been new that term —and who still
seemed new though all the others who had
come with him had shaken into their places
long ago. But Humpty-Dumpty King (so


called from the big, fair, dreamy head set so
incongruously on a delicate, puny body—
coupled with the fact that his Christian name
was Humphrey) still roamed the school awk-
ward, shy, aloof. There had been an intention
at the back of Streaker’s crowded mind for a
long time to have him up to his study and
try the “ cake and kindness stunt,” followed
by a friendly lecture on “ bucking up.”
And now he had come on his own account —
probably in trouble of some sort. Streaker
swept a pile of books off his only other chair
and pushed it forward.
“ Good-o, I wanted to see you. Take a
pew,” he said cheerfully.
The visitor took the chair, and sitting down,
surveyed his host without remark.
No prep—to-night,” queried Streaker,
with intent to make an opening.
“ No. Yes, I mean,” said his guest ab-
stractedly.
Streaker laughed. " When I was in IVb
it didn’t pay to cut it,” he said. “ What’s
the trouble ? Let’s hear.”
King went on studying him thoughtfully.
Then abruptly :


" Er —can you cook ? ” he asked.
Streaker’s feet dropped off the mantelpiece
where they had been resting. The Livy
slid off the table on to the floor. For a minute
the photos on the wall held their breath.
In their day a small boy who had attempted
to be funny with his seniors would have been
out of the door in ten seconds. But after a
minute Streaker, who had a larger sense of
humour, was merely amused.
" No,” he said, “ I can’t. Why ? ”
His visitor looked thoughtful. “ That’s a
pity,” he murmured. “ And a week’s hardly
time to learn in. Can you drive a car ? ”
Streaker gazed at the intrepid youth with
astonishment.
“ I have that honour,” he remarked in a
tone of withering irony which was apparently
entirely lost on its object.
“ That’s better,” he said. “ And I know
you can run a bit.” He jerked his head
towards the row of cups. “ You’re not in
the Dramatic Society by any chance, are
you ?
Streaker rose slowly from his chair.
“ This,” he remarked quietly, “ has ceased


to be funny. Outski, my lad.” He stretched
a firm hand to the younger boy's collar.
But the extraordinary youth called Humpty-
Dumpty merely frowned impatiently.
“ Sit down,” he remarked tersely, and
though he had not raised his voice, an absurd
impression was registered in Streaker’s sub-
conscious mind that, elevated to a lieu-
tenancy in the cadet corps, this puny youth
would have an extraordinarily good word of
command.
At the same time Streaker had a good word
of command himself, and his “ Get out ”
would have brought instant obedience from
any other member of the lower school.
For a minute his visitor regarded him with
narrowed eyes. Then he shrugged his
shoulders.
“ Very well,” he remarked indifferently.
” It was only that I was going to ask you
to stay with me for the holidays. I thought
you might like to.”
He rose from his chair and turned to the
door.
Silence on Streaker’s part would have been
more dignified than sarcasm, but the sublime


audacity of the last remark had shaken
him.
" He —thought—l—might—like—to,” he
remarked almost admiringly to the gallery
of photos, “ and do the cooking, and run
the car —and the errands —and —what was
it ? —perform charades for him after dinner.”
His visitor only gave him a small and
enigmatical smile.
Streaker's tone changed suddenly. “ See
here, kid,” he said kindly enough, “ you’d
better tell me what’s at the bottom of it all.
Have some of those young asses in IVb been
daring you to come here and give this ex-
hibition of vaudeville humour, or what is it ?
What do you want me to stay with you for ?
Why did you think I would like to ? ”
The younger boy had already opened the
door, but now he turned on the threshold*
and his pale, dreamy face was silhoueted
against the darkness of the passage.
“ Because it’s going to be an adventure,”
said Humpty-Dumpty simply.


CHAPTER II
THE CYNIC RECEIVES AN INVITATION
STREAKER woke up suddenly. He had
been dreaming of —he was not quite
sure what he had been dreaming of,
but there had been speed in it and mys-
tery and a fight and a clean rushing
wind. He could still feel the tang of it
as his waking eyes took in the familiar
dormitory ceiling and he felt a childish
disappointment in being recalled to the
everyday world before the dream was fin-
ished.
There was no doubt the dormitory ceiling
was most monotonously familiar —perfectly
disgustingly familiar after eleven weeks of
term. And there was still a whole week to
go—in the grey light of half-past four a.m.
it seemed an endless period.
“Jolly funny/' he meditated, “last night
I was dead keen on everything, but this
17 b


morning —my aunt, I feel fed up.” He
rolled suddenly out of bed. “ Phew, it’s
hot,” he said, and stole past the row of
sleepers to the window. There was a wide
stone ledge outside it, which precarious
eminence the seniors of the dormi-
tory reserved strictly for themselves when
meditatively inclined, and he crawled out
on to it —only to find it already occu-
pied.
Cynic Carthew was sitting there in all the
glory of green and purple pyjamas.
The Cynic was not popular in the school.
Sixth Form prizeman, leader of the debating
society, editor of the Towersman, these
honours would have availed him nothing
beside the fact that he played no games
and openly scoffed at them as pastimes
for the mentally deficient. The respect
he commanded was entirely due to his
biting tongue and his positively uncanny
genius for impersonation scenes on Dramatic
Society gala nights. His conversation was
generally couched in terms of quotation
from the more satiric of the English
poets.


" You came and quacked beside me in the wood;
You said, ‘ The view from here is very good.'
You said, ' The sun-up’s pretty, isn’t it ? '
And ' How the nights are drawing in,' you said.
By—er—Jove, I wished —I wished that you were dead."
was now his morning greeting to Streaker.
“ Diddums ? ” replied Streaker equably.
He was perhaps the only person in the
school who might have been called a friend
of the Cynic’s, and the two watched the dawn
together in a not unamiable silence.
Presently:
“ Going away for the holidays ? ” growled
the Cynic.
“YYes,"e —es," said Streaker, “ I suppose so."
He was annoyed to find that his late dream
had in some curious way subtracted all the
interest from the pleasant house parties to
which he was invited. There would be
riding, tennis, dancing, but there would be
no —no salt in them now.
” I have received an invitation,” remarked
the Cynic. “ And when little boys from the
Lower School come and pester me with in-
vitations I fear my manner of studied un-
pleasantness must be growing less effective
than of yore. Hence my early rising— to


pluck the motes of amiability from out my
soul.”
“ Who was it ? ” asked Strcaxer.
“ Don’t know. Never saw him before.
Funny little fish with a big head.”
“ King —from IVb,” said Streaker slowly.
He was just remembering that Humpty-
Dumpty had played a leading part in that
swift vivid dream of his —had been directing
the fight in fact —and the discovery filled
him again with that unaccountable annoyance.
“Yes, I believe that was his name. Extra-
ordinary youth—said he’d heard I was good
at Stinks in general and would I like to come
and stay with him ! ”
“ Did you kick him out of the study ? ”
queried Streaker with interest.
“NNo.”o —o.” The Cynic hesitated. ” D’you
know, Streaker, for one mad minute I nearly
went ? I asked him out of sheer curiosity
what inducement he had to offer, and he
looked me over in a slow sort of way and
drawled out : ‘ Well, for the first time in
your life you wouldn’t be —bored.’ ”
“ Cheek,” commented Streaker.
“No, not cheek,” said the Cynic slowly,


“ Psychology. A bull’s-eye. As a matter of
cold, hard fact, Streak, I’ve been bored ever
since I can remember. Bored cold with term
time and colder with holidays. Bored with
lessons and colder with games. Bored with
rotters and colder ” —he gave Streaker a
friendly grin—“ with good, amiable people
like yourself. But I don’t want to be —I’d
give anything for a chance to be thrilled.
And then this kid comes along and puts his
finger right on the spot.”
Streaker said nothing. He was uncomfort-
ably aware that though he was far from being a
bored person, that the word “ adventure ”
had gone right to his heart. The two sat
on in silence while the wild, red dawn flared
round their ledge and died into the common
light of an ordinary school day and the
familiar bell woke the machinery of school
life to motion.
It was a long day, a hot day, a tiresome
day. Just which of the many monotonous
details of it finally irked his seniors Humpty-
Dumpty never knew.
It is only certain that when before evening
prep he obeyed a summons to the captain’s


study he found there two mighty men both
more than a little embarrassed at their own
weakness of mind.
Humpty-Dumpty smiled his enigmatic
smile.
“ So you’ve decided to come ? ” he said.
“ We’ve decided nothing of the sort, you
young owl,” Streaker said, “ but ”
“ But your particular style of humour
happens to amuse us,” broke in the Cynic’s
drawling tones, “ and you have our gracious
permission to jest a little further —in fact,
to tell us all about it.”
“ I’m not going to tell you anything,” said
Humpty-Dumpty. “ Anything at all. If
you don’t want to come, don’t. If you do —
the whole expedition is under sealed orders.
We’ll receive them on the way —until then
all I can tell you is that there will be a Cross-
hall car at the school gates two hours after
we break up, fully equipped and provisioned
and provided with a map of French’s Forest
and Pittwater, which is where we are
going.”
“ A Crosshall,” said Streaker suspiciously.
“ There aren’t any in Australia.”


“ There’s one,” said Humpty-Dumpty.
” Mine, My father sent it out from London
last month. That’s the car I want you to
drive.”
Streaker stared at him. The Crosshall
was the latest wonder-car on the English
market. Many and many a time had he
(he was an ardent devotee of cars) pored over
its glories as related in the English catalogues
and gloated over its pictured lines. And
Humpty-Dumpty was casually offering him
one to drive with his own hands.
“ Yes, I want you to run the car,” con-
tinued Humpty-Dumpty, " and I’m inviting
the Cynic because he’s a scientist, and my
father’s expeditions always take two-thirds
scientists —and also because he could manage
any disguising or acting we might have to
do. I was hoping one of you would be able
to cook, because I’ll be pretty busy as it is,
but as you can’t ” —he broke off and pro-
duced a book from his pocket—“ lam fagging
it up myself.”
“ One Hundred and One Delicious Dishes
and How to Make Them,” read his astonished
seniors on the cover.


Humpty-Dumpty fluttered the pages.
“ Caramel cream,” he murmured.
“ Petits Pois au Naturel. Or how about
Macedoine aux Abricots. Take one pint of
whipped cream ”
" That’ll do,” interrupted Streaker curtly.
Humpty-Dumpty closed the book reluc-
tantly.
“ In return for your services,” he said,
” I think you could manage to knock out a
fairly good time. There’ll be the car and
camping, and surfing and fishing, and all
that sort of thing —probably no more than
your other invitations offer you if it weren’t
for the —well, Something Else.”
“ And that is ? ” said the Cynic.
" I can’t tell you,” said Humpty-Dumpty.
" I can only say ” —his voice grew suddenly
so low and vibrant that his hearers w T ere
impressed in spite of themselves —“ that the
Something Else is—Big.” He turned and
walked abruptly out of the room.
There was a minute’s silence between the
two he left behind. Then the Cynic laughed
and yawned.
" Melodramatic infant, isn’t it ? ” he said.


" However I hardly think I’ll join the cast
of his five-reel gripping mystery film.” He
rose to go.
" A Crosshall,” said Streaker thoughtfully.
If it had not been for that one point he would
have dismissed the mad story from his
thoughts in a minute. “ Said his father sent
it to him.”
” And there was something about his
fathers expeditions,” said the Cynic. " Who
is his father—we forgot to ask. Anyway
I'm taking IVb prep to-night and I’ll ask him
just for curiosity. So long.”
An hour later Streaker was handed a
twisted note in the Cynic’s black hand-
writing.
“ The plot thickens,” it said. “ His father
is Sir John King ! ”
Streaker whistled. Sir John King the most
famous and picturesque old boy the Towers
School had ever produced, the great and
honoured scientist-explorer. Never a big
thing throughout the world for twenty years
but he had had a hand in it —never a far
corner of the earth where his foot had not
trod.


He had cut his way with a bill-hook through
the lianas of the steaming jungles of the
Panama Isthmus with the first survey for the
canal; he had sailed for the white silences
of the Antarctic not once but three times ;
for two years he had been lost to human ken
in darkest Papua. The Balkans knew him,
and the Far East, and during the war he had
been buried in Arabia on what errands the
British Secret Service alone knew. It was
only certain that in the next three years he
earned the right to the title of diplomat as
well as of scientist and explorer.
“If that’s Humpty-Dumpty’s father,”
said Streaker to the photos on the walls,
“ every-thing is otherwise —very otherwise
indeed.”
There was no doubt it did alter matters.
John King transacted his business in strange
places —who knew what big thing might be
brewing out there in lonely French’s Forest
above the sea. Pittwater, that happy holiday
harbour beloved of yachtsmen, was less likely
but then —with John King no place was un-
likely.
Streaker leaned from his study window


into the cool darkness with his brain racing.
House parties versus this erratic affair—.
And then there came to his ears a creaking
noise—a creaking and a crying of wild swans.
He looked up and saw their V-shaped flight
against the stars as they headed north over
the deserted playing fields —north to their
far lagoons and lonely marshes, and their wild
honking seemed to cry as Humpty-Dumpty
had cried “ Adventure ! ”
Streaker shut down the window with a
sudden decisive crash.
“That’s torn it,” he said. "We’ll go ! ”


CHAPTER 111
“ AS I WENT DOWN THE WATERSIDE ”
IT was two o’clock in the afternoon a week
later. Two hours since the five hundred
and seventy-seventh hymn which bears
the magic rubric “At End of Term ” had
echoed through the chapel, succeeded by
the joyous babble at the gate as cab after
overloaded cab bore the care-free boarders
away.
Only Streaker, the Cynic and Humpty-
Dumpty were left, and now they also were
gathered in the archway awaiting their con-
veyance of departure —Streaker and the
Cynic with the slightly uncomfortable feeling
that the whole affair was ridiculous, Humpty-
Dumpty quietly absorbed in his cookery
book.
“My aunty said Streaker suddenly. It
was his favourite expression in moments of
great emotion.


A car had that moment slid through the
school gates—a car of which even Streaker
in all his hauntings of motor shows, had
never seen the like.
“ My fat aunt,” he murmured again, drink-
ing in the immense length of her lines, the
distinctive aluminium of the radiator, the
set of the headlights, the height of the cowl,
the size of the wheel base.
" Didn’t know there was one in Australia.”
The uniformed chauffeur pulled the magni-
ficent thing up beside them.
‘ Richards,” said Humpty-Dumpty,” you
will drive us round the drive until Mr. Brooke
understands the car. Then you will hand it
over to him.”
His seniors looked at Humpty-Dumpty
curiously, and to Streaker, at least, the exact
nature of the adventure became of relative
unimportance. Permission to drive this
apotheosis of a car was adventure enough
itself. The boys climbed in, Streaker and
the Cynic in front, Humpty-Dumpty among
the neatly stowed camping gear behind. For
five minutes the chauffeur spoke technical
mysteries to Streaker—then the clutch slid


in like velvet and they shot down the long
school drive. At the gate they stopped to
set the chauffeur down —the masters who
found Streaker slow in comprehending his
Latin would have had no cause for complaint
when he turned his mind to learning a car —
and to exchange a few lively sallies with the
Sergeant Major, their immemorial foe. Then
they were off again, the school behind them
and the road before, the car purring like some
beautiful tiger, running velvet-shod, eating
up the miles under Streaker’s enraptured
hands.
They flashed through the city that was
bright with the hot Christmas sunlight and
gay with Christmas shoppers, women in
bright coloured summer frocks carrying great
bunches of orange-scarlet Christmas bells,
and children tugging at the strings of gaudy
toy balloons. A scarlet-coated Santa Claus
beamed at them from every window, and
even the Cynic w r as moved to approval.
“ Not so worse —holidays," he commented,
lying lazily back in the luxurious seat and
watching Streaker avoiding the crowd with
dexterous hands. Across the punt that


ferried them to the north shore of the Harbour
City they came up with a pilgrimage—the
great Christmas pilgrimage of Sydney to the
long surf beaches—car after car, brimming
over with children and gramophones and
frying pans, perspiring small boys on bicycles
with camping outfits strapped to their backs,
cart after cart, butchers’, bakers’, milkmans’
pressed into sendee as gipsy caravans, jour-
neying on to the beaches and the bungalows
and the long blue Pacific surf.
“ Watch,” said Streaker, and opened his
throttle. The big Crosshall shot forward,
overhauled the whole string and with a joyous
note like a comet from her long silvered
horn, took her place at the head of the pro-
cession with insolent ease.
Yes, holidays were not so wwse at all.
Streaker swamg the great car into the road
down to the water again at the Spit, and as
he did so he started a little in his seat —a
breeze had whipped his cheek, salt from the
ocean the very wdnd of that queer dream
of his.
Then he heard the Cynic singing cheerfully
to himself beside him.


“ As I went down the water-side
None but my foe to be my guide,
None but my foe to be my guide.
and his spirits rose still higher. Holidays
were well in any case, but holidays with the
zest of a secret adventure running through
them like a scarlet thread w r ere still better.
“ I lighted down my sword to draw
I hacked him in pieces sma’.”
sang Carthew even more cheerfully.
" I hacked him in pieces sma'.”
They drew up to wait for the punt in the
little cluster of boatsheds and confectionery
shops that had collected there, and Humpty-
Dumpty leaned forward from the back seat.
“ Streaker,” he said. “ I want you to go
into the shop nearest the punt. I w r ant you
to buy a packet of Sweet Sixteen chocolate.
But not any packet —it must be taken from
the stack in the windowg and it must be the
third from the bottom. No other will do.”
“ But think wiiat a fool I’ll look,” objected
Streaker, “ making the woman dive into the
window for me. She might want to know
w r hv.”
j


" Must say you’re a bold, bad, dashing
buccaneer, Streak,” cut in the Cynic's drawling
voice, “ to stick at a little detail like that.
Come along—l’ll help you.”
He heaved himself out of the car, and the
two boys crossed the road together. At the
door of the shop, to Streaker’s horror, Carthew
seized him firmly by the hand.
” My little boy,” he explained to the shop
girl, indicating the six-foot muscular Streaker,
in just the falsetto tones with which he had
played an elderly dowager in the last perfor-
mance by the Dramatic Society, “ is fractious.
Remarkably strong willed—inherits it from
his poor dear father. The doctors warn me
never to cross him unless I have a mustard
bath at hand. In case of convulsions, you
know.”
He beamed amiably upon the astonished
girl, while Streaker struggling to free himself
turned purple with embarrassment.
There, there, dear,” said the Cynic sooth-
ingly, patting him on the shoulder. “ Hush,
hush. I’m sure the kind lady will get it for
you out of the window. That pile of Sweet
Sixteen chocolate if you would be so kind—


he’s taken a fancy for having one out of the
window and not out of the shop.”
The girl complied in a dazed fashion, and
the Cynic scrutinised the heap through an
imaginary lorgnette.
“ There you are, Archibald. Take your
thumb out of your mouth and choose the one
you want, and say * thank you ’ to the pretty
lady.”
The hypnotised Streaker chose, and wrench-
ing his hand free from the Cynic’s grasp, fled
madly.
“ Such a dreadful child,” murmured the
Cynic sweetly. “So kind of you. Good
morning.”
He put down his sevenpence and drifted
gently from the shop, leaving the girl giggling.
Humpty-Dumpty glanced at the packet
sharply—then with a still sharper glance
around him stuffed it carelessly into his
pocket.
His seniors, noting his precaution, also
looked round them with interest. Was it
possible that from one of these hooded cars,
apparently so innocently bent on holiday
making, enemy eyes were watching them.


“ Punt’s in the offing. Come along. Once
aboard the lugger and the girl is mine,”
announced the Cynic and they slid forward.
As they took their places on the punt,
Streaker had a curious feeling that eyes were
indeed watching them. And not from one
car alone, the occupants of every car on the
punt were scrutinising the Crosshall, though
their expressions could hardly be called
inimical, in fact they might better be
described as highly amused.
“ Personally,” remarked the Cynic, who
had also perceived the gaze, “ I’ve got the
sinking feeling that a bridegroom must have
when it dawns on him that there is a white
satin shoe and a box of confetti behind the
car. In fact I can’t bear the suspense any
longer, I’m going round to investigate.”
He got out of the car again while Streaker
and Humpty-Dumpty craned their necks to
watch him.
“ Ladies and gentlemen,” the Cynic's voice
came to them from behind the hood, imper-
turbable as ever, ” absolutely no deception
I assure you.”
With the bland air of a conjurer he


extracted a small boy who in some miraculous
fashion was wedged between the luggage
carrier and the back of the hood.
“ Podmore,” gasped Streaker.
He was the inkiest, nosiest, and in his
senior’s eyes, the most objectionable small
boy in the whole Lower School. In owl-like
spectacles and a collar so extraordinarily
grubby that Streaker blushed for the honour
of his house and made a mental note as to
adding a Form llb linen parade to his multi-
farious duties next term, he was far from being
a prepossessing object, being rendered even
less so by a complete envelope of dust.
“ For heaven’s sake shove him inside now
and let him explain afterwards,” said Streaker,
becoming aware after the first moment of the
interested scrutiny of their fellow passengers.
He ducked his head and feigned an absorbed
interest in the switchboard until the stowaway
had been hustled into the shelter of the hood
and the Cynic had joined him again in the
front seat —after which, the interest they
had aroused was happily diverted in the
business of landing.
Once again the powerful, silent engines


brought the Crosshall to the front, up the
long curves they swept, a fleet of twenty
cars striving vainly behind in her dust.
But at the top of the hill Humpty-Dumpty
leaned forward.
“ Turn off by the little church,” he called.
Streaker swung the car reluctantly. He
was enjoying the car’s superiority intensely
and would have liked nothing better than to
lead the race all the way to Manly.
But as he turned, the wind stung his cheek
again, sharp this time with the clean frag-
rance of wild flowers, and he saw before him
a wild open country rolling to the sky. Even
in the sunlight it had a hint of deep purple
in its shadows that gave it an air of mystery
and made the road to Manly look suddenly
flat and commonplace. Even the little church
had an air of its own—an air of possessing a
secret.
A butcher’s cart rattled towards them —
possibly it was the reckless pace at which it
drove, but something had lent the three men
who sat aloft on it a dash of the sinister and
piratical. One wore a patch over his left
eye.


As they drove on they passed a lonely
cottage where a small flaxen-haired child sat
in her petticoat beneath the clothes-line on
which her scarlet frock was drying. So
intensely red it was, so vivid against the dark
ragged moorland behind it, that it seemed
like a flag, a shouted challenge at the gates
of this country whose secret they hoped to
wrest. Further on a great hound snarled
at them, a black bull on the road lowered
its head menacingly as Streaker blew his
horn and swerved to avoid it.
“ And yet ” —■
“ Dauntless the slug horn to my lips I set
And blew ‘ Childe Rolande to the Dark Tower came.
murmured Carthew at the sound.
(The fact that no one ever appreciated nor
recognised his quotations did not daunt the
Cynic for an instant.)
The car ran on —the landscape was empty
of dwellings and the road of travellers now.
“ I guess we’ve got enough privacy to
court martial the prisoner,” remarked the
Cynic. " Pull up, Streaker, and let us examine
the worm. Chuck him forth to the lions,
Humpty.”


Humpty-Dumpty got out of the car —he
walked forward a few steps to a rise in the
road and stood outlined against the sky
surveying the windy country in silence, a
small Napoleonic figure.
Then he turned.
“Yes, a court martial and a council of
war,” he said.


CHAPTER IV
SEALED ORDERS
THE prisoner was haled forth —a pitiful
enough object with tears making fur-
rows down the grime of his cheeks.
"You can be the Counsel for the defence,
Humpty-Dumpty. ITI conduct the case for
the Crown,” said Carthew. He pensively
knotted the four corners of his handkerchief
to make himself a wig.
The prisoner told his tale between sobs.
“ I was just hanging round the gate lodge,”
he wept, “ and ”
“ Why hadn’t you gone home ? ” inquired
the prosecuting counsel.
" Haven’t got a home to go to. My people
are dead. Some holidays Igoto an uncle’s,
but mostly I stop at the Towers.”
" Go on,” said Carthew.
"and I heard you tell the sergeant
you were going to Manly. And it was such


a big car that I saw there was room on the
back and you wouldn’t see ’cause the hood
was up. And I felt so fed up with school
that I hopped on so’s I’d get a lift to Manly,
and nick off without you seeing and have a
surf, and come home by boat. And I don’t
see that it hurt you, anyway,” he concluded
defiantly.
The Cynic regarded him with disfavour.
“ When I think,” he murmured, “ that in
front of a whole punt load of respectable
people I had to —ah—acknowledge that I was
acquainted with you I’m thankful that I’m
about to hide my head for some time in the
wilderness. When I —ah —consider that you
did maliciously and with intent to injure,
conspire against the—ah —awe and majesty
wherein doth sit the —ah —dread and fear of
prefects such as my learned friend, Mr. Streaker
Brooke, and myself by making us a laughing
stock to horrid little boys on the punt, I—ah—
consider that there is no reason why the
utmost penalty of the law should not be
exacted. However, as a matter of form,
the jury will retire.”
" We’re the jury,” he added unexpectedly


to the judge and counsel for the defence.
“ Come on.”
They retired out of earshot, and all three
conferred earnestly while the prisoner sat on
the footboard of the car and noted dismally
the camping gear stowed trimly in the back seat
and the wild and alluring open road in front,
where these three fortunate youths were
travelling towards unbounded freedom. And
for himself the dreary flat monotony of the
deserted Towers School.
Two more tears of intense self pity streaked
the grime of his cheeks.
The jury was returning.
“I’m the judge now,” remarked the versa-
tile Cynic. “ Streaker is the usher. Usher,
hand me the black cap.”
He donned his knotted handkerchief the
other side out.
“ Prisoner,” he said ferociously, “ you have
been tried and found guilty of stowing away.
On consulting the precedents cited in such
learned works as the Red Rover and Bonza
the Black Buccaneer, we find that the penalty
is for the stowaway either to walk the plank
or, if the crew is shorthanded, to be forced


to sign on for the duration of the voyage.
The crew of the Crosshall lacks a kewpie on
the radiator —therefore you shall not return
to the gilded pleasures and luxuries, to the
gay social whirl of the Towers School. I sign
you on for the position of official mascot to
the expedition. So in future you will travel
tied to the front of the car instead of the
back. Streaker will wire to the matron and
inform her of your fate.”
In the squeal of rapture not unlike that of
a guinea pig that followed the Cynic realised
that although Podmore might not possess the
accomplishments of a master adventurer,
at least he had been bound to the expedition
with fervour and loyalty. When the jury
first retired both he and Streaker had been
strongly in favour of shipping the stowaway
on the Manly tram, with half a crown to spend
the day in Manly and instructions to return
to school in the evening.
But Humpty-Dumpty had unexpectedly
intervened.
“ Let him come along with us,” he said ;
“ he won’t be much use, but he’ll be as keen
as mustard. Kids of that age positively live


on plots and secret societies —the Lower
School’s as full of them as Russia. And I
don’t expect you two know what it is to be
lonely. I do.”
” I wouldn’t mind ninety per cent, of the
Lower School,” grumbled Streaker, “ but
this particular specimen is over the fence.”
Humpty-Dumpty looked at him with nar-
rowed eyes.
“ Who is in command of this expedition ? ”
he inquired, and for some inexplicable reason
it was the eyes of the Captain of the School
that fell first.
“ Don’t say I didn’t warn you,” he said ;
but beneath the surface neither he nor the
Cynic was displeased. It would have needed
very flinty hearts indeed to condemn a fellow
being to the dreary class-rooms while all Out
Doors was shouting of sun and wind, and
holidays.
After which they returned, and Carthew,
who always took the lead when there was
speaking to be done, pronounced sentence.
Such was the enlistment in the expedition of
Podmore, at the time so trivial, in the end
to be so fraught with fate.


And then at last Humpty-Dumpty drew
from his pocket the packet of Sweet Sixteen
chocolate.
Very carefully he removed the gay paper
wrapper with his penknife ; then he drew
out from the same pocket a bottle of iodine
and a brush.
“ It’s a secret ink. You make it by boiling
rice in water/' explained the Cynic from the
depths of his scientific knowledge as Humpty-
Dumpty washed over the blank inner side
of the wrapper with the iodine.
The paper turned purplish brown, blue
characters began to stand out on it and a
scratchy map.
RENDEZVOUS
it said
I. At the House with the Twisted Chimneys.
11. In Drowning Maze.
111. At Hole-in-the-Wall.
Watch, Wait,


CHAPTER V
THE HOUSE WITH THE TWISTED CHIMNEYS
IT was after four o’clock when the Cjmic
suddenly announced “ chimneys on the
starboard bow,” and following his point-
ing finger, perhaps a mile away across the
upland along which they drove, they became
aware of five white twisted chimneys catching
the late sun above a cluster of dark trees.
Three minutes later Streaker checked the
car in front of a wide gate of rusty ornamental
iron. A breakwind of ragged black firs
planted close along the fence hid the house
entirely from view and filled the air with a
mournful monotonous murmur as the wind
whistled through their dark needles.
From a board at the gate a torn “ For
Sale ” notice flapped drearily.
“There’s a roars -of - fun - and - shrieks - of-
merriment air about the place that appeals
to one immensely,” said the Cynic as they


gazed —" so comfy and homelike, don’t you
think ? ”
Humpty-Dumpty put his hand on the
latch.
“ The iron gate
Ground its teeth to let me pass.”
murmured the Cynic, and such was the
atmosphere that Podmore started and re-
garded the rusty hinges quite nervously.
They found themselves on a big square
neglected lawn where the late sun still lingered.
On the farther side the purple shadows that
lurked about the open country had drawn in
and deepened about an old stone house,
proud, austere, reticent, built so tall that its
north-east windows could look out over the
firs, over the wild uplands, to the distant
ocean.
The boys stared at it curiously. This old
English-looking grange in French’s Forest
where the style of architecture was chiefly
weatherboard and galvanised iron ! But
Humpty-Dumpty was speaking.
“ Streaker, take the east side of the garden
and house ; Cynic, the west ; Podmore, the
south. Examine them carefully and bring me


word of anything—no matter how small—
that attracts your attention.''
Streaker and Carthew hesitated. They had
not 3et become accustomed to receiving
their orders from a junior, but after a moment
they went their ways as bidden. They had
undertaken the expedition and they would
play the game. Humpty-Dumpty was left
alone pacing the lawn, rank with weeds.
Only a camelia, blooming wild and out of
season, told that the garden had once been
lovely.
Ten minutes slipped by, fifteen, twenty,
then he beheld Streaker and Podmore re-
turning.
Streaker, whose arduous duties as prefect
left him little time for the perusal of romantic
literature, had not found much at all.
“There are some old stone steps leading
down to the harbour,'' he said, “ and some
old stunted pear trees. And the house has
long windows opening on to the balconies,
but I looked in and there’s nothing to see.
Old satin striped wall papers and gilt mirrors,
and odds and ends of old furniture.''
“ Well, Podmore," said Humpty-Dumpty


» f
I 'f
‘I found these in an old chest in the stable loft,' he said
Drowning Maze ] [Chapter
[Chapter V




HOUSE WITH TWISTED CHIMNEYS 4c
turning to the representative of the Lower
School with a smile, for the small boy was
plainly bursting with information. No bald
unimaginative statements like Streaker’s for
Podmore.
“ On the south,” said Podmore with the
business-like air of a detective reporting to
Scotland Y T ard headquarters, “is a well.
An old well, very deep, the sort that ’ud be
jolly useful for putting things in. Treasure
and skeletons and things. In fact I wouldn’t
be surprised if there were some in it now,” he
added with an affectionate glance at the old
lichen-grown coping.
“ Proceeding further along the house,” he
continued with deep enjoyment, “ is the door.
It’s a jolly big door as you can see for your-
selves, and if you kick it you can feel its
pretty thick. It ’ud be jolly useful to be
inside it if we were besieged,” he added
hopefully. “In fact it’s a jolly useful house
in lots of ways. And there’s something else
pretty interesting about that door. The
keyhole. It’s only about two’n a-half feet
from the ground.”
“ What do you deduce from that ? ” in-


quired Humpty-Dumpty smiling. Podmore
was so plainly in his element.
“ Owner of the house is a dwarf of course,”
returned Podmore triumphantly. “ We’ve
only got to drive round the neighbourhood
looking for a dwarf and capture him, and the
treasure or whatever it is we're here to find,
is ours ! ”
“ What’s the Cynic found ? ” said Streaker,
interrupting him suddenly. They all turned
to look along the drive which, overhung by
gum trees, swept towards a distant, half-
hidden cluster of stables. The Cynic was
walking towards them holding some thing or
things carefully in his hands.
“ I found these in an old chest in the stable
loft,” he said in his level voice, and laid the
things—there were three of them —down in
the grass.
Two were long steel rapiers—rusted all
over, but still sharp and deadly looking.
The third was a human skull.


CHAPTER VI
WHAT HAPPENED IN THE DRAWING-ROOM
THERE was a long silence amongst the
boys on the weedy lawn. Only now
there was an ominous note in the wind
that whistled through the firs, a ghostliness in
the fragrance of the spilt pink camelia petals.
Involuntarily they glanced up to the empty
windows to make sure that no hidden male-
volent eyes looked down therefrom.
Only the Cynic seemed unmoved.
“ Rapiers for two and coffee for one,” he
remarked, “ that was the correct order to
give the butler before a duel, wasn’t it ? And
then I expect they came out and fought by
moonlight on this lawn. Or in the shrubbery
by candlelight. By the way, were these what
you were expecting to find, Humpty-Dumpty?”
“ I don’t know,” said Humpty-Dumpty,
“ you’ve seen my orders —they merely say :
‘ Watch, wait.’ And it’s getting dark ; we’d


better drive the car in and get some wood for
a tire and fix up where to sleep."
A windy red sunset was indeed burning
behind the dark moorland, and for an hour all
speculation as to the mystery had to be
shelved while they housed the car in one of
the sheds, unpacked their blankets and decided
to camp on the verandah on the side of the
house farthest from the lawn. Then there
was supper to be cooked—the big baskets
in the car provided chops, sausages and
potatoes for the occasion—and the first stars
were shining before the subject could be
broached again.
Humpty-Dumpty maintained a guarded
silence; whether he had expected to find
anything of the sort the others could not
determine. Streaker, whose mind had no
bent for imaginative theory making, was also
taciturn, so the conversation was left to
Podmore and Carthew. The others lay in
the starlight listening to the two voices:
Podmore’s excited and earnest with the words
tumbling over themselves in his eagerness to
advance some improbable theory ; the Cynic's
drawling and cynical as ever as he capped


it with some more fantastic supposition
still.
But at last even Podmore’s imagination
was exhausted, and Streaker rising, broke a
branch of green gum leaves and thrust them
on the fire to keep off the mosquitoes. Then
one by one they rolled themselves in their
rugs and slept.
It was Streaker who woke first. For a
minute his mind was a blank ; then he became
aware that behind the long French windows
that opened on to the verandah where they
lay, there were lights. Lights and voices.
He put out a cautious hand to touch the
Cynic, and at the same moment Humpty-
Dumpty and Podmore sat up suddenly, also
awakened by the noise.
Fortunately the moon was clouded over —
it was easy enough in the darkness to creep
close to the windows and look in unobserved,
though with bated breath.
The scene within surprised them. If they
had beheld a gang of coiners at their work,
or even Podmore's dwarf engaged in perfecting
an infernal machine here in this lonely house
so far from men, they would have felt it more


appropriate than the commonplace sight that
met their eyes.
Half a dozen middle-aged men and women
in conventional day-clothes were sitting about
the room in the most ordinary conversational
attitudes possible. Anything less romantic
would have been hard to imagine. The boys
might have been looking in on any suburban
drawing-room in Sydney.
They strained their ears to catch the con-
versation, but only a confused murmur
reached them through the glass. They noticed
that the party often gazed about the room
with interest—sometimes they smiled, but
more often they shook their heads regretfully.
The boys felt that an air of sadness hung
over them all.
Presently Streaker became aware of some-
thing else. They were waiting for something.
At the end of the room, wide folding-doors
gave into the hall, through which could be seen
the wide staircase and beyond it the inner
side of the big oak door which had met with
Podmore’s approval in the afternoon. And
Streaker now perceived that the party had
drawn up their chairs in a rough semi-circle


facing the staircase, and by the direction of
their glances he saw that they were waiting
for someone or something to come down it.
At the same moment he noticed that a
window farther along the room was open—
he left the others and slipped towards it.
When he ventured to look in again he
perceived at once by the tense expression of
the watchers that something was about to
happen.
Then he saw that a woman was coming down
the shadowy staircase. She was a tall woman
and there was something terrible in her way
of moving. One hand was stretched out
before her to feel her way ; in the other she
held a long wiiite candle that lit the ghastly
wdiiteness of her face, the loose white stuff in
wdiich she was clad, the black hair that
streamed over it.
Half-way dowm the flight she paused,
staring at her hands. Even at that distance
Streaker could see the horror in her face.
“ Yet, here’s a spot,” she said and rubbed
at her fingers as if she were washing it off.
“ Out, damned spot ! ” she said. “ Out, I
say.” Then she turned her head listening.


One, two, she counted as if a clock were
striking, “ why, then, his time to do it. Hell
is murky ! Fie, my lord, fie ! A soldier and
afeard ! Aet who would have thought the
old man to have so much blood in him. ,,
Streaker became aware that though he
could hear every word with an awful distinct-
ness, she was whispering—a low strained
whisper that chilled the blood.
The Thane of Fife had a wife, wiiere is she
now ? What, will these hands ne’er be clean ?
No more o’ that, my lord, no more o’ that,
you mar all with this starting.”
She swayed forward another step in the
flickering candlelight.
“ Wash your hands, put on your nightgown,
look not so pale, I tell you yet again he’s
buried; he cannot come out on’s grave.”
A moan broke from her lips, a moan as if
she could bear no more.
Come, come, come, come, give me your
hand, what’s done cannot be undone ; to bed,
to bed, there’s knocking at the gate, to bed,
to ”
Next instant there w T as a stifled shriek from
every w’oman in the room, and Streaker felt


the hair rise on his head. For in very truth
there was knocking, low, thunderous, unmis-
takable —someone was knocking on the big
oak door.
The men had jumped to their feet and were
staring at each other in surmise. The woman
on the staircase had sprung back against the
banisters, her hands to her throat. After
a tense minute one of the men strode into
the hall, drew back the bolts of the door
and flung it open.
There was no one outside —only the moon
swam high and white over the empty lawn !


CHAPTER VII
THE SEVEN-YEAR AGAVE
THE men stared at each other again ;
then they took a few uncertain steps
into the garden to investigate. At
the same moment Streaker found the Cynic
at his elbow. He was panting a little.
Let s have a look, will you,” he said, and
peered in. “ Oh, I say —I am a rotter.”
He had caught sight of the women’s blanched
faces. Next minute he put his hand on the
window sill and vaulted clean into the room.
For a minute all was confusion. The
women shrieked again, the men came running
back—when the babble quietened as they
realised gradually that the intruder was
nothing more terrifjdng than a schoolboy,
Streaker saw that the Cynic was apologising
very humbly and contritely indeed.
“It was a most unpardonable thing,”
he was saying; “ I didn’t think—l didn’t


realise how startling it must have been for
you. Only—l know Macbeth off by heart,
and when I knew that bit about the knocking
was coming it seemed to me how gorgeously
dramatic it would be if there really was
knocking on the gate. And I didn’t stop to
think how scaring it would be for you —I
just slid round to the front and knocked.”
His distress was so evident that Streaker
saw the faces round him melt a little. The
stoutest of the men looked him over and
smiled.
“For a gentleman of your tender years
you certainly have a very discriminating
sense of the dramatic moment,” he said.
“ The situation you created had its merits —
distinct merits. Not to mention an intimate
knowledge of the Elizabethan playwrights.”
Streaker was beginning dimly to understand.
Apparently the staircase affair had been a
bit out of a play. Macbeth —it was by
Shakespeare, wasn’t it ? Personally his know-
ledge of Shakespeare was confined to Henry V
which he had read for the Intermediate, and
Julius Caesar, which he was preparing for the
Leaving Certificate. But the Cynic used


to swot Shakespeare when the rest of the
school was at football, and so probably had
recognised the scene while he, Streaker, was
still wondering if the woman were mad.
She had come down from the stairs by now,
and in the bright light he saw that her white
gown was nothing but a long loose motor
coat turned back to front and the pallor of
her face had been smeared on with a powder
puff. But why—why these theatricals in
this deserted house ?
But Humpty-Dumpty was at his side by
now, with Podmore owl-eyed behind him.
" We’d better go in quickly,” said Humpty-
Dumpty. “ I don’t want the Cynic to ex-
plain exactly why we’re here.”
So three more figures vaulted out of the
darkness, through the windows into the
lighted drawing-room.
“ And are these also Shakesperian critics ? ”
inquired the stout man smiling. “ And is
it your habit to peruse the works of our ever-
living poet at the witching hour of 10 p.m.
in deserted houses ? ”
Humpty-Dumpty explained briefly that
they had been motoring down to camp at


Palm Beach, had had a puncture, seen the
empty house and come in to shelter for the
night.
“ And woke up to find Lady Macbeth
walking down the stairs,” broke in the
Cynic. “ Really I think you ought to for-
give me the knocking on the gate because I
couldn’t have scared you worse than you
scared us. We came over all dithery like
until I recognised it was a play.”
The fat man laughed. “ A tribute to
your powers, Miss Masefield,” he said. “ You’re
right, boy—l guess we’re quits.”
The late Lady Macbeth, who had slipped
off her dust coat, was now revealed as a
comfortable motherly person of fifty-six or
so, laughed.
“ I think the least we can do is to invite
them all to supper,” she said, and her voice,
no longer that strained whisper, was rich
and mellow.
And in five minutes the still bewildered
Towers schoolboys found themselves eating
cold chicken and salad which these extra-
ordinary people produced from their suit-
cases.


“ But —but,” said Streaker at last —“ I
suppose we haven’t the right to ask —but
why?" He looked towards the staircase
and then at Miss Masefield. “ And —is it a
secret or—could you possibly tell us who you
are ? ”
The air of sadness that had momentarily
departed suddenly shadowed the faces again.
It was the stout man who answered slowly,
" We are the John Fenton Theatrical Com-
pany,” he said. ” All that is left of it.
You have heard of us, perhaps.”
The boys’ faces remained blank.
The fat man gave the company a glance
that was half-mocking, half-pathetic.
“ And yet in our day we were not un-
known,” he murmured. ” Your fathers would
probably tell you we were the best Shakes-
pearian company that ever played in Sydney.
But that doesn’t matter now —only this was
John Fenton’s house. He built it when he
retired here to escape from the smell of the
footlights and the noise of the crowd.”
" But not so far away,” broke in Miss
Masefield, ” that he couldn't extend un-
limited hospitality to all the members of


his late company and treat them to rest
cures here and coach them in any part if
they wanted help.”
She broke off and pointed through the
window. “ You see that agave? ” she said.
Looking out, the boys saw it swaying in
the moonlight, a cluster of white blossoms
set on a stem thirty feet tall. They had
noticed it in the afternoon.
“ It’s a seven-year agave,” said Miss Mase-
field, “ only flowers once every seven years.
Last time it flowered it was John Fenton’s
birthday and he gave us all a party —a
wonderful party here in this room. And we
looked out at the agave and talked about
what we all hoped to do before it flowered
again. I remember my great ambition was
to play Lady Macbeth—so Mr. Fenton laughed
and said, ‘ Show us what you can do.’ So
I wrapped myself in a sheet and played
it —there on the stairs like I did to-night.
And he coached me for a whole hour.
All the others had equally lofty ambitions,
and we decided that in seven years, when
the agave flowered again, Mr. Fenton should
give us another party and we’d come


back and tell each other how far we had
got.”
She fell silent.
" There were twenty of us that night,” said
the fat man ; “ to-night there are only six
of us left alive in Sydney. John Fenton died
before the agave had finished flowering—
the others —some became famous and are
playing in London —some did not and are
playing in tents in country towns. And some
are dead and one’s in gaol. But those of
us who were still here remembered John
Fenton’s birthday and we got the key of the
house from the agent and motored down here
for auld lang syne.”
“ And did you play Lady Macbeth ? ”
asked Streaker.
“ Yes,” said Miss Masefield simply. “ I
played it as the old play bills used to say,
before every crowned head in Europe, and
it was all through his coaching. So to-night,
when I saw the old stairs, I wanted to play
that scene there for the sake of sentiment.
Actresses are sentimental, you know.”
“ What about the skull,” said Streaker
suddenly, “ and the rapiers ? ”


The company looked at each other sur-
prised. The Cynic coloured and laughed.
“ I'm afraid I was having the others on,”
he said. " I found a skull and two rapiers
in an old chest in the stables, but I also
found a bit of an old programme of ‘ Hamlet.’
And I knew there was a skull in the grave-
digging scene, and I knew there was a fencing
scene, so I guessed the things were just
theatrical properties. But I couldn’t resist
abolishing the programme and displaying the
others.”
Podmore’s voice made itself heard for the
first time that evening.
“ I don’t see what they wanted to go and
build a well for,” he observed bitterly, “ if
there wasn’t going to be a duel or a skeleton
or a murder or anything.”
In his eyes at least the affair of the House
with the Twisted Chimneys had been an
utter and supreme fiasco. Not for eight days
yet was that lonely garden to live up to its
appearance.


CHAPTER VIII
CONCERNING A POTATO
IT was bright sunlight when the boys aw T oke
from the sleep into which they had fallen
when Lady Macbeth, the fat man, and
all their company had packed themselves
into a big touring car and vanished into the
darkness whence they had come.
" Well, it’s full-speed ahead," said Humpty-
Dumpty, breakfast being finished. " Last
night wasn't exactly dull, but it w T asn't
what we were here to wait for. So we’ll
try the second rendezvous to-night. North-
ward-ho. Streaker, please."
But when Streaker brought the Crosshall
purring along the weedy drive, Humpty-
Dumpty was missing and the Cynic had to
be sent to fetch him. Then the rusty gate
swung once more on its hinges and the lonely
house was left to its memories and purple
shadows.


“ He’s a funny kid, our respected com-
mander-in-chief,” observed the Cynic to
Streaker in the privacy of the front seat as
they sped along. "Do you know what he
was doing when I went for him ? Burying
Mr. Alas-Poor-Yorick’s skull under the
camelia tree, in a grave lined with pink
petals. Said that after having been alive
and playing a part behind the footlights, after
death it deserved a quiet sleep. He’s got
various other queer ideas —I had a long chip
to him this morning while we were packing
up the breakfast gear. I asked him why
he’d never told anyone at school that he
was Sir John King’s son, and he looked at
me in a funny way for a second and said,
‘ You wouldn’t have either if your father was
a big explorer and you were a miserable little
sick prawn who’d never been five miles
outside your bedroom door.' Apparently he
was always ill when he was a kid. Sir John
must be jolly decent to him though; he's
always sending him out presents like this
little hay-burner, for instance.” He in-
dicated the Crosshall.
For an hour the car fled along through


strong sun and shouting nor’-easter. Then
with a hiss and a sigh it swerved to the
right with a punctured tyre.
“ Er —bother ,” said Streaker sweetly. “ Ex-
cuse my language, ladies.” He descended
into the dust with a spanner and a sigh.
The others were left to survey the scenery,
which was monotonous, consisting entirely of
broken hills covered with a harsh, stunted
scrub. They had not passed a house for
miles, and were consequently surprised when
a man appeared unexpectedly from the bushes
almost beside them.
Their surprise, however, was not so great
as his. He jumped backwards, half into
the scrub.
“ Good morning,” said Humpty-Dumpty
politely.
The man made an obvious attempt to
cover his false move with an assumption of
friendliness.
“ You give me quite a turn,” he said.
“ Wasn’t expecting to see anyone just here.
Never see anyone round here, I don’t. Just
walks along by meself and picks the little
flowers for me brother who sells them in


Sydney. Very fond of the little flowers, I
am." The words contrasted oddly with his
evil face.
“ A fondness for flowers —especially little
ones —signifies a poetic nature," observed the
Cynic sententiously. “ Like mine. I feel
sure that you and I are twin souls, Mr. — I
fear I have not your name."
The man, whose shifty eyes had been
traversing the occupants of the car while he
spoke, had apparently come to the con-
clusion that he need have no fear of them,
and his tone changed suddenly.
“ None o’ your lip,” he snarled sud-
denly, and swinging across the road, dis-
appeared in the ti-tree scrubs on the farther
side.
The Cynic gazed after him sadly.
“ A wortlty soul, no doubt," he murmured,
" but lacks polish—lacks polish. I wonder
why he was so ready to pour out his life
history to us."
At this point, however, the conversation
was cut off by Streaker emerging from the
dust and taking his place again at the wheel.
They drove forward again, and swinging


round the next bend, perceived ahead of
them another flower-picker—a woman so
weighed down with the great bundle of
cream and red Christmas bush on her back
and walking so wearily, that Streaker slowed
the car.
“ Can we give you a lift ? ” he said.
The girl—she was little more, for all the
wedding-ring on her left hand —lifted eyes
that were heavy with tears. Any greater
contrast to the man who had appeared from
the bushes would have been hard to imagine
than this girl who, in her faded cotton frock,
looked like a wild flower herself. Her hair
beneath the broken rush hat had the
red-brown of a banksia bush, her skin
had the faint flush of boronia, and her
eyes, for all their weeping, were the blue of
dianella.
“ Thank you,” she said indifferently.
The Cynic evacuated the front seat in her
honour.
“ And are vou fond of wild flowers too ? ”
inquired Streaker as they drove on, merely
for the sake of making conversation.
“ I hate them.”


The words and the speaker seemed so
incongruous that Streaker felt that his first
efforts had not been altogether successful,
and cast about for another opening.
“ Was it your husband we met about a
mile back ? ” he asked.
“My husband’s brother. I hate him.”
Streaker took refuge in silence for a mile
or so. Then he inquired if she liked living
in the district.
“ No.” She did not add the corollary this
time, but it was implied in her voice.
They set her down presently before a ram-
shackle dwelling of galvanised iron. She
thanked them listlessly and went in, shutting
the door behind her in their faces.
" She might have given us a billyful of
water for lunch,” remarked the Cynic.
“ Never mind, there’s a creek down in the
hollow.”
He scrambled down from the road and was
gone about half an hour, while the others
waited with growing impatience. At last
just as they were setting out to search for
him, he came back swinging the billy at 2
dangerous angle.


“ Mind out, you owl, you’ll spill it,” said
Streaker. Then he looked at the billy
sharply.
“Are you aware of the interesting fact,”
he inquired, “ that you have walked about
half a mile and kept us waiting here parched
with thirst, and come back without the
water ? ”
The Cynic looked down at the billy as if
he had seen it for the first time.
"So I have,” he remarked, with mild
surprise. Then he relapsed into abstraction
again.
Streaker sent Podmore off with the billy.
When he turned round again the Cynic was
walking with a purposeful step towards the
door of the ramshackle house. He knocked
loudly.
A man opened it, a younger and better-
looking edition of the man on the road.
Evidently his brother and the husband of
the wild-flower girl. Two ugly hounds fol-
lowed at his heels.
“ Er —my friends and I are having chops
for lunch,” began the Cynic politely, “ and,
as you know, chops are absolutely nothing


without chips. Do you think you could sell
us a couple of pounds of potatoes ? ’’
“ No, I couldn’t." The door slammed to
in wrath, but there had been fear in the
man’s eyes also.
“ I don’t think well lunch here after all,"
said the Cynic. “ Start up the perambulator,
Streaker. I think we will evacuate this
locality where our fate may rush and seize
us in the very act of devouring our lunch."
Two miles farther on they disembarked,
and over the chops —without chips—the Cynic
held forth.
“ I was going down the hill," he said,
“ when suddenly I saw a green patch of
cultivation like a little Chinaman’s garden
in the middle of the scrub. I took a step
sideways to see it better, and found I couldn’t
see it at all. Took a step in the other direction
with the same result. Scrambled round the
hillside for five minutes and found that the
only place I could see it from was my original
spot. So I went back and with a good bit
of trouble managed to work down to the
vegetable garden, which wasn't nearly as
small as I thought, and all planted with the


same thing. Well, it was such an in-
convenient place to have a kitchen-
garden that I prospected round a bit, and
after a while took the liberty of scratch-
ing around with my little hatchet, other-
wise the billy lid. What do you think I
found ? ”
“ A piece of eight,” breathed Podmore,
his interest in life, so damped the night
before, suddenly reviving.
With an air of triumph the Cynic produced
from his pocket a very prosaic earthy potato.
“ A dirty old spud,” said Podmore, crest-
fallen.
“ Your adjectives, though unkind, are not
ill-chosen,” said the Cynic; “ but all the
same, the spud, as you term it, lit up the
whole affair. Add several acres of potatoes
to a family of three who can’t possibly eat
them all, and yet who are not willing to sell
them, and to the total thus obtained add the
villainous expression of our flower-loving
friend, the tears in the eyes of our flower-
hating one, and the amount of strength with
which they all slam doors in the faces of
unoffending strangers, and the answer is


simple. Perfectly elementary, my dear
Watson.”
“ When you have quite finished being
clever, Cynic ” said Streaker, and yawned
ostentatiously.
“ The answer is,” said the Cynic slowly,
“ that the moon shines.”


CHAPTER IX
STREAKER SWEEPS A CHIMNEY
“ r a moon shines,” repeated Streaker.
“ You mean the sun does, don’t
you ? Judging by your late con-
versation, my lad, I should imagine it had
shone to the point of giving you sunstroke.
They say it always affects the‘reason.”
“ Don’t you know what moon-shining is ? ”
asked the Cynic. “ It’s hullo ! ” He broke
off and pointed along the road by which
they had come. A great mass of flowers and
greenery was moving slowly along it appar-
ently on its own account. It was not until a
minute later they perceived a horse in front,
since it too was hung with green branches to
keep away the flies.
The man who had slammed the door was
driving it, and the Cynic stared, a little
disconcerted.
“ Possibly I’m wrong,” he began doubtfully.


“ Where’s the next hill ? Streaker, you’re
the fastest runner. Get off the road and live
up to your name —streak through the bush
to the next hill and watch this cart go up it —
without being seen, of course.”
So earnest was his tone that Streaker, with
a reluctant glance at his unfinished pannikin
of tea, rose and went. The bushes closed
behind him.
The Cynic turned to Humpty-Dumpty.
“Is it absolutely necessary that we
should all be at the second rendezvous to-
night, or could I stay behind here —to see
the moonshine ? I could join you by sun-
rise.”
Humpty-Dumpty calculated rapidly.
“ We’ll all stay,” he said. “ Nothing will
happen in the Maze before to-morrow after-
noon at the earliest.”
Ten minutes later Streaker arrived back,
panting.
“ There was nothing to see,” he said.
“ After your sending me off so urgently I was
expecting the cart to turn into Cinderella’s
coach or a pumpkin or something, but it
didn’t. The man just hopped off and walked


alongside and stirred the horse up a bit with
the whip."
“ Did the horse seem to strain at the load
much ? " asked the Cynic.
“ Yes, a good bit," assented Streaker,
" I thought so," said the Cynic. " I
suppose it didn't occur to you that wild
flowers shouldn't have been a very heavy
load for a hefty nag like that, or that there
shouldn't have been any need for the man to
get out and walk ? "
“ N-no,” said Streaker ; “ there's some-
thing in that. But even now I don’t see
what the moon has got to do with it."
" Moonshining," the Cynic explained at
last, “ means illicit whisky distilling. In this
case it’s distilled from potatoes and carried
to town under the wild flowers."
There was a silence while the facts sank in.
Then :
" But what was the girl crying about ? "
asked Humpty-Dumpty.
" I’m not quite sure," said the Cynic, “ so
I'm going to ask her. Any volunteers to
come with me to face her brother-in-law
and the dogs ? ”


The remainder of the expedition took a
simultaneous step forward.
Half an hour later, having hidden the
Crosshall not without some trouble behind
the thick casuarinas that screened the road,
they came again in sight of the tumble-down
cottage.
“ This week’s novel and entrancing
competition for our readers,” murmur-
ed the Cynic. “To separate the lady
from the brother-in-law and the hounds
in two moves. Competitors must enclose a
coupon.”
“ It looks to me as if the answer must be
contained in next week’s issue,” said Streaker,
“ because it certainly isn’t shouting at us at
the present moment. Still, we might as well
scout round.”
They scattered, each taking a side of the
cottage and examining it from under cover
of the trees. After ten minutes the three
elder boys met again at a discreet distance,
but with little to report. The dogs were
asleep in the front, the brother-in-law was
smoking on the back step, and the lady was
invisible.


At this point Podmore burst through the
trees.
“ Lend me your neckties,” he commanded.
“ What for ? ”
* Quick. Lend me your neckties and I’ll
have her here at sunset.”
So urgent was his tone that his seniors,
albeit unwillingly, obeyed, and he was gone
again like an arrow, to return after a long
interval leading by a halter of variegated
silk neckwear a lean and melancholy cow.
In his other hand he carried a cow-bell by
its clapper.
" Perfectly elementary, my dear Watson,’’
he said proudly, endeavouring to imitate the
drawling manner of the Cynic, which had his
profoundest admiration. “We hide the cow
here, and when the woman comes out at
sunset to milk it we tinkle the bell and she’ll
walk straight to us.”
Crude as the plan seemed, it succeeded
beyond their expectation. At ten minutes
to six the lady of the wild flowers came from
the cottage, looked round for the cow, heard
the faint ringing among the trees, and walked
towards it, and found herself confronted by


a small and bespectacled boy who was
assuring her earnestly “ to have no fear, you
are among friends.”
Streaker stepped forward.
“ We want to help you,” he said gently.
She whirled round on them, a madness of
fear and hate in her eyes. “I’ll set our dogs
on you,” she said.
“ We know everything,” said the Cynic,
“ and we want to help you because we can
see you are unhappy.”
“ Unhappy ! ” The girl laughed wildly.
Then she turned, and leaning her face against
a tree, began to cry gently, hopelessly,
monotonously.
Bit by bit they pieced out the pitiful story.
She had been married two years to the
younger brother, and they had taken up a
citrus orchard some miles away, working
hard but happily. And then on an evil
Friday had come her husband’s brother
whispering, whispering in her husband’s ear.
In a week the orange orchard was deserted,
the young couple were translated to the
brother’s tumble-dowm cottage on the lonely
ridge, and there, under disguise of flower


picking, the evil moonshine was made —a
raw, villainous, illicit spirit that her husband
drove away in his cart beneath its mass of
flowers and distributed for twenty miles
around.
“ It's not only my life that it’s poisoning,”
said the girl dully, “ though Jim drinks the
stuff himself and scowls at me all day long
and beats me and makes my existence a
misery to me, but it’s poisoning the lives of
half the men all round the district. The
whisky they sell in hotels is bad enough, but
this stuff is a hundred times worse.”
" Can’t you inform the police ? ” asked
Streaker.
The girl turned on him like a native cat.
” And have Jim arrested, when it’s all the
fault of that fiend his brother. I’d die
first.” She laughed her bitter laugh again.
” I probably will die soon, anyway.”
“ Where’s the still,” interrupted the Cynic
suddenly.
" Down the creek below the potato
paddock,” said the girl. “ But my brother-
in-law’s going down straight after tea to
bottle the stuff they made last night.”


“ Could you keep him at tea an hour ? ”
said the Cynic.
" I’ll try,” said the girl doubtfully; “ but
he’ll be awfully angry with me already for
keeping him late.” She cast a panic-stricken
glance at the sinking sun. “ And mind out —
he’s got a revolver.”
Then she was gone, hurrying across the
paddock, the melancholy cow at her heels.
“ We’ve got about three-quarters of an
hour clear,” said the Cynic, “ and we’ll need
it. Come with me, Streak ; you others stay
here.”
He dived down the hill to the creek. It
was a stiff run breaking through prickly scrub,
tumbling over boulders, scrambling down
rapids, for the stream bed fell rapidly. They
came to the potato garden, skirted it and
panted onward.
Beyond it the creek fell suddenly in a
waterfall into a black-walled hollow full of
echoes and choked with dark scrub that hid
the bottom from sight.
“ Looks a likely place,” said the Cynic,
and began to hunt round the top of the fall.
” Ah, I thought so.” In spite of the failing


light he had discovered a couple of rough
steps cut in the rock to the right of the fall,
and below them two iron spikes gave further
foothold. Descending gingerly by these, they
found a short, rough ladder, and then they
found themselves at the bottom, by an inky
pool into which the fall splashed loudly.
Beyond, the stream split in two round an
island of silt where tall gum trees pressed
thickly together. The two boys shivered for
all that they were hot with running. Then
they climbed round the pool and, wading
one of the creek branches, landed on the
island. One step through the trees and they
found the still—a slab shed with a wide,
squat chimney made of kerosene tins.
“ Foiled ! " said the Cynic. “We are
undone. That is to say, the door isn’t.”
But Streaker w'as not captain of athletics
for nothing. The flat roof was easy of access,
and a minute later he w 7 as peering dowm the
wide chimney.
” There’ll be apparatus below,” called the
Cynic anxiously. ” Don’t drop on to it, or
the whole scheme will be wTecked.”
Streaker merely grunted. He had one leg


down the chimney by this, and was con-
templating the space through which he must
wriggle rather doubtfully. He was trusting
to his elbows and feet to work him down, but
it would not be a pleasant proceeding.
The Cynic saw him vanish slowly. A
struggling arm waved a minute out of the
top and was gone ; then only a creaking of
the tin told of his progress. The Cynic’s
mind began to plan rapidly what he should
do after Streaker had let him in. There
were only twenty minutes to spare, though
it was probably still light enough on the
ridge; down here among the trees his luminous
watch was beginning to glow faintly, warn-
ingly. Twenty minutes more and the brother-
in-law would come climbing down the ladder.
Suddenly he felt his heart jump.
The scuffling noises in the chimney had
ceased and had been succeeded by a series
of loud knocks. And above them came
Streaker’s voice, muffled and desperate.
“ Cynic ! Cynic ! I’m stuck ! ”


CHAPTER X
MOONSHINERS
THE scent of the rotten fern came to the
Cynic sweet and drugging like chloro-
form, numbing his limbs, stunning his
brain. The second hand of his watch slid
once round.
“ Cynic ! Where are you ? I’m stuck ! ”
The Cynic was not used to climbing roofs,
but he got there somehow. But once there,
what was he to do ? Should he get a stick
and prod Streaker down the chimney like one
prodded the marble into a lemonade bottle
with one’s thumb ? The second hand of his
watch slid round twice more while he debated
the question.
In sixteen minutes the brother-in-law would
arrive and find them ! Or suppose he didn’t
find them and lit a fire under the chimney !
Or suppose he never came and Streaker were
starved to death ! The second hand wa


positively racing by now. Fourteen minutes
to go.
And then with a thud and a rattle the
miracle happened. Streaker fell.
A minute later with blackened hands he
opened the door and helped a shaken Cynic
from the roof.
" There’s no time to do anything now,” he
whispered. ” We’d better go.”
“ Come on,” whispered the Cynic, and they
took three steps through the trees towards
safety. Then suddenly with one accord they
wheeled round again and went deliberately
back into the shed.
Streaker took an electric torch from his
pocket and flashed it over the plant. Rudely
as they were constructed, the scientific
Cynic who knew a little of most
manufacturing processes, could recognise
the converters, mash tub, and fermenting
vessels.
” This must be the condensing coil,” he
said, touching a spiral pipe, ” and that’s
the tub where they skim off the fusel oil.
At a certain low temperature it comes to
the top.”


" This isn’t the time for a lecturette on dis-
tilling,” said Streaker. “ Get a move on.”
The Cjmic bent over another tub, and
picking up an old mug that lay beside it,
dipped it in. For a minute he splashed busily
between the two. " Very thoughtful of them
to manufacture the remedy themselves,” he
said.
And then at last they could go. Thankfully
they closed the door behind them and broke
through the trees, waded the creek again and
began the ascent of the rough stairway by
the fall.
“ We’ve still five minutes,” said the Cynic
midway up. " Loads of time to get
away.”
He felt Streaker’s hand suddenly close
over his mouth in the darkness. At the
same minute a straggling lantern beam fell
on the steps above his head. The brother-
in-law was come to his business early !
Streaker was tugging at his sleeve, pulling
him sideways from the steps along a slippery
ledge that ran towards the fall. Luckily the
noise of the tumbling water covered their
scuffling movements.


“On your hands and knees,” whispered
Streaker. “ Follow me and don't fall off.”
Clinging with fingers and toes along the
slimy rock, clutching at ferns that not in-
frequently gave way, the spray of the fall
splashing them all over, the black water
below with its ugly snags waiting to claim
them, it was a nightmare passage.
Something soft, clammy, unspeakably cold,
flopped suddenly into the Cynic’s face.
“ Hang on ! It’s only a big frog.”
Streaker’s strong hand shot out only just
in time to save him from falling. By main
force he pulled him into a dripping cave
right behind the curtain of water of the fall
itself.
The brother-in-law had passed their ledge
by this. Looking out through the screen of
water, they had a blurred vision of his
hurricane lantern swinging down the last of
the steps, skirting the pool just as they had
done. Then it flickered a moment among
the trees and was gone.
” Hope we didn’tleave any footmarks,” said
Streaker anxiously. “ Luckily the ground was
pretty hard. Well, we might as well go.”


" Streak, you’!! think me a deadly funk,
but I can’t. Not along that ledge again in
the dark.”
Streaker, whose nerves had been hardened
in the football field by the necessity of hurling
himself at another man’s whirling nail-studded
boots, pondered. It was obvious that the
Cynic could not remain there all night to be
discovered in the dawn as the moonshiners
went home. There was only one thing to
do ; he crawled to the far end of the ledge,
and pushing the catch over on his electric
torch, set it on a stone to shine back along
the ledge. Then he crawled back in its glare
with the comforting thought that the man
might have glanced through the trees, seen
the light, and even now be standing with a
revolver covering his outlined figure.
“Be quick, Cynic. You can see your w r ay
clearly, and I’ll hang on from behind.”
The Cynic set out painfully. Streaker
behind meditating ruefully to himself that
from the other side of the pool they must
look just like the clockwork rabbits in a
shooting gallery, running along a ledge in
the painted scenery, to be shot at.


But nothing happened. The man was
apparently absorbed in his work, and the
boys gained the stairway in safety. The
friendly darkness enveloped them again as
Streaker pocketed his torch, and under its
cover they hurried up-stream.
“ You know," said the Cynic as they
repassed the potato patch, “ our friend
Humpty-Dumpty does know something about
balancing his men. “ You’re minus brains
but plus nerve ; I’m minus nerve but plus
brains; in consequence our team w'ork’s
rather good. Wonder how the kid dis-
covered it."
Gets it from his father," said Streaker.
They say he’s got an uncanny power of
picking the man he wants out of the gutter
or off a throne, off a farm or out of a shop.
And whatever they are they chuck every-
thing just to trek along after him."
Just then there was a glimmer of light
ahead, and Humpty-Dumpty and Podmore,
much relieved to see them safe, pounced
on them and dragged them up to the
cottage.
Ihe woman was waiting for them in the


little kitchen, and four cups of cocoa steamed
for them on the table.
" You’ll have to sit on the floor,” she said.
“Jim broke all the chairs last time they
made a big boiling, they drank so much to
celebrate it.”
“ There won’t be many more boilings,”
said the Cynic. “Do you know anything of
their process ? No —well, listen. Before the
stuff is bottled they cool it to a low tempera-
ture and the fusel oil comes to the top.
Then they skim off as much as possible.
To-night I put a little of the fusel oil back.
It blended because the temperature on a
night like this isn’t low enough to bring it
to the top, and your brother-in-law will
bottle the stuff without noticing. The con-
sequence will be that his customers will feel
most alarmingly and horribly, though not
dangerously, ill. Your brother-in-law, know-
ing that he skimmed the alcohol as usual,
will be puzzled, but will probably go on with
another boiling. When its ready for bottling
you’ll go down —you must have lots of
chances —and put some of the fusel back as
I did. I’ve written the quantities on this


piece of paper. Don’t put more, or you
might really hurt someone. After the second
attack of fusel-poisoning I guess the moon-
shine market will come down with a thud.
In fact, I wouldn’t be surprised if your
husband’s customers were so annoyed that
they wrecked the still. At any rate, I’m
sure he’ll find it more profitable to return
to the oranges and lemons and bells of St.
Clement’s trade. It’s a much riper scheme
than if we’d wrecked the plant itself, because
then they would just have built it up again.
But a wrecked market isn’t nearly so easily
repaired.”
The woman was weeping again, wearily,
thankfully. When she looked up at last
her four St. Georges, who for all their
unromantic schoolboy appearance, had
slain her dragon, had vanished into the
night.
Something attempted, something done,”
sang the Cynic, emerging from a pleasant
reverie on the unpleasant effects of fusel oil,
has earned a night’s repose. To-morrow,
Humpty-Dumpty, we will be at your service
again for the pursuing of the main chance.


I hope this little campaign to get the blue
ribbon of temperance worn hereabouts hasn’t
delayed us too much.”
“ N-no,” said Humphrey. “ No, not a bit.”
But there was a curious note of uncertainty
in his voice.


CHAPTER XI
DROWNING MAZE
THAT’S the Maze,” said Humphrey,
and pointed across the tranquil in-
land sea called Pittwater.
On the farther shore between the low hills
was a wide, deep inlet filled with swamp-
mangrove trees. Even in the strong after-
noon sun it had a chill, grey, dreary air.
Must say your mysterious friends have
a cheerful taste in rendezvous,” said the
Cynic, looking across the water that burnt
blue beneath the strong afternoon sun.
First they choose a moated grange haunted
by Lady Macbeth, and now they invite us
to afternoon tea in a swamp that looks slimy
and miserable when the temperature’s a
hundred degrees in the sun.”
Humpty-Dumpty made no reply, being
en S a § e d in steering their pulling-boat between
the fleet of yachts and launches that lay


anchored off green little Newport, where
they had left the Crosshall garaged. Some-
times he peered anxiously towards the Maze
as if looking for some sign, invisible to the
others, of the business that had brought
them there.
As they came closer to the mangroves the
water grew streaky with channels, and throw-
ing the yoke lines to Podmore —Streaker and
the Cynic were rowing—Humpty-Dumpty
climbed forward to control the boat from
the bow.
“ Pull up and down a bit, will you ? " he
said. “ It's hard to find the entrance."
They were in front of the mangroves by
now —grey, stunted, twisted things growing
out of the water, the long roots trailing
dismally from their branches like dishevelled
hair, the white suckers pushing up through
the water like dead white fingers. And in
between the tide was making up grey and
oily, for all that it was so blue outside.
“ I asked an old fisherman once why he
called it Drowning Maze," said Humpty-
Dumpty, piloting them in through the outer
fringe of trees, “ and he looked at me \ery


solemnly and said : ' Mister, if you go in
there at midnight you’ll know why. They’re
a-drowning of themselves, them trees are—
a-drowning and a-choking and a-gurgling,
a-dying and a-sighing for to get to their rest
in the co-o-old, grey mud. But they can’t
drown mister —there’s a curse on ’em to
keep ’em there a-choking, and a-gurgling till
Judgment Day.’ Then he looked at me more
solemnly than ever and said : ‘ And there’s
more than trees a-choking this hot weather,
mister.’ So I felt the least I could do was
to give him two bob.”
They were inside now in the murky light
under the roof of sad-coloured leaves. On
every side of them sluggish little channels
ran mazily twisting between the tree-stems,
ending in snags and banks of grey ooze, or
places where the suckers grew too thick for
the boat to pass. Only the channel they
were in ran on in a grey aisle beneath the
weeping branches, and they pulled up it
slowly, ducking their heads every minute to
avoid a bough.
“ I hope you’ve been doing the Hansel and
Grethel stunt, Humpty,” remarked the Cynic*


" and have been dropping white pebbles or
breadcrumbs or something to mark the way
we came in. Personally, I lost count after
the thirty-third turning to the right and the
forty-first to the left.”
“ It’ll be all right,” said Humphrey
abstractedly. " Anyway, you can stop
here.”
Streaker and the Cynic rested on their
oars, and the boat remained motionless, for
it was nearly slack water.
“ Well, when does the curtain go up ? ”
inquired the Cynic cheerfully.
Humphrey shook his head impatiently.
He appeared to be listening, straining his
ears to catch some distant sound in the
winding water passages. The other boys
listened too, listened intently, but nothing
came to their ears save the steady drip-drip
of the oar-blades.
The minutes slipped by. Streaker, Captain
of Boats, feeling the familiar touch of the
oar butt in his hands, began to dry swing
to and fro in his seat, exhorting himself
softly to " get those hands away there,
stroke —steady, men, steady —six, you’re late


sit her up there, crew —hit her for a dozen,
men
Podmore, hanging head downward over
the stern, was endeavouring to entice crabs
along a near-by log with a fragment of
biscuit he had found in his pocket, and the
Cynic, inspired by his efforts, was repeating
such portions as he could remember of the
“ Ancient Mariner.”
“ Yea, slimy things did walk with legs
Upon that slimy sea,”
he recited with relish.
The tide had turned now and was draining
out down the channel, sucking, sucking round
the tree-stems, fingering, fingering at the
boat.
" Touch her, bow, two, three, four, hold
her, stroke,” murmured Streaker, bringing
his crew in imagination on to the starting-
line at the All Schools Boat Race.
“ Come along, crabbie —nice little crabbie
eat the nicey biscuit,” murmured Podmore
to one of the crabs which he fondly believed
was becoming tame.
“ The water like a witch’s oils
Burned blue and green and white,’
chanted the Cynic.


“ Isn’t it about time we started home,
Humpty-Dumpty ? Your friends must be
out shopping or at a matinee or something.’’
Humpty-Dumpty came to himself with a
start and a shiver and glanced up. The
dim light had grown perceptibly dimmer, and
a grey vapour was beginning to rise from
the surface of the water, curling up like
smoke.
“Yes,” he said, and his voice was dull with
disappointment. “ Row back to Newport.”
“My aunt, I’m hungry ! ” said Streaker.
“ Crew, forward all. Are you ready ?
Paddle .” His oars caught the water and
they shot along beneath the branches with
ringing row-locks, while the grey haze rose
wraith-like about them.
“ Starboard,” called Humpty-Dumpty from
the bow as they threaded their way. “ Star-
board again. Port —oh, hard astern —hard
astern ! We must have come the wrong
way,” he said in a troubled voice. “ It’s
hard to see.”
The mist was indeed stealing down on
them from twenty aisles. Along none of
them could they see more than two lengths.


and the main channel seemed to have dis-
appeared altogether.
They pulled a few cautious strokes, Humpty-
Dumpty feeling the way with an oar like a
blind man with a stick ; then, with a soft
sighing beneath the keel, the boat bedded
her nose in a mud-bank.
“ We’ll have to pole her off,” said Streaker,
and standing up, toiled vigorously. The mist
was all round them now, wrapping them in
like a wet grey blanket, and the boat, freed
from the bank, bumped mangrove trunks on
every side. She began to spin from the
blows as if unseen hands were jostling
her.
“ The tide’s running seventeen ways at
once,” said Streaker, peering, puzzled, over-
side.
And the bowsprit got mixed with the
rudder sometimes,’ ” came the Cynic’s plain-
tive voice through the mirk.
A thing, as the captain remarked,
'Which frequently happens in tropical climes.
“ Drown the Cynic, someone.” The inter-
polation was Streaker’s.
" ‘ When a vessel is, so to speak, snarked.’


Well, well, I often wondered what ‘ snarked
meant. Now I know.”
“ You’ll know still more before we get out,
I imagine,” remarked Streaker. “ We’re here
till the fog lifts, which won't be before
morning.”
“ Are we downhearted ? ” exclaimed the
Cynic. “No, no, my brave fellows, my
noble comrades, be not overcome. The hours
shall trip by merrily. From now till cock-
crow I shall recite to you verses from ”
He broke off suddenly.
Somewhere in the mist a voice was singing
quite close to them ; a high, cracked voice
was singing ragtime !
The boys sat spell-bound.
“Oh E—liza ! Lil’ E—liza,
LiT E—liza Jane.”
The tune was familiar enough. It was the
year’s most popular song, and the school
had whistled themselves sick of it. But
here —in Drowning Maze was another matter.
"Oh E—liza 1 Dear E—liza ! ”
“ He’s up in a tree,” said Podmore sud-
denly.


The others listened. It was true. The
singer was unmistakably in an aerial position.
A moment later Podmore spoke again.
“ It's not a man,” he said, “ it’s a gramo-
phone.”
Again they listened.
” Our juvenile friend speaks truly,” said
the Cynic. “It is a gramophone. But even
now why the owner has to lead it up a tree
in the heart of this somewhat unpleasant
swamp before he can enjoy his twelve-inch
celebrity records I fail to see.”
" LiT E—liza Jane.”
The record shrieked to a triumphant close^
Then the mist was silent again—silent,
blank, impenetrable.


CHAPTER XII
THE PURPLE SLIPPER
FOR perhaps ten minutes the boat drifted
on in the blind mist, twisting in the
eddies, bumping among the trees. The
mysterious gramophone remained silent, in-
visible.
“ Mind out." Humpty-Dumpty, wdio was
in the bow, spoke loudly as the boat slid
under a low-hanging branch.
As if in answer to his voice there came a
sound almost exactly over their heads in
the mist-hidden tree-tops, the sound of an
opening door.
It was an incredible sound to drift down
from tree-tops, but there was no mistaking
it —the rattle of a handle, the jar as it was
pulled back across a floor, the light slam as
it swung against a wall. Without doubt
above their heads someone had opened a
door.


A minute later a voice came down to
them —not a gramophone’s voice this time,
but a man’s —clear, even, decisive.
“ Are you Grayson’s men ?” it said. “ Be-
cause I’ve got an automatic in my hand, and
I tell you straight if you’re not out of
here in two minutes shooting practice will
begin.”
The boys stared at each other, Humpty-
Dumpty shaking his head to disclaim any
knowledge of this voice from the clouds;
then they gazed up into the mist, where very
vaguely they could now discern something
built up among the trees —a shadowy dwelling
constructed after the fashion of the tree-
house of the Swiss Family Robinson, The
speaker was apparently on some sort of
balcony in front of it, and now they heard
the sound of a drawn spring and the rattle
of cartridges coming into the firing chamber.
The Cynic raised his voice and addressed
Streaker with his most deliberate drawl.
“ I say, Streak,” he said, “ do you consider
this —ah • person above us is a—ah
gentleman ? ”
“ Rotten bad form, whatever he is, talking


to strangers without being introduced,” was
Streaker’s reply.
There was a minute’s silence above. Then :
“ What do you want ? ” came the voice still
curtly.
“ The way out,” replied Streaker with
equal brevity.
“You can go the way you came. This
isn’t a Cook’s tourist bureau.” There was
the sound of footsteps turning to re-enter
the door.
And then from some comer of the Maze a
breath of wind stirred the fog for just one
second and gave them a glimpse of a man’s
figure. As the mist closed down again
Streaker lifted his voice.
“ Ooh ah ee ! Ooh ah ee ! Ooh ah ee !
Ooh! ” he yelled with all the breath in his
lungs.
There was a startled silence above. Next
second an answering yell came down to them
of mingled incredulity and delight.
“Ee ah ooh ! Ee ah ooh ! Ee ah ooh !
Towr-r-rs,” was its cryptic import.
It was the historic war-cry of the Towers
School football team. From time immemorial


the purple and orange striped fifteen had
taken the field with that impressive sentence
which, uttered from the depths of fifteen pairs
of sturdy lungs, was calculated to instil
respect into the hearts of even the hardiest
opponents. Whoever the man of the mist
might be, and however many automatics he
might have about his person, he was a
Towersman and a brother ! And he wore,
as Streaker had seen in the momentary
clearing of the mist, the coveted and honour-
able First Fifteen blazer.
A rope ladder uncoiled itself from the
mist, its foot splashing the water within a
few inches of the boat.
“ Come right along up. Hitch the boat to
a tree. Have you got a painter, or shall I
throw you down one ? Mind the fourth step,
it’s wearing a bit.” The voice was eager now.
Like Jack who climbed the beanstalk the
boys climbed into the clouds and landed on
a wooden balcony.
“ Aren’t you Kelvin Carfrae ? ” said
Streaker, looking at their host. “ You were
skipper of the firsts when I was an infant
in IVb, and left school to go to the war ! ”


“ That’s me,” said their host ungrammatic-
ally. ” Well, well, how’s the Chief ? And
the old Sa-Major ? Who’s going to win the
footy comp. ? ”
In a flood of queries and answers they
drifted inside to the single room of the
mansion, a rough wooden box of a place,
though of surprising size, with the branches
scraping on its roof and the sound of the
lapping water beneath the floor. There were
the ordinary furnishings such as a Primus, a
frying-pan, some rugs on the floor that
evidently served as a bed, a couple of faded
photos, one of the familiar Towers, one of
a football team with their host holding the
ball, prerogative of captains, and the gramo-
phone, whose music they had heard so lately
with an immense pile of records beside it on
the floor.
But there were two things that the boys
regarded with greater interest. One was a
shape beneath a white sheet, a long, slender
shape that occupied the floor-space along the
entire farther wall, mysterious, provocative.
The other object stood above it on a little
bracket strangely incongruous in its rough


surroundings, a dancing-slipper of violet satin,
slim, feminine, exquisite, with an air of
delicate disdain in the curve of the instep,
the poise of the heel.
“ Ld just slip out to the kitchen and run
you up a few scones,” said their host—
“ that’s what the best hostesses say, isn’t
it ? —but for the fact that I haven’t the
kitchen and I haven’t the flour.” Then his
face brightened. “ I’ve stacks of condensed
milk,” he said.
Five minutes later they were enjoying a
truly princely tea —an entire tin of con-
densed milk each, eaten neat with a teaspoon.
Over it they conversed with their host, a
boy of perhaps twenty-three, built clean and
straight like Streaker, after the regulation
pattern of Tower School captains. But
between them was a difference—the terrible
difference of War. When Streaker crossed
the room it was like a careless young race-
horse ; when Kelvin Carfrae moved it was
like a weary automaton of which the main-
spring was nearly run out. And though for
the first half-hour he was almost feverishly
animated with interest in the school news,


the boys saw presently that he was hardly
listening. Chin sunk on hand, he was staring
absently at the floor and his eyes were
brooding, sullen, unhappy.
“ I say, hadn't we better go now ? ”
Streaker broke suddenly off in the midst of
a stirring account of a match.
“No—stay here. It helps.” Kelvin’s voice
was low and strained.
Scarcely knowing what to say, the boys
sat on in silence while outside the branches
scraped louder and louder on the roof and
the window-pane grew dimmer and darker.
A storm was brewing and the Maze was full
of uneasy mutterings.
Through the half-dark they saw Kelvin
get up and take the little purple slipper
from its bracket and put it in his pocket,
apparently for safety. Then he sat down
and was lost in forgetfulness again.
Louder and louder grew the storm, and
then the boys became aware of a new sound,
a creaking of the room in which they sat, a
creaking and a shivering. On looking closer
they saw that the comer posts of the rough-
built room were living mangrove trunks


between four of which the low-roofed dwelling
had been lashed. No wonder, with the wind
tearing through their leafy tops, that the
comer posts complained.
Suddenly with a scream of nails a board
started from its place. In a second the wind
had wrenched it free and was pouring in
through the gap. Thunder followed and a
flash of lightning.
There was a shout from Kelvin, almost a
shriek.
“The Slipper —the Purple Slipper ! ”
“ In your pocket,” shouted Streaker.
But Kelvin was tearing at the object under
the shroud-like sheet. By the next flash of
lightning the boys had a glimpse of purple,
of something long and slim and straight.
Then by the next flash they saw it clear—
a high-speed boat, clean as a knife, straight
as an arrow, the hull exquisite in purple
enamel. And along the stream-line of the
bow her name was lettered clear “The
Purple Slipper.”
“ Into the water,” shouted Kelvin. “ The
weight of the engine—she’ll drop through
the floor.”


To launch a delicate-skinned speed boat
in the dark through a narrow door eight
feet above the water would not have been
an easy task at the best of times, but with
the tree-house threatening to give way under
their feet any minute, and the wind trying
to fling them headlong into the water, it
was well-nigh impossible. For an entire
hour they battled with the Slipper, hewed
out the door space with a tomahawk to give
her passage, rigged up a block and tackle to
lower her, fended her off the tree-trunks
with the mattress stripped from Kelvin’s bed,
steadying, nursing, coaxing her like a live
thing. Kelvin worked like a madman.
Streaker, versed in the handling of fragile
racing eights, methodically and anxiously, the
C3mic and Humpty-Dumpty with good will
but little knowledge. Podmore assisted
chiefly by falling twice into the water at
critical moments and causing operations to
be suspended while he was rescued.
But at last, at last the Purple Slipper rode
in the water, rode with just that faint air
of disdain of the silken shoe in Kelvin’s
pocket. The boys in their boat and Kelvin


!
“ ‘ I tell you straight if you're not out of here in two minutes,
shooting practice will begin.’
Drowning Maze] Chapter XII




in a dinghy produced from its moorings
beneath the house sculled round her
anxiously.
“ She broke her exhaust lead,” said Kelvin,
“ but I’m going to try to tinker it up. You
chaps go up and be getting dry. House-on-
Stilts won’t fall down now the boat’s out of
it.” He settled into the boat with a lantern
and a bag of tools, and Podmore for assistant.
It was an hour before he climbed the rope
ladder again, and though his face was lined
with weariness the hard work had driven the
misery from his eyes. He held out his hand
to Streaker in a brief grip.
“ Well played, School,” was all he said,
but they understood. “We took her for a
trial spin,” he added. “ She went wonder-
fully.”
“ And I drove her back,” said Podmore
overflowing with pride.
A little later, over a meal of Worcester
sauce, fancy mixed biscuits, and lemon and
melon jam—Kelvin’s larder was most extra-
ordinarily stocked —he told them a little in
embarrassed, disjointed sentences.
“ The war,” he said. “ Some of us —it


wasn’t wounds or shell shock. Just felt
dithered. Used to start work and chuck it
up for no reason whatever —just couldn’t
go on. Until " —he turned brick-red under
his sunburn and his hand slid into his pocket
—“ there was —a girl. But naturally enough
her father wouldn’t look at me until I could
keep the same job for at least a week, which
I couldn’t. And I got so mouldy that I
pushed off to the most forsaken spot I knew ”
—he jerked his head round Drowning Maze—
“ and camped here in a rotten little motor-boat
and only went out at nights for fear I'd meet
some cheery blighter who’d hit me on the
back and ask me to sail with him. And then
one night over in Newport I saw it advertised
that Clyne’s—you know the big engineering
crowd —were offering a big prize for the
speed boat race at the New Year Regatta,
and, which was more important, I heard
privately that if the boat had been built
to an original design they would be ready
to take the thing up pretty largely. I don’t
know—somehow it seemed the one thing I
could settle down to. You see, I had been
trained in the Flying Corps, and I’d always


known a lot about engines and things. I
rigged up a House-on-S tilts for a building
loft —it was a good place, being so secret
and yet close to Newport —and I've built
her pretty nearly single-handed —got the
engine parts cast in town, of course.”
“ Who are Grayson's men ? ” asked the
Cynic. “ The ones you keep the automatic
for ? ”
His host looked at him with the old misery
back in his eyes.
“ I'm not quite sure,” he said. “ Some-
times I think they’re men who are building
another boat for the race and are spying
round to steal my ideas, and sometimes ”
he looked at them almost piteously —" I
think I must —living alone, you know —have
just made them up.” His voice was very
low. Then he shook himself.
“ I couldn’t fix that exhaust lead per-
manently, so I’ve hidden the boat in a bed
of young trees,” he said, “ and I'm going up
to town to get it specially cast. If you’d
care to camp here, House-on-Stilts is at your
service. It’s quite convenient really. There’s
a channel straight to open water which I call


my private entrance, and my ladder’s rather
nutty. If you look there’s a little cord led
down a tree-trunk ; if you pull it the clove-
hitch undoes and the ladder unrolls. Where
are you going to, by the way ? ”
Streaker looked grimly at Humpty-Dumpty.
“ I don’t know,” he said, “ but I mean to
during the next half-hour.”
“ Sorry ; didn’t mean to ask questions,”
said Kelvin. “ Anyway, I must push off if
I’m going to get to town to-night. 'Stonishing
luck, old beans.” He vanished down the
ladder.
And then at last Streaker turned to Humpty-
Dumpty.
“ Look here, my lad,” he said, " this is
the end of the section. We’ve let you behave
like one of the strong, silent, lone-hand heroes
of a movie drama for four days, and it’s
pretty evident that something’s gone wrong.
You’ve got out of touch with your head-
quarters or miscalculated times ; something
has come unstuck, anyway. And now you’ve
got to tell us, otherwise I’m not going on,
and well get busy to see what can be done
to pull your adventure out of the consomme.”


THE PURPLE SLIPPER n 7
k
Humpty-Dumpty looked at him very
steadily, but he was white to the lips.
“ To-morrow,” he said, “ we are going to
the third rendezvous —the Hole in the Wall.
If there is no one there I will tell you to-
morrow.”


CHAPTER XIII
THE HOLE IN THE WALL
IT was to-morrow morning. A monotonous
dispiriting rain soaked through the grey
roof of mangrove leaves into the grey
ooze of the swamp floor. Inside the House-
on-Stilts preparations for a late breakfast
proceeded in silence.
Streaker had put on again the dignity
befitting the Captain of the School —there
was an ominous chill in his manner as he
fried the eggs over the Primus, and he ignored
Humpty-Dumpty entirely. The Cynic en-
gaged in strapping up blankets was equally
silent, but once or twice he shot a curious
glance at Humpty-Dumpty, and on each
occasion his expression grew thoughtful. Even
Podmore’s exuberance was damped by the
frozen countenances of his seniors, and he
moved nervously about his toast-making with
praiseworthy but entirely vain efforts to


subdue the clatter that accompanied his
movements.
Only Humpty-Dumpty himself seemed un-
aware of the tension. Chin propped on hand,
he sat on his blankets taking no part in the
breakfast preparations, merely staring at the
opposite wall. Quite what his expression
denoted the Cynic could not decide.
Steadily, steadily, fell the rain—it would
have taken the heart out of the gallantest
adventure ever afoot. There was no object
to be gained by setting out in such a deluge,
so they sat on till midday, still in silence —
a silence that grew grimmer as the minutes
passed. Once Podmore turned on the gramo-
phone, but it seemed to shriek so raucously
in the stillness that he guiltily switched it off.
Little did they guess how they should hear that
gramophone next.
But at last about two o’clock there came
a lull, and Humpty-Dumpty rose and shook
himself.
“ To the Hole in the Wall,” he said, and
climbed down the ladder.
Two hours later they trod the miry road
that ran across the waste uplands called


Priest’s Flat, between Newport and Palm
Beach ; Humpty-Dumpty had refused to take
the Crosshall; Streaker stopped suddenly.
“ What’s that noise ? ” he said.
“ Surf,” said Podmore, and indeed the low
thunder had sounded unceasingly on their
right ever since they left Newport.
“ No,” Streaker insisted. “ It’s underfoot.”
The four of them stopped, still gazing down
at the road, but there was nothing more
remarkable there than mud.
“ Bosh ! ” said the Cynic, and hitched up
his pack to move on. Then he stopped again.
Beneath their feet faint but unmistakeable
there was a sound as if the whole land had
jarred ever so slightly on its hidden bases.
Humpty-Dumpty brightened at once.
“ We’re there,” he said. “ I thought I’d
missed the place. There’s the funnel now.”
Following his eyes the boys looked to their
eastern side. Parallel to the road lay a black
and evil bog; beyond it sea-bitten grass
sloped upward to the sky and ended against
it sharp as a knife edge, hiding the ocean
from sight. And in the clean sharp line was
a little V-shaped nick.


“ The funnel! ” said Humpty-Dumpty again
and without further word stepped into the bog.
The others followed, not cheerfully but of
necessity, for the slime was up to their
knees.
“ ‘ It may have been a water-rat I speared/ ”
quoted the Cynic thoughtfully as he prodded
the depths before him with a stick.
“ * But ’ugh ! It sounded like a baby’s
shriek.’ ”
They were on the grass on the further side
at last, walking up towards the little nick
in the skyline which Humpty-Dumpty called
the “ funnel.”
“ There’s white smoke coming up it,” said
Podmore rather nervously.
It was true. It was the fine white smoking
spray from breakers one hundred feet below !
As the chill of it touched their faces a chill
crept involuntarily into their hearts. Then
they looked over into the thundering, seething
inferno below.
“ We can’t,” said Streaker in a final tone.
“ They’d murder us.”
They were looking down into a nether world
—a tumbled wet black floor of rock where


the long racing murderous seas drove home
with the weight of all the Pacific behind them,
reared themselves twenty feet high, hung one
dreadful second and then crashed down —
thousands upon thousands of tons of boiling
white. Could they have caught a living man
in their fury the same second would have
seen his bones dashed bare and crunched to
a powder white and fine as the flying spray.
The boys half expected to see the black rocks
themselves stamped down and choked to
death.
Humpty-Dumpty set foot in the sliding
shale of a natural staircase that dived almost
perpendicularly.
” Come on,” he said and looked back with
a glance half scared and half taunting. After
that there could be nothing to do but to follow
him.
They crept down one by one, the wind
ramming the breath back down their own
throats. At the foot of the staircase they
began to crawl along at the foot of the cliffs
in single file. The waves were breaking with
shattering explosions within a few yards of
them —it seemed only a matter of minutes


before one should lick them all four into its
yawning gulf. But still Humpty-Dumpty
held on.
Suddenly he turned, his face triumphant.
In the uproar no words were audible, but
following his upward pointing finger they
beheld a black circular hole in the cliffs.
Only too relieved to clamber out of reach of
that sinister sea they scrambled up the rocks
after him to the entrance.
It was vast as a cathedral, vaulted high,
receding into impenetrable shadows and rever-
berant with awful organ tones of ocean. If
the seas had sounded awesome without, here
the echoes rolled so dreadfully in the roof
that the boys felt that they must inevitably
dislodge some mass of rock and send it
hurtling down to block the entrance, to
entomb them for ever and a day.
"Now you can understand what we heard
under the road," said Humpty-Dumpty.
" This runs inland for a quarter of a mile.”
He spoke low, but they all, himself included,
jumped at the sound of his voice.
" We're going to spend the night here,” he
added.


" What on earth for ? ” said Streaker curtly.
Humpty-Dumpty shook his head.
“ Not yet,” he said. “ I said I’d tell you
to-day, but the day won’t be over till mid-
night. I’ll tell you at midnight. In the
meanwhile we’d better have something to
eat.”
It was curious the difference the homely
preparations for a meal made in the sepulchral
gloom. There was no wood to make a fire,
but the Thermos was piping hot and they ate
hungrily, sitting on the ground a few feet
within the entrance, which appeared a jagged,
black circle like a camera lens vignetting a
tumbling waste of sea that darkened as they
watched.
The meal over, Streaker, the Cynic and
Podmore wrapped themselves in their rugs —
with no fire and no light, sleep seemed the
only way to pass the hours until midnight
should illumine the mystery at last. Only
Humpty - Dumpty remained sleepless—
Streaker's last waking glimpse of him was
a small figure bolt upright in the entrance,
black against the sky. He seemed to be
gazing out to sea —there was a curious


blending of expectancy and hopelessness in
his attitude.
* * * * *
Streaker awoke with a start. It was long
after midnight —a wild dawn was already
streaking the sky over the ocean. By its
light he saw that Humpty-Dumpty had fallen
asleep still sitting upright with his back
against a rock. In the vague light his face
had lost its Napoleonic qualities —it was
merely the face of a very tired little boy in
the Lower School, and so wan and pinched
that Streaker’s heart smote him for his own
sternness of the past two days.
Then he steeled himself again—it was
absurd that a child like this should be the
leader of the expedition —it was time the
maturer minds of himself and the Cynic took
charge.
“ Humpty,” he said, and shook him gently
enough.
The boy woke instantly—his eyes fled
seaward in one swift glance. The horizon
was empty.
“ Wake the others,” he said. There was
the calmness of despair in his voice.


But the others had awakened at the sound
of the voices. They had not followed hot-
foot on the track of the adventure for four
days to sleep calmly through its denouement.
“ Begin at the beginning," said Streaker.
" Why, where, how, and when did the ad-
venture begin ?
He paused. The Cynic and Podmore leant
forward anxiously to hear.
Humpty-Dumpty flung one last expectant
look to sea. Then he turned to face them.
“ There never was any adventure ! " he
said.
Streaker’s yell and Podmore’s squeak
mingled together and were echoed with hideous
mockery in the vaulted roof. Only the Cynic
lay back in his rug and chuckled quietly.
For a whole long minute Streaker’s wrath
held him inarticulate. Then he took the
younger boy by the shoulders.
But a new dignity had fallen on Humpty-
Dumpty —a tragic dignity that impressed his
hearers in spite of themselves. He waved
Streaker back with a gesture that was almost
imperious.
“ Sit down, Streaker," he said, and there


was a ring in his voice. " Sit down all of
you and listen.”
" Yes, Streaker, sit down,” interposed the
Cynic unexpectedly.
Streaker sat down, but with glowering eyes.
Then in a low, level voice the strange youth


CHAPTER XIV
JOHN KING’S SON
NEARLY all njy life,” said Humpty-
Dumpty, “ I’ve been ill. Most of
the time I’ve been in bed or as a
great change, convalescing on a balcony.
It hasn’t been a thrilling life exactly.” He
paused and stared out to sea.
“You know what my father is ? ” he went
on. “He was always away, but if ever it
was possible at all he used to come home to
see me once a year at Christmas —I can
remember him walking into my bedroom fresh
from Central Africa, Afghanistan, Panama,
New Guinea, only when he was in the Antarctic
he missed coming. He used to stay a week —
just stick beside my bed and talk to me all
day—and, if I couldn’t sleep, all night too —
and tell me all the things the press reporters
would have sold their souls to get, about
jungles and ice-floes and shipwrecks and pack-


horses and orchids and lost islands and
revolutions. And he brought me big trunk-
loads of presents —all chosen to amuse an
invalid. I used to lie in bed with my head
on a pillow that belonged to the first Rajah
Brooke —you know the Englishman who was
made King of Sarawak—and the tray my
meals were brought on was carved from
a sled Shackleton had used at the South Pole.
And I drank my medicine out of a cup that
belonged to Laurence of Arabia, and my
counterpane was the finest tiger skin that
ever came out of India. I’ll show them to
you some day. Then he’d give my nurse
a blank cheque to buy me anything on earth
I wanted, and go off again across the world
on some big lone hand job that had to be
done three thousand miles or so from civilisa-
tion. And I was left to look at the ceiling
for fifty-one weeks and break my heart
because I was John King’s son, and instead
of being his lieutenant I was a miserable little
sick frog. And I used to fret myself more
ill than ever for an adventure of my own.”
” Well ? ” said Streaker curtly, for Humpty-
Dumpty had paused again.


“ One day I was wailing about it to the
old doctor who looked after me, and he said :
‘ Laddie, laddie, you’re gey and sorry for
yourself, but you’re nae the only one. Ceevili-
sation’ (he was very Scotch) ‘ has eleeminated
adventure frae daily life, but it canna and
it willna eleeminate it frae the hear-r-t o’
man —no nor o’ women. The whole wor-r-r-ld
is sick and cr-r-raving for a real guid old
fashioned adventure wi' muffles on the row-
locks and a map wi’ a skull and crossbones
and a wee writing to-day, “ Tr-r-r-easure lies
here.” I tell ye this, if I could dose my
patients wi’ a tablespoonful of adventure
three times the day—laddie, it would be the
finest tonic in the wide, wide wor-r-ld.’ ”
Humpty-Dumpty paused a minute to smile
at the memory of the old man.
“ So then,” he went on, "I used to lie
in bed and plan out wild dreams of what
I would do when I grew up. I was going
to start a society, not to provide people with
bread or warm clothing or education, but
with adventures —real live adventures with lots
of sun and wind and danger and hard riding
in them, to take them out of their dull mono-


tonous selves and their flat stale go-to-office-
in-the-moming and come-back-at-night lives.’’
“ Where were you going to get your stock
of adventures to supply your benevolent
society from ? " inquired Streaker unkindly.
“ That was a difficulty,” admitted Humpty-
Dumpty. “ And for a couple of years I
couldn’t solve it at all. And then last year
I was sent down here ” —he waved a vague
arm along the sounding coast and inland
towards the bushland hills—“ to convalesce.
And the very minute I crossed the punt at
the Spit the feeling came on me that here
somewhere in this ten square miles of coast
an adventure was going to happen—l w r as
as certain of it as I was that the car was
driving along the road. When you’ve been
ill for a long time you get sort of sensitive —
you can feel things like that, that other people
can t. \ou don’t know—you haven’t any
idea how certain I was. It was always just
round the next corner or just behind the
windows of some house I passed or looking
out of the eyes of people I met on the road
the whole place was waiting, for something
that was going to happen—soon !—soon ! ”


(“And his voice was just like a gimlet
boring yon inside,” was Podmore’s description
when six weeks later he poured out the story
to an enraptured audience in IIb.)
“ Well, it didn’t happen in the fortnight I
was there, but I went away convinced —
convinced, I tell you —that if I could only
come back and be in the right place at the
right moment ”
“ And you mean to say you had the ice-
chilled nerve to drag us down here against our
wills ” began Streaker.
“ It wasn't against your will,” said Humpty-
Dumpty calmly. “You remember what my
old doctor said —that the whole world was
craving for adventure. Well, you and the
Cynic were no exceptions —you simply jumped
at the invitation as soon as I mentioned the
word. You pretended you didn’t want to
come, but you did. You ought to be jolly
grateful to me for asking you because the
adventure’s here all right if you’d only have a
bit of patience.”
“ H’m,” said the Cynic. “ How did you
manage the chocolate business at the punt ? ”
“ That was easy,” said Humpty-Dumpty.


“ there was no message in the one in the shop
of course. I said something to you about
the need for secrecy and put it in my pocket.
In that pocket there was a faked packet
of the same brand —when I took it out of
course I substituted it. Jolly obvious, but
at that time you weren't suspicious. And
you see I had to have something to keep you
interested,”
“ What made you choose Twisted Chimneys
and the Maze and this place ? ”
“ They were the places where I had the
feeling strongest,” said Humpty-Dumpty. “ I
could only guide us by that.”
(" His eyes," said Podmore later to llb,
"were like when you put salt in a candle —
all bluey-green sparks.”)
At this point Streaker who had been
listening with ill-concealed impatience broke
into the discussion :
“ Heavens and earth, Cynic, what does it
all matter ? Can’t you see we’ve chucked
away a whole week of the holidays and no
end of decent invitations for this this
trap. I can’t make out how you take it so
quietly.”


The Cynic put his hands behind his head
and looked out to sea. Then he smiled his
most annoying smile.
“ I knew,” he said.
If Humpty-Dumpty’s statement that there
was no adventure had caused a diversion,
the Cynic’s was a bombshell. For a long
minute Streaker, Podmore, and Humpty-
Dumpty, stared at him too amazed to
speak.
Then :
“ How ? ” said Streaker, the calm of re-
signation in his voice.
“ That night up at Twisted Chimneys I
borrowed Humpty’s coat and I found a book
in the pocket. It was a Stevenson and it
fell open at a place where Stevenson says
almost the identical thing about some places
in Scotland —about the waiting feel. The
whole passage was heavily pencil-marked—
evidently Humpty had read it often. After
that I watched him pretty closely for a few
days and somehow —I don’t quite know how
—began to guess.”
“ And why,” queried Streaker icily, “ didn’t
you cut the farce short ? ”


The Cynic looked out at the dawn again.
It was a long minute before he spoke.
“ Because," he said slowly, “ I believe it
too."
"Rot!" Streaker’s voice was explosive.
"You can say what you like," said the
Cynic. " It's true. The place is waiting—
something is going to happen. Like the
feeling before a thunder storm."
" Well, why doesn’t it ? " inquired Streaker
crisply.
The Cynic shrugged his shoulders.
" Stevenson says : ‘ The man or the hour
had not yet come,’ ’’ he said. " Perhaps
we’re not the men."
Streaker lost his temper finally and com-
pletely.
" No, I’m hanged, if we are," he said.
" Cynic, I think you’re raving mad. Person-
ally I’m catching the first 'bus from Newport
back to town. You lunatics can stay and
chase your adventures till you fall over the
cliffs. Possibly that will be an adventure
for you."
No," said the Cynic, " we’re coming too.
The game’s up, Humpty—we can’t stay here


for ever. Well have to leave it to the next
comers.”
Humpty-Dumpty lifted his head from his
hands.
“ Yes,” he said dully, “ the game’s up.”
So they packed up in silence mocked by
a sallow dawn, breakfasted, climbed along
the perilous rock path and up the staircase,
on purpose to catch the Newport ’bus and
leave Humpty-Dumpty’s country to solve its
own riddles without their aid.
And at the top of the steps they tumbled
head first into the middle of the Adventure
itself.


CHAPTER XV
STREAKER IS CONVERTED
IT was quite true. Down the long hill
from Newport came the Adventure
itself. It was riding in a motor-car
extraordinarily badly driven.
But it was not the car’s erratic progress
that riveted the boys to the ground —their
incredulous eyes were fixed on the aluminium
glinting on the radiator, the high-set head-
lights, the long, unusual lines of the body,
the set of the hood.
It was their own Crosshall.
Streaker was suddenly galvanised into
action. Though Humpty-Dunpty was the
actual owner of the car, in the ten long days
Streaker had driven it its power and beauty
had entirely enslaved his heart. And now
to see it stolen before his very eyes —worse
still, perhaps to see its gears stripped by that
’prentice hand at the wheel.


"On to the road,” he yelled. The four
of them raced forward —in a moment they
had spread themselves cordon-wise across the
track.
The car came on —they could see now that
it was driven by a girl. Their own horn
shrieked a warning to them.
" Don’t move,” shouted Streaker above the
noise of the oncoming engine. “ She won’t
have the nerve.”
With a shriek and a swerve the car bore
down on them. Streaker, who was the last
to jump clear felt the mudguard brush his
hand. In another moment the car would be
a hundred yards away.
And then the girl lost her head.
Her foot fumbled for the accelerator —
missed it—in her panic, for no reason whatever,
she changed gears. There was a sound of
racing engines—the car lost momentum —next
second four Towers schoolboys landed neatly
—two on each side—on the footboard.
There was a minute’s confusion in the front
seat —then Streaker’s hand with the mark of
two rows of sharp small teeth printed on
it pushed down the switch.


The Crosshall stopped ; the girl dropped
back panting in the comer beyond the wheel
and Streaker looking round to the back
seat was just in time to prevent the Cynic
and the passenger who were rolling and
scuffling on the floor from tumbling through
the open door on to the road.
Then he became aware that the girl who,
he now saw was still a flapper, was speaking.
“ Gentlemen/' she said, and there was
something in her voice that w r as very different
from an ordinary light-hearted flapper's voice
—something tragic, urgent, compelling.
“ Gentlemen, I beseech you. Drive on.
There are lives at stake."
The boys stared at her—then at the
passenger whom Streaker was pinning down
in a comer of the back seat.
They saw a girl and a boy, obviously
brother and sister, unusually alike, both
about seventeen, both with black hair, white
faces, desperate eyes.
H m,” said Streaker. “ First you steal
our car, then you try to drive it over us,
and now you want me to act as your chauffeur.
Rather unusual, isn't it ? "


The girl gave him one long straight look.
“ Yes, very unusual,” she said quietly.
“ But I think you are going to.”
Again the boys stared at each other. There
was a long silence. Then without a word
Streaker moved into the driving seat.
" Straight on ? ” he asked and let in the
clutch.
The girl pointed through the wind screen.
On the damp road a tyre pattern stood out
clear and new —four diamonds and four
crosses.
“ Follow if you please,” she said.
Streaker, not having anything to say,
drove on in silence. The girl was silent
too, but as the car fled along the road he
felt that her tensity was communicated in
some strange way to himself. To his surprise
he found his hands gripping hard on the
wheel, his eyes straining ahead.
“ There’s no other w r ay out of Palm Beach
is there ? ” she asked suddenly, “ except by
boat or this road.”
As Streaker shook his head a car appeared
driving towards them—empty except for the
driver. As it passed them the boys leaned


out —the four crosses, four diamonds, had
patterned themselves again on the damp
road.
“ They hired that in Newport,” said the
girl, " and we couldn’t get another one.
So you see I had to take yours.”
Streaker did not see, but the badness of the
road claiming all his attention he refrained
from comment.
Ten minutes later he drew the car up
outside the store at Palm Beach. It was
the social hour of the little surfing colony
when the whole population turned out for
their mails and stores. The tiny rickety
pier and the deep shady store verandah were
alight with girls in gingham frocks carrying
g a Y Japanese umbrellas, and sunburned, bare-
legged boys in white shorts and shirts carrying
lobsters and billies of milk, and loaves of
bread and tins of kerosene. Small children
rode down the steep road on ponies ; every-
one seemed to know everyone else; every-
one was laughing. Yet this strange girl
said there were lives at stake.
She slipped out of the car; her brother
jumped from the back seat and came to where


Streaker sat at the wheel. He took his hat
off and stood with the sun beating down on
his head.
“ You have done more than you will ever
know,” he said. “ More people than you
can dream of will be grateful to you. Some
day I hope I shall be able to repay your
kindness.”
“ That's all right,” Streaker said awkwardly.
He was not used to boys of his own age
who spoke in this melodramatic fashion.
And yet was it melodramatic ? Somehow
there seemed a deadly earnestness about this
pair that gave their stilted words a curious
ring of truth.
The boy replaced his hat, the girl bent her
head, then they went into the store, their
plain dark serge clothes contrasting oddly
with the gay thin summer frocks around
them.”
” Oh, well,” it was Humpty-Dumpty who
spoke, and his voice was still dull with the
disappointment of the night before ; ” we’d
better go home.” He looked wearily towards
Streaker, who in the dawn had been so
wrathfully insistent on going at once.


"Yes,” said Streaker, but his voice had
lost a little of its emphasis.
The Cynic got out of the car and drifted
into the store to buy apples. The place was
fast emptying, but the Crosshairs late pas-
sengers were still at the counter deep in
conversation with the storekeeper.
" Have I seen four dark men ? ” the latter
was saying. "Miss, if fourteen dark men
were to come into the store at mail time and
stand on their heads on the counter I doubt
if I d notice them. The whole Beach packs
into this store at eleven o’clock, and I have
to provide them with everything from cocoa-
nut biscuit to a toothbrush. And then you
ask me the colour of their hair ! ” He gazed
at her more in sorrow than in anger.
Thank you.” The boy and girl turned
from the counter and out again.
The Cynic bought his apples and returned
to the car.
" Let her went, Streak,” he said. " Run
up the paying-off pennant ; the crew of this
expedition is hereby paid off, disbanded,
finish, mafessh. Let the band play * Home
Sweet Home.’ ”


But Streaker made no movement towards
the clutch.
“ How about a surf first,” he said casually.
“No hope,” said the Cynic. “ A lad in
the store told me that it’s not worth going in #
It’s dumping hard after the storm.”
But still Streaker did not move. “ Might
as well have a look,” he said.
“ Why waste time,” objected the Cynic.
“ I thought you were so keen to get home.”
“ An hour or so doesn’t make much differ-
ence,” Streaker said off-handedly.
The Cynic gave him a searching look. Then
he lay back in his seat laughing silently.
" It’s no use, Streak,” he said. “ Stop
bluffing and confess. You’ve got the feeling,
too —something’s going to happen after all
and you want to be here to see it through.”


CHAPTER XVI
WANTED, POSITION OF TRUST
AS the afternoon sun slanted down on
Palm Beach, the girl who had so lately
stolen a motor car stood with her
brother on a hill.
Pittwater lay at their feet—the smooth,
far-reaching, evening-tinted waters, the dark
islands, the countless inlets, the densely
wooded hills, the hazy sunset distances—so
far, so impossible to search. The little breeze
that blew across the water, sent a chill of
despair into their hearts.
Paul, lam so tired. What are we going
to do ? ”
Jacinth, I don’t know.”
Again the breeze shivered across the water.
With heavy hearts they turned from their
gazing and went down the hill.
As they passed the store, the storekeeper
spoke to them from the doorway.
M 5 K


" There’s a letter for you,” he said, and held
out a white envelope.
The brother and sister stared at him. By
no remote nor impossible chance could there
be anyone in Palm Beach whom they knew
—anyone who knew them.
Paul opened it. Inside was a strip of
newspaper : the Situations Wanted column.
Half way down it between the requirements
of a Light General and a Daily Gardener,
a handwritten slip had been pasted.
" Wanted Position of Trust,” it read :
“ By Us Four and Crosshall Motor Car,
speedy, reliable; accustomed adventures.
Dangerous work a speciality. Any trial.
“ What —where ? —I don’t understand,’ said
Paul bewildered. Then he looked out through
the store door. A motor car w’as standing
there, its low long lines the very embodiment
of strength and speed, and beside it four sun-
burnt boys, strong, quiet, broad shouldered.
“ Oh,” said Jacinth, and went forward, a
sob in her throat. “ Oh, help us, help us,
help us ! ”


CHAPTER XVII
IN COMIC-OPERA COUNTRY
IT was half an hour later. In a pulling
boat, out in the middle of Pittwater —
the only place Paul had deemed private
enough—the brother and sister were inter-
viewing the four applicants for a position of
trust (dangerous work a speciality).
“ I don’t know' how you came to be here,”
Paul said in his queer stilted voice that yet
sounded so curiously true, “ nor why you
should want to help us. I only know that
it seems as if heaven itself had sent you. It
is not everyone who in his hour of need
finds four brave men to help him.”
Streaker and the Cynic frowned impatiently
at the theatrical quality of the w T ords, and
Podmore stared owl-eyed. Only in the stern
Humpty-Dumpty sat straighter —John
King’s son had led an expedition to a tryst
with adventure at last.


“And now," said Paul. “ I will tell you
everything."
“ Hold on," Streaker said awkwardly.
“ How do you know you can trust us.
Wouldn’t you like some credentials or some-
thing ? "
“ I have been trained to be a judge of
men’s faces," Paul said simply. Then he
looked away across the sunset water.
“ Do you know where Cadalia is," he asked
after a pause.
There was silence on the part of his audience.
“ I thought you would not know. I had
a tutor once who used to say that Englishmen
regarded a Balkan state in two distinct
lights. One was as a comic opera. The other
was a novel by a gentleman whom I think he
called Mr. Hope. It does not matter —you
may consider Cadalia as which you like,
but I should be grateful if you would remember
that the people there can die of hunger
quite as painfully as the people in other
countries . . ." His voice was suddenly raw-
edged.
“ However, in the war, Cadalia sided with
the Allies. Perhaps her army —it was the


size of a toy —did not much assist the Allies,
but the Turks punished Cadalia just the same.
In two days they overran the whole kingdom
sacked it and burned it, and looted it —
orchards, mines, vineyards—made everything
barren for years to come. Everything was
gone—everything except the Mangroves."
“ Mangrove bark—used for tanning, isn’t
it ? " said the scientific Cynic.
“ Yes," assented Paul, “ but tan-bark is
not very valuable. But there was a chemist
whose wife had died, just starved to death,
and well, I suppose that spurred him on.
He discovered a secret process for making a
dye-stuff out of crushed mangrove bark com-
bined with two unusual mordants," Paul
broke off. “ Your coat has faded a little,
I think," he said courteously to Streaker.
There was a general smile. Streaker’s new
honour blazer which had arrived from the
shop the correct deep crimson, which was the
privilege of honour blazers alone, had within
a week of wear in the sun, turned to a sickly
confection of pink, mottled with puce, about
which the little boys in the Lower School
made up unseemly songs.


“ That is because the Germans were the
only ones who could handle the aniline and
alizarin dyestuffs—they had their own secret
processes unknown to the Allies. But this
vegetable dye-stuff w T ould have captured the
purple, red, brown, orange half of the German
market, and Cadalia, wdiose entire coast was
thick with mangrove swamps, would have
become more prosperous for its size than any
country in Europe, and your blazer ” —he
smiled again to Streaker —“ would not have
looked like a ”
“ Zebra with measles,” interpolated the
Cynic. “Go on.”
“ On Easter Sunday,” said Paul slowiy,
“ the chemist laid the formula before the King
of Cadalia and the Prime Minister, and they
thankfully agreed that the Prime Minister
should set out next day to England to pawn
the Crown Jewels —the only things the Turks
had not been able to find—to buy the working
plant. They divided the formula in halves
for greater safety —one half the Prime Minister
was to take to England, the other half
the King was to look after. On Easter
Monday ”


“ Carry on,” said Streaker, for the voice
in the dusk had stopped abruptly.
“On Easter Monday, when the Prime
Minister’s train arrived at the border, he was
found murdered in his carriage. The Crown
jewels and the half formula were gone.
When the King got the news, he went straight
away himself to the chemist to re-obtain a
full formula. But ” Again Paul’s voice
stopped and the boys moved a little uncom-
fortably. Narrative of remote improbable
events as it seemed, yet that queer strained
voice of Paul’s and the infinite attentive hush
of the evening lent it a curious potency.
“ But when he got to the chemist’s lodging
—it was over a grocer’s—he found him lying
across the stairs with his throat cut. Just
like a comic opera, you see,” Paul’s voice was
bitter. “So that left no one who knew the
complete formula. During next month thieves
made eleven attempts to steal the other
half of the formula from the King’s apart-
ments, but without success. You see Germany
would have paid them hundreds of thousands
of pounds tor it, because they had just had
to give up their dye secrets to the Allies.


So then Stavros —that was the name of the
chief of them—a young Cadalian count by
birth, who had sold himself to Germany to
spy on his own countrymen, stirred up a
revolution with German gold—one can stir
up anything with gold in a starving popu-
lation—and brought it to a head by telling
the peasants that the King had sold the
Crown jewels, and was planning to desert his
ruined country and go to America with the
money. He challenged the King to appear
in full regalia and jewels at the Cathedral
Service next morning. Well " Paul
shrugged his shoulders fatalistically.
“ Well, what ? ” asked the Cynic, who was
watching him keenly.
“ The King obviously could not. So he
did not. And the revolution boiled over and
mobbed the palace. And as he had hoped,
Stavros was able to search the King’s apart-
ments. But he didn’t find the formula,
and he didn’t find the King. They were
gone. And for some reason of the least ex-
pected, the mob turned on Stavros—mobs
are strange things you know —and Stavros
had to go too —quickly. It was believed that


he came to Australia . . . and yesterday
Jacinth and I saw him and three others in
Manly, and followed him in trams and buses
and ” —a fleeting smile lit up the boy’s grave
face —“ other people’s motor cars to Palm
Beach. And then he vanished into thin air ;
and you came.” His voice broke off wearily.
“ That’s all,” he said. “ Unless you’d like
to ask any questions.”
Nobody spoke for a minute. Then the
Cynic’s voice drawled one of his inevitable
quotations through the dusk.
“ What’s Hecuba to him or he to Hecuba,”
he queried. “In other words what are the
troubles of Cadalia to you. Did you learn
it all from a history of the Great War ?
Though I think I know the answer.”
There was another silence broken only by
the ripple and splash of a jumping fish.
“Yes,” he said, “ you’re right. “ I am —
I mean I was—the King of the place.”


CHAPTER XVIII
THE BANGLE OF THE FAIR-HAIRED WAITRESS
OVER by the long beach the little covey
of yachts began to hoist their riding
lights. In the pulling boat the Towers
School boys stared curiously through the
dusk at Royalty.
“You see when the revolution came in
the front door of the palace I went out the
back,” said Paul.
“He didn’t want to,” put in Jacinth
swiftly; “he wanted to —what is it you
English say —stand by the train, or is it ship ?
But he had to look after the half formula and
) y
me.
“So we went to London,’’ said Paul.
“ Both of us had had English nurses and tutors
all our lives, that’s why we can speak English
fairly well, and lived very quietly until
one day we heard Stavros had gone to Sydney
in Australia, and we thought that if we only


followed him and get the other half of the
paper we could save Cadalia. Well, we only
had enough money to pay our passage out,
and when we got to Sydney we had to earn
some money first before we could do any-
thing. It was hard, you see comic opera
kings and grand duchesses are not brought
up very usefully. All my tutors ever taught
me was diplomacy and statecraft and intrigue.
And Jacinth knows court etiquette and gene-
alogical trees and very little more. So I got
a position as a gardener’s boy and she took
a housemaid’s position at the same house.
Only we both got dismissed the first
day.”
“He didn’t garden well enough, and I
laid the tables too well,” explained Jacinth.
“Too well ? ” queried Streaker.
“ I was very foolish,” said Jacinth. “ I
had never set a table before and tried to
remember exactly how the lunch table was
set at home —at the Palace and ”
“ and the little foolish one set each
place for five courses and three wanes! ”
said Paul, “ and there were only boiled eggs
and tea. However, we did better in our


next place—we were there six months and
amassed quite a fortune in wages.”
" But yesterday was our day out,” said the
former grand duchess, “ Always on our days
out we had searched for Stavros, oh, every-
where we had searched, but yesterday was
my birthday, and Paul said we would take
a holiday and go to Manly. And within
five minutes of coming off the boat we saw
him with three others. We followed him,
as you know, but he has vanished —into the
air, he and the others.”
” They did not go out by road,” said Paul,
” or we would have seen them, they were not
on the launch that departed for we saw
it go, they are not here in Palm Beach.”
" How do you know,” said Streaker ; " they
might be in one of the cottages ? ”
Jacinth shook her head very positively.
“ But no,” she said, “ I went to each
cottage —it was the idea of Paul —with a
little johnny, no, I mean a billy, and I
knocked on the door and I asked for some
water to make tea. And while they went to
seek it, I could see well through those
cottages so small and open. It was of


the most impossible for four large men to
hide therein.”
“ And why should they hide ? ” said Paul.
“Of one thing I am assured, and that is,
they have not seen us nor have they any
reason to suspect we are within ten thousand
miles of this Australia. No, only one answer
remains—for some reason unknown they have
taken boat and are somewhere ” —he made a
helpless gesture across the twilight towards
Pitt water —“ somewhere there. But where,
the good Heaven alone knows ; we have asked
every man who owns a boat, and they all deny
to have rowed them or seen them.”
“ I think I can guess the reason,” said the
Cynic ; “ there are about fifty miles of man-
grove swamp hereabouts, and I wouldn’t be
surprised if your friend, having failed to steal
the missing half of the formula, is going to
work it out by experiment in a nice quiet
corner far from the madding revolution with
plenty of material at hand. It oughtn’t to
take him very long ; our job will be to inter-
rupt him in time.”
“ Run up the Blue Peter,” said Streaker,
‘‘ this expedition is going to start on a fifty


mile search at once —toot sweet —immedi-
ately. If not sooner.”
But their search was unexpectedly shortened
by forty-seven miles. As they sat at dinner
an hour later in a little guest-house at Palm
Beach —even the most daring expeditions
having to take some thought for meals and a
lodging for the night —a girl came forward
to wait on them, a girl pleasant-faced but, so
far as the boys could see, perfectly unremark-
able. Yet Jacinth was sitting forward in
her chair with staring eyes.
“ Paul,” she breathed when the girl was
out of hearing. " Paul, did you see ? Her
bracelet. Look at it when she comes.”
Presently the girl returned, tray in hand.
On her w 7 rist a large trumpery-looking barbaric
bracelet contrasted oddly with her cotton
frock.
“ That’s a queer bangle,” Jacinth said
idly, watching her unload the tray.
The girl looked at it and smiled.
“I’m only wearing it for fun,” she said.
“ It’s only brass with bits of coloured glass
stuck on. It was rather a joke how I got
it ? ”


" How was that ? ” asked Streaker en-
deavouring to keep his voice from sounding
too curious. But he could see that Jacinth’s
hand had closed over the edge of her chair
until the knuckles stood out white.
The girl smiled again. “My young brother
has got an old boat,” she said, “ and some-
times if the regular boats are all engaged,
he rows gentlemen out fishing. Well, he was
taking four gentlemen this morning, and
just as they got aboard one of them dropped
a suit-case. And it was just full of things
like this, dozens o’ them.” She smiled broadly
again.
“ Yes ? ” said Jacinth.
” Well, young Bill, he’s always reading
detective stories and of course he thought
he’d got four jewellery thieves on board the
boat. The men nearly died laughing and
kidded him on for a bit, but at last it turned
out they was only theatrical things —made
out o’ tin and glass—that they were going
to use for the fancy-dress ball at Newport
on Regatta night. As if anyone’d have real
jewellery as big as this —real common-looking
things I call them. But young Bill wouldn’t


believe them and wouldn’t row them nowhere
till one of the gentlemen says : ‘ Righto, son,
you can have your pick o’ the lot.’ So even
young Bill was satisfied that they wouldn't
be throwing them away like that if they was
real.”
Jacinth was fumbling with shaking fingers
at the catch of her purse. Though it was
below the level of the table, Streaker could
see she was pulling out a bundle of notes.
But before she could display them her brother's
hand shot out.
“ Lend me your purse, Jacinth. I’ve no
change.” He selected some coin and laid it
on the girl's tray with the little bill.
“ Where do people camp hereabouts ? ”
he asked casually.
“ Most everywhere,” said the girl, ” but
I guess these men were new chums. They
made Bill row them down to the Maze —nasty
wet place it is for camping.”
“ Why this thusness ? ” queried the Cynic
of Jacinth when the waitress had gone.
“ That bracelet —it is part of the stolen
Crown jewels of Cadalia and worth many
hundred pounds.”


'flu A \ jAiL, ,. ■ J^VnKl
i ii I CvJ-'’iW \ v.l
jlV Jj ” | IJH| 1 . v^B
tit lr . > >1 Ik tjfiwKap
V W 1
* , I
“ ‘lt’s only brass with bits of coloured glass stuck on.
r, ■ m [Chapter XVIII
Drowning Maze]




" Stavros was always cool and quick
witted,” said Paul; " that small boy might
have ruined his plans. A thousand pounds
was a little price to pay to put him off his
guard. And truly the girl was right—it is too
large. We will let it go, Jacinth, it is better
to lose it than to make a sensation here,
which Stavros might hear of and be alarmed.
And to us also the price is small if by that
clue we may save Cadalia.”
On the farther side of the table, Humpty-
Dumpty was recklessly pouring salad dressing
into his tea, mistaking it in his excitement
for milk.
“ Drowning Maze,” he said. ” I knew,
I knew. I told you it would happen there.”


CHAPTER XIX
A GRAMOPHONE RECITAL
THE tide was ebbing out of Drowning
Maze. At the same time a small
boat was making up it, a boat that
in one respect conformed to Humpty-
Dumpty's childhood dreams. Handkerchiefs
had been knotted round the row-locks.
Everything was very still, not a single
sound betokened the presence of the four
dark Cadalians who, the boy Bill of Palm
Beach had averred, were camping there.
" I vote," whispered Streaker —they had
no wish to advertise their own presence —
" that we land one of us at House-on-Stilts
to get breakfast. I’m jolly hungry."
Indeed they all were ; they had started
from Palm Beach at 3 a.m., and it had been a
long stiff pull against the wind.
The Cynic produced some matches and they
drew lots. The shortest fell to Humpty-


Dumpty, and they slid noiselessly up the
private entrance, where a boat was already
moored.
“ Kelvin must have come back," said
Streaker surprised, as Humpty-Dumpty
climbed the rope ladder, gained the balcony,
unlocked the door, waved, and went in.
They heard the door shut behind him.
%/
Then they slipped rapidly, noiselessly away
to begin their search. Their initial plan was
to locate the Cadalians’ camp and experi-
mental workshop, if such they had, without
being discovered themselves. It would have
been easier under cover of darkness, but the
nature of the Maze rendered midnight navi-
gation impossible. Hence their early arrival
—in the hope of finding Stavros and his
companions still abed.
Methodically they examined either main
stream, the branches, the back-waters, softly
they rowed from aisle to aisle between the
trees, the Cynic pencilling a rough chart as
they went for future reference. They did not
speak, only peered to port and starboard,
forward and astern, or occasionally up into
the leafy roof. An hour slipped by.


“ We’d better give up for a while,” whis-
pered Streaker at last. “ They’d be awake
by now, and w’e’d come on them suddenly
round a bend.”
Still with bated breath they stole back.
To their straining ears the intense silence
w r as fast becoming eerie.
And then, just as on that afternoon a week
before, the gramophone screamed from the
tree tops.
The crew of the little boat jumped in their
seats. Then they sat petrified. A long
minute passed.
” Humpty must have gone mad,” said
Streaker, and began to pull at a feverish rate.
” He’ll have them down on us in five minutes.”
But the Cynic’s hand shot forward.
" Stop ! ” he said, grasping at the oar butts,
” stop, stop, stop. What's the name of that
tune ? ”
“ For heaven's sake, Cynic,” said Streaker,
and shook him off. ” Don’t you understand,
we’ve got to stop him at any price.”
But the Cynic was sitting still, his eyes
shut, an expression of intense concentration
on his face.


“ La —la, la, la ! la —la ! ” he sang beneath
his breath and beat time in the air with his
finger. “ Stop, stop, don’t row. I’ll get it
in a minute.”
Streaker rowed doggedly on. He was still
several channels from House-on-Stilts.
There was a suppressed shriek of triumph
from the Cynic.
" Wait, waititty, wait, wait,” he sang.
" That’s it, of course, of course. Now will
you stop, Streaker. Something’s happened
and Humpty’s signalling to us not to come.”
” Bosh ! ” said Streaker, but he stopped
pulling nevertheless. There was no doubt
that those were the words—he remembered
Kelvin playing the same record the night of
the storm.
The record ceased, was replaced by another,
a fox trot with an accompaniment of rattling
castanets. This time they could all fit the
words to the music.
" You’ve—got—to —watch your step.
You’ve—got—to —watch your step.
Diddle dum di dum ti die,”
sang the record. And this time even Streaker


was convinced that Humpty-Dumpty was not
conducting this early morning gramophone
recital merely for his own benefit.
The syncopated melody jazzed to a close.
Down in the boat the crew of five leaned
forward with straining ears.
Again the invisible needle burred on to an
invisible disc.
“ All —the elephants —wear dancing shoes
They —keep hopping—with the kangaroos,’
the music informed them.
“ What! ” said Streaker.
The music switched on to another tune,
evidently it was a medley record.
“ At one and two I'm with Maud and Sue;
Three and four, two girls more.
Five and six it’s with Kate I fix
was the only answer vouchsafed to him from
the tree tops. Presently the tune changed
again :
“ If you were the only girl in the world,”
it sighed plaintively through the whispering
water aisles.
“ And I were the only boy.'


The Cynic was clutching his head with both
hands. Jacinth and Paul, whose knowledge
of musical comedies was a minus quantity,
sat dumbfounded.
“ We had a little duck and a lot of green peas,
A bottle of ginger ale and a bit of Cheddar cheese,”
said the music suddenly cheerful again.
“ The message must be at the end,” said
the Cynic. “ Listen carefully now.”
“ Every little lady has a right side and a wrong,
So you must be careful on which side you come along,’
confided the record.
" When the sun is shining and her gown’s a perfect duck.
Watch your opportunity and go and try your luck.”
There was another verse equally unfathom-
able about a lady in Bond Street and that was
all. Absolutely all. Silence soaked into the
Maze again, only the water lapped at the
little boat.
The expedition sat motionless, mentally
conning over the words they had just heard.
“ Elephants—dancing shoes,” murmured
Streaker.


" The only girl in the world," muttered
the Cynic.
" A bottle of ginger ale," whispered Pod-
more.
Jacinth and Paul, having nothing to
said it.
The Cynic raised his head from his hands
where he had buried it in perplexity. There
was the light of dawning inspiration in his
eyes.
" Those aren’t separate songs," he said ;
“ they’re all out oi the same revue. And the
name of the revue is "
"THE BING BOYS ARE HERE,"
said Streaker slowly.
" Exactly," said the Cynic. " H.-D. means
to indicate that he is not alone. There are
people with him. Who are the people ?
Kelvin? why the need for caution. Strangers ?
no need for caution again. No. The Bing
Boys are ’’
Streaker’s lips puckered in a noiseless
whistle of dismay. " Stavros and C 0.," he
said.


CHAPTER XX
TREE TOP ROAD
PRESENTLY the music began again. It
was a song, apparently comic, but
whose words and music were unfamiliar
to the boys. They had got the words of the
other songs as much by memory as by
hearing, for they had all had their month or
so of fame in the last few years. But of this,
having no assistance, they could only catch
odd words.
“ We’ll have to go closer,” said Streaker,
and paddled a few swift silent strokes. One
more bend would put them in full view of
House-on-Stilts. ” Shall I go on —it may
be dangerous ? ” he queried of Paul with a
glance at Jacinth.
Two red spots leaped to the clear pallor of
Jacinth’s cheeks.
“ Row on,” she said imperiously before her
brother could speak, “ at once, immediately.”


The boat sprang forward again. There
was need for haste for at least ten inches of
the record’s appointed twelve had whirled
themselves away, still unintelligibly. But
just as the boat shot out into the watery
street of the House-on-Stilts the refrain was
wafted to them, clear and unmistakable.
When you’re wearing the ball and chain."
The comic voice having delivered its mes-
sage was silent.
However cryptic the other songs this one
at least was clear. Not only was Stavros in
occupation of their own stronghold, but
Humpty-Dumpty was a prisoner, even if not
constricted by the convict’s traditional ball
and chain, by something equally effective.
“ Shall we rush the place ? ” whispered
Streaker. It was a forlorn hope and he knew
it. Stavros and Co were four strong and
probably well-armed men ; though the boat’s
crew numbered five, one was a girl and another,
Podmore, too small to count for more than
a half. Moreover they would have to attack
by route of a rope ladder one by one.
“ And give them six prisoners instead of


one,” said the Cynic. “ No, for Humpty-
Dumpty’s own sake we’ve got to get under
cover quick.”
Streaker dipped his oars cautiously one
stroke, two strokes, three strokes, as he rowed
towards the cross channel that meant safety.
All eyes were fixed backward on the little
tree-house that fortunately remained with-
out sign of life. Ten strokes —the Cynic
pulled his starboard yoke line —the boat
glided swiftly out of the dangerous channel.
They were only just in time, behind them
came the faint rasp of an opening door.
Further into the heart of Drowning Maze
was an island, an uncomfortably small island,
it is true, but at least it offered a headquarters,
a base, to the now homeless expedition.
Here by midday they had made some sort
of a tent with a sail slung between trees,
moored their boat and washed down a scanty
meal with a few drops of water from the
boat’s demi-john—their only supply now they
were cut off from the tank at House-on-Stilts.
And here they sat with grave faces to
discuss the situation.
“ We’ve got to rescue Humpty-Dumpty,


re-take House-on-Stilts, watch them day and
night until we either discover what’s on their
piece of the formula or can steal it outright,
and all without breaking a twig or starting a
ripple in the water that will give away the
fact that there are five people living in the
Maze within two hundred yards of them,”
said the Cynic.
“ Perhaps they’ve guessed that already,”
said Streaker. “ Humpty-Dumpty’s arrival
without any visible means of transit must at
least have started them thinking.”
“ You needn’t worry about Humpty-
Dumpty,” said the Cynic, “ his imagination’s
in quite good working order. He’ll have
told them he flew across on a seagull’s back
or swam across on a shark, rather than let
out the truth, and convinced them, too.”
“ Gentlemen,” said Paul in that courteously
formal tone of his, “ as soon as it is dark
enough this evening I will take my sister to a
boarding house in Newport and leave her
there in safety, and then ”
“ Paul ! ” Jacinth’s voice was stormy. " I
won’t go. I won’t be sent away like a
child ”


" Jacinth," Paul’s voice was grave. " I
command it."
The Australian boys who were not used
to commanding their sisters —at any rate
not with any success —expected an outbreak
from the stormy-eyed Jacinth. But they
had forgotten that besides being Paul’s sister,
she was his subject sworn to loyalty. After
a second’s internal conflict she bent her
head and courtesied to her brother as low
and formally as if they had stood in a Cadalian
throne-room instead of on a muddy island
of a marsh in the Antipodes.
" It is for Cadalia," Paul said in a low voice.
"You must take with you our half of the
formula and if anything happens to me you
must carry on the search for the other half
without wasting a moment in attempting
to rescue me. My life is only one, the formula
will save thousands of our people from
starving."
Paul broke off with that rare smile of his
and turned to the boys.
" Perhaps my tutor was right," he said.
" Perhaps we of the Balkans do talk a little
too much like a chapter of a novel. But ’’ —


his voice grew serious again—“ nevertheless,
I am going to ask you to swear by all that
you hold most dear that if anything does
happen to me, one of you two ” —he looked
at Streaker and the Cynic—“ will immediately
escort my sister and the formula to Sydney
and place them in the charge of the Ser-
vian Consul, we have no consul here for
Cadalia.”
Streaker and the Cynic paused a moment
before replying. They had no wash to have
to return to Sydney just at the moment
when “ the scrap ” promised to grow most
exciting.
“ Swear, gentlemen,” said Paul. '* I am
aware that I can lay no commands on you
but, there are women and children dying for
want of that formula.”
“ Righto ! ” said Streaker and the Cynic.
Paul smiled again. “ It’s just as well I
had an English tutor,” he said, “ and learned
that the ‘ Righto ’of the English peoples is
as binding as another nation’s vow by all the
saints. And now we must begin to recon-
noitre.”
“ I wish we’d got a canoe,” said Streaker;


*' this boat’s so clumsy in case we wish to
retire with dignified haste.”
The Cynic, who had been lying in his
favourite position on his back, staring up into
the leafy roof, suddenly opened his lips :
“ Then join our leaping lines that scumfish
through the pines,” he said.
The others waited patiently for an ex-
planation.
“ If,” he said, “ we made a pair of climbing
stirrups, there’s no reason that one of us
couldn’t crawl through the branches. It’s
not far; and Heaven knows they’re thick
enough.”
Streaker cast a practised eye upward.
“My aunt! ” he said. “My fat aunt !
I believe you’re right, Cynic. Bags Ito go,
I expect I’m more used to climbing than
you people.”
" No, bags I,” said the Cynic. " Because
if they’ve started experimenting with the
mangrove or the chemicals, I’d know more
about it.”
“ No,” said Paul. “It is for Cadalia. The
king must be the first into danger. That is
Cadalian etiquette.”


The Cynic drew out his matches again,
the ones they had used to decide who should
enter House-on-Stilts to cook breakfast. Now
alas, they needed one less ; he handed them
to Jacinth to hold.
Paul drew first, then Streaker, last the Cynic.
With a smile he showed the shortest match.
Half an hour later, having manufactured
quite effective stirrups from the boat’s painter,
and aided by a leg-up from Streaker, he set
out. Streaker, who remembered his giddi-
ness the night they had raided the haunt
of the moonshiners, was surprised by the
confidence with which he moved from branch
to branch. The last week, scrambling about
in the open, separated from his books, had
taught the Cynic much.
Fortunately a light wind had sprung up
whose rustling cloaked the noise of his move-
ments, and in five minutes not even the
anxious watchers on the island could detect
a trace of his progress. All they could do
was to settle down to wait until seven o’clock
when, since Stavros was not likely to con-
tinue his experiments in the dark, the Cynic
had said he would return.


Honrs do not pass quickly in a mangrove
swamp. The tide ebbed out slow and oily,
the sad-coloured leaves dropped into the sad-
coloured water, and that was all from hour
to slow hour.
“ Let’s see who can count most crabs in
ten minutes. The valiant suggestion to-
wards dispelling the monotony was Pod-
more’s.
Jacinth played to please him. She counted
eighty-seven in the appointed time ; Podmore
ninety-three. Then they went back to their
listening.
Three o’clock, four o’clock, at five o'clock,
though it was far too early, Streaker began
to prepare tea merely for the sake of some-
thing to do.
Six o’clock and the light under the trees
began to grow dim.
“ Makes it all the safer for him to come
back,” said Streaker cheerfully, though for
some reason he was feeling depressed.
Quarter to seven, ten to seven, five to
seven.
” Any minute now,” said Streaker still
more cheerfully.


Even when half-past seven arrived, withoux
the Cynic his voice was still optimistic.
“ I expect there was something interesting
happening and he couldn’t tear himself away,
he opined.
But when eight o’clock brought complete
darkness his heart sank.
“ We’d better have tea,” he said abruptly,
“ and then we’d better row your sister over
to Newport and fix her up at one of the
boarding-houses. I know the manageress at
one of them —she’s awfully decent and’ll
look after her splendidly. I expect the Cynic
will be here when we get back.”
But when just before midnight their boat
minus Jacinth, but plus fresh stores and
water, fumbled its way back to the island
everything was silent, dark, and empty.


CHAPTER XXI
BOTTLE POST
STREAKER took out the matches. This
time he had only need of two. Pod-
more held them and with the first light
of dawn straggling through the trees he and
Paul drew for the right to travel by the tree-
top road.
“ Good! ” It w-as Paul who spoke, an
inch of match in his fingers.
Streaker, who held tw r o inches, bit his lip.
Between the Cynic and himself there had come
to be an entirely undemonstrative but deep-
rooted friendship, and he longed to work his
anxiety off in action. But the extra inch
of match condemned him to fidget all the
morning on a ten by tw r elve island with
Podmore, while Paul departed on his aerial
reconnaissance.
“ I’ll make a semi-circle and come on
House-on-Stilts from the far side,” said Paul.


“ If they captured one of us on this side
yesterday, they’ll be on watch to-day.”
Then the leaves swallowed him.
The sole feature that differentiated that
weary morning from the weary afternoon
before, was that the tide was making in
instead of out.
Streaker sat on a log and stared at it
gloomily. What a mad idea their plan of
stalking Stavros was after all —how foolish
to send Paul by the road that had betrayed
the Cynic. Yet to go by boat was riskier
still. And now there was nothing that he
could do himself but to go and put his head
in the same trap. No, worse still, there was
Jacinth and his promise to take her out of
danger. To whom could he appeal for help ?
Naturally he would have to call on the police
to rescue Humpty-Dumpty and the Cjmic,
if he thought they were in real danger, but
they could hardly ask the police to help him
steal the formula —that was Cadalia’s affair
and no part of the duty of an Australian
constable. And in the confusion of a police
arrest, Stavros would be sure to dispose of it
safely.


“ For heaven’s sake, Podmore, let’s p’ay
cat’s cradle or tiddley-winks, or hopscotch,”
Streaker broke out at last. “My brain’s
going round and round like a gyroscope.”
Podmore, who always took his seniors in
deadly earnest, gravely produced a string and
twined it cat’s cradle fashion round his
thumbs.
Whereat Streaker laughed and felt a frac-
tion better.
Eleven o’clock. Streaker began to wonder
how Jacinth was faring at the boarding-house.
What sombre eyes she had for a flapper
it would be worth a lot of risk to obtain the
formula just to see them light up.
Next he began to remember things her low
voice had told him while they had waited
yesterday —tragic, cruel things she had seen
at wayside stations as she and Paul fled
through Cadalia, and a lump came into his
throat. While he sat here idle those children
were starving all for the want of a half-sheet
of paper. At this stage of his meditations
he broke off to throw a tin mug at Podmore
who was laying in the bottom of the boat
whistling absentmindedly. It was his choice


of tune that irritated Streaker —the history
of the little nigger boys who one by one met
with untimely fates until “ then there were
none ” was hardly a tactful selection at the
moment.
And then with a sigh of relief he found it
was five to one. In five minutes if Paul had
not arrived he would be free to act.
Paul did not arrive.
“ We’ll take the boat,” said Streaker.
“ Tree Top Road is evidently not a success.
Hop in Podmore, otherwise you’ll be marooned
on this cheerful isle.”
Podmore hopped in. It was such a relief to
be doing something that they set off almost
gaily. Before they had gone two channels
the gramaphone began.
“ Good iron,” said Streaker, and strained
his ears eagerly. A message from the pris-
oners would be all the help in the world.
A record of a woman’s voice began to
float along the water, rich and sweet. Then
with a wild shriek it broke off before Streaker
could recognise a word. It sounded exactly
as if someone had suddenly knifed the singer
in the back, but fortunately the boys were


aware that the same effect could be procured
by lifting the tone-arm roughly from the
disc while in motion. Still it was an un-
pleasant sound to hear —since it indicated
that Stavros had discovered the system of
musical signalling.
Streaker crept two channels closer and after
some searching found a leafy rift through
which House-on-Stilts was visible. But the
door was shut, no inhabitants w'ere in sight,
evidently they were within engaged on the
midday meal. For half an hour the two in
the boat w r atched in vain.
And then with beating hearts they saw
the tiny window open by the merest fraction,
saw a hand creep out and something dive
neatly into the water below. A moment
later it bobbed up again—the neck of a bottle.
Streaker looked swiftly overside.
“ Tide’s turned,” he said. “ It’ll go
straight down the private entrance. If we
nick dow r n by the main channel, we’ll catch
it easily.”
But though they were at the foot of the
private entrance as fast as oars could take
them there was no sign of the bottle.


“ Caught in a snag,” said Streaker, and
grimly stripped off his clothes. The idea of
swimming in that murky water was not a
pleasant one.
He slipped over the side' without making a
ripple.
“ Br-r-r-r! ” he said below his breath.
Clammy things touched his body below the
surface, clutched at it, tangled round his
ankles. He hoped profoundly that they
might be only suckers and weeds, but they
did feel remarkably like dead men’s fingers
and long dead hair.
But he swam on, his head low, his eyes
searching.
He saw it ahead at last as he had expected,
a tangle of debris within uncomfortably short
distance of House-on-Stilts. There was
nothing for it but to do the last few yards
under water.
“ Br-r-r,” he said again, and with one
strong stroke of his feet drove himself below
the grey tide.
Fortunately there were no dead men down
there as he had expected, but there were
spectral crabs, ugly mysterious shapes —with


a gasp of relief he rose by the black snag
and clutched at the precious bottle. House-
on-Stilts was still silent and he decided
hastily that he would rather risk a shot
from its windows than the underworld
again.
A few minutes later he and Podmore having
rowed to a safe distance were hurriedly
examining the bottle.
Inside on the back of a label tom from a
jam tin was a brief note in the Cynic’s black
scrawl.
“Clear out,” it said. “Quick. Take
Jacinth. S. is going to comb out Maze this
afternoon. All four are armed.”
That was all. Not a hint of their own
danger, but on the other hand no word to
say that they were safe, which Streaker felt
sure Paul would have put in if possible for
Jacinth’s sake.
And he, Streaker, was bound by his promise
to desert them all and make for safety.
His heart black within him, he rowed back
to the island. He knew he had a few minutes
to spare and at least he would not let them
force him to abandon his stores.


“ Hop in,” he said again to Podmore,
when the packing was done.
But Podmore made no hopping motion
whatever.
“ Hop in,” said Streaker sharply,
“I’m not coming,” Podmore said
“ Don’t waste time, you little owl.”
Streaker’s temper was short with anxiety.
" I’m not coming. Paul didn’t ask me
to promise—only you and the Cynic. I’m
going to stay here.”
“ Without a boat ? ’
“ Yes.”
For ten minutes Streaker raved, expostu-
lated, argued, pleaded, coerced, abused.
“ In one minute I’ll put you in the boat
by force,” he concluded.
“ I’ll just jump out while you’re rowing
and swim back,” said Podmore. His voice
was quite calm.
'* But why —why —why ? ” said Streaker.
“ You won’t be able to do anything for
them.”
" I might.”
With one despairing glance Streaker began
to unload the tinned meats and the demi-


John again and cast them on to the islet.
Then he held out his hand.
“ Good luck, kid," he said. " I’m proud of
you. And I’d sell my soul to stay too."
Then he was gone. Podmore heard the
faint noise of the muffled oars grow fainter
and cease in the distance. He was alone on
the islet —once more there was silence in
Drowning Maze.
Silence hour after hour. And then the
sound of oar blades came to him again. But
this time they were not muffled —this time
they were not fading into the distance. They
were coming closer —closer —closer.


CHAPTER XXII
TWO PLAIN, TWO PURL
ON the verandah of a boarding-house in
Newport, Jacinth sat very still. Before
her was a green garden stretching
down to the water where white doves cooed
unceasingly and borders bloomed sweet with
English flowers. But Jacinth’s eyes found
the peace and beauty irksome—they strained
beyond the garden across the water to where
a mangrove swamp basked in the sun. If
only her eyes could pierce its leafy depths.
She began to fidget with the cord of a blind.
How extraordinary it all was —she had been
living all that week in the very heart of a
big adventure and yet never could she re-
member a week so full of long, dull waiting
hours. Yesterday on the island, to-day
“ Don’t you sew, dear ? ” said an elderly
woman with a kindly face, noting her restless
hands.


“ I'm afraid I don’t know how,” said
Jacinth.
“ What about knitting, then. Haven’t you
ever knitted yourself a jumper ? ”
“ I’m afraid not,” said Jacinth, and began
to pluck at the blind cord again.
The elderly woman gave her a gentle look
of disapproval.
” My dear,” she said, “ come and sit down
by me and stop fidgeting. If you little
modern girls with your jazzing and your
motor cars and your rushing about would only
sit quietly down to sew occasionally and calm
your nerves you would be pleasanter people
to sit on a verandah with.”
“ Have I been so very bad? ” said Jacinth
startled.
“ Indeed you have,” said the lady cheer-
fully. “ Come along, I’m going to teach
you to knit.”
So for an hour the thoughts of an ex-grand
duchess were forcibly diverted from her
stricken kingdom, her brother's peril, to the
tedious intricacies of plain and purl. Little
wonder that the wool snarled beneath her
awkward fingers.


And then just before six o’clock the gate
latch clicked. It was Streaker come to keep
his promise.
Jacinth’s needles clattered to the ground.
In a second she was at his side.
“ Paul ? ” she said.
Streaker’s grave face answered her in
silence.
“ There is a ’bus back to Sydney in
ten minutes,” he said presently. “ Will
you be ready ? We promised, you know.”
Jacinth turned to the elderly lady.
“ Thank you for the lesson,” she said
quietly. “I’m going to buy needles and
wool as soon as I get back to Sydney. I’m
afraid I am going to need something to keep
me patient rather badly.”
“ Let me give you this,” said the woman,
oddly touched by the girl’s haunted eyes.
The ’bus was crowded. Streaker found a
comfortable place for Jacinth inside, but he
himself was forced to wedge himself with
two others beside the driver. One hand
he kept in his pocket closed round a
little silk powder puff which Jacinth had
given him, inside which lay a little slip


of paper that was half the ransom of a
kingdom.
At the top of the hill he looked back and
guessed that Jacinth did likewise. Pittwater
lay spread out like a lovely map behind them
with a scarlet sunset reflected in the water.
Only Drowning Maze remained black and
cold, giving no hint of what might be happening
in its shadows. And he and Jacinth must
leave its danger and its mystery and go home
to Sydney and safety.
The 'bus swayed on through the evening
and into the early dark and Streaker, who had
slept not at all the night before, felt his senses
blurring—his head fell forward and he slept
sitting up.
The lights of Manly woke him. They had
come to a stop on the gay crowded water-
front and people were hurrying by, light
frocked, bare headed, to picture shows, ice-
cream fountains, pierrot entertainments, and
the bell was ringing for the Sydney boat.
He jumped hastily down to help Jacinth
out.
But when he looked inside, her seat was
empty !


“ Young lady with dark hair,” said a large
woman in answer to his frenzied inquiries,
“ why, she got out way back by Kareel Bay
somewhere ! Gave me her fare and asked
me to give it to the conductor/' The woman
hurried off to her boat.
Kareel Bay—it was more —much more —
than half-way back. As he stood on the
pavement in that light-hearted throng
Streaker felt helpless, lost, bewildered.


CHAPTER XXIII
BACK TO THE MAZE
INSTINCTIVELY his fingers closed over
the formula in his pocket. Thank
Heaven that was still there. He had
given his promise to Paul to deliver Jacinth
and the formula to the Serbian consul im-
mediately. But the formula was here and
Jacinth was —heaven alone knew where
Jacinth was. And there was no one in the
world to whom he could turn for advice.
Suddenly in his perplexity his eyes fell on
the poster of an evening paper.
“ Sir John King," it said “ Famous Explorer
Arrives in Sydney."
Humpty-Dumpty’s father had come to
keep Christmas with his son after all.
Streaker could have thrown his hat straight
into the air. Instead he rushed madly along
the wharf, buying a paper en route, and
scandalised the deckhand by the dangerous
193 N


space which he covered in boarding the
already moving boat.
Sir John he found by studying the paper
was at a hotel. An hour later he was showm
into his room.
A man rose up to meet him. Streaker
had always imagined the great explorer to
be one of those lean, keen, steel and whipcord
men w r ith a glance like a haw T k’s and a skin
burnt by the sun, but the man who came
towards him was small, almost frail, with a
big head, a pale face and eyes as blue and
dreamy as Humpty-Dumpty's.
“ Sit down, won’t you,” he said almost
shyly. At the same time he put out his
hand to the bell push.
Streaker explained briefly that he was
from the Towers, and Sir John’s face lighted
eagerly.
“ You’ll think it an absurd question,” he
said. “ I know that men of your standing,”
he looked at the prefect’s badge on Streaker’s
hat, “ have no call to know even the names
of new boys—but have you by any fortunate
chance an idea where my son is spending his
holidays. Ah, just a moment ”he spoke


to the attendant who had answered his ring
in a low voice.
Briefly Streaker described it all —the manner
of the expedition’s setting out from Towers,
the meeting with Jacinth and Paul.
“ Have you heard of a place called Cadalia,
sir ? ” he said.
“ Cadalia ! ” said Sir John. “ I should
say so. Most interesting and unfortunate
country. It’s on the verge of starvation
because a valuable document was stolen
during a revolution. The revolutionary
government offered me the job of recovering
it and I’ve been leading an expedition round
the Balkans in search of it for six weeks
without finding a single clue.”
Streaker drew a silken powder puff from
his pocket.
“ In the meantime your son’s expedition
found half the document,” he said.
Sir John leaned forward sharply, examined
it slowly, thoughtfully :
At that minute the attendant returned
with a steaming dinner on a tray which he
set down before Streaker.
“ I noticed you hadn't eaten for at least a


whole day,” said Sir John in response to
Streaker’s questioning gaze. “ I know the
signs. No, no protests —eat it up. Amateurs
in these affairs always think it unprofessional
to be over anxious about their meals —whereas
professionals consider that the man wdio misses
few r est meals is the one who’ll win the cam-
paign.”
So between mouthfuls Streaker told the
rest —making a plan of the Maze in mashed
potato with peas to represent House-
on-Stilts and the island and a map of Pitt-
water with apple pie shores and a custard
sea.
Sir John said very little. Only wdiile
Streaker was concluding his story he lifted
the table telephone from its hook. Streaker
noticed that he gave the number without a
reference to the book.
“ I carry a list of telephone numbers of a
reliable garage in forty cities throughout the
world,” he said smiling in answer to Streaker’s
unspoken comment. “ The minute or so
saved in that way has been of value to me
several times. It saved my life once. Ah,
is that Jenk’s garage ? ”


He gave his order for a car —at once —
long distance.
“ But first we will put this —he held up the
pink powder puff—in the Safe Deposit/'
So once again that night Streaker travelled
the moonlit road to Newport. But now all
was changed—the little man who sat by
his side had in spite of his frailty, in spite of
his dreaminess, managed in some curious way
to transmit an electric current of energy to
Streaker’s tired body, an electric current of
hope to his anxious mind.
“ Show me where the Grand-Duchess
Jacinth got out,” said Sir John.
“ From what the woman said it must have
been here,” said Streaker as the tiny cluster
of Kareel Bay lights appeared ahead.
Sir John stared in perplexity into the
darkness and loneliness of Priest’s Flat.
“No inducement there,” he said. “ She
must have gone back to Newport.”
The car shot forward again. And then at
last they were dropping down the last hill
into Newport.
To their surprise though it was nearly
midnight Newport was still awake. Knots


of people had gathered round the little post
office, down by the wharf numberless lanterns
flitted to and fro, every yacht and launch
showed lighted portholes.
“ What’s happening,” said Streaker as the
car pulled up to one of the idlers, his mind
immediately connecting the activity with the
happenings in the Maze.
“ Regatta to-morrow. Lot o’ sailing men
just come dow r n by the last ’bus from towm.”
Streaker sighed with relief. He had feared
—he did not know what he had feared.
“To the boarding-house,” he told the
driver and added to Sir John : “ She just
might be there.”
But she w r as not —no one had seen her at
all, so they paid off the car and walked down to
the boatsheds and the little pier.
Here all was excitement; dinghies putting
off laden with stores, a banjo thrumming,
calls across the water from craft to craft.
Amidst it all Streaker hurried from boat-
shed to boatshed with growing impatience.
Nowffiere could he hire a pulling boat—every-
thing was engaged hours since.
At last, just as he gave up hope, he caught


sight of a familiar figure sculling easily
through the throng.
“ Ooh-ah-ee ! Ooh-ah-ee !” he yelled, and
to his joy Kelvin Carfrae heard—paused—
swung round and came back.
“ Cheero,” he said, and made room for
them both.
Out from the lights and the laughter they
pulled, out into the glassy stillness beyond.
Kelvin was very happy. Already in
imagination he could see the Purple Slipper
shoot across the water like an arrow from a
bow, winning him his heart’s desire. He
began to sing the tune the distant banjo was
playing.
Streaker’s hand shot across his mouth. In
a few terse words Sir John outlined the story,
after which Kelvin rowed on, effectually
sobered.
As they neared the entrance Streaker spoke.
“ Shall we muffle the row-locks again, sir,”
he asked.
Sir John nodded. Then he opened a little
suitcase and dealt out three automatics.
“ I know Stavros by reputation,” he said.
“ Row to the island first. I don’t like to


think of that plucky child Podmore being
left alone any longer."
Fortunately Kelvin was familiar enough
with the Maze to navigate it easily, even
in the dark. Without a single false turn
he found the island —ran the boat into the
soft ooze of its shore.
“ Podmore," whispered Streaker.
There w T as no answer. “ Asleep, I expect,"
said Sir John.
Streaker began to walk cautiously round
the tiny space feeling—they had no torch—
for the boy’s sleeping body. For quite five
minutes he groped before he admitted the
truth. Podmore was not there.
" House-on-Stilts,” ordered Sir John
sharply. We’ll have to rush them—it’s our
only chance." Again Kelvin worked miracles
of blindfold pilotry until they came into the
channel of the tree house which, as they had
expected, was dark and still and sleeping.
“ Sure to be a sentry somewhere,” whispered
Sir John. “Be ready with your guns, but
not too quick—you don’t want to hit one
of our lads in the confusion."
Cautiously Kelvin pulled the cord that


dropped the ladder. It fell with a discon-
certing splash, but though they held their
breath in trepidation no sound of alarm
came from above.
“ I’ll go first,” said Sir John. “ Follow me
quickly on to the balcony one by one. Then
we’ll rush the door together.”
The boat rocked a second as his weight
left it —the ladder swayed, then was still.
Streaker swarmed after him.
A minute later Kelvin joined them on the
balcony.
“ When I say ‘ go/ shout,” said Sir John.
“ Shout loudly, fire a couple of shots into
the air and rush ! ”
He listened another second.
“Are you ready— go /”
There was a volley of shots and shouts,
a rattle of charging feet, the crashing of a
splintered door that fell before them.
Then Sir John’s voice rose calm and cool
above the tumult.
“ Put up your guns, gentlemen. There is
no one here.”
It was true. For the second time that
night they were too late.


When Kelvin at last found a match and
with it lit the lamp fixed in the wall, they
saw that not only was Stavros not there nor
his assistants nor his prisoners, his working
plans nor his formula, but even Kelvin’s
stores and blankets had been removed. Only,
forgotten on its bracket, a little arched satin
slipper poised delicate and disdainful as before.
“ I feared as much,” said Sir John. “ I
was afraid from the moment we came within
fifty yards of the place. It was all too easy—
far too easy. Stavros isn’t the sort of person
to allow his fastness to be stormed with quite
such ease as all that.”
He began to walk round the room scrutinis-
ing every inch for some trace or message.
“ Back to Newport,” he said at last, “ and
w T e’ll ring up the police.”
Down in the boat again Kelvin spoke
apologetically.
“ It seems rotten to think about a race
in the circumstances,” he said, “ but to-
morrow is more than a race to me. Do you
mind if I have a look at my boat —it’s only
a minute or tw T o from here.”
On through the darkness they rowed again


until they felt the leaves of the young thicket
brush again beneath their keel and push
upon either side the boat.
Kelvin put out a hand.
“ She’s moored to this,” he said running
his fingers down a mangrove trunk. “ Ah —
here’s the hitch.”
But the clove hitch had trailing ends.
Someone had cut the painter —like all the
rest they had come to seek, the Purple Slipper
was not there. Like all the rest it had
vanished out of Drowning Maze into un-
charted night.


CHAPTER XXIV
REGATTA !
SUN and wind and fluttering flags ! Flags
everywhere splashing the burning blue
of Pittwater with red and white and
yellow. Happy little eighteen-footers shook
out their racing suits, launches rode out with
gramophones lilting on the deck, and beyond
them in almost unearthly beauty the tall
yachts swayed down to the racing line.
Bona, Magic, Eunamara —some of the loveliest
yachts on Sydney Harbour were circling there
off little Newport.
Everywhere was babble, laughter, excite-
ment. Only on a grassy point a young man
and a boy sat with haggard faces and eyes
that ached for want of sleep. One was Kelvin
Carfrae, noted on the regatta stewards’ list as
owner of the Purple Slipper entered for the
dyne’s All-Comers’ Speed Boat Race. The
other was Streaker.


“My dear boy, you’re done in. Go to bed,”
Sir John had said with kindly impatience,
when at 3 in the morning they had landed
again in Newport after their fruitless visit
to the Maze. “I’m going to turn out the
whole police force to scour the countryside
and you are so sleepy you’ll only get under
their feet. Vanish —run away—go to bed.
I’ll wake you if I want you.”
He had dived into the little public telephone
box and shut the door in Streaker’s face.
“ T-t-t,” he had said when half an hour
later he emerged to find Streaker still sitting
on a bank and had marched straight across
the street into the hotel which, this being
Regatta Eve, was still awake.
Here he had booked a room and run Streaker
up the stairs with a hand on his shoulder.
“Do you want me to have to tuck you in,
laddie ? ” he said.
A strange man was Humpty-Dumpty’s
father, Streaker reflected as he obediently
got between the sheets. Did he always find
time in trying circumstances as now when his
son and the ransom of a kingdom were in
jeopard} 7 to put his staff to bed.


Then at last, in spite of his anxieties, being
utterly worn out, Streaker had fallen asleep.
But now it was morning. He had woken
to find a note on his dressing table. “You
can’t help—stay in bed —amuse yourself—
go to the pictures—only don’t worry,’’ and
dressing hastily had discovered that Sir John
had vanished out of Newport without leaving
a trace behind him. Only Kelvin Carfrae, with
the dazed expression of a man who had been
hit between the eyes, was down at the little
pier watching all the speed boats of New South
Wales —and five from other States —gather
for the fray. Only the Purple Slipper of
Drowning Maze w'as missing from the roll-
call.
“ I’ve been everywhere,’’ he said in response
to Streaker’s questions. “No one saw her
or heard her —and she makes a fair noise
you know —no one saw your foreign friends —
no one saw the girl. Or the small boy. It’s
as if the Maze had sw r allowed them all."
“ Don’t ! ” Streaker spoke sharply.
Those lead-grey waters, that insidious ooze.
He had a horrible picture of that under-
world where he had dived —were there perhaps


other shapes down there drowned and still
this bright blue morning ?
“ I don’t know how anyone could have
found the Slipper ,” said Kelvin; “she was
absolutely invisible in those thick leaves.”
He stared unseeingly at a great white yacht.
“ Anyway that’s the end. My whole life
was staked on that race.”
“ Bosh ! ” said Streaker. “ You’re only
twenty-four. You can build another boat —
the Clyne’s position will be gone, but you
can get another one.”
“No.” Kelvin’s voice was perfectly calm,
but it had a note of finality. “ I can’t go on.
If I had won that race I should have won ”
he hesitated, then said the name quietly and
clearly—“ Marjorie, and I could have faced
life and work again. But without her I
can’t —the War —it sounds weak to say it,
but it’s true —took too much. I crashed twice
you know.”
“ Perhaps,” said Streaker diffidently “ she
won’t mind even if you don’t win the race.”
Kelvin took a handful of small change from
his pocket. “ One —two —two and fourpence
—two and ninepence halfpenny. And a


baronial residence known as House-on-Stilts.
Those are my total assets in the world. I
put every last penny into building the boat.
Would you have me ask her to come and
live in Drowning Maze."
" Perhaps," suggested Streaker still more
diffidently, “ her father might "
" I couldn’t," Kelvin spoke quickly. "Not
from him. He said —oh, various things. I
may be weak, but there are some things one
cannot and does not do."
Unseeingly they watched a sculling race
fight past. If five days before anyone had told
Streaker that four good crews would pass him
with only half a length between them and he
would not turn his head to see the finish, he
would have been incredulous. Yet so it was.
" Let’s get out of this," said Kelvin at last,
and they turned away from the pier.
Up in the little square before the post
office the mail motor ’bus was just arriving.
They saw the scanty little mail bag carried
into the tiny office.
" I’m going to ring up the police station
at Narrabeen," said Streaker. " Wait until
I get change." He w r ent up the steps.


When he came with his coppers he tossed
a small parcel to Kelvin. “ Came by this
post,” he said.
” They’ve put two constables on the trail,”
he reported after his telephone conversation,
but they can’t spare any more. The others
have all been called up to deal with the
New Year holiday traffic.”
Kelvin glanced round the deserted square.
“ Look,” he said and unwrapped the paper
round the parcel. It was a little slipper of
purple silk —twin of the one in the House-
on-Stilts. And pinned to it a slip of note-
paper that carried the faint fragrance of
violets were written two words.
" Good luck ! ”
“ Fate has really a very fine sense of the
ironic,” said Kelvin, and tried to smile. But
as he turned his head away Streaker saw
that his mouth was oddly twisted.
Again they wandered aimlessly down to their
grassy point and for two long hours they sat
in silence while with white sails and flags and
shouting and cheering the Regatta ran its
course.
Race after race slipped by them —finish


after finish was fought out beneath their eyes
twice a capsize enlivened proceedings —gay
parties of spectators picnicked around them
with laughter and sandwiches and lemonade —
over on one of the big launches men and girls
were jazzing and singing.
Streaker glanced at a programme that had
come into his hands, he did not quite know
how.
“ How about another stroll," he suggested
casually. He had just discovered that the
speed boat race was the next on the programme
and he wanted to save Kelvin the pain of
seeing it.
Kelvin shook his head. “ I’d rather stay,"
he said.
The signal flags were being run up in the
starter’s boat and the speed boats were
darting to the line in answer to the summons
like beautiful swift dragon flies.
Kelvin named them as they came —every
famous boat in the Commonwealth was hover-
ing there, skimming, dancing, circling behind
the line.
There were the long preliminaries of the
start —then a puff of smoke on the water —


the sound of the pistol—the roar of the
engines. Like live things the boats literally-
hurled themselves forward.
For a minute Kelvin shut his eyes—the
pain of the sight seemed to have seared his
eyeballs. How often in dreams had he
planned that scene —the line of leaping hulls
-the spray
He opened his eyes suddenly. Streaker’s
fingers were biting into his arm. Streaker was
stammering incoherent things in his ear.
“ Look —on the pier—Kelvin you idiot, open
your eyes —on the pier—look on the pier, I
tell you.”
Kelvin looked. Down the steep slope
behind the pier a motor lorry was driving
at some considerable risk —was stopping—
was being surrounded by a crowd of people.
Men were unloading her —quite a number
of men. They were carrying her cargo
shoulder-high down the wharf —they were
lowering it into the water —something long and
slender —something that when the sun caught
its polished surface seemed to be dressed with
purple paint.
For a moment she rocked gently beneath


the pier—then the incredulous watchers
on the point saw a dark figure jump
lightly in.
Next instant like a shuttle shot across a loom
the Purple Slipper shot across the surface of
the water !


CHAPTER XXV
INSIDE AN ENVELOPE
LIKE an ever-lengthening white arrow
tipped with a purple barb the Purple
Slipper’s wake streaked itself across
the water. Inch by inch her shining hull
lifted bare and dripping from the surface
until it almost seemed that the boat had
left the water altogether and was skimming
above it in a smoking haze of spray. She
passed Kelvin and Streaker on their point
before either of them had time to recover
from their stupefaction and take a step closer
to the water’s edge. All they could see was
the oil-skinned figure crouched low behind
the spray screen tending the engine and the
wheel.
“ The Slipper Kelvin said dully. His
dazed mind did not seem to realise the situa-
tion in the least degree.
The rest of the race was already fading


in smudges of spray behind a distant point
Only their long widening wakes remained
causing the Purple Slipper to skip and skew
in an ugly dangerous fashion that made
Streaker hold his breath.
“ She’ll break her back ! ” he said, w T ell
knowing the frailty of such hulls.
“No she won’t.” Kelvin was stung out
of lethargy at last. “ She’s tough—l believe
she’d stand a light sea outside the Heads.”
Little did he guess how well she had been
tested.
The low hulls had quite vanished now —
only the Purple Slipper was visible —held
doggedly down on their trail. Then she
too disappeared leaving them to look at each
other.
“ Who ? ” said Kelvin weakly.
“ Where —how ? ” said Streaker and
broke off helplessly.
They began to pace up and down the little
point in a frenzy of impatience. Kelvin was
muttering to himself in a way that caused
Streaker to put a hand on his shoulder to
steady him —only to find that his own was
also shaking violently. So they walked


together in silence while the minutes dragged
away.
“ They turn this side of Lion Island,” said
Kelvin.
“ Look,” said Streaker.
There were smudges of spray in the distance
again—smudges that turned gradually into the
dark lines of clean, lifted, bows.
“ That’s the Possum ,” said Kelvin, as the
first grew recognisable.
“ Lady Gay,” he said presently, “ and
Silver Heels.”
“ Pinafore,” he said after a longer pause.
” Hazard —Sea Snake — Halcyon.”
Streaker held his breath. Would the right
name never come.
“ White Witch.”
There was a long, long pause.
“ Purple Slipper.”
The Purple Slipper was still running last,
but —was it fancy or was the distance de-
creasing ?
Kelvin moved forward suddenly—sharply.
It was not fancy—the Purple Slipper was
overhauling the White Witch, was level with
her, has passed her, was whittling down the


long space between the W hit e/JV itch and the
three next boats who almost
abeam.
Right off their green7point she came up
behind them.
“ Pull out,” Kelvin’s voice was almost a
scream as he shouted to the unknown steers-
man at the helm of his boat. “ Pull out —
oh, pull out, pull out.”
In answer the oilskinned figure swept a
sleeve down the spray screen, peered through
and held straight on —straight into the
maelstrom where the three waters converged
in a havoc of broken water.
For a minute she tossed madly—then rolled
in a sick fashion until Kelvin shut his eyes so
that he would not see her roll herself under.
When he opened them again the Purple
Slipper was sliding smoothly along the surface,
while in her not inconsiderable wake Hazard,
Sea Snake and Halcyon splashed uncom-
fortably.
“ Whoever it is has got more faith in my
building powers than I have,” said Kelvin.
“ I never dreamed she’d stand that.” Then
his brows knit in a puzzled fashion : “ He’s


got more nerve than knowledge of steering,’
he said. The race was turning on the third
lap and there was no doubt that the Purple
Slipper had bungled the turn abominably.
Sea Snake, far more skilfully handled, over-
took her again. Together they shot forward
after the distant Pinafore —bow beside bow
they vanished round the far point.
Kelvin was very still now—still and white,
but he forced a smile.
“I’d give my entire fortune of two and
ninepence for enough chloroform to last me
until they come in sight again,’’ he said.
But when at last they saw the spray he
turned his head away.
“ I can’t look,” he whispered.
“ Possum ,” said Streaker.
“ Silver Heels — Lady Gay must have broken
down.
“ Purple Slipper ,” he shouted. “ Ooh-ah-
ee, ooh-ah-ee. Slipper, Slipper, Slipper ! ”
There was a choking sound from Kelvin.
He had turned his head just in time to see his
slender purple hull slide by Silver Heels.
The noise of their engines was like pistol
shots.


Kelvin was murmuring to himself again.
Streaker heard just one word repeated over
and over : “ Marjorie—Marjorie—Marjorie."
Suddenly he grabbed hold of Kelvin’s arm.
“ Run," he said. " Pull yourself together
and run. It’s the Slipper's race —Possum
hasn’t a hope. You’ve got to be on the
pier."
Together they ran blindly, panting for
breath that excitement had stolen from them.
Together they broke into the village street
and rushed down the slope to the pier just in
time to see the Purple Slipper, having com-
pleted formalities with the judges’ boat where
her number was hoisted, come alongside.
“ He cant steer,” panted Kelvin as they
pushed their way through the crowd. Indeed
the unknown helmsman had just scraped
several feet of purple enamel off on one of
the piles.
There was a sudden stir all round them,
a stir of astonishment —then the crowd opened
to let the helmsman through.
But it was not a helmsman —it was a helms-
girl. In sou’wester and oilskins, cheeks
scarlet with excitement, spray still glistening


wet all over her, she ca me through the curious
onlookers toward them.
“ Marjorie ! ” said Kelvin.
An hour later Streaker, Kelvin and Marjorie
Deane sat at afternoon tea on the hotel
balcony, the latter with a perfect storm of
questions raging round her head.
" I’m so very sorry/' she said —the anxiety
in Streaker’s eyes was so acute. “ I’m afraid
I don’t know anything. Not anything of
your friends at all nor how the Purple Slipper
got to Sydney—not anything. I only know
that when I was asleep about six o’clock this
morning there came a most tremendous ring
at the doorbell, oh such a clatter and when
the housemaid went down she found a rather
grubby little boy sitting on the doorstep fast
asleep. When she opened the door of course
he fell backwards and woke up and gave
her this ” she fumbled in her handbag
and produced tangled up with a powder-
puff and a lace handkerchief, a soiled little
note.
“To the lady who wears purpel shoes ”
was the address on the outside. Inside :


“ Come downstairs quick,” it said in Pod-
more’s unformed writing.
“ Neither Podraore nor the Cynic could
resist being dramatic if the heavens fell,”
said Streaker smiling for the first time for
two days.
" The housemaid was just going to hand it
back thinking it a joke when she remembered
I often wore mauve and purple frocks and
brought it up. And —and I knew it was the
day of the race and I knew what Kelvin’s
boat was called so I began to get dressed.
But half-way through I heard the dinner gong
which stands in the hall begin to ring most
violently and I hurried down to get there
before my family should arrive on the scene.
The little boy was standing there with the
gong stick in his hand and his eyes nearly
falling out of his head, he was so sleepy. All
I could get out of him w*as, ‘ Down at the
boatshed at the Spit —Purple Slipper —be
quick —new exhaust lead —told them to put
it in—make sure they have —be quick—race
starts at twelve.’ Then he just dropped
on to the hall divan and rolled over and
went to sleep.”


“ And what did you do ? ” inquired Kelvin,
and there was a light in his eyes where the
misery had lurked of old.
" Me —I didn’t know what to do. I tried
to wake the child though it went to my heart
to disturb him, but I couldn’t get anything
out of him except to be quick. So I
was buick ; I tore out to the garage and
stole father’s two-seater and drove —
drove fast. I saw one policeman at least
memorising my number plate—fortunately
it was too early for there to be many
about.”
“ And then ? ” said Kelvin.
“ Then I got to the Spit and tore into the
first boatshed I saw and there was the Purple
Slipper, up on a slip with everyone in the
district standing round staring at the exhaust
lead —it was barely hanging together and no
one was doing a stroke to it. And then I’m
afraid I rather lost my temper ; I whirled
round on the man and asked why he hadn't
done what he was ordered to. He just
grinned and said: ‘ Well, miss, when a
nipper brings a boat in and orders expensive
repairs and offers you ninepence in payment


yon don’t exactly rush the job.’ Well,
fortunately, I had remembered to bring some
money and I simply hurled ten pounds at his
head. Then he began to make difficulties —
said he hadn’t got a lead and couldn’t get one
for a couple of days. And then —and
then I'm afraid I just broke down. I
was still shaky from driving so fast —and
wept.”
“ Marjorie ! ” Kelvin’s tone was such that
for an anxious second Streaker feared that,
forgetful of the surrounding tea-drinkers, he
would precipitate himself round the table to
comfort her.
But Marjorie continued quite calmly.
“It was quite all right. I really didn’t
do it on purpose, but as a matter of fact
it was quite the best thing I could have
done. They all changed at once and they
were so nice and willing to help, but still
they couldn’t think of anything to do. And
then —I don’t know quite how it happened,
but I somehow told them almost everything —
about the race and Clyne’s prize and you
building it all alone down in the swamp and
they were returned men too, and before I


knew what was happening they were pull-
ing the lead out of their own launch
and working like mad while I held my
watch and gave them the time every five
minutes.”
" But how on earth did you get her from
there to here ? ” queried Kelvin.
“ That was a problem,” admitted Marjorie.
“ Until then I had thought I could get a
man to run her up the coast, but they said
the sea was far too heavy. Then I thought
if I rang up for a big car I could carry her
lashed on. But I saw she was much too big,
and I was nearly weeping again, until a big
lorry of bricks came past. So I ran out and
offered the man anything he liked to tip
the bricks out and carry the Slipper. Naturally
he hesitated a bit, but then the other men
came out and told him the whole story, with
a few picturesque additions of their own, and
before I knew what had happened the bricks
were tumbling into the road and they had
shipped the Slipper and I was up on the top
of the lorry racing and rocking along the
road like a tank going into battle. And those
men —you don’t know what dears they were


—not one of them would take a penny.
They just stood out in the middle of the
road and took their hats off and gave three
cheers for the Purple Slipper, and one of
them threw a horseshoe for luck. So then ”
She broke off suddenly.
Sir John King was making his way through
the tea-tables towards them, a letter in his
hand. He bowed courteously to Marjorie,
then turned to Streaker,
“ This has just come for you by the after"
noon mail,” he said.
Streaker tore it open.
“If Mr. Streaker Brooke brings both
halves of the formula to the fifth mile-
post on the Newport road at twelve to-
night the three prisoners will be set free
to-morrow. If any attempt is made to
arrest or otherwise to tamper with my
messenger the prisoners will not be liberated
and reprisals will be instituted.
Stavros.
Signatures of prisoners added as token
of good faith.
* Carthew, King, Paul R.’ ’


|W <», C" v ' '
-*mm f *m
_ -«•* -•"': jfc?
'W* 0 * ' - y ., J. ** '" «’
*** ->. -*»j
''< '-*»««>*■ .. ■ '* ::«» ■
, . . .--.!■ --J
“ He had turned his head just in time to see his slender
purple hull slide by Silver Heels.”
Dtowmng JST aze] [Chapter XXV




“Both halves,” said Streaker. “What
does he mean ? We’ve only got one. He’s
got the other himself ! ”
“I can only deduce,” said Sir John,
“ that he has in some way lost it and
somewhat unreasonably suspects you
of the theft.” He spoke absently,
being engaged in holding the paper to
the light, intently scrutinising every
inch.
“I am disappointed in my son,” he said
at last. Those three boys must have
had the paper in their hands for several
seconds while they signed, yet there is
not a single scratch of the pen to give
us a clue to where they are. It
would have needed skill, of course, to
do it without attracting attention, but
it could have been done with care and
—a-ah ! ”
With a look of satisfaction he extracted
from the bottom corner of the envelope a
morsel of brown pulp.
“ This conveys nothing to me, of course,”
he said, but Ive no doubt that the boys
knew it would speak volumes to you. It


is, I should say, a fragment of a flower petal
that was, when gathered, probably pink or
white. There are various blooms such as
camelias, which turn brown when bruised.
Now what association have you with pink
petals ? ”


CHAPTER XXVI
THE SIEGE OF TWISTED CHIMNEYS
IN a bare upstairs room of the House with
the Twisted Chimneys—the same house
where the boys had made their first
camp and met with Lady Macbeth —the
Cynic, Paul, and Humpty-Dumpty, having
no chairs, sat on the floor.
Outside in the passage one of the thre e
German chemists who formed Stavros's staff
smoked in an armchair, down on the lawn
beneath the open window another of them,
the ugly bulge of an automatic beneath his
coat, whistled fragments of Wagnerian grand
opera. Somewhere about the house the boys
knew Stavros and the third chemist, also
equipped with automatics, awaited confidently
the answer to their letter touching the matter
of ransom.
The Cynic was reciting the “ Prisoner of
Chillon ” as being the most appropriate piece


in his repertoire for the occasion. Humpty-
Dumpty, his face pressed against the window,
was meditating dreamily on the pleasure it
would afford him if he had a jug of water to
empty on the head of the unsuspecting
chemist on the grass. Only Paul seemed to
feel the strain of the situation, and paced
the room at intervals with a quick, uneven
step.
“ I am so afraid,” he said for the twentieth
time, “so afraid that your friend Streaker
might think it his duty to rescue us and
might hand over the formula as ransom. As
if the formula were not worth the lives of
three hundred instead of merely three boys
like us.”
“ Quite so,” said the Cynic dryly. He was
perfectly willing to forfeit his life in the
service of that distant and unknown country
Cadalia, but Paul could hardly expect him
to be rhetorical about it. As for Humpty-
Dumpty, nothing seemed to disturb his new-
found happiness. Was not the adventure
working out in an almost miraculous fashion
in the very spots where the feeling had come
on him most strongly ? Was he not in the


very thick of events such as he had dreamed
of so many months in his sick-room ?
“ I wonder,” he remarked, “if Streaker
will remember where he saw camelia petals
last. Probably not; he wasn’t there when
I buried that skull and put petals in the
grave, and I don’t expect he went botanising
round the garden. Still, when the wind
blew all those petals up through the window
it did look like a direct suggestion to try it.”
“ With spiders I have friendship made,’’
murmured the Cynic. " Have seen the mice
by moonlight play. You know, Humpty-
Dumpty, it’s all absurd. People don’t get
imprisoned in lonely granges by bold bad
villains of the theatrical name of Stavros in
the twentieth century. The unromantic police
force and electric trains have killed all that
sort of thing. I’m expecting every minute
to discover that the last ten days haven’t
been real at all and we’ve merely been
reading one of the yams on the back page of
Comic Cuts."
“ Try to walk out that door,” said Humpty-
Dumpty, “ and you’ll discover it’s real
enough.” He watched with interest while


the Cynic rattled the handle of the locked
door in vain. A thundering guttural “ Nein ”
from outside came to convince him that the
imprisonment was real enough.
Humpty-Dumpty returned to his window-
gazing. There w’as something haunting and
sad about that ancient garden that appealed
to his sense of the picturesque. Presently he
called the others to come and look also.
“ I thought I saw something move,” he
said. “There behind that shrub. Might
have been a cat. No, not the big shrub
this one.”
But the Cynic’s eyes were riveted on the
big shrub, and following his intent gaze, they
too saw something beneath the green leaves,
something that looked like a boot, a man s
black boot. And as they watched it moved
slightly as if it had a foot therein.
The boys felt their breath come quicker,
and at the same moment round Humpty-
Dumpty’s shrub came a hand, a large hand
that a moment later was stealthily withdrawn.
Then for five long minutes nothmg hap-
pened. Only the nor’-easter keened in the
ragged firs and set the grass shivering on the


overgrown flower-beds. Only the tall stem
of the seven-year agave swayed like the mast
of a derelict ship.
Presently they noticed that the chemist
on the lawn was growing uneasy, as if he
felt the scrutiny of the unseen eyes. He
looked sharply about him once or twice, and
his whistled rendering of “ Die Meistersinger ”
grew uncertain. But apparently the foot
and hand visible to the boys from their
upper window were invisible to him,
and after a minute or two he seemed re-
assured.
“ What did you say about the unromantic
police force ? ” whispered Humpty-Dumpty
suddenly, and following his gaze the boys
saw, standing so straight and still among the
dark firs that he looked like a tree himself,
a dark uniformed constable.
At the same moment they saw the chemist
on the lawn start violently. Evidently he
had seen or heard something he considered
suspicious. Next second he recovered himself,
and with a nonchalance the boys could not
help admiring began to stroll, still whistling,
towards the big front door.


But as he passed the great camelia bush
there was a stir in the leaves, a shout from
the boys above at the window.
“ Well played, oh, well played, School! ”
Clean and low and hard, Streaker —the boys
could recognise his blazer —had hurled himself
in a flying football tackle at the man’s knees.
For a moment they rolled together in the
gravel path ; then the man regained his feet
just as the door was opened from within. He
staggered through the heavy oak door that
Podmore had so admired, slammed violently
to with a scream of bolts. The Siege of
Twisted Chimneys had begun.
“ Listen,” said Paul. There was a crash
outside the door of their prison room that
indicated that their sentry had knocked over
his chair; they heard the clatter of his
running feet in the passage. Then more
feet. The whole house seemed full of con-
fused noises.
When they turned back to the window again
strange things were happening in the garden.
The tall clump of red-hot blossoms flowered
forth into a policeman ; the other policeman
in the flr grove ceased to be a tree and sprang


forward; Kelvin Carfrae appeared appar-
ently from the depths of the well and out of
a rose bush materialised a small, frail man
with a large head who looked up to the
prisoner’s window and smiled and waved
his hand.
“ Father ! ” breathed Humpty-Dumpty.
Suddenly the attacking force dived back
into their rose bushes and fir groves. From
the window of the room on the left side of
the prisoners a shot had whistled within a
fraction of an inch of Sir John’s head.
" Stavros ! ” said Paul. “He is what you
call a crack shot! ”
The room on the right side of them had
opened fire now. The boys saw that both
windows were firing methodically to prevent
any of the attackers working round the sides
of the house to take it in the rear. Whenever
the bushes revealed the faintest sign of
life a bullet bit the dust but an inch short
of them.
“ Strange ! ” said Paul after a few minutes
of this. ‘T never knew Stavros to miss before !
He was famous as a marksman throughout
Cadalia ! ”


The clatter of feet outside their door sounded
louder, died away, was repeated, confused
with the echoes of the bare boards.
The Cynic began to listen intently.
“ How many men do you think there are
in each room ? ” he said presently.
“ I don’t hear anyone moving downstairs,”
said Humpty-Dumpty, “ so there are probably
two in each.”
“ Wrong,” said the Cynic. “ There’s only
one man between the two rooms. He’s
running up and dow T n the passage firing from
each window alternately.”
” Precisely,” said a calm voice from the
doorway. “ And now may I save your friends
the trouble of liberating you ? ”
It was Stavros. Cool, graceful (he was not
more than twenty-six), insolent, he smiled
at them a minute framed in the door space.
Then he turned and sauntered into the next
room.
When the boys sprang after him they found
him sitting on a broken chair indolently
lighting a cigarette. Beside him on the floor
lay an automatic and a fitter of spent
cartridges.


“ Empty,” he said, tossing away the
match as the Cynic bent hastily to pick
up the gun. “ Otherwise I should have
been able to give my friends a longer
start.”
“ Why didn’t you go too ? ” said Humpty-
Dumpty.
“I ? Oh, someone had to stay, I was
the best shot; also the poor German devils
had wives and children. And besides ”
he smiled maliciously at Paul —” we of Cadalia
do not consider it altogether dignified to
retire by the back door when the enemy is
at the front.”
For a minute it seemed that Paul would
hurl himself at Stavros’s throat. The memory
of that day of revolution when for the
sake of Jacinth he had thus escaped
from the palace was the bitterest thought
he had. But before he could move came
the sound of breaking glass below and
the trample of feet on the stairs, and
next minute the attacking force broke into
the room !
“ The others —garden goes down to the
water at back —got away in a boat,” panted


one of the constables, and seized Stavros
roughly by the arm.
Stavros freed himself, disdainfully brushed
the sleeve of his coat where the constable’s
hand had rested, and bowed to Sir John.
“ I am delighted to meet you, sir,” he said
gravely. “If things had been otherwise I
should have wished to serve under you in
one of your ventures ! ”
Sir John looked at him keenly. There was
no tremble in the slim brown hand that held
the cigarette, no regret in the clear eyes that
he had not sought safety in the boat with
the Germans.
" Indeed,” said Sir John, ” if you had not
been a traitor you might possibly have been
a gentleman after my own heart.”
Stavros’s only answer w r as a delicate shrug
of the shoulders. Then he turned to the
constables.
“ At your service, officers,” he said, and
walked out of the room between them. But
at the door he turned a minute.
“ My duty and obeisance to the Grand-
Duchess Jacinth,” he said to Paul, and w T as
gone.


Paul turned quickly to Streaker.
“ Where is Jacinth ? " he said. “ You
took her to the Servian consul, of course ? ”
But no one answered him ; everyone's face
was very grave.


CHAPTER XXVII
IN WHICH EVERYBODY TALKS AT ONCE
IT was just at that moment that two more
people walked up the echoing stairs and
came in to the grave little meeting. They
were Marjorie and Podmore.
" How on earth ? ” began everyone
at once.
Marjorie smiled at Kelvin.
“ Well, did you expect me to stay peace-
fully at the hotel after you had all sailed
away in the car armed to the teeth ? ” she
said. “ I gave you a good start because I
knew you’d make a fuss about letting me
come too ; then I hired a car and came
after you. And I picked up the infant on
the way ; he was coming to Newport to find
you all.”
“ But, Jacinth,” said Paul. “We must
go at once —at once. She may be in danger.”
Podmore, who was diving about the floor


for the spent cartridges as souvenirs, looked
up.
" Jacinth’s all right,” he said casually.
“ Where ? ” The word burst from everyone
in the room.
“ Hole-in-the-Wall.”
“ Why how what for? What’s she
doing ? ”
" I dunno what she’s doing now ; she was
knitting last time I was there.”
“ Quickly,” said Sir John. “ We’ll drive
there at once. We can talk as we go.”
Twenty minutes later —never had Streaker
driven so fast —they were scrambling down
the staircase in the funnel of the cliff, hurrying
along the rocks where now that the storm
had died the sea scarcely broke, climbing up
to the circular entrance.
A strange sight met their eyes. In the
soft brown light of the interior a girl was
sitting throned on a rock, a girl whose head
and throat and arms and dress were
alight and ablaze with jewels. More jewels
strewed the ground at her feet as if the
Hole-in-the-Wall were Ali Baba’s cave.
Strangest sight of all, the girl's crowned


head was bent down over a piece of tangled
knitting.
For a minute she did not hear their foot-
steps in the soft shale. Then she looked up
and saw them outlined against the sky in
the cavern entrance. She sprang up, the
liquid fire of the diamonds rippling about her.
And then they all seemed to be sitting in a
circle on the floor, and everyone was talking
and explaining at once.
“ Order, order," said Sir John at last.
" Start from the beginning, when you first
got separated."
“ That was when I went up the ladder into
House-on-Stilts," said Humpty-Dumpty,
" and found, instead of Kelvin, four men
lying asleep on the floor. The first one who
woke up said * Ach, Gott,’ which is about
all the German I know, so I guessed who
they were straightaway. They were all
quite affable to me, because they took it for
granted that I was the owner of House-on-
Stilts ; in fact, they offered to pay me a
rent for it. Apparently they had just come
across the place by accident wdien they were
sculling round the Maze the day before


looking for a base for their experiments, and
had calmly appropriated it. Well, they
gave me some breakfast and were quite
decent until I tried to open the door to go
out on the balcony (I wanted to warn you
people), when I found it locked, and Stavros
quite casually showed me an automatic
sticking out of his pocket. So after a bit I
asked casually if I could play the gramo-
phone, and he said ‘ Yes.’ In fact the
Germans, who were jolly musical, were quite
pleased, though I don’t think they thought
much of my selections. So we went along
smoothly until the afternoon, when the Cynic
arrived.”
The Cynic reddened.
Fell out of a tree,” he said. “ A couple
of the chemists were out on the balcony
messing about with test tubes, and I tried to
get close enough to see, and fell into the water
with a frightful splash under their very eyes.”
“ Well, that made Stavros suspicious and
puzzled, of course,” went on Humpty-Dumpty,
but still, he didn’t imagine that we could
know anything about the dyes or Cadalia
until Paul arrived.”


“ A branch cracked loudly,” said Paul.
“ Tree Top Road was not as easy to travel
by as it had the appearance of being.”
“ So of course, when he recognised Paul,”
said Humpty-Dumpty, “ Stavros understood
everything, and decided to search the Maze
for the rest of you at once. To our jolly
surprise they left no one to guard us I
suppose they thought they’d need ah the four
for the raid —so as soon as they had gone
we began to dig at the door lock with our
penknives. And then we began to get
sleepy
“ it was a ghastly feeling,” said the Cynic.
“ We tried to fight against it, but we hadn’t
a hope. Paul dropped dowm on the floor,
and then Humpty-Dumpty, so of course I
guessed we’d been drugged. We’d had some
coffee with them before they went—unwise
on our part, of course —but w r e’d had to eat
with them for nearly tw r o days, and nothing
had been tampered with before. But it was
a rotten feeling, waiting to slide down to the
floor and not knowing whether w r e had been
poisoned or whether it was merely some-
thing like chloral hydrate. I got the


door open, and then I don’t remember any
more ”
“ Golly, you looked funny,” remarked Pod-
more, “ all lying on the floor in a heap.”
“ And when did you visit House-on-Stilts,
my promising infant ? ” inquired the Cynic,
surprised.
“If you were on an island and you heard
Stavros coming along in a boat, I bet you
wouldn’t stay there,” said Podmore. “ You’d
get into the water like I did.” He shuddered
at the recollection of the squelchy shallows,
the slimy deeps through which he had floun-
dered, half wading, half swimming. “ I
nearly got drowned, ’n I was just going to
scream out to Stavros to save me when I
suddenly bumped into the Purple Slipper —
you know where we put it in among the
shoots, Kelvin —and I climbed in and had a
rest ’cause I could hear Stavros right away
the other side of the Maze. After a bit I
remembered I was quite close to House-on-
Stilts, and I thought I’d see if I couldn’t
rescue you all, so I swam along ’n pulled the
ladder down, ’n when I got up I found the
door open and walked in and saw you all lying


on the floor asleep, and I shook you, ’n I
punched you, ’n I hit you, but I couldn’t wake
you up/’
" What did you do then ? ” inquired Sir
John with interest.
“ I went and looked for some biscuits,”
said Podmore, “ ’cause I was hungry, but
I couldn’t find any. But in the biscuit tin
I found a lot of those things ” —he negligently
indicated the crown jewels of Cadalia —" and
some more in the tea tin. So I put them in
the potato sack and climbed down the ladder
and hooked them on a low branch to be
ready.”
“ Ready for what ? ” inquired Sir John.
“ The Purple Slipper said Podmore. “ I
waded back and got her and I started her
up ” —he looked to Kelvin for applause; the
rest of his somewhat extraordinary doings
he was narrating with perfect calm, but in
this one particular there was pride in his
voice—“ and I set her going slowly down the
straight bit —you know, what you call the
private entrance. Golly, she made a row.
Why doesn’t someone make a silent engine,
Kelvin ? ” He paused inquiringly.


“ I don’t think you realise quite how we
are hanging on your words, old thing,” said
Kelvin. " What happened next ? ”
" Oh, I just grabbed the sack as I passed
and I slid down the private entrance like
one thing, making an awful row, ’n as soon
as I got clear of the mangroves Stavros began
to shoot at me from somewhere in the trees,
so I bucked up the spark and let the Slipper
go. Golly, Kelvin, she licked along.”
“ Why didn’t you go to Newport ? ” queried
Sir John.
“ I didn’t know what to do,” said Podmore,
“ and the boat was going so fast I couldn’t
think. I was afraid to go to Newport with
the jewel things. I thought they might be
stolen, so I just went on and on and on till
I came to the Heads. And then ”
“You don’t mean to say you went outside
the Heads ? ” said Kelvin incredulously.
“ Yes, I did. The moon was coming up
and the sea was as still as still. But golly, it
was lonely out there.” Podmore was silent
a minute.
“ And then I thought there was a storm
coming up, and I was scared the Slippe r


would go down with the sack and all, and
I was just going to turn back to Palm Beach
and risk them being stolen when I saw the
Hole-in-the-Wall with a fire in it. And then
I saw Jacinth standing up in the light
because she had heard the noise of the engine.”
“ It is the Grand Duchess’s turn to speak,”
said Sir John. “ Will she explain how she
came to be here in the Hole-in-the-Wall ? ”
“ When I was in the coach with Mr.
Streaker,” said Jacinth, “ I saw a car pass
us by and turn up a cross-road, and in it,
lying back very white in the back seat under
the hood, was Paul. I did not think —I
jumped out, meaning to follow it up the
cross-road by the tyre tracks, so clear was
the moonlight.”
“ Why didn’t you tell me to get out too ? ”
queried Streaker.
“You had the formula to deliver/' said
Jacinth simply. “ That was more important
even than Paul. But I lost the tracks almost
at once, and I had no money and there was
nowhere I could go for the night. And then,
in the bright moonlight, I looked towards the
coast, and behold, there was the little nick


of which you, Mr. Streaker, told me that
day on the island when you recounted me
your adventures to pass the time. And I
thought that the Hole-in-the-Wall should
shelter me for the night, and with much
difficulty I found it. Scarcely had I made
a little fire when I heard a noise and then
Podmore came in the little boat and shouted
to me, and I ran down to the water’s
edge.”
“You see I thought I’d land the jewels,”
said Podmore, “so it wouldn’t matter if the
storm did come. So I brought the Slipper
in very close. It was so calm, and I separated
them into four lots because they were too
heavy in the sack, and I wrapped two lots
in bits of the sack and one lot in my coat
and one in my socks, and I threw them on
to the rocks and Jacinth picked them up.
Then I went on to Sydney.”
“ Why didn’t you go back to Newport ? ”
said Kelvin. “You might have got caught
in the storm.”
“ I thought of that,” admitted Podmore,
“ but I couldn’t have got a new exhaust
lead for the race in Newport, and I didn’t


know if I could find you. So I went on.
Oh, I say ! ”
The last indignant ejaculation was called
forth by Marjorie, who had risen softly from
her place, crossed the circle, and kissed
him.
“ So I took the Slipper to the Spit, but
they wouldn’t touch anything till someone
grown up ordered it. So I went to Marjorie ! ”
“ How did you know her address ? ” said
Kelvin.
“ Considering the same address was written
five times inside the hull, I thought some
friend of yours must live there, and as it
was in purple pencil I thought it might
match her shoes,” retorted Podmore amid
general laughter.
“ H’m,” said Sir John, “ I only know this.
Mr. Podmore, if when you leave school some
time hence you would care to join my staff,
I would rejoice to have you.”
It was a tribute for which several men
throughout the Empire would have sold all
they had.
“ Well, that seems about the end of the
mysteries,” said Streaker. “ Oh, no ! How


did you people get from House-on-Stilts to
Twisted Chimneys ? ”
“I’m not quite sure,” said the Cynic.
“ Apparently there’s a road at the back of
the Maze that we didn’t know of. I have a
hazy recollection of being taken up there
and put in a car just as the drug began to
wear off and driven along. I expect that
was when Jacinth saw Paul. I don’t know
how Stavros came to choose Twisted Chim-
neys, except that the night before Humpty-
Dumpty and I had been talking to each other
about the night we spent there, and he may
have gathered that it was lonely and deserted
enough to suit his purpose.”
“ But,” said Paul, “ the formula ! The
formula seems vanished for ever.”
“ No, it hasn’t. I gave it to Jacinth,” said
Podmore. “ Didn’t I tell you —it was in the
tea tin too.”
Two hours later two loaded cars swept
past that little grey church above the Spit
where ten days before Streaker had swung
the Crosshall out of the beaten track to
Manly and steered her towards Adventure.


Kelvin leaned forward and touched Sir
John on the shoulder.
“ Will you all come here this day next
week, sir ? ” he said. “ Marjorie and I are
going to be married here. And we want
Streaker for our best man.”
“ And Podmore for bridesmaid,” said
Marjorie.


CHAPTER XXVIII
THE ORDER OF THE RAINBOW
THROUGH the great stained-glass window
of the cathedral of Garda, capital city
of Cadalia, the light streamed many-
coloured, falling in splendour on the King’s
rich robes of scarlet and on the pale, upturned
faces of the multitude. So rich and vivid the
scarlet, so white the faces with the pallor that
is bom of starvation that at first sight the
contrast seemed a cruel one.
But it was not so. The scarlet robes
were the first sign of Cadalia’s dawning
happiness.
Four months ago the King had come home
from that far end of the earth, Australia,
bringing with him the lost crown jewels, and
more than the crown jewels, two little slips
of paper on which was written the formula
for a dye process—nay, the formula for
Cadalia’s happiness.


In that four months the King had sold
his crown jewels, his private estates, every-
thing that was his, had negotiated in every
country of Europe foi capital on the security
of the formula, and in four months the
stricken country had raised dye works that
were in a few years to make it rich and
famous.
And the first silk steeped in the great
dye-vats had been the robes for the King’s
Restoration Ceremony.
Up into the vaulted roof of the cathedral
soared the choir voices sweet and shrill.
Slowly from his place the Archbishop swept
forward with the plain, narrow circlet of gold
representing the heavy jewelled crown that
the King had sacrificed for bread for his
people. Over in her place of state beneath
the great window a dark-haired girl, also in
scarlet robes, stood erect and still. Although
she was the King’s sister and a Grand-
Duchess she also wore no jewels save a slim
chain that had belonged to her mother and
had been set with three rubies. But even
from that the central and largest ruby was
missing.


Again the choir boys’ voices rose into the
vault, then were still. The King was about
to confer the Orders of the Rainbow, the
highest and most ancient honour Cadalia had
to bestow for signal devotion and gallant
service.
The multitude swayed to its feet while the
Archbishop chanted the names of the honour-
able recipients.
“Now know all men by these presents ”
the voice rose solemn and full, the smoke of
the tall candles curled upwards—“ our well-
beloved and faithful, Streaker Brooke, of
Sydney, which is in Australia, our well-
beloved and faithful Cynic Carthew” (Paul
had never known that the Towers School-
boys’ nicknames were other than their real
baptismal ones, and so the Archbishop re-
cited them in all good faith), “ our well-
beloved and faithful Humpty-Dumpty King.
And more honourable even than these,
for that his service and his devotion
were the greater, we do make our most
well-beloved and faithful William Podmore
to be a Baron of our same most ancient
order ’’


Eleven thousand miles away that same day
the four new-made Knights of the Rainbow
moved about the Towers School as yet un-
conscious of their honours.
Streaker was haranguing his football team
prior to a competition match, and for the
moment his mind had forgotten everything
in the world except the fray before him.
But unconsciously his hand slipped into the
pocket of his blazer, where, enclosed for
safety in a small box which had originally
held gramophone needles, he kept his mascot.
It w r as of rather extraordinary value for a
schoolboy to carry 7 , being a large,
fire-hearted ruby.
Up in his study the Cynic was quoting
poetry.
Humpty-Dumpty w 7 as in the School sick-
b?y recovering from a cold. But no longer
did the ceiling irk him w r ith its monotony.
He had too many vivid memory 7 pictures to
paint thereon, too many plans to make for
the next expedition that he should lead forth
“ because it’s going to be an adventure.”
Podmore w 7 as constructing an ink-squirt
to enliven the monotony of a Latin lesson


THE ORDER OF THE RAINBOW 25
that was proceeding around him. But Fate
did not favour his inventive powers. At the
very moment that the name of the new-made,
well-beloved and faithful Baron of the Order
of the Rainbow echoed through the Cadalian
cathedral it rang short and sharp through an
Australian schoolroom :
“ Podmore —take thirty lines.”
THE END
Printed in Great Britain by
Ward, Lock and Co., Limited, London.






Cuxhju-tt J /U& ■ ■
2,
n CH W


Date Due
SEP 1996-
I
I
j
3 1508 00497585 5


■
■
