

LL /






tiByjUll®||||l|/ >tumilli ' ii il Mm ni in niiLui imm min hum VU'iif®! 'I ! iu^i
Rev.r.b.S.Hammono,
THF MAM a/ a Mrr
THE MAN WHO r, WANTS
Blue Band
Australia


AUSTRALIAN PROHIBITION YEAR BOOK,
1918. No. 2.
DRY MUNITIONS
Prepared by
JOHN VALE.
Foreword and Statement of the
Case for War-Time Prohibition
by Rev. R. B. S. HAMMOND.
STATE SECTIONS
By JAMES MARION. VICTOR E. STANTON,
W. TYLER and SYD. CUMMINS.
AUSTRALIAN ALLIANCE
PROHIBITION COUNCIL.


PRINCIPAL CONTENTS.
Alcoholic Strength of Liquors 5&
Alcoholic Camouflage 14
American Advance 35
Australian Products 48
Boyce, Archdeacon 59
Business Men Testify 38
Canada 4 1
Chief Justice of New Zealand 57
Control in Britain 33
Drink Bill of—
Australia 53
Queensland 77
South Australia 75
United Kingdom • •• 55
Victoria 7 2
War Time 53
Drunkenness, Decline in ••• 64
Drunkenness in Australia ■ 66
Economic Entanglements 49
Employment 49
Justice, Expenditure on 66
Kitchener's Mutilated Message 47
Local Option, Victoria 7°
Licences —
New South Wales 62
South Australia 62
Drink Bill of—
Victoria 62
Melba, Dame, Sings Praise of Prohibition ... 65
New South Wales 67
New Zealand 46
New Zealand Contrast, A 65
Not New, But Still True 60
Not Yet —But When? 9
Periodicals, Australasian Temperance 80
Queensland 76
Rechabite War Experience 22
Revenue From Drink 5 1
Russian Camouflage 45
Senate Committee’s Report 23
Six ©’Clock Closing—
New South Wales 68
South Australia 74
South Australia 73
Spendings, Some Australian 54
State Alliances 80
Tasmania 78
Teetotal Car, The 34
Victoria 70
Victorian Local Option Law 7°
War-Time Drink Consumption 53, 62
War-Time Prohibition 7
White Book of Black Facts ... ... ... 28
Workers Employed in Breweries and Distilleries 49


PREFACE AND PERSONAL
As this Book will go to many with whom I have been associated
in Temperance work in past years, a personal note may be pardoned.
Owing to the extreme pressure of my work as the Secretary of a
great Friendly Society—work added to greatly by the concerns of our
many noble soldier members whose interests must stand before all
else—l was compelled in June last to resign my office as Hon. Secre-
taiy of the Australian Alliance Prohibition Council. Before doing so
I had been privileged to assist in inaugurating the great movement
thro ghout the Commonwealth for War-Time Prohibition.
Should the war be over before our halting political leaders have
risen to the demands of a momentous occasion, there will still be
need for Prohibition to make Australia safe for the great home-com-
ing, and to aid in repatriation, and in bearing the economic burdens
which will be a part of war’s aftermath.
The latest recruiting poster, “ Quick 57 is a little belated. The
Australian soldier is not now fighting with his back to the wall. On
the contrary, he has the war-weary enemy on the run. But our
leaders should apply their motto, “ Quick, 7 ’ to the protection of our
returning heroes against the wiles of the home foe.
The Prohibition Year Book is issued in October, so that its infor-
mation may be available for use in the observance of the W orld’s Tem-
perance Sunday, which this year will be November 10th.
I desire to acknowledge the help of contributors, whose contribu-
tions are published under their names. Especially do I thank Mr. G.
H. Knibbs, C.M.G., Commonwealth Statistician, who has prepared
the Commonwealth Drink Bill, and furnished other statistics in advance
of official publications. It will be noted that the official estimate
of our war-time drink waste is nearly ,£20,000,000 for the latest year.
The Victorian Alliance, for reasons quite peculiar to its own cir-
cumstances, is for the present doing its Prohibition work through
the Strength of Empire Movement. In Queensland, owing to other
special circumstances of a different character, the Temperance forces
have combined in the Strength of Empire Movement. In New South
Wales, South Australia and Tasmania, the Alliances are more vigorous
than ever, and are doing splendid work in the interests of Prohibition,
Copy for the State’s section of this Book from W 7 est Australia is
on its way, but will arrive too late to be included, for which I am
sorry. The W 7 est has put in fine work for Prohibition, as it has towards
winning the war by its contribution to the fighting forces.
The information contained in the following pages in reference to
Britain, America, Canada and Russia is only supplementary to that
given in the Year Book for 1917, “ Wdser Through the War.”
JOHN VALE. ✓
October 16th, iqiS.




FOREWORD
FACTS and the most wonderful union of forces the world has ever
known are killing - the liquor traffic. Medical science, social
betterment, economic progress, and the Church have all united
and taken a hand in unmasking alcohol, until to-day it stands stripped
and ashamed, without a single shred of covering, waiting in fear and
trembling the too long deferred sentence to get off the face of the
earth. The Australian Alliance Prohibition Council came into existence
to meet the growing demand for Commonwealth Prohibition. Each
State Alliance represents all the forces in that State at work to dethrone
alcohol, and from each of these Alliances a council has been formed
to foster the War-Time Prohibition movement, to hold the States in
closer formation in the great battle against the liquor trade, and to
provide the machinery that will eventually permanently free Australia
from the burden, the curse and the menace of alcohol. The A.A.P.C.
is the Federal Temperance Parliament, and will have its enemies,
just as the Federal Parliament of the Commonwealth has; but it will
outlive its enemies, profit by criticism, and triumph by virtue of the
righteousness of its cause. The only body that can guide to victory
the anti-alcohol sentiment of the Commonwealth is the A.A.P.C.,
because it alone is representative of all the forces, and it alone has
in each State the machinery, built after many, many years' labour, to
enable it most effectively to do the work.
We need to-day loyalty, knowledge, enthusiasm, courage and
daring, and then alcohol, the world wrecker, will be for ever removed
from the path our loved ones must walk in, and the world will know
progress beyond the dreams of the most Utopian.
The needs of our fellow-men cry to us, the achievements of Canada
and U.S. of America beckon us, and the promise of Divine help awaits
us. On, then, my friends, to a speedy victory!
"/fed-/


Australian Alliance Prohibition Council
President—REV. R. B. S. HAMMOND.
Vice-Presidents—HON. S. MAUGER, J.P. (Victoria), LADY
HOLDER, J.P. (South Australia), ALDERMAN STORRER (Tas-
mania), Mr. J. MATHER (West Australia).
Acting- Hon. Secretary and Treasurer —Mr. H. R. FRANCIS, T. and
G. Building-, 136 Swanston Street, Melbourne. ’Phone, Central,
8457.
Federal Information Bureau—N.S.W. Alliance, 321 Pitt Street, Sydney.
Secretary-—Mr. J. MARION.
“ GRIT”
The Federal organ, edited by Rev. R. B. S. Hammond. Published
weekly, id. 33 Park Street, Sydney. Box 390, G.P.O.
COUNCIL.
New South Wales—REV. R. B. S. PIAMMOND, W. C. CLEGG
JAMES MARION.
South Australia—VV. C. BROOKER, W. J. MANNING, V. E.
STANTON, LADY HOLDER, J.P.
Tasmania—W. W. OSBORNE, ALDERMAN STORRER, SYD.
CUMMINS, F. H. RALPH.
Victoria—HON. S. MAUGER, J.P., H. R. FRANCIS, FRANCIS
WILSON, R. T. CHENOWETH, J.P.
West Australia—Mr. J, MATHER, REV. G. TREGEAR, Mrs.
OLIVER.
THE AUSTRALIAN ALLIANCE PROHIBITION COUNCIL
Is a Federation of the State Alliances.
ITS OBJECTIVE IS
Prohibition of the sale, manufacture and importation of alcoholic
liquors as beverag-es. It will use Local Option laws to the extent
that they are available to secure No-licence. It seeks State-wide
Prohibition throug-h a State referendum, and aims at an amendment
of the Federal Constitution which would enable Commonwealth Pro-
hibition to be achieved
THROUGH THE WILL OF THE PEOPLE.
It seeks Prohibition for the period of the war, and of repatriation by
Federal authoritv.


THE CASE FOR WAR-TIME PROHIBITION
THE APPEAL OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE A.A.P.C. TO THE
ACTING PRIME MINISTER.
Australia Cannot Do Its Best with a Bayonet in One Hand and a
Bottle in the Other.
IT IS NECESSARY.—The need of men and money and our obliga-
tion to the returned soldier are urgent.
(i) Some 70,000 men in Australia have enlisted and never left our
shores; in addition, some 11,000 have been returned from
overseas without having fired a shot. Drink is the largest
factor, though not the sole factor, in this immense loss of
man-power. At the lowest, drink accounts for 25 per cent.
(2) Since the people spent 20 millions in drink, then many cannot
respond to the loan appeal. It follows that other businesses
are starved and they cannot respond to the loan appeal.
(3) Colonel Farr on sworn evidence said, “ Drink makes repatria-
tion more costly and more difficult. At least 10 per cent, of
all we give is wasted in drink.” Mr. Blyth, of the Ameliora-
tion Fund, N.S.W., says on sworn statement: “We have
spent .£220,000, at least 33 per cent, of which has been
wasted in drink.”
(4) Freight space is so essential that it is imperative that we ex-
clude all alcoholic beverage in the interest of necessaries.
As a business proposition we cannot stand a 10 per cent,
loss of men, money, or effort.
IT IS WANTED. —There never has been in the history of Australia
such a widespread and such an influential demand for anything as
there is for War-Time Prohibition. No section of the community is
exempt. No appeal is so generously subscribed to as the appeal for
monev for War-Time Prohibition. No demonstration is more largely 01
enthusiastically attended than that for War-Time Prohibition.
IT IS A FEDERAL MATTER.—(I) The Federal Government re-
ceives the whole of the revenue, and it is in their interest
to deal with this matter, and not the States.
(2) It relates exclusively to soldiers, finance, and repatriation, and
as such is entirely Federal.
(3) The Federal Government having (a) closed bars at certain
ports, in the County of Cumberland for certain days, in
Queensland for soldiers at 6 p.m., have proved their power
to proclaim War-Time Prohibition; (b) having limited horse-
racing and fixed price of foodstuff, they have proved their
right and power to protect the Commonwealth from the
alcohol menace; (c) having protected petrol tins by a pro-
hibition proclamation, the people may reasonably expect
them to protect men.


ui) Ihe action of the Canadian Government is a precedent and an
incentive. The action of the U.S.A. Government also chai-
leng-es our attention (a) in prohibiting- all soldiers from
obtaining any drink; (b) in prohibiting the manufacture
of all spirituous liquors; (c) in reducing the alcoholic con-
tent of all beer to less than 3 per cent.; (d) in closing all
bars within a ten-mile radius of all camps; (e) in conferring
upon the States the right to alter the Constitution in favour
of National Prohibition; (f) in proclaiming War-Time Pro-
hibition for the nation.
This is a call and a challenge to us in the interest of efficiency to
keep step with our Great Ally and prohibit liquor for the speedy
ending of the war.
TH£ COST OF IT.— No one really doubts the necessity or the
desirability of saving ourselves from the drink waste. It has now
become a question of the means. Other countries—notably Canada
and U.S.A.—have lifted the question beyond conjecture or argument.
Those countries prove (a) that financially it pays, and in no single
case has Prohibition embarrassed the financial position of the Govern-
ment; (b) there has never followed in any of the 28 States of America
or the 8 Provinces of Canada an unemployed problem resulting
from Prohibition; (c) after 38 years Kansas State proves that other
evils do not result from Prohibition.
The immediate loss of revenue is hardly noticed because of the
immediate financial buoyancy resulting from the redirection of the
spending power of the people. People buy revenue-producing goods
m quantities to equal from a revenue point of view the loss on
alcohol revenue. People who buy paint for their house serve the
country better than when they bought paint for their nose. People sooa
acquire an income that yields revenue.
It is the soundest transaction ever undertaken by any country,
and never has there been a country, county, or town that has suffered
financially through Prohibition.
On these grounds, and above all that w r e might do our best for the
speedy and successful winning of the war, a vast majority of the
people urge War-Time Prohibition.
ROBERT B. S. HAMMOND.


“ NOT YET ’’—BUT WHEN
In the Federal House of Representatives on September igth, Mr. W.
F. Finlayson, M.P., asked the Hon. W. A. Watt, Acting - Prime Minis-
ter, whether the Ministry had considered the advisability of the Prohi-
bition of the liquor traffic during the war, and received the reply,
“ Not yet.” Subsequently the Minister promised earnest considera-
tion.
“ Not yet,” as relating to action, has been the attitude of the Em-
pire's statesmen, with the honourable exception of those of Canada
and Newfoundland.
There are two historic utterances of Lloyd George, which have often
been quoted, but cannot be repeated too often until logical effect is
given to them. They are:
“ Drink is doing us more damage in the war than all the German
submarines put together.”—Speech at Bangor, February 28th, 1915.
“ Nothing but root and branch methods will be of the slightest avail
in dealing with this evil. I believe that to be the general feeling. The
feeling is that, if we are to settle German militarism, we must first of
all settle with the drink. We are fighting Germany, Austria and Drink,
and, as far as I can see, the greatest of these, deadly foes is drink.”—
Reply to Deputation of Ship-builders, March 29th, 1915.
Lord Kitchener saw the point, and took upon himself the vow of
abstinence. The soldier may not talk, but he does things.
The King followed Kitchener, and proclaimed Prohibition for the
Royal palaces, in the hope, it is believed, that the nation would
follow. He may have felt hurt when he found that the brewer in
Britain counts for more than the King.
Arthur Mee, in the last of his books, which Australians may not read,
writing in December, 1917, says: —“ It is as probable as anything can
be that, but for drink, the war would be over now.”
He is far from being the only authority who has expressed that
opinion. No one can dogmatise on the point, but there are sound
reasons for the belief that if the Empire had promptly followed the
King and Kitchener the victories of 1918 on the Western front might
have been the victories of 1915 or 1916. Advantage could not be taken
of the numerical superiority of the Allies because of the shortage of
arms and munitions, and the famine in shot and shell was in part due
to the superabundance of drink. That was the fact which converted
the King. On other pages I have given an epitome of the Report
to the House of Commons on this subject—The Black Facts of a White
Book.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF A SONG.
In the early days of the war, which now appear to be so far off, the
cables flashed the news of the marching through a town “ Somewhere
in France,” of the first British Expeditionary Force, the army of


which we can hardly speak without a catch in the throat. The gal-
lant Britishers, we were assured, were marching to Berlin, where, at
some time near to the Christmas of 1914, they would meet the hardy
Russians, moving like a “ steam roller” from the East, and there dic-
tate the terms of peace. As the soldiers strode through the cobbled
streets of Boulogne—-for the secret is out—French women hailed them
as deliverers, bedecked them with flowers, and proffered the plen-
teous wine of the country to drink, and they sang, “ It’s a Long, Long
Way to Tipperary,” thinking it was not so far to Berlin. The lilt of
the chorus made the inane revue verses for a time the Empire’s most
popular song. There was a period of light-heartedness and easy-going
confidence which might be called the “Tipperary” stage of the war.
Our own immortal first contingent marched through Melbourne to the
“Tipperary” tune. The little brown men from Japan, allied with
the Empire to aid our “ White” Australia, tried to sing the Empire's
song. The dark-skinned warriors from India claimed kinship through
it as they marched through Marseilles. It echoed through Cairo slums
and the tainted streets of Port Said. Russian audiences rose in respect
when bands played it, mistaking it for our National Anthem. Even
our enemies sang it when human kinship asserted itself over the claims
of authority, and the men in the snow-bound trenches fraternised with
their voices. The lilt of the chorus made the song. It was sung with-
out thought of the sordid revue associations. And yet the “long, long
way ” allied with “ Piccadilly ” and “ Leicester Square,” have come to
have a sad significance. There is no need to stress the point, but we
may well make open confession, which may be good for the soul, of
the fact that we sang “ a long, long way ” in association with light
reference to those elements of weakness in our national life which
have helped to make the road to victory as long and hard as it has
proved to be. And still we say, “ Not yet.”
There has been much repentance since the war began, but it is
partly the repentance of the devil, who, being sick, vowed that he
would become a saint. Just before the war the house of hereditary
legislators in Britain contemptuously threw out a measure of Tem-
perance reform in the interests of the people's liberties, and, inciden-
tally, of brewery dividends. What did this terrible measure propose ?
Merely a slight reduction in the hours during which liquor was sold
in England on Sunday. An agitation was afoot to extend the week-
night closing hour of public-houses in London, on the ground that
12.30 was too soon after midnight for a city which aspired to b'e
fashionable. Soon after the outbreak of war toe venerable and
esteemed Dr. F. B. Meyer was made the object of venomous attacks
from the jingoistic journals because he called attention to the perils
which beset young soldiers on their arrival in London. He saw ruddy-
faced boys, fresh from Canadian farms, lured by young, innocent-look-
ing, if garish, girls, the decoys for the bold, abandoned, diseased
women, lurking in the back streets. Because he published when he
saw r and asked if the arm of authority was shortened that it could not
save, he was denounced as a vile-minded person, seeking out nastiness
in his desire for notoriety. Later, when some of the press critics


realised that soldiers upon whom the protection of the miserable
bodies which shivered in their own cowardly skins depended were
being- spoilt, they joined in the demand for preventive measures.
The strength of Britain is not in the gay, night life typified by
“ Piccadilly ” and “Leicester Square,” as they were in the days of
their glory—or their shame.
When the war began some of the greatest scientific experts, having
military experience, made an appeal for War-Time abstinence on the
part of soldiers and sailors. They included the late Sir Victor
Horsley, the greatest brain specialist in the world, who afterwards laid
down his life while serving the victims of blundering in Mesopotamia
—blundering which he declared to be largely due to whisky-affected
brains. They said:
‘ALCOHOL OR DRINK—
1. Slows the power to see signals
2. Confuses prompt judgment.
3. Spoils accurate shooting.
4. Hastens fatigue.
5. Lessens resistance to diseases and exposure.
6. Increases shock from wounds.
We, therefore, most strongly urge you, for your own health and effi-
ciency, that at least as long as the war lasts you should become total
abstainers.’ *
Never has wisdom been more fully justified than it has in the confir-
mation by experience of these opinions.
When the first British Expeditionary Force left for France, every
man carried in his knapsack a message from the great soldier who
afterwards found a sailor’s grave in the cold North Sea. It warned
him to shun two allied evils—drink and immorality—which together
have put out of action man-power sufficient to have turned the tide of
war long before America came in to do it. Our Federal Government
cabled for the full text of the message, and it came with the essen-
tial things cut out. That was an early indication of the attitude of
Authority. The experts pleaded for a teetotal army; blind, blundering
Authority provided inducements to create a drinking army, and
partly succeeded.
THE MAN POWER LOST
to the Empire through the allied evils against which Kitchener warned
his men is a matter of conjecture, as the facts have been partly con-
cealed. But those who assert that it is enough to have made
the difference between victory accomplished and the present position of
hope deferred have reasons for their belief. We think with pride,
mingled with sorrow, of the British army to which Kitchener gave his
counsel —for its size, probably the finest army the world has seen up
to that time—fighting day after day against overwhelming odds,
obliged to fall back to escape annihilation, and yet delaying the
enemy advance sufficiently to enable the allied forces to finally turn it
into a retreat. Fighting while going back is the hardest fighting of


all. When at last the tide of battle was turned this little army defeated
the Kaiser’s best troops, drove them across three rivers, ending- with
the Marne, and pursued them as they ran in precipitate flight—the
heroic little army which saved Franee and the world!
The Kaiser was credited with calling this a “ contemptible little
army. 55 He knew British soldiers too well to call them “ contemptible. 55
The New York “ Times 5 5 5 “ Current History of the War, 55 in its
neutral days, gave the correct translation of the Kaiser’s words, show-
ing that “ contemptible 55 was inserted by a newspaper correspondent.
There is an army which is not little, but might be called “ contempt-
ible, 55 though I prefer a less censorious word—shall we say “ piti-
able 55 ? The pitiable great army, or the real “ contemptibles. 55
—the men put out of action by the home foes which Authority had
aided and protected. If the first 100,000 Britishers were able to turn
the tide of battle four years ago, this number, ever so much greater,
added to the millions who have fought since might have won the
war.
There is no point in pursuing these sad might-have-beens, except
to protest against the policy of “ Not yet. 55 Canada has adopted War-
Time Prohibition. America has fixed December ist next as the date
upon which brewing is to cease, and July ist, iqiq, for the inaugura-
tion of War-Time Prohibition. What of Australia? It may be said
that conditions here are different, and do not demand the drastic
remedy. Our circumstances are very near to those of New Zealand.
The New Zealand Efficiency Board, composed of five successful men
without anti-liquor bias, recommended War-Time Prohibition to pro-
mote National efficiency.
Australia Needs Efficiency
just as much as New Zealand, and, indeed, from one important
point of view Prohibition is more urgently required. We still
depend upon voluntary recruiting to maintain the strength of our
depleted fighting forces. It is, therefore, important that hindrances to
recruiting be removed, and Drink is one of them. From the time
when the Prime Minister pledged Australia’s “ last shilling 55 we have
spent about 1,600,000,000 shillings (,£80,000,000) in drink, Our manu-
facturers are hampered, and many people are subjected to deprivation,
because of the failure to get necessary things from abroad, owing
partly to the shortage of shipping. The use of paper is to be controlled
for this reason. During the year ended June 30th, 1918, ships from
abroad brought intoxicating liquors of the retail value, approximately,
including duty paid, of £7,000,000. Paper, which helps to provide
brain food—sometimes—is to be curtailed. Why should “ Johnny
Walker 55 still “go strong 55 to steal away the brains? An official ex-
planation has been given of the purposes of the blue arm bands on our
returned heroes, which leaves out reference to drink, but it is obvious
that if the blue band of Prohibition were round the Commonwealth it
would not be needed on soldiers 5 arms. All patriots would cheerfully
stand with the soldiers in this helpful deprivation, and shirkers might
at least feel compulsion in abstinence. We close bars at some ports


of call, when hospital ships arrive, to make those parts of Australia
safe for the time being'. We should make all Australia safe foi the
great home-coming. No other single factor would aid repatriation
more than the elimination of alcohol. Even if the war were won while
our Ministers are treading the path of dalliance, and saying “ Not
yet,” there would still be need for Prohibition for the glad time when
the boys came back to stay, because it's “ over over there.” But, alas!
even that is “Not yet.”
For reasons quite ample to those in authority, Australia is not
permitted to sec the full measure of the glory of the deeds of her sons
on the blood-stained fields of France. We get glimpses of the break-
away in March, when the retreating crowds were not all civilians. Ihe
Australians elbowing their way through, till they reached the point of
contact, where they dug in and stopped the German onslaught. Philip
Gibbs describes the pride of the British army, the Guards holding on
at one point to the last gasp, “until the Australians should arrive.”
When they did arrive there was no “ last gasp ” for them they
stayed. The peasants came back to their homes with the poor belong-
ings they had taken in their flight, for they said, “The Australians
are here; they never retreat!” It was after this that an English paper
came out with the appeal to Britain: —“ Wake up and
HELP AUSTRALIA WIN THE WAR!”
Australia is honoured through her heroic sons. We cannot accept
the compliment literally, but we may well be proud of the reputation
won by our “ splendid men.” We may resolve to do something heroic
to be in keeping with them. While they are fighting Germany and
Austria let us resolve to fight and conquer the third of the triumvirate
—Drink.
Banish the entire liquor industry from the United States; close
every saloon, every brewery; . . . and the nation will suddenly find
itself amazed at its efficiency, and startled at the increase in its
labour supply. I shall not go slow on Prohibition, for I know what
is the greatest foe to my men, greater than the bullets of the enemy?”
—General Pershing, Commander-in-Chief U.S. Army in France.


ALCOHOL’S CAMOUFLAGE
THE GREAT DELUSION.
“ The popular belief in the stimulating properties of alcohol, as
regards nervous and other Junctions, seems to be of purely subjective
origin and illusory; it is in the main, if not wholly, an effect of the
narcotic influence of the drug, for it dulls the drinker's perception of
unpleasant conditions in himself and his surroundings, and may make
him feel better, more efficient, and stronger than he really is.”
Report of Advisory Committee of British Central Board of Control
on Alcohol (page 125).
The British Board of Control has made a brave attempt to carry
on the sale of intoxicating liquors without producing intoxication. It
has not wholly succeeded, and cannot in the nature of things ; but its
drastic restrictions have done much to check the offensive of the great
Home Foe which Authority has refused to destroy. It may prove,
however, that the Board’s most valuable contribution to Temperance
reform is its Report on the Action of Alcohol on the Human Organism.
In November, 1916, the Board appointed an Advisory Committee of
eight leading scientists, each with some special qualification for the
task before it, with Lord D’Abernon, the Board’s chairman, as its
head, “ to consider the conditions affecting the physiological action of
alcohol, and more particularly the effects on health and industrial
efficiency produced by the consumption of beverages of various alco-
holic strengths.” It is believed that not one of the nine authorities
chosen is an abstainer: certainly not one had shown any anti-alcohol
bias. Ihe Committee ignored the ethical aspect of the drink problem,
the social evils and economic waste. Its sole business was to report
on “the existing state of scientific knowledge regarding the action of
alcohol on the human organism.” The Committee has issued its
first report, which might be summarised as confirming the judgment
of one Solomon the Wise, given quite a long while ago, that
“WINE IS A MOCKER.’*
It robs man of his strength and makes him feel stronger; it lowers
his bodily temperature and makes him feel warmer; it lessens his
powers of endurance and makes him feel more fit; it promises to make
the heart glad and adds bitterness to the cup of sorrow. The Judas
drug which kisses that it may betray; which injures while making its
vict'ms believe that it has helped—that is a'“mocker.” Here we have
the secret of the popularity of rum in the trenches. The men who take
it are the least capable of judging its real effects. It is the “ mocker ” ;
they are the mocked. If any modern scientist can give alcohol a
better name than that let him stand up and do it. Shakespeare
offered another name, but he was not thinking of things merely physio-
logical when he said; “If thou has no name to be known by let us
call thee devil!”


In Government documents relating: to customs and excise duties
alcoholic beverages are described as stimulants. The verdict of
science is that they are narcotics. The revenue may be a stimulan
to the harassed Treasurer in war-time, but the beverages which yield
it are narcotic drugs to the consumers. If it takes sixteen drinks
to make a man “ dead drunk,” the first of the series puts him one-
sixteenth on the way to deadness.
The following' are the more important of the Committee’s findings .
(a) “ The main action of alcohol (apart from the effects of its
continued excessive use) is confined to the nervous system.
(b) Alcohol is narcotic rather than stimulant in action.
(c) Its nutritional value is strictly limited.
(d) Its habitual use as an aid to work is physiologically unsound.
(e) The ordinary use of alcohol should not only be moderate, but
should also be limited to the consumption of beverages of adequate
dilution, taken at sufficient intervals of time to prevent a persistent
deleterious action on the tissues.”
Drinkers may seek comfort from conclusion (c) and (e), but taken
in connection with the context they cannot find much. Temperance
reformers cannot accept the report as the whole truth concerning
alcohol, but there is .enough explosive force in it to shatter most ot
the defences which have grown up around alcohol during thousands
of years of ignorance. Note
HOW THE DELUSION GREW.
At some stage early in the history of mankind it was found that
the fruit of the vine, allowed to rot and ferment, produced (if the
fermentation were arrested at a certain stage) a beverage which could
be taken as a joy-giver. It made glad the heart of man, and was
taken on festive occasions to induce joyousness. There was at first no
pretence that it was an aid to effort in w r ork or fighting, it was just the
joy-giver. The desire to be made glad grew. Men desired to be joyful
every day, and at every meal. One of the first effects of alcohol is to
create a feeling of need for itself. Men accustomed to its use being
deprived of it feel a sensation of loss. Guided by sensation, there-
fore, instead of knowledge, drinkers cut off from wine inferred that
they were suffering loss of vigour. In natural sequence the joy-givei
came to be regarded as the strength-giver. As the centuries rolled
on the delusion grew stronger as it came to be hoary with age. After
distilling had been discovered the stronger spirits were regarded as
having great medicinal value, and were sometimes known as aqua
vitae —the water of life. Alcoholic liquors were believed to be both
food and physic, good for almost all the ills to which flesh is heir, and
sometimes ministering to minds diseased. Ihe late Mrs. Partington
really described a very common practice when she said: “ There
were only two circumstances under which she indulged in a little
spirit—when she was very, very poorly, and when she wasn t. Such
was the almost invincibffi ignorance which modern science found itself
up against.


In chapter 111., dealing 1 with the mental “ effects of alcohol,” the
Report says of alcohol, that
THE SECRET OF ITS CHARM
more than any other is that it produces: u a sense of careless well-
being or bodily and mental comfort. In so far as this sense of well-
being is of bodily origin, it is no doubt largely due to a flushing of
the skin with blood that abolishes all sense of chill; but it is due
also in part to a blunting of the sensibility to the small aches and pains
and a thousand hardly distinguishable sense-impressions which, except
in those in perfect health, contribute to tip the balance of bodily
feeling-tone to the negative or unpleasant side.”
Here is a further extract bearing on the sense of warmtk which
alcohol imparts:
“ The taking of alcohol during, or as a preliminary to, prolonged or
severe exposure to cold, is on every ground to be condemned. Any
sensation of warmth which it produces, under such conditions, is an
illusion fraught with danger; its effect is to render the subject indif-
ferent to a peril, which is in fact seriously increased by its use.”
WHY WE BLUSH.
That is why some blush. Some are past blushing. The under
skin, or dermis, is closely set with minute blood vessels, called capil-
laries, which are supplied with blood through small arteries. There
is a wonderful system of nerves which control the blood vessels so
that they contract or expand according to the needs of the body. The
normal condition is the medium. The vessels may contract or expand
as Nature demands. The nerves are susceptible to slight influences,
and may lose their power of control under a shock. A sensitive child
it discovered in wrong-doing. The shock causes the nerves to lose
their controlling power. The arteries dilate, and blood rushes to
the skin. The blood is red and hot, and the skin becomes red and
hot. That is the natural history of a blush. No one would suggest
that blushing really warms the body, or would help its subject to resist
cold or exposure. If we could keep warm by blushing the occasions
for blushing are so many that we never need be cold. When the
weather is hot the arteries dilate in order that blood may flow through
the skin, and lose heat by radiation. The tot of rum given to the
soldier in the trenches causes the nerves to lose their power of control.
Alcohol always acts as a paralyser. The arteries expand. The warm
blood flows to the surface, and there is a glow all over the body.
The drinker says: “ The teetotaller can talk till he is black in the
face, but he can’t convince me that I’m not warmer,” Rum has
done on a cold night what Nature does on a hot day to reduce the
heat of the body—brought the warm blood to the surface so that its
heat is lost by radiation, and internal warmth lowered. Served with
scalding hot tea when in a hurry, one ignores manners and pours the
tea into the saucer. It is spread out to cool. The saucer is warmed.
Rum spreads out the blood to cool, when warmth is needed. Nature
knows her business. When she brings the blood to the surface it is
to cool the body. Blundering authority with the rum ration dissipates


the heat when the body needs it most sorely. Another effect is to rob
the body of warmth by retarding oxidation. Soon after taking the rum
the temperature is lowered, but the drinker may not be conscious of
the fact because the agent which did the mischief made the sentine s
less vigilant, and would in the end put them to sleep.
Before chloroform was invented, men about to undergo operations
were sometimes put under the effects of alcohol in order to lessen
feeling’ and blunt pain. The drunken swagman, sleeping by his fare,
may be fatally injured by burning before realising danger. ? aID 1S
Nature’s warning. There is a legend of a blacksmith who cursed a ot
iron for burning him, and swore that he wished some power would
make him proof against the pain of heat. In answer to his wish an
evil spirit took away all his sense of feeling. Exulting in his new-
found power, he seized the hot metal without a twinge of pain. Soon
he saw to his dismay that his flesh had been burnt to the bone. Pam
may save from death. Alcohol lessens the feeling of cold while inten-
sifying the actual mischief. Again, a mocker !
THE FIRST POINT OF ATTACK.
There is a pregnant sentence at page 32 of the Report: . . “ Alcohol
successively weakens and suspends the hierarchy of the brain, and
therefore of the mind in the order from above downwards ; that is to
say, in the inverse order of their development in the individual and
in the race.” Properly understood, this statement clears away quite a
number of misapprehensions.
We sometimes say of a man who drinks, “ It goes to his head.
That is the popular expression of a scientific fact. We remember poor
Cassio’s plea; “ I have a very poor and unhappy brain for drinking.”
Alcohol is a poison with an affinity for the nerve-centres of the brain.
The brain cells develop in a certain order. First those which control
the heart; then those which control the lungs; then those which con-
trol movements. The child breathes from the moment of its birth.
Later it learns to walk. Then the knowledge centres develop; the
child begins to learn. It asks questions, as parents know. The
appetite for knowledge is created. Finally the moral centres come
into action; those which have to do with self-control and discipline.
The highest come last. Now note the significance of the statement in
the Report: “Alcohol successively weakens and suspends ... in the
inverse order of their development.” The highest faculties develop
last, and alcohol attacks them first. It weakens self-control before
it affects the mind. It clouds the mind before it makes walking
unsteady. Alcohol does its worst work oft-times before the outward
signs of the evil spirit within are manifest.
The youth has only had a drink or two. A truthful friend would
readily swear that he was absolutely sober. Yet in the matter of self-
control he is under the influence of alcohol. The enemy has captured
the first line of defence. Under these circumstances he is confronted
by temptation. He may be far from home, and is at the period of life
when desires are strong. Self-control being weakened, he yields.
This is one of the reasons why some official estimates of the propor-


tion of certain cases due to drink are quite valueless. The witnesses
do not know when the action of alcohol begins. I venture the opinion
that the majority of drink-caused laspes from virtue, accidents and
offences happen before there are any outward signs of intoxication.
I again quote from the Report, page 39: —
But a point of greater practical importance is that, without signs
of intoxication in the full ordinary or in the legal sense of the term,
the beaiing and individual attitude of mind suffer temporary change
as an effect of the drug; and those in contact with the person so
affected have for the time being to deal with an altered individual,
whose mind lacks temporarily its normal factor of judgment and con-
spicuous elements of its self-control. There is hardly any need to em-
phasise here the obvious fact that the directions which these altera-
tions tend to take commonly, even as instanced merely by the few
sub-types of deviation of judgment and behaviour just mentioned,
are likely to be fraught with serious consequences for the due dis-
charge of responsibilities in all walks of practical life. Accuracy,
avoidance of accidents, tactful handling of colleagues and subordi-
nates, observance of discipline, punctuality, reticence in matters of
confidence, are all obviously jeopardised; and an additional source of
friction is brought to complicate the relations between the employer
and the employed. 5 ’
The Report makes clear that alcohol is in no sense an aid to
MUSCULAR WORK.
The British authorities recently appealed to the well-off classes to
drink wine in preference to beer, so that the reduced supply of beer
could be available for the workers. All restrictions on the withdrawal
of wine from bond have been removed. The belief that beer helps the
workers is merely the lingering of the old delusion. Here is one
of the conclusions of the Report, page 130; —
“ We have found ample reason to conclude that the taking of alco-
holic beverages to promote such (working) efficiency is not only useless
or even detrimental in immediate effect, but is also likely to be, in its
ultimate results, seriously injurious to health. In the light of our
knowledge of how alcohol acts on the body, there can be no question
that its habitual use by the worker as a substitute for food, or in the
belief that it gives a fillip to energy, is physiologically unsound. 55
The more important the work, the greater the danger. Note from
page 55’-
“ seems, therefore, permissible to suppose that the greater the
precisional delicacy and alertness demanded in a muscular act and
the greater its degree of difficulty, e.g., by reason of novelty to the
performer, the more liable will that act be to show impairment under
the influence of alcohol, and, within limits, the smaller will be the
dose of alcohol which may impair the act. Reliable evidence that
alcohol improves, in normal circumstances, the efficient performance
of any muscular act, unskilled or skilled, seems at present to be wholly
lacking. 55


It may come as a surprise to some to learn that many of the most
striking: Temperance facts were
“ MADE IN GERMANY,”
or at least were discovered there. Before Germany lost her prestige
amongst the nations it is recognised that she had given to the
world some of the most valuable contributions to scientific Temper-
ance. Through education, counter-attractions, and social legislation
the per capita consumption of beer in the German Empire was brought
considerably below the British. German professors started to investi-
gate alcohol without any bias against it. By the use of instruments
of absolute precision, they determined to a fraction how far drinking
diverts the mental and physical capacities from the normal. Emotion,
or moral sentiment, did not come in at all. The whole thing was
reduced to absolute mechanical accuracy. The leader was Dr. Emil
Kraepelin, professor of mental diseases at the Munich University.
His assistants were eminent professors. The experiments were re-
peated hundreds of times, and continued for a quarter of a century.
In all comparisons as between the man normal and the man under
the influence of alcohol the dose given was one conventionally deemed
moderate. The same people were made the subjects of the tests.
They had their abstinence days and their moderate-drinking days. So
far as their own impressions were concerned, they usually felt that
they were doing better after alcoholic indulgence. Here is a sum-
mary of some of the tests :
(i) Withstanding fatigue in weight-lifting. A u good glass’ ’ of
Bordeaux wine caused a loss of from 7.6 per cent, to 8 per cent.
(2) Mountain climbing. Two and one-third glasses of beer in-
creased the time required to climb 8000 feet above sea-level by 21.7
per cent.
(3) Writing test. The usual dinner allowance of alcohol increased
time required from 5.6 per cent, to 7 per cent., the latter being in the
more complicated test.
(4) Response to a signal. Quickness decreased from 6 per cent, to
8.3 per cent.
(5) Type-setting. Three-quarters of a tumbler of Greek wine,
lighter than the usual Australian wine, increased the time needed for
a given task 9.6 per cent.
Again I emphasise the point that the subjects of these experiments,
being mainly men accustomed to drinking, felt on their non-alcoholic
days that they were not doing so well, and when their customary in-
dulgence was restored felt that they were doing better. Always the
“ mocker ” !
Our own Professor Osborne, who has been a student of German
scientific Temperance teaching, points out a fact of fascinating in-
terest as showing
HOW NATURE GUARDS
against alcohol the innocent babes who are helpless themselves.
Physiologists used to wonder why Nature put into milk a sugar dif-
ferent from all other sugars, and the most indigestible of all sugars.


They know now that milk sugar is the one sugar which will not fer-
ment and produce alcohol. The babies and all young animals are
constantly taking into their mouths the micro-organisms which cause
fermentation. If milk sugar would ferment and produce alcohol, as
other sugars do, there would be a danger of alcoholic fermentation
being set up in the little mouth or stomach. Wise Nature has decreed
that the babies’ sugar shall not produce alcohol.
Professor Osborne has given a
CONCISE SUMMARY
of alcohol’s effects which cannot be too often quoted
“ The time has come when the members of the medical profession
have satisfied themselves, after careful experiment and exhaustive in-
quiry, that alcohol is no longer to be regarded as a food of any value.
Alcohol is, in fact, a narcotic poison; it stimulates because it para-
lyses the sense of fatigue and weariness, which is Nature’s warning
signal. It abolishes self-restraint, which is one of man’s highest
attributes, and the only courage which it gives is a misdirected and
useless recklessness. There is not an organ of the body with which
alcohol comes in contact which is not irritated and injured by it.”
This is a confirmation of some of the points which I have stated.
There is a reference to the courage which is conventionally, but with-
out reason, called c ‘ Dutch.” The dose of rum before an attack may
possibly help some men in “ going over the top,” but because of it
they may not be so well fitted to look after themselves when they are
over. Our eager Australian boys have no need of rum’s aid in this
regard. Here is a fable:
A mouse found itself in a wine cellar. On the floor were some
drippings from a tap. It licked up a few drops, and then straightened
itself up and said, (l Where is that cat that chased me yesterday? I
want to meet it now!”
One of the delusions about drink is that alcohol kills microbes. It
may be a dangerous admission on the part of its defenders that it
will kill anything. What it does, however, is to put out of action
the bodyguards provided by wise Nature against infection. The Re-
port says of alcohol that it “ lowers the defences of the body against
microbial invasion.” It is
A TRAITOR WITHIN THE GATES.
The white corpuscles of the blood are the bodyguard provided by
Nature to expel the microbes of disease. These corpuscles are liable
to be put out of action by cold, fatigue, imperfect excretion of waste
matter, and by alcohol. When the body is in a normal condition, as
soon as microbes have entered the circulation, or made a surface attack
through some external injury, the white corpuscles fly to the scene of
the invasion and devour the intruders. Alcohol makes the corpuscles
less alert. When the danger signal comes they do not mobilise quickly,
nor move rapidly to the attack. The enemy is more likely to establish
its hold and cause sickness. Wise Nature establishes the bodyguard;
blundering humans put it out of action.


The healthy body treats alcohol as an invader. As soon as it enters
expulsion begins. It comes out with the breath (that sw y ®
drinker’s breath is such a tell-tale), with the perspiration and other
excretions. When the body is fatigued, or the health is bad, the resist-
ance is less strong; the alcohol remains longer and does more damage.
That is a reason why the old-time practice of prescribing intoxican s
in sickness created so many inebriates. Resistance to the enemy was
weak. The wearied men in the trenches, while hailing rum as an
ally are more susceptible to its traitrous influence.
A medical witness before our Senate Committee of Inquiry said the
men spoke of the rum ration as “the one bright spot m the whole
day.” The letting in of a traitor in the guise of a mend.
THE DRINKER’S COLD COMFORT.
Returning to the British Report, the authors hold that alcohol may be
a food as well as a poison, and support the theory that a strictly
limited quantity of alcohol may be consumed in the body as fuel, tor
this purpose, however, sugar is cheaper, is not a poison, and carw s
no moral risks. The conditions are stated under which moderate arm
ing may, in the opinion of the committee, be physiologically harm-
less in the case of the large majority of normal adults, namely :
“ (i) To avoid a continued action on the issues, such an interval
should elapse between the times when alcoholic beverages are drunk
as will prevent the persistent presence of a deleterious amount of the
drug in the body. ,
“ {2) To avoid direct injury to the mucous membrane of the stomaci,
alcohol should not be taken in concentrated form, or without food.”
In other words :
There must be a long while between drinks.
Spirits and most wines must be well watered.
And drink must only be taken with meals.
And what would be the reward? No promise of benefit, but escape
without harm. The man who seeks to comply with the last condition
by having frequent meals, would run foul of the first, which demands
a long interval between drinks.
To most drinkers it would be easier to get right on the water
waggon” than to hang behind the brewer’s dray in this fashion.
And how would these rules strike the liquor seller? Authority, seeking
to be merciful, says“ Drink only well-watered alcohol with your
meals,” which means never at the bar. Another set of scientists say.
“Drink not at all!” Poor Boniface, standing between the two, might
very well say i “ A plague on both your houses.
The Report is not so thorough in its condemnation of alcohol as
some scientific Temperance handbooks, but it is official, and is pub-
lished at H.M. Stationery Office. Even a conservative statement of the
case must carry great weight with this authority. The Report tells
the man in the trenches that he is better without the rum ration. It
informs the delicate that spirits for sudden heart attacks are a mis-
take. It tells the worker that drink will not help him, but is • more
likely to hinder him. It infers that alcohol is always injurious to the


young, to the nervous and highly-strung, and to soldiers who have been
injured in their country’s service. It brands alcohol as a deceiver,
injuring the system with its pretence of stimulation. It gives ample
justification for Prohibition during war and demobilisation, and, in-
deed, for ever.
THE RECHABITE CONFIRMATION
WHY SOME DID NOT GO,
WHY SOME DID NOT FIGHT,
AND SOME DID NOT STAY.
The following must not be construed as an attack on “ Our Splendid
Men.” It may reflect on some who unfitted themselves for service.
Its value lies in the fact that it gives the war experience of a body of
abstainers whose records have been carefully kept. It confirms the
statements of leading British Medical Scientists, made at the com-
mencement of the war, when they pleaded for war-time abstinence on
the part of ail men about to serve the Empire.
In giving evidence before the Senate Committee of Inquiry as to
soldiers and drink, on September nth, 1918, Bro. John Vale, District
Secretary of the Independent Order of Rechabites, submitted docu-
ments to prove the experience of Victorian Rechabites in the war. Up
to May last 3480 benefit members of the Order had enlisted. Figures
were published on March 22nd, 1918, on the authority of Sir Samuel
Griffiths, Chief Justice of the Commonwealth, showing that out of
387,926 who had been accepted for service, 68,937 were discharged, or
deserted, or died before embarkation. If the Rechabite recruits had
shared the average experience, their quota would have been over 600.
He only knew of 27. In the early days of the war there was much
sickness in camp, and seven members died, and one was killed by
accident, before embarkation. In addition 19 were discharged on
account of physical unfitness. There might be a few cases unrecorded,
but making quite a liberal allowance for these, it was safe to say that
if the whole force had kept to the Rechabite standard over 60,000 of the
men, left here in inglorious security, would have gone to play their
part as heroes at the front. Further, it had been stated that of the
men sent overseas, 11,000 had returned without having fired a shot.
The number of Rechabites who had come back without seeing the
firing line was extremely small. Up to October 31st, 1917, the men
returned from all causes, including the disabled, were 14 per cent,
of those who had embarked. The Rechabites returned up to that
date were 7 per cent, of their number. The difference was less marked
now, because the comparison is with the men who endure. Up to June
30th, 1918, the total returned was about 22 per cent, of the embarked.
Of the Rechabites, 541 had returned up to a later date, being 15.5 per
cent. These comparisons were not between Rechabites and drinkers
exclusively. The army embraced a large number of other abstainers
whose experience could not be tabulated, but which helped to keep
down the average. He was convinced that a comparison between all
abstainers and all drinkers would be even more striking.


DRINK ON TRIAL IN
AUSTRALIA.
AMMUNITION FROM THE SENATE COMMITTEE S REPORT.
As an outcome of the agitation for War-Time Prohibition, conducted
by the Australian Alliance Prohibition Council, the Senate of the
Commonwealth resolved on January 10th, 1918—“ That a Select Com-
mittee be appointed to inquire as to the extent that intoxicating liquor
is adversely affecting out-going and returning soldiers, and the best
method of dealing with the sale of intoxicating liquors during the
period of the war, and of demobilisation and repatriation.” The
following Senators were appointed to form the Committee: —Hon. J.
Thomas (the mover), N.S.W.; H. S. Foil, Queensland; Lieut.-Colonel
Bolton, Victoria; J. Grant, N.S.W.; Colonel J. Rowell, South Aus-
tralia; J. Guy, Tasmania; and R. Buzacott, West Australia. The
Committee sat and examined witnesses in Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth,
Hobart, Launceston, Sydney and Brisbane. Its first and last sittings
were held in Melbourne.
All the witnesses—except a few interested champions of the liquor
traffic, who manifested no shame in giving first place to the craft by
which they won their wealth, or their livelihood —admitted that drink
has been a hindrance in the prosecuting of the war—more or less. It
might be thought that in such a momentous business as the world's
biggest war any kind of hindrance is large enough to demand removal.
The full strength of the evidence in support of W T ar-Time Prohibition
has not been revealed in the press reports. One bit of censored testi-
mony as to the events which led to the closing of Adelaide hotels
when hosnital ships are at the port, liberated for publication in full,
would help to make irresistible the demand for Prohibition throughout
the Commonwealth. Some silly things were said by witnesses, and
these were not censored.
Rev. R. B. S. Hammond,
who was the principal exponent of the case for War-Time Prohibition,
and who gave no encouragement to members of the Committee w r ho
sought his approval of half-way —or less—proposals, gave a striking
illustration of the cost of drink in lost man-power. He may, or may
not, sing “ Rescue the Perishing,” but he tries to do it. He controls
a police court mission and an inebriates’ home. He told of 29
men with a drinking history who had been accepted for service in the
war. Up to the time w r hen he gave evidence 12 of these men were
back in Sydney without having fired a shot. They had been trained
and sent overseas at the usual cost to the Commonwealth, and had
proved worthless. One of them died while in khaki in a Sydney
street. A dozen spoilt soldiers may seem a few, but the point is that
they were 4 t per cent, of the class of whom one man had personal
knowledge.


(< On the Question of the * Wet ’ or 1 Dry ’ canteens.*'
there was a conflict of testimony. Rev. R. B. S. Hammond quoted the
opinion of Lord Roberts that the old style was a “ relic of barbarism. ”
Rev. Frederick Ward Harvey, resident chaplain of the Liverpool Camp,
N.S.W., said:
“ I have had experience on board transports, and I can say again
that the health and behaviour of the men are excellent under the
‘ dry ’ canteen system. In England I saw the ‘ wet 5 canteen system,
and was not convinced that it was a success. On the contrary, I am
of the opinion that the conduct and health of the men would be
better with the ‘ dry J canteen. I am sure that fights and disagree-
ments amongst the men are of more frequent occurrence in the camps
in England than they are cither in camp at Liverpool or on board
transports. I saw men drunk and troublesome many times on Salis-
bury Plain. I know that the ‘ wet 5 canteens are said to be efficiently
controlled, but, nevertheless, men got drunk, and I know that many men
learnt to drink in the 1 wet 9 canteens. I know of cases where men
went to bed drunk every night, and this was in a camp where it was
not easy to obtain drink except through the canteen. It frequently
happened that when drafts left for France many of the men were
under the influence of drink, and a good deal of unnecessary work
was put on the conducting officers of drafts because men were drunk.
I object to the ‘ wet 5 canteen on the grounds that it places temptation
in the way of young soldiers who have not yet learned to enter a
hotel in search of refreshment. In the 1 wet * canteen they first learn
to drink, and in some cases that I know of personally, promis-
ing young soldiers have been spoiled.”
William Francis Woodcraft, Y.M.C.A. Secretary at Brisbane, who
has rendered fine patriotic service throughout the war period by
personal dealing with enlisted men, gave evidence on this point. He
said:
“ In the early days of the war, when ‘ wet 5 canteens were allowed
in camps, there were more intemperance soldiers in the streets at
night making an endeavour to catch the last train than there were
later, when there were no ‘ wet’ canteens, and when there were 15,000
men in the various camps. The strongest, and perhaps the only
argument I have against ‘ wet 5 canteens is the boy soldiers. A group
of men occupy one tent. A suggestion is offered for a good night at
the canteen, and, because of his enforced close association with his
new mates, with whom he feels he must have things in common, the
young soldier is laughed into taking his first grog. This is not
merely theory. I have seen it worked out in practice. When the camps
were large I have often to wait most of the morning to see the Camp
Commandant, because he was so busy ( criming 5 a large company
of men who were paraded before headquarters. The men did not seem
fit for hard drill that day, and from their appearance, and from infor-
mation received, I can say that their trouble was drink, or the result
of drink. At one time, and for many months, we experienced serious
trouble in the streets at night, and from personal knowledge I can
state, without fear of contradiction, that nearly all this trouble was


caused by drink. We had as many as 15,000 men in camp in Queens-
land with the 4 dry ’ canteen; but earlier in the war with smaller camps
and 4 wet ’ canteen, there was more drunkenness noticeable in the
streets. I say that, because I saw the men returning- to camp.”
Here is a little bit of military testimony from Lieut.-Colonel George
Andrew Ferguson, D. 5.0., V.D.
By Senator Colonel Rowell.
“Where were you in Egypt ?”— 44 At Abbassaye, between Heliopolis
and Cairo.’ ’
44 There was a 4 wet ’ canteen there?” —“Yes. We had a lot of
trouble there.” Enough said!
DRINK AND EFFICIENCY.
Brigadier-General John Keatly Forsyth, asked— 44 You think that
drink does affect the efficiency of the soldiers?” —replied, 44 As regards
efficiency, it is the worst enemy of the soldier.”
Lieut.-Colonel G. A. Ferguson
44 As an officer in charge of troops, would you prefer to have to deal
with total abstainers ?” —“ Certainly I should.”
44 Do you think you would get more out of them?”— 44 Yes, I do.
There would be fewer orderly-room offences. As Commanding Officer
of a battalion I had to deal with such offences, and I think I can say
that 90 per cent, of the 4 crimes ’ were due, directly or indirectly, to
drink.”
44 But I understand there are not many who give way to drink?” —
“ There are not many charges. The charges vary according to the
position you hold in the line. While you are in the front line, and
there is no liquor available, there are practically no charges. But when
you get back to the rest camp, where the men can get a better supply
of liquor, the charges begin to increase. Even then the number of
charges in a battalion would not be very many.”
“. . . I give the illustration that while we were in the line there
were very few 4 crimes ’ at all, but when we would be in reserve and
away from the front, the work of the orderly-room would increase.
When men would come before me, and I asked them what I should
do with them, they would say, 4 Send me up into the front line where
I cannot get any liquor.’ ”
Safer in the trenches than at the bar!
“ Dry M and “ Wet ” Ports of Call
A letter was admitted which made the following comparison
44 This was proved by the example shown by the men, when given
permission to go ashore at an American port (name deleted). This
was an ideal chance of letting the American people see the Australian
in his true form. It was in one of the 4 dry ’ States of America, and
the American officers to whom I spoke were greatly impressed by the
fine physique and bearing of our men. We were the first Australians
to call there. There was no drunkenness there, and consequently no
insubordination of any sort, although the men had every opportunity.
Later, at a port in the Pacific, where the men got liquor ashore, the
appalling spectacle of drunken men, some of whom were cripples, being


assisted by the local people back to the ship after being: found asleep
on the side of the footpaths and elsewhere, did not create a favourable
impression of the men who were so admired and esteemed by the
American people.”
We are the patriotic people who want to see the Australian soldier
at his best always.
DRINK DELAYS RECOVERY.
Charles Thomas Poulson, secretary of the Southern Branch of the
Tasmanian Licensed Victuallers’ Association, seriously assured the
Committee that drink accelerates the recovery of some patients. The
medical and nursing: authorities had a different tale to tell. I quote
questions and answers from the evidence of William Brooker Vance,
medical practitioner, Commanding: Officer, No. u Australian General
Hospital, Caulfield.
“ How many patients have been through your hands at the Caul-
field Hospital?”—“ Last year, from ist January to 31st December, 9676.”
44 Can you say if drink affects invalided soldiers to any extent?”—
“ Yes, very much indeed, because if a man takes drink while under
treatment he does not make satisfactory progress.”
“ Do you find that a certain number of the men manage to get
intoxicating: liquors while under treatment?” —“ A certain proportion
do. Last year I had 91 men up before me at the orderly room on
charges of drunkenness, but that number did not include all the sol-
diers who had taken drink while under treatment. Quite a large num-
ber of men absent without leave were also “on the bust.” They
told me they were ashamed of themselves, and preferred to get sober
before they came back to the hospital.”
“ What do you do when they return?”—“They are brought up on
a charge of being: absent without leave, and are punished accordingly.”
“In your opinion does drink seriously affect the progress of
patients?”—“Yes. It retards their recovery.”
“ Do some of the men who go away from the hospital on leave
return within the time specified the worse for liquor?”—“Yes.”
“ If a man is a total abstainer, would he recover more quickly than
a man who is accustomed to drink?” —“There is not the slightest
doubt about that. As a medical man, I can tell the Committee that a
total abstainer will stand disease very much better than a man who is
in the habit of taking alcohol.”
“ Would you be in favour of complete Prohibition during the cur-
rency of the war?”—“Yes absolutely, and for everybody, either in
regard to the sale or manufacture.”
It has been stated that the blue arm-band for invalid soldiers was
adopted on the recommendation of the military doctors. Here is
one at least who wants the blue band for the Commonwealth.
From those responsible for the nursing of the men I select a passage
from the evidence of Augusta Isabelle Moore Robinson, Principal
Matron of the No. 9 Australian General Hospital, Roseneath, Tas-
mania.
“Have the drinking habits of the men interfered with your work?”
—“ Yes. in several instances wffien men have suffered from the effects


of dhole. It is our opinion out there that the wounds of men who
drink suffer more or less. . . . When men have been away at night
their pulse-beat is raised in the morning. They are more or less shaky
and off colour, and there is more discharge on their dressings. From
these facts I form my opinion that drink is bad for them.”
WHY MEN ARE STRANDED.
Arthur Madciock David, secretary to the Victorian Branch of the
Returned Soldiers and Sailors’ Association.
“ Have you noticed a number of cases of men being actually
stranded a day or so after they return?” —“ Yes.”
“ Do they come to you?”—“ Yes.”
“ I suppose that drink has been an unfortunate factor in that re-
spect?”—“ In go cases out of 100 it has been.”
“THE ONE AND ONLY DETRIMENT.”
Captain Charles Richard Brewis, R.N., Naval Transport Officer,
gave evidence as to the improvement resulting from Six ©’Clock closing
in Victoria, and the closing of hotels at Port Melbourne when troop
ships are leaving, but more is needed. On December nth, 1917, he
wrote for the information of General Sellheim: —
“ I have to inform you that excessive drinking whilst in port, espe-
cially immediately prior to proceeding to sea, is the one, and practic-
ally only, detriment to an efficient trooping service. This applies to
the crews of vessels employed as troopships and hospital ships. I have
witnessed the most regrettable incidents amongst military officers and
men for active service returning to their transport in a state of intoxi-
cation after having.landed for a few hours in Melbourne.”
He recommended that all hotels within a radius of 20 miles of the
General Post Office in Melbourne be closed when troopships were at
the port.
SOLDIERS ARRESTED IN BRISBANE.
The natural reluctance of the police to arrest soldiers for drunken-
ness is well known. Lieutenant H. W. Morey, Assistant Provost
Marshal, Brisbane, gave evidence that there had been 6348 arrests
of soldiers in Brisbane, of which 1360 were for drunkenness.
Evidence was given by Ernest Hamilton Ruddle, president of the
Queensland United Licensed Victuallers’ Association, who concluded a
written statement as follows: —“ In conclusion, as far as Queensland
is concerned, we must pay a tribute to the general sobriety and good
conduct of the men in uniform, and our special thanks are due to the
officers in charge of the men, who, at all times, have done everything
to assist our efforts in the cause of true temperance, and any restric-
tions which they have seen fit to impose, we, as an association, have
strictly and loyally adhered to.”
Mr. Ruddle’s conclusion must be regarded as a lame one. The
efforts of the Trade in “ the cause of true temperance ” have clearly
not been entirely successful.


A WHITE BOOK OF BLACK
- - FACTS - -
It is worth while recalling - some of the black facts from the official
Report on " Bad Time Kept in Ship-building - , Munitions and Transport
Areas,” ordered by the House of Commons to be printed on May ist,
1915. This was the document which caused the King - to set the nation
the example of Prohibition by banishing drink from the Royal palaces.
In giving an epitome of the Report now it should be stated that the
restrictions imposed on the liquor traffic by the Board of Contiol have
effected a vast improvement. Moreover, that we are called upon to
take off our hats to the very large majority of British workers who
have stood up to the strain of the long and gigantic war like heroes.
Some soldiers of industry have literally died from over-work—-dying
for the Empire as much as though they had laid down their lives on
the battlefield.
With gigantic numbers the small percentages are large enough to
make a vital difference.
I quote direct from the Report of thirty large, closely prmted
pages: —
The first reports are from the Admiralty. They show that while the
country is at war men were doing less work than would be regarded as
normal under peace conditions. Content to dissipate time and money
because of higher wages, and so making the boon a blight to them-
selves and the country.
In the case of 135 fitters employed on submarine engine work, the
time lost amounted to the equivalent of a full week’s work of 28 men
that is to say, each man did a little more on the average than
three-quarters of an ordinary day’s work.
The reports from the north-east coast show that the lost time at one
ship-yard by rivetters equalled 35 per cent, of the normal; platers, 25
per cent. ; and drillers, 22 per cent. By the workmen as a whole
nearly one-third of the normal time was lost.
Letters are quoted from employers as follow:
(a) “We regret to say that a number of men are losing a consider-
able amount of time, mostly, we are afraid, due to their drinking
habits ... if some step could be taken to restrict their opportunities
to indulge in intoxicating liquor enormous benefits would result in the
progress of this and other naval work we have in hand.”
(b) li Regret to say considerable number of our workmen are absent
from duty to-day—drinking.”
(c) “ Regret to complain construction of H.M.S. - delayed
through workmen absenting themselves from work through excessive
drinking.”
The Captain-Superintendent of the torpedo-boat destroyers building
in various parts of the country reports that “ the main difficulty that
contractors have to contend against is the inability on the part of the
men to work full time.” “ Inability” is a kind way of putting it.


<< The manager of works on the north-east coast, where large quan-
tities Then are manufactured, states that, if the two public-houses
just outside the works could be closed, his output would be very largely
m The men at the front sacrificed through lack of shells while shell-
makers were getting drunk! , . •
In one yard, out of 211 rivetters employed, only fourteen lost no time
in one week. Sixteen were absent the whole week; eleven were absent
forty hours or over; fourteen lost thirty hours or over; forty-one
twenty hours or over; fifty ten hours or over; and so on. Out of
jn only fourteen did a normal week’s work.”
The Captain-Superintendent of the Clyde reports:
«i n a ship-yard last week, where a warship is under repair, work on
the inner bottom of the ship was so badly carried out as to suggest at
once an inspection that it could not have been done by men who were
sober. It was dangerous, and had to be condemned. In the same yard
(and it is common in most others) drunken men, nominally at work,
have had to be removed. Men are bringing or smuggling liquor into
the yards in bottles, and facilities for buying spirits in bulk at public-
houses and at licensed grocers must be stopped.”
A later extract we shall give shows that patriotic publicans are offer-
ing special facilities for men to buy liquor in bottles!
We wonder if bad work, due to half-drunken workmen, has escaped
discovery until the enemy’s guns found it?
The Director of Naval Equipment reports :
« Sunday working is of little value, as the money paid for Sunday
work leads to abstention from all work for often two days, and a Sun-
day worker will frequently not return till Wednesday. The money
earned is sufficient to satisfy the men’s standard of living, and any-
thing extra beyond ordinary wages encourages abstention to enable
loafing in public-houses instead of doing their honest day s work.
It appears that the Sunday work plan has been a doubtful aid.
Double wages are paid. The man who has worked at his very best for
six days needs the Sunday off, and may keep fit for strenuous service
by taking it. The waster who loafs on some week-days, works on Sun-
day for the sake of the double pay.
The White Book includes a report of the deputation from the Ship-
building Employers’ Federation which waited upon the Government to
urge total Prohibition of the sale of liquor during the war. The
master ship-builders said, in effect: “We want to do our best in the
crisis. It’s up to you to help us by closing the liquor bars.” We
quote from the report:— .
“ The deputation, which was representative of the leading- ship-
building firms in the country, was unanimous in urging that, in order
to meet the national requirements at the present time, and the urgent
necessities of the position, there should be a total Prohibition during
the period of the war of the sale of excisable liquors. It was repre-
sented by them that mere restriction of hours, or even total Prohibition,
within certain war-work areas, was not sufficient, as certain classes
would be entirely unaffected, and it was felt by the deputation that


total Prohibition should apply as an emergency war measure, not only
to public-houses, but to private clubs and other licensed premises,
so as to operate equally for all classes of the community. In putting
forward these views, those who spoke on behalf of the deputation ex-
pressed themselves as satisfied that there was a general consensus of
opinion on the part of the workers favourable to total Prohibition
along the lines indicated.
The members of the deputation stated that, speaking with the
experience of from 25 to 40 years, they believed that 80 per cent, of the
present avoidable loss of time could be ascribed to no other cause than
drink. The figures of weekly takings in public-houses near the yard
were convincing evidence of the increased sale of liquor. 55
The deputation submitted figures for the month of March which
showed that of each 1000 ironworkers employed, only 24 per cent,
worked over the normal hours, while 640 out of every 1000 worked less
than the normal hours.
From Good Friday to Easter Monday inclusive were given as holi-
days. On Easter Tuesday the men should have returned invigorated,
but let the report speak concerning certain yards:—
u On Tuesday, the 6th April, 1798 men of the Ship-yard Department
failed to turn up; 1431 of the Engine and Boiler Shops, and 666 in the
Repair Depaitment; and the absences continued abnormal for some
days. On the 7th April, 2916 men were out from work the first quarter
of the day, of whom 1670 remained out all day. Even on the Bth 2500
were out the first quarter, and 1500 remained out all day. 55
Admiral Lord Jellicoe found that the efficiency of the fleet was so
affected by delay in repairs that he wrote to the First Sea Lord as
follows :
U To-day an officer in a responsible position arrived. His account of
things on the Clyde was most disquieting. He said that the men
refused altogether to work on Saturday afternoon; that they took Wed-
nesday afternoon off every week (if not the whole of Wednesday) and
worked on Sunday because they got double pay for it. He said, also,
that they only worked in a half-hearted manner. My destroyer dock-
ings and refits are delayed in every case by these labour difficulties,
and they take twice as long as they need do. I feel that you ought to
know the facts, and so put them before you now. 55
A manufacturer of high explosives is painfully aware of the fact that
he is not delivering the goods in the quantities needed, and writes:
u Even at the present time we are not turning out as much as we
could otherwise, owing to various troubles, and this is due to the fact
that the men have been making good money and, unfortunately, wasting
most of it in drink. Consequently, they are in such a condition that
it is impossible for them to attend to their duties in a proper manner
even when they come to the works, which is at odd times, and to suit
their own convenience. 55
The repoit reflects upon the workmen, always with discrimination,
recognising that some are doing their best. The discrimination is
needed also in allotting the blame. Britain is reaping what she has
sown. The report mentions that in one street alone, adjacent to a


Scotch ship-building: yard, there were thirty public-houses within a
distance of half-a-mile, That is what the workman, cursed with the
drink appetite, has to face. Again, of all the yards along - the Clyde,
there was at the time one —only one—where accommodation for taking
meals was provided. The public-house welcomes the men. They find
warmth and shelter while they eat their food, but, of course, are con-
strained to buy liquor. Society pays dearly for its neglect of social
duties.
To prevent early morning drinking public-houses by the Clyde were
kept closed till ten a.m. This is how the publican met the case: —
61 Large numbers of bottles, varying in price from 6d. to 2s., are put
ready in the public-houses, to be carried away just before closing
time for use the next morning, owing to public-houses not opening
until ten a.m. In some cases men wait about in the morning till they
do open, preferring the loss of time to going without their morning
drink.’ 5
This is a grim comment upon the publican’s joke: u If whisky inter-
feres with your work, give up—work! 55 To show their patriotism,
some of the publicans who put up 2s. bottles of whisky to serve as a
morning u nip, 55 displayed notices asking their customers to “ avoid
excess. 55
One of the saddest sections of the report relates to difficulties with
transport ships, owing to the drunkenness of crews, particularly of
firemen.
“ Yesterday the crew of a transport deserted. The same thing hap-
pened the day before. The firemen go on board the transports drunk,
making it impossible to get up a full head of steam, so greatly reduc-
ing the speed and endangering the lives of thousands of troops by
making the vessels a target for submarines. 55
“ We sent 250 dock labourers to Havre (France) under capable
civilian supervision. They all got drunk and out of hand in the first
fortnight. 55
The authorities are reluctant to prosecute, but this is a case in which
they did: —
“ Captain Roberts, the commander of the transport, told the court
that there were over 1000 troops on board, and that the men should
have joined the ship not later than 3.30 on the afternoon in question,
The sailing hour was six o’clock. Two men were brought on board
at seven, one of them intoxicated, but the rest did not put in an appear-
ance at all. In consequence of the absence of these men witness was
unable to proceed with the ship, which, as a matter of fact, had to
return to Southampton. The troops had to be transferred, there was
twenty-four hours 5 delay, and everything was dislocated.”
In this case the men were wanted at the front. Some of them had
travelled from the west of Ireland and others from the north of Scot-
land, and had been from fifty to sixty hours on the way. Another
two or three hours should have seen them in France, but, because the
ship’s firemen were drinking, “ everything was dislocated.”
The Director adds: —
“ I can only reiterate that the time now taken to prepare ships for


service is a grave danger to the success of the naval and military
operations, which depend so largely on efficient sea transport.
“ To-day I find a transport required for urgent military service, to
prepare for which would normally occupy seven days, will take twenty-
two days to complete, in spite of every effort made to accelerate the
work.”
From officer in charge of British Channel:
“ Twenty-six ships delayed through desertions, etc., resulting in
total delay of thirty-six days, six hours—almost entirely due to drink.”
From principal naval transport officer on South Coast:
c< Transport work hampered by:—
“i. Drunken members of crews miss ships, hence ships short-
handed, or on occasion are prevented from sailing altogether.
<c 2. Firemen return in drunken condition, hence they are unable
to keep steam, causing speed to be seriously reduced, with obvious
danger resulting—constantly occurring.
“3. Dock labourers, and coal porters, especially latter, knock-off
work early to get drunk before closing time.”
Another South Coast transport officer cites typical cases;—
u i. Seamen under influence of drink; captain and pilot clear ropes
away and take ship out themselves.
“2. Men on shore all returned drunk; ship unable to put out to sea.
“3. Men again drunk; much delay in putting out.
“4. Firemen and seamen on shore return drunk; ship loses the
tide.”
It is fitting that this summary should conclude with an official liquor
trade comment, vide ‘‘Australian Brewers’ Journal,” 20th April, 1915*
page 353. An official writer, referring to the armament and munition
worker at Home, says:—
“If I were in his place I should drink until the cows came home
and damn everything.”
Certainly the British liquor trade has done its best to this end.
Thomas Carlyle Anticipates the Liberty League.
“ No man oppresses thee, O thou free and independent Franchiser;
but does not this stupid porter-pot oppress thee? No son of Adam
can bid thee come and go, but this absurd pot of heavy-wet can and
does. Thou are the thrall, not of Cedric the Saxon, but of thy own
brutal appetites, and this* scoured dish of liquor. And thou protest of
thy liberty! Thou entire blockhead!”—“ Past and Present,” Book
111., Chapter XIII.


BRITISH CONTROL FACTS.
Opponents of Prohibition may seek arguments from the experience
of Britain under war-time control, but the facts uphold the contention
that as you reduce the facilities for the sale of liquor you lessen
intemperance and its attendant evils. The inference is—abolish the
facilities and you stop the results. In London the hours of sale on
week days were reduced from ig£ to 5L Prohibition for 14 hours
daily. In many other cities and districts they were cut down from
to 5a* The output of beer has been halved, and the consumption
of alcohol in all forms almost halved. The alcoholic strength of liquors
has been lessened, and treating made illegal. Canteens for workers
have been established, of which 95 per cent, are “ dry,” and in others
beer sales are limited to a pint for each customer with meals. This
summary only includes the chief reforms accomplished. Here are Some
illuminating figures as to results: —
ARRESTS FOR DRUNKENNESS IN LONDON.
Year iqi4. 1915. 1916. 1917.
Mal es 49,077 ... 35,866 ... 19,478 ... 10,931
Females i8 >577 ... 15,970 ... 9,975 ... 5,736
Total s 67,654 ... 51,836 ... 29,453 ... 16,667
The provincial statistics are equally striking. Of course only a small
proportion of those who get drunk have the misfortune to be locked
up. People are not arrested for drunkenness unless they happen to be
disorderly also, or incapable. Public order in Britain is at present
largely controlled by patriotic “ specials,” who have no desire, usually,
to be mixed up in brawls, or to sacrifice business by attendance at
police courts. But there are statistics which are not affected by human
factors. Nature’s laws cannot be dodged. The actual consumption
of absolute alcohol fell from 89,000,000 gallons in 1914 to 45,000,0000
gallons in 1917. Direct alcoholic mortality was nearly halved in the
case of men, and more than halved with women. Taking the two sexes
together the alcoholic deaths were in 1917 only 49 per cent, of the pre-
war rate. Liquor restriction has saved more babies than German air-
ships killed in England. The overlaying of infants by drunken mothers
has been reduced from 1226 to 704, or by 43 per cent. In 1914 there
were 2385 cases of attempted suicide, and in 1917, 935. One might
think that the awful strain of war in its fourth year; the shortage of
food; the frequent menace from the air; the fear of ill news con-
cerning dear ones at the front, and all the other causes of anxiety
would have increased the attempts to “ shuffle off this mortal coil ”;
but no; less drink has more than counteracted all of them in this
respect. Drink reduced nearly one-half, and its results in the aggre-
gate are halved also. This should strengthen the case for the abolition
of both.


THE TEETOTAL CAR.
Merrily, Oil ride away,
In my teetotal car.
The “ Teetotal Car’’ was a popular song at Temperance meetings
fifty years ago. It was a figurative car. To-day it has materialised.
When, before America entered the war, the liquor trade spread dismal
stories of Kansas ruined by Prohibition, “ Collier’s Weekly ” answered
them with the above cartoon.
There is no place in which every family owns a motor-car, but
prosperous. Prohibition Kansas comes nearer to that ideal than any
other place, with a car to every five families.
Hon. Crawford Vaughan, ex-Premier of South Australia, wrote from
u dry ” Seattle: —“It is interesting to see the line of automobiles
outside a ship-yard in a reserve marked ‘ For Employees. 1 Ship-yard
workers come to their work in their own cars. I spoke in the Labour
Temple in Seattle. Outside there were cars galore. Labour delegates
going to the Trades Hall in automobiles may seem anomalous to our
people. But why not? They now pour spirit into the machine in-
stead of down their own throats. They own the machines where the
brewers and publicans owned them before. 5 ’


AMERICA’S ADVANCE
The Kaiser, when urging his naval students to practise abstinence,
in an address delivered on November 21st, 1910, predicted that in the
next great war the nation which drank the least alcohol would be the
winner. Should the present war be prolonged till after July Ist, Iql q,
that nation is likely to be the United States of America. America
entered the war with a “ dry ” navy, which has done wonderful things
against U-boats, and safeguarded the transportation of nearly two
million soldiers across the Atlantic. Her soldiers were trained in
camps protected from both bars and brothels, and have proved them-
selves to be great fighters without the incitement of rum rations.
Already the American Army and Navy have complied with the Kaiser's
condition of victory, and the nation promises to do so.
The great events in France and Flanders which have given us the
assurance of victory may be attributed in part to overwhelming
superiority in men and armaments, as well as in strategy. But it is
at least significant that the change from the lurking fear that by
some series of unspeakable calamities we might suffer defeat, to the
joyous assurance of victory, synchronised with the advent of an army
fresh from Prohibition camps, and whose leaders had defied the
official tradition that vice is necessary for soldiers. America’s Presi-
dent had said:—
“ The Federal Government has pledged its word that as far as care
and vigilance can accomplish the result, the men committed to its
charge will be returned to the homes and communities that so
generously gave them with no scars except those won in honourable
conflict.”
Out of the 48 States 28 have declared for Prohibition, and in all
but one it is already in operation. The Federal territory is dry. The
distilling of potable spirits ceased in September, 1917. Distillers are
busy making spirits for use against the enemy instead of their fellow-
citizens. Brewing will cease on December Ist, this year. War-time
Prohibition will operate from July Ist, 1919.
But America has done a greater thing than these. In November.
1917, Congress submitted to the States a proposed amendment to the
Federal Constitution, for ever prohibiting the manufacture and sale
of liquor for beverage purposes, which amendment, if ratified by
three-fourths of the States, will go into effect one year from the date
of ratification. It is necessary that 36 States ratify the measure before
it can be made effective. Already 14 States have done so. The Legis-
latures of most of the remaining States will meet in 1919, mostly in
January. The hope is cherished that the necessary majority for rati-
fication will be secured. Thereafter America will be free from the
liquor traffic, not only during war-time, but after. The blessings of
Prohibition will enhance the blessings of peace.
Here is the answer to the stories of Prohibition failures in America.
They were not all inventions, but most were exaggerations, and were


partly made possible by peculiar American conditions which are ex-
plained in “ Wiser Through the War.” Called upon to take a
dominating part in the struggle to “ make the world safe for demo-
cracy,” and seeking to fit itself for this supreme task, on the basis of
the experience of more than half the States, America has resolved
to banish drink for war-time, and will probably continue the banish-
ment for ever.
U.S. NATIONAL PROHIBITION.
The long-looked-for passing of the Constitutional Amendment, pro-
viding for the total Prohibition of the sale, manufacture, and impor-
tation of liquor, by over a two-thirds majority, passed both the Senate
and House of Representatives last year. The Amendment has been
sent on to the States for ratification. It is necessary that 36 out of
48 States of the Union should approve of the Amendment. So far 14
States have ratified, as follow:
(1) Mississippi.—Ratified by Senate, January Bth, 1918, 28 to 5.
Ratified by House, January Bth, 1918, 93 to 3.
(2) Virginia. Ratified by Senate January 10th, 1918, 30 to 8.
Ratified by House, January nth, 1918, 84 to 13.
*(3) Kentucky.—Ratified by House.. January 14th, 1918, 66 to 10.
Ratified by Senate, January 14th, 1918, 28 to 6.
(4) South Carolina.—Ratified by Senate, January 25th, 1918, 28 to
6. Ratified by House, January 23rd, 1918, 66 to 29.
(5) North Dakota. —Ratified by House, January 25th, 1918, 96 to
10. Ratified by Senate, January 25th, 1918, 43, to 2.
•(6) Maryland.—Ratified by House, February Bth, 1918, 58 to 36.
Ratified by Senate, February 13th, 1918, 18 to 7.
*(7) Montana.—Ratified by House, February 18th, 1918, 77 to 8.
Ratified by Senate, February 19th, 1918, 3$ to 2.
*(8) Texas. —Ratified by Senate, February 28th, 1918, is to 7. Rati-
fied by House, March 4th, 1918, 72 to 30.
•{9) Delaware. —Ratified by House, March 14th, 1918, 27 to 6. Rati-
fied by Senate, March 18th, 1918, 13 to 3.
(10) South Dakota. —Ratified by Senate, March 19th, 1918, 43 to o
Ratified by House, March 20th, 1918, 86 to o.
•(11) Massachusetts. —Ratified by House, March 26th, 1918, 145 to
91. Ratified by Senate, April 2nd, 1918, 27 to 12.
(12) Arizona.—Ratified by Senate, May 23rd, 1918, unanimously.
Ratified by House, May 24th, 1918, 29 to 3.
(13) Georgia.—Ratified by Senate, June 26th, 1918, 34 to 2. Ratified
by House, June 26th, 1918, 129 to 24.
(14) Louisiana.—Ratified by Senate, August 6th, 1918, 21 to 20.
Ratified by House, August Bth, 1918, 69 to 41.
•Non-Prohibition States at time of ratification.
The above 14 States include Montana, in which State Prohibition
has not yet taken effect, and 4 States which have not yet adopted it.
Texas has since gone “ dry.”
Nearly all the remaining State sessions of Legislature will be held
early next year, mostly in January- It is confidently expected that the
requisite 36 will be secured.


AMERICA’S " DRY” STATES.
W€ have compiled the following table of the American Prohibition
States. Prohibition is now in operation in 27 States. Montana will
be added on December 31st next. Prohibition also operates in the
District of Columbia, Alaska Territory and Puerto Rico.
In 20 at least of the Prohibition States large areas were first freed
from licences by Local Option. The boons of local No-licence
strengthened the desire for State-wide Prohibition.
Constitutional Prohibition means that the law is put into the Consti-
tution of the State by the vote of the electors, and can only be repealed
by the same means.
Population Area Year
1910 Sq. took
State. Nature of Law. Census. Miles. Effect.
Alabama —Statutory Prohibition 2,138,093 5L279 J 9 X 5
Arizona — Constitutional Prohibition by
Referendum 204,354 113,810 1915
Arkansas —Statutory Prohibition 1,574,449 5 2 »5 2 5 *9*6
Colorado —Constitutional Prohibition by
Referendum 779,024 103,658 1916
Dist. of Columbia—Act of Congress 33 1 >069 60 1917
Georgia—Statutory Prohibition 2,609,121 58,725 x 9°8
Idaho—Constitutional Prohibition by Re-
ferendum 3 2 5,S94 S3,354 1916
Indiana—Statutory Prohibition 2,700,876 36,045 1916
Iowa —Statutory Prohibition 2,224,771 55» 1916
Kansas —Constitutional Prohibition by Re-
ferendum 1,690,949 81,770 1880
Maine—Constitutional Prohibition by Re-
ferendum 74 2 » 37 1 29,895 1851
Michigan—Constitutional Prohibition by
Referendum 2,810,173 57,480 1918
Mississippi—Statutory Prohibition 1,797,114 46,362 1908
Nebraska —Constitutional Prohibition by
Referendum 1,192,214 76,808 1917
New Hampshire—Statutory Prohibition ... 430,572 9,03! 1918
New Mexico—Statutory Prohibition ... 3 2 7,3°i 122,503 1918
North Carolina —Statutory Prohibition ... 2,206,287 48,740 x 9°9
North Dakota—Constitutional Prohibition
by Referendum 577,056 70,183 1880
Oklahoma —Constitutional Prohibition by
Referendum i,657, x 55 69,414 1907
Oregon—Constitutional Prohibition by Re-
ferendum 672,765 95,607 1916
South Carolina —Statutory Prohibition by
Referendum 1,515,400 30,495 *9*5
South Dakota —Constitutional Prohibition
by Referendum 583,888 76,868 1917


Tennessee Statutory Prohibition 2,184,789 41,687 1909
Texas—Statutory Prohibition 4,896,542 262,398 1918
Utah—Statutory Prohibition approved by
Referendum 373,35! 82,184 1917
Virginia—Statutory Prohibition by Re-
ferendum 2,061,612 40,262 1916
Washington—Statutory Prohibition by Re-
ferendum 1,141,990 66,836 1916
West Virginia—Constitutional Prohibition
by Referendum 1,221,119 24,022 1914
Prohibition goes into effect in Montana, December 31st, 1918.
Also under Prohibition :
Alaska Territory (population, 64,356), January Ist, 1918.
Puerto Rico (population 1,118,012), March 2nd, 1918, by Referendum.
Panama Canal zone.
ON A QUESTION OF DOLLARS.
Business Men Testify.
Tacoma, Washington.
Business shows increase of 25 to 40 per cent. Now able to go up
and down streets without meeting drunken men.—McLean Brothers.
Denver, Colorado.
Denver was forced dry against her will by a State vote. The change
in the aspect of the city has been marvellous. The contrast between
the former cond tions and the present general sobriety is very dis-
tinct.—Budd Shoe Company.
Portland, Oregon.
Prohibition then to Oregon is all and more than we hoped for. It
has raised the moral standard of our State. Our men in Oregon to-day
(and I will include the women and children) look cleaner, fresher, and
brighter from a physical standpoint and dress appearance than they
did in former times; all of which I attribute to the elimination of
liquor.—Ray Bankhurst.
Denver, Colorado.
We had one instance of a woman who bought a player-piano three
years ago, and was obliged to give it up soon after, as she could not
keep up the payments. Her husband was not a drunkard, but had
lost several positions on account of his drinking.
Last spring this same woman came in with her husband, and both
testified to the change that had come about in their home (since Prohi-
bition), and that they could feel safe now to go ahead with the pur-
chase of another player-piano.—The Knight-Campbell Music Co., per
V. G. Knight, Vice-Pres. and General Manager.


Portland, Oregon.
While the officers of this concern were personally opposed, we are
happy to say that our business has been on the increase for the past
year, collections have been much better also than for the past five
years.—lra F. Powers Furniture Co.
Tacoma, Washington.
We find that our sales have increased, and collections are much
better, and we do not have so much trouble with old, past-due accounts.
We say nothing about the moral side of it, because that is all on one
side, and there is nothing to say against the movement.—Standard
House Furnishing Co.
Spokane, Washington.
Summing up, would state that we have had over a year of experience
under Prohibition law with results so beneficial that there is now very
little division of opinion over the matter here.—The Crescent Depart-
ment Store.
Denver, Colorado.
We have had one year to test out the effect of “ going dry ” on sales
and collections, and it is only necessary to say that, if we had to vote
over again, we would vote “ dry ” every time.—Hedgecock and Jones,
Specialty Store.
Spokane, Washington.
A great many people who were spending their money for liquor
are now good, respectable citizens, and buying the necessaries of life.—
Kemp and Herbert, Department Store.
Tacoma, Washington.
Men who were former bar-room squanderers are now building homes
instead of paying rent —their wives and children dress better and eat
better, and, in fact, not only their families, but the men themselves,
are happier, and get more out of their lives. —Queen City Market, H.
J. Marx, Prop.
Spokane, Washington.
Effect of State-wide Prohibition has been most beneficial. Our gross
sales have increased 30 per cent. There is no doubt that a great many
pay cheques find their way in payment of meats and the like, instead of
into the saloons. —Welch’s Market, per W. N. Neville.
Spokane, Washington.
From a strictly business standpoint, I do not bel eve there is a mer-
chant in Spokane who does not believe that Prohibition is more con-
ducive to prosperous business. —C. E. Marr.
Tacoma, Washington.
Best thing ever happened. Money that formerly made the saloon
keepers rich is now uplifting the working men and their families.—
Puget Sound Meat Co.


they know what they talk about.
American State Governors Speak.
The following are culled from the testimony of the Governors of
some Prohibition States, given during the months of March and
April, 1918, and are therefore quite up to date,
Arkansas: Governor Hays, “ Ninety per cent, fewer arrests for
drunkenness. Prohibition a decided success.”
Arizona: Governor Hunt, “Since Prohibition went into force,
marked decrease in commitments to prison and insane hospital; needy
families perceptibly decreased; no adverse effect upon legitimate busi-
ness.”
Colorado: Governor Carlson, “ Two thousand new savings accounts
opened in one month; collections in department stores broke all
records; credit men report many overdue accounts (deemed uncollect-
able) paid up; crime reduced greatly. Prohibition a great success.”
Idaho: Governor Alexander, “ The results of Prohibition are most
satisfactory; never such beneficial results from any other measure in
so short a time; savings banks deposits increased; Boise, chief of
police, and four policemen dismissed because no longer needed; police
courts deserted; city and county gaol empty; accidents decreased.”
lowa. Governor Clark, “ Prohibition has reduced arrests from forty
to forty-five per cent.; commitments to State hospitals greatly de-
creased ; demands on poor fund much improved; importation of intoxi-
cants reduced nine-tenths.”
Kansas: Governor Capper, “Wealth per capita greater than any
liquor State; death-rate lowest per capita; bank deposits largest of
any State; no open bar-rooms, and two million people who never saw
a liquor saloon; an automobile to every fifth family.”
Maine: Governor Milliken, “The honest efforts of all officials
charged with the enforcement of the Prohibition law in Maine, have
brought about a condition so satisfactory that all discussion of the
wisdom of the law has permanently ended.”
North Carolina: Governor Kerr, “ The benefits of Prohibition are
great, and are continually increasing. Twenty-one per cent, more
children attending school; bank deposit increased 100 per cent.; build-
ing and loan association stock increased 250 per cent.”
North Dakota: Governor Hanna, ‘Both from moral and financial
standpoints, Prohibition has been a success in North Dakota.”
Tennessee : Governor Rye, “ We have lost the liquor traffic and we
are glad; crime reduced; streets free from drunkards; bank deposits
enormously increased, property more valuable; life safer; people more
prosperous and happier; public morals on a higher plane.”
Virginia: Governor Hatfield, “ Business has improved; arrests de-
creased ; insane commitments less; savings banks swelled; Prohibition
a great success.”


1919
DOMINION OF CANADA.
The Dominion of Canada has prohibited the importation, transporta-
tion, and manufacture of alcoholic beverages, as a war-time measure.
This took effect, April ist, 1918.
All the Provinces have adopted Provincial Prohibition, usually by
referendum, and following Local Option successes. The following is a
list: —
Population
Province. 1911. Year took effect.
Alberta 375,000 ... 1916
British Columbia 392,480 ... 1917
Manitoba 455,614 ••• *9*6
New Brunswick 351,889 ... 1917
Nova Scotia 492,338 ... 1916
Ontario 2,523,268 ... 1916
Prince Edward Is 93,728 ... 1907
•Quebec 2,002,712 ... 1919
Saskatchewan 492,432 ... 1916
Latest estimate of whole population, 8,075,000.
Area in square miles, 3,654,000.
Newfoundland (oldest British colony). Prohibition took effect in
1917.
’Provincial Prohibition will take effect in Quebec May ist, 1919.
The province is nearly wholly “ dry ” by Local Option, fewer than
100 licences being left, most of which are in Montreal. These may
have lapsed by the cutting off of supplies.
Importation ceased on January 31st, 1918. The transportation of
liquor in parts which have prohibited the common sale of liquor ceased
on April ist. Any liquor or beverage containing not more than 2\ per
cent, of proof spirit does not come under Prohibition.
In reply to an enquiry sent on behalf of 100 Kalgoorlie business
men by the Bishop, Dr. Golding Bird, following the visit of Rev.
R. B. S. Hammond, the Prime Minister of Canada, Sir Robert Borden,
cabled: —
“ Prohibition of the importation, manufacture and transportation
of liquor, which was brought into effect by the Dominion Government
on April ist, 1918, has been too recent to announce definite results. It
will, of course, cut down materially the Customs and Excise revenue.
Prohibition of the sale as a provincial measure has been in force in
eight out of the nine provinces sufficiently long to realise and confirm
the expectation of great benefits—moral, commercial, and industrial—
consequent on its enforcement.’ *
The Mayor of Geelong, Victoria (Alderman H. Hitchcock), at the
request of 1200 persons who had heard Rev. R. B. S. Hammond,
cabled as follows to the Premier of Ontario Province, Canada, which


has been under Prohibition since September, 1916: —“ Please cable
candid opinion of Prohibition; its industrial, commercial and moral
value. Does it contribute to war problems.” The Premier (Sir
William Hearst) replied. “ Prohibition in Ontario a distinct success.
It has diminished crime and improved moral conditions. There is
less loss of time by workers. It is beneficial to employers and em-
ployees. It increases the efficiency of the people, and conserves
money for war purposes. The moral, industrial and financial forces
of the country have been strengthened.”
PROHIBITION IN CANADA.
The Story of Success.
“ The proof of the pudding is in the eating.” A comprehensive
investigation has been made into the results of Prohibition in Canada,
replies to questions being solicited from newspaper editors, mayors,
and business men. The following summary of results is from “ The
Pioneer ” (Toronto) :
“ i. Retail and wholesale business increased and improved; a larger
proportion of cash trade, a greater demand for the better class of
goods.
u 2. Increased regularity, punctuality, and efficiency of workers,
resulting in greater earnings for labour and larger returns for capital.
“3. More employment at better wages. Better conditions and
greater safety of work. Higher standard of living.
“4. Rent and taxes more promptly paid. Artisans building and
buying homes for themselves.
“5* Home life bettered. Wages formerly wasted now used for family
comforts and luxuries. Fathers more fatherly. Mothers more motherly,
children happier.
“6. Savings bank deposits increased. Money diverted from bar
and liquor shop to channels of honourable trade, giving health, strength
and vitality to business generally.
“7- Hotel accommodation improved; now quieter, cleaner, safer and
more home-like.
“8. Schools and colleges better attended. Improvement in health
and morale of pupils, better results from work of teachers.
“9. Decrease in drunkenness and crime, fewer police cases, ability
to apply prison reform methods more successfully.
“ 10. Poverty and pauperism lessened, ignorance and vice dimin-
ished, social refoim work of all kinds helped and made effective.
“ 11. Former opponents of Prohibition have been converted to the
support of that measure by the operation of the law, and public opinion
is to-day more pronounced in favour of this method of dealing with
the evil of intemperance than when the various laws were enacted.
“ 12. Prohibition has come to stay in Canada, not as a war mea-
sure, but as a permanent legislative reform.”


PROHIBITION IS GOOD BUSINESS.
TESTIMONIES FROM THOSE WHO KNOW.
Canadian Allis-Chalmers Ltd.
There is no question that the effect has been very beneficial from
the standpoint of industry; and if industrial conditions have been
improved, it is safe to argue that the men themselves have been im-
proved as well, because it is the improvement in the men which has
caused the improvement in industry.
(Signed), Melville Roberts, Manager of Works.
Inter-Provincial Brick Company of Canada Ltd.
I believe this is the only thing which has made it possible for
us to satisfactorily carry on our business during the past few months.
Owing to the high wages which we have been paying, we would
ordinarly have expected to be short of men for several days after
each pay day. I understand, however, that instead of this, our men,
who are paid semi-monthly, save one pay, and live on the other pay.
F. B. M. McFarren, General Manager.
Poison Iron Works Ltd.
Lost time has been cut down 80 per cent. Labour disputes are
almost entirely absent. The general demeanour of the men is much
pleasanter. We would never consent to go back to the old order of
affairs.
W. Newman, M.A., Works Manager.
Bell Telephone Co.
I have always been a moderate drinker, with strong accent on
the adjective. Before the war I was opposed to Prohibition. It is
beyond question that Prohibition in this Province has worked great
good. Among business men you never hear adverse criticism. It is
generally admitted that the law will never be repealed.
(Signed) K. J. Dunstan, Superintendent.
Massey-Harris Co. Ltd.,
Largest Manufacturers of Agricultural Implements in the Empire.
There has been a great increase of sobriety in our city since the
Act came into force, and this naturally has added not only to the
happiness of the families formerly affected, but also to the general
prosperity of the community.
So far as our own business is concerned, there has been a marked
improvement in regularity of our employees, particularly after pay day.
Thomas Findley, President.
T. Eaton and Co. Ltd.,
I am connected with a bus ness where we employ about 18,000
people, and 1 must say we have never had as little trouble with our
people as we have bad since the bar has been abolished in Toronto, and
I am quite sure that we will never see a bar in Toronto again.
C. Booth.


The Williams Davies Co. Ltd. f
Largest Packers and Provision Merchants in the Dominion.
The constant report has been that many people who previously
spent their earnings at the bar, are now buying with same, boots,
clothing and groceries, resulting in their families being properly clad
and fed, whereas before they were left, in some cases, to charity.
The result I notice directly in the business which occupies my daily
attention is that certain men that used to be away now and again on
a periodical spree are now working with us steadily, resulting again
in their savings going to better things.
F. F. White.
A GOOD EXCHANGE.
Gipsy Smith relates that he was travelling on a railway in a com-
partment with five publicans as companions. They spoke to him, and
said that if he and others kept on attacking the drink trade they
would have to go to the workhouse. He replied “If you fellows go
in, the others will come out.”
AN APT INTERJECTION.
In a British election before the war, Mr. Constable, Unionist candi-
date for Blackfriars, Glasgow, was addressing a meeting, and endea-
voured to illustrate how the foreigners were taking work from the
British working man. He used an illustration which he thought would
appeal to his audience. “ Take a bottle of whisky,” he said, ” the
bottle is made in Bohemia, the label is printed in Germany, the cork
comes from Spain, the tinfoil, top from the United States, and ” —here
a stentorian voice shouted —“and the whisky from hell!” The rest
of the argument was lost in a storm of applause.
COULDN’T REGULATE THE DOG.
A very small boy was trying to lead a big St. Bernard dog up the
road. “ Where are you going to take the dog, my little man?” in-
quired a passer-by. “ I’m —I’m going to see where—where he wants
to go first,” was the breathless reply. The little boy resembled the
man who tries to regulate the liquor traffic—but there is no sugges-
tion that the dog bore any resemblance to the cruel traffic.
THE RIGHT HOUSE.
This happened in a Massachusetts village when a Local Option poll
was impending. There was one liquor saloon in the village, and a week
before the polling day a placard as big as the entire front of the
house was raised before it. This enormous placard said, in huge
red letters “If Prohibition passes, this house will be closed.” But in
the dead of night odd noises were heard, and the next morning the
enormous placard covered the whole front of the village poorhouse.


RUSSIAN CAMOUFLAGE
It has been said that “ Russia went ‘ dry’ m 1914, and went silly ns
ini? ” as though there were some connection between the two events.
We are really in the dark as to most of the recent happenings in
Russia, and newspapers are chiefly blind leaders of the blind. There
are some facts which stand out vividly, and amongst them the magni-
ficent services rendered to the Allied cause in the early days of the
war, when Russia was “ dry.” The 1914 battle of the Marne was a
turning point in the war. It is reasonable to say that it could not
in human probability have been won but for the fact that the enemy
had recalled twenty of his best divisions from France to go to the
rescue of East Prussia, and that the rapid mobilisation which made
the Russian invasion possible at that stage could not have been
effected without Prohibition. Later the hand of treachery began to
appear, though it was not then recognised. Immense armies of brave
men were left without sufficient arms and munitions. We read of regi-
ments going into battle with one out of each three soldiers armed, the
others waiting until a comrade fell to pick up his weapon, and mean-
while offering their bare breasts to enemy shot and shell.
Quite competent authorities declare that but for Prohibition Russia
would not have recovered from the Galician retreat in 1915, and t lat
the elimination of drink was an important factor in delaying the
separate peace. What if there had been a longer interval between
Russia going out and America coming in?
Putting our own feelings of disappointment out of the question,
can we wonder at the Russian people being war-weary ? Their em-
pire, comprising one-seventh of the earth’s land, was big enough foi
them. They had no share in the territorial aims of their rulers. At
the end of iqi6 there were two million Russian soldiers dead, and
five million permanently crippled.
The first Russian revolution won the admiration of the world. It
was a “ dry ” revolution. Unhappily, when authority fell from a
people not properly fitted for self-government, the beneficent expres-
sions of authority crumbled along with the tyrannical. Vodka cam?
back, and the slumbering appetite was revived. Many of the excesses
reported were to the accompaniment of raided liquor stores, and
drinking orgies. Alcohol has helped in the downfall from which
Russia will rise again. Liquor men and Liberty-Leaguers are welcome
to all the comfort they can get from Russia’s lapse.
WHICH WAS THE PAGAN?
In 1842, Sir Henry Pottinger, Her Majesty’s Minister at Pekin,
pressed the Emperor Tankwang to legalise the sale of opium in his
dominions, and to derive a revenue from its importation. The heathen
Emperor replied, “It is true that I cannot prevent the introduction of
the flowing poison; gain-seeking and corrupt men will, for profit and
sensuality, defeat my wishes; but nothing will induce me to derive a
revenue from that which causes vice and misery amongst my people.”


NEW ZEALAND
The Dominion of New Zealand has secured Anti-Shouting- and Sk
0 Clock Closing during the progress of the war, and there is now a
g-reat uprising in favour of Prohibition. It is quite understood that
1 Prohibition be carried it will be as a permanent measure.
In 1911 the first vote upon National Prohibition was taken in the
Dominion. The figures of the vote were: For Prohibition, 259,943;
for Contmuance, 205,661. The percentage of the total vote for
hibition was 55.83. A political party securing a majority of over
54,000 would be described as “sweeping the country.” Under the
three-fifths’ majority provision the newspapers were able to announce
the “ defeat of the extremists.”
The issue was again fought in 1914, when the war had just begun
and reformers were adversely affected by the new conditions. The
traitorous part played by the drink had not been revealed, and many
patriotic people thought that Prohibitionists should have agreed to a
truce at a time when unity was desired. The votes were: For Prohi-
bition, 247,217; for Continuance, 257,442. The percentage for Prohibi-
tion was 48.99. Had the poll been six months later the result would
have been different.
The Government appointed a National Efficiency Board to aid the
country with its recommendations. The members were selected be-
cause of their proved ability and business knowledge. Their work
was a labour of love. They were to give the Government the best
expert advice upon all matters relating to efficiency. Having this
commission, the Board came up against drink. Having taken evidence
from many witnesses, including brewers, hotel-keepers, wine and
spirit merchants, employees in hotels and in clubs, hop and barley
growers and merchants, the Board reported: “ That the people should
be better able to provide the necessary amount of taxation if the
inefficiency at present created by the effects of alcohol is removed.
That less expenditure will be required in connection with the
Police and Prisons’ Departments, the Hospital and Charitable Aid
Boards, the Mental Hospitals, the Inebriate Homes, and for other
public institutions.
“ That the increased National thrift which is most desirable, and
which would follow the diversion to productive trade channels of the
money now spent upon liquor would, in the opinion of the Board, as
evidenced by world-wide experience, where the abolition or reduction
of the use of alcoholic liquor has operated, more than counteract the
loss of public revenue now received from this source.
“ That the m oney now spent on liquor, if its sales were stopped,
would be spent or invested in some other direction. If spent, the
expenditure produces, directly or indirectly, a revenue to the State;
if invested, it becomes subject to annual taxation.


“ From a National Efficiency point of view the Board is convinced
that it would be beneficial to the nation and conducive to the well-
being- of the people that the importation, manufacture, and sale of
wines, beer and spirituous liquors (including medicinal preparations
containing alcohol) should be prohibited.’ ’
Under the Dominion law, if National Prohibition were carried the
liquor trade would receive four years’ notice in lieu of compensation.
The Board recommended that compensation be given instead of time.
In the opinion of the members it would pay to give the happy despatch
quickly.
The New Zealand Alliance has accepted the Board’s recommenda-
tions, and is conducting a magnificent campaign to secure a vote
of the people this year, the issue to be decided by a simple majority.
Never before has the Alliance led so great, or so enthusiastic a party
as it does to-day in the effort to make the Dominion safe for the
great home-coming.
THE LATE LORD KITCHENER’S MUTILATED MESSAGE.
When the war began it was cabled that every British soldier going
to the front received a printed copy of a message from Lord Kitchener,
amongst other th ngs, advising them to resist temptations to drink.
Our Defence Department cabled for the full text of the message, and
when the reply came the reference to drink and the allied evil had been
cut out. We can appreciate better now than we could in 1914 the
wisdom which put it in. The following are the precise words as given
by Lord Kitchener;
“ You have to perform a task needing your courage, your energy,
your patience. Remember that the honour of the British Army depends
upon your individual conduct. It will be your duty not only to set an
example of discipline, but also to maintain friendly relations with
those whom you are helping in this struggle.
“ The operations in which you are engaged will, for the most part,
take place in a friendly country. You can do your country no better
service than in showing yourself in France and Belgium in the true
character of British soldiers. Be invariably courteous, considerate,
and kind. Never do anything likely to destroy property. Always look
upon looting as a disgraceful act.
“ You are sure to meet with a welcome and be trusted. Your con-
duct must justify that welcome and that trust. Your duty cannot be
done unless you are healthy and sound. So keep constantly on your
guard against any excesses. In this new experience you may find
temptation both in wine and women. You must entirely resist both
temptations, and, while treating all women with perfect courtesy, you
should avoid any intimacy. Do youi duty bravely, ‘Fear God; honour
the King.’ ”
