

tvJ
(7SU2^
&s,9is.s.
(P. Sty*
/M/.




DUGONG OIL.
BY THE EDITOE.
There are many substances of the animal kingdom used in pharmacy of
considerable importance, and others possessed of valuable curative pro-
perties are from time to time being discovered.
Dr T. Thompson has pointed out the medicinal value of various
animal oils besides cod-liver oil, such as sperm and seal oil, and the result
of his observations was a conviction that fish oils generally resembled one
another in their remedial properties, although differing in their apitude
for digestive assimilation in the human stomach. He tried neat’s-foot oil,
an animal oil obtained from a soft, solid fat found between the parchment
and the leather skin of animals, also an oil obtained from a species of fish
abounding on the Malabar coast; and these trials were frequently attended
with encouraging results.
The practice of daily inunction is common in many warm countries,
and serves to soften the skin and keep the body in health. In tropical
regions, vegetable oils are chiefly used ; but the New Zealanders and some
others use shark oil. The Esquimaux and Greenlanders imbibe large quan-
tities of train, seal, and various fish oils ; whilst the natives about the large
rivers and coasts of Brazil use turtle oil, and fat obtained from the alligator
and crocodile.
Those who are employed in the woollen trade, soap, candle and
other factories, where oils and fats are largely used, enjoy a comparative
immunity from scrofula and phthisis. Sailors believe a whaling voyage to
be a cure for consumption ; and probably the quantity of oil drunk and
taken into the skin may have its beneficial effect upon the system.
Another animal oil having medicinal properties has of late years been
added to the list of commercial products: it is obtained from the Dugong of
Australia. The Dugongs and Manatees were formerly classed with the
Cetacea; but, being herbivorous animals, Professor Owen well remarks that
they must either form a group apart, or be joined, as in the classification of
M. de Blainville, with the Pachyderms, with which they have the nearest
affinities. The name has been corrupted from the duyong of the Malays.
There appear to be two recognised species of the dugong ; 1. Halicore
Dugong (the Indian dugong—the Trichechus Dugong of Gmelin, Dugungus
Indicus of Hamilton); and, 2. 11. Australis . H. Tabernaculi is, however,
considered by Ruppel a distinct species.
Ihe first species is met with about the shores of the Indian Ocean,
Ceylon, and the islands of the Eastern Archipelago. Round Ceylon they
are frequently seen in considerable numbers, especially along the northern
shore of the island among the inlets from the Bay of Calpentyn to
Adam’s Bridge, where the water is still and shallow, and abounds with
algse and fuci; length from 7 to 8 feet. They are also caught about the
Straits settlements Bor 9 feet long. Leguat, about 125 years ago, says they


were met with in flocks of 300 or 400 around the Isle of France (Mauri-
tius), and they were 20 feet long.
HALICORE DUGONG.
2nd. The Australian dugong is a native of the north-west coast of
Australia. It is the manate of Dampier, the whale-tailed manate of Pen-
nant. It is unnecessary here to enter into details of the specific anatomical
distinctions of these species, which have been pointed out by Dr Gray and
others, and can be referred to by those specially interested, under the
article “Cetacea,” in the ‘English Cyclopedia,’ or any other work on Natural
History. These remarks have reference exclusively to its oil.
About Moreton Bay the aborigines give the dugong the name of the
yungan, and are immoderately fond of its flesh. It is their greatest
delicacy ; and when one is speared on the coast, a general invitation is
sent to the neighbouring tribes to come and eat, and the party never leave
the carcase till it is all gone. The colonists are, however, now taking the
capture into their own hands, for I see occasional shipments of about 50
gallons of dugong oil from Moreton Bay, valued at 40s. a gallon, and many
cwt. of dugong ivory (incisors), valued at 60s. a cwt. The animal frequently
weighs there from 12 to 14 cwt., and the skeleton of one forwarded a few
years ago to Europe measured 11 feet in length.
Dugong oil wasa few years ago brought into notice by medical men in
Australia as a therapeutic agent possessing all the advantages of cod-liver
oil, without its nauseous taste and smell. It has also been successfully used
in diseases of the ear, and has further been recommended as a depilatory.
Dr Hobbs, a practitioner of Moreton Bay, and Health-Officer of Brisbane,
in the new Northern Australian colony of Queensland, was the first to draw
attention to its virtues in Australia. He received a prize medal for it at tbe
Sydney Exhibition in 1854, and has now continued the use of it for upwards
of six years as a substitute for cod-liver oil; it has proved eminently bene-
ficial in the treatment of debility, atrophy or wasting of children, dyspepsia,


chronic dysentery, consumption, chronic bronchitis, &c. &c. It has found
its way, through Dr Hobbs’ agency, into the medical stores of Sydney,
Hobart Town, and other Australian cities.
Dr M‘Grigor Croft, of St John’s Wood, Physician, late Staff-Surgeon
to H.M.F., and Medical Officer to the Ceylon Rifles, has the credit of having
introduced and tested its merits in this country in extensive private prac-
tice, and at the Hospital for Consumption, Brompton. Dr Croft is worthy
of all praise for the trouble he is now taking in endeavouring to make the
oil cheap and accessible to the British public, as he is highly successful in
his treatment of consumption and other cases with it.
The animals of the allied genus, the Manatus, would, we should suppose,
prove equally useful for their oil. Three or four species are recognised.
The best known is the Manatus Americanus, Cuvier, which frequents the
mouths of rivers, and quiet, secluded bays and inlets among the islands of
the West Indies and the coasts of Guiana and Brazil. It is said to attain
nearly 20 feet in length, and differs from the dugong in having no
canines or incisors. An old author, R. Brookes, M.D. (Nat. Hist.), speaking
ot it, says, “ The fat which lies between the cuticle and the skin, when
exposed to the sun, has a fine smell and taste, and far exceeds the fat of any
sea animal. It has this peculiar property, that the heat of the sun will not
spoil it, nor make it grow rancid. The taste is like the oil of sweet almonds,
and it will serve very well in all cases instead of butter. Any quantity may
be taken inwardly with safety, for it has no other effect than keeping the
body open. The fat of the tail is of a harder consistence, and when boiled
is more delicate than the other.” The flesh of the manatus is highly
esteemed as food in all those countries the shores of which it frequents. In
my work ‘On the Curiosities of Food,’ I have cited opinions regarding it. In
Brazil the natives call the manatus the “ peixe boi.” It is particularly
abundant in the lakes of the Amazon. Wallace, in his Travels up that
river, describes their capture. “ Beneath the skin,” he says, “is a layer of
fat of a greater or less thickness, generally about an inch, which is boiled
down to make an oil used for lighting and cooking. Each yields from five
to twenty-five gallons of oil.” Edwards, in his ‘ Voyage up the River Amazon,’
speaks of them, and says, not unfrequently they are taken 8 feet in length.
It is said to be a distinct species from the manatus of the Gulf of Mexico.
that if the faeces of serpents were
heated with nitric acid and a little ammonia added, a beautiful purple
colour was produced. He named i purpurate of ammonia. This sub-
stance, when dry, has the appearance of a dark-red powder, soluble in
