









DUNHAM DAYS






X X
/Q <J
'
,C;
C
l
MARIAN


DUNHAM DAYS
A SKETCH
M. I. LITTLE
Illustrated by Marian Alsop
ADELAIDE:
E. J. McAlister &- Co., James Place


All rights reserved.


O Ct or ■
DEDICATED
WITH AFFECTION
GERTRUDE SCARFE.
We gaze in happy retrospect
A down the distant years,
Filled with crowded memories
Of school-day hopes and fears.
A chain of linked fondness
Connects "old girls" with " new,"
And prompts this halting tribute
From my weak pen to you.
M. L.




Page
7
14
20
27
33
40
44
CONTENTS
CHAPTER I —HELEN'S LETTER ... ... 7
CHAPTER II —DUNHAM ... ... ... 14
CHAPTER III —MOTHER MONICA ... ... 20
CHAPTER IV—TROUBLE ... ... ... 27
CHAPTER V —THE PETITION ... ... 33
CHAPTER VI—COMFORT 40
CHAPTER VII—THE PICNIC ... ... 44
CHAPTER VIII —FRANCIS AND FRANCES ... 51
CHAPTER IX—TIGER STORIES ... ... 55
CHAPTER X —NEW FRIENDS ... ... 61
CHAPTER XI—THE HEART OF A CHILD ... 70
CHAPTER XII—THE MATCH ... ... 83
CHAPTER XIII —HELEN'S FAREWELL ... 94
CHAPTER XIV—THE BREAK UP ... ... 102


..


DUNHAM DAYS
CHAPTER I.
HELEN'S LETTER
"O, bother French," said Helen; ''bother, bother,
bother it!" Mr. Ollendorf was shut with a bang,
and Helen sprang up from her seat on the old grassy
mound, mutiny and fun sparkling in her face. "Don't
look shocked, dear heart, but," with a dramatic ges-
ture, "Can you imagine any use for this elegant lan-
guage in far away New Guinea. No, I'm far too
excited to study anything, far less this useless stuff."
"Helen! Helen!" the protesting voice was of
singular sweetness, "You must work for the Exam.,
only a few weeks ahead, remember. Don't trouble
about New Guinea now, but think of Sister Mary
Agnes. You know how keen she is on our passing."
"Thy words have wisdom, sweetest saint, but no
study for me to-day; you just can't dream what has
happened. Yes, I'll bottle it up for a while, and
leave you in peace if you wish, but absorb this old
gentleman." indicating the scorned French grammer,
"in my present state of mind is absolutely not to be
done! Go ahead, Marian, dear, while I sit here and
simmer."


Helen Scott and her bosom chum, Marian Dance,
were supposed to be working hard. Heads, and oldest
pupils, of the large Convent school, their usual be-
haviour, was correct to a point, and with the Univer-
sity examinations but three weeks ahead every avail-
able moment was spent in study.
To-day being warm, the Senior Class were studying
in the old school garden. Some seated on stools and
others on the quaint round mound which formed the
centre of many garden plots scattered here and there
among lawns and shady trees, the whole completely
enclosed by different portions of school and convent
buildings.
The many girlish heads had been bent intent on their
books until Helen's outburst caused a general amused
smile. Something had evidently occurred to upset her
lively ladyship, but obeying Marian's request for
silence work was resumed" by everyone but Helen.
She subsided so far as to sit quietly down, but her
hands lay empty before her. Thoughts, evidently uu-
scholastic, lending many and various expressions to
her face.
How long had she been at Dunham ? Always since
hei babyhood; and now she was to leave, for such had
been her news to-day! Ah! the dear, dear place,
every stone of ivhich seemed precious! Mother and
sister had the kind nuns been since that day so
long ago when a nearly heartbroken man had placed
her in their charge. Only once in all those years had
her father seen his daughter, and now she was to join
him a\\ ay in that half wild land. Sitting so still in
ibis peaceful garden, Helen's heart contracted with
keen, sharp pain, and unbidden tears rose in the great
brown eyes. How she loved this quiet haven, where
gentleness and ioAe held sway ; taming to their own
sweet rule so many differing natures.
Marian sat beside her quietly working on. calm as
some summer lake, her noble, even temperament being
Helen's stay and support. She, too, seemed especially


to belong to '"Dunham," being one of a large squatting
family who, taking up land in Queensland, were so
badly crippled by draught that trips to Sydney were
hopeless. Hence Marian saw but little of her '"ain
folk," relying more and more as the years passed on
the nuns, who supplied loving care as from apparently
limitless sources.
The affection binding Helen and Marian was part
of their very selves. Loyalty to the old school lay
deep in both, but in almost all else no two natures
could well have differed more. Helen being life per-
sonified in its brightest most impulsive form, while
Marian dwelt in a world of her own. True, staunch,
and reliable, but a dreamer more than all. her lovely
face brought thoughts of holy things, so spiritual were
the grey eyes, low, broad brow, and sweetly curving
lips. Helen worshipped this beauty, often gazing at
her friend in wonder, loving her the while as some-
thing infinitely precious.
After sitting silent for quite twenty minutes Helen
decided she could bear no more, so deliberately leaning
backward she lay across Marian's book, thus substi-
tuting her own laughing face for brain-racking moods
and cases. Marian looked at her hopelessly. "Are
you quite mad, dear Helen? Sister Mary Agnes will
be here directly, and whatever will she think?"
"Don't know, dearest, but it simply can't be helped.
Talk I must, or bust. Marian, you don't know
how awful I feel. Look at this." She waved a let-
ter. "Just come to-day, and lam to go. Yes, leave
school. Say good-bye to all this darling place. Oh.
I want to weep. "Can't bear his empty home any
more." so the poor old pater writes. All arrange-
ments are made, and I am to leave; a whole long year
too soon." and sitting up suddenly Helen gazed at her
friend, who certainly looked upset by this most un-
looked for news.
"Oh, darling. I am so sorry, no wonder you could
not study. When did the letter come?" "Just at 4


o'clock; Mother Prioress sent it down, so Sister Mary
Agnes doesn't know yet. It is perfectly ripping in
one way, to be seeing the Dad and the glorious trip!
They say that going through the Islands is a dream,
but, oh. the awful distance. When shall I see all
this again? It fairly breaks my heart.
'"Poor old Helen; it does seem hard, and whatever
shall I do? Still," and Marian flushed shyly, "how
lovely for your dad. dear, to have his girl again."
"indeed, and I'm not so sure; it really is very hard.
Mamma was pretty and just as sweet tempered as
you. He is sure to imagine me the same, and think
what a disappointment I'll be. Ugly and dark, and as
cross as two sticks."
"Helen, you silly child." Marian laughed with glee;
"you have the dearest brown face, and enough fun to
waken the dead. He will simply adore you."
"Marian, do you mean it?" ever since the letter
came I have worried about my looks. You certainly
comfort me much, and I had nearly forgotten" (here
Helen fairly beamed); "if just one thing can be
managed the going won't be so bad. It is all to do
with you. dear, if only you will consent. Will you?"
"I think I must hear it first, goodness knows what
wild cat scheme you are hatching."
"Not wild at all; only perfectly lovely. The Dad
has heard all about you, and says that he seems to
know you. Now. Marian, don't you think, if you
could square your home people, a year's stay in New
Guinea would be just the nicest thing. Think of
our travelling together, and the fun we should have
when we got there. Will you come, sweetest; it
means so much to me?" Standing before her
friend. Helen pleaded with might and main, with no
lack of energy, despite their lowered voices.
'Helen, I should love it. as of course you already
know, but there is much to be thought of; something,
too. which you do not know, must also be considered."
Helen was nearly weeping. Marian looked down.


embarrassed. "But, dear," seeing Helen's disappoint-
ment ; "letters are very good substitutes, and plenty of
those will be sure to reach you."
"But they won't be at all the same. I had built
on this little plan whenever I thought of leaving.
There are plenty brothers and sisters in your home,
but none at all in mine. Don't you think there is any
hope of my having you?"
"Don't talk so sadly, Helen; you can't think how
I should love to be there, just with you; and it is no
little thing which stops me. Though I can't explain
it all now, you shall know very soon, and then you
will forgive me."
"You mysterious old thing, who's plotting now?
However, I'm not giving in, and have you I shall;
but Marian, look, here comes Sister Mary Agnes—
was she ever so shocked before?"
"No wonder, I'm sure; nice behaviour for two moni-
tors! Talking hard in study hour."
The school classrooms faced the gardens, and emerg-
ing from the large hall came Sister Mary Agnes,
head mistress of Dunham, and cheeriest woman. What
a wise and noble woman was this same head mistress!
Firm in her rule, and demanding their best from all,
she yet had the true mother's heart, which enfolded
all her charges in an atmosphere of love. Hundreds
of girls had been in her care, and now held her memory
dear, scattered though they were throughout the length
and breadth of Australia. To say she was surprised
but feebly expressed her feelings on observing her two
most trustworthy girls so flagrantly breaking rules.
Helen's doing so was not entirely unprecedented, but
Marian—yes! She could truly say she had never
known her to transgress before in this particular way.
Helen and Marian rose to meet her as she hurried
across the garden.
"My dears." was her greeting to the two; "can you
be aware that the French class commenced five minutes
ago, and also that you are talking?"


This last was so very obvious that both girls smiled.
"Do please forgive us. they begged together, nelen's
news must bear the blame. It was so very unex-
pected that we neglected everything else."
"Indeed! but I don't think it excuses you altogether.
Am I to know what it is, Helen; or is it one of your
many secrets with Marian? To cause such glaring
disregard of rules makes me think it something very
uncommon."
"It is uncommon—unexpected!—and more than a
little unhappy,"—Helen took into her own, one of
the Nun's white beautiful hands, squeezing it hard
with excitement. "Papa has written that he wants
me at once; so goodbye it will be to you and all this,"
with a comprehensive wave. "I just feel awful about
it, and could hardly believe my eyes on opening this,"
handing her father's letter.
"Ah! this is sooner than you thought, dear. We
shall be sorry, indeed, to lose our wiid Helen; why,
you are like our very own baby." Saying which the
nun bent to Helen, kissing her tearful face, bringing
back the smiles, for, from Sister Mary Agnes, kisses
were rare indeed.
"And, my child; will you miss the examination?"
Sister Mary Agnes exclaimed, having but hastily read
the letter.
"No, worse luck!" sighed Helen; "there isn't even
that grain of comfort. According to Papa, my boat
will leave about two weeks after Exam, week; so it
will mean grinding for that, and then one mighty rush
to be off. I love to be going home if only I might
take you with me." Here Helen hugged Sister
Mary Agnes with much detriment to her veil.
"Marian simply has to come; it would simply kill
me to leave everyone," and half laughing, half crying,
Plelen disclosed her cherished plan.
Sister Mary Agnes listened quietly, neither dissuad-
ing or encouraging, as Helen begged vainly for


Marian's promise, which the latter would not give.
The Nun telt too sad; Helen had seemed like her own,
for 110 mother could have done more than she for the
little motherless child, who had first been placed in her
care nearly ten years ago, guiding and guarding the
girlish life with strict but gentle hand.
1 wonder do we realise how generous and unselfish
is the love of a Nun for her charges. She gives with-
out stint from her own warm heart, often, alas! receiv-
ing but scant return. "Nuns love God," says careless
youth, accepting all that is done. But are not their
hearts most human, too, in spite of their lofty calling?
Assuredly they are, and their pupils should not forget
it. Helen never would, whatever the future might be.
Sister Mary Agnes being second to none in her love,
and so would ever remain.
When Helen at last stopped talking, Sister Mary
Agnes suggested a walk in the grounds for all the
Senior Class.
"You are far too excited to work, so walk until you
get calm; and, my dear, I had nearly forgotten, Mother
Monica wishes to see you, but not before this evening,
so I will take you to her myself after night prayers are
over."
"How perfectly lovely!" cried Helen, fairly beam-
ing ; quiet talks will the beloved Mother had been few
and far between, owing to pitiful suffering, which
shadowed all their lives. "It is just about a month
since I saw her sweet face last. Marian, don't
you wish you were me?"
"Yes, I most certainly do, but come along, Madcap,
or there will be no time for a walk. Thank you
so much, Sister Mary Agnes, for letting us off our
French. Helen's luck again!" And, linking her arm
in her friend's, Marian called the others, who, with
many expressions of thanks, went in to get their hats.


CHAPTER 11.
DUNHAM.
These "Dunham" girls were singularly blessed in
their spacious school home. The building itself was
quite apart from the Convent, but for a long connect-
ing corridor, which formed one side of a square.
School, Convent, and Guest House making the other
three sides, in the centre of which bloomed the girls'
own particular garden.
Really a very imposing group of buildings, Helen
always declared that its own piece of sky was bluer,
its trees and grass greener than anywhere else near
Sydney. The lazy Parramatta bounded the grounds
to the front also on one side, but broad acres ot bush
land stretched away on the other two, much of which
was left untouched, thus insuring for all time health-
giving air in plenty.
"Dunham" had not always been a Convent, having
belonged many years ago to a well-known wealthy
pastoralist, from whom the Nuns had bought it. They
found it necessary to erect many additions, but the
original old-time house still stands splendid and strong
as an example of excellent building accomplished by
convict labour. Broad, white steps led from a pil-
lared verandah to lawns of vivid green, which sloped
to the river front. The drive was on the left, divid-
ing still larger lawns, which formed the school play-
grounds, and was flanked on one side by stretches of
shrubbery, where natives of many botanical families
and many distant lands flourished in friendly nearness.
Fine Camphore Laurels, intermixed with dusky pines,
made a very handsome avenue, whose shade proved
most acceptable after strenuous games in the summer
months.
About a mile from the Convent Buildings a high
paling fence with wrought iron gates formed the boun-


dary for the Nuns, beyond which they never went,
though their land extended much further, partly pure
bush, and partly deserted vineyards with delightful
ferny creeks, perfect as picnic spots, and much beloved
by the school girls . One more picturesque than all
being known as THE Vineyard, from its long position
as first favourite. How many gay scenes it had
witnessed! What hundreds of girlish confidences,
whispered 'twixt friend and friend as they sat on its
ancient terraces!
The busy world with all its rush and bustle comes
daily nearer to "Dunham," but the big iron gates stand
firm, enclosing a life of peace—busy, but very happy
—where God rules one and all. Long may those gates
so stand strong and undisturbed.
It was to the Avenue commonly called the "Long
Walk" that the Senior girls now came—a merry,
laughing group; headed by Eleanor March, who, re-
markable for her beauty, ranked immediately after
Helen and Marian on the School's list of monitors.
Eleanor loved to lead, and certainly did it well, being
blessed with a nature more placid than most, which
usually kept peace in any times of excitement.
Tall, fair, and slender; her dainty high-bred face
had a scornful power of expression, very effective in
keeping girls "up to the -mark." Strangely enough,
her own especial chum pleaded guilty to all the failings
which Eleanor frankly detested. Madge Drew was her
name. Clever, quick, and industrious, she captured all
the prizes for subjects demanding brains. But there
her achievements ended, and many frantic hours
occurred during every week, when Eleanor, bent on
reform, attacked her personal appearance, which was
untidy to a fault. Even now, as they walked arm in
arm down the drive, Eleanor's dainty fingers were
busy arranging a crooked tie, coaxing to union a
widely parted skirt and blouse, but stopping short at
the mop-like head which no amount of effort could
ever keep in order,


Madge was quite a short girl, not at all bad looking,
despite the martyred expression which Eleanor's
efforts produced.
"Why can't you let me alone, Eleanor? All these
fixings and pins make me feel like a tinned sardine —
too braced up to move. If only I'd been a boy!" Her
voice held deep regret.
"Even that would not help you just now; boys don't
drop garments haphazard, as you seem likely to do."
(finally righting the obstinate skirt). "You are an
ungrateful little thing, Madge, quite forgetful of how
much you owe to this,' said Eleanor, waving a mighty
pin.
"Good old pin! I'll write it a sonnet —'Lines of
affection to a pin, by one who has felt its point.'
Whew! don't torture me, Eleanor; you have stuck it
in a mile."
"Better than 100 lines for untidiness. There, now
you look slightly better, if you don't come to pieces
again." And looking critically down, Eleanor thought
she might do for at least an hour or two.
The others walking behind watched operations
amused. "Eleanor certainly never says die," remarked
Inez Malcolm, a frank, pretty girl of fifteen. "If
she'd only work at tennis as she does with Madge and
her clothes, this coming match would not bother us so
much." Inez was head of the Sports Club.
"Whom do we play next, Inez?" inquired Francie
Dunn, a girl of about the same age, but of more fragile
and delicate build.
"The 'old girls' again, and it looks as though they
would win. Eleanor won't practise for our second
double, which makes it weak. The Juniors are nearly
driving me mad with their careless play! So Helen
and I, as first double, will have to be winners for all.
We can't do it," (Inez puckered her brows). "The
old scholars this time have a simply splendid team.
Can't you wake Eleanor to the gravity of the case?
She doesn't like me, so I daren't."


"Oh, rubbish, Inez! but I'll approach her ladyship.
What is the matter with the Juniors, though? They
promised quite well."
"If you could only see them" (here Inez shrugged
expressively). "Jean Brown deserves a smacking, for
she can play, but just ivon't try. Poor little kid, she
had to work to-day, though, and won't forget it in a
hurry." Inez grinned wickedly.
"What happened?"
"I had the four young ones out for practice at mid-
day recess, all grumbling at once for new balls—Jean
loudest of all and determined to play the fool. 1 just
stood it for three games, watching her hit every jolly
thing into the net, urging the others to do likewise;
young wretch! It was fairly maddening, I assure you,
as time is so short, but I paid her out. Truth was,
they wanted to go to the River, shirking practice, but
their naughtiness spoilt that fair hope. Leaving Patsy
and the two Yanes to play their hardest, I worked
Jean at singles, fining her ten lines for every bad shot.
She battled properly then, but nearly expired in the
process."
"Poor old Inez, you do worry over things."
"Well, wouldn't you? This match will decide
for the year. But I do wish they did not
rouse my temper so. Poor little mites, I'm sorry
enough after; but 'Dunham' simply has to win, which
they don't seem to realize."
"Don't get too keen, Inez; nothing is worth hurting
others for, and you know those youngsters adore you."
"I like them, too, except when I'm cross. Francie,
you don't know how lucky you are not to be cursed
with a temper! Mine will be the end of me yet;
though, goodness knows, I try to control it." Inez
sighed rather sadly.
"You are splendid, Inez," Francie squeezed her
hand warmly. "You will be twice the character I
am. Sister Mary Agnes thinks so too!"
"Indeed she doesn't."


"Yes, truly; and here's some encouragement for
you. She says 'that of all the girls she has taught
you have the worst temper but control it best.' "
"Did she really say that ?" Inez flushed with
pleasure. "I thought she had only seen my extra
special rages. I know that her dear old face appeared
in the Hall yesterday just in time to see me shaking
this same Jean for spilling my ink."
"Oh, that's nothing, she sees all the times you don't
get cross as well. As for lean, I could shake her my-
self."
" You shake Jean!" chimed in two or three others,
who were walking behind. "Fancy gentle Francie
shaking anyone."
Oh! I'm not gentle," said Francie, "but you girls
all spoil me; sorry for the lonely one, I suppose."
"Well, so we are Francie darling, but you can't be
lonely with all of us to love you. When is the next
fat letter coming?"
"Not for ages; one came yesterday, not good news,
though."—Francie's eyes filled with tears. "Floods
again in the Hills, and ever so much fever, so Papa
thinks I had better remain over here for Christmas—
that makes five years since I have been home."
"Poor Francie, but you must come to us," cried
May Sinclair, also Kitty Cairns, two bright girls
whose homes were close to Sydney.
"I, too, must have you for some of the time," said
Inez with warm affection; "although ours is such a
small home that it won't be as gay as the others. Still
you will come for a while, won't you, Francie?"
"Yes, indeed, and thank you all. I just love my
different visits, but can't help fretting a bit."
"Still, it won't be so very long now before you leave
for good," said Inez; "and then to live in Java. Oh,
Francie, you are lucky; better off even than Helen.
How would you like a prospect like mine? A tiny
wee cottage in stuffy Petersham, no money for any
fun, and endless lessons to give? Why, you will be


a very fine lady, with servants to even unlace your
boots."
"Inez, don't be absurd! But perhaps it is just as
well; there isn't much power for struggle in that
ridiculous hand," Francie held up her transparent
member in unqualified disgust. ''You will make your
way; probably get a 8.A., and make your name in the
world, so the fates have managed aright. But talking
of letters, was not Helen's a surprise? I am so sorry
that she is leaving."
"Yes, so are we all. and just look at her now—
frantically waving. We'd better hurry on, it is nearly
tea time, too."
"Girls, why did you dawdle so?" said Helen when
they reached her. "I have been calling and calling,
but you took no notice."
"Well, here we are," said Inez; "and blame Francie
who is sad about not going home, so of course we had
to cheer her. What's the commotion, anyhow?"
you forgotten that to-morrow is 'Competi-
tion day.' and we should have picked our sides?"
"Goodness," said Inez, "so it is. Why not do it
now ?
"No, there's not time." looking at her watch, "and
to-night I shall be with Mother Monica. Whatever
shall we do? There will be no time to prepare our
questions." <
"\\ hy not leave it to chance for once." quietly
said Marian. "Put all the names in a hat. which we
can do at evening Rec. There is not much difference
between us."
They did not all look agreement with this, but Helen
and Marian, being first and second in the highest form,
had the right to arrange as seemed best in such purely
class affairs | and as just then the bell commenced
ringing there was no other way they could manage.
"Run, girls, run! or we shall all get marks for
lateness," cried Helen, so picking up their skirts
they raced for home, reaching there just in


Time —breathless, it is true —but able ro take
places at the head of the long procession which
formed to sing the evening hymn before march-
ing to the Refectory. Helen the while feeling very
happy, as her longed-for talk with the Mother drew
near.
CHAPTER 111.
MOTHER MONICA.
Leaning back wearily in a deep, low chair, Mother
Monica waited for Helen. The clock had just struck
seven, so night prayers would soon be over. How
still was that quiet room with its heavily-laden shelves,
which ran from floor to ceiling. It was really the
Convent library, but used as a second reception room,
should the other one be in use. as often happened on
great occasions such as a Clothing or a Profession.
It was the room in which all school interviews were
held —cheerful or the reverse, sometimes witnessing
deep girlish sorrow, but more often sweet happy
talks. To-day had been hard for the Mother, leaving
pitiful lines in her lovely face, as proof of the pain-
laden hours. How gentle she was, and brave! Striv-
ing so hard in all to resemble her beloved Master.
"'Mother Mary Monica. Lady Abbess of Dunham"
was her full and rightful title, but to all she was
known as "The Mother." which suited her nature bet-
ter. for a mother in every sense she was to the large
and varied family which owned her quiet rule, think-
ing for them, planning for them, but never for herself.
One's instant impression in her presence was a feeling
of something holy. Purity and love shining clear in
the brave blue eyes, always so tenderly soft, except at
a hint of wrong, when their blueness turned to black.
Mother Monica was very lovely, with perfection of


feature to match her soul, and when she stood in
Choir, tallest of any there, the wonderful grace of her
figure carried well its draping of black.
No wonder the children loved her with reverence
and tender pity, a simple strain had turned to in-
curable hip trouble, which caused her agonized pain,
but her face was unlined like a child's, though nearly
thirty years had passed since she first bade good-bye
to the world.
That was in far-away England, in a famous old
House of her Order, but she soon begged to come to
Australia, there to take charge of "Dunham*' and
spread through homes in this new fair land Saint
Benedict's noble ideal.
Sister Mary Agnes met Helen after prayers to tell
her the Mother was waiting, warning her at the same
time not to stay too long.
"It has been a bad day, dear." The Nun's kind
face grew sad. "How she bears it I cannot think."
"It seems too dreadful." said Helen, "can all the
doctors do nothing?"
"Not any more than they have; remedies help a
little, but for most of her hours of pain there is no
other cure but endurance."
"Perhaps she ought not to see me. lam longing
to have my talk, but not if it tires her more;" and
stopping dead in the cloistered w ay Helen turned to go
back, despite keen disappointment.
"You won't tire her. dear, only don't stay too long."
And as by now they had reached the closed white door.
Helen knocked and went in.
"Come, dear Helen," said the Mother's voice from
the further end of the room; "I am lazy to-nig'nt. in
my easy chair, so you must walk to me—not much
like a Nun now is it?" drawing Helen gently down
to kiss her with infinite sweetness.
"I hear you are worse again. Mother," (there was
heartbreak in Helen's voice) ; "is it very awful?"
"It is, dear, sometimes; but not so bad just now.


My girlie mustn't worry, for all is done that can be.
Sit down just here," bending to her footstool. "I
feel I want you as close as possible, you will be so far
away from us soon."
"Oh, Mother, don't; it is too awful to think of those
miles of sea and land between you all and me."
"But you want to go, dear, for the Dad's sake?
Think of his lonely life."
"Yes, I do, and of his great, great goodness; but life
is very hard, isn't it? We never seem to get some-
thing without losing in return."
Mother Monica smiled. "I should put it the other
way, dear, to quote the old-time saying. 'God never
shuts tight one door without opening wide another,'
and your 'Dunham' door won't ever be shut, but
always wide open to welcome you back. Not as a
Nun, though, I'm afraid. Eh. Helen?
"No, I'm afraid not," but Helen looked rather
thoughtful. "I suppose girls don't often enter in the
place where they were educated?"
"Why, of course they do; there are several here,
as you know."
"Yes, so there are," but she spoke as if greatly
surprised.
"Why do you ask, Helen?"
"Oh, nothing, at least nothing definite; but I sort of
had an idea."
"My dear, that sounds rather mixed. However,
I'm going to preach, so put your curly head there,"
taking it on to her lap, "and prepare for quite a long
sermon. You are our babv, Helen," said the Mother
stroking her hair, "and like other worldly children you
are going away from our care. Still, you have had
your training, and must abide by what you have learnt.
Just two things I want to mention: 'Put others first,
and be careful in your reading.' It seems very simple
advice, but it means much. Great love will come to
you in proportion as you give it, so in all life's biggest
things give, give, give. So you will be happy, dear, in


.


HELEN AT WORK IN THE OLD SCHOOL GARDEN.


a true, safe way. That is one thing. Helen." The
Mother paused a moment, Helen the while sitting still
until the sweet voice should continue. Would not
that hour come back in the long, long years ahead,
bringing an exquisite memory of the Mother and what
she said?
"Now, to consider your reading," and the Mother's
voice grew grave. "Many books you are sure to see
quite unfit for a girl to read, but you must use your
own good sense in deciding on their merits; on one
point however, you must promise, and that is simply
this: 'lf once you perceive that a book is bad, you will
shut it up immediately.' Will you promise, Helen?"
"\es, Mother : certainly." The promise was given
readily, but through life Helen never forgot it.
"Do so, dear, and you cannot regret it, for no
amount of amusement can make up for soiling your
mind. I don't often lecture so gravely, do I? But I
know you will always remember. Now, what about
the coming Examination, to talk of more everyday
things?"
"Good, bad, and indifferent," said Helen with a
wry grimace, "the middle one being me. Marian and
Madge are perfectly certain to pass. Inez also, but
Eleanor is doubtful—as for me ! Ask Sister Mary
Paul" (their anxious arithmetic mistress). "Why, I
believe you have," seeing Mother Monica smile.
"Yes, I have heard of your latest achievement in
varied Mathematics, which was clever, but hardly cor-
rect. Did you purposely mix your questions, dear?"
"No, but did them by guesswork; nothing will put
figures into me," Helen sighed in despair. "My
other subjects are safe, but arithmetic!" Her ges-
ture conveyed more than words.
"Don't despair, dear, you scrambled through the
Junior, and will probably come out on top."
"Never! never! never! but I shall try my best all
the same. What a rush the whole thing will be;
every day down to Sydney for Exam., and when that


is over perfectly endless shopping. I shan't mind
that, though! Papa did not say in my letter how much
I could spend; perhaps he has said it to you ? Do tell,
dear Mother; has he sent me a fine big cheque?"
"Yes, dear, he has; far, far too big;" but Helen's
eyes danced.
"Glorious, simply glorious! I shall buy the
sweetest things, and you will inspect them —won't
you? —to see whether all is right."
Helen outspread her arms, revelling in prospect
among limitless frocks and frills, kneeling up in ex-
citement to clasp the Mother's knee —she in turn being
every bit as interested as the extravagant girl her-
self.
When Helen had discussed her outfit, from hats and
frocks to boots, Mother Monica begged her attention
to something not nearly so gay.
"Just a poor Irish family," said the Mother, with
deep emotion, "but brave and good beyond words. Sit
down quietly for a last ten minutes, while I tell you
their story, and what I am wishing to do."
Helen sat down at once, instantly keen to help.
"They have only recently come out, and to begin
with are very poor. It appears that their land, what-
ever it was, in Ireland was lost to them by roguery.
Who was responsible I cannot say, but from being
quite well-to-do people, they sank to extremest want.
What their struggle over there must have been to
maintain a bare existence is impossible for you to
realise in this land of peace and plenty. Manage
somehow, however, they did. and retain through
it all their own nice ways, for a more lovable
woman than the mother, who called on me last
week, it would be very hard to find. Their
name, by-the-way, is O'Brien. Fortune smiled at
last in the shape of a welcome legacy, just sufficient to
bring them out to Australia, and here they all are
at our very gates —for the land which the Government
gave them is next on the river to ours. Now, dear,


we must help them," and Mother Monica paused. "Do
you know," she gently continued, "I have seldom felt
so like weeping as when Mrs. O'Brien was sitting
talking here. One by one she had seen her treasures
go, until at last she had nothing left. Then came a
greater grief in the parting with her sons, for the eldest
two went to America with little hope of return. Here
the family are sure to get on, but the start will be
hard and dreary with no chance of making friends.
We are helping with material things, but don't you
think that a little pleasure often proves equal to food?"
"Yes, indeed it does. Poor Mrs. O'Brien! Has
she any children with her?"
"Oh, yes, dear, several. Good sons and nice daugh-
ters, and it is the latter who have my especial sym-
pathy. If my little plan succeeds, it will brighten their
lives a great deal."
"What is it, Mother? I know all the School will
help."
"Thank you, Helen; but will they understand?"
Again the Mother paused. "Money we dare not
offer, but happy young companions would prove a
joy indeed. The difficulty lies in this: Though essen-
tially nice and refined, the O'Briens have had no
schooling, which of course shows in their speech. Can
I rely on the girls to entirely hide their surprise?"
"Oh, yes, Mother" (Helen spoke eagerly) ; "they
would not hurt them for worlds."
"But, then, the matter of frocks!" The Mother
looked perplexed. "Again I dare not lend them,
though I know you would give, and Marian also; but
if we arrange for a party to give these girls some plea-
sure, how can they really enjoy it with nothing pretty
to wear?" Looking so concerned, the Mother was
girlish herself.
"H'm! it is awkward," and Helen thought hard,
hands around her knees.
"I think I have a scheme which ought to prove just


right." she presently turned on her stool. "To expect
them to let us dress them when they don't even know
us is certainly out of the question, and to ask them
on Club day among crowds of strangers would only
make them'miserable. But if we could have them
alone, just Mrs. O'Brien and the girls, I'm sure they
would get to like us, and all would be quite plain sail-
ing. I back Marian to win over anyone once she
makes up her mind. Believe me, dear Mother."
with usual emphatic gesture, "before the day was over
she could offer them all she had without any offence to
their pride."
"Yes, I believe she could; but what would you ar-
range?"
"Sister Mary Agnes first! She is bound to say
'No' straight off."
"But why, dear?"
"Exam.!" answered Helen briefly.
"Ah, yes; I had forgotten, but she will relent when
she hears their story. Don't you think so?" The
Mother looked disapopinted.
"No, indeed; I do not! But if anything should
persuade her we could easily have them on Thursday.
Give them tea in the schoolroom, play some tennis, and
make friends generally; poor things, I do feel so
sorry."
"ft certainly would be nice, though I feel like a
wicked conspirator, but would one day really make a
deal of difference?"
"No. but it unfortunately means two, as Monday
next is a holiday, which S'ister Mary Agnes bitterly
resents, but will not quite forbid, as it happens to be
the half-yearly picnic. What she will say of two
days wasted is more than I can imagine."
Mother Monica smiled. "I wonder who dreads
the Examination most, Sister Mary Agnes or her
girls?"
"Oh, we do, of course," with frank amazement.


"I'm not so sure," said Mother Monica; '"however,
we must be kind before all, so if you will speak to the
children, I will coax the Head Mistress, and I appre-
ciate your enthusiasm very much indeed."
"Why, Mother, we love to do it; but surely that
can't be the time?" Helen looked up aghast. "I
promised not to stay long, and its after 8 o'clock.
Whatever will Sister Mary Agnes say? You must be
simply tired to death."
"No, dear, I am not at all, but perhaps you had
better go now. I think you have done me good."
So, bending gently down, Helen kissed the saintly
face softly, noting how all their talk had dealt with
pleasure for others, which was ever the Mother's way.
CHAPTER IV.
TROUBLE.
Punctually at nine o'clock next morning all the
classes took their places in the large schoolroom, look-
ing far more eager for lessons to commence than on
other days.
The School Hall was bright and cheerful, very
lofty, and of great length, so that three or four classes
could go on at the same time, without in the least in-
terfering with each other. The walls were prettily
papered and hung with maps, both historical and geo-
graphical, placed between the numerous windows,
which being set high in the walls could always be
left open, allowing plentiful air with out any
draughts. Begonias and flowering plants flourished
on their wide sills, and at the extreme end of the
Hall a beautiful statue of the Blessed Virgin smiled on
the busy life beneath. The desks with their forms
ran down either wall, the class tables standing well
in the middle of the floor.


Competition day was a time-honored custom at
"Dunham,'' and proved a very effective test of know-
ledge, as each side strove for the most difficult ques-
tions, some extraordinary ones often resulting.
It occurred once a month, taking the different subjects
in turn, the side having most correct answers to its cre-
dit of course being the winner.
Geography was to-day's subject, and the Senior
Class had drawn their sides the night before, as fol-
lows : —Helen, Madge Drew, Eleanor, May Sinclair,
and Kitty on one side; Marian, Inez, Francie Dunn,
and two other girls on the other.
As the names came out with Madge and Kitty on
the same side, Inez was a picture of consternation.
"Not much hope for us," she said, "with those tv/o
against us. Madge never forgets a thing, and Kitty
knows the whole round world, I think."
"Cheer up, Inez," said Marian; "you're quite as
good, if you keep cool," as, indeed, she was, and a
valuable acquisition to any side, provided all went
smoothly.
Now they all sat in their places, at the far end of
the Hall—Sister Mary Agnes in charge, to act as arbi-
trator, and register the marks for the winning side.
Helen had threatened unknown consequences if any
of her side should fail; but having, after Marian, the
two smartest with her she really felt confident of win-
ning.
Marian was not so happy, but put great faith in
Inez, who generally did well in these tussles, the only
drawback being her excitable temper, which was never
to be relied upon under defeat.
"Try not to listen to anything. Inez," she begged,
"except just your own question, for so sure as you
think we are losing away will go your head!" to which
Inez agreed, though only half attending.
Nine o'clock striking almost immediately, there
could be no more advice, and after the Act was said


Sister Mary Agnes gave the signal to begin, Helen's
side having won the right of first question.
Helen attacked Marian first, with what nearly
proved a poser. Wickedly smiling, she faced her un-
happy friend, asking—
"Which of the continents possess the greatest mile-
age in rivers?"
Now, Marian failed in figures, and at first thought
she was done for, as in hasty mental arithmetic she
tried to total all the largest waterways. Wicked Helen
had known she would act just so, in her dear old
methodical way, and miss the obvious answer. But
Fate was in favour of Marian, for, just in time, deter-
mining not to miss her first question, she gave up her
desperate calculating, as the minute allowed was
almost gone.
"It must be America, if Helen doesn't take them
separately, she quickly decided, so, assuming an air
of confidence very far from her real feeling, she an-
swered sweet and clear:—
"The American continent has the greatest mileage,"
which, of course, was quite correct, and scored one
mark to her.
Her side questioned next, May Sinclair having to
answer, which the poor girl failed to do, so Marian
was two ahead.
Inez got the next, which was simple in the extreme:
"Name the towns on the Danube." Hardly able to
grasp her luck in being so easily let off, Inez rattled
along, but alas ! for being too sure ! What was Inez's
horror, on quickly naming the list, to hear Marian give
a gasp of dismay, and the opposers an audible smile.
She had described the noble Rhine, instead of its
sister Danube.
Oh, w hat an idiot! she exclaimed at seeing her
slip, but time was up, and the mark gone, so nothing
more could be done.
That made them two to one, but Inez was upset,
which worried her captain more than the loss of a


mark, so early in the game. Her fervent prayer now
was that questions would fall to the others, and leave
the girl time to recover.
For a little while so it proved. Eleanor had to
define the boundaries of Thibet, Kamschatka, Pales-
tine, and Paraguay, which her ladyship did with ease,
making the scores just level.
Francie Dunn was in luck, her task being an enumer-
ation of every island in the British Empire, which to
her was easy enough, so Marian's side was in the lead
again.
Helen had to think a bit in safely answering hers,
which was put by Marian:—
"Give the exact latitude and longitude of every city
owning a million or more of inhabitants." No easy
task, but she managed it, earning a clap of applause
as the scores came level.
So the questions went on, some difficult, others
merely catchy, until the hour was nearly run, with
Marian still one ahead.
Madge Drew had not asked many, but had made no
faults, so when a quick little question came from her
Inez was its victim:—
"What land would you first sight in sailing due
east from New York?"
Again, alas! for Inez, never waiting to think —
"Ireland, of course," which raised a general titter.
Inez, annoyed, commenced to explain how Ireland,
being the most westerly point of Europe, it must be the
first land touched at.
"I said east, not west," remarked Madge.
"East?" exclaimed poor Inez.
"Yes, East," echoed Eleanor, somewhat mockingly;
"and it seems to me we win."
"You do not win," retorted Inez; "and I call the
question unfair," appealing to Sister Mary Agnes.
"No, dear," the Nun replied. "I think you were
fairly caught; there have been several questions much
the same."


"She should have said travelling." Inez maintained.
"Sailing due east is impossible; you are a sneak,
Madge Drew, if you score that point."
"Inez, sit down at once!" Sister Mary Agnes called
in warning. Marian also tried to grab her arm, for
she saw from her face that the ready rage was just
on the point of breaking, but Eleanor fed the fire with
her tone of superior calmness.
"Better luck next month, Inez. Water is on your
brain to-day, and we do win, for you have failed to put
a return question, and the time is now up. Making
us ahead!"
Inez went perfectly white, anger checking her
tongue; but far, far worse for her, a ruler was lying
near, which her fingers clasped convulsively.
"Are you scoring that point, Madge?" she said, be-
tween her teeth.
"Certainly," the other said quietly; "everyone knows
it was fair."
"It was not fair," Inez almost shouted; "and you
are a mean little cheat." With that she lifted the
ruler, and with all her headlong passion flung it
straight at Madge.
Instantly all was confusion, for Inez did not miss,
but caught Madge fair on the forehead, knocking her
white and senseless. So quickly do such things hap-
pen, that Sister Mary Agnes sat for a second in horror
unable to move or speak, but quite the reverse with
the class. Eleanor managed to catch Madge, and all
rushed to her assistance; all excepting Inez, who now
stood white and still, alone on her side of the table.
Sister Mary Agnes soon recovered, taking Madge
from Eleanor's arm, at the same time sending Marian
with an urgent message for the Convent Infirmarian.
Madge looked perfectly lifeless, and in the midst of
her own terror, as she held the helpless form, Sister
Mary Agnes found room to pity Inez, whose luckless
rage had brought this thing about.


With Eleanor's assistance.. Madge was carried from
the room; the other classes standing dismayed at the
whiteness of their schoolmate's face as it lay on the
Nun's firm arm, but before she left the class table
Sister Mary Agnes bent over Inez, whispering words
of counsel:—
'Tray to God, Inez, with all your heart, that this
prove only a faint," for the continued stillness of the
stricken girl filled her with terrible fear.
Poor, angry Inez! As Madge was carried away
she stood by the table alone. All her anger gone, cold
and stunned from the horror of her deed. She paid
no heed to the many curious glances cast in her direc-
tion, but stood as if turned to stone, numb with very
terror. Somehow, a thought kept coming, that she
had done it all before, or else she had known that
she would! Something dreadful was bound to hap-
pen some day, as the result of her passionate nature.
Now, indeed, it had! and poor, poor Madge was hurt.
Hurt —perhaps it was worse than that—with a pitiful
shudder of dread. Ah! surely that could not be.
God would never let Madge die for just one minute
of anger. Oh, He must not; He must not. She
sank once more in her seat, with head buried deep in
her arms, praying so hard from her hot young heart,
that this dreadful thing might not be.
So she sat for an hour, unconscious of all around,
every part of her being absorbed in imploring petition.
Many footsteps hurried to and fro, but school work
was at an end, and she was left undisturbed.
At last a step came near, and a kind little hand was
laid on her shoulder.
"Look up, Inez," said Marian's voice. "Madge is
only stunned. She was unconscious for nearly an
hour, or I should have been back before."
"Oh, Marian, dear, is that really true?" and the
haggard young face was raised.
"Yes, Inez," said Marian gravely; "she is out of all
danger now."


"Ah, I thank God." Inez dropped her head,
breaking into uncontrollable sobs; the blessed relief
seemed more than she could bear. Saved were Madge
and herself —one from death, the other from far, far
worse. As the load of dread was lifted, she could
not stay her sobbing, and Marian let her cry, knowing
it was best, for though the worst had not come, very
hard times were still in store in consequence of her
act.
CHAPTER V.
THE PETITION.
On the following morning all the inmates of "Dun-
ham" seemed sad or worried; strange quiet reigning
in those busy schoolrooms usually so filled with cheer-
ful bustle.
Inez had passed a dreadful night, and moved about
like a ghost. Looking at her drawn white face now
it was hard to realise what a happy, bright girl she had
been but yesterday.
Most of the children were particularly kind, endea-
vouring to show by many loving acts how sorry they
were for her trouble. Eleanor alone stood firmly
aloof, and made no pretence at forgiveness.
Inez had behaved outrageously, she declared,
and deserved any punishment. As for pleading against
her being expelled, she for one would not lift a finger
in her behalf. Such girls were not fit to be at
"Dunham."
"Eleanor, how hard you are!" said Marian. "Of
course she will not be expelled, hers was not wilful
wickedness."
"Will she not? I fear you are mistaken, Marian.
What else do you suppose is worrying Sister Mary
Agnes so much?"


"I certainly hope you are wrong," said Marian; ''it
would be quite too dreadful. Why, no girl has been
expelled from here, except for something unpardon-
ably bad, and I feel sure Mother Monica will forgive
Inez."
"Mother Monica never sets aside the rules, how-
ever strongly she feels about anything," retorted Elea-
nor; " and if you don't call this sort of thing unpardon-
able, I wonder what is. Mother Monica may forgive
her, but I never shall, and there are several who will
follow me." With that she walked away.
Unfortunately, Eleanor was correct in both her
statements. If anyone could have peeped at Sister
Mary Agnes just now, as she sat at her writing table
thinking hard and long, something very like tears
would have been seen in her kind, brown eyes.
The rules were all to clear. Any act of personal
violence meant expulsion, and not Mother Monica
herself could save Inez, unless petitioned by the whole
school to do so. But with Eleanor's strong opposing
influence at work, such a petition was highly improb-
able.
During all her term of office Sister Mary Agnes
could not remember anything which had upset her quite
so much as this. How many girlish troubles had been
thought over in this little room, where she now sat —
part school, library, and partly her own special writ-
ing room, where she was comparatively free from in-
terruption. The window faced the school garden,
and as she looked at the sunny borders, gay with
coloured blooms, even their brightness seemed
shadowed. Sister Mary Agnes liked Inez, for, apart
from her unreliable temper, she was absolutely trust-
worthy and honourable. If the child had not been so
sincerely sorry, it would have been easy to send her
away; but the remembrance of her heart-broken
weeping as she stood beside Madge's bed convinced
Sister Mary Agnes that her most bitter punishment
was already coming from her own heart.


A hurried knock interrupted these anxious thoughts,
and brought Sister Mary Agnes to her feet, fearing
she knew not what fresh trouble.
Helen entered eagerly, flushed with indignant ex-
citement.
"Marian tells me," she burst out before Sister Mary
Agnes could speak, "that Inez may be expelled for hit-
ting Madge. It is not true, surely?"
"I fear it will come to that," said Sister Mary Agnes
sadly, "unless you all intercede. You know, dear,
the school could never continue if such actions as hers
were condoned."
"But, dear Sister Mary Agnes," begged Helen,
"Inez is such a sweet girl, and if that unfortunate
ruler had not been so near, Madge would never have
been hurt. The little ones are in a dreadful state,
nearly all weeping at the thought of her going, and
Jean Brown moving about a perfect picture of
misery."
"Indeed," said Sister Mary Agnes, surprised; "I
thought Inez had been rather severe with her."
"Oh, she is cross with them all sometimes, but no
one fights their battles like Inez."
"I am indeed pleased to hear that," said Sister Mary
Agnes, "as it looks more hopeful for the petition."
"And it is that which I have come about," said
Helen, "for instead of acknowledging how irritating
she was, Eleanor is refusing to sign or help Inez in
way. Her remark really did the mischief, for
having lost two marks for her side. Inez naturally felt
sore, and Eleanor chipping in with her tone of
superiority, just drove the poor girl wild."
"You are a good pleader. Helen, but you cannot
blame Eleanor quite so much as that. However, we
must hope she will come round. Have you asked
Madge to persuade her?"
"We thought of it, but did not like to worry her."
"Well, I think you may, as she is nearly herself this
morning."


"Oh! thank you, Sister Mary Agnes. I will send
Marian, she will explain without tiring her," and
Helen hurried off.
She had hardly gone when Sister Mary Agnes
received a message to send Inez to Mother Monica
at once; so going into the School room where the poor
child was vainly trying to study, she bade her come
quickly.
"Mother Monica has sent for me?" said Inez, flush-
ing uncomfortably. "Oh! I don't want to go."
"My dear! Why not ?"
"She won't look at me now. I couldn't face her,
really, Sister Mary Agnes, I couldn't."
"You don't know our dear Mother, Inez, if you are
ever frightened of her in trouble. So go straight up
to her now, and I think you will come away com-
forted."
But Inez felt differently. She knew the trouble her
conduct must have caused to one who had all their
interests so much at heart, and for the first time in
her life went to the mother's presence with reluctance.
Meanwhile, Marian was doing her part, in trying
to convince Madge of the absolute necessity for her
interference. "Eleanor want Inez expelled?" Madge
exclaimed, when Marian had told her how things
were. "But I can hardly believe it! Surely, if I bear
no malice, she needn't either! Though that ruler was
undoubtedly hard" (with a rueful, reminiscent smile).
"Inez is such a remarkably straight shot! Any other
girl would have missed!"
"But you will try and persuade Eleanor? Won't
you, Madge dear?"
"Why, yes, of course I will. Being expelled would
simply ruin Inez. I can't imagine anything worse.
Eleanor is apparently oblivious to that; but just send
her to me, and see what happens."
"Oh, Madge, you dear thing! The whole School
will bless you, if you get her signature."


"Well, leave the petition here, and send her lady-
ship along."
So Marian went downstairs, and Madge, sitting up,
waited for Eleanor with a most determined sparkle in
her shrewd blue eyes.
In a few minutes my lady sailed up, looking sweetly
pretty as usual, and apparently quite unconscious of
the trouble she was causing. Madge in her turn
watched the lovely face, and vowed that its calm
should soon be upset to some purpose; for, fond as
she was of Eleanor, her selfish hardness on this occa-
sion was making Madge very angry indeed.
After gentle inquiries, Eleanor at once noticed the
petition. "So." she remarked in a tone of faint disgust,
"Helen lost no time in worrying you, too, about
that impossible girl. I told her clearly what I thought,
and trust Dunham will soon be rid of her."
"Indeed!" was the quiet response. "Meaning Inez,
I suppose? Are you not signing then?"
"Signing! Of course not; are you?"
"Most decidedly yes," here Madge spoke very de-
liberately, "and what is more, I intend that you shall
also."
"Me! Are you mad?"
Madge whitened slightly, for to estrange Eleanor
meant no slight heart-break to herself. "Not at all.
But no girl shall be expelled from school on my
account. If, as my friend, you will not sign when I
ask you to, I have means to make you do so, and shall
most assuredly use them."
. I think you forget you are my friend, Madge,"
said Eleanor with pained offence.
"I do not, but you are behaving abominably. Inez
is poor; you know it, and are allowing her to be dis-
placed. How do you suppose she will ever earn her
uing with this against her always?" (with sparking
indignant eyes).


"I don't know, and I really don't care; her temper
was atrocious." Eleanor leant back bored.
''Perhaps it was, but there are other far worse
things—especially in Mother Monica's eyes." Madge's
tone held meaning.
"Oh! Lies, I suppose you mean ?"
"Yes, lies or deliberate deceit. You know how she
hates anything of the kind. I don't think a girl who
indulged in such things could hope for much mercy,
do you?"
"No, of course, she could'nt. But why this sermon
to me?"
"Because it concerns you very nearly, as you will
presently see. You are a horrible prig sometimes,
Eleanor, but I did not know you could be cruel before.
So unless you sign that petition at once—" ("Never,"
from Eleanor.) "I shall tell Sister Mary Agnes of
your interesting correspondence last month, and the
charming literature your boy friend sends you. Then
perhaps you will understand yourself what public
disgrace feels like. There now, take your choice."
To say that Eleanor was surprised at having dis-
closed what she thought no one knew but herself only
feebly expressed her feelings. One gasp of dismay
she gave, then, regaining her usual calm, endeavoured
to talk Madge over.
"Madge, you are making the very worst of things.
I never read those horrible books."
"No? Well, you will hardly expect Sister Mary
Agnes to believe you, when she knows they have been
in your desk for a month."
"I really meant to show those books and tell
Sister Mary Agnes about them, but Gerald could
never have known what they were like, and I was
ashamed to say anything about them."
"Well, maybe you were, but you must not forget
the deliberate untruth you told about them, when
Sister Mary Agnes asked what parcels you had
received on guest day. I suppose you wonder how I


know all this? Perhaps you do know that Inez is also
quite aware of how you stand? In my opinion that is
the secret of your sudden dislike to her, and anything
meaner I never heard of."
During this further speech of surprises Eleanor
changed from red to white, and back to a hot em-
barassed red, with such startling rapidity that Madge
felt her announcement was having the desired effect
of breaking her obstinate will, and that nothing
further for Inez need be feared; but what she did not
expect was Eleanor's bitter sobbing.
"You are unkind to me. Madge," she complained,
"and if I have been mean, Inez doesn't like me
either. She was looking at me when Sister Mary
Agnes questioned me; and I know one day in her
rages she will blurt the whole thing out, and I wouldn't
stoop to beg her not to."
"Well, she never told me, Eleanor. It was by the
merest chance I found out; so you need not persecute
her through fright. As to what you intend doing, I
don't know; if it were I, I should confess the whole
business to Sister Maty Agnes."
"No, no, no, I couldn't," declared Eleanor.
"But you must confess sooner or later," Madge
maintained. "Why not do it now, and free your
mind."
"I don't agree with you at all"' —the pretty face was
cold. "No one is hurt by my untruth."
"You are hurting Inez on account of it," Madge
chipped in quickly.
"Not at all." Eleanor would not give way. "Per-
haps one day I will tell Sister Mary Agnes that I told
her an untruth, but explain the whole thing I won't.
I will do what you want for Inez, for friendship's
sake, but the other is my business." This last was
decidedly final.
"Very well, then," said Madge, "sign this petition,
and I shall try to forget all about it."


So, making the best of a bad bargain, Eleanor signed,
but declared she would never speak to Inez again so
long as they both remained at Dunham.
With that Madge must needs be content, only too
pleased to have gained the day. But lying back
wearily on her pillows when Eleanor had gone, she
mentally reviewed their friendship, and wondered how
it would stand if Eleanor persisted in her avoidance
of Inez, in which she would never join. Her careless-
ness of truth, too, horrified Madge completely. How-
ever, one thing was arranged and Inez saved from
expulsion. As to the future, that must take care of
itself, and turning over to try and ease her now aching
head. Madge fervently wished all obstinate pig-headed
people at Timbuctoo, or the Pole.
CHAPTER VI.
COMFORT.
Mother Monica waited again; this time for Inez,
but with different feelings of sadness than Helen's
departure had brought her. Here was tragedy; and.
unless averted by wisely tender counsels, ruin and
wreck for a fine young character.
Tike all noble natures Mother Monica had herself
passed through soul-shaping struggles, certainly not of
the same description, but enough to make her deeply
understanding of the personal devil tormenting Inez,
and of her gallant fight for the mastery.
Such an overwhelming defeat as yesterday's display
of rage had been, might very easily make her lose
heart altogether and give up the struggle. This
in Mother Monica's eyes, was the great danger to be
dreaded for the child, and if possible prevented.
Inez came with a timid little knock, and before she
quite realised she was there, found herself kneeling at
the Mother's feet, sobbing out her sorrow and begging
for help.
Mother Monica had opened the door herself, and
something in the tender face looking so gravely down


had filled Inez with hope and taken away all fear.
Did she guess, I wonder, how many hours of the
previous night, which had seemed so endless to herself,
had also been sleepless for the Mother? For so they
had, and marks of her anxious vigil showed on the
sweet face to-day.
"How did it happen?" was all she said, and Inez
told her tale.
"W hat can I do, Mother, and what will become of
me? I have tried so hard, and yet. when my temper
rises, it carries away everything. I don't want to be
wicked, and I would not hurt Madge for anything,
still yesterday I could have killed her when she made
me lose. Why have I got this fiend inside me to drive
me mad?"
Mother Monica held her two little hands to stay
their excited trembling. "We all have something to
work against, dear, and we are not asked as to what
our task will be, Inez; but remember, child, we do
not work alone."
"I've prayed and prayed, and what's the good ? Oh!
Mother, I wish I were dead."
The poor girl was kneeling at Mother Monica's feet
—not nestling comfortably as Helen had done, but
gazing up to those brave blue eyes, as if to gain
courage from them now in her own sore need.
"You have tried, Inez, with all your strength to
conquer your angry feelings?"
"Yes, Mother, I was determined; and then in a
minute the work was undone, just when I thought
things were better."
"Do you think perhaps, dear, you did not ask often
enough foi help? But you know your weakness
now, and in this bitter trouble have learnt much.
Nothing can we do unaided, and though you tried to
control your temper before, you were not frightened
of it as you are now. Is not that so?"
"No, I was not frightened, but lam now." Inez
shuddered.


"Well, dear child, I hope you will never, never get
over that fright. Nothing will ever be so serious to
you now as loss of control, will it? You would bear
any punishment or endure anything to be quite sure
you would never injure anyone in anger, is that not
so?"
"Yes, Mother. I would do anything," the poor
girl said bravely.
"So long as you live, you can never be sure, Inez,"
and at the horror in the child's eyes, Mother Monica
quietly took her hand and continued: "It is dreadful
and it is frightening, but, dear, you know your danger
now, and half the battle is won. Just a little prayer
very often for protection, with constant fear of your-
self. and, my child, you will never in your life be
really angry again."
"Oh! Mother. Is it possible?"—the young face
gathered trust and humble struggle.
"Do you see the mercy behind the sorrow, now,
Inez? Everyone has their own personal battle to fight
in order to prove their worth and merit Heaven.
Yours seems harder than most, but I do not think it
is, on account of its open character; anything hidden,
or only partly known, is far more difficult to combat
You know, I suppose, dear, what the consequence of
your act may be?"
"That I may have to leave Dunham? Oh. yes, I
know," and Inez sank her head on the Mother's knee.
"It may not come to it; but if you have to go, what
will you feel about it? Hard and bitter against every-
one and everybody?"
"No, Mother. It is only just punishment, but the
thought of the home ones nearly breaks my heart.
They must have starved to keep me at school."
"Yes, I know. In absolute point of fact, Inez, I
could keep you here against everyone's opinion, but
such help from me would bring you no happiness, and
the other children's mothers would be quite justified
in objecting. But in matters affecting the School, I


have always relied on the Benedictine spirit in the
children, and am sure they will act fairly now."
"Indeed, I am sure they will," Inez agreed, "and
their kindness to me since yesterday has been wonder-
ful —the little ones especially, in spite of the bad times
I have given them."
"They are good children and kind, so if the worst
comes to the worst you will face it bravely, and think
of the many that loved you? Is that so, dear?"
"Yes, I will never, never forget," and Inez rose to
take her leave, sad it is true, but strong and courage-
ous for her bitter ordeal.
Just as she was kissing Mother Monica good-bye,
Sister Mary Agnes entered, flushed and happy, with
the petition in her hands.
"May I beg you to look at this, dear Mother?" she
asked, holding out the paper. "It is quite complete
and I hope will meet with your approval."
Mother Monica took the petition, holding Inez's
hand the while, relief and satisfaction showing clearly
in her face as she slowly read the names.
"Madge Drew heads the list, I see; that was very
nice of Madge. Do you think this is the real wish of
the School, Sister—that Inez should stay and no more
be said?"
"From what Helen tells me," Sister Mary Agnes
replied. "I think it is undoubtedly so. One girl was
unwilling to sign her name at first, but I think, dear,"
turning to Inez, "it was solely on account of her friend-
ship for Madge; so in my name and that of the whole
School, I ask forgiveness for Inez." Sister Mary
Agnes quietly awaited the Mother's reply.
Inez was tightly clasping the Mother's hand, and
her nervous pressure when Eleanor was referred to
had not escaped Mother Monica's notice; but nothing
was said, and, quietly taking the child's other hand,
she drew her down and softly whispered: "Go back
to your work and your schoolmates now, but never,
never forget."


"Inez and I," she continued, addressing Sister Mary
Agnes, "have been making a strong defensive alliance,
so black, wicked rages will never occur again, of that
we are quite sure; and as to-morrow is the day of the
picnic, all troubles will be blown away in the bush,
together with white faces and frightened looks."
Poor Inez was too unstrung to make any reply; but
one always knew Mother Monica would understand,
which indeed the kind eyes did as they followed the
girlish figure leaving the room with Sister Mary
Agnes.
Sitting quietly for a moment after their departure,
a deep prayer of thankfulness ascended front Mother
Monica's soul up to God, for trouble averted and a
sore heart soothed.
CHAPTER VII.
THE PICNIC.
Thursday morning; and a bright sun! Hurrah for
Spring and a day in the bush! Silence was most
strictly enforced in the dormitories at Dunham, so the
cheers were imaginary, but quite a lot of delight may
be expressed in wide-flung windows and hasty dress-
ing. Sister Mary Agnes, noticing the unusual eager-
ness_ to say good-bve to bed, fervently wished for a
picnic even r day.
The rule of hearing Mass and tidying rooms still
holding good for holidays, the girls were not free to
make their preparations until 9 o'clock, when
from the general turmoil of fuss and commotion one
would have imagined an expedition of weeks was in-
tended, instead of a simple picnic. Such a packing
and collecting of things! Endless baskets, tea billies,
cushions, books, a spade for digging fern roots, and


last, but by no means least, a very large frying pan.
The English governess, Miss Timms, looked at the
last-named article in horrified surprise, this being her
first experience of Dunham picnics, but before long
she realised that, whatever else was forgotten, that
frying pan would most certainly be remembered.
"Where's the pan" came in tones of anxious enquiry
from nearly every girl in turn, and none were satis-
fied until their own eyes assured them of its safety.
At last they were ready, and away down the avenue,
after many cheery good-byes to Sister Mary Agnes
and promises to be good. The Vineyard was their
destination to-day, and the merry party soon covered
the mile to the big iron gates, where a change of loads
took place. Once through the gates they were really
in the bush; wild flowers everywhere, and the gums in
their new spring frocks of red and green waving them
joyous welcome. Their path to the Vineyard was the
narrowest of bush tracks, so they were a rather strag-
gling party, and those who took short cuts through
the bush, at the same time manipulating bulky baskets,
nearly all came to grief. Still, nothing very serious
occurred, and shortly before twelve o'clock they all
arrived safely at the old pear trees by the creek.
Soon the unpacking was done, and two fires built —
one for tea making and the other for pancakes, which
were the feature of the day. Such delicacies, I ven-
ture to state, can be had nowhere but at Dunham; at
least, not in such perfection. Perhaps under somewhat
similar conditions they might be produced, but I very
much doubt it. However, if you would like to try, this
is the way it was done:—
Mix your batter 'neath the shade of a rustling gum,
listening the while to advice from many eager watchers.
Heat your precious pan, 011 the fire prepared for the
purpose, and kept in order by very excited Juniors.
If, in their hurry, green wood gets mixed with old and
you reap the benefit in smoke, of course you must not


mind, but when the pan is warmed just right, resign
its handle to your best friend only, and carefully pour
in the mixture; watch it very anxiously, and at this
moment take no notice of anyone's opinion. When a
general puffiness appears in the cake, throw it wildly
m the air, and catch it right side up. This did not
always happen, and the uncertainty but added charm.
Still, when it did do the right thing, a little more cook-
ing and the pancake was done, turned out before an
admiring crowd, and finally eaten.
The office of cook had, of course, to be shared, and
Eleanor was to have commenced operations to-day;
but seeing Inez busily making the fire, she turned
stiffly away and said she wouldn't cook.
Helen looked at her in annoyance, but quickly took
her place; worked away at the batter, and hoped Inez
had not noticed.
All went well, and a fine array of pancakes were
soon ready for lunch, with Miss Timms keeping guard
against ants. Her conversion was complete, and never
again would horrified looks humiliate the good old
pan.
As she looked around at the pretty deserted terraces,
long stripped of vines, but clothed now instead with
dainty clematis and Queen of the Bush; then at the
tree covered hills and ferny creek, a little murmur of
admiration crossed her lips. "So different to England,
ah! yes, but lovely in its own wild way."
Lunch over, and their marvellously mixed menu
disposed of, the girls followed their own devices for
all the long afternoon—some gathering wild flowers,
or digging fern roots from the creek, others playing
games or reading their favourite books.
Marian and Helen wandered off together to a sunny
hillside of their own, and throwing cushions among the
fern, settled themselves very comfortably.
All up the bank the silvery bracken stretched, with
occasional soft brown shadows from the gums break-




" IT SEEMS I'M TO HAVE A BAD TIME," LAUGHED HELEN


ing its shimmering surface; away below was the
creek, which here was very shallow, rippling over
brown rocks whilst singing ol its wanderings.
Helen had read herself sleepy, and turned rather
drowsily to her friend, to see what she was doing, but
the expression she surprised on Marian's beautiful
face awakened her completely.
"Why, dear heart, you are seeing visions,'' she said.
"What were your thoughts just now?"
"I think they were of God," was the quiet reply.
"See that glorious sunlight filtering through the trees,
Helen. It reminds me somehow ot His love, brighten-
ing and warming all the careless, lovely world. We
don't often say 'thank you' to Him, do we?"
"You do, dearest, but a great many of us don't."
"I never want to leave Dunham, Helen. Are you
very, very surprised?"
"Never want to leave Dunham! But you can't stay
at school for ever!" and then as understanding slowly
came to her, Helen's eyes grew very big and wistful:
"Why, you're never going to be a Nun, Maisie
darling?"
"And why not? Is it not the happiest life imagin-
able ?'"
"Happy! Why, they give up everything!"
"Silly old Helen, so must everyone if they love tiuly.
It is the different ideal that is all, and to me theirs
seems the perfect life—high, pure and useful."
"But, Maisie, you forget; no home of your own, no
warm human love, or dear little cuddly babies."
"Do you think so, dear? Well, the love I shall have
will be above all, and you are not forsaking your
chum just because she becomes a Nun, are you? I
expect all your chicks to be sent to me for training,
you know."
Oh! Marian. It is lovely, but I can hardly realize
it. What will your people say ?"


"They are delighted, dear, but they and Mother
Monica both agree 1 must go home for two years first.
Aunt Rachel in Sydney is very funny and the only one
against it. She says lam infatuated, and is going to
give me a brilliant season by way of antidote. Dear
old thing, she means well, but it won't make any
difference, and the two years of probation will soon
pass; then back to where I really belong."
"Marian, I think you are choosing rightly," said
Helen presently, watching the calm steadfastness of
the beautiful face, "and girls will love you, in the
future, just as we do Mother Monica. Thank you,
darling, for telling me."
"I hope you may be as happy, Helen, but I don't
think you will," Marian replied thoughtfully. "Im-
pulsive warm-hearted people like you generally get
into trouble, and you won't have your sedate old
friend to control your violent fancies."
"Good gracious, Marian." Helen flushed uncom-
fortably. "You don't imagine me falling in love all
over the place, do you ?"
"That is just what I do fear," and Marian smiled;
"so remember my timely warning. Control your
tendency for worship, my child; for most assuredly
Helen, in ordinary life it won't do, and my little friend
is too valuable to waste herself in that fashion. Will
you try and be careful, sweetheart?"
"Yes, I'll try," and Helen's laughter rippled out;
"but, according to you, I'm in for a bad time."
"Well, we'll hope not, but be careful," and laugh-
ingly ending their conference they gathered up their
belongings, to join the others.
From the high ground where they stood, several of
the younger ones, in charge of Inez, could be seen
racing along a high bank farther up the creek.
"That looks rather dangerous,' 'remarked Helen,
and she had hardly spoken when, with a piercing
scream, Jean Brown disappeared. "She's gone into


the creek for a certainty. I'd better go and help." So,
throwing her belongings to Marian, she was soon
across the flat and into the bush beyond, when a
shout from Inez reached her ears and guided her to
the water's edge, where the funniest sight imaginable
met her eyes.
Astride a good-sized log was Inez with long legs
nearly in the water, her body flat to the wood, and
down-stretched arms just managing to grasp Jean's
stout leather belt. The pair were really in danger, for
a very deep hole was just underneath them, but the
funny look on Jean's red little face and the queer
spectacle they both presented were too much for
Helen, who stood for a moment helpless with laughter.
"Why don't you come to our assistance?" came
in gasping indignation from Inez. 'T can't move
either way, and the child will be stifled if I hold her
like this much longer."
"Very well, I'm coming," and Helen was soon
astride also and reached the pair. Then unbuckling
her own belt, she managed to pass it through Jean's,
thus giving her longer rope. The poor little thing was
very frightened, but between them they got her to the
bank, finding that no harm was done but for a few
bruises and the wetting.
"Don't cry, Jean," Inez said, "but run as fast as
possible to the fire, where Miss Timms will lend you a
coat and dry your things." So the small girl hurried
off, and the others followed more slowly.
"However did it happen?" asked Helen.
"Well, you see how steep this bank is," said Inez,
pointing up. "They were all racing along the top—
Jean at the very edge. I shouted loudly to her to stop,
but she was far too excited to listen. In another
moment I should have reached her, but a stone must
have caught her foot, and down she went over the
side, rolling over and over at a great rate, splash into
the creek. It gave me a dreadful fright, as she didn't


appear at once, but she has had a worse one and will
listen in the future.''
Jean meanwhile had reached the lire, where most
of the girls were assembled, packing for home.
"Dear me," exclaimed Eleanor, as the bedraggled
little figure ran to Miss Timms. "What an appalling
object you are, jean; mud from top to toe. Wherever
have you been? For goodness sake don't come too
close."
"You'd be dirty too, if you'd been in the creek," and
Jean commenced to sob. "But for Inez I'd be dead."
"Oh, would you, poor little kid?' said Eleanor re-
lenting. "Well, come here, and I'll take oft' your
things, or you'll be dead from other causes." So her
wet things were removed, and when Helen and Inez
came up they found all busily engaged in the drying
of Jean, who soon cheered up under so much attention,
and was quite dry and herself again when the start
was made for home.
To many of them, the lazy walk on the homeward
way was the best part of the day; tired but happy
they sauntered along, examining their treasures of
flowers and ferns, which eventually were sent to their
favourite Nuns, for decorating the Chapel and Altar.
Envied was the fortunate girl whose offering was
placed nearest to the Tabernacle, and the thoughtful
Nun who acted as Sacristan used generally to manage
that each had a turn in the place of honour.
Soon home was reached and a full account of the
day retailed to Sister Mary Agnes, who looked some-
what concerned on hearing of Jean's adventure, but
packed her oft" to bed immediately, hoping all would
be well.
No one was to blame but the small person herself,
and her fright being deemed sufficient punishment,
no more was said, thus leaving unspoiled their day of
perfect delight, long to be talked of and enjoyed, until
the passing months should bring its repetition.


CHAPTER VIII.
FRANCIS AND FRANCES.
As Helen had foretold. Sister Mary Agnes did say
a very great deal on hearing of the arrangements made
regarding that sad Irish family, and for giving poor
Mrs. O'Brien and her children a little pleasure. Kind-
ness itself to anyone in trouble, her heart was dread-
fully divided now, for of course they must be helped
and cheered; but, "Dear me," she sighed, "why could
they not have come a fortnight hence, when the exami-
nation would have been over and all anxiety done
with."
Some little cherub must have pitied her perturba-
tion ; for early one morning before any plans were
made, came a little note of regret from Mrs. O'Brien,
"Patsy and Dick were sickening for measles." she
wrote; "indeed, Dicky's were 'out,' so might they
please come later to see the dear Nuns, and make all
the young ladies' acquaintances?"
Was ever anything more fortunate? Sister Mary
Agnes sighed with pleasure—not the measles, of
course; but two precious days wasted from study had
seemed really more than any Head Mistress could
bear. So the relief was great, and writing a sympa-
thetic reply to the anxious mother. Sister Mary Agnes
determined that their welcome when they did come
should be in proportion to her joy at escaping them
now. The last week had been far too exciting al-
ready, she thought, for nerves that needed to be at
their best; so, from now to the dreaded week itself,
school routine must be in no way disturbed, and the
girls must be given every chance to succeed.
And in such wise the following days did pass. No
cramming or extra work was allowed, but every mo-
ment of the day was used to its fullest advantage, and
every weakness strengthened.


Helen and Marian did not feel very nervous, but
Inez was so worked up, that Sister Mary Agnes seri-
ously feared a collapse before the week was over.
Eleanor was still actively hostile, which perhaps partly
accounted for this, as in such circumstances their jour-
neys to and from the University each day presented
anything but a happy prospect. Madge was also going,
but besides being Eleanor's friend, she was useless for
companionship, as, contrary to all advice, she studied
every moment of the time. Helen and Marian were,
of course, recognised as inseparable, so Inez antici-
pated a very isolated time, and wished Frances Dunn
could have kept her company.
Frances was her greatest comfort now, for. noticing
the silent pain caused by Eleanor's unkindness, she
watched for Inez at play-hour and never left her
lonely.
Sister Mary Agnes was not blind to the state of
things, but having so decidedly championed Inez in
her trouble, she deemed it best not to interfere; and, to
do Eleanor justice, she did not realise what mischief
she was doing. Fear for herself was really the root
of her avoidance, but others, not knowing that, gradu-
ally followed her lead, leaving Inez very much out
in the cold at tennis and other games.
One day a set had been formed with Inez standing
by—Grace Douglas took the lead with Eleanor for her
partner, and, before anyone else could speak, called
two girls from a distance for their opponents.
To be thus put on one side where formerly she
had led was too much for Inez, and feeling bitter tears
rising she quickly turned aside.
A pair of gentle dark eyes met the unhappiness in
hers, and Francie was beside her. "Let us go for a
walk," she said, "and forget them all. I'll tell you
tales of the gorgeous East." So away they went
through the sheltering trees, Francie talking fast the
while, commencing with accounts ofhhre r own family
wanderings.


"We didn't always live in Java, you know, Inez,
but went there from the Straits Settlements, which I
really know most about. Malacca is my favourite of
all the towns there, being in a lovely part of the
country, and simply full of history. ft was beautiful
also to visit the churches built by Saint Francis him-
self, and to feel you were really living where he did,
though very differently, I'm afraid. The hardships
he went through must have been dreadful. lam
called after him, you know, and was baptized in his
very own Church."
"His very own? Why one more so than the
others?"
"Well, you see. he built them all. but it was in the
one just behind our house that he saw his wonderful
vision. He was saying Mass, and the Church was
crowded, mostly with people praying for their absent
sons and husbands, for the Portuguese were then at
war with some fierce natives to the north. In the
middle of Mass the Saint saw a great naval battle in
a vision, and turning to the people he told them their
fleet was victorious. So great was their reverence
for him that marks of rejoicing were displayed every-
where, and when in a few days the fleet did return in
safety everyone on board was lost in wonder as to how
the joyful news had reached them. Oh! the whole
place speaks of him up there, and to think of the
thousands of miles he covered with such scanty means
of travel seems almost as wonderful as his miracles."
"Perhaps he touched at Australia in one of his
voyages amongst the islands?"
"No. I'm afraid not," Frances replied. "We are
too far south, but still he came fairlv near. I'm al-
ways so glad he never really got to China."
"Francie, why? It was his lifelong wish, wasn't
it?"
"Yes, they say it was, but I think dear St. Francis
was too gentle and loving to deal with the Chinese;


they wanted a real warrior Saint to tackle them. St.
Ignatius or someone of that sort."
"You funny girl, that doesn't seem very polite
to St. Ignatius."
"Well; no disrespect meant, but the Chinese are
fiends, and want a soldier to wake them up. They
appreciate a forceful love far more than gentle
methods."
"But what about the Malays; they are cruel enough
surely?"
"No, they're not," Francie stoutly declared. "They
are splendid—brave, courteous, honorable, just the
ones to appreciate a gentle spirit like St. Francis
Xavier. You should pray to him, Inez; he'd help you
a great deal with that temper of yours."
"Do you really think so? Well, perhaps I will, but
you haven't told me much of the East yet, Francie."
"Oh, well, I've told you the best first, as the whole
country speaks of St. Francis and his work. If you
like tiger stories and such. I know dozens, but don't
you think we had better turn back now, as the bell
will ring presently?"
"Yes, and you've been a real dear," giving the slim
figure a grateful squeeze. "I wonder is Eleanor really
going to keep this up for ever?"
"Don't trouble about it. Time will bring her
round, and she can't be very happy herself whilst be-
having so disagreeably. You just go your own way,
Inez, and take no notice. The other girls will soon
get tired of her nonsense."
"I don't know about that," Inez sighed. "It
is horrible to feel someone is disliking one so much."
"Well, here's someone that likes you very much.
Doesn't that compensate at all?"
"Yes, indeed, Francie. You're just a darling, and I
won't mope any more. So let us run back, and to-night
you'll tell tiger stories, will you ?"
"Yes, dear, with pleasure."


CHAPTER IX.
TIGER STORIES.
That same evening when recreation hour came,
Francie's proposal to tell stories was greeted with ac-
clamation, and the juniors being admitted they all sat
round the big hall, eagerly waiting for her to com-
mence.
"You must hear a little about the Malays first,
she began, smiling at her circle of eager listeners, "for
they are much nicer than the other inhabitants of
their country; by that I mean the tigers.
The Malays are born aristocrates, and the tigers are
sneaks. To see a little Malay boy standing in a
stream, spear gracefully poised for throwing, with
fearless courage and pride in every line of his erect
figure, makes one quite able to believe the wonderful
tales that are told of their bravery in hunting these
ferocious beasts, and one I shall tell you directly has
always struck me as the most daring example of their
courage."
"Easy to guess Francie's pet people," teased Inez.
"Very well," replied Francie," wait until you have
heard this, and see if you don't agree with me."
"Continue, dear girl, I won't interrupt any more."
So Francie began again:—
"You have all read of Indian jungles and how im-
penetrable they are, but in the Malay States the
growth is even denser, and in some places so solidly
matted together that I believe a ball thrown against
it would come back as from a wall. Paths in some
places are very narrow, and absolutely shut in by
walls of growing green. It is very, very beautiful,
but as you can imagine very awkward for unexpected
meetings.
"In one Malay village, situated near just such a
jungle as this, a friend of ours (Mr. Graves) was act-


ing as District Officer. One morning an old Malay
woman came sobbing to him in great distress, and
after much trouble, he managed to find out that her
husband had gone after a tiger three days ago, and had
not been heard of since.
''This sounded ominous, so our friend sent for the
heads of the village to hear all particulars, and decide
what was to be done.
"It transpired that the tiger in question was a par-
ticularly bad one, and had done so much damage that
a double reward was offered for his skin. £2 10/ in
English money is the amount generally given for a
tiger skin, and is the Government reward; so £5
tempted the Malay to do what most people would have
refused to attempt for £5OO.
"The tiger's lair was known, and was situated at
the end of a tiny tunnel-like pathway through the
jungle. Track would more rightly describe it, for
crawling on all fours was the only way to get through
it. and of course any turning was impossible.
"Into this the hunter had been seen to go, his onlv
weapon an old-fashioned single-barrelled rifle and
his large hunting knife—the rifle being one that took
quite five minutes to load, so any second shot was im-
possible.
"The man had gone in, but where was he now, and
who was going to find out?" Francie paused a mo-
ment. She was a good story-teller, and her circle of
listeners were quite absorbed. No answer came to
her query, so she presently continued: "To enter that
ghastly tunnel with, in all probability, a wounded tiger
at the end was no light task. Still it had to be done,
and, looking well to the surety of his modern quick-
firing weapon, our friend entered that path where the
old Malay had gone with only his old single-barrel.
Mr. Graves moved warily, but nothing stirred ahead
of him, and after an anxious stealthy crawl he came
at last to the lair.


"There was the brave old hunter, and the ferocious
brute beside him, both stone dead. His aim had been
steady and true, but just too late to stop the awful
spring which bore him to the ground, and killed him
instantly—the brute must have expired at once, for
not a scratch or mark was on the hunter's body.
"How's that for bravery?" Francie looked around.
"Oh, horrible!" "What a courageous old man!"
"Who got the reward?" and many more such excla-
mations greeted her story, but all were firmly agreed
that it was one of the bravest actions that any of them
had heard of, and that her partiality for the Malay
race was quite justified.
After Francie had explained a good deal more about
the Malay country, with its wonderful flora and fauna,
they all demanded another story, though not quite so
horrible.
So, really nothing loth, she commenced again, and
told them an experience which had befallen her own
father as an unexpected sequel to a day's quiet sport.
Having only gone after snipe, he was wholly unpre-
pared for more formidable game, and as he afterwards
said, when describing his sensations, quite the worst
of them all was his feeling of absolute helplessness.
The country, where he was, had wide stretches of
high bamboo grass, traversed by tiny paths, and it was
on entering one of these on his homeward way, that
his walk with death took place. The time was late
afternoon, with already a waning light, which showed
even fainter in the over-arching grass.
Tired, but satisfied with his day, he was walking
quietly on, his bearer having gone another way, when
suddenly in the stillness a heavy pad, pad, of some
stealthy, stealing animal sounded just behind him,
keeping time with him and apparently but a yard away
in the grass.
His feelings were indescribable. Alone in the
gathering dusk, practically unarmed, something —he
knew not what, but could pretty shrewdly guess —was


walking there beside him. Step by step it kept along,
relentlessly; sure of its prey; perhaps awaiting com-
plete darkness or the first open ground before mak-
ing its deadly spring, and there was nothing that he
could do.
For about three hundred yards that stretch of grass
continued, and my father says his walk was the most
terrible experience he had known. For each step
of the way he felt might be his last, and the tiger
upon him; for the pad, pad, went on all the time; he
could almost hear the thing breathing.
How it would have ended goodness only knows, for
the clear ground was approaching, but suddenly, as
if by magic, a tremendous fire sprang up, and the
tiger fled dismayed.
Hearing the huge body tearing through the grass
my father knew for certain the danger he had been
in, and the first relief was so great, that for the mo-
ment he could not move.
But quickly pulling himself together he hurried on
for home, and on emerging from the grass saw what
had been his salvation—an immense pile of brushwood
set on fire by the natives, who were busily clearing the
ground.
Warning them of the tiger's neighbourhood, he de-
cided to organise a hunt on the morrow, and I believe
they finally got the animal. But so long as he lives
my father says he will never forget that '•ghastly
walk," as he truly says, " in company with death."
"Oh. Francie, dear, you must stop." Sister
Mary Agnes broke the spell. "Many more such
stories, and the little ones will not sleep. What a
truly dreadful land! I pity any who live there."
Francie smiled delighted. "You would love it
really, if you were there," she said, "but I won't tell
any more tiger tales if you don't like them, though I
know a lovely lot."' Her tone held faint regret.
"Don't you remember any less startling incidents,
dear? It is nice to hear of such a different life, but


that last experience makes one shudder.' Sister
Alary Agnes evidently voiced the general opinion.
"Well, this is a funny little incident which happened
when we were in China," and Francie commenced
again. "Not being a doctor I cannot explain it, but
this is just what happened. Our head gardener
there was a family man, owning a little cottage, a wife
with the tiniest feet, and numerous yellow babies. One
of these, a sturdy little chap of three, became very ill,
and everything possible was done to make him better.
Still he grew weaker and weaker, in spite of all their
care, and one night when the rain was pouring down
the little fellow died. The Chinese, as you know, are
very superstitious, and detest dead bodies. They give
them every mark of respect, but whether or not in
their crowded home there seemed no suitable place
to lay the little corpse, or whether it was just super-
stition, for some reason or other they put the stiff
little figure outside and left it until the morning in all
the pouring rain.
"No doubt the poor mother went out early to bring
it in. When she did her fright was so great that she
nearly fainted, for there lying before her was her boy
alive! —eyes open wide, and breathing quite naturally.
How to explain it 1 don't know," said Francie, in
response to looks of wonder, mingled with incredulity,
"but so it really happened. I have seen that boy, and,
so far as I know, he is alive to-day, cured by a bath;
perhaps it was the first he had ever had, and the shock
may have restored life."
"Well," said Inez, "that's the most extraordinary
yarn I have ever heard, and if you were not the teller,
Francie, I really could not swallow it, but seeing is
believing, and you saw. What an awful thing to put
the poor little body out of doors!
"Yes, it seems dreadful to us, but they look at
things so differently—fancy dressing their little boys
up as girls so that their gods won't be jealous of them,
and take them away! To me they seemed the most


upside down people imaginable, but they are very
patient and industrious, though in some ways fearfully
cruel. I knew of one man ''(Please don't tell us,"
Marian interrupted, "it will only give us nightmare,
and we can't do any good so far away. I hate hear-
ing of horrid things."
"Poor old Marian! What would you do if you
found your cook roasting live rats in the oven ?"
Francie smiled mischievously.
Marian looked too disgusted for speech, but the
little ones were as horrified as Francie could wish, and
more to see their expressions than for any pleasure in
the telling she related several enormities perpetrated
by their own servants —such as plucking birds alive,
dropping hot coins on children's backs, and a few
other such pleasant amusements, which to them seem-
ed funny, although punished by her father, as they
rightly deserved.
"\ou don t like the Chinese, Francie, you know,"
Inez chipped in, "and I believe you are painting them
blacker than they really are."
"No, all those happenings are true, and though any
boy is cruel through mischief, the absolute delight
which a Chinaman takes in inflicting pain is what
sickens me, and I certainly don't like them, splendid
as they are in many ways."
"Well, dear," Sister Mary Agnes remarked, "you
must remember that they are pagans, and have never
been taught that cruelty is wrong, so we must not
judge them too hardly. Thank you for amusing us
for a whole hour, Francie, for I see it is nearly seven
o'clock. Now get your veils, children, and prepare
for Benediction, which will be a better prelude to bed-
time than nightmare stories," which admonition broke
up the sitting as all hurried to their desks for veils and
prayer books in readiness for the bell's summons to
the chapel.


CHAPTER X.
NEW FRIENDS.
Examination week came and went. All who ha
lived through that dread experience knows its teiro
but too well, especially the awful waking on the first
A good deal modified in the case of our girls b>
pleasant anticipations of their journey to town tor
Dunham being somewhat in the country a sight o
Sydney almost recompensed for the misery to be
endured during the day. The first day was, ot com se,
the worst, for nervousness magnified dimeult que
tions • but. after facing the crowded examination hall,
and nearly dying from fright on opening the papers,
their thorough knowledge of the subjects stood the
Dunham girls in good stead, and feeling fairly certain
that their answers were correct, the subsequent work
ceased to hold much terror for them; and in almost
every case they finally declared that examinations
were not such bad things after all, and the week more
enjoyable than otherwise. . ,
Ml the papers were re-done for their mistiess
satisfaction later, and any mistakes made were so
obviously slips from nervousness that bister -Uary
Agnes felt quite confident of their success ie
future proved her right, for in that year Dunham had
no failures, and. to the immense delight of the school
generally, Madge Drew headed the honors list, with
Inez in a very creditable position, a little way down.
Of course, manv anxious nights and days weie
passed before this' happy certainty was known, but
once the week was over, Sister Mary Agnes,
relieved beyond measure and at peace with all the
world, decided that with Mother Monica s permission
the poor O'Briens might now have their promised
welcome to Dunham. So, bidding Marian write to
them at once, the following Thursday was set apart


for the entertainment of those cheery Irish folk, who
had borne so much and so bravely, and who were now
making a plucky start in this new land.
The reply (a delighted acceptance) came promptly,
so preparations commenced forthwith. Requests were
forwarded to the Sister in charge of the kitchen for
applies of Sister Mary Anthony's delicious scones
and cakes, Mother Monica having previously given
orders to that effect; and making liberal use of the
contributions of pocket money so willingly offered,
Marian compiled such a list of sweets, fruit, and pas-
try to be forwarded from the stores, that Sister Marv
Agnes, seeing its length, truly wondered if the
O Briens would survive it.
But every one protested against curtailment: "Oh,
» really, Sistei Mary Agnes, they will enjoy all
those things, and they won't make them bilious.
Oh, no, surely not." So, seeing that their hearts were
set on a gorgeous spread, Sister Mary Agnes duly tele-
phoned their requirements, wondering to herself if so
much was considered essential for the entertainment
of Mrs. O'Brien, her two daughters, little Patsy and
Dick, where the list would have ended had the whole
family been coming.
Thursda> arrived smilingly fine, so anxiety was
stilled on the weather account, and as the guests were
expected about 2 o'clock, the big school hall was
decorated in the morning, the tea tables being got
ready immediately after noon-day dinner. They were
placed at the farthest end of the hall, with long
screens improvised to hide their beauty until the ap-
pointed time. Eleanor and Helen did most of the
arranging, with Sister Mary Anthony ever at hand to
supply anything which they had forgotten. The eat-
ables were not to be brought from the kitchens until
later, but as the tables stood complete in snowy
damask, dainty china, and exquisite bowls of deep
red roses, Eleanor had to admit that it really looked
very pretty.


Sister Mary Agnes was brought to inspect, and ex-
pressed herself extremely pleased with the taste dis-
played, and giving a little sigh wished that Mother
Monica could see the results of her thought, but the
Mother was ill that day, and the sad little looks on
one and all showed that their thoughts were with her
in her pain, despite their merry occupation.
Satisfied that ail was in readiness the girls went
up to dress —some for tennis, and the rest pretty
summer frocks, not too smart, in case the O Eiiens
might feel hurt.
Marian, Helen. Eleanor, and several of the seniors
decided to welcome their guests in the avenue, as hav-
ing to cross the river the O'Briens would not be able
to come up either of the big main walks, and as the
College buildings stood a little apart from the Con-
vent proper, they might have wasted precious time in
walking to the guest house.
"Bring them through the School Chapel door," Sis-
ter Mary Agnes advised, "as that is nearer to the
drive than the west entrance."
So, assembling just outside, the girls awaited the
strangers in some trepidation as to their party's suc-
cess.
"I do hope they will be happy," Marian exclaimed,
her pretty face flushed with anxiety. "It would be
dreadful if they just sat round and did nothing."
"Goodness, Marian!" Helen laughed; "you seem
to forget that they're Irish. Whoever heard of
Irish folk who didn't talk? They never seem to stop."
"I sincerely hope they won't, but these have had
such awful times. Poor Mrs. O'Brien is sure to be
sad. We won't mention her troubles, Helen, dear.
She might cry, you know."
"Oh! don't worry. She may be quite different, and
as jolly as can be."
"Well, I hope so. Do run to the corner, Inez, and
see if they are coming," and Inez hurrying off almost


as quickly returned to say they were nearly there. She
seemed to have had a shock.
"\ou wont need to soothe our martyr," she said;
for she looks the pink of happiness. Helen, if you
feel like giggling perhaps you'd better go, for Mrs.
O Brien is a sight you're quite unused to."
But Helen could make no escape, for at that moment
the Irish quintette appeared.
First, a buxom matron, enormously stout, but fairly
beaming with good humor. Two tall girls walked be-
side her, looking like slender poplars supporting a
stunted oak. A pair of merry urchins, whom Inez
claimed at once for her own special charge, completed
the little group. But what about Mrs. O'Brien? How
was she going to enter ? Broad as a block of granite,
she nearly described a square of solid black-clothed
womanhood, topped by a huge black bonnet. Marian
looked concerned, Eleanor disgusted, and Helen, after
her first strangled giggle, had managed to keep her
face, and immediately catching sight of the merriest
dark blue eyes beneath that cavernous head-piece, de-
cided on the instant that Mrs. O'Brien would do, and
if she couldn't be got in straight would just have to
go in sideways.
Marian sweetly advanced to bid the strangers wel-
come, and nearly vanished from sight in a mighty
motherly hug. "Heavens!" (Eleanor started). "If
she s going to do that to me I intend to take my depar-
ture." But no such escape was possible, for Mrs.
O'Brien was upon them, merrily talking and laughing
in the sweetest of Irish voices, despite her appalling
size.
Helen kissed her warmly, but Eleanor tried to avoid
it, though not with the least success, for, being by
far the tallest, Mrs. O'Brien could not miss her.
So, in her majesty, went to that most distasteful em-
brace. emerging more than slightly ruffled in temper,
as well as frills. "Ugh," she said to herself, "she's
just like a feather bed."


But Marian looked relieved —no martyr-like sadness
here —and asking the names of all the children, she
suggested their going inside where the rest of the girls
were waiting.
An anxious moment followed as the party neared
the door, Mrs. O'Brien also eyeing it with a specula-
tive glance.
"It's ten to one I'll stick," Marian vowed she heard
her whisper; but once really in the doorway the tiniest
push did the trick, and Mrs. O'Brien was in with a
mighty sigh of relief.
Surprises were not yet over, for seeing the Sacred
Heart Statue, down the whole party knelt, to the
girls' intense embarrassment, who, far more reserved
in their piety, were not used to such public demon-
strations. But naturalness was its keynote, and 011
seeing their visitors' faces, the girls quite understood,
and in that moment loved them. They themselves,
of course, always bowed, and made an act of love
when passing through the Chapel, but such quiet de-
votion would by no means content the Irish, who
loved their Lord with all the strength of their hearts,
and could no more have passed His Image without a
display of that love, than they could have greeted
new-made friends with cautious, cold formality.
The little interlude was soon over, and Marian led
on once more through several doors, of happily wide
dimensions, until at last the big school hall was
reached, where Sister Mary Agnes, with all the other
pupils, has assembled to meet their guests. It said
much for Dunham training that no murmur of wonder
or even the faintest sign showed how surprising was
Mrs. O'Brien and her figure to all their preconceived
notions of an heroic and saintly mother.
She soon made friends with them all, and seated
herself in their midst, telling them endless stories
brimful of wit and fun. Sister Mary Agnes joined in
the laughter, and Helen winked at Marian. "Who's


doing the talking? You or the woebegone visitor?'
And Marian owned she was wrong, only too glad to
have proved so.
Presently a move was made for the Courts, all
going out except Sister Mary Agnes and Mrs. O'Brien.
The latter, deciding to see over the School, wandered
through all the spacious rooms, full of admiration,
tinged with regret that her dear Kathleen and Mary
could not join its happy inmates.
Talking all the time, some hint of endless struggles
was disclosed in careless fashion; grinding poverty,
which would have daunted the bravest hearts, had
been endured and nearly conquered, but heart-break
was in the tones at mention of the distant sons who
had gone to the far West, succeeding, it is true, enough
to help their parents in their turn, but lost to sight
to their mother for long and bitter years. Tears stood
in the blue eyes sometimes, but always a laugh pre-
vented their falling, and every tale of trouble was
ended in the same bright way: "Shure the good God
helped us, and here we are to-day."
Meanwhile Patsy and Dick were enjoying splendid
times in the junior class room, with Inez and the small
fry—Patsy adopted by Jean Brown, and Dicky en-
sconced in perfect comfort on Inez's knee.
The many maps around proved of absorbing inter-
est to him. "What's on dem?' he asked, with fat little
finger pointed, and being told, demanded an exhaustive
account of each country—lnez wondering the while
at the quick intelligence of his questions, and his
rapid grasp of all she told him.
"You are a clever little boy, Patsy, but it's a pity
you don't speak correctly," she presently said, "you
always say 'dem' instead of 'those.' "
"I like 'dem' best."
"But it's not good English, dear."


"English! I not English! I Irish. Damn dem
English!"—and jumping from her knee he confronted
Inez like a young fury.
"Patsy, you naughty, naughty boy; wherever did
you hear that ? I don't love you any more. We were
all English, and you don't hate us. do you ?"
Patsy looked puzzled, but his big blue eyes some-
what lost their blazing anger. Putting his little hand
on Inez's knee he regarded her intently. "You Eng-
lish? But you didn't steal our farm and make us poor.
Dem English do that."
"Ah. no. Patsy darling, it wasn't because they were
English." Inez gathered the sturdy young fighter
in her arms. "There are bad people in every land,
but you mustn't think of them any more. Look." —to
create a diversion —"what is that coming across the
garden ?"
"Tarts! Hurroosh!" With a wild leap he was
tearing across the flower beds before Inez could stop
him, English and Irish completely forgotten.
Sister Mary Anthony was coming slowly, laden
with high piled plates, but seeing the rushing little
figure, she wisely stayed her course to receive its
sturdy onslaught. Flinging himself against her, Patsv
demanded tarts, one for each hand, and as Inez was
now on the scene she gave him two, and, with Sister
Mary Anthony sharing her amusement, saw them dis-
appear like lightning.
"Dem good, dem werry good; give Patsy some more,
Inez."
"No. indeed, I won't. You'll be ill; but you can
have plenty at tea time. Come along, now, and we'll
get out to the tennis courts, too."
So out they went and watched some very good
games, with Kathleen and Mary O'Brien shaping quite
well, both being so keenly interested in the play that
Helen's suggestion that they should come every week


using her and Marian's things for the present, was
received with unfeigned delight.
Afterwards, though, as they walked in to tea,
Kathleen came up to Helen, shyly grateful.
"How kind of you," she said, "'to think of us like
that. We shall never forget it, never. You do things
so nicely that one hardly realises what is given."
"That is a very high compliment," Helen laughed;
"from an Irish girl. too. for you are called the really
tactful people, but I'm very sure if the positions were
re* ersed you'd do ever so much more for us."
"We should like to; but you don't know how de-
lightful this weekly outing will be in our grinding oM
life. Poor Mother will bless 3*oll for it quite as much
as we do. So thank you all, and dear Mother Monica
very, very much."
'We're delighted to have 3*ollHelen gave the slim
waist an impulsive squeeze which settled the point of
their coming.
So in eveiw way their part 3* was a success. Mrs.
O'Brien felt that here at least were real friends and
true for her girls, and the3 r themselves soon lost their
wistful shyness and were realh* quite at home.
The tea table received all the admiration it deserved,
and Sister Agnes leaving them for a while during the
meal could hardly believe her e3'es on her return.
P3*ramids of fruit, quantities of cakes, scones, and
every imaginable daint3* —all had vanished.
"Why, my dears," she exclaimed, "3*ou surely can't
have finished even-thing? Shall I send to the kitchens
for some more?"
"Oh, no," came the answer with a general laugh,
"though we certainly did demolish most of them, but
Patsy having decided that he wants another party to-
morrow, we packed what was left in a basket for
him to take home."
"Shure, the 3 r oung spalpeen has no manners," and
Mrs. O'Brien tried to look severe. "It's spoilt entirely


he'd be if this young lady had her way." regarding
Inez with a very loving look. "Tt has been a day
of days for him. indade, and for us all. But now I
am afraid we must be going, with God's blessing and
a stranger's thanks to you all. You will give our
grateful respects." she continued, rising, and address-
ing Sister Mary Agnes; collecting her bairns the while,
"to the dear Reverend Mother who has treated the
strangers in such royal fashion. \\ e came to Aus-
tralia expecting no friends, and here we have dozens
all made in a day," the kindly eyes filling, she
looked at the girls in such grateful fashion that their
trouble was amply repaid, and they vowed she must
come again.
"No more play for me." she replied to the many
warm invitations, "but the young ones shall come each
week, and God bless you all for your kindness. Come,
children; now, say good-bye." The little band moved
off. all excepting one.
But Patsy would not go. and his wild howls rent
the air. Sister Mary Agnes looked dismayed, until
Inez soothed his trouble: "She could not go with him,
oh. no. but every week he must come to her when the
others came for tennis." So finally he relented and
bade them all good-bye. tightly grabbing his basket
containing to-morrow's feast.
Of course, opinions were varied regarding their
oversea visitors, all agreeing that the girls were de-
lightful. though not so sure of the mother, but Inez
upheld her, firmly supported by Helen especially, and
at last the others vowed, too. "that she was just
Nature's lady, simple, brave, and good."


CHAPTER XI.
THE HEART OF A CHILD.
Many quiet days of mingled work and play followed
the O'Brien's party, until warm October was come,
and the year seemed almost ended.
As the time so relentlessly passed, Helen often in-
dulged in a quiet weep, thinking of all the good-byes
so fast approaching.
Only three weeks more and then her boat must leave,
taking her with it. so very far away from all these
dear ones here, who had brightened and blessed with
their love her lonely, motherless life. And now she
must do her part, sharing as far as possible the
demands of her father's high position, and making
his home happy after long years of emptiness.
The choosing of her outfit had been unmixed
delight. After years of school plainness, how joyous-
ly did she revel in dainty chiffons and muslins. Marian
shared her pleasure, for, knowing how keenly the two
friends would feel their parting, kind Mother Monica
gave Marian holidays too, so they both had gone
shopping together, attended by an old English nurse,
who had been at Dunham for years.
Dodo she was called by the scholars, old and young,
who held her in affectionate regard. On these par-
ticular outings, however. Helen would quite willingly
have left her behind, for Dodo was an excellent shop-
per. which Helen was not. and that young person's
extravagance filled Dodo's frugal mind with horror.
Helen's procedure was simple—always choosing the
most expensive shops, she stated her wants, without
mentioning price; as a natural consequence, being
shown the most elaborate articles, rather unsuited to
so young a girl, which, however, she usually bought,


and then wondered sadly why her money vanished so
soon. Dodo, however, would tolerate no such be-
haviour, and heedless of horrified expressions from her
charges, brushed aside all extravagant beauties, and
demanded "the cheapest and the best" in tones which
brooked no denial. Usually a compromise was effect-
ed, and, thanks, to her rigid economy, Helen's extrava-
gance was somewhat kept within bounds, and i educed
to a common-sense level.
Returning to "Dunham," tired but happy, all their
purchases were at once sent to Mother Monica for
approval or the reverse, as, despite her secluded
Convent life, her taste in such matters was perfect.
Helen very well knew that if Mother Monica con-
demned a hat or gown, it might as well be sent back
at once, so she very wisely did so.
One evening as the trio reached the School door, a
very worried head mistress was awaiting them, in
great concern about Jean Brown, who had suddenly
developed a most alarming temperature, and was now
sent to the infirmary until the doctor should arrive.
"I cannot understand it," Sister Agnes concluded.
"I felt obliged to get Sister Mary Benedict from the
Convent, badly needed as she is by Mother Monica,
but the child seemed in such an alraming state that
her presence was absolutely necessary. She cannot
say what the attack is, but I want you girls to have
your tea quickly and go to bed at once, for I may be
obliged to have your help during the night. Poor little
Jean seems half delirious, and is tossing about calling
incessantly for Inez and Eleanor. Francie Dunn, who
sleeps near her in the dormitory, says has been
restless for a long time, talking and moaning in her
sleep."
"Poor little mite," said Helen; "I wonder what it
can be; perhaps her ducking at the picnic has affected
her."


"Maybe it has something to do with it," agreed
Sister Mary Agnes, "though that is a fortnight ago.
Still, we can do nothing more until Dr. Burke
arrives, so go now, children, and get your tea."
The doctor had been out when first rung up, but a
message catching him on his rounds, he soon arrived
at Dunham, and was met by Sister Mary Agnes, who
conducted him at once to the infirmary, which was
managed by Sister Mary Benedict, almost a doctor
herself in actual knowledge. She stood in the door-
way now to receive Dr. Burke, who knew and respect-
ed her highly as a thoroughly competent nurse. "Not
much left for me to do, Sister," he remarked, with a
comprehensive glance round the well-ordered room;
"but what could have brought fever to Dunham? I
have never known it before," and seating himself by
the child's bed, he watched her restless tossing with
his hand on her burning head.
it A very healthy patient," he presently remarked,
except for the rising heat. Has she overworked her
small brain, do you think ?' looking somewhat gravely
at Sister Mary Agnes, who, in spite of her anxiety,
had to smile: "No, Doctor," she replied, "that most
certainly never happened to Jean."
_ ell, it is her brain, somehow," with a puzzled
air, for her body is quite right,'' and bending low
over the bed he heard Jean's excited murmurings.
"Inez and Eleanor! Inez and Eleanor!" ("She has
got them on the brain," he muttered), and "Eleanor
going to hell. All liars go to hell." Here came a
pitiful sob.
Good gracious! The old Doctor turned to the
waiting Nuns. "Can you explain these extraordinary
fears.-' lor unless we can remove their cause, the
case may really be serious."
I am as puzzled as you,' Sister Mary Agnes re-
plied, and can make nothing of her reference to
Eleanor. Inez, I know, she is very fond of, but all


worry about her is over some weeks ago," relating the
ruler episode and Inez's narrow escape from expul-
sion.
Still the frightened reiteration went on: "Eleanor,
do tell, do tell. Liars belong to the devil." and the
piteous tones of entreaty showed how great was the
torment within the child's mind.
"With your permission, Sister," Dr. Burke decided,
"I will send for Eleanor." and Sister Alary Agnes as-
senting. a message was sent to the School. "She may
know the key to our riddle, and bring peace to this
weary brain."
Sister Alary Benedict meanwhile was standing very
quietly by the bed's foot. Nurse by instinct and
training, she saw at once the wisdom of Dr. Burke's
suggestion. Her's had been a selfless life, with every
thought and action absorbed in care for others, hirst
in all things with her was Alother Alonica, whom she
loved dearly, and without doubt her devoted care dur-
ing so many pain-filled years had helped to prolong
that beloved life. The School did not as a rule see
much of Sister Alary Benedict, for, added to her
duties as Infirmarian, all the business correspondence
of Dunham fell to her share. The girls were slightly
in awe of her brisk personality, but none failed to
realise the warm, unselfish heart which beat beneath jt.
On hearing Dr. Burke's remark, she turned inquir-
ingly to Sister Alary Agnes. "In this rather unusual
case, Sister," she said, "had we not better leave
Eleanor alone Avith Jean? There is some occurrence
of which you evidently know nothing, and fright may
preA-ent Eleanor doing as Jean Avishes. I suggest our
leaving them both in Dr. Burke's hands, for, having
daughters of his oAvn, he may be able to manage Avhat
we cannot."
Sister Alary Agnes looked as if she hardly cared
to leave her charge unattended, but seeing the sense
of the suggestion, she presently agreed, and they both
left the room as Eleanor entered.


_ Dr. Burke, thinking deeply, had moved slightly be-
hind the door. Eleanor walking quickly past the Nuns
thought that the room was empty, and went quietly
up to Jean's bed, bending gently over the tossed little
figure, all the cold beauty of her face transfigured
with tender concern. Watching the pretty picture
which they made, Jean's terrified ramblings about
Eleanor going to hell seemed to the Doctor singularly
inappropriate.
Standing there with one cool hand lightly laid on
Jean's head, Eleanor's very presence seemed to have
a quieting effect on the child, who soon lay still, and
presently opened her eyes, apparently with no more
trace of delirium.
On seeing Eleanor a look of intense pleading show-
ed on the little face, keeping in check the fear behind,
and clasping the cool hand in her two small hot ones,
she begged in piteous accents:
"Do tell, dear Eleanor; do tell Sister Mary Agnes
all the truth about those books, will you? For Father
Jarard says that all liars go to hell, and I don't want
you to go to hell; no, I don't." As if overcome with
the prospect. Jean broke into bitter weeping.
The absolute surprise of Jean's outburst rendered
Eleanor speechless, though a hot flush of annoyance
quickly dyed her face and quite dispelled its softness.
Dr. Burke watched her very closely, and seeing
from her expression that Jean's words were not wild
ramblings, he deemed it time to make his presence
known, and also to act; so assuming his most pro-
fessional air, instead of his usual fatherly manner
when attending the Dunham children, he also crossed
to the bed and quietly looked at Eleanor, while she,
realising that he had heard Jean's appeal, flushed more
hotly than before.
"You must understand, Miss March," he addressed
her, using his thermometer the while to emphasise
his words, "that this child is in serious danger" (here


Eleanor paled). "Mental anxiety of some sort lias
evidently told on her system, but what that anxiety
is we tio not at present Know —except that it is con-
nected with you. Removed it must L>e, and at once,
or brain fever will soon follow, so whatever she asks
you to do, you most assuredly must agree to, and
mat without Hesitation. lou understand me, I tliink r
Hearing tlie quiet firmness of his tone, Eleanor
knew there was no escape.
She regarded him lor awhile in horrofied dismay
as the fuii meaning of his words came home to her
mind. "Confess to Sister Mary Agnes 1 And then
make friends with Inez! Oh, i really, leally cant,
and sinking beside the bed she devoured Jeans face
with her eyes. "Mow did you know, Jean, she al-
most sobbed, "that you should work yourself up like
this, and lead me into such trouble?'
Jean had stopped her weeping, and seemed to be
half asleep, but hearing Eleanor s query she turned
upon her pillow, and smoothed the eldei gn 1 s cheek
with very coaxing softness.
"I did not mean to listen, Eleanor, but that day
when Madge was sick I had been sent to the dormitory
for my mending, and heard Madge say you had told
Sister Mary Agnes an untruth, and had concealed
things. That was all I knew, but next Saturday
Father Jerard told us how our Lord hates lies, that
the devil was the father of lies, and I knew that you
had told a lie!" (Here the small mouth drooped
piteously). "Then about Inez," little jean presently
continued; "she cries and cries every night, and I
know it is because you and some of the others won't
speak to her. You won't be unkind any more, will
you? And you will own up, won't you? For I do
love you so very, very much." The little arms were
round her neck with all their baby pleading, while
Eleanor's working face showed how bitter was the
struggle she was enduring. But the baby love won
with its pitiful fright and pleading.


"bo you thought and thought," Eleanor finally said,
"until you made yourself ill! Poor, quaint little Jean;
I really wasn't worth it. Still, I must do what you
want, though you don t quite realise how hard a task
you have set me. And now," gently stroking her hair,
"that you have my promise, will you try to sleep
dear ?"
"\es, I think I could if you gave me a kiss," and
as poor, proud Eleanor stooped to the waiting face,
she wondered, awed at the childish love which had
wrought such a change in herself.
Put how the small mind must have worried at the
thought of her own wrongdoing. Well, at least, she
could make amends," so whispering into Jean's ear,
a glad smile came in response.
"You will make friends at once? Oh, Eleanor, how
good, and I know Sister Mary Agnes won't be cross.
Dear, dear Eleanor; I shall get well now 7,' and turning
on her pillow Jean fell into sound sweet sleep.
Eleanor watched her a while, envying her peace,
dread filling her own thoughts, in view of the ordeal
ahead. Looked up to and worshipped by half the
school, she must now 7 acknowdedge a fault which the
>oungest would have scorned to commit. Covering
her eyes with her hands, those moments by Jean's bed
w ere the most miserable she had known.
Dr. Burke meanw r hile had been watching her
trouble, and, seeing her head go down, he deemed he
might safely speak.
"A bit of hard road ahead, eh?" his cheery voice
broke in, "but take an old traveller's word, Eleanor,
it won't be so bad when you get there. Just
like the nettle, can t hurt if you grip it firm and sure
so w hat about good-bye to me, and seeing Sister Marv
Agnes at once, eh?" y
Eleanor dropped her hands, her eyes imploring a
few minutes grace; but the doctor did not see as
going up to Jean's bed he looked down with much
satisfaction.


"Decided improvement, most decided, which you,
my dear, have accomplished. Well, I shall give my
instructions to Sister Mary Benedict outside, and send
Sister Mary Agnes to you. So, good-bye, and good
luck," with a firm grip of her hand, which somehow
strengthened Eleanor, the kind old man was gone.
Now for her own bad time. She shivered at the
thought. How to tell, she knew not, and what would
Sister Mary Agnes say at hearing how one of her
eldest girls had wilfully deceived her? It seemed but
a second before the kindly figure she so much dreaded
was standing there before her.
"Why, dear child, you look quite ill, and Jean is so
much better. What is it, Eleanor?"
"Oh, Sister Mary Agnes," she blurted out, "I hardly
know how to begin, for I have behaved so very badly,
and am really the cause of Jean's illness. She knew
of something I had done which was wrong, and wor-
ried herself ill in consequence."
"You, Eleanor?" Sister Mary Agnes interrupted.
"Yes, even Eleanor, who thought so much of her-
self," and nervously clasping and unclasping her
hands, she made her tardy confession in no way ex-
cusing her untruth or her bitter unkindness to Inez.
Never a word of censure came, when the trying
recital was finished, for Sister Mary Agnes sat as if
stunned, unable at once to realise that it was indeed
Eleanor who had acted thus—Eleanor, of whom she
was so proud, and whose word she would have taken
on all occasions.
"But, my dear, how long ago was this. J was all she
could find to say.
"Nearly a month," replied Eleanor gloomily, "when
we all had visitors on guest day."
"Ah, yes! I remember. I asked had you received
any parcels, and you said 'No.' You are not generally
a coward."
"I did not stop to think, Sister Mary Agnes, and it
was not a scolding I feared, but so many were stand-


ing round just then, and to think of them all knowing
was too awful, and I was afraid to tell your after-
wards."
"And for nearly a month you have concealed an
untruth?" (The nun's face showed deepest amaze-
ment). "Disgracing yourself and the medal which
you wear?" The blue ribbon round Eleanor's neck
proclaimed her "Child of Mary," an honour only
achieved after months of strict probation.
At the words the girl's head sunk low, while a wave
of hot colour rushed to her face. "I have not been
wearing my medal," she confessed in scarce audible
tones, and unpinning her apron disclosed her blue
ribbon just pinned to her dress, instead of bearing the
well-loved badge, which, besides implying that its
wearer was considered worthy to be called a "Child
of Mary," conferred also the rank of School Monitor
on a senior girl.
"You discarded your Heavenly Mother's picture?"
The nun's gentle face grew stern. "May I ask why?
Though certainly you have only forestalled me in tak-
ing it from you." (This was the greatest disgrace
which a head girl could suffer.)
"You will never take my medal?" Eleanor's hands
outstretched with impetuous pleading. "I will bear
any other punishment, but I cannot exist without my
medal. It was only from reverence that I took it off,
but I kissed it every night." Eleanor's hands were
clinched as she thus confessed her innermost thoughts.
"You kissed it," Sister Mary Agnes repeated in
mystified tones; "kissed the face of Christ's gentle
Mother with a lie on your soul, and angry thoughts
in your heart. Such affection sounds somewhat
unreal and very disrespectful." A sparkle of indigna-
tion greeted what to Sister Mary Agnes sounded like
hypocrisy.
Eleanor flushed more deeply. "It may seem so, but
I did not mean it that way. I love Our Lady, and
believe my kiss was a prayer, which she has answered


J >
i


PI.EASE DO TELE!" THE CHIEDISH VOICE PEEADED.


by making Jean ill and forcing me to confess. 1 lease
believe me, Sister Mary Agnes," the girl implored ear-
nestly. "Take my ribbon, that the school may know I
am in disgrace; but unless you want to make me woi se
than ever, please do not take my medal. Behind the
imperious words was a depth of tender feeling.
"That is no way to speak, Eleanor. The Nun was
puzzled, but also relieved and very much surprised at
this entirely new aspect of the girl s nature. She
could not doubt its sincerity with the eager, anxious
face before her, although the two actions seemed
strangely incompatible. Still, long contact with
growing souls, so full of good and evil instincts, had
taught her patient wisdom, even when not under-
standing. }j
"You must give me your ribbon, Eleanor. The
girl unpinned it and handed it to her. "But, with
some hesitation, "as through your wrong-doing you
seem to have kept some love for God's Mother, I will
not demand your medal, which, if you like to wear
under your dress, I shall not forbid your doing so."
"Thank you," Eleanor replied quietly, "very, very
much.
"And you never read those books, Eleanor, truly?"
Sister Mary Agnes continued, looking keenly at her.
"No, they are in my desk now, and except for the
first few chapters, which told me what they were like,
I don't know a word that is in them, but just hoped
to return them and forget the whole thing."
"That would hardly have been right or possible,
but you have acted honourably now, though certainly
rather late. Still, if you are going to make friends
with Inez, there is nothing more to be said."
"But I must tell the girls," and Eleanor flushed
uncomfortably, "to really make amends to Inez."
"Well," said Sister Mary Agnes thoughtfully, "I
am not so sure of the wisdom of that, for such matters
are best not discussed in the School. Those who know
already you may tell of your confession, and if before


the whole School you make friends with Inez, and in
future try to repair the harm you have done her, that
will be all that is necessary; though to say how very
much you have surprised and grieved me is more than
I can do. It seems as if you had acted in direct oppo-
sition to all your years of training,'' and the sad look
of disappointment on the dear Nun's face showed how
deeply she had been hurt.
"Oh, Sister Mary Agnes, I am very sorry." Tears
of real sorrow for the first time filling Eleanor's
eyes. "Will you never trust me again?"
"Never is a long time dear, but you have destroyed
my faith in you at present. You have been so callous,
as if unconscious of any wrong; but that, at least, is
altered, and Sister Mary Agnes smiled more cheer-
fully. "The future must hold but one motto for you
now, 'Truth before all!' Is that how you feel about
it?"
"Yes, indeed," said Eleanor slowly. "I sincerely
trust that never again shall I deny or conceal any-
thing." And so ended her dreaded interview.
The meeting with Inez had still to be faced, and
might prove very unpleasant, but, realising how all
occasion for personal fear had vanished, much of her
bitterness melted, too, and she only waited for Sister
Mary Benedict's return before "proceeding to the
School.
Jean was still sleeping peacefully, one small arm
framing her curly hair, the innocent childish face
looking lovely in its sleep. "True little heart,"
Eleanor softly said, "you have been a good friend to
me." And as Sister Mary Benedict came in just then
saying she would sit with Jean for an hour, Eleanor
bade her a respectful good night, kissed the child, and
went in search of Inez.
Happy as she felt at having made her avowal to
Sister Mary Agnes, the thought of begging pardon
was repugnant. Still, despite her faults, she was just,


and knew that nothing but a public apology from her
would thoroughly convince her chums how completely
her feelings had changed, and how much she regretted
her unkindness, which had led to such painful hours
and so many slights for poor Inez.
Knowing she would find all the Senior girls in the
long hall, as it was still recreation hour, Eleanor
walked in and straight up to Inez, who was seated at
the end table, herself busily sewing, and surrounded
by Madge, Helen, and Marian, who were just as
busily talking. Francie Dunn was playing waltzes,
whilst some of the others danced, but passing her on
the way, Eleanor asked her to stop for a minute, and
made straight for the end of the room.
The conversation stopped at once, Inez immediately
bundling up her work, as if for a move, for so marked
had been Eleanor's dislike that she nearly always went
at her approach.
Eleanor saw her intention, and flushed in conscious
shame. "Please, Inez, do not go, for I particularly
want to speak to you, and before all the others."
"Certainly," said Inez, resuming her seat, but look-
ing rather uncomfortable.
"For a long while," Eleanor began, raising her voice
so that all should hear, "you know that Inez and I
have not been friends." Here came a pause, as if the
tall, pale speaker was in doubt how best to continue.
"But it has not been only that," she bravely continued,
"for I have tried, and succeeded, in influencing a good
many of you against her also; and it is for that I
am so sorry now, and very much ashamed. Inez and I
may never come to be friends again, but this I want you
to know, that she has been most honourable all
through, and that I have been entirely to blame. If
you ever can forgive my unkindness," turning with
appeal to Inez, "it would make me very happy to be as
we were before all this trouble came," and Eleanor
stood quiet, awaiting her reply.


Inez felt greatly moved and immensely sorry for
Eleanor, knowing what this speech must have cost
her. For some time she had guessed the reason of
Eleanor's unkindness, but being completely in the dark
as to Jean's part in the play, knew nothing of its re-
moval. Happy as a reconciliation would have made
her, she hesitated, half in doubt what to say, unless
Eleanor had confessed. Eleanor saw her puzzled look,
and understood her dilemma. Flushing and slightly
lowering her voice, she addressed Inez alone.
"I may tell you, Inez," she said, "that Sister Mary
Agnes knows everything, and hopes that we will make
friends."
"Is that really so? Well, indeed, I am delighted to
be friends again; it has been too awful for anything,"
and extending an impulsive hand, Inez gripped
Eleanor's, and going somewhat aside, heard all about
little Jean's trouble, with its good and happy sequel.
Eleanor could be winning when she wished, and her
humility was very sweet, so exerting all her powers,
she tried to make amends, coaxing and begging Inez
to forgive the pain she had caused her. It did not
take very long, and they presently joined the others,
both much happier for ending their bitter estrange-
ment.
That night, before going to bed, Eleanor took her
medal, attached it to a cord, and hung it very humbly
around her neck. Publicly she was no longer a "Child
of Mary." and was deposed for the time being from all
school offices as such. Still, she did not seem to mind
so long as Our Lady's badge was hers to love and
cherish, and she prayed that if ever her ribbon was
returned, she might prove more worthy to wear it.


CHAPTER XII.
THE MATCH.
In the coming years, when joy and sorrow were to
make of Jean's life a picture in light and shade, the
days of her convalescence in the sunny School Infirm-
ary would ever stand out brightly as a time of perfect
bliss. Her loving little heart being eased of its burden,
no sign of fever returned, and the hours were brimful
of peace.
Eleanor often came to sit by the bedside and talk
for an hour together. Such a different Eleanor now.
All pride and haughtiness were gone from her lovely
face, leaving instead a tender look of gratitude for the
child, who had shown her the right. Jean, on her
side, lay still, content to watch the elder girl, and
know that all worries were over. Inez also came, with
eager impatience to get Inez well, partly out of love
for the dear little thing, but even more on account of
tennis requirements, for the final match day was draw-
ing near, when all competent players were needed, and
Tean was the best of the younger set.
Jean said she felt quite well, but Dr. Burke insisted
on quiet, and refused to allow her up until nearly a
week had gone —which left but a slender margin of
time for getting into practice.
Inez met him one day, and begged for a shortening
of the time.
"You need her for a tennis match?"—his eyebrows
were raised in mock horror —"a patient who verged on
brain fever must avoid excitement, not seek it." He
eyed Inez's pleading face with provoking calm.
' "But surely she was not so bad as that," Inez urged,
"and I am dreadfully anxious to have'her play."
"Dear, dear, me!" Dr. Burke replieid quietly. "Is
the occasion so very important?"
"Indeed, it is," Inez explained rapidly. "We play


the 'old girls' ever}- term, and so far have won a match
each. Next Saturday's fight will decide who are this
year's winners. We hear that Trix Gaskell, who only
left last year, has joined the 'old girls' team. She is
a champion, and if May Travers comes, too, who is
also very strong, we shall have a most awful tussle.
Helen and I can hardly hope to beat them, so the fate
of the match will lie with the other two pairs. Jean
is good, and we do need her so badly."
''Well, well" (the Doctor was fond of Inez, but
liked to tease her a little), "and you would risk the
child's health for the sake of a game of tennis?"
"Not just an ordinary game," Inez pleaded, flushed
with concern, "and not if all this time in bed is abso-
lutely necessary. Could she not possibly get up just
a little sooner, dear Dr. Burke? Two days' practice
would make so very much difference." The girl's eyes
were most imploring.
"Hardly prudent, that, my dear young lady." The
old Doctor was giving way, but took his time about it;
to play hard tennis after several days in bed is a mani-
fest absurdity. Still"—with a maddening pause—
perhaps on next Wednesday a game might be man-
aged—mind, only one game," detaining Inez, who was
about to run off delighted. "Just a quiet game, and
another on Thursday and Friday. Would that be
sufficient practice to put her in form for the match?"
"Yes, plenty. Oh, you darling. Dr. Burke," and
bestowing a radiant smile, Inez flew to impart the
news that Jean might get up three days beforehand,
and play in the match after all; whilst the Doctor
watched her flying form with an envious smile for its
youth.
Most of the elder girls were in the school hall, and
Inez called the good news as she ran. "Really, is that
so?" Helen exclaimed. "What an immense relief, for
just do look at this," holding out a paper. "We have
received a list of the 'old girls' playing, and they are


frightfully strong. See here, Inez," Helen lent over
the table, and marked the names with her pencil—
"First double, Trix Gaskel and May Travers;
"Second double, Jean Wilson and Mary Burrows;
Third double, Mrs. Somers and Mrs. Drewitt.
The last two are weak, their second double moderately
strong —but their first! My dear, they will wipe us
out! It is awful —two sets straight they are sure to
get. So all hope of the match depends on our second
and third doubles. Eleanor and her partner are good.
So is Jean, but poor child, she can't, be fit for much.
Inez, I'm afraid we are utterly done for." Helen
wrinkled her happy face in a pucker of deep despond-
ency. "We've never been up against anything quite
so strong before—have we ?"
"No. they are certainly tough." Inez replied; "but
why make so sure that you and I won't get some
games? We are not dufifers, and steadiness goes for a
lot."
"But not against first-class players." Helen replied
dejectedly. "If you'd ever seen Trixie serve, you
would feel just as unhappy as I do. It's a lightning
stroke, and the ball shoots for yards."
"Humph!" muttered Inez. "I'll stand yards back,
that's all. You can serve well, too, Helen"—refusing
to be despondent—"and if the others win their sets, it
will level things up. Why, the match may be counted
on games. Surely we can manage to win one or two.
Come and have a hit now. I'll give you fifteen, and
see how much I can beat you by."
"Come on then," Helen agreed. "It's no good
worrying too much. This permission for Jean to play
is at least one grain of comfort. Still, two champions
together"—Helen's gloom returned tenfold. "They
are wretches to bring them both at once. Don't you
think so, Inez?"
"Horrors!" Inez answered laconically; "but never
mind. Let's to practice; something is sure to happen,"


and swinging her racket vigorously, she ran on ahead
to the courts, quite determined to keep up her spirits.
The courts were on the river side of the Avenue,
and though prettily situated near a background of
stately gums, were by no means in perfect condition.
They were only earth ones, kept in order by the girls
themselves, except for the occasional aid of the gar-
dener's heavy roller. Usually no great eagerness was
displayed for the work pertaining thereto, but when
match day approached, an eruption of energy appeared,
which resulted in much sweeping, rolling, and marking.
To the non-players' credit be it said, they did the whole
task themselves, in order to leave the players quite
fresh for the all-important duty of winning glory for
Dunham. Broad stretches of grass surrounded the
courts, with trees at pleasant intervals. Under these
trees, on the day of the match, tables for tea would be
placed, with Marian in charge. She, as head of the
school, would stand with Sister Mary Agnes at the
entrance to the playground, to receive the guests, and
then with a cheerful army of helpers take care of their
entertainment, which meant a little self-sacrifice, as tea
time always seemed to arrive just when the game was
keenest. This final match held exceptional elements
of interest, as not for many years would Helen again
play on Dunham courts. Such unhappy events, too,
had recently occurred that the match would serve to
make friends all those who had been at variance—also
never before had the schoolgirls been pitted against
such excellent players as were coming up on Saturday.
When the news of her shortened confinement and
permisison to play reached Jean, she declared the old
Doctor a Briton, but her erstwhile happy hours now
became heavy-laden, as she impatiently waited for
release. Daily, Inez asked her was she stronger, and
to assure her completely, Jean one morning shot out
of bed and scampered around the room.
Inez was horrified. "Get back at once," she begged.
"What should we do if you caught a cold?"


Jean laughed delightedly, but returned to her crib
in deference to the other's piteous anxiety. "Don't
worry, Inez dear," she said. "You see lam really
strong, and to make doubly sure, I am swallow ing
every mixture which Sister Mary Benedict
Some are fairly awful, but it s in a good cause.
When her Wednesday really came, and at last she
stood on the courts —racquet in hand, ready for her
practice—she certainly looked quite well, although
Inez was rather anxious for fear she should overdo it.
"Dr. Burke said most positively that one game must
be your limit to-day," Inez remarked, by way of re-
minder. "It doesn't seem much, so I think we will
make it a single. Come on to the top court with me
a few good strokes will get your eye in better than
many weak ones."
Jean seemed inclined to rebel at the one game limit,
but Inez was firm. So they had their single, which
gave Tean a good deal of running, and at its finish she
leant "a little breathlesly on the net and was quite con-
tent to stop.
On the morrow, she was not so tired, much to the
Captain's relief, so, telling her to take things slowly,
Inez and Helen attacked their own deficiencies. A
broad wall was used for their practice, and they talked
of volleys, smashes and back-hand returns, with the
air of embryo "Wildings." Practice and the weather
absorbed their whole attention, and when on Friday
night some heavy clouds appeared, their spirits went
down to zero.
"How sickening if it rains" —Inez looked vexedly at
the heavens. "I do believe those clouds will just empty
themselves and depart, leaving our courts a real
puddle."
Which was just what those wicked clouds did—for
during the night a sharp shower occurred, and Inez
waking depressed sighed in desperation. In the morn-
ing the sun was shining, and doing his best to make


amends, but, as the girls knew, not all his beams could
make the court right in one day, especially at the
further end, where it dipped the slightest bit.
"It will be as slippery as can be," said Inez, a
picture of gloom; "and look at that corner —it's hope-
less." They had gone to inspect in a body, and truly
the sight presented was not of a comforting nature.
"It's the last straw," Helen declared. "How can
we play even decently in that stretch of absolute mud ?"
"The 'old girls' will feel it as badly, even more so,"
Eleanor remarked; "for they always play on grass, but
can't we do anything for that end of the court? Why
not try some sand ?"
"Brilliant idea!" they agreed. "Eleanor, you are
improving."
Sand was brought from the river bank, and applied
in generous measure. When an hour had elapsed, and
another inspection took place, it proved to have been
effective, making a far more playable surface than
any had expected. In fact, all was fairly dry, but for
one impossible corner, and that would prove a han-
dicap to whoever was on that side.
"Never mind," was the general verdict. "We change
ends on the odd, so everyone gets it alike."
It was a pretty sight when at 1.30 sharp all the girls
were ready on the lawn, standing about in excited
groups awaiting their guests' arrival, for besides the
players, parents and friends were expected. Presently
some motors and cabs drove rapidly up the long
walk, and shortly after a few ladies were seen coming
under the trees. "There's your mother, Eleanor,"
Madge Drew called, as a pretty figure appeared, and
Eleanor throwing down her racquet ran over the grass
to meet her. "And yours, Inez," as a sweet-faced
woman in black showed up—at which Inez also ran
forward. "Here come the players," was the signal for
a chorus of general welcome. Six cream-garbed
figures they were, who, after kissing Sister Mary
Agnes, were surrounded by the girls, and subjected to


many reproaches on daring to bring two such excellent
players. .
The players in question enjoyed it immensely, and
were taken presently to the courts, which now looked
quite respectable, although slippery at one end.
''Do be careful," the girls cautioned their visitors,
"for if anyone falls, Mother Prioress will stop the
match." .
"It's not too bad," May and Trix declared, "but
may hinder one running back.
"One advantage for us there, and we are clutching
at any," Inez smiled whimsically. "Your service
ing so terrific a name. I am standing off tie
court, so also is Helen; hence the need wont tiouble
us. Most other things will, though."
"Sillies!" the others replied. "Ye may not beat
you at all. Be sure, however, we shall try."
"Our intentions are similar," Helen rejoined laugh-
ingly, "but not quite so hopeful. Shall we commence
now? It is nearly two o'clock. (
"Very well," Trix replied. "Will you call, Inez ?
and the two captains tossing, Inez won call.
"Shall we take serve or the side, Helen.-" she asked.
"Side, I think. You are white with nervousness, so
we'll take the bad end to begin with; then you can serve
from the good one, and buck up, there s a dear. After
all it's only a game." They were walking to their
places.
"But I don't want Dunham to lose, and just look at
all the girls. Their hopes are placed on us, and we
really haven't a chance."
"Rubbish," from Helen. "Why you are more
anxious than I was. Well, here goes"—as Trix
called "Play."
The service was swift but straight, and somehow
Helen returned it. Trix had run to the net, and
returned it low and hard with a stroke across the
court which Helen could not reach.


"Oh, do wake up, Helen," Inez called excitedly.
"If you had run, I'm sure you'd have got it."
"Impossible, my child. She whisks them down like
lightning. Have a try at yours."
Inez received her service, but never even reached it,
and the ball shot yards beyond her.
"Thirty-love"—her face was a study. "Isn't it
awful,' she moaned, "I believe they will get a love set."
Helen had to laugh, although her heart was heavy.
"Love set after two strokes! Inez don't be silly."
Still another service came down, which completely
outclassed the Dunham girls, and the score was "Forty-
love"—a deadly hush from the onlookers told a tale
of heartbreaking fear.
Then Inez saved her return —how she did she never
knew, but somehow the ball went back and lobbed just
over the net —a miserable stroke but lucky, for May
Travers having to rush up to get it, her return was
rather uncertain and came straight for Helen, who
drove it well to the others' back line, and scored the
first point for Dunham.
"Oh, you darling, Helen!" Inez burst out. "You've
broken our luck at last."
After that they brought the score to deuce, but had
desperate work to do so—then Trix achieved two
beautiful serves, and the first game was lost to
Dunham.
Inez served next. Her nervousness gone, she was
settling to the game with a grim determination to win
every point she could. Obviously they were out-
classed, still nil despcrandum, and she sent in her first.
This service of hers was an under-arm thing, which
earned itself much opprobrium—still, having a certain
pace, and she being able to place it where she chose, it
oftimes proved effective. Aiming now directly for the
outer service-line of the opponents' court, she sent a
swift stroke in the corner, just over the net. May
Travers ran quickly forward, but too late —she had


missed it. But luck was against Dunham, as "Fault"
called by the umpire quenched the new-born elation.
"Bother," commented Inez, whilst sending in her
second to the extreme opposite corner, and this time
correctly. May got it, but only just, and hitting harder
from her hurry sent her return quite out of the court.
Wild applause followed —this being the first stroke
which had really beaten the "old girls."
From thence forward Inez used her head, and,
knowing well that only careful skill could possibly get
them a game, she watched like a little lynx. If her
opponents stood back expecting a swift ball, she lobbed
one just over the net. Should they stand up close,
swish went in one with all the force she could manage,
and such tactics brought success, for she won her
service for Dunham.
Still, despite every effort our girls could make, they
had met their match, and more so, as in all points the
others were superior, and brought the score to 5-2
against Dunham, with apparently little effort to them-
selves.
The ring of onlookers were wrapped in doleful
silence. Their girls were fighting splendidly, but
defeat was very near. Then, when hopes were lowest,
Inez served for the second time. lier bright little face
looked strained and white, but try to the last she would.
The others watched for her "twisties," but this time
she did not send any—instead she smashed in her ser-
vices with the energy of despair. Some cherub must
have guided them, for not once did she make a fault.
They landed hard and never rose an inch. Fifteen-
love, thirty-love, forty-love—not one had the others
returned. She hardly dared to think, but sent in her
last like lightning. It was right!—and May Travers
missed it. Game —and a love one —to Dunham! The
girls cheered ecstatically, and Inez herself gave a little
gasp of delight in joy almost unbelievable.
"Five-three," called the umpire, which soon was
changed to "Six-three, and set" —Trix paying Inez


back with some of her own swift coin. Her strokes
had pace and weight, and as one of them smashed
straight into Inez' racquet, wresting it almost out of
her hand, a smile of admiration dispelled her disap-
pointment.
"Scot," she remarked, with more emphasis than
elegance, "if we do get beaten at least it is no dis-
grace, for they play more like men than girls."
When the end of the first set was reached, Helen
flung herself on the grass, declaring she simply must
stop for five minutes or die from want of breath.
Inez could not rest, but glued her eyes on the further
courts, where the seconds and thirds were playing.
She tried very hard not to mind defeat, but tears
nearly came at the thought, for her hot little heart was
keen, and the honour of Dunham was dear. The next
set she knew would be worse than the first, as she and
Helen were tired, whilst the others were perfectly
fresh, and her heart was heavy indeed, when time
being called, she went in again to tackle their uphill
game.
Only two games had been played, however (both in
the "old girls'" favour), when, with Inez verging on
heartbreak, a wild "Hooray" came from Court No. 3.
Jean and her partner came rushing down, waving their
racquets delightedly. "Two sets straight," they shout-
ed, "and Eleanor's will be the same. Cheer up, Inez!
We've won, we've won!"
"Oh, the blessed relief! Is it true, Jean?" both
Helen and Inez asked, hardly daring to grasp at the
comfort.
"True? Of course it is—6-3, 6-4, those were our
scores. Eleanor is now 6-2 in her second, with one set
already to the good. So we must win, don't you see ?"
"You splendid little thing, Jean" —the elder girls
could have hugged her. "To you and Muriel all
honour is due, for I'm sure you have had a big fight."


"Yes, we had to go for it," the elated juniors replied.
"Are you girls going to finish this set? It is not
needed."
"Shall we play on?" Inez asked Trix.
"Yes, we might as well finish," the other decided.
So they did just for fun, and, so contrary is fate,
now that all desperate need was removed, Helen and
Inez played better than they had done during all the
day, bringing the score to 4-6.
Eleanor came down presently, placidly content.
"Win?" Inez queried. "Oh, yes," she replied non-
chalantly; "both sets to us."
So Dunham won the day on the strength of its
junior players, and when all the excitement and happy
congratulations were over, little Jean and Muriel came
to Inez with a pretty word of thanks for her trouble
in coaching them so well.
"We have been a dreadful bother," they admitted
between their smiles, "but you are pleased with us
now, aren't you, Inez dear?"
"I should say so," Inez replied, and kissing them
both she went off to change with a heart overflowing
with love for two small girls, whom only a few weeks
before she had dubbed a most dreadful nuisance.
A merry tea followed, when tongues ran wild and
every stroke was discussed. All too soon the good-bye
time came, and the "old girls" took their departure,
vowing with many laughs to next year retrieve their
losses.


CHAPTER XIII.
HELEN'S FAREWELL.
Helen's day had come!. On lightning wings, so it
seemed to her, but in reality not until the beginning of
November.
Having to leave before the year was over, the loss
of a month's marks would make a big difference in her
prize list, though some she was certain of (the French
prize not being one).
Still, prize day being December 20th, it was a long
way ahead, and Helen hardly expected to receive any
books, but Mother Monica thought otherwise, and had
decided that she should. Thinking of it weeks ago,
she had sent away her order quite two months earlier
than usual.
Helen was to leave on Monday, so on the Saturday
before, Eleanor, Inez and Marian came to Sister Mary
Agnes asking for a late recreation, as they wished to
entertain Helen. Pleased at their kind thought, Sister
Mary Agnes gave permission, only stipulating that
they be not too late or too noisy.
Late recreation meant the hour after 8, when usually
the little ones went to bed and the elder girls to study.
It always came on Saturday nights, or the eve of
holidays, but on such festive occasions as the present,
one hour was not nearly long enough,so an extension
had to be obtained, and all stayed up. The desks being
pushed back in the big Hall, and tables also, a fine
space was available for either dancing or a concert.
That morning Helen had received her invitation, for
they did things in style! Quite a little work of art it
was, being most daintily hand-painted. An answer
was requested to the head Child of Mary, so using her
prettiest paper Helen wrote her aceptance, which was
duly forwarded per Jean.


She knew what was before her, having often fare-
welled others, but in her own case she could have
wished that the dear old girls had forgotten for her
heart was so full at leaving them she rather dreaded a
break-down.
Putting on her smartest white frock, usually kept
for high days and holidays, she was in the Hall
punctually at 8 o'clock, and found everything arranged
for a concert, her chair being placed in the position of
honour next to Sister Mary Agnes.
How many times had she organized just such even-
ings, when each girl sang or played whatever the part-
ing one wished. Some farewells held no sadness, for
girls living quite near could hardly be said to part.
But for her she knew it was indeed a long good-bye,
and could as yet hardly picture herself in any other
surroundings than these which had been her home for
so long.
Sitting very close to Sister Mary Agnes, she held
her old Mother's hand, and was sometimes comforted
by a kindly pressure, telling of heartache like unto her
own.
The little ones commenced the programme with
merry quartettes and choruses, suiting well their
childish voices. Helen always enjoyed their perform-
ance, for every one of them sang with most whole-
hearted energy, convinced in their own little souls that
no such singing had ever been heard before.
Eleanor played next, the glorious Pathetique Sonata,
with its opening of splendid grief. For her second
piece she had chosen Greig's dainty Ballade, so full of
haunting sadness, but on showing it to Helen, an im-
ploring negative came, asking her to change it. "Not
that to-night, Eleanor," Helen said. "You play it far
too well, and its sadness breaks my heart. Greig only
wrote for happy folk, I think. Play something by
Sinding, will you"—and Eleanor agreeing, the lovely
Ballade was put down.


Marian had promised to sing next, but seeing how
doleful Helen seemed, she thought a little comic relief
might safely be introduced, so calling Inez and Madge
she persuaded them to recite an absurd piece of non-
sense (learnt they alone knew where), which had the
desired effect, rather horrifying Sister Mary Agnes,
but leaving everyone else convulsed, with partings
quite forgotten.
A subdued excitement had been rippling through
the Junior benches for some time, and at the close of
this recitation Jean stepped forth to perform with her
beloved Marionettes—amid cheers from the young
confraternity, and sighs from the others.
"1 hey re like the poor, always with us," said
Eleanor, intensely bored, and the puppets were indeed
very old friends, appearing without fail at every
school concert. But for the small ones their charms
were ever new, so the seniors had just to endure
as Sistei Mary Agnes was in thejr favour, saying as
if she meant it, that "they were not stupid at all, but
really clever when well worked."
Jean certainly worked them well, and the sight of
her childish eagerness v/as as good as any play, so
hearty applause greeted her when at last the perform-
ance was done—mostly for her dear little self, though
she did not know it, and returned to her place more in
love with her toys than ever.
And now Marian must sing, for Helen would wait
no longer.
"What shall it be then?" she asked—"frivolous or
otherwise?"
" The Rosary' first," said Helen; "and then 'May
God be with You,' you always promised me that for
good-bye."
"Very well, dear, but don't cry over it, for I shall
sing as if I meant it."
So, asking Eleanor to play, Marian sang to her
friend, with all her lovely soul and the full splendour
of a glorious voice. Everyone loved her singing, and


as the noble words rang out, filling the wide hall, a
hush fell over everyone, but only to Helen and herself
did those words tell their special story and hold a
sacred meaning. „ , , , ,
Well Helen knew where all the deep love of
Marian's heart was centred, and the last passage of all
with its sobbing acceptance of life's Cross, sung by so
many as a heart-break, was rendered by Marian with
simple gladness, as but the happy necessity of Love s
inevitable Mine and Thine.
Helen must treat life the same, though in a different
path and her friend's quiet remark when her voice
died' down, "Thank you, Maisie, I will try," showed
she had understood.
The school never allowed Marian to sing but one,
so giving a pleased general smile in acknowledgement
of their enthusiastic clapping, Marian sang her second,
this time thinking only of Helen, and her motherless
life ahead. How truly she echoed that wish —
"May God be with you when in misty morning
Of life's great conflict, you must stand alone."
Helen thought the words sounded prophetic, and
watching Marian as she sang—so happy and sure in
her own absolute sacrifice —she prayed that clearer
vision might also come to her, as guide to her wayward
feet, to keep them straightly set in ways ever upright
and true. . .
No word was said at this songs conclusion, all
understanding what it meant to the friends —not a
mere song, but a sweet message of parting between
two lives so long united in intimate, all-knowing
affection. , . , .
"Now, Helen," said Sister Mary Agnes, "I think it
is your turn; something you must do, just by way of
remembrance."
And Helen thinking quickly, agreed with a gleam of
mischief. "It may be just what I like?" she bargained,
and receiving ready assent, she asked that the black-


board be brought down with a large sheet of drawing
paper pinned on it.
"Now, girls," she commenced, standing beside it
and sketching rapidly. "This is what you have always
wished for, and you must accept it as my parting gift.
Permission has never been obtained before, but you
have just heard Sister Mary Agnes grant it"—whilst
speaking, her crayon continued working with lightning
speed, she the while cleverly managing to obstruct the
Nun s view of the board—"l hough by no means what
it ought to be," Helen went on, "I hope my little gift
will meet with general approval, if only as a makeshift
until you get a better—and now, being finished," she
turned with laughing gesture, "allow me to present the
school with a very imperfect likeness of a well-known
face," and to everyone's delight, there smiled Sister
Mary Agnes from the board, her expression caught
exactly.
It was 1 eally splendid, and the general exclamation
of pleasure quite bore down the Nun's surprise.
"Helen, you naughty, naughty girl!" but it was said
with a tender smile.
"Helen, you're a brick," said Inez. "How clever of
you to think of it. W ell get a fine frame and hang it
in here, we've wanted this for ages and now we've got
it. Good old Helen," and .as Marian carefully took
the sketch down to prevent all danger of smudging,
Helen made peace with Sister Mary Agnes, for her
totally unexpected contribution to the programme.
When several more had sung or played, the Head
Mistress went quietly into the library, returning
presently with two small parcels, which, with some
little ceremony, she handed to Eleanor, asking her to
present them.
Thus was Helen surprised in turn, for parting gifts
were not the rule, except among special friends. But
Helen was somewhat different, having been at school
so long, and having always entered so keenly into


all school interests. Eleanor had started the idea, so
now in the neatest of speeches she related Helen's
virtues: How well she had always upheld Dunham
traditions! Her invariable kindness and generosity!
Her remarkable industry (which was greeted with a
snigger), and many more nice things, ending up with
strong expressions of regret for losing her, but trust-
ing that she would accept their gifts in remembrance
of Dunham and her own happy school days. Then
gracefully, Eleanor handed the parcels to a most
amazed Helen, but eager voices left 110 time for words.
"Open them, Helen, and then tell us if you like them,"
came from all sides. So untying the silken cords,
Helen first disclosed a wonderful little work bag fitted
with every imaginable pocket. "That's from us,"
spoke up Jean for the small ones, "and I made the
thimble case" (which had evidently cost her much
pain and pride). "Elsie did the cotton pocket," and
"I did the hemming"—from the tiniest of them all
"Oh, you dears," said Helen, "it's just lovely, and
every time I sew on a button I shall think of some of
you," and she kissed each one of the excited little
faces.
"Now for the other," said Inez. "It is from the
whole school," and on opening a flat leather case there
lay the quaintest bangle, apparently painted miniatures
connected by tiny chains of gold, each little scene de-
picting part of Dunham, and on the flat surface
behind were the girls' names inscribed, from Marian
down to the youngest.
Helen read them all, and looked at it most lovingly.
"Girls, you are far too good," she said, with a
break in her voice. "It is the loveliest present possible.
I shall call it my armlet of friends," and putting the
bracelet on, it fitted her arm most beautifully.
"Speech, Helen, speech," Inez demanded firmly,
quite blind to appealing gestures.


So rising from her seat in a perfect whirl of
nervousness, Helen tried to thank them. W hat she
said she never knew, but they all seemed satisfied,
and cheered her maiden effort at its rather dwindling
close.
That night was her real good-bye, and was gone
through more bravely than she had thought. On
Sunday afternoon she spent a long happy hour with
Mother Monica, receiving three lovely prizes, and
some kind motherly counsel. They talked mostly of
Helen's plans and her many projects for beautifying
the old home, with all manner of schemes for helping
her father, at which Mother Monica smiled. "If you
do all that, my dear,'' she said; "we shall soon have
you back on our hands returned with many thanks,
"for it sounds as if Father will receive a whirlwind
daughter. Don tbe in too great a hurry, dear, to carr\
out new ideas. You know the old motto. 'Hurry
slowly,' which after all is the surest way of obtaining
lasting results. So control those managing instincts,
and Mother Monica waited for more.
Helen had lots to talk about,-and seemed to find an
endless supply of questions on ever}' imaginable sub-
ject. When "their time was nearly flown, the sweet
face bent over Helen. "You must go soon now, dear!
and may never see me again, but remember these few
words: As you have acted at school, so lam sure
you will at home, though perhaps not seeing life in
quite so simple a light. Two little remembrances will
keep you straight and true. Here is one'^ —Mother
Monica pointed to a passage in the Imitation, which
Helen read after her: "I am He who teach men all
thgy know. . • • The time will come when Christ
the Master of all masters, and the Lord of the Angels,
will appear to hear all men their lessons, that is, to
search the consciences of all mankind.' Your first life
lesson is now over, dear, go on to your next remember-
ing who is your Master. Some things will be difficult,


but Love can conquer all, and knowing for whom you
work, nothing can ever frighten you. 'For the earth is
God's not man's, and His power is over all.' " That
was the good-bye from Mother Monica. "Go now,
dear, may you come and see us soon." Helen kissed
the Mother and went with gentle reverent love,
cherishing her words through all her life long.
The morrow brought friends to escort her to the
boat. All was rush and bustle, with never a minute
for thought. The cab was sent on ahead, and the
girls walked with her to the big white gates. The time
was very short, so farewells must be the same, which
after all was the best. A kiss, of course, all round,
with many strong injunctions: "Write every week,"
"Don't get eaten by the blacks," "Tell us all about
your trip." and very many more, emphatically agreed
to by Helen. Oh! for schoolgirl promises—so genuine
and so frail. At last good-bye to Sister Mary Agnes,
in one warm comforting hug. and just two words: "Be
good."
Thus her school days ended, and the taxi whirled
away.
"Dear, dear home." she murmured in her heart,
"may some good fortune bring me soon within touch
of you once more."


CHAPTER XIV.
THE BREAK UP.
One more important event before the year was end-
ed — an d the longed-for day of school "break up" be
really come at last. That was on the 20th, the glorious
day," but before its blissful dawning some strenuous
work must be done.
The half-yearly examinations had all to be struggled
through, when hands and heads held one big ache from
the long hours of writing. These were fairly bad, but
worse was yet to follow in the musical exam., held
about the 19th, and comprising such nervous terrors
that it was universally dreaded.
Eleanor being without nerves, did not mind it at all,
consequently coming off well; but to most, their annual
exhibition was a deadly day of woe. Mother Monica
came down for it, and sat in the long school hall,
surrounded by all the nuns, some of whom were ne\ei
seen except on this day of days. Bo good excuse there
was if before so many judges a performer's nerve
gave way, and instead of doing her best she sang or
played, as the case might be, as if half dead with
fright, bringing shame upon herself, and sorow to her
teacher.
School and scholars both, were as resplendently
clean and tidy as the proverbial new pin, when punc-
tually on the stroke of ten they filed into their places
to await the Mother's coming. She never kept them
waiting, but soon entered the hall at the head of her
whole community, sweetly acknowledging their greet-
ings as she walked to her seat at the end. Slight sub-
dued confusion ensued before all the nuns were seat-
ed, but a few minutes found every one settled, work
basket on knee—apparently the picture of repose, but
every faculty keenly alert —observant of their charges,
a demeanour transforming (for the children) well-


known and loved figures into judges most stern, l\nx-
eyed for faults, and intolerant of mistakes.
When the children begged and implored to be spared
this yearly ordeal, but one reply was given them:
"What is the use of your music if it is at the mercy
of your nerves," so in spite of her sympathy for their
sufferings, Sister Mary Agnes stood firm, and told
them to do their best, carefully recording marks for
the merit of each performance, which marks were
dearly valued, as one earned on Exhibition Day
equalled three won on an ordinary occasion.
Oh! the ghastly terror when your turn at last was
come, and rising from your place among the crowded
benches you made a shaking way to the piano, fingers
generally numb, and limbs indulging in unusual dis-
connected movements quite beyond power to control.
At last the broad space was traversed, and the stool's
haven reached. But there the notes stared at you in
unfamiliar strangeness, each shining glossy key intent
on your undoing. Then desperation came, for some-
thing must be done, so almost in a dream you did
your nightmare task, though the written notes danced
and the ivory ones played weird tricks. At last the
end was reached, for better or for worse. Back you
went once more among the cheery crowd, who were
brimful of criticism, good, bad, or indifferent —"Splen-
did," of course, from your chum; "Second movement
much too fast, you should have seen Sister Mary
Joseph's face," from another; all uttered in piercing
whispers, your attention the while being centred to the
front, where the judging semi-circle were making their
decision. A smile from your pet nun doubtless meant
good news, or very, very rarely Mother Monica would
lightly applaud, showing approbation of the highest.
But more often than not the teachers briefly conferred,
and at last the marks were told, putting an end to sus-
pense, and leading to much conjecture as to who
would be highest for the year.


When all had done their part, averaging at least
two breakdowns, the luckless ones receiving unbound-
ed sympathy from the girls, and nearly as much from
the nuns, the reading of marks took place, and class
positions altered accordingly.
All the classes stood for this, in rank behind rank
down the hall. The seniors hearing their fate first, then
moving aside for the next. To an uninitiated listener
the record held sounds of mystery, as only abbrevia-
tions were used, and to know that in geography Marian
stood credited with 40 P's, 10 G's, 5 B's, and 3 o's,
would in no way have accounted for the outburst of
applause which greeted its recital. But as P meant
perfect, G good, B bad, and O omitted, it will be seen
that her average for good work was splendid. In all
subjects her marks ran high, with one solitary excep-
tion, which weakened her somewhat. As try she ever
so hard, Madge beat her hopelessly in Arithmetic,
but in all else Marian led, thus retaining her leadership
and high position as head of the school. Once or
twice it had been a near thing, as Madge was bril-
liantly clever, but physics did for her, for they unto
Madge were as fire unto water, unabsorbent and un-
akin. So hearing her totals read just five behind
Marian she accepted defeat gracefully, and joined in
the general congratulations, Marian giving her com-
fort in a few whispered words, "Only one quarter for
me next year, dear Madge, and then you can take my
place," said rather wistfully, for Marian thought of
Helen, so far, far away.
The workers enjoyed the reading of marks, but not
so the idle and lazy, who fretting and fidgetting all
the time looked rather abject and miserable. When
any specially startling record was read, consisting
mostly of B's, kindly heads were bent in pity for their
confusion, but when better results appeared, smiles
came, too, making the culprits determined that next
year should see a difference, with no more loafing for
them.


A few quiet words from Mother Monica ended the
morning's work. Just and most impartial, all had their
meed of praise or blame. Every sincere effort was
acknowledged, successful or otherwise. Slovenly
work alone met with no mercy, but anything really
good received such hearty commendation that the for-
tunate performer flushed with pleasure, cherishing her
pertinent words through all the coming year.
Then with dignified grace she dismissed them,
promising to see each girl on the morrow, when
prizes would be presented with a short intimate talk
far more acceptable than any public display, and taking
her leave of the school, she returned to the Convent
with all the nuns —the latter as they walked down
the hall having trouble to maintan their dignity, as-
sailed as it was on all sides by absurd girlish whispers
of farewell.
And now the day itself really came, after weeks
and months of marking the passing dates. Yesterday
had seen the last date erased 011 the almanac, and this
morning its joyful destruction, with six glorious weeks
ahead of happiness fairly won.
Oh! the 20th! Its mention brings a thrill, how
often wished for, when so immeasurably far in the
future, but here was its very self, with all the wild
excitement. The Guest House bell continually ring-
ing, announcing someone's relatives, and then the
frantic good-byes, each minute hours in length, until
they were really off.
All had dressed impossibly early, and the time
seemed nearly endless before any summons came, but
once the bell commenced its message never stopped
through all the live-long day, until the last anxious
colleen was safely despatched for home, and Sister
Mary Clare, who was Guest Mistress for the year,
walking quietly through the corridors, realised now
how exceedingly weary she was from her many hur-
ried journeys to and fro.


When all had gone, Francie with Inez, and Alarian
to good Aunt Rachel, who was determined to cure her
nonsense, Sister Alary Agnes viewed the School, so
empty in its stillness, but having no air of loneliness —
but rather a happy waiting, sure of returning life—
while for the busy guiding hand which had controlled
the youthful destinies through all the past year, a
vision of quiet weeks, comparatively free from care,
held out consoling arms.
So now good-bye to Dunham. Beautiful and calm
as it stands 'neath the summer sky.
All the young life has left, leaving a Christmas re-
pose. But the School Alother's heart beats on, earnest,
warm, and true; ever serenely eager for work to
commence anew.
Printed by E. J. McAlister & Co., James Place, Adelaide.


'
.




illjj J
1508 02112649 0


