

"AIL DESPERANDUM."
DUNHEVED
ISLAND
OR,
The Dutchman's Dream,
A TALE OF
SUBMARINE SQUATTING,
BY
PAUL FAITHFULL.
“The sea supplies all my needs. Sometimes I cast my nets, and they are drawn in ready
to break. Sometimes I go and hunt in the midst of this element, which seems inaccessible to man,
and run down the game of submarine forests. My flocks, like those of Neptune's old shepherd,
graze fearlessly the immense ocean meadows. I have a vast estate there, which I cultivate myself,
and which is always stocked by the Creator of all things.”
“ 20,000 Leagues under the Sea."
PRINTED BY M. P. BRANSTON & Co., 36, ST ANDREW'S HILL, LONDON;
PUBLISHED BY JOHN LIONEL CHING & COMPANY,
TOWNSVILLE, QUEENSLAND, AND SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES


The Dream of Dan der Bmaart-Rop
“ IT is only the first step that costs,” say the French, but the
first in my tale is a long one and takes us back to the year 1750,
when the Dutch East Indies were the summit of bliss to the brave
and adventurous sons of Holland. In those days of triennial
voyages and in the year mentioned there sailed into the port and
Dutch colony of Sourabaya a hale and vigorous mariner, Johan van
der Zwaart-Kop, master and part-owner of a bluff Amsterdam-
built galleon, eleven months out from home, a smart enough passage
at that time. No sooner had the skipper finished the necessary
duties connected with the security of his vessel, and satisfied the
requirements of the authorities and his agents, than wending his
way to the hospitable dwelling of an old schoolmate and -friend,
now a prosperous planter, after due interchange of greetings and
news, he retired to his room thereto enjoy a few hours’ well earned
repose, after the anxieties and cares of what was justly esteemed
a long and hazardous journey.
Before falling asleep, his thoughts went back a year, when he had
bid a fond ana sad farewell in the little Friesland village home, to
his dearly-loved motherless daughter and only child, eighteen years
of age, the apple of his eye, the pride and joy of his life. For some
time past Kattrina had been painlessly languishing with a hidden
and mysterious complaint, the nature of which was unknown to the
physicians, and for which there seemed no cure. Slowly fading
away, she appeared to the heart-broken parent as a beautiful lily,
blooming but to die ; and as he parted trom her in anguish of mind,
he felt that in all human probability he had embraced his child for
the last time. Tenderly musing on the object of his affections,
Zwaart-Kop passed into dreamland and found himself sailing over
a smooth and limpid sea towards a lovely island. Strange fish
swam beneath him, and the most splendid birds circled in the air
above, while, to the right stretched, as far as the eye could reach,
a grand, verdure-clad coast, with sparkling rivers and sandy bays,
unlike and far exceeding in sublimity any land he had ever seen in
his forty years’ travels. Whilst thus gazing with enraptured eyes
at the scene before him, a beautious female form arose from the
water, and in a sweet and melodious voice thus addressed him :
“Do not despair, fond father, your daughter shall not die ; I, who
know your love and devotion, will sacrifice myself for her. Give
me but a little time to prepare myself, and come again to this spot
in three moons. Pierce me with a lance, and what you find on the
blade thereof let your daughter taste, and she shall live.”
With these words the mermaid disappeared, and Johan van der
Zwaart-Kop awoke to ponder over his dream, or vision, he knew
not which it was. Sleep fled from his eyelids, and the more he
thought the more perplexed he giew, for a feeling took possession


of him that there was something in this beyond human ken.
Finding it impossible to compose his mind he arose, and, after a
cooling bath, strolled out, and shortly found himself at the bazaar,
or open market, where, at this early hour of the morning, men from
all parts of the Eastern Archipelago and neighbouring settlements
were gathered together, buying, selling, and bartering the rich and
curious commodities of those strange and barbarous lands. Under
one of the palm-thatched open booths he noticed an excited group
of natives and foreigners gesticulating and chattering in true
Eastern fashion, in the centre of which he found, on approaching,
a grave, white bearded Malay displaying an enormous and splendid
pearl, of great value. Not blind to business, the Dutchman
awaited an opportunity for private converse with the owner, who,
by his costume, bore the appearance of a mariner, which was not
until the crowd began to disperse an hour later, when breakfast
time approached. Adjourning to a neighbouring tea-shop, Zwaart-
Kop soon discovered that the jewel was not for sale, but in answer
to further questions the Malay, contrary to the habits of his nation,
showed himself not averse to describe where, far away to the
south-east, through narrow channels, rapid currents, and past in-
numerable reefs and islets, the shell-bed existed whence had come
this gem of the ocean, and as the Eastern glowingly described the
nature of the locality, our worthy Hollander, to his utter amaze-
ment, found it to be the counterpart of the scene so vividly depicted
in his dream but a few hours previously. Instantly recognising
this to be no ordinary coincidence he earnestly besought the man,
whose name and calling he found to be Saipoor, master of a
lugger, or proa, to accompany him on board his galleon, where, in
the secrecy of his state room, he related his dream , and opened his
heart to the intelligent and astute Oriental, detailing his fears and
anxieties, and soliciting all further information in the power of the
latter to give. After customary deliberation, and the consumption
of more than one bowl of tobacco, Saipoor told him that he had
on several occasions been ashore on the island seen in the dream,
and had traded with the inhabitants, a tribe of powerful, athletic
blacks, who had, partly by signs, given him to understand
that in the adjacent waters there existed beings which were
neither fish nor animals, of great size, strength, and speed,
called in their dialect Yan-gan. Once and again, but very
seldom, they managed, under favourable auspices, to secure
one of these by spearing, and in such case a special feast
was held, and the food partaken of had such marvellous
effect that new life was infused into them, the young be-
coming strong and vigorous, and the old rejuvinating themselves,
to the gladness and joy of the whole community. He, himself, had
looked upon this as a fable, or tradition, but after what the Dutch
captain had told him concerning his vision, he was now inclined
to put some faith in the story. Nearly overcome with joy at the
thought that a cure for his beloved daughter seemed fairly within
his reach, Van der Zwaart-Kop, under guarantee of a very sub-
stantial reward, contracted with Saipoor for conveyance to the
island, and facilities for trading with, and, if possible, obtaining


some of the coveted treasure from the inhabitants, having, how-
ever, first given a bond that the secret of the locality should not
be further divulged. Knowing that it would take at least six
months to discharge and reload his vessel, the skipper felt that he
was not injuring his co-partners or consignees by an absence
estimated not to consume more than two-thirds that time Em-
barking, therefore, in Saipoor’s swift-sailing proa, the adventurers
glided away in a south-easterly direction, through tortuous channels
and past treacherous reefs, until at the expiration of five or six
weeks they drew near the looked for spot, and one morning at day-
break saw before them the lovely and mysterious island, the
sight of which filled the worthy Dutchman with mingled hopes
and fears. Running the vessel into a narrow deep-water creek,
and making fast with a stout coir hawser to thick and wide-
spreading mangroves, the Malay and his companion sprang ashore,
and soon found a narrow path, along which they walked, until
they arrived at a neatly-kept village of about twenty thatched
huts, ornamented with magnificent mother-o’-pearl shells and
strange-looking skulls, tusks, and bones of ivory, shaped somewhat
like an Australian boomerang. They were at once surrounded by
members of the tribe—handsome, symetrical, peacefully-inclined
aborigines, to whom by signs Saipoor indicated his desires, show-
ing sundry many-coloured scarves and kerchiefs to be given in
exchange. With exclamations of pleasure at the sight of these
hitherto unknown articles of beauty and luxury, the natives quickly
signified that within three days they would procure the desired
treasure, at the same time pointing to themselves, their wives, and
their children, as examples of its health-giving qualities. Our
travellers hereupon retired to their ship, buoyed up with the hope
of being rewarded for their venturesome trip. They soon saw a
score of blacks depart in three “ dug-out ” canoes toward the
mainland, and shortly disappear in the distance. The intervening
time was spent in fishing, and in procuring large quantities of pearl
shell and beche de mer, which at this time was just becoming known
as an exeeding rare luxury in the southern ports of China.
True to their promise, the natives returned within the alloted
time, towing after them the carcase of a strange sea-monster,
somewhat the shape of an enormous seal, its skin covered with
bristles, and with a beard on its chin—the Yan-gan of which the
Malay had spoken. It required the united efforts of the tribe to
roll the huge beast up the sloping shore, where it was cut up with
sharp shells, and the beef-like flesh roasted on a large fire. The
chief, however, first cut off a piece of pure white fat near the heart,
and conveyed it to his own hut, where he was afterwards for some
considerable time occupied in preparing it in strict privacy. The
blacks meanwhile delightedly enjoyed their repast, and our
travellers on partaking of it found the flavour to be most delicious,
and superior to any meat they had ever eaten. The following day
an earthern bottle containing a small quantity of sweet-smelling
oil, the product of his secret labours, was delivered to Saipoor by
the chief, with instructions as to its use, and after the promised
articles had been handed over, our adventurers, followed by the


good wishes of the friendly islanders, commenced their return
voyage.
Without any incidents worthy of special mention, they in due
course arrived safely at Sourabaya, and the bottle with its precious
contents having changed hands for the agreed reward, Captain
Van der Zwaart- Kop, chafing at the slow and cumbersome
shipping usages of those days, hastened on as far as he could the
preparations for the homeward voyage. Two years and nine
months after his departure he again sighted the quay at Amster-
dam, and three days later arrived at the old village home. Here,
though grateful at finding his dearly loved daughter still alive, yet
he was deeply shocked at her appearance, which was that of a
living skeleton, and it appeared sufficiently evident that had his
voyage been prolonged to the usual three years he would have
found himself alone in the world. Nevertheless, “ where there is
life there is hope,” and the fond and anxious father lost no time in
administering to his suffering, and by everyone believed, dying
child, the priceless liquid he had risked and spent so much to
obtain. To his intense delight, and to the amazement of the
neighbours, but especially of the wondering physicians, the lovely
patient rapidly grew better and stronger, becoming in a few weeks
more beautiful and more vigorous than she had ever before been.
Thus, thanks to the marvellous concatenation of circumstances
occurring at that remote eastern port, and to the energy and
devotion of a parent, and last, but not least, to the existence of
that wonderful creature, the Yan-gan, the grateful Duchman was
enabled in his declining years to enjoy the happy laughter and
innocent pastime of a troup of handsome, athletic grandchildren—
for, you may be sure, Kattrina was eagerly sought after by
numbers of eligible suitors, the whole country-side ringing with
this romantic history, and before the worthy skipper again braved
the perils of the deep she was married to the man of her choice.
Now, before closing this part of my yarn, let me refer to a seem-
ing incongruity, in that Van der Zwaart-Kop saw in his dream a
beautous female form, whereas in reality the creature captured by
the islanders was a male, and covered with bristles. Well ! I
may here state that the Yan-gan, now known as the Halicor&
Australis ( vide Cuvier’s and other naturalists’ works) is and was the
original of the mermaid, but named by Dutch navigators Baard-
maenetje, or “Little Bearded Man,” probably because the males,
or bulls, possess a kind of bristly beard around the mouth ; so that
the halo of romance surrounding this extraordinary denizen of the
deep has some foundation in fact,' and the actual and well-proven
properties and circumstances connected with it are of sufficient
value and interest of themselves to fill a book, but it is not my
desire to weary the reader with details. It will be necessary, how-
ever, to stride forward a hundred years, when we have plainly put
before us not fancies but incontrovertible facts, and these of a very
remarkable character. It was reserved for the Hon. Dr. Hobbs,
Member of the Legislative Council, late Chairman of the Queens-
land Medical Board, and Medical Officer of the Queensland
Government, about the year 1850, to discover the properties of the


oil of the Halicore Australis , or Dugong, and, it I have been rightly
informed, his attention was first directed to its remarkable
fattening qualities somewhat in the following manner :
During a period of severe drought the Doctor observed some
miserably thin, more than half-starved aborigines wending their
way to the coast, and two or three weeks later he, to his great
astonishment, noticed the same individuals returning, but in a very
different condition, their bodies being now well nourished, so much
so that they were as fat as pigs ready for market. Inquiring into
the cause of this phenomenon, the Doctor learned that they had
been capturing and feeding upon Youngan, which is the native
Australian name for this creature. Hereupon Dr. Hobbs started
a fishery, in a small way, and the results may best be described
by giving some extracts from his lecture before the members of
the School of Arts at Brisbane, entitled
“ ELAIOPATHY,”
or the treatment of chronic diseases by means of oil: —
As I disclaim all intention of propounding any new doctrine or system of treat-
ment of chronic disease, it becomes necessary to explain what I mean by Elaio-
pathy. About fourteen or fifteen years ago, Baron Liebig's work on Animal
Chemistry was first published, explaining the chemical process of respiration and
nutrition, suggesting the method which ought to be adopted, and the principles
which ought to guide us in the investigation of that important- subject. Liebig,
in that masterly work, compared the animal body to an apparatus of combustion,
a furnace which was supplied with fuel, and showed that this combustion was
supported by the oxygen of the atmosphere taken into the lungs in the act of
respiration meeting with the carbon taken into the system in the process of
nutrition. Two or three years after the appearance of this work, a highly
carbonised substance, called cod liver oil, beoame a popular remedy in the treat-
ment of consumption, to feed probably the flame of “ the expiring lamp,” asKirke
White, in his Sonnet to Consumption, so beautifully yet significantly expresses it ;
and since that period its use has been progressively increasing, until at length its
administration has become universal in almost every form of chronic disease. It
is to this systematic use of oil as a curative agent I have ventured, in the absence
of a better, to apply the term Elaiopathy ; the only relation, therefore, in which
I stand to this system is that of its baptismal sponsor and the introducer of the
Dugong Oil in the place of that procured from the cod’s liver.
Believing Elaiopathy to be a rational mode of treatment, and dissatisfied with
the nauseous train-oil like fuel usually supplied to our sickly furnaces, I made
diligent search for a substitute in our own district; and I can now unhesitatingly
communicate to you, after testing the power of my discovery for nearly five years
in a great variety of chronic disorders, that the Dugong oil is one of the most
potent and reliable remedies I have ever met with in the treatment of chronic
disease. ....... ......
But when I speak of chronic disease, I mean something more than mere
inveterate long protracted maladies. I mean, in addition, that the system has
become affected by their debilitating and depressing effects, and by the inter-
ruption they occasion to the due performance of the vital functions of digestion
and circulation, of secretion and excretion, the blood has become both impure in
quality and deficient in quantity—-conditions plainly manifested by the cadaverous
appearance of the complexion, and the general emaciation of the body.
This, then, is the idea of chronic disease I wish to convey to your minds; and
in endeavouring to explain to you the rationale of the treatment of such by Elaio-
pathy, it becomes necessary, in order to make such explanation intelligible, to
impart to you certain information respecting the blood, how it is produced, how
purified, how circulated, what changes it undergoes in disease, and how it may be
renovated
To a person in health the renovation of the blood is no very difficult matter to


accomplish, since the food contains all the elements required for that purpose
but the question now arises, how is the sick man, who has lost all appetite for food
and is the subject of a long protracted and exhausting malady, to obtain the re-
quisite amount of carbon to satisfy the demand of the oxygen contained in the air
he every moment breathes ? Of late years a highly carbonised substance, called
cod liver oil, has been administered by medical men for this purpose. At first it
was thought that the infinitesimal proportion of iodine it contained was its active
clement; but that theory having now exploded, its powers are generally attributed
to the SO or 90 per cent, of carbon it contains. This oil is procured from the livers
of cod fish, and its taste is as disagreeable as its train-oil like odour. So unpleasant
indeed is this oil that there are very few persons who can take more than three or
four tablespoonfuls in a day, which at the most will only yield 2 ozs. of carbon to
the system towards 13 9 ozs. required, leaving a fearful balance against the sick
man. Fortunately, however, the theory is better than the remedy commonly
used ; and the sick people of Australia are singularly favoured in having, in their
own territory, an herbiverous cetaceous animal, the Dugong (Halicore Australis),
inhabiting the rivers and bays of oui eastern coast, from Moreton Bay to Cape
Yorke, from which an oil can be procured, possessing all the properties required
for this purpose. , .
So sweet and palatable is the oil procured from the Dugong that, m its pure state,
it may be taken without disagreeing with the most sensitive stomach, and also
used in a variety of ways in the process of cooking : so that this potent restorative
remedy may be taken as food, and many ounces consumed almost imperceptibly
every day, and thus furnish the system with the requisite amount of carbon
for its daily oxidation.
This feeding upon oil may appear at first sight a novelty to many of you ; but
such is not the case, for its use is more widely spread than is generally thought of.
The inhabitants of the Arctic regions live upon it almost entirely, and enjoy toler-
able health ; so also do the inhabitants of Northern Russia and the regions
adjoining. To come nearer home, the Guachos in the Pampas of South America
touch nothing for months together but beef, containing a very large proportion of
fat; and we are told by Mr. Darwin that the inhabitants of Terra del Fuego,
on the occasion of discovering the floating carcase of a putrid whale, regard it as a
feast, and bury a considerable portion of the blubber in the sand as a resource in
time of famine.
The beneficial effect of dugong oil in chronic disorders in general may be attri-
buted to its nourishing properties, the blood being supplied through the chyle
with absolute necessary ingredients, without that stimulation of the system which
almost every article of diet will more or less produce. But in chronic disorders of
the digestive organs, in the treatment of which it is peculiarly valuable, I am
inclined to the opinion that, in addition to its emollient action upon the digestive
mucous membrane, the unusually large proportion of glycerine this oil contains
exerts its peculiar solvent powers upon the crudities and inspissated bile locked up
in the alimentary canal, which by their presence keep this highly sensitive mem-
brane in a perpetual state of irritation This irritation, if not relieved, soon
becomes reflected in some of the numerous organs connected with it by nervous
communication; thus, the windpipe—the lungs—the heart—the liver—and the
kidneys—become at first only sympathetically affected, and, if over-looked,
ultimately the seats of fatal organic disease.
I have stated already that I have used the dugong oil in my own practice for
nearly five years. I proceed now to relate a few cases by way of illustration, pre-
mising that the patients referred to are all living and, with the exception of one,
residing in the Moreton Bay district at the present time, that in their relation I
am not divulging any professional secrets, but rather complying with the frequently
expressed wish of the majority to make the virtues of this valuable remedy more
extensively known. And further, should any of my professional brethren still
feel sceptical on the matter, or dissatisfied with uiy conclusions, or with the imper-
feet manner in which I have endeavoured to elaborate this subject, then most
cheerfully will 1 furnish every facility in order that they may investigate it for
1 was first led to the use of this oil by having under my care a young man who
had suffered from an obstinate obstruction in the bowels, terminating in acute
inflammation, for which he had been bled five times, and otherwise extreme y
reduced, leaving him in an exceedingly debilitated condition. His illness extend ett


over a period of eight months, and the debility attending the stage of convales-
cence was very protracted, notwithstanding the administration of all the usual
remedies prescribed in such cases, together with every necessary comfort. Feeling
assured that, owing to to the irritability of the stomach of my patient, cod liver
oil could not be retained, if administered, 1 resolved upon trying the dugong oil as
a substitute, telling him not to expect any great improvement until he had taken
■it for a month. At this time he was so weak he could not walk from his chair
to the verandah of his house, a distance of a few yards only, without experiencing
the distressing feeling of exhaustion. In a fortnight under its use, he could take
short walks ; and in a month could leave his house fer several hours, walking a
considerable distance without feeling much fatigue. He then went to the Bay, and
amused himself in fishing and procuring this oil, which he used freely, not only in
its pure state, but also frying his fish and flour cakes and other articles of food in
it. He returned to see me in perfect health, and quite fat. It was not the mere
recovery of this patient that so much suprised me, but the rapidity of the change
from complete prostration to perfect health and vigour.
The second case I relate is one of nervous dyspepsia. This patient was a middle-
aged man, of habits not the most prudent or temperate. He had been ailing some
short time previous to my seeing him, and had been dosed with calomel pills and
black draughts in order to strengthen his nerves ! While relating his symptoms to
me he could not refrain from tears ; he had an inward feeling that his end was fast
approaching. Night brought neither rest to his exhausted frame nor slumber to
his eye-lids ;he rose from his bed unrefreshed and uninvigorated. His appetite
for food was gone, and what little his friends prevailed upon him to partake
created nausea and flatulence at the pit of the stomach. One day he would com-
plain of his heart palpitating so violently, as if it would bound through its bone-
bound cavern : on another he would discover that his pulse had ceased to beat at
all; on a third the pressure upon the brain he would describe as being so dreadful
that Atlas, with the whole world upon him, could not complain more loudly.
From the sofa to the door of his apartment was the only exercise he had strength
enough to take.
Viewing this case as one resulting from imperfect nutrition, owing to the dis-
order of the digestive organs, produced by over indulgence in alcoholic drinks, and
that the mind was participating in the weakness of the body, I suggested the use
of the dugong oil, considering that it would have a beneficial effect in two ways
first, by its emollient action, it would allay the irritability of the over-stimulated
mucous membrane of the stomach, and thus relieve the nausea and flatulence ; and
second, by its absorption, would afford to the system a highly concentrated food in>
a small compass, without the trouble of mastication or digestion. My expectations
were fully realised. In about a fortnight, under this simple treatment, thi*
patient was enabled to undertake a journey of 100 miles into the bush to resume
his occupation there.
The third is a case of chronic dyspepsia, resembling what is called by an eminent
physician, Dr. Wilson Philip, “ dyspeptic phthisis.” A young man who had been
a cab-driver in Sydney, exposed to the vicissitudes of all weathers and seasons,
came to Moreton Bay for his health. He had been suffering from disorder of the-
stomach and bowels for many months, attended with great flatulence, head ache,
weakness, and other symptoms, and latterly a troublesome tickling cough, with
expectoration, had distressed him both night and day. He had consulted many
practitioners in Sydney, both English and foreign, and had been in the hospital
some time, but without benefit; and from his description he could truly say he
“ had suffered many things of many physicians.” His emaciation was very great
when he consulted me, and his poor thin frame was enveloped in numerous waist-
coats, shirts and flannels, to keep up warmth in this notoriously warm climate-
As he peeled them off, one after another, I was reminded of the old grave-digger in
Hamlet disencumbering himself of his garments before commencing to dig Ophelia’s
grave, and my gravity was almost upset.
As the stethescope gave no indication of serious organic change in the lungs, I
treated him for the stomach disorder, prescribing a very bland farinaceous diet,
with dugong oil one hour after every meal. I saw no more of him for a long time.
One day I was accosted by a fat-faced ruddy-looking young man dressed in the garb-
of a stockman—that is, a blue striped shirt and trousers fastened by a belt, and
nothing moi’e —who thus introduced himself, —“I daresay you think it very strange,
sir, 1 haven’t been to see you before ; I’m horse-breaking now.” Not recognising,


my patient with the numberless shirts and flannels, I replied. You have made a,
mistake ; I have no horses requiring breaking.” He then told me his name, and
reminded me of his case, and spoke in the most glowing terms of the benefit he had
derived from the use of the oil. In describing its action upon him, he remarked,
u The very first dose I took of it seemed to sweeten my stomach. It was this re-
mark that first led me to attribute to the glycerine (the sweet principle of oils) that
active share in its beneficial properties in stomach disorders to which reference has
been already made. , , . ~ . „<r
I have now to describe a different malady, but one very prevalent in all parts ot
the colony, viz., chronic dysentery. , „ . , , ,
A young lady, eighteen years of age, who had suffered from dysentery for fo r
years, was placed under my care. Every effort had been made to restrain it, but
without success. The sufferings of this young girl were intense ; for four years she
had not enjoyed an undisturbed night’s rest, and so great was the pain in the
bowels that whenever her sisters were merrily disposed she was compelled to leave
the room, owing to the aggravation of her pain occasioned by the indulgence ot a.
laugh. She was exceedingly thin, and had not grown in the least since the onse
° f I suggested the use of the dugong oil, both for its emollient as well a.s its nourish-
ing properties. For about a month it was taken regularly, and great improvement
was manifested ; she spent better nights and suffered less pain. J
this improvement she became negligent m the use of the oil. and ultimately
abandoned it. The complaint returned in all its fury. The oil was once more
resumed, and its use was persevered in about six weeks more, and perfect recovery
was the result. This patient is now in excellent health, and has never had a return
of her dreadful malady. ~ „ . , , ,
The next case is something like the last. A young man left Brisbane last year
for the Victoria diggings, and while there was seized with dysentery, which con-
tinued, as he expressed it, “ off and on ” for six months. Finding himself getting
weaker every day, and despairing of recovery, he returned to his friends here a
perfect shadow, having lost 701bs. weight (5 stone) in that short space of time. A
few weeks’use of the dugong oil, and he was well. . .
I pass to another class of cases—viz., those manifesting the symptoms 01 incipient
C °A young married lady, the mother of three children, who had suffered a rather
severe attack of influenza during its prevalence in Brisbane a few years ago, and
whose convalescence was rather protracted, became ultimately the subject ot the
following symptoms Quick pulse, frequent tickling cough, profuse night perspira-
tions, frequent diarrhoea, great debility with loss of flesh, and the respiratory
murmur, but very feeble, over the whole chest. The mother of this lady, Paving die
of consumption, the appearance of these symptoms, and their resistance to a le
usual remedies,ifrom which not the slightest permanent benefit whateverwas derived,
occasioned great alarm m the family circle. Months rolled on. Despairing of
success, I had recourse to the dugong oil, and to the astonishment and delight of
her anxious relatives, ere three months had elapsed, she was in perfect health.
The following case is somewhat similar :— A young man of the most temperate
and abstemious habits, who for about six years had applied himself most assiduously
to business, rising early and retiring late to rest, and scarcely allowing himself
time to take his meals, consulted me for the following symptoms frequent cough,
especially at night and in the morning, attended with considerable expectoration,
great weakness, and loss of flesh, evening fever, quick pulse, and feeble respiratory
murmur in both lungs. From the general appearance and from_the habits ol tbis
patient, I entertained a very unfavorable opinion of his case, and thought that his
constitution was breaking up, and pulmonary disease would become inevitably
established. My prescription was, cessation from business, change of air, generous
diet, and dugong oil The oil was taken for about two months, and afterwards
rubbed into the chest for two more. By this means his health became perfectly
my earliest cases, although not attended with perfect success as the other
cases I have related, was one of chronic bronchitis. , ,
When this patient returned from Sydney, to which place he had gone for changft
of air, he was in an exceedingly debilitated condition, and his voice, which ha
been previously loud and shrill, was reduced to a mere whisper. His cough was
very troublesome, and attended with a profuse expectoration. He was the subject
of great nervous excitement. Upon the receipt of any mtellegence, pleasing or


otherwise, his heart would pulsate with extraordinary rapidity, and for this he
used to take diluted prussic acid. He had been recommended cod liver oil, which he
took for some time with apparent benefit, but was obliged to discontinue its use on
account of its disagreeing with his stomach. After this temporary derangement
had subsided, he resumed it, and during the whole of the day after taking his dose
he was troubled with disagreeable eructations and other sensations of irritation at
the pit of the stomach, and at night his old malady of bleeding from the lungs re-
turned, the effect, I believe, of that irritation. I have known this to happen in
other cases, especially where this malady has been complicated with gastric dis-
order, and therefore think in such cases a sweet unirritating oil, like that of the
dugong, to be decidedly superior to the cod liver. On recovering fiom this attack,
I recommended the use of dugong oil, and in the course of a few weeks his voice
and strength returned, and he was enabled to resume his duties. Although the
bronchitis will probably remain uncured, yet to obtain strength sufficient to labour
is a blessing not to be lightly esteemed.
I will not occupy any more time in the recital of cases ; suffice it to say that I
have also successfully treated wfth this simple remedy cases of atrophy or wasting,
of St. Vitus’ dance, and innumerable cases of marasmus or mesenteric disease of
children. Let it not be understood that I make use of this oil to the exclusion of
every other remedy, for such is not the case. My use of it is restricted to those
cases of chronic disease wherein cod liver oil is admissable, and, in administering
an agreeable substitute, of which a much greater quantity maj be taken with a pro-
portionate amount of benefit, I think it will be admitted, at least, that a great
desideratum is supplied, and disease dtprived of one of its disagreeable concomi-
tants.
For having first introduced Dugong Oil as a substitute for cod
liver oil Dr. Hobbs was awarded a medal at the Exhibition in
Sydney in 1854, an d also at the Paris Exhibition in 1855.
REMARKABLE CONCURRENCE OF OPINION.
Now, my main object in quoting at such length from an ancient
and musty document published at Brisbane some thirty years ago
is to establish in the minds of my readers without a shadow of
doubt the very plain and substantial fact that the value of the
oil obtained by proper methods Irom the Dugong is vouched for
by a gentleman ol the highest standing in the medical and social
world; but other lecturers and writers of more modern times have
in the interests of the public given a large share ol their attention
to this particular theme.
The authors of “ The Queen of the Colonies,” “ Our Australian
Cousins,” &c., have referred to the Dugong at length. Space will
only permit me to give some brief extracts :
Shortly after my arrival, having seen the sights and tasted the local delicacies,
amongst them being some very fine oysters, which, on the barter system, cost a
fig of tobacco per sack of four bushels, I was invited to a native banquet followed
by the inevitable corroborree. It is of the former or rather of one particular dish
I make special mention. Before me was placed on a Staffordshire plate flanked
by a Birmingham knife and fork a cutlet of most inviting smell, and on further
acquaintance equally pleasant to the palate. So agreeable indeed that a second
soon followed the first, accompanied with some damper of peculiar excellence.
"Whilst partaking of this capital repast on an island devoid of cattle, I became
aware that ten or twelve pairs of vivacious eyes were fixed upon me with inquiring
gaze, and when the inner man was satisfied eager questions were asked : “How
you like um ? ” “What you tink um ?” “Good.”—“Veal.” “Very much
good,” was my reply.— “ Yah ! yah ! yah ! ” laughed the blacks. “ You no tell
«m. That fellow Youngan ! Good fellow Youngan.”—Thoroughly mystified I
turned to my guide for information, and he told me that the flesh of which 1 had
been partaking was cut from the carcase of a fish (so-called) named in the native


tongue “ Youngan,” but by European* tbe “ Dugong,” and the veritable original
of the fabled mermaid
The habits and physical conformation of this curious marine animal, correspond-
ing in so many particulars with the description of the behemoth by the patriarch
(Job xl. 15) have led some to the belief that the two are identical. Such belief,
however, is not without some show of reason. The Egyptian word, from which
the name is derived (bo-he-mo-ut), signifying water ox, strongly supports such an
idea, and this is coupled with the facts that the digestive apparatus of the Dugong
is precisely alike in every particular to that of the ox, and the bones so heavy
that from their great weight and density when struck together they give out a
metallic sound, thus closely agreeing with the Scripture description before referred
to : ** He eateth grass as an ox, his bones are like bars of iron.” Whether this
supposition be right or wrong, the Dugong has as good a claim to the honourable
mention of the patriarch as the hippopotamus (sea-horse), which animal has
generally been considered the behemoth.
Of all resources of Queensland waters none is so extensive or valuable as its
flocks of Dugong, which abound in all the northern waters, and are found in
certain seasons as* far south as Moreton Bay, although they are here in much less
profusion than further north. The Halicore Australis is an animal around which
hangs a halo of romance, so strange are its habits and such singular properties has
its flesh. Until lately very little was done to make any practical use of the vast
wealth which Providence has thus spread out on the shores of this Colony
(Queensland), and which may, perhaps, be found equal, when well developed, to
any other of its means of wealth, not even excepting its sheep or its sugar. . .
The flesh of the Dugong is considered b> those who have tasted it a great
luxury. From the same animal can be procured flesh resembling beef, veal, and
pork. It appears to be a highly nutritive kind of food, for not only do the
natives, but the white people also, who engage in the pursuit of capturing them,
and consume it in the absence of beef and mutton, become remarkably fat Upon a
submarine station there need be little expenditure for beef or mutton. The sub-
marine squatter who can dine off a veal cutlet fried in oil every day cannot com-
plain much of his cuisine, for even Soyer, with the most perfect gastronomic
arrangements would fail in supplying a more dainty dish, concerning which an
American writer has said :—“ It was a dish of which Apicius might have been
proud, and which the discriminating palate of Heliogabulus would have thought
entitled to the most distinguished award !”.......
With all these properties--a fat which is equal, if not superior, to the best cod
liver oil in consumptive cases, and superior to it as being useful in many other
diseases of the human frame, with the great advantage of being sweet and pala r ahle
as a food —with a skin which may either be boiled down to a jelly for children or
invalids, or >ur d into the stoutest and m st durable l ather —with bones that equal any
other ivory, while its flesh can be eaten either as fresh or salt meat —the Dugong
must play an important part among the future products of this highly favored
country, especially as this is the only portion of British territory where it is
found. As the shores of Queensland abound with large shallows with mud
bottoms, on which grows the grass eaten by these animals, their feeding grounds
are unlimited, occupying probably over 3,000 miles of coast. ....
The Dugong somewhat resembles in shape and size the porpoise, but is unlike
it in having no dorsal fin. The hide or skin in its dried state, although much
thicker, partakes of the character of pig skin, and if tanned and prepared would,
doubtless make good saddles. (The raw hide mukts the best coach braksS i know «/. —
P F.) The bones are very heavy, of the same specific gravity as ivory, and take
a beautiful polish ; when struck together they give out a metalliferous sound,
indicating the density of their structure, and reminding one of the bones of
behemoth which were like “ bars of iron. ” The eyes are very small and deep
set in the head, like those of a fat pig. The ears also are very small. The tail is
like that of a whale ; and as the tins, one on either side, are so very small in
proportion to the size of the animal, it is evidently the principal propelling
power. The Dugong is a graminivorous ruminant ; by means of its large lips the
loug blady grass growing on the banks in shallow water is plucked off and con-
veyed to the mouth, the roof and floor of which are curiously covered with
circular tufts of short bristly hair, resembling two shoe brushes which have been
almost worn down to the wood. The design of this is very evident; the thin
blades of grass could not be retained in the mouth were it not for this arrange-
ment. The tongue is short, thick and small. In the upper jaw the bulls have


two front teeth or tusks; the females (cows) have none. (This is not the case _
The cows have tusks, hut they do not protrude from the upper jaw. — P.F ) The grinders
are like those of the ox. The stomach is precisely the same as that of ruminant
animals in general, full of grass of various degrees of fineness, indicating more
than one mastication, and innumerable long worms, like those found in horses
occasionally. The heart is like the whale’s—double. The lungs are of great
length and of great capacity. The mammse are beneath the fins, as in other
mammalia of that class. In rising to blow, the Dugong exposes less of the body
than the porpoise, and at a distance might be mistaken for a turtle. The meat of
this animal when fresh is very tender and savoury ; its muscular fibre is very
short and easily digested. To persons suffering from weak stomachs the Dugong
meat would prove a very nutritious and easily-digested article of diet. The mode
of capture for commercial purposes is by long nets ; but when sport is the object
the harpoon is used. It is whaling, in fact, on a small scale ; as a sport, it is as
exciting as foxhunting, without the noise. The oil produced from this animal
is very sweet compared with other animal or fish oils ; and although none would'
take it from choice, yet, compared with cod liver oil and other medicinal
remedies, it is palatable.
Here, however, I first saw the Dugong fresh from its native element, 14 feet in
length by 10 in girth, yielding from 200 to 300 pounds of good beef, 5 to 6 gallons
of the most valuable medicinal oil known, besides a weighty quantity of solid rib
bones and inch thick skin. It suckles its young, which it supports with its
flippers, answering the purpose of arms, and provided with joints similar to those,
of a human being. Hence in olden times it was taken for the mermaid. ...
In the early accounts given by naturalists respecting the Halicore
Australis errors are noticeable, showing that in all probability
these scientific men never saw the mammal they were describing,,
but the half-dozen or so extracts given above are from the writings,
of gentlemen of note who have personally visited the fisheries, and'
observed the habits and peculiarities of this “ treasure of the
deep,” so that, combined with the valuable medical evidence given,
in its favour, there is no possibility of disguising the fact that in
Queensland waters there exists a creature whose properties have
only of late been brought to light, and are now indisputably found
to yield the most valuable medicinal and nutritive oil known to-
science. And in this respect it may be well here to mention—in
order to explode popular fallacy—that a well-known analytical
chemist told me himself—here in London, this very year of grace,
1886—that he had analysed a number of samples of new brands
of cod liver oil, and had found them contain no trace of lodine or
any other medicinal properties. So much for the credulity of the
British public !
HOW THE TRADE BEGAN.
Notwithstanding the praiseworthy, efforts of the Hon.
Hobbs, partly owing to the great stir that cod liver oil, with its
train oil-like smell and taste, was making in the world, partly to-
the inhospitable and dangerous character of the Queensland coast
in those days, and partly to the ignorance of scientific chemistry
displayed by the few scratch fishermen employed in the budding
industry, no serious or commercially organised attempt was made
to develop so important a trade until the year 1872, when the
attention of Mr. John Lionel Ching, an enterprising and adventurous
Cornishman, of good family, and of maritime and colonial ex-
perience, was drawn to the matter, with the result that he established .
several fishing stations in Hervey’s Bay, near Maryborough, and;
4 £


there conducted a large and successful business, having many
novel and interesting appliances, including a partially submarine
inclined railway, the adventuresome trips on which afforded
delight to myself and the hundreds of tourists and consumptive
patients visiting his main station (one of the “ Lions” of Queens-
land) for the purpose of partaking of Dugong meat and oil, the
many table luxuries derivable therefrom, and engaging in the
capture of the Youngan. The following, culled from an account
of these fisheries, will give a fair idea thereof to the reader : —•
“In. response, then, to a cordial invitation, I soon after paid a visit to the fishing,
boiling-down, and refining establishments of Mr. John Lionel Ching, a tall
Cornishman, with true west country notions of hospitality and good living,,
judiciously blended with Colonial freedom and trustfulness. Here ample op-
portunity was afforded me of engaging in the capture—and preparing the rich'
products—of this denizen of the sea, and for a considerable period I had the
pleasure of enjoying the society of a polished gentleman, yet withal practical
chemist, and of assisting in the numerous details connected with so large and
important an industry. There are at this present time hundreds of persons
living who have reason to thank Mr. Ching for his indomitable perseverence and
wonderful patience in spending so many years in a sub-tropical climate, exposed
to many hardships and disasters, in procuring and preparing the most palatable,
nourishing, and valuable medicinal oil known to science.
The camp was well-placed on the sea beach fronting a vast expanse of shallow
water, enclosed, or nearly so, by a long sandy island, inside which came with
each tide flocks of Dugong to feed on the submarine algse growing in profusion on
the mudflats stretching for miles in front and on either side of the station. Across
the deep and narrow channels, by which only these could be approaehed, were
stretched long and very strong nets of wide mesh, made specially for the purpose
at Biddiford, North Devon, in which the lung-breathing Halicore, becoming en-
tangled, were, though living in the sea, actually drowned in their own element,
not being able to rise to the surface for the supply of air necessary for their
existence. Boats being despatched every morning to the nets the captures were
towed back to camp, or, rather, to the inclined railway reaching down to thd
nearest channel, or creek, and then the slippery, slimy, half-ton-weight carcases
were cheerily hoisted to the cutting-up shed, standing on a slight eminence over-
looking the bay. Before describing subsequent operations, however, it should be
mentioned that quite as many Dugong were captured by harpooning. This work
was performed by blacks, specially trained, of whom there were several in Mr.
Ching’s employ. These men, having extraordinarily developed senses of sound
and sight, were enabled to see their prey approach under water from a consider-
able distance. Laying on their oars they, with extreme cautiou, noiselessly
steered their boats in front of its track, quickly and skilfully driving in the sharp
harpoon, and the same time laying their boat “end on.” In a moment the
tortured and terror-stricken animal would be towing craft and crew out to sea at
the rate of perhaps twenty miles an hour, until, on its becomiug exhausted, they
would gradually haul on the line, and, when close enough, a long and razor-like
lance would finish the work of destruction. Then from a blood-red circle would
be slowly drawn the unwieldy but valuable game, and exultantly towed to land,
each of the crew there to receive the reward of his labours.
This sport was found so attractive that strangers from long distances often
visited Mr. Ching for the purpose of engaging in it, and afterwards partaking of
a portion of its produce at their host’s hospitable and liberally-supplied table.
The cutlets, steaks, brawn, bacon, and other condiments prepared from the
Dugong, under the skilful hands of an old man-o’-war cook, furnished the most
splendid dishes, the oil and lard being freely used in all. I have frequently
remarked with amusement the astonished look of visitors when informed of the
precise nature of the sumptuous repast they were so thoroughly enjoying.
Nothing would please me more than to listen to the guesses at the “ Criterion”
or “ Delmonico’s ” were a Halicore cutlet placed on the table and public opinion
invited as to its antecedents. i


BOILING DOWN AND REFINERY.
The Dugong having been taken into the shed, the first operation performed was
skinning In consequence of the extreme thickness of the epidermis, reaching from
three quarters of an inch on the belly to an inch and a half on the back, this took a
considerable time. The carcase was then cut up into convenient sized pieces, each
of which, being placed on an exquisitely clean slab, the delicate task of flinching
had to be gone through. This consisted of carefully separating the thin streaks
of fat from the accompanying lean right down to the ribs. Especial care had to be
exercised that no meat should cling to the fatty layers, otherwise the oil would
be discoloured and liable to become burnt in the boiling. This done, the meat
was salted and placed in casks for use on the up-country sugar plantations, whilst
the priceless fat, after being cut into small pieces, was passed through a large
sausage machine and thence into the coppers, where it had to be boiled for a
certain length of time. The oil then went through two stages of refining and
filtering, and, after a special secret process, it was deemed ready for market. Mr;
Ching’s manufactures have been tested at various Exhibitions, also by well-known
chemists and medical men, and found to be absolutely pure. As such they are at
all times guaranteed by him, and the public may rely on having, under his name,
the genuine article itself pure and unadulterated.
The marvellous effect of the fatty matter of the Dugong must be seen to be
believed. My own experience is that blacks, coming down from the interior in a
starving condition, have become, after a fortnight’s stay at the fishery, as fat as
ordinary human beings can well be, and that consumptive and debilitated persons
have, in a short space of time, regained strength, appetite, and spirits. I would
not go so far as to say that Dugong or any other oil is a cure for consumption,
but have no hesitation in affirming that it relieves the worst symptoms, assists in
forming new tissues, and renovates the weakest system.”
EXTENDED OPERATIONS.
After several years’ fishing in Hervey’s Bay, during which their
operations became gradually extended, and their reputation widely
spread, Mr. Ching’s Firm decided upon removing their head-
quarters farther north out of the way of advancing civilization and
its concomitant steam traffic, all tending to frighten away the
timid Dugong, and established themselves near the Great Barrier
Reef, upon that lovely spot known as
DUNHEVED ISLAND.
Here Mr. Ching and his partnershaving at their back enterprise
and capital, have gathered together a perfect fleet of vessels, and
with modern and expensive appliances, suggested by long ex-
perience, have succeeded in developing
A MAGNIFICENT INDUSTRY,
unequalled and unapproached in any part of the world.
With regard to their manufactures let public opinion speak for
itself, but, to clinch the nail, out of a large packet of medical and
private testimonials, let us take the following, the originals of
which can be seen on application to the manufacturers :
MEDICAL, & PROFESSIONAL TESTIMONY.
J. L. Ching, Esq., Maryborough.
Dugong Fishery. J
Dear Sir, —I have given your Oil to consumptive patients with marked benefit.
In all cases considerable increase in weight and strength' followed its use, and in a
few cases to a remarkable extent. It has this advantage over Cod Liver Oil,
that it does not produce nausea.
JOHN J. POWER, M.R.C.S., L.R.Q.C.P.I.
Oct. 4th, 1875.


I have used the Dugong Oil, as prepared by Mr. Ching, extensively m my
practice for the last eighteen months. I introduce its use as an article of food
rather than as a medicine, thereby overcoming the prejudices of many of my
patients. In stremuous cases and in incipient phthisis (after correcting any
derangement of the digestive organs) I find it of the utmost value, both in
children and in adults. I regret very much that so valuable an article as the Oil
of the Dugong, as prepared by Mr. Ching, should suffer in repute by the unskilful
preparations of that Oil introduced a few years ago by other persons. The Beef
and Bacon of the Dugong as articles of diet I can speak of in the highest terms.
The Yeal of the young Dugong is really delicious.
J. P. LANE, M.8.C.5., Eng.,
July 16th, 1876. Surgeon, Maryborough, Queensland.
Mackay, Queensland, April 25th, 1884.
Dear Sir,—Since my arrival in northern Queensland I have had many
opportunities of learning the results of your Dugong Oil in diseases of the chest
and respiratory organs, and in many cases of general debility ; it is much,
more palatable and easily digested than the Cod Liver Oils generally found in the
market, and more readily taken by children ; as an embrocation in chrome
rheumatism, stiffness of the joints, &c., it is very highly spoken of. The
numerous ways in which it can be taken considerably enhance, its. value ; cakes,
omelets &c., can be cooked with it, the patient scarcely detecting its odour.
I have gleaned the above particulars from customers who have used it, and
recommemi it to their friends, and 1 have no hesitation in expressing my opinion
that it only requires to be better known to the medical profession and the public
to be largely prescribed and consumed. I am, dear Sir, yours faithfully.
To J. L Ching, Esq., W. MARTIN FORSTER, M.P.S., Viet.
Dugong Fishery, Repulse Bay, Queensland.
Adelaide Street, Maryborough,
Mr. Ching. . . ,
Dear Sir,—l have great pleasure in informing you that there is a great
demand for your Dugong Oil here. I wish you could send more of it into the
market. It is the best Dugong Oil I have seen, and is far and away better than
Cod Liver Oil, both in taste and medical properties. Trusting you will soon
be able to give us a good supply of this, valuable medicine, . , gr
I remain, yours faithfully, ARTHUR J. HARRAP, Chemist, &c.
Brisbane, 9th May, 1884.
I hereby certify that the Dugong Oil, as prepared by Mr. J. L. Ching, of
Repulse Bay, has always borne the character of being the purest and most
genuine article in the Queensland market. Its only drawback is its scarcity.
JAMES C. MOFFAT, Chemist, Edward Street, Brisbane.
To C. Smith. Esq., Surgery, Brunnerton, Grey Valley, N.Z.,
Agent for Ching’s Dugong Oil. I ( ] ctc ’^ er ; 3( ]. th ' . 1885 *
Sir 1 can confidently recommend the Dugong Oil for the following reasons,
as I have been giving it a fair trial now for the past three months in my practice
here and in tbe Grey Valley district ? . , .
The first case I tried it for was a child twenty months old, weighing nine
■bounds and a half. I swathed it in the Oil twice a day (having had it rendered
and scented nicely), and the child is now twenty-two pounds in weight, and
almost able to stand. It had no internal medicine, as the digestive capacity was
too Y e h a av ; e a | go tried the oil for several cases of rheumatism, using it after my
Turkish bath. I find it strengthen the joints and muscles, and alleviate the
pain. It is a capital vehicle for any anodyne application. _
I have also used it in several cases of night sweats m phthisis with great
advantage as a strengthener and a preventative to fresh cold
° I remain, yours, &c.,
CHARLES DE LACY MAC CARTHY, B A., M.B &c., &c.
Trinity College, Dublin.


Mr. It. H. Harland, F. 1.0., F.C.S., in his analytical report on Ohing’s
Dugong Oil, dated London, sth May, 1886, states :
“It probably owes its highly nutritive properties to its purity, freedom from
acidity, and pleasant taste and odour. It has evidently been prepared with
great care.
*• The entire absence of a fishy taste and smell, combined with the fact that it
is readily assimilable, renders it peculiarly suitable for delicate persons,
while its physical condition is such as to recommend it for general domestic
purposes.”
COMMERCIAL TESTIMONY.
Office of Commissioners, Philadelphia Exhibition,
Queen-street, Brisbane,
Mr. John L. Ching. December Bth, 1875.
Dear Sir, —Your exhibits for Philadelphia do you the greatest possible credit.
I can assure you that some of the heads of the Ministry who saw them and the
Commissioners think so. It is the most complete of all. The photographs
interested us much ; we took them to Government House. His Excellency was
much gratified in observing the process, and remarked, ‘ ‘ The Oil must make its
way, as also the Dugong Meat.” It is splendid, the piece you sent down for
exhibition last July I had hanging up at home, more as a curiosity than anything
else. It suddenly struck us to test it by boiling, and really, after the treatment
it had received, it is wonderful how we ate it all, but we did, and enjoyed it much.
It reminded us of Westphalia ham, etc.
I am, dear Sir, yours very truly,
(Signed) SEPTIMUS WEBSTER,
Secretary to Commissioners of Philadelphia Exhibition.
Maryborough, Queensland,
John L. Ching, Esq. May sth, 1884.
Dear Sir, —I have much pleasure in testifying to the acknowledged value of
your Dugong Oil. My firm (Messrs. Bryant & Co.) were agents for you for about
seven years, and although at first the qualities of Dugong Oil had to be found out,
the demand for your Oil through your mode of preparation when you left
Maryborough was largely in excess of the supply, and after you left the demand
was constant. The Bacon, also, was much enquired for, and could now be sold
in very large quantities
1 am, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
T. BRYANT,
Mayor of Maryborough, Government and General Auctioneer.
Mr. J. L. Ching. Maryborough, sth May, 1884.
Dear Sir, —It gives me great pleasure to certify to the efficacy of your Dugong
Oil.
During the last five years I find the sale has steadily increased. This I
owe to the purity of Oil, and it is now becoming a household medicine.
Yours faithfully, A. F. SAPSFORD.
P.S.—The Dugong Oil is very largely prescribed by the Medicos, and will shortly
run Cod Liver Oil out of Queensland market. A.F.S.
PRIVATE TESTIMONY.
Rockhampton,
To J. L. Ching, Esq. 18th July, 1879.
Dear Sir, —I have great pleasure in testifying to the good effects produced by
the use of your Dugong Oil. Both my wife and children have been using the Oil
for the last five years for chest complaints and debility, and we found that after
trying various other remedies, your Oil was the only thing that effected a complete
cure.
You have my permission to use this letter in any way you may think fit.
Yours faithfully,
STANLEY HILL.


Belle Vue, East Maryborough,
J. L. Ching, Esq. 2nd October, 1879.
Dear Sir,—l am only too happy to add my testimony to your long list of
testimonials in favour of your Dugong Oil. My eldest boy, delicate from his birth,
was taken alarmingly ill. Every remedy was tried that medical skill could suggest
until a medical gentleman, who had in similar cases tried Ood Liver Oil, suggested
that a flannel bandage soaked in Dugong Oil should be placed around his body.
This was done, and a small quantity of the Oil mixed with his food at every meal.
At the present time the youngster is healthy and strong, and I certainly attribute
the saving of his life to Dugong Oil. Yours truly,
LLEW. HUGHES.
John Lionel Ching, Esq., Mackay,
Repulse Bay. Jan. 16th, 1884.
Dear Sir, —I have much pleasure in stating that I have used your Dugong Oil
for my young daughter, six years of age, who for some time had been suffering
from a weak chest. The Oil was given on slices of orange, and rubbed into her
chest and back twice a day, with a piece of flannel well saturated with the
Oil applied to the chest during sleep. This, with the addition of sulphur fumes,
has eompletely restored her.
I have also used it for bruises. On one occasion, having my foot badly bruised
by a horse’s tread, I immediately wrapped it up in a rag saturated with the Oil.
In two days the colour was almost removed, and 1 could walk without pain. I
have also used the Oil with good effect for rheumatism.
Believe me, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
JOHN NICHOLSON, C.P.S.
From R. I. Kingsley, Esq., Diocesan Secretary, Province of Nelson, N.Z.
Greymouth, N.Z., June sth, 1884.
Dear Sir, —It may assist you in making known your Dugong Oil if I bring to
your notice one or two of the valuable qualifications that have come under my own
observation.
In addition to its highly nutritious and flesh-forming qualifications, 1 have
found it to be of very great value in all rheumatic affections, a little being rubbed
in soon affording relief. One gentleman suffering from weak lungs used it on my
suggestion, and found by rubbing in a small quantity on his chest after his morn-
ing bath, in addition to internal use, that it had the effect of allowing him to face
the coldest wind with impunity.
For chilblains, chaps, and ordinary sores I have found the Oil very healing.
You ought tq find a large sale for it in these Colonies.
To C. Smith, Esq., Yours truly, ROBT. I. KINGSLEY.
Agent for Ching’s Dugong Oil.
From J. Sharp, Esq., J.P., late M.H.R., and ex-mayor of Nelson.
Nelson, N.Z., 10th June, 1884.
Dear Sir, —Respecting your inquiry re Dugong Oil, I have to state that my
medical attendant many years ago, when the Oil first came into notice, ordered
me to take it in lieu of Cod Liver Oil, which did not agree with me, and which
I found difficult to take. I found I could easily take the Dugong Oil. that it
readily agreed with me, and 1 soon found the benefit of it, for after about one
month’s taking it, it had done me so much good that there was no necessity to
take more. Yours truly,
To C. Smith, Esq. JOHN SHARP.
J. L. Ching, Esq., St. Helen’s Station, Mackay,
Peninsula. Jan. 25th, 1884.
Dear Sir, —1 have used your Dugong Oil, and have no hesitation in saying
that in every case T found it most efficacious. In cases of rheumatism it has a
marvellous effect. I have obtained instant relief from severe cases, two or three
applications entirely removing all trace of the complaint. I have always found it
a sovereign remedy for indigestion, and would strongly recommend all sufferers
from whatever cause to give your Oil a trial.
I am, dear Sir, yours faithfully, HARRY MURRY.


Marine Baths, Nelson, N.Z.
To Mr J L Ching. 3rd March » 1884 -
Dear Sir —lt is with much pleasure I offer my humble testimony to the
efficacy of your useful Dugong Oil. I speak from experience. I have found it to
cure almost anything —sore throats, burns, bronchitis, sore eyes, and sores of all
kinds. I would not be without it for a fortune. I write this for you to publish
it for the benefit of others. Mbs. W. JOHNSON.
Testimony of an East India Merchant.
W B. Gilmore, Esq. (late of Madras), of the firm of Gilmore, Young-
husband & Co., Auckland, N.Z., writes :
“As to Ching’s Dugong Oil, I think it a good antidote for rheumatism and
muscular pains generally ”
John L. Ching, Esq. „ Maryborough 6th May, 1885
Dear Sir —During my visit to your fishery camp at Hervey s Bay a few
years ago I had many opportunities of noticing the beneficial effects of Dugong Oil
taken medicinally. In one instance, I remember well, a gentleman suffering from
asthma and evidently almost prostrated with that most distressing complaint,
derived so much benefit from taking the Oil that he was able to resume his pro-
fessional duties in two or three months, and I heard only a few weeks ago that
he had enjoyed good health ever since. , ...
I know for a fact that all the consumptive patients m this district prefer it to
Cod Liver Oil as it does not produce that feeling of nausea that the latter does.
In conclusion, I may state that I enjoyed far better health during my
stay at your camp than ever I did in my life either before or since^
y J lam, dear Sir, yours truly, ALF. CROCKER.
20, Beverley Terrace, Cullefcoats, England,
15th February, 1886.
Dear Mr. Ching,—Allow me to express how much good your Dugong Oil
did for me when I suffered from acute rheumatism. I used it externally night
and morning for some time, and found the Oil most soothing and curative. I
*•“ "* “ P- M- H. BRAMWELL.
“ Fairlight,” Blackheath,
„ 16th June, 1886.
information I have much pleasure in mentioning that during
st ’; n the Colonies your Dugong Oil relieved, and. m fact, took away pains
in the chest and a hacking cough from which I it
to mv friends everywhere, and brought some home with me, which has provea
very y useful for swollen and sprained wrists and rheumatism, when well and
Sen tty Übed in. I hope all my Colonial friends wdl give .t a tnaL I have
made cakes and biscuits with it, and very mcegently,
M. SMITH.
SPECIAL NOTE.
TOD LIVER OIL is manufactured from the decomposed livers ot
‘ fish, and contains injurious acid. In many of the cheaper sorts
not the slightest trace of lodine is discernible. f+ i
THING’S DUGONG OIL is the pure unadulterated extract of the
fresh and sweet-smelling fat of the mammal, carefully and scient-
ifically clarified, and contains no acid whatever.
“CHING’S DUGONG OIL,”
whilst containing all the curative properties of the best Cod Liver
Oil, is, as nearly as possible, tasteless and free from smell, possessing,
furthermore, marvellous fattening qualities.


SYNOPSIS.
Having thus briefly traced the history of the Mermaid, Baardmaenetje, Yan-gan,
Youngan, Halicore Australis, or Dugong, down to the present time, and having
recorded the success of the latest and greatest attempt at utilising, for the benefit
of mankind, its marvellous combination of valuable properties, I take it that
principally to the untiring efforts and patient investigations of a medical scientist,
the Honourable Dr. Hobbs, and of a practical business man and chemist, Mr.
John Lionel Ohing, whose motto is “ nil desperanduin,” is due the fact that the
THE DUTCHMAN’S DREAM
has, in these modern times of ours, been
GLORIOUSLY FULFILLED,
and an industry has been established that shall carry the name of this curious
mammal down the annals of posterity to the lasting service of the human race.
I remember meeting some twelve or thirteen years ago, on the coast of Queens-
land, the late Sir Wyville Thomson, professor of natural history, and chief of the
scientific staff in the expedition of H.M.S. “Challenger” round the world, and
he expressed to me his great interest in the habits and conformation of the
Dugong, stating his belief that in years to come its value from a medical point of
view would be appreciated. These words have come true, for the preparations of
J. Lionel Ching & Co. are finding their way to the remote corners of the southern
hemisphere, where the solitary “hatter” no longer need fear the fever, ague, or
rheumatism, so long the bane of his life. It is only of late years that Dugong Oil
has been properly tested for these complaints, and recently the Firm have pre-
pared an Ointment for External use, called
“CHING’S INFALLIBLE,”
and got up very nicely in blue opal screw-capped pots, bearing as Trade Mark the
letter C transfixed by a harpoon, without which no preparations bearing their name
are genuine. In recognition of his arduous labours, of the purity of his manu-
factures, and of the extreme scrupulous care given to them, Mr. Ching, during
the past ten years, has received over Twenty Medals, Prizes, and Certificates, and the
people of Queensland should be proud of having amongst them such a notable
SUBMARINE SQUATTER,
who from his charming island home can survey his flocks gambolling and browsing
around him. To that marine and sylvan retreat I would recommend all in search
of health to pay a visit. There they will enjoy life and its surroundings framed
on a different and more romantic scale than it has ever fallen to their lot to
witness. The charms of Hervey’s Bay were great. The benefit to invalids
sojourning at Mr. Ching’s fishing stations was immense, and men are yet alive to
tell the tale, but mutability is the order of the day, and to experience the delights
which it has been my pleasure to record, visitors must travel farther north, first
taking care to communicate their desires to the Firm, at Townsville or Sydney.
And now one word before I close. Men’s brains have been taxed, their
ingenuity drained, to bring before the easily-deluded public the fancied merits of
Quack Medicines and Universal Cures, but it is my pleasing duty to point to un-
deniable medical and scientific evidence, and to personally vouch for the fact that
the preparations referred to in this little work are the
ABSOLUTELY PURE AND UNADULTERATED
extracts from the fresh and sweet-smelling fat of the Dugong, skilfully made and
scientifically treated. As such they are honestly and fearlessly recommended,
not alone on the proprietors’ word, but on authenticated medical evidence, for the
weakest infant or the gloomiest hypocondriac who longs for
HEALTH AND HAPPINESS.
Finally, in wishing my readers farewell, I cannot refrain from mentioning the
glorious success now being achieved by our splendid and daily crowded Exhibition
in London, whereat English people are so astonished, and of which Colonists may
well be proud. These pages serve to publish yet another Colonial industry to
add to the well-being of Britons. To all who take an interest in our Empire of
the South, to our friends and fellow-countrymen in the Great Dominion on which
the sun never sets, I address those oft-repeated but ever-welcome words—
“ADVANCE AUSTRALIA.”


“EXTRACTUM HALICORES CHINS.”
Over
Medals
■ CHING’S DUGONG OIL.
RECOMMENDED by the Medical Faculty for its wonderful curative properties
in cases of Consumption, Diseases of the Chest and Bowels, Chronic Cough,
General Debility, Defective or Insufficient Nutriment, Chronic Bronchitis, In-
digestion, Biliousness, Wasting in Children, &c.
i Th J S • 9, 11, bein 8 devoitl of an y unpleasant taste, may be administered very
beneficially amongst the food, substituting the Oil where Lard. .Dripping, or
Butter are ordinarily use 1. It is more especially adapted for cooking Fish. The
fill can also be used m*the manufacture of Pastry, Biscuits, Cakes, &c. By this
means the most fastidious taste may be overcome, and the Oil more easily
assimilated and rendered less liable to produce nausea in cases of extreme
sensitiveness or irritability of stomach.
In Boz. and 16oz. square amber Bottles, bearing Trade Mark.
One or Two Tablespoonfuls taken three times a day after meals will, in a
short time, invigorate the most feeble constitution.
DUGONG OIL
extremely volatile and sensitive to every change of temperature,
solidifies m cold weather. It is, therefore, necessary to warm it slightly by
placing a bottle near the fire, or in hot water, for a short time before using.
“CHING’S INFALLIBLE,”
Or Specially-Prepared Dugong Ointment.
A certain relief, and frequently a cure, for Rheumatism, Lumbago,
Sciatica, Sprains, Bruises, Sore Breasts and Eyes, Strained Sinews and
Joints, &c. It also wonderfully assists the growth of the Hair.
In loz. and 2oz. blue opal Pots, with screw caps, bearing
Trade Mark embossed on top.
DIRECTIONS.—Cover a piece of lint, or soft rag, with the Ointment, and bandage the
parts affected, or, where possible, rub the Ointment well in night and morning.
Where Turkish or warm Baths are taken, use the Ointment after same.
JOHN LIONEL OHING & Co.,
SOLE MANUFACTURERS & PROPRIETORS,
DUNHEVED ISLAND, QUEENSLAND.
Depots at Townsville and Sydney. *
Twenty
fvDE
Prizes,
and Certificates.
