

i
I
DURABESTOS
HOMES
Colourful Beauty


Wunderlich DURABESTOS (asbestos-cement) Building Sheeting
A Sheet of Durahestos , measuring 8 feet by 4 feet, being placed in position.
AS this illustration evidences, Durahestos is virtually a prepared wall, all ready for use* It
ZJk is made in big Sheets, of numerous stock sizes, ranging as large as 10 feet by 4 feet* You
A X can handle, cut and fix it more quickly, even, than timber linings or weatherboards*
Being composed of asbestos fibre and Portland cement, united by mixture and compression
into a dense and tough Sheeting, Durahestos is weather-resisting, so can be used just as effectively
for exterior as for interior applications* The surface finish is a pleasing grey in colour, and as
smooth as finely trowelled cement.


DURABESTOS HOMES
of COLOURFUL BEAUTY
A HOME of colourful beauty that is the new
ideal cherished by homebuilders to-day*
in its most pleasing schemes of har-
monious expression is now employed generously, to
add a note of radiant charm and richness to even
the least pretentious of dwellings* New homes
that proclaim the joy and magic influence of colour
are appearing everywhere in the suburbs and country*
In Durabestos, the Wunderlich Asbestos-Cement
Sheeting, you will discover a product that offers
you unlimited scope for pursuing this latest vogue*
It is a rock-hard and smoothly-surfaced Building
Sheeting that lends itself to attractive designing
and colourful decoration, in both the interior and ex-
terior of the home* Yet in every way it is an econo-
mical material, being cheaper even than timber
linings and weatherboards, and easier to erect*
Perusing pages 4 to 9, you will be surprised how
delightful and how varied are the exterior colour
schemes you can achieve with Durabestos* The
choice and arrangement of colours have been sug-
gested by expert decorators, and sufficient schemes
are provided to enable you to select something
entirely to your own liking* It is necessary to bear
in mind that the colour treatments must be carried
out after the material is nailed in position, as we
supply Durabestos in its natural grey finish only*
No doubt your local decorator will have had ample
experience in this direction and, under the super-
vision of your architect, will be able to follow our
schemes successfully*
Apart from the charm of the colour treatments,
the Durabestos Homes we illustrate possess real
quality of design, and demonstrate beyond question
that when planned by an architect, structures
built with Durabestos compare more than favour-
ably, in appearance, with those constructed of
other materials* As you will notice, a factor that
adds remarkably to the exterior attractiveness of
the Homes is the employment of large cover mould-
ings, these being wide and thick in section, and
spaced at suitable intervals* In any design your
architect may prepare for you, we advise you to insist
on this feature, since the extra cost entailed is not
excessive*
Another factor of importance is the Roofing, which
should be of Wunderlich Terra Cotta Tiles if
the element of colour is to be fully preserved,
and effective protection in all weathers is an end
you have in view*
On pages 12 and 13, we provide various suggestions
for the appropriate use of Durabestos as a Wall
Lining and Ceiling Material in your rooms* In
this connection, only one colour scheme is dis-
played, as the art of interior decoration is widely
understood and alternative ideas will suggest them-
selves to your architect or decorator*
However much you may fancy one of the Home
designs we picture, do not decide to copy it until
you have seen your local architect* Probably, by
amending the design to suit your exact require-
ments, he will be able ultimately to save you money
and inconvenience* Then, if the plans are submitted
to us, we will gladly furnish a list of quantities of
Durabestos Sheets which the building entails ; but
we cannot undertake the construction of Dura-
bestos Homes* This should be entrusted to a
recognised builder*
WUNDERLICH LIMITED
ADMINISTRATION Baptist Street, Redfern, Sydney
DURABESTOS WORKS: Cabarita (N.S.W.) and Sunshine (Vic.)
Showrooms and Offices
SYDNEY STH. MELBOURNE ADELAIDE BRISBANE NFWPASTIF
Baptist St., Redfern 2.0 Hanna St., (near Stutt St.) Cot. Crete and Motphett Sts. Amelia Street, Valley Builders’Exchange, King St.
, J PEI ) TH HOBART LAUNCESTON
Lord, Short and Newcastle Sts. 139 Macquarie St. 71 St. John St
CATALOGUE D. 32 1/6/30


Durabestos—The Rock4ike Building Sheeting
Minimises Labour Reduces Costs
Builds Better Homes
A Building Sheeting of solid rock —in every way
as rigid, long lasting and fire-retardant that
virtually what Durabestos offers you. It is
the most convenient and effective lining available
to-day for remodelling or repair work as well as
for new construction for exterior as well as interior
applications.
Hard as Concrete—Smoothly Surfaced
Durabestos is a modern building material, made at
our Works, from asbestos-fibre and Portland cement.
These are thoroughly united, by mixture and our
exclusive process of compression, into a dense and
rigid product, as hard as concrete and as smoothly
surfaced, almost, as a slab of marble. The natural
colour is a pleasing cement-grey.
Wide Range of Stock Sizes
You can obtain Durabestos in big, broad, eaves-high
Sheets. There is a wide variety of convenient sizes,
ranging from lengths of 3 feet to 10 feet, by widths
of 3 feet and 4 feet. Two standard thicknesses are
in daily use, viz. : 3-i6ths of an inch (approximately),
for general purposes, and s~32nds of an inch (ap-
proximately), for ceilings. The latter thickness is
sometimes employed for interior walls, above dado
height.
Readily Cut, Nailed and Erected
Despite its toughness and rigidity, Durabestos can
be cut and nailed as readily as timber. After fixing
the Sheets to wall studs or ceiling joists, it is usual
to apply cover battens over the joints and, if desired,
at intervals between joints. Timber strips are fre-
quently used, but strips of Durabestos are also effective.
Painting is Economical
Being highly weather-resisting, Durabestos need not
be painted. However, where colourful treatment is
needed, as in the case of modern homes, this can
be carried out economically, since Durabestos is not
porous and will absorb less paint than timber linings
or weatherboards. In the case of interior treatments,
you can paper Durabestos in the same way as Plaster
walls.
Ideal for Exterior and Interior Walls, etc*
There is no limit to-day to the uses found for Dura-
bestos Sheets. They are equally as effective for exposed
positions as for interiors. When building the new
home, you can use them for exterior walls, in lieu
of weatherboards, for interior walls and partitions,
in place of wooden linings and for plain ceilings.
Besides, they are ideal for gable fillings, eaves linings,
balcony panels, and, in fact, any purpose previously
served by timber. Even in brick homes, you will
find Durabestos a perfect material for the walls and
ceilings of the bathroom, kitchen and laundry, as
steam, fumes and heat will not impair it.
Cheaper than Timber-Fireproof—Durable
No other material affords the same opportunities as
Durabestos, for attractive effects at bedrock cost. In
most districts, Durabestos is cheaper than timber.
Moreover, it does not deteriorate. Unlike timber,
plaster and iron, it cannot flake, sag, crumble, rot or
corrode. It is fire-retardant and proof against white
ants, borers and other destructive agencies, which
impair the stability and diminish the value of struc-
tures built with most other types of lining in use to-day.
Used for Buildings of All Types
Throughout Australia and New Zealand, Durabestos
has been utilised in the construction of thousands
of homes and buildings of all types, including shops,
factories, cinemas, club houses, grandstands, farm
buildings, garages, etc. There is nothing experimental
about such structures, for they are approved by archi-
tects, financiers and Government Departments. Also,
being fire-safe, they are favoured by Insurance Com-
panies, who charge lower premiums than those ap-
plying to timber structures.
Insist on “Durabestos”
If you have in mind utmost attractiveness and per-
manence, combined with moderate cost, then Durabestos
is the building material that will enable you most
effectively to carry out your scheme. Be sure, however,
that you obtain the genuine product which can be
identified by the name clearly marked on each sheet.
Any substitute for Durabestos will lack the qualities
of rigidity and extreme smoothness which are imparted
by our perfected methods of manufacture.
DURABESTOS ( a cTslnt s ) BUILDING SHEETS
Page 2


Code
Word
Thickness and
Stock Width
Stock
Length
Weight Per
Sheet
Code
Word
Thickness and
Stock Width
Stock
Length
Weight Per
Sheet
Durabac
No. 2 by 4 ft. wide
io feet
73
lbs.
Duraj us
No. 1 by 4 ft. wide.
10 feet
63
lbs.
Durabed
ditto
9
65
yy
Durakal
ditto
9 it
56
Durabif
ditto
8
58
yy
Duradok
ditto
8 „
50
Durabog
ditto
r ~r
/
5i
yy
Duradum
ditto
7 »
44
Durabuk
ditto
6
44
yy
Duradyp
ditto
6 „
28
yy
Durabyn
ditto
5 //
35
yy
Durafag
ditto
5 »
3i
t y
Duracad
ditto
4 a
29
yy
Durafej
ditto
4 it
25
y f
Duracig
No. 2 by 3 ft. wide
io feet
54
yy
Duraken
No. 1 by 3 ft. wide
10 feet
47
y y
Duracoj
ditto
9 »
49
yy
Durakip
ditto
9 »
42
yy
Duracul
ditto
8 „
44
yy
Durafol
ditto
8 „ I
38
y y
Duracym
ditto
7 »
38
it
Durafun
ditto
7 »t
33
yy
Duradaf
ditto
6 „
33
it
Duragah
ditto
6 „
28
yy
Duradeg
ditto
5 »
27
it
Duragek
ditto
5
24
yy
Duradij
ditto
4 »
22
yy
Duragil
ditto
4 it
19
it
Code
Word
Approx.
Thick-
ness
Standard
Size
Descrip-
tion
Weight
of One
Sheet
Duragom
Durasat
Durahel
Durahim
Durahon
i inch
1
4 t*
5-i6 „
3
8 >>
1
2 tt
8 ft. by 4 ft.
ditto
ditto
ditto
ditto
One smooth face
Both faces smooth
ditto
ditto
ditto
80 lbs.
80 „
TOO .,
120 „
l68 „
Stock Sizes, Thicknesses and Weights of
DURABESTOS (Asbestos-Cement) BUILDING SHEETS
Sizes: Durabestos Building Sheets are available in
two main thicknesses, viz : 3-i6ths of an inch (termed
No. 2), and s~32nds of an inch (termed No. 1). On
account of a possibility of variation during the process
of manufacture, we refer to these thicknesses as
“ nominal,” or “ approximate,” but it is seldom that
the Sheets fail to measure reasonably close to the
stipulated thickness. The stock sizes, in each thick-
ness, measure :
3 feet wide ; by 4,5, 6,7, 8,9, and 10 feet long.
4 feet wide ; by 4,5, 6,7, 8,9, and 10 feet long.
Uses: For External Walls, Internal Walls, Parti-
tions, etc., we recommend No. 2 thickness {i.e., 3-i6ths
of an inch). For Ceilings (and, if desired, for Internal
Walls above dado height), it is customary to use No. i
thickness ( i.e ., s~32nds of an inch thick).
Weights: The approximate weights of Durabestos
Sheets are : No. 2 thickness, 16.3 lbs. to the square
yard ; and No. 1 thickness, 14.1 lbs. to the square
yard.
Code Words: In the event of telegraphing or cabling
particulars of their requirements, clients will find
the following code words of service. When compiling
the message, it is necessary, firstly, to mention the
quantity required, then quote the code word for the
thickness and size.
Thicker Durabestos Sheets —for Special Purposes
Circumstances at times render it desirable to employ
Durabestos Sheets of utmost rigidity, and, conse-
quently, of greater thickness than the standard Sheets.
To meet this requirement, we manufacture Durabestos
in four special thicknesses, viz. (approximately) :
i inch, 5-i6ths of an inch, | of an inch, and \ inch.
Two Smooth Faces: As these thick Sheets are utilised
frequently for partitions, we manufacture them with
both faces smoothly finished. In addition, the J inch
thickness is available with one face only smooth, as
in the case of our standard Sheets.
Stocks and Delivery : The J inch thickness is avail-
able, in the stock size, viz. : 8 feet by 4 feet, at short
notice. All other thicknesses can be supplied within
a few weeks from our receipt of the order. Early
notice should be given us, to ensure satisfactory delivery.
If special sizes are required, we will submit an es-
timate of price and time required for delivery, on
receipt of particulars.
WUNDERLICH LIMITED- MANUFACTURERS
Page 3


A Colourful Home Built with Durabestos
HERE is a home of colourful beauty, such as can be built,
at low cost, with Wunderlich Durabestos Sheets. The
picture illustrates the use of this material for Exterior Walls,
Verandah Panels, Gables and Eaves Lining.
In the interior of this home, the walls would be lined with
Durabestos, which would be used for the Ceilings also, if plain
effects were desired. A more artistic scheme would be to instal
Wunderlich Metal Ceilings because the designs are richly
decorative and add so much to the attractiveness of rooms.
Suggested Colour Scheme
The exterior colour scheme comprises Walls of pure white
or pale cream, with cover mouldings of apple green ; the
gutter being painted a similar green shade. Windows and
doors would be gloss-white. The roof would be Wunderlich
Wunderlich
Terra Cotta Tiles, in a medium-red tone.
NOTE. — Should you fancy any design shown on pages 4
to 9, you should submit it to your architect, who will explain
where it must be revised to suit your specific needs.
DURABESTOS ( a ce b SILt s ) BUILDING SHEETS
Page 4


Of Distinctive Quality is this Ideal Home
WHO wouldn't be pleased to own a home possessing
such distinctive quality I Yet the example we
illustrate is of inexpensive construction, being built with
Exterior Walls, Verandah Panels and Piers, and Eaves
Lining, of Durabestos Sheeting, Internally, there would
be Walls and Ceilings of Durabestos, unless a more
decorative treatment with Wunderlich Art Metal were
preferred.
Suggested Colour Scheme
To achieve the above colour scheme, paint the walls a
pale biscuit tone, and the cover battens a medium shade
of Brunswick green. The gutter should be a warm
chocolate colour, and the windows and doors gloss white,
Wunderlich Terra Cotta Tiles, dark red in colour, provide
a distinctive roofing,
PAINTING, — It must be understood that we supply
Durabestos in its natural grey colour only, as painting
can best be done after the material has been nailed in
position. No doubt your local decorator will be able
to follow any of the colour schemes herein suggested.
WUNDERLICH LIMITED MANUFACTURERS
Page 5


Decidedly Economical This Durabestos Home
WHEN your aim in home-building is economy, the logical choice is a cottage such as that illustrated
compactly planned, artistic in design, colourful in finish* Such a home, with Durabestos
Exterior Walls and Eaves Lining, is a decidedly inexpensive investment, since Durabestos is cheaper
than timber, inexpensive to transport, and so easy to erect*
To reap the full benefit of the low cost of Durabestos, you should use this material for the Ceilings
and Interior Walls also* Several suggestions for attractive treatments are shown on pages 12 and 13
of this publication* Perhaps you favour a more decorative note in the Ceilings of the important rooms,
in which case we recommend to you the numerous ornate
Ceiling designs available in Wunderlich Art Metal* These
designs are artistically reproduced in special quality steel,
and lend themselves to colourful treatment by the decorator.
Suggested Colour Scheme
Walls of light ivory, with cover mouldings painted old rose
shade, and a roof of Wunderlich Terra Cotta Tiles, in a
light red tone, shading to buff, provide the dominating
note in the colour scheme of this Exterior* The Eaves
Soffit is painted an apple green shade, and the gutter salmon
colour* Windows and doors are gloss white*
DURABESTOS ( a c s e b £I t n? s ) BUILDING SHEETS
Page 6
- V


A Durabestos Cottage of Appealing Design
A HOME of colourful richness one of appealing design,
built to defy the weather and to last for ages is here made
possible through the use of Durabestos for Exterior Walls, Pier
Casing and Eaves Lining* For the purpose of providing variety,
we employ weatherboards up to sill height, but there is greater
durability, fire-safety and artistic value in Walls that are entirely
of Durabestos from bottom plate to eaves*
After studying the effect which Durabestos offers in this Exterior
treatment, try to picture the interior of the home, finished just
as attractively with this material* Every room can have Walls and
Ceilings of Durabestos, in neatly panelled effects, because the work
is so easily carried out, at a cost that even the least affluent of home-
builders can afford*
Suggested Colour Scheme
The colour of the Walls is a pale pink, with cover mouldings painted
crimson-brown* The gutter is the same colour as the Walls, but
the Eaves Soffit is a biscuit shade* Windows and doors are finished
gloss white* A Roof of Wunderlich Terra Cotta Tiles, chocolate
coloured, completes the scheme*
WUNDERLICH LIMITED-MANUFACTURERS
Page 7


i-u : R 2^, ... s v .
Sturdy and Permanent these Durabestos Walls
ALL that you can wish for in a home of moderate cost is
/V embodied in this pretty design. It has a richness of cheerful
colouring as well as a sturdiness and permanent quality that
only Walls of Durabestos can contribute to a wood-frame home
of modern design.
The Verandah Panelling and Eaves Lining, as well as the Exterior
Walls, are of Durabestos Sheeting, which can be used to ad-
vantage wherever you have previously used weatherboards or
timber linings. It is particularly effective for the lining of Interiors,
being smoothly finished, all ready for painting, and immune from
such common defects as flaking, sagging and rotting. Accord-
ingly* you would not hesitate to use Durabestos for the Interior
Walls and Ceilings of a home such as we illustrate above.
Suggested Colour Scheme
The Exterior colour scheme is a striking combination of light
mauve for the Walls, Spanish blue for the cover mouldings, and
intermingled colours in the Roof of Wunderlich Terra Cotta
Tiles. The gutter is painted Spanish blue, and the windows
and doors are finished gloss white.
:iTCHLN □
i'c" a 10-o' |||
>ED ROOM I
Is'-O m x IQ-O" I
Jl PORCH j
SED ROOM E>e.D ROOM
j2 : o" x IZ' O" 1 3' o' x 1 2.’ O
—>JU.
V ERA IN DA H
DURABESTOS (TTmITT) BUILDING SHEETS
Page 8
, ,


■■ f
I
:
Durabestos Builds Ideal Week-end Homes
THERE is no excuse for building your sea-side or week-end
cottage with perishable or expensive materials, when
Wunderlich Durabestos enables you to erect a permanent
structure, such as we illustrate, in remarkably quick time
and at bedrock cost* This example is decidedly picturesque,
with its Walls, Pier Casing, Verandah Panels, Gable Filling
and Eaves Lining of Durabestos Sheeting*
No other building sheeting offers comparable quality and
character in Exterior Wall treatment, much less can it assure
the same security against rigorous weather conditions, par-
ticularly near the sea, where Durabestos has proven impervious
to the destructive action of salt-laden air*
Suggested Colour Scheme
The colour scheme which contributes so effectively to the
beauty of this small cottage, comprises walls and gutter of
quite pale apple green, with cover battens painted sienna*
The windows and doors are painted gloss white* Wunderlich
Terra Cotta Tiles, in a medium shade of red, provide an ap-
propriate and colourful roofing*
WUNDERLICH LIMITED MANUFACTURERS
Page 9
ms.


Suggestion for a Garage
with Walls of Durabestos
THE above illustration of a garage demonstrates the effective-
ness of Durabestos Walls for structures of this type. From
the working drawings shown on this page, it will be seen that
the use of Durabestos does not necessitate special timber construction,
although it is desirable, if waste is to be curtailed, that structures
should be designed so as to suit the stock sizes of Durabestos Sheets.
In the present example, the wall studs are spaced at intervals of 2 feet,
centre to centre, so that Sheets of a stock width of 4 feet can be
utilised to advantage. The height of the wall studs is 7 feet 6 inches,
therefore Durabestos Sheets of a stock length of 8 feet can be used
without undue waste.
Garages, workshops, farm buildings, and structures of similar type,
which do not call for utmost attractiveness of interior finish, are
usually built with exterior walls, only, of Durabestos. These ensure
complete protection against the weather, and satisfactory exterior
appearance. Internally, the wall studs are exposed. As an alter-
native, the Durabestos Sheets may be used as an interior lining
only, the wall studs being thus exposed to the weather.
Terra Cotta Tiles and Ridqinq- Red. or Chocolate
SIDE ELEVATION
DURABESTOS ( a c s IST n °t s ) BUILDING SHEETS
Page 10
' ! iMBf Mi


|P| sail ||||
Suggestions for Durabestos Treatments to Gables, Eaves, etc.
An attractive treatment, with Durabestos,
to Walls and Gable.
Durabestos here makes possible an
attractive Entrance Treatment.
Balcony Enclosure and Gable Panels
of Durabestos Sheeting.
Walls and Gable Fillings are treated
with Durabestos.
Picturesque half-timber effects,
achieved with Durabestos.
Ceilings, Balcony Walls and Panels, Eaves
and Gable, are of Durabestos.
Gable Treatment and Eaves Lining
carried out with Durabestos.
Durabestos treatment to Verandah
enclosures, Balustrading and Gables.
Verandah Piers, Exterior Walls, Gables
and Eaves Linings, of Durabestos.
Every home provides scope for the economical employment of Durabestos Sheeting. As the pictures
demonstrate, it is the ideal material for Gable Fillings, Eaves Linings, Verandah Enclosures and Pier Casing,
Balcony Panels and Balustrading. It does not require painting and is perfectly weatherproof.
WUNDERLICH LIMITED —MANUFACTURERS
Page ii




Durabestos Treatments to Ceilings and Walls
Durabestos makes possible an endless variety of effects in the treatment of Ceilings and Interior Walls.
Very attractive results may be achieved by the use of moulded timber cover battens, or Wunderlich Enriched
Metal Mouldings, in lieu of the flat timber cover battens shown in the suggestions above.
Page 13


* •
yp*:'


One Hundred and Seventeen Uses for Durabestos
Dwellings
Lining for exterior walls.
Lining for interior walls.
Ceilings. Partitions.
Lining to gables.
Lining to eaves soffits.
Barge Boards. Fascia Boards.
Panelling for cupboards.
Panelling for balcony fronts.
Lining to stair soffits.
Window hoods.
Fireplace hoods.
Enclosing verandahs.
Girder and beam casing.
Enclosing baths.
Boxing in verandah piers.
Front fences. Gate panels.
Tops of cupboards and presses
Back lining for box frames.
Lining between piers under house
Domestic Uses
Draining boards. Gas boxes.
Tops of washing tubs and coppers.
Panelling under sinks and wash-
basins.
Splash boards for sinks.
Draining racks. Oven trays.
Shower and bath screens.
Fire screens. Stove recesses.
Folding screens. Draught screens.
Sliding doors for cupboards.
Lining for cool safes, drip safes.
Gramaphone cabinets. Mail Boxes.
Lining cooking boxes.
Boxes for garbage.
Shelves. Drawer bottoms.
Bottoms of serving trays.
Hearth for kitchen fires.
Palm stands. Flower boxes.
Backing for heavy mirrors.
Backings for paintings and pic-
tures.
Protection for shelves in green-
houses.
Bottoms of aviaries, etc.
Bins for bedclothes.
There are hundreds of
uses for Durabestos —in
new construction, renova-
tions, and odd jobs at
home or on the farm. This
list of common uses is
worth keeping in mind,
having been compiled
from information supplied
by a thousand carpenters
in Australia.
Shops, Offices, etc.
Panelling for counter fronts.
Counter tops. Stallboards.
Shopwindow backings.
Lining lift wells.
Lining of dormer windows.
Newsboards for newsagents.
Waste paper baskets.
Lining mail chutes.
Lining for bridgeways between
buildings.
Lockers.
Farm Buildings
Lining for all farm buildings.
Panels for windows in out-build-
mgs.
Kennels for dogs.
Beehives. Poultry brooders.
Incubators. Silo sheathing.
Raised floors for fowl houses.
Drop doors for fowl houses.
Flooring for haystacks and on top
of staging.
Feed bins and troughs.
Grain Chutes.
Lining for wool press.
Push-out window shutters.
Skillion roofs.
Lining bunks in shearers' huts.
Under tanks to prevent wooden
stand rotting.
Rabbit pits along fences (to prevent
burrowing under) ♦
Hoods for farm tractors.
Sides of carts, barrows, etc.
Cinemas and Halls
Casing for footlights.
Cinema screens. Prosceniums.
Operating boxes.
Hoarding. Signboards.
Sundry Uses
Covers for tanks.
Shedders for water cooling
towers.
Louvres for ice works, etc.
Casing in W.C. pedestals.
Backs and partitions of urinals.
Safety guards around machinery.
Covering motor boat engines.
Tops for mixing tables.
Glass cutting benches.
Tops of tables.
Sand trays in kindergarten schools.
Fruit and fish stalls.
Templates. Doughboards.
Setting out boards.
Scoring boards. Blackboards.
Lining in between walls to make
rat proof.
Dust proof panelling for weigh-
bridges and scales at mines.
Sheathing for bottoms of oyster
punts.
Lining conveyor shafts in fac-
tories.
Kilns for tobacco curing.
Uses for Waste
Louvre slats. Ant caps for piers.
Scraps for concrete.
Mock shingles.
Packing up bearers and joists.
Ventilators (when perforated).
Mats for bath heaters, primus
stoves, pots and pans.
WUNDERLICH LIMITED —MANUFACTURERS
P age 15


Durabestos is fixed to studs with
special blunt-pointed nails.
Large stock sizes simplify the
erection of Durabestos Walls.
When used for Ceilings, Dura-
bestos may be nailed direct to joists.
The Method of Fixing Durabestos Sheets
BEFORE building with Durabestos, you should
study the list of sizes on page 3 of this pub-
lication, as utmost economy will result if you
can design your walls, ceilings, partitions, etc., to
suit stock-sized Sheets.
Nailing
Durabestos is nailed in the same manner as timber,
special blunt-pointed nails being used. These
nails should be driven at about 12 inch intervals,
and should be at least fths of an inch away from the
edge of the Sheet. We stock these special nails (as
illustrated), 1 inch long by 14 gauge, in galvanised
steel, and find that half a pound is required for each
100 square feet of Durabestos Sheeting.
Spacing of Studs
To ensure a flat surface, timber studs should be of
even depth. Our stock-sized Sheets are either 3 feet
or 4 feet wide, so studs should be spaced at either 18
inch or 2 feet centres.
Jointing
Durabestos Sheets are NOT lapped the edges are
simply butted closely against one another. Over this
butt joint, it is usual to nail timber Cover Strips,
which should be not less than three inches wide and
three quarters of an inch thick, in the case of exterior
wall treatments. Most of the colour illustrations
displayed on previous pages demonstrate the use of
cover strips of substantial dimensions, ranging from
6 inches to 9 inches wide, these contributing greatly
to the attractiveness of the designs. Sometimes, Dura-
bestos is employed for cover strips, in lieu of timber.
Support Behind Joints
There must be support behind all joints. If, for in-
stance, the walls are higher than 10 feet, it will be
necessary to let in wooden cross pieces between studs,
at a height of 10 feet.
Cutting
No matter how carefully sizes are ordered, a certain
amount of cutting is usually necessary. When new,
Durabestos can be sawn like timber. A more general
method is to place a batten along the direction of the
Horizontal Joints
cut, and, with a sharp-
pointed chisel, score
a deep line to the de-
Below we illustrate a typical horizontal joint, showing
the use of our Galvanised Drip Strip. This strip
extends from the back of and under the upper Dura-
bestos Sheet, and laps down over the lower Sheet.
A felt strip may be used in the same manner, in lieu
of the Galvanised Strip. Finally, the cover batten
is applied.
sired length; then
STUD snap off the surplus
material. If you
S'SL moisten the Sheet
where the cut is to be
made, you will find it
much easier to score
Securing Cover Battens
the line and to sever
Cover Battens may be nailed, but are best secured
with screws.
J the Sheet.
DURABESTOS ( a c s e b 5I t n °t s ) BUILDING SHEETS
Page 16


Wunderlich Products
for Home Builders
Manufactured by Australian Craftsmen
WUNDERLICH METAL CEILINGS
No type of Ceiling affords greater attractive-
ness and permanence than the Wunderlich
Art Metal Ceiling, Available in a wide
range of modern designs, Wunderlich Ceilings
make possible an appropriate and tasteful
treatment to every room in the home. They
are reasonably priced and are not expensive
to instal, as any tradesman can erect them.
Being produced in a special quality, paint-
protected steel, they cannot crack, flake,
rot, burn or fall down. For country homes,
in particular, they are ideal, as the material
travels compactly, at low freight cost, and
there is no risk of breakage. Our 48 page
catalogue, picturing the numerous artistic
designs, is available free —on request.
TERRA COTTA ROOFING TILES
For distinctive beauty and effective weather-
protection, there is no roofing to compare
with Wunderlich Terra Cotta Tiles, They
offer you an unlimited colour-range, in-
cluding shades of red and brown, buff,
yellow, clinker, and numerous effects in
glazed and semi-glazed finishes. Despite
their many advantages, these Tiles are
decidedly economical, because they never
require painting, seldom need repairs, and
last forever, without deterioration. They add
considerably to the investment value of the
homes they adorn. Typical examples of
colourful roofs of Wunderlich Terra Cotta Tiles
are shown in our free booklet, ** Roofs of Tile."
WUNDERLICH LIMITED
Manufacturers of
ART METAL CEILINGS : DURABESTOS (ASBESTOS-CEMENT) SHEETS
TERRA COTTA ROOFING TILES : SHOPFRONTS AND SHOWCASES
ARCHITECTURAL METALWORK : ARCHITECTURAL TERRA COTTA
TERRA COTTA GARDEN ORNAMENTS : WUNDERGLAZE
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY GREEN PRESS LTD., FRANKLIN STREET, GLEBE, SYDNEY.


DURABESTOS
HOMES
Cobwful Beauty
