

DURYEA’S
"MAIZENA"
COOKBOOK
DELICIOUS
ELICATE
AINTIES


SUGGESTIONS
IN making gravies and sauces, use Duryea’s Maizena for
thickening—not flour. Cook thoroughly and the improved
taste of the gravy or sauce will please you.
In making pancakes, use one-third Duryea’s Maizena in-
stead of all flour.
When eggs are scarce and several are used, a teaspoonful
Duryea’s Maizena may be used very satisfactorily in place of
one egg.
For use in making ice creams, Duryea’s Maizena is unex-
celled and, when it is used, the yolks of so many eggs are
not needed.
All kinds of crusts, steamed puddings and dumplings, are
much better when part Duryea’s Maizena is used in place of
all flour.
When short of cream in an emergency, Duryea’s Maizena,
with milk and egg, makes a good substitute.
To prevent icing from running off while being spread, lightly
dust the cake with Duryea’s Maizena.
A little Duryea’s Maizena introduced into a juicy fruit pie,
such as rhubarb, cherry, etc., prevents its running over.
A pinch of Duryea’s Maizena in the salt cellar will prevent
the salt from growing hard.
Duryea’s Maizena is fine to powder candies, such as marsh-
mallows, etc.
Published by the
NATIONAL STARCH CO., NEW YORK.
Proprietors “ Duryea’s Maizena.”


RECIPES.
Wheat Bread.
FOR all bread made with yeast, the milk should be warm,
but not boiling. After it is well heated, let it cool to
the luke warm point, although in winter it may be made
a trifle warmer than in summer. Sift together well, one
cup of Duryea’s Maizena, seven cups wheat flour, and one heap-
ing teaspoon salt. Rub in one-half tablespoon lard and two-
thirds tablespoon butter. Follow this with a half yeast cake
dissolved in two-thirds cup milk, or two-thirds cup home-made
yeast. Then gradually add the milk, stirring all the time, and
heating well for twenty-five minutes after the milk is all in.
As soon as it is done, cover well, but loosely, with a cloth and
set to rise over night in a place where it will not become chilled,
but will not be too warm. In the morning mould quickly into
two loaves and put in buttered pan, and let rise again even with
the pan. This bread may be made with lukewarm water instead
of milk, and is much preferred by some.
Parker House Rolls.
SIFT together five and one-half cups wheat flour, and one-
half cup Duryea’s Maizena with one tablespoon sugar, and
one teaspoon salt. Rub in one tablespoon lard and butter
mixed. Mix in one-half yeast cake dissolved in two-thirds cup
milk. Then add two cups warm milk and knead well for
twenty-five minutes. Cover closely and let rise over night. In
morning, flour pastry board, roll out dough about one-half inch
thick. Cut out with large biscuit cutter, butter and fold. Put
in tins and allow to rise one and one-half to two hours before
baking. Bake about twenty minutes.


French Rolls.
SIFT together one pound wheat flour, scant half-cup Duryea’s
Maizena and three-fourths teaspoon salt. Warm one and
one-fourth pint new milk with two tablespoons butter.
When cool mix into the flour with one well-beaten egg and table-
spoon yeast. Beat well, but avoid kneading. When risen, form
into rolls, handling as little as possible, and bake at once.
Tea Biscuits.
SIFT well together two and one-half cups flour, one-half
• cup Duryea’s Maizena, three fourths teaspoon salt, and
two teaspoons baking powder. Rub in thoroughly two
large tablespoons lard. Moisten with milk until consistency
to roll out. Make about three-quarter inch thick and cut with
biscuit cutter. Bake at once a good brown.
Graham Muffins.
SIFT together one-half cup Duryea’s Maizena, one-half cup
flour, one cup graham flour, one-fourth cup sugar, three
teaspoons baking powder and one teaspoon salt. Beat
yolk and white of one egg together and stir into it one cup
milk. Add to flour and stir it lightly one tablespoon melted
butter. Bake in gem pans, in moderate oven.'
Popovers.
BEAT whites two eggs very stiff. Add to one cup milk
beaten up with yolks of eggs and pinch salt; sift to-
gether three-fourths cup flour and one-fourth cup
Duryea’s Maizena. Turn in milk and eggs gradually, beating
hard continuously. Pour into very hot popover tins and bake
twenty minutes in quick oven. Remove from tins and serve
immediately, as they fall quickly.
Flannel Cakes.
TWO cups flour, one scam cup Duryea’s Maizena sifted with
one teaspoon salt and three teaspoons baking powder.
Add gradually three cups milk, beating until smooth.
Melt and stir in two even teaspoons butter; add last, two well-
beaten eggs. If sour milk is used, substitute one teaspoon soda
for baking powder, stirring into milk. Bake on hot griddle.


Rice Cakes.
MIX one cup boiled rice, one cup flour, and one-fourth cup
Duryea’s Maizena, into which one half teaspoon salt has
been sifted. Add one unbeaten egg and one good tea-
spoon baking powder. Beat and stir well and add sufficient
milk to make good griddle cake batter. Bake on griddle.
Waffles.
SIFT together one-half cup Duryea’s Maizena, one and one-
half cups flour, one-half teaspoon salt and two teaspoons
baking powder. Beat together yolks and whites two
eggs, add one and one-half cups milk, stirring gradually into
the flour. Add finally one heaping tablespoon butter, melted.
Cook in waffle iron.
Maizena Cakes.
CREAM one-half cup fine granulated sugar and one-half
cup butter. Add grated rind one lemon. Beat three
eggs, yolks and whites separately. Stir yolks into butter
and sugar, with one level cup Duryea’s Maizena, into which
one level teaspoon baking powder has been sifted. Then add,
tablespoon at a time, whites of eggs. Put into small buttered
tins, filling only half full so as to allow for rising. They
should be baked to a delicate straw colour in a moderate oven.
Make icing as follows: Boil for four minutes, one-fourth cup
granulated sugar in one-fourth cup water. Sift in, stirring all
the time, sufficient confectioners’ sugar to make icing proper
consistency. If icing becomes too thick, lemon juice or # hot
water may be added. Do not attempt to ice cakes while hot or
icing will run. They should be cold or nearly so.
Loaf Sponge Cakes,
BEAT yolks of six eggs very light with two cups sugar.
Add whites which have been beaten very stiff. Turn in
one cup boiling water. Last, beat in very lightly two
and three-fourths cup flour and one-fourth cup Duryea’s Mai-
zena, previously well sifted together with one tablespoon bak-
ing powder. Flavour with lemon extract and bake in loaf pan
in moderate oven.


Cream Puffs.
PUT four level tablespoons butter into one-half cup boiling
water in a saucepan. Take one and one-half level table-
spoons Duryea’s Maizena and add enough flour to make
one cup. When well mixed, turn into the boiling water and stir
until the mixture leaves sides of saucepan. Remove from the
fire and cool by beating. Stir in, one at a time, two unbeaten
eggs, beating the mixture thoroughly. Line baking pan with
well-buttered paper and drop upon it of the batter,
making the spots as round as possible but a little higher in
the centre, and bake in hot oven for thirty minutes. Split
when entirely cold and fill with Filling for Cream Puffs (be-
low) ,
Filling for Cream Puffs.
SIFT together two teaspoons flour and two level tablespoons
Duryea’s Maizena. Put small pinch salt into one-fourth
cup cold milk and mix. Add three-fourths cup scalded
milk. Stir well until entirely smooth and cook twenty minutes
in double boiler or in pan set over boiling water. Add beaten
yolks of two eggs and cook just long enough to set. Remove
from fire, add teaspoon vanilla and one-fourth cup sugar.
(Flavouring extracts should never be added to any mixture
while the mixture is still boiling, as much of the strength will
pass off in the steam.) If not smooth strain, and when cold
fill puffs, putting the two parts together again.
Yankee Cake.
TAKE one egg, piece butter size two eggs, one and one-half
cups sugar, one and one-half cups flour, and one-half
cup Duryea’s Maizena. Turn butter, eggs and sugar into
a bowl and beat well. (Do not beat eggs alone.) Stir in flour
and then maizena, into which three teaspoons baking powder
have been sifted; slowly stir in one cup milk. Flavour to taste
and bake in moderate oven three-quarters of an hour. Good
as layer cake.


Chocolate Layer Cake.
CREAM together one cup butter and two cups sugar. Beat
four eggs well, and stir in. Add two and one-half cups
flour and one-half cup Duryea’s Maizena sifted together.
When well beaten, bake in jelly tins, in moderate oven.
For filling, use one-half cake chocolate dissolved in a little
water, and boil, stirring constantly. When cold add yolks
of two eggs and one-half cup rich milk in which two teaspoons
Duryea’s Maizena have been dissolved. Sweeten to taste and
boil till quite thick. Spread between layers and on top of cake.
Silver Layer Cake.
BEAT gradually one cup sugar into one-third cup creamed
butter. Into one-half cup Duryea’s Maizena and one
and one-fourth cups flour, sift two and one-half tea-
spoons baking powder. Take one-half cup milk and add to
creamed mixture by degrees, alternately with the sifted flour,
etc. Flavour with one teaspoon lemon or vanilla extract and
turn in stiffly beaten whites of three eggs. Bake in layer tins.
Gold Layer Cake.
CREAM together one cup sugar and five level tablespoons
butter. Add yolks four eggs and one whole egg. Sift
two and one-half level teaspoons baking powder into
one-fourth cup Duryea’s Maizena and one and one-third cups
flour. Into one-half cup milk, put three-fourths teaspoon
vanilla. Add these two combinations alternately to creamed
mixture, a little at a time, and beat well. Bake in layers.
Angel Cake.
SIFT together five times, two and one-half ounces flour and
one ounce Duryea’s Maizena. Add one teaspoon cream
tartar and sift again. Sift three times, ten ounces pul-
verised sugar. Beat very light whites of twelve eggs. To
these add sugar, one teaspoon vanilla, and lastly flour and
maizena stirred in lightly. Grease mould on bottom only and


bake fifty or sixty minutes. When removed from oven turn
upside down on table so that air may reach it. Do not take
from mould until entirely cold.
Snow Cake.
ONE teacup butter and two teacups sugar well rubbed to-
gether several hours before required. Stir in altern-
ately, whites twelve eggs and two and one-half cups
flour. When well incorporated, add one cup sweet milk. Lastly,
sift in one-half cup Duryea’s Maizena with two heaping tea-
spoons baking powder. Pour into well-greased loaf tin. Bake
in moderate oven until cake draws away from the sides of the
pan.
Drop Cakes.
CREAM together six ounces butter and eight ounces sugar.
Add four eggs, yolks and whites beaten separately. Beat
well and add seven ounces flour and one ounce Duryea’s
Maizena previously sifted together, and flavour to taste. When
all has been thoroughly beaten, drop some distance apart on
well-greased tins and bake in moderate oven.
Delicate Cake.
RUB together to a cream, one cup butter and two cups
sugar. Dissolve in one cup sweet milk, one-half tea-
spoon soda and add. Sift together one cup Duryea’s
Maizena, two cups flour and one teaspoon cream tartar. Turn
in to butter and sugar. Beat well and add whites seven eggs
beaten to stiff froth. Flavour to taste. Bake in moderate oven.
Never fails to be good.
Fig Filling.
YANKEE cake may be used for a jelly cake or layer cake
of any kind, by baking it in layer tins instead of a loaf.
Fig filling makes a delicious variety of layer cake. To
one-fourth pound of figs that have been put through the chop-
per, add one-half cup sugar and two tablespoons Duryea’s


Maizena. Put in double boiler and pour over gradually, stir-
ring all the while, one-half cup boiling water. When well
mixed add one and one-half tablespoons lemon juice and grated
rind of one-half orange. Cover and cook for at least a half
hour, stirring occasionally. If figs are entirely soft put directly
over fire, mashing and stirring to make them smooth. Do not
stop stirring for a moment or the mixture will burn.
Vanilla Filling.
SIFT together through a sieve sufficiently coarse to permit
the sugar to go through, one and one-half level table-
spoons flour, one-half cup sugar and one-fourth cup
Duryea’s Maizena. Add two eggs slightly beaten. Scald one and
one-half cups milk in double boiler. Pour gradually over the
maizena, etc., return the whole to the double boiler and cook
for twenty minutes, stirring continually. When it has creamed,
add a good pinch salt, one tablespoon butter and one teaspoon
vanilla. Use when cold.
Plain Pie Crust.
ONE and one-fourth cups flour with one-fourth cup Dur-
yea’s Maizena, one-half teaspoon baking powder, one-
half cup lard and one-fourth cup of cold water. Cut
lard thoroughly into flour with a knife and chop and stir, not
using the hands at all in the mixing. Add water in same way,
using occasionally the thumb and finger when absolutely neces-
sary, but only then. The less crust is handled at any time
the more flaky it will be.
Richer Pie Crust.
THREE cups flour, one scant tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena
and one teaspoon salt, sifted well together. Cut into
this one heaping cup lard (or half butter if preferred),
chop and mix with a knife, only using the hands to toss lightly
together. (Never knead pie dough or it will be tough). Mois-
ten with very cold water only just enough to roll out. Use as
little dry flour as possible in the process.


Blackberry Pie.
LINE pie-plate with good rich crust —made according to
recipe already given. Wash blackberries, drain and fill
plate quite full. Sprinkle well with sugar. Sift over
all, one generous tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena. This will
thicken juice and keep it from running over. Add top crust
well pricked, and bake. Strawberry, whortleberry, rhubarb and
peach pies should be thickened in the same way with Duryea’s
Maizena.
Dried Apple Custard.
AS dried apples are generally of a uniform tartness, the
following recipe will be found a good one, though the
amount of sugar must be somewhat governed by con-
ditions. Stew apples until done, and rub through colander.
Should be juicy. To enough apples for one pie, beat in one
whole egg and yolk of a second. Add one-half cup butter, one-
half cup sugar, one scant teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena, juice one
lemon and one-fourth nutmeg, grated. Beat all well together
and bake with bottom crust only. When done, cover with
meringue made from white of second egg and return to oven
till a delicate brown.
Fresh Apple Custard.
TO one pint apple sauce add one quart sweet milk, four
eggs, one tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena, pinch of salt,
one-fourth grated nutmeg, one tablespoon melted butter,
juice one lemon and grated rind of half. Bake with under
crust only and do not put any meringue on it.
Lemon Custard Pie.
TAKE one heaping tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena, juice and
part of the rind of one lemon, three eggs, one cup sugar
and one teacup milk. Mix maizena with a little of the
milk and set the rest to scald in double boiler. When boiling
stir in cornflour. Boil one minute and add yolks of eggs well
beaten. When cool, add sugar, rind and juice of lemon, all


beaten well together. Bake in deep pie plate, lined with crust,
in moderate oven for one-half hour. When done, cover with
meringue made from whites of eggs. Return to oven and
brown lightly.
Lemon Pie.
WITH cold water make a thin paste of three level table-
spoons Duryea’s Maizena. Put in double boiler and
add slowly, stirring the while, one cup boiling water,
and cook until boiling. Take from fire and stir in one
tablespoon butter and one well-beaten egg. When thoroughly
mixed, add one-fourth teaspoon salt, one cup sugar and juice
of one large lemon or two small ones. Again mix well and
bake in one crust or two, as desired.
Lemon Cream Pie.
TWO lemons, grated, yolks of two eggs, small lump butter,
one-half small cup flour, one tablespoon Duryea’s
Maizena, three cups sugar, two cups water. Cook in
double boiler until thickened. When cool, put in tart crusts
already baked.
Boston Cream Pie.
TWO teaspoons butter, one cup sugar, two eggs beaten
together, two teaspoons baking powder, three cups flour,
pinch baking soda. This makes three layers. Split
layers and put following cream between. One quart milk,
five eggs, one tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena, one cup sugar and
a little vanilla. Cook in double boiler, and when cool spread
between layers.
Strawberry Cream Pie.
(Strawberry Short Cake.)
SIFT together one and one-fourth cups flour, one-third cup
Duryea’s Maizena, and two and one-half level teaspoons
baking powder. Cream together three-quarters cup sugar
and two heaping tablespoons butter. Add one whole egg and
one separate yolk beaten light. Then add, a little at a time,
alternately, the flour, etc., and one-half cup milk. Bake in


two layer cake pans. When ready to serve put cream filling
between layers and meringue over top. The cream filling is
made as follows: To two and one-half level tablespoons Dur-
yea’s Maizena mixed with three tablespoons cold milk, add one
cup scalding milk. Turn into double boiler and cook for
twenty minutes, stirring frequently after thickening begins.
When thoroughly cooked add one-fourth cup sugar, pinch salt,
one-half teaspoon butter, one-fourth teaspoon lemon extract
and one well-beaten egg. Remove from fire at once, beat well
and cool. When ready to serve make meringue of whites of
two eggs whisked to a stiff froth with one-fourth cup powdered
sugar and a few drops lemon juice. After meringue has been
spread, drop strawberries all over the pie, allowing them to
sink well into the meringue. Serve as soon as possible.
Mock Cream Pie,
BEAT together one cup sugar, two tablespoons Duryea’s
Maizena and yolks three eggs. One pint boiling milk,
pinch of salt and one teaspoon butter. Turn into single
crust already baked. Grate nutmeg on top and bake again.
Cover with meringue and brown.
Cocoanut Pie.
BEAT together yolks of three eggs, two tablespoons sugar
and one scant tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena. Add two
cups milk and one-half cup freshly grated cocoanut.
Pour into deep pie plate lined with crust. When baked cover
with meringue made from the whites of the three eggs, sprinkle
lightly with grated cocoanut, return to oven to brown lightly.
Ice Cream.
SIFT together one-third cup sugar, one-half teaspoon salt,
one level tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena. Add one pint
milk and stir over hot water till it thickens. Cover and
cook twelve minutes, stirring occasionally. Into one-half cup
sugar, gradually beat the yolks of three eggs already beaten.
Stir into the hot mixture, and keep on stirring till it thickens.


Strain into freezer when cold, flavour to taste, and add one
pint cream, and freeze as usual.
Vanilla Ice Cream,
TO one quart milk, which has begun to simmer in double
boiler, add two cups sugar, beaten together with two
eggs. Then sift one tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena to-
gether with a little dry sugar and put in last. Let cook steadily
for about ten minutes, stirring all the time. Take from fire
and add one quart cream and vanilla extract to taste, and freeze.
Tutti Frutti.
TURN into one pint new milk, two teaspoons Duryea’s
Maizena previously dissolved in a little cold milk. Cook
for several minutes. While at boiling point pour over
yolks four eggs (previously beaten with three cups sugar), and
boil ten minutes, stirring constantly. When cold, add one
quart cream and freeze. When half frozen, add one pound
dried and candied fruit (raisins, citron, cherries, etc.), which
have been soaked in one glass whiskey and juice one lemon.
Finish by freezing.
Frozen Custard.
ADD to one quart new milk two teaspoons Duryea’s Maizena,
previously dissolved in a little cold milk. Boil until
maizena is thoroughly done. Pour boiling mixture
on yolks of three eggs well beaten with one cup granulated
sugar, stirring constantly. Flavour to taste, and set aside till
cold. Freeze as ice cream. When half frozen, stir in one pint
whipped cream and finish.
Lemon Ice Cream.
GRATE into two quarts milk rind three lemons. Boil
and strain. Boil again and add two tablespoons Dur-
yea’s Maizena. Stir this into four well-beaten eggs and
add one and 'three-fourths pounds sugar. Set to cool. Add
juice one orange and five lemons, and freeze. When half
frozen, add one pint whipped cream.


If desiring orange flavour instead of lemon, use the juice
ten oranges and two lemons, with the grated rind of three
oranges and one lemon boiled in the milk and strained out.
Orange Custard.
TO one pint milk add yolks two eggs and one level tea-
spoon Duryea’s Maizena. Sugar to taste. Put in double
boiler and set over fire. Let the water boil gently and
stir mixture till it thickens. Set off to grow cool. Take four
oranges, slice, and in a dish put a layer of oranges and a layer
of sugar alternately, finishing by pouring the custard over
the whole.
Cocoa Custard.
TO a digestion that will refuse chocolate because too rich,
cocoa may be found perfectly digestible, because the fats
have been removed. When such is the case, a nice
custard made from Duryea’s Maizena will be found very ac-
ceptable, if instead of other flavouring cocoa is added to the
maizena before dissolving it in milk. Set on ice and serve
with thin custard or cream.
Cup Custard.
TO each beaten egg allow one and one-half cups milk and
one saltspoon Duryea’s Maizena with one level table-
spoon sugar and a few grains of salt. Flavour to taste,
and set in cups in water in oven to cook till thick.
Mock Custard.
PUT in double boiler one quart sweet milk and let boil.
Add one-half cup sugar, one small lump butter, teaspoon
cinnamon (or nutmeg grated in), four well beaten eggs
and pinch salt. Dissolve in a little cdld milk, two tablespoons
Duryea’s Maizena and add to boiling mixture. Let boil until
maizena is thoroughly done.


Prune Whip with Custard Sauce.
TAKE one pound prunes and soak over night in enough
water to cover them well. In the morning cook in
the water in which they have been soaked, until soft
enough for the pits to be removed readily. Chop fine and
sweeten to taste. Add well-beaten whites two eggs to which
have been added one tablespoon pulverised sugar. Beat thor-
oughly and stand on ice for one hour. Serve with custard
made as follows: Take one dessertspoon Duryea’s Maizena and
dissolve in a little cold milk. Add this to one pint milk, yolks
of two eggs and one tablespoon sugar. Cook until sufficiently
thick. When cool serve as sauce for prune whip.
Float.
ONE cup sugar, three eggs, one and one-half pints milk, and
one heaping tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena. Put in
double boiler. Cook till the mixture thickens. Flavour
with vanilla and serve cold.
Charlotte Russe.
ONE quart rich milk, four eggs well beaten, six tablespoons
sugar, one teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena. Cook in double
boiler until thickened to a custard. Line a glass dish
with sponge cakes and pour custard in centre. May be covered
with whipped cream.
Bedford Charlotte.
COVER six or eight slices (moderately thin) of “yester-
day’s bread” with damson preserve. Line a platter with
these slices. Make a custard of one quart milk, six
eggs, one tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena, six tablespoons sugar,
and two teaspoons vanilla, having reserved the whites of two
of the eggs for frosting. Pour custard while hot in among
the bread. When cold put on icing. Serve cold.
Lemon Jelly.
JUICE two lemons, two eggs beaten separately, one and one-
half cups sugar, one teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena and one-
half teaspoon lemon extract. Boil in double boiler until
thick. Serve with sponge cake or crackers.


Chocolate Pudding.
DISSOLVE one large tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena in a
little cold milk and add to one pint milk that has just
come to the boil. Mix together two tablespoons grated
chocolate and a half teacup sugar. Boil until it thickens, turn
into individual moulds and set to cool. When cold, put on ice.
Should be served with thin custard or whipped cream.
New York Pudding.
PUT to heat one pint milk. When it comes to the boil
stir in three tablespoons flour and one tablespoon Dur-
yea’s Maizena which have been well moistened with a
little extra milk. Stir until thickened and set to cool. Beat
two eggs, yolks and whites separately, and stir in first the yolks
and then the whites. Put in a pan and bake for an hour by
setting pan in another of hot water in the oven. Serve with
wine or lemon sauce.
Blanc Mange.
PUT into a saucepan three-quarters cup Duryea’s Maizena,
add pinch salt and four tablespoons granulated sugar,
moisten with one-quarter cup cold milk, then add two and
one-quarter cups boiling milk. Boil for five minutes, stirring
constantly. Flavour with one teaspoonful vanilla extract, allow
to boil up, mixing well, then pour into a wetted mould. If
chocolate flavour is desired, grate two ounces sweet chocolate
into a small saucepan with one tablespoon milk and allow to
warm till dissolved. Turn into the custard when adding
vanilla.
Maizena Pudding.
TAKE one and one-half tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena, one
quart new milk, one egg, a little salt and four table-
spoons sugar. Heat milk till near boiling, add mai-
zena previously dissolved in a little cold milk. Pour mix-
ture upon well-beaten egg. Put back in skillet and boil up
once, stirring briskly all the time. Remove at once and flavour
to taste. Pour out to cool.


Caramel Pudding.
TAKE one pint rich milk, yolks of two eggs, two table-
spoons sugar, one tablespoon Duryea s Maizena. Add
wine, macaroons, or any kind of preserved fruit. Heat
milk in double boiler, oeat yolks very light and add sugar
Stir maizena in a little cold milk and add to hot milk. Cook
till thick and make meringue of the two whites and four table-
spoons sugar. Set in oven to brown lightly.
Delmonico Pudding.
DISSOLVE three tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena in a little
cold milk and add to one quart milk and the yolks of
five eggs beaten up with six tablespoons sugar. Boil
up till mixture thickens (a little less than five minutes), pour
into pudding dish and bake for one-half hour. Remove from
oven, and, when cool, cover with frosting made from whites of
the eggs beaten with six tablespoons sugar. Return to oven
and bake delicate brown.
Dandy Pudding.
DISSOLVE two tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena in a little
cold milk. Put one quart milk in double boiler with
one-half cup sugar. When it comes to- the boil add
yolks of three eggs and the maizena. Flavour with lemon, and
put in individual glasses. With the whites of the three eggs
and three tablespoons powdered sugar, make whip for the top
of each glass.
Tipsy Parson.
TAKE sponge cake moistened with sherry and lay in glass
dish. Make custard of one pint milk, yolks two eggs
and one heaping teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena. Pour over
cake while hot. Just before serving sprinkle blanched almonds
freely over lop. Beat whites of eggs into stiff froth with two
tablespoons powdered sugar and one cup sweet cream.


Blackberry Mush.
PUT upon the stove in enough water to cover well, desired
quantity of blackberries. Let cook thoroughly. Mash
and strain when done. To each pint liquid sweetened
to taste, add one teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena dissolved in one-
half teacup milk. Cook until thick, stirring all the time it
not quite as thick as liked add a little more maizena, but bear
in mind the thickening properties of Duryea s Maizena and
do not be too lavish in adding it, for fear you may overdo the
desired result. Should be served very cold.
Chocolate Sauce.
SIFT together one-half tablespoon flour and one tablespoon
Duryea’s Maizena with a few grains of salt. Dissolve
in a little cold milk and turn into one pint scalding
milk in double boiler. Cook ten minutes, lo one and one-
half squares melted chocolate add one-fourth cup sugar Stir
smooth and turn into thickened milk. Beat whites of two
ecr<rs very stiff, add one-half cup sugar and yolks of two eggs
wdl stirred but not beaten. Stir hot milk slowly into eggs.
Turn back into boiler and let stand a moment or two, but not
cook. Flavour with vanilla and cool.
Banana Sauce.
TAKF two large, very ripe bananas, mash through a fine
sieve into a saucepan. Have ready four tablespoon.
Lemon juice, which pour over immediately, and cover
in order to prevent discoloration of bruised bananas. Sift
together two scant tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena and one-half
cup sugar Add slowly one and one-fourth cups boiling water,
stirring steadily the while, and let simmer for about ten minutes.
beal well. Serve with fruit pudding or plain boiled
pudding.


Mock Cream.
AN excellent substitute for whipped cream may be made in
the following way:—Three-quarters cup of milk; keep
back enough to mix one large dessertspoon of Duryea’s
Maizena. Boil milk, and stir into maizena. Leave until quite
cold. Beat one tablespoon butter and one-quarter cup sugar
to a cream; then add cold mixture a tablespoon at a time,
beating well each spoonful. Flavour with vanilla.
Orange Sauce, Hot.
CREAM together one scant cup sugar and two tablespoons
butter. Stir in by degrees two heaping teaspoons Dur-
yea’s Maizena. Add one and one-half cups boiling
water. Put on back of stove where it will keep hot and thicken
to a rich cream, but will not boil. Just before removing, flavour
with orange extract to taste.
Canned Fruit Sauces.
ALL canned fruits, more especially the tarter ones, lend
themselves to the making of delicious sauces for plain,
boiled, or baked puddings and make an economical, de-
licious and dainty dessert.
In making, mash fruit to a pulp, and to one cup juice and
pulp add one-half cup water and let come to boil. If tart, take
one cup sugar (less if fruit be sweeter), add two level table-
spoons Duryea’s Maizena, pour hot liquid over and cook for
ten minutes, stirring till smooth, and beat into it stiffly beaten
whites of two eggs. Do not allow to stand but use at once.
This sauce may be used cold by leaving out the whites of the
eggs until ready for use. Beat up cold mixture very smoothly
before beating in white of eggs.
Milk Sauce.
(To be used on puddings instead of cream.)
BEAT to a cream, one ounce butter, and one cup sugar.
Add pinch of salt. Dissolve one teaspoon Duryea's
Maizena in a little cold milk. Add to one-half pint milk,


cook till maizena is thoroughly done, and flavour to taste.
Pour boiling mixture on a well-beaten egg, stir well, and serve.
Sauce for Sponge Cake.
A DELICIOUS 'Sauce to use on squares of sponge cake or
lady-fingers that have grown slightly stale is made as fol-
lows : In one cup boiling water, melt one-half cup currant
jelly and two tablespoons sugar. Add two good tablespoons
butter. Dissolve one heaping teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena in
one-half cup cold water (or sherry, if preferred) and turn in
slowly. Allow to boil gently till maizena is thoroughly
cooked, stirring constantly. Keep hot till needed, by setting
in pan of hot water, stirring once in a while to prevent skin
forming on top.
Roast Beef Gravy.
AFTER roast has been removed, pour from pan all the
fat except about one tablespoonful. Into this, stir one-
half tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena. Put over fire and
cook until well browned. Add gradually, stirring all the time,
one pint boiling water, boiling till thick and smooth. Season with
salt and pepper. All brown gravies may be made after this
recipe, using judgment in relation to the quantity of fat.
Where it seems too plentiful, pour off some; where it is
scarce add butter.
Gravy for Steak and Onions.
AFTER frying steak, proceed as in making roast beef gravy,
then add the fat in which the onions have been fried.
If steak and onions have been fried in the same pan, the fat
will be already flavoured with the onion.
Creamed Chicken Gravy.
AFTER frying chicken, make a gravy as follows: In the
pan from which the chicken has been taken, pour
desired quantity of milk, season with butter, salt and
pepper, and thicken with Duryea’s Maizena. Cook until
thoroughly done and serve in separate bowl.


White Sauce.
TO one pint boiling milk, add two tablespoons butter into
which one heaping teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena has
been well rubbed. Cook well, for only by thorough
cooking are brought out the full flavor and velvety texture
obtained by use of the maizena. This sauce is to be used
in dressing new potatoes, onions, cauliflower, squash and
cabbage. For fish, hard-boiled eggs either chopped fine or cut
in slices should be added.
Lobster Sauce (for Boiled Fish).
("MIT the meat of one-lobster into dice. Pound the “coral”
up with one tablespoon butter. Sift together one and
one-half tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena and one-fifth
teaspoon cayenne. Rub up with one tablespoon butter to a
smooth paste. Add one pint boiling water, the pounded
“coral,” lemon juice to taste. Simmer five minutes and strain
upon the diced lobster. Boil up once and serve.
Tomato Sauce.
TO one pint tomatoes put one good slice onion and one bay
leaf and stew twenty minutes. Mash through sieve and
put in small pinch baking soda. Mix together one and
one-half tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena and two tablespoons
butter, melted. Gradually add pulp and season to taste with
pepper and salt. Cook thoroughly.
Caper Sauce.
MELT one ounce butter and stir in one-half ounce flour
one-half ounce Duryea’s Maizena, well sifted together.
Stir until perfectly smooth. Pour into this one pint
milk and boil up well. Then add one teaspoon vinegar and
three tablespoons capers. Season with pepper and salt. Serve
with lamb or mutton.


Parsley Sauce.
TO one ounce melted butter add one teaspoon Duryea’s
Maizena. Stir well until smooth. Turn in one pint
milk and let come to the boil. Season with pepper and
sah and add chopped parsley and lemon juice. Serve with
fish.
Velvet Sauce,
SIFT together one and one-half tablespoons flour and one-
half tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena. Stir into one ounce
melted butter. When blended pour in one quart rich
chicken or veal stock, add some kitchen bouquet, one-half
cup mushroom liquor, six whole peppers, one saltspoon salt
and a dash of nutmeg. Stir continuously and allow to boil for
twenty minutes. Remove from fire, skim well and return where
the mixture can simmer for one hour. Strain and put in more
salt and pepper if needed.
Port Wine Sauce.
TO one teacup good White Sauce made with Duryea’s
Maizena add a little of the following mixture: Port
wine, one pint; walnut pickle, one-half pint; three
fresh lemon peels, thinly sliced; six eschalots, peeled and
sliced; three tablespoons fresh grated horse-radish; half ounce
allspice; same of pepper; two Chili peppers chopped and one
teaspoon celery seed. Put into a glass jar with one pint mush-
room catsup. Shake well and stop tight. In fourteen days
this is ready for use and will be found invaluable as an
adjunct to kitchen flavorings. A very little is required at a
time for either sauces or gravies. Claret may be used instead
of port.
Creamed Chicken on Toast.
REMOVE all the meat from the bones of cold cooked
chicken and put through meat grinder. Turn into a
skillet with a little water and heat through. To each
cup chicken add two cups milk, one teaspoon butter, pepper and
salt to taste, with a little parsley, very finely chopped. Thicken


to rich creamy consistency with Duryea’s Maizena which
has been previously dissolved in a little cold milk. Cook
until maizena is thoroughly done. Serve hot on buttered
toast.
Tomato Toast a la Kingsford.
HAVING strained one-half cup juice from a can of toma-
toes, put the remainder to cook. Sift together one-
fourth cup Duryea’s Maizena, one teaspoon salt,
a pinch white pepper. Stir to a paste in the cold liquid. Turn
into hot tomato and cook for a quarter of an hour. Have
ready eight slices of toast. Having dipped the edge of each
slice in boiling, salted water for a second, butter the slices
well and lay close together in serving dish. Pour over the
hot tomato sauce and garnish with parsley. If something a
little different is required, grate into the mixture one-half cup
cheese, a good slice of onion, cooked in butter till soft, with
one-half sweet pepper chopped fine. If the latter be used,
serve tomato without toast.
Creamed Oysters.
RINSE one pint oysters in a very little water and drain.
Turn them into the oyster liquor, which has Deen
strained and put to heat, and leave till edges curl. Re-
move and keep hot. In one-half cup hot water dissolve one-
fourth teaspoon beef extract. Sift together two level table-
spoons Duryea’s Maizena and the same quantity of flour. Add
three level tablespoons butter and brown. Pour in gradually
one cup oyster liquor and beef stock. Cook thoroughly and
add oysters, one-fourth teaspoon salt, white pepper to taste,
one teaspoon Worcestershire sauce and a few drops onion juice.
Cook a moment longer and serve in paste patties.
Salmon, Sauce Piquante.
MELT butter (or oil may be used if preferred) and sea-
son with salt, pepper and lemon juice. Into this
dressing dip salmon cut into one-half inch slices.
Drain and broil. Serve with “sauce piquante” made as fol


lows: Sift together two tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena and
equal quantity flour with one-half teaspoon salt and one-
fourth teaspoon pepper. Brown slightly in three tablespoons
butter. 1 hen add one and one half cups brown stock, or
plain water, with one-half teaspoon kitchen bouquet and cook
well. When thick and smooth add one tablespoon capers, one
tablespoon chopped sweet pickles, one tablespoon olives and
one tablespoon green sweet peppers. Cook for five minutes,
add one tablespoon vinegar and simmer for ten minutes more.
Fondu.
GRATE a half pound Parmesan, Gruyere or any other
good dry cheese, and having stirred over the fire one-
half pint cream with enough Duryea’s Maizena to
thicken it, turn in the grated cheese and a little salt. Stir till
cool and add four well-beaten yolks of eggs and, last of all,
five whites whipped to a stiff froth. Bake in a papered tin in
a hot oven, filling the tin to only half its depth to permit of
the fondu rising, as it should, very high. If not served at
once it will fall. Time to bake, twenty minutes.
Welsh Rarebit.
INTO a cold pan put one-half pound cheese cut up rather
fine; add good sized lump butter and one teacup milk in
which two level teaspoons Duryea’s Maizena have been
dissolved. Set over fire and stir as the mixture begins to
cook. Put in a little salt just before taking from the fire.
Made in this way the veriest amateur will have a delicious,
creamy Welsh rarebit with no distressing Jumps in it.
Welsh Rarebit No. 2,
STIR one-half level teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena into one
tablespoon melted butter while hot. Cook well and
quickly, but do not permit to brown. When done add
one-third cup milk or cream, stirring continually, and lifting
pan from fire once in a while to beat mixture smooth.. Then


turn, in one-half pound mild, soft American cream cheese
chopped into small pieces. When melted season with salt,
mustard, and Worcestershire sauce. Do not let boil for a
second after maizena is in, but stir constantly. Serve quickly.
Pour over salted wafers or toast.
Lobster Patties.
CUT into small pieces tail part two boiled lobsters. Sea-
son well with pepper, salt and a little lemon juice.
Dissolve two teaspoons Duryea’s Maizena in a little cold
milk and turn into one pint boiling milk. After it has thickened
add butter and cook until quite thick. Stir lobster into this
mixture and heat through. Fill patty shells, which have been
heated.
Mock Terrapin.
SIFT together one-fourth teaspoon salt, one tablespoon
flour and two level tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena.
Melt one rounding teaspoon butter and when hot mix
in flour and maizena, adding a pinch of mace and cayenne.
When mixed add gradually one-half cup cream, stirring and
cooking thoroughly. When done add one-half cup cooked
rice, one-half cup finely chopped calf’s liver, one-half cup
cold chopped veal, two hard boiled eggs chopped, and one
teaspoon finely chopped parsley. Stir with a fork till well
mixed, add one-half teaspoon lemon juice and simmer for
five minutes. Add sherry to taste.
Curried Eggs.
BROWN a slice of onion in two tablespoons melted butter
and set aside. Sift together one and one-half level
tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena, one-half tablespoon flour,
one teaspoon curry powder and one-fourth teaspoon salt. Stir
into melted butter and cook for five minutes, adding gradu-
ally one and one-fourth cups milk. M hen all has thickened
add five hard boiled eggs cut lengthwise in quarters. Leave
over fire long enough to heat well and serve at once with hot
boiled rice.


Eggs a I’ltalienne.
BOIL the requisite number of eggs hard (not less than
fifteen minutes), shell and keep hot. Make a dressing
in proportion of one pint milk, a piece butter size of
small egg, and two teaspoons Duryea’s Maizena which has
been dissolved in two tablespoons cold milk. When all has
boiled up and thickened to consistency of thick cream, add
salt and pepper (a little cayenne if liked). Cut eggs in half
lengthwise and pour hot dressing over them. Serve at once.
May be garnished with chopped parsley.
Poached Eggs a La Kingsford.
POACH desired number of eggs in one quart hot water
to which have been added one teaspoon salt and one
tablespoon vinegar. Eggs should be broken one at a
time into a saucer, and slipped carefully into the hot water
and allowed to simmer until white is set. When done, place
upon hot platter and cover with a dressing made as follows:
To one-half cup rich milk, add one tablespoon butter, one-
fourth teaspoon salt, and pepper to taste. Thicken with
Duryea’s Maizena till like thick cream. Serve on toast if
desired.
Frizzled Beef.
PUT a generous piece of butter into a frying pan and let
get hot, but not hot enough to scorch the beef. Shred
the beef and turn into the pan. If very salt should be
scalded some time before and allowed to become pretty dry.
Allow to cook well, stirring the while, but not to become
brown, unless specially desired (as some people prefer it this
way). When done dredge with Duryea’s Maizena, stir well
around and allow to cook a half minute or so. Then add
milk and allow to cook till gravy thickens as desired. May
be served on rounds of buttered toast or in covered dish by
itself.


Sweetbread Fricassee, White.
BLANCH the sweetbreads and cut in slices. To one pint
veal liquor add one heaping teaspoon Duryea’s Mai-
zena and one level tablespoon butter with tablespoon
cream. Season with grated lemon peel, nutmeg and white
pepper. Cook together ten minutes, add sweetbreads and
allow to simmer twenty minutes.
Sweetbread Fricassee, Brown.
CUT sweetbreads in small pieces, flour and fry. When a
good brown pour over them a pint of good beef gravy,
highly seasoned. Simmer until sweetbreads are tender.
Thicken with a little Duryea’s Maizena and butter. Add
mushroom catsup.
Larded Sweetbreads.
BLANCH and lard the sweetbreads with bacon. Put in a
stewpan with one pint veal broth. Add a little brown-
ing mixture and the juice of half lemon. When tender
thicken gravy with one teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena and one
level tablespoon butter rubbed together. Lay bunches of
boiled celery around the platter when sweetbreads are served.
Breaded Tongue, Tomato Sauce.
SEASON thick slices of cold boiled beef tongue with salt
and pepper. Dip in beaten egg, roll in bread crumbs,
fry in hot butter or hot fat and serve with tomato sauce
thickened with Duryea’s Maizena.
Fried Tomatoes.
CUT into halves required number of tomatoes that are not
so ripe as to be soft (or tomatoes canned for the pur-
pose of frying may be used). If they are a little green
so much the better, providing there are one or two very ripe
ones among them. Turn cut side up, season with pepper and
salt and dredge with flour. Put plenty of butter (or some


use half butter and half lard) into frying pan and when hot
lay in the tomatoes, cut side down. Always fry the cut side
first if you would have them keep shape. When well browned
turn with cake turner and fry other side. When done remove
one at a time all except a few ripe halves, upon a hot platter.
Mash the ripe pieces well, put in a little more butter, add milk
and bring to boil. Then add sufficient Duryea’s Maizena to
make gravy thick as desired, some preferring it thicker than
others. Turn over the tomatoes and serve at once before dress-
ing chills at all.
Savoury Custard.
TO three tablespoons cold milk add two level tablespoons
Duryea’s Maizena. To this add gradually one and
three-fourths cups scalding milk. Let cook three
minutes, stirring constantly. When thick remove from fire and
pour into three slightly beaten eggs. Season to taste with
salt, pepper, paprika, cayenne and onion juice. Into each of
six small custard cups drop one-fourth teaspoon butter. Divide
mixture into six cups and stand cups in pan of hot water. Bake
in moderate oven until firm. Serve with hot buttered toast.
Do not remove from cups.
Chipped Beef and Celery.
TO two tablespoons butter, melted, add one cup celery cut
in small pieces. Cook until celery has browned lightly.
Sift together one tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena and one
tablespoon flour, and gradually add one cup milk with pepper
to taste. When done to rich creamy consistency turn in one-
half pound chipped beef. If this is too salty it should be
scalded for a minute and dried at once. Serve with toast.
Chicken Croquettes.
TO one full pint finely chopped cold chicken add one tea-
spoon salt, one-half teaspoon pepper, one cup cream,
three teaspoons Duryea’s Maizena, four eggs, teaspoon
onion juice, tablespoon lemon juice, pint bread crumbs and


three tablespoons butter. Put the cream to boil, cream flour,
maizena and butter together and stir gradually into the hot
cream. Turn in meat and seasoning and boil for two minutes.
Add two eggs well beaten, set off fire at once and allow to cool.
When cold, shape, roll in crumbs, dip in egg and fry in deep
boiling lard.
Macaroni Milannaise.
DROP into salted boiling water one-half package macaroni
broken into inch lengths. Cook until tender and drain.
Season one can tomatoes, or fresh ones in small pro-
portion, with one bay leaf, one blade mace, one slice onion, one
stalk celery, three cloves and a pinch of soda, and cook twenty
minutes. Melt two level tablespoons butter and stir into it
two tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena. Season with salt and
gradually add tomato pulp. Cook till thickened. Mix with
one cup bread crumbs, one rounding tablespoon butter, melted.
When cool add one-half cup grated cheese. In buttered bak-
ing pan lay, layer for layer, the macaroni and the sauce. Put
the crumbs over them and bake in moderate oven till crumbs are
browned. Serve hot.
Plain Fritters.
SIFT into one and three-fourths cups wheat flour, one-
fourth cup Duryea’s Maizena, one-half teaspoon salt, and
one good teaspoon baking powder. 1 urn in one unbeaten
egg and when well stirred in add enough milk to make fritter
batter, and one tablespoon melted butter. Fry in deep hot lard,
but do not cook too quickly, as thorough cooking is required
to bring out 'the delicate texture and flavor of the maizena.
Cereal Fritters.
LEFT over cereals of all kinds may be utilized as a founda-
tion for fritters. To each two cups cereal, add two cups
milk, one tablespoon Duryea’s Maizena, one-half tea-
spoon salt, one unbeaten egg and two teaspoons baking powder.


When all has been thoroughly beaten together, add sufficient
flour to make proper consistency to fry as fritters, in deep hot
fat.
Salmon Souffle.
TO one rounding tablespoon butter, add two rounding table-
spoons Duryea’s Maizena. Rub to a smooth paste, sea-
son with salt and pepper. Gradually add three-fourths
cup milk, cook until smooth. Remove from fire and add three
well-beaten yolks eggs, one-half teaspoon onion juice, one tea-
spoon each lemon juice, chopped parsley, pinch mace. Flake
meat of one sjnall can salmon and add one cup soft bread
crumbs. Mix together and turn in stiffly beaten whites three
eggs. Bake about thirty minutes in pan set in hot water.
Chicken Souffle.
SIFT together two level tablespoons each Duryea’s Maizena
and flour with one-half teaspoon salt and white pepper
to taste. Stir into three level tablespoons butter melted,
and add gradually one cup milk and one cup chicken stock.
When thoroughly cooked add two-thirds cup soft bread crumbs
seasoned with few drops onion juice and one-fourth teaspoon
celery salt. Add two cups finely chopped cooked chicken, and
one tablespoon chopped parsley. Remove from fire and stir in
well-beaten yolks three eggs, then the whites beaten to stiff
froth. Bake about thirty minutes. Serve in same dish.
Apple Souffle.
PASS through a sieve four tart apples which have been
pared, cored and cooked in just enough water to keep
from burning. Sift together four level tablespoons
Duryea’s Maizena and one level tablespoon flour dissolved in
four tablespoons cold water. Melt one tablespoon butter with
one-fourth teaspoon salt and turn in one cup boiling water, and
add flour and maizena. Sweeten to taste one cup hot pulp
and flavor with one teaspoon lemon juice. Remove from fire
and stir thoroughly. Add beaten yolks three eggs and whites


beaten to stiff froth. Pour into shallow baking dish and bake
in moderately hot oven until puffed and brown.
Spanish Omelet.
TO two tablespoons melted butter add one tablespoon finely
chopped onion and cook till a light brown. Sift together
two level tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena and one level
tablespoon flour. Brown in the butter. Add gradually one and
three-fourths cups strained tomato pulp. Cook well and season
with one tablespoon chopped green sweet pepper, one tablespoon
capers, two tablespoons finely chopped canned mushrooms, one-
fourth teaspoon salt and dash of tobasco. together four
eggs and add four tablespoons water with one-half teaspoon
salt and pepper to taste. Cook in buttered omelet pan, spread
some of the sauce over it when brown, fold over and dress with
remainder of sauce.
Cream Omelet with Green Peas.
TO one and one-half level tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena
add one-half cup rich milk and one level tablespoon
butter. Bring to boil and season with salt and pepper.
Beat yolks four eggs very light and add to sauce, with one-half
cup green peas already cooked. Beat whites of eggs to stiff
froth and turn into mixture. When brown and firm, roll and
turn out on a hot platter. Garnish with cup hot peas.
Ham Omelet.
INTO one and one-half tablespoons Duryea’s Maizena, beat
a little at a time, one-half pint milk. When well blended
add three well-beaten eggs and beat again. Turn in one
good half cup of shredded or grated ham and stir well. Fry in
hot fat. Turn with cake turner and lay one half over the other.
Serve very hot.
Omelet Au Gratin.
DISSOLVE one teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena in one-half cup
milk. Beat together four eggs and one-half cup grated
cheese. Mix all well together. Turn into well-buttered,
hot pan. Brown, but do not scorch.


Apple Omelet. •
TO two cups cold apple sauce, add one-third cup sugar,
three well-beaten eggs and one-half tablespoon Duryea’s
Maizena dissolved in two tablespoons milk, f lavor with
cinnamon or nutmeg. Beat well. Bake slowly twenty minutes.
Serve warm.
Creamed Spinach.
AF I ER thoroughly washing and picking over spinach, cut-
ting off roots, throw into boiling water and allow to cook
twenty minutes after it has begun to boil. If boiled too
long, it will become dull in color. When tender, drain, squeeze
and chop fine. Season to taste with butter, pepper and salt,
and let simmer for five minutes. Dress with White Sauce.
Creamed Parsnips.
SCRAPE and boil till tender six medium-sized parsnips.
Slice lengthwise, put back in skillet over fire and dress
with two tablespoons butter, pepper and salt to taste,
and a little finely minced parsley. Stir until butter boils.
Remove parsnips and lay in serving dish. Add to butter, three
tablespoons cream in which has been dissolved a good, pinch
Duryea’s Maizena; allow to boil up well once, and pour over
parsnips.
Creamed Cabbage.
SELECT a tender head. Cut in six, lengthwise, and remove
the heart. Boil or steam the rest until tender. Drain
thoroughly and cut in small pieces, but do not mince.
Dress with White Sauce (see pa"ge 26) and put back in skillet
to keep hot till served.
Cauliflower.
THE medium sized cauliflowers are best, and they should be
white and firm. Cut only the flower out and lay in salt
water an hour before cooking. Put in boiling salted
water and cook until tender. This should take about twenty
minutes. Take out just as soon as done, as overcooking will
spoil. Serve with a dressing made of Duryea’s Maizena, butter


and milk, put over the fire and cooked until the consistency of
thick cream. Broccoli may be served in same way.
Cream of Celery Soup.
TO six small stalks add one pint water and boil thirty to
forty-five minutes. Boil in separate vessel, one-half can
tomatoes, in which has been dropped a pinch soda. Mix
two level teaspoons Duryea’s Maizena with a little cold milk.
Put to cook one pint milk. When boiling add maizena and
cook ten minutes. Mash celery, strain and add, then put in
strained tomatoes, one tablespoon butter and season with pepper
and salt. Serve very hot in bouillon cups with spoonful
whipped cream on top.
White Soup,
TO two good sized white potatoes, mashed while hot, stir
in generous teaspoon butter and salt to taste. Stir into
this when cold, yolks two eggs. To five cups boiling
milk, add one teaspoon Duryea’s Maizena which has been dis-
solved in a little cold milk. When all has boiled for a second,
turn in the potato and boil again for a moment, adding black
pepper to taste. Strain through a sieve and serve piping hot.
Fine for winter luncheon.
Oxtail Soup.
CUT two oxtails into joints, wash and stew with one-half
pint water and one ounce butter. The fire should be
quick enough for the liquor to need stirring all the time.
Cook till juice is all drawn from meat. Fill up with three
quarts boiling water, turn in teaspoon salt, let boil and skim.
Then add three carrots, two turnips, three onions, one head
celery, one bay leaf, four cloves, some black pepper, and two
slices ham. Boil all gently for four hours. I ake out tails
and strain liquor, adding ketchup to taste. Thicken with a
little Duryea’s Maizena moistened in cold water, put back the
tails and simmer for about five minutes.




