

A STORY OF THE BUSH.
By H. A. R. JOY.




A STORY OF THE BUSH.
H. A. 11. JOY.
BEISBANE:
t~ 110 I!
SAPSFORD & CO. (Late Warwick & Sapsfoel), ADELAIDE STREET.
189 5.




PREFACE.
A c retain man was sent into a garden to till it, and to
provide of the fruits thereof for the sons of his master.
The garden was of a great size, and the soil rich and fer-
tile ; but by reason of the fewness of the labourers weeds
and barrenness gloried over its fruits and flowers. Of
those who laboured there some were diligent and ener-
getic; others slovenly and uncouscientious; many wrought
more harm by their clumsiness than good in their zeal;
in few only were ardour and skill combined. Yet the
work accomplished was solid and conspicuous. The man
came to the parcel of ground whither he had been sent to
till it, and his heart burned within him for the work to
which he was called. But he had no spade. And he
said, “ How shall I do that I may dig this plot of ground ?
Without a spade I cannot dig, and unless I dig I cannot
earn the money to buy a spade.” As he so spake with
himself he looked round about upon his fellow-labourers
who were working in the garden, and he walked amongst
them seeking if perchance he might find a spade that was
not in use. But he found not; and though he asked
many no man gave unto him. And he said to himself,
“ What do I that in seeking for a spade I lose the precious
hours that I should spend in digging ? lam resolved
what to do.” So he went out amongst his friends, and
he said unto the first, “ Friend, lend me, I pray thee,,the
price of a spade, and from the returns of my labour I will
repay thee.” But his friend, smiling on him, commended
Koir
17-5 77


him elsewhere. And he said unto a second friend as
unto the first, and like unto the first the second answered
him. From one to another he passed in turn, and all
answered him in like manner ; some laughing, others
railing. Some bade him make a spade for himself;
others, mocking, enjoined him to sit down and whistle if,
peradventure, a spade might come. Sick at heart and
grieved beyond measure, he betook himself to the public
agencies, but with them he fared no better. And he said
to himself, “ All this time do I lose in seeking where-
with to begin ! And the sons of ray master await the
fruits of my labour.” So he returned to his plot and
endeavoured with much cogitation how he might make
a spade without materials and without tools. And the
passers-by, both workmen and idlers, chided him for a
man of Belial, and for bitterness of spirit he held his
peace.
And when he saw many of his fellow-labourers steadily
toiling each on his plot, and knew in himself that he
was stronger and more capable than they, driven by the
impulse of an impotent longing, he tore at the ground
with his nails and broke it here and there with pieces of
stick and stone, till weary of the vain and ridiculous task
he relapsed'exhausted into the abyss of hopeless thought.
But when he felt that his strength was failing him for
lack of use, and his muscles relaxing in enforced idleness,
so that if he should at length gain a spade he could
scarcely attain to use it, he cried aloud in the frenzy of
his despair. But the heavens were as brass above him,
and there was none that answered him hence or thence.
As he cried and poured out his soul into vacancy, throw-
ing out his arms in an agony, with one of his extended
hands he struck a thistle, and with the stab of the thistle-
spines a hope thrilled through his darkened spirit. And


lie said to liimself, “ At the least if I may not dig, nor
plant fruits and flowers in the plot that has heen given
me to till, I can pluck off the heads of the weeds and
thistles that they may not seed themselves ere a spade be
found.” And he spent all the strength of his manhood in
in this task that a child might do; the power that had
grown of long training and the skill that had come of
diligent endeavour waned and decayed in disuse.
Thus to the last he worked, and at the last he died.


“A striving and a striving and an ending in nothing.'’
“ A deep below the deep,
And a height beyond the height!
Our hearing is not hearing,
And our seeing is not sight,”


£ HMuvibus XAmim.
W&rLOST no time in unsaddling my horse and
turning him into the paddock. Then I went
Affry PCM Straight to the barracks, not delaying to dis-
jFW pose of boots or leggings, for I knew that
through long hours of loneliness and anxiety
a sick man had been waiting for my return.
V The “ Jiarracks” is the edifice where the Jackeroos
$ sleep, and varies in construction and style with the
circumstances of the station to which it belongs. In this
case it was a rough hut-like building of split slabs, divided
into several compartments each occupied by one or two
men.
Pushing open the door of one of these rooms as
noiselessly as its creaking hinges would allow lest the
invalid should be asleep, I was greeted with a bright
glance of recognition, and walking in sat down at the
foot of the bed.
“ Well, Professor,” I asked, “ all square ? ”
“ All li,” he asserted ; a phrase which we had borrowed
from the Ohinkies.
Asking no question as to the success of my expedition,
he took my hot hand into his own thin white one, and the
contact emphasised the difference between his and the
sun-burnt leather-skinned fist that he held.
“ You’ve been very quick,” he said, “ I’m afraid yon
must have hurried too much. I had made up my mind
not to expect you for another hour. You’re a regular
brick and I’m very grateful to you.”


“ Not a dashed little bit,” I replied. “ I didn’t want to
keep yon waiting longer than I conld help. I’d have
been hack sooner only the nag was knocking up with the
heat.”
“Yes; I knew it must he awfully hot outside, for it
was fairly stifling in this room in spite of the refrigerating
paint.”
“ It’s a blanky nuisance living thirty-five miles from a
doctor,” I said. “By the way, I haven’t told you yet
that the fellow was out, hut was expected back in a few
hours and will come straight on here.”
“ Thank you,” he replied, with a pressure of the hand
that was fuller of speech than words, and added after a
pause, “ you’re awfully good to a useless old swag like me.”
Neither of us spoke for some seconds. I watched the
sunlight playing on the floor through the joints of the
log-walls ; then noticing the untidiness of the room I set
to work to fix things up a hit. He followed me with his
eyes, and thanked me for every little attempt at re-
arrangement.
“Been lonely?”
“No, not more so than usual; but I’m glad, very glad,
you’ve come back. No one knows but those who have
been similarly situated what it is to lie hour after hour,
day after day, longing for a familiar face to look at and a
familiar hand to clasp.”
“ And you don’t call that being lonely ?”
“No ; I call it being foolish and sentimental; anyhow
you’ve come back, and you’re ”
“ Better than nothing!” I chipped in, completing the
broken sentence; but I saw that I had guessed correctly
and pained him, and called myself all sorts of idiots.
“ You’re a good fellow and a true friend,” he said.
“ Sheep are looking well,” I remarked after a pause; it
was the only idea that would occur to me. As he didn’t
reply, I added, as a further item of interest, that some of
them had got worms very badly.
“ That's cheering,” he said with a laugh which set him
coughing, and interrupted the conversation.


“ Been reading ?” I asked, picking a book off the bed.
It was a volume by a man named Browning, open at a
poem called “ Rabbi Ben ” soraeone-or-otber.
“ Well, I tried to read a little, but I couldn’t fix ray
attention,” he replied. “ Would you mind putting the
book on the shelf for me ; I shan’t want it again till to-
morrow.”
Poetry is not in my line, and I handled the book as a
bachelor does a baby, glad to get it stowed away amongst
the other mysterious looking volumes.
I ran my eye along the shelf and thought of the time,
about a year ago, when Mack and I first found them in
the new chum’s room.
“ By Jabers, Boss, just look at these books !” cried
Mack. “By the Hokey ! the names alone are warranted
to peg out an emu at a thousand yards. ‘ Conic Sections,’
eh ? by Dr. Salmon. That’s a fishy book ; my word it is
so; a darned fishy book. If that’s the sort of stuff he
reads he’ll never be any good at foot-rotting or mustering.
‘ Conic Sections.’ Hot too bad ! I recommend by prefer-
ence Comic Sections —‘Ally Sloper,’ for instance; can’t
beat it in the island; we shall have to educate him up to
it. What’s the next sort of section-Johnnie? ‘Prolego-
mena to Ethics !’ Holy Jerusalem ! that’s not too putrid;
not at all too utterly stinking; we might measure pad-
docks with these names when they’re hard up for a job.
Author, T. H. Green, if you please ; a jolly sight too
green for a blooming sheep run. Carry me out!” and
affecting to be overcome, Mack had trotted out of the
room.
I reflected now on the fulfilment of Mack’s prophecy ;
not a very venturesome one. Certainly poor Hutton had
not been a brilliant success in the sheep-yards; though
everybody admitted that he worked with attention and
diligence, and took all rebuffs in good part. A scene in
one of the drafting yards came suddenly back to me. Wo
were putting sheep through the race —several thousands
of them ; a scorching hot day, and the still air thick with
dust; we were all tired, and Hutton I could see was


utterly fagged out. In a moment of abstraction he marked
a sheep with a wrong coloured chalk, and it passed conse-
quently to the wrong mob. “ Hutton, you confounded
idiot, ” roared the manager; hut I shouted to another
man for the tar barrel and drowned the rest of his speech
except the closing words. “ I bet my head those damna-
tion cat’s eyes of yours couldn’t tell a merino from a
cross-bred. What do you take me for P” “ Well,” Hutton
had replied quietly, though his voice was trembling with
suppressed indignation. “ I took you for a gentleman,
more or less ; but I promise you I won’t do it again.”
A violent fit of coughing recalled me to the present, and
I went to the head of the bed and fixed the pillows a little
more comfortably. “ How did you put in the day P”
“ Wriggling about mostly : this bed is excellent training
for a coffin; it’s so narrow, one can only lie in one spot,
and that gets so hot and hard, it’s like lying on hot bricks.
But it’s all right; you mustn’t think I’ve been uncom-
fortable; it’s much better than the one Procrustes kept
for his guests.”
“ Never met the gentleman,” I said, and I still wonder
who he was and why he kept such shoddy furniture, for
it must have been blamed bad if it was worse than that
supplied to our push.
“ I was haunted all day by the ghosts of unactualised
potentialities, and ”
“ What sort of spooks are they ?”
“ I mean thoughts of what might have been, and my
brain has been whirring like aclock with the pendulum off.”
“ Thinking of the past ?” I asked.
“Well,” he said, “not so much thinking as trying not
to think; holding my head together while the wheels of
memory buzzed round inside. I was as nearly going mad
to-day as I have ever been, and I have more than once
felt near it.”
“ Do you remember,” I asked, “that you once promised
that you would some day tell me something about your-
self ? I don’t want to bother you, but perhaps —talking
sometimes relieves a fellow a bit.”


“ Yes, perhaps it will be best,” he replied. “ Will you
help nie to sit up, and jam a pillow down my back ?
Thanks ! how old are yon ?”
“Twenty-four; why?” I replied, surprised at the
sudden and apparently irrelevant question.
“ I thought so —only a year younger than I. How long
have you been overseer ?”
“ About two years.”
“So have I,” he said; “an oversea-er —transported.
So you see we have something in common. Light your
pipe before we start this yarn.”
“ Won’t the smoke make you cough ?” I asked.
“ Oh, no,” he replied. “ A bit of extra coughing is
nothing. I’ve nearly had the last of it. Light up; I
couldn’t talk at all if I were thinking all the time that
you were missing your pipe. Are you sure you won’t be
bored with autobiography P”
“ Positive !” was all I could find to say.
“ Well,” he said, “ to tell you the truth, I have lived
pent up so long that I feel almost incapable of talking of
my own little affairs. Everything is buried up under
coils of enforced reserve. Don t suppose that I mind for
my own sake. There w 7 as a time when I would not have
done it, for I should have shrunk from the thought of
your pity; but I am beyond that now —no pity can do
good or harm. WLat makes me hesitate is the thought of
putting it into your power to think hardly of those whose
honour is sacred to me. But it is every sailor s duty to
indicate uncharted rocks ; it may save future shipwrecks.
My story will be safe with you, and your unfailing kind-
ness has earned you the rights of friendship ; and a little
confidence is all I have to give you.”
I said nothing, but handed him a glass of water which
he was trying to reach from a chair by the bed.
“ Thank you ! Well, I scarcely know where to begin.
Perhaps, like the Catechism. I had better start with my
name. You know me as Hutton, but that is only an
alias. I took it when I came here because it rhymed with
mutton, and I thought it would harmonise with circum-


stances. My real name is Horace Reginald Gurney.”
He paused for a moment and continued, “ It seems awfully
funny to hear one’s own name pronounced, even by
oneself. I haven’t heard it for so long; it almost made
me expect to see my old self walk into the room when I
said it.”
There was a knock at the door; the coincidence made
us both smile. I opened it, and found the half-caste boy
in his usual state of brown rags and red flannel.
“ Plenty fellow swagman, Boss; wantum tucker.
Baal me find Mr. Dickson ! All dam angry; baal fillum
"bingie to-day !”
I was not absent many minutes.
“ Horace Reginald Gurney !” the sick man continued,
hardly seeming to have noticed the interruption. My
father is a Q.C. with a small practice, and, formerly, a
large family. He lives upon a small property in
Northamptonshire. An excellent man with considerable
abilities, but not untouched with the bitterness that too
often grows of disappointment. He had gone to the Bar
full of promise and prospects, fresh from a distinguished
university career. His friends prophesied that he would
carry everything before him; but he seemed to expect him-
self that instead of having to push his own way to the
front everybody would be eager and anxious to carry
him there. It took him half his life-time to realise his
mistake, and the rest to lament it and chafe at the
stupidity of mankind.
His mind was par excellence pragmatical, and unable
to shape ideas to the conditions of the moment.
Knowing that he was by no means well off, and that he
had considerable liabilities, he formed an absurdly
exaggerated notion of his poverty, and used to talk us to
death with proverbs, and threats of the workhouse and
bailiffs. We boys and girls never knew how much truth
there was in such representations, and I can recall a
nursery consultation after one of the periodic tea-table
harangues at which we discussed the realisable value of
the rocking-horse, in view of the impending extinction of


jam. But there were maxny points we found hard to digest
on reflection, as, for insttance, when we found that just
after declaring the utteir impossibility of giving Bob a
pair of skates, he gaves £5 for a hall-lamp that had
struck his fancy. Bxcepfffor such an occasional “ treat to
resolution,” he was forewer trying to do things “ on the
cheap,” and so wasting money all round. If he wanted
to buy a carriage and tlhe coach builder showed him a
good one for forty poumds, and a ramshackle alternative
for twenty-five, he would certainly buy the latter, with
the remark that we must “ cut our coat according to our
cloth,” and then spend another twenty-five pounds in
getting it done up and made usable.
Well, he carried this principle through everything:
we youngsters were never allowed a penny of pocket
money; we were told that it couldn’t be afforded; for
threepence a week was thirteen shillings a year, and that
in fifty years would be thirty-two pounds ten shillings,
which might be exactly the sum needed to get rid of a
bailiff. When we grew up, we were encouraged to hope,
there was a chance wo might know the value of money.
I don’t think we were virtuously anxious to learn it.
All the money we got in the year was the few shillings
we received from uncles and aunts in Christmas boxes and
birthday presents. It wasn’t money we wanted, but the
chance it would have given us of supplying ourselves with
the usual tools for exercise and amusement: for though
living in the country we were allowed neither a pony, a
boat, a gun, nor any of those things usually considered
indispensable for boys. The girls were better off, because
the mater remembered that she had once been one; but
we didn’t think the pater had ever been a boy. On one
occasion, going with some friends to a garden party, I was
asked to play tennis; and I can remember to this day my
shame, when the hostess, in response to my request for the
loan of a racquet, remarked, “ I’ll see if 1 can find you one,
but people generally bring their own.” I was then sixteen.
My brother, two years before, by saving up his occasional
shillings and pennies, managed to buy a cricket bat, which


was the pride of us youngsters; but the text of many
lectures on extravagance. Ten and six for a cricket bat!
Why it might have provided a nigger with pyjamas !
On my seventeenth birthday, by a rare stroke of luck,
I received a ten-pound note from my grandmother; but I
soon wished it had never come.
My father at first eloquently said nothing; and the
mater opined that it was only because my grandmother
was in her dotage that she could do anything so absurd.
It must have been really intended for my father, who was
up to his neck in the expenses which we caused him ; and
that it was too ridiculous to send £lO to a boy of my age
to squander.
I could read a latent regret that the action had not been
illegalised by the’ “ Table of Kindred and Affinity.”
Swallowing down a visionary bicycle, I handed the note
to ray father and begged him to take and spend it as he
might think well.
“ Oh, no, my dear boy,” he said ; “ I wouldn’t think of
such a thing. Keep it by all means since it is yours;
only take my ad vice while you can getit, and spend the money
judiciously ; best of all put it in the savings bank against
a rainy day —it may save you from the workhouse yet.”
And then they fell to discussing that wretched bank-
note all through lunch time, advocating all sorts of alter-
native investments. At last, when we were by ourselves,
my mother said :
“ Don’t you think, dear, it would be very nice to spend
your money in buying an oil stove for the kitchen. I
have long been wishing for one to save the coal. It
would benefit all the family, and be ever so much better
than selfishly squandering it on some silly fancy.”
Yes, I admitted that it would be “ very nice,” for I felt
that anything would be very nice indeed that would put
an end to the fuss, though I knew well enough that the
stove was only one of the mater’s latest fads and would bo
relegated to lumber at the end of a week.
Bob and I, after a most patchy education under half-a-
dozen different schoolmasters and tutors, were now being


taught by our father sat home, which meant that we
worked all day by oursellves and with him for an hour at
night; hut being really to make up for conscious
deficiencies we worked more steadily than might have
been expected, and, perhiaps, by following our own tastes,
so far as a curious assortment of antiquated books would
allow, wo made better progress in general knowledge,
though doubtless less iin special, than we might have
picked up at a public school. Rut we often felt sore for
being put down as fools for deficiencies in scholarship
which were due to inadequate teaching, and we could not
understand why the correctness of a Latin quantity should
be valued above a whole volume of Natural Science.
By this time our family had been reduced by the deaths
during the last eight years of four of the children, and
life was more unbearably monotonous than ever; for a,
large family is sufficient unto itself, whether or no there ik
much social intercourse with outsiders. Of this we had
practically none. It was said to be too expensive to pro-
vide visitors with lunch or afternoon tea, and a tennis
lawn was out of the question, so all attempts at sociability
on the part of people who were inclined to be friendly
were discouraged.
Bob and I, after spending a week designing all sorts of
schemes to make a flat-bottomed boat, came to the con-
clusion, that we really couldn’t do it with a packet of
nails and a tar-brush, in the absence of wood, tools, and
tar ; so we obtained an estimate from the village carpenter
and represented to the pater, that a boat sufficient to
satisfy our needs could be made for 30s. ; might we have
it P His answer was not disappointing, for we had
expected nothing else ; but we failed to see that a Bible
class for village boys in the evenings would be an equally
adequate as well as more useful form of exercise and
recreation.
So we fell back on hunting grass-snakes and water hens
with walking sticks, and set to work to build a summer
house, but got into a great row for annexing a clothes-
prop for the latter piece of work; and into a worse one


for breaking the roof tiles in scrambling after jackdaws in
the chimneys.
Finally, there seemed no possible outlet for energy, but
in squabbling; and life, if before dull, became utterly
miserable with petty quarrels about nothing. For petty
trifles get to look extraordinarily large if you have nothing
to do but brood on them. Or, perhaps, it is more correct
to say, that they entirely cease to be petty, and become
actually large ; for all external facts find their proportion
in subjective conditions.
I didn’t see the point, but I knocked the ashes out of
my pipe and laid it on the inverted packing case, which
served as a dressing table. “ And the old man bluing his
beans all the time, like a good ’un P” I said.
“ Nohe replied with emphasis, “you mustn’t
mistake matters like that. My father sacrificed his own
interests in many ways in the holocaust which he surren-
dered to his inexorable Bogie. There was nothing
consciously selfish in his regime —it was his idea of
domestic economy. He subscribed liberally to charities
and passed with outsiders as a generous man. I remember
hearing Bob say one day when he had been refused fifteen
shillings to buy a pair of cricket shoes, that he hoped the
Governesses’ Benevolent Institution would get much
blessing from the guinea which was posted the same day,’’
But you will be wondering why I tell you all these
details; they can hardly seem to be connected with my
presence here, which is the part you wished me to explain.
It is certainly not from any weak-minded desire to
magnify petty grievances, or to excite your compassion
with an injured-innocent air of amateur martyrdom. Had
I been built that way I wouldn’t have kept silence for ten
years.
If we are to accomplish any work in the world that is
worth doing, it is a prime necessity that our minds should
be kept healthy. This can only be ensured by keeping
them fully occupied with a flow of healthy thought, A
healthy thought if it become monotonous ceases to be
healthy and becomes corrupting. For example, the effect


of sunshine on a turnip field may he a healthy thought en
passant, but if you brood on nothing else for three weeks,
though you will have discovered all sorts of parables and
poetic ideas in the turnips and their suggestions, your
thoughts on the subject will have become maudlin and
ridiculous.
Of course, a turnip well pondered upon will suggest all
the thoughts and problems in the universe ; but if it starts
to do that to a boy of fifteen the turnip should be boiled,
and the boy sent for a change of air.
The brain as a physical organ, part of the body, profits
by bodily exercises. It is the machine with which the
spirit works ; and how can the spirit do good and effective
work if the machine is not kept in proper working order ?
And what is the use of a capacity to make bricks if clay
and straw are not provided ?
An education should be the drawing-out of latent
faculties. In our case it was the repression, the checking
by under-feeding and suffocation. But a mushroom will
come up in spite of i curbstone; and in the long run
Nature will overcome irtifice. It is in the hope that you
may be able to save otlera from the mental squint which
hampered me so sorely till time and experience restored
the balance, that I giveyou these apparently trivial details.
People are so apt to overlook the fact that every material
thing has a spiritual significance. The value of recreation
does not end with the augh or the perspiration ; it has an
exhilarating effect on the mind which strengthens it for
better work. We wen never allowed to go to a circus or
a theatre or a dance. Just suppose (we were told) that
the Second Advent hok place at the moment we were
watching a clown jumi through a hoop; whatever would
our Lord think of us, lis professing servants ? My sister
Ethel replied that shewas sure He would be very glad to
see us enjoying oursekes for once ; but my mother said
she had a headache, aid we had better go and play quietly
up-stairs.
A cricket match in -lie abstract, considered philosophi-
cally, is seen to be coitemptible, irrational, and absurd ;


but if you play in it it will do you more good than
the afternoon’s meditation which you sacrificed to do
so.
Of course the effect of this method of education was
not the same with each of us, but it was bad with
all, though it differed with our several dispositions. Bob
was a shrewd, kind-hearted, thoughtful and affectionate
fellow, but inclined to be reserved and moody; and find-
ing that whenever he did pop his head out of his shell it
was stamped on, he very soon learned t,o keep his shell
shut; and once finally closed no oyster-knife on earth
could open it. I was of a high-strung sensitive tempera-
ment, sent to the Seventh Heaven by a kind word, and for
a week to Hades by an unjust one. And I was relegated
so often to the latter place that I finally didn’t find it
worth while to come out between-whiles. I became
hyper-sentimental and sat on stone-heaps writing verses
about “ battered hearts ” and “bleeding spirits.” Exer-
cise with the hatchet might have been serviceable, but
when we applied to the pater for leave to cut down super-
fluous trees we learnt that it was only preposterous con-
ceit that would have conceived such an idea, since such
a work demanded experience and skill. But w r e might
look on while someone else did it, and it would be well to
profit as much as possible from observation, for we might
some day have to earn our bread with an axe.
“ Well,” I said, “ what may we do ?”
“Do?” he replied; “why there’s the whole district
open to you ! Go for a walk —lovely meadows and a
beautiful river; what more do you want ?”
“ Poob !” said Bob ; “ we’ve ”
“ Don’t say ‘ pooh !’ to me, Bob.”
“ I beg your pardon, pater ; but I mean we’ve walked
all the walks a thousand times.”
“ Well, then there’s no danger of losing your way ; go
and walk them for the thousand and first time. You
can’t want anything better—green trees, and birds sing-
ing; why, I find that delightful, and if it satisfies me
it ”


“ Oli,” I said, “ the birds are sick of the sight of us in
most of the fields, and if you don’t give us something else to
do they’ll stop singing altogether; and that’ll be beastly
rough luck on you.”
“ Don’t use vulgar slang, Horace; there’s no such
thing as luck, and if there were it couldn’t be ‘ rough ’
or ‘ beastly.’ Pray, what is it you want ?”
“ I don’t care what it is so long as it’s something. It’s
no use saying a gun, because you’ve let the shooting.”
“ The fact of the matter is you are discontented—ye are
idle, ye are idle, therefore ye cry unto us; that’s what
Pharaoh said of the Israelites, and it is equally true of
you.”
“ But Pharaoh was telling lies,” said I, “and he found
it out when it was too late. Perhaps if you’d ever been a
boy ”
“Bosh, Horace!” the pater replied, “you’re losing your
temper. Is that the proper way for a Christian boy to
speak to his father? and you a Sunday-school teacher
and only confirmed six months ago !”
“ Confirmation,” I said, “ is supposed to be a sign that
one has come to yea’s of discretion -sufficient, perhaps,
to handle an axe witlout lopping off somebody’s leg.”
“You’re much to> young to know anything about
boys,” he said. “ Tow can you understand parental
duties and liabilities why, it’s all I can do now to keep
ray head above water and you who are the causes of most
of this expense havt the face to talk about guns and
hatchets. We shall rad in the work-house yet. Go for
your walk and leave ne in peace, for I’m busy.’
Bob always left the talking to me, seldom venturing a
second sentence if tin first didn’t have the desired effect:
and since he always preferred to walk by himself I had
perforce to do the sane, though I didn’t prefer it.
We started a collection of birds’ eggs, but were told it
was a sadly cruel thiig to do. The poor little birds were
created to make us happy and not to be robbed; just
think if we were brds how would we feel under the
circumstances! “If the birds were created to make us


happy,” I said, “ that’s just the very reason why they
should let us take their eggs.”
“ Then you will be selfishly depriving other people of the
pleasure of hearing them sing.”
“ Oh no,” I replied, “ we always leave one or two eggs
in the nest to hatch the ‘ music of the moon.’ ”
“Its impertinent to contradict me,” said the mater, and
we withdrew.
Nevertheless Boh was for giving it up; hut I preached
him round with a sermon on “hath God care for oxen.”
The deadly dullness of existence naturally made one
dispirited, and took the colour from one’s face; for as we
advanced in our teens and had greater needs crying for
satisfaction we felt the monotony more and more. One
day a caller happened to remark that I looked pale, and
from that day forward for at least a year it became the
fashion to worry me about my health; I was threatened
with patent medicines and doctors, and never greeted with
“ good night ” or “ good morning ” without such a remark
as “ how flushed you look; do you feel feverish F ” or
“ how pale you are ; did you sleep last night ? ” or “ poor
fellow I wish you were a bit fatter.”
I started to learn Hebrew to occupy ray time and do
something interesting, but I heard the pater telling the
mater that he did not expect me to live through the year,
and the fact that I had taken to Hebrew was a symbol of
approaching death, for Hebrew was the language of
Heaven. I don’t know where he found that out, but I
immediately gave up learning the language, not exactly
from superstition, but from a creepy feeling which spoilt
all my pleasure in it. I’m afraid I was not as anxious to
make a short cut to Heaven as my father could have
wished; but it was represented as such a monotonous
place that I thought it could scarcely be any improvement
on present conditions; and once there you could never
get out —that was one of the principal blessings ; whereas
I always hoped I should get out of my present surroundings
some day or other. I was inclined to prefer curses ; there
was some excitement in them.


After being thus talked at, and talked to, and talked
about for a long time, I began to fancy that I really was
rather ill; though indeed I was perfectly well, and w r ould
have been in rollicking good spirits but for the pestilential
depression of the atmosphere which sapped all the vivacity
out of one, and left nothing but vague hopes to live upon.
Even a cork may become water-logged. I got a pimple on
my chin. “ Come at last!” I said, “ only another year to
live !” for I determined it must be a cancer. I took to
reading patent medicine advertisements, and soon found
that I had an extraordinary complication of diseases. But
I recovered from them all in a perfectly miraculous way
during a week spent in an uncle’s family at Brighton.
“ The water, please, Boss !”
I was feeling as dazed as a pea-struck Border-Leicester,
and handed the water without speaking. “Tired?” I
asked, after returning tie glass to the chair.
“No; I haven’t felt so well for a long time; it does
one good to let off a litte steam, though it’s hard lines on
you, perhaps, as the safety valve. But I know I shall be
fearfully tired when I oice stop, so we must peg away
before the collapse that is, if you haven’t had
enough ?”
“No I said, “ I’d nther hear it all, if you wish to tell
it to me.”
“ Where had I got to F Oh ! I remember. Well,
at eighteen —by the waj there’s a photo, of Bob you might
like to see, in a purse h one of the pockets of my best
trousers ; I should like o h.ave another look at it- -on the
peg behind the door.”
“ No ?” I said, “ there's only one old pair of bags here;
they can’t be the ones ym mean, for they’ve got two big
holes in the seat.”
“ That’s the very retson why they are my best; don’t
you understand?”
“ Not much,” I said.
“ Don’t you see, on Sundays I always wore a coat with
tails which covered u> the holes; so I reserved the
trousers for the occasioxs when I wore that coat; and since


I sold it six months ago to that Afghan hawker fellow, I
turned the bags out to grass on the back of the door, and
turned the pockets into a museum of souvenirs.”
I found the photo. ; he looked'at it silently for some
seconds, and handed it to me suddenly with tears in his
eyes. “ You must forgive me for making a fool of myself,”
he said; “ I’m awfully fond of Bob, and can’t bear to
think I shall never see him again. "We never got on as
boys, but circumstances were more to blame than we were.
We were always fond of each other, and only quarrelled,
generally, for something to do ; and being so different in
dispositions we were not able to be companionable to any
real extent.”
Putting the photograph under his pillow he continued
after a pause, his voice still trembling—“ Well, when
I was eighteen I was, to my great delight, sent to Cam-
bridge, solemnly adjured that it was only by the greatest
self-sacrifice on my father’s part, that he could give me such
an advantage. All this set forth at great length, though
I knew it was nonsense, for though he never confided to
me any of his business affairs I had picked up enough to
know that the expenses of our education were not depen-
dent upon his income.
It surely rested with his discretion to send me to college
or not according as his means allowed ; but why should
he spoil a generous plan by making it appear that I was
wronging him by falling in with it ?
I often felt that I ought to apologise for being born ;
there were times when I could have truly said that I was
sorry for it. Indeed, it seems a cruel kindness to bring
children into the world if the parents are not prepared to
give them the advantages pertaining to hereditary position
and capacities. Yet from the way my mother used to
talk, one could only conclude that in her opinion parental
duty ended with the bestowal of life and vaccination, and
that everything else was a concession of generosity and
a special favour, involving the sacrifice of personal
interests on the part of the parents. Of course we knew
there was more bark than bite, but to be incessantly


barked at does not tend to cheerfulness though it does not
cause hydrophobia. “ Hard words break no bones."
Ho ; if that was all they did life would be happier.
I did not argue with the pater on the theory he had
been expounding, for experience had taught that such a
course was worse than futile. It was always stigmatised
in the first instance as rebellion, and in the last as the
gabble of one who was too young to have any thoughts on
any subject, emphatically on the one in question.
My father never used strong language. I never once
heard him utter a swear-word, and seldom saw him out of
temper; but he had a graceful way of conveying very
ungracious sentiments.
“ Like a cow scratching her eye-lid with her hind foot P”
I suggested.
“Yes; exactly,” he said, laughing, “you’re a bit of a
poet in you’re way.” To return to our muttons—oh, bless
me, no, let’s forget sheep for once; 1 believe your old
cow suggested it. My allowance of ten pounds a term
considerably exercised one’s ingenuity to make both ends
meet without so limiting the circle of one’s relationships as
to negate the potential advantages of university life.
Tradesmen’s bills swallowed most of the money that I
needed for books ; and lending libraries, though an excel-
lent supplement, are utterly unsatisfactory as a substitute
for a private book-case. In order to increase my slender
resources I took to tutorising in spare hours ; thus depriv-
ing myself of much needed exercise and fresh air ; for I
was reading for honours and threw myself as much as
possible into the social and intellectual life of the place.
Of course my health suffered, but I was not in any way
definitely ill, and was so absorbed in work and hope that
I snubbed my looking-glass when it told me I was look-
ing so. My mother had prophesied before I went up to
college, by way of a parting benediction, that I should
probably break down in health during my first term ; but,
though I worked longer hours and much harder than ever
before, the relief of being away from home was such that
the improvement in my health was noticeable to everybody.


Ifc was the gradual accumulation of irons in the
fire that proved too much for one. I generally spent
most of the vacations at home. One loug vacation I had
determined, to go to Greece, and was negotiating for a
tutorship or travelling companionship, the only means for
providing the funds for doing so. But the mater said, it
w r as very unkind, to go abroad after she and. Ethel had
been waiting for me all term to return and relieve the
dullness of life. However, she added with a sigh, she
supposed it was only natural that when boys grew up
they should get tired of their mothers ; Ethel was the
only one who was faithful to her, and no one else would
miss her or care two straws if she died. However, per-
haps it was best I should go to Greece if I was set on
it, and so on ; and at the end my stony heart had melted
—perhaps because it was so full of Greece —and I spent
the vacation at home, feeling utterly crushed with the
barrenness of the weary months. Towards the end of it,
while I was joyfully anticipating the beginning of terra,
my mother, finding me reading in the drawing-room,
remarked :
“ I do wish, Horace, you would try and do something
to earn your salt. It makes me utterly sick to see you
idling at home like this week after week. If you can’t
get a tutorship you might at least dig in the garden and
save the expense of a man.”
The blood rushed to my head, and for a few seconds I
could hardly see. When I regained sufficient calmness to
speak I said, kissing her over the back of her chair :
“ Last Spring, mater, and the Spring before I spent
much time and pains and small pleasure —for I hate gar-
dening —in planting the whole of the front garden with
flowers, and on each occasion one of your precious econo-
mical job gardeners pulled them all up in mistake for
weeds. I thought it was no good interfering with econo-
mical principles again. But if you’ll tell me what you
would like done I will do my best.”
“ Oh, no,” she said, “ we don’t expect young swells from
Cambridge to trot about doing jobs for their mothers.”


“You expect‘young swells from Cambridge ’ to have
extraordinarily good tempers,” I said, pacing the room.
“ Oh, no; we don’t expect anything of them hut con-
ceit. Well, if you’ve got nothing else to do, you might
go down to the carpenter and bring up a chair which he
has had to mend and kept an unconscionably long time.”
I thankfully seized the excuse to hurry from the room.
I used to envy Bob his power of dismissing such a
matter with a grunt (though I have seen him twitch all
over with pain at the time) and sleeping all night like
a top ; for it would keep me pacing my room till the small
hours of the morning or lying awake all night arguing
with fate.
My father took no practical interest in my University
life beyond prophesying that I should be ploughed in the
next examination whichever it happened to be. As I
knew he expected nothing from me I lost a very precious
incentive to diligence; though a natural hunger for
knowledge kept me hard at work. On the contrary he
would have been disappointed if Bob had ended anywhere
short of the woolsack; and for no reason that I could
divine unless that Bob’s nose was the same shape as his
own.
One pat on the back from a father does more to encourage
one than any amount from other hands, till one has learnt
not to expect them ; and it is a hard lesson to learn.
After graduating I obtained consent to remain up another
year and read for a fellowship : and my ambition was
rewarded.
Now I began to look forward to a few years’ diligent and
happy work in preparation for a wider sphere. But I was
quite unwell; competition had been severe, and the strain
had been great coming as it did upon an accumulation of
difficulties that need not be detailed.
So I asked the pater if he could afford to give me a
holiday. “Oh yes,” he said, “ I’ll gladly give you £5 and
you can go to the sea.”
I declined with thanks, knowing that nothing short of
two months change of scene and air could set me up.


Then I tried to get any remunerative post that would
enable me to spend a few weeks abroad ; but one that I
was negotiating about went to someone else at the last
minute ; and as term was just about to begin, I gave up
the idea of a holiday and returned to Cambridge in low
health and spirits.
The collapse came in a few weeks. After a severe and
all but fatal illness the doctors ordered me to the coast.
My mother came with me, and talked about expenses all
the time till I was ready to drown myself : it never seemed
to dawn upon her that her presence was doubling
them.
My head to-day is as clear as a magic lantern —fever I
suppose —and throws the pictures of memory with extra-
ordinary vividness before me. I seem to be actually living
the scenes over again,—thoughts, feelings, sayings long
past are all present and living.
Amongst many conversations during that time I will
give you the outline of one, because it is fairly typical.
“Oh dear ! ” I said in a moment of weariness after
reading all day; “ I wish there were enough of us for a
rubber of whist.”
“You don’t mean to say,” exclaimed the mater, “that
you’ve been learning to play cards ? you’ll be learning
billiards next, and then horse-racing, and then—”
“ I have played billiards many a time.”
“ My dear boy, don’t you know that those are the devil’s
two favourite games ? ”
“ That shows remarkably good taste on his part,” I
said: “ What game would you recommend by preference?”
“ Well, Halma’s a very good game,” she said.
“ That would be anticipating a recreation which I
reserve for purgatory,” I replied; “besides its not
sociable enough.”
“ Why, then, Table-croquet’s just the thing.”
“ Happy thought !” I said, “ or why not ‘ Up Jenkins ?’
we might play it in the college hall after dinner.”
“Yes; and those are innocent and delightful games;
quite free ‘from the temptations of Satan.’ ”


“I’m not so sure of that,” I replied; “you would
naturally suppose that they were a bit too slow for him;
but as a matter of fact, I always feel far more inclined
to lose my temper and do other naughty things after an
hour at £ go-bang’ than after two hours at billiards or whist.’’
“ Fancy yoii doing all these things and never telling
me ; and you who never had a secret from me ! ”
“ The reason for reserve is fairly obvious,” I said, “ and
if you are going to cry now I shall be sorry that I ever
mentioned it at all.”
“You don’t know what it is to see your eldest son, the
pride of your heart going to —to the dogs—and only
mocking at all attempts to save him. I wish from the
bottom of my heart you had never gone to Cambridge;—
and your father says the same, for he says you have been
led into agnosticism.”
“He charged me with being a Wesleyan in the begin-
ning of his last letter,” I replied, “ and towards the end said
I had been led astray by ‘ dangerous guides ’ of the Pusey
Persuasion. I expect to-morrow I shall hear that lam a
Mormon. But cheer up, old mum, and before old Nick
sends round the wheel-barrow let’s have a game of
draughts.”
After we had made a few moves the mater asked “What’s
the book you were reading just now ? ”
“ Hypatia,” I said.
“ I’m sure you’re too young to read Kingsley; and
‘ Hypatia ’ above all; why that’s the dreadful book, isn’t
it, which casts doubt upon the eternity of Hell ? ”
“Its rather uncharitable of you,” I replied, “to find
fault with it on that account, immediately after deciding
that lam to reside there. But you may make your mind
quite easy, for it hasn’t suggested a single doubt that I
haven’t had for the last ten years; so we may as well go
on with the game.”
After a few minutes further play, “ Where did you get
the book P”
“ At the railway station,” and anticipating the reason of
the question, I added “ it’s one of the sixpenny edition.”


“ But you really shouldn’t waste money in that way,
dear boy ! Sixpences mount up. Suppose we all spent
sixpences on buying books every time the fancy took us ;
and if one does, why shouldn’t all ?”
“Certainly,” I saidwhy shouldn’t they? That’s
just what I can’t make out. But I didn’t buy it for
fancy; I bought it in order to get some occupation to
keep my mind off the eternal mill-round of worry, which
makes me feel as if I can never get into good enough
spirits to get well.”
“ You should be ashamed of yourself. Just thick of
all the trouble and expense we have been at in bringing
you down here, and instead of being grateful, and helping
to save when you can, you want to lavish money on a
whole library of books which—”
“ Only one,” I said.
“Oh, yes; so far; that’s the first, but who knows
where you will stop when you've once begun. You’re
getting dreadfully selfish as all sick people do. Only
yesterday you were asking for stewed apples instead of
rhubarb, which is only half the price and quite as good.
It isn’t the mere book or the apples that I grudge ; but it
makes me grieve to see you getting so selfish.”
“ Well, mater,” I said, “ shall we finish the game P”
“ No,” she replied, “ I think we may as well stop. You
don’t seem to be much interested in it, and there’s no use
pretending to play if you want to grumble and lecture all
the time You’d better go for a walk; the fresh air will
put you in a better temper.”
So I gave her her work-basket and a kiss and walked
till I was almost too tired to stand ; for I had only been
out of bed a week.
However, at the end of a month I was greatly better ;
but the doctor recommended another month by the sea,
and then a voyage.
I wrote to my father who replied that I must either
come home or shift for myself, since he could spare me
no more money. The doctor forbade me to go home,
since the climate was unsuitable. So I took a tutorship,


where everything proved to he against one’s chances, and,
of course, a relapse followed. Even then the doctors pro-
phesied that I should get quite well if I had a sea voyage,
and spent a year in Australia.
So the passage money was drawn and I set sail,
landing in Melbourne with £25 and a few letters
of introduction to non-influential people. It had been
my hope to secure a lectureship at the University,
but there was no vacancy; and though I advertised
and answered advertisements at every chance, someone
else always stepped in before me. You see the recent
financial break-down and consequent retrenchment had
reduced all available posts by at least fifty per cent, and
doubled the competition for the remainder. I soon found
out the mistake of supposing that my degree would help
me ; if anything it did the opposite.
One advertisement ran : “ Wanted a man able to teach
French and the piano, and to look after a stud bull.”
There had been nothing about stud bulls in the Tripos. I
offered to try, however—like the historic case of the boy
and the fiddle —but was rejected in favour of a farmer’s
son, who could vamp music hall songs and stumble in
Grammar-school French.
Then I tried the Press; but my articles were returned,
with the remark that they were outside the interests of
the journal’s clientele , adding, that if I would write short
stories about shearers, introducing women and revolvers,
they would probably prove acceptable.
But I could not bring myself to write penny-dreadful
fiction, even for bread and butter; for a pen to me is a
sacred weapon for the service of mankind; not to be pros-
tituted to one’s stomach.
Just before my last sovereign was spent, I got a tutor-
ship. The terms were board, lodging and washing free.
The work proved utter drudgery —dragging two lazy louts
of vulgar boys through the elements required for a clerk-
ship examination. But the actual work itself was far less
trying than the whole tone of the life and surroundings ;
and then to be shown off two or three times a week as


“ our noo tutor —’e’s a Caimbridge man,” to gaping
brokers and unctuous commercial travellers. Besides
there are innumerable unpleasantnesses in such an associa-
tion that don’t appear on the surface. None of the
ordinary courtesies or social proprieties of life are under-
stood. One day at dinner, when everybody was making a
rush on roast goose, and I declined it, in order to divide
the carving. “ Ou, Mr. Gurney,” said the hostess, '• I’m
affraid you think my goose isn’t fit to eat.” I kept the
post six months, but felt worse instead of better, so went
to see a doctor. He told me I must leave the city at once,
and ought never to have remained there. Peace of mind
and country air were indispensable; I was still quite
curable under proper conditions.
Hitherto I had kept much more bright and cheerful
than 1 could have ventured to prophecy had I foreseen
such a life ; for I felt that one could put up with anything
if it were hut the darkness of a tunnel leading from a
health lost to a health restored; but when I found that I
was wasting time and sacrificing powers and prospects all
in vain, and that all one's efforts at endurance only ended
in getting worse, I heard the first fiendish laugh of that
giant Despair, who has me eked me in every weaker moment
since.
But I braced myself up to begin again. As I had
just received £25 from my father 1 resigned my tutorship,
and went up country. Had I been led to expect that that
£25 would be followed by another in three months’ time,
I should have had small difficulty in arranging some plan
for the conduct of life ; but I was distinctly told to expect
no more, though my father hoped to be able to send odd
sums occasionally.
Obviously I could make no definite plans on indefinite
supplies; and several pounds had to go to defray small
debts incurred during the late tutorship.
For another six months I knocked about at odd jobs.
After trying many shops in vain for employment I was
engaged to drive a baker’s cart, but after a few weeks at


this I caught a cold and was turned off. Then I became
book-keeper on a station, hut the squatter was drunken
and brutal, and I resigned it after two months. You see
the great Australian cities, where alone I could have had
a chance of suitable employment, are all more or less un-
healthily situated; while the country districts, though
excellent as regards climate, offer no openings for work
otherwise than as a clerk, a tradesman, or a manual
laborer, except in few exceptional instances, which demand
an influence that was not at my command.
Can you imagine what it is to go on day after day with
no interest or hope but the next post —and that less an
interest than a hunger which consumes you with its ever
deferred satisfaction—with its dim prospect that there
may possibly at last arrive some answer to an advertise-
ment you sold your clothes to pay for, or some response
to an application for a post which you know has probably
been already given to another; filling a drawer with letters
of refusal, and your heart with a growing despair that has
long taken the light of life from your eyes and your
existence. Wearily pacing some verandah, up and down,
up and down, up and down, turning over and over and
over, day after day, week after week, every conceivable
idea for obtaining at least sufficient money to relieve
necessities that allow no peace of mind. Knowing that
steadily and surely you are getting worse in health and
that every day’s endurance leaves you a day worse than
the day before; unable to leave your present obnoxious
surroundings for the lack of money to cover travelling
expenses, and for the absence of any means of livelihood
elsewhere. Sleeping the broken sleep of anxiety, and
waking every morning to a dull, deadening sense of fore-
boding which returning consciousness too soon explains ;
and then another weary day, with the same beginning,
the same continuation, and the same dreary end ; and all
the time in a chasm of loneliness that is never more inten-
sified than in the society of others.
At the end of several months I knew I was only worse
than ever, so I accepted the invitation of friends —people


whom I had never met hut had known mutual friends in
England—to stay with them.
tinder their care I regained a certain amount of strength,
but the better I became the more unendurable was the
monotony; for there was nothing to do but sit in the
garden, or talk about flowers and trifles with my hostess:
my host was a bank manager at his office all day, and
always came home in a bad temper.
Being naturally of a very active and energetic disposition
the enforced indolence preyed on my mind, which for lack
of interests began to grind on itself in much the same way
as it had done in the old days at home. There was nothing
to divert one’s thoughts from the incessant demand to
provide for the next step.
Of course I tried to study, and to occupy myself reading
and writing, but one needs more than a book and a chair
for study ; the flatness of all one’s surroundings blunted
one’s attention ; and there was nothing in a little bush
town of five-hundred people to rouse one up or keep one
on the go.
My father’s last letter repeated his assurance that he
could make me no allowance; and recommended me to
“ cut my coat according to my cloth : ” he did not realize
that it was a pall and not a coat that I was cutting.
To my father’s letter my mother added a post-script ;
that I ought to remember how expensive my education
had been ; that money was wanted now for Bob and Ethel;
and that every penny spent on me was so much taken
away from the provision for the comfort of my father’s
and her own old age. This for the fiftieth time, —though
once would have been enough to make one prefer to bite out
one’s tongue before asking money again.
It was easy enough to see that the money which was
sent to me in small and irregular supplies, would amount
to a great deal more in the course of a long illness than
would ever have been expended if they had made me a
sufficient allowance at the time I came abroad; for I
should then have quickly got well, and once well, I should
have become self-supporting. With the difference also,


that the heavier expenditure would be all to no purpose.
So much for the wisdom of doing 1 things “ on the cheap !”
Here he paused, panting; tired with such long-continued
speaking. “ Rest,” I said, “ you are fagged out. You
can finish to-morrow if you care to finish at all.”
“ No, no;” he said ; “ I must get done now I’m started.
The tumult of long pent-up feelings boiling over chokes
me—will you kindly give me the water ? ” Then he
repeated more to himself than to me —
“ In words like weeds I’ll wrap me o’er,
Like coarsest clothes against the cold;
But that large grief which these enfold,
Is given in out-line and no more.”
After a sip of the water and a fit of coughing, he con-
tinued —“Yes; only in outline ; for with the best will in
the world I couldn’t convey to you, a son of the wild
hush with your head full of sheep and grass seeds, and
your heart on a managership, the mental and spiritual
hunger that was gnawing at one’s vitals like the vulture
in the ‘ Prometheus Vinctus.’ Even a statement of all the
facts could not do that; and it is very little of them that
lam giving you —‘ in out-line and no more.’ I don’t
want to confuse your thoughts by a long weary wail, but
just to show you the direction of matters, and so guide
your reflections.
Well, by means of one of my letters of introduction, I
came on here; I was ashamed to trespass longer upon the
hospitality of my friends, who were far from well off ; and
in any case their climate for the approaching season was
expected to he damp and unfavourable ; moreover, I seized
with avidity on any excuse to get aw T ay from the utter
stagnation of existence.
The climate of this place was recommended; and there
was a vacancy. I did not anticipate the life. You know
the rest. I have been here for a year; you all thought
me sulky and reserved—perhaps, not without cause ; but
it was not from want of will to make myself agreeable; I
did my living best to enter into your life and interests.
In order not to give colour to the accusation of being


stand-off and proud, I forced myself to talk in slang tliaat
my whole nature abominated ; I learnt to walk with a rood
and to come to meals in dirty clothes; and spat on thhe
floor as a concession to good fellowship —though frorm
sheer lothing I could scarcely touch my meals. Many r a
time I imitated laughter lest someone should suppose thaat
he had wasted upon me what he considered a good jokee;
hut I found no companionship and ate my heart out in thhe
solitude. People use such exaggerated language to expresss
trifles, that it is very difficult to find expressions that wiill
convey adequate meanings when we want to speak cof
things that are not trifles. I know plenty of people whho
would say they “ate their heart out ” if they were unabile
to go to a picnic. I only hope they will never learn thhe
full meaning that the words can bear ! One only takes fto
eating one’s heart in the utter starvation of all social amd
intellectual instincts.
“ But you interested yourself,” I said, “ in your owm
way; you read and wrote ; I remember Mack saying thsat
if you knew as much about a sheep-pen as you did aboxut
a writing-pen you would make a good bushman.”
“ I tried ; but as I told you before, it takes more than a
chair and a book to make study possible. I was too
utterly blunted by my surroundings. The roof always
began to sit on my head directly I sat down, and after
vainly struggling for an hour or two I had to throw down
book or pen and dash away on horseback to get rid of the
maddening pressure.”
“But you always seemed happy; of course you were
quiet and reserved ; but we thought that was your nature.
You were always cheerful.”
“By an intense effort of will one may force oneself to
appear outwardly cheerful; but it is only by living on the
spur, and that is not a nourishing diet. By your own
confession you fellows all thought me naturally reserved
and silent; you did not know that a laughter-loving and
buoyant nature was being stifled in an atmosphere where
nothing but blatant vulgarity passed for wit, and where
one could only prove good spirits in coarse horse-play or


obscene jests. You say that I seemed cheerful ; but you
knew nothing of the black fits of depression which drove
me into the wilderness to wrestle them out alone. You
only saw me when I had won back some degree of
calmness and self-control.”
“ Surely,” I said, “if you had written explicitly to your
father and demanded money he would have sent it to you P”
“Yes; but when I was actually dying what use was
there in asking money which could no longer save me ?
So long as it could have helped me, he persistently refused
it ; and, hoping that every post might bring me an offer
of some work upon which to live, I hesitated to insist
upon it. He crushed all the life out of me, and then,
w r hen the malady had become chronic and incurable, he
would not, —could not, I hope and trust only could not—
see that it was he and not a “ Mysterious Providence ”
that had crushed me, and wrote in a tone of patronizing
compassion to his “invalid son” consoling him with
Scripture-texts for the thought that his life was ruined.
It was exactly as if he hart pricked a hole in an india-
rubber ball, and then, soliloquizing about the “ Mysterious
Providence ” that prevented the ball from bouncing, had
kicked it flat, flabby and useless into a cupboard with the
sigh of a man who feels that he is himself an object of
compassion for being forced to keep such a mere inert
mass of india-rubber in his possession.
“ But didn’t you write P” I asked.
“Yes; with unfailing regularity; and I stated all the
main facts plainly enough; but from very shame I
refrained from grumbling or complaining about them.
So they replied that from the cheerful and jocular tone of
my letters they could see that I was in excellent spirits
and doing well, and that I seemed indeed to have fallen
on my feet.
“ If I ever did allow a gloomy letter to go to the post—l
wu-ote plenty but mostly burned them—it was put down
to bad temper or cynicism.
“ People who are accustomed to scream every time their
corns are trodden on, can’t understand that it is possible


a man may be silent although he is burning at the stake.
If they find such a man they conclude that he is enjoying
the warmth.”
I was pacing the room in an indignation which
threatened to make me too boisterous for an invalid’s bed-
chamber —
“ I wish I had your daddy by the scruff of the neck,” I
said. “My word ! I’d ”
“Stop!” cried Gurney; “not a word of that sort,
please. You forget that you are speaking to his son ; and,
if you knew the pain you caused, you would hold your
tongue. I love my parents from the bottom of my heart,
and every word that would pain them pains me.”
“ But it’s all their fault that you who might have been
happy and useful have been utterly miserable and ”
“ Not utterly miserable,” he replied quietly ; “ there is a
‘ Peace that no pressure from without;
No strife within can reach.’
I am only going to be melted down with other bits of
broken metal in the melting-pot of death; and some day
its contents may be run into moulds and coined for fresh
service. Who knows P If God has any object in giving
a man life, it’s absurd to suppose that human mistakes can
thwart his purposes.”
“ That doesn’t do away with other people’s respon-
sibility,” I said, “melting-pots or no melting-pots.
Because a man will go into a melting-pot when he’s dead,
it doesn’t follow that you have a right to kick him all the
time he is alive.”
“No he replied, “ but their mistake has been wholly
one of the head. I believe they truly love me, and they
will realise it when they hear that I am gone. If they
don’t I am thankful not to know it.
Mry Kpi'veTe ko.t ’oifnv, ’aAAa rr/r Slkoj'o.v Kpunv /cpirare —I
forgot for the moment that you didn’t know Greek.
You’ll find it in John vii., 24. It means that we must
look below the surface and not judge people’s characters
by their actions. We don’t blame a shortsighted man if he


mistakes a horse for a cow at a distance, and there is such a
thing as mental shortsightedness.”
“Well then,” I replied, “such people should get
mental spectacles.”
“My death will be such,” he said, “ they’ll see much
more clearly when they look at life through that.”
“ It’s always been my idea,” I said, “ that money should
be laid out to serve life, not life laid out to serve money.”
“You’ve some queer ideas,” he said, trying to laugh.
His eyes were closed, and his head was sinking on to
the pillows. There was a dreamy far-away look on
his face, and he was evidently exhausted. I helped him
into a lying posture.
“By jingo!” I remarked, as my hands touched his
shoulders; “ they won’t get much tallow out of you in
the melting-pot.”
“ Sheep, sheep, sheep !” he said wearily ; “ sheep to the
last moment of life. It never occurred to me that you
would associate my metaphor with boiling-down works.
Forgive me, I didn’t mean to be scotty,” he added, giving
me his hand.
“ Have the lemons come yet ?” he asked, after a pause.
“Ho,” I said; “I’ve tried everywhere within a radius
of eighty miles, but the mailman will be here again to-
morrow ; perhaps he will have succeeded this time. Is
there anything I can get you instead F”
“ Ho, thank you, old chap ; I have all I want. I’m too
tired to feel or to wish any more. It seems somehow as
if all the feeling and wishing machinery had broken down,
and I have nothing but a longing for rest.”
I stood silently for a moment looking at him ; his eyes
were closed again, and he was breathing heavily. It was
a refined and handsome face, and neither the lines with
which sickness and worry had marked it, nor its thinness
and pallor—for the flush which had brightened it in the
excitement of speech had died away—had made it look
commonplace or unattractive. The mouth was firm and
resolute, and there was not a trace of bitterness in any of
its lines. Suddenly he opened his eyes.


“Ah !” he said ; “ I felt you were looking at me, dear
old fellow ! What is it? Want a shave? I meant to
ask you, hy the way, to shave me before the doctor
came ; I’m ashamed to be seen like this; but I’m too
tired.”
“ Good night!” I said, wishing to give him a chance to
rest, “ I’ll come hack when the doctor arrives.”
“ Half a minute !” he said. “ You’re going to England
next summer ?”
“ Yes ; if I can manage it.”
“ Well, as a last favour, I beg you will go and see my
parents. Give them my dying love, and tell them I hope
that their old age will be in every way as comfortable and
happy as they could wish. Ho !” he added, interrupting
my promise; “don’t say that; just give them my love,
and say good-bye. Tell them I was thinking fondly of
them with my latest breath, and that I’m awfully sorry to
have been so expensive. Good night, old man ; and God
bless you for your goodness to me !”
I left the room with his smile of gratitude in my eyes.
Two hours later I returned with the doctor, too late to be
of service. He was dead !
Sapsford & Co., Printers, Adelaide Street, Brisbane.




'
.
V. : •/. . ■ * ‘ . . . ■ , . ■ . i v.
,
■. ... / * *•■■■■
■
.
.■.■ , • ■ •
■
■
*
