

Each in His Own Tongue
esvwt© to US PAMS
Bo x iz.
WO SERMONS
DELIVERED IN THE
Unitarian Christian Church, Adelaide,
JULY 1 1 and 24, 1904,
CATHERINE H. SPENCE,
r /vij 1 i • .
5S~f 1 I*l IvLIVIV iA \
" v \0 1 >1 vß;i iB
V\ x
ADELAIDE :
PRINTED BY VARDON AND PRITCHARD, DRESHAM-,STREET.
1904.




Each in His Own Tongue.
Acts 11., vi. and vii.—“ Each in his own tongue.”
The mythical narrative which symbolises the spread of
the Gospel through all lands, among all peoples, and in all
languages, which is commemorated in the Roman, Greek, and
Anglican Churches on the festival of Whitsunday, six weeks
aft?r the Resurrection feast of Easter, has been perhaps best
fulfilled in the work of the Bible Society, which has translated
the sacred books of the Hebrews and of the Christians into.
every known language.
It is evident that the story is not literally true, for
although Paul writes of the speaking with tongues: as one of
the gifts or manifestations of the early Christian Church, he
accounted it as the least of the gifts, because what the rapt
speaker said was unintelligible to others, and needed a gifted
interpreter. The speaker edified himself only, and contri-
buted nothing to his hearers.
Some brethren indeed believed that they could interpret,
but it was quite possible that they gave only their own ideas.
The characteristic of the Pentecostal miracle was that the
tongues were understood by people of Various nationalities;
but as Paul describes the gift it was like the Irvingite tongues
in later days, a quite useless and bewildering manifestation
of religious excitement.
The modern fulfilment which gives the Bible to all peoples
does not always do the good that is boasted of at centenary
meetings. Scattering a collection of books of various value
over the world does not evangelise it. Sometimes, for want
of wise guidance, these Scriptures have been regarded as
fetishes, and instead of being read as the records of religious
evolution during a period of thousands of years, they have
been used to strangle the living inspiration which never leaves
us, and to stereotype creeds and ceremonies that check the
expansion, the purification, and the elevation of the religious
sentiment, “Commit Thy Word, O Lord,” not to written books
only, “but to the lips of faithful men, and to the free winds
of Thine invisible Providence”—the prayer in our Prayer-
book—not to bishops or priests, not to kings or emperors, not
to ecclesiastical councils or secular parliaments, not to printed


Bibles or Prayer-books, but to the lips of faithful men and
the free winds of Our Father’s invisible Providence. This
is a prayer for a Free Church.
Into every hide-bound law or custom or book, however
grand and free it may have originally been, there creeps the
dry rot of stagnation and the worse canker of bigotry. “Thus
shaft thou believe and profess, and not otherwise. There' is
danger in doubt, there is destruction in schism. The Church’s
rob) is in one piece, like the coat of Jesus. Woe to him who
would rend it. The Church’s fold is the only refuge for the
weak and the sinful, the only sanctuary for even the best and
the strongest of the human race.” And even when dissent
became imperative, and the voice of a Luther, of a John Knox,
of a Wesley, called those who thirsted after a better right-
eousness than that of the Church of their fathers into a new
communion, each sect claimed to be the true Church, and
built, a wall of separation, beyond which salvation was doubt-
ful, if not absolutely hopeless. To each individual in each
body of Sectaries the Gospel was preached in his own tongue.
He felt the light and the truth and the hope come home to
his understanding and to his heart, as he had not felt them
in the old outworn forms, uttered by conventional or indiffe-
rent or Self-seeking clericals. And it is this which is the spiri-
tual lesson of the marvellous tale of Pentecost. The Gospel
appealed to. all, and all felt they could claim it. In the
full glory of the great Roman Empire a small band of poor
men began a work that has outlived that empire, and is going
on now. No wonder that tradition heaped marvels and
-mvths round its crucified Head and His immediate followers :
%/ '
no wonder that it costs usi some pain to sweep them away.
The modem rendering of my text, which I shall follow in
these remarks, I find aptly and beautifully expressed in a
poem by William Herbert Carruth, published in “Brother-
hood,” and it shows how we of all denominations can em-
brace all thinking and loving men and women in our fold with
no separating walls. We need say, “Stand off!” to no one.
“Let whosoever thirsteth come and drink of the water of
life freely.” This is the poem :
A fire-mist and a planet,
A crystal and a cell,
A jellyfish and a saurian,
And a cave where the cave-men dwell.
Then, a sense of law and order,
And a face turned from the clod;
Some call it Evolution,
And others call it God.


A haze on the far horizon,
The infinite tender sky,
The ripe, rich tints of the cornfield,
And the wild bird sailing high.
And all over upland and lowland
The charm of the golden rod,
Some of us call it Nature,
And others call it God.
Like tides on a crescent sea beach,
When the moon is new and thin,
Into our hearts high yearnings
Come welling and surging in,
Come from the mystic ocean
Whose rim no foot hath trod;
Some of us call it Longing
And others call it God.
A piquet frozen on duty,
A mother starved for her brood,
Socrates drinking the hemlock,
And Jesus on the Rood,
And millions who, humble and nameless,
The straight, hard pathway trod;
Some call it Consecration,
And others call it God.
It naturally divides into four parts —Creation, Nature,
Aspiration, and Consecration. And I shall try to take each
in its order. It will do you no harm to repeat each division
the weighty words contained in the eight lines which give the
idea to be grasped —
A fire-mist and a planet,
A crystal and a cell,
A jellyfish and a saurian,
And a cave where the cave-men dwell.
Then, a sense of law and order,
And a face turned from the clod;
Some call it Evolution,
And others call it God.
I am old enough to recollect the first whispers of evolu-
tion, not, indeed, in the scientific world when Lamarck spoke
to somewhat deaf ears, long before I was born, but in the
forties, when Robert Chambers published anonymously his
“Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation,” and later the
works of Charles Darwin on the “Origin of Species,” and of
Herbert Spencer, Huxley, Wallace', and others. What a ter-
rible thing it appeared to the man in the street, to the woman
in the house, and, above all, to the priest in, the pulpit, that
any one should dare to doubt, and even to contradict, the
Scriptural record that man, full-formed and developed, perfect
in mind and body, had been created by the fiat of the Deity
out of the dust of the ground, and given dominion over all the


lower living creatures and over the whole earth. But even
the Biblical record did not claim that man had been created
of nothing, any more than the earth. That was said to be
without form and void, and darkness brooded over the face
of the earth. It was created at first dark and empty and
with waiter above and water beneath. And God said,
“Light be,” and “Light was.” This is the literal translation
which the Greek critic Longinus admired so much, more sub-
lime than ours. In six successive days all was made, and
all was good. Hugh Miller and others tried to explain the
days ats ages or aeons with doubtful success, for the creation
of the sun, moon, and stars in the midst of the marvellous
week was a serious stumbling block.
The verses I read give in eight lines an advance of, I
am afraid to say or to guess how many millions of years, and
the steps between each degree of development are quite as
sublime and noble as those in the magnificent hymn of “Crea-
tion” which the old Hebrew writer has handed down to us
fruit oral tradition. No early literature comes up to it in
its account of the origin of the universe.
“A fire mist and a planet.”
How long before the fire mist consolidated into a new
planet? How long before the molten mass of elements, re-
volving round the central sun of our solar system, cooled into
rock' of granite and crystal? And before the waters found
their appointed places? Not for ever, as the Psalmist be-
lieved, for interchange of ocean and continent has taken place
once, or more than once. How long was the crystal, the
atom of the rocks, the only struggle towards organised life?
How long before the cell, the primordial source of life, multi-
plied itself by fissure, and produced the lowest forms of animal
existence, gradually rising through ascidians and jellyfish to
creatures with bones outside, like crabs and shrimps, up: to
vertebrate fishes, up through many steps to the gigantic
saurians who peopled this earth? Still on and upward life
ascends, through the birds and mammals, with their love and
care for their offspring, the beginnings of altruism and
here ism—-always higher, and, as a rule, more beautiful.
At last comes man into a world which he is to subjugate
to himself, not through strength; the elephant, the lion, the
bull, and hosts of other animals have far more strength than
he. Not through natural weapons; he cannot rend with
teeth and claw, he cannot gore with horn or tusk, he cannot
trample toi death with his weight the creatures with which the
earth is filled. But the process of evolution, slow and sure,


has enabled him to stand upright and look up as well as down,
and on a level. The forefoot of the) quadruped has developed
into the marvellous hand that can fashion tools for work, and
weapons for defence, and with regard to the wonderful grey
matter in the brain, that receives and sends messages to eye
and ear, and limb and trunk, more richly endowed than any
of the creatures large or small by whom he was surrounded.
Is this an ignoble ancestry? Are we ashamed to think
that we have real affinity with the lower animals, and have
been advanced to be their lord and master; and, therefore,
should be merciful and careful for them? Man has been
proud of having been formed of the dust of the ground and
made perfect. Alas! the perfection was of brief dura-
tion. He might more reasonably be proud, or, at
any rate, be thankful, that he has been endowed with the
power to make progress, and with the desire to do- so. A
great world was before him to shape to his needs. Some
things he had to submit to, others to conquer, and the soul
which acts through this wondrous grey matter has to decide
which course to take.
A sense of law and order,
And a face turned from the clod.
When did this dim sense arise? How was it developed?
Was it not by taking note of the regularity of day and night,
of summer and winter, of vegetation, of growth, of birth, of
death ? It was a hard school our far-away forefathers were
set into; but they learned their lesson. And it was the settled
order of things that encouraged industry, that led to agricul-
ture, to taming of domestic animals, to storing for the future.
It was the irregularities, the storms, the earthquakes, the
volcanoes, the floods that led them to that fear which is the
beginning of all religions. Thank God it is not the end of
them ! What they could see and understand helped them.
What they could not understand or provide against paralysed
them, and gave rise to priestcraft and ritual, and ideas of
Divine wrath and vengeance, to be propitiated by sacrifice, to
be softened by prayer, to be warded off by praise. But the
more we study the laws of nature the less there is of the un-
known which is to the untrained mind the terrible, and the
gradual evolution of religion towards love and trust in the
Creator and Preserver of the Universe, and towards peace
and goodwill towards men, is permeating the world of creeds
and Churches.
This growth is not only natural; I think it Is lovely.
Would any parent among us desire to have his children come


to him like full-grown men and women, little Adams and
Eves? We know that before birth each human germ goes
through the lowest form of the cell, up through every grada-
tion of animal development till it reaches the perfection of
child life; and after it opens its eyes on the world has to learn
to see, to hear, to smell, to touch, to taste, and for the first few
years of life has no conscious memory of the time when it
was learning more and accomplishing more in proportion than
in the same lapse of time ever after. Truly a grand com-
mentary on the doctrine of evolution, and, to my mind, a con-
clusive proof of its truth. And it is not bodily or mental
powers alone that are gradually evolved from the primal germ.
How in teres ting it is to watch the evolution of the religious
instinct in the old writings of the world, and especially in
the Hebrew Scriptures. The pictures of Jehovah in the earlier
records are material and partial and cruel, rising gradually to
the grand conceptions of Isaiah and Mioah and the later Psalms,
of a God just and compassionate, who prized mercy above sac-
rifice, and honesty and charity above professions of devoutness
to Himself. In reading Claude Montefiore’s Bible for Home-
reading for use in Jewish families, this gradual elevation and
spiritualization of the character of God is shown to> have gone
on till not only the Unity but the Fatherhood of the Deity
was taught in temple and synaigogue and home. It was
not altogether a new doctrine when Jesus proclaimed it. The
mission of Israel to be a light to the world, which we see, espe-
cially in the later Psalms, where the devout are called on to
sing a New Song, showed the expansion of the idea of a tribal
or national God to the conception of a God of the whole earth
and of all peoples, “Each in his own tongue.”
11. The second branch of my subject deals with Nature,
the visible universe—
A haze on the far horizon,
The infinite tender sky,
The ripe, rich tints of the cornfield,
And the wild birds sailing high.
And all over upland and lowland
The charm of the golden rod;
Some of us call it Nature,
And others call it G-od.
How much or how little of this beauty was perceived or
felt by the cave men or the lake dwellers we can only guess.
The oldest literature does not deal in, description of inanimate
Nature, but in narratives of the actions of men, or the deeds
of those magnified men whom they held as Gods. Indeed, the
appreciation of natural beauty seems as much evolved and


developed from small beginnings as the arts and sciences them-
selves. The haze on the far horizon was scanned only asl por-
tending the weather to come. The infinite tender sky, with
its blue space flecked by sailing clouds, white or dark, by day
and night, and gemmed with stars, which were only regarded
as the little lamps which aided the sun and the moon to shed
light on the great centre, the earth, were first watched for
guides to steer by in the desert, or the forest, or on the sea
before either their beauty charmed the eye, or their magnitude
or their distance dawned on the intelligence. And even now
there are but few of us who make the most and the best of the
feast of beauty provided for us every day and every night, and
at every season of the varying year.
Perhaps theology is answerable for giving a wrong direc-
tion to our thoughts, for all the ideas of celibate monks, of
ritualistic priests, of devout puritans, were that the world in
which we are placed was under a ban, and it was| only by giving
a spiritual interpretation to natural objects that we could
please the Creator and Preserver of the world. I can scarcely
give you a better example of what I mean than by quoting,
as well as I can from memory of sixty years, some lines of John
Newton’s, the friend of the poet William Cowper, whose in-
fluence was not good for that great reviver of the love of
Nature, who should have been encouraged to look outward,
and not inward.
The lines are written on the seashore, a rocky, romantic
shore of 'England—•
In every object here I see
Something, my God, that speaks of Thee;
Firm as a rock Thy promise stands,
Thy mercies countless as the sands,
Thy goodness as the ocean wide,
Thy grace an ever flowing tide.
In every object here I see
Something, my heart, that tells of thee;
Hard as the granite rock, that stands
Barren, and shifty as the sands,
False and deceitful as the ocean,
And, like the tides, in constant motion.
This is the manner in which Newton would have liked
Cowper to have looked on Nature ; but for the benefit of man-
kind he looked at it otherwise, and saw in every freckle, streak,
and shading of the wayside or the garden flower marks of God’s
unrivalled pencil; saw the grandeur of the ocean, first the
barrier between nations, afterwards its highway for human
intercourse ; in the smooth sands worn down from what was


once the steady rock, the way by which continents are built
up and worn awiay; in the tides the ebb and flow of the vast
ocean in obedience to the attraction of the sun and the
moon.
The poem which is my text is American, no doubt, as it
speaks of the charm of the Golden Rod; but all over the world,
and particularly in Australia, yellow is the prevailing color of
the natural flora. In England we have the buttercup, the
primrose, and the dandelion, the gorse. and the broom as ex-
amples of the exuberance of bright yellow flowers. Grant
Allen quotes Darwin, Lubbock, and Muller in support of his
contention that yellow is the primitive color of all flowers, and
that it iiS sure to predominate always, especially where the 1 bee
and the butterfly and other pollen-bearing insects are un-
known or few. We have the charm of the yellow wattle and
all the Mimosa tribe in our early spring, and the Cape mari-
gold or dandelion lower down,, and of the smaller flowers,
whether bulbs or not, yellow is the color of the greater part of
all.
Garden flowers carefully cultivated have their infinite
varieties of hue as well as of structure, dependent on selection
and fertilization, but the original gift of flowers to man is
golden, all over the world.
An Australian poet has well expressed the feelings of joy-
ousness with which we breathe sweetness' and see the beauty
of our early summer—
There is bloom on the golden wattle,
And a fragrance fills the air
From the odors, rich and subtle,
She shakes from her wavy hair.
From the quickened glebe is springing
The green and the blended gold,
And the glen and the gorge are ringing
With the hymns of the sylvan wold.
In a natural sense, and not in the spiritual sense of the poet
who sees Horeb and Sinai in our daily life, we see
Every common bush aflame with God.
Mary Howitt says —
God might have made enough, enough,
Enough for great and small, ,
Enough for food, enough for health,
Without a flower at all.
Not without flowers of some sort, otherwise there would have
been no corn or berry or fruit, but the dull green of the primi-
tive flora was well exchanged long before man had eyes to 1 see
them for the golden flowers 1 of the waste and the wild. When


Mungo Park’s heart was cheered by the sight of a little wild-
flower in the deserts of Africa it was not because it was an
emblem of spiritual growth or heavenly bliss, but because he
felt the great Creator, who had given this lonely plant exist-
ence, and let it bloom, would also care for him in his needs
and his distress. And instead of writing and singing doleful
verses about the falling leaves of autumn, emblematic of de-
terioration, decay, and death as a warning for us to be ready
for the winter of death, we should hail the season of harvest,
when the rich ripe tints of the cornfield give promise of food
for man and beast, and the blossoms of spring have developed
into ripe fruit, delicious and wholesome. Cod has made every-
thing beautiful in its) time—day and night, summer and
winter, seedtime and harvest—has each its appropriate
charm. Nature never did betray the heart that loved her,
and no amount of mechanical invention and scientific dis-
covery can check the development of the sense of beauty in
our hearts. Each generation brings its own poets, each gene-
ration now brings its own painters to see and to express that
sense of beauty. The early artists confined themselves to the
human form and to grand architecture. At the revival of
letters and aids it was humanity, not Nature, that was the sub-
ject of painter and poet, but gradually we are learning that
what is seen and felt of natural beauty and of Nature’s pro-
cesses can be absorbed by the poet and the painter and ex-
pressed with a human interest added, which heightens the
beauty of the poem and the landscape.
“Each in his own tongue” the poet, the painter, the man
of science expresses God Himself when he reveals the living
garment of God.
“Tell me where God is?” a somewhat cynical sceptic asked,
of a child. “Tell me where he is not ” said the child, and
indeed the sense of the omnipresence, of the all-pervadingness
of the spirit of the universe is stronger now than it ever was.
In the words of the greatest Psalm in the Bible, “Whither
shall I go from Thy spirit or whither shall I flee from Thy
presence. If I ascend up into heaven thou art there, if I make
Sheol my bed Thou art there. ’
I may here quote from James Lane Allen in words which
he puts into the'mouth of an enthusiastic devotee of science:
“Men used to talk of the secrets of Nature; there is not the
slightest evidence that Nature has a secret. They used to
speak of the mysteries of the Creator. lam not one of those
who claim to be authorities on the traits of the Creator.
Some of my ancestors considered they were such. But I


do say that men are coming more and more to think of him
a. 9 having no mysteries. We liave.no evidence that as the
old hymn says, 'He loves to move in a mysterious way. The
entire openness of Nature and of the Creator —these are the
new ways of thinking. They will be the only ways of think-
ing in the future unless civilization sinks again into darkness.
What we call secrets and mysteries of the universe are the
limitations of our powers and of our knowledge. The little
that we do know about Nature, how open it is, how unsecre-
tive! There is nowhere a sign that the Creator wishes to
hide from us even what is life. If we ever discover what life'
is no doubt we shall then realise that it contained no mystery.
It was the folly and the crime of all ancient religions that
their priesthoods veiled them ; whenever the veil was rent, like
the veil of Isis, it was not God that men found behind it; it
was nothing. The religions of the future will have no veils.
As far as they can set before their worshippers truth at all it
will be truth open as the day. The Great Teacher in the
New Testament, what an eternal lesson on light itself does He
give to us. That is the great bea|uty of His Gospel. And His
Apostles. Where do you find Him saying to them, ‘Preach
my word to all men as the secrets of a priesthood and the
mysteries of the Father?’
It is the tragedy of man alone that he has his secrets.
Life is full of things that we cannot tell, because they would
injure us; and of things we cannot tell because they would
injure others. But surely we should all like to live in a time
when a man’s private life will be his only one.
Ah! and when, troubled and perplexed with our own
secrets, and with those of others, which are often as embarras-
sing, how healing is the influence of Nature. We may call
her unconcerned, for she may not sadden the world out of
sympathy with us and our individual suffering, but her very
calmness soothes us. I think it is rather an anthropomorphic
idea that some good preachers express when they say that we
grieve God by our sins, and gladden Him by our repentance.
But as the manifestation of God in outer nature so often com-
forts us, helps us, inspires us, we may feel sure that in the
inner depths of our souls, which are akin to the Divine, we have
only to open ourselves to the light, only to seek guidance in
perplexity, and strength in weakness, to receive from the Inex.
haustible and the Infinite what we need.


“Each in his own tongue.”
We have last Sunday evening treated of the outlook of
man on the material universe. Now we proceed to the inlook,
the operation of the Spirit of God or the spirit of man. Our
poet thus writes on the subject. —
Like tides on a crescent sea beach,
When the moon is new and thin,
Into the heart high yearnings
Come welling and surging in,
Come from the mystic ocean
Whose rim no foot hath trod;
Some of us call it Longing,
And others call it God.
It is about eighty years since a, little girl, coming home
with her schoolfellows from the parochial school in a
suburb of Glasgow, picked up a leaf on which some verses
were printed. She wore spectacles, which was a strange thing
in those days. She had been called a fool and a dunce be-
cause she could not learn to read, but her good old grandfather
had recollected that her eyes had been badly affected when she
had had the measles, and suggested that she might not be able
to see, and tiled her with his spectacles, and she found they
made her letters distinct. She then had glasses of her own,
and learned so fast that her schoolfellows said she had been
shamming before. The leaf was one from a hymnbook, and
contained James Montgomery s beautiful hymn on prayer
which we have sung, and on which I particularly dwelt. It
begins thus—
Prayer is the soul's sincere desire,
Uttered or unexpressed,
The motion of a hidden fire
That trembles in the breast.
Prayer is the burden of a sigh,
The falling of a tear,
The upward glancing of an eye
When none but God is near.
Prayer is the simplest form of speech
That infant lips can try,
Prayer the sublimest strains that reach
The Majesty on high.
“Oh, this is bonny, bonny,” said the girl; “I never have
read anything like it.” Her companions jeered at her.
Jeannie was always setting up for being clever, and was it


likely that a leaf torn out of an old book and thrown away
could have any value? “I 11 show it to grandfather, said the
aggrieved child. When the old man saw it he did nob jeer.
He read it through and through, and said, “You’re right,
Jeannie; it’s bonny, it’s very bonny. There's nothing in the
Bible better than these verses,” a bold thing to say in Pres-
byterian Scotland, which had been rent not so long before on
the question of the psalms and paraphrases, the “auld Hcht”
maintaining that the psalms were David s, inspired by God,
while the paraphrases on certain passages of Holy Writ were
the mere work of man. Barry s “Little Minister” shows the
superstition so honestly held that the book of inspiration was
closed. But the old man felt the) spiritual power of the beau-
tiful hymn, and Jeannie, when an old woman herself, told
me the story. The well-known hymn never had a higher tri-
bute paid to it. The unknown jpoet, William Herbert Car-
ruth, who wrote the verses in “Brotherhood applying to our
modern conceptions of Creation and Providence, the im-
manence of God in all the vastly extended fields of Nature,
and in all the better understood possibilities of the human
soul, had similar inspiration to that of James Montgomery, the
Moravian, a century before. And the words speak peace to
many a doubting questioning heart. We reverence the more
the more we understand. Claude Montefiore tells us there is
only one word in Hebrew for fear and reverence, and that the
common translation, fear —for reverence came into use in the
English language but slowly, misleads us as to the right atti-
tude of the soul to God. The word reverence is never used
with regard to God but once in the Old Testament, and that
is changed to fear in the revised version, and only once in the
New. The word reverence is used as the attitude of subjects
towards Kings and of wives towards husbands, while fear is
used hundreds of times as the right way of looking on God.
But in all ages we must believe that the Tides of the Spirit
come welling and surging in, bringing what our poet calls
longing after the Best and the Highest, which is also aspira-
tion after closer kinship with the Divine. These mysterious
tides that come in the darkness of night, in the moments of
quiet and contemplation, that fill the soul with a sense of its
possibilities and its responsibilities, that give strength to our
resolution and persistence to our endeavors—
And tasks in hours of insight willed
Shall be through days of gloom fulfilled.
Says Matthew Arnold—and I should aidd that the dlays
of gloom would be gradually lightened, for nothing cheers the


depressed soul like the accomplishment of some task
to which we feel we are consecrated. In the rush
of modem life, with its business engagements, its conven-
tions and its trivialities, with journals and books to fill
up ©very leisure time not occupied socially, we have but too
few hours of insight. Roman Catholics and Anglicans have
devised a system of retreats where the soul may in solitude
commune with the Father; but, alas! it is not those who need
it most who apply to it; and those who do too often go to
forms and ritual instead of communion with the living God.
No one I suppose has seen the diaries, if any were kept, of
these devotional weeks or months; but I fear they would
disappoint us if we saw them.
We do not make as much or as good use of our Sun-
days as we might do. There is a medium between the rigid
Sabbatarianism of our ancestors and the absolute waste of the
day of rest in mere pleasure and frivolity. All the world
is deploring the secularising of Sunday. Not only is Church-
going perfunctory or absent, but in all ranks of life there is a
disposition to make it a day of rest and amusement; some-
times the amusement rather than the rest. Sunday, the Sab-
bath, as Alex. McLaren first pointed out to> me, is not a day
taken from us, but a day given to; us. “Behold, I have given
you the Sabbath/’ For what? For rest for man and beast,
but also to be a milestone iin our upward and onward progress
—a day for not only wearing best clothes, but for reading our
best books and thinking our best thoughts. As Wordsworth
says—•
The world is too much with us —late and soon,
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers,
Little we see in nature that is ours;
We give our hearts for gold —a sordid boon.
But it is not all greed; there is fear of want for ourselves
or those dependent on us that enters largely into the; engross
sing search for the material, and keeps so l many working at
high pressure ; but the tides of the Spirit may reach into even
those we think too self-absorbed to let them enter. What a
mystery to us is each individual soul; but all are open to the
great Spirit of the Universe. And behind what we can see and
hear, behind what we guess at, there are inarticulate longings
and desires, the feeling after God if haply they may find Him
somehow in the daily work, in the family circle;, in the public
spirit, in the interest in the past, in the hopes for the future.
Amid much that saddens in our present day conditions I think


we may be sure that there never was a time in the history of
our race when there were so many men and women eager to
learn what is best to be done for the betterment of humanity,,
and willing to do it when they see the straight hard path of
duty. True, some of them make mistakes. All are liable
to make such mistakes; but there is nothing in the pulpit
or the press of the present era like the dull blank level of in-
difference that never tried to soothe or alleviate the suffer-
ings that must needs come. Hospitals and nurses, asylums and
refuges, child-saving and training, free education, political
freedom, religious toleration; these things have not
come of themselves. The high yearnings have come well-
ing and surging into 1 devoted souls that have compelled per-
sistent effort and self-denial. And the same tides are at work
for the improvement of all good things, and the discourage-
ment and eradication of all things evil.
And it is not from the devout alone, not from the pro-
fessing Christian alone that the world gains from these tides
of the Spirit. It is not only towards the building up of
charitable institutions and the careful administration of them
(which is quite as essential) that these tides flow. They
flow towards the lessening and destroying of the causes which
bring on the distress that needs the relief. William Lloyd
Garrison broke away from every Church in the United States
because even the Friends were so disloyal to their noble tra-
dition that the money lent by their members to Southern
planters on the security of chattel slavery, made them refuse
the use of their meeting-houses for his mission, and oppose
his work. Charles Booth completed with, the labor and lavish
expenditure of many years a monumental work, a clear and
candid study of the “Life and Labor of London,” invaluable
to all philanthropic and humanitarian workers. For when
we see exactly how we stand, we can then decide better in
what direction it is best to move. He is an advanced Uni-
tarian. Mr. Rowntree, a Friend, has added to his invaluable
work on the temperance problem a similar study of York,
which people naturally thought a very different place, with
much better conditions, but found the proportion of poverty
not very much better. When I was in Chicago I found
several ladies at Hull House mapping out that great city after
Charles Booth’s plan, with the drinking saloons, the houses
of ill-fame, and the Churches marked, and the gradations of
poverty among the native and the foreign quarters. This
is as much God’s work, impelled by the tides of His Spirit,.,
as praying and preaching and singing psalms.


I have often been asked about the peculiar tenets of
Unitarianism, and it has been supposed that as we do not
admit the Deity of Jesus Christ, we do not have any faith
in the Holy Spirit, whereas we have the strongest faith and
reliance on its influence. In the advanced currents of modern
thought and speculation it is the third Person in the orthodox
Trinity that is the God who is really believed in. Creation
is so removed from us by the distance of seong of evolution,
in which the original fiat of perpetual progress and develop-
ment from the lower to the higher seemed to have been
given but once, leaving all to law and order, that it is through
our spiritual nature, its needs, its longings, and its satis-
factions that we feel the reality of the Great Upholder of the
Universe. As Tennyson says in ‘The Higher Pantheism” —•
Speak to Him, for He hears, and Spirit with spirit can
meet;
Closer is He than breathing, and nearer than hands and
feet.
God is law, say the wise, 0 soul, and let us rejoice,
For if He thunders by law the thunder is yet His voice.
Law is God, say some; no God at all, says the fool,
For all we have power to see is a straight staff bent in
a pool.
And the ear of man cannot hear, and the eye of man
cannot see;
But if we could see and hear that Vision, were it not He ?
Even to the orthodox Christian, who believes that Jesus
Christ once for all satisfied Divine justice by His death on the
cross, and who gives Him the second place in the Trinity, the
obligation is carried very far back, and he continually looks
through the vista of nineteen Gentries for all that he owes
to the Redeemer of the World; but as we read in the fourth
Gospel in the last farewell to the disciples, the Comforter was
to abide with them for ever, telling of the Father, and leading
them into all truth. Things that they could not bear now
would be revealed to them when they were ready to receive
them, as well as those things they had heard from the Master’s
lips brought back to their remembrance. Yes; that univer-
sal pervading Spirit has spoken to each in his own tongue; and,
in spite of ecclesiastism, which limited it to authorised and
conventional channels; in spite of secularism, which would
smother it in the rush of worldly business, or pleasure, or the
hard grind of work for daily bread; in spite of extravagant
enthusiasm which misapplies its teaching and runs to extremes
and fanaticism, that Spirit is immanent as much as in past
days, and always works for good.


And yet of the thousands of hymns appointed to be
sung in Churches, how many are devoted to; the creative
Spirit who made and governs the world, how many to the life,
and especially to the death, of Jesus Christ, and how few to
the Spirit which calls us, which inspires us, which sanctifies
us?
Prayer in most of the Churches of the world consists of
adoration and praise, of acknowledgment of sin and unworthi-
ness, of thanks for mercies received, chiefly for a way of pardon
and redemption through the life and death of the Incarnate
God on the cross, and of desires for the heavenly rest- —-safe
from all the evil of this world. But little acknowledgment
of the many blessings of this life and of this day. Indeed,
it seems as if all that was done for us had been accomplished
in the first thirty-three years of the Christian era, and that
we must hark back to them for all our hope and our inspira-
tion. What I love in the poem I hajve taken for a text is
that it brings God to us here and now, and I am glad that
it speaks of consecration, and not of self-sacrifice.
As Maeterlinck says admirably: “In this world there are
thousands of weak noble creatures who fancy that sacrifice
must be the last word of duty; thousands of beautiful souls
that know not what should be done, and seek only to yield
up their life, holding that to bet virtue supreme. They are
wrong; supreme virtue consists in the knowledge of what
should be done—whereto wo should offer our life.” To a soul
that is slowly awakening all appears sacrifice, inclination is
always at war in the duty, but When it has entered fully into
its inheritance, all sense of painful effort has gone/' In the
land of Beulah, where the command of the conscience is the
delight of the soul, nothing appears hard. In our poem this
high attitude is not called self-sacrifice, ascetism or martyr-
dom; it is called consecration. It implies loftiness of spirit
as well as sympathy ; it implies self-respect as well as devout-
ness ; it implies repose as well as intensity. Maeterlinck warns
us against excessive sympathy. He says: “It is not our para-
mount duty to weep with all who- are weeping; to suffer with
all who are sad, to expose our heart to the passerby for him
to caress or to stab. We must bear in mind that we are; cus-
todians of our life, that to fulfil our spiritual destiny, to ac-
complish right to the end the task for which we were created,
is more vital to ourselves and more difficult than to sacrifice,
that is to give up our moral existence to the first one who
chooses to; take it.”
I am apt to use the phrase “quantity of being” to express
the degree to which we have attained in self-development


through our absorption of that viewless, voiceless Spirit of God
which is ever ready to fill the waiting soul. Before we can
give out we must first acquire 1 , and when we have acquired
enough we shall.lose the idea of sacrifice even for our greatest
efforts and our hardest tasks.
I again quote from Maeterlinck : “Nearly all the greatest
things of this world have been done by men who concerned
themselves not at all with ideas of sacrifice. As a rule, it
is far easier to die morally, nay, even physically, for others,
than to learn how best we should live for them. There are
too many beings who thus lull to sleep all initiative personal
life, and absorb themselves wholly in the idea that they are pre-
pared and ready for sacrifice.
“I delight to do Thy will, O' God,” is the expression of
the attitude of the strong soul. The grand and good woman,
Frances Power Cobby of whom I spoke recently in this Church,
never spoke or thought of sacrifice, though she made many for
conscience sake, and in the course of her work.
And millions who, humble and nameless, have consecrated
their lives and their talents to service of some kind, to the
pursuit of truth, to the diffusion of knowledge, to the soften-
ing of the hard lot of their suffering fellow-creatures, rational
or irrational, to the sweetening and beautifying of life all
around them, are themselves unconscious of the great work
they are doing. They ask for no reward. Give them only
the glory of going on, and the hope that when death stops
their earthly career some one or more will carry on their
work here, and that they will be themselves raised to no idle
heaven, but to a similar though higher plane of work and
progress.
Shakespeare says: “Spirits are not finely touched but
to fine issues,” and that is as good as any text in the Bible.
Instead of expecting little from ourselves we should expect a
great deal; the more finely our spirits are touched the more
noble should be their work. The gift from God implies a
consecration to the service of man, with no flourish of trumpets,
no popular applause, but simply because of the sense of
brotherhood which flows from our belief in the Fatherhood of
God. And some consecrated souls have yet to learn the
Fatherhood of God through their realization of the Brother-
hood of Man. There are secularists like Bradlaugh and Holy-
oake, who have worked for human freedom and human better-
ment, without the consciousness of the Divine mandate. And
there are hundreds and thousands who are toilsomely and
ungrudgingly adding to our knowledge of the physical world,
and of our own frames, without any religious feeling con-


sciously entertained, but indirectly benefiting the human
race'. They speak in their own tongue, and they are not
quite sure what lesson the world is learning. I have been
recently reading a book by Carl Snyder on “New Aspects of
Science,” from which I extract the following striking passage
in “The World Beyond Our Senses.” He speaks first of the
strange, empty world seen by Helen Keller, the girl wlm lost
sight and hearing at the age of twenty-one months, whom I saw
and heard in Chicago eleven years ago, who has recently taken a
degree at Harvard University: “The world wherein lives
Helen Keller would seem to us, translated! there singular
enough. In her world floats no sound. The rustle of the
forest, the roar of the cataract, the harmonies of Beethoven
and Wagner, the magic of the spoken word, enlist no thrill.
Dawn and dusk, days and seasons, are to her alike. The glory
of the summer, the burgeoning of the spring, the colors of the
autumn, are known to her only by dim changes in the warmth
of her skin. The places of the earth are all the same, the
desert or the crowded Strand of London. Bagdad or the
Yosemite differs for her only in its smell. Save for the reports
of those around her, conveyed by touches of their fingers on her
hands, of the living world she knows little, and could learn
little more.
“And we, dowered with the seeing eye and the listening
ear, have pity for this stricken girl. It is but very slightly
we realise that in some sense w© are all Helen Kellers, and
that ours, too, is an Helen Keller world. Suppose' by some
magic that our eyes might be opened so that we could see the
filmy waves of light that reflect for us the landscape and the
morning sky, the waves of sound which bear to us the carol-
ling of the lark; suppose that in the dancing air we could see
the myriad particles wildly chasing each other at a speed of
nearly half a mil© a second; that in the lump of sugar or
grain of salt dissolving in our cup we could watch the twirly-
wirly Sir Roger de Coverley dance of the atoms, partners skip-
ping gaily one to the other like as on a ballroom floor ; sup-
pose we could watch the twinge of pain, the thrill of joy as it
travels along the nerves; that we could see the lines of force
which circle round a magnet and generate electricity in a
dynamo; suppose that beyond the deepest red or the faintest
violet all the colors of the spectrum could be opened to our
view, would not such a world seem as weird to us as would
our visible world could Helen Keller’s sightless eyes be touched
by the light of day?
“It is from our eyes that wo learn most. Our other senses,
marvellous as they seem, cannot tell us half as much. They


measure and compare every little dot and stroke and turn in
the printed page so hopelessly bewildering to the untaught,
and alike the gleam of a star, distant it may be hundreds of
thousands of millions of miles. Yet beyond all that the eye
may see, that ear may hear, that hands may feel, outside of
taste and smell, outside of any native sense, there lies an
unseen, unheard, unfelt Universe, whose fringe we are just
beginning to explore. A flash, so to speak, from this super-
sensual world came with the discovery of the Rontgen rays.
It is now eight years since we first learned that we may look
into our own bodies and see our bones, and the wonder has a
little died. But they are still called X-rays, for we know not
what they are or where they belong.
“On we go, compressing air, discovering and utilising
radium, and there is no apparent limit to our gains. The
union of the practical with the speculative and scientific makes
it as far certain as anything human can be that each acquisi-
tion is 'permanently retained. The number of devotees to
science, not in one country only, but all over the civilised
world, will prevent such a darkening, such an eclipse as bar-
barians and bigoted ecclesiastics plunged the world into after
the fall of the Roman Empire. And, above ail, the mechani-
cal genius of man has constructed the delicate instruments
for measuring and weighing, for analysing and separating, for
testing and experimenting, which were unknown to the giant
intellects of olden times.”
The book from whom I make this extract is material-
istic in its tendency, but when I read of the great men who
have spent themselves without stint in the pursuit of truth
and in the application of science to the needs of men, I feel
that the great Spirit of the Universe must speak through
them as well as through the devotional and the benevolent
souls who feel after God in other ways. Kepler said : “My
God, I think Thy thoughts after Thee,” when he sought and
found some of the laws of Nature. And one of the greatest
of our modern scientific men, William Thomson, Lord Kelvin,
who has just completed his eightieth year, who has dealt with
Geologic time and Plutonic forces, has never had his faith
shaken in God. Last year, in a lecture on “Rationalism,” he
said “that scientific thought had been compelled to accept
the idea of creative power. We are absolutely forced by
science to believe with confidence in a directing Power, in an
influence other than physical, dynamical, or electrical forces.”
Thus, where some of us call it Science, let us, with this great
man, call it God.


sZ\
giia|
i> 1
/-V w
g 1 —^
r—j
>0
§>
?i— 3
>l I
l~




