

EAGLESFIELD
(THE NEW SCHOOL, 1867)
DAELINGrHUEST, SYDNEY.
(OPENED FEBRUARY, i86~.)
T. D. P. S.
187 9- HSTo. 1.
JULY 16.
v* \
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME AND CO., PRINTERS,
186 PITT STREET,
1879.




3. —Various Class Lists.
1, —Address of the Principal,
2. —Prize List.




ADDRESS OF THE PRINCIPAL.
July 1G1h,1879.
The profession of Teaching ought to be honourable. The title of School-
master ought to be respectable. He is credited by the world with the
due performance of important duties towards the State, or at least
towards individuals. He maintains, generally speaking, the reputation
of industry and morality, and is generally, if not in all cases, much better
informed in science and literature than those who avail themselves of
his assistance in the education of their sons. And yet one cannot but
detect, and the schoolmaster cannot but feel, that there is an under-
current either of contempt or of compassion for his position in the minds
of English people in general.
It would be easy to say that this is the fault of the people. But
such an answer is not an explanation ; and the fact needs to be accounted
for. There are special reasons arising from obsolete or nearly obsolete
arrangements which have had much influence in forming English opinion
on the subject. Of these the principal I believe to be the restrictions
which in England, under the Established Church, practically made every
teacher either a clergyman or the subordinate of a clergyman ; and
secondly, the habitual expectation of Church preferment as the reward
of successful management, or sometimes of mismanagement, of a school.
This English practice had, or rather has had, a prejudicial effect upon
the Profession, if I may be allowed to use the term, both within itself
and in the judgement of the public, and this effect is still visible even in
New South Wales. But it is evident, whether this cause is now in oper-
ation or not, that local errors of practice will, as a rule, only account for
local misapprehension, and that some more general disqualification must
be at the root of our failure to obtain a higher estimation than we do.
One reason is found in the fact that many of our number are men who,
for want of some element in their character, have broken down in the
pursuits for which they had prepared themselves; while others have
received, but not profited by, an expensive education, intended to fit
them for positions which they have failed to obtain, and resulting in
unfitting them for any other walk in life. There are many other causes
which it would be tedious to enumerate; but that which weighs most
with myself, and of which I am most conscious, is the tendency to
pedantry on the one hand, and to impatience of opposition on the other,
which is naturally engendered in the daily labour of the Schoolmaster.


The impatience arises from a misconception of the Teacher’s duties, and a
forgetfulness that a pupil stands in everything but age, learning, and the
requirements of discipline on the same level as himself; we think of
the mote in the other person’s eye, and forget the beam that is in our
own. But the other is a continual, if contemptible, danger. The
incessant attention to small matters of detail which is incumbent upon
us leads us to magnify their importance, and to diminish the relative
value of each subject as a whole. It becomes a sort of mental short-
sightedness, in which our vision of a landscape is restricted to small
accidental bits in immediate proximity to the eye, cannot clearly discern
even the middle distances, and is quite blind to the great panorama that
lies before our unconscious gaze. To obviate this ever recurring danger
there is no better method than now and then to withdraw the mind
from the details of daily work, and endeavour to obtain a clear and
wide prospect over the field in which our labours are appointed.
To-day, therefore, instead of entering into any considerations as to
the relative value of various portions of the curriculum, instead of de-
fending Drawing, or modern Languages, or Gymnastics, or Geography,
or any other special subject, and instead of discussing as I have done on
previous occasions, the particular methods which have been successfully
applied here or elsewhere in their teaching, I propose to lay before you
a few thoughts as to that function of school work which is to fit a man
for Life, disregarding for the moment the consideration of those lessons
which are intended to qualify him for immediate employment.
We want, then, to make our pupils capable and useful citizens ; and
secondly, to make them in the true sense of the word, gentlemen; and
last, because most momentous of all, and at the same time least within
the scope of human calculation, men of pure and unselfish life, and of
that high principle which, fearing God, fears nothing else.
We want this, of course, but, equally of course, we shall not get it.
We cannot, even in our most sanguine moments, venture to hope for the
realization of more than a very small per centage upon our aspirations.
Yet, as the range of the shot increases with the elevation of the gun, so,
within similar limits, does the effort to attain the unattainable result in
larger advantages than would have been secured under a less audacious
ambition. And we may, therefore, disregarding the doubts and sneers
with which we are assailed, proceed to consider once again how our plans
are to be laid for the campaign upon which we suppose ourselves to be
entering. We desire, then, first, to bring up boys so that they shall be
qualified, and desirous, to do their duty in that state of life into which it
shall please God to call them. I know that it is a phase of modern
thought to cavil at this expression, and to assert on the contrary that
the duty of every man is to endeavour to rise to some condition regarded,
by what is called Society, as a higher one than that which he already
occupies. I only mention the point to dismiss it, having no doubt about
the matter, and this being neither the place nor time for a full exami-
nation of the question.
Now, in order that they shall be qualified for their duty, they must
have acquired the habit of industry, or rather of steady work, and the


faculty of concentration of their whole mental (and if necessary, bodily)
functions upon a given object for a given time. The habit of steady work
may evidently be produced by industry in any one branch of study or
practice. Perhaps of all the elementary school subjects Arithmetic is of
the greatest primary service in this respect: but the work is continued in
every lesson of whatever kind which seems to the pupil to be very hard.
We need not attempt to draw an exact line between steady work and
concentration, though they are quite distinct branches of mental develope-
ment, and though the first may be called a Habit, inasmuch as it is
generally exercised without conscious pressure from the will, while the
Faculty of concentration, though capable of being cultivated by habitual
practice into an unconscious function or habit, seldom or never attains
this stage in men of ordinary intellectual power, and continues to act
only under the direct command of the controlling resolve.
But this faculty of concentration is in nine out of ten cases only
rudimentary in young people. And the enormous difficulty which all
teachers who understand what they are doing meet in the develope-
ment of this rudiment, is, I believe, the true cause of the introduction
into the education of the young of such violent stimulants as flogging,
now happily almost extinct, but succeeded by an extreme competition
whether for public honours, or for large money prizes, disguised under
various honourable surnames. And this unwholesome stimulation of
the young intellect is naturally followed, at no remote period, by a
morbid and often fatal abhorrence of any thing like earnest thought.
The literature which is to-day popular among the majority of young
educated men in England is, I believe, of itself an evidence of the truth
of this allegation.
I have been in my time a believer in, as I was trained under, such
a system of unrestricted and fierce competition; and if my opinions
have changed it is not that the system did not happen to suit myself.
And I do not wish it to be supposed for a moment that I am
opposed to competition and emulation altogether. On the contrary,
I regard them as of the utmost value in giving additional life and
interest to study, and use them freely every day in classes, and occasion-
all} r in examinations for honours. Their evil influence begins when the
pupil, or indeed the teacher, begins to think rather of the examination
than the subject; it is growing when he breaks or slurs the regular
routine of his course in order to “ prepare for examination” ; and it has
reached its fatal maturity when “likely” passages, questions and problems
are picked out for special cram, and every known peculiarity of the
examiners’ method is carefully studied for the purpose of passing off
upon him some coached up scraps of learning as a fair sample of the
candidate’s attainments.
This whole business is so miserably destructive of intellectual
power and freedom that it cannot, I trust, last very long. Examina-
tions are and always will be regarded as a necessary part of education.
But not many in a life-time; and none on Text-hooks. Books nourish
our intellectual powers, if we feed on them properly; but cramming
is injurious to digestion. Examination as to our knowledge of the


Subject is unfortunately, considering the amount of conscious and
unconscious imposture in the world, expedient and necessary. But a
competitive examination which is to test the quantity of Text-book
which each candidate has succeeded, not so much in assimilating, as in
swallowing and retaining until the critical moment, is not to be called
useless, but disastrous, to healthy education.
And all the efforts that the examiners make (as they do) to stem
the current are vain. They are in the hands of the crammers, and
their efforts but struggles against the stream. Cramming will increase
and improve year by year. It will look more and more like the real
thing, but will he so less and less, like some Manchester cottons we have
heard of, in which the “dressing” increased in a few years from
25 to 200 per cent!
And after all the sacrifices which the system involves, the not
uncommon destruction of health or of life itself among the delicate and
ambitious, the substitution of material for intellectual aims in all, and
the angry resentment of those who fail, what is there to show for the
system 1 Has scholarship improved 1 Are the winners in examinations
better, or abler, or pleasanter men than the losers 1 There is room for
the questions. It may be that the average standard has been somewhat
raised, but lam doubtful even of that. However, I distinguish, of
course, between the Competitive Examinations which lead to places of
emolument, and those in which the reward is honour only. The latter
are by no means so pernicious as the former. On the contrary, if they
are rare and severe, they are of admirable service. But such examina-
tions for admission to the Foundation in the noble endowments of
England, whether in School or College, bear in addition to the charges I
make the more shameful and indelible brand of spoliation of the poor.
Admission by Competitive Examination as closely excludes the poor, for
whom and for whom alone these famous endowments were founded, as if
it were made a clause of the new statutes that the competitors should be,
not indigent, as the Founders desired and stipulated, but sufficiently
wealthy to secure the most expensive teaching in England for their sons
as a preparation for their competition The most expensive I say, for the
“ coach” who is able or is believed to be able to secure success for his
pupils in such an examination, can charge what he likes, and does so;
while without “ coaching” few, it is understood, have any chance of
success. Ho election should be made by examination, but by the
electors after an examination, the result of which should be one, and
only one, of the many factors which should combine to form their
judgment. After the age of twenty or so there need be little favour
shown to the poorer. If of equally good metal, he will by that time be
the superior of the wealthy competitor who could easily have defeated
him five years before. It will be understood that reference is here made
to the English practice rather than to that which is found in Hew South
Wales, because in the mother country it has now been in force for many
years, commencing in the Universities, and gradually extended in its
application to the higher education in general. Here, on the contrary,
the system has but recently taken root, and has not been encouraged


by the existence of numerous and wealthy endowments, nor by the
surrender to public competition of all appointments in the public
service, an act which was prompted by an honesty on the part of
Ministers which shrank from corrupt action, and was yet not sufficiently
masculine to carry out its own principles on its own responsibility and
at its own risk. To examine into the working of a method satisfactorily
we must observe it in its most complete and mature development. And
therefore, in this question 1 have referred to England principally.
The system of Public Examinations which has been initiated here,
in imitation of the modern English practice, is free from many of the
objections which are urged against the purely competitive system. And,
depending as it does for the most part, upon the general or common
schools of the country, it is less likely to fall into abuse. But it has
already produced, in a lower degree, many of the evils which I believe
to be inseparable from the system.
I cannot doubt, from general observation and information, that the
natural tendency of the teacher to devote himself especially to the more
promising pupil, to the detriment of the duller, is fostered and increased
by the distinctions which a large success in the examinations confers
upon him. And lam equally certain that there is a growing tendency
among the scholars to fly to “ Crammers,” and to study text-books instead
of subjects. lam still more certain that the examiners discourage this
to their utmost. But so long as text-books are named the evil will
spread. There is only one which I would except and retain, and that is
Euclid. A Latin, French, or German Book, if large enough to defy
mere memory, is not a text-book in my sense of the word. It is a
Subject like any other. And the time will come, and that before long,
when the text-book will be relegated to the sphere where it may be
useful. Meanwhile, so far as my own practice is concerned, though I
do not object to examinations of a certain kind, and though I know
only too well the imputations to which my action lays me open, I shall
continue to teach without the slightest glance at the conditions under
which my teaching may be supposed to be tested. On the other hand I
do not here say that I shall not occasionally give special prizes for special
subjects, in which the candidates’ relative proficiency may be determined
by a competitive examination. But the ordinary school prizes have never
been given in this school, nor will they ever with my consent be given,
according to the result of an examination pure and simple. I therefore
deliberately preclude myself from the use of this particular spur to
stimulate flagging industry.
The difficulty then, of developing rudimentary powers of concen-
tration, remains with us unsolved, and the more difficult of solution in
consequence of the general adoption around us of the stimulating or
forcing method of culture. Yet the difficulty must be met. If we
cannot develope that faculty of concentration by fair means, we have
little right to censure those who are less scrupulous in using any means
which will produce the desired effect.
Now it must be clearly understood that under no circumstances,
and by no means whatever, can this power of concentration be


developed to any considerable extent in a very large majority of boys
of average ability. But as almost every one has a rudimentary sense
of music, which can be cultivated to a certain extent, and which then
stops positively at a certain point which is only ascertained by trial;
and as in the same way every one can be taught to draw, or paint, up to
a certain mark, beyond which it is impossible for him to pass ; so is it
with this power of mental concentration, without which no man
can be really excellent in any trade, business, art, profession, or
science, while with it he will as surely, though it may seem unaccount-
ably, outstrip all competitors. It is capable of a certain degree of
developement in almost any boy, but in very few cases to a very high
degree of perfection.
Now the school studies which most immediately test, and therefore,
if duly used, develope this power, are in the usual order of their course,
Grammar, Euclid, and Logic. The latter indeed is often omitted, as
belonging rather to the studies of the University. And indeed, as I
have often shown, the first book of Euclid, treated as a text book of
examples in accurate reasoning, so that the pupil is familiarized with
the forms and nomenclature of Logical processes, is quite enough for
our purpose.
I need not remind parents or pupils that the school subjects
against which the most hearty and vigorous objections are maintained
are precisely these—Grammar —and Geometry. How many ingenious
reasons are given for the surrender of both ; and how few on either side
are sufficiently alive to their enormous importance for the purpose of
vivifying, developing and maintaining that power on which all excellence
depends. It must be borne in mind that mere industry of the ordinary
kind will not gain in these subjects the same results as it will in others,
in Arithmetic or Algebra, for instance. Nor will occasional concentra-
tion, which is quite possible with many boys who do not make it
habitual, come to much good, either in school or in the world outside.
But it will be asked—How, by what means, or methods, or by
what pressure is this habitual concentration of the Reason to be
evolved out of its rudimentary and microscopical condition. This is a
natural and just inquiry, and the hesitation I feel in beginning the
reply arises from the sense which I entertain of the vast and over-
whelming importance of the subject. For the full answer to this ques-
tion involves the determination of the whole training up of a child in
the way he should go, from a time long before he, or she, can speak,
until the individual has to assume the absolute and undivided x’esponsi-
bility for his own actions. And this is clearly beyond our present scope.
I will only briefly say this. That the first step towards the cultivation
of strength of will ought to be taken early, as early as possible, and that
this step is the subjugation of the petulant Self-will of the child,
What we call Self-will is exactly the opposite pole of the Will Rational,
It is waste of time to ask whether they are different phases of the
same faculty or not. It is quite sufficient to see that they are different
things.
Every one knows that from one cause or another this subjugation


of Self-will is very rarely completed, to say the least of it, in a boy at
his entrance to school. In some cases it has not been even attempted,
in others attempted so injudiciously as to have done more harm than
good ; in others has been more or less sufficiently advanced, and in some
few, where exceptionally good seed has fallen upon exceptionally good
soil, satisfactorily effected. With all these varieties of condition the
schoolmaster has, in his turn, to deal; and it may easily be supposed
that the complexity of his task renders particular description impossible.
But at any rate some general outline, it will be said, may surely be
indicated. It may then be stated as a fact, that the study of Grammar
(and this implies Latin) and Geometry form the most useful training
for a vigorous and athletic tone of mind. But these studies are
admitted to be difficult, and even painful, at least in the outset. How,
then, if we surrender the use of the usual stimulants, because we believe
them to be unwholesome, can we induce a boy—or indeed a man—to
begin and to persevere in what he feels to be painful, and whose
reward he can but dimly imagine 1
There is only one force which can compel him, and that is his own
will. So long as the will remains inactive, no faithful work can be done
in anything. And while it is sluggish and undecided, only the easy and
vulgar acquirements can be reached, and that with a very vague and
uncertain grasp. When it awakens, the memory becomes a new faculty,
and such tasks as the learning of languages, Algebra, Geometrical
drawing, and the like, turn to agreeable and fruitful studies. But
when the Will is wide awake, and springs up fresh and vigorous, then
the lions which stood in the path to deter the sluggard draw aside before
its determined advance. Then the student finds that the expense of
the first step is already paid. The nettle is found to be stingless.
This is all very promising indeed. But how can we get this Will that
is to do all these fine things into a wide awake condition 1 An outline
of the method may perhaps be sketched, but it will, I fear, be likely to
disappoint the inquirer.
The object is the subjugation of Self-will, in the first place, to the
Bational Will of the teacher ; and in the second, to the growing Reason
of the scholar. And the path towards that object is nothing more
wonderful or mysterious than the faithful performance of a routine of
duties which most are apt to think very tedious and very contemptible.
We do not know why it is that the moral will is only formed by
the continuous practice of little moralities ] nor how it is that the
intellectual will is in like manner developed by the incessant and
persevering repetition of small exertions of the intellectual faculties.
But it is the fact ; and it is in the acquisition of such arts as distinct
pronunciation in reading aloud, neat and accurate writing, addition
and subtraction, multiplication and division, that the power is obtained
for the far more difficult exercises which Grammar presents. This, if
ill taught, being the most difficult portion of the work which a child
has to get through, becomes the most detrimental of all elementary
studies to mental energy. If well taught, or perhaps I should
rather say, if well mastered, it is of all studies the most electrical in its
effect, from the first day that a young boy assimilates the distinction


of subject and predicate, substantive and adjective, verb and adverb.
And when the mind is, so to speak, saturated with Grammar and its
Logic, that is to say, when it is imbued with an unconscious familiarity
with the nature and distinction of the conceptions which lie at the base
of our common knowledge, no subsequent stage of school work will be
found to present unsurmountable difficulties. But I would warn parents
and teachers alike, that if a child have once been badly entered into
Grammar, he scarcely ever recovers from the effects of his false start.
It is much better to leave the subject out altogether than to purchase
such a disaster for an empty name. It is a difficult and unsatisfactory
task to teach children Grammar in their native tongue. They may, of
course, be taught to speak, read, and write grammatically without any
conscious exercise of thought. But though this is right and proper, and
though without it we cannot proceed further, yet this is not Grammar.
Grammar is a science requiring hard thinking. Its elementary portions
are hard for a child, yet within his reach ; its higher problems are among
the most abstruse in Philosophy. The science of Language is the science
of Thought itself. But even in its most elementary form it is more in-
telligible when studied in a foreign tongue than in our own; and Latin
is, for many reasons, the best for the purpose. Grammatical Latin is,
therefore, our first stage of serious difficulty. The difficulty is enormously
increased by the tiresome and paralysing practice of beginning with the
Accidence. Begin with the science, and learn the Accidence as
necessary, until a sufficient number of detached facts are known to make
it worth while to string them systematically together in Declensions and
Conjugations. Now, every rightly-put question in the Syntax of any
language, requires the pupil to think in order to answer. Memory will
not serve. And so the practice, the testing, the sifting, proceeds from
day to day, some minds awakening early, some late, some, alas, not at all.
The work may be and is relieved from monotony by the subject matter
of the passage upon which the class is at work. But the teacher must
remember that it is the science which is the main thing. Boys of an
industrious turn prefer the Accidence, which charges the memory only.
Idle ones hate both with a perfectly sincere hatred. But I must not
enter into details.
Geometry—and this for practical school purposes is Euclid—is the
next stage. (Elementary Algebra is of not much use, if any, apart
from its application to the solution of arithmetical difficulties, as in the
ordinary problems given in Equations). And to make sure that the
pupil is not here also trusting to memory, it is desirable that the
first start should be made without book on the black board. Here again
no answer can be made without thought, which is, for a young boy,
severe thought. It is not necessary to preclude the use of books except
in class, and after some careful preliminary practice the book may be
freely used.
Having thus given a hasty sketch of the elementary course which
culminates in Geometry, I return to the general question of Qualification
for the Tasks of Life by the habit of steady work and the faculty of
concentration.
If a boy has been trained, or rather encouraged to train himself


to steady work, and cultivation of that higher faculty into habitual
use, he is certainly qualified to do his duty in that state of life into
which it shall please God to call him. And in his case it is morally
certain that he will also be desirous to do it, and that he will do it too.
Such a young man, whether of good moral principle or not, in
whatever condition of life he may be, will never be satisfied to exert
less than his utmost energies upon the work which he has to do. If he
should be a day labourer, he will not spend his time and ingenuity in
finding out how near a shilling’s worth of work he can do for seven
shillings a day ; if a clerk in a public office he will never say or dream
of thinking that he will do just the value of his “screw.” Whether
his motives for hard work be good or bad, his work will be thoroughly
done, slurred neither from indojence nor hurry.
So far we have considered only the qualification for entering suc-
cessfully upon special study or special work. We have now to consider
something of the manner in which the boy, youth, or man should guide
himself so as to be in the true, not transcendental, sense of the word, a
gentleman.
If you see a man who is clean and neat in person and dress, who
is courteous in manners, agreeable in conversation, and whose language
is simple, accurate, and free from profanity or indecency, you at once
call him a very gentleman-like man. You are not yet warranted in
calling him a gentleman, because, for all you can tell this may be but
the external paint and varnish of the creature. He may be a grasping
man, a liar, or a cheat; he may break all the commandments in their
turn, and all you see may be a mask for his real business.
How no one will call a screw, a curmudgeon, a liar, or a cheat, a
gentleman. (It is true that grave crimes are held in society to be
compatible with the character.) But short of this extreme hypocrisy,
there are many men who show a fairer front in “ form of plausive
manners ” than is quite consistent with the true state of their internal
arrangements. A man may show all the externals that I have
mentioned, and may be also quite clear from dishonour, vice, or crime,
who yet is in no way a gentleman inside. He may be selfish, unfeeling,
cruel, or mercenary, may use to the utmost any legal advantage which
fortune puts into his hands ; may in short live in the habitual per-
formance of a thousand acts which no true gentleman would perform.
He cannot then fairly be called a gentleman.
Again, we can imagine a man of the strictest honour and integrity,
perfectly unselfish, brave and compassionate, who nevertheless cannot,
except in the transcendental way, be called a gentleman. His person
and clothes may be unclean, his manners may be rude, his language
harsh and incorrect, perhaps interlarded with terms of an objectionable
character, and he may on the whole create quite as wrong an impression
in his disfavour as the “ swell ” of whom we spoke above did to his
own advantage.
The cases are rare, btit of sufficiently frequent occurrence to warn
a parent or teacher from being misled by plausibility on one hand or
roughness on the other. No rule can, as far as I can see, be laid


down for the formation, of the character of the true gentleman.
The essential foundation of generosity, and real regard for the feelings
of others, is laid by nature, and education, in any sense of the word,
can do little more than endeavour to see that it is neither morbidly
extended, nor selfishly contracted.
And here the discretion and self-respect of the teacher may stand
the scholar in good stead. No teacher, of course, will allow of foul
language, swearing, stealing, or other immorality, so far as he can
prevent it. But unfortunately these are the very things that he cannot
prevent. These offences are all of necessity—with reference to the
teacher, who is, so far as such things are concerned, in the position of
policeman—committed, if committed at all, “on the sly ; ” and become
worse, as being secret vices, than if committed in the face of society.
But if the teacher while reprobating these detestable forms of misconduct
also ranks with them as equally abominable, the very discreditable
vices of street lounging, tobacco smoking, betting, gambling, and the
like ; and if, at the same time he manages to encourage sneaking —that
is giving of private information by a scholar against the character of his
fellow-scholars to a master, he has done as much as he fairly can, not
being intentionally a perverter of youth, to demoralize (or confuse the
moral perception of) the boys who are unfortunately under his charge.
An accidental issue of this practice is that there is no redress for real
wrong or cruelty among the boys, since the fear of being considered a
sneak comes to outweigh all other considerations, and the master is left
in ignorance of things which boys of honourable feeling would other-
wise either prevent or expose.
We have seen what a teacher can do to harm a boy’s chances of
becoming a gentleman. For a boy cannot he a gentleman—be can only
be a gentlemanlike boy, to become a true gentleman in time. We must
now see what he can do in their favour. First, he must deal with boys
as he would with gentlemen. If any statement is made to him as to a
matter of fact which he cannot believe, but is unable at once to disprove,
he must accept it. Not “ believe” it, as Arnold is reported to have
said. That is a matter quite beyond our discretion, as it is beyond our
power. But we must accept it, as we should the word of any man in
society who stated something which we could not quite believe, which
was indeed exceedingly improbable ; but of which we had no certain
grounds for contradiction. Secondly, he must never listen to a com-
plaint made against people in general. “ The boys,” or “ some of them ”
is in the mouth of ill-bred, ill-schooled boys, the equivalent for the cat
with the clumsy or dishonest housemaid. As the girl says that the cat
breaks the crockery, and steals legs of mutton, so the boy says that he
left his Principia in his shelf, his hat on its peg, or his slate on the table
a minute ago and “ some of them ” have taken it away. There are
occasions when such a complaint is true ; but they are rarer than many
a teacher supposes. When a boy has once found that it is a sufficient
excuse for his own negligence, or idleness, to pretend that “ some of
them ” have done something, he applies it, like the bad housemaid,
indiscriminately ; and the most prodigiously absurd thefts are charged


against “ some of them.” Thieving in a school is indeed a miserable
calamity, but it would be better to have an undetected thief among us,
than that any number of honourable boys should incur the smallest
shadow of suspicion for that of which they are innocent. (At the same
time it may often be necessary to affect large numbers for the offence
committed by an unknown and cowardly creature. Here, however, there
is no imputation of dishonour upon those who, innocent themselves, are
deprived of privileges on account of the secret misconduct of perhaps one
individual. It is hard, but cannot be helped.)
Thirdly, the teacher must insist upon a cheerful tone in answers, I
take it for granted that he will insist upon a respectful one. There are
some schools in this country in which boys are allowed to answer in
class in an aggrieved tone, as if they were under some unjust compulsion.
How this habit is most detrimental to the formation of the manners of
a gentleman. “Guessing” is bad for the intellect. Pertness or affect-
ation of wit is offensive, and productive of disorder, but neither can be
considered as bearing much upon the point we have in view. But the
“ Peter Grievance” way of answering is really a very bad practice indeed.
I need hardly add that all servility in manner must be summarily
stamped out. A boy should either answer as a witness in the box, or in
the natural manner of gentlemen in conversation. Nothing can be more
nauseous than the incessant repetition of ‘ Please, Sir,’ ‘ Please, Sir,’ in
class, and it is quite incompatible with the demeanour which ought to
prevail on either side.
Fourthly. The teacher should always treat with courtesy all boys
not actually in offence. Though they may have been in the wrong half
an hour ago, they may want to be in the right now, and it is not just to
throw any stumbling block in their way. No “previous conviction”
should ever be thrown in a boy’s teeth who has not at that moment
been found guilty of the same offence. The disregard of this principle
creates an unhappy antagonism which it is very difficult to eradicate,
however unreasonable it may be. When a boy has persuaded himself
that a master has a “down upon him,” he gets into a hopeless condition
of unreason and misconduct. It is not to be supposed that our language
is always courteous. I speak for myself, but I might, lam sure, speak
for teachers in general. It would be a very bad thing if it was, unless
indeed, perhaps, the extreme of courtesy in language went hand in hand
with a similar extreme of severity in corporal punishment. That con-
junction has something to be said for it.
Fuither than this the teacher can only generally encourage an
open and straightforward demeanour, simplicity of speech, and disinclina-
tion to make excuses, even where an ingenious one may be readily
found. He must also put down all sly tricks with peashooters, squirts,
passed letters, upset ink and the like, as distinguished from ordinary
forms of disorder. In this he will find more difficulty than he
anticipates, but he must keep trying.
I am not vain enough to suppose that I carry these views fully into
practice. But I dare boldly assert that I never lose sight of them.
Drill, gymnastic exercises, dancing, and elocution are iall handmaids


to dress the outward form and air of a gentleman. I allude to them
here only to show that Ido not undervalue them. But at present lam
concerned with the inside rather than the outside.
The third object of general Education is to produce men of pure
and unselfish life, who fear God, and therefore fear nothing else.
This is a theme too high for present discussion. But I do not like
to pass it over quite in silence, because I see in the minds of many,
who think seriously upon the subject, an unfortunate confusion or
ambiguity of ideas. Such a character as I speak of is not to be
established by any theological training. Theology, as by far the most
difficult of all sciences, can never be in any kind of way understood by
the young or the uneducated. I suppose that all divines, of whatever
school or sect, must admit this. It follows as a matter of course that
all reasoning upon dogma, and therefore all controversy, and all denun-
ciation of heterodoxy, must be excluded from schools. 1 believe that
such subjects are, from the good sense of the managers, in most cases
thus excluded. Still, wherever a denominational school exists, as also in
all Sunday schools, there is a strong, though it may be unacknowledged
or unconscious bias towards bringing into excessive relief, the theo-
logical peculiarities which attach to such denomination. And it is
difficult to avoid argument when specific propositions of the kind are
enumerated, On the other hand, there may be sometimes ground to
suspect that in schools which are not subject to any distinctly religious
supervision (and this supervision unfortunately involves some expresssion
of theological opinion), a distinctly atheistic mode of thought may, at
least, in some degree, be propagated without the directors intending it,
or knowing that such is the case. For you must well recollect that
the great mass of the most popular scientific writing of the day is
positively and often confessedly Atheistic. About this there is no
manner of doubt. The question then with the thoughtful and God-
fearing parent is often—How shall I deal with this dilemma 1 There is
on one side the danger of forming a mind narrow, prejudiced, and unable
to see behind its blinkers, but still a mind that can recognize a God.
On the other hand there is the danger that the religious faculty shall be
so stunted and deadened by absolute disuse, that it will cease to be a
factor in the conduct of life.
If there were no choice but between these two, I should surely
advise the preference of the first, as far the least of the two evils. But
I confess I could never see why the existence of this dilemma should
be presumed. I believe it to be in every way advantageous to the
State that its whole population should be brought up at the same
common schools. It follows that nothing directly contrary or insulting
to the faith of any sect must be taught. But it is not only possible
for, but it is the most binding duty of the teacher, while silent
respecting the specialities of each sect, which will be certainly, in the
case of religious people, inculcated at home, to observe and maintain in
whatever portion of the School course, a reverent and religious tone of
thought and phrase. There is no subject which does not in itself, from
time to time, remind us of the narrow limits of human intellect and


human energy, and of the infinite wisdom and power of God. And the
whole process of teaching and learning is not only an intellectual but
also a Moral operation, while for morals there seems to be no intelligible
basis but the Conscience, that is, the Reason and Will controlled by the
Word of God. You cannot indeed appeal directly to the Conscience,
except in very serious matters ; but you can always keep before you and
your pupils the idea of duty to God, as well as of duty to Man. This
may perhaps be fairly called a recognition of that Faith which is the
basis of all vital religion under whatever creed, and from some partici-
pation in which no part of the human race has ever been excluded.
But as I said before, this theme is too high for the occasion. I will not
enlarge upon the subject.
Referring to another matter, of certainly less general importance,
but nevertheless of some interest to those concerned in the direction
or use of this School, I have to mention the proposed change of name,
from “The New School,” to “ Eaglesfield.”
This alteration has already become familiar in an irregular
manner to many friends and pupils; and I now desire to lay before
them the reasons for such change, considering that all ‘ aliases
lie under a certain shadow of suspicion.


EAGLESFIELD-
THE NEW SCHOOL, 1867.
This school has now been at work since February, 1867, when it was
opened under many difficulties, and in a very incomplete condition. I
do not wish to refer at present to the circumstances under which I con-
sidered myself bound to enter upon an enterprise for which I had very
insufficient means ; but I may thankfully declare that I have never as
yet seen reason to regret the undertaking.
The schoolroom, and the small buildings in immediate connection
with it, were just completed in time for the opening, when it received
its first levy of pupils, to the number of fifty-four, most of whom had
migrated with me from the Grammar School. There was then no
Gymnasium, no master’s residence, no paved way, or shelter from the
weather, except the school verandah ; and the playground, which was
all rough turf and patchy rock, was only inclosed by a tumble-down
fence. To make up for these inconveniences, the playground, I must
admit, was very much more extensive than it is now. The whole
paddock between Kirketon House, now the property of the
Hon. G. Lord, M.L.C., to the south, Rosebank garden to the west,
William-street to the north, and Darlinghurst Hoad to the east, was
open and unoccupied, and was, of course, utilized by the boys in the
various ways that they understand so well. Besides, the great old fig-
trees, pines, and oaks of Rosebank overhung and sheltered a strip of
fine greensward, where now the lane called Kirketon-street, and the
stables of our neighbours, occupy the ground. Things soon, however,
began to alter, and the alteration proceeded with great rapidity both
outside and inside our boundaries. The Gymnasium first sprung up,
but only as a covered playground. Then I obtained two more adjoining
allotments to the north, on which the Schoolhouse now stands. The row
of houses between this and William-street was piece by piece completed.
The trees which I had planted in the ground began to make a respectable
show, the gymnasium was fitted up, the schoolhouse built, and covered
passages and pavements were added, until by degrees the New School
assumed its present familiar appearance.
And now that the New School is twelve and a half years old it
may fairly claim to have attained its majority, and to be entitled to a
new name on the very ground that it is new no longer.
Now, there died in Oxford in 1349, or 530 years ago, a North
country Englishman, a resident in Queen’s College, of which he was also
the founder, named Robert Eaglesfield, or, as written in accordance with


the North country grammar, which rejected, then as now, the possessive
inflexion before the noun, Robert Eglefeld. And it is his name that
I propose to adopt for the New School. He was a clerk in holy orders,
confessor to Queen Philippa, the wife of Edward the Third, had evidently
been himself educated in Oxford, and had in all probability accompanied
the Queen in her campaigns on either side of the Border between England
and Scotland, and there witnessed the frightful devastation which the
savage and incessant wars of Edward I. had spread wide over both
countries.
At any rate, he so took to heart the desolation of his native land
and the consequent destruction of all schools and other places of
learning and religion therein, that in devoting all the little property
which he possessed to the foundation of a college which should close its
fostering bosom against no race or deserving nation,* he yet stipulated
that on account of the devastation of their country, the great indigence
of the beneficed clergy, and the extraordinary rarity of any kind of
learning in those districts, a preference should be given in election to
natives of Cumberland and Westmorland, among whom I have the
honour to rank myself, f
To this college thus founded more than five hundred years ago, and
which under the favour of many successive Queens Consort of England
has grown from a very small beginning to its present wealth and
importance, I owe my University career. I had been destined for
Cambridge, as it was supposed that, the bent of my mind being rather, in
school-days, towards Mathematics than Classics, I should be more likely
to benefit by the studies of that University, than by those in use at
Oxford. The advantages, however, offered by the foundation of
Robert Eaglesfield, finally brought me to Queen’s, where I became
taberdar or scholar on the original foundation of Robert Eaglesfield, and
was in due course elected Fellow, remaining for several years in College,
and working assiduously enough at my tutorial duties and the drawing
up of our new statutes and general study, until, in those tranquil groves
of literary leisure, I was gradually brought to the resolution of removing
out of Oxford, and indeed out of England, to some place where rougher
work had to be done. And it turned out that Sydney was to be the
scene of my future labours. |
It is only natural that I should still regard with affection and
gratitude the ancient house of which I became a member more than
o
* “ Ita tamen quod, si habiles fuerint, propter patriae vastationem, personarum
in eadem indigentiam ampliorem, literaturseque in ipsa insolitara raritatem, illos
proponent qui de comitatibus Oumbriae et Westmerlandiae fuerint oriundi, &c.,
&c. ” —Statutes of Queen's College, p. 12.
f “ Adjicio quod sicut Universitas Oxoniae, juxta sui nominis designationem,
universes suscipit undecunque ad ipsam causa studii confluentes, sic et Aula prae-
dicta nulli genti vel bene meritae nationi sinum claudat subsidii, ut quam univer-
salis sit scholarium ipsius Universitatis recollectio, ipsorum assumendorum ad
aulam praemissam sit tam generalis election.” —Statutes of Queen's College, p. 12.
| See Appendix.


thirty years ago, and to which I owe so much ; and it is not less natural
that I should bear a special respect to the memory of the good and
faithful man who founded it with all his earthly goods in January, 1341,
nearly five hundred and forty years ago !
I dare not call this school Queen’s College, for a college is a body
corporate, and this is none; nor Queen’s Hall, for that is the ancient
name of the College. Nor is there any right or reason for my calling it
the Queen’s School.
Let me, therefore, in memory of our Founder’s wisdom, charity,
and devotion, attach his name to this very remote offshoot of his plan-
tation, so distant in time and in space, and in all the circumstances of
human society, and yet so directly traceable to that act of his—five
hundred and more years ago.
I propose, then, to give the New School the name of Eaglesfield, not
without some faint hope that it may yet grow into a shoot that shall also
endure and increase like the parent tree.
PRIZES.
When the first distribution of prizes took place in this room, in
December, 1869, I explained at some length my views upon the subject,
pointing out at the same time how much more easy and less invidious
a task it is to decide rival claims by a single examination, pure and
simple, than for the teacher who is also the daily examiner of his
pupils, to determine who are to be preferred, and in what degree. And
there is a further disadvantage attaching to the latter method, that as it
greatly enlarges the possible number of prizes, so also it increases their
expense, until this may be considered to become a serious consideration.
Nevertheless, as I believe it to be the most just, and the least in-
jurious, system for the award of school prizes, I have no intention of
making any alteration in it. It is, however, necessary, as the other
arrangement is so generally accepted that any departure from it
requires some sort of apology and explanation, to re-state on each
recurrence of prize-day the principles upon which prizes are adjudged.
In the first place, then, the prizes are of at least three degrees ; those
of the first class indicate that the pupil to whom it is awarded has,
without any serious exception, fully satisfied his teachers in his conduct,
his industry, and his proficiency, and that during a whole year. It
would be difficult for a very young boy to succeed in gaining this dis-
tinction, as he has not yet attained to adequate self-command to maintain
a sufficiently steady bearing, or to attend to lessons without occasional
distraction. The second order is in recognition of good work and good
behaviour, inferior however, one or both, to that distinguished by the
first, while the third is given where there is reason to be well satisfied
with either work or behaviour, but not with both, or not fully ; and no
pupil is eligible for a prize of any of these three degrees unless he has
been in continuous attendance during the four preceding quarters.


APPENDIX.
I hope I may be pardoned if I mention here that I had first made up my
mind to take the charge of Upper Canada College, Toronto, and had actually
done so, principally upon the advice of my friend, Mr. Goldwin Smith ; and that
it was only when I had been warned that I might probably find the climate of
Canada too severe, that I was induced by Professor Jowett (now Master of Balliol)
and Sir Charles Nicholson to turn my attention to New South Wales ; these
gentlemen being then engaged in the appointment of masters for the Sydney
Grammar School. I knew very little about the colony, but was attracted by the
opening which the establishment of a perfectly new school in a new country offered
for an attempt at a more rational system of Grammar School education than I
had ever seen in operation in England ; and I was encouraged in my plan, and my
opinions on this point were, with slight exceptions, confirmed by the approval of
my kind friend the Provost, now Archbishop of York. And I take advantage
of this opportunity to add that I should never have relinquished the position
which I originally held as Head Master of the Sydney Grammar School, but that
I found that my efforts were so little seconded, I will not say thwarted, by
persons who ought to have assisted me, that I had made up my mind to surrender
that post, as requiring a different kind of man than myself, when a vacancy
occurred in the chair of Classics in the Sydney University, for which my friends
urged me to apply. Indeed I was assured, before my application, of a majority
of votes. While still hesitating, I received a letter from Sir Charles Nicholson,
which had been sunk somewhere, in the Red Sea, I think, on the passage, and
may therefore have been a little late, informing me that on the news of the
lamented Woolley’s death, the Archbishop of York, with whom I had held no
communication since my arrival in Australia, had written to the senate recom-
mending me as a very fit person for the vacant Professorship.
After reading a copy of this letter I could hesitate no longer, and, confess,
lived in a sort of Fool’s Paradise for a week or two, thinking that I might now
have some advantage in this new position for carrying out many plans which I had
then in view. However—after a series of delays, which told me plainly enough
that I should not, in all probability, be elected—a final decision was arrived at by
the Senate, in, as I have been given to understand, a very small meeting, and by a
very small majority, that they would send to England for a Classical Professor,
who should be fully acquainted with all the most recent improvements in teaching.
That under the circumstances the senate were able to secure the services of so
eminent a scholar as Dr. Badham was a very fortunate, though I confess I had
thought a very improbable result. In the meantime though, while still seeking for
an escape from my perplexities, I was labouring at my duties to the very utmost
of my powers, an enquiry was formally initiated, with every circumstance of insult,
into my conduct as Head Master. Indignant and angry as I was, I warned the
Trustees, as I had done on a previous occasion of the same kind, that on the
conclusion of the investigation, whatever the result might be, I would resign,
and that meanwhile I would use my best efforts both for the conduct of the
school and the promotion of the enquiry. As month after month of this
preposterous business dragged on, I found that the limit which I had proposed,
verbally only, for my connection with the School, was too early ; and, in extending
that term, when I thought I was sacrificing my own interests to that of the
Institution, I found, too late, that I had done what was construed into a formal
the urgent remonstrance of Sir John Young, at that time Governor, I
wrote on September 1, 1866, to withdraw my resignation. On November 19, it
was decided, under circumstances which many will recollect, the Chairman
voting twice in order to obtain a majority of one, that my resignation should be
accepted. I protested against this evasion of a verdict, but in vain, and had to
set to work at once, as I did not mean to leave Sydney, to organize a new school.
While still carrying on, to the best of my ability, the institution withwhich I
was still connected, I had to buy this land and build this schoolroom, so that its
being opened on February 2, 1867, was a kind of feat in School engineering.


* Norton, J.
Levy, H.
Macarthur, A.
Levy, L.
Jones, T.
Pope, W.
Holdsworth, E.
Burdekin, T.
Gilchrist, W.
Burdekin, N.
Gilchrist, J.
* Fitzhardinge, A. [p]
* Harrison, T.
Fitzhardinge, R.
Manning, A.
* Moss, L. [p]
* Hay, R.
* Penfold, W. [p]
Curtis, H. [p]
* Smith, R. [p]
Spencer, H,
* Campbell, J. [p]
Lamb, P.
Campbell, W.
* Barker, T.
* Bemey, G. [p]
Campbell G.
Forbes, C.
Taylor, H.
Jordan, T.
Molony, J.
PRIZES.
Ist Class. — Hancock, S.
Albery, F. J.
2nd Class. W.
* Myers, M.
Lee, F,
*o’Neill, G.
Marks, H.
Kite, W.
* Albery, E.
Davis, G.
*Hay, N.
Harris, E. H.
3rd Class Marks, P.
Icely, C.
Machardy, R.
Innes, G.
Wren, D. C.
Leary, J. G.
Hammond, P.
Woodhouse, M.
The names here following, not having been in continuous
attendance for four succcessive quarters since last Prize Day, are dis-
qualified for prizes.
* Those who are marked thus * are specially commended for good conduct and application,
[p] Awarded Books in token of special merit.


PUPILS (N. S.) EAGLESFIELD
July, 1878, to June, 1879, inc.
Norton, J. A.
Macarthur, A. H.
Williams, F. S.
Hancock, S. W.
Jones, F,
Holdsworth, E. J.
Norton, W.
Myers, M,
Gilchrist, W. G.
Gilchrist, J. W.
Holle, H. G.
Harrison, F. J. W.
Manning, A.
Thorne, S. H.
Hay, R. T. D.
Curtis, H.
Marks, H.
Marks, P.
Bremer, E.
Spencer, H.
Lamb, P.
Barker, T.
Icely, C.
Campbell, G. H.
Taylor, H.
Lee, F.
Machardy, R.
Hay, C. D.
Innes, G. M. L.
Wren, D. 0.
Molony, J.
283. O’Neill, G.
287. Leary, H. J.
290. Levy, H.
291. Hammond, P.
292. Woodhouse, M.
293. Kite, W.
294. Levy, L.
295. Cohen, M.
296. Albery, J.
297. Albery, E.
298. Davis, G.
299. Pope, W. R.
300. Milford, J.
301. Pearson, C. H.
302. Hay, N,
303. Harris, S. H.
304. Burdekin, T.
305. Burdekin. N.
309. Penfold, W. C.
310. Smith, R. M,
311. Campbell, J. B.
312. Campbell, W. D.
313. Berney, G. A.
314. Forbes, O.
315. Jordan, T.
316. Stephens, C. T.
288. Macarthur, E. J. B.
289. Leary, J. G,
306. Fitzhardinge, A. G.
307. Fitzhardinge, R. E.
308. Moss, L.


ORDER US' ENGLISH.
June, 1879.
DETERMINED BY WRITING FROM DICTATION,
DIVISION I.
* Curtis, H.
* Hancock, S.
O’Neill, G.
* Moss, L.
Holle, H.
Hay, N.
* Smith, R,
* Myers, M.
Kite, W,
Norton, W.
Penfold, W,
Albery, J.
Albery, E.
DIVISION 11.
Innes, G.
* Campbell, J.
Marks, H.
* Pearson, 0.
Burclekin, T.
Leary, H.
Wren, D. C.
Gilchrist, J. W.
Burdekin, N.
Woodhouse, M.
Lee, F.
Leary, J.
Bremer.
Williams, F.
Davis, G.
Thome, S.
LOWER ENGLISH.
RECITATION AND PARSING.
Cohen.
Lee,
Burdekin, T.
Campbell, J,
Icely.
Hammond.
Marks, P.
Burdekin, N.
Woodhouse.
Hay, C.
Macarthur, E.
Leary, J.
Wren.
Davis.
Machardy.
Harris.
Pearson,
Fitzhardinge, A.
Campbell, W.
Milford.
Berney.
Stephens.
Jordan.
Fitzhardinge, R.
Forbes.
* Specially commended.


ORDER IN LATIN.
December, 1878.
UPPER SCHOOL.—DIVISION I.
Curtis, H. j
Harrison, T. > seq.
Holdsworth, E. )
* Hay, T. D.
DIVISION 11.
Kite, W.
Hay, N.
Barker, T.
O’Neill, G.
Holle, H.
Macarthur, A. H,
Gilchrist, W. G.
Norton, J. A.
Remove A.
Bremer, E.
Thorne, S.
Remove B.
Pearson, C. H.
Marks, P.
Davis, G.
Leary, J.
Levy, L.
Lee, F.
* Spencer.
LOWER SCHOOL.—DIVISION I.
Woodhouse, M.
Burdekin, N,
Wren, D. C.
Macarthur, E.
DIVISION 111.
Marks, H.
Leary, H.
Norton, W.
Williams, F
Albery, J.
Jones, F.
Innes, G.
Myers, M.
Albery, E.
Gilchrist, J. W.
Manning, A.
Lamb, P.
* Molony, J.
DIVISION 11.
Campbell, G.
Burdekin, T.
Icely, C. \
Hammond, P.)
DIVISION 111.
Levy, H-
Cohen, M.
Machardy, R.
Harris, S.
Hay, 0.
Milford
N.B. —Those Pupils who left before December Examination are denoted by
an Asterisk, and their places estimated from the September lists, which have not
been printed.


ORDER IN LATIN.
June, 1879.
DIVISION I.
Curtis, H.
Kite, W.
O’Neill, G.
Holle, H.
Hay, N.
Norton, W.
LOWER SCHOOL-DIVISION I.
Hay, C.
Cohen, M.
Fitzhardinge, A.
Harris. S.
Machardy, R.
Campbell, W.
DIVISION 11.
Myers, M.
Leary, H,
Albery, J.
Albery, E.
Innes, G.
Marks, H.
* Gilchrist, J. W.
* Penfold, W. C.
* Williams, F.
* Smith, R.
DIVISION 11.
Berney, A.
Fitzhardinge, R.
Stephens, C, T.
Forbes, 0.
Jordan, T,
DIVISION 111. and Remove.
Pearson, C. H.
Leary, J.
Woodhouse, M.
Marks, P.
Campbell, J.
Burdekin, N.
Lee. F.
Wren, D. C.
Davis, G.
Burdekin, T.
Macarthur, E.
Bremer
Hammond, P.
Icely, C.
OUT OF LATIN.
Hancock. S.
Moss, L.
Thome, S.
Macarthur, A.
* Order Alphabetical, in consequence of absence, and other difficulties in the way of proper
classification.


ARITHMETICAL CLASSIFICATION.
Hay, J. N.
Moss
Hancock
Curtis
Norton
Smith
Marks, H.
Kite
Macarthur, A.
Albery, J.
Albery, E.
O’Neill
Leary, H.
Williams
Holle
Davis
Innes
Myers
Leary, J.
Campbell, J.
Burdekin, T.
Burdekin, N.
Pearson
Forbes
Jordan
Bremer
Thorne
Hay, C.
Macarthur, B.
Icely
Machardy
Fitzhardinge, G.
Bemey
Cohen
Campbell, W. D.
Fitzhardinge, R.
Milford


Curtis
Norton, W.
Moss
Hammond
Kite
Hancock
Hay, N.
Hay, 0.
Smith
Albery, J.
Pearson
Cohen
Penfold
Woodhouse
Lee
Wren
Icely
Davis
Holle
Leary, J.
Marks, H.
Special Class ( Mans . Marie).
Curtis.
O’Neill.
* Hancock.
* Norton.
* Macarthur, E.
Elementary Classes.
Myers.
Holle.
Innes.
ORDER FOR MAPS.
FRENCH.
Bremer
Innes
Forbes
Thorne
Jordan
Wren.
Bemey.
* Specially commended.
Macarthur, B.
O’Neill
Albery, E.
Milford
Berney
Myers
Burdekin, N.
Marks, P.
Campbell, J.
Stephens
Machardy
Harris
Leary, H.
Fitzhardinge, G.
Campbell, W, D,
Fitzhardinge, R.
Albery, J.
Pearson.
Leary, H.
Marks, H.
Woodhouse.
Davis.
Campbell, A.
Penfold.
Williams.
Machardy.
Campbell, W.


GERMAN.
Smith.
Curtis.
O’Neill.
Myers.
GEOGRAPHY.
(voluntary.)
Curtis.
Pearson.
Hancock.
Moss.
Macarthur, A.
Myers.
Holle.
Penfold.
Cohen.
At same hour as Gymnastic Lessons.
Hay, C.
Woodhouse.
Davis.
Leary, H.
Harris.
Marks, H.
Williams.
Cohen.
Fitzhardinge, A.
Stephens,


EAGLESFIELD.
GENERAL MEASUREMENTS
December, 1878, to June, 1879.
Showing the Height in inches , Girth of Chest in inches, and Weight
in pounds averdupois.
December, 1878.
April, 1879.
June, 1879.
J§ A W) g § M) |> f 0 4 .1?
ojz; & ® - s tj ® - s jh ®
m W b b b
-a -e
140 70 34| 140 70j 34| 139 absent.
155 7H 31J 136 72 32 147
175 65i 33 131 ... 664 344 140
186 644 284 104 66 29f 111
195 644 29 96 absent.
215 67| 34 1234 absent.
217 64J 304 113 654 33 i 126
219 52| 234 61 53f 25 63
220 67| 36 137 absent.
221 61£ 30 98 62| 30J 103 absent.
228 55 254 70 55f 25f 72
231 absent. ... ... ... absent.
233 64f 34£ 132 absent.
236 not measured. 66J 29£ 112 674 304 115
241 absent. ... absent.
246 65 30 96 66£ 31* 111
247 69£ 31 127 69| 304 1304
248 60i 27 87 62 284 103
256 68J 33 139 684 334 147
257 absent. ...
258 67 444 221 67 44 225
260 624 31 108
262 584 30 89 61 314 103
269 61f 29 80
271 absent.
272 68 31 122 68| 314 130
274 54 264 69 54£ 26| 724


31
GENERAL MEASUREMENTS — continued.
December, 1878.
April, 1879.
June, 1879.
School
No.
-+3
r-S
.s°
w
-*3
'f-l
3
-*3
'to
m B
>
-»3
A
.2°
'S
w
tj
o
43
'to
£
■+3
s
w
rQ
O
•43
*s
£
276
not measured.
59
27
80
279
584
27
83
604
274
93
280
624
32i
114
634
324
114
not measured.
281
283
64
absent.
30
113
• V
66
absent.
314
125
287
654
32J
109
664
334
123
288
58|
254
81
59|
25|
87
289
62f
294
109
644
304
122
290
291
58|
60
28J
27
92
78
614
absent,
274
86
292
65
324
126
654
334
131
293
66
35
126
664
354
130
294
295
60
534
294
25
95
62
534
absent.
24
66
296
631
31
101
654
314
106
297
634
304
100
644
314
100
298
604
28
84
61J
284
90
299
300
52|
absent.
264
65
544
absent.
264
72
301
584
264
83
59
27
88
302
704
31
123
714
33
130
303
54
26
76
55
27
82
304
584
27
78
60
27
86
305
55
25|
66
551
25|
71
306
544
27
72
544
27
74
307
484
244
48
48
244
49
308
654
324
109
664
33
118
309
604
28
100
614
28
103
310
644
29
100
644
304
107
311
56|
254
72
57
264
75
312
52|
254
68
53
254
70
313
624
284
99
62f
284
101
314
49|
224
50
49|
234
50
315
534
25
53 i
534
25
68


MUO N
PWt XT' A
223—235 DARLINGHURST ROAD.
Principal - - W. J. STEPHENS, M.A., Oxon.
First Class Literis hufnanioribus, and Third Disciplinis
Mathematicis et Physicis, 1852.
Late Fellow and Tutor of Queen’s College, Oxford ;
and First Head Master of the Sydney Grammar School.
General
French
Drawing
Dancing
Gymnastics
ASSISTANT MASTERS.
ENTRANCE, ONE POUND {JZI-)
Quarterly Fees — General Course.
Including Elementary Drawing, Elementary French, and
Elementary German.
QUARTERLY FEES FOR EXTRA TUITION
Drill ........ 1 1
SPRING- TERM, 1879.—COMMENCED MONDAY, JULY 14-
Mr. MILLS
M. MARIE
Mr. RAWORTH
Mr. NEEDS
Mr. D’HARCOURT
1. —Day Scholars . . . . . . £5 ° °
2. —Day Boarders . . , . . . . 9 10 o
3. —Resident Pupils . . . . . . 25 o o
Special Instruction in any of the Regular Subjects, or Dancing . 220
Chemistry . . . . , . . . 3 3®
Gymnastics—lst quarter only, 2nd and 3rd, £1 ; 11 ; 6; any subsequent
quarter, £1:1:0
N.B.—Each pupil is expected to present each morning (except under special
exemption), a written exercise, Geometrical Drawing, Map, or other Drawing.
