

Early Tales
The beginning of the
LUTHERAN CHURCH IN AUSTRALIA
from 1838 to 1880
By J.M.R. Ey
Translated by A.L. Heidrich 1984


Early Tales
The beginning of the
LUTHERAN CHURCH IN AUSTRALIA
from 1838 to 1880
By J.M.R. Ey
Translated by A.L. Heidrich 1984
THE TRANSLATOR IS A GRAND-DAUGHTER
OF THE AUTHOR




"Remember the days of old, consider the years of many
generations, ask thy father and he will show thee,
thy elders, and they will tell thee." Deut. 32 v. 7.
CONTENTS
1. Departure and journey of the first emigrants. 5
2. Klemzig. 14
3. The "Zebra" and the founding of Hahndorf. 19
4. The Synods until the separation. 38
5. The ship "Skiold" and the founding of Lobethal. 45
6. The Pateller and the Church separation at the Synod in
Bethany in the year 1846. 57
7. The "Kavel" Synod. 60
8. The "Immanuel" Synod. 65
9. The Evangelical Lutheran Synod in Australia. 71
r
the following articles with minor alterations to words and
phrases appeared for some years under the heading "From the past"
in the "Kirchenbote" , official organ of the Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Australia. As the heading already indicates in these,
only the tales of the earliest beginnings of the Lutheran Church in
Australia will be told and that in an unconstrained manner. Upon
the request of many readers of the above mentioned Church paper in-
formation of Church affairs of the present time have been included
at the end, however time and circumstances did not allow for more
than a short resume. The author has where possible, avoided con-
troversial matters and allowed the facts to speak for themselves.
If, in spite of this, the author is openly accused of being a party
agitator he confidently submits to the judgement of all unbiased
readers and can assure them that ultimately he can refer them to
the source so that they can verify that the information contained
in these tales has been checked for historical accuracy with the
utmost diligence. May the Lord launch this little booklet with His
blessing and inspire the worthy readers of it when they pray "Thy
Kingdom come" to include in it too the infant Lutheran Church of
Australia.
Lobethal, September, 1880. The Author.




1 Departure and journey of the first emigrants.
It was at Tschicherzig on the Oder, on Friday the Bth June
in the year 1838 that a group of emigrants commenced their journey
to the far-distant South Australia. A crowd of people stood on the
shores of the Oder gazing with various emotions upon the boat to
which the travellers were committing themselves. A few shook their
heads at the foolhardy undertaking by the people who were leaving
their homeland and wanting to go to a practically still unknown
land; others stood there with sorrowing hearts, for many of the
emigrants had to say a sad farewell to loved relatives and friends
they would never see again in this life. There were some among
them too who wailed: Oh if only we could join them and enjoy the
freedom that is still taken from us.
What then was the reason why these people left their father-
land in order to found a new homeland in a distant country? They
were searching for that which was no longer available in their old
homeland, namely to serve God according to the old Lutheran way,
and conduct their divine services, unhindered and undisturbed, and
to be allowed to instruct their children in the pure doctrine of
the Word of God.
Through the enforcement of the compulsory union persecution of
the faithful Lutherans and their pastors took place in Prussia and
this was regarded by many as unbearable.
As all attempts at unhindered religious services proved futile
they still had the one hope that if a deputation telling of their
persecution could reach the ears of the king he would protect and
help them.
End of August, 1837, such a deputation came to Berlin. On
Monday, the 28th August in a short memorandum it petitioned for a
personal audience, or, if that was not possible, permission to pre-
sent a fuller memorandum setting out their religious and conscience
problems to His Majesty. The whole week went by without a response.
During this time a written statement was prepared setting out the
great persecution the Lutherans in Prussia had to endure, together
with a petition to stop the same, and Cabinet Minister Mueller and
the King's personal pastor Dr. Strauss, as chief counsel in the


spiritual ministry were approached to at least support this humble
petition to the king. On departing, one of the members of the de-
putation, while heartily shaking hands with the latter, suggested
to him that "he could use his influential office as the palace pas-
tor, as John the Baptist did, though it would probably not cost him
his head".
On Sunday the 3rd September Pastor Lasius preached a sermon
and celebrated communion in the home of an elder of the Lutheran
congregation in Berlin. The members of the deputation were there
also. However, the police followed them and when the service ended
they, together with the pastor, had to go to court for a severe ju-
dicial examination. During this they were asked what cause they
had for such a deputation. Their answer was: the severe persecu-
tion, the monetary and prison penalties, the seizing of their pro-
perties, their clothing, their cattle and other household and farm-
ing utensils, simply because of their steadfast adherence to the
three-hundred-year special Lutheran Church confessions and divine
services. After this statement had been recorded an edict was read
to them which forbade any depuation to the king. They were sternly
warned, in view of this edict, to abstain from trying to carry out
their project and to take themselves home without delay. But the
deputation did not want to leave without some result therefore sev-
eral declared they would not go until the petition by the Lutheran
congregations had been presented to His Majesty, for the rights of
the Lutheran Church were founded not only on the state laws of
Prussia but also upon peace negotiations and privileges conferred
on the whole nation. The consequence of this outspoken reply was
that the leaders were taken off to prison, and the following day
were cautioned in court by the police to go home quietly. As this
too proved fruitless they were served with transportation notices
which, allegedly had been ordered by the king. When they demanded
to be shown the Royal Order, the Chief of Police told them it was
held by a higher authority but he assured them on his word of hon-
our "the Ministry had ordered that they must leave Berlin 'as soon
as possible' " , but the king with his own hand had struck out the
words "as soon as possible" and then written instead "at once"
when the Order was placed before him. Following this on the sth
September, at 5 o'clock in the morning, the members of the deputa-
tion were taken in a carriage, accompanied by two policemen in civ-
ilian clothing, from Berlin for twelve miles to Frankfurt on the
Oder, where they received their order to depart, together with in-
structions to travel to their homes on a direct route. In the
meantime a copy of the petition left by the deputation had reached
the king, who however, handed the same unanswered to the Minister
of Religion and pronounced the complaints in the lodged petition as
frivolous fabrications and lies and threatened the petitioners in


the strongest terms should the force of the law have to be used
against them in the future.
But towards the end of the same year a number of Lutheran con
gregations joined in a written submission to the Minister of Reli-
gion in which the following several facts were stated;
"That the Lutheran divine services were interrupted by force,
in which even during the preaching of the sermon, the police
forcibly dragged or pushed members of the congregation out
through the door; and if one locked the doors, as the first
disciples of our Lord did, to guard against such evils, the
use of force was greater. So the Policeman Mintzig in Jul-
iusburg behaved at Weaver Bierosch's, arming himself with a
wood-axe, and like a thief and murderer, broke open the
house door and, with the help of his assistants, threw all
the listeners out during the preaching of the sermon.
Whereupon, not the disturbers of the divine service but the
worshippers of God were given hefty fines by the higher
authorities of the state.
Further, how in the village of Lutziene alone, the penalty
for conducting Lutheran divine services amounts to more than
3,000 dollars in fines with the year (1837) only one-third
gone. Similarly, how the Lutherans in Gross-Tschunkawe have
been fined such large sums that their wages for the whole
year have been taken in many cases, for holding Lutheran
Church divine services. Further, how, for having Lutheran
pastors conduct holy baptisms and confirmation services,
householders and widows were held in long imprisonments,
their posessions, clothing, household goods, livestock, even
their ploughs, stolen from them by execution of warrants.
Even where an official (Gattert) from Dunkawe had his child,
which had been baptised by a Lutheran pastor, taken by Con-
stable Berg to Suhlau to the united Pastor Butzki for re-
baptism. Similarly, too, the smith Kreisel from Schwiebe-
dawe had his six-month old child, long since baptised, taken
away by the aforesaid Constable Berg under authority from
the local court to Millitsch and baptised again, which was
then endorsed by the resident judge of the supreme court,
and so on."
At the close of this submission the Lutherans begged that this
shocking evil be stopped and for the Lutheran Church to be allowed
unrestricted and free right of worship alongside the United State
Church; and also for the freedom of their imprisoned pastors and


heads of households; failing this to give them permits to emi-
grate.
In a judgement of the 22nd March, 1838, the first request was
totally refused; as regards the permit to emigrate, they were ad-
vised to apply to the appropriate state sub-prefect.
When finally, after many fruitless efforts the Lutherans were
able to solve their hardships by emigration, many made use of their
permits. We had left the first, who had chosen faraway Australia
as their refuge, on the boats at Tschicherzig on the Oder, and will
now return to them in our tales and go with them in spirit on their
distant journey.
We find our travellers joyful and happy. Though it hurt them
to bid farewell forever to their dear homeland with its many memo-
ries, they already felt the freedom of a bird that has escaped from
its cage, on the ship. Their song of praise resounded under the
unfettered heavens, and their prayers ascended to God. No police-
man hindered them anymore. Their "We all believe in one true God"
and "All glory be to God on high" sounded lovelier and more real to
them than if they had sung it in a church.
On the first day the travellers stopped at the village of Net-
trow, took on brother Fiedler, and then immediately proceeded to
Crossen the following day. A large crowd of curious people had
gathered on the Crossen bridge, some of whom made their mocking
laughter heard, but some, too, marvelled at the courage of the emi-
grants. Then it was full speed ahead to Frankfurt on the Oder, and
they reached this village, which lies before the first lock, on the
Sunday. How happy the brethren were that they could hold their be-
loved Sunday worship service without being disturbed, or even with-
out fear of being disturbed. That was a freedom they had so longed
for and for which they thanked the Lord with all their hearts.
Even the sailors were not unmoved by the proceedings.
On Saturday our emigrants arrived at Berlin and were thus able
to celebrate the second Sunday of their journey in this city.
Early Monday morning, directed by the Prussian State Customs
Officers, they were conveyed in their two boats past the many
bridges to the main part of the city. The expressions on the faces
of the numerous spectators portrayed curiousity, wonder, mockery
and here and there probably sympathy too for the emigrants who the
majority certainly regarded as fanatics, who were hurling them-
selves into misfortune. Many brethren of their faith in Berlin
boarded the boats and accompanied them through Chariottenberg to


Spandau. Their way led past the tents on the Spree where the lead-
ers of this world gathered to enjoy the fresh Summer climate.
While the children of this world enjoyed themselves in their own
manner the Lutheran emigrants sang with hearts filled with emotion
"Come follow Me" and similar hymns. So it should be with Chris-
tians. All Christians are emigrants, for they depart from the So-
dom of this world and direct their journey towards the Land of
Freedom where the Children of God will truly attain their freedom.
The ship in which they sail is the Church of God; their compass,
God's unerring word, and the pilot is Jesus, and His Spirit drives
them to the true goal. This ship certainly travels through the
midst of the world, but its passengers must not dawdle by the way
with childish games, and when the world calls and tempts on every
side they must follow Him who says, "come follow Me".
Soon the brethren in the faith in Berlin had to bid their
farewells and with tears gave them their blessings. The boats
stopped at Spandau. There appeared many extra souls taking part at
the evening devotions, amongst them some soldiers. On saying fare-
well these wished the emigrants God's blessing and were sad that
their brethren had to leave their German fatherland because they
were Lutheran.
The following day, in calm weather, they went past Potsdam,
and the day after through Brandenburg. Then they went by Rathenow
and Havel berg to the last town in Prussia, Wittenberge where the
customs office was situated. Now they were out of Prussia, travel-
led on the Elbe through parts of Hanover and Mecklenburg, and after
three days had the joy of seeing the city of Hamburg.
Here in Hamburg a Mr. Heyn, a well-known person of that time,
took charge of the emigrants, and they were shown such compassion
in this city that they could remember the short sojourn in Hamburg
with pleasure and gratitude towards God and the local brethren.
The ship ordered for them, the "Prince George" had arrived
from London, and as it had already been provisioned by Mr. Flaxman,
the travellers, on their arrival (it was on the 6th July) were able
to go in their little boats from the Oder to the ship, transfer
their belongings and move into their cabins between-decks.
After they witnessed the arrival of two further Oder boats
which brought a further party of Lutheran emigrants to Hamburg
their ship set sail early Sunday morning at 2.00 a.m. on the Bth
July. However it soon hove to and halted for three days waiting
for a doctor. During this time a child of brother Jensch died and
was buried on the banks of the Elb. Cuxhaven was reached early on


Friday. After a stormy passage over the North Sea, during which
time the remains of an elderly couple, Langeschen, had to be com-
mitted to the deep, twelve days after its departure from Hamburg,
the "Prince George" cast anchor about an hour's distance from the
English town of Plymouth. Because of unfavourable winds the con-
tinuing journey was delayed for ten whole days and the passengers
had the opportunity of seeing the town and the surrounding dis-
trict. It was a delight for them to see towns and green fields
again, but a greater delight still to them was that Pastor Kavel,
who was to accompany them to Australia as their pastor, was able to
embark here as a new passenger.
While the passengers go ashore and sight-see, and the "Prince
George" takes on fresh water, we will take the opportunity to be-
come acquainted with the more important facts of Pastor Kavel's
life.
Pastor Kavel was born on the 3rd September, 1798, in Berlin
where his father was a tailor by trade. He was the eldest son, one
of five children, and received at his holy baptism the names August
Ludwig Christian. His parents, though living in poor and humble
circumstances, were pious and upright people who brought up their
children in the fear and admonition of the Lord. As their first-
born son soon showed an aptitude for study and a desire for learn-
ing, his father decided to set him aside for an academic life, al-
though, because of his meagre circumstances, he could not see at
the time how it would become possible. August Kavel first attended
the ordinary elementary school, then for several years the gymna-
sium at "Grauen Kioster" and during the years 1817-1820 the Univer-
sity of Berlin. Although as a student he had to contend with phys-
ical troubles, he applied great effort to his studies, and later
also by private tuition acquired the necessary tuition, and somehow
even managed to help maintain his parents.
At this time Rationalism was in its full flower and Christian
Professors were a great rarity. Blessed with a Christian upbring-
ing in his parental home, Kavel was given a solid foundation when
he came up against doubts as to the beliefs of fundamental Chris-
tianity. Inner struggles and battles of the soul, and a searching
for the truth kept him from the intemperance of student life, and
drove him to prayer and the searching of the Scriptures.
After he had passed his two exams with distinction in 1820, he
soon received a call as a pastor to the village of Klemzig in Zuel-
-lichau.
At his ordination in Berlin he was required on oath to support


the Holy Scriptures and the symbolic books of the Evangelical Luth-
eran Church, and the question was put to him, was he prepared to
surrender all goods and possessions, even body and life, for the
sake of this divine truth, to which question he replied "Yes".
The congregation was in a pitiful and derelict state and of spiri-
tual life there was scarcely a glimmer to be found. Through the
faithful witness of Pastor Kavel a revival occurred, which at first
involved only a single soul or two and then gradually increased to
greater dimensions. The pubs, the gambling dens, and dance halls
became empty and the time which previously had been wasted in these
sinful pastimes was now devoted to God's Word, Bible study and
prayer meetings. As the stipend for the Klemzig pastor was a good
one, Pastor Kavel had his parents and dependant brothers and sis-
ters come to live with him and thereby showed himself to be a
grateful son.
The Union was introduced into Prussia in the year 1830, and
also Pastor Kavel, who too had in the past a great admiration and
leaning towards the Moravian Brethren (actually the mother of the
Union) joined them as he was not convinced of either their danger
or of their false principles. Nevertheless he came to a better un-
derstanding in the year 1835, and at Easter of that year he, to-
gether with a large number of his spiritual children, left the
State Church, and, because of his convictions, forfeited his posi-
tion, livelihood, and house and home and was compelled to move with
his dependants out under the open skies, cast upon the care of God
and sympathetic people. But as the persecution of members not con-
forming, of which we have already heard, began to occur. Pastor
Kavel very soon thought of emigrating, so in 1836 he travelled to
London to enquire about the matter, either to America or to some
other country to be arranged. However, not until the middle of
1838 were the Lutherans in Prussia able to get permission to emi-
grate, and until then Pastor Kavel had to sojourn in England. Dur-
ing this period he came in contact with Mr. G.F. Angas who was
agreeable to sponsor the emigration by providing the necessary
guarantee.
Just at the time of Pastor Kavel's arrival in London, the
movement there to found a new colony in Australia under different
conditions from the previous ones had come to fruition. A Mr.
Wakefield had put forward the principle that capital and work
skills had to be combined, and that the simplest way to raise the
necessary funds to bring free emigrants to the new colony was by
the sale of Crown Lands, whereas until now New South Wales (Botany
Bay) and Tasmania had been chiefly populated by convicts. Mr.
George Fife Angas had very strenuously associated himself with the
new colonisation scheme and purchased many thousands of acres of


Crown lands. So when he heard of Pastor Kavel, and that he was
proposing to emigrate with his religious followers he saw and
seized a suitable opportunity to send industrious colonists to his
land and thus to help bring about the Wakefield colonisation sys-
tem.
Pastor Kavel's sojourn in England also proved of great benefit
in that he could here become proficient in the English language.
From London he put out a Declaration dated 7th July, 1838, stating
in the name of the Triune God that he adhered to the Lutheran
Church and to its confessions contained in the seven symbolical
books and in conclusion declared that he acknowledged "that this
Church and doctrine was founded on God's Word, and he adhered to it
and that he would preach no other doctrine to his congregation ex-
cept the truth contained therein, and furthermore, by God's grace,
proclaim it with the utmost vigour, and to perform the rites of the
Holy Sacraments and the Office of the Keys until his end, with
God's help".
How great his joy must have been, when, after years of frus-
tration, the means and ways of emigrating to Australia were at last
found, and the "Prince George" dropped anchor in Plymouth harbour,
with his beloved congregation and his parents and brothers and sis-
ters on board.
After ten days the anchor was weighed again and they set out
for their distant goal. The journey on the whole was a good one,
and on the 30th October the travellers saw the first point of Aus-
tralia. "Thank God ", rang out from every voice. Soon they would
set foot on the land that was their goal and their hope; the land
of freedom where they could worship their God unmolested. However,
it was another three weeks before the ship could drop anchor at the
harbour entrance, on Sunday, the 20th November. August Kavel, the
brother of the pastor, the ranger Fiedler, Mr. Flaxman (Mr. Angas's
agent) and the captain stepped ashore and walked to Adelaide, which
in those days was still not a town like the present Adelaide, but
comprising odd clay or wooden huts, though here and there they be-
gan to erect stone or brick houses.
When the expedition returned to the ship they brought back
with them some Australian plant specimens, leaves of trees, and a
pair of shot birds which afforded the emigrants great joy for they
had before them again mother earth where things lived and grew.
On Monday the pilot brought the ship into harbour and tied up about
a quarter of an hour's distance from the present landing place. As
the unloading proceeded the emigrants went to Port Adelaide. But
the few huts that were there were not sufficient to accommodate


them all, consequently they first had to set to and build huts so
they did not have to camp out in the open. An Englishman also made
available a block of land upon which was built a shed covered with
canvas which could be used as a family house. When the owner of
the land discovered that these people had not come to Australia in
order to get rich, but as a result of persecution because of their
beliefs, he did not charge a thing for the use of his property.
The English too had built a little timber Church which they joyful-
ly and willingly offered to the Germans without charge for their
use on Sundays and also weekdays. So the Lord had given His bles-
sings to the journey.
Twelve persons had certainly died on the journey - the re-
mainder could now thank the Lord and praise Him that He had led
them over the vast ocean with His almighty hand and permitted them
to find a land where no government hindered them from performing
their religious rites.


2 Klemzig.
<r 'rn.
the "Prince George" emigrants could not settle at Port Ade-
laide because there was no opportunity for them to settle in a uni-
ted religious community. Had the tradesmen and labourers gone to
Adelaide and dispersed throughout the land in search of work it
would have been more profitable at first. But they had not come to
Australia because of the money. Therefore they searched for a lo-
cality where they could settle and remain together and form a reli-
gious community. Such an oportunity soon presented itself in which
Mr. Angas temporarily leased to them a section of 144 acres about
four miles from Adelaide, on the banks of the Torrens. By Christ-
mas and the week following our brethren moved into their new place
of residence. But there was nothing there except trees and bushes,
and at that time of the year the ground was so hard no plough could
penetrate it. It was a case of using feet and hands. Trees were
felled, timber prepared for the huts to be erected, clay was pre-
pared, and old and young worked with such energy that in a few
months a whole village stood there completed. The land was divided
into lots, each containing 4 to 5 acres, and as each owner took
possession of his lot he erected his hut and outhouses and thatched
them with reeds from the banks of the nearby River Torrens. The
long row of gabled houses along the street clearing, surrounded by
gum trees and shrubs, presented a pleasant scene and it seemed as
though a little bit of the old German fatherland had suddenly been
resurrected. But the brethren had not only thought of themselves
and their needs, they had also built a manse of the same material
as their own houses only much larger and roomier, and directly op-
posite, a Church with a dwelling attached for the schoolteacher.
Pastor Kavel moved into the manse and his brother Ferdinand Kavel
moved into the teacher's dwelling, conducting his school in the
Church compound. So the first Lutheran Church was established in
South Australia and as she received nourishment in the spiritual
world so too there was no lack of the necessary physical nourish-
ment in spite of the odd shortages. Those parcels of land with
boundaries along the Torrens were soon transformed into gardens
that flourished and blossomed. The resultant vegetables and fruit
found ready market in nearby Adelaide. The virgin soil brought
forth fruit abundantly, so that the first settlers at Klemzig (for
so the new settlement was called) certainly had reason to thank and
praise God.


The quick transformation of this spot and the conduct of its
occupants made a great impression on the English living in the
vicinity. So, for instance, reports an English newspaper of the
time:
"It is well known to all our readers that about 3 English
miles distant from Adelaide there exists a German village
called Klemzig, but we have reason to believe that this
little neighbouring settlement is not so well known
amongst us as it deserves to be. Klemzig lies on the nor-
thern side of the stream on G.F. Angas Esquire's property,
like Adelaide surrounded by stately trees, and from several
points there are views of our nearby lovely mountain range.
The stream flows by and for this time of the year holds a
considerable amount of water. An atmosphere of serenity
pervades this spot which is quite what one would imagine to
be an ideal place of refuge for persecuted piety. The un-
ity and the resigned submissiveness of the German charac-
teristics portray themselves to perfection in Klemzig. Only
four or five months have elapsed since the hand of man
first began to clear this settlement in the wilderness but
already about thirty houses have been built, and some of
these are good and spacious. All are neat, clean and habi-
table; they are mostly of clay or from unfired bricks
which are dried in the sun. The low huts consist of brush-
wood and are thatched with straw. The banks of the river
are covered with gardens. These consist of narrow, un-
fenced strips of land, separated by narrow footpaths. Con-
sidering that the suitable time of the year to cultivate a
garden has not yet arrived, the quantity of vegetables the
Germans already have under cultivation is evidence of their
industrious qualities. The residents are subjects worthy
of no less observation. An unobtrusive observer will find
all and sundry as busy and energetic as the English bees in
spring. They weed, or water, build, fish, milk, wash, chop
wood, carry water and so on outside the dwellings. Inside
the house the housekeeper is pursuing her domestic chores
with like industrious fervour. She busies herself bread-
baking, butter making, cooking and similar activities. No-
body is idle. Even the children who are too small to work
but still big enough to learn, one sees attending school,
receiving instruction from their tireless, admirable pastor
at regular stated hours. The observer would marvel at the
courteous service, with their skills and the fine manners
of the mainly peasant folk. The man will raise his hat as
he passes and courtesy in a manner that is neither uncouth
nor servile. The woman, although perhaps bent under a bun


die of wood, greets the passing stranger with a smile or
some other expression of polite greeting, etc. I think
our neighbours are worthy of note on our part. Driven
from the land of their birth because they would not sub-
mit to the worst type of tyranny which binds the spirit
in chains and which endeavours to force them to give up
their beliefs, they came here, built their religious al-
tar in our midst, and now present to us a pattern of a
practical colonist which is well worthy of our imitating."
We can see from these observations by a foreigner that our
brethren understood the correct manner in which to handle the situ-
ation and to win the respect of their neighbours. In spiritual
matters also things stood much better than in later years, for then
the fire of first love still burnt brightly in the hearts of many
with gratitude to the Lord who had so wonderfully brought about the
emigration, making it easy to follow His Word and Commandments.
But this state was not to endure for long; for the Evil Foe does
not rest when God's Kingdom is being built, and His kingdom is to
be destroyed.
The "Prince George" was followed by more ships bringing Luth-
eran emigrants, and the settlement at Klemzig could no longer ac-
commodate them, so they were scattered, and new settlements founded
in Glen Osmond and Hahndorf. Pastor Kavel, no doubt with the wel-
fare of the Church and congregation in mind, came to the grand de-
cision to re-unite and settle the now scattered flock in one place
so that both old and young could be served so much better. The op-
portunity to do this soon presented itself, as Mr. Angas, through
his agent Flaxman, had purchased 28,000 acres on the Gawler. Pas-
tor Kavel contacted the latter and actually reached the point where
he had already finalised a contract for sale and purchase with Mr.
Flaxman on the 30th June, 1839, by which the Klemzig congregation,
and the Lutherans in Glen Osmond and Hahndorf had undertaken to
purchase 2,000 acres at the enormous price of £lO (ten pounds) an
acre. That was certainly not a very Christian act on the part of
the vendor. But the transaction was supported because of the exag-
gerated claim as to the value of the land, and also because it had
been implied that a town and a university would be built next to
their settlement to which the Europeans in India would send their
sons to be educated. Also there appeared to be no difficulty to
the brethren in sending their produce to Adelaide by ship on the
Gawler River as was thought at the time. So Pastor Kavel's pet
scheme neared its fulfilment - but man proposes and God disposes.
The enthusiasm generated by the prospect of benefit for the
Church's promotion, as well as by the persuasion of their pastor,
soon waned and a repudiation followed. Our brethren considered


just how precarious it was after founding their settlement with so
much effort to leave it again in so short a while, and to move into
the inland. In fact it was a sin if they incurred so great a debt
on top of the debt they already owed, and not knowing if they would
be able to pay it back. On top of this their problem was increased
still more by the fact that the Hahndorf brethren withdrew and the
full burden was placed on the shoulders of the remainder. So the
majority of the Klemzigers declared "we are not moving, we stay
where we are."
That was a severe blow for Pastor Kavel, not only on his own
account because the carrying out of his plan was made impossible,
but also on account of the congregation as the reputation of German
trustworthiness was in danger of being lost because the contract to
purchase bore their signatures. Pastor Kavel declared it a betray-
al of trust and put it to the congregation members as a matter of
conscience to take the land; and even if it entailed a great sac-
rifice, the brethren would have to make the sacrifice for the sake
of the welfare of the Church. Yes! he felt bound for the sake of
his conscience, to refuse to give Holy Communion to any who de-
faulted. This distressing strife dragged on for years and shat-
tered the newly founded Klemzig congregation to its foundations.
During the course of the next two years the moving of the
Klemzig people was to have been accomplished but in fact this con-
gregation continued for four or five years longer. Eventually,
with the consent of Mr. Flaxman, the first contract was cancelled
and it was arranged that individuals could buy land for themselves
from the 28,000 acres acquired by Mr. Angas. So began the congre-
gation of Langmeil on the Gawler, and of the Klemzig brethren also,
one after the other moved there after the relationship with their
pastor had changed.
The houses in Klemzig did not remain empty but were taken over
by later emigrants who, however, did not enter into a union with
the Prussian Lutherans, but chose as their pastor a certain Bor-
chelt, an old experienced Christian man, and as he had had himself
ordained by an English reformed minister, he moved into the manse
vacated by Pastor Kavel. Even now his successor, Pastor Maschmedt,
who was ordained and appointed under similar circumstances, lives
there.
Most of the huts built by the first emigrants have collapsed,
only the sturdiest still standing. The Church is prevented from
collapsing by props. Probably in a few years there will be little,
remaining to show what Klemzig, the first important German settle-
ment soon after the founding of the Colony, was once like.


"For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as
the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the
flower thereof falleth away: But the Word of the Lord
endureth forever


3 The “Zebra” and the founding of Hahndorf.
our weeks after the departure of the "Prince George" from
Hamburg the anchors of a second emigration ship were weighed and
this also was to bring a number of Prussian Lutherans to South Aus-
tralia. It was on the 21st August that the Danish ship "zebra"
left Altona and under a stiff south wind sailed up the Elbe. The
passengers on board numbered 187 persons (106 adults and 91 chil-
dren). These had to contend with many difficulties almost from the
beginning of the journey. As the ship struck heavy seas and was
tossed to and fro many of the upper bunks in between decks became
loose and fell on the lower ones. Children in them were thrown out
and were in no small danger of being killed. The bunks had been
knocked together in a hurry by a man who had falsely passed himself
off as a ships' carpenter. As these were of necessity re-erected,
very few could sleep in the upper bunks during the entire journey
whenever the sea was at all rough.
The passengers were badly smitten with a lot of sickness. A
type of typhoid fever broke out and on the 24th September there
were about eight persons down with the illness. The passengers of
the "zebra" were particularly lucky in that the captain of their
ship was not only a kindly, but also a Christian man. As far as
was possible he did what he could to provide nursing facilities to
ease their troubles, and he cared for them as a father for his
children. Nevertheless it was no easy burden that our fellow be-
lievers had to bear. In the beginning they did this with great
patience and showed submission to God's Will when their relatives
or friends became death's victims and their bodies were swallowed
up by the ocean, but when the sick became ever more numerous and
the onslaught of sickness ever more severe, the spirits began to
sink and complaints became practically universal, "oh" they said,
"None of us will reach Australia; we will perish at sea and die."
To fill to the brim the measure of their suffering scurvy be-
gan to appear. Legs and feet of the passengers started to swell
and the teeth in their mouths became loose, these being the usual
symptoms of the onset of this illness. The captain found himself
in a difficult situation. The doctor, as well as a number of the
sick, insisted that the ship should land at one of the nearby is-
lands. A short stay would not have helped and means were lacking


for a longer sojourn as neither the captain nor the passengers had
the necessary cash, and credit was not available on these islands.
So there was nothing left but to journey on in God's Name and rely
on His Almighty Power to help. The captain consoled the impatient
with the fact that they were nearing the coast of Brazil, and he
would land there if it became necessary. All measures of preven-
tion and to improve health conditions were of no avail, but as the
ship crossed the line God's help came with a mighty force. In a
few days the sick adults began to improve and the children too were
soon well again. Those suffering from scurvy were given large
quantities of sauerkraut and potatoes, and with God's help, soon
began to recover. With this came a new spirit and a new life, and
prayers of thanksgiving rose up to God.
Between the 15th and 16th November they sailed around the Cape
of Good Hope. Until then from the time they crossed the line noth-
ing worthy of note occurred. The captain marvelled at the differ-
ence between these emigrants and those he had carried to distant
parts of the world before. He found the unity which was so evident
amongst them particularly praiseworthy, and held them up as an ex-
ample for the whole world. The rich had shared their goods with
the poor in order to make their emigration possible, even though
they did not know whether they would ever get a farthing back.
Even those who had contributed nothing towards their journey re-
ceived the same quantity and quality of meals as the others, and,
if occasionally dissatisfaction or criticism was uttered about the
food, it came from those who had paid nothing for it.
So, on the whole, the conduct of the passengers was praise-
worthy, but the frailties of human nature came along with them, and
minor disturbances of the peace occurred. There were seven or
eight persons in particular who loved to find fault and could not
keep their tongues in check. However, when the warning was given
to them that they would have to be separated from the others if
they were not quiet, they gave no further trouble.
What the captain particularly noticed and what gave him great
pleasure were the divine services which were regularly held by the
emigrants. He had given the sailors strict orders that they were
not to disturb the passengers' services in any way. It was par-
ticularly moving for him when he beheld the deck full of people in
the evenings, on their knees and often with tears in their eyes,
pray to God for His support and blessing on their undertaking. It
too made a deep impression on him when he heard words such as
these: "You know, oh God, it is not the wish to see other lands,
or the search after transient riches which moved us to leave our
homeland. The faith in You and Your Holy Word has compelled us to


do it. Therefore lead us to whatever place in your vast creation
where we can earn our daily bread and where your divine Word is al-
lowed to be taught, pure and unhindered."
On the 19th December the "zebra" sailed to 42 degrees latitude
south. This was the southernmost point they reached on their jour-
ney. Here an old lady passed away, the captain making a particular
note of this in his day book. She had become very distressed and
consequently became dangerously ill. Already on the third day of
her illness she summoned her relatives to her, took her leave of
them, begged all those around her for forgiveness if she had in any
way offended them, and then, with obvious devotion, prayed a hymn
for the dying committing her soul into God's hands. Scarcely had
she said "Amen" when she stopped breathing - she was a corpse.
Twelve hours later her body was committed to a watery grave.
In the case of a death the procedure on the "zebra" was as
follows: On the death of a person the head of the family would go
to the captain and inform him of the name and the age of the de-
ceased. Then the doctor held a post mortem to ascertain that death
had actually occurred. The sailmaker prepared a big sack into
which the corpse was placed. An hour before the lowering took
place the captain ordered a flag to be flown at half-mast. After
this had been done the deceased was brought on deck. Here the doc-
tor would make another inspection after which the sack, weighed
down with suitable objects, was sewn up. It was then covered with
a big flag fastened to the side of the ship, its ends floating in
the sea. The emigrants gathered around and sang a funeral hymn, a
lay preacher prayed and probably also gave a short address. The
mourners then stepped back and the captain, together with the cho-
sen sailors, surrounded the bier. The door was raised to an up-
right position and the body lying on it slid behind the flag into
the sea. When the covering was raised there was nothing more to
see, the ocean had claimed its sacrifice. How comforting it was to
the bereaved Christians in such circumstances to know that on THAT
DAY even the sea will give up its dead.
Even to the last the devil tried to disturb the peace and
unity of the little emigrant flock. Several of those who had ad-
vanced the passage money for others began to fear that they might
lose it and so wanted to place a lien on unused provisions. But
the others who had paid their passage money objected to that as
they also had a share in the unused provisions.
Also the master tradesmen wanted to assert their master-status
over the workers, but the latter would have none of this as they
declared that in Australia they were as good as their masters and


what they themselves made they could also sell and keep the cash
proceeds. A master bootmaker even wanted to make a rule that the
wearing of wooden shoes would be absolutely forbidden, because
otherwise the whole of Australia would adopt this bad custom and
thus deprive the bootmaker of a living, which would be against the
seventh commandment. The quarrelling became so heated that the
captain had to step in and explain that the emigrants would find
that laws already existed in Australia and therefore it was not
necessary for them to quarrel over such matters, or even to intro-
duce laws of their own. In spite of these minor skirmishes which
the captain related, he expressed his admiration for them, explain-
ing that though it was necessary at the moment for him to suppress
them he would not allow it to detract from his good opinion of the
people. Granted, these occurrences revealed their human weaknesses
on the other hand in spite of this these dear people showed that
they allowed the Holy Spirit to work in them and made every effort
to crucify the sinful flesh.
On the morning of the 27th wind and weather were favourable.
The captain ascertained that they were nearing the land of their
destination, but none of the passengers had the faintest inkling of
it. When the latter were gathered on the foredeck at 8 o'clock the
former said to them, "If the favourable wind continues and I am not
mistaken, we will be able to see the land of your future home at
about 10 o'clock". The joy that spread throughout the ship was
boundless. The captain was beginning to regret his statement as he
feared the disappointment would be too painful should his observa-
tions prove wrong. With obvious impatience the passengers waited
for the stated hour. Ten o'clock came and there was no sign of
land. Impatiently old Captain Hahn strode up and down, climbing
the crow's nest himself more than once to take a look himself. Af-
ter an anxious hour, at last, at 11 o'clock he saw on the distant
horizon, rising up like a bank of clouds, the coast of Kangaroo Is-
land. As he called out the good news to the crowd, joy shone on
all faces, and all eyes watched the ever clearer coastline coming
into view. So they sailed ahead through Investigator Strait and
across St. Vincent's Gulf until the ship dropped anchor at the har-
bour entrance on the 29th December, and lay here at anchor. It was
Sunday and the people were all attired in their Sunday clothes.
Then they noticed that a boat containing six men pushed off shore
from the mainland opposite. The company soon arrived at the ship.
Quietly the passengers surrounded them. The strange gentlemen went
over the whole of the between decks. When they asked the emigrants
questions they received polite and proper answers. When they re-
turned back on deck they found words difficult to find to express
their astonishment to the captain at the healthy appearance of the
passengers and at the order and cleanliness everywhere. One of the


gentlemen presented the passengers with two sheep so that they
could strengthen and refresh themselves with fresh meat, and he was
also very helpful to them later on when they landed. Before the
gentlemen left the captain received orders from the commander of
the pilot station to unfurl the sails and steer up the Gulf. This
was done and a pilot boat came out to meet them and brought the
ship safely into harbour. However, because of a low tide it was
only on the Ist January that they could get over the sand bars, and
it was the 2nd January when they landed in Port Adelaide.
Scarcely had the safe arrival become known when many English-
men arrived in search of labourers or maids amongst the emigrants
to employ them, those gentlemen who had visited the ship having
spread the word around about their fine qualities. Very few, how-
ever, consented to be engaged as they had come to Australia to form
a Christian community and therefore, above all else, it was impera-
tive that so far as possible they remain together and not separate.
What they wished to do was acquire a tract of land on which they
could erect a Church and school, and also in the sweat of their
brows support themselves. In those days it was still not as' it is
with so many today - body first and then the soul. A greater joy
to the new arrivals, than that given by the Englishmen, was the ar-
rival of their own fellow believers who had landed before them and
now came to meet them. Amongst them too was Pastor Kavel who bade
them welcome in God's Name, and who lived on the ship for the dura-
tion of its stay in harbour.
As previously related, the emigrants from the ship "Prince
George" who arrived four weeks earlier, had built themselves huts
in Port Adelaide. As these in the meantime had rented the land
from Mr. Angas at five shillings an acre, they vacated the land and
their fellow-believers from the "zebra" took their place and moved
into the vacant huts.
Because of necessary business matters Captain Hahn had to
travel to Adelaide, and he took this opportunity to do something
for the passengers of his ship who had become very dear to him.
Mr. G , the treasurer of the Colony who called himself the
Finance Minister, had twice by letter invited him to pay a visit.
This Mr. G. was considered to be the richest man in the Colony in
addition to owning great tracts of land in the vicinity of Ade-
laide. Captain Hahn accepted the invitation to him, and was warmly
received. The Mr Finance Minister showed him his, for that time,
very convenient and beautifully appointed house. Yes! and more-
over went and produced a map and pointed out the boundaries of his
extensive estate, much to the astonishment of his guest, remarking
at the same time to him, "Now you can tell my friends in Hamburg in


what favourable circumstances I find myself here". "Wait a mo-
ment", thought the honest captain, "now is a favourable opportunity
of which you must take advantage for your beloved emigrants",
therefore he answered, "That I will gladly do, but the gentlemen in
Hamburg who you remember are all folk who have the welfare of the
emigrants very much at heart. I would be very grateful to you if
you would place me in the position where I could relate that Mr. G.
of his bounty had allotted the Germans a piece of land where every
family could build themselves a cottage and establish a garden, and
that he in this way has taken 187 persons under his protection.
Through such an act your name would be held in great honour in Ham-
burg." But in answer to that speech Mr. Finance Minister made a
wry face. In an instant the rich man had a very meagre income, and
shrugging his shoulders, he said, "These people are lovers of sing-
ing and praying and such characters are usually lazy." Captain
Hahn, however, replied, "If you, being half a German, will do noth-
ing for these poor people what can one expect from the English, and
whatever is to become of them. Those of them who have money can-
not, as foreigners, legally buy land and still you will not give
them any." But all arguments by the captain were fruitless and
sorrowfully he had to withdraw. Then he turned to Dr. Finnis, Mr.
Metcalfe and others who also owned land in the vicinity of Adelaide
with the same petition. But these too would not be persuaded to
take up the poor emigrants although the grounds they put forward
were not as negative as those of Mr. Finance Minister. One said he
had to keep his land available for building lots as the town expan-
ded; the other answered that the railway line to the new harbour
was going through his land. Enough! The philanthropic Hahn was
unable to arrange anything. Nevertheless, his efforts were later
to be crowned with success. Mr. Dutton, with whom the captain had
become especially acquainted, came on board the "zebra" a few days
after the abovementioned vain effort. He and his companions stated
that they had purchased an area of land near Mt. Barker and could
not extoll the beauty of the land enough. Seven or eight of the
emigrants had already been there and their testimony agreed with
them too. The latter expressed the wish to their captain that they
be allowed to settle there. Naturally this was not possible if the
owners of the land did not agree to it. The captain did not miss
this opportunity of putting the matter to the visiting gentlemen
as, in his opinion, it could be of no great concern to them if they
could make available at least a small area of land upon which about
36 cottages could be erected. The result of this renewed effort
was that the gentlemen who had purchased this land invited Captain
Hahn to make a journey into the hills with them in order to inspect
it. He accepted the invitation with pleasure.
"I", so wrote this valiant man in a report which we take
24


from an old English newspaper of the year 1840, "rose
early on the morning of the 24th January and started my
journey. The travelling party gathered in the city. As
I doubted my ability to ride such a long way, I travelled
in Mr. Dutton's conveyance in which our provisions were
also stored. A second vehicle contained the ladies, and
12 gentlemen followed on horseback. The whole party con-
sisted of 18 persons, without the attendants. By 11
o'clock we had ascended Mt. Lofty which is 2,400 feet
high and from which there is a magnificent view. At the
foot of this mountain range to the west there is a plain
of 10 to 11 miles down to the sea. From the spot where
we were standing there was enough to see to make eye and
heart rejoice. In the distant horizon we could see the
ships lying at anchor in Holdfast Bay. On the already
mentioned plain we could see the settlers, like a swarm
of ants, busily erecting houses and cottages in order to
establish the city of Adelaide. Further to the right we
caught a glimpse of our German emigrants who were mostly
occupied erecting rural huts from branches and foliage
and founding their village, which they called Klemzig af-
ter their hometown. Southerly, to the left, the eye was
captivated by the green and flower-covered meadows upon
which shepherds were herding their flocks. The hill on
the northern side presented a different imposing, pleas-
ing and friendly vista. From an almost perpendicular
drop of about 1,800 feet there emerged a beautiful valley
covered with lovely trees. The southerly side of the
same was encircled by a long chain of hills which gradu-
ally merged into the plain in a slanting direction.
Trees and creepers obscured the view to the east. We
breakfasted here, and then continued on our journey. The
attendants, who followed on foot, led the horses and con-
veyances along the often dangerous roads. At 2 o'clock
we came to a small hut on the summit of the hills where
we halted to eat our midday meal, and to give the horses
an hour's rest. We then proceeded on our way. After we
had travelled about another 16 (English) miles, often
over steep hills, the dense forests and the hills gave
way and a beautiful valley came into view through which
our way took us, although the tall trees which covered
the heights and often reached 100 feet above the ground
obscured our view considerably even though they were not
festooned with creepers as in the jungle.
The riders, vehicles and those on foot had become separa-
ted during the last part of the journey so a halt was


made at the entrance to this valley to enable the strag-
glers of our party to catch up. My travelling companions,
Mr. Dutton and I were the first to arrive at this spot, so
I took advantage of the time gained in waiting to alight
from the vehicle and examine more thoroughly the quality
of the soil of this beautiful area which was part of the
property owned by Mr. Dutton and his partner. My first
gaze fell upon the majestic trees grown so from nature, as
though the hand of a gardener had planted them there. One
tree stood from another 40 to 70 paces apart so that the
plough could go around these to cultivate the land without
having to fell a single tree. At those places which seem-
ed to me to be the most fertile, the grass was 3 feet 4
inches high and gave the appearance of a European corn-
field. Probably few will give credibility to this des-
cription, and I myself would have doubted the existence of
such country, had I not seen it with my own eyes.
The lack of water, which is generally so evident in this
country, was not in evidence here. The Onkaparinga River,
which is probably about 6 or 7 feet deep, and its water of
exceptionally good quality, flows through this valley, and
in it swim fish of several kinds, which have probably
never been disturbed by the cunning art of the angler.
At last the rest of the party had arrived and we proceeded
on our way. But I did not leave this valley without the
wish that the ownership of it would become that of my emi-
grants. How happily they could live here and how happy I
would be if I could leave them in the knowledge that they
were left in such good circumstances. But as my request
had already been stated I did not want to repeat it now so
as not to appear too pushing.
Although from the heights I thought of this landscape as a
valley, as we proceeded on our journey I realised it was a
long stretch of flat country, and even though there was a
slight elevation here and there, it was flat enough to en-
able a plough to go over it easily.
As darkness fell we arrived at Mr. Finnis* cattle station
where there were two tents in which the shepherds lived.
Here the night was to be spent. The better of the two
huts, which was covered with rushes, was naturally set a-
side for the ladies. The place allocated to me, Mr. Dut-
ton and the other gentlemen of the party, was strewn with
fresh grass. As there was no room in this simple shelter


for the rest they had to go in search for a tent erected a
mile further on.
I waited impatiently for the morning. Before the first
rays of the sun had greeted the surrounding hills I had
already left my bed and revelled in the heavenly beauty of
the scene that met my eyes. The lovely long grass, wet
with dew, covered the earth with a pleasing green. Wild
birds such as parrots, etc., flitted from branch to branch
in the separate high trees, singing in their own peculiar
manner. Beside our hut there flowed from east to west a
crystal clear brook with fresh water. Mount Barker, its
summit crowned with glorious trees, rose about 4 miles dis-
tant from us. In short, the whole scene was so enthralling
that no artist could have drawn a better picture. How
lucky I felt myself to be and how joyful at that moment was
my spirit - almost as though I had come one step nearer
to perfection. The material for some romantic novel was
spread out before my eyes. One by one gradually the whole
party gathered before our hut and it was decided to go on a
kangaroo hunt in this early morning. Those who had come on
horses had them saddled. The gentlemen assembled, armed
with rifles and followed by their dogs. As Mr. Dutton and
I were neither hunters nor riders, we had the horses har-
nessed to our vehicle and drove after the hunters. My sole
purpose for the drive was to reach Mount Barker as I was
rather anxious to climb to the top. Mr, Dutton was of like
mind so we drove there. Mount Barker is estimated to be
about 2,500 feet high. We drove until we reached the foot
of the mount. My travelling companion, however, was a poor
climber on account of his corpulence, and therefore re-
mained seated in the conveyance. It was on the 25th Janu-
ary, 8.00 a.m. that I climbed this mountain. From its sum-
mit I could see the Bay of Alexandrina, as well as the
River Murray. The land on this side of the mountain, even
if not so flat, had fewer trees and presented a romantic
view.
At 11.00 a.m. we re-assembled before the tents for break-
fast. When we finished I took a walk with Mr. Metcalfe who
was a part-owner of this district. We sat down in the
shade, under a tree, where we were joined by Messrs. Finnis
and Dutton. They asked me then what I thought of this
country. I answered, 'lt seems to me as though nature has
been over-extravagant in lavishing its gifts upon South
Australia . Now I have only to see Asia, which I hope to
visit shortly, and then I have been to every part of the


world. I was born and bred in the country. I left it
and am therefore not qualified to judge more than a por-
tion of it, and though I have never gone so far inland
in any country as in this, I am not entirley ignorant of
the fertility of the places that I have visited because
I have always made it my concern to study this subject.
But I must openly confess that I did not expect to find
such beautiful land here and that actually I did not ex-
pect to find such anywhere in the world. If the "Zebra"
lay opposite the entrance to your estate and if my family
were with me, I would willingly spend the rest of my life
in this valley and never return to the restless world.
But my gentlemen, I ask you, could it be God's will that
this beautiful land, so suitable for cultivation and
where hundreds of people could make a good living, should
be used for grazing only. With such a vast area of flat
land you would hardly miss it if you let my emigrants
have 50 to 100 acres from any corner of your holding
where they could found a settlement. Wouldn't the know-
ledge that you have made so many people happy outweigh
tha value of that little piece of land a hundred-fold,
and don't you think the land would double in value if it
were cultivated by my industrious countrymen. As posi-
tive as I am now that if this colony is used for grazing
purposes so positive am I too that without cultivation
it will collapse as quickly as it rose. The merchants
will grow rich but the workers poor. The latter will
have to leave the land, and if there is nothing left for
the merchants to do then they will have to follow them,
having the striking example in the case of Kangaroo Is-
land before our eyes daily. What use would a 1,000 acres
in the wilderness be to you.'
They all agreed with my statement with regard to the ne-
cessity for the cultivation of the land, but as regards
the idea that such a catastrophe could overtake the col-
ony they were exactly of the opposite opinion.
Mr. Metcalfe spoke first, and said, 'i am not opposed to
bringing your emigrants here.' 'Nor am I', said Mr. Dut-
ton. 'lt would please me to have them here in order to
see what industrious farmers could make of this land.'
said Mr. Finnis.
'My dear gentlemen,• I replied, 'I am very much obliged
to you for your outspoken sentiments and ask that you
grant me your attention and allow me to make some fur


ther statements which will have but one ultimate purpose
My emigrants have arrived landing on your shores practi-
cally free of debt but at the same time quite without
cash. The costs of bringing them and their chattels out
here would have to be settled first, as well as their
maintenance provided until they are in a position to
support themselves. However, I think that if they were
supplied with milk they have sufficient provisions to
keep themselves for at least another nine months. But
they need seed, some farm implements, and, above all,
milch cows and oxen to pull the ploughs.'
The gentlemen considered all these points and the fol-
lowing agreement was reached, which I wrote down in my
note book immediately and, by consent of both parties,
stated the conditions to be included in a legal contract
for leasing, and sale and purchase:
1. Messrs. Dutton, Metcalfe and Finnis will have sur-
veyed and set aside at least 150 acres for the emi-
grants who came out on the " zebra ", and will lease
them to the aforementioned, the first year without
rent. Of this land 38 acres will be set aside for
building purposes, the balance for cultivation.
2. The above gentlemen undertake to supply the said em-
igrants for up to one year with the necessities of
life until by diligence and industry they are able
to harvest products from the leased land.
3. All their goods and chattels to be brought to the
said site under the same conditions.
4. Immediately upon their arrival on the land the con-
gregation shall be given six milch cows in order to
provide them with milk. The following March each
family is permitted to keep as many young cows as
they wish, but when they have been brought to milk
production they must exchange them every three
months for fresh cows. Nevertheless each family is
permitted to keep two milch cows. They are to have
the use of the cows and the pasture free of charge.
5. Hens, ducks, geese and pigs will also be given to
the emigrants with the aim that through their prod-
ucts such as butter, eggs, poultry, fruit and vege-
tables they take to market they will soon improve


their circumstances.
6. This agreement to be in force for the first year only
and to be looked upon as a trial. Much will depend
upon the industry of the emigrants and the suitabil-
ity of the ground for cultivation. If everything
turns out well and the gentlemen find, as they all
expect that the emigrants are diligent and hardwork-
ing, then in the following year each family shall be
allotted on lease as much land as they are able to
cultivate. The abovenamed gentlemen will then not be
reluctant to take up more German emigrants.
7. The three gentlemen will within the next year at
their own expense, build a Church for the emigrants,
the latter, however to give them every assistance.
8. Mr. Dutton promises to give £2O, Mr. Metcalfe £lO and
Mr. Finnis £lO annually for the salaries of a pastor
and a teacher.
9. Mr. Koch (a farmer, but not one of the travel party)
was appointed overseer and treasurer during the first
year, with free board and lodging besides a salary of
£4O.
10. Any emigrant who could purchase his own cows was per-
mitted to graze them free of charge.
Before all this was finalised it was one o'clock. I told
the gentlemen I had now attained my object, and, if they
had no objection, I would start on my return journey right
away. An attendant was sent with me to show me the way
and by nine o'clock in the evening I was back in Adelaide.
It was so dark I dared not risk going to the harbour
therefore I spent the night in the city. But the follow-
ing morning, very early, I returned to the port and on to
my ship."
Thus far Captain Hahn! Who could not help but love this hon-
est man who had so successfully taken up the cause of the Lutheran
emigrants. When he had related to them what he had accomplished,
they could not thank him enough, and Pastor Kavel embraced him with
joy and gratitude. He richly deserved the honour when his beloved
emigrants called their settlement after him, HAHNDORF.
We have already related how the passengers on the "zebra" took


over the huts at the Port vacated by the passengers on the "Prinz
Georg" .
As now, with God's help, it had been possible for the former
to bring about a Lutheran settlement in the hills, the move to it
had now to be undertaken. But in those days that was no small mat-
ter. No carrier was willing to take a waggon load of goods to the
new settlement under £7, and only a very few could produce such a
sum. Those who had the necessary finance had themselves and their
goods transported.
But what was to happen to those who could not find the neces-
sary expensive freight charge? These made themselves little wooden
carts and they themselves were harnessed to them. But they could
only load a few articles at one time and so they had to pull their
carts to and fro many times before all the goods were moved from
one point to another. So things were gradually moved until they
reached the hills near what is now the suburb of Glen Osmod where
they called a halt for a short while to rest before undertaking the
strenuous journey ahead. Before them lay the high and steep Mt.
Lofty ranges over the summit of which the still unmade road led to
their destination. Here, partly with the help of the carts and
partly on their shoulders, our brethren carried their possessions
bit by bit to the top of the hill, then down the deep valley and up
again to the top of the next hill until eventually the destination
of their difficult journey had been reached. The last of them ar-
rived only after six months and in that long time had completed a
journey which we can cover in a few hours.
In the meantime a third ship had arrived with Lutheran emi-
grants. This was the ship "Catharine" which had left Hamburg 14
days before Michaelmas 1838. This brought approximately 130 emi-
grants, most of whom were natives of the duchy of Posen. On their
arrival end of January, 1839, these brethren were again able to
move into the huts at the Port which had been vacated by the Hahn-
dorfers. After a short stay here they moved on and settled in the
place at Glen Osmond which had served the brethren from the ship
"zebra" as a brief halting place on their travels.
They built cottages for themselves and by May of that year
were so far advanced and settled that the first synod in South Aus-
tralia was able to be held in their midst. This community, how-
ever, had to struggle against much physical sickness. In particu-
lar there was scurvy, which claimed a number of victims, whose
graves at the foot of the hills are the only remaining indications
of this settlement. This community existed for only a few years as
its members soon scattered and intermingled with the other settle


ments. With the "Catharina" there also arrived a character of whom
we must make particular note, as he had a greater influence in the
circumstances of the development of our Church than can be pleasing
to any true Lutheran. It is namely Johann Friedrich Krummnow, a
tailor by trade. Although small of stature, hunch-backed, and with
scarcely understandable speech, yet he was able to have a quite ex-
traordinary influence, not only upon individual congregation mem-
bers, but also upon Pastor Kavel. When he became too aggressive
with his communistic and donatistic heresies he was forced to leave
the Lutheran Church in South Australia and he founded a field for
his unholy activities in Victoria. There he appointed himself a
bishop and gathered around him a congregation with communistic
principles. Here, about ten miles from Hochkirch (now Tarrington)
he bought with the money from his congregation members a large area
of land upon which they worked as a community. However, the pro-
ceeds of their labour did not belong to the individuals but to the
commune, or, in fact, to its founder. Those members who finally
grew weary of his drivings and left the community could not get
back the money they had paid into the scheme, even with the help of
the civil law courts. At the moment (1880) this sect has very few
members. Their meals are taken together and they look upon the
pronouncements of their seducer as upon an oracle. This man is al-
so much pre-occupied with the exorcism of the devil. His methods
for doing this are supposed to be most peculiar.
However, after this small digression we will return to our
Hahndorf brethren. Fifty-two families founded Hahndorf. Numbered
with these were fourteen families who came out on the "Prim Georg"
and had first settled in Klemzig. The first dwellings consisted of
packing cases over which branches of trees had been laid. Cottages
were only built after the land had been divided into parcels and
allotted to individual holders.
The first divine services were held under the open sky, then
in a small hut which had previously belonged to a cattle station
and was situated where St. Michaels Church now stands. This hut
also served as the pastor's residence when he came to Hahndorf.
Any further information we have to relate about the external cir-
cumstances of this settlement we will quote from the words of an
Englishman, Mr. J.Wm. Bull in his "Early experiences of Colonial
Life", who, amongst other things, states:
"Shortly after the arrival of Pastor Kavel with his numer-
ous children - as they can in truth be termed because
of the spiritual influence he exercises over them - came
to me and placed before me the circumstances under which
this great company of emigrants came here; that they


were on the whole poor but industrious and honest, that
it was only by obtaining credit that the journey was made
possible, and that they would, furthermore, require live-
stock and other things, and finally, land for which, in
the main, they would need credit and asked me if I would
supply them with cattle. A few had money and could pay
cash, some could make part payment, and those who requir-
ed total credit agreed to repay their indebtedness on
certain terms. I did not refuse to enter into negotia-
tions and I was soon visited by quite a number of his
people. Subsequently I had many transactions with them
and always found them prompt and trustworthy.
Now I proceed to tell of the problems with which this
community had to battle in order to obtain land upon
which they could establish their settlement. As our sys-
tem of land tenure does not allow for the taking up of
Crown land on credit, the Germans who arrived at that
time, instead of paying £1 an acre to the state, had to
pay big prices and high rates of interest to private
speculators. For the Hahndorf land they had to pay £7
per acre. I do not know how high the rate of interest
was but I think it was 10 per cent. Now this land com-
prised of that first especially allotted land taken up
through Messrs. Dutton, Finnis and McFarlane for the
price of £1 per acre, so it was certainly not out of
gracious charity - therefore the foreigners, as I am
able to say, did not make a great bargain. The area of
the land was 240 acres, which cost them £1,680. In ad-
dition, on their pastor's guarantee, they were given .cre-
dit for provisions, etc., to the extent of £1,500 until
they could support themselves; seed wheat cost them £1
per bushel, also they had to pay at least 40 for the
price of working bullocks.
Before their arrival the inhabitants of Adelaide were
poorly served with vegetables and other products at exor-
bitant prices. For instance a pound of butter cost 2s.
6d. (2/6d) (2i marks) and eggs on a similar scale. The
Germans soon began to take a small quantity of butter to
the town and after a few months vegetables also, - usu-
ally on the backs of the women - and in the same manner
they also brought their purchased goods home on the re-
turn journey. After awhile one beheld a whole file of
old women and girls in their German costumes heading for
the capital city. Before the end of the first year of
their arrival amongst us they provided the town people


with a plentiful supply of vegetables, etc., which re-
warded them with a good profit. After the first harvest
they set their little hand-mills in motion and soon they
were able to repay all their debts and buy another 240
acres near their place from the government for the price
of £1 per acre.
Their farm implements were of their own construction and
primitive in style; of the form that had been in use in
their old homeland for hundreds of years. Some time af-
ter their arrival we could have seen some rather amusing
teams harnessed in front of a little plough or wooden
harrow - maybe a woman with a rein over her shoulders
which by means of a rope of the required length was fast-
ened to a swing, with a small bullock, a cow, or a pony
attached to the shorter end, the husband or father guid-
ing the plough with the one hand, and with the other hol-
ding a long pipe which he thoughtfully smoked. The wood-
en plough was light enough to enable a man to carry it
away on his shoulders.
It was not long before we saw them in better circum-
stances, with a pair of beautiful and well cared for
horses which were kept and handled in such a manner that
the other emigrants could well take them as an example."
Thus far the Englishman, who on the whole gave an accurate ac-
count. But we will return to the contemplation of matters pertain-
ing to the Church. During the second year after their arrival our
Hahndorf brethren built a Church on the land they had set aside for
Church and school purposes. It was just a simple, low building
plastered with clay. As the small hut the pastor occupied was no
longer suitable, a manse was built in the same simple style with
similar materials as that of the Church. Some time later the con-
gregation bought another property in the Main Street with a suit-
able building for a Church school.
Pastor Kavel served the Hahndorf congregation once every six
weeks and then stayed there for two Sundays. On the whole spiri-
tual peace reigned during the early days even though the already
mentioned tailor Krummnow had begun to belittle the office of the
ministry, had begun to hold prayer meetings in the homes, and to
spread the seeds of his fanaticism. As an example of his odd ideas
the following anecdote is related here.
In the vicinity of Hahndorf a group of young lads went on an
opossum hunt. They kindled a fire in the bush and sat around it


telling each other yarns. All of a sudden Krummnow appeared before
them and asked in his peculiar nasal tone, "Boys, have you got
faith?" "of course" they cried as if with one voice. "Throw your
hats into the fire and if you have faith they will not burn," com-
manded and said the strange saint. The boys didn't wait to be told
twice, and one after the other threw their hats into the fire.
Naturally they were consumed by the flames. Then Krummnow called
Out, "So you see, you have no faith. Here is money so you can buy
other hats", and with these words he disappeared into the bush.
The hitherto harmonious atmosphere was also to be disturbed in
another manner. On the 28th October, 1841, Pastor Fritsche and his
emigrant congregation arrived in South Australia and some of them
settled in Hahndorf. At first Pastor Fritsche lived in the small
cottage which at that time still served as the manse and both pas-
tors were of one heart and one soul. But then Pastor Kavel, prob-
ably inspired by Krummnow, often held forth with his chiliastic
ideas and Pastor Fritsche was compelled to denounce them in public.
Added to this was the confusion arising from the Langmeil land pur-
chase and into which the Hahndorfers were also drawn. As they re-
fused to leave Hahndorf - and they had very weighty reasons for
doing so - Pastor Kavel refused them Holy Communion. There were
times of great strife then, and the wounds that were inflicted then
have not healed to this day. So, when Pastors Fritsche and Kavel
separated in 1846, the Hahndorf congregation followed Pastor
Fritsche. They well knew how much they had to thank Pastor Kavel
for, as, in both the spiritual and physical he had cared for them
with selfless devotion and faithfulness. Also on many points of
doctrine they were more in agreement with Pastor Kavel than with
Pastor Fritsche, but still they could not continue with him as he
attacked the Articles of Faith and publicly objected to certain
points. So Pastor Fritsche served the Hahndorf congregation from
Lobethal, but a small proportion of them remained with Pastor Kavel
who occupied the manse and in it from time to time preached to his
small flock.
The 20th Sunday after Trinity, 1855, was an especially joyful
festival for Hahndorf, for on that day, through Pastor Fritsche,
they obtained their very own pastor in the person of young Pastor
Strempel.
Pastor Strempel had received an excellent secondary education
in Germany and on his arrival in South Australia entered the Theo-
logical Seminary in Lobethal. He passed his matriculation examina-
tion in August of 1852, and in August of 1855 his theological exam-
ination with honours. Because Pastor Kavel and his people still
had occupation of the manse the new pastor had to move into the


school-house and share the limited accommodation with the at-that-
time still unmarried teacher.
Meanwhile the old Church building had deteriorated so badly
that the building of a new one could no longer be postponed. The
congregation, however, was not prepared to do this until the title
to the Church property was in order. One of the trustees had re-
mained with Pastor Kavel and moved away from Hahndorf. He refused
to sign the transfer to the new trustees who had separated from
Pastor Kavel. Unfortunately, as nothing could be achieved by vol-
untary agreement it became necessary to resort to the civil courts
to have this matter put in order. The court gave an order favour-
ing the congregation, but which also cost them £3OO in legal costs.
Consequently the followers of Pastor Kavel had to vacate the manse
in which, until now, they held their services, and Pastor Strempel
moved into it with his young wife. Pastor Kavel's congregation
then bought a piece of land on the outskirts of the village on
which there was a residence and there they built a small brick
Church.
Before this period a second, or more correctly a third congre-
gation had already been formed. Besides the Prussian Lutherans
others from time to time had settled in Hahndorf, partly from Luth-
eran State Churches, and partly from the United Church of Prussia.
Some joined the local congregation but others could not and would
not submit to the existing Church rules. This latter group then
formed their own congregation and called themselves German Protes-
tants. They built themselves a brick Church and had Pastor Kappler
serve them at intervals. He had emigrated from the Kingdom of Sax-
ony, "united" according to his doctrine and practice, and particu-
larly hostile to the Lutheran doctrine of the Office of the Keys.
Later he moved to Mount Gambier, served a congregation with similar
principles down there, and died there several years ago.
In the year 1858 a former theological student, Adelbert Fied-
ler, came from Hanover and settled in Hahndorf. He wanted to join
our synod and applied to the General Church Council for a Church
appointment, but as nothing came of it he took over the care of the
German protestant congregation, and besides them he also served a
congregation in Lobethal opposing that of Pastor Fritsche.
When Pastor Kavel found the long journey too much for him Pas-
tor Staudenmeyer, who had become pastor of the Kavel-synod congre-
gation at Lights Pass, took over the small Hahndorf congregation.
But when this congregation began to increase Pastor Staudenmeyer
obtained for them their own pastor in the person of Pastor Keppler
who, like himself, was a native of Wurtemberg. However this ar


angement did not last long as Pastor Keppler had to leave Hahndorf
soon afterwards and return to Germany. After this the German prot-
estant and the Kavel congregations united and Pastor Fiedler served
as their pastor until he returned to Germany in 1874 where he now
serves as a pastor in the Hanovarian state Church. But before he
left them he advised his congregation to join one of the estab-
lished synods, as a result of which his former Hahndorf congrega-
tion followed his advice, the good outcome being that they came
over to Pastor Strempel's congregation. So for a short time Hahn-
dorf found itself in the unusual situation in Australia where there
was only one local congregation. But, sadly, this happy state did
not last long as most of the members of the earlier Fiedler congre-
gation left again and went to the old Kavel Church where they were
served by the pastors of the present Immanuel synod.
When, as already mentioned, the title to the Church property
was in order, members of the original congregation began to plan
the erection of a new Church building. At the meeting called to
consider the matter such an enthusiasm was shown for this undertak-
ing that even at the meeting the not inconsiderable sum of £7OO was
promised - so that on the 29th September, 1858, the foundation
stone of the new house of God (which was to continue under the name
of "st. Michaels" Church) was able to be laid. The two Pastors
Fritsche from Lobethal and Meyer from Bethany supported the offici-
ating local pastor at this inspiring ceremony. On the second Sun-
day after Trinity the following year the new Church was dedicated
to the service of the Lord. Pastor Meyer delivered the festival
address. The Church is built of stone, with a slate roof, and cost
about £1,200.
The old manse began to fall into ruins and had to be demol-
ished, since when Pastor Strempel has resided in his own house.
The Hahndorf congregation is still one of the largest in the
Evangelical Lutheran synod in Australia and before all else has the
ambition to have the college and teachers' training school of this
synod in its midst.


4 The Synods until the separation.
C<S «
y Is has been stated, the first synodical convention of South
Australian Lutherans took place in Glen Osmond on the 23rd May,
1839. It was now time to form a constitution of the Australian
Lutheran Church. With what state of mind our brethren approached
this task Pastor Kavel states in the foreword to the Church con-
stitution in these words:
"Members of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Klemzig,
Hahndorf and Glen Osmond in Adelaide, South Australia, af-
ter many trials which they had to endure for the sake of
the confession of faith in the Kingdom of Prussia in
Europe during the years 1830-1838 (besides the thousands
that were left behind in the fatherland, and, so someone
has related, another congregation which emigrated to
America with their Pastor in the above years) through
God's wonderful guidance and under His Almighty protec-
tion, emigrated from the said land of persecution to their
present place of residence, and that, in worldly terms,
not for the purpose merely to eat and to drink, to marry
and be given in marriage, to buy and to sell, to plant and
to build, and then, like Sodom and Gomorra, to perish
(Luke 17, 26-29) or even to have their hearts overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life,
and so that day come upon them unawares (Luke 21, 34)
but so that, founded upon God's clear Word the confessions
of the Evangelical Lutheran Church set out in its 7 Sym-
bolical writings, they can, unhindered organise themselves
into a congregation, avoiding the introduction of all
false secular writings, or unscriptural influences
How far the good intentions set out here have been carried out
in deed any intelligent Lutheran can judge for himself. The first
article of the Church constitution, the first inspired by Krummnow,
states: The congregation from its inception insists that only
those can be regarded as true members of the Church who, not by
their own reason or strength believe in Jesus Christ but have been
called by the power of the Holy Spirit through the Gospel, enlight-
ened by His gifts, sanctified in true faith, and who strive to re-
main steadfast therein, and accept the seven symbolical books set-
ting out the doctrines of the Evangelical Lutheran Church as scrip


tural and the teachings of the Church which are also in agreement
with this Church constitution.
In 12 further articles, amongst other things, it was further
stipulated that only those members could be eligible for the posi-
tion of an office bearer who had sufficient knowledge of the con-
tents of the symbolical books; further, that the congregation
should have, besides the pastor, a proportionate number of elders
who, besides their customary duties, were to watch over the pas-
tor's teachings and behaviour, and in cases of extreme necessity to
administer the sacraments of Baptism and Holy Communion; further,
in the case of Church discipline, that there are three grades of
puni shment:
1. The refusal of Holy Communion for a short period.
2. Excommunication from the congregation until after the matter
has been resolved; for instance, in the case of a fallen
young woman, until after the birth of the child.
3. Excommunication from the congregation and condemnation to
satan publicly before the whole congregation.
The Glen Osmond synod adopted these Church ordinances unani-
mously. In fact, from letters written during that period, it is
evident that our brethren were very pleased over the fact that the
Church now had a constitution.
At that time the Dresden Mission Society adopted a resolution
to take the Gospel to the native born (aboriginals) peoples of
South Australia, and they sent out four missionaries, namely
Schuermann, Teichelmann, Meyer and Klose. The two missionaries
Teichelmann and Klose worked near Adelaide and they had a large en-
rolment of aboriginal children at their school. Missionary Schuer-
mann founded a mission station at Port Lincoln, and Missionary
Meyer in Encounter Bay. It would have helped the mission work had
the Lutheran congregations supported the missionaries financially
and aided them. But as the latter would not acknowledge the new
Church constitution they were not looked upon as true Lutherans be-
cause, according to this constitution, only those were true members
of the Church who declared their agreement with it. The mission-
aries declared that this rule had an unhealthy importance placed
upon what was a mere human ruling, and they regarded the introduc-
tion of the office of the elders which had been given the task of
the supervision of the office of the ministry, and to administer
the sacraments, an introduction of something new which had been un-
known in the Lutheran Church until now.


Also some rulings with regard to Church discipline they looked
upon as overstepping the bounds of God's Word and teachings. When
Pastor Fritsche arrived in South Australia he agreed in essence
with the missionaries' views, but he believed the wisest course was
not to come out in opposition to the Church constitution immediate-
ly as he hoped all the unhealthy parts could be eliminated gradu-
ally, bit by bit.
Synod assembled once a year and it was looked upon as the
bounden duty of every voting member to attend. No records exist of
the synods of 1840 and 1841. In the year 1842 synod was held in
Hahndorf on the second and third days of Pentecost - the 16th and
17th May. At this convention, besides sundry unimportant matters,
the question arose as to what should be done with such persons who
had, with the consent of their parents, become betrothed and then
broken their engagement. Further, the Marriage Act which had re-
cently been passed by Parliament and shortly to become law was
read.
Already at that time there was opposition to the public apol-
ogy for public offences as demanded by the Church, so that synod
had to justify the existing practice. Also, some of the so-called
elders made exaggerated use of the powers ascribed to them under
the Church constitution, and, without consulting the pastor, admin-
istered Church discipline and excommunicated people, so that synod
was compelled to declare its objection to such abuse and disregard
of the priestly office.
There was also a debate over private and general confession.
Further information about the resolutions is not available.
In the year 1843 synod was held in Klemzig during the days
from the 12th to the 14th March. It appears from the minutes of
the synod recorded by Teacher Topp that only external matters were
dealt with, and in particular the settlement of the repayment of
the passage money on the ship "skioid".
In the year 1844 synod assembled in Bethany from the 3rd to
the 4th March. At this the congregations of Bethany, Klemzig,
Hahndorf and Lobethal were represented. First, the Marriage Act
which had been read out at the Hahndorf synod was discussed, and
the resolution passed that the Government be asked to permit the
Lutheran Church to use the Lutheran marriage formula in place of
the country's marriage vows.
The already oft mentioned Krummnow now stepped forward with
his peculiar ideas with ever greater audacity, and as the two pas


tors could not accuse him of any misdeeds, they brought the matter
before synod which protested against the false teachings of Krum-
mnow by the following resolution: "So long as a Lutheran congrega
tion which supports the Office of the Keys, but does not yet prac-
tise the public excommunication and condemnation to satan, provid-
ing it does not mock at the same, then we can have fellowship with
it."
Even at that time rumours of chiliasm began to be heard so
that this synod had to concern itself with that doctrine. The con-
sequent resolutions are stated verbatim as follows:-
"Thirdly it was considered imperative that a statement be
given by synod on its attitude towards the much debated
question, 'What is the teaching according to Holy Writ
and of the doctrine of our Evangelical Lutheran Church
about the millenium which is mentioned in the 20th chap-
ter of St. John's Revelations', synod has therefore stated:
a. Some maintain that these thousand years are still to
come, others that they have already come.
b. The whole synod agrees unanimously that this thousand
year period must be accepted according to God's Holy
Word: 'The Thousand year reign of the saints with
Christ' as it is written in the Revelations of St.
John, chapter 20 v. 4, in order to prevent the fur-
ther misunderstanding of this article by the breth-
ren .
c. The whole synod declares itself unanimous in agree-
ment with Article 17 of the Augsburg Confession,
which repudiates the following error, 'that before
the resurrection of the dead only the righteous ones
and saints shall have an earthly kingdom, and all the
wicked will be destroyed.'
d. As regards the visible coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, synod acknowledges that only one has been ex-
pressed and taught in clear words in Scripture, name-
ly as that one on Judgement Day."
The synod held in the year 1845, from the 24th to the 28th
August at Hahndorf is, with the exception of the very first, the .
most important of this period. The resolutions passed there are
still in existence and carry much that is still of interest to us.
The three main subjects deliberated concerned the Marriage question


the Chiliasm doctrine, and the charging of interest to brethren.
As regards the Marriage question, it still centred around the
Marriage Act which had been read at the Hahndorf synod and discuss-
ed at subsequent synods. The Act did not forbid the use of the
Lutheran Marriage formula but insisted on the declaration at the
marriage by the bridal pair "That i n.n. know of no
lawful impediment why I should not take her N.N. (or him N.N.) to
be my lawful wedded spouse". With the exception of two brothers,
the whole synod agreed to this form, and in fact the whole Marriage
Act was not contrary to God's expressed Word, or against the doc-
trines of our Evangelical Lutheran Church. Under these circum-
stances synod presented three possible alternatives:
a. Either the pastors accept the Government's authority to
marry according to the law as set out in the Marriage Act,
or
b. The Church petition the Government to be allowed to use
the Marriage Formula of the Wittenberg agenda, without
requiring the bridal pair to make the stated declaration,
or
c. The Church resign to the Government the sole legal right
of performing the marriage and only retaining the bless-
ing of the union by the Church.
Synod voted for the first of these alternatives because it
contained nothing contrary to God's Word or doctrine.
The second choice was not favoured because the Government
could, by granting the concession under the said Wittenberg agenda
obtain a ruling that might endanger the freedom of the Lutheran
Church in this country.
The third way, which they agreed was certainly the safest for
the peace of the Church, they did not vote for because firstly, the
distance from the place of residence to the Registrar (Government
office) was such that the bridal pair would sometimes be required
to wait from one to two days in between the legal marriage and the
ceremony of the blessing by the Church; secondly, thereby mixed
marriages could not easily be prevented; and thirdly, because it
would then have to be admitted that the legal marriage was valid
even without the blessing of the Church.
In the history of Hahndorf it occurred that both pastors min-
istered to their adherents at several places at the same time.


Being still members of the same synod at this time if was of course
improper to stop it, which the synod wished to do. But the appar-
ent, ever increasing rift with regard to Chiliasm prevented this
from being brought about.
The attempt foundered because of the contentious questions
evoked thereby concerning two stil 1-to-come resurrections of the
body and about a special appearance of Christ at the beginning of
the millenium which is referred to in Revelations 20 by St. John.
During the debate on these questions there was a terrifice explo-
sion of temperaments. Pastor Kavel and his adherents supported
them, but Pastor Fritsche and his adherents denounced them and
thereupon pointed out to the other party that in the interpretation
of the relevant Bible passages they were departing from the teach-
ings of the Church, that is, from the Lutheran doctrines. The two
pastors, however, did not yet desire it to come to a parting, so
Pastor Kavel stated he would study the Scriptures together with the
Symbolical books thoroughly, and also discuss and deliberate with
Pastor Fritsche concerning them, and, if possible, arrive at a
unanimous interpretation which the 17th Article of the Augsburg
Confession, and the Lutheran theology as that of Luther's own, Mel-
anchton, Johann Gerhard, August Pfeiffer, Johann Weidener, Martin
Chemnitz and David Chytraus and others. Pastor Fritsche was full
of joy at such a declaration, slapped his fellow pastor on the
shoulder and said, "Is that really your intention my dear Kavel?"
Of course Pastor Fritsche could not give an assurance that he would
not preach and teach against Chiliasm during this period for con-
science sake, because, as a Lutheran pastor, he was committed to
the symbolic books. However he would do it in a tactful manner,
and he also promised to study carefully the writings of the apos-
tles and the prophets, as well as the Church writers who had writ-
ten in favour of Chiliasm and confer with Pastor Kavel over them.
Thus the dispute over Chiliasm was averted for the time being.
The question of the payment of interest was now stirred up, as
some of the brethren were lax in the repayment of the passage money
which the more affluent brethren had advanced, and the query was
levelled at them whether it was right for Christians to require the
payment of interest as well as the repayment of capital. The ques-
tion was carefully considered in the light of God's Word, and it
was acknowledged as right that when brother had to borrow from
brother money or other goods in time of need no interest or reward
was to be demanded. Furthermore, that as creditors they were not
permitted to confiscate from their debtors' dwellings articles of.
necessity by force, but they were permitted to seek the aid of the
civil courts if the debtor, out of spite, refused to pay. However
it was stressed upon the debtors that it was their duty to repay


their debts as soon as possible, and, as many of them now found
themselves in better circumstances than their fellow believers, it
would not be unreasonable for them to add interest say at 5 per
cent to the capital.
Thus far an account of the first synods. Now we will retrace
our steps again and tell of the founding of another principal con-
gregation of our synodical membership.


5 The ship “Shield” and the founding of Lobethal.
I
It was on the 22nd May, 1841, the Saturday before Exaudi, that
three boats from the Oder dropped anchor at the city dike at Ham-
burg. These brought a small group of Lutheran emigrants from
Gruenberg, Zuellichau, Meseritz and Bruecken-Hauland in Prussia.
They had gathered together under the leadership of their called
Pastor Fritsche and wished to travel to South Australia and there
to enjoy again their long desired freedom of worship. Their be-
loved pastor, who had already waited in Hamburg for some time, wel-
comed them, and on Exaudi Sunday held a divine service for the
first time in order to strengthen them through God's Word for the
long and arduous journey that lay before them.
On the 24th May they boarded the ship "skioid" that was ap-
pointed to take them away across the great ocean to the place of
their choosing. Only on the 3rd July at 1 o'clock midday a pilot
boat took the ship up the Elbe. However a contrary wind arose and
as it was to sail into the north sea the ship had to ride at anchor
in Cuxhaven until the 11th July.
Here we will interrupt*the travelogue and first relate a lit-
tle of the life story of Pastor Fritsche.
Gotthard Daniel Fritsche first saw the light of day on the
20th July of the year 1797 in Liebenwerda, a small village in the
former Dukedom of Saxony where his father was the village musician.
His upbringing, which he received in his parental home, was no
doubt that of a respectable citizen but in no way Christian.
After our Gotthard had received the necessary elementary tui-
tion in his hometown he entered the gymnasium in Dresden on the
10th May in the year 1809; attended this institution until 23rd
April, 1819, and graduated from there with the highest qualifica-
tions. As that particular part of Saxony where Fritsche was born
had become Prussian since 1815 he had to join the military and en-
ter into Prussian service. However he only had to wear the sol-
dier's uniform for a few months as he was declared unfit for mili-
tary service because of a hernia and other ailments. This inflic-,
ted sickness which almost brought him to the brink of the grave,
was the first setback to his subsequent conversion. Already spiri-
tually stirred, Fritsche entered the University of Breslau the same
45


year, 1819, to study Theology there. In the lectures by Professor
Dr. Scheibel his soul, that was searching for peace, found what it
was searching for; and out of the wordly minded youth there became
a disciple of the Lord Jesus.
Fritsche left the university in 1823 and considered the situa-
tion of house tutor in several places when the squire of the seat
of Rappard appointed him head of a school attended by the children
of Jews. When in the year 1830 the former passed his exam Pro min-
isterio with honours, and because he had therefore assented to the
union he was an eligible candidate for the office of the holy min-
istry and often, besides retaining his teaching position, he
preached in the manor of the squire of Rappard in Pinne, and the
latter, recognising the sincere and devout character of the young
candidate, had him appointed as first preacher to the local Church.
In the meantime Fritsche, the longer he contemplated the union the
more deeply he regarded it as damning and anti-scriptural, and
though he found it very hard to oppose his friends and benefactors
at Rappard, prompted by the urgings of his conscience through God's
Word, he publicly withdrew from the union. The consequence of this
was his appointment to the ministry was withdrawn and he was for-
bidden, under threat of monetary fine or imprisonment, to perform
in any spiritual capacity whatever.
So the earlier prospects of security were gone. Our Fritsche
had sacrificed them for the Saviour's sake. He had to leave the
Rappard house, although Squire Rappard later gave him a token of
esteem. But the Lord had already provided a place of refuge for
the young confessor. Squire Zahn of Turowo in Pinne was a true
follower of the Lutheran truths and took in this conscience-driven
refugee.
After Fritsche had joined the few Lutheran pastors who in sec-
ret had already formed themselves into a Lutheran synod, he was
ordained as a Lutheran pastor by Pastor Wermelskirch. Despite the
government prohibition he now officiated first in the Zahn house-
hold, as well as amongst the few Lutherans in and around Turowo,
and later to wider groups in the rites and duties of his office,
transmitted to him by God and the Church. But we can well imagine
that this did not happen without problems.
A number of Lutheran pastors had been imprisoned at this time
and their widely scattered flocks would have been quite without
spiritual care had Pastor Fritsche not taken them under his care,
and served them with Word and Sacrament under God's often visible
protection. This service was by no means an easy one. Declared
open game, with the hunters always after him, he was compelled to


wander through the countryside, hiding in cellars and hay lofts
during the day, at night often travelling through storms and snow,
and at the same time by day and by night carrying out the many
duties of his office. One needed the power of a strong faith to
carry out this work. The Lord gave it to him. In order to enable
him to also travel during the day he wore the dress of a Polish
peasant. He was cloaked in a linen smock, bound with a rope. A
fur cap with ear-flaps usually covered his head. Carrying his few
possessions in a satchel, attired like a peasant striding along
with his stick, no-one would have taken him for a pastor. During
his first five-year flight the Lord protected him in a wonderful
way. Even when, in his honest way, he gave his correct name and
profession to his pursuers they did not believe him, and so just
because of his frankness and honesty he more than once escaped al-
most certain arrest. During this time of flight the refugee had to
fight against continuous sickness as well. Often racked with ex-
cruciating pain, he had to carry out his priestly duties or travel
through the cold dark night. He did it too, willingly and with
joy, but his illness increased in severity and pain. As all medi-
cal treatment failed to bring about an improvement however, he saw
in it the hand of God directing him from his present field of
labour. So he bade farewell to his beloved Turowo on the 27th Feb-
ruary in order to transfer to Hamburg.
Here in Hamburg Pastor Fritsche experienced, if not a complete
cure, at least an easing of his suffering. In between times small
groups of emigrants had organised themselves in different places,
and they had contacted him to provide help with the problems that
might arise in arranging for their emigration. As Mr. Angas in
London could not find it possible to support these emigrants in the
same manner as he had done with those who had travelled to South
Australia with Pastor Kavel, other ways and means had to be found.
So Pastor Fritsche, accompanied by Dr. Huebbe (who at that time
sponsored the Lutheran emigrants with great affection) travelled to
England and were able to return to Germany with the joyful news
that Christian friends in England were prepared to promote the ven-
ture with loans and gifts.
After much worry and many difficulties, after much dithering
to and fro as to whether the journey should be to America or to
South Australia, the stage was finally reached when the ship
"skioid" (of which mention has already been made) could sail from
Hamburg to South Australia with the aforementioned ready and wait-
ing emigrant congregation.
On the fifth Sunday after Trinity the ship left Cuxhaven under
a gentle breeze and entered the north sea. On the rest of the


journey there was nothing exceptional to relate, except that death
gathered in a rich harvest amongst the emigrants so that 44 bodies
had to be committed to the ocean during the voyage.
On the 18th October the voyagers could see the first land of
South Australia in the far horizon. On the 26th October they
sailed past Kangaroo Island. On the following day they entered the
Gulf of St. Vincent. At last, on Thursday the 28th October, 1841,
at 4 o'clock in the afternoon the long journey ended in Port Ade-
laide. As the anchor was lowered the whole congregation between-
decks did according to the Lord's command in Psalm 104, and thanked
the Lord for His mighty and gracious never-ending support. Already
during the prayer of thanksgiving the brethren Fr. Kavel (teacher
at Klemzig) and the former ranger Fiedler appeared in order to wel-
come the newly arrived brethren and to wish them God's blessing in
their coming in and going out.
During the following days a number of other brothers from
Klemzig and Hahndorf arrived and took all the passengers with their
belongings away, some to be quartered in Hahndorf, and some in
Klemzig. Pastor Fritsche, together with his mother-in-law and
bride who were citizens of Hamburg and had travelled on the same
ship, were received with the most loving hospitality by Pastor
Kavel at Klemzig, and he arranged that his newly-arrived brother
pastor, after a short stay in Klemzig, was provided with a dwelling
in Hahndorf. It was that little shepherd's hut which we have al-
ready mentioned in the story of the founding of Hahndorf. In that
little hut too, on the 12th January, 1842, Pastor Kavel officiat-
ing, Pastor Fritsche was married to his bride. But after only a
few years, on the 19th February, 1845, death robbed him of his be-
loved wife, and, although still in the flower of his manhood he
could not bring himself to enter into the state of matrimony again.
From Hahndorf Pastor Fritsche served his now scattered congre-
gation - a portion in Hahndorf; a second portion which had set-
tled in Klemzig and still a third portion which had travelled north
and founded the settlement of Bethanien (Bethany) in the vicinity
of Langmeil. However, those members who had remained in the so-
called "south" were very anxious to found their own settlement and
organise themselves into a Church congregation. For this purpose
they chose an area of Crown land on the western branch of the Onka-
paringa River, drawn to their notice by Bro. Ferdinand Mueller, who
at that time was a shepherd by the said River, and at a conference
in Hahndorf the heads of 18 families covenanted to take this land.
However, that was easier said than done. Instead of money the
brethren had the burden of the ship's passage debts on their shoul-
ders. But the Lord provided a solution here. Pastor Fritsche's


mother-in-law, probably the only one with some superfluous cash,
was agreeable to advance the necessary finance. Mr. Flaxman, the
agent for Mr. Angas, at a cost of £5 sold the brethren a land-order
which was necessary to ensure the acquisition of Crown land. So
far so good. But another problem arose because none of the emi-
grants who had arrived on the "skioid" had been naturalised, and so
none of them could purchase land from the Crown. Even here, to
solve this difficult problem, help had come in the person of the
previously mentioned tailor, Krummnow. He was already an English
citizen, and he was willing to take up the land on behalf of the 18
families. But cunning, and at the same time covetous, seizing the
opportunity to enforce his sectarian ideas, he declined to purchase
the land under any other conditions but that the new settlers in-
troduced communism, and allowed only members of the congregation to
live on the land. After many unpleasant disputes over the matter
it was finally agreed that Krummnow purchase the land and that he
undertake to re-sell it to the heads of the 18 families with whose
money it had been purchased. However, it caused many problems and
monetary costs before our brethren finally got out of the hands of
this strange saint, which eventually happened in 1850. The land
in question consisted of 3 Sections of 168 acres.
After Bro. F. Mueller, in the presence of Krummnow, had
measured the land and divided it into separate parcels they were
raffled on the 4th May, the Wednesday before Ascension Day, and
each was given his piece. As, after the division, only 2 acres re-
mained for Church purposes, Bro. Mueller surrendered to the Church
a further 2 acres which had fallen to his lot. On this occasion
too the name "Lobethai" was given to the future settlement because
the new settlers praised and thanked God for having rescued them
from so many troubles and in spite of their proverty had allowed
them to find a homeland.
Now the family fathers set to work on their land to provide a
shelter for them and theirs. Some built huts of bark, others dug
caves and still others made use of hollow trees. Only two built
reasonably roomy timber houses, namely the brothers Hoffmann and
Preiss. The beginning was difficult enough, and the brethren had
to help each other in a similar manner to that which we have al-
ready described with regard to the Hahndorfers.
Pastor Fritsche now served his congregation in Lobethai from
Hahndorf, and at first preached from a fallen log, which at the
same time had to serve as an altar. A distance away another two
logs lay leaning against each other so that they formed an enclo-
sure. In this enclosure he heard confession and pronounced the ab-
solution.


Because the congregation had no means with which to build a
manse Pastor Fritsche borrowed money and built with it a two-roomed
cottage into which he and his wife moved on the Bth September,
1842. But as this could not suffice even the most modest require-
ments he had a second cottage erected, which still exists today,
and served for many years as the home of the widow of Pastor Oster
who died at sea on the voyage out to South Australia.
When the Bros. Hoffmann and Preiss had completed their houses
they placed them at the disposal of the congregation for the hold-
ing of divine services and so they were held, first in the house of
Bro. Hoffmann, and later, for a longer period, in Bro. Preiss'
house. In the last named house too Bro. F. Mueller commenced the
Church school with 9 children.
Two years after the founding of Lobethal another ship arrived
with German emigrants, some families of which settled in the vicin-
ity of Lobethal, founding the settlement of " schoenthai" . In con-
sequence of this and through other ways the population increased
and the congregation grew larger so that the hitherto used locality
for Church services in the Preiss home became too small. So, in
the year 1843 the congregation had to consider building a Church.
The brothers Kleinschmidt and Klar entered into a contract to build
and in the course of two years there stood according to the stan-
dards of that time, a stately Church building. It was built of
bricks, 75 ft. long, 45 ft. wide, and 17 ft. high, and was dedica-
ted as the "Evangelical Lutheran Church of the Vineyard of Christ"
("Zum Weinberge christi"). Two years after the completion of the
Church building the congregation erected a manse.
When the priorities with regard to the establishment of Lobe-
thal had been met. Pastor Fritsche began to ponder on how the
future spitirual needs of the Lutherans in Australia would be taken
care of should the Lutheran Churches expand further afield, or
should he or his fellow worker Kavel be torn from them by death.
So the decision was soon reached that they themselves would prepare
young men for the ministry. As a result, in response to an invita-
tion issued by the two pastors, five youths, aged from 13 - 15
years, applied to undergo such training. Besides them layreader A.
Hensel, who at that time was giving lessons in the school at Klem-
zig, wanted to dedicate himself to the ministry. So, under great
difficulties. Pastor Fritsche commenced his task. Of the five
youths three soon gave up their studies so that the tuition could
only be continued with Mr. Hensel, C. Heinze, and Chr. Auricht. As
Chr. Auricht also left Pastor Fritsche in the year 1846 to continue
his studies under Pastor Kavel at the outbreak of the chiliasm dis-
pute only Hensel and Heinze remained under the concerned care of


the first named. However, the small number was soon to be in-
creased.
In the year 1847 during Christmas week the ship "Geliert" ar-
rived with German emigrants and brought with it the widow of Pas-
tor Oster and two youths who had attended the gymnasium at Posen
to the Secunda class, namely the son of the first named Philipp
Oster, and Adolph Strempel. These two youths now joined in the
course and moved into a small hut that was built to accommodate the
students. As C. Heinze left the seminary before the commencement
of the actual theological studies, there were only three left to
complete the course. The energy of Pastor Fritsche in his efforts
to instruct his pupils in the necessary subjects never flagged and,
as so often happened, he was accompanied by his pupils wandering
through the bush on his many and often distant journeys in connec-
tion with his office. His zeal was not only that of imparting to
them the most necessary practical knowledge for the office of the
ministry, but also to educate them as well-trained knowledgeable
theologians - and in the period of some seven years it was gran-
ted to him, under God's gracious support, to achieve this goal. On
the 20th and 21st April in the year 1852, Hensel, Oster and Strem-
pel passed their matriculation exam for the study of theology, and
in August 1855 they took the three-day theological examination. As
the three candidates had received regular calls they were ordained
by Pastor Fritsche, assisted by Pastors Meyer and Teichelmann, on
the 29th August, 1855. They were installed - Pastor Strempel in
Hahndorf on the 20th Sunday after Trinity by Pastor Fritsche, Pas-
tor Oster in Hoffnungsthal on the 22nd Sunday after Trinity by Pas-
tor Meyer, and Pastor Hensel in Blumberg (Birdwood) on the 23rd
Sunday after Trinity by Pastor Fritsche. With the departure of the
three young pastors the Theological Seminary in Lobethal ceased to
exist as Pastor Fritsche did not feel well enough to take on new
students.
In the year 1853 serious strife broke out amongst the members
of the Lobethal congregation with regard to the worldly dance and
similar worldly amusements. On one occasion there was a wedding in
the town at which, in accordance with worldly custom, there was
dancing and some of the members of the congregation also took part.
Pastor Fritsche as a faithful spiritual shepherd was very upset
about it and declared it as his duty not to allow this bad custom
to take hold, for, as he said, "The Holy Ghost had through God's
Word weaned the Lutheran Church from the dance and other worldly
amusements while they suffered persecution in Prussia, and also up
until now in Australia, therefore as a servant of the Lutheran
Church I cannot tolerate that these wordly customs are again intro-
duced" .


So he tried to convince the persons concerned of the sinful-
ness of the worldly dance and demanded from them an acknowledgement
that their participation in it was sin and to admit so publicly be-
fore the congregation. A small number of them united and complied
with the wishes of their pastor and the congregation. Another por-
tion, however, wanted to maintain the freedom to dance, and because
it resulted in the disturbance of the public Church services and to
gross slander. Pastor Fritsche and the congregation were forced to
publicly excommunicate some from the congregation. Thereupon a
number of like-minded persons combined and started an opposition
congregation with more lenient rules of conduct, built a Church and
had the already mentioned Pastor Fiedler from Hahndorf serve them.
That was the first rift which cleaved the hitherto united congrega-
tion of Lobethal - but, alas, there came more and greater rifts.
Pastor Fritsche exercised his office with the utmost faithful-
ness and with self-sacrificing love towards his penitent children.
However, as in the year 1863 his physical frailties increased
markedly he looked for an assistant because he felt he was not
strong enough to perform the duties of his office at the high stan-
dard he desired. It seemed too that his wish was to be fulfilled,
for at this time Pastor Dr. Loessel, who had served an opposition
congregation to Pastor Schuermann in Hamilton, came over from Vic-
toria. Dr. Loessel wished to acquaint himself with the local
synodical situation because his position in Victoria was in ques-
tion. Because he had resigned from the Union in Germany and had
served in the Breslauer synod, and because he had been recommended
to the above congregation in Victoria by the sainted Pastor Harms,
he was allowed the use of the chancels of our synod as guest
preacher. So he came to Lobethal also, and Pastor Fritsche be-
lieved that in him he had found the man to whom he could entrust
his beloved congregation. The more so because Pastor Loessel had
presented himself to the Church council, supported our synodical
constitution, and as regards the worldly amusements, denounced his
previously-held view towards the same and now regarded them as un-
seemly for a Christian. In this way it was brought about that Pas-
tor Loessel received a call to Lobethal. However, as Pastor
Fritsche wished to expend his last failing efforts in the service
of the Lord, he expressed the desire to serve the congregation
jointly with Dr. Loessel, but the latter would not consent to this,
and it seemed as though the whole arrangement was to come to noth-
ing.
During this time Pastor Fritsche came to his death-bed. On
Monday, the 26th October, 1863, in the evening at 8 o'clock, this
faithful worker in Christ's Vineyard entered into the joy of his
Lord. On Thursday, the 29th October, in the presence of many


mourners, the solemn burial service took place, and Dr. Loessel, af-
ter timely admonitions, delivered the funeral address on 2 Tim.
2,11. In the evening of that day the latter announced to the as-
sembled pastors and Church members in the house of mourning that he
had now definitely decided to accept the call from a section of the
Lobethal congregation. Already the following day, however, he made
all sorts of objections when Pastor Oster offered to publicly in-
stal him on Reformation Day, also he brought up several points in
the present Church organisation to which he could not agree. Hav-
ing returned to Adelaide he now tried to postpone the date of as-
suming office in Lobethal and when it became known that he proposed
to serve the orphaned congregations of Adelaide and Bethany as well
as Lobethal, the Lobethal congregation regarded it as lawful to
rescind its call and demand the return of the travelling money they
had already paid him. But all the members of the Lobethal congre-
gation were not in agreement with this action so they separated
from them, had Dr. Loessel, who in the meantime had become the pas-
tor of "Bethlehem" Church in Adelaide, serve them and now built a
third Church in Lobethal. That was the second separation this con-
gregation had to experience.
From that time the portion of the congregation remaining,
still large numerically, was served by Pastor Strempel as a visit-
ing pastor from Hahndorf till the year 1866, when Pastor Hellmuth
took over the ministry. But after only two years Pastor Hellmuth
was compelled to seek employment in another colony and the Lobeth-
al ers were once more left orphans.
Pastor Strempel had to take over again as a visiting pastor.
But only now the hardest time of trial and purging was to begin.
The vacancy for the position of pastor in Lobethal, through the
notice in a German Church periodical, was drawn to the attention of
Pastor L.F.E. Krause, who, in North America filled the position of
a minister in the service of the Ohio Synod, and he applied through
a number of successive letters for the post. There was this much
known of him in Australia that he had belonged to the old resis-
tance fighters in the cause of Lutheranism during the time of the
persecution, so the greater proportion of the congregation accepted
his application with pleasure. Eventually it came about that a
call and the passage money for the journey via San Francisco to
Australia was sent. However the latter was returned with the re-
mark that he could not travel through the haunts of Indians and
wild animals (?) and that his route would have to be via England.
The copious correspondence on his part, in which in a most unjust •
manner he held forth about the Missouri synod and how it ruled over
the pastors here, and further through a letter of warning from a
trustworthy person in America portraying an all too true picture of


him, made many members apprehensive and had scarcely regretted the
call when Pastor Krause made the circumstances of his coming here
on certain conditions of which there was no prospect of fulfilment.
As steps were in the process of being taken to rescind the whole
business relating to the call, a telegram brought the unexpected
news that Pastor Krause had already arrived in Sydney via San Fran-
cisco. The Lobethal congregation, unfortunately, let him come in
spite of the warning events, and so Pastor Krause made his entry
into Lobethal on the Ist December, 1871.
It took only a short while before he entered into heated con-
troversy with his fellow pastors about exorcism and private con-
fession, portraying those pastors who did not practise exorcism as
perjurers and calling those practising general confession an "im-
penitent lot". Other serious disturbances occurred in the Church
as well. When nine members, at the instigation of the congrega-
tion, suggested to Pastor Krause that he would not have quite so
many hymns, and if there was a large number of communicants instead
of the private confession make an exception and have a general con-
fession, and in his office as shepherd of their souls show more
faithful concern for the weak, he accused them, in a public service
that they had tempted him to depart from the Word, doctrine and
confession.
At a conference called soon afterwards Pastor Krause reporting
on the meeting with the nine members, repeated a statement made by
one of them, but wrongly accused another of the members having said
it. When his attention was drawn to it he said, "well then i'm a
liar and a liar cannot be a pastor therefore, in the name of the
Triune God I resign from my office." Then some of his most ardent
supporters gathered signatures to a petition in which Pastor Krause
was requested to assume his office again. They were successful in
obtaining 10 signatures. Shortly afterwards there was a funeral at
which Pastor Krause officiated, and here he said he had been re-
quested to resume his office again by 10 members and presumably the
congregation would not object if he did so forthwith. One member
protested against it because this very important matter would have
to be discussed and decided upon at a conference, but the congrega-
tion was so weak they put up with this irregular conduct and by re-
maining silent reinstated Pastor Krause as their pastor and thereby
creating for themselves a severe instrument of punishment. However
the dispute with the 9 members was not yet at an end, but the mat-
ter was more or less settled at a special synod.
During this period the formation of the Immanuel synod oc-
curred and of it joining the Victorian synod which our synod
brought about by it giving up again the care of a portion of the


membership earlier served by it. Pastor Krause was quite on the
side of the Immanuel synod and the Victorians, and at a special
synod called in Carlsruhe in order to discuss the matter he sent a
memorandum full of unjust abuse against the Church council. Such
letters of abuse and slander had already been sent out frequently
by him and then if the matters of contention were to be discussed,
he took advantage of every opportunity. As he refused to enter in-
to a verbal debate at a commission appointed by synod for this pur-
pose and thus shattering the final attempt at an understanding, the
synod broke off all Churchly connection with him.
For a short time after this Pastor Krause held divine services
in the hall of the manse. Then, although they were mostly people
of slender means, he requested them to build a new Church. Before
this he, together with his congregation, had already applied for
membership with the Immanuel synod. Through its pastors it exam-
ined the matters of strife and pronounced our synod, the Church
council, and the Lobethal congregation in the wrong and justified
Pastor Krause in his actions, and accepted him with his congrega-
tion into their synodical union.
In the year 1874 Pastor Fiedler returned to Germany and Pastor
Dr. Loessel took over his congregation. So, at the time there ex-
isted only two congregations in Lobethal, until Pastor Krause foun-
ded a third and became affiliated with the Immanuel synod. On
Christmas Eve in the year 1879 Pastor Dr. Loessel died, arranging
beforehand that Pastor Krause should conduct his funeral and take
up the spiritual care of his congregation. Pastor Krause promised
and did it too without first consulting his congregation, which
believed it had thereby been deprived of its rights in that their
pastor had taken over the spiritual care of another congregation
with which they had had no previous Church affiliation without hav-
ing discussed the matter with them. When questioned about it. Pas-
tor Kavel brandished his rights as pastor, and decided even against
holding a meeting in connection with the matter, and as ill feeling
began to appear in the congregation because of it as well as mut-
terings in various places, he resigned from his office before the
astounded congregation. A commission from sections of the Immanuel
synod blamed Pastor Krause for the way in which the matter had been
handled and so he gathered his adherents who still followed him
blindly, about 15 in number, around him and formed a fourth congre-
gation in Lobethal, serving them in a private house. Thus this man
succeeded in dividing the Church that the sainted Pastor Fritsche
had worked so hard to establish, into three parts and with it the
separation and heartache that reached even into individual fami-
lies, and that not for the sake of the confession of faith but be-
cause of his obstinate and wilful behaviour.


Earlier, in the year 1876, when the congregation "zum wein-
berge Christi" dismissed Pastor Krause and resumed possession of
their Church property (with the exception of the manse) the author
of these "Communications" on the acceptance of the call sent to
him, took over the spiritual care of this congregation bleeding
from its many wounds.
The congregation left by Pastor Krause still adheres to the
Immanuel synod and is spiritually served by pastors from there.


6 The Pateller and the Church separation at the
Synod in Bethany in the year 1846.
m
i *low that we have dwelt on the sorrows and joys of one indi-
vidual congregation up until the present time, we will return again
to the events which concern the further development of our synod in
general.
On the 18th September, 1845, the ship "Pateii" landed at Port
Adelaide and brought along with it an increase for the Lutheran
Church in Australia by a number of families who, as former adher-
ents of a certain Menzels, had adopted the so-called gross chil-
iasm. Soon after their arrival they expressed their sectarian
ideas, making the teacher at Bethany feel compelled to withhold the
communion vessels as Pastor Kavel was about to give communion to
the Patell chiliasts in that Church. As a result there followed an
upheaval of no small proportions and when he arrived at Bethany
Pastor Fritsche had to call and conduct a meeting that year on the
9th October, to which the Patellers were invited. They appeared
too. On being questioned they acknowledged the acceptance of the
Symbolical books of the Evangelical Lutheran Church and it was
pointed out to them that they were rejecting the meaning of the
17th Article of the Augsburg Confession. Then began a heated dis-
pute with regard to this subject until well into the night, and
eventually ended when the Patellers pronounced such quarrelling as
ungodly and left the meeting. But Pastor Fritsche's soul was
filled with great concern over the departure for, he maintained, he
had gone too far in already demanding a decision by the Patellers
at this meeting, so he called a second meeting over the matter
shortly afterwards. A greater opposition to the newly arrived
chiliasts was revealed by the anti-chiliasts than Pastor Fritsche
had thought and during the course of the debate he was driven to
state from Melanchthon's writings that in the 17th Article of the
Augustana not only the so-called gross but all chiliasm was con-
demned, whereupon the Patellers walked out. Pastor Kavel accepted
the Patellers and from then on often preached about chilianism.
Pastor Fritsche on the other hand felt constrained to witness pub-
licly against it and to show that according to the 17th Article of
the Augsburg Confession no true Lutheran could be a chilianist.
Following this he was accused by Pastor Kavel of putting man's
word (by which Pastor Kavel was understood to mean the Symbolical
books of the Lutheran Church) before God's Word. Yes! the latter


went so far along the path of error that he condemned the confes-
sional writings themselves.
When the time arrived for the synod of that year (1846) and
Pastor Kavel was appointed to prepare the agenda the faithful ad-
herents of the Lutheran Church were astounded and distressed when
they found therein the proposition that the question of the conver-
sion of the Jews as a united nation, the question of the still un-
resolved matter of the 1,000-year rule of the martyrs with Christ,
and such similar matters, as well as protestation against 5 points
in the confessional writings of the Lutheran Church, were to be
dealt with.
This important synod was opened in Bethany on the 10th Sunday
after Trinity, the 16th August, 1846. The deliberations commenced
in the forenoon of the 17th August. Pastor Fritsche had invited
the two missionaries to this synod and they both attended. Immed-
iately a debate arose as to whether they could be acknowledged as
members of the Evangelical Lutheran Church. On that point the
question arose as to whether in fact-there was a Lutheran Church in
Germany, or whether there ever had been one. Pastor Kavel denied
the last and wanted to prove it by saying, "a Church that is under
the control of a princely consistory (council) is not the Church
which our Lord, as its head, had established, and goes against
Matthew 18, 17 and Acts 6, 2. So, because the Lutheran Church in
Germany has been under the control of princes for the last 300
years and was not ruled by the congregation, it is a false Church
to which he could never belong" .
He tried to support this by quoting from the Smalcald Articles
and the Small Catechism, that Luther and the Articles of doctrine
had acknowledged the right of the Kaiser and the State to have
jurisdiction over the Church.
Pastor Fritsche retorted to this that the Symbolical books in
no way acknowledged that the Kaiser had such rights to appoint
bishops, pastors, or other Church servants, and if he has done so,
it was not on the authority of the Symbolical books, but on his own
self-assumed power - and when it states in the Smalcald Articles
that the Kaiser alone has the right to grant bishoprics it does not
mean the office of bishop but the secular entitlements that went
with the position of bishop. That the Evangelical Lutheran Church
had not observed and carried out the words of our Saviour, "Tell
the congregation" was an untruth. After only a few years it would
have been the custom of the congregations to call their Church wor-
kers by vote.


The debate on this subject became ever more heated until at
last Pastor Kavel seized his hat and left the assembly with the
words "I will never belong to a Church which for 300 gears has been
under a princely consistory, and still is, and which was not ap-
proved by the apostolic Church constitution" . Those of like
opinion followed him and they continued their meeting of synod at
Langmeil while those remaining with Pastor Fritsche continued synod
in Bethany. Thus the long-feared Church-separation became an es-
tablished fact, without first having a debate on the conversion of
the Jews, chiliasm, and Protestation. This happened later by means
of a number of brochures, of which we mention the one written by
Pastor Fritsche, "Elucidation of Protestation" in 1847.
Several attempts to heal the division failed, and such is
still the case so that in one place there may be two or three con-
gregations, each calling themselves Lutherans without being in any
way in Church affiliation with each other.


1 7 The “Kavel” Synod.
/I
lfter the above related sad break each of the two synods con-
tinued along its own path. Those who followed Pastor Kavel clung
more than ever to the foundation rules which were already stated in
the first Glen Osmond Church constitution. In future Church con-
stitutions they always returned to the first one as a deciding fac-
tor, stating the following omissions at its conclusion:
"Because the congregation was in duty bound by the Word of
Christ and the apostles to observe the Church constitution
and Church order according to the apostolic command as
contained in the Holy Scriptures, so they protest by their
avowal of the apostolic confessions of the Evangelical
Lutheran Church of those parts in the same where they are
in contradiction to the apostolic Church constitution,
namely:
1. Against the teaching that the Kaiser (the temporal
power) alone had the power to grant bishoprics.
(see Schmalk. Art. on the power and jurisdiction of
the Pope. Page 244, Koethe's edition).
2. Against, that "kings and princes, as the highest
ranking citizens, should help and supervise so that
all manner of error be avoided and the minds properly
instructed."
(see Schmalk. Art. on the power and jurisdiction of
the Pope. Page 247.)
3. Against, that "parents and breadwinners deny food
and drink to those children and servants who refuse
to learn the Catechism, and to report them so that
such incivilised people will be driven from the coun-
try by the prince.
(see preface to the Small Catechism, page 225.)
4. Further, against the teaching that there are actually
3 real sacraments, namely Baptism, the Lord's Supper,
and the Absolution, when in fact only the first two


are true sacraments.
(see Apology on the number of Sacraments - Page
148) ",
Besides this it was stipulated that those who wished to join
one of their congregations would have to testify before the assem-
bled congregation that they have been convinced from their hearts
that they are lost and condemned sinners without Christ, but that
the Lord has given them faith, mercy and peace. Also, no matter to
what Church they belonged, they were required to renounce in succes-
sion the Greek Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Reformed and United
Churches, also those Evangelical Lutheran Churches who discarded the
apostolic Church constitution. Upon these renunciations there fol-
lowed the public profession of faith in the known teachings of chil-
iasm, a still-to-come anti-Christ in person, a thousand-year reign
by Christ with His resurrected saints, the return of the Jews to the
land of their fathers, and their conversion to Christ. This decla-
ration ended with the words, "Here we Stand; we cannot do other-
wise; God help us. Amen." Further, it was declared that they
would reject the 17th Articles of the Augsburg confession, together
with all Anabaptist false teachings about chiliasm and believe,
teach and confess only the Bible's, and it concluded, "But our short
confession is no confession for the foolish, but for those who re-
ceive their wisdom from on high (James 3, 17). Who has this wisdom
rejoices that an apostolic Church constitution has again been talked
of and steps taken in hand to implement this, even if we have not
yet reached the ultimate goal. However he who does not experience
this joy but is only suspicious and even destroys what has already
been achieved in this regard, proves thereby that already the morn-
ing glow is offensive to him and that he does not wish to see the
brightness of the light of day - nor will see it. Such a one had
better examine himself to see whether he has not in him something of
the spirit of those Jews (at least in regard to this) who did not
rejoice at the appearing of the day of Christ, even though they had
experienced it. He who is of God hears God's Word. Amen."
Besides Langmeil, Pastor Kavel also had the congregations of
Lights Pass, Hahndorf, and a number of others, to serve. In spite
of his vigour and his enthusiasm, because of his increasing age, it
became impossible for him to serve so many congregations. So the
congregation of Lights Pass, together with several adjoining congre-
gations called Pastor W. Staudenmayer from Wurtemberg in the year
1860. As he took over his office he wanted to reform some of the
old orders and customs, which antagonised some. It also occurred
that charges of false teachings concerning the person of Christ were
levelled at him. Also, he acknowledged the 4 Protestations against
the Articles of Faith were groundless, and so in the year 1861, he,


together with a considerable proportion of members of his congrega-
tions of Lights Pass, Gnadenfrei, Nain, and Ebenezer rescinded
them. A break resulted because of all this and Pastor Staudenmayer
with his supporters separated from the old Kavel synod, and formed
a synod of their own.
Pastor Kavel had died the year before, and his former pupil
Ch. Auricht became his successor in Langmeil. In Lights Pass the
followers of Pastor Staudenmayer retained the occupancy of the
Church and manse, but that portion who had remained with the old
Kavel synod chose their former teacher, Mr. Rechner, as their pas-
tor and built a new Church directly across from the old one.
Through the efforts of Pastor Staudenmayer a second pastor,
W. Keppler, came from Wurtemberg. He, however, served only a short
time in Hahndorf, and then in Gnadenfrei, after which he went back
to Germany. Pastor Staudenmayer too, who began to suffer from ill-
health and who could not become reconciled to the Australian situ-
ation, followed his brother pastor to the old homeland. In his
place came Pastor Niquet, who until now had served in Victoria the
synod with which the Staudenmayer-Keppler congregations had become
affiliated. In Tanunda, close to Langmeil, several families of the
same persuasion, also called a pastor in the person of Pastor
Reusch from the Mission Institute at Basel.
The Evangelical Lutheran Synod in Australia made the attempt
to reunite with the dissident portion of the Kavel synod but which,
for a number of reasons, did not eventuate. Similar efforts how-
ever had different results with the original portion of that synod
being those served by the two Pastors Auricht and Rechner.
Almost simultaneously within the two synods concerned the de-
sire surfaced to take up mission work again amongst the aborigines
of South Australia, and, with that object in view, to get in touch
with Pastor Harms at Hermannsburg. The synod of the Pastors
Auricht and Rechner sent a friendly communication concerning this
to the pastors and congregations of our synod (the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Australia), dated the 17th October, 1862. This
was answered in like manner by the latter agreeing with the propo-
sals made. But in order to be able to undertake this combined work
with a good conscience attempts were made to achieve, with God's
help, a confessional union even if not a synodical one; and such a
union actually eventuated on the 22nd June, 1864, at a meeting of
brethren which was held and attended by the pastors and many breth-
ren from both sides at Langmeil for confirmation.
The chief clauses of the mutual agreement were as follows:-


"In the name of those congregations represented by the pas-
tors here present of the Synod of South Australia (now The
Evangelical Lutheran Synod in Australia), together with
the agreement of many brethren acknowledge that on their
part the earlier doctrinal quarrels were conducted with
many weapons of human frailty, namely the rough interpre-
tation of the 17 Articles of the Augsburg Confession and
at times had failed to adhere to the firmly held practice
in the Evangelical Lutheran Church with regard to chiliasm.
The latter accordingly is regarded as in the category of
freedom of belief so long as it is not practised in a fan-
atical way.
In the name of The Synod of Langmeil etc., the pastors
present with the agreement of a great number of brethren
present representing the congregations state:
1. That they on their part too acknowledge the sins com-
mitted during the heat of the doctrinal disputes and
retract them.
2. That the discarding of certain passages in the Sym-
bolic books regarding protestation in the year 1846,
as attacks by them on the precious doctrine of our
beloved Church is now solemnly and sincerely retrac-
ted and repealed.
3. That they, nevertheless, for their conscience sake
felt compelled also in the future to protest against
such interpretation of the relevant points in the
Symbolic books where the temporal powers in any way
encroach on the rights of the Church, or encourage or
allow the teaching of the three sacraments in the
Lutheran theological sense."
On the basis of this agreement in which alas, there was not the
love of truth in all points, the combined mission work came to pass.
In September, 1866, besides the two Pastors G. Heidenreich and G.
Hellmuth, the two Missionaries J. Goessling and E. Homann, as well
as the colonist H, Vogelsang from Hermannsburg met. Pastor Heiden-
reich in Bethany, and Pastor Hellmuth in Lobethal were welcomed and
installed with joy by their congregations. The two aforementioned
missionaries, as well as the colonists Vogelsang and Jacob, travell-
ed north and founded a mission station at the Killalpenina Lake.
Both synods contributed generously to this work which was managed by
a combined Missions Committee. After a promising start prolonged
droughts caused a lengthy interruption.


The establishment of the Immanuel synod happened during this
period, and because of it some big changes occurred in the Church as
well as in the mission situation.


8 The “Immanuel” Synod.
W|
e have already related that the portion of the Kavel synod
which separated and went with Pastor Staudenmayer became affiliated
with the Victorian synod. The Victorian synod was founded in Mel-
bourne through Pastor M. Goethe and was carried on under genuine
United rulings. Therefore they called their teaching personnel ex-
clusively from Basel. Later P. Gothe left Melbourne and went to
America. His successor, the present president of the Victorian
synod, Pastor Herlitz, instituted no alterations to the confessional
stand of the same. Thus wrote Pastor Herlitz in his publication
"Dem Christenboten" in the year 1866, "We will never renounce the
constitution so that 'Reformed' as such, without anything further,
must be admitted to Holy Communion."
Against that kind of utterance Pastor Auricht vehemently bore
witness with strong words in the Church publication produced by him.
In spite of this the Australian synod was astonished at the news in
the year 1874, that the Pastors Auricht and Rechner had not only
united with the Pastors Reusch and Niquet as one synod, but had also
united with the Victorian synod. Upon a query by Pastor Oster, the
president of the Australian synod, he was forwarded the "union Pro-
tocol!" from the conference held at Lights Pass on the 24th June, in
which it was stated clearly and plainly that the union was confirmed
and that the point of view of the Victorian synod as being a "de-
cidedly Lutheran" one, was expressed. As such a union was effected
without the knowledge and without consultation with the Australian
synod, which until now had been confessionally united with the Pas-
tors Auricht and Rechner, there arose in consequence such a dissen-
sion that an invitation to attend the first assembly of this newly
formed synod, calling itself "Immanuel synod ", was not accepted by
the Australian synod, because they could not, for conscience sake,
foster Church fellowship with the Victorian synod.
Up until now it was customary for the two synodical mission
societies to hold a combined mission festival on St. Michael's Day.
However, in consequence of the just described happenings, each syn-
odical society decided to celebrate its own mission festival, the .
Immanuel synod at Langmeil and the Australian synod at nearby Beth-
any. In the evening of the 28th September some of the pastors of
the Australian synod had already assembled and speaking about the


sad Church-break were united in the wish to see if it were not pos-
sible to unite in a God pleasing manner to the extent that the mis-
sion festival next day could be celebrated together, and in response
to an issued invitation the four pastors of the Immanuel synod ar-
rived at Bethany that same evening. Pastor Rechner took the oppor-
tunity to state here that the union with the Victorian synod was not
yet finalised and that the therein quoted passage of the Protocol
had been incorrectly inserted. Asked by the opposition to comment
Pastor Reusch explained that he had come to the Reformed communion
table in Basel, excusing himself thereby in that he himself had
spoken the words of distribution in the Lutheran manner. Although
he would not acknowledge that he had betrayed the Lutheran doctrine
in Basel, he did confess that according to his present confession of
faith he could not take part in a Reformed communion service again.
The desire for union was so great that this latter explanation of
Pastor Reusch was regarded as sufficient to satisfy the conditions,
and that the mission festival on the following day was regarded as a
combined one even if it had to be celebrated in two different
places. In the evening of the 29th September the pastors of both
synods met again in Langmeil and there joined together and as one
man agreed to take a stand against Victoria and that future rela-
tions with the Victorian synod be dependant on whether anything
could come of the union. The conditions of which were to be put to
Victoria by South Australia in order to make a union possible, and
should be finally settled at a pastoral conference convened for this
purpose.
This conference took place at Rosenthal on the 14th October,
1874, and lasted all night until 6 o'clock next morning. At this
eight points were settled and upon which the South Australians were
going to remain fixed unconditionally before they could unite with
Victoria. These were subscribed to by all pastors present. The
most important of these points were Points 3 and 7.
3. The rule, to remain non-revocable, that in future no
teaching personnel be called from the United Basel
Mission Institute. If, through conviction, pupils
sever their connection with Basel and then apply for
service in the Church here, then a call may be sent
by it to the same, but on the condition that they
first at a proper place submit themselves to a Collo-
quium orthodoxiae.
7. Members of other confessions be allowed, as guests
only, to officiate at our Church altars, but in no
case allowed as a substitute:- compare with Pastor
Herlitz's Explanation concerning this in the •Chris


tenboten' No. 12, year 1868, Correspondence. The
free exchange of pulpits by the Victorian synod with
the Moravians was also to be brought into question
here.
Pastors of the Australian synod departed from this conference
full of joy. However, in a communication from Pastor Reusch dated
the 19th October he explained himself in a way that, so far as the
abovementioned two points were concerned, they were kept as a matter
of fact by his endorsement of them.
At a pastoral conference of the Immanuel synod held from 3 -
4th November, all its pastors gave the same interpretation. Now
good counsel was at a premium. As the pastors of the Immanuel synod
did not keep their promise to the pastors of the Australian synod
that they would oppose the Victorian synod as one man, the Church
council of the Australian synod had to handle the matter alone, and
appointed two Pastors Schuermann and Strempel as delegates to the
Melbourne synod. Pastor Herlitz having invited the pastors and mem-
bers of all Lutheran synods and congregations in Australia to the
proceedings. The Immanuel synod elected the Pastors Reusch and
Rechner for the same purpose.
The important Melbourne synodical gathering took place on the
23 - 24th November. The delegates for the two South Australian
synods were present. Before the opening of synod the mutual rela-
tionship of the three concerned synods and the confessional stand-
point of Victoria and the 8 Rosenthal points were discussed in seve-
ral pastoral conferences, with the only result that the existing
differences were highlighted. The delegates from the Church council
had accordingly expected the invitation from Pastor Herlitz to in-
clude the participation in the debate over the 8 points by synod.
But this was denied them and they were admitted only after the Vic-
torians had first discussed it amongst themselves alone and could
convey to them the achieved result. With regard to the two main
points, the synod had rejected the framing of them by the Church
council, but adopted the altered one by the Immanuel synod, namely
as follows:-
Point 3. What is required is the following: that every
pastor who finds or wishes to find an appoint-
ment in our Evangelical Lutheran Church in Aus-
tralia shall renounce all unionistic and indeed
all prevailing beliefs contrary to our sound
Evangelical Lutheran doctrines, as well as all
dead orthodoxy and from the depths of his heart
take the whole Word of God alone as our rule


and guide in our faith and life and be obliged
to accept our Lutheran confessions as contained
in the complete Concordia Doctrinal confessions
as witness that the Evangelical Lutheran Church
is built on the foundations of Holy writ alone.
And to make sure that we obtain teaching per-
sonnel adhering to such doctrines we stipulate
definitely as proper that such a called prea-
cher subjugate himself to a Colloquium ortho-
doxiae at an appropriate place.
Point 7. To permit members of other confessions to of-
ficiate at the altars of our Churches only in
cases of utmost emergency. If a repetition is
requested, joining the congregation must first
take place - and so on.
Here, at the close of the debate. Pastor Strempel insisted that
in Point 3, the condition remain that in future no more teaching
personnel be permitted to be called from Basel because the teaching
institution was "united" and the Lutheran Church in every case per-
mitted only Lutheran (and not reformed, united, and the like) theo-
logical candidates to be given a call. Pastor Herlitz as president
of the synod explained, amongst other matters, his opposition to it.
Stating, "This point declares that it was actually wrong then to
have called pastors from Basel; therefore, if this rule was cor-
rect, the congregation had committed a sin thereby. In the Basel
Mission Institute only Lutheran theology was being taught." When
this statement by their president became known to the whole synod he
turned to the representatives of the Church council and stated ver-
bally: "You see that there can be no thought of a union so long as
you persist in justifying this point, either through God's Word or
the doctrinal writings. The whole lengthy debate has shown us that
you did not approach us as brethren to deliberate with us, but as
masters in order to dictate to us, therefore I declare to you in
the name of our synod that under these circumstances we cannot enter
into a union with you even if you should offer it to us. Allow me
however, out of love, to give you the warning that the path upon
which you are treading leads to the dead orthodoxy of the Lutheran
Church in the 17th century. To you outward Lutheranism is the chief
thing, we on the other hand search in Lutheranism the living Chris-
tianity. "
Upon such remarks the representatives of the Church council
lost all desire to participate further in the proceedings and on be-
ing informed the following day that they were present merely as
guests they left the venue of the assembly.


Under the circumstances Point 7 could no longer be brought up
for discussion, but it had been discussed at the pastoral conference
which had preceded the synod. There a pastor from the Victorian
synod had asked the South Australian synod, "if you were unable to
receive Lutheran Holy Communion would you prefer to go without com-
munion altogether?" Then several from the other side, including
Pastor Rechner, declared, "Certainly, if I cannot receive Lutheran
communion I would rather remain without communion." Upon Which
cries rang out from the Victorian side, "That is quite shocking."
Answer from the Other side, "That is Lutheran! That is according to
our biblical confession! " Whereupon Pastor Leipoldt replied, "And
if that appeared in the Confessions it would be shocking."
Although Pastor Herlitz soon afterwards declared that he would
no longer appear at the reformed communion table, the confessional
standpoint of the Victorian pastors was here made clear.
The union of the Immanuel synod with the synod of Victoria was
definitely finalised. The Australian synod, however, because of its
standpoints, had to refrain from such a union. When the result of
the Victorian discussions became known there was quite a disturbance
in the congregations of the Australian synod, because there were not
only members who were in agreement with the Victorians but also
those who had matters to complain of with regard to the handling of
this or that by the Church council. So it felt compelled to call a
special synod to enable it to be judged on its actions with regard
to these very weighty concerns, without first waiting for a period
to allow the departing synod to return. This was held with a great
deal of interest at Carlsruhe from the 9th to the 11th March, 1875.
At the conference the Church council submitted in great detail the
correspondence from both sides, together with enclosed articles from
the various Church periodicals setting out the full procedure and
conduct with the Immanuel and Victorian synods. The whole synodical
conference was convinced thereby that the Church council had acted
correctly and expressed its gratitude to it for guarding the truth
of its doctrine in such a spirited manner. But this achieved result
could not prevent those members in several congregations who were in
sympathy with the Immanuel and Victorian synods from leaving, and
from then on being served by pastors of the Immanuel synod.
Since the union with Victoria, the Immanuel synod has outwardly
grown very much. Pastor Heinze with several congregations joined
soon afterwards. Then came Pastor Krause with his adherents from
Lobethal. Already in 1873 this synod attempted to affiliate with
the Neuendettelsau Institution because it hoped to obtain chiliastic
pastors from there. But at that time the affiliation was declined
on the part of Neuendettelsau because of the clause in their Church


constitution that the lay elders were obliged to watch over the life
and teaching of their pastors. But after the promise had been given
on the part of the pastors of the Immanuel synod to change this
clause, that institution began to send students as pastors to South
Australia. Up until now 4 pastors from Neuendettelsau are stationed
here, namely Pastor J. Stolz in Point Pass, Pastor L. Keibel in
Appila, Pastor Matschoss in Mount Gambier, and Pastor F. Koschade in
Yorketown. Altogether there are 10 pastors belonging to this synod
and each of them has two, three or more congregations to serve. Be-
sides this, it carries on the mission work amongst the aborigines,
formerly conducted by the two synods combined, the two Missionaries
Meyer and Flierl (the latter from Neuendettelsau) working with great
blessing. Up until now 16 aborigines have been baptised.


19 The Evangelical Lutheran Synod in Australia
o
C2yince the Church separation in the year 1846 this synod, in
the previous chapters simply called "the Australian synod ", found it
necessary to consider cleansing its Church constitution from the un-
sound elements that still adhered to it from earlier times, but this
could only be brought about gradually. Following the example of the
Breslauer synod, it appointed a Church authority under the name
"General church Collegium" , comprising of four pastors and five lay-
men, which should attend to the affairs of the Church but be subject
to General synod. Later this Authority was given the name "Church
Council ". ,
Following the introduction of the Church council there appeared
within the Australian synod three differing parties. One was in
favour of a strong Church committee with absolute unchallengable
authority; another party was in favour of adopting the Missouri
Church constitution completely; the third took up a "middle of the
road" position. This diversity of attitudes was the reason for dis-
agreements from one synod to the next over the adoption of the
Church constitution, which was finally resolved at the General synod
in Blumberg (Birdwood) in 1877. By this constitution the institu-
tion of the Church council is retained. Its authority however goes
no further than that of a president of an American synod.
The first paragraph of the same states:-
The Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia is the amalga-
mation of such congregations in South Australia, Victoria
and other colonies which:
(1) Adhere to the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Tes-
taments as the inspired Word of God, the only source
and norm of Christian doctrine and the only sure and
authoritative guide for life and practice as well as
acknowledging the symbolic books of the Evangelical
Lutheran Church to be a true and unadulterated state-
ment and declaration of the Word of God.
(2) To practise pulpit and communion fellowship only with


those who are considered true believers according to
the doctrines of the Lutheran Church.
(3) Practise discipline in doctrine and living by its
servants and members.
(4) Concern themselves with the Christian schooling of
its youth.
(5) Insist on not tolerating in their membership the sec-
ret societies such as the Freemasons, Oddfellows and
so on.
(6) Its participation in the promotion of the Synod and
to help support it by subscribing to the upkeep of
the same according to their means.
As conditions for joining the Synod the following will be
be required of all congregations:-
(1) Public resignation from all unionistic principles.
(2) Acknowledged confession to the Book of Concord of the
Lutheran Church.
(3) Not tolerate the teaching of chiliasm from its pul-
pits .
(4) Proper calling of the servants of the Church.
(5) The use of biblical discipline.
As regards the supplying of the necessary teaching power, it
is here related that the 3 students which the sainted Pastor
Fritsche trained are still serving the same congregations which
first called them after 25 years.
The Dresden missionaries, after encountering unsurmountable
hindrances in the mission work, entered the service of the local
Lutheran Churches.
Pastor Klose served the small "Trinity" congregation in Adel-
aide for a short time.
Pastor Meyer became pastor to the Bethany congregation which he
faithfully served until his death in the year 1862.
72


Pastor Schuermann is still engaged in fruitful labour in the
parish of Hochkirch (Tarrington) in Victoria.
Pastor Teichelmann has periodically filled the office of pas-
tor in several places but has now retired to private life.
New increase in the teaching strength was received by our syn-
od through the two missionaries Meischel and Appelt who had with-
drawn from the Leipsig mission because of the caste question. Pas-
tor Meischel served the "Bethlehem" congregation in Adelaide for
several years and then went down to Mount Gambier and became the
spiritual guardian of the local Lutheran congregation there until
the frailty of old age compelled him to retire from office. Pastor
Appelt is the pastor of the Dutton parish.
As the congregations of the Australian synod increased it had
to look about for additional pastors. Through the mission it had
become associated with Hermannsburg and Pastor L. Harms was kind
enough to send the Pastors Heidenreich and Hellmuth, who had been
meant for America, to Australia. Pastor Heidenreich became the
successor to the sainted Pastor Meyer at Bethany and Pastor Hell-
muth came to Lobethal. In addition Teacher R. Ey dedicated himself
to the study of theology and in the year 1868 was able to be or-
dained after passing the required examinations and was installed as
pastor of the Carlsruhe parish.
As the mission work amongst the aborigines, which had again
been taken up by the two synods, had come to a standstill, the Her-
mannsburg missionaries, with the consent of its Director Harms, en-
tered into the service of our synod. Pastor Homann became pastor
of the "Bethlehem" congregation in Adelaide. Pastor Schoknecht
took over several congregations in Victoria. Pastor Goessling did
the same in Albury in N.S.W. until he returned to mission work in
New Zealand and Pastor Wiese, also a graduate of Hermannsburg, be-
came his successor. Those who came out from Hermannsburg in the
latter years, soon found after their arrival a group of colleagues
within our synod, namely Pastor Bertram in Carlsruhe; Pastor Georg
in Emmaus; Pastor Hoopmann in Yorketown on Yorke's Peninsula, as
successor to the young deceased Pastor Niemann; Pastor Meyer in
Hoyleton; Pastor Thiessen in Caltowie; Pastor Bode in Germanstown
in Victoria and Pastor Peters in Murtoa, also in Victoria.
Because of our separation from the Immanuel synod the mission
work was no longer carried on together. The Immanuel synod resumed
work at the mission in the former locality and continued it, the
Australian synod handing over to the Hermannsburg mission all its
assets at the Mission valued at several thousand pounds sterling on


the condition that our Church too would be provided with the neces-
sary supply of pastors. Hermannsburg now established a new mission
station on the Finke River in Central Australia. Under many hard-
ships and with substantial monetary sacrifices, by God's grace it
succeeded in getting a firm footing there. Since the erection of
the most essential buildings the three missionaries Kempe, Schulz
and Schwarz are able to carry on with the actual mission work,
which they are doing too with much enthusiasm. A primer has been
printed in the aboriginal language and a school commenced. All
moneys collected by the Australian synod for mission purposes go to
this mission. In this last year the donations collected from its
congregations amounted to over £282 (5,800 mark).
The Australian synod at present consists of 17 parishes of
which 12 are in South Australia, 4 in Victoria and 1 in New South
Wales. Some statistical information in connection with these will
conclude these records of the history of the Church.
1. THE PARISH OF ADELAIDE consists of the "Bethlehem" congrega-
tion in Adelaide and environs. Not long after the founding
of the colony and its capital, the city of Adelaide, there
were in the latter place a number of Lutherans who formed
themselves into a congregation and built a small Church naming
it "Trinity". This small congregation was under the spiritual
care of the two Missionaries Klose and Teichelmann. Various
causes resulted in the disbanding of this congregation, with
the exception of a small residue, and "Trinity" Church came
into the possession of strangers. In the year 1860 a group
from Pastor Maschmedt's congregations in Adelaide and Klemzig
left him because he would not abstain from presenting his
views on his new astronomy from the pulpit, namely that the
earth was not a sphere but a four-cornered disc. As this
group was also at variance with their former pastor over his
confessional standpoints they amalgamated with the remnant of
the old "Trinity" congregation and joined the Australian syn-
od; bought a Church and called the Lutheran Missionary J.F.
Meischel, who had returned from East India, as pastor. From
this time on the congregation went under the name of "Evangel-
ical Lutheran Bethlehem Church". After three years of fruit-
ful labour Pastor Meischel accepted the call from the Lutheran
Church at Mount Gambier, and his successor was Pastor Dr.
Loessel. During his term of office, however, the "Bethlehem"
congregation withdrew from the Australian synod. In the year
1868 it joined our synod again and was periodically served by


pastors from it. During this time the resolution of the con-
gregation was carried out, namely to build a larger Church so
that other Germans who had been alienated from it because of
it being a mission congregation, would now be given the oppor-
tunity of coming back to it. The foundation stone of the new
"Bethlehem" Church, built in a lovely Gothic style, was laid
on the 20th July, 1871, and on the 23rd June, 1872, it was
dedicated as a Church. Several weeks later Pastor E. Homann
was installed, first as manse occupier, and then as their pas-
tor and shepherd. At the moment the count of communicants
stands at 160. The school associated with the congregation is
under the capable and faithful care of Teacher Andresen.
2. THE PARISH OF BETHANY consists of the congregations of Beth-
any, Schoenborn, Neukirch, and Rheinthal. The congregation of
Bethany was founded by the sainted Pastor Fritsche from some
of those emigrating Lutherans who came from Prussia with him
on the ship "skioid". At first the divine services were held
under the open sky and in huts, and then for two years in the
home of the departed Brother Grosser, until a massive, spa-
cious Church was able to be built. This was dedicated by the
two Pastors Kavel and Fritsche on the Ist July, 1845. In the
year 1846 that noteworthy synod took place in it. As Pastor
Fritsche found it too difficult to serve the distant congrega-
tion of Bethany from Lobethal they called the Evangelical
Lutheran Missionary H.A.E. Meyer as their pastor in the year
1844. The same carried out the duties of his dedicated office
with true devotion. Besides Bethany he gathered a number of
other congregations and served them with Word and Sacrament.
On the 17th December, 1862, Pastor Meyer was suddenly torn
from his blessed labour by a stroke. Until the parish could
procure their own pastor again Pastor P. Oster undertook its
care and served it from Rosenthal.
The number of communicants at present stands at 268. There is
a school connected with the congregation which has been con-
ducted by Teacher Topp with unflagging faithfulness for 37
years.
The congregation of SCHOENBORN was founded by the sainted Pas-
tor Meyer in the year 1855. Twenty-seven householders joined
it and built the still well-maintained Church complex, which
simultaneously serves as a school and a teacher's residence.
The congregation numbers 72 communicants and has a Church
school.
The NEUKIRCH congregation was likewise founded by the sainted


Pastor Meyer. For many years divine services were held in a
private home, until in the year 1860 a massive Church was
built. Upon the calling of Pastor Appelt the congregation
built a new manse which is still used by the congregation tea-
cher. When Pastor Appelt resigned from this congregation it
joined the Parish of Bethany. At the moment 70 communicants
belong to it.
The RHEINTHAL congregation, founded by Pastor Heidenreich, has
only been in existence for several years but numbers about 100
communicants and has, like all the rest of the congregations
of the Bethany parish, its Church school.
3. THE PARISH OF BLUMBERG (Birdwood) was founded by Lutheran emi-
grants from Prussia and was served by Pastor Fritsche from
Lobethal until 1858. In August of that year the congregation,
rapidly growing in membership, was taken over by Pastor C.A.
Hensel. For 20 years this congregation numbered about 400
communicants but through the failure of harvests brought about
by the so-called " Take-all ", many were forced to leave the
locality, and as a result of which the congregation was re-
duced to about 172 communicants.
It owns a large, imposing Church, a large school building, and
the Church school is still well attended.
The congregation of FRIEDENSBERG was constituted in 1869, and
until now has been served with Word and Sacrament by Pastor
Hensel, at first in a private home until the year 1861 when
the congregation moved into the pleasing and imposing Church
built by it. At the moment it numbers 102 communicants and
has a Church school.
The congregation of PALMER was founded in 1869 and in the year
1873 built a fine roomy Church. The number of communicants
stands at about 92 at the moment and it also has a Church
school.
4. THE PARISH OF CARLSRUHE consists of the congregations of Carl-
sruhe. Emu Downs and Appila.
The congregation of CARLSRUHE was founded by the sainted Pas-
tor Meyer. On his death Pastor Appelt took it over. In the
year 1868 Pastor Ey became their pastor.
However before this the congregation had already built a small


but pleasing little Church. But after several years, as the
congregation increased its membership three-fold, it had to be
enlarged considerably. Further, a roomy school was built and
that too in recent years has had to be extended. After Pastor
Ey had accepted the call to Lobethal in 1876 this congregation
was served alternately by Pastors Oster and Homann, until in
the year 1878 it again had its own pastor in the person of
Pastor Bertram. The number of communicants is about 250 and
the Church school is well attended.
The congregation of EMU DOWNS was first visited regularly by
Pastor Ey. When he moved south Pastor Georg took it over un-
til it joined the parish of Carlsruhe. This congregation num-
bers 43 communicants, has a solid little Church which was ded-
icated on the 21st Sunday after Trinity, 1876. It also has a
Church school.
The congregation of APPILA was founded by Pastor Ey. It re-
ceived its own pastor in the person of Pastor Thiessen. After
he went over to Caltowie Pastor Bertram took over. The commun-
icant count is around 30.
5. THE PARISH OF CALTOWIE consists of the congregation of Cal-
towie together with 6 small neighbouring congregations which,
like Appila, lie in the northern districts which have been
taken up by farmers only in the last 7 or 8 years.
The congregation of CALTOWIE was founded by Pastor Ey and at
the moment is under the spiritual care of Pastor Thiessen.
The Church is held jointly with the local members of the Im-
manuel synod. Besides Caltowie, Pastor Thiessen also serves
the following congregations: Canowie, Yongala, Black Rock,
Malloway, Spring Creek and Palmer.
The whole parish numbers 134 communicants.
6. THE PARISH OF EMMAUS includes the congregations of Emmaus,
Petershill and Friedrichswalde.
The EMMAUS congregation is the youngest of the three congrega-
tions. The founding members of it, who had been gathered by
Pastor Appelt, formerly belonged to the Point Pass congrega-
tion which had been induced to join the Immanuel synod but the
former remained true to our synod and kept Pastor Appelt who •
continued to serve them until they joined the Carlsruhe
parish. .


In the year 1872 they built a solid school building which is
also used for meeting for divine services. As the membership
rapidly increased this congregation, together with Petershill,
called Pastor D.W. Georg as their pastor. The number of com-
municants at present is 135. This congregation too has its
Church school.
The congregation of PETERSHILL was founded through the sainted
Pastor Meyer. After his death it was served by Pastor Appelt.
Then Pastor Teichelmann became their pastor until the year
1878 when they joined the Carlsruhe parish. However, as the
Carlsruhe congregation increased its membership considerably
and ever greater calls were made on the services of their Pas-
tor, Petershill was persuaded to join with Emmaus to call
their own pastor. This congregation owns, besides a school
building, a fine solid Church, has a Church school and numbers
124 communicants.
The congregation of FRIEDRICHSWALDE was similarly founded by
the sainted Pastor Meyer, and was served after his death by
Pastor Appelt. Then in conjunction with Carlsruhe they called
Pastor Ey as their pastor. When he left for Lobethal in the
year 1876, this congregation joined the Emmaus parish. At the
moment it numbers 90 communicants, has a fine school building
for its Church school, and a fine, solid Church.
7. THE DUTTON PARISH consists of the Dutton, Gnadenberg, St.
Kitt, Tableland, Neales and Eden Valley.
The DUTTON congregation, which during the first six years of
its existence held its divine services in a private home, now
possesses a fine little Church. The school building built by
it was let as a state school, but has, even so, established a
Church school again. This congregation consists of 70 com-
municants .
The congregation of GNADENBERG was gathered by the sainted
Pastor Meyer. Since the year 1861 their pastor has been Pas-
tor C.D. Appelt who was called as their pastor in conjunction
with Neukirch. It has a fine building for its Church school,
as well as a nice, substantial Church, and numbers 100 commun-
icants.
The congregation of ST.KITT now numbers 34 communicants and
for some years has had its own school building in which it
conducts its Church school.


The TABLELAND congregation numbers 24 communicants, has a
school building which at the moment is used only for the pur-
pose of divine services.
The congregation of NEALES numbers 90 communicants and since
1874 has a nice Church which is also used as a school room as
this congregation too has a Church school.
The congregation of EDEN VALLEY at first belonged to the par-
ish of Bethany, but later joined the Blumberg parish. When
Pastor Hensel had to relinquish his services because of ill-
health, Pastor Appelt became its pastor in 1874. This congre-
gation numbers 70 communicants, has a Church building and a
Church school.
8. THE PARISH OF HAHNDORF consists of the congregations of Hahn-
dorf, Salem, Callington and Monarto.
The congregation of HAHNDORF numbers 280 at present and has a
well-attended Church school.
The SALEM congregation was at first served by Pastor Teichel-
mann but a few years after its foundation (in the year 1856)
it joined the Hahndorf parish. Its communicant count is 50.
This is the only congregation in the Australian synod which
still allows its school building to be used as a state school.
The CALLINGTON congregation was served by Pastor Fiedler at
the beginning of its existence, but after several years placed
itself under the spiritual care of Pastor Strempel from Hahn-
dorf. It numbers 70 communicants and has a fine solid Church.
The MONARTO congregation was gathered by Pastor Teichelmann
but when he left the district it joined the Hahndorf parish.
This congregation has a substantial school building which is
used to instruct its children in the Church school and also
for the assembling for divine services. It numbers 80 commun-
icants.
9. THE PARISH OF HOYLE'S PLAINS has only just been established
and consists of the congregations of Hoyle's Plains and Can-
dowie, Pastor H. Meyer being their pastor.
The HOYLE'S PLAINS congregation numbers 20 communicants.
The CANDOWIE congregation has 25 communicants.


10. THE LOBETHAL PARISH consists of the congregations of Lobethal,
Mount Torrens, Sommerfeld and Mannum.
The LOBETHAL congregation has 185 communicants and has a
Church school which has been conducted by Teacher Mueller for
the past 38 years.
The MOUNT TORRENS congregation was formed about the year 1856,
and was served by the Lobethal pastors of the day, at first by
the sainted Pastor Fritsche, and at present by Pastor Ey who
was called by it jointly with Lobethal to be their pastor.
This congregation possesses a fine big Church, a Church
school, and numbers 90 communicants.
The SOMMERFELD congregation has left Palmer. As it was re-
fused special Church care it sought and found spiritual care
from the pastors of the Immanuel synod. When the brethren of
this congregation were convinced of how unjust and one-sided
the judgment of that synod was with respect to our conduct
against Pastor Krause, they gladly returned to their old spir-
itual home. This congregation owns a school building which
also serves as a Church. It has a Church school and numbers
85 communicants.
The congregation of MANNUM on the Murray has only recently
been established and numbers 50 communicants.
11. THE ROSENTHAL PARISH comprises the congregations of Rosenthal,
Lyndoch, Rowlands Flat, Freeling, Pinkerton's Plain, Corconda,
Dal key and Hummocks.
The congregation of ROSENTHAL was founded in 1850 and was or-
iginally served by the sainted Pastor Meyer. Pastor Ph.J.
Oster took over the spiritual care of the congregation in
1855. During the last few years it has erected a new school
building as an older one no longer served its purpose. On Re-
formation Day, 1859, the foundation stone was laid for "st.
Martin's" Church which, by Australian standards, was very com-
modious. It was dedicated eight months later. Pastor Oster
moved to Rosenthal in 1863. The congregation presently num-
bers 140 communicants, and it has a Church school.
The LYNDOCH VALLEY congregation is part of the old Hoffnung-
sthal congregation. The latter was the oldest German settle-
ment in this district. It was founded by Lutheran emigrants
from Nekla (in the Province of Posen) in 1847, received spin*-
80


tual care from the sainted Pastor Meyer from 1848 - 1855, and
from 1855 - 1863 was the place of residence of Pastor Oster.
That congregation disbursed because of a local calamity, and a
section moved 5i miles south of the township of Lyndoch, pro-
curing a piece of land with an English chapel on it, which was
used as a school room, and then also dedicated as a Lutheran
house of worship under the name of "st. James" church. The
number of communicants at present is 110. Earlier it was con-
siderably larger, but because of a separation with the Imman-
uel synod caused by the stand the Australian synod had to take
against Pastor Krause, it was reduced. This congregation
still maintains a Church school.
The ROWLANDS FLAT congregation is the other section of the old
Hoffnungsthal congregation. It dedicated its lovely "Trinity"
Church in the year 1867, and at present numbers 80 communi-
cants. Unfortunately Rowlands Flat does not have a Church
school and sends its children to the local state school.
The remaining congregations in the parish are considerably
smaller:-
The congregation of Freeling has 50 communicants
" " " Pinkerton's Plains has 25 "
" " " Dal key has 25
" " " Corconda has 10 "
" " " Hummocks has 10 "
12. THE PARISH OF YORKE'S PENINSULA comprises the congregations of
Yorketown, Edithburgh, Kilkerran and Gum Flat.
The congregation of YORKETOWN, like Edithburg, was gathered
together under extreme difficulties through Pastor Strempel,
and was served by him from 1874. It was served by Pastor Ey
from 1876 until in 1878 they had their own pastor in the per-
son of the sainted Pastor Niemann. After his death Pastor J.
H. Hoopmann became their pastor and occupied the newly-built
manse at Yorketown, while divine services are held in an
earlier built large school building at Weaners Flat three
miles away. The number of communicants stands at 66.
The EDITHBURG congregation was established in the same way and
was served from Yorketown. It possesses a school building for
its Church school, and in which divine services are also held:
It numbers 71 communicants.


The KILKERRAN congregation formed itself in the years from
1876 to 1878. It was at first served by Pastor Ey but joined
the parish of Yorke's Peninsula when the sainted Pastor Nie-
mann was installed. The local, fine, solid Church belongs
jointly to several parties, but it is also used as a school by
the congregation. This congregation numbers 110 communicants.
Th-e GUMFLAT congregation has 13 communicants.
13. THE PARISH OF HOCHKIRK consists of the congregations of Hoch-
kirch, Tabor, Neukirch and Gnadenthal.
The HOCHKIRK (Tarrington) congregation was formed in the year
1852, when 9 families from Rosenthal settled there. In the
following year Pastor C.W. Schuermann accepted the call to be-
come the pastor of this congregation. It increased rapidly
until a decrease in membership occurred due to a separation
brought about by a dispute over the doctrine of re-birth and
the worth of Holy Baptism.
Hochkirch possesses a fine, stone Church, a good manse, and a
weatherboard school building which is used as the Church
school. The communicant membership is 162.
The TABOR congregation, together with Gnadenthal, likewise has
a stone Church which also serves as a School. It numbers 52
communicants.
The NEUKIRCH congregation only has 35 communicants as many of
the Lutherans there moved to Albury.
The GNADENTHAL congregation has 36 communicants.
14. THE PARISH OF GERMANTOWN comprises the congregations of Ger-
mantown, Waldkirch, Melbourne and Torrumbarry.
The congregation of GERMANTOWN, like that of Waldkirch and
Melbourne, was founded by Lutherans who could not go along
with the Victorian synod for conscience sake. At first these
congregations were served by Pastor Schuermann. Then they had
their own pastor in the person of Pastor P. Jacobsen, who
served them faithfully for many years, until he, after a brief
period in the Horsham district, occupied the manse in Christ


church. New Zealand, and works there with blessing. The pres-
ent pastor of this parish is Pastor J. Bode. Germantown has a
fine substantial Church, and numbers 85 communicants.
The WALDKIRCH congregation has its own Church building and
numbers 58 communicants.
The MELBOURNE congregation consists of 20 Lutherans scattered
around Melbourne and its suburbs. These had called their own
pastor in the person of Pastor W. Peters, but he soon had to
give up his situation as Melbourne did not offer a suitable
field of growth for the Lutheran Church. One portion of the
local Germans were not the least bit interested in the Word of
God, and the other portion with Christian ideals found satis-
faction in the Victorian synod which had built a beautiful
Church here, and had a large congregation, whose pastor is the
gifted and extremely capable Pastor H. Herlitz.
The TORRUMBARRY congregation has only just been formed and
numbers 20 communicants,
15. THE PARISH OF NATIMUK comprises Natimuk, Vectis East, Dimboola
and Tarranginnie.
The NATIMUK congregation is the place of residence of the pas-
tor of this parish. Like its sister congregations, it was
first served by Pastor Schuermann, and then had its own pastor
in the person of Pastor Schoknecht. Natimuk has a substantial
manse and a fine Church, which was dedicated as "st. Paul's"
Church in June, 1874. The congregation has a Church school
and numbers 86 communicants.
The VECTIS EAST congregation also possesses its beautiful
"zion" Church which was dedicated on the 24th Sunday after
Trinity 1876, and also a Church school. It consists of 86
communicants.
DIMBOOLA congregation also has its nice "st. Peter's" Church
and a Church school. It has 136 communicants.
The congregation of TARRANGINNIE has only just come into
being.
16. THE PARISH OF MURTOA consists of the congregations of Murtoa,
Minyip, Bungalally, and Sheep Hills.


The congregation of MURTOA, like Minyip and Bungalally, be-
longed to the parish of Natimuk. But as it became too dif-
ficult for Pastor Schoknecht to serve the far-flung parish
properly, the above three congregations broke away and Pastor
Jacobsen took over their spiritual care. His successor was
Pastor W. Peters in the year 1879. Besides the manse Murtoa
has a fine Church and numbers 88 communicants.
The MINYIP congregation has its own Church building and num-
bers 98 communicants.
The congregation of BUNGALALLY numbers 26 communicants and
likewise has its own Church building.
The SHEEP HILLS congregation is just in the process of being
established and it is not possible to give an exact count of
its communicant members.
17. THE PARISH OF ALBURY comprises the congregations of Gerogery,
Jindera, Burrumbuttock, Wodonga, and Banal la.
The congregation of GEROGERY, together with Jindera and
Wodonga, was founded in the years 1866-67. These three con-
gregations called the Missionary J.F. Goessling as their pas-
tor and he arrived there in July, 1868. When Pastor Goessling
returned to mission work Pastor H. Wiese became his successor.
Besides a manse, Gerogery has a fine, roomy Church, and a
Church school. The communicant count stands at 63.
The congregation of JINDERA numbers 91 communicants and like-
wise has a Church school. A stately Church was recently dedi-
cated.
BURRUMBUTTOCK congregation has a Church school and numbers 46
communicants.
The WODONGA congregation is in Victoria, has a nice Church,
and numbers 41 communicants.
The BENALLA congregation, also in Victoria, numbers 21 commu-
nicants .
In addition to the 17 parishes there is also MOUNT GAMBIER in
South Australia, which at the moment is not an independent


parish but is served by a number of pastors. Mount Gambier
congregation has about 65 communicant members, and a large
Church building. It was first served by Pastor Schuermann.
Then this congregation called Pastor Meischel from Adelaide,
who, because of the frailties of old age and deafness eventu-
ally retired from his office after years of faithful labour.
According to the statistics here set out the Evangelical Luth-
eran synod in Australia has 70 congregations which number
5,141 communicants and are served with Word and Sacrament by
17 pastors. In this union there are 35 Church schools which
are maintained by the respective congregations without any
kind of support from State authorities.


( 11 though the writer of the above information could by no
means make the claim of calling it a history of the Lutheran Church
in Australia, nor indeed would wish to, nevertheless the observant
reader will get a glimpse of its foundation, evolution and the ac-
companying disputes connected with it. May the Lord, therefore,
bless this unbiased work so that the members of our synod are en-
couraged to true faith, and thereby portray their love for their
spiritual home, so that they carry in their hearts the woes and the
welfare of it, and earnestly and often pray for it, and with joyful
hearts bring in the necessary sacrifices. Where there have been
transgressions may the Lord forgive; where the truth has not
pleased, or where there was no love for the truth, may the Lord
overlook it, and in spite of our sins not withdraw His Hand of
blessing but allow His Lutheran Zion in Australia to grow and
flourish. What has been torn and wounded may He heal; where there
has been a wandering down false paths may He redirect on to the
right way; what has fallen may He restore and allow us to live to
see the day when all who call themselves Lutheran, and love the
truth, reach out the hand of kinship and in union stand fast upon
the firm foundation of Eternal Truth.
Amen, Thy help Lord Jesus Christ impart;
For Thou alone our Guardian art;
Help us for Thy name's sake.
So we, Thy congregation, make
Songs of thankfulness and praise.
And joyfully proclaim - Amen.








