

EARLY DAYS
OF
ENGLAND.
BY
JAMES BONWICK,
Inspector of Denominational Schools, Victoria,
Author of “ Geography of Australia and New Zealand,”
etc. die.
1857.




EARLY DAYS
OF
ENGLAND.
BY
JAMES BONWICK,
9B Inspector of Denominational Schools, Victoria,
Author of “ Geography of Australia and New Zealand
Sfc. Sfc.
1857.




INTRODUCTION.
Boys and Girls in Australia should not forget
the country of their parents —the land of the
brave, the good, and the free— Old England.
They who live beneath the gum-tree shade
should think of the old Oak Home. The
island of liberty has produced famous warriors,
fine poets, true patriots, great scholars, and
kind Christians enough to make it well known,
honoured, and loved everywhere. We Austra-
lians owe much to the struggles and labours of
Englishmen a long while ago. Our liberty has
been gained at the price of their best blood.
England is the true land of heroes.
To know how much we owe to those heroes
of the past, to learn the progress of improve-
ment in knowledge, home comforts, and freedom,
we must study the a History of England.” To
make Young Australians familiar with that sub-
ject, this little sketch of their Fatherland is
presented to them by their devoted friend,
THE AUTHOR.
April 17, 1857. ' v




EARLY DAYS OF ENGLAND.
Part I.
THE BRITONS AND ROMANS.
Upon an island, full of gloomy forests of oak
trees, with broad marshes and sweet spots of fer-
tile beauty, lived tribes of painted savages, who
spent their days in hunting for food, or fighting
with their neighbours, and their moonlight
nights in chorus songs and laughing corrobbe-
ries. The tattooed and cannibal Britons were the
first inhabitants of the land of Englishmen.
Once they dwelt in Tartary ; then, roaming
westward to the shores of the German Sea, some
passed over to the chalk coast of the island.
They went by the name of Cimbri, Kelts or
Celts. They were of the race from which the
Irish, the Welsh, and the Scottish Highlanders
have sprung.
They were tall, strong, and dark. They wore
their hair thrown back. Their clothes were of
skin, and of a rude cloth. Differing from other
natives, they wore trousers. They had some
knowledge of metals, for they dug the soil and
wrought bracelets and ornaments of gold.


Though without books, they marked characters
upon rocks for writing 1 .
Unlike our natives, the Britons had an
idea of religion, and priests, called Druids, to
govern them. These men of long beards knew
more than they told others. They led the
people to worship images. The oak and its
mistletoe-bough were much thought of. The
Sun and fire were prayed to. The customs of
the Celts are not forgotten. In Scotland they
leap through the fire at Beltane, or day of Bel,
the Sun. The country folks of Ireland used to
make their cattle go through the Bel fire.
The temples of the Druids were circles of
great stones. Logan, or rocking stones, were set
up to puzzle the tribes. The Cromlech was a
flat stone on which they burnt sacrifices. Some-
times they burnt captives iii a huge wicker
basket of a cross shape to please their idols.
The dead were buried with their weapons in long
Barrows, or heaps of earth.
Eighteen hundred years ago, Julius Caesar, a
Roman general, having fought against the peo-
ple of Gaul, and killed many for the pleasure of
conquest, turned his attention to the Island of
Britain. He wished to shed blood there, and
gain a great name as a hero. He did little the
first time. The following year he brought
30,000 chosen warriors of Rome against the
tattooed tribes. His provision parties were cut
off, his troops were entangled in morasses, and
he left without a conquest.


Other generals continued the fight for above
a hundred years. Caractacus was led captive to
Rome. Queen Boadicea bravely headed the
Britons, as they tried to drive the Romans from
their homes. The Druids sang songs of war to
cheer the men. But the British war chariots,
clubs, arrows, and spears, were no match for the
discipline of their enemies. The island became
subject to the Eagle Standard, and many Romans
left Italy to form colonies in the new country.
The conquerors behaved well to the brave
Britons. They taught them agriculture, build-
ing, and other arts, and established schools
among them. For nearly three hundred years
there was peace in the land. The Gospel of
Jesus Christ wrns early introduced into the coun-
try, and entered the cabins of the Britons as it
passed through the gates of palaces. The
painted savage had now become not only civi-
lized and instructed, but christianized and happy.


THE ANGLO, OR ENGLISH, SAXONS.
These Englishmen of the olden times formerly
roamed like Tartars over the plains of middle
Asia. Emigrating to the woods and shores of
Germany they became hold pirates and robbers.
These Sacse, Saksuns, or Saxons, paid visits to
England, burning, stealing, and enslaving-.
Constantine, a Roman governor, having quarrel-
led with his master at Rome, took the name of
Emperor of Britain, about the year 400. To
strengthen himself he made friends with the
pirates, and gave them some good ships. When
the Saxons returned home, they built new ves-
sels after the Roman model, and repaid kindness
in more cruel attacks.
Just then the barbarous Piets of Scotland
plagued the Britons terribly. The Romans could
not help them, for they were wanted at home to
keep off the German savages from Italy. The
Britons, therefore, in 420, became independent,
and got help from the Saxons against their
northern neighbours. The Saxons liked our old
country so well, that they determined to conquer
it for their own home.
Much doubt is thrown upon stories of that
warfare. We know that the English were 200
years before they had mastered the Britons, and


even then Wales was free. Kent was settled about
450; the South Saxons settled in 480 ; the West
Saxons in 500; the North Saxons in 550; and
the East Saxons, or Angles and Middle Saxons, in
600. Other rovers conquered and governed in
Mercia.
Wessex, of the West Saxons, was a strong
kingdom, and soon absorbed Sussex, Kent, and
East Anglia. Mercia was in the centre, and
Northumbria in the north. The Saxon Heptar-
chy, or seven kingdoms, did not last long.
There were five, and four, and five again, and then
three. Generally one King was at the head of
the other King's, who was sometimes of Mer-
cia, hut generally of Wessex. Egbert of Wes-
sex was the eighth Bretwalda, or chief King.
The British King, Arthur, fought against the
West Saxons. Drunkenness subdued the Britons
of the north. The Danes afterwards troubled
the Saxons as they had troubled the Britons.
Coming from the German home of the .English,
the pagan pirate Danes hated the comfortably
settled and Christian Saxons. Their ships came
to the Angles-]and. They destroyed the churches,
murdered the monks and priests, robbed the peo-
ple, and sold many for slaves.
Northumbria fell beneath the blows of the
red-haired pirates in 866. East Anglia was
overrun, and its good king murdered in
Suffolk. Mercia next sank as a Danish pro-
vince, and Wessex only was left. Ethelred,


the ruler of Wessex, was defeated. Upon his
death in 870, Alfred, his son, tried to stay the
invaders, but was obliged to fly and hide him-
self in a marshy island.
The young- Englishman tried again. Dressed
as a harper, he came a spy among the Danish
soldiers. Gathering his troops, and helped by
the Britons, he attacked them when off their
guard, drove them to East Anglia, and freed his
country. ITe was never King of all England,
hut of its southern and western parts only.
Alfred the Great was a good King of Wes-
sex, making good laws, setting a good example,
and encouraging trade, learning, and religion.
He worked hard to do his duty, though troubled
with a dreadfully painful disease. After some
years of peace, Hastings, the pirate Dane,
terribly troubled the West Saxons. Our noble
king was called by the fine name of “ Alfred the
truth-teller.”
Edward, his son, increased his dominions by
the death of his sister, the pious Queen of Mer-
cia. Athelstan, the beautiful grandson of
Alfred, began to reign over middle and southern
England in 926. The Northumbrian Danes got
the help of the Scots, Welsh, and Norwegians,
against him. A great battle was fought. The
brave Londoners pierced the Scots circle, the
raven banner of the Danes was seized, North-
umbria became Saxon again, and Athelstan was
declared the First King of all England.


The next Kings were Edmund the Elder,
Edred, Edwin, Edgar, Edward the
Younger, and Ethelred. Dunstan, the
learned Monk, governed England in the days of
Edwin and Edgar. Edward was killed by order
of his mother-in-law, Elfrida, to make way for
her foolish son, Ethelred, who afterwards married
Emma, the sister of the Duke of Normandy, in
France.
The Danes came again. Though no longer
idolators, they were still fierce warriors. Our
King bought them off by paying the price of a
quarter of a million of acres. The Danes came
again. Pretending friendship, the English took
advantage of many and murdered them. Sweyn
and his son Canute arrived with a fleet to con-
quer the land. Ethelred and soon died.
Edmund Ironside, so called for his toughness
and courage, was chosen King. Deceived by


his friend Edric, he was defeated by Canute, and
afterwards murdered in 1016. Canute became
the first Danish King’ of England. At first
cruel and proud, he changed into a just and
merciful ruler. His sons, Harold Harefoot,
a had man, and Hardicanute, a glutton and
tyrant, succeeded him.
The English and Danes then agreed to he
governed by the gentle Edward the Confessor,
son of Ethelred, in 1042. Brought up in Nor-
mandy, he introduced Norman lords and bishops,
and promised his crown to his friend William,
Duke of Normandy. But the Earl of Godwin
was the real ruler of England. The weak
Edward promised the throne, also, to the earl’s
son, Harold. The King died in 1066. Harold
got himself made King, and William prepared
to fight for the honour.
Another rival appeared. Tostig, the brother
of Harold, got Hardrada, the King of Norway,
to invade England with 500 ships. On Septem-
ber 25th the battle was fought. The English
could not break the ring of the Northmen, and
fled from the field. The Norwegians broke their
line to pursue them. The English rallied, rushed
upon the disordered troops, pierced the throat of
Hardrada, and the heart of Tostig, and delivered
their favourite Harold.
Three days after this, William landed in Kent
with a fine army of 60,000 men. A thousand
vessels crossed the channel. The English fleet had


been expecting them for a month, and it was
while the Saxon sailors had gone for fresh pro-
visions that the Normans slipped over. Harold’s
strong army prepared for William, had been
nearly destroyed in the victory of September.
The bold King gathered what men he could,
marched down southward, and faced the invader
at Hastings on October 13th, 10G6.
The next morning- the Saxon wedge was formed,
and in its midst was the banner of Harold,
sparkling with gold and jewels. A Noi-man
harper rides forward, sings a war song-, and
hurls a spear at the English line. The charge
is made, and boldly met by the battle-axe of the
Saxons. Again and again does the Duke dash
onward with his iron horsemen, but the wedge
cannot be broken.
Arrows are now shot upward, so as to fall


upon the heads of the Englishmen. One pierces
the eye of Harold. A fright ensues. William
presses forward, the warriors give way, the ban-
ner is hurled down, and the liberty of Saxon
England is gone for ever.


CONDITION AND HOMES OF THE
ANGLO-SAXONS.
Our forefathers had different ways from ours.
The men wore long" gowns and no stockings, and
had their cloaks fastened on one shoidder. They
were fond of long’ hair, which was parted in the
middle, and they let their beards grow. Their
faces were sometimes tattooed and painted like
New Zealanders.
Their houses were small and inconvenient.
For furniture, they had chairs, stools, tables,
and a sort of sofa. Babies had cradles then.
The Saxons were fond of hot baths like the Turks.
Their food was not so good as ours. The bread
was of barley and rye, and the meat was gene-
rally salted. He who drank that which a dog-
had tasted was obliged to fast one day or sing a
hundred psalms.
The amusements of the early English were
hawking, throwing the bar, tumbling, jumping-
through a hoop, wrestling-, dancing of horses,
bears, and monkeys, harp playing-, and a sad
amount of gambling and drinking-. King- Edgar
made a law that no one should drink more than
a certain quantity at a draught. Agriculture
was not much understood. The plough was a
very poor one, and the crops were slight. Trades


were not many then. The carpenter was called
a tree worker. Swineherds were more common
than shepherds. The monks were the best me-
chanics and farmers, because the only educated
people. A horse then cost 80s., a cow 55., a pig 1
or sheep Is. An acre of land was worth from
one to four sheep.
Women were well treated, though the wives
were bought from their parents. Widows recei-
ved half their husbands property. When sick,
the Saxons thought themselves tormented by
evil spirits, and used charms to drive them off,
just as our blackfellows do.
The few books they had, taught them sad non-
sense, such as Young Australians do not believe.
They thought there were men in Gaul, now
France, who were of three colors, who had tails
like lions, and mouths like the sails of a windmill.
They thought that the Sun would not shine on
the Red Sea, and that on some trees diamonds
and pearls were growing. Alfred’s teacher said
the heaven was like fire, turning the stars round
the earth. The first teachers of the English came
from Ireland. Good Bede translated St. John’s
Gospel into English, and Alfred did the same for
other parts.
The Anglo-Saxons were divided into three
classes—Thanes, Ceorls, and Theowes, or slaves.
The Thanes must have 500 acres of land; the
Ceorls were freemen, but with little power. The
Theowes were bought and sold like cattle, and


were valued at the price of four oxen. When
the people became Christians, slavery gradually
passed away. Once the English would sell
their own children for slaves. We read of a man
paying 40s. to buy the freedom of his wife, his
children, and his grandchildren.
As fines were paid for injuries, they were in
proportion to the rank of the party: being for a
Bishop or an Earl, 5 times as much as for a
Thane, and 30 times that for a Ceorl, while for
knocking out an eye 50s. were paid; it was 10s.
for cutting off a great toe, and 3s. for knocking
the nose.
When a man was charged with a crime, per-
sons came forward to give him a character. If
this were good, he was set free ; if not, he was
put to the ordeal. His hand was thrust into
boiling water, and then bound up and sealed.
In three days the bandage was removed, and if
no sore remained, he was pronounced not guilty.
The punishments then in use were banishment,
slavery, branding, whipping, cutting off ears,
hanging, and stoning.
To keep order, the country was divided into
Hundreds, or districts of one hundred families,
and Tythings, or districts of ten families; all
these were answerable for the good behaviour of
their neighbours. Most of England was divided
into counties before the time of Alfred. Four of
these counties were Chenth, Nordfolc, Berroche-
scire, Cestrescire. Lancashire and others were
formed after the Saxon days. Though Kings had


great power then, there were occasional meetings
of Earls and bishops, called Witena-gemots ,
to advise with him.
Once our forefathers were idolators. They
called the days after objects of their worship:
as Sun-day , Moon-day, Tuisco-day, Woden-day,
Thor-day, Friga-day, Seterne-ddy. The Sun
was regarded as female, and the Moon as male.
Loki was their devil. In heaven they thought
to hunt and fight all day, and feast all night.
When cannibals and blood drinkers, they sacri-
ficed men and women to their idols.
Although the British Christians were crushed
beneath the yoke of the cruel and pagan English
Saxons, they had, doubtless, some influence in
enlightening their conquerers. But in very early
times our forefathers were visited by certain good
missionaries from Christian Ireland, and from
the monastery of lona, a western Isle of Scot-
land. The northern and western parts of the
land became at least partly christianized through
those pious men. About the year 600, Pope
Gregory had kind thoughts towards the wild
English, and sent St. Agustine to convert the
kingdom of Kent. The King and his people
received the Gospel, and his daughter strength-
ened the work in Northumbria, when married to
its king. The worthy Oswy of Northumbria
introduced the religion of the gentle Jesus among
some of his heathen neighbours. When men
felt how good God was, and how good he was
to them, they loved him, and were happy.


Part II.
HISTORY OF THE KINGS.
William the Conqueror began to reign in
1066. The Normans, or Northmen, came from
a Norwegian island as pirates, under Kollo, and
subdued, and settled in, the north of France. The
conquest of England was not made at Hasting’s.
The Saxons of the west and the Danes of the
north were not quieted until after many battles
and great slaughter. The Norman nobles were
very cruel to the English ; they burnt, plundered,
and murdered without mercy.
William turned out many farmers from their
fields, and levelled houses and churches, to form
the New Forest, in Hampshire, to hunt in. One
of his sons was killed there by a stag, and an-
other by an arrow. His son Robert was bold
and hasty. A quarrel with his brother led to a
dispute with his father. In a battle between
them in Normandy, Robert was near killing the
King. The King of France had taken the part
of the rebellious son, and used improper language
about the Conqueror. William resolved to be
revenged, and commenced the first war between
France and England, which unhappily lasted,
with short intervals of peace, for 750 years.


Having set fire to a French town, William
was hurt by his horse stumbling over some hot
ashes. He died of a fever soon after. So little
was this rough man beloved, that his friends for-
sook his body, which was buried by charity in a
disputed grave, at Caen, in Normandy, in 1087,
after he had reigned 21 years.
William 11. hurried to London and was
made King, in the absence of his elder brother
Robert, who had gone to the Holy Land to fight
the Saracens. He afterwards made an agreement
with his easy brother. William cared little about
his people, and spent most of his time in hunting.
Riding in the New Forest one day after a stag’,
Sir Walter Tyrrell, shooting at the animal,
missed his mark and struck a tree. The arrow
glanced off, and entered the heart of the King,
who was passing. His body was found by a
carter. He died in 1100, after a reign of 13
years,
Henry I. seized the treasury and got made
King at the expense of Robert. His treatment
of his brother was wicked indeed. After agree-
ing to Robert being Duke of Normandy, he
quarralled with him, fought, and took him prisoner.
Putting out his eyes, he confined him in a castle,
where he lived for 26 years. Henry married a
Saxon lady, the neice of Edgar Atheling, the


son of a Saxon King of England, but behaved
unkindly to her. His daughter, Matilda, mar-
ried the Emperor of Germany, and afterwards
married Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, and had a
son named Henry. The King promised his
English subjects more freedom, but never gave
it. He died in 1135, after reigning 35 years.
Stephen seized the throne in the absence of
Matilda. His father was Earl of Blois, and his
mother was Adela, the daughter of William the
Conqueror.- Matilda fought against Stephen,
put him in prison, and was crowned Queen.
But her pride induced the Norman Barons to
place Stephen again upon the throne. These
quarrels spread misery throughout the country ;
no one’s life or property was safe. The Queen’s
son, Henry, came from France with an army.
To prevent bloodshed, it was agreed that Henry
should succeed upon Stephen’s death, which took
place in 1159. He was King 19 years.
Henry 11. had been well educated for the
times, and he introduced some good laws.
Thomas A’Beckett was his favorite, and became
Archbishop of Canterbury. In a church contro-
versy they took opposite sides. The murder of
A’ Beckett by four Knights was said to have
been by the King’s knowledge, and the anger of
the Pope was roused against him. Various


troubles and rebellions obliged Henry to submit.
He walked barefooted to the tomb of A’Beckett
at Canterbury, and performed other penances.
In his reign Ireland was conquered. There
were then five Kings in the island, one of whom
was always the chief. Dermond, King of Lein-
ster, injured a lady, whose husband obtained the
help of O’Connor, of Connaught, to drive out the
tyrant. Going over to England, Dermond pro-
mised Strongbow, Earl of Pembroke, to give
him his daughter Eva for a wife, and the kingdom
after his death, if that Norman would place him
on his throne again. A Norman force of 80, de-
feated 3,000 Irish. Strongbow carried all before
him, and conquered the whole of Ireland but
Ulster. Henry 11. came across to Dublin in
1171, and claimed the country seized by his
vassal Pembroke.
Henry was troubled in his family. His wife
encouraged her sons to rebel against their father,
France, Scotland, and Flanders joining the sons ;
hut they were all defeated by the King. His
son Henry died in France, and Geoffrey was
killed by a horse. Another rebellion was joined
by Richard and John. The heart of the father
was broken, and he died in 1189, after a reign of
85 years.
Richard I. was grieved at his father’s death.
Of a gigantic body and fiery spirit, he delighted
in war, and joined Philip of Prance against the


Saracens. A quarrel between the Kings left the
English alone to fight with the Sultan Saladin,
who had regained Jerusalem. In the battle of
Ascalon, Richard slew 40,000 Mahometans. But
the sickness of his troops compelled him to make
a peace. On returning home he was shipwrecked.
Attempting, in disguise, to pass through the
country of his enemy, the Duke of Austria, he
was seized and confined till ransomed by his
people.
A baron of his had found a treasure in Nor-
mandy, and refused to give it to his lord, the
King. Richard sought to compel him. An
arrow wound then caused his death in 1199, after
a stormy reign of 10 years.
John succeeded his brother. He was crafty,
cowardly, and cruel. He murdered his young-
nephew Arthur, tyrannized over the English,
tortured the Jews, scorned his nobles, and des-
pised the clergy. Quarrelling with the Pope, his
country was cursed and his subjects were set in
rebellion. He was compelled to own himself a
vassal of the Bishop of Rome. He became more
cruel, and his people rebelled and obliged him to
sign the Magna Charta of freedom. Obtaining
foreign soldiers with money, he broke his oath
and was worse than ever. The nobles called
over Lewis, the son of the French King, to reign
over England. When advancing to meet the


invader, the sea broke over and destroyed his
treasure. John was taken ill and died in 121 G,
after a bad reign of 17 years.
Henry 111., son of John, was declared King-,
and Lewis retired home. The boy had been ill
trained, and he was surrounded by rough barons.
He was weak and deceitful. He promised to
keep the Charter, but kept not his word. His
reign was one continued scene of disorder. The
nobles, under the Earl of Leicester, governed the
King, until Prince Edward released his father
from their power. To oppose Henry, the first
House of Commons was assembled by the barons.
This foolish King reigned 56 years, dying in
12 72.
Edward I. is said to have been stabbed by a
poisoned dagger in the Crusades, and to have
had the poison sucked out by his wife. He was
a great warrior and an upright King. He con-
quered Wales and added it to England, but not
until he had murdered the bards, who roused the
people with their songs. The Welsh Britons
were governed by King Llewellyn, who was
killed in battle. Edward’s son was born in the
country, and called the Prince of Wales.
As some Scotch King’s had been compelled to
acknowledge themselves vassals to English
Kings, Edward the Eirst thought he had a right


to interfere with the choice of a King in Scot-
land. Two out of many claimants were selected
—Robert Bruce and John Baliol. Edward sup-
ported the latter; and because he would not
submit to the English King’s orders in every-
thing, he was set aside, and Scotland was added
to England.
A patriotic chief, named Sir William Wallace,
collected a few men, and kept up a brisk war-
fare with the English/though the majority of
the Scots quietly submitted. After eight years,
Wallace was betrayed by a friend and put to
death by Edward. The grandson of Bruce car-
ried on the struggle, and was again and again
defeated. Twice had Edward conquered Scot-
land, and a third time was he summoned north-
ward. He vowed vengeance ; but death stayed
his hand of blood, and saved Bruce, in 1307,
after a reign of 35 years.
Edward 11. was too fond of pleasure to hurry
on the war with Scotland, which had time to
prepare for the invasion. In 1314, Bruce
routed the far-famed Norman English chivalry
at Bannockburn, and delivered his mountain
home. Edward gave himself up favorites,
and he and they suffered for their neglect of the
people. His wife, Isabella, the daughter of the
King of France, joined Earl Mortimer and others
to imprison and murder Edward. This hap-
pened in 1327, after a reign of 20 years.


Edward 111. revenged bis father’s death by
killing Mortimer and confining Isabella in a castle
for life. He was a man of war, like bis grand-
father. The Scots severely suffered at his band.
He pretended a right to the throne of France
through his mother, though by the law no
woman could reign in Paris. He defeated the
French fleet at sea, and gained the battle of
Cressy in 1346, having but one-third the force
of the enemy. Calais was beseiged and taken.
Queen Philippa, in the absence of her husband,
captured David, King* of Scotland, who chose
that opportunity to invade England.
Edward the Black Prince was the warlike son
of Edward. He took John, King of France,
prisoner, and gained the battle of Poictiers in
1356. Though brave, the Prince was cruel;
and he loved fighting so well as not much to
care about the justice of his wars. He died in
1376, and Edward 111. followed in 1377, after
being King 50 years.
Richard 11. was tlie son of tlie Black Prince,
He had a handsome figure, but a bad temper.
He was careless with money, and not honest
about the means of getting it. Oppressed by
nobles and king, bowed down by expenses of
wars, and kept in bondage, the laboring people
rose under Wat Tyler, and demanded freedom
and fair play. Richard yielded at first, but


treated them worse after. Yet when the King
began unjust violence toward his barons and
towns, there was a cry against him that he was
unfit to rule. Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of
Lancaster, and cousin of the King’s, headed the
rebellion. Richard was deposed and imprisoned,
and Henry chosen in his stead. This foolish son
of the hero of Poictiers was soon afterwards
murdered, in 1399, after reigning 22 years.
Henry IV. was the first King 1 chosen by the
Parliament of England. Several rebellions took
place. The great Earl of Northumberland
attempted to dethrone him, and got the aid of
the Welsh and Scots, hut was defeated, and his
son was killed. An archbishop afterwards headed
a revolt, and suffered death. Henry was the
first English ruler who burnt people for opinion’s
sake ; he cruelly persecuted the religious sect of
the Lollards. He died in 1413, after a reign of
14 years, and was succeeded by his son.
Henry V. was turbulent as a boy, and war-
like as a man. He loved fighting, and cared
little for the misery he occasioned. Taking
advantage of disorders in France, he sided with
one party against the King, and claimed the
throne for himself. The skill of his archers and
courage of his men gained the battle of Agin-
court in 1415, in which 8,000 French nobles and
gentlemen were slain. It was then agreed that


Henry should marry the Princess Catherine, and
wear the crown of France upon the death of the
King. Had Henry the Fifth lived, France would
have been joined to England. But that monarch
reigned but nine years, dying in 1422.
Henry VI. This boy King 1 was unlike his
father. He was gentle, timid, and religious.
Having no will of his own, others governed the
country in his name. His brave uncle, Bedford,
sought to complete the conquest of France; but
that land was delivered from fierce invaders by
the wisdom and valor of a woman. Joan of Arc,
though very young, loved her country and be-
lieved that angels would help her to save it.
Others believed in her, and, under her banner,
drove the English from the devastated fields of
France. Betrayed by jealous French lords, she
fell into the hands of her enemies, and was burnt
as a witch.
Henry married Margaret of Anjou, a hold-
hearted woman. The Duke of York tried to
get the throne from the weak King, whom he
imprisoned. But the brave Queen gathered
troops, and the Duke was killed in the fight of
Wakefield. His son Edward was assisted by
the Earl of Warwick to carry on what was called
the War of the Hoses; the Yorkists wore the
white rose, and the Lancastrians the red. Ed-
ward was crowned King in 1461, and Margaret


lost 40,000 men in a battle. Warwick afterwards
changed sides, put down Edward, raised Henry
again, and got the name of King-maker . Ed-
ward returned, defeated and captured the Queen,
and murdered poor Henry and the Prince in
1471.
Edward IY. was a handsome, but cruel man.
He thought only of pleasing himself. After
being King altogether 22 years, he died in
1483.
Edward Y. was hut about 13 years old, and
was placed, with his brother, the Duke of York,
under the care of his uncle Richard, Duke of
Gloucester. The sins of the father were remem-
bered in the death of these children, who were
soon smothered in the Tower of London, after
their uncle had been invited to the throne.
Richard 111. had a restless reign of two
years. His friend Buckingham joined his
enemies with the Welsh, hut was taken and
beheaded. Richard was clever, cunning, and
brave. He was not naturally cruel, and, while
King, acted fairly and nobly to the people.
A rival appeared in Henry Tudor, Earl of Rich-
mond, grandson of the widow of Henry V., by


her marriage with a Welshman. Assisted by
some foreigners from Normandy, he landed in
Wales, obtained more troops, and met Richard at
Bosworth Field on August 23rd, 1485. Betrayed
by one of his generals, the King rushed into the
midst of his foes, and was killed; his body was
shamefully ill-treated. His rival became Henry
VII., and put an end to the war of the Roses,
the power of the barons, and the feudal system.
He became the first despotic King of England.


HISTORY OF THE PEOPLE.
DOMESTIC LIFE.
After the Conquest, the manners of the people
suffered little change from the influx of a few
foreigners. The more frugal and abstemious
habits of the Normans checked, in some degree,
the gross and boisterous feasts of the Saxons.
The Government exercised some influence upon
the customs of society, especially in regulating
prices, wages, dress, &c. The Normans intro-
duced warlike sports, chivalrous songs, feudal
laws, and an improvement in the arts.
The Normans shaved the hack of their heads.
The English for some time wore huge mous-
taches. Long hair was preached against in
churches. Fashions in dress changed, and were
often ridiculous. Men even wore long streamers
to their sleeves, and had the points of their boots
so long- that they were fastened up to their
knees. Ladies’ head-dresses were of fantastic
shapes, sometimes towering like a pyramid, or
rising’ up in two large horns. Tight lacing was
complained of as early as Henry I. Beaver hats
appeared in the reign of Edward 111. The Par-
liament attempted to restrain extravagance in
dress. Laws were passed specifying the quality
of stuff certain classes were to use for clothing.
No artizan, by the command of Edward IV.,


could wear a coat of cloth costing 2s. a yard.
We read of Monks being prohibited the use of
white gloves and gaudy shoes.
In their living, the early English had few
luxuries. In the days before tea and coffee, the
common people drank water, and the richer had
cider, ales, and foreign wines. Wheaten bread
was only seen on the tables of the great. Trades-
men used oaten and barley cakes. Meat was
seldom eaten fresh; and salt meat or bacon
rarely entered the working-man’s door. In that
day, when there were no turnips and little hay,
beasts were usually killed in autumn and pre-
served, as little food could be had for them in
winter.
Poor folks fared badly. The harvest time
was the laborer’s festival, for then he would be
allowed a few salted herrings a week to favor
his coarse bread. As to vegetables, one could
hardly say that any existed. The use of salt
meat and oatmeal occasioned sad diseases of the
skin, and for centuries maintained hospitals for
lepers. Dependance upon few articles of food
made famine frequent and destructive. A bad
harvest for grain, with little communication with
other countries, was the source of much misery.
Many thousands died of starvation every year or
two.
The want of wholesome food 7 the want of pro-
per drainage in towns, and the want of medical
knowledge, were the great causes of the many


grievous pestilences of the olden times. The
sweating sickness, the falling sickness, the black
vomit, and other forms of pestilence, spread over
the country, unresisted hut by the tolling of
church bells and the utterance of charms. The
Great Plague, in the reign of Edward 111., car-
ried off half the population of London and one-
third of the country.
The upper classes had four meals a day;—
breakfast at 7, dinner at 10, supper at 4, and
livery, in bed, at 8 or 9 at night. Forks were
not tised in those days. Pieces of cut meat were
handed to the guests, at the end of pointed sticks,
by kneeling servants. Improved modes of cook-
ing were brought from France by the Normans,
who loved dainties more than gross eating.
Our forefathers were early risers, because they
went early to bed. The curfew bell toiled at 8
for all lights to be put out. This practice was
not introduced by William the Concjueror, nor
was it confined to England. In Saxon days,
and over all Europe, the curfew , or cover-fire
bell, rang at sunset in summer, and at 8 o’clock
in winter, for all fires to be extinguished. The
reason is obvious. When most houses were of
wood, and built close together, too much care
could not be taken to guard against danger of
fire. Our ancestors, hardy as we think them,
had no liking to cold-water bathing-, but con-
stantly employed hot-baths.
The habits of the people generally were not


so tidy, clean, decent, and orderly as now. The
behaviour of a lady at table, her vulgarity of
speech, her coarseness of manners, her uncleanli-
ness of skin, and her utter ignorance, would
greatly shock us at the present day.
There was an aspect of neglect and untidiness
about their houses. The floors were bare, unless
covered with rushes, which were often overlaid
with greasy bones, and other remnants of a feast,
thrown off a board which boasted no table-cloth.
The walls were bare also, and the chinks freely-
let in the draught of rheumatism. The smoke
ascended through a hole above, if the wind would
allow it; otherwise, it circulated round the
room. The fire was usually made in a brazier,
and set in the middle of the room. A few hours’
sooting, under these circumstances, would make
the hot-bath a necessity, as well as a luxury.
The openings for air and light, called windows,
were blocked up with shutters when the wind
was rough or the rain beat in : none but the very
wealthy had glass frames. People lay down at
night upon their hard beds with the clothes they
wore in the day ; or, taking off these, reposed
under the coverlid without night dresses. The
want of linen or cotton clothing beneath the
rough cloth or leathern garb would seem a griev-
ous inconvenience in these days. Then, the
gentlemen had no newspapers, nor had the ladies
any flower gardens.
The use of a bed and sheets was confined to


knight and their dames. We hear of dying- be-
quests of those articles now in common use. The
mother of Richard 11., the fair wife of the Black
Prince, left her son her bed, which was a very
fine one. It was of red velvet, ornamented with
ostrich feathers of silver and leopards’ heads of
g-old. Counterpanes were first known about
1380. Some great folks had chimnies as early
as the year 1200 : the bricks came from Flanders.
Furniture could not have been very costly in
Edward the Third’s time ; for we find that Col-
chester, then the tenth town in England for its
size, having a population of 3,000 souls, pos-
sessed furniture and clothing valued at the small
rate of £SBO. Coal from Newcastle began to he
burnt in London in the reign of Henry 111.
But severe laws were afterwards made against
the use of this fuel, as its black smoke was
thought to poison the inhabitants of the city.
The convenience to housekeepers of this useful
mineral, however, brought it into general notice,
in spite of the King’s edict. It is likely that the
black smoke occasioned the speedy building of
fire-places and chimneys.
A little money went a long way in those
times. A man with an income of £lO a year
was independent of work. In the reign of
Henry 111., a sheep, perhaps weighing from 12
to 20 pounds, could be bought for less than a
shilling; hut, then, that amounted to nearly a


week’s wages of a laborer. A rough mason
would earn fourpence a day; and a carpenter,
fivepence. In harvest time, mowers received
fourpence a day and their rations, or sixpence
without rations. A principal hind on a farm
received twenty shillings a year wages, his
rations, and four shillings allowance for clothing.
A female servant got ten shillings a year. The
wages of working men, and even the prices of
wheat and other produce, were regulated hy the
laws of Kings and Parliaments.
In those rude times, when coaches did not
run, and even goods were conveyed on pack-
horses, there was little travelling for business or
pleasure. The majority of the people dared not
move from their parishes, and gentlefolks feared
to trust themselves upon the highway. The
roads were in a shocking condition. No effort
to mend them was ever made till Edward 111.
caused tolls to be levied for the repair of
some of the principal routes. Robbers, too,
infested the country, levying contributions upon
travellers, attacking villages, and even obliging
towns to purchase their favor with presents.
The early English had a greater relish for fun,
and gave more time to sports and amusements,
than their descendants in our fatherland. The
old Saxon games were retained, and others
introduced, by the conquerors. Music and songs
were ever favorites. There was a brave ballad


about the Battle of Agincourt, in 1415, that was
long the war song of the English. The first
verse ran thus :
“ Owre Kynge went forth to Normandy
With grace and myst of chyvalry;
Then God for hym wrout marv’llously
Wherefore Englande may call and cry
Deo gratias!”
Henry V. liimself was a great lover of music
and played upon the organ. A few tunes are
yet to be seen set to the music of that period;
the notation differs from ours. Church music,
the simple hut affecting’ harmonies of more
ancient worship, formed the principal subject of
study and practice in monasteries. Gleemen
sung- airs in the streets, as well as performed
upon the harp, flute, violin, and a sort of guitar.
The drum was first heard of in the reign of
Henry VI.
Though without amphitheatres, the English
had animals to fight. Not only hears, hut horses
were baited by dogs. Wild boars and stags
were hunted even in the near neighbourhood of
London. Hunting was the sport of nobles.
Hawks were greatly prized for the chase of
herons. Ladies accompanied their lords when
hawking*. Horse-racing and cock-fighting were
common sports.
Without buildings for theatrical performances,
the people were fond of plays. These were
generally Scripture stories, acted upon a stage


fitted up for the occasion in the market place of
towns. The trial and death of the Saviour was
a common subject in the Mysteries of these street
performers. Mummers amused folks by imitating
the feats and cries of wild animals, appearing- in
dresses descriptive of their parts. At the masques,
or plays, it was usual to act savages, the men
being clothed in shag-gy skins for the occasion,
rushing- at each other, tearing, roaring, biting,
raving, or wildly dancing.
There were seasons of jollity and dissipation,
as the Feast of Fools, the Feast of Asses, and
the Church Ales. The latter were so called from
the practice of villagers meeting together for
drinking in the churcli-yard. Even the clergy
sometimes gave their presence at what would he
called heathenish rites, the remnants of pagan
ceremonies. An ass would he led into a church
up to the altar, adorned with flowers, and pro-
fane hymns he chanted, and prayers uttered, in
homage to the beast.
The jester, or fool, was a man oddly dressed,
with a curious staff in his hand, whose business
it was to make people laugh. Every baron had
his fool, who was allowed every indulgence in
language and practical jokes, and who, during
the lengthened absence of his warlike lord, be-
came the enlivener of the forlorn and secluded
ladies of the castle.
Among the rougher games were those of the
quarter-staff, boxing, wrestling, and the tourna-


ment. The first was playing- with sticks, and
many a hard blow would he received, if not
actively warded off. The tournament was a
sham fight between knights or gentlemen war-
riors. Upon a day appointed, a lady would be
chosen as Queen of Beauty, to reward the victor.
Sometimes in single combat, and sometimes in
melee , the knights would rush at each other with
blunted spears, and try to upset one another from
horseback. Some wounds and bruises would
follow these rough games, and lives would be
often lost. Even while clad in armour, splinters
could enter their bodies or pierce their eyes.
The rustics ran at the quintain , on the village
green. Loosely" turning upon a pole was a cross
ai', one end of which was a fiat-board, and on
the other end swung a block of wood. Men
tried to hit the board with a stick in hand, and
then dodge aside before the swinging block could
reach their heads. Sometimes a quintain was
fitted up on a boat. The players were rowed
quickly to the object, pole in hand; and if they
. missed the mark, they would go head over heels
into the river. May-poles and morris-dancing
amused the female villagers.
The in-door games were draughts, chess, and
a kind of whist. Ladies played at bob-apple, or
worked embroidery". Nine pins of wood were
set up, and a stick thrown at them. Quoits
were used. Jugglers threw up knives, tossed
balls, and otherwise diverted the multitude.


Gambling was the game and vice of high and
low. The dice was preached against and law-
condemned, but almost universally handled.
Among the amusements, the modern enjoyments
of concerts, lectures, and home reading, were
unknown to our forefathers.
AGRICULTURE AND TRADE.
With rude instruments, no manure, and little
safety of reaping- a crop, the poor farmer made
little progress. The plough, driven by oxen,
and sometimes by men, rarely went two inches
into the soil. The produce was not like that of
some Australian fields, 40 and 60 bushels to the
acre, but only 8 or 10. Arable land, in the
leign of Henry V., could be had for sixpence an
acie rent. Meadow land fetched a higher price.
We read of a man paying a rental for a sheep'
run in so much ewe cheeses every year.
Monks were the best farmers. In all times
the most intelligent men make the most skilful
artizans and labourers. Some of the monks
used chalk and lime for manures. Monasteries
were not merely supplied by the charity of the
pious, but by the field labours of their inmates.
Pigs were run out as sheep and cattle are now.
Permission to run a drove in a forest, to feast on
the acorns, was granted, in some cases, on con-
dition of the landlord taking one hog in ten for
payment.


For centuries the English ate the mutton and
cured the skins, but made no other use of the
sheep. In Edward the Third’s time the wool
export became the chief export of England, as it
was of Victoria before the gold discovery. Tin
had always been an important branch of trade.
The trade with foreign countries was carried on
in foreign vessels, especially of V enice and
Genoa. Richard 11. tried to encourage English
shipping by passing a law forbidding any other
vessels carrying English goods, but the law was
not heeded.
The vessels of that period were small in size,
without cabins, and slow in motion. Fighting
ships grappled each other, and so came to close
quarters. Bars of iron and logs of wood were
hurled from one to the other. The compass,
known in China for 3000 years, was not used in
England till the year 1200. Pirates beset the
merchant on the sea, and thievish barons robbed
him on shore. In travelling about with goods,
the lords of castles would pounce down upon the
caravan, and levy a black mail for permission to
pass the estate.
Tradesmen protected themselves in towns by
purchasing franchises or freedoms of kings, and
by uniting’ into Guilds or associations for mutual
support. Stores were not extensive, as we find
that a mercer’s stock in trade cost but £3. A
blacksmith’s stock and tools were worth ten
shillings, and a carpenter’s set of tools, few in


number, could be bought for a shilling. Shoe-
makers were sometimes guilty of Sabbath break-
ing • for we read of an enactment fining any
such one twenty shillings for working on the
Sunday. The use of armour led to considerable
progress in the manufacture of metallic goods.
Pairs were held, often at the will of the Sove-
reign, for the sale of produce.
Money transactions were chiefly in the hands
of the Jews—the goldsmiths and lenders. They
were the first to use bills of exchange ; this was
in the 13th century. The coin was principally
of silver, the exportation of which was pro-
hibited. Golden Angels of Edward IV. were
worth about five shillings; Nobles were 6s. Bd.;
and Groats fourpence. By debasing the coin’
kings often made profit. They would take away
tlm silver in large quantities, and mix the re-
mainder with copper. A shilling, instead of
having a shilling’s worth of silver, would be
worth, perhaps, sixpence. The history of a
Scotch pound of silver is curious:—ln 1424, it
was worth 375. 6d.j in 1456, 965.; in 1475,
1445. A shilling was thus valued at a shilling’
though worth but seven farthings.
LEARNING OF THE EARLY ENGLISH.
If not quite so ignorant as the old Saxons, the
English at the period of our history knew very
little, and believed in many absurdities. They


thought much of charms, fortune-telling, and
astrology. Their knowledge of other countries
was of 3 a ridiculous character. The Crusades
first brought the English people associated, not
only with Saracens, Turks and Greeks, but with
Italians, Germans and Spaniards.
Even in universities the information taught
was far from being either extensive or practical.
Of Greek and Hebrew nothing was known.
Bacon knew something of Euclid s Geo-
metry, though few students got beyond the pons
asinorum. Most of the student s time .w as
spent in the study of logic and the art of dis-
nutation. Tlig subjects oi discussion tv ere tiibing
and vain. Even the clergy were not very
learned. Before the year 1300 all that was
required of them was, to know the len Com-
mandments, and to be able to explain the seven
mortal sins, the sacraments, and the creeds.
Poetry was almost monopolized by the Trou-
badours, who sang from castle to castle lofty
deeds of arms, and the trials of beauty. Our
poet Chaucer flourished about 1350. A number
of chroniclers, or historians of theii times, ap-
peared in the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries ;
as William of Malmsbury. An extract from
Wickliffe’s translation of "the Scriptures will give
an idea of the spelling at that time: “ This
moises ledde hem out, and dide wondns and
signes in the londe of Egipte and m the Reed
Sea, and in the desert fourti gheens.


Books were valuable, because scarce; and
scarce, because they were copied by hand.
Manuscripts of learning were often erased to
receive the narrative of an idle legend, because
of the cost of parchment. Paper was made from
cotton rags in the 12th century, and from linen
in the 13th. Printing in Europe began in 1441.
Caxton, the first English printer, lived in the
reign of Edward IV.
Public Libraries then did not own many
volumes. That of Oxford University was kept
in chests, and chained to prevent theft. We
read of a Bishop of Westminster, in the year
1300, having 17 books. There were 27 volumes
in Abingdon Abbey in 1327. Henry 11. gave
security when borrowing a Bible from a cathe-
dral.
Scientific knowledge -was rare indeed. The
monk Roger Bacon, who died in 1292, has the
credit of many inventions and discoveries. It
was believed that he was aided by evil spirits,
and a story was told of his being once flown
away with, and his cap being seen on the top of
Salisbury Cathedral’s spire. Alchemists thought
by certain mixtures to make gold, and also to
produce a liquid that should cure all diseases.
A man in Edward the Third’s day pretended to
make silver. The Arabs introduced Algebra
and our present numerals. Astronomy was then
simply astrology.
Architecture made great progress under the


Normans. There was a gradual change from
the solid but unpicturesque Saxon style to the
light and imaginative Gothic. The number of
cathedrals, churches, abbeys and monasteries
erected during this period of English History is
an evidence of the religious tone of feeling among
the people, and their architectural zeal. The
workmen were a superior class of men, and tra-
velled from town to town under the name of
Freemasons. The first stone bridge thrown
over the river Thames at London was in 1209.
RELIGIOUS PROGRESS OF THE EARLY
ENGLISH.
The Normans were more reverential than the
Saxons, and their clergy more obedient to the
Pope. It was not long- before the Priests were
made independent of the civil law; they could
only be tried by the clergy. This produced
several disorders. In Henry the Second’s time,
this act was repealed at a Council. Thomas
A’Beckett, Archbishop of Canterbury, contended
fiercely for the rights of his order, and was
banished by the King*. Peace was made be-
tween them by the Pope, and the Archbishop
returned. In the absence of the King, he
excommunicated those who had taken part
against himself. This occasioned much excite-
ment and complaint. Four knights then mur-
dered A’Beckett at the altar. He was esteemed


a martyr by the people of England, who made
pilgrimages to his tomb.
A contest took place between John and the
Pope, about who should appoint the Bishops.
The character of the King procured him no
friends. For his opposition, the Pope placed
the country under an Interdict. The bells
were not tolled, religious ceremonies were
not performed, and obedience to John was
declared unlawful. The King yielded, asked
pardon of the Legate, and promised to hold the
Crown of England as a vassal of his Lord the
Pope.
It was long before uniformity was obtained.
Several liturgies were in use, according to the
will of the Bishops. Nearly one-half the land
of England got into the possession of the clergy,
chiefly through dying bequests of men of pro-
perty. There were 137 churches in London
when the population was only 40,000, less than
one-half* that of Melbourne.
At various times persons arose, objecting to
what they termed unscriptural novelties in the
Church. Wycklifle, in the reign of Edward 111.,
was one of those early Reformers. He
translated the Bible into English, for the benefit
of his countrymen. The Lollards (so called from
the name of a German) were the sect of those
differing from the established form of religion,
objecting to outward rites as a means of grace,
and acknowledging the Bible only as the stand-


ard of belief. The first persecution for opinions
was in the reign of Henry IV., when many
Lollards were put to grievous tortures and pain-
ful deaths. Their doctrines re-appeared with
the Puritans and Nonconformists oi after times.
Monks and Nuns have been recognized in the
Christian Church from a very early period.
Monasteries were more favored in England after
the Conquest. They were, in many cases, bless-
ings to the poor of a district. The Monks fed
the hungry, preached to the neglected, and be-
friended the oppressed. The Monastery was
often the sanctuary of freedom, as well as of
learning and piety. But misuse of wealth injured
the usefulness and reputation of the Monks, by
increasing their pride, indolence, and luxurious
habits. The St. Augustine and Benedictine
Monks were an ancient order. The Cistercians
arose in 1128; the Carthusians, in 1180; the
Dominicans, or Black Friars, in 1216; and the
Franciscans, or Grey Friars, in 1223. Ihe
Carmelites wore white cloaks.
The Crusades, or wars for the Cross of
Christ, were connected with the religion of that
period. Men went pilgrimages to visit the holy
places of Jerusalem, &c. They were ill-treated
by the Mahometan Saracens and Turks. Peter
■ the Hermit preached a Holy War against the
Unbelievers, and, for several hundreds of years,
the Western Christians of Europe fought with
the followers of Mahomet. Though, after all,


they gained nothing of the Holy Land, many
good results followed the CAisades. Knowledge
was increased; the people at home gathered
political strength while the barons were away,
and trade was encouraged.
The Knight Templars atfd Knights of St.
John were fighting Monks in the Crusades.
They had great influence in various countries,
and accumulated much wealth. To crush their
power and obtain their riches, Kings brought
charges of' blasphemy against them, killing some,
and driving others away, and seizing upon their
revenues. There was a Templar Church in
London.
POLITICAL CONDITION OF THE PEOPLE.
At the Conquest, and after some insurrections,
the lands of the country were taken from their
English landlords. Normans, also, were ap-
pointed to all high offices in Church and State.
The mass of the common people were slaves as
before, and could never move out of their parishes
without leave. Great changes took place among
the governing classes. William claimed Eng-
land as his right by conquest, and divided the
country among his great Barons, on condition
that they held the land as his vassals or servants,
and agreed to serve him in his wars whenever
required; the Barons dividing their portions


among 1 persons of lesser rank, upon similar con-
ditions to grant military service.
This kind of arrangement was called the
Feudal System. It bound all classes together.
If the vassals served their lords, their lords were
bound to protect them. But the weaker felt the
hardship. Heavy dues were paid by them;
their property was at the mercy of the Castle
Baron ; their daughters could not be married in
opposition to their lord’s will, and their sons were
taken from the plough to 'fight for him. The
Barons were constantly quarrelling with each
other, and the poor people suffered most in the
disputes. The Game Laws were severe. If a
farmer killed a wild boar, stag, or hare that was
destroying his crops, he would have his eyes
taken out.
The only friends to the poor then were the
monks and the poorer clergy. Through their
influence, many men were induced, upon a death-
bed, to grant freedom to some of their serfs or
slaves. Then a law was passed, that whoever
lived in a town without being claimed by his mas-
ter, for a year and a day, should be free for life.
Some were allowed time to work out their liberty
and buy the deliverance of their children. Even
down to the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the slavery
of the laboring classes had not passed away.
The principle of Trial by Jury was introduced by
the Normans, though it took hundreds of years
to be perfected.


The rise of towns was the birth of freedom in
England, as in other countries of Europe.
Tradesmen made money by labor, joining to-
gether in guilds , or associations for mutual pro-
tection, and then bought indulgences from the
barons of their district or the King of the coun-
try. In this way charters were granted, giving
them freedom of trade, leave to govern them-
selves within the walls of the city, and to protect
themselves against unjust assailants. Municipal
corporations thus began, and the towns became
the refuge of run-away slaves and the terror of
cruel lords. London got liberty to choose sheriffs
and other officers in the reign of Henry I.
Kings soon found it to their interest to en-
courage the towns, in order to supply their
treasury, and to strengthen themselves against
turbulent barons. People, to get a charter from
the King for a place, would promise always to
supply so many men of war when he needed
them. In the reig’n of Stephen, the barons were
constantly fighting; castles were erected all over
the country, and great misery followed. Henry
11. wisely checked the evil, and was a friend to
the people. He established itinerant judges in
1175. Richard I. helped the towns forward to
obtain money to carry on his wars. Nobles in
the Crusades granted favors for the same reason.
John was a man without right feeling or prin-
ciple. He cheated and oppressed all classes.
The barons and bishops compelled him to sign


the Great Charter of freedom in 1215.
This law gave equal rights to all free men;
protected franchises or charters to towns;
granted protection to foreign merchants, and
opposed the compulsory marriage of wards and
arbitrary imprisonment. Henry 111. spent a
life in making and breaking charters. To help
themselves against the King, the nobles got up
a parliament of representatives from the country.
This grew into the House of Commons, where
the people have a voice, as in the Colonial Coun-
cils. The Commons secured the right to enquire
into public abuses in the year 1376. They
granted subsidies of money to Edward I. on
condition that he extended their power. Ed-
ward 111. wanted money for his wars, and so
promoted the liberties of England.
The rebellion of Wat Tyler, in the reign of
Bicliard 11., was one of the most important
points of English history. The poor serfs were
getting enlightened ; they saw the wealthy
buying power, and they, too, longed for free-
dom. From ignorance or weakness they sought
deliverance by strength of arm. A law had been
passed for all above 15 years of age to pay a
certain tax; this burden fell hard upon the poor.
John Ball, a priest, made hold speeches against
the tyrant lords. Wat Tyler, a blacksmith,
headed a party to go to the King, claim his pro-
tection, and ask for better laws. They sang on
their way,—


When Adam delved and Eve span,
Who was then the gentleman ?
They demanded four things : —That there
shall be a total abolition of slavery in England,
that the rent of good land should be reduced to
fourpence an acre, that they should have liberty
to buy and sell like other men, and that a gerie-
ral pardon should be granted them. The King
consented to all, and engaged thirty clerks to
make copies of the charter.
But he treacherously got troops together,
broke his word, and murdered numbers of the
people. Wat Tyler was struck down by the
Mayor of London, and the Bishop of Norwich
led an army to butcher multitudes. But though
the rebellion failed, the people’s fetters received
such a blow as never to be strong again. The
Commons took the part of the serfs, and gra-
dually the labouring men of England got liberty
to work where they pleased, and at what they
pleased.
Henry IY. and Henry Y. granted further
concessions to the people. The war of the Roses
in the next reign was a quarrel among the nobles,
in which, as usual, the lower classes suffered.
Jack Cade headed a rebellion against the upper
classes, but was killed. Edward IV. ascended
the throne through courting the power of the
towns, promising increased charters of privileges.
He, however, began the practice of forced Bene-
volences, a sort of forced loan from individuals.


.Richard 111. was a warm friend to the people,
and passed some excellent laws. The success of
Henry VII. crushed the power of the aristocracy,
then enfeebled by long 1 wars. The struggle after
this lay, not between the people and nobles, or
the nobles and King-, hut between the people, or
House of Commons, and the crown. This was
the end of the Feudal System.
The treatment of the Jews in the olden times
was most unjust and barbarous. No law pro-
tected them. Their wealth was their only de-
fence, while it exposed them to violence and
wrong*. A false cry ag’ainst them, on the ascen-
sion of Richard 1., occasioned the murder of
thousands. John tortured them to obtain money.
Cruel barons confined them in dung-eons until
they paid large sums for release. They were
more than once banished from the country. This
unchristian injustice against them lasted until
very lately. A few years ago, no Jew could own
land in England; nor had he an opportunity of
holding a public office, however wealthy and
virtuous he might be.
We cannot contemplate the early history of
England without a feeling of gratitude for our
own increase of domestic comforts, social advan-
tages, and political privileges. The true-hearted
will ever seek to improve the condition of the
age in which they live, and endeavour to make
people wiser, better, and happier.


Works by the same Author.
Geography of Australia and New Zealand.
Cloth, 4s.
Illustrated with Four Maps of the Colonies.
Sanctioned in the schools of the National and Denominationa.
School Boards of Victoria.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
Mr. Bonwick has been for many years resident in these colonies
he has had access to the best sources of information; he has been
indefatigable in his efforts to produce a book which might be a
standard one on the subjects it treats; and he has succeeded.—
Melbourne Argus.
DISCOVERY AND SETTLEMENT OF PORT PHILLIP.
2s. 6d. and 4s. 6d.
Future historians will turn to it as a repertory of valuable facts
lucidly, systematically, and chronologically stated. —Melbourne
Argus.
MAP OP VICTORIA.
Affording information upon Geological Features, Roads, &c.
THE BUSHRANGERS;
Illustrating the Early Days of Van Dieman’s Land.
2s. 6d. and Is. 6d.
The book is by no means a mere Newgate Calendar, but some-
thing infinitely better. It exhibits a correct position of the state of
society in earlier days. —Hobart Town Colonial Times.
WILLIAM BUCKLEY, THE WILD WHITE MAN,
AND HIS PORT PHILLIP BLACK FRIENDS. 2s.
GEOGRAPHY FOR YOUNG AUSTRALIANS. Is.
One half the book relates to the Geography of the Colonies. Pre-
pared for the use of Junior Classes.
GRAMMAR FOR YOUNG AUSTRALIANS. Cd.
THE EARLY DAYS OP MELBOURNE.
Is. Clotli, Illustrated.
HOW DOES A TREE GROW; Or, BOTANY FOR
YOUNG AUSTRALIANS. Is.
EARLY TIMES OF ENGLAND FOR YOUNG
AUSTRALIANS. Is.
BIBLE STORIES FOR YOUNG AUSTRALIANS.
Part 1. Is.
Goodhugh Ac Hough, Printers, Flinders Lane,




Works by the same Author.
Geography of Australia and New Zealand.
Cloth, 4s.
Illustrated with Four Maps of the Colonies.
Sanctioned in the schools of the National and Denominationa
School Boards of Victoria.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
Mr. Bonwick has been for many years resident in these colonies
he has hadaccess to the best sources of information; he has been
indefatigable in his efforts to produce a book which might be a
standard one on the subjects it treats; and he has succeeded.—
Melbourne Argus.
DISCOVERY AND SETTLEMENT OF PORT PHILLIP.
2s. 6d. and 4s. 6d.
Future historians will turn to it as a repertory of valuable facts
lucidly, systematically, and chronologically stated.— Melbourne
Argus.
MAP OF VICTORIA.
Affording information upon Geological Features, Roads, &c.
THE BUSHRANGERS ;
Illustrating the Early Days of Van Dieman’s Land.
2s. Gd. and Is. 6d.
The book is by no means a mere Newgate Calendar, but some-
thipg infinitely better. It exhibits a correct position of the state of
society in earlier days.— Hobart Town Colonial Times.
WILLIAM BUCKLEY, THE WILD WHITE MAN,
AND HIS POET PHILLIP BLACK EEIENDS. 2s.
GEOGRAPHY FOR YOUNG AUSTRALIANS. Is. '
One half the book relates to the Geography of the Colonies. Pre-
pared for the use of Junior Classes.
GRAMMAR FOR YOUNG AUSTRALIANS. 6d.
THE EARLY DAYS OF MELBOURNE.
Is. Cloth, Illustrated.
HOW DOES A TREE GROW; Or, BOTANY FOR
YOUNG AUSTRALIANS. Is. j
EARLY TIMES OF ENGLAND FOR YOUNG
AUSTRALIANS. Is.
BIBLE STORIES FOR YOUNG AUSTRALIANS, j
Part I. Is.
Ooodhugh do Houghi Printers, Flinders Lane. I
