



Early Memories
The Great Nor-West
and
A Chapter in History
of W.A.
f nilj. M.A.. :
E. S. Wigg & Son, Printers and Publishers.
Hay Street.




DEDICATION.
MY DEAR WIFE
OUR TWELVE SONS and DAUGHTERS
This little volume is affectionately dedicated as a
Souvenir of events and times that ever seem
to linger affectionately in my
remembrance.
A. R. Richardson.
oo I




PREFACE.
TV TO doubt much of the earlier history, the real pioneering
A days of the Great Nor’-West and far North of this
immense State of Western Australia have, like the
■earliest happenings of many other portions of Australia,
escaped the pen of the chronicler, and as those old times
are now gradually fading from living memory, and of those
who took a hand in the eventful work of subduing the wild
and native conditions prevailing over that large territory
(equal m area to four or five Englands), there now remains
but a little band and they gradually but surely becoming
fewer it has occurred to me, that failing the appearing of any
abler historian I should seek to save the record of those far-
off days from passing away into the land of hazy tradition.
Hence these memoirs and for which I seek from my readers
an indulgent hearing—making no pretension to any high
standard of literary excellence.
A.R.R.


EARLY MEMORIES
THE GREAT NOR’WEST
A CHAPTER IN HISTORY
OF W.A.
MY earliest knowledge of what is now known as the
North-West District of Western Australia originated
from hearing it spoken of in our family circle and
dates back to some time about the year 1863-64, being then
■about 16 years of age, and having left school and put in about
a year in my father’s office in the town of Portland, Victoria,
I haye recollections of some new country over in Western
Australia being the subject of conversations between my
father and an uncle—Mr. Thos. Anderson, also of Portland.
I would like here to mention that though at this time doing
some probationary office work I had made it clear to my
father that life in an office or in a town was not to be my
destiny in life, but that my heart was set on the country
and the bush, and I may also say that my father did not
discourage the idea of his boys taking up bush life and
deserting the path selected in youth for himself—that of a
University career. It seemed as if his own experience of
life at Glasgow University and the stewing and laborious
study required to qualify for his A.M. degree resulted, as
he was sometimes heard to say, in a resolve to spare his
own sons a similar ordeal.


The discussions above alluded to between my father and
uncle —Tom Anderson —related more especially to some
explorations then lately carried out in the North-West
portion of W.A. by the late Frank T. Gregory, a surveyor
with a genius for discovery and travel in unknown lands,
and brother of the late Augustus Gregory, also of considerable
exploration fame, and who was surveyor-general of Queens-
land for some years —to which department, I believe, Mr.
Francis Gregory also transferred himself after leaving
Western Australia.
The exploration trip just alluded to was what is known
as Gregory’s 1861 expedition, on which he landed at Nicol
Bay, and for some months travelled over the large pastoral
areas situated between the Ashburton and the De Grey
rivers, opening up and reporting considerable tracts of good
pastoral country, just within the tropics, between latitudes
23 0 and 19 0 30' S. Lat., but to this subject we propose to
return later on. It was Mr. F. T. Gregory’s published
journal that had found its way into the hands of my uncle
Mr. Thomas Anderson —and from whom my father obtained
his information and the accounts of pastoral counti} 7 in the
far, far West ; extracts from which getting to the ears of
some of us young fellows fired our enthusiasm and excited
the spirit of restlessness and discontent with the ordinary
every day routine and humdrum daily life of towns and cities
—which spirit is, no doubt, responsible for the expansion of
the great British Empire, for had all her young men been
content and satisfied to remain at home and enjoy the
ease and leisure afforded by the comforts, luxuries and
recreation of the civilised life of cities, then no other race
but little Englanders would have been called into existence,,
and no large splashes of red would greet the eye of the
proud Britisher as he scans a map of the world.
About this time Mr. Alexander Edwin Anderson, second
son of Thomas Anderson already mentioned, being then
about 28 years of age, and one of the accountants with an
important firm of merchants and shipowners in Portland,,
viz., Messrs. Henty, Learmonth & Co., the principal being
Mr. Stephen George Henty, who, both in himself and his
brothers, Edward Henty (by some considered to be the:


pioneer settler of Victoria) and Frank, bore such a prominent
and important part in the foundation and early settlement
of Victoria, and as to Mr. Stephen George, he also, and his
wife, were among the earliest original settlers in Western
Australia. It was thus due, largely, to the deep impression
that the published journal of Mr. F. T. Gregory’s explorations
in Nor’-West Australia made on young Edwin Anderson and
his fixed purpose to induce some companions to join him
and get up a party to exploit this far off land of Goschen
that finally resulted in our party and company being formed
and our expedition launched, to translate into reality and
fact our youthful dreams of acquiring sheep-stations in this
promised land.
The writer, ere these schemes came to maturity, had left
his native home and youthful occupations, and some few
months before reached down his saddle from its peg, saddled
up his pony, strapped on his valise, and by a ride of 120 miles
found himself on the sheep-station of his mother’s
brother —Mr. Alex. Anderson —situated on the Skipton
Plains, and known as Bangaal, with the object of ac-
quiring the necessary experience in station life and
management to fit him for the life and occupations
he had set his heart on following. A short paragraph
connected with the early pastoral settlement of Victoria
may here be of interest relative to this Bangal Station,
near Skipton. Uncle Harry Anderson, with his brother,
Alex. Anderson, away back in the thirties, leaving their
Fifeshire home with the object of preparing the way for
their father, Alex. Anderson, senr., to follow with his family
in order to settle in Western Australia, as will be found
related a little further on, but after landing and having a
look around at the country near the mouth of the Swan
River young Mr. Harry Anderson, who appears to have
possessed some shrewd independent judgment for so
young a head, decided it was not the style of country that
he left the beautiful and fertile lowlands of Scotland to
■emigrate to, and so having heard good reports of the
land in Tasmania (then Van Diemen’s Land) he
promptly made up his mind to go on there in the
same vessel he had voyaged in to Western Australia,


but owing to the meagre means of communication in
those early days he failed to get word to his father and
family in time, and so they came on and landed on the Swan,
and some few years after, Mr. Harry Anderson, leaving Tas-
mania, came over to Victoria seeking pastoral lands, and
finding country on Emu Creek, around Borryalloak,
Skipton, he took up some 70,000 to 75,000 acres
of that fine, open, healthy sheep country, and later
on, when his brother, William Anderson, with his
father and family, had had enough of Western Aust-
ralia and left it to go also to Tasmania, divided the
country with his brothers, Alex, and William, Alex, taking
some 25,000 acres at Bangal, on the opposite side of the Emu
Creek from Borryalloak, and William some 12,000 to 15,000
acres lower down at Banongil, keeping about 35,000 acres at
Borryalloak himself, and which some years after he sold as
an established sheep station to Francis Ormond, founder
of Ormond College, who in later years leased it to Edward
Greaves, his brother-in-law, and who established the well-
known Borryalloak stud flock, and Harry Anderson returned
to Scotland, purchasing the old family estate at Chapel, in
Fifeshire, where he lived and died, his eldest son, A. T.
Anderson, being now in Victoria connected with Young-
husband, Rowe and Co. After a few months on Bangaal
I went on another fifty miles nearer Geelong to my cousin’s
station at Mt. Hesse, then being managed for the Timms’
family by Mr. Geo. Aitken, brother of James Aitken, for
many years manager for Dalgety & Co., Melbourne, and now
deceased. Remaining there for a further fifteen months’
experience during the latter half of which my cousin William
F. Timms having taken over the management of Mt. Hesse
himself, and gaining all the experience an eager learner
could pick up on a well-managed property of over 30,000
sheep, I, with the modesty characteristic of youth and
inexperience, then considered myself ready for any phase of
station or pioneering life ; but doubtless four years later,,
when the stern realities of such a life had left its mark upon
me, I would possibly have been more ready to allow what a
number of thinks I didn’t know.
In the meantime my cousin, Alex. Edwin Anderson, had
been busy with his plans and the perfecting of his enterprise,.


and the personel of the company was to consist of himself
manager; the late Mr. McKenzie Grant, afterwards of
Newmarracarra, near Geraldton, and part owner of the De
Grey Stations, to be sub-manager ; my elder brother, John
Elliot Richardson, and who became finally sole owner of the
Pyramid Station, of which more later on, now of Claremont ;
the late John Edgar, elder brother of A. W. Edgar, of
Strathalbyn, Gin Gin, and myself to be the five working
shareholders ; the late Mr. David Edgar, of Pinehills, Har-
row, Victoria, and J. B. Fitzgerald, friend of Edwin Anderson,
the two sleeping shareholders.
The plan of campaign was to charter a barque, fit her up
for carrying about 1,600 to 1,700 maiden ewes and horses,
plant and equipment, waggon, tools, 12 months’ stores, etc.,
and ship the sheep at Portland Bay and sail right away for
what is now known as Cossack, but then as Tien Tsin
Harbour, and afterwards as Port Walcott, and finally Cos-
sack, being a few miles eastward of Nicol Bay, where Mr.
Gregory had landed his exploring expedition in 1861, and for
some years after the district was known as the Nicol Bay
District. All details being worked out and completed, and
after anxious and somewhat tearful farewells with our
anxious mothers, fathers, sisters and brothers, and many
friends, on the sth of March, 1865, we tripped anchor and
sailed out of Portland Bay only some 26 years, I believe,
after the late Mr. Edward Henty had sailed into it, when
arriving from Tasmania to practically lay the foundations of
settlement of Port Philip, afterwards Victoria. Myself and
John Edgar were the boys of the party, he requiring one
month and myself four months to entitle us to enter our
18th year. Many boys nowadays are only just thinking of
leaving school at that age. j ' •!
I may be pardoned if going back a little and dealing
briefly with a few incidents in the life-history of those who,
no doubt, were more or less instrumental in calling into
existence the events which, without egotism, may be said
to have exerted some influence in after history of Western
Australia’s pastoral lands.
Mr. Thomas Anderson, the father of Edwin Anderson,
the leader of our expedition, was one of the pioneer settlers of


Swan River, in connection with my own grandfather, Mr,
Alex. Anderson, who with his family, my mother, Jane
Anderson, a girl of 12 or 13, and Ted Anderson’s mother, a
few years older, being among them, came out from Fifeshire,
in Scotland, in the year 1834. Mr. Thomas Anderson, though
of the same name, was not at first related to my grandfather,
but afterwards married his daughter, Jessie Anderson. The
family no doubt had adventurous and hard times, and often
on very short commons in those early days of Western
Australia. My grandfather after living some time on the
Swan about Bassendean made an expedition with Thomas
Anderson to what was known then as going over the hills,
getting as far as Newcastle, where he took up an area of
land, known now as Mt. Anderson, and afterwards purchased
by and now owned by Mr. Barnard Clarkson. But my
grandfather not being satisfied with the country and the
prospects of the settlers after a sojourn of some five years or
so cleared out to Tasmania, taking his family with him.
He was a Scotch farmer, and perhaps with Scotch instinct
discerned there was a long, slow, financial struggle in store
for the early pioneers of Western Australia, and he was no
doubt not far wrong.
It was in connection, I believe, with the sale of this Mt,
Anderson that Mr. Thos. Anderson made a later trip back
from Victoria to Swan River, I think about 1862 or 1863, but
am not sure of the date, however, while over in Perth he met
the late Mr. Walter Padbury —and let us reverently lift our
hat and bow our head at the mention of that honoured old
pioneer—and from Mr. Padbury got the information (he also-
corresponded with him) about Gregory’s explorations in
North-West Australia, and also learnt that Mr. Padbury,
who was really the leading and original pioneer of North-West
Australia, was sending a shipment of live stock and a party
to take up and occupy some of these pastoral areas dis-
covered by Mr. F. T. Gregory, so it comes around that
Mr. Thomas Anderson’s son, Alex. Edwin Anderson, hears
all about the North-West territory. A few words more to
elucidate practical details, it must not be supposed that
Mr. Edwin Anderson went straight from the accountant’s
desk of a merchant’s office to the management of a pioneer
party of settlers for —before he went to that office, at about


19 —he had been born and bred in the bush and experienced
pioneer life in Victoria, first in the Plenty River ranges and
afterwards on the Smoky River ; and also as to our second
in command, Mr. McK. Grant, leaving his native heath in
Scotland at the age of 17, and passing through varied ex-
periences at both station life in Victoria and Queensland,
and also as a gold digger for some years on Bendigo and
Ararat, and being a man of considerable practical ability
and force of character Mr. McKenzie Grant possessed the
needed characteristics to make his way to the front in the
foundation work required in establishing and developing new
countries.
After the various experiences connected with a voyage in
a stock ship, and they are neither pleasant nor agreeable for
landsmen if they had to do as we had, go down in the close,,
smelly hold to feed and water the sheep twice a day, and clean
the whole of the hold twice during the voyage, and it was only
boyish if I confess we often wished ourselves back in Victoria.
We reached Fremantle about the 19th day out, and called
there for information, etc., which we hoped to get from Mr.
Padbury or others. Fremantle in 1865 was a funny looking
little old place, but we were glad of a few hours ashore. We
did not meet Mr. Padbury (he was away at Yatheroo, I
believe) but we found his fellow pioneer who had been the
first to follow his lead in farming and sending a party and
shipment of stock to Nicol Bay, viz., the late Mr. John
Wellard, and who came on board our ship and gave us all
the instruction and information in his power. I do not
know if a little, short paragraph, somewhat on the romantic
side of things, is admissible here—but on being introduced
as one of the youngsters of the party to a fine, handsome,
rather military-looking gentleman, over six feet in his
boots, with commanding voice, fearless eye and manly mien
and bearing, but all softened with a kindly look, I little
thought at that time that nearly nine years later I was again
to stand before John Wellard to solicit the hand of his
youngest daughter in marriage, and she in her turn was to
live for two years in the district, as her home in full view and
but four miles distant from the bold, dark, picturesque
table-topped hills of Mt. Wellard range, named after her
father.


Our real anxieties for our stock on board did not truly
begin till reaching some 500 miles north of Fremantle we
got into a belt of calms, and as it was still March the heat
was intense and in the hold was stifling, and while damped
hay had been sufficient in the cold latitudes it was now
found that tubs and troughs must be improvised and a full
draught of water supplied to the panting animals. However,
we reached our destination with the loss of under twenty,
on the 27th day out from Portland Bay, and on the 2nd
day of April, 1865. One little incident and rather narrow
escape might be here related; as showing what a slight
dividing line there often is between success and disaster.
The course given to our skipper by the Fremantle Harbour
Master (Captain Harding), afterwards drowned, was, as far
as my memory serves, North-by-West-half-West ; but
allowance was not sufficiently made for the deadly current
sets sometimes met with on that North coast. So shortly
after sun-set, the day after leaving Fremantle, while bowling
along with a ten-knot breeze, the man on look out roared
out the rather appalling cry, “ Breakers ahead ! ” And
there, straight in front of us, about half a mile distant, rose
white streaks of surf arising on the outer edge of the
Abrolhos Islands, off Geraldton. Had the ship’s distance
run been three miles less our fate in the darkness had
been sealed and our chapter in history prematurely closed.
When within about three miles of Jarman Island our
excitement and joy was real when the masts of a ship were
observed and which proved to be the barque “ Tien Tsin ”
laying at anchor in what is now known as Cossack Roads, but
then the entrance to Butcher’s inlet. An historical incident
of some interest is connected with the presence of the
“ Tien Tsin ” at Cossack at that time —Captain Jarman being
in charge of her and her first mate, the late Captain
Butcher, afterwards pilot or harbor-master for some years at
Breaksea Island to conduct the mail steamers into Albany
Harbor, and later on pilot at Rottnest —and her present
charter was to bring down from Camden Harbor the major
portion of the pioneer settlement which had gone up there
from Victoria with the object of settling that district, but
which, owing to the country in the neighborhood of Camden
Harbor being quite unsuitable for sheep (they nearly all


having died) the chief portion of the settlers had decided to
abandon the undertaking and get out of the country, and
amongst these disappointed settlers we were rather delighted
to meet some old Portland friends and schoolfellows, amongst
whom was the late E. T. Hooley, who, in after years, was
manager in Fremantle for Dalgety & Co., Ltd., also amongst
the company was Mr. Tom Murray, son of late Andrew
Murray, of Colac, Victoria, and several others who stayed
behind at Cossack and Roebourne ; we also heard of another
friend and schoolmate, Mr. Alex. Mcßae, who was also
one of the prominent members of the Camden Harbor
Company, but who stayed behind to prosecute some further
explorations at Camden Harbor with Mr. Trevor Sholl, and
later on coming down as far as Roebuck Bay (now Broome)
he took over the management of the Roebuck Bay Settlement
for a time, but finally settled in the Roebourne District where
our own party were. His two brothers—Duncan and George
—are to this day settlers and station-owners in the Nor’-West
while his three other brothers, Farquhar (for many years a
settler and in business in the North) and Jack and Roderick
have all passed away from Earth. A peculiar and somewhat
contradictory phase of this migration of the early settlers
from Camden Harbor was that the “ Tien Tsin ” had just
conveyed a resident magistrate, Mr. R. J. Sholl, and staff up
to Camden Harbor thinking it was to be a permanent settle-
ment, but Mr. Sholl (who had his son Trevor with him,,
afterwards drowned in the ill-fated schooner “ Emma ”)
after residing there some six months advised his Government
to transfer him to Roebourne—a much more promising
country and settlement—and which advice they acted on
and so Mr. Sholl was Her Majesty’s representative for Roe-
bourne District for some 15 years or more and filled the
many onerous responsible duties of his office with marked
ability, success, satisfaction, and advantage to the whole
district; and in those days when no such thing as steamers
were thought of and communication most intermittent, the
duties and responsibilities of an R.M. in a new settlement
when difficulties frequently arise through natives breaking
out and murdering settlers, required both a wise judicial
head and executive talent in the possession of both of which
Mr. Sholl excelled.


Our own next move and practical difficulty was to get our
live stock landed. Nothing would persuade our over-
cautious skipper to creep in closer than about three miles
from the shore or beach, and so we had to improvise rafts by
lashing two boats together and planking them over to land
our horses on, and also get the sheep off in small lots in the
boats, the “ Tien Tsin ” lending some of hers ; but after
three days trying anxious work, and attended with some risk,
we succeeded in getting all ashore, and then the poor sheep in
detachments had to be got up to Roebourne Pool, io miles,
for a drink, which meant, as the weather was still very hot,
travelling them slowly all night ; and as, unfortunately, ours
were paddocked sheep from Victoria they could not be
trusted five minutes at night to camp. We had several
dreary and sleepless nights watching before we could get
yards made to enclose them in at night. We then learnt by
observation of some of our brother settlers from the Swan
River, and who, as sheep paddocks were then unknown in
Western Australia, took up sheep all their lives used to being
shepherded and camping in the open at night, what an
advantage they had over us Victorian settlers, for it took
about two years to break ours in, and during the process
we must have lost a couple of hundred, off and on, in strag-
gling little lots. We were in this and a hundred other ways
learning the lessons, the difficulties and the hardships of
pioneer work, but for all that one would not desire in later
life to exchange or miss out any of those experiences in
exchange for the easy circumstances and enervating, self-
indulgent comforts of over-civilization. Strong men and
strong nations are moulded and built up by what its people
endure and overcome, and the same nations and men
likewise drift into senility and decay in the absence of such
discipline, experience and self-denials.
Let us now go back in thought to the condition and
history of this early settlement around Roebourne, and as to
whom we found there before us. First of all, Mr. Padbury’s
party with his brother-in-law, Mr. Charles Nairn, as manager,
had left Roebourne, or the Harding River, as it was then
known by, and taken their flocks and party over to the
De Grey River, where Mr. Padbury had first taken up his


country, being about 160 miles further eastward pastoral
country highly spoken of by Mr. F. T. Gregory in the journal
of his travels in the North-West ; then the next to arrive
was Mr. John Wellard’s party, under the management of
Mr. Shakespeare Hall, whose wife and two sons, Ernest and
Aubrey, and daughter Joy were all till recently residents
of Cossack, and the boys still remain there. Let me add
here that Mr. Shakespeare Hall was also one of the original
exploring party that accompanied Mr. F. T. Gregory in 1861.
So also was that grand old pioneer settler, magistrate and
gentleman, the late Mr. Maitland Brown —all honor to his
name —himself the soul of chivalry, courage and kindness.
Next on the list, the late John Withnel and his wife (still
living), Emma Withnel, two household names in the memory
of all old Nor’-Westers ; they had settled at Roebourne Pool,
on the Harding, on the hill which they named Mt. Welcome,
after having made an unsuccessful and rather disastrous
attempt to land their stock, sheep, horses, etc., in Port
Hedland from the barque, “ Kestral,” under command of
Captain Pringle, and were now under those difficult condi-
tions rearing a family of young growing children, some of
which, John, James, William, Ernest and Lilia, still remain
resident settlers at the North-West, the other members
removing down South. Words do not properly express the
kindness and help extended to our own party and to other
arriving settlers by both Shakespeare Hall and Mr. and
Mrs. John Withnell, and but for them and their kindly aid
our first few weeks and those of many others would have
been harder than it was, though perhaps at the time we
thought them hard enough for us. Then there were other
Swan River parties who had arrived a month or two before
us —Thos. Lockyer and his son George, with his partner,
W. Taylor ; there was also another party from Victoria in
charge of Lampton L. Mount (formerly known as champion
amateur runner of Victoria), his overseer —Mackay (a hardy
old Scotchman), and Frank Mount, his brother. Then
arriving shortly after ourselves were Mr. Samuel Viveash,
now residing on the Swan, whose father was many years
Resident Magistrate at Guildford, and his partner, Thomas
Middleton, James Wilkinson, another worthy Northam
settler pioneer, with whom were Mr. Richard Eaton, now a


prosperous farmer up Goomalling way. Then about a month
after our arrival Mr. Norman McLeod, father of Donald
McLeod of Minilya Station, arrived with his brother Magnus
and afterwards took up the Maitland runs, now known as
Chirritta, the property of A. C. Gillam, Donald McLeod
living on it for some years previous to Mr. Gillam’s arrival.
Next, I believe, on the scene was the Denison Plains
party, who left Melbourne in the ship “ Warrior ” with rather
a flourish of trumpets, intending to land at Roebuck Bay
(now known as Broome) and strike thence inland to the
Denison Plains discovered and reported on by late Augustus
Gregory; however, getting becalmed off Cossack and
running short of water they decided to land at Cossack, and
amongst them were some names that for some years after-
wards were associated with the history of the North-West.
The late R. L. McKay, who founded Mundabulangana
Station, now owned by his nephew, S. P. McKay. Mr. H.
W. Venn, of Dardenup Park, but since deceased, regretted
by all who knew him, being also one of the party, and who
afterwards purchased from Dr. Baynton the Karratha Runs
on the Lower Maitland, now owned by Withnell Bros., and
on which station Mr. Venn lived for some dozen years or so.
Then there were Messrs. Simpson and Macintosh, who took
up Mardie Station, now owned by the writer, and Mr. S. R.
Elliott and Mr. H. O. Timms, also on the Fortescue, the
Brothers Fraser and James Stewart, who later purchased
Balmoral Station on the Lower Fortescue from Robt. Fraser,
and which is now owned by his brother, David Stewart,
and many others who having left drift out of memory.
But amongst them Donald M. Paterson, who settled Yanarie
Station, afterwards joined to Karratha. One or two more
which came later on might be mentioned. The original
holders of the Millstream, viz., Alex. Mcßae, late T. R.
McKenzie, and George and Alfred Howlett, with the late
Kenneth McLean, also Horace Hicks who founded the
Springs Station on the Upper Harding. The brothers
Robert and James Seymour, Aleck McEdwards, and some
two years after our arrival Mr. Charles Harper, who after-
wards joining in partnership with the late Edwin Anderson
and McK. Grant became part owner of the De Grey Station
and after selling out of that to John Edgar and Aleck W.


Edgar, joined George W. Mcßae in Globe Hill Station,
Ashburton River. Mr. Edwin Robinson and John Seabrook
of Beverley purchasing Langwell Station, the property of the
late Kenneth McLean, who established it, they afterwards
selling out to Duncan Mcßae, who with Charles Straker still
holds it. Later on Richard Burges, of Tipperary, York,
arrived to take over from Lockier Clere Burges the manage-
ment of Andover Station, having joined partnership with his
cousin, Tom Burges, of the Bowes. Then so many new
arrivals and so much buying and selling took place that it is
both difficult and perhaps not of public interest to mention
them all.
Our own party about eight weeks after arrival establish-
ed themselves on Pyramid Station, and at the end of four
years Messrs. A. E. Anderson and McKenzie Grant sold out
to the remaining three partners —myself, my brother (J. E.
R.), and John Edgar, and which for a further period of about
seven years was under my management and control. I then
gave up the management first to Mr. J. G. Brockman, after
which my brother Elliot took it over and lived on it for
another 15 years and held his interest in it till two years
back, that is continuously for over 40 years.
We would like now to recur to a few of the earlier
incidents of the pioneer settlement connecting it with other
districts.
Owing to the long passage of one of the small coasting
craft going for supplies the little settlement got into great
straits for food. Fortunately Mr. Sholl, when coming from
Camden Harbor, brought a fair supply, but when others ran
short and this was distributed it soon began to vanish, and
the rations gradually diminishing we in our party, after a few
weeks of half-a-pound of flour per day, were almost at the
famishing point before succour arrived. To make things
worse sickness and scurvy broke out —John Edgar down
with typhoid, McKenzie Grant with scurvy, Mr. Anderson
away to Fremantle for another shipment of stock, my
brother not extra well, I had the proud distinction of being
the soundest of the party. On another occasion dearth
and famine were close upon our heels owing to the
disaster happening to the schooner “ Emma,” which
was lost under circumstances of especial sadness. She left


Cossack with some 50 souls on board —many of the earliest
settlers of Roebourne districts, some of whom intended
returning with stock to form other stations and among them
also was Trevor Sholl, eldest son of the R.M., Mr. R. J. Sholl
—but she was never heard of more, no doubt encountering
and foundering in a “ willy-willy,” so the settlement,
realising dearth and hunger in front of them, organised
an overland horseback relief party to ride over to
Geraldton, some 700 miles, Mr. Charles Harper taking
charge of it, accompanied by Mr. Farquhar, Mcßae and two
others. They reached Geraldtonsafely, but succour arrived
before their return, several of us being reduced to six
ounces of ground up barley meal per day ground in a
coffee mill.
While at the North we learnt from fragmentary reports
that some settlers had taken up country on the Gascoyne
River. Our own reading of F. T. Gregory’s report on the
Gascoyne country did not impress us favorably and we
thought it was not good enough to explore, but he no doubt
saw it under a severe drought and formed a too unfavorable
impression as since then some substantial stations, and many
of them, have become established on the Gascoyne River
and also on Minilya, the Lyndon, and a large and important
back district with its pleasant little sea-port town and centre
at Carnarvon, have rewarded those who believed the
country to be good.
A somewhat notable incident illustrating the vicissitudes
of pioneer settlement occurred some two years after our
settling in Roebourne district. Mr. Padbury finding his
isolated station on the De Grey not yielding any return, but a
constant financial drain, gave orders for its breaking up and
the sheep to be brought back overland to the Swan. This
expedition, a very responsible and anxious one, he entrusted
to Mr. Edward Roberts, of Yatheroo, who successfully
carried it out ; and this fine belt of pastoral country re-
mained idle and not even rented for about three years, until
Mr. A. E. Anderson and McKenzie Grant desiring larger scope
than that afforded by the Pyramid Station for their flocks
to increase decided to take up the country again and carry
on sheep farming and the pearling industry combined, and


having command of a good body of blackfellow divers it
answered very well, in fact for five or six years, until the sheep
got into good numbers, the pearl shells paid better than the
sheep station. The permanent and continuous settlement
of the large pastoral area on the De Grey River thus originat-
ed from the establishment of the De Grey Station by Messrs.
Anderson and Grant, and from this parent stock branched
out the various and somewhat numerous pastoral holdings
and homesteads now successfully established on the De
Grey River.
Another important incident in connection with the
history of the Nor’-West was Mr. E. T. Hooley’s adventurous
project to drove a large mob of sheep, horses, etc., from the
Bowes Station, near Northampton, right through to the
Ashburton, where he had taken up some country. In the
previous season (a very dry one) he had made an unsuccessful
attempt to get North to the Ashburton via Sharks Bay ;
however, the following season he pluckily resolved to start
flocks and all, and, keeping well inland, again attempt the
problem, and having fortunately a good season he got
through successfully and established a station on the Ash-
burton River ; but as hard luck would have it the same fate
that attended Mr. Padbury on the De Grey waited on him,.
and,after a couple of years —financial failure, which is so often
the first result of pioneer settlement in distant, far back,
isolated localities, drove him out and the Ashburton pastoral
country was once more abandoned to the blackfellows, and
no doubt these same blackfellows had a pretty good hand in
making the position untenable, as they were very trouble-
some, bold and hostile, as our late Chief Inspector of Stock,.
Mr. Morton Craig, could testify to, he having been left for
some time in charge of the party by Mr. Hooley, and his
experience of Ashburton natives was not over and above
joyful. Later on Messrs. Alex, and David Forrest re-
occupied this country and under their management (with
Sir John Forrest and Sept. Burt as partners) they have
established successfully the Mindero Station, but even
with them its first few years were anything but profitable.
Just previous to Mr. E. T. Hooley’s giving up his
Ashburton project he, under urgent business necessity, made
a bold, venturesome journey to Geraldton, doing the journey


—some 700 miles distant —all alone, with two horses, ac-
complishing it in three weeks. As in several parts the
natives were very treacherous and hostile it gives us a fair
idea of the stuff Mr. Hooley was made of, that is real pioneer
material.
We must now retrace our narrative once more and
endeavor to follow the progress of expansion in the occupa-
tion of the various tracts of country as far as memory will
allow us, for speaking some forty years after the earliest of
these events it is only natural that in some details in-
accuracies may creep in. I have already sketched the
history in outline of the Pyramid Station, and as its establish-
ment was amongst the very first batch it has claims to
historical mention. But as far as the district around
Roebourne was concerned, for as I have said Mr. Padbury’s
party had moved eastward to the De Grey River some 160
miles from Roebourne, and so what was known as No. i
Block was that of Mr. John Wellard’s and which included
that long stretch of fertile plain extending from Mt. Hall
near Roebourne away across the Eastern Harding and on
across Jones’ Creek, known to the old settlers as Gregory’s
Camp 14, and thence on to the lower portion of the River
George. The homestation had been located at Andover on
the Harding, ten miles above Roebourne, for convenience
sake. Adjoining Mr. Wellard’s run on the east side was
John Withnel’s run, embracing all those fertile plains of the
Lower Sherlock River, and in after years acquired by his
son-in-law, John G. Meares. I might here mention that
what were then known as free stock runs consisted usually of
100,000 acres each and were held subject to stocking con-
ditions. Adjoining Mr. Wellard’s No. 1 Block and extending
south up the valley of the George River and taking in what
was and is known as King’s Pyramid Hill (a very remarkable
cone-shaped hill forming a perfect pyramid) was the Pyramid
run and adjoining this on the west was Indernoona run of
Messrs, \ iveash, Wilkerson and Middleton. The Lockyers
and Taylor taking up a run on the Upper Harding at Cooya-
pooya. The next move was westward on to the Lower
Maitland. Some of the Warrior party (Denison Plains Com-
pany) establishing themselves there. Mr. H. W. Venn, with
Mr. D. M. Paterson and Mr. Norman McLeod, and Mr. R. L.


McKay, and later on D. N. McLeod (son of Norman McLeod)
establishing Chirritta Station on the upper portion of the
Maitland River, then gradually as exploring parties in those
days of frequent occurrence amongst us pushed their way
further out the Lower Fortescue and Mardie Station became
established by Robt. Fraser and Simpson and Macintosh, and
our own party seeking for more scope explored away south to
the Tableland and Upper Fortescue, a good area of pastoral
country became established on the Tableland, the Millstream
and Upper Fortescue, Tambery Creek, Mulga Downs, and
the Marsh Country. But previous to this and during our
first few months residence in the district our manager
(A. E. Anderson), with E. T. Hooley, Lampton, L. Mount,
and Tom C. Murray, resolved to form a party and go right
on to the Ashburton River to inspect a considerable stretch
of pastoral country reported there by F. T. Gregory on his
exploration trip and reported in his journal. To get there
except by the coast, which was not liked as a route for water,
necessitated penetrating the rugged and rather impracticable
mountainous belt known as the Hammersley Range, and
Gregory did not give too encouraging a report of his own
journey through it ; in fact, he experienced great difficulty in
getting through. However, after much labor and loss of
many horseshoes, and a few escapes of horses slipping down
precipices and a lot of hill climbing, the party succeeded in
getting through (since then a very easy pass further to the
South and East has been found) and they ultimately reached
the Ashburton River, near Duck Creek, not far from the
present site of Mr. Harry Higham’s home station, Nanutarra.
This was in August, ’65, and following the river down for
many miles three large blocks were taken up, one by Mr.
Anderson for our company, one by E. T. Hooley, and one by
T. C. Murray ; and it was this country that a year or two
later Mr. Hooley attempted to settle and which was his
objective when taking his sheep and stock through overland
from Geraldton. Our own party did not go on with our
Ashburton block. I went across some two years after to
inspect it, but the Ashburton was then suffering from a
droughty season and the country looked anything but
attractive or inviting. As I have said the real permanent
occupation of the Ashburton, and its expansion and exten-


sion, right up the river to Hooley and New’s Station, George
Mcßae’s, Harry Higham’s, and John Hancock’s, Ashburton
Downs, really began with the Messrs. Forrest and Burt’s
settlement there. Another stage had now been reached in
the history of our own party and company, the termination
of the four years’ partnership contracted for, as between the
members of the Portland Squatting Company, which was
the title of our firm, had arrived and some important changes
in the affairs of the company were in contemplation, and this
perhaps is a suitable opportunity for some comment on the
general financial aspect of these various colonising enter-
prises and the forming and developing of pastoral properties
in North-West Australia. It is a happy delusion that
many, perhaps the majority of, people who take any heed
to or interest in industrial developments, that from a financial
and commercial point of view the establishing of station
properties in our Nor’-West areas has been a long chapter
•of prosperity, and that whatever trials or hardships the
pioneers of these districts passed through, financial worries
and anxieties formed no part of them. But nothing could
be further from the real facts. But the dwellers of cities
will say, look at these Nor’-Westers that migrate down
annually to spend a few months’ holiday in the city ol
Perth, prosperity and flourishing circumstances written all
■over them. Yes ; many, though not all by any means, of
those who for the last io or 15 years have been visiting Perth
for two or three of the hottest months are now in comfortable
circumstances financially ; but let it not be forgotten also
that many of them have borne the burden and heat of the
tropical day for perioos varying from 15 to 30 years, or even
longer, and let me assure very many of those whose daily
life gives them daily access to all the comforts, recreations,
and attractions of the city, that they would not endure for
•one month, certainly not for a year, what has been the normal
usual daily life and circumstances for long years of a great
many of these much envied Northern squatters and pastora-
lists. But we are getting too far ahead of our theme, and
I was about to give a short detailed result of our own four
years’ experience, and I might say, generally, of the majority
•of the Northern pastoralists at that time, that they were
not at all satisfied with their prospects or at all hopeful of the


ultimate commercial outcome of thier pioneer ventures.
If many of them had been offered the actual capital embarked
in them they would have left without much persuasion and
many others if they could have seen how else or wheie else
to make a better start would not have hesitated. A fair
number did leave and turned their backs on Western
Australia and afterwards acquired wealth and opulence in
the Eastern Colonies —Victoria, New South Whales and
Queensland —but with many of us we were so circumstanced
that though the prospects in staying were not very brilliant,,
yet to go elsewhere with our limited capital offered nothing
much better (thus we thought at the time), but in comparing
notes in after years with many of our schoolmates and
boyish acquaintances who remained in Victoria and New
South Wales we found they had made quicker progress and
more substantial advance than ourselves. And as proof of
what I am here setting forth, let me say that the two oldest
and most experienced in our company to whom we ceitamly
looked up to as the wisest—Messrs. A. E. Anderson and
McK. Grant —had resolved at the end of our four years part
nership term to turn their backs on North-West Australia
take their share of our flocks overland to Northam and
Newcastle districts and look out for pastoral country there,
where, as they said, they could live in some kind of a tolerable
climate, and where droughts and other North-West experi-
ences would not trouble them. However, this step could
they have carried it out would have been a great mistake, and
as Providence ruled it, an unusually dry season checked their
passage over. After spending a year on the Lower Fortescue
they returned, and, as I said, took up and occupied the runs
and pastoral country abandoned by Mr. Padbury s party and
stock and their advent there resulted in the permanent
settlement and development of the De Grey River. m ce
then what began as one station property has developed and
divided up into nearly a dozen, extending some 200 to 250
miles up the De Grey, Oakover, Nullagine, Coongan and
Shaw Rivers. The first addition or branching out from the
parent stock being Mulyie Station, some thirty miles above
the De Grey house, first established by Mr. A. E. Anderson s
brothers (J. W. and John Anderson), and afterwards pur-
chased and carried on nearly to this day by his two nephews


{Messrs. Ross and Tom Anderson), and who made a good
property of it by hard work and good management. Then
other cousins, the Hardie Brothers, came on the scene and
there are two or three stations amongst them. Then there
were Messrs. W. C. Ball and Charles Ball and Mick Corbett,
who formed another station now established at Muccan.
Then Christopher Coppin started his place and a large cattle
station which had been established by the De Grey firm
(Messrs. Grant, Anderson and Edgar) was purchased by the
Darlot Brothers, who to this day own it and which is now
known as Wurrawagine Station. There are also others
started in more recent years, and while we are on the east-
ward country we might shortly mention that in addition to
McKay Brothers’ large Mimdabulaganna Station that the
writer and his brother-in-law (J. Pierce Wellard) formed and
established the Boodarrie Station, and adjoining to -the
South of it, the brothers Fred, John and Charles Wedge
established Cobbalana Station and which afterwards was
united to Boodarrie under one firm of Wedge, Richardson
& Co. Then John G. Meares, who married a daughter of
John Withnel’s, having served some years with the De Grey
firm, established Portrea Station and later on acquired the
ownership of the Sherlock Station, which was among the
earliest occupied runs in the district.
The original De Grey Station was carried on for many
years by the firm of Harper, Grant and Anderson (Chas.
Harper having, joined them) together with pearl-shelling
enterprises, and Mr. Harper later on selling out to John
Edgar and his younger brother, A. W. Edgar (now of “Strath-
albyn ”), and who afterwards managed it for many years
and now with his sister, Mrs. McKenzie Grant, and her sons,
are chief proprietors of it, and a very fine pastoral property
it is and speaks well for the judgment and the insight of
the late Walter Padbury, who originaly selected the
country.
I must now crave permission to carry events backward
again. Messrs. Anderson and Grant having permanently
severed their connection with our company, it now remained
to the three of us, having bought out the two sleeping
shareholders in Victoria, to carry on the Pyramid Station


and begin its development and the increase of the flocks
to the best of our ability. One important drawback to
financial success attending squatting enterprises about this,
time was the rather low price of wool on the English market
and also that the wool produced by the sheep in hot, dry and
dusty country under the old shepherding system, causing
it to rule still lower, and the weight of fleece was also
much below what careful breeding and the introduction
of a more suitable class of rams has of late years
raised it to. I remember that for many years we
reckoned from 2s. 3d. to 2s. 6d. per fleece per head an
annual normal return for station flocks. Of course at that
time and some years later all sheep' were shepherded, and
under that system you can never obtain the same results
either in weight of fleece or cleanness and length of staple
as under system of paddocks, and it was not till the year
1878 that settlers began to think it possible or practicable
to form sheep paddocks in the Nor’-West, and I believe the
practise was first initiated by Messrs. Anderson and Grant
on the De Grey Station.
Amongst the earliest firms of merchant storekeepers
established in the Nor’-West, at Roebourne, the names of
Farquhar Mcßae, G. Fauntleroy and Frederick Pearse are
most remembered, though many others followed. The firm
of Mcßae & Pearse was familiar in business circles for many
years, and later in life Mr. Fred. Pearse, after retiring from
business, was given the position of R.M. of Wyndham, and
later still placed in charge of the native prisons, etc., at
Rottnest. I think he came to Roebourne about the year
1870 or 1871.
In view of all the improvements in the way of steamer
communication, trade developments, etc., etc., people have
but little conception of the hazardous and inconvenient means
of getting to the settled districts of Perth and Fremantle by
sea that had to be borne with in those early days. For some
years little schooners of from 25 to 60 tons had to carry on the
trade, bring supplies, carry the wool and also passengers.
The first detachment of passengers voyaging to Fremantle
was in the cutter “ Mystery,” of 20 tons burden, our manager,
A. E. Anderson, being one, intending to purchase more sheep’


for our party. They were between 40 and 50 days getting
down to Fremantle against the prevailing strong South-East
trade winds. They ran out of provisions when away out
at sea some 300 or 400 miles off shore, but fortunately met an
American whaler out at sea and got some provisions from
her, the Yankee skipper remarking to the mate in charge
of the rescue boat that he had often heard tell of fellows
going to sea in a “ sarvin mallet ,” but he had never seen it
before.
On another occasion passengers were stewing bullock
hides to make soup, and later in January of the year 1872 I
myself met with a not too comfortable experience in a 60-ton
fore and aft schooner, in which I was the only passenger, she
carrying our own and other settlers’ season’s clip. It took us
47 days getting from Cossack to Geraldton, before which
time we were out of all kinds of provisions except water and
a little flour. Everything else, including firewood, became
exhausted and for a fortnight the allowance was half-a-pound
of bread per day, and but for a kind of accident or a bit of
Scotch caution on my part we should have actually starved,
for not liking the appearance of the ship’s stores at leaving,
I asked the captain very politely if he would have any
objection to my putting a bag of flour of my own on board
as I was of a rather pessimistic turn of mind as to possible
length of passages and head winds, etc. He very condes-
cendingly replied that if it would reassure my mind and give
me any comfort I might do so, but he was not gracious
enough to acknowledge afterwards when the ship’s cook
doled out our daily allowance of the bread made therefrom
that my little thought and apprehension had saved his
ship’s crew and himself, but I think it is these various
vicissitudes and glorious uncertainties that attract our spirits
in pioneer experiences.
While these events were transpiring at the Nor’-West,
no doubt a similar set of experiences were being passed
through in the Gascoyne district and up the Murchison River,
but as we can only relate our own experiences and recollec-
tions I must be pardoned if I cannot give as full particulars
of them in these reminiscences, but will relate further on
some particulars gathered from friends who took part in
the pioneer enterprises of those districts.


The pearling industry was no doubt an important de-
velopment in the early history of the Nor’-West, and about
two years after the establishment of the settlement, it being
observed that some of the coastal natives wore as ornaments
some mother-o’-pearl shells, a few enterprising spirits ob-
tained a boat and, taking some natives, went in search and
obtained a small shipment which realised a good price, and
really started the industry first by beach-combing after the
high tides had receded from the shore, and later on by diving
in open water, the blackfellows proving expert divers up to
seven fathoms and being quick of sight used to recover the
shells from the deep. After some years, the industry gradu-
ally resolved itself into one employing Malay divers with
diving dresses ,etc. A few sad chapters might be related in
connection with the pearling industry by the accidents and
loss of boats and lives through the dreaded “ willy-willys ”
or cyclones, especially before coastal boats got to know and
dread them. And right up to more recent times these
disasters have been periodically occurring, and all the
experience of past catastrophes do not seem to result in
pearlers being able to insure their own safety.
I have already made mention in these notes of the
exploring expedition of F. T. Gregory in 1861, but as the
important discoveries of pastoral lands on this trip, and
Gregory’s report of them was really the origin and foundation
of the settlements afterwards established in the Nor’-West
his journey is entitled to a more than passing allusion, and
I had intended to return to that subject but it has not seemed
to work in with the events of my narrative. As I have
mentioned, Mr. Gregory, whose expedition was conveyed
from Fremantle in the “ Dolphin,” effected a landing at
Nicol Bay near the mouth of the Maitland River, which
watercourse he at first traversed inland, and though I have
not now a copy of his valuable and interesting journal with
me (they are almost out of print except possibly there will
be one or more in the records of the Lands Office) I remember
that he records that when camped in his tents on the Mait-
land in the month of May he experienced some heavy showers
of rain. He then appears to have traversed in a southerly
direction the River Maitland to its rise in the ranges then
across the watershed till striking the Fortescue River, I think


about thirty or forty miles below Millstream, in the rough
and precipitous ranges about that locality. He then appears
to have travelled up the Fortescue for some miles, mentions
the Millstream and the fan palms growing around it and the
long deep reach of water, and then left it to penetrate south
through the Hammersley Range where he met with serious
difficulties in piercing the Range, but'finally emerged on the
far side on good country and striking the Hardy River, which
he then followed down to its junction with the Ashburton,
kept away south until he could just sight and distinguish
Mt. Augustus on the Lyons, and which he recognised through
having visited it on a previous journey up the Gascoyne.
He then retraced, followed up the course of the Ashburton
River, reported and remarked on the pastoral country of
Baring Downs, returned through the Hammersley, naming
Mt. Bruce, Mt. Samson, Mt. Brockman, Mt. Pyrton, etc., etc.
Then travelling further up the Fortescue for a while struck
away to the eastward, crossing the heads of the Yule and
Shaw Rivers via Glen Herring and the Marsh country, till
he struck the De Grey River, known, I think, now, as the
Nullagine, and followed it down nearly to its junction with
the Oakover, and thence followed up the Oakover River right
up to its farthest point near Mt. McPherson, where he was
baffled and had to retrace owing to encountering an intrusion
of the inland Australian desert with parallel sandridges and
waterless country, and where Mr. Gregory himself had a
narrow pscape of losing his life when on a flying kind of
scouting expedition, having taken Maitland Brown and
possibly another with him, but lam not quite sure. How-
ever, but for the superior endurance of Maitland Brown,
who pushed on back to the depot camp to reach water and
succour, his horse giving in on the way and he finally reaching
the depot camp on foot much exhausted, it is possible Mr.
Gregory may have perished before relief and water were
taken back to him. As the season was then drawing on to
the hotter months he decided to follow the De Grey River
down towards the mouth and return nearer the coast to his
principal camp on the Lower Maitland and to his vessel,
and thus he discovered and mapped out the fine areas of
pastoral country on the De Grey River, Lower Yule, the
broad Sherlock Plains, and that fine stretch of grassy plain


between the Sherlock and Roebourne on the Harding River
and also further west across the Nicol to the Maitland River.
It being now well into October and the weather becoming
hot and the waters drying up, after a trip of over six
months, travelling most of the time except while resting
their horses, Mr. Gregory re-embarked his horses and party
safely on to his vessel and returned to Fremantle, and then
got out his most valuable chart of the district and his very
valuable, faithful and interesting journal, which in the earlier
days of the settlement when we used to be out looking for
pastoral runs and country to settle on, was a kind of bush
bible to us, and everyone had most implicit faith in the
correctness and accuracy of Gregory’s journal and chart.
# *
So far the incidents we have narrated, the thoughts
and reflections we have indulged in, the experiences of one’s
early and youthful life, which, looking back upon in the
light of mature manhood and ripened years, appeals in
many of us to the romantic or poetic side of our nature if
we have any, and strikes chords which in their vibrations
diffuse feelings of either seriousness or sadness. Yet they
have not passed out of or beyond the region of the outer,
the visible, the material life which while we are of this body
we have all to live, and while these experiences are being
passed through they are no doubt very real and all our
philosophy may seek in vain to belittle their reality on the
plea they are but the fleeting shows of our short sojourn
here below. But for all that, when the day arrives for look-
ing backward upon that which is past and gone, the beautiful
words of the poet come home to us :
This world is but a fleeting show,
To man’s illusion given ;
Smiles of joy and tears of woe.
There’s nothing true but heaven.
And so a right regard for truth should convince us there is
a greater and more enduring reality than this outer, this
visible life, which we live open to the view and cognition of
our fellow man ; and that is the inner life, that which is,
so to speak, of the unseen, and was it or was it not a truth
that the great Apostle of the Gentiles spoke when he declares
in II Co. iv, 18, “ For the things which are seen are temporal,


but the things which are unseen are eternal.” For my
part, if it can be clearly demonstrated that any of the
moral sayings either of our Lord in His words or of His
inspired apostles are not true when tried by the deep, moral
experiences of our own souls, that is if contradicted by
the testimony of our inner consciousness, then I would give
up the Bible as truth, because He that formed the mind
and breathed the spirit of man must know what is in man
and what is true of him, and if He has spoken in His word
as to what is characteristic of the deeper thoughts of our
hearts, they must be true to man’s moral character and
faithfully describe the springs and motives that always,
originate and give rise to his outer actions and his conduct.
And possibly there is no life like the pioneer life in the
bush that brings out and unmasks what is in man, for the
more that artificial and conventional restraints, force of public
opinion, usages and customs of society, etc., surround
and control man the less he manifests outwardly or discloses
what he would be or might be if such restraints were re-
moved, and so man betrays more of his real self. But for
all that I do not care how primitive, simple and unconven-
tional the condition that a company of mankind may live
in in the bush. Men still false to their real inner life and
dissembling an outer guise to his companions, will not allow
his true inner self to appear too openly. Possibly the
greatest poet and moralist that literature knows expressed
this thought in those words, “ To thine own self be true
and it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not
then be false to any man.” But, strange to say, there is
no one that a man is more untrue to than to himself. The
strangest part of all this “ morally ” is that in such abandon-
ment of the restraints of conventional society man is less
ashamed of manifesting the bad that may be in him than
the little bit of the best. And it is here morally where the
testing and crucible enduring element in the life and charac-
ter of young men going forth to the somewhat wild and
searching life of the bush comes in. He escapes for the
time the no doubt terribly seductive and character wrecking
influences of the city, with all its soul-destroying attractions.
But he must meet and resist those which, though of a
different order, are yet present and that also seek his down-


fall or his moral declension. Satan has not disappeared —
he has changed his dress merely. What then shall we say
is to sustain us to preserve and save the soul of the intrepid
self-reliant youth who the spirit of enterprise, love of ad-
venture, impatience of the same daily somewhat effeminate
routine and round of office and city life stirring within him
till he can also decline and refuse its offers of pleasure and
luxury, resolves to face the bush and carve out and build
up a future born of his own right arm and his own con-
structive brain, for disguise it, cover it up by shutting your
eyes, or veiling it with the silken gauze of self-deception
as we will, moral danger lays in his path, whether in the
city or in the bush. No doubt too many of our rugged-
minded and large-hearted bushmen build their hopes
on the enduring power of a mother’s influence and
spirit, and perhaps (if so fortunate) aided and strength-
ened by a serious minded father’s counsel and instruction
and though too often concealng it from the eye of his hut
or camp companions, the youth for a time does remember
the prayers he learnt at his mother’s knee or the family Bible
reading of his father’s house, yet if it hath nothing
deeper than a human origin or the force of merely moral
or even religious teaching, oh, how often doth it break
down unable to stand against the world, the flesh and the
devil! But a fond mother, trusting her boy to face this
evil world, may say, but surely my boy will be befriended
and safeguarded and helped as to his inner life and in his
soul by right minded men of honorable feeling and upright
lives. They will shelter him and seek even to lead him
in the right paths, and direct him by wise counsel. This, too,
alas ! but a fond and delusive dream. Little help will he
meet with from any such quarters or influences, and, though
sad to think of, he will find plenty hindrances and moral
influences all tending in the opposite direction. Let him
in fond hope of these sympathising, strengthening
words seek to test his upright and honorable friends and
elders. Let him in Godly confidence seek to speak out a
few words on those deeper matters of the heart and our
relation and standing as before God as sinners or of Christ
the Saviour, and he will probably taste of the bitter ex-
perience of the cold reception his few words will receive,.


or the cynical smile the word of ridicule, or painful silence
his remarks will evoke. And so in bitter experience he
must learn that if he is to stand and not to drift it is not
from man and certainly not from the world he is to find help.
Where else then, the soul may ask in its despair, can this
talisman be sought for, that shall endure against the 'assaults
of these principalities and powers in high places, and well
may the youth, in deep self-concern, ask himself in the
words of that beautiful hymn —
Will your anchor hold in the storms of life,
When the clouds unfold their wings of strife ?
When the strong tide lifts and the cable strains
Will your anchor drift or firm remain ?
Poor boy ! anxious youth, can I not sympathise with you.?
There is only One source in the whole universe whence
thou mayest derive strength and succour against the face
of this enemy of thy eternal well being, and it comes from
the unseen world, for the visible things, the tangible, the
material things can not give you a breath of it. Neither
churches, cathedrals, solemn music, impressive ceremonials,
vestments, intonations, awe-inspiring architecture can help
you here, for what use are they all to you in your lonely
bed under the gum tree or out on the rolling plain ? But
even there thou canst look up. The vault of heaven is
above you, and One there is who speaks to your deepest
soul from above. Listen, then, to His voice, for He wants
your ear. “I am come that ye might have life and have
it more abundantly.” Who, then, is this that speaks ?
Even He that gave Himself for us that He might redeem
us to Himself, “for ye are not your own (we may not therefore
do as we like), ye are bought with a price even
with the precious blood of the Lamb, for ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things; as silver and
gold, but with the precious blood of Christ as of a
Lamb without blemish and without spot.” —Pet. i, 18, 19.
For face to face with the living God in the loneliness of the
bush you have to learn the solemn, the awful truth that
you are a sinner and that sin is hateful in His sight, who is
of purer eyes than even to behold iniquity, and though
you refuse and decline that meeting with your God about
your sins now in time, it will have to take place in eternity ;


but then He will be seated on a throne of judgment and
judgment even in human tribunals bars the plea of mercy
being raised and even love cannot interfere or obtrude
the course of righteousness. But “now” He is seated on
the throne of grace and the Son is with Him on the Father’s
throne, and is not He the same one who came right down
to where we were, in our sins, and gave Himself in death
for those sins? And now the Father loves the Son and hath
given all things into his hands, and so you may come in all
your sins and meet the sinner’s Saviour —and a just God
and yet a Saviour. Will you then hold back and refuse
to seek that face and decline his invitation, who is ever
pleading, “ Come unto Me,” and ever asking that solemn
question of man, “ Why will ye die ? ” Here then is the
only but the all-powerful talisman against the corruptions
and the enticing invitations of a sin-loving world and of
our own sin loving hearts, and which accepting and believing
from the heart at the age of 16 and ever since treasuring
I have found to be the only power that can help in time
of dire need. Referring again for a little space to this power
of unseen things, how often do we find man sceptically
questioning both the reality and truth of this “ unseen ”
world if urged upon him in spiritual things as it is by the
Apostle Paul, and yet readily accept it and bowing to it
in natural, in intellectual, in scientific things —for what is
the moving force pervading the world’s concerns but ideas ?
how much can you see of them ? Look at this busy world
of steam engines, steamships and all the mass of life and
terrific force arising therefrom. Where did it spring from
and originate but in the idea of an intelligent brain watching
the effect of steam on a kettle’s lid. Note a huge tram-car
rushing along a street or against the law of gravitation —
up a hill. What is driving it ? You point the enquirer to
the line of copper wire overhead. He (in ignorance) takes
a piece, cuts and powders it and submits it to the microscope.
What can he see of the power ? Again, what incites or
controls your greatest actions in conduct but obedience to
unseen forces —you either fear and so are prevented in acting
by the thought of the moral judgment of your fellow man,
or are moved to mighty deeds by ambition in expecting to
win the approving thought of your friends or the world


all in deference to the sway of that which is “ unseen ”
and so the Apostle’s moral dictum is confirmed. But, ah !
he saith more of it than of its power, for the unseen things
are eternal— they do not pass away. And so again as to
that other mighty, all-preventing force the law of gravitation,
yet very imperfectly understood by science, which is only
beginning to learn what it is not. Alas ! there is just as
powerful and persistent a moral law —even moral gravitation
—and ever trending downwards, seeking to bring us to
earth and the dust, requiring the opposite projectile force of
spiritual energy to move us upwards to Him who will give
the Spirit of the New Life in Christ Jesus, which seeks the
things that are above. And now I am going to make a
sad confession, even this I feel constrained to apologise for
writing so much in this strain. And why ? Well, one fears {the
wretched fear of man again) it will not be popular reading.
It will evoke the smile of silent ridicule, and if further
conforming to natural instinct I would promise not to
offend again in this particular. Whose offending do I allude
to ? Is it offending my God (the one Christ told us we were
to be in fear of offending) ? Surely not ! He would not
be displeased at any humble or stammering effort to proclaim
His love, His grace, His righteousness. Then how awful
doth it read —apologise and seek to soothe man’s offended
feelings for speaking to him about His God and telling of
His beloved Son, and how He gave Himself for us. But
that is just what we are inclined to do —in heart —the best
of us.
So now I will venture to proceed with another chapter
in this little relation.
One great difficulty that was experienced by the early
settlers and pastoralists in their efforts to stock up their
runs in the Nor’-West in the earlier days was that of procur-
ing the live stock for the purpose. They had to be either
imported by vessel from the older settled portions of the
colony in the South, or right away from the Eastern States,
or otherwise driven overland from the South. In any case
the initial outlay and cost, as also the risks, were very great,
and, furthermore, there were in those days no very numerous
herds to draw from amongst the stock owners in the South,
and they had to be purchased in small drafts and collected


together before starting them away. The result was that
during the first ten years of settlement at the North there
were a good few different droving enterprises from the
South to the North that had to be undertaken, the pioneer
effort in this direction being, as I have mentioned, that
of Mr. E. T. Hooley, in 1866, following on which came several
others. The distances and risks were considerable and if,
as was sometimes the case, a dry season was struck
it was both slow and hazardous. Mobs of cattle and horses
had also to be taken overland, the distance from Perth to
Roebourne being about one thousand miles, or from the
Geraldton district, whence stock was in some instances
■obtained, being about 750 miles. It would be impossible
at this distance of time (even if it were advisable) to instance
them all. A few of the earlier ones dwell in one’s memory.
I believe about the year 1867 or 1868 the brothers George
and James Fisher from York or Beverley district took sheep
overland ; and after that David Forrest took a mob over
to stock up the Ashburton runs, they being attacked by
natives en route, Mr. David Forrest getting a spear wound
in the shoulder. Eater on I remember myself purchasing
a mob of cattle and some horses in 1874 in the Southern
districts and Mr. N. D. McFeod and John Hancock (Mrs.
John Withnel’s brother) undertaking to take them over,
they having also purchased other stock for the same destination.
They struck a very dry season and could not get the cattle
further than the Lyons River, where, leaving them for a
time, some thunderstorms scattered them before they could
return to them and a considerable number got back to the
Murchison and became wild cattle. Charley Smith, who is
now almost the cattle king of the Gascoyne district, recovered
many of them. The two brothers Woolhouse, Henry and
William, accompanied D. McLeod, taking some of their
own cattle from about the Greenough and afterwards
became proprietors of Yarraloola station, near Robe Hill.
Mr. H. W. Venn, of Karatha station, with Mr. T. R. Mc-
Kenzie, of Millstream station, also purcased a considerable
mob of horses and drove them overland to the Maitland
and Upper Fortescue. Another mob of cattle started over
in charge of Mr. Henry Clarkson, but on the way over his
name was added to the rather long and sad list of Nor’-


Westers who fell victims to the treachery of the blacks,,
for while on a scouting trip by himself in search of water
for his cattle they surprised him and murdered him. His
two brothers, Robert and Joe, afterwards resided some
years at the North and owned Karratha station after
Mr. H. W. Venn sold out. Mr. John Brockman then took
charge of Clarkson’s overland mob, taking them on through
to Roebourne. Space and memory both fail us to relate
of very many other overland trips of stock, as ultimately
the stock route became more established and after another
ten years mobs of sheep and cattle were being driven in
the opposite direction to supply the metropolitan markets
with fat stock. Many exploring trips also in search of
fresh country and runs were undertaken by the earlier
settlers between 1865 and 1870 —very important under-
takings at that time and more or less attended by difficulties
and some risks either from dry tracks and waterless belts
or from the savages, and when only two or even three are
on the explorers’ track together it is rather a long dreary
night-watch, from dusk light till daylight, and even in those
Northern latitudes from June to September the nights are
often very chilly and if the easterly winds are on often
bitterly cold and many of us have lively recollections of
many long night watches. The orthodox thing if natives’
tracks or fires have been observed in the day-time being to
watch without fires, but sometimes if very cold we would
camp out in a good clean place and make a big fire and
take our chance of being sniped at from a distance, as it
was not rifles but only spears that had to be considered.
If a traveller is absolutely by himself and so night-watching
out of the question, he will often adopt the ruse, if suspecting
darkies, of boiling his billy can and have his supper just
before dusk and then saddle up, ride on several miles,
and before camping take a good brisk canter for a couple
of miles in the dark and then off-saddle and hobble out in a
quiet place in the dark and count that he has dodged any
possible followers for that night. If the party is small and
night-watches tedious and wearisome, a little lively terrier-
dog or fox terrier carried by day in the packs is a good
institution, as he will give the alarm if anything unusual
is moving.


No doubt in what has already been chronicled of the
•events and incidents of the pioneering connected with the
•early history of the North-West settlements one feels it
would make far too long a story to deal with many of the
details of the daily life and the pursuits and experiences
of individual settlers engaged in building up and developing
the country. They would be, generally speaking, typical
and characteristic of life in the Australian bush. The many
occupations, the numerous station duties connected with
forming stations, improving and stocking them from the
day you get your approval of the government granting
you a lease of the land until you can turn it out a going and,
let us hope, a paying concern, with homestead buildings,
station yards, hundreds of miles of fencing, sheep paddocks,
water wells, dams, and in the present day windmills, troughs,
outstation yards, woolshed, and some thousands of sheep,
necessitates years of patient work, planning detail, manage-
ment, and anxious thought and care ; and also let it not be
forgotten if at last it emerges into a dividend paying pro-
position, years of anxious and economical contriving to
obtain the needful funds for all these necessary improve-
ments ; and the pioneer’s life and toils, hardships and
anxieties have been going on day by day for years and years.
His house building, his stockyard making, his thousands
and thousands of miles of horseback work sometimes night
and day, his mustering expeditions, which when of cattle or
horses that so easily get wild and difficult to gather in on
large runs often fifty miles and more from one boundary to
the other, often entails a lot of rough riding and skilful
handling. Travelling sheep in dry seasons in search of
feed or water, necessitating the getting them across waterless
stages also meaning much night travelling, and in dry season
the horses and hacks often knocking up from weakness, the
rider then having to dismount and carry his saddle over
some waterless stage ; then the horse-breaking and excite-
ment, as well as painful experiences with buckjumpers and
outlaws ; and in the case of Northern Australia much of
this work having to be carried on and carried through with
the thermometer ranging from ioo° to 115 0 in the shade,
which often necessitates when travelling long lonely night
journeys. All such and kindred experiences the pioneer


anticipates and takes as they come and would consider
himself a chicken if not quite ready and willing to tackle
them whenever the emergencies of his occupation placed
them across his path, and then in after life loves to think
of and look back on them.
These little sketches or momentoes of North-West history
would perhaps be rather incomplete if I left out any allusion
to the aboriginal native and the vexed and misunderstood
native question, though I would prefer not raking it out,,
but knowing the subject from experience of its very begin-
nings up to now I should not refuse to speak.
Taken then as a whole as a general average and in-
cluding individually the whole of the native population,
allowing for the exceptions, the odd cases, the exceptional
cases of cruelty or unfair treatment, which it would, be
utterly impossible to avoid when a strong and masterful
race comes in contact with an inferior, ignorant and savage
race, I say that until the stage is reached when they come
in too close contact with the more advanced civilisation of
towns, townships, public houses and payment in cash for
any little service rendered, but up to the time of reaching
that stage the natives were better off, happier, more com-
fortable, better fed (by far) than they ever were in their
savage state. And so long as they were employed on the
stations engaged in station occupations and personally
supervised and under the control of the station owner or
manager things were right enough, always allowing for
about the same proportion of unfortunate exceptions as
we have to allow for in, say, the city of Perth or Melbourne
of law breakers, wife beaters, women abusers, and unruly
citizens, in proportion to the law-abiding and law-respecting
members of society. As advanced civilisation was brought
in closer touch with natives as the authorities in well meant
ignorance gave instructions and authority to unwise, often
personally prejudiced police to put the natives up to all
kinds of moves, incite to insubordination, encourage him
to consider his employer as one who wanted to get every-
thing out of him and withhold what he the native might if
only knowing enough demand. Then the relations between
native and employers began to get more difficult and the
natives got worse instead of better and in very many cases


so impossible did the situation become that very many
stations decline to have anything more to do with them—
won’t employ them, and he, the native, is fast becoming an
idle vagabond, no good to himself nor to anyone else. I
•am writing this as one who has not only had to do with
natives for many years and observed their characters, dis-
positions and tribal customs, and without claiming to be
an expert learnt to speak their own language, and also,
what is important, I speak as their friend of many years
and without the slightest touch of anything but good
feeling and sympathy towards them, the result of very
many years’ companionship and camp life with them in
the bush under varying circumstances and situations of
both difficulty, trial and danger, as well as happy times,
•down to nursing them and feeding them in various diseases
and not excepting that deadly epidemic smallpox, which
about the year 1867, coming down the coast from perhaps
Camden Harbor where Malays in ' search of beche-le-mer
visiting the coast had inoculated them with the disease,
carried them off in hundreds if not thousands ; and, further
than this, I have both in past times and in recent years
travelled about amongst scores of other stations and was
able to judge of the treatment, condition and happiness of
their lot generally, and as a whole, and thus to mark and
note any unhappy exceptions and which I am glad to be
able to say wfere the exception and not the rule.
I would like to add to this that to anyone who has
had the opportunity of this practical acquaintance with
the native question and their relations with the great body
-of pastoralists and station owners, the spectacle presented
us a year or two back originated and worked up by excited
and ignorant writers in the newspapers of some thousands
•of city residents headed and inspired by very many clergy-
men who had never taken the trouble to ascertain the facts
and who for the time seemed to absolutely forget and lose
sight of the moral condition of scores or hundreds in their
own parishes or living in the next street, all met together
in public halls and shrieking and yelling shame on a con-
siderable body of respectable settlers, most of whom were
far higher in moral standing and social life than hundreds
of those who were denouncing them and clamoring for their


condemnation, and punishment. I say to those who know
in contrast to this assemblage of ignorant excited crowds,
who do not know with their prejudiced leaders and promoters.
The whole scene appeared too ridiculous for serious dealing
with and was a sad illustration of how man with all his
own sins upon him but nicely covered up from public view,
or from the impertinent gaze of his fellows, can sally forth
with a jaunty air of complacent virtue beaming all over
him and denounce in scathing terms the sins and short-
comings of others and find moral solace and comfort in the
process, and while in this virtuous mood hears not the
voice of Nathan speaking to King David, “ Thou art the
man.”
Amongst the earlier settlers in the North-West, arriving
as they did from countries which as to latitude, climate,
scenery, topography and vegetation stood in strong contrast
to the district they now found themselves in, there was
considerable diversity of opinion and occasional arguments
as to the character of the scenery, or- as to whether any
of it could lay claim to the beautiful or picturesque —the
burning sun, the extreme dryness of the vegetation after
long periods without rain, the wide expanse of treeless plains
broken only by more or less dry watercourses as indicated
in the distance by a green belt of gum trees or cajeputi and
rugged chains of broken stony hills, some of them simply
great piles of black or red looking basalt, diorite or granite,
as .the case might be, and often devoid of vegetation except
the inevitable triodia or spinifex and often without that —
just dark bare piles of large stones and rocks looking as
if thrown up by some great convulsion, giving one more
the impression of desolate grandeur or a kind of vast loneli-
ness than of any conventional kind of beauty. Then the
coast line of bare salt marshes and mangroves, revealing at
low tides a wide barren expanse of salty mud or sand. All
this when compared with our recollections of the softer
fertile appearance of many parts of Victoria, or to those
who had acquaintance with old England, or those hailing
only from the timber covered areas of South-Western
Australia was not at first apt to give the thought of either
beauty or picturesqueness and very many who, having that
kind of mind or with tastes formed, confined and narrowed


toy the contemplation of their former surroundings and
measuring all things by the standard of what they had
become accustomed to and what was familiar, protested
against the very thought of any beauty or scenic grandeur
being discoverable in the landscape formed by hill and
plain or rock and dale of the North, yet while perhaps
pitying, one can not sympathise much with those minds and
dispositions that seem to think that all natural beauty
or the beauties of nature must or should be of one pattern,
•say of that of, the old countries of Europe or the pretty
fertile and soft landscapes of many parts of Southern
Australia—fertile fields, soft grass and tree-covered hills of
green, with glimpses of water or lake or river, all very
beautiful and restful no doubt ; but is there to be no other
form of landscape that can inspire us with either admiration
or poetic thought or sentiment, surely this would make
nature to be very stereotyped ; and when in the far North
■one can more fully enter into the thought and feelings of
many of our soliders and generals or such writers as Steevens,
who after a time became in a sense captivated by the vast
semi-barren stretches of plain and mountain in the Soudan
or Egypt, or with the vastness of the veldt of South Africa,
and in passing through the Red Sea and through the Suez
Canal one’s thoughts are often carried back to the North-
West, by the marshy shores and rugged red and barren
hills as on the coast of Arabia, and it is open to argument
if Nature can be truly ugly. Many localities, it is true,
may be the very contrast of what we are accustomed to
think of and recognise as beautiful or as pretty and which
.give the sense of fertility and productiveness, but can not
another and totally different class of scenery also appeal
to our imagination and sentiments by their grandeur, their
vastness, even their weird loneliness and striking outline, and
looking off in the distance instead of focussing our gaze
on too close a view we are often struck and our imaginations
impressed with a captivating sense of the greatness, the
vastness and even the lonely beauty of many parts of
Northern Australia, bending our heads in reverent acknow-
ledgment of Him who doeth all things well and maketh
nothing in vain, for surely the earth is yet beautiful and
man alone is vile.


THE ROEBUCK BAY SETTLEMENT.
Consulting such records as are available, including
information contained in Government departments and
which I here acknowledge, also some extracts gleaned from
the History of Western Australia, compiled by W. B. Kimber-
ley in 1897, and from my own recollections of current events
while residing at the North, I find that what was originally
known as the Roebuck settlement (now Broome) had its
origin in a sensational story related by a convict named
Wildman, at Fremantle, in the year 1864. His tale having a
fair basis of circumstantial evidence, and its central issue and
principal theme being the ever attractive one about some
rich gold deposits, it duly excited the imagination of several
enterprising spirits that heard it. It was to the following
effect :—That this convict while first mate of a vessel named
“ Maria Augusta,” from Rotterdam to Java, in the year
1856, owing to an accident to her rudder, anchored some-
where near Camden Harbor for the purpose of repairs, and
while laying in the bay he, while inspecting the country
ashore, picked up several good nuggets of gold and which
he afterwards sold to a bullion merchant in Liverpool for
£416. His reason for keeping the secret so long was that
he had hoped to be able to charter a vessel and personally
visit the spot again. The only description of the locality
he could be induced to divulge was that it was on a river
flowing into Camden Harbor and which presumably would be
the Glenelg. He volunteered to act as guide to any party
going up there to search for the gold, his terms being that
his penal servitude of fifteen years was to be remitted and
he allowed to go free. I understand that some of those
who were disposed to take action on this report were cautious
enough first to send an enquiry through the Government
and ascertain from the Home authorities whether such a
parcel of gold had ever been sold to a Liverpool merchant,
and the reply was such as to confirm the convict’s story.
The outcome of this was that an adventurous little party
or syndicate was formed and after funds had been subscribed
—the Government even contributing some £l5O towards it —
that Mr. Panter, then Inspector of Police, and who was placed
in charge, and Messrs. Turner, F. and H. Caporn, Du Boulay,


W. Scott, Langoulant and Stokes, in addition to Wildman,
the convict, and two natives, proceeded to the locality in the
ship “ New Perseverance,” with Captain Owston in com-
mand, she having been chartered for the expedition, sailing
from Fremantle on the 2nd March, 1864, having horses and
equipment for the inland exploring work. It will be noted
that this expedition primarily projected to look for gold at
Camden Harbor, but which en route back to Fremantle
called in and landed at Roebuck Bay ; left Fremantle just
eleven months after Mr. Padbury’s party and stock sailed for
the Nicol Bay District on the 2nd April, 1863. And, further,
looking into the records it will be found that a previous
expedition of a few venturesome and enterprising bushmen
had visited Camden Harbor, explored some of the country
about the Glenelg River the year previous to this gold search
expedition, viz. : —Messrs. Kenneth Brown, Samuel Ham-
mersley, Aubrey Brown, Barnard Clarkson, F. Pearse, and
Dr. Martin, and who chartered the “ Flying Foam.” Cap-
tain Cooper leaving in May, 1863, having landed and explored
the country around Camden Harbor, they reported on it as
a fine country, with abundance of grass and water ; though
in parts very hilly, rocky and difficult to travel over with
horses. And, of course, Captain Grey had also previously
visited and travelled over this portion of North-West
Australia. This party also proceeded in the ship’s boats
some ten miles up the river, and while on this trip were
attacked by over thirty powerful looking warlike savages
and who were only repulsed after several shots had been
fired by the small party in the boats.
To return to the gold search party, they having reached
Camden Harbor, though having encountered a “ willy willy ”
(typhoon) on the voyage up, they were only saved from being
wrecked by the good seamanship of Captain Owston. They
now experienced some trouble with their convict guide, who
was to have revealed to them those rich gold deposits, but
turned sulky on arrival and obstinately refused to go out and
show the locality, so they were compelled to go searching on
their own account, but without any luck. The convict after-
wards, when at Roebuck Bay, attempted to escape at night
with two of the boats, so he was put in irons. On the return
trip they called and landed at Roebuck Bay and travelled


some fifty miles inland to the eastward and Mr. Panter, on
his return, reported it as well grassed, fertile country and
though without any running streams, yet fresh water was
easily obtainable at shallow depths. Dr. Martin was yet
more glowing in his reports and appears to have been im-
pressed with the character of the country and its suitability
for pastoral settlements. Though in the light of practical
results neither of them could have been extra good judges of
sheep country, as the pastures and grasses have not been
found at all suitable for sheep, though cattle have
thrived and done well.
The favorable reports taken back to Perth by the party
resulted in stirring up some of the more speculative spirits
into forming a pastoral company or syndicate to subscribe
funds, charter a vessel and establish a large sheep station on
these Roebuck Bay grassy plains, and so we find a few
prominent gentlemen issuing in 1864 the prospectus of the
Roebuck Bay Pastoral and Agricultural Association, Ltd.,
with a capital of £20,000 in £lO shares —rather an ambitious
project in those early days of small things. The provisional
committee recall to our minds a few, old familiar names,
being Lieutenant-Colonel Bruce, F. B. Barlee, Major Cramp-
ton, C. Wittenoom, G. Shenton, J. G. C. Carr, and J. Farm-
aner, with Mr. R. J. Sholl as Secretary. The revised pros-
pectus, which set forth the estimated expenditure of the
company during the first three years, made provision and
estimates for purchase of five thousand sheep, twenty head
of cattle, twenty-five horses, a vessel of fifty tons, provisions,
arms, implements, stores, etc., or total expenditure during
the first twelve months of £IO,OOO ; second year, £2,500 ;
third year, £3,500, which was now to include some buildings,
shearing sheds, etc. Total £16,000. As evidence of the very
sanguine expectations that results and returns were based on,
it was estimated that a profit equal to seven and a half per
cent, on the total capital would be earned the first year,
twelve and a half per cent, the second, and eighteen per
cent, the third, and it appears that these sanguine calcula-
tions must have by many been considered as likely to be
realised for the shares were rapidly taken up and the list
closed by the 31st August—tenders being then invited for
supply, stock, etc., etc. Most of our experience in pioneering


enterprises and stocking of new country, especially when
situated at considerable distance from the base of possible
supplies, warns us that a period of at least four or five years
must lapse, and during that development period a consider-
able inflow of capital and cash be imported into such under-
takings before much prospects of returns can be looked for,
and in a great many ventures and enterprises that I could
mention it has been ten years before even colors began to
show on the right side of the ledger.
The business phases of the new venture having thus
far progressed the " Flying Foam ” was procured and an
advance party sailed away in her early in October, 1864,
including the manager (Mr. Jas. R. Harding) with young
Lock Burges, Jr., as assistant, Mr. Panter accompanying
the party more as a guest. Having previously visited the
locality his experience, it was reckoned, would be of great
service to the expedition.
A meeting of shareholders was soon after convened and
Messrs. F. B. Barlee, G. Clyde, C. Wittenoom, S. E. Burges,
E. W. Lander, G. Shenton, and Major Crampton were
elected directors. The next step was to charter the two
vessels “ Nile ” and “ Hastings ” to convey the stock to
Roebuck Bay, carrying about seven hundred sheep each.
The “ Flying Foam ” having returned from her advance or
scouting trip, Mr. Harding’s report informed the company
that the country chosen was excellent. Mr. Burges’s report
confirming this, in fact, speaking in still higher terms. How-
ever, it was not long before a very sad and terrible disaster
overtook three members of the little party that had landed at
Roebuck Bay. As Messrs. Harding, Panter and Goldwyer
desiring to. explore the country to the south towards Fa
Grange Bay and so taking two or three weeks’ provisions left
the main camp to carry out their object. Not returning to
time Fock Burges deemed it expedient to go out in search of
them and taking a small party tracked them to Fa Grange
Bay but then lost all traces of them in a mangrove creek, and
when the “ Nile ” left Roebuck Bay on 4th January, 1865, to
return to Fremantle no news of them had come to hand, and
so a search party had to be despatched from Perth, Mr.
Maitland Brown offering to take charge of it, and as he
already had valuable experience with Mr. Frank Gregory’s


exploring trip in Nicol Bay district in 1861, and was more-
over known to be a first-class bushman with plenty of pluck,
his offer was gladly accepted* by the Government. Mr.
Brown’s party consisted of Messrs. Burges, Francisco, D.
Brown, with Troopers Williams and Toovey, and two native
policemen. The “ Clarence Packet ” having landed the
search party at Roebuck Bay, they soon got a start and while
on the search met some natives and elicited from them that
while three white men were camped at night on the bank of a
creek, the natives had attacked them and though the white
men in resisting the attack shot three blacks and repulsed
them, yet the following night they renewed the attack
in much larger numbers. Stealing upon them while asleep
the natives tried to pin them to the ground with their spears,
but even though badly wounded they managed to drive them
back, killing several of their number ; but the natives know-
ing their victims were badly wounded collected again with
additions to their numbers in daylight and overpowered
them, slaughtering the poor fellows with spears and clubs —
another sad tragedy to be added to the already numerous
list of such disasters to brave and lonely bushmen seeking
to make the waste places of Australia habitable for man.
Mr. Maitland Brown having secured two natives, ordered
them to lead the party to the scene of the murder, but they
with true nigger cunning tried to lead them astray and
attempted to escape themselves, but finally Mr. Brown
and his party discovered the bodies of the murdered men at
Lake Ingedana, all close to each other, a tent covering the
bodies of Messrs. Panter and Harding, and laying around
were broken spears and clubs as also the baggage of the party.
Their horses were also speared, one being found a few miles
off with spears protruding from its body. The poor fellows
had been killed on Sunday night, November 13, 1864.
While returning with the bodies Mr. Brown’s party was
followed by a considerable body of natives at a distance and
later on four of the rescue party were on some pretext or
other decoyed into a sort of ambush amongst some man-
groves and there the natives attacked them. However, they
fought their way out, the natives getting considerably the
worst of it. The remains of the three unfortunate explorers
were conveyed back to Fremantle in the “ Clarence Packet ”


and were on the 17th of May, 1865, buried in the Perth
-cemetery in the presence of a considerable number of
sympathetic, sorrowing mourners, the whole affair making
a deep and sorrowful impression on the community. Mr.
Maitland Brown received a letter of thanks from Governor
Hampton with other marks of distinction.
As far as we could gather from friends who had either
visited or resided at Roebuck Bay (amongst them Mr.
Lockier Burges and Mr. Alex. Mcßae), little success attended
the efforts of the pioneer settlers to establish sheep stations
there. The nature of the grasses, or of the soil, or both,
did not seem to suit sheep, and they did not thrive or increase
under the pastoral conditions that prevailed there. Cattle
did better, and in later years fairly successful stations appear
to have been established. Messrs. Streeter and George Roe
have occupied as cattle stations a considerable stretch of
country around Roebuck Bay, but now known as Broome,
and between there and the Fitzroy River, and have increased
their herds up to considerable numbers, but I do not think
it is a sheep country.
A few more incidents occur to me in connection with the
Roebuck Bay settlement towards the close of our first
year in the Nor’-West during 1866. We received a letter
from our old Victorian friend and my schoolmate, Alex.
Mcßae, who was the eldest son of Duncan Mcßae,
•of Victoria, former proprietor of both Glenorchy and
Glenormston stations, and known by the familiar soubriquet
•of the “ raal Duncan ” —a fine specimen of the old typical
highlander. From this letter we learnt that Aleck Mcßae
had while en route, leaving the deserted Camden Harbor
settlement, stayed at Roebuck Bay and agreed to take on
the management for a time, as Mr. Joseph Logue, who had
been managing it, wished to leave and get back to the South.
But after a residence of a few months Aleck’s experienced
eye soon saw there was little prospect of success for the
concern as a pastoral settlement, and shortly gave up the
management, coming on down to where we were with which
district around Roebourne he maintained his connection
and interest till, meeting with a severe illness, death claimed
him. For a few years before his death he represented, with
myself as his colleague, the Northern District in the West


Australian Parliament. I remember hearing Mr. A. Mcßae
relate to us when at our camp rather a thrilling experience
while travelling with a small party, Mr. Joseph Logue,
himself, a couple more, and a Swan River native (black
fellow). They were making across from Roebuck Bay to
the Fitzroy River about ioo miles, and some half way across-
or nearing the Fitzroy they were camped one night, and
natives’ tracks having been observed close around, they took
the precaution after finishing supper of sleeping some 200
yards or so away from their fire, leaving some of their
pack saddles, etc., laying around near the fire, and taking
watch in turns through the night. It happened to be the
Swan River native’s watch about two hours before daylight,
and his quick eye noticed a native dog looking around for
scraps near the fire where supper had been served. So he
came and quietly asked Mr. Logue or Mcßae if he could
have a shot at the native dog, and, getting permission,
he went out some short distance from where the party slept
to get a good shot, when, lo ! he detected a large party of
blacks crouched down on their bellies sneaking up stealthily
on to what they thought were the whites sleeping around
the fire, but which was only the packs and other things.
The Swan River native then lost his head and instead of
quietly arousing his party he fired on the moving mass of
the enemy, which of course fully alarmed them, and they
all escaped, leaving behind them a fine display of clubs,
dowaks and a few spears, but of course taking most of their
spears with them. This was quite close enough to be
pleasant, and I expect the darkies had thought to duplicate
the successful tragedy of less than a year before when
Panter, Harding and Goldwyer were the victims.
Finally, our old friend Mr. Shakespeare Hall took the
management of the Roebuck Bay station, and having urged
on Mr. Bailee and other members of the association the
wisdom of abandoning the enterprise, he brought all the
sheep, stock and party away in the schooner “ Perseverance,’*
and which vessel on her second trip into Cossack Creek
struck on some rocks and there she left her remains, the
reef being known as Perseverance Rocks to this day ; and
thus ended that chapter in North-West settlement, and
Roebuck Bay remained a kind of dead letter till in later


years the Kimberley District was being settled and stocked,
and our own company (the Murray Squatting Co.) when
adding to their flock already established on the Fitzroy
River in 1881 landed a shipment of sheep there, in charge
of Mr. William Paterson, driving them thence across to the
Fitzroy.
So far I have made little more than passing reference
to the early days of settlement in those northern districts
laying south of the Ashburton River, not being personally
familiar with their records, but through the kindness of
two or three friends who were individually concerned with
the early happenings of the Gascoyne and Murchison
districts, I have been able to glean many interesting in-
cidents connected with the earliest settlement of these
districts. I regret that Mr. Charles Brockman has made his
notes and references to the part he took in establishing
the Gascoyne settlement so short, but those who know this
hardy and intelligent old pioneer will remember that he
is a man of action rather than of words and with him to
be up and doing is of more value than talking about it.
He, however, kindly informs me as follows.
Notes of the Gascoyne by Charles S. Brockman.
The settlement was formed in July, 1876, when Mr.
Aubrey Brown, who had taken up a lot of land near the
mouth of the river (on spec.), arrived with about 4,000 sheep
from the York district. I had made arrangements to explore
the country twelve months before that time, but was delayed
owing to want of means, etc. I finally started from the
“ Irwin ” with one white and one native on Ist May, 1876,
going through the Murchison and striking the Gascoyne near
Mt. Clere. After putting in a fortnight there I struck for the
coast, distant about 300 miles, which I reached on the 15th
July, 1876, passing Mr. Brown with his sheep near the
Kennedy Range. I remained with Mr. Brown for a couple
of weeks assisting him to establish his station. I then (in
company with Mr. G. Hamersley, who had in the meantime
come up by the coast route) started to explore the coast
country in the neighborhood of the North-West Cape, dis-
covering the two rivers which I called the Minilya and
Lyndon. Returning to “ Irwin ”by coast route at the end


of September, and starting overland with 3,600 sheep, I
arrived at Rocky Pool, 50 miles from the mouth of the
Gascoyne, on the sth April, 1877. The same year I estab-
lished Boolathana Station, and a few years later the Minilya
Station, selling out and leaving the district in 1885. The
order of settlement as far as I can remember was about as
follows :
Ist. A. Brown.
2nd. C. S. Brockman.
3rd. Gooch and Bunbury and Davis Bros.
4th. Bush, Howard and Sewell.
After that a steady stream of settlement set in. The dist-
rict soon made a name for itself as a good sheep country.
No doubt such a large and important district as the
Gascoyne deserved a much fuller record of its infancy
and growth than Mr. Brockman’s notes give us. I
understand that the brothers Davis, Lionel and Charley
first opened up and settled the country around Mt. Clare,
now forming part of the large pastoral property of R. E.
Bush and that George Gooch and brother settled on the
country and ruus forming the Wandagee Station, while
Aubrey Brown’s station and runs were afterwards sold to>
Messrs. Forrest, Burt & Co., and became known as Brick-
house Station.


UPPER MURCHISON NOTES.
An important link in this sketch of the history of the-
Nor’-West District early settlement has yet to be supplied
from the earlier incidents and events taking place during
the settlement of the Upper Greenough, Sanford and
Murchison Rivers District, for while the expansion of pastoral
settlement and the development of Western Australia’s
immense pastoral areas during the sixties and seventies
were farther north being resolutely pushed out by those
whose venturesome spirits refuse to be confined in those
well-beaten tracks and ruts of the settled occupations and
daily routine of civilised life, there had also been initiated
by the same class of pioneers another colony of advance
settlement starting out from the Geraldton district and
working out towards what is now known as the Upper
Murchison District.
For some years previous to this later trek eastwards
the late Charles Von Bibra had in the face of most adverse
conditions managed to establish a horse and cattle station
down near the mouth of the Murchison River, later known
as Murchison House, but as far as any information I can
obtain guides me their operations do not seem to have
taken them far up the river and the settlement taking place
some years later many miles higher up the Murchison
arose from an independent source.
To the kindness of Mr. Frank Wittenoom I am indebted
for a large portion of the information and facts which follow.
During the early seventies John Perks, then in the employ
of the late Thomas Burges, of the Bowes Station, about
thirty miles from Geraldton, wishing to take a bushman’s
holiday trip and shooting excursion, and with only native
attendants and companions got out as far as Tallerang
Peak —then pronounced by the natives as Thalering —and
does not appear to have reported on his return anything
special in the way of good country. Again on a later
occasion, taking some horses to carry rations and with
natives as attendants, he got up beyond what is now the


Yuin Station, and on his return reported to Mr. Thos.
Burges the existence of promising looking pastoral country
on the Upper Greenough River, and which resulted in Mr.
Burges the following season sending several flocks of sheep
(from the Bowes) to graze, putting them in charge of shep-
herds, with Perks as overseer. Finding that on their return
to be shorn at the Bowes that their condition and the
percentage of lambs was most encouraging and better
than the sheep grazed on the Bowes runs, he resolved to
give this country a closer personal inspection, and so,
accompanied by Mr. Sydney Davis, of Tibradden Station,
and the Rev. C. Howard, they all three started out on
an exploring tour, reaching as far as Yuin in the one
direction and Gabyon on the south branch of the Greenough
in another. On their return Mr. Burges took up on lease
from the government the country which afterwards was
enlarged to the area of the present Yuin Station, and
Mr. T. Davis selected the country now forming a portion of
the Tallerang Station. Following upon this, Mr. Howard’s
son Walter, with Cham Shenton, took up the country now
forming the Gabyon Station, but then known as Mungarra,
and shortly after procured sheep and put on it, Mr. C.
Shenton some time after retiring to go pearling (being
afterwards, while engaged pearl-shell fishing, killed by the
natives). Mr. Fred. Hare (present Commissioner of Police)
then joined Mr. Howard.
About this time or previous in the year 1873 Mr. Thos.
Burges and young Edward, now Sir Edward Wittenoom,
with David Judge made a private trip out seeking for
pastoral country, reaching as far as the Sanford River
and took up a leasehold of the country now comprising
the Murgoo Station, returning via the Murchison River,
travelling in the vicinity of the Ballinoo pools, Mr. Burges
taking up the country around them.
In the year 1874 Sir John Forrest made his expedition
over to South Australia, making his final departure from
the Bowes Station and en route travelled via Murgoo, Boo-
lardy, Moorarrey and Milly Milly stations, though he does
not appear to have been specially impressed with the
pastoral capabilities of that tract of country as far as
reports gave indication.


In the year 1875 Messrs. Edward and Frank Wittenoom
took over some 15,000 sheep from the Bowes Station, and
having arranged for a good long lease of the sheep and country
from Mr. Thos. Burges, they permanently established the
Yuin Station. During this period various droves of stock—
sheep, cattle and horses —were passing along this route in
charge of various owners, either establishing pastoral
noldings and stations in the North-West district or to
augment the numbers of breeding stock on country already
held from Ashburton River to the De Grey, and as Mr. Witte-
noom explains the tax levied on the pastures by these travel-
ling flocks made it rather a disadvantage having country
directly on the route. About this time Mr. Thos. Little with
Mr. Taylor took up the Meeka Station on the Sanford River,
afterwards forming it into the Murchison pastoral country,
with Messrs. W. E. Marmion, W. S. and G. Pearse as chief
partners.
During 1876 —one of many good seasons occurring at
that period—Edward Wittenoom with J. Perks took up
the country now known as Boolardy Station, and which
property Mr. F. Wittenoom holds to this day.
In 1878 Mr. F. Wittenoom, taking again Mr. Perks,
reached as far as where Mileura and Nookawarra stations
are situated, and afterwards established those stations.
In recognition of these and other exploration work, the
government granted Messrs. Edward and Frank Wittenoom
a free lease for three years of an area of 300,000 acres of
pastoral country in that district and which they with Mr.
T. Burges formed into a cattle station on their return to
Murgoo. The exploring party from South Australia, in
command of Ernest Giles, in 1876 reached the head camp
of Messrs. Wittenoom and camped and rested their camels
some weeks near Murgoo Station.
Various other stations were now being formed and
changing hands in this district, Mileura and Nookawarra..
The former afterwards sold to Messrs. Walsh and Sons,
Milly Milly Station by Jas. Aitken, Dallak Station by Tom
O’Grady, afterwards joined by R. D. O’Grady, the Cruik-
shank Bros, also coming over from Victoria and engaging
in squatting about or on Anneau Station.


In 1880 country now known as Belulay close to where
Nannine now stands, being found by F. Wittenoom and
afterwards sold to J. B. Roe and Ernest Lee Steere.
Later the pastoral country now known as Meebijan
Station in the vicinity of Peak Hill, and soon after stocked
with cattle by Messrs. Wittenoom and A. Dempster and
later sold to Clarence Brown, who had brought over a mob
of cattle from the Nor’-West for stocking up country further
south, though but a few years before this date stock were
being driven the opposite way to stock up the Nor’-West
country.
Many other new holdings and pastoral properties were
about this time established, which it would be difficult to
follow, and perhaps not too interesting to outside public,
but sufficient has been related to account for the early
beginnings of far back settlements on the Murchison country.
Mr. Wittenoom seems to say that they found no serious
difficulties in handling the natives and keeping on friendly
terms with them during the earliest days when only those
experienced in pioneer work and new countries had to do
with them, but upon the advent of strangers and new
settlers from other parts, and the natives being spoilt and
their heads turned by a policy of over indulgence at one
time and inexperienced methods of treatment and correction
at another, with much ignorance of their ways, habits,
customs, language, dispositions, etc., the natives began
thence to acquire a familiar kind of contempt for their white
employers, and ceased to look on them with the proper
respect tempered with a proper and reasonable fear which
the superior race should have inspired, and soon showed a
disposition and intention to measure strength and a
determination to drive them out of their country, and
then there was no end of trouble with them for some years,
accompanied by most serious losses to their flocks, and
finally resulting in the memorable and historical visit of
R. M. Fairbairn to the district to report generally on the
treatment to demeanour of the natives on Gascoyne and
Murchison, and the advent of the Rev. Gribble, missionary
and general mischief maker, and finally the celebrated libel
case between Rev. Gribble and the West Australian news-
paper.


By kindness of Mr. W. J. Butcher I glean the following,,
and these notes and incidents are added to th ose given me
by Mr. F. Witienoom :
In the year 1875 Mr. E. W. Butcher—father of the
brothers W. J. and Chas. Butcher —arrived in Fremantle
from Victoria, with the object of seeking country suitable
for Pastoral settlement, and after many enquiries decided
to select, or, as the squatters’ term is, take up, some lease-
holds from the W.A. Government of country in the vicinity
of the Robinson Range, reported to him as being good
looking country. He then returned to Victoria to make
the necessary preparations and arrangements for settling
in W.A., and, meeting with some other gentlemen with
kindred purposes in view, they formed a company, known
then as the Murchison Squatting Co., and Mr. Butcher,
sen., with his son E. W. N. Butcher as manager and re-
presentatives of the having chartered a ship called
the “ Lucy S. Wills,” and purchased a cargo of ewes in
Victoria, with working plant and other stock, they set sail
on their voyage and landed at Geraldton in the year 1876.
Proceeding thence with their newly-imported flock and
plant they set their course for the Upper Murchison, via
the Bowes station, and after a long, trying journey, and in
those days when the black fellows were plentiful and not
too friendly disposed, surface water very scarce, and on
the Murchison mostly salt, it was an undertaking attended
with many difficulties and considerable risk ; but in spite
of both danger and difficulties they, after camping some
time at Messrs. E. and F. W. Wittenoom’s Boolardie station
to rest and recruit their sheep, succeeded in reaching with
their flock some 350 miles back from Geraldton, having
travelled via Sandford River and Murgoo station,
settled on the country afterwards known as Morarrie station,
on the Upper Murchison, and began the important business
of developing their pastoral holding, but after a struggle of
two years with all these adverse forces arrayed against
them, the most serious of which was perhaps that caused
by the hostility of the natives and finding the financial
prospects of the undertaking not too promising, the company
sold out eventually to Dr. Hope and Henry Monger, who
then carried on Morarrie station for some years till the


big drought of ’9i-’92 practically more than half exterminated
their flocks.
Mr. Butcher, sen., then selected the country now known
as Berringarra Station and in the year 1877 Mr. W. J.
Butcher, then only between 17 and 18 years of age, and
his brother Chas. J. Butcher having joined their father in
partnership and taking over the active management, pro-
ceeded to develop this property, first purchasing 2,000 mixed
sheep from Mr. Nat. Cook, at Arino, on the present Midland
Railway line, and travelling them overland to Berringarra,
the journey occupying over three months on the road, but
by careful and skilful droving they landed them with a loss
of only 42 all told. The progress of the brothers Butcher
during the ensuing two years, they informed me, was quite
satisfactory, the seasons being good and the natives having
by careful handling becoming better disposed and even
being made useful at station work ; but here again the
financial aspect of the question intruded its unwelcome
presence and again was the frequent experience of those
who engage in the early development work of building up
far back sheep stations tasted. Initial outlay, long cartage
to port adding a heavy premium to all articles of consump-
tion and use as also to the cost of getting wool or stock to
markets, added to which the fact that in those early days
there were no financial institutions prepared to make large
advances on stock and station holdings and the settlers
could only appeal to two or three firms of merchants, which
in Geraldton were confined to Messrs. Charles Crowther
and Co. and Scott and Gale, and so it was often found
most difficult to finance any large pastoral enterprise
through its earlier stages when profits were out of the
question. Finally the Messrs. Butcher Bros, decided -to
sell out to Messrs. Smith and Campbell, and later on the
natives, waking up to the fact that the intrusion of the
white race looked like a permanent job, became exceedingly
troublesome, killing and driving away the sheep in numbers
and harassing the settlers and their flocks in a most per-
sistent manner, and the losses from this cause were very
disheartening and Messrs. Smith and Campbell, after
struggling along for a few years, again sold out to Mr.
Darlot, sen., in the year ’Bl or ’B2, and who, with his three


sons, Everard, Lennard and Harry, took over the place
and began a vigorous policy of development and improve-
ments, poor Harry Darlot some years after falling a victim
to a boat accident on the Swan near Crawley, Perth, and
Mr. Darlot, sen., being deceased, the two sons, Everard and
Lennard, have up to this day retained their interest in
Berringarra Station.
Next, in 1878, W. J. Butcher, with his father,
organising a small private exploration party, with the
object of finding a shorter route to port in the vicinity of the
lower Gascoyne, struck off towards the Upper Gascoyne
and followed it down to the sea, where Carnarvon now
stands, reaching there about a year or so after Charles
Brockman and Aubrey Brown had established sheep stations
on the Lower Gascoyne country, where Boolathana and
Brickhouse Stations are now situated. What Mr. W. J.
Butcher saw and noted of the Lower Gascoyne country
resulted in his later on settling there and taking up country
and some years afterwards, in partnership with J ohn
Brockman, purchasing Boolathana Station from Charles
Brockman, and now with his brother Charles Butcher
he holds considerable pastoral interests in the district.


THE KIMBERLEY DISTRICT.
Having brought the eariler history of the Nor’-West
settlements up to more modern times, it is now appropriate
to introduce a sketch of the early history and settlement
of the Kimberley districts. As I have only personal know-
ledge of its earliest incidents, I may omit much that would
be interesting, through not having heard them.
I believe it was in 1879 that it was thought by some
that an effort should be made to discover something about
the character of the country lying between Roebuck Bay
and the Leopold Ranges, and thence on to Camden Harbor,
and also the country on the Fitzroy River. As Mr. Alex.
Forrest had been carrying out some surveys in the North-
West district where the subject was being discussed, he,
having the spirit of the explorer strongly developed, ex-
pressed his willingness to lead a party with the object of
traversing this extensive and little known belt of country.
The De Grey firm of Messrs. Grant, Anderson and Edgar
and Richardson and Edgar, of Pyramid Station and other
Nor’-West stations, also Withnell, Fisher, Pyramid, McKay
and Karatha station, having offered to supply some of the
horses, and the W.A. Government being agreeable to
assist the expedition in the interests of geographical and
geological science, the party was organised. They made
their final start from the De Grey Station, travelling along
the coast or within a few miles of it till striking the Fitzroy
Rivers, which the party followed for nearly 200 miles.
They then made • for the Leopold Ranges, where their
difficulties really began, ultimately finding it nearly im-
possible to penetrate those ranges, Mr. Forrest decided
to return to the Fitzroy River and explore the country
up that river, following it up to its sources. They then
struck across for the Port Darwin telegraph line, following
the line to Port Darwin. As is now well-known and a
matter of history, some fine pastoral country was met with
on the trip, more especially on the Fitzroy, Ord and Margaret
Rivers. Mr. Forrest in his first progress report mentioned


also a good stretch of pastoral country parallel with the
coast as lying between the De Grey River and La Grange
Ba y, but in this he was mistaken as to the character of
the country, as, being attracted by his favorable report, I
made a special trip up from Fremantle to Cossack by sea
and, with my brother-in-law, Mr. Pierce Wellard, who was
then in the North-West, we followed Mr. Forrest’s route
nearly to La Grange Bay, but were disappointed with the
style of country. It was found to be low-lying flats of rather
calcaieous 01 marly soil, yielding only coarse grass or salt
glass flats like portions of Roebuck Bay country, and
though afterwards tried with sheep it did not prove a success.
However, good country was discovered and made known
on the Fitzroy and Ord Rivers, and the possibilities of
pastoral settlement up there was discussed with a few friends
resident in the south and west districts, notably Messrs.
William Paterson, now manager of the Agricultural Bank,
his brother George Paterson, of Creaton, Pinjarrah, Mr!
S. L. R. Elliott, now of Oakabella Station, near Geraldton,
but then a young man of 18 years not long from England
and living with the writer at Serpentine gaining colonial
experience, and Mr. Hamlet Cornish, of Pinjarrah, whose
family had been many years residents of Pinjarrah and
district. After making plans, we resolved in the year 1880
to form a piivate company including the above names,
tit up a small vessel at Fremantle, buy sheep and live stock,
and, landing the stock at Beagle Bay, drive them across the
Peninsular and make for this new El Dorado on the Fitzroy
River. Excited, no doubt, by the same glowing accounts
in Mr. Alex. Forrest’s journal and possibly
stimulated into action by our example, other enterprising
spirits began to form plans and project enterprises with
the same objects in view as ourselves, amongst whom
certain names and well-known personalities occur to me,
who afterwards became interested in pastoral enterprises
in Kimberley district, either as working or sleeping partners
in the various companies formed. Amongst whom, speaking
from memory only, were the brothers Edward, John and
William McLarty, W. E. Marmion, M.L.A., Silas Pearse,
M.L.A., and his brother George Pearse, Robert Sholl, M.L.C.!
Alex. Forrest, M. C. Davies, I. and S. Emanuel, who went


from Sydney direct to Kimberley with a considerable
shipment of sheep, etc., William Lukin, Frank Monger,
Theodore Lowe, Couchers of the Williams River, the
Barnetts, Gregory, George Rose and his several brothers,
and many others I do not remember, all of whom took
more or less prominent parts in forming, establishing and
developing the settlement in West Kimberley. I am not
at present touching the settlement of East Kimberley,
which was initiated and begun by settlers who brought
cattle over from Queensland to the Ord River, several mem-
bers of the Durack family being the first, also Mr. Panton,
many years magistrate in Melbourne, with Jas. Munroe,
Messrs. Connor and Doherty and others.
I must not omit to mention the part played by another
old pioneer, Julius G. Brockman, for while others were
discussing the prospects of pastoral settlement in Kimberley
and making plans and forming companies to occupy and
take possession of the pastoral lands made known through
Mr. Alex. Forrest’s exploring party and his journal —
which party, by the way, had Arthur Hicks, afterwards
gold warden at Dundas, as second in command —Julius
Brockman, with his characteristic promptness, energy and
dash, took the bull by the horns, engaged a small coasting
craft, popped a small shipment of some 300 or 400 sheep
into her, and taking charge of the expedition himself, sailed
right away (from Cossack I think) for Beagle Bay, landed
his stock there. He made a hut of stone and formed a
depot, intending later on to make over to the Fitzroy
when his sheep reached more important numbers. When
our party, consisting of George Paterson in charge, with
Sam Elliott, Hamlet Cornish, and T. McAtee and two
Swan River natives landed at Beagle Bay, they found
Julius Brockman’s little camp already there, and so they
joined forces. After a month or two temporary residence
(a portion of the time at Lake Louisa), and making a pie-
liminary horseback trip over the Fitzroy and across to
the May and Meda Rivers to inspect the country, they
decided to drive all the stock across to the Fitzroy. This-
they successfully accomplished, though water was scarce
on the track. And so in April, 1891, some seventeen years
after the first settlers landed at Cossack or Nicol Bay,


the first mob of sheep was landed on the Fitzroy River,
being the forerunner of many other lots to follow.
To carry on the further development of our own ex-
pedition in the following year, we arranged for another
vessel and contracted for the purchase of some 1,300 ewes
and some draught mares from Messrs. Richardson and
Edgar, of Pyramid Station, Mr. J. E. Richardson being then
manager. Shipping these at Cossack, Mr. W. Paterson
having taken the management of this second shipment,
landed them at Roebuck Bay and drove them across to the
Fitzroy River, sinking some wells en route as he went across
Mr. J. P. Wellard, who was then establishing and developing
Boodarie Station for himself and myself, accompanied him
in order to judge if Kimberley offered better prospects
than the older Nor’-West district, but after inspection
decided to remain where he was at Boodarie. Mr. George
Paterson had then returned to Pinjarrah after twelve months
of residence at Kimberley, and William Paterson took
charge for a few months, but did not appear to be impressed
with the suitability of the Lower Fitzroy country for sheep.
The grass was rather too rank and seemed more of a cattle
country. The final result was that after a discussion amongst
the partners and a later inspection and trip up to the
settlement myself, we decided to accept an offer for the
whole concern, known as the Yeeda station from a buyer,
Mr. A. Games, who held adjoining country and intended
forming a large cattle station as well as sheep. This he
later on most successfully carried out, though, as in so
many pioneer enterprises, it did not yield much return for
the first five years, but rather involved a large outlay and
some anxiety as to ultimate success.
Meantime, as I have indicated, other parties arrived —
the Kimberley Pastoral Co., John and William McLarty,
managers ; the Meeda River Pastoral Co. ; J. H. Monger
and Co., William Lukin in charge; the Couchers and
Barnetts ; a Mr. May and Mr. Poulton ; the brothers Em-
anuel arriving also with an important shipment of ewes
from Sydney.' Mr. George Rose, the first of the Rose
family to visit the Kimberley district, came then, and so did
several others, resulting in the permanent settlement of the
West Kimberley district both with sheep and cattle though


it was found that the best sheep country was higher up
the river and not on the rich, luxuriant grassy flats down
on the lower coastal country and overflowing deltas of the
river. Amongst the earlier visitors to the young settlement
to inspect country and judge of its prospects was Mr. Panton,
so many years Police Magistrate of Melbourne.
I would like now to retrace a little in order to mention
a few important incidents in connection with the earlier
history of West Kimberley, one being the first serious trouble
with the natives. Our small party of settlers had to keep
very close watch on both the attitude and doings of the
aborignial natives, for they were around in considerable
numbers, well armed, and preserving a somewhat independ-
ent attitude, though often frequenting the camp in an
outwardly friendly demeanour. Our party having, had
some experience of natives were careful to try and prove to
them that they wanted to be friends and that no harm was
meant to them in any way. But, of course, savages are
jealous of the first intursion of an alien race into their
country and hunting grounds.
I would like here to make it clear and bring it home
to a large class of well-meaning philanthropists who get
terribly astray in their judgment of the whole moral and
political aspect of this question as to where lies the respon-
sibility of wresting from these savages and taking pos-
session of the countries so many centuries in their
undisturbed possession and who, for the great purpose
of creation and of the Creator to make fruitful the earth
and habitable for man, not in his savage state, but in a
higher form of development, make no effort to fulfil
this destiny. I say then that the responsibility of taking
possession of these lands rests with the flag, with the
nation, with the British people, while the individual settler
merely occupies on the authority, under the instructions,
and in accordance with legal rights, granted him by the
King, acting through the Prime Minister and Parliament
of his country. He has a right, therefore, to expect that,,
as he pays all rents, taxes and impositions levied by such
State authorities for the use of his lands, and is seeking to
make them productive and to add to the wealth of the nation,
he will be protected, or if stern necessity arise be
allowed to protect himself against those who challenge his.


right and seek to assert a rebel authority over the territory
granted him by his nation. Otherwise, let England and all
nations leave these countries alone to the undisturbed
possession of either the Australian, the African, or the
New Guinea savages.
We may now resume our story. I have mentioned that
in the employ of the party were two Swan River natives..
One day one of these natives, “ Neah,” was out on the
plain shepherding the sheep while the party were in at the
station busy with the work of shearing the first little clip
and other occupations, and at the dinner hour were camped
under the shade of a tree, having lunch about 200 yards or
more from the camp, where the provisions, firearms, etc.,
were located. A few natives approached the little company
(consisting of George Paterson, Samuel Elliott, Hamlet
Cornish, McAtie, and, I am not sure but I fancy, another
of the party). The natives showed apparently quite
friendly intention and were allowed to come within forty
or fifty yards. The first ones laid down their spears
and were shortly afterwards joined by a few others coming
along in little parties. They gradually moved up closer and
in a nonchalant kind of way retained their spear in their
hand and sat down until there were a dozen or more. Others
being at a water hole a short distance away.
Mr. Hamlet Cornish’s quick eye noticing that the natives
sitting down were gradually edging and shuffling nearer the
party and detecting a rather excited restless look in their
eyes, mentioned it to Mr. Paterson, who rather laughed
at his suspicions and asked if he were nervous. At last,
Hamlet, feeling satisfied that they were edging up and
bringing their spears with them, jumped up and said, “ Those
natives are up to something. lam going for my rifle.”
George Paterson remarked “ If you feel frightened,
Hamlet, you had better do so.”
Previous to this the natives had been trying to excite
the curiosity of the party and lead them from the camp
by telling them that a large alligator was down at the pool
and they wanted to spear it. Mr. Cornish on reaching the
main camp, took up his rifle and stood there with it in his-
hand, and the natives seeing they were suspected shortly
made some excuse and left. Nothing else happened till


evening, when they found that “ Neah ” did not come
home with the sheep, and, going out to look for him, they
discovered his murdered body on the plain. They then
realised that at the very time the natives were at their
camp and very nearly close enough to make their onslaught,
the native shepherd “ Neah ” had already been murdered
by them. So but for the alertness and mistrust of Hamlet
Cornish, in a few moments more they had been all thrust
through with many spears.
Not long after this the same natives did succeed in
murdering Tony Cornish, the younger brother of Hamlet,
resulting in a body of police, assisted by the settlers, spending
many weeks in hunting and tracking up the guilty
ringleaders, some of whom were caught, tried in Perth
in the Supreme Court, and hanged.
About two years after the first arrival of permanent
settlers on the Fitzroy, an important survey party was
organised and sent out by John Forrest, then Commissioner
of Lands. He and his brother Alex, accompanied them
with the object of examining personally some of the country,
and also to ascertain if a more suitable port than Derby
could be found in King’s Sound, there being an idea that
Port Lsbourne possibly might be found a better centre to
serve the settlement as a port than Derby.
A somewhat interesting and notable incident occurred
in connection with this expedition, though of rather an
unfortunate nature. The whole of the survey party with
some forty or more horses, were embarked on the steamer
“ Macedon,” owned by James Lilly and Co., which sailed
from Fremantle in, I believe, March, 1883. She only got
off Rottnest when, sailing too close in, she struck on a
straggling rock and stuck fast. Fortunately, the weather
was fine and all the party and horses, etc., were safely dis-
charged into large lighters next day, and the “ Macedon ”
remained a wreck. The only steamer then available to
continue the expedition was the old “ Rob Roy,” of the
capacity of 200 tons, and into this they managed to squeeze
the whole of the party, together with a large number of
passengers, in all about forty saloon passengers and thfe
forty odd horses, fodder, survey equipment, etc. Having
decided I should visit our settlement and deliver over the


■station and stock to the agent of the purchaser, I obtained
permission from Mr. John Forrest (not at that time knighted)
to accompany his survey party, and he also kindly promised
me a horse to ride across from Roebuck Bay to the Fitzroy
River. With the second start in the old “ Rob Roy ”
I had the honor of accompanying the party. In March the
weather on the northern coast was fairly sultry and it was
much like being couped up in a tank. However, after
putting out sundry passengers at Cossack, the “ Rob Roy ”
:successfully landed the survey party and all the horses at
Roebuck Bay, now known as Broome. John Forrest and
Alex. Forrest, T. Collins (who had been on several survey
parties with John Forrest when on active work in the field
in the Gascoyne district), a Swan River native and myself
having selected some of the horses, started on ahead of the
main staff for the Fitzroy River. In going across we found
the mosquitoes pretty thick and full of energy and per-
severance.
Arriving at the Yeeda Station after about a five days’
jaunt (about ioo miles), we were pleased to meet Hamlet
Cornish, then in charge of our own party (Sam Elliott
having gone to Fremantle with the natives arrested for the
murder of Tony Cornish in capacity of interpreter),
we also had the pleasure of meeting some of the other
Kimberley settlers, Willie Lukin, Frank Monger, Theo.
Lowe, the McLartys (who then had the K.P.C. main
•camp at Loolingye, towards Mt. Anderson, as it was
after this date they established their head station
at Liveringa). Just at this time the Government had
decided to establish a Government Resident at Derby, and
this responsible post was entrusted to Mr. Robt. Fairbairn,
for many years P.M. for Fremantle. He was to arrive in
the barque “ Amur ” (Capt. O’Grady), which ship was to
go by sea to Pt. Usbourne to meet John Forrest there
with his land party.
I should here mention that if the disaster to the
“ Macedon ” was unfortunate from many points of view,
the delay enabled the geologist, Mr. Hardman, to arrive
from England or Ireland just in time to catch the delayed
departure of the “ Rob Roy.” To that incident we can
credit the discovery of gold in the Kimberley district earlier


tKan it probably would but for his arrival. Mr. Hardman’s
investigations with the survey party gave indications that
gold would probably be found in the Kimberley district.
He got colors himself and indicated on his geological chart
many likely localities, most of which were verified by the
researches of prospectors.
Leaving Yeeda Station, after delivering over the stock
and station to the buyers’ representative, who was Mr. A.
Forrest himself, I accompanied Mr. John Forrest, Mr.
Hardman, geologist, Collins and Swan River native Aleck
(Mr. A. Forrest remaining on the Yeeda Station) on the
trip to find out and inspect Port Usbourne. It was an
interesting trip, though not actually of the pleasant variety,
as the mosquitoes were plentiful, and the horses, off a
voyage and quiet unclimatised, would not stand the work.
So by the time we had been eight or ten days out most of
us were walking turn about, some horses knocking up,
and one horse was drowned in his hobbles in one of the
deep pools of the Robinson River. I was not much im-
pressed with the country between the Meda River and
Port Usbourne and on the lower branches of the Robinson,,
afterwards formed into the Obagamma cattle station.
Though there was plenty of long grass and water and
running streams, it gave me the impression of being not only
too rank for sheep but probably not a fattening country
for cattle, though they would likely breed there well enough
and increase. The horses certainly did not thrive on it.
When we searched within about seven miles of the actual
port we found the ranges so rough and precipitous that
we had to leave the horses in camp in charge of Collins and
native. Sir John, Mr. Hardman and myself started off on
foot to get to the actual port and see if the barque “ Amur ”
was there, and a fine bit of Alpine climbing it was. It
took us from morning of one day to mid-day of the following
day to reach the spot and back to camp. Poor Mr. Hardman,
too recently from Ireland and not broken into bush work,
was dead beat, and we almost feared of getting him back
safely. But it was a rough task in the bush that Sir John
Forrest, then in the prime of life, could not carry through..
In travelling in the bush with Sir John Forrest one was
struck with characteristics that stood out prominently..


His buoyant hopefulness of disposition, nothing seeming to
make him depressed or to lose heart, was marked. He was
always apparently in a cheerful mood and determined to
'look upon the best side of any situation or difficulty. These
traits have also strongly marked the history of his later
political life in the various distinguished positions he has
since occupied.
On our return journey we reached one of the sheep
stations on the Meda and within some thirty-five miles from
Derby. As the party intended travelling on up the Meda,
and I wanted to catch the barque “ Amur ” to return as
far as Cossack in her, I left the party to ride back to Derby.
As the vessel did not start for a few days, I journeyed on
back to Yeeda Station, Mr. George Rose having taken
■on the management of it for Mr. Games. Since then many
fresh cattle and sheep stations have become established
in West Kimberley, and the Kimberley Pastoral Company’s
station Liveringa, under the management of,Willie McLarty
for a number of years, has ultimately increased to nearly
100,000 sheep and some thousands of cattle, and is now
under the management of Percy Rose.
The East Kimberley district was established more by
settlers bringing cattle over to it from Queensland and South
Australia. Prominent amongst these are the family of the
Duracks, who drove cattle some thousands of miles from
‘Queensland, also Messrs. Osmand and Panter, who es-
tablished a cattle station on the Ord River, and also Messrs.
Connor and Doherty, who entered into partnership with the
Duracks. These have had to pass through the various
-experiences, trials and hardships of pioneer settlement
with the additional difficulties of their station being 200
•or 300 miles inland from their port, which for East Kimberley
is Wyndham. To that place, somewhere about 1883 or
1884, the West Australian Government established a
resident magistrate, and formed a townsite. From this
port now are shipped the largest supplies of fat cattle
that come into Fremantle from Kimberley or the North,
though, I believe, West Kimberley shipping from Derby
runs a very good second. Three specially chartered steam-
ers, carrying 500 to 600 head of fat cattle on each trip are
kept constantly running between Wyndham and Fremantle


from March to November by the three firms of Forrest,.
Emanuel; Connor, Doherty and Durack, Ltd. ; and
Copley and Co. So East Kimberley as well as West Kim-
berley has become an important source of meat supply
for the metropolitan and goldfields markets, West Kimberley
also shipping down a fair number of sheep as well as cattle.
The difficulty of Shipping first Wool Clips, and the
Founding of Derby.
I am indebted to Mr. R. S. Elliott for the following
additional particulars and incidents connected with the
early days of Kimberley :
After the arrival of the Murray Squatting Co., Kimberley
Pastoral Co., and others, and the consequent growth of
the sheep industry, the shipment of wool with a view to
placing it on the London market became urgent. Our
nearest known port frequented by shipping was Cossack,
and we were dependent wholly for the carriage of our stores
and the shipment of our wool to the kindly services of the
pearlers, when at the end of the pearling season they came
to Beagle Bay and King Sound to return their native
divers. Mr. N. Bryan, a leading pearler, who had brought
stores for us in 1888, reported deep water close and a good
anchorage near Mary Island in King Sound, and informed
us that, provided the land carriage could be arranged, there
would be no difficulty in shipping wool at the point. Pre-
vious to this the first season’s clip had been taken on board
a thirty-ton lugger some twelve miles higher up the river,
which was difficult of access and moreover dangerous.
An inspection of the land journey to the point named by
Mr. Bryan disclosed a fairly easy road but total absence
of water. To overcome this we decided to test the country
for water, and T. P. McLarty, and myself set out with
tools and a fortnight’s supplies, and put down a well at the
nearest point of the Pindan stretching down to the Marsh
at the spot where now stands the town of Derby. We
were fortunate in striking a good supply of potable although
brackish water, which opened up the North and made the
shipment of wool possible. Having finished the well on
a Saturday, McLarty and Elliott spent the following day
in cutting and erecting a beacon pole, which they carried


with great labor out of the Pindan and erected on edge of
mangrove beach as a guide to any boat that might be sent
for their wool. More was to come from their simple effort
than was then apparent. About this time the Government
of the day decided that the prospects of the new settlement
were sufficiently encouraging to demand the formation of a
township and the establishment of a Resident Magistrate,,
with police at his disposal. Mr. R. Fairbairn, R.M. at
Fremantle, was selected for the responsible position, and
the barque “ Amur ” was chartered and fitted out with
horses and necessary equipment for organising and estab-
lishing the new centre. A survey party was attached to
the expedition, with Mr. Brooking, Surveyor-General, and
Mr. H. T. Johnston second in command, whose mission
was to survey the new township, traverse rivers and tribu-
taries, and make a general trigometrical survey of the
country. The first port examined was Roebuck Bay, now
known as Broome, and which has since become the head
centre of the pearling fleet and the landing place of the
telegraphic cable connecting Western Australia with Europe
via Bango-Wangie. Although the harbor at Roebuck Bay
left nothing to be desired, it was wisely decided that the
position was too remote to be of service to the new settlement
on the Fitzroy. Leaving Roebuck Bay, the “ Amur
proceeded to examine Collier Bay, to the north of King’s
Sound, where it was considered that Usbourne might be
suitable for that purpose, but the land approaches were
found to be unsatisfactory and as in the case of Roebuck
Bay the position was too remote from the settlement.
Turning to the southward once more, the “ Amur ”
made her way slowly round the shores of King’s Sound
to Mary Island, where she fortunately sighted the beacon
placed in position by Messrs. J. P. McLarty and S. R. L.
Elliott to mark the position of the well and proposed shipping
place for their wool. As the supply of water on the “ Amur ”
for the stock had become almost exhausted, a party was land-
ed, who succeeded in finding the well. The horses and
equipment for the party were put ashore, and after inspection
it was decided by Mr. Fairbairn to fix the new townsite at
this spot. It was named Derby, after the then Minister
for the Colonies, Lord Derby. It has since served as the


shipping port for the whole of the West Kimberley district,
and the above short account will show to what accidental
•circumstances the choice was due
This little history would be incomplete v/ithout some
fuller reference to the earty settlement of East Kimberley
direct from those who took part in it, and I am indebted to
the kindness of the Messrs. Durack Brothers, who with their
father and cousins can claim to be the original pioneers of
East Kimberley, and they relate as follows :
Our attention was first attracted to West Australia
by the notices that appeared in Eastern papers of the late
Mr. Alex. Forrest’s expedition across West Australia.
Mr. Patrick Durack, father of the present Duracks of
the firm of C. Durack and Durack just about then sold out
of considerable properties that he possessed in Western
Queensland, of which he was the original pioneer some
twenty years previously, sought after fresh areas of Aus-
tralian wilds to subdue and make ready for the habitation
•of the white man.
About the end of 1880 or early 1881 shortly after Mr.
Alex. Forrest’s return from his Kimberley expedition, two
members of the Durack family came over to Perth and
there met Mr. Alex. Forrest, on whose representation of
the wealthy resources of the Kimberleys they took up large
tracts of country both in East and West Kimberley. To
further test the capabilities of this country funds (contributed
to principally by Mr. Emanuel, sen., father of present
Messrs. S. and J. Emanuel, and Mr. Patrick Durack, father
•of the Duracks of C. D. and D.) were provided and an
•expedition was organised under the leadership of Mr.
Michael Durack, since deceased. Amongst the party were
Mr. Sid. Emanuel, of Forrest, Emanuel and Co., Mr. Thomas
Kilfoyle, Mr. Pentecost, Mr. Jose, Davidson, two native
boys, with provisions for six months, twenty-seven horses,
packs, equipment, etc., they set out from Sydney on a boat
called the “ Vortigen ” and chartered for this purpose.
The first night out the machinery* of “ Vortigen ” breaks
down, which necessitated return to Sydney. Some little
delay then ensued, when the “ Vortigen ” is replaced by
the “ Volmer,” which in due time landed them safely in
Port Darwin. Here they secured a small craft called the


Levuka,” a sailing boat. After a wearisome voyage of
twelve days they landed on the west side of Cambridge
Gulf, opposite the present township of Wyndham, consider-
able difficulty being experienced in landing, the horses
having to wade through a quagmire, marsh and mud.
Their travelling for the first week or two was attended
with great difficulty, owing to the rough and hilly nature
of the country traversed since their landing.
Rivers now showing on the map as “ Pentecost,”
■” Durack,” “ Dunham,” and “ Bow ” —all large well-
watered streams running into Cambridge Gulf, were named
by this expedition.
After travelling some weeks in a partly south-easterly
direction the party reached the Ord River at a point known
as the Red Butt, about 140 miles from its mouth. Following
up the course of the Ord River in southerly direction they
found one of Mr. Alex. Forrest’s marked trees, the first
evidence of the white man’s trespass, but a welcome land
mark to weary explorers traversing for the first time an
unknown country.
Directing their course shortly after leaving the junction
of the Ord and Negri Rivers they travelled partly south-west,
passing in or about the vicinity of what is known as Hall’s
Creek Gold Fields.
The party, after a tedious and trying journey of nearly
six months and attended with the usual share of the pioneer
explorers’ hardships, eventually reached Beagle Bay,
hungry, foot-sore and weary. Few of the twenty-seven
horses survived the five or six months’ rough march through
the rough and rugged country they met with at times.
Horses suffering much through the fact that they lost most
of their shoes, the party being obliged during the latter
stages of the journey to beat out copper rivets, which acted
as temporary substitutes for horse shoe nails. Members of
the party, too, suffered much for want of boots, substitute
for which had to be provided from the leather of their pack
saddles. Game was plentiful, but most of their ammunition
had to be abandoned in the earlier stages of their journey,
as well as much of their commissariat, resulting in a very
considerable addition to their hardships through short
rations thus being imposed.


No time was lost after return of the party before
the Duracks set about in earnest to occupy their newly
acquired territory.
Mr. Patrick Durack, father of the present Duracks of
C. D. and D., Ltd., started from Queensland about 4,000'
head of breeders early in 1883, one lot consisting of about
2,500 head travelled under the charge of Mr. John Durack
who met his sad death at the hands of the natives shortly
after his return in 1886, the balance of 1,500 in charge of a
Mr. Moore, of New South Wales. In close proximity to this-
lot there travelled another 2,000 breeders, under charge of
Messrs. Kilfoyle and Hays, owners Durack, Kilfoyle and
Hays, who were the original proprietors of the Rosewood
Station, on the borders of W.A. and Northern Territory,,
this Mr. Durack, since dead, being ruthlessly shot down
by natives in his bed, while Mr. Kilfoyle died recently in
Port Darwin, December, 1908. About the same time were
started another 2,000 breeders, owners Lumley Hill and
Durack, the former one of the original pioneers and for
many years a member of the Queensland Assembly ; the
latter leader of the expedition in Kimberley, 1882. In
charge of this lot was Michael J. Durack, now of Hill and
Durack, Lissadell Station, and at present living at Cottesloe.
After a most protracted and trying journey of some two years
and eight months the respective parties reached their
destination on the fertile banks of the Ord River, August,
1885, but with numbers considerably reduced, being about
half of what they started with. Labor was very scarce and
expensive in those days and men were not disposed to venture
into an unknown territory and on a hazardous undertaking
except under strong inducement. The party met with
many difficulties on their march, through floods, droughts
and native reprisals, as well as much suffering from fever
whilst passing through the Gulf country on the borders of
Queensland and Northern Territory, which accounted for
the deaths of some of their men. An advance guard was
for the last 300 to 400 miles employed in prospecting a road.
It was estimated that for every animal landed its cost per
head amounted to not less than £lO, added to which there
must elapse some years of profitless and expensive waiting
before returns can be looked for from any export and sale


of fat beef, but all such items in the game, the toil and
hardship, sacrifice and risk of life, a hot sultry climate,
with mosquito and fly accompaniments, absence of the
comforts of civilisation, with years of lonely isolation in
the far and distant back country are soon lost sight of and
forgotten by our up-to-date legislators and electors, should
they begin to suspect that these poineer pastoralists are
at last getting some return from their enterprise and patient
enduring and soon an ungrateful haste is displayed in
minimising such profits by vexatious legislation intended
to hamper and penalise him and considerably lessen his
prospects of profits in the future.
Following on the initiative of the Durack family, other
settlers followed with their herds, amongst whom we may
note those of Osmund, Panton and others.


GENERAL REFLECTIONS.
The pioneer and pastoral occupation of portions of Aus-
tralia’s immense territory having been in the earlier stages of
her history of extreme importance to her, it may be both
pertinent and interesting to enquire as to what degree those
pioneers who led the van and who blazed the track for
Australian settlement to follow, are entitled to recognition and
how far worthy of appreciation by the country which may
have grown into importance or even greatness out of those
far back and dimly remembered beginnings, and whether,
too, the pastoralist calling and occupation and the industry
itself is entitled to or is worthy of protection, legislation or
even generous treatment from Australian Governments and
people, or whether—the spirit that more frequently moves
our more up-to-date politicians—to deal out short shrift
and little quarter to all and sundry who may belong to the
class of settlers considered to be pastoralists, is the right
attitude for any politician desiring the confidence and
respect of his country and her people. The justification
usually pleaded on behalf of this more summary method
of wiping out and dismissing all pastoral lessees, is usually
that they have already had a long enough and cheap enough
lease of the people’s national, estate, the land, and anything
they may have made or accumulated through the grazing
rights they have held over these lands has been by virtue
of a kind of legalised theft, and that they have for years
enjoyed privileges that never should have been allowed
them, and only were allowed under great misconception
of what the country was giving away or through class in-
fluences in former days and that seeing they got hold of
rights and privileges in former days that modern
legislative wisdom and higher political principles would never
dream of allowing to any individuals, that the legislatures
of to-day would therefore be justified in retracting these rights
and either repudiating the contracts the government of the
day had assented to, or otherwise loading them up with
second thought restrictions, taxes, conditions, or provisos,
as to virtually amount to a repudiation of the conditions of
their leases without the consent or sanction of the second
party to such leases, and no doubt the spirit of some of our


modern legislators is such, that it can do these kind of things
without a blush or a moral twinge of conscience. It might
then be instructive if we seek to carry ourselves back in
thought for a space of years and review the actual position
and look at the commercial aspect of the question and
the situation as it then stood. And as we are writing West
Australian history we may be allowed to confine our ex-
amples to her territory, merely remarking that the earlier
pastoral history of the other states was somewhat similar,
except that the West Australian pioneer had not by any
means an equally promising future before him and the
country he tackled was from a pastoral standpoint distinctly
inferior to, say, a great portion of New South Wales and a
great deal though not all of Queensland —possibly South
Australian conditions in her Northern areas more nearly
resemble those of Western Australia. Well, then, for many
years this large pastoral territory laid there partially un-
known and very distinctly unsought after, and even after
it was known for many years very few indeed were anixous
to tackle the problem of occupying or stocking these little
known wilds. But without pressing that plea, the political
and even the moral aspect of the problem is this—whatever
the terms and the privileges were that the government of
the country offered to any and all that would go out and
occupy and stock up these lands, these offers were open to all.
There was no privileged class among the people to whom the
offers or terms of ’the leases were confined; anyone
who cared or dared to go could claim the privileges by
complying with the conditions. Was then the field rushed
with applicants eager to profit by occupying such cheap
land ? History records rather the opposite, and only the
few among the more venturous or enterprising spirits
accepted the terms. But it may yet be replied that only
those with considerable means or some capital could take
advantage of the terms. That up to a certain point is true,
but the facts of history also give to that reply an ugly knock,
as very many of those with some capital and who put it
all into the venture emerged out of it, some after five years’
struggle and effort, some after ten, some after fifteen years,.
minus their capital, and, what was more impossbile to
replace, minus the best years of their life ; while others who-


did go with very little means, often as servants and station
hands, working for others, came out in the end successful.
But what these facts go to establish firmly and indisputably
is this, that the terms or the privileges offered were not in
the first place so gilt-edged as to be rushed by eager volun-
teers, nor were they such as to secure financial success to a
large proportion of the pioneers who entered the contract
and took up their lease ; in fact we could cite so many
failures financially during the first twenty years of settle-
ment at the north as to probably over balance the
successful ones, and these not of mere new chums without
the essential experience nor the practical ability, but often
from the result of early pioneer difficulties —bad season’s
initial outlay usually so heavy, and expensive during the
development stages of both station and farm. So the
argument or plea that the terms and privileges enjoyed
by pastoralists during the early years of their tenure were so
gilt-edged and one-sided that they should not be shown
too tender consideration in later years, falls absolutely to
the ground when examined in the light of the facts. But
another important consideration yet remains—a considerable
proportion of present day lessees never did partake of any
of these earlier so-called privileges, for they paid for in
cash whatever was the value of the unexpired tenure of the
pastoral leases they now hold, and bought and paid for them
in the confidence and belief of future governments acting
in good faith and carrying out their side of the contract
and not of being guilty of either partial or actual repudiation.
So the title of all the pioneer pastoralists to some generous
consideration at the hands of the country is that they
performed and carried through enterprises that very few
at the time were disposed to tackle—the difficulties, the
character of the life, the isolation, the hardships and dangers
were there for a certainty and had to be reckoned with
and now they can, as a result of their labours, point
to a country occupied, settled, made valuable and
productive and a big national asset, and which if
left in its native condition until those who are loudest in
’enouncing its present occupation by pastoralists had gone
■iw th and conquered it, would have to this day remained an
uninhabited wilderness.




£ /
1508
01498926


