

Gariy < —
Closing
dm.
DRAFTED BY
THE^>
Early • Closing - Association
New South Wales.
price chreeperjce.
Sydney:
W. R. Winsor, General Machine Printer,
10 Imperial Arcade.


THE OFFICERS
OF THE
Early Closing Association of New
South Wales.
President:
Alfred Allen, Esq., J.P., Lawson.
Vice=Presidents
Miss Rose Scott, Sydney;
Messrs. R. J. Morgan, Newcastle;
„ J. Barnard, Tamworth ;
S. F. Tanner, Bathurst ;
„ T. R. B. Bavin, 8.A., L.L.8., Sydney
~ 0.0. Dangar, Kempsey.
Trustees:
Alderman W. W. Williams, Balmain;
O. W. Burner, Waverley.
Auditors;
T. A. Lewis, Balmain ;
A. Moore, North Sydney.
Hon. Secretary:
W. Main, Sydney.
Minute Secretary:
H. Spencer, Sydney.
Treasurer:
J. B. Atkinson, North Sydney.
Executive Committee :
Mrs. Granger, Misses King, Beattie, A. Gay,
McSweeney, Shelly, Messrs. O. Jackson, A. G.
Foster, and H. Sandon. •
Donations will bo thankfully received and acknowledged
by the Hon. Secretary, Walter Main, 25 Imperial Arcade,
Pitt Street, Sydney.


VSBSS/ 2
TOODUGTIOfI
In preparing this Draft Bill, the object of the Early Closing:
Association has been to set forth in the most convenient and
intelligible manner, the provisions which that Association, repre-
senting as it does, all classes of shop assistants, desires to see
embodied in any Early Closing Act which is placed upon the
Statue Book of this Colony. It is not pretended that this is a
Bill ready for immediate adoption by Parliament; the form of a
Draft Bill was adopted because it was considered that by this
means the suggestions of the Associatioi i would be more readily
grasped by the public, and that the process of amending any Bill
which might be introduced by the Government would thereby be
made somewhat easier.
All that is claimed for this Draft, is that it is an honest en-
deavour, made with some special knowledge of the interests
involved to meet the difficulties that must arise in connection
with legislation of this kind, and to solve those difficulties in a
manner that will cause the least possible loss to the shopkeepers,
and the least possible inconvenience to the public. To com-
pletely avoid some small loss and inconvenience is admittedly
impossible, if an Early Closing Act is to be of any benefit to the
over-worked shop assistant. All that can be hoped for is to
secure the greatest possible benefit to the employee at the least
possible sacrifice on the part of the employers and the public,
and the Committee of the Early Closing Association are satisfied,
after a very long and careful consideration of the subject, that
this end will be best realised by a measure which is similar in its
essential features to this Draft Bill.
It will be remembered that the Early Closing measure intro-
duced by the Government last session, merely limited the
number of hours per week during which any shop assistant
should be employed. It is not necessary to say anything as to
the uselessness of this proposal; the reception it met with in the
House was a sufficient indication that this was clearly recog-
nised Our suggested Bill prescribes definate hours for closing ;
six o’clock on four days of the week, ten o’clock on one day, and
one o’clock on the remaining day. Considerable difficulty was
experienced in fixing the day for closing at one o’clock. Four
suggestions have been carefully considered in the drafting of this
Bill:—•
1. The division of Sydney and Suburbs into Metropolitan
and Suburban areas, and fixing Saturdays as the Metropolitan
and Wednesday as the Suburban half-holiday.
Some of the objections to this course, are :
(a) The difficulty of satisfactorily defining the Metropoli-
tan area so as to avoid the anomaly of having one set
of provisions for one side of a street, and another set


of provisions for- the other—a difficulty illustrated by
the working of the first Victorian Act.
(b) The injustice that would be done to the very large
class of smaller shopkeepers within the Metropolitan
area, however defined —a class which is to a large
extent dependent on the trade of Saturday afternoon
and evening.
2. The second suggestion is to prescribe Saturday as a
general and compulsory half-holiday for City and Suburbs.
This course is quite as objectionable as—(l) —for it would
not only ruin the above-mentioned class of smaller shopkeepers
in the city, but would also affect very seriously the trade of
Suburdan shops, and tend more and more to centralize trade in
Sydney. Further, it would cause no small inconvenience to the
Suburban population. So far as we can learn, the smaller shop-
keepers are almost unaminous in their disapproval of this course.
3. A third alternative is to prescribe a general half-holiday
for City and Suburbs on Wednesday. This is objectionable, be-
cause it would involve the opening of all the large City shops on
Saturday afternoon, since these establishments could not afford
to give two half-holidays in the week. The employees of these
firms who constitute a very considerable proportion of shop-
assistants, would therefore be deprived of their Saturday
half-holiday.
4. The fourth suggestion, and the one that has been adopted
in this draft, is to provide that all shops must close at one o’clock
either on Wednesday or Saturday, and leave it to the option of
each individual shopkeeper to decide which of these days he will
select.
This proposal is not without objections, but it avoids the
most serious difficulties in the way of the other proposals, and
it has this solid advantage, that it will involve the least possible
change of existing conditions. The large City firms will continue
to give the Saturday half-holiday, and the Suburban shops the
Wednesday, as at present. The only people affected will be the
class which makes legislation necessary —viz., those shopkeepers
who will not fall in with any voluntary movement for granting a
weekly half-holiday.
If it be objected that to allow this option to shopkeepers
will make the Act difficult of enforcement, the answer is that
the jealousy of rival shopkeepers will probably prevent evasions-
that might escape the notice of the Inspectors.
With regard to the one night for closing at ten o’clock, the-
suggested provision is that if a shop closes at one on Wednesday,
it may remain open till ten on Saturday ; or if it closes at one on
Saturday, it may remain open till ten on Friday. The naming of
Friday may seem somewhat arbitrary, but it is absolutely
necessary for the enforcement of the Act, that the provision with
regard to this should be clear and definate.
Country Shopping Districts.
It is only necessary to say with regard to the Country, that


the fullest freedom is left to the shopkeepers of any Country
.Shopping District to decide, first—whether they will have the
Act at all, and secondly—what day they will choose for their
half-holiday, if they decide to have the Act enforced in their
district. The adoption of the suggested provisions with regard
to the Country districts would involve as little alteration as
possible in existing arrangements.
Exempted Shops.
Part 111. of the Draft Bill is an attempt to deal with shops
which are usually exempted from the operation of an Early
Closing Act, but which need legislative restrictions per haps more
than any other class. The convenience of the public forbids any
attempt to subject them to the same restrictions as ordinary
shops, but it is considered that the proposals embodied in this
Draft Bill make sufficient allowance for this convenience, while
at the same time they secure some limitation of the outrageously
excessive hour's worked by assistants in these schedule shops.
Other Provisions.
It will be seen from an examination of the other parts of the
Draft Bill that every effort has been made to concede as much as
possible to the interests of the shopkeepers. Half-an-hour has
been allowed for serving persons, who at the time fixed for clos-
ing are being or waiting to be served. Pr ovision is also made by
draft clauses—26-30 for a limited amount of overtime, for stock-
taking and similar purposes. Any provision of this kind, how-
ever, opens the door for evasion of the Act, and therefore must
be strictly safe-guarded in some such way as is suggested in this
Draft. All these clauses, however, are merely inserted as
suggestions, and though they are regarded by the Early Closing
Committee as of no small importance, they are not considered as
essentials. The sine qua non of a useful Early Closing Act, in
the opinion of the Early Closing Committee, is the prescription
of definite hours for closing on definite days, and any Act which
secures this will be to that extent acceptable.
It may occasion some surprise that no suggestion is made
in this Draft for exempting from the operation of the Act shops
in which no labour is employed except that of the owner and his
family. This omission is intentional, for the reason that the
Committee are very strongly of opinion that such a provision
would arouse a very great amount of hostility, and would work
very grave injustice to the majority of the smaller shopkeepers.
There are many instances to be found in the suburbs, of two
shops of the same class within a short distance of one another,
one worked by means of outside labour, the other by the owner
of the shop and his family. To close the former, while allowing
the latter to remain open, would be to penalize the employer of
labour for the benefit of a man who has the good fortune to be
able to carry on without the expense of outside assistance, or, to
put the same thing in another way, to give an additional advan-
tage to a fortunate shopkeeper at the expense of his less fortunate
competitor. Therefore, the omission of any provision exempting


shops worked by the owner and his family, has been deemed the
fairest course to pursue. It must not, however, be taken to
indicate that the Early Closing Association fails to recognise the
importance of placing as few restrictions as possible on private
liberty, or of encouraging to the fullest extent, individual inde-
pendence and enterprise. These considerations have had the
fullest weight, but they are hardly strong enough to outweigh
the considerations of equity and expediency that have been
suggested above.
In conclusion, it may be well to say that the Draft Bill here
submitted is by no means a tentative measure, framed more with
a view' to What is desirable than to what is possible. Its pro-
visions are for the most part, taken from Acts of the other
Colonies, which have justified themselves by the test of experi-
ence. It is for this reason that we earnestly and confidently
recommend the suggestions contained in it to the most careful
consideration of all those who desire to see the consummation of
this much needed reform.


NEW SOUTH WALES,
1599.
VICTORIA REGINA.
AN ACT IN AID OF EARLY CLOSING.
Be it enacted by the Governor, with the advice and
consent of the Parliament of New South Wales
as follows :
1. Short Title. —This Act may be cited as the
“ Early Closing Act, 1899,” and shall come into force
on a date appointed by the Minister.
2. Interpretation. —ln this Act the following terms
have the following meanings, that is to say
(a) “ Shop ” means any building, or portion of a
building, in which goods are offered or ex-
posed for sale by retail, and shall include
stall, tent, vehicle, or boat.
(b) c - Minister,” Minister for Labor and In-
dustry.
(c) “ Shopkeeper ” means any occupier, directly
or indirectly, as principal of any shop, and
includes any agent, manager, foreman, or
other person acting, or apparently acting, in
the management or control ®f any such shop.


(d) “ Shop assistant ” means am person employed
in any such shop, and includes all buyers,
salespeople, or clerks, but ,does not include
any person engaged solely as carter, or
night watchman.
(e) “Inspector” means any inspector, or member
of the police, appointed under this act.
(p) “ District ” shall mean a district for the
purpose of this Act.
(g) “ Closing time ” means closing time fixed or
appointed pursuant to this Act.
3. The chief objects of this Act are to provide :
(a) The definition of the Metropolitan and
Country Shopping District.
(b) For fixing closing times for all shops and the
days to which the fixed closing times shall
apply.
(c) For ascertaining by direct vote, the wishes of
the shopkeepers in any country shopping
town or district, with reference to this Act
coming into force in such town or district,
and the days to which the fixed closing;
times shall apply.
4. This Act is divided into parts as follows :
Part I.—The Metropolitan Shopping District.
~ ll.—The Country ~ ~
~ lll.—The Exempted Shops.
~ IV.—The Closing of Shops.
~ V. —The Miscellaneous.
PART I.
Metropolitan Shopping District.
5. The Metropolitan Shopping District shall
the area now included in the metropolitan penny postal
area.
6. All shops within the Metropolitan Shopping Dis-
trict except those mentioned in schedules 1 and 2 shall
close on four days of the week at 6 (six) o’clock : on
one day in the week at 10 (ten) o’clock, and on one day
in the week at 1 (one) o’clock.
7. The days on which all shops in the Metropolitan
Shopping District shall—except as hereinafter provided—


close at six o’clock shall be Monday, Tuesday, and
Thursday.
8. The day on which all shops in the Metropolitan
Shopping District shall close at, or before ten o’clock,
shall be Friday or Saturday.
The day on which all shops in the Metropolitan
Shopping District shall close at one o’clock, shall be
Wednesday or Saturday.
Provided that any shop which closes at one o’clock
on Wednesday may remain open till ten o’clock on
Saturday, and any shop which closes at one o’clock on
Saturday may remain open till ten o’clock on Friday,
but shall close at six o’clock on Wednesday.
PART 11.
Country Shopping Districts.
9. Any municipality wholly or partly outside the
Metropolitan Shopping District may constitute a
Country Shopping District.
10. The closing times for the Country Shopping
Districts in which this Act in accordance \tith the pro-
visions hereinafter contained shall apply shall be as
follows :
Four days at 6 o’clock p.m.
One day at at 10 o’clock p.m.
One day at 1 o’clock p.m.
The day on which all shops shall close at 10 p.m. and
at one p.m. respectively to be decided as hereinafter pro-
vided.
11. Any five shopkeepers in any Country Shopping-
District may by memorial in the prescribed form to the
Minister ask for a poll to be taken to decide whether
the provisions of this Act shall apply to the said district,
and also to decide as to what days the above-mentioned
closing times shall apply.
12. On receipt of such memorial the Minister shall
issue a proclamation referring the questions contained
in Schedule 5 to this Act to a poll of all the shop-
keepers in the said district.
13. If a majority of the shopkeepers voting in any
Country Shopping District shall vote in favor of the
application of this Act in that district the Minister


shall by public notice in the “ Government Gazette
declare the Act to be in force in the said district, and
shall specify the days chosen by the majority of shop-
keepers voting for closing at one o clock and ten o clock
respectively, whereupon the provisions of section 10
hereof shall apply to the said district. Provided that
in the event of an equal number voting for different
days for closing at one o’clock or ten o’clock respectively,
the Minister shall decide the day on which these closing
times shall apply.
14. Shopkeepers who keep any shop of the classes
mentioned in Schedules 1 and 2 hereof shall not be
entitled either to sign a memorial to the Minister or to
vote on the questions submitted under section 12 heieof.
PART 111.
Exempted Shops.
15. The provisions of Parts I and II of this Act shall
not apply to shops of the classes mentioned in Schedules
I and if to this Act, but such shops, whether in the
Metropolitan or Country Shopping Districts, shall be
subject to the following provisions.
16. All shops mentioned in Schedule I to this Act
shall close not later than half-past seven p.m. on live
days in the week, and not later than ten p.m. on one
day in the week.
17. All shops mentioned in Schedule II to this Act
shall close not later than eleven o'clock p.m. on everyday
in the week. No employee in any shop mentioned in
Schedules I and II to this Act shall be employed m or
about such shop for more than hours in any one
week.
18. All assistants employed in shops of the classes
mentioned in Schedules I and II to this Act, together
with all assistants, or clerks, in any wholesale or retail
business, or in any business of a commission shall
be allowed a half-holiday from the hour of one o clock
in the afternoon on some one working day in every
week excepting any week in which there is a public
holiday, which is allowed to such employees as a holiday.
If the owner, or manager, or person having the control
and direction of such shop or business, shall not arrange


for and grant to each such assistant or clerk one half-
holiday in every week, as provided by this section, he
shall be guilty of an offence against this Act, and shall
be liable to a penalty as hereinafter provided.
PART IV.
Closing of Shops.
19. Every shopkeeper within the Metropolitan Shop-
ying District, and every shopkeeper in any Country
Shopping District where this Act shall apply shall not
later than the closing time fixed, close his or her shop
by ceasing for the remainder of the day to sell or offer
goods therein.
20. Every shopkeeper who keeps his shop closed on
the whole of any public holiday, shall be exempt from
closing his shop at one o’clock in the afternoon of one
day in the same week as hereinbefore provided.
21. No shopkeeper shall be liable to any penalty
merely by reason of his serving after closing time any
customers who at closing time of such shop was in such
shop, being or waiting to be served. Provided that no
shop assistant shall be employed or allowed to be, or
remain in any shop on any working day for more than
one half-hour after the time prescribed by this Act for
closing.
22. Any shopkeeper who offends against the provi-
sions of this Act, either by not closing his shop at the
time specified in the foregoing provisions, or by compel-
ling or allowing any employee to remain on the premises
after closing hour, or in any other way, shall be liable
to a penalty not exceeding £2 for the first offence, and
£5 for the second or any subsequent offence.
PART Y.
Miscellaneous.
23. Polls shall be taken as follows: (a) The voting
shall take place not earlier than twenty-eight days and
not later than thirty-five days after the public notice for
a poll. (b). The voting shall take place in such manner
as shall be directed by the public notice, or as shall be
prescribed by regulations, (c) The result of the poll
shall be certified by the returning-officer to the Minister.


24. Any shop in which two or more classes of trade
are carried on shall not be deemed to come under Part
111 of this Act, unless all of such classes of trade belong
to those specified in Schedule I or II to this Act, or
unless that part of the shop in which the non exempted
class of trade is carried on is properly separated from
the exempted trade
25. Alteration. —lf this Act shall have remained in
force in the Metropolitan Shopping District, or in any
Country Shopping District, for a period of not less than
two years thirty shopkeepers in the Metropolitan, or five
shopkeepers in any Country Shopping District respec-
tively may by memorial in the prescribed form request
the Minister to submit the question of an alteration of
the days to which the closing times fixed by or under the
provisions of Parts I and II of this Act shall apply.
Such memorial shall set out the alteration proposed
by the persons signing, and on receipt of such memorial,
the Minister shall proclaim a poll referring the question
of such alteration to the shopkeepers of such metro-
politan or country district.
Provided that no shopkeeper who keeps a shop of the
classes mentioned in the Schedules I and II to this Act
shall be entitled to sign such memorial or vote at such
poll.
26. Notwithstanding the provisions hereinafter con-
tained, any shop assistant may be employed after the
closing hours fixed by this Act for a period not exceed-
ing three hours on any one day (not being a half-holiday)
on not more than six days in any one quarter of a year,
provided that one hour be allowed such assistant for tea,
and provided also that the shop shall be closed during
such period.
27. No shop assistant shall be employed under the
preceding section after the closing hour fixed by this
Act, unless the shopkeeper who so proposes to employ
such assistant shall first have obtained a license in the
prescribed form signed by the Inspector.
28. Application for such license shall be in the form
prescribed by Schedule IV to this Act, and shall
state the number of days in the current quarter on
which assistants have already been employed in such shop.


29. Registers to be kept, showing what licenses issued.
30. License to be exhibited in prominent place on
shop.
31. Tne Minister may appoint inspectors, or members
of the police in every district to carry out the provisions
contained in this Act.
32. Responsibility of Managers. —Where any
offence for which the shopkeeper is liable under this Act
lias been committed by some Agent, Manager, Servant,
Workman, or other Person, such Manager, Agent,
Servant, Workman, or other Person shall be liable to
the same tine as if he were the shopkeeper.
33. Occupier of Shop may lay information
against actual offender. —Where a shopkeeper is
charged with an offence against this Act, he shall be en-
titled, upon information duly laid by him, to have any
other person who he charges as the actual offender
brought before the Justices at the time appointed for
hearing the charge, and if, after to the satisfaction of
the Justices that he has used due diligence to enforce
the execution of the Act, and that the said other person
had committed the offence in question without his
knowledge consent or connivance, the said other person
shall be summarily convicted of such offence and fined
accordingly, and the shopkeeper shall be exempt from
any conviction or fine.
34. Forms. —The forms contained in the third
Schedule hereto, with such modifications as circumstances
may require, shall be sufficient for all purposes.
35. Evidence.— The production of the “ Government
Gazette ” containing anything purporting to be a copy
of a Proclamation issued under the authority of this
Act, shall be conclusive evidence of the issue of such
Proclamation and of the validity thereof, unless the
Minister shall certify to the contrary.
36. Definition op Public Notice. —Notice by ad-
vertisement published in two newspapers circulating in
the district, shall be sufficient public notice for all the
purposes of this Act, and the production of any news-
papers containing such notice, shall be evidence of such
notice and of the validity thereof.
37. Procedure Courts.— Where any person is


charged with an offence against this Act, such charges
shall be heard before a Special Magistrate, or two or
more Justices, who are not shopkeepers or employees in
any shop.
38. Summary Procedure. All fines imposed by this
Act shall be recoverable summarily.
39. Appeal. —Any party aggrieved by a summary
conviction under this Act, or dissatisfied with any order
dismissing any information under this Act, may appeal
therefrom to the nearest Local Court of full jurisdiction ;
and all appeals shall be conducted in manner prescribed
by law for the conduct of appeals from Courts of
summary jurisdiction.
40. Regulations. —The Minister may make regula-
tions for carrying this Act into effect.
41. Publication of Regulations.- All such regula-
lations shall be published in the “ Government
Gazette,” and shall take effect from the date of such
publication unless otherwise provided in such regula-
tions, and copies of such regulations shall be laid before
both Houses of Parliament within fourteen days from
the making thereof, if Parliament be then in Session,
and, if not, then within fourteen days after the
commencement of the next Session; and in all legal
proceedings the production of the “ Government
Gazette ” containing any regulation purporting to have
been made under this Act, shall be prima facie evidence
that such regulations have been duly made.
SCHEDULES.
First Schedule. — Chemists, Druggists, Hairdressers, Tobac-
conists.
Second Schedule. — Restaurants and Eating Houses, Fish and
Oyster Shops, Fruit, Flower, Vegetable, Dairy Produce and
Refreshment Shops, Confectioners, Newsagents, Under-
takers, Publichouses, Pnlmhiiiiu Bakers.
Third Schedule. —Petition for Alteration of Days to which the
Fixed Closing Times apply in any Shopping District.
To His Excellency 'the Governor —
We, the undersigned shopkeepers in the Shopping
District, respectfully petition for an alteration of the days to
which the fixed closing times prescribed by the “Early Closing
Act. 189 ” apply in the said district as follows :






THE PROPOSAL.
Fixed Closing Time. imposed Alteration of Days to which Fixed
Closing Times Apply.
Six o’clock To be altered from Monday, Tuesday Wednes-
day and Thursday to Tuesday, Thursday,
Friday, and Saturday.
Ten o’clock To be altered from Friday to Monday.
One o’clock. To be altered from Saturday to Wednesday.
Dated this
day of
Signature of Shopkeeper. |
Shopkeeper’s Address.
Proclamation Declaring Days to which Fixed Closing Times in
any Shopping District Apply.
C.D., Governor. I His Excellency the Governor hereby pro-
L. S. j claims and declares that from and after the
publication hereof in the “ Government Gazette,” the days set
out in the first column, in the schedule hereto shall be the days to
which the fixed closing times, prescribed by part I of the “llarly
Closing Act, 189 ,” set out in the second column of the said
schedule hereto, opposite the said days, shall apply within the
said Shopping District.
THE SCHEDULE REFERRED TO.
First Column —Days.
Second Column—t losing Time.
Tuesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday Six o’clock.
Monday Ten o’clock.
Wednesday ) One o’clock.
Given under the hand of His Excellency the Governor and the
seal of New South Wales, this day of , 18 .
A. 8., Chief Secretary.
Fourth Schedule. —Application for permit to work overtime.
To the Inspector—l the undersigned desire a permit to work my
assistants overtime (under the provisions of the Early Closing
Act) on the said date being the quarter of
the year, 189 . (Signed)
PERMIT REFERRED TO.
Permit granting (Name) (Trade or Pro-
fession), to work his assistants overtime under the provisions of
the Early Closing Act on the being the
quarter in the year 1899.
(Signed) Inspector.
Fifth Schedule. —Questions to be submitted to shopkeepers in
accordance with Schedule 12.
1. Do you desire that the provisions of the Early Closing Act
shall apply to the district of
2. On what day of the week do you desire that the closing
time shall be one p.m.
<l. On what day of the week do you desire that the closing
time shall be ten p.m.


7¥f
P 0 l&LlO
A / O&J
<A*f
Closing Hou for Shops.
The following are the urs for the Closing of
Shops advocated by the i Closing Association of
N.S.W., namely :
4 Days a V- • at 6 p.m.
i „ io p.m.
i „ „ i p.m.
