

Port Fairy, according to Lieutenant Tyers’ chart, is situated in Lat. 38deg.
23min., Long. 152 deg. 18min. 45sec. east, and his very clearly-detined plan of
the Port is to be seen in the ancient Parliamentary Papers on the shelves of
the local Mechanics’ Institute. To describe the locality as it now appears to
us moderns, and reckon that the old time residents would recognise the place
by that description, is hardly to be expected; therefore, we may more interest
both the new and old Port Fairy-ite by some comparison of old-time appear-
ances with present-time actualities. The appearance of Port Fairy,
“Before that Time’s effacing finger
Had swept the lines were beauty linger’d,”
must have been charming; fordid not the old “salt” who first entered the
bay become quite sentimental in the choice of the fantastic name suggested to
his mind on first viewing our little harbour? Then, the sombre-looking, but
handsome, sheoak grew in grand luxuriance along the foreshore of the bay,
brightened up at that season by the golden yellow of the black wood and
wattle; and the graceful bowing of the trees forming the forest glade at the
foot of Flagstaff Hill bade welcome to Captain Wisharrb in a manner as to
inspire him with a poetic turn. Were his “ log” now available, we should
doubtless read sentiments recorded which would convey to our minds some
ideas of the beauties he saw, but long-since shattered by the ruthlessness of
the whaler and the settler.
The River Moyne, from Magazine Corner to Rosebrook, was then
beautifully fringed with the flowering ti-tree and the waving Australian
bulrush, whilst its banks were guarded by a thick fringe of straight grown,
graceful eucalypti, all presenting a sylvan beauty such as charmed even the
savage breast of the aboriginal, who made Punyujvpkil (the native name
of Port Fairy) his resting place and camping ground.
Then again, the “ long wash of Australasian seas,” which lapped
the beautiful white sands of the bay, and in play or tempest poured in on
to the more rugged coast line of the Southern Reach, must have lent an
additional enchantment to the surroundings of this “fairy’’spot; and no
wonder is it, that the kings and princes of the Port Fairy Tribe loved to
revel on the commanding hills of their coast —truly veritable natural castles
for God’s nobility.


Bui. these beauties largely d : °appcared with the advent of the white
man ; and, to his shame be it recorded, no eflort tc repair by artificial means
the devastation of the natural woodlands, was made to recompense for the
lost charms. The laying cut of the town necessitated the clearing away of
natural beauties of outline; and the inevitable angular highways were
substituted for pretty undulating park-like spots.
The Port Fairy of to-day, contrasted with these ideas, is bare indeed ;
the only real beauty spots being the Botanic Gardens, and its charming
recreation oval, and, perhaps, the natural glade below the Battery reserve.
Buildings of some pretensions have supplanted the bark mia-mi is of the tribes
that long-while inhabited the site of the town ; and the common-place things
of lives devoted to money-making have usurped the happy surroundings of a
people whose purpose in life was of the pure Arcadian ideal.
The town is pleasantly situated, and will, when Australia becomes
peopled in proportion to its natural resources, be one of the choice watering
places of the continent. It already stands well up in that position ; whilst,
as a port for the shipment of the nation’s produce, it is certain to attract
the merchant prince—who is ever on the look-out for facilities which will
enable him to ply his trade with profit. The present of Port Fairy is but
prophetic of future greatness, and though we of the first century of its life
are regretful of comparative inactivity, we may rest confident in its future
great progressivencss. The meandering Moyne will yet be lined with the
world’s merchantment ; warehouses and manufactories will crowd its banks
from Rosebrook to the extreme point of Sir John Goode’s training walls;
and everywhere •* Port Fairy ” will be a synonym for push, progression, and
prosperity. Then, Griffiths Island will be either a huge manufacturing
centre, or, preferably, the location of the palatial residences of the capitalist;
and the regret of future aldermen will be, that a short-sighted council, in the
years gone by, sold for a paltry “mess of pottage” in the shape of a
Government cheque for £7OO, a heritage once-possessed but despised.
Port Fairy, November Ist, 1896.


PORT FAIRY, VICTORIA.
■
“ Koo-000 ! ” “Naranawear !” * were the exclamations which re-echoed from
Yoluuk f to Wirrang-eering | and from Murteech |j to Yatt Mirng $, on
the early morning of April 25th, 1810, when the white wings of
“ The Fairy ” cutter was observed by the natives to glide into and rest
inside “the patches” of Port Fairy Bay. From the date mentioned, the
history of Port Fairy commences, for until that auspicious morning this
portion of Australia had been a terra incognita to the white man. The
locality, as seen then by James Wishart and his crew of two A.B.’s,
though under the unpleasant conditions of an equinoctial gale, gave the
sturdy old sealer a favourable impression, and his fancy suggested that the
place was worthy of a name as sentimental as that borne by the little craft
which he had sailed safely into the calm waters of the bay, and hence the
euphonious “Port Fairy” was the distinctive name given by the god-
father and discoverer to our pretty port and town. Passing the shallow
waters at the entrance to the river (afterwards called “the bar,”) Wishart’s
little dingy floated on the calm bosom of the Gnarn Kolak (the River Moyne)
as far up as the present swinging-basin, where never before had any
craft but the bark canoe of the aborigine been seen ; and so delighted
was he with his new found shelter spot (as many tempest-tossed mariners have
since been), that he determined to make “ Port Fairy ” a resting place on
his fishing voyages, and so did, for many years afterwards, when on seal-
catching intent.
Rumours and records are extremely vague and rare in matters of
•* Port ” for many years subsequent to its discovery ;
but the appearance of William Armstrong, in a vessel named “ The Pelican,”
a few years after Wishart’s accidental entrance, gave to the bay opposite
Kilb rney its appellation, and established the indentity of the place for future
traders. These old votaries of Neptune assumed the right of naming localities
in the early times, when councils and committees were not; and a little
sentiment as well as some self-laudation seems to have prompted their
nomenclature. Thtis,*we have “ Mills ” Reef, “ Martin’s ” Point, “ Griffiths ”
Island, and other titles which will always remind us of residents who
were prominent in those times, and who are now deserving of our kindest
thought.
•' Wonderment! “ What is this ?” f Griffiths Island. J Aringa. IJ The Sea,
§ Tower Hill Island,


In 1836, the Launceston Examiner (Tasmania), mentions that “ the hay
whaling at Port Fairy and Portland had commenced, with every prospect of
a successful season. The whaling parties at those stations are those of
Messrs Hewett and Co., Henty, and John Griffiths, who employ in tho
trade this year upwards of 100 expert hands.” Ten years prior to this how-
ever (in 1826), Captain John Mills had visited Port Fairy, but the first
fixed residents of the place seem to have been Messrs Raby and Penny,
who had a whaling station here before the Henty’s were at Portland in
1834, in October of which year The Thistle schooner (now embedded in the
sand on the east beach, below Mrs. M'Daniell’s cottage) conveyed the
pioneers of Portland to their early Victorian home. In 1835, Bonwick
says that Port Fairy was w independent, and outside the locations of
adventurers,” confirming the assertion that settlement had before then been
established.
Captain Campbell’s first voyage—according to his own statement
given before a Royal Commission appointed in 1853 to enquire into
the Western Harbours—was made in 1836 from Tasmania, and he resided
here for six months during the whaling season, i.e,, from April to October.
This he continued to do during the twelve remaining “ whaling ” years.
Captain Griffiths (whose honored name is borne by the Island at the
entrance to the Moyne) preceded Alexander Campbell, and lived on the
banks of the River, somewhere about Rutledge’s wharf; and after-
wards had permanent occupation of “ The Island,” whereon he not only
erected a residence, but had “try works” for the “rendering down” of
the shoals of whales which were then captured and casked for profit and
reward. The Griffithses —father and son—and the Millses—John and
Charles —combined farming with their whaling operations, and appeared to
be thriving towards wealth by their attention to the dual industries. The
relation of the exciting whale chases of those days, and tho hair-breadth
’scapes—have they not tingled in the ears of us younger pioneers, when
listened to from the lips of Hector Wales, Sam Mott, George Philmore,
Hugh Donnelly, or other brave whalers of the thirties; and the whale-
bone-strewn beaches of the bay and Island gave ample testimony for years
of the immensity of the transactions carried on here.
The unearthing of the skeleton bones of the leviathans, which for a
quarter-oentury had been embedded in the sands, and the shipment thereof,
gave profitable employment and cargoes to several small schooners which called
here *on behalf of the bone-dust manufacturers of Melbourne during
the sixties. But now, not a trace of the Griffithses, the Campbells,
or the Millses, is to be found in the place, either by relic or monument—
except that which they themselves preserved by the naming of the Island
and the Reef. These whaling men held undisputed possession of the “ new
territory ” for years, and with their families established a thriving settle-
ment, several rude dwellings being erected along the banks of the river.
A small store or two were opened, with supplies brought over from
Tasmania, the first shop being a little wooden structure kept by John Cox,
and built on the spot afterwards enclosed by the extensive wharf premises of
Messrs Wm. Rutledge and Co.


Whilst John Griffiths was residing on “the Island,” he, with P.
M‘Daniel (father of the well-known lighterman, whose death hy drowning
in 1870, whilst returning from Julia Percy Island, was universally re-
gretted), built a sea-going vessel, which they named “ The Brothers,” and
launched her in the South-west Passage, just opposite where the Corpora-
tion Baths tanks and windmill now stand. Taking advantage of a tine
day, and with the intrepidity characteristic of these old sea-kings, “ The
Brothers” was sailed out through the Passage hy Captain Campbell ; and
having been given over to the charge of a master mariner, named Paddy
Grant, this worthy took her to Melbourne, sold her for £9O, and levanted
with the proceeds. This put a stop to the establishment of what Griffiths
intended should be a permanent industry in Port Fairy; and shortly afterwards
he returned to Tasmania, and resumed his trade as a shipbuilder.
The “Sydney Griffiths,” 400 tons, the first ship which sailed direct
with a cargo of wool from Port Fairy to London, was built by this worthy,
roan in Tasmania, and commanded for years by Captain John Cowtan.
In 1848, the last whale was caught in Port Fairy, since which year no
cry of “ There she spouts ” has ever resounded from the “ look outs” round the
bay, although at intervals some fine fish have been observed in our waters in
later times, but these have been allowed to depart without an effort to capture a
prize which the old harpoonists were ever eager to risk even their lives to
secure. i
In September, 1835, Lieut. Surveyor Wedge visited Portland and Port
Fairy in the interests of the Government of New South Wales, which
then, and until 1851, controlled the whole of the territory now comprised
in the boundaries of the colony of Victoria, and reported on the character
and capacity of the harbours, and the appearance of the country along the
South-Western coast-line. This report, and private advices received from
captains of vessels which had visited Port Fairy, led Mr James Atkinson,
of Sydney, a solicitor with keen earth-hunger, to cast his longings
towards so desirable a locality.
After having failed in 1834 to induce Governor Bourke to give him a
special grant of 100,000 acres at Twofold Bay—which he had applied for in
the interests of a syndicate, and had preferred the princely price of 3s fid per
acre, with a condition that he would undertake in five years to locate there-
on one adult male or female for every hundred acres granted—Mr Atkinson
conceived the bold idea of going further afield, and, in 1839, applied for
an area of 5120 acres of land, “in a parish unnamed, at Port Fairy?lkSo
far away from the centre of government, the “ special survey ” sy%£m
adopted by the Sydney Parliament to induce settlement in the colony \vas
worked upon without the knowledge of the then residents of the port; and
although Mr Latrobe, who was representative agent for the Government at
Port Phillip, protested most strongly in correspondence to the central
authorities against the alienation to a single individual of so large an area
in the locality of a seaport, the “ backstairs ’ influence of the applicant was
stronger than the protest of the official. And so Port Fairy was bodily
handed over at £1 an acre to Mr. Jatnes Atkinson—an act which strangled
the progress of a place intended by nature to be the entrepot for the whole
commerce of the Western district of Victoria.


By this very unfortunate transaction, the whole trend of pros-
perity inaugurated by the whaling settlement was diverted ; for, with the
advent of Government immigrants, the possibility of this town being speedily
created into a place of permanent, substantial, and city-like proportions, was
checked and crushed, because of the impossibility to obtain property on free
hold conditions. The inability of Mr Atkinson to make a heavy profit by
thesubdivision of his estate was possibly attributable t© a fact disclosed in a
document which sets forth that in December, 1845, “ A sum of six
thousand pounds had been advanced to James Atkinson, of Marion, in the
territory of N.S. W., on security of certain lands at Port Fairy, and other
localities described.” So that, perhaps, we latter-day critics have misjudged
the reasons which caused the “absentee landlordism,” from which we have
ever since suffered. Mr George Urquhart resided here as agent for the
absentee landlord until 1848, when Mr R. H. Woodward assumed control,
which he retained until succeeded by Mr F. A. Corbett in 1869.
Notwithstanding this serious drawback, population was attracted to
Port Fairy ; and from Tasmania and New South Wales many prominent men
came across. The forerunner of the great firm of Messrs Win. Rutledge and
Co.—Mr John Cox—in 1839 established a mercantile business which was deve-
loped by the firm named into gigantic proportions, they having purchased the
good-will in 1843. The history of Port Fairy for twenty years after
this was virtually created by this firm ; for throughout the whole colony,
and particularly the Western portion, the reputation and trading transac-
tions of Wm. Rutledge and Co. made Port Fairy the centre of an immense
circle of business, unequalled perhaps in those days outside the capital of
New South Wales.
The names of Mr John Ritchie, Ourang-Ouranga, Messrs Campbell,
Mac Knight and Irvine, of Dunmore station; Tom Browne, “ihe Swamp;”
Win. Carmichael, Blackfellows’ Creek ; De Little Bros., Caramut; Dawson
and Mitchell, Kangatong; John Good, Injemira; Gothereux and Wilson,
St. Helens; Wm. and David Hutton, Gazette; Sam Gorie, Ardonacbie;
Henry Phillips, Mount Napier and Kilmorey ; John Pearson, Yambuk ; Fred
Smith, Woodlands; Twomey, Kolor ; E. Youl, St. Kitts; and Matthew Gibb,
St. Patrick’s Day ; all belong to this time, besides many others of ancient
note, whose names are not now to be recalled. With such a procession
of wealthy settlers, little wonder is it that trade flourished.
In 1844-6 cultivation had advanced considerably, the farming families
introduced by Mr Atkinson to settle his lands now being in evidence at the
Duck Holes, The Black Swamp, and Yates’ Hill, and in 1847 Alexander
Struthbuiltthe windmill which for very many years stood on the little knoll at
the end of Gipps-street, nearly opposite to where some years later Dr Russell
erected that substantial, but long unoccupied pile of buildings, known as
the “ Moyne Steam Flour Mills.” The windmill was brought over from Sydney
by Captain Grant, in the brig Socrates (now on the East beach), in 1843, and
when Mr Strulii removed to Woodford it was purchased and worked by Messrs
Rutledge and Co,, Charley Ashby being the miller. Alison and Knight’s


mill at Rosebrook was built about the same time, and the consignments of the
flour turned out there had first to be punted across the Belfast Lough in flat
bottomed lighters, and then carted to the stores which Rutledge and Co. had
erected on the east bank of the river, opposite their principal wharf, which
was then managed by Mr George Lostock.
The brig “Dusty Miller” was wrecked off the Island in 1847,
and Captain Saunders, of that craft, retiring from seafaring pursuits, built
the Stag Hotel, and opened it amidst much congratulation and a big business.
As the town was extending, Saunders diverted a good deal of the trade from
the “Old Merrijig,” kept by “ Joe ” Betts ; and the “ Royal Merrijig,” kept
by one Middleton—both situated in Gipps-street, near the river. The
“Royal Merrijig” was none other than those pretentious two storied brick
buildings, now falling into sad ruin, at the corner of Gipps and Campbell-
streets, and which afterwards were the seat of the legal and municipal
departments of the town. In that building, the first Belfast Road Board
held its meetings, and the police and other courts were also conducted there,
prior to the erection of the present court-house in 1858.
In 1847, Cowtan and Bland, both employes of the magnate firm of
Rutledge and Co., commenced business in the premises in Bank-street now
owned and occupied by Mr J. B. Holden ; and were successful, with all
others during the “ good old times ”up to 1863. John Bland—genial wooden-
legged John—was foremost in all local and social enterprises, whilst the
sedate John Cowtan applied himself closely to the more mundane duties of
the general store established by the firm and to the shipping trade they
shared with W. R. and Co. They remained after the “crash” of Rutledge
and Co. for a short time. In this same building the progressive firm of
Wm. Bateman and Go. afterwards became located, and did an export trade
of colossal proportions, necessitating during some potato seasons the chartering
of eighteen or twenty vessels at one and the same time, to convey the
products of this, the then potato-monopolising district, to all parts of
Australasia. What a sight that was ! to see the bay literally as full of ocean
going vessels of various tonnage as the anchorage ground could accommodate,
and nearly all controlled by Bateman and Co. They, yielding to the
ever-recurring cycles of depression, in their turn gave way to Messrs.
Challacombe and Bishop, who for several years maintained a big commercial
connection, and held control of an extensive mercantile and shipping trade
In the early days—reckoning the “ fifties ” and “sixties” under that
category —Haynes and Young founded a business which has until to day
survived the “ wrack of merchants and the crash of time,” and F. P. Stevens
and Co, Bell and Co., Wm. Beaver and Go., A. Ovendon; Lord, Golds-
brough and Co.; Croker, Scott and Co.; W. N. Hoskiug, R. Frizzell, Grubb and
Blair, Hutton and Bulstrode, Andrew Bruce, M. Neiman, Robert M'Mahon,
and others of lesser magnitude, were contemporary. But, perhaps, to
collate under distinctive headings the items which have helped to make
“history ” for Port Fairy will be the better plan of recording the events of
the past. First, then, having briefly mentioned a few of the incidents of
early settlement, before “ well regulated society ” was counted as neces-
sary in early colonisation, let me introduce the pioneer efforts of Local
Government.


LOCAL GOVERNMENT.
“The District of Belfast” was the first municipality established in
the Colony of Victoria entrusted with the local administration of its affairs,
having been “proclaimed” in 1852—a year after the “ separation ” of the
District of Port Phillip from the mother colony of New South Wales.
Mr Dilmond J. Howes was the first secretary of the “ Belfast District
Hoad Board ” (as the corporation was then named), as well as its surveyor,
and within its boundaries were included nearly the whole area of the
present Shires of Belfast, Dundas, Warrnambool, and Minhamite, and
the Borough of Koroit. The management, however, of this gigantic muni-
cipality seems to have been superior at least to the more recent acts of local
government in Port Fairy, which have given occasion for criticism and
comment. The first council was composed of Messrs R. H, Woodward, C. H.
Macknight, Horace Flower, S. Macgregor, R. Urquhart, J. Irvine, and J.
Whitehead. In those days, the Government provided the money for
public works by heavy grants from the general revenue of the colony, and By
this means many of the main roads were early constructed. One of the
most important acts of the Belfast Road Board was the construction of the
main roads leading to Warrnambool and Spring Creek, both of which works
were supervised by Mr. Howes. Some of the streets of the town were
also partially laid out whilst under the control of the Road Board, but, after
some agitation on the part of the residents, who considered more attention
was demanded by the rapidly-growing settlement around the Port than could
be given by a Board in charge of such an extensive district as that described,
authority was obtained in 1856 for the election of a Council to manage the
public affairs of the Municipality of Belfast. The following official record of
the first half-year’s doings of our original civic fathers is of especial interest
in these more degenerate days of municipal government:—
“ The District of Belfast was duly proclaimed a municipality on the Ist day of
July, 1856, and its boundaries described as “ Commencing at a point on the sea coast,
being the south-eastern angle of section vii., parish of Belfast, thence by a line bearing
north, seven degrees fifty-two minutes west, being the eastern boundary of sections vii.,
viii., ix., and x. to the southern boundary of section xxiv. in the parish aforesaid,
thence by a line easterly, being the southern boundary of sections xxiv., xxv., xxvi., and
xxvii. to the River Moyne, thence by the western side of the River Moyne to the
Belfast Lough, thence by a line south-easterly, crossing the said Lough to the
northern angle of suburban portion SBa in the said parish of Belfast, thence on the
north eastern boundary of said portion to the sea coast, and thence by the sea coast
to the commencing point, including the Islands at the mouth of the Moyne.” And
a public meeting of the householders and landowners within the said district was
held in the Court-house, Belfast, on Saturday, the 27th day of September, 1856, for
the purposes prescribed by the Municipal Institutions Act, James Mylne Knight,
Esq., having been appointed by His Excellency to preside at such meeting.


“ The meeting elected Messrs John Bland and John Wall to act as assessors, and
decided that the council should consist of seven members, who should not receive
pecuniary remuneration. A poll was then taken by voting cards, and the following
are the names of the members declared duly elected, and the number of votes received :
—John Mason, 222 votes ; Lloyd Rutledge, 210 ; Alexander Russell, 200 ; William
Ninnis Hosking, 194 ; Joseph Whitehead, 189 ; David Talbot, 186 ; Charles Ruffle, 174.
“The first meeting of the council was held in the Road Board Office on the 30th
day of September, at which Alexander Russell, Esq., was elected chairman for the
municipal year. The following officers were elected :—Town Clerk —S. J. Bayly
was appointed on the 21st October, at a salary of £lOO per annum. Town Surveyor
Charles Kingk was appointed on the 14th November, at a rate of £250 per
annum, the surveyor to provide himself with instruments. Treasurer —William
Young, Esq., manager, Bank of Victoria, tendered his services gratuitously, which
were accepted, October 7th.
“The council have not yet thought fit to appoint permanent committees,
but for the carrying out of special objects the appointment of special committees
has been found advantageous. For the compilation of the ratepayers’ roll, the
valuation of the assessable property, and the collection of the rate, tenders were
called, and the most eligible tenderers appointed.
“ The following By-Laws were adopted by the council : —No. I—For striking
a rate of one shilling in the pound on the yearly value of all property within the
municipality ; passed October 7, gazetted November 4. No. 2. —For the appropriation
of the Government grant-in-aid for the year 1856 of the municipality ; passed 19th
November, gazetted December 30. No. 3.—To regulate the deposit of night soil, &c.
passed November 12, not yet assented to, on the ground that no site was set
apart for the purpose. No. 4—To regulate by means of standing orders the pro-
ceedings of the council ; passed October 14, gazetted December 9th, and January
16th, 1857. No. s—To enforce the cleansing of chimney flues ; passed November 12th,
gazetted March 3rd, 1857. No. 6—For the preservation of footways, water courses,
&c,; passed November 26th, gazetted 16th December. No. 7 —For the prevention of
accidenta 1 fires ; passed December 3rd, gazetted.
“ Applications to Government. For the use of a room in the police office
buildings. The ptesent council chamber granted gratuitously. For copy of the
Oovernment Oazette —Granted. For eight copies of Municipalities’ Act —Granted.
For a moiety of police bench fining when applicable—Granted. For a tracing of
the Belfast special survey—Granted. [This tracing disappeared in 1884]. For 50
copies of by-law No. 3 —Refused.
“ Correspondence.—The council availed themselves of the earliest opportunity
to urge upon the Government the immediate necessity of expending the sum of Ten
thousand pounds voted for public works in the district for 1856, so long delayed, but
which have since been commenced and are in progress. A lengthened correspondence
took place in reference to the grant of £4,000 in aid of this municipality, and,
after what the council felt to be a tedious and unnecessary delay, received the first
moiety (£2000) on the 20th December, The second moiety was received on the 14th
January, 1857. The council most unanimously voted a congratulatory address to His
Excellency the Governor on his arrival. The council have petitioned the Governor
and Executive Council to place upon the supplementary estinjates for this year the
sum of £20,000 towards improving the harbour of this port.
“ Miscellaneous.—The Superintendent of Police communicated \vith the council
and signified his willingness to carry out any suggestions of the council as to the
employment, &c,, of the police. The arrangements having been explained to them,
were considered satisfactory. The council have availed themselves of the labour
of prisoners for breaking road metal. The Census Commissioner solicited co-operation
of the council in the taking of the census,'which was willingly accorded, A device
for the corporation seal, with the motto, “Commune Bonum,” was agreed to by the
council, has been approved, and the seal is now in the hands of the engraver. A
resolution was passed by the council on the 25th March, 1857, to request His Excel-
lency by proclamation to exempt from assessment places of worship, schools, &c., as


defined, to which no reply has yet been received. Property liable to assessment has
been valued at the annual value of £23,873. Number of persons on ratepayers
roll, 431. Number of persons in the municipal district, as per census returns just
taken:—Males, 1083; females, 1197; total, 2280. Banker—Bank of Victoria.
“ Public Works—The prosecution of public works was necessarily delayed until
council received the grant in aid, w’hen contracts were immediately advertised, and the
tender of Messrs G. and R. Johnston, for street improvements, was accepted, amount
£1673 10s ; also the tender of the same parties for the formation and metalling with
limestone one half of the road from town to Rosebrook ; amount, £l4OO Bs. Both works
are in progress. The street improvements consist of the formation, metalling with
limestone, and drainage with pitched water tables, of portions of Bank, William,
Regent, and James-streets. Tenders for other urgently required works have been
called for, and the works will be proceeded with as soon as practicable.
“ Attendance.—There has been 29 ordinary and 15 special meetings of the council.
The Chairman attended 22 ordinary and 13 special; Cr. Mason, 29 ordinary and
12 special ; Cr. Rutledge, 15 ordinary and 9 special; Cr. Hoskings, 24 ordinary and
12 special; Cr. Whitehead, 26 ordinary and 9 special ; Cr. Talbot, 20 ordinary and
10 special ; Cr. Raffle, 26 ordinary and 10 special.
“ The working of the council hitherto has been attended with many difficulties,
and that they have many more to contend with the council are well aware, but
notwithstanding their peculiar position, they have full confidence in their own ability
to place the municipality of Belfast on a footing satisfactory to the ratepayers.”
During these early times of 1856 things certainly boomed municipally
for amongst the accounts of the period were items: “G. Appleton, day
labour, 9s per diem ; F. Farish, 8s per diem,” and this, notwithstanding the
fact that prison labour was available, free , for stone-breaking. The council
met weekly for six months, with occasional special meetings. The town
clerkship was thrown open to tender, and five residents sent in offers, as
follows :—John Burnie (the father of John Davidson, of that ilk), tendered at
£2OO a year; John Frizzel (whilom policeman and storekeeper), at £100;
Edward Shalders (an of Rutledge and Co.), at £l6O ; &. J. Bayly
(then a budding solicitor), at £l5O, or on “ as favourable terms to the
council as any respectable legal practitioner ”; E. G. Yorke (a respectable
legal practitioner) sent in a tender at £lOO, which was considered by the
council, but, on the pretext that it was “ not received in time,” the application
was thrown out, on the motion of Cr Mason, seconded by Or Ruffle. Mr S.
J. Bayly’s tender was accepted, but on the terms offered by the “ respect-
able legal practitioner,” viz., £lOO per annum. The Road Board proffered
the services of their surveyor, Mr Howes, until the council had made an
appointment, which was accepted. Subsequently, Mr. Charles Kingk’s
election as engineer was made, at £250 per annum, on the special recommenda-
tion of Captain Paisley, the Government marine engineer. His delayed
reports on the street forming and town drainage, which the council had
determined to spend £4OOO upon, led to an open rupture between
the members and their officer, and a notice co the effect that “ the council had
no confidence in their surveyor ” was given, and the position vacated during
the first year, but only to result in Mr Kingk’s re-appointment. The
selection of a coat of arms, or distinctive municipal design, was
referred to Councillors Talbot, Mason, and Whitehead—the result of their
labours being the production of the very shield which now hangs in the
present council chambers, and which represents in the design, a golden


fleece, a ship, and a sheaf of wheat, with the words “Borough of Port Fairy
Commune Bonum ”in a scroll. It cost £3l to obtain the official seal bearing
the same device. In November of this year—only four months after
establishment the municipal authoriies commenced an agitation for
Government help to improve the harbour and Or. Charles Raffle is to be
credited with the motion to ask for £20,000 for that purpose. Long before
this, however, a move had been made to endeavour to render the siltation on
the bar less severe, and John Griffiths had entered into a compact with
Mr James Atkinson to erect a breakwater between Griffiths and Rabbit
Islands, with a view to checking the income of sand carried by the sea
rushing through that old passage. In fact, it appears the agreement was
completed, Griffiths to receive £5OOO and a lease of the islands for 50 years, in
return for the satisfactory completion of the work. He did erect the greater
part of the breakwater, but in a tremendous storm during the equinoxes
of 1847 it was washed away, and poor Griffiths suffered much loss. The
breakwater which now stands on the same spot was afterwards built by
prison labour, and was partially successful in minimising the siltation.
In September, 1856, the infant municipality was visited by Sir
Henry Barkley (the recently-arrived Governor of the colony), who came
in H.M.’s sloop Victoria, and was brought on shore by Captain Mills and
his hardy crew (composed of Thomas Pearson, Andrew Farncombe, John
Griffiths, George Swanston, and big George Anderson). The events of that
visit will never be effaced from the memory of the “ old identities ” who
witnessed the gorgeous pageant which accompanied His Excellency from
the wharf up Cox and Sackville streets to the Star of the West (then held
by John Walwyn Taylor, who had but recently erected those commodious
premises). The friendly societies, the councils, and the public all joined in
procession, headed by a trio of musicians—Cornelius M'Bride, the undertaker,
with a fife; Aldridge, a clerk at Beaver’s, with a drum manufactured from a
wooden flour barrel with a calfskin head ; and George Hellyar, a Cousin-jack
stonemason of inventive musical genius, with a home-made flute. The
extreme ridiculousness of the bandsmen’s appearance must have made
even the demure Sir Henry smile: for the fifer was a Goliath in stature
compared with the drummer, who was lean, guant, and knock-kneed ; whilst
the flautist was short, stout and stuffy. A levee was held, an address
presented, a banquet provided, and a “good time” generally, indulged in.
The weather was wet and boisterous, but the ardent loyalty of the early
residents was demonstrated for days after the Governor left the town.
The official record of this important event appears in the council
archives as under :
“In pursuance of the resolution of the council, passed on the Bth
day of September, 1856, a public meeting was held this day at the
Municipal Council Chambers, to take steps to secure His Excellency the
Governor a suitable reception on his visit to this town. The chairman
of the council occupied the chair. Committees were appointed for the
following purposes, viz : —To draw up an address to be presented to His
Excellency the Governor on his landing; to make all the necessary
arrangements to entertain His Excellency at a public dinner; and to make
suitable arrangements for the proper reception of His Excellency. His
Excellency Sir Henry Barkley, K. 0.8., arrived at this port (Port Fairy) in
H.M.S. Victoria, and landed at Belfast in the afternoon of the same day.


The deputation appointed by the council received His Excellency on his
landing, and the procession, as previously arranged, escorted him to the
Star of the West Hotel, and at 7 o’clock His Excellency was entertained
by the inhabitants at a public dinner. In consequence of His Excellency’s
arrival, no meeting of the council was held this day. The following address
was presented to His Excellency by the deputation appointed for the
purpose, viz :
“To His Excellency, Sir Henry Barkly, Knight Commander of the Most
Honorable Order of the Bath, Captain General and Governor in Chief of the Colony
of Victoria, Vice Admiral of the same, &c., &c., &c. —May it please Your Excellency
—We, the members of the Municipal Council of Belfast and the inhabitants of the town
and district generally, take leave to address Your Excellency and to offer our
sincere congratulations upon your safe arrival in this part of the Colony under
your rule, and to express the pleasure afforded to all classes by Your Excellency’s
visit. We beg to assure Your Excellency that a deep feeling of loyalty and devotion
to Her Majesty, and to yourself as her representative, fills our hearts, and we are
persuaded that great personal respect and regard for Your Excellency animates this town
and district. The remoteness of our locality from the seat of your Government made
us fear that we should not have an opportunity of testifying these sentiments in
the present way but we have been constantly anxious since Your Excellency’s arrival
in the colony to support and strengthen your Government. We believe that Your
Excellency will be gratified by seeing the advances made among us, particularly
in developing the agricultural resources of the country. The united districts of
Belfast and Warrnambool supply the colony annually with about four hundred thousand
(400,000) bushels of grain, and ttiis (conjointly with the energy displayed in other
places) has checked large remittances hitherto made to foreign countries for corn,
and also found suitable and honourable employment for a great number of farming
people. The churches and schools will show Your Exceilercy that the great objects
of all government —the maintenance of religion and good order, —have not been
neglected here ; and while we again express our pleasure that this the first Vice-
Kegal visit ever paid to Belfast should be made by Y T our Excellency, we venture
to express a hope that it will leave a favourable impression on your mind —S, J.
Bayly, Town Clerk ; John Mason, Chairman.
“ The following was the Governor’s reply :
“Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,— l receive with much pleasure this loyal
and dutiful address from the inhabitants of Belfast. I thank them especially for
their congratulations on my safe arrival at their Port, and for their assurances of
esteem and of support to my administration of the Government. It is my wish
whilst on the spot to make myself acquainted, as far as practicable, with the
capabilities and requirements of the town and neighbourhood, and I feel confident
that when I have the opportunity of visiting the local institutions to which you
refer, I shall find them of a character highly creditable to the population, and
calculated to confirm the favourable impressions with which I a.n prepared to view
the exertions of your infant municipality.
“ Immediately after the presentation of the address, His Excellency
held a levee, and in the course of the afternoon visited the various public
offices and buildings, and on the following day, Friday, 17th, took his
departure overland for Warrnambool, being escorted by the police Magistrate
and several of the inhabitants,”
This event in the social history of Port Fairy is still an era-mark
in the mind of the “ oldest inhabitant.” Tenders for the erection of the
jetty were let shortly after this, Porter and Kobinson securing the contract
at £4,600, so that the governor’s visit was not fruitless.


Early in its experience*, the Municipal Council discovered the unsatis-
factory position with respect to the control of the streets and roads of the
town, caused by the Atkinson monopoly; and correspondence was opened
up with the then Attorney General enquiring as to Atkinson’s rights. No-
thing satisfactory, however, appears as the outcome of that letter-writing ; but
later on, a communication was received from John Steavenson, secretary of the
Central District Road Board, stating that “it appears that when Atkinson’s
Special Survey was alienated from the Crown, over measurement was given,
for the express purpose of marking off roads afterwards. But our municipal
fathers did not follow the matter further on this important departmental
memo., and so, in later years, open conflict between the parties resulted.
Before the establishment of the Town Council, Parliament had been
moved, on the proposition of Mr Cole, M P., to order the production of the
“ correspondence, notes, and references relating to “ the selection of the
Special Survey at Port Fairy by Mr James Atkinson, as also respecting the
islands and land in the neighbourhood selected by him,” also “ pai ticulars of
the land in the vicinity held by Government, and how acquired,” all with the
olject of dislodging Atkinson from his Robinson Crusoe position of being
“ lord of all he surveyed ” —at least so far as public highways were concerned.
These papers were produced, together with plans of the Survey, but all tended
to strengthen rather than weaken Mr Atkinson’s position.
Some very extensive works of street forming and making were under-
taken during the first year of the Council’s existence. A report on the
drainage of the town gave rise to much deliberation—three surveyors (Kingk,
Campbell, and Howes) being engaged to report on the best methods. The
section in James-street proved a difficult problem—the proposals to convey the
water through Bank street, or by William street, and through Wood-
ward’s paddock, Id the river, caused much wrangling, and ultimately the
present existing scheme was adopted, being reported to be the least expensive.
In 1857, the Commissioner of Public Works and a party of Parlia-
mentarians visited the place, and the Hon. W. M. K. Vale was interviewed,
and he promised to the council substantial help for harbour improve-
ments. The post office buildings were erected in Bank-street, by Mr John
Mason, the old wooden building in Sackville-street, which had hitherto
served as offices, being vacated at the end of 1857.
The council obtained the concession to prisoners sentenced to 12 months
of being retained in Port Fairy, instead of being sent to Melbourne for
imprisonment, the gaol being now proclaimed, the purpose being to secure
their labour for the benefit of the town. Then, Trades Hall objections to
this principle were never thought of, and Governments were pliant in
the extreme.
Lmmox Trew, long afterwards known for his eccentricities, even then
had a fad; and it took the form of a strong antipathy to unsightly telegraph
poles, on which topic he repeatedly sent lengthy epistles to the council and
other authorities.
During this year an agitation was commenced to construct a tramway


“ to some point on The Plains, or elsewhere ;” some-what indefinite, certainly,
but really to connect this port with Ararat, and the then almost unknown
Wimraera district. Would that our far-sighted legislators had accomplished
that purpose ! However, a conference to discuss the matter was held, at which
Warrnambool Road Board and Municipal Council were represented by Messrs
A. Struth and Allan Jenkins, and S. Macgregor and J. Elliott respectively ;
Messrs John Bland and John Mason, and Dr. Russell and Joseph Whitehead
acting for the Belfast Road Board and Municipal Council. A resolution was
arrived at, tothe effect that the “ early formation of a road equi-distant from
Belfast and Warrnambool to the goldfields, as well as the neighbouring
country ” was desirable. A report on the subject was drafted, deputations ap-
pointed, and an application made for £lOO,OOO for the purpose of construct-
ing what is now known as the main Ararat road In 1858, £20,000 was
actually obtained, and the fixing of a “commencing point advantageous
alike to Belfast and Warrnambool” was determined upon, miles south
of Woolsthorpe,”
At this time, work was very scarce, and large numbers of men were
without means of livelihood. The council accepted the responsibility of
providing labour, and at one meeting passed £146 for relief wages.
The construction of this road, however, relieved them considerably.
The annual elections this year brought forward eight candidates, and
resulted as follows :—J. Bland (dead), 204 ; Jos. Whitehead (dead), 157 ;
Abijah John Brown (dead), 137; J. Lockyer Huntly, 119; Wm Witton
(dead), 21; John Finn (dead), 1; Charles Ruffle (dead), 1; J. M. Knight
(dead), 6. The two latter withdrew after nomination, but apparently there
was no provision for such procedure, and they had to go to the poll. Or.
Mason was elected chairman. During the year, Crs Bland and Hosking
were fined 10s each for not attending after a “call” ot the council, but
apologising, the tine was reduced to Is. The very first attempt at street
tree planting was this year made, Cr Talbot proposing a vote of £5O for the
purpose, but neglect killed the trees planted then, as it did similar attempts
in later years.
The agitation for better gaol accommodation had resulted in the
erection of the present buildings. Previously, the gaol had been merely a slab
hut, standing at the corner of Gipps and Cox-streets, on Rutledge’s pro-
perty, where also the first court-house stood. Prisoners were then treated in
a free and easy manner; frequently when incarcerated for drunkenness
being let go home on promise to the constable to “turn up” at court next
morning. The sailors trading to the port gave considerable trouble to the
constables, and one instance comes to mind. A big 6ft. 3in. son of the
Vikings came ashore for a “ spree,” and was “ run in.” When sobered,
however, he forced his way out of the slab watchhouse, and walked up the
town. Constable Watson, the watch-house keeper, and another “trap,”
called “The Native Dog”—old residents will recognise him—met the
sailor opposite Dr Russell’s corner, and again essayed to arrest him, but
he declined to go back to the slab hut. Armed with the authority of the law,
although in plain clothes, the constables proceeded to take the man, but
he remarking, “You took me when I was drunk before, but you’re not able
to take me now I’m sober,” let out and scattered his men, ultimately dipping
the three in the swamp that then existed opposite the Star of the West.


The court sat then as often as necessary, Mr VV. Rutledge generally
administering the law. If a case came before His Worship which he thought
required special punishment, he would invariably enquire, “ Is The Wave in 1"
If that vessel were in the harbour, then defendants knew their doom,
“Three months in Melbourne gaol” was the order, and, in irons usually,
the culprit was conveyed to tlae schooner. If The Wave wasn’t “in,”
then a heavy fine followed, or the accused, if he had no money, was dis-
charged with a caution.
The present gaol buildings were erected by a man named Broadbent,
and proclaimed on the 20th August, On the very first day it was opened
for the reception of inmates, Broadbent kept high holiday, and fell into the
hands of the “traps.” Next morning he was presented for being drunk and
disorderly, and pleaded guilty, remarking in his Yorkshire dialect to His
Worship, who presided, “ Wa’ll, I builded the plaice, so I think I had a
right to be the first to occupy ’eu.” The plea was accepted, and he was
discharged.
In the earlier part of this year, Mr Woodward (Atkinson’s agent) had
refused permission to the council to obtain material for road making from
off the lands of the Survey ; and, acting upon what was presumed to be
their rights as given by the Municipalities Act, the corporation tendered
a sura of £22 10s as purchase money for seven and a half acres of land in
“ Avery’s paddock ” (now owned by Mr W, Fowling), from whence to
obtain stone. Workmen were put on to obtain the material, whereupon
summonses were served upon the men for trespass and for the value of the
stone removed. A special meeting of the council decided to defend the
action, but, in the meantime, Mr Woodward had been waited upon, and
agreed to settle the matter by arbitration. The deed was prepared for the
arbitrators, and after three months** hanging up,” the negotiations fell
through. A resolution was passed, as expressive as it appears to have been
merited, recording “ the unqualified disapprobation of the discourteous and
reprehensible manner in which Mr Woodward had p trifled with the time of
the council and interests of the public by refusing at the last moment to
execute the arbitration bond; and although he had previously perused
and approved of the draft of the same, afterwards demanded £3l
2s 8d for the stone.” This resolution raised the ire of R. H. Woodward, and
a writ was issued for the value of the material —but an order for £l2 Jss
only, with £8 8s Gd costs, was obtained against the council. The meetings of
the council had been held in the court house buildings, but in July, 1858, the
premises in Sackville-street, adjoining the Stag, and which until then had
been occupied as the Bank of Australasia, were rented from Mr Lennox
Trew, and for many years continued the seat of municipal government. An
effort to sell as offices to the council for £5OO the premises off Gipps street
(then known as “the Billiard Room”) now owned by Mrs Tucker, and
occupied by Mrs M'Oallum, was ineffectual. The place had been built
for the special delectation of the squatters who then made Port Fairy a
centre of foregathering, but at this period had become little used—the Stag
and the Star both being provided with billiard rooms for their visiting patrons.
It was about this period that Mr James Atkinson granted lands in various
parts of the town for public purposes—Town Hall, Mechanics’ Institute,
Oddfellows’ Hall, Boarding School Bay, &c. —which was his sole patrimony
to the public in return for the special survey advantages. Mr Charles


Kingk’s excellent plan of the town, which now adorns the wall of our
municipal chambers, was prepared to define the streets and reserves; and has
ever been since reckoned as an accurate alignment of the streets and properties
The charge for its production was <£93 14s ; but the claim was objected to, and
MrKingk had to sue for payment. He proceeded for £ll4 14s, but was only
awarded £46 Is, with £26 9s coats Thus early did our municipality dabble
in law—and the legacy seems never to have deserted the successors to the
office of councillor in Port Fairy. As a result of this litigation Mr
Kingk was deprived of his position; Mr John S. Jenkins, now of
liichmond, receiving the appointment, Hut he only acted as surveyor for
about two years, having been elected to a similar position in Hamilton,
at a higher salary, Mr George Kelly succeeding Mr Jenkins here.
Direct shipments of wool, gold, tallow, <fec., were regularly despatched
from Port' Fairy in these times; and, for the better lightering of go)d-,
Hulledge atid Co. imported from England, in sections, a large iron flat-
bottomed lighter, at a cost of £3OOO. In putting her together, the workers
here fitted the plates incorrectly and had to take her to pieces after being
nearly completed ; not altogether an accidental mistake, it was hinted, but
to lengthen the well-paid wages of the period. The lighter, which was
painted bright red, I remember, was launched ’midst great jollification, and
drawing but 18in. of water was reckoned to be the very thing for
“crossing the bar.” Her maiden trip, however, nearly cost the lives of
the four men who took her out of the river with the first cargo of wool.
A big roller caught her on the Bar, and twirled her round and round like
a cork, the sailors all being precipitated into the sea. The lighter was a
failure, being built with a broad beam which prevented her sailing against
the currents and seas then to be faced at the mouth of (he river. She
to this day lies embedded as a foundation on the water frontage of some
portion of the Steam Packet Wharf; and when speculative archacelogists
in the dim centuries of the future are delving and digging for evidences of
primitive civilisation, this old iron monstrosity will give them more trouble
to define than even the mythical Spanish galleon which to day is exercising
the credulity of some Warrnamhool savants. In connection with this iron
lighter, a story is told of how Mr. George Stewart, then P. M., was
inspecting Iter whilst in course of construction. Our friend, George Appleton
was engaged helping, and, in passing some red hot nuts and bolts to
the engineer, purposely dropped one of the “nuts” on to the P.M.’s
broad-rimmed beiltopper, just as he was ascending from the ship’s hold,
which had the effect of scorching off the rim of that gentleman’s then very
fashionable head gear. No wonder George was afterwards dubbed with a
nick name, which was created by this incident.
The present botanic gardens area having been secured, a commence-
ment was made to reclaim what was then a low, swampy, reedy morass.
It had been a paddock for the grazing of the police horses, which numbered
some 18 to 20 animals, for there were at that time eight mounted and six
foot police stationed in Port Fairy, Cr, Talbot purchased in Adelaide
a quantity of trees and shrubs which were received in June, 1859; and
our late estimable friend, Baron von Mueller, thus early began his beneficent
labours for the colony, and sent a number of willow-cuttings for the
beautification of the river walks. Unfortunately, they proved unsuitable
to the saline properties of the river banks. Mr Henry Hedges, a practical


gardener of extensive British experience, was appointed superintended
(not curator), and submitted a plan for laying out the gardens. That plan
was subsequently adopted, and in our lovely serpentine walks and delightful
oval we have a monument which will ever keep green the memory of Henry-
Hedges. £5OO was obtained from the Government for fencing purposes,
and £2OO as a grant to develop the gardens.
On the 9th November of this year (1859), the Prince of Wales attained
his majority, and the loyal Australians made proper holiday—the council of
the Borough of Belfast failed to meet, and things generally got on the “ razzle
dazzle.” Whether it was during these festivities that the rate roll was stolen
or not, will fiever now be known ; but that important municipal document
had been exhibited outside the office for public information, and purloined.
A reward of £lO discovered the culprit, and one John Johnston was
warned to appear before Her Majesty’s Justices in and for the colony of Vic-
toria, to answer a charge of theft, and there and then agreed to pay the £lO
to the informant, with £1 8s 6d costs, it the “ grave and reverend seigneurs ”
would withdraw the charge—which they did.
It must have been about this time—gay times, too—that the
following record, which appeared in the rough minute book of the council,
was made: —“Present Crs Mason and Whitehead; the engineer and the
town clerk were also in attendance, but there being no quorum, notwith-
standing most exemplary patience had been exhibited by these devoted
servants of the public and guardians of the public, &c., the business lapsed.
—God save the Queen. Or Ruffle in the distance—but Crs Mason and
Whitehead bolted ; the town clerk and engineer stood to their guns.” Then
another item, indicative of the highly charged surroundings of the early
days reads:—“Or H was fined 10s for being drunk and disorderly,
and a resolution was passed that in consequence of the misconduct of Or
H —, one of the members of this council, it be recorded in the minutes
that the council feel such conduct tends to bring the council into con-
tempt, and they therefore express the hope that Or H will resign his
seat at the board, or at least refrain from attending at the meetings of the
council, and a copy of this resolution be sent to Or H The council-
lors were not afraid in those days to be outspoken ; and the offending mem-
ber never again appeared at the board.
In 1860, the choosing of a town-hall site gave considerable trouble.
Mr Atkinson having named or four allotments he was willing to present
for the purpose, it was ultimately fixed to take the allotment in Sackville-
street north, the spot where Mrs Unkles’ cottage now stands; but sub-
sequently the corner whereon the gasworks are erected was settle upon—and
the town-hall is still unbuilt.
The owners of property in James-street south were notified by the
council now, as they have been many times since, that they were encroaching
on the public footpaths, and a warning was sent each “ that they must under-
stand that they shall have to put same back to the building line at any
moment when called on by the council to do so.” How would that resolution
operate in this day of grace 1896 1


The Court-house was built in this year, and the council assumed the
position of censors of the Government plans, and had some of their sugges-
tions embodied in the erection of the present structure,
Public baths, too, gave rise to considerable discussion ; but the “ for.
ward ” party carried a resolution to erect, and did erect some bathicg boxes
at Boarding School Tucker and Gallin’s tender for £l4O being ac-
cepted, but £6l 12s 5d extras were demanded by the contractors when the
work was finished. James O’Dell and his wife were appointed caretakers,
but the same year heavy weather was experienced, and smashed some of the
bathing houses to splinters, and the others had to be secured by “ heaping
stones round the buildings.” The site granted by Mr Atkinson had been
enclosed by a 6-feet paling fence, but this was completely washed away.
ye modern-time Sabbath desecrators: “ Sabbath bathing in the public baths is
prohibited,” was the determinate resolution of the Council of the Borough
of Belfast in 1860.
George Appleton—a present-day municipal critic —about this time
began his apprenticeship for later honours—for has he not been a councillor
of the Borough of Port Fairy since?—and in the interests of somebody (?)
wrote, complaining that the surveyor (Mr George Kelly) was “ getting work
done without tendering.” This was not forgotten by Mr George Kelly ap-
parently, for, a month or two later on, we read, “ G. Appleton applied for
£2O on account of cleaning water tables and repairing footpaths, when
the surveyor declined to certify, because of the very rude and unfinished
manner in which the work was done." Mr Appleton, who was present,
charged the surveyor with partiality, blundering, and unfairness, but
he didn’t get the £2O.
The Moyne mills were built in this year, and the laying down of the
Gipps-street frontage gave rise to some discussion. Lloyd Rutledge obit.
In 1861 the council borrowed from the bank £2OO to provide relief
works for the labouring class, and 5s per yard for 2| inch metal was decided
upon as the rate to be paid ; but the “ friend of the working man ” next
meeting succeeded in having the rate increased to 7s 6d, which, with carting,
made the cost of the metal 12s 6d per yard.
Numbers of men left the town for the New Zealand gold fields,
amongst whom were the gardens superintendent (Hedges) and his assistant
(Jones). Win. Besc was appointed to the curatorship, but only occupied it
for a few months, when our old friend, and present curator, secured the
position, which he has held, with one or two breaks, ever since.
The building of a town hall was again discussed, and the Govern-
ment was asked to vote £lOOO for its erection—but up to date'.they haven t
done so, nor are likely to. At the annual nomination of councillors, Mr
George Haynes, who had filled a vacancy occurring during the year, made
a record of self-assurance by proceeding to nominate himself! but Mr John
Thomas Wild interrupted our friend, and « begged to propose Mr Haynes.”
In those days, nominations were made at a public meeting of ratepayers.


A poll was taken, and resulted in G. Hutton receiving 151 votes; Dr.
Russell, 128; P. Gleeson, 81; G. Haynes, 79. There were some
rumpuses in the council following, and Messrs Bland, Beaver, and Janies Scott
resigned, their places being filled by Messrs Mason (who had also resigned
some time previously), 116; G. Haynes, 101; and J. C. Spink, 50; the
other candidates, John Lee and John Meagher, obtaining 50 and 47 votes
respectively. Mr. James Mylne Knight was elected town clerk and sur-
veyor in 1861, and was as popular as he was efficient. The legality of Mr.
Haynes’ nomination was questioned by Mr. John Lee, who took his seat at
the council table at the first meeting succeeding the election. Mr. George
Hutton (chairman) ordered Lee to withdraw, which he declined to do and
assaulted the chairman, whereupon a constable was sent for, and John was
“ accordingly removed.”
1861 seems to have been a year of depression in municipal affairs,
for no record remains of “something attempted, something done;” and at
the beginning of 1862, all work was suspended for six months on account of
lack of funds. “ Block 7 ” —that long time insanitary waterhole off
street—caused some trouble, it being made the peg upon which a dispute
with Mr J. Atkinson, the landlord, was hung; and reports and complaints
were repeated and bitter—but to no apparent purpose,
The extreme loyalty of those times crops up again in the form of a
pathetic resolution of condolence to Her Majesty Queen Victoria on the
occasion of the death of the Prince Consort. But the death of Prince
.Albert had less cause for mourning to us as a town than an event which
transpired in our own history. Then Port Fairy district became clothed
in “ sackcloth and ashes,” and the emblems of that mourning have even
to the present times been borne by the locality, because of the collapse of
the great business firm of Wm, Rutledge and Co. With their collapse
followed a great financial depression, and the severance from this town of
business, which has never been regained. Squatters, who had always made
Rutledge and Co. their bankers, transferred their dealings elsewhere; farmers
and others followed suit, and everywhere in Western Victoria the big smash
was hailed with regret, whilst in Port Fairy the effect was paralysing. After
events proved that the pressure brought to bear on the firm by the banks
was an iniquitous proceeding, for, after the heavy and reckless expenses
forced upon the firm by the Insolvency Court, they honourably paid 20s.
in the pound to all their creditors, and “ certificates ” were granted to the
grand men of the firm—W. Rutledge, Horace Flower, and Francis Forster
—in March, 1863, without demur. The liabilities totalled £177,508,
But to return to municipal matters. Or. Abijah John (Clockey)
Brown died June, 1862. He had been a member but a short time, and the
business energy of his Stag proprietary was not developed as a councillor. At
the subsequent annual elections, Hugh Sloley —pater of our military-mannered
Fred—topped the poll with 90 votes; G. Haynes, 85 ; David Smith (now of
Koroit, but then proprietor of the Commercial Hotel) 70; Dr. Boyd, 60;
W. Beaver, 48 ; J. C. Spink, 34. Will the events of that election ever be
forgotten? Mere mention conjures up a drunken crowd, a wheelbarrow, and
its pitiable occupant. Mr. John Mason again elected chairman. The plan of
letting the management and work of the Botanic Gardens by tender was


this year attempted, and James Prior’s offer at £52 per annum was accepted.
It didn’t work well, apparently, for the principle wasn’t continued long.
The erection of the bridge over the Moyne connecting the jetty with the town
was commenced in 1862, the contractors being Alex. Amos and Co., and it
proved of splendid facility during the after years that Bateman and Co.
controlled from here the potato markets of the colonies. The “ cutting ’
through the Flagstaff Hill was carried out by George Appleton and Co., to
connect the jetty and bridge by a tram line. The making of the Yambuk,
Rosebrook, and Hamilton roads was further gone on with, costing some £l2OO,
The trouble with the trustees of the cemetery —John Finn and James
Anderson—about this time created much interest, and the public press was
greatly exercised respecting the suppression of the accounts connected with
God’s acre. Mr James Atkinson having granted the site of the old cemetery
also nominated the trustees, and they considered their responsibility was alone
to that gentleman, and not to the public. However, it led to the cemetery
being placed on a better footing, and to trustees being appointed on nomination
by the council. One of our present State pensioners, Mr H. J H. Irwin, who
was then master of the Church of England school in Prince-street —and many
of us remember the “cutting” manner of his methods of tuition—was an
applicant, with Mr. William Witton, for the position of rate collector to the
municipality, but was unsuccessful. Mr Owen Flannery had previously
been revenue officer.
It was during 1862 that the Duffy Land Act selections were at their
highest, and the town was very much alive—the late J. T. Wild and John
Owen Evans made a haul by buying up every Government map of the
parishes obtainable, and selling them at a high profit to the eager applicants
for the land. Dummyisru was rampant, and everyone with a pliable con-
science was hired by the large landowners to put in applications for land, on
the chance of being successful in the balloting. All the old topers and loafers
of the place, as well as many others who would now be ashamed to admit
their connection with the “ big swindle,” crowded the land offices on the days
of selection. 102,905 acres were selected in the Belfast district, and the town
was crowded with visitors.
In April of 1863, Mr Allan Jenkins, as agent for Mr A. H. Knight,
preferred to transfer the “ waterlxole” in Block 7 to the council for one shilling \
but the offer was deferred, and deferred, until it was withdrawn altogether,
and so the town lost what could easily have been converted into a valuable
public reserve. One other blunder was also perpetrated at the time—the
imposition of tolls on the main roads leading into the town, fortunately,
it didn’t prove profitable, and the gates and houses, erected at a good deal of
expense, were sold for a song.
Another public grievance, which to this day has never been
remedied, was also considered by the council, and a fence erected by an
adjoining landowner ordered to be removed from the road leading to the
new cemetery on the hummocks. The fence was not removed, but a com-
promise arrived at (which never should have been), consenting to a gate being
put across the road —which gate was soon after locked, and ultimately the
remains of some of our earliest history-makers were allowed to reach their


last resting place only by the sufferance of private individuals. The
corporation were advised by eminent counsel’s opinion that the road-rights
Were their’s, yet pity ’tis, they failed to assert them. The idea that by so
doing they would benefit the one holder of land in the vicinity of the
cemetery seems to have blinded their sense of duty to the public, and dulled
any sentiment of respect to the friends of the dead occupants of the distant
acropolis.
In September, 1863, the municipality was proclaimed “ The Borough
of Belfast.” At the subsequent election, there were nine candidates, the
polling being:—Joseph Whitehead, 123; R. H. Woodward, 123; J.
Mason, 98; Charles Ruffle, 98; Dr Russell, 41; Lewis Grant, 40;
Lennox Trew, 15; Andrew Bruce, 1 ; Wm. Webb, 1. On the casting vote
of the chairman, Cr Mason was elected to the third seat. On 21st October,
Or Haynes was elected first mayor of the borough.
This year the Government grants-in-aid were considerably reduced ;
and Cr Hutton, fearful apparently of the ability of the town to support
separate municipal government (and that fear has come on succeeding Port
Fairy councils), proposed an amalgamation with the Belfast Road Board.
It was, however, not persisted in.
Mr Charles Sumner was elected town clerk in succession to Mr.
James Knight, who proceeded to Penshurst as shire engineer. The auditors
of the town accounts were then elected by the burgesses in public meeting,
and their charge for examining and certifying to the accounts was £2 2s,
and that fee so remained until the system now in vogue became law,
which gives fortunate Government nominees to the position the privilege
of levying £6O or £lOO, as the occasion requires.
The council joined with the road board in securing the proclamation
of the main road to Hamilton, via Macarthur, and, for obtaining signatures
to the petition to be presented to Parliament to secure that purpose, had to
pay a sum of £35.
The mail arrangements at this time had not evolved a very good service
and an agitation for a daily mail with Melbourne, via Wickliffe and Ballarat,
was commenced, and ultimately secured. Verily, a round-about way, when
viewed from present time hurrying !
In 1864, there was a pronounced agitation by the council to prevent
the further extension of the jetty—a questionable proceeding viewed from
present time limitation of shipping facilities—and resolutions thereanent
(referred to elsewhere) W’ere as thick as blackberries. In this year, Mr W.
Barrett, a clerk employed by Atkinson’s estate, was appointed town clerk,
and Messrs M‘Mahon and Webb elected as members of the council, Mr
R. H. Woodward being mayor.
The building of the Mechanics’ Institute was commenced, and £25
voted by the council to help the funds. A big bazaar and Bruce auction
(in which a seal, caught on the beach and stuffed by Mr George Cast wood,


formed an attractive exhibit) realised some £2OO towards the funds, and,
through the energy of the committee-, a substantial Government grant was
also secured towards the erection of the present creditable building.
Mr A. IT. Knight was visiting Port Fairy about this time, and
renewed the offer to dispose of block 7 to the corporation for Is, which offer
was accepted, but the tiansfer was never completed.
The question of altering, or removing, the bridge across the Moyne
leading to the jetty, so as to enable small vessels to come up to the wharves,
was one which gave rise to a good deal of controversy ; and ultimately the
advocates of the total removal of the bridge, headed by Cr W. Webb, carried
their object—much to the disgust and inconvenience of the bulk of inhabitants
who had used the bridge and jetty for a promenade, and which, if how
existent, would be an invaluable adjunct to our seaside attractions.
On the 24th December, 1864, Mr James Atkinson, the proprietor
of the Belfast special survey, died in Sydney, N.S.W., and residents were
hopeful that then some change in the management of the estate would
accrue; but the property being encumbered, nothing was possible, and
for twenty years longer Port Fairy was destined to be under the ban of
absenteeism. Nithsdale Carleton Atkinson, son and heir to the estate,
continued the same style and conditions of management right up to the
decimation of the property in 1885.
The sand drift along Belfast East was beginning to become a trouble-
some matter, and the impossibility of preventing cattle wandering upon the
hummocks led to the tabling of a resolution in 1865, “That the Board of
Lands and Works be asked to have the lands along the coast line resumed by
the Government and fenced”—of course, that didn’t come off. The bridge
near the gardens was reported to be in a dangerous condition, and barriers
to prevent dray traffic were erected fora while; which “precaution,” if we
lead between the lines, was taken as a forcible argument for pressure on the
Government for a vote for a new bridge, which object was soon afterwards
secured, on a special leport from Mr Steavenson, Engineer of the Public
Works Department.
January 3rd 1866, was proclaimed a day of humiliation and prayer,
on account of the protracted drought, and those of us who remember the
continuance of heat and lack of rainfall recognise the great need there was for
more than human intervention to lessen the disastrous results of the sus-
pension of the regular course of seasonable rains; this present year’s dryness
gives promise to be a repetition of that season’s experience of high prices.
There was in those times a well-known resident named Cole, who
at intervals came to loggerheads with the council ; and a periodic collision
occurred whilst he was engaged as herdsman. He rented the “ boiling-down ”
paddock, which was then, as it now is, the “key” to the entrance to the
common, and because of some grievance which occurred, Cole fenced across
(he entrance, and deprived the townspeople of their grazing grounds until
his conditions of settlement were agreed to. Since then, the council
themselves have leased the land, it having frequently given rise to trouble.


It was in this year Mr .Chrlstapherson reported upon the feasibility
of providing a water supply for the town ; hut his report, like that of
Mr Gordon, on the Moyne Swamp reservoir, resulted in nothing hut talk.
Later, however, the permanent reservation of the land at the Moyne Falls
was Secured, and will some day prove an invaluable provision for the liquid
necessities of this town.
Baton von Mueller, ever eager to promote the advance of agricultural
science, forwarded to the council some plants for experimenting as sand-stays,
hut little effort was made locally to second the Baron’s desires. They
were certainly planted out, hut no further attention given.
Mr Charles Ruffle was elected Mayor this year, and, at an election to
fill a vacancy caused hy Mr R. H, Woodward’s resignation, “Charley” Voisey
defeated I)r Russell hy 18 votes, amidst much local excitement.
The experiment of establishing a public market was made in 1867,
and Messrs Southcombe and Ireland’s tender for erecting the open buildings,
which stood for some years on the present gasworks site, was accepted at
£110; but although by-laws were framed to compel the sellers to alone
trade at the “ market,” it proved a frost, and the buildings were afterwards
sold for £l3 11s There were many changes in the jwrsonnel of the council
during 1867, Messrs P. M‘Darnel, J. Jellie and Dr Loftus becoming members;
the first named defeating the well-known solicitor, and first town clerk, Mr.
S. J. Bayly. The establishment of an Industrial School for the Western
district was agitated for, it being proposed drat Koroit should be its
location, but Government patronage was beginning to be less lavish, and
nothing came of it.
The first move towards municipal embarrassment, in the shape of
money-borrowing for unproductive works by means of loans on debentures,
was made in 1867, and Cr. Webb is to be credited with the proposal to
raise £lOOO by this means. Amongst those who tendered for lire loan,
appear the names of R. Emery, for £300; Dr Loftus, £150;
Lodge, £l5O.
Our neighbours to the East were advancing rapidly, and the
exodus of many Port Fairy families thitherwards materially aided its pro-
gression. The removal of the resident police magistrate (Capt. Lane) to
Warrnambool gave occasion for a strong protest, which was effective until
tin* excitement subsided, when the P.M. was shifted without further ado.
A first start was made towards illuminating the town ; but it was not until
1868 that the streets were actually lit, when four kerosene lamps were
provided.
Great trouble occurred again over the roads of the town during the
year 1868, ; the Bootahpool-road trouble arising because of Mr. E. A, Corbett
closing it to traliic. The council thereupon seemed once more detennined
to assert their fullest rights, and did secure free control of that important
thoroughfare, and also instructed Mr Howes to survey that and the Albert
and new Cemetery roads, with a view to proclamation. Lawyer E, G. Yorke
being mayor—which position he gained by ballot, after equal voting with


Or W. Young—the inherent inclination of borough councillors for litigation
was probably encouraged, and the same idea as that recently expressed by a
present-day councillor that “ Supreme Court law was cheap,” seems to have
been listened to—and with precisely the same costly experience to the rate-
payers as we to-day are undergoing.
The Duke of Edinburgh visited the colony in 1868, and some com
motion was aroused in the loyal breasts of municipal councillors, and every
town and village was eager to secure the presence of the first scion of
royalty that had visited Australia. A dutiful address was prepared and
engrossed, and some councillors of the Borough of Belfast visited Moffatt’s
Hopkins Hill station, near Caramut, where Prince Alfred liad been invited
to spend a week, and presented it to His Royal Highness. They were some-
what abashed, -however, on their arrival at Hopkins Hill to find that their
municipal confreres from Warrnambool furnished a very different personal
appearance to themselves, they appearing in ordinary evening dress, whilst
each of the nine councillors from Warrnambool were clothed in specially
made light suits, white belltoppers, and blue veils—a copy of the attire of
the Prince. The reply read by Prince Alfred to the address may be seen
in the council chambers to-day. The annual elections this year show the
results: —G. Hutton, 199; J. Jellie, 166; G. Haynes, 15$/ E. G. Yorke,
130 ; W. Beaver, 85 ; the first three being elected. One. event of election
day was amusing. Richard Lane, the giant-like host of the Commercial,
then a councillor—an old sport, of great good nature for a wager ran a
hundred yards race in Sackville-street, with Edwin Bartlett, the baker, on
his shoulders, against opponents of lesser weight, and won midst the plaudits
of the crowd.
In 1869, the Rosebrook bridge was re-built, under the direction of
Mr T. E. Rawlinson, shire surveyor, C. G. Miller being the contractor, at
£1534. The first bridge at Rosebrook was built by Mr John Mason in 1853.
The erection of bathing houses on the Eastern beach was determined upon,
and £4OO voted therefor; but only two small sheds were erected, which
were afterwards removed, for fear of their being washed away. Poor old Tom
Kinneally was killed on the Hamilton road, said to have been the result of
careless stacking of metal on the highway, for which the council was re-
sponsible, Mr Geo. Butchart, who now had re-opened the Moyne Mills, and
was engaged in milling and produce dealing, was eltcted to the council in
place of R. Lane, who removed to Warrnambool ; and at the August
election, P. M‘Daniel polled 169; Dr Scott, 116; G. M, Johnston, 114; T.
Southcombe, 104—Cr Webb being appointed Mayor,
During 1870 there culminated the disputes regarding the rights of
the council to the roads and streets then unopened ; and notices to all persons
to remove obstructions were issued, special directions being given to the
agent of the Atkinson estate to remove the fences in Campbell-street which
crossed James, William, Albert, and College-streets, and Victoria terrace.
This he declined to do, and the council pulled them down; whereupon legal
proceedings were instituted by the estate to recover £5OO damages. A verdict
fora farthing was given; when a new trial was applied for by the council,
which was granted ; but. as the costs in the first trial had not been paid, an
application was made to rescind that order, which appears also to have been


granted. A compromise was agreed to later on, Mr Corbett consenting to
give rights over the Cemetery road, the Lagoon road, Albert road, the
Sandspit road, and a road encircling the Cricket ground, in Oampbell-street,
to Boarding School Bay, leasing four acres of that coast for 31 years (on
condition that if Mr Atkinson resumed possession of this reserve he should
pay for any improvements made), and also of the Cricket ground for same
period on similar terms. The Bootahpool and other roads at Rosebrook
were also to be proclaimed and placed under control of the council, con-
ditionally on their fencing the one side of these roads. These conditions,
however, were only partially observed, as residents of the present time are
aware. The cost to the town of gaining these concessions was over £BOO !
which, it was contended by those opposed to litigation, could have been
avoided by mutual forbearings. In fact, Ors Jellie and Scott urged that
course. Messrs Mason, 276; Webb, 241; Butchart, 179; were the successful
candidates for election (his year; John Lee and Robert M'Mahon receiving
each 90 votes. Cr Andrew Bruce was elected mayor.
In September, 1870, the boating accident, which resulted in the
drowning of Cr Patrick M'Daniel, occurred. A pleasure party consisting
of Messrs P. M'Daniel, 0. Voisey, A. Kell, Adam Pinkerton, Alex. Bishop,
T. W. Gaggin, Richard and Win. M'Daniel, Jack Cooper, and Dan. Saunders
had gone on a trip to the Lady Julia Percy Island, and on the return voyage
the weather roughened frightfully, and for fear of foundering, they determined
to attempt to land in Leura Bay. Poor M'Daniel was at the tiller of the
lighter Surprise, and made the effort to save the party, and did so at the sacri-
fice of his own life. A roller washed him off the deck, and he was never
seen again ; the others narrowly escaped a watery grave, the lighter
being much damaged.. The event caused deep regret, Mr M'Daniel being
highly esteemed in the place.
In 1871, the agitation for railway extension to Hamilton, via Kirkstall
and Macarthur, was first commenced, Dr Scott urging that a survey should
be asked for, which request was promised to be (and was, subsequently)
complied with. The present curator’s cottage was purchased, the Government
having no further use for the buildings as immigration depot. The land was
added to the Gardens reserve, Cr Webb was again on the borrowing idea,
and proposed floating a loan of £4OOO to make Albert, Regent, and Griffiths
streets, the Rosebrook road, and erect bathing places and a town hall, but the
proposal did not receive support. This year, Mr F. A. Mandeville was ap-
pointed town clerk (by the casting vote of the mayor), over Mr D. J.
Howes, and Mr George Castwood treasurer—the latter to this day con-
tinuing to discharge the important functions of that office. Messrs Hutton,
166; Haynes, 146; John Gee, 146; M'Mahon, 127, were the candidates at
the annual election. Cr Bruce reelected mayor.
Dr Scott urged the council in 1872 to press the scheme for the con-
struction of a canal from Port Fairy to Tower Hill Lake, so as to allow
produce and goods to be conveyed by small crafts to Port Fairy for shipment.
The doctor’s idea was to obtain prison labour for the work of excavation. May
it not be, that some day this ridiculed idea may be consummated ! The
audit fees this year were £4 4s, Messrs W. Beaver and Robert White doing
the work.


That grand piece of bridge masonry over Woodward’s drain was built
by Mr T, E. Rawlinson, C.E, which will ever be a monument to his skill
and care. The reconstruction of Sackville-street by the same engineer was
carried out by Andrew Fogarty and Co,, and the excellence of the work
has been demonstrated by the fact that since then but little outlay has
been required for its maintenance. It was a costly job, but its excellence
has proved it to be very cheap. The contract price of the ten chains was
£477 6s, and the charges for supervision and extras occasioned some trouble
with Mr Rawlinson and the council. In both these works, Mr Richard Emery
(now a councillor of the borough) was entrusted with the supervision.
After this, there seemed to have been a time of passiveness in council
work for a while. The elections in 1873 show Samuel Earle, 176; Robert
M'Mahon 166; W. Webb, 163; J. Lee, 158; James Fletcher, 135. During
this year Dr Scott resigned, and went to Hamilton to live, when Mr Fletcher,
solicitor, was elected to the vacancy so caused. In 1874, a little tree-planting
was carried out, but only those now gracing the entrance to St. John’s
Church remain as an evidence of the desire of a few councillors to beautify
the town. What a pity more of it wasn’t done. At the annual elections
(1874) J. M. Knight polled 210; John Lee, 195; G. Hutton, 183; G.
Haynes, 183. The tieing of the latter two led to a scrutiny, on the action of
Mr Haynes, but the result was in favour of Hutton, one ballot paper on
which was written “1 vote for Hutton,” being accepted, notwithstanding
that both names were erased. A big deputation was this year sent to
Melbourne re harbour works, at a cost of thirty-six guineas ! A. T. Woods
resigned his seat, as did Messrs Webb, Hutton, and Knight, during 1874, Mr
James Scott tilling the first vacancy, and Messrs Thomas Hutton, 0. Ruffle,
and G. Haynes those of the latter three.
The hummocks in Belfast East were fenced along the top to prevent
the sand being disturbed by cattle, a special vote being obtained for the
purpose. In October, 1874,’ Mr 8. J. Bayly, the tirst town clerk, died in
Warrnarnbooi, aged 45—a talented and successful solicitor. In 1875, Or
Haynes proposed a loan of £6OOO for road works and a town hall, but it
didn’t go. It was in this year that the Assize Court was threatened to be re-
moved, but by protest was prevented, on the council consenting to the holding
of the sittings alternately with Warrnarnbooi, which arrangement has
continued ever since. Mr E. Vanstan was elected this year, as also Messrs
Frank Tilley and Irwin Beatty, as members of the council.
Nothing of peculiar interest is recorded during this municipal year,
except, perhaps, the visit of Sir George Bowen. He was entertained by the
Mayor (Mr Thomas Hutton), and the town was en fete. The Governor
proceeded to Portland by steamer, being conveyed from the wharf in a
specially decorated steam barge, commanded by Captain Grant, A large
number of townsfolk accompanied Sir George to Portland to witness the
turning of the first sod of the Portland railway.
The firm of S. Macgregor and Co., auctioneers, whose business had
extended from Warrnarnbooi to Port Fairy and elsewhere, became insolvent,
which caused a considerable crisis amongst farmers and traders of this district.
The liabilities were £22,219 19s lOd.


In March, the Oddfellows’ Hall was burned down daring a performance
given by a travelling ventriloquist named Bosco. It was in this year, too,
that Haynes’ store in Sackville-street was destroyed by fire, when a stock
valued at £BOOO, and the buildings £12,000, were completely ruined, which
added more disaster to the town.
In 1876, tho retrenchment principles in Government departments
began to evolve, and the gaol was done away with, though strenuous
efforts to prevent it were made. The minimum of Government patrimony
was now being received by this town, and tho action of Or Vanstan (a
retired member of the force) in proposing the removal of the Superintendent
of Police—Mr D. D. Chambers—wasn’t looked on with favour. This was,
however, done a little later without request.
During 1876, Mr James Mylne Knight, a worthy and highly esteemed
public man for years, died, after a very short illness, amidst much regret. Mr
M‘Mahon was elected mayor in 1876, and those who remember the deputa-
tion which that year visited Melbourne in the interests of the harbour
improvements will re-call the report of events accompanying that week’s holi-
day in the metropolis. Mr George Appleton was elected a member of the
council, but though a candidate several times since, his apprenticeship has
never yet been renewed.
In 1877, the first meeting of the Dundas and Villiers Railway League
was held, and for several years an agitaiion for the construction of a line
connecting the Western district towns with the rail way system of the colony
was continued ; but dissention cropped in, and the interests of the various
localities became dissimilar, and the association collapsed, after much labour
and money being expended in obtaining statistical and political help.
The alteration of the electoral representation of the colony caused the
boundaries of the Port Fairy district to be altered in 1877, and Mr H. J.
Wrixon severed his valued political connection with this constituency, at
the following general election. Sir John O’Shanassy was elected, and he
immediately interested himself to have the name of the harbor changed
to “ Belfast,” which was done with consent of the council.
The harbour works were proceeded with this year, and the first diver,
our honoured friend Mr Isaac Smale, was sent down to help in the work of
deepening the channel leading to the s< a. The town clerk, Mr F. A.
Mandeville, was presented with an illuminated address and a doceur of
£lO 10s on the occasion of his removal to Melbourne—Mr Z. D. Wilson,
being appointed to succeed as municipal clerk.
A fire occurred in the Shire offices, Sackville-street, in which most of
the valuable records of the Belfast Road Board and the Shire Council were
destroyed. The then st cretary was charged with having caused the disaster,
and received a short term of imprisonment. In this year Mr W. Rutledge,
Port Fairy’s celebrated pioneer banker-merchant, died at the Farnham Estate,
aged seventy years, and had maintained to the last a degree of respect
from all Western district residents which amounted to veneration. Ho
deserved it. His death was caused by a buggy accident, which occured on
the road just beyond Korongah.


In 1878, a renewal of the agitation for building a Town Hull was
commenced by Or Ireland, who proposed a loan therefor; but beyond the
appointment of a committee to report, nothing resulted, as usual. Mr.
Haynes had thoughtfully, when on a visit to England, procured a quantity
of seeds for the Botanic gardens; but like other thousand and one special
donations to tha treserve, they were neglected and forgotten. Messrs Woods
and Tilley resigned their seats, the latter after occupying the Mayor’s chair
for a few months. Or Vanstan took the position of Mayor, and Messrs.
Southcombe and lies the vacant seats at the council table.
The Government had decided to erect a new post-office, and applications
were invited, through the council, from persons willing to sell a suitable site
for the building. Mr Joseph Handricks offered his allotments in Saokville-
street for £475 ; Mr W. Grubb his residence and land opposite the Star of
the West Hotel for £924 ; L. Buchholz the land in Bank-street on which
Mr L. Keating’s and Freckleton and M'Oallum’s premises now stand, for
£340 ; J. Wiiitehead, Mr W, Searle’s present residence and land in Bank-
street, £4OO ; W. Osmond, allotment next to Vanstan’s, at £350 ; J. Mason,
land Bank-street, £5OO ; and land at corner of Barclay-street, £5OO. Grubb’s
corner was recommended to the Government; but the officials had in the
meantime been interviewed in the interests of the Atkinson estate, and
by politcial influence the site whereon our present complete post-office
buildings stand was selected, but the price paid was never disclosed.
The dredge Wombat, which had been working in the river, was
threatened to be removed to Gippsland Lakes entrance, but was allowed
to remain on pressure being brought against the proposal, for a short time
longer. It was in 1878 that Sir John Goode visited Port Fairy to report on
the improvement of the harbour, towards the cost of which visit the Borough
Council contributed £loo—half the cost. Private contributions amounting
to some £5O were received, but afterwards returned to the following donors,
viz :—F. A. Corbett, £25; S. Baird, £5; Rutledge Bros,, £2 2s; G.
L}diaid, £2 2s ; J. Barclay, £3 3s; and others.
The road to the common w'as again in evidence, by Cole’s doggednrss,
and it was then the council ascertained that the fancied road beyond Stewart’s
in Belfast East had no existence—so said the Government authorities, and
Cole was master of the situation.
Scarlet fever was very prevalent this year, and the Borough Council
were forced to pay a considerable sum under the provisions of the Health Act
for special attendance on fever patients. This led to a proposition to erect a
fever ward on the hospital grounds, and the committee of that institution
consented to that course; but with the waning of the fever epidemic, so went
the enthusiasm for a contagious ward.
The great famine in India aroused the sympathy of the people of Port
Fairy to the tune of £B2 ss, which was forwarded to the authorities. In
1879, Captain H h. Lane died, a heart-broken victim of the Berry blight,
the Government having dispensed with his services as police magistrate. Sir
John Goode’s report on the harbour works was received early in 1879, and
a deputation waited on Mr J. B. Patterson, the Commissioner of Public
Works, who promised to visit and inspect for himself. This he did, with
no very good results.


In September, 1879, George Jellard and Edward Barley were drowned
whilst attempting to enter the South West Passage in their fishing boat.
Michael Prior, who was with them, succeeded in swimming ashore, almost
exhausted. In the same month, John Nichol went fishing in the bay alone in
a dingy, and was never again heard oh These events caused a gloom over
the town.
In 1880, Cr Ireland, ever progressive in suggestions, proposed the
purchase of a weighbridge for the Corporation, which was subsequently
procured, and Cr Magner, who had just been elected a councillor, introduced
the question of the erection of gasworks in the town. A poll of the
ratepayers was taken on the matter at the municipal elections, and, amidst
much opposition, the vote was in majority for a loan being raised for
the purpose, but Mr Magner himself was defeated, Messrs W, Earle, 0.
Bourne, and 0. Ruffle being returned, the two former in favour of gasworks,
the latter against* Or Wm. Horsley was elected mayor.
The harbour crew, which had been retained without a harbour-master,
Coxswain Hanby being in charge, was this year disbanded; the Government
very generously offering to keep on the crew, if the council paid their wages !
The Commissioner of Public Works and several members of the
Ministry visited the port, the mayor (Or Horsley) generously defraying the
whole of the expenses of entertaining the party. Crs Fry and Ireland re-
signed, for some reasons Unrecorded, Messrs Magner and Tucker filling their
places.
On Ist October of this year, the great fire in Sackville-street occurred,
whereby the Gazette office, W. Earle’s printing office, J. Mason’s office, D.
M. Ross’s drapery store, and R. Ireland’s shop and timber yards, and
Hutton Bros.’ extensive warehouses, were totally destroyed, with their
contents. The loss was estimated at £BOOO to £lO,OOO, and only very
partially insured.
In May, the foundation stone of the post-office was laid by the Hon.
Thomas Bent, the Commissioner of Public Works; Sir John O’Shannassy
and Mr Hickman Molesworth, who were then contesting the electorate,
giving exciting electioneering speeches on the occasion. It was on this visit
to Port Fairy that Mr. Pent promised to give £5OO towards erecting the Free
Library Lecture Hall, which promise was fulfilled, notwithstanding Sir John’s
doubts, which led him to urge Messrs Earle, Horsley, and Martin, who had
elicited the promise from Mr Bent, to “get it in writing.” Mr Bent,
however, provided the money without any such course being adopted. A
bazaar to supplement this grant was organised, and realised £375 net towards
the building fund. Donations from Knight and Lydiard, £5O; J. Alison,
£25 ; and many lesser amounts enabled the committee to commence the
erection of this splendid hall, which, when completed, cost over £2OOO. Mr.
John Perry’s tender for the stonework was £804; and Mr R. Ireland’s
for the carpentry £535 14s 6d, which comprised the original shell of the
structure. The writer claims to have been the originator of the idea of
building this hall, and of suggesting the securing of the site from the Temper-
ance society for a term of 99 years, conditionally on a substantial stone


ball being erected, and of reserving to the temperance organisations of the
town the rights conveyed to them by Mr James Atkinson in his original
gift of the premises. The old temperance hall building—originally the
Sydney store —was sold to Mr A. Cameron for £lO, and the substantial
timbers of the structure were afterwards utilised in the erection of his
coach factory in Cox-street.
In 1881, the enclosing of the central area of the Botanic Gardens as a
recreation reserve was carried out, on the motion of Cr Earle; and the
present beautiful oval secuVed to the townsfolk. Some councillors urged its
being permanently let for cultivation, but fortunately did not carry their
proposals, l/i response to the agitation for money to be spent on the harbour,
a return was asked in Parliament to be prepared, showing the amount
expended ; and it was shown that from 1861 to 1866, £35,207 5s 9d had
been spent.
Our worthy townsman, Mr 0. Bourne, was first elected in 1881, and
has since to be credited with excellent work as a councillor. The council
secured the present office premises from the Government for a consideration of
£lOO, through the exertions of a deputation composed of Messrs Southcombe
and Earle, which had to contest the matter with the police authorities, who
strove to deprive the municipality of the property. Mr Z. D. Wilson, town
clerk, died in October this year; Mr Fredk. Speed, who had several times
previously acted as town clerk, being again appointed clerk pro tem. It
was this “ grand old man ” who should have been permanent town clerk,
but who, in later years, was cashiered, to give another man the position of
rate collector, and that man embezzled over £2OO of the council’s moneys !
In 1882, J. D. Burnie was elected town clerk by the casting vote of the
mayor, an appointment which led to considerable aftertime commotion.
The loan for the construction of gasworks was floated, and the plana
and specifications prepared under the direction of Mr Ihos. Bowman, O.E. ilie
railway bill of Mr Duncan Gillies aroused the latent energies of the local
leagues this year, and in the interests of the extension to this port the council
engaged Mr J. L. Huntly, 0.E., an old resident fully seised of all the data
requisite, to give expert evidence before the Legislative Council regarding a
line from Hamilton to Port Fairy. This was subsequently secured, via
Koroit.
Some disputed boundaries of frontages to Griffiths-street, Port Fairy
East, gave the council much concern, and Mr. Alex. Ingram was instructed
to survey same, but no definite starting point being available, his survey,
costing £36, was of little value in deciding matters, and the supposed “ land-
jumpers ” remained undisturbed. At the general elections of this year,
Sir John O’Shannassy was defeated by Mr John J. Madden, a popular
footballer, runner, and schoolmaster of Killarney, Sir John died in May,
1883, of diabetes. Mr. D. Keating was first elected to the council in
1882, and Mr. W. Webb mayor. Both these gentlemen still occupy seats
at the council table.
The weighbridge erected in front of the town hall was purchased,
costing £206 4s. In 1883, a large ministerial party, headed by the Hon.


Alfred D Q akin, visited the Western ports, and were everywhere banquetted.
In Port Fairy, an elaborate welcome was given them, the wants of the
harbour being dilated upon by councillors amidst the popping of much
champagne. The August elections returned W. Earle, 160 ; 0. Bourne, 157;
P, Tennyson, 121. Messrs Charles Ruffle, 106; and J. Goble, 61, being the
other candidates. Mr Webb was re-elected mayor. There had been much
unpleasantness caused to several townspeople by the town clerk, and, imme-
diately after the elections, a motion for his removal was proposed, and
carried on the casting vote of the chairman, the mayor being away in
Melbourne- On his return, he refused to carry out this resolution of the
council, and four councillors resigned to test the opinion of the burgesses
on the subject. The result was that only one candidate was nominated
in addition to the four retiring members, and Mr Joseph Goble displaced
Or Magner. This gave the town clerk another pliant supporter, and he was
retained for a while longer.
In 1884, the idea of a bridge across the Southwest Passage, to connect
Griffiths Island with the mainland, was first mooted ; but, like the more
recent move in that direction made by our modern organisation, the Seaside
Visitors’ Association, it was allowed to hang, and we are yet waiting for that
desirable accommodation.
The gasworks buildings were erected, at a cost of £3500, Mr Thomas
Bowman, C.E., being the designer and superviser, for which he obtained
a commission of £250, The building and gasometer tank were built of
bricks locally made by Mr J. Willsher, on the clayey grounds of the Three
Chain road, near Kirkstall, and, though not of good colour, they are of
an extremely substantial class, and have proved well made.
It was during this year that matters culminated in connection with
the town clerk’s obnoxious behaviour towards the minority of the council
and many prominent residents. The annual elections were contested on the
question of Mr Burnie’s dismissal or retention, and the excitement of the
few weeks preceding the elections was at a high pitch. Meetings were held
every night for a fortnight, and extra efforts made by the friends of both
parties to secure election. Messrs G. Haynes, T. Southcorabe, and E. Vanstan,
all ex-mayors of the borough, were nominated in opposition to Messrs R.
Ireland, W. Earle, and O. Ruffle, and popular feeling was evidenced by the
fact that at no previous municipal election was the polling so heavy, the
votes being—Earle, 221 ; Ireland, 213; Ruffle, 193; Vanstan, 124; South-
combe, 116; Haynes, 67. The voice of the people thus determined the
action of the council in the matter, and a vacancy in the town clerk’s office
was shortly afterwards declared. Cr W. Earle was elected mayor. The
Hon, Duncan Gillies, Minister of Railways, visited Port Fairy in 1884, to
inspect for himself the Western district and its claim for railway extension.
He was banquetted at the instance of the council, and his railway bill
afterwards included a line to the western coast towns.
The Norfolk Island pines gracing the south end of Sackville-street
were presented and planted by Mr. Thos. Hutton and Mr. Win. Fowling,
and will ever remain a protest against the neglect of the municipality in the
matter of beautifying the town by tree planting.


: 1 —- ; - -■■ r*r* -
Governor Sir Henry B. Loch visited the district, and was interviewed
by the mayor, on behalf of the borough, at Koroit. The gunboats of the
Victorian Navy, which had but recently arrived in the colony, also entered
Port Fairy, under command of the late Captain Thomas, whose valour at the
seige of Alexandria during the Egyptian War of the year previous, made
him worthy of the public reception dinner given in his hdnor at the Star of
the West.
Mr John Russell was appointed town clerk in November, in succession
to Mr Burnie, but forfeited the confidence of the council shortly afterwards by
misappropriating the moneys of the ratepayers. An excellent official, but
entangled in difficulties which led to dishonesty. His records and system
of office work are a pattern to succeeding town clerks.
Tn December of this year, Messrs, Smith, Whitley, and Anderson
purchased the 4,300 acres of lands of the Belfast Special Survey, still
held by Mr. James Atkinson, for a sum of £750,000, and great anticipations
of an immediate return of prosperity to the town were created. It was in
this month, too, that the directors of the Belfast and Koroit Steam Naviga-
tion Co. made the blunder of purchasing for £8,250 the unsuitable little
steamer Bellinger, to place in the Western trade, on which transaction the
shareholders suffered the heavy loss of over £2OOO on her sale.
In 1885, the council purchased from the syndicate above-mentioned
the allotments at the corner of Bank and Cipps-streets, for public baths
purposes, for a sum of £2oo—most residents considering at the time that
the speculators might have generously donated to the municipality the
allotments; especially as the mayor and councillors supplied much information
and assistance in connection with their purchase of the survey. Mr Charles
Ruffle, one of our oldest residents and a prominent public man, died early in
1885.
In March, the fires were first lighted in the Port Fairy gas works,
the ceremony of ignition being performed by Mrs W. Earle ; the engineer,
Mr Bowman, remarking that the mayoress had that day “ lighted a fire
that would never be extinguished,”
The loan for the erection of hot saltwater baths and the construction
of the Eootahpool road, was floated this year, and the works inaugurated.
At the annual elections, Crs Cameron, Keating, and Sickler were elected, Cr
Earle was re-appointed Mayor, and received the first mayoral allowance ever
voted by the municipal council, the amount being £4O, which, at the ter-
mination of the year of office, was all returned to the council’s funds, except
an item of 35s paid for advertising. Cr. C. Ruffle resigned, owing to ill
health.
A verdict for £5O, and £l9 9s costs was obtained by Mr. Davie
Alison against the Council in 1885. he having received some injury by tripping
over a hole in the footpath in Sackville street, for which accident the
Council was held responsible, more to the gratification of the parties whose
antagonism at that time to the Council had prompted the suit, than perhaps
to the successful litigant.


On 31st March and Ist April, 1885, the Great Land Sale took place,
every allotment submitted being sold without any trouble, and the great
incubus of absentee-landlordism* which for nearly half a century had over-
shadowed the community, was removed by one wield of the auctioneer’s
hammer. A large number of leaseholders under the Atkinson regime now
became owners by purchase, and a very decided improvement was soon
Apparent in the appearance of the buildings of the town. These had been
allowed to get into disrepair and dilapidated (sure evidence of want of
interest by rent-racked tenantry), but soon repair and renovation were
universal. But forty years’ handicap of the evils resulting from the un-
equalled conditions under which the town suffered by the orignal alienation to
a single individal of the whole of the land within three miles of the port, was
a weight not easily shaken off, and other localities having provided the
facilities needed for permanent settlement, but little “ foreign capital ” was
introduced, or new families attracted by the sale of the “ Belfast Special
Survey.” The “syndicate” worked up the auction sale properly, engaging
“The Vagabond” (the late Julian Thomas) to come down and write up
the place, and the flowing advertisements and descriptive letter press which
was circulated broadcast handsomely repaid the outlay it occasioned. The
auction realised a very handsome profit to the syndicate, netting, it was
asserted, no less than £90,000, and that without the payment of a single
penny of cash by the purchasers before disposing of the whole estate. The
town allotments were sold “ by the foot,” varying from 5s (for outside
vacant allotments) to £l4 per foot, and the farm lands averaged £lB per
acie for over 3000 acres. One act of generosity is worthy of record in
favour of the syndicate, and that was the reservation from sale of the cottages
occupied by a few indigent widows of the town—-a reservation to this
day respected. They also named the streets formed by the subdivision of
some of the blocks, after old residents, i.e., Grant-street, Oorbett-street,
Ritchie-street, Earle street, &c., but beyond these items, no such favours
to the community as were conferred by the original proprietor by the
“ free gifts” of land, etc., for public purposes, can be credited to the “land
boomers,”
On the last day of 1885, Captain Lewis Grant died—a landmark in the
history of Port Fairy being thus removed. He first arrived in 1839, in
charge of the brig Socrates, “Joe” White being his first officer. After
trading for a few years between this port and Sydney, his vessel was
wrecked in the bay in 1844. He then established himself as a shipping agent
and wool merchant, and his fleet of lightens for years made the River
Moyne a scene of activity. Until his death, at the age of 75, the worthy
captain conducted an extensive business, which continues in somewhat
diminished proportions under the management of his only son, Lewis, to
this day.
It was early in 1885 that rumours of war between England and
Russia were cabled, and the colonists were imbued with a decidedly military-
ardour. Everywhere, volunteers were presenting themselves for enrolment as
a defence force, and in Port Fairy over 100 names were sent in to the
Mayor, and forwarded to the military authorities as men willing to take up
arms in defence of their country should hostilities be commenced. Plans for
the defence of the port were prepared, and some modern guns were sent to
replace the old muzzle-loaders which now ornament the Botanic Gardens
But war was, averted, and the excitement subsided.
! .. . .. ~.r—


In 1886, the Borough Council decided, on petition from the rate-
payers, to change the name of the town to its original designation of Port
Fairy—a very wise alteration under the altogether changed conditions of
proprietorship—for had not the old Irish city name been applied to the place
by Mr James Atkinson, whose identity and association with the town had
not tended to be of anything but a dis advantage and a drawback. To
Mr Fred. R. Emery, 1 believe, may be given the honour of suggesting
and carrying out this distinctive improvement.
Sir John Coode, the eminent marine engineer, made a second visit
this year to the colony, to report on the harbours of Victoria, and his arrival
in Port Fairy was looked upon as a decisive act on the part of the Government
to complete the works of improvement commenced in accordance with
Sir John’s plans, as supplied in 1879. But that consummation is not yet.
Mr J. D. Burnie and Cr J. Goble created some commotion in
municipal circles, by demanding a special audit of the accounts of the council
in November of this year, and a good deal of feeling was engendered by
the action. In fact, legal proceedings were threatened against seven members
of the council for alleged illegal acts, and Or. Bourne was served with a writ,
which, however, was not proceeded with. Cr Goble suffered the indignity
of a vote of censure in connection with this action, a vote assented to by
the whole council, in Cr Goble’s presence.
A public meeting to protest against the removal of the Priestman’s
dredge, employed in deepening the River Moyne, to Portland, was held,
and very positive resolutions arrived at, with the result that the dredge was
returned in August of that year. Mr F. A. Mandeville was elected the
second time as town clerk of Port Fairy, after being away from the town
about Seven years.
In January, 1886, the lamentable accident occurred at Boarding School
Bay, which resulted in the death, by drowning, of three ladies, Mrs F.
Zeplin, of Melbourne, Miss A. E. Richardson, of Hawthorn, and Miss
Annie E. Searle, of Port Fairy, The circumstance caused intense sym-
pathy. Mrs R. Thomas, a niece of Mrs Zeplin, was awarded the R.H.S.
medal for her bravery in saving Miss Mary Richardson, and attempting
to save the others.
A public banquet was given to Mr J. J. Madden, on his re-election
as member of Parliament representing the town, at which Mr James Munro,
Minister for Public Works, attended, as well as a number of politicians.
The export of potatoes this year from Port Fairy totalled 20,000
tons, there being no fewer than twenty-four local and Melbourne firms
represented in the trade. A record season, A poll of the ratepayers was
taken to decide the site on which the buildings for hot and cold saltwater
baths should be erected, and the majority favoured the present site in pre-
ference that proposed at the south end of Gipps-street.
Mr. James Ireland, a former member of the borough council, and
resident very highly esteemed, died in Gippsland in May, 1886, aged 62;
and another old identity, in the person of Mr. Lennox Trew, who for


some three or four years previously had lived a hermit life on his laud
at the Moyne Swamp, died in loneliness. He was possessed of considerable
property, but lived a most singular life, holding peculiar views on ordinary
matters of business. Many early-time incidents in connection with his life
and habits whilst he conducted the Stag Hotel, will be recalled by the mere
mention of his name. Mr W. Witton, a resident of this district dating back
to 1844, also died—at Warragul, in Gippsland —full of years and respect.
Every old resident will remember “ Billy Crayfish,” (Wm. Archer) a real
character, who for a quarter of a century resided in a cave on the coast
near Aringa. A harmless old fellow, said to be well-connected in England,
but who in his youth transgressed the law, and was transported in 1841,
for alleged poaching. He was found dead at his cave-home in November.
" In 1886, Mr. R. Ireland was elected Mayor; and there was no
opposition to the retiring couucillois.
The “new cemetery” on the hummocks, Yaruhuk road, was this
year revoked as a public burial place, and many of the coffins as were
removable were taken up and re-intern d in the old cemetery, by consent of
the Government.
The record of the lBB7 was filled with obituaries of many
prominent men of the Port Fairy district. Mr. James MTntosh, the clever
Scotch engineer, who came from Scotland in charge of the machinery for Dr.
Russell’s steam mills, and directed the erection thereof, died in Melbourne- on
26th January; and that well-known and highly-esteemed pioneer, Mr. John
Ritchie, of Aringa, was also numbered amongst those who were. Mr Ritchie
arrived in Tasmania in 1834, then about 24 years of age, and remaining
about five years in the “ tight little island,” sailed across the Straits in the
brig William, and landed in Portland Bay, with stock ready for settlement,
in 1839. Shortly after arrival, Mr. Ritchie found his way Port Fairyward,
and settled on Aringa, occupying that splendid pmee of country up to
the time of his death, which occurred at St, Kilda on the 6th January, 1887.
The records of Mr Ritchie’s useful life as one of the original founders of the
Belfast Road Board, and for years afterwards as a shire councillor—are
they not preserved in the archives of Local Government of the Western
district? and his services to the town and district in many other ways are
well known. Mr F. E Beaver, M.P. for Belfast in 1857, also died this year;
as well as Mr John Gibson, a long time councillor of the Shire, and breeder
of high-class horse stock at Leura ; and the Rev, Maurice Stack, an early-
day clergyman of the R.O. Church, who bequeathed £l,OOO to the Port
Fairy Hospital, and whose monument exists in the substantial form of a
convenient building on the hospital grounds, named “ The Stack Fever
Ward,” as well as by marble tablet at the entrance to the main building
recording his munificence.
Tenders for the construction of the Port Fairy and Koroit Railway
were accepted—Messrs. Buscombe and Chappefl being the contractors. No
provision having been made to carry the line further than to Cox-street, an
agitation was made for its connection with the wharves on the river. About
the same time the effort to secure a direct service with Ararat and thence
to the Wimmera, was continued. Both were secured; but the latter by a


- - . ■■■■ ■ . ■ ..
political arrangement which has since proved its folly. A line hy way of
Hamilton was of no use in securing to this Port the Wimmera trade, and
not being strong enough politically to obtain a direct connection with Ararat,
it was urged that Glenthompson should be the point of junction on the
Portland to Ararat Railway. Instead of this, however, being granted, Mr
Gillies included in hi* 3 bill and carried through, the Penshurst-Dunkeld
—a line long-since grass grown and closed for want a traffic.
On the 17th May, 1887, the official proclamation by Sir Henry
Loch of the alteration of the name of the town from Belfast to Port Fairy
was made in the Government Gazette, Very energetic agitation for the
immediate commencement of the railway to Koroit was carried out, meetings
and deputations being of frequent recurrence. This was deemed necessary
to assure the promise made by Mr. Gillies that Port Fairy should be placed
on the same footing as Warrnambool so far as railway facilities were con-
concerned, being realised ; for there were ominous indications of delay and
dilly dallying, likely to prevent that result. However, it eventuated ; but
have our expectations of benefit by this railway connection been satisfied ? I
trew not.
This was Queen Victoria’s jubilee year, and Port Fairy joined in the
universal paean of congratulation to Her Majesty on her attainment of
fifty years of sovereignty over a kingdom on which “ the sun never sets.”
High holiday was proclaimed on 21st June, and the councils, the friendly
societies, the burgesses, and the children, formed a monster procession,
marshalled by Or. Alex. Cameron on a wild white charger. , Parading the
streets to the brass band strains of the National Anthem, the crowd marched
to the Agricultural Society’s Grounds, where a public feast was indulgea in,
sports organised, and jubilee medals, struck commemorative of the occasion,
presented by the Mayor to every child present. Silver medals, suitably
inscribed, were also presented to every child born in Port Fairy during
Jubilee year, and the mayor promised gold medals to all mothers so
fortunate as to present twins or triplets to augment the number of the
Queen’s subjects, but no mother proved loyal enough to be entitled to the
prize. The town was illuminated at night as never before; a monster
bonfire was lighted on the hummocks, and torched by the mayoress ; and
a ball and banquet followed by a huge pyrotechnic display, wound up the
loyal and successful demonstration. Each child attending the schools of
the town was next day presented with a copy of the New Testament,
bearing the autograph signature of “ Victoria Reg.”—a characteristic token
of the her Majesty’s acknowledged basis of “England’s greatness.”
That excellent work of road making from the Bridge to the Flagstaff
Battery along the river bank was inaugurated this year, our present mayor,
Mr. Tennyson, deserving the credit of its inception. Mr. John Nimmo, the
minister of public works, having consented to allow the silt taken out of
the river to be utilised for the work, the eost of this road was virtually
state-borne. Mr. I. Smale’s supervision assured superior construction of the
stone-faced embankment. It ought now to be tree-planted, and be named
Jubilee Parade.
The municipal elections were uncontested, Messrs Ireland, Earle and
Fry retaining their seats. Or. Ireland mayor, with an allowance of £7O.


On the Bth December, 1887, the ceremony of turning the first sod
of the railway connecting the town with the metropolis was performed,
the site of that important event being a spot where Port Fairy’s early
associations of progress!venesa were evolved, viz., in Rutledge and Co.’a
store premises, at the corner of Cox and Gippa-streets. In this same
locality, the great syndicate sale had been held a couple of years previously ;
the first lock-up and Court-house had been established in the forties; and
in excavating for the railway line, portion of an old land-mark, in the
shape of the heel of Rutledge’s flagstaff, was brought to light. That
flagstaff was the mainmast of the schooner Swift, wrecked on the island
in 1855, and, when decked with bunting from heel to truck, as it invariably
was on high days and holidays, proved a great attraction to the old
residents. The ceremony of cutting the first sod was performed by the
mayor, Cr Ireland, the iron wheelbarrow used to carry away the sod,
and the shovel with which his worship removed the earth, being brightly
painted and decorated. Speechifying was indulged in, the militia gathered,
a procession formed, and the inevitable eating and drinking were carried
out. A banquet and concert in the evening wound up the festivities.
What a past-master at organising these demonstrations poor Fred Mandeville,
the town clerk, was !
The fatal accident at The Crags, near Yarabuk, occurred in 1887,
whereby two schoolmasters, W. Beilby and 0. Yaughan, were drowned, and
their bodies were never recovered. Messrs John Jackson (found drowned
in the river), Charles Pickerd, John Henry Atkinson, chemist, T. Fairbairn,
and E, Willshire, all old identities, also joined the majority.
Mr Saville Kent visited Port Fairy to report on the fishing grounds
of the Western coast, but his investigations resulted only in costly official
reports of little value. The Thursday half-holiday was established in 1887.
In January, 1888, Mr John J, Madden died. He had represented
Port Fairy in Parliament for five years, and was a most popular member.
A monument to his memory was subscribed for by the police of the colony,
and erected in the Melbourne cemetery in recognition of his successful obtain-
ment for the “force” of the Parliamentary franchise. Sir Bryan O’Loghlen
was elected as his successor without opposition, Mr M. C. Donnelly, a
former shire secretary, withdrawing from his announced candidature.
In March, the Railway Commissioners visited the town to obtain
information as te local desires regarding the railway accommodation required,
and they consented to carry the line across Gipps-street to the Government
wharf—the intention having been to stop short at Rutledge’s corner.
Th« Korongah Estate, which, for many years, had been worked
and improved by Messrs Knight and Lydiard, and had employed a township
of hands, was sold to the Hon. T. Bent, at a high figure—in fact, at
“ boom ” prices. The cutting up of large estates had been proclaimed to
be the panacea for all the ills the town a)nd district had suffered from;
but actual experience has not confirmed the advantages promised, either
with respect to the Belfast Survey or to Korongah,


On July 19, the first spike (specially gilded for the event) was
driven in the first sleeper laid on the railway line to Koroit, the Mayor
performing the act, by request of the contractors, Messrs Buscombe and
Chappel, who also noted the event by a big invitation banquet held in Mr
Holden’s yictoria Hall, at which over 200 guests attended. The contractors
for the railway commenced the building of the line at Port Fairy, because
of the cheapness of landing at the wharves by the river the material
necessary in the construction; and during the year several vessels heavily
laden reached Port Fairy, The largest sailing vessel that had ever entered the
river Moyne—“The Lord of the Isles”—brought railway timber, and the
s.s, Hesketh and others rails for the highways.
It was in this year also that the present site for the hot salt water
baths was finally fixed upon, after much discussion and protest, some
councillors urging that the buildings be placed at the end of Gipps-street
below Russell’s mill. At the elections Messrs Webb, Southcombe, and
Keating were elected ; Mr Charles Bourne being made mayor.
In November, Mr George Lydiard established the Rosebrook Butler
Factory, which was the forerunner in this district of the extensive and profit-
able dairying industry now being carried on with so much success ; and
to Mr Lydiard this locality will ever be indebted as being the first to demon-
strate the advantages of machinery in the manufacture of butter and cheese.
Ever since its establishment, the Rosebrook Factory (which is now carried
on by a limited liability company, with Mr Lydiard as managing director)
has maintained a leading position, and this year (1896) has introduced a plant
for milk concentration—the demand for which product is said to be un-
limited.
During 1888, the deaths of Messrs Joseph Bedford, Wm. Oruickshank,
J. Sullivan, Wm. Cain, S. W. Thorn occurred; and two other old residents,
Billy M'Lean (98) and Alick M'Kenzie (88), who were of the very earliest
of Port Fairy’s settlers, ended their days in the Port Fairy hospital.
On Ist January, 1889, the first journey was run on the new railway
road, the Wesleyan Sabbath school having been kindly permitted the use
of the contractors’ trucks and engine to convey the children to Maher’s Hill
for a day’s outing. Subsequently several runs were made before handing
over to the Government.
It was during this year that the road to the Eastern beach w T as cut
through the hummocks, and the sand removed therefrom carted on to the
Botanic Gardens oval, so as to make it level and dry. The mayor, Or Bourne,
was the author and finisher of this excellent scheme, and “ Bourne’s Avenue ”
will outlive the adverse criticism to which its author was subjected when pro-
viding the excellent facility of a road to the beach.
A big deputation, asking for a sum of £30,000 to complete the
harbour works, was organised in May of this year, the neighbouring
municipalities giving every assistance. Mr Gillies, the then Premier,
promised that the money should be available, the expenditure to extend
over four years. The late Sir Janies Patterson was Minister of Customs


at the time, and was never very favourably disposed towards Port Fairy,
and he visited the town in the Lady Loch immediately after the deputation
returned, with the result that the £30,000 was never obtained.
This same year, Sir Thomas Esmonde, a member of the British House
of Commons, visited Port Fairy, in the interests of the “Home Rule for Ire-
land ” agitation, and as a result of an address at a public meeting held in the
Lecture Hall he obtained the sum of £l5O towards the funds for promoting
self-government for Ireland. The Town Clerk’s speech on that occasion
was of a most thrilling character.
The Port Fairy Trawling Company was organised by six or eight
gentlemen anxious to test the profitableness of deep-sea fishing off the Port
Fairy coast, and the small steamer Eclipse was purchased to carry out the
operations. It did not prove a remunerative venture, and, after a three years’
existence, the company was wound up, and the little craft sold.
Messrs. Tennyson, R. E. Unkles, and P. O. Gleeson were elected
councillors this August, Cr Goble being left out. At the election of mayor,
Crs Tennyson and Earle were nominated, and on the vote the latter was
elected, whereupon Cr Tennyson left the table in indignation, alleging some
uncalled reasons for his defeat. He afterwards sent in his resignation, but
at the election to fill the vacancy so caused, Mr. Tennyson offered himself
as a candidate, being opposed by Mr. Goble, who received 142 votes to Mr
Tennyson’s 129.
Mr John Meagher, one of Port Fairy’s earliest inhabitants, and a
man of much wealth, died in September, 1889, his will being proved for
£87,685, £5O ol which he bequeathed to the local hospital. Messrs
W. Grubb, Thomas Whyte, W. Sutton, Charles Williams, Edward Vanstan
(an energetic ex-mayor and councillor for many years), and James Steele
were amongst the many old local identities who passed from their labours,
as did also Mr Edward Hurst, the well known squatter of Eumeralla East,
and the Inspector-General of Public Works, Mr W. H. Steele, who was always
a strong help to Port Fairy’s harbour improvement scheme. “Flash Jack,”
a character who in the fifties used to carry the mails between Port Fairy
and Fiery Creek, and a noted horseman, was found drowned in Spring
Creek, near Lindsay’s station. The crowds which assembled to witness
Jack’s arrival in the town with his pack horses, eagar to be first to obtain
their mails, w'as a sight of the early fifties not easily forgotten. Major
William Learmonth, who for many years commanded the Western district
Volunteer foice, also “piled his arms” in 1889.
On the 12th November, the first train through from Melbourne
arrived in Port Fairy, conveying the Commissioners of Railways and a
number of officials of the Department, who had journeyed to make personal
inspection of the new line before taking it over from the contractors, and a
promise was then given that the railway should be opened for traffic before
Christmas.
The purchase by the council of Griffiths Island for £7OO, was made
from the Syndicate in 1890, primarily to enable the Government to obtain


stone for the extension of the training walls the for harbor improvements,
the inability of the Government to deal with the syndicate having been put
forward as a reason why the works bad not been prosecuted in accordance
with Mr, Gillies’ promise. The suggestion of the purchase was made by
the Inspector-General, Mr. Steele. When the Council subsequently parted
with the Island to the Government they did so at the net cost, actually
forfeiting an item of £l7B interest paid on the loan raised for the purchase.
On the 24th February, a children’s demonstration marked the opening
of the railway to Port Fairy, and the biggest and most successful banquet in
the town’s record was held on the 25th, in the Lecture Hall, the Hons. Sir
Bryan O’Loghlen, Agar Wynne, and Charles Young, and Messrs Murray and
Anderson, M.P.’s, being present, as well as the Mayors of Koroit, Portland,
Hamilton, Warrnambool, and Ballarat; and the Presidents of the Shires
of Belfast, Warrnambool, Minhamite, and l>undaa, and some 200 guests.
The Mayor presided ; Mr Charles Staker, of Melbourne, being the caterer.
In March, the annual meeting of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows was
held in Port Fairy, some 150 deputies being in attendance. A week of
unprecedented entertainment was provided for the visitors.
A road to Boarding School Bay was again this year agitated for, and
an effort made to purchase road rights from the Syndicate, but their usual
heavy demands were prohibitory.
The question of a water supply for the town was also discussed by the
council, and a special report was made by the borough engineer, Mr 0.
H. Neylon, in which he estimated that an ample supply could be provided
for somewhat about £13,000 or £14,000. Several members of the council
visited the water reserve at the Moyne Falls with the engineer, to verify his
recommendations with regard to an altered site for the head-works, and
came to the conclusion that Mr Neylon’s scheme was thoroughly practic-
able. Then the question of means to carry it out cropped up, and it was
thereupon shelved—and so remains to this day. It was a pity that the legal
borrowing powers of the municipality had been so far exhausted as to
prevent so large a loan being raised, otherwise the then progressive council
would certainly have provided the community with one of the first necessities
of populous towns. It will have to come some day, and the preliminaries of
those times will prove of value when future efforts to provide water are
being made.
The omission from the Government Railway Bill of a line from Port
Fairy to Hamilton via Yambuk and Macarthur, which had been strongly
agitated for, gave occasion for public meetings and protests; and the Mayor
and Shire Secretary, Mr W. J. Wall, were deputed to personally interview
members of Parliament with the object of securing support to a proposal
for the inclasiou of the line, when the schedules were being discussed in
Parliament. For a week they laboured in the metropolis, and had not
the Government Bill been forced to succumb, there is no reasonable doubt
that a majority of the members would have voted for the line. A capital
plan of the proposed route and statistics attached was prepared by Mr.
Neylon, and when the colony is again in the position to build new railways
the line referred to cannot be omitted


In July of this year the dastardly outrage which resulted in the death
of a very old resident, Mrs Wharton, was committed by a man named
Penberthy, who, after a three days’ trial, was convicted of manslaughter,
and sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment.
In August, Messrs Lydiard, Haymes, and Tennyson were elected
councillors, Messrs Fry and Earle having retired from the position. Mr
Southcombe was appointed mayor.
In this year (1890), Mr Andrew Bruce died. He arrived here in
1853, and for many years was a prominent figure in public affairs, being
mayor in 1878. Mrs John Finn, aged 92, Mrs Whitley, an eccentric old
resident, Messrs Charles Green (a resident of 46 years), Charles Hardie,
Charles Williams, and Thomas Cook, all pioneers, also crossed the bar.”
The purchase of the land fronting Carapbell-street and the seashore
from the syndicate was effected, after considerable dilly-dallying, the price
for the 162 acres—being an investment which future generations
will look upon as a bagatelle for so great a public patrimony. To ac-*
complish the freehold to the town of that splendid area, a loan was floated
for £3soo —the proceeds to be devoted to the erection of a new bridge at
Rosebrook (jointly with the shire), the payment for Griffiths Island (£700),
and for the land now known (out of compliment to the then mayor) as
“Southcombe Park,” It would have been more appropriately named
“ Mandeville Reserve,” if the memory of the person through whose energies
and foresight the area was obtained had been properly honoured. But that
having been overlooked, would it not even now be a little recognition of the
efforts of a man .who died in the service of the council, to attach to the
splendid road through the “ park ” to the southern beach the name of him
to whom the town is primarily indebted for securing the privileges which
for forty years had been denied ?
The road referred to, which I will name “jMandeville-parade,” and
which has proved of so much convenience to the numerous seaside visitors,
was a work of which Mr Neylon, the borough engineer, may justly be
proud, the excavation and formation of a metalled road through a shifting
sand hill and a large swamp being no mean triumph.
The drainage of the swamp on the same reserve was also carried out
by the same engineer, and deserves, too, special mention, it being thought a
work of impossibility when first suggested by him.
Since these last named events, nothing has transpired in municipal
government of much importance, beyond perhaps the embezzlement of
some £250 or £3OO by a revenue officer. The loss of these moneys
was not the only difficulty that was created, for to discover the discrepancies,
the auditors, Messrs Wilson and Kell, entailed a cost to the council of over
£lOO, subsequently increased by the expenses of a Supreme Court action
commenced by Wilson to recover his fees as auditor ; which even now is
unsettled, and the amount to be paid undefined. It may cost £2OO, or
it may be £3OO before the difficulty is got over.


The visit of the Governor, Lord Hopetoun, in 1894, gave an
occasion for some festivity- and the usual loyal address was presented by the
mayor, and banquet held, at which the customary after dinner compliments
were handed round. Sir Bryan O’Loghlen, the Hon. Thomas Bent,
—then Speaker of the Legislative Assembly—and other M.P.’s accompanied
the Governor on his visit.
The cause celebre in colonial municipal litigation, too, occurred between
councillors of this borough, A migratory publican, named Holland, com-
menced proceedings against two fellow councillors, Ireland and Earle, for
supplying goods to the corporation, claiming penalties of £5O for each time
those councillors sat at the council after so dealing. The proceedings in the
one case were settled before going into Court, on payment of Holland’s
preliminary costs; but in the case against the Mayor (Mr Ireland), the
Supreme Court held that the charge had been sustained, and gave judgment
for penalties amounting to £3500. This aroused an intense excitement
throughout the colony, and an Act of Parliament was immediately passed
to prevent unprincipled fellows putting the stringent but unobserved pro-
visions of the Local Government Act into operation against municipal
councillors unwittingly offending. A public subscription was raised to re-
coup Mr Ireland portion of the cost of his defence; the Governor-in-Council
having remitted the penalties.


THE HARBOUR.
Port Fairy Bay is situated on Latitude 38° 23' 47", long. 142° 14' 58”
east (so says a more recent nautical authority than Lieut. Tyers), Mr T. H.
Osborne having kindly written me to correct the bearings printed in the
opening chapter of this “History,” and gives these tigures as correct, pointing
out that Lieut, Tyers’ record would situate Port Fairy a few miles east
of Cape Howe—nearly 600 miles away. There is always a safe anchorage
for vessels of small capacity, and in calm times, steamers of 2000 tons have
safely anchored in its waters. It is exposed to the S.E., and with “ busters ”
from that point the least protection is afforded. The first efforts to
improve the harbour were made in 1847 by John Griffiths, described -else-
where in this “History,” but it was not until 1854 that any survey was
made with a view to some definite action being taken to provide facilities
for the increasing shipping business of the port. In that year, Mr John
Barrow, 0.E., was deputed by the Government to report, and as a result
£3OOO was voted by Parliament “for harbour improvements.” Lieutenant
Tyers had in 1853 visited the Western coast to obtain data for preparing
plans of the harbohrs of Portland and Port Fairy, and copies of his plan
and report are to be seen in Vol. 111., Parliamentary Papers of Victoria
In 1853, the ship Cornelius, 247 tons, anchored in the bay direct from
London, with merchandise for Messrs Rutledge and Co., and 15 other vessels
are also reported as having visited the Bay; but, as early as 1848, the
Sydney Griffiths, 400 tons, had loaded wool from Port Fairy direct to
London, which trade was maintained during the existence of the merchant
firm named. A few years ago, the Gulf line of steamers called into Port
Fairy for wool, but the facilities for loading being unsuitable, they dis-
continued after the second season.
The erection of the now decayed and destroyed jetty was the first
Government work of improvement undertaken, and this seems to have
been done as the “ outcome of a meeting held in a public house.” So said
Mr Barrow in his evidence given before a Parliamentary select com-
mittee in 1857. He also asserted that the inspector in charge (one Harris)
had erected the jetty in a different position to that directed. It should
have been in a line with Cox-street, instead of Campbell-street, so as to
have reached deeper water. That committee, as a result of evidence
given before it in the Council Chambers, Port Fairy, by Captains Mills,
Oowtan, and Grant, and Messrs Binyon, Harris, and R. H. Woodward,
recommended the “ erection of a low jetty or groyne on the northern shore
of the bay, having for its object the alteration of the set of the inshore
currents, which created a. bar of sand at the mouth of the river.” In the


same year, W. Bennett Hays, Esq., of Romford, Essex, supplied a report (1
think at the instance of W. Rutledge and Co.) on the improvement of the
harbour, based only on information supplied, and without any personal
examination of the locality, in which he recommended the erection of a
breakwater from Rabbit Island to the end of the “Patches” Reef, at an
estimated cost of £63,020. Would that Mr. Hays’ recommendations had
been adopted; we should now have a “harbour,” and the sticking and!
striking of vessels coming up the river would never have been necessitated.
However, large suras of money were spent on the jetty, and on a bridge and
tramway to connect it with the town ;■ but the opinion of Captain Alexander
Campbell, “ that Port Fairy would never be much without a breakwater,”
and that he would recommend “ laying out £30,000 for that purpose,” led
several of the prominent men of the time to agitate for works of improve-
ment to facilitate the increasing trade of the port other than that provided
by the jetty. So we find Mr Atkinson in 1857 offering to pay one-third of
the amount the district would raise for works of improvement which
would render the river navigable; an estimate of the cost of which seems
to have been made by Mr Atkinson’s agent (Mr Woodward) at “ from
£20,000 to £25,000 to make the Moyne navigable as far as Rosebrook mill
for vessels drawing Bft.” But this didn’t come off; and in 1859 a resolution 1
appears in the early archives of the municipality to the effect that the
Government be informed “ that the balance of the harbour vote would be
most judiciously spent on a line of piles at the entrance of the river,
either close or sheathed, to direct the full force of the current to the bar.”
Then commenced the collision between the advocates of jetty exten-
sion and river improvement, and the latter seems to have gained the
majority; for, in August, 1859, Or James Mylne Knight proposed,, and Or
John L. Huntly seconded—“ That a correct chart of the bay of Port Fairy,
showing soundings, rocks, currents, &c., and describing nature of the
bottom, action of tides, and the effect of various winds on currents, &c., be
prepared and forwarded to the highest engineering authority in Great Britain
on harbours, for the purpose of obtaining an opinion as to the practicability
of removing the bar permanently, and obtaining an estimate of the cost.” No
effect whatever seems to have been given to the resolution ; for in 1864 it
was resolved “to vote £5O, conditionally on £lOO being contributed by
local proprietors of land, to obtain the services of a competent engineer to
prepare plans for the removal of the bar.” Mr E. Moriarty, of Sydney, was
so engaged, and to him is the credit given of propounding the scheme of
improvements afterwards adopted (and still unfinished) of confining the
currents of the river and South Western Passage between dykes, so as
cause a scour that would remove the sand obstructions at the river mouth.
A sum of £l5OO was voted for jetty extension in 1864, and this was urged
to be used for commencing the work recommended by Mr Moriarty; a very
strongly-worded protest being sent to the Government against any “ further
expenditure on the jetty, which would be wasteful and useless.”' This brought
Mr W. W, Wardill, the engineer-in-chief, to Port Fairy in January, 1865,
to report on the subject; and he supported the scheme proposed by the
Sydney marine expert. No money was therefore expended for a year or
two; but in 1866, Mr Gordon Evans, M.P. for the town, notified that the
‘‘ works for the improvement of the harbour would be commenced forth-
with.” The works weren’t commenced forthwith ; for Dr Russell reported, as
a result of an interview with Mr Wardill, “that the Government were not


the officers being W. Rutledge, president; S. Macgregor, vice-president;
Messrs J. M. Knight, Marcus Macartney, R. Urquhart, J. 0. Mathieson,
committee; the latter also being secretary. The prize list totalled nearly
£100; but, like many show day experiences of later years, wet weather
marred the proceedings. The next show was held at Woodford, and in
succeeding years at Yangery ; and afterwards alternated between Port Fairy
and Warrnarnbool. In 1862, each town determined to run a “ lone hand,”
and the Belfast Agricultural and Pastoral Association was formed, Mr John
Ritchie being the president, and Mr W. Barrett secretary. For some years
the show was held in Laskie’s yards, until it became too small, when the
land inßelfast East was secured. The society prospered under the presidency
of Messrs John Ritchie, A H. Knight, G. Lydiard, J. B Holden, R. Ireland,
J. Goldie, R. E. Unkles, and, in later years, of younger men of energy, in the
persons of Messrs John Finn, J. 0. and G. Ritchie. Mr G. W. Osbarne
held the secretaryship until 1871, when Mr W. Earle, the present secretary,
assumed the office. The removal of the show grounds to the present site,
purchased from Mr J. B. Holden in 1886, and the subsequent buying of the
ten acres adjoining, led to the society being involved in a debt of some
£4OO or £5OO, and the interest in agricultural shows being divided by the
establishment of a society at Koroit, it has been found difficult, in the face
of increased prize lists, occasioned by competition, to entirely wipe off the
liabilities, and so the society is now struggling with a lessened Government
grant against difficulties. To this society many important acts in connection
with the agricultural advancement of the district are due. Eight or nine
years ago, Mr James Goldie was nominated by the society as a pupil for
instruction in modern dairying processes, which led to his appointment as
manager of the first butter factory opened in the district The establishment
of the experimental plots at Rosebrook, whereby the colony has largely
benefited by the careful demonstrations made in scientific farming by Mr
John Goldie, under Mr A. N. Pearson’s able direction, is due to die society ;
and the bonus system in connection with the butter export trade was first
proposed in a circular issued by the Port Fairy Association in 1887. And,
more recently, the effort to establish sugarbeet growing in the district, has
received the support and assistance of the association. The annual shows
of to-day have been the means of educating the farmers of the district in the
improved growth and breeding of stock, and though just now there seems to
be a lack of interest in agricultural shows, it would be a pity indeed to
suspend the one institution of the district which has so far survived the
pressure of “ the times,” and the varied experiences which the farming
industry of the district has undergone during the half-century of its ex-
istence. The Horticultural Society was originally an offshoot of the Agri-
cultural Association, and for many years maintained a leading position
amongst kindred societies. The names of VV. E. Wheeler, A. T. Woods,
Dr Baird, W. Fry, H. Searle, and J. Prior are inseparable from its history.


THE SAVINGS BANK.
The Savings Bank was established in 1853, there then being 25
depositors, having £1283 14s 9d to their credit. The trustees were the Rev.
Thomas H. Braim, D.D., Rev. Thomas Slattery, W. Rutledge, Esq., M.L.0.,
John Ritchie, Esq., J.P., R. H. Woodward, Esq., and R. Colies, actuary.
Reference to recent published returns of this bank will provide material for
comparison. The business was then conducted in a small wooden building
in Cox-street, but with increasing demands the present ornate banking
premises were erected in Bank-street. Mr Robert Allan for years occupied
the post of actuary; and, on his death, Mr John Mason was appointed, to be
succeeded by Mr F. A. Mandeville, Mr Oglethorpe, and the present officer, Mr
H. L. Lomax. The present trustees are Messrs G. Lydiard, J.P., J. C.
Ritchie, J.P., C. Bourne, J.P., W. Earle, J.P., and T. Southcombe.
THE MILITIA.
In 1855, the Volunteer Company was first formed. Mr John Mason
being appointed captain; Mr W. H. Hawkins lieutenant; Mr John Scott,
drill instructor, For many years it was maintained with much spirit; and
the ladies of Port Fairy in 1856 presented the company with a silver
bugle at a public parade in the old cricket ground—an illustration of which
important function appeared in the Illustrated London News of the day, a
reprint of which can be seen, as well as the identical bugle then presented,
by applying to Sergeant Artis at the Orderly Room. In 1863, the Volunteer
coips of the colony were disbanded, and the Western Artillery Company
organised, Captain Mason still retaining command of the Port Fairy detach-
ment, On one occasion, the local corps made a mimic attack by night on
Warrnambool, and with the little 6-pounder gun found on the beach, fired
blank cartridges to such purpose as not only to frighten the Warrnamboolians
into submission, but to smash the windows of several of the houses in the east
end of Timor-street. In 1868, an encampment of the whole Western forces
was held in Port Fairy, the town being alive with soldiery, they being
billeted in the old Court house buildings. Once or twice the men in the
ranks mutinied ; and on the occasion that they disobeyed Lieutenant Hutton
by running away at “double quick” through the streets, the court martial
proceedings were amusing. In 1884, there was another alteration in the
constitution of the civilian soldiers; and the Western Garrison Artillery
was established, the Port Fairy Battery being in the second brigade.
Lieutenant Andrew Kell had been promoted at this time to the command, and
was gazetted as Major, his staff now comprising Captain Harrison and
Sergeant-Major Egan, with seveial non-coms.


THE TRADE OF THE PORT.
Would afford matter for lengthened reference; suffice it to say, that in
1853 trade had assumed considerable proportions, as may be judged from
these figures: Duty paid on bonded goods, £6409 7s 8d; on spirits,
£5227 ; on tea, £293 ; and, as an outcome, 120 male and 8 female “ drunks ”
had to “ face the music ” before W. Rutledge, Esq , J.P. In that year 19
foreign ships entered the port, and 56 coastwise traders; the exports in-
cluding 4199 bales of wool, 1773 ounces of gold, 24,340 bushels of wheat,
4 tons of potatoes (!), and other smaller items. In 1854-6 the imports totalled
£262,127 ; and the exports £334,414. These figures are enormous; and
have not been equalled since, except in the potato boom times, but, in the
coming days, when rabbit preserving in in full swing, and sugar beet becomes
a staple of the district, Port Fairy should exceed all previous records both of
import and export trade. So mote it be.
NEWSPAPERS.
The Belfast Gazette was started in 1848 by Mr T. H. Osborne, who
had previously edited the Portland Gazette , but finding Portland could not
support two newspapers, brought his press and type to Belfast, and the trials
of conveying the material by the unmade fifty mile road journey was no
little pioneering difficulty. The Gazette , after being for some years success-
fully carried on by Mr Osborne, was purchased by Mr Arthur Youngman,
a scholarly and literary gentleman, who continued its issue until March, 1864,
when it ceased publication for a few weeks. The copyright was then pur-
chased by Messrs Smith and Osburne, who again issued the Gazette in May,
1864. They remained in partnership until 1872, when Mr Thomas Smith
assumed the sole proprietorship for a while, subsequently disposing of his
interest to Mr R. G. M'Cutcheon. He in turn sold to Mr G, W. Osburne
in 1877, who continued the issue of the Gazette until 1890, when Messrs
Hogarth and Richmond, the present proprietors, purchased the property.
The Banner of Belfast was established by the late Mr Michael O’Reilly, who
continued to publish it ’midst the varied experiences of colonial journalism
until 1874, when it was purchasedb y Mr D, J. Howes, and published by Mr
C. H. Emery, who ran it for a few years. It ultimately ceased issue, and
became incorporated with the Port Fairy Gazette.


GENERAL.
In addition to the foregoing, there are many items of social history
that deserve mention. How that the numerous Government officials—Peter
Nicolson, collector of customs ; T, P. Philpin, landing waiter; Captain Mills,
harbourmaster; W. E. Wheeler, clerk of courts; 0. Lydiard, inspector of
police; with their many subordinates—-created in Port Fairy an attractive
circle of first-class men, which made the place sought after and enjoyable to
the surrounding settlers and others. Drs Lee, O’Hara, Frame, Jermyn, and
Russell ; with solicitors Barber, Thomson, Thurlow, and Bayly ; also formed
a coterie of good fellows, whose places are now blanked ; whilst of the “ live ”
tradesmen who then existed, we have few fellows to-day. The hotels of the
early times bore the names —British, Caledonian, Hibernian, Royal, Stag,
Union, Merrijig, Sally Ann, Farmers Inn, Star of the West, and Flannery’s ;
some of which have retained their original signs, but others have assumed
other titles. The breweries were conducted by Messrs Finn and Meagher,
R. Spry, 0. Brooker, and later, by A. Guinn ; whilst as auctioneers, R.
Frizzel, Halhed and Spry, J. H. Hill, and Charles Ruffle are the earliest ;
followed by Macgregor and Knight, S. Macgregor and Co., J. Jellie, J, L.
Laskie, J. B. Holden, and Freckleton and M'Callum. The first school estab-
lished in Port Fairy was kept by one Wilson —“ Plunket Wilson ” they used
to call him—his seminary being a little thatched hut standing where Beaver’s
store (now the Salvation Army barracks) was afterwards built. Mr
George Castwood and his wife also kept school, as did Mr and Mrs
Weston; whilst private seminaries were conducted by Mrs and Miss
Heatley, Mrs Youngman, Miss Hughes, Mrs Kirk, and others. An
event in early history, omitted in the foregoing rough outline, was the arrest
of a noted English bank robber named Oodrington Leviston. He was brought
to Port Fairy, and charged with the crime of bushranging Mr W. Rut-
ledge remanded him to Geelong for trial, and himself marched him to the
wharf for despatch by the schooner Wave, then clearing out for the me-
tropolis. Leviston remarked, “ You’ll hear of me again shortly, Mr Rut-
ledge ;” that gentleman replying with his characteristic emphaticness, “No
fear of that, you scoundrel.” But, sure enough, within a w'eek he had
stolen one of Mr Rutledge’s mail horses and escaped. The schooner had put
into Warrnambool, and the prisoner had by some means got rid of his iron
shackles, and during the night got ashore, and thus was free. He was,
however, subsequently arrested in England, under the name of Green,
and ended his days in gaol. Then, again, the shooting of a bushranger by
Mounted-constable Wigmore is an item which will be vividly remembered
by old residents. The constable had met with two outlaws some distance
outside the town on the Yambuk road, recognising them from descriptions sup-
plied. On reaching the point of the road near the Catholic Church, the
fellows desired to separate, to which Wigmore demurred, revealing his iden-
tity. One attempted to galloped away, and succeeded, but the second, who had
a revolver in his hand, was ordered to “stand,” and on attempting to escape
received the contents of the constable’s bull-dog, and died before he reached
the police station. An inquest was held, and the constable justified in his


action. About tiie same time, Sergeant Dodds was stabbed by a lunatic named
Rutledge, and died as the result. Boiling-down was carried on largely,
as well as salting-down, and immense numbers of sheep and cattle were
yearly exported in the shape of tallow and preserved meat. On the Island
boiling-down works were carried on by Messrs Huntly and Thomson, and at
Martin’s Point, Messrs M'Oracken had extensive salting works, the meat
being sent to Sydney and Tasmania in casks. The old “ Boiling
Down” on the Common was one of the most thriving institutions of the
early times, before freezing and preserving were thought of as being
practicable. The emigrant depot occupied the site of the present Custom
house, being a row of small wooden buildings for the accommodation of the
newly arrived colonists, and were in charge of Charley Pizzy and Mr and
Mrs Hobbs. Previous to the erection of these houses, the new arrivals were
“ put up” in tents near Martin’s Point. Hugh Wallace was the first under-
taker who introduced a hearse for the conveyance of the dead to the ceme-
tery “ shoulder-wrights,” as they were called, having previously been
engaged to carry the coffin on the shoulder, or on a kind of hand-barrow,
Charles Ashby being the “boss” shoulder-wright. Wallace imported the
hearse from Sydney in the brig Sarah; and did away with the occupation
of Ashby and the others. In 1851 the separation of the colony from New
South Wales was befittingly celebrated in Port Fairy, a whole bullock being
roasted on the flat below the Oddfellows’ Hall, and a real gala day was
indulged in. Good Fridays were invariably set aside for “ rounders,” and
“ tinkers, tailors, soldiers, sailors,” all engaged in what was then the
popular game. George Watson was in charge of the Flagstaff on the look-out
in those days, and when “ indisposed ” to attend to his duties, his wife used to
hoist the old man’s night-cap as a signal if vessels appeared in sight,
lhat red night-cap was often seen. In 1848 a little ketch, named the Fairy,
with two sailors, and a Captain Brown, fitted out in the Moyne, and sailed for
the Californian diggings, but was never afterwards heard of. Several instances
of drowning in the bay have occurred during the periods under review,
amongst them beingGeorgeßest,saddler (and, by a curious coincidence, in 181)1,
his only son met a similar fate, at almost the same spot, when directing
the proceedings of a successful regatta) ; George Gregory, fisherman; George
Darby, tinsmith; Wrixon Johnstone, fisherman; John Nichol, labourer;
Yarmouth Lincoln and George Jellard, Edward Burley, and others. In 1857,
the lighthouse was built on Rabbit Island, at a cost of £1730; and the fol-
lowing year the quarters were erected by Messrs MTvenzie and M'Gowan,
the contract price being £2OOO.
There was a good deal of envy apparent on the part of the residents
of Portland in 1848 53 towards the growing settlement around Port Fairy,
and when an agitation was set afoot to induce the Home Government to allow
ships to convey the increasing numbers of immigrants arriving from the
United Kingdom, direct to Port Fairy, instead of being re-shipped from
Portland, there was a protest against such a course, the unsafety of our
harbour being put forward as the reason. It did not succeed, however, and
several ships laden with old-world adventurers landed here direct. Then
again, in 1851, on a petition from the Portland people to establish a Court of
Quarter Sessions there, a grievance was created against this town, as the
following extract from a letter sent to the Home authorities by the manager
of the Union Bank at Portland will explain:—“l regret to inform you
that the Colonial Government has thought proper to establish a Court of


Quarter Sessions at Belfast, Port Fairy, a private township, and at a distance
of fifty miles by land and about thirty-three by sea. In cases of forgery or
minor offences it will be necessary for witnesses to cross three or four rivers,
attended with the greatest danger in winter. A strong remonstrance has
been signed by the inhabitants of Portland, but with no good result.
Notwithstanding the well-known dangerous harbour of Port Fairy, the Council
has granted large sums of money for certain improvements there, which
have been disallowed to Portland Bay, where there is a Government township
of many years’ standing, besides the great difference in the upset price of town
land, which in Portland is £lOO per acre, and at the new township of Port
Fairy is only £8 per acre. Portland is also an older township, possessing a
fine harbour, a bank, a gaol, and courthouse, which are wanting at Port
Fairy.” This letter brought somewhat of a snub on the Portland bank
manager, for Downing-street informed him that if he had any “ further
complaints to make upon a subject of which they were in the dark, he
must transmit through the Lieutenant-Governor, who would then have an
opportunity of making what explanations he might think necessary for his
own justification, and for a perfect understanding of the subject.” Portland
afterwards obtained the same concessions, as their own agitation had first
secured to this place. A record of 1852 shows that no fewer than six inquests
were held in Port Fairy in that year John Marr, William Middleton,
Elizabeth Ferguson, “Bob,” Denis Daley, and James Green—all but the
last named having the now rare verdict recorded by Coroner A. W Hume (
of “Died from the visitation of God.” Green was drowned. In 1853,
the Government purchased as a site for a gaol the hill whereon is now
erected the State School buildings, the price given Mr Atkinson for the
five acres being £516 5s 6d, though a free grant of one acre was given for a
lock-up in Campbell-street. The “ Merrijig ” was purchased also, for police
barracks, for £Bl4 10s, the same year, but somehow afterwards reverted
to the Atkinson estate.


THE ABORIGINALS
Some interesting 'stories might be told of the aborigines which abounded
in large numbers around Port Fairy up to the fifties. The Port Fairy
tribe (or “Peek Whunrong ” —kelp lip) was once a most numerous body,
whose territory (according to Mr James Dawson, author of “ Australian
Aborigines”) extended “ along the sea coast from the mouth of the Hopkins
River to nearly half way between Port Fairy and Portland, thence to
Dunmore, Tarrone Swamp, Kirkstall, Koroit, Woodford, Allansford, Fram-
lingham, and down the Hopkins River to the sea.” On the present common,
about Killarney, was a favourite camping ground, and thereabout frequent
tribal battles were witnessed by the early whalers and residents of the
pioneering times. The last pitched battle took place in 1854, just beyond
Mahony’s farm, and some tierce fighting was then indulged in, and witnessed
by quite a number of white folks without interference. On the sand
hummocks in that vicinity hundreds of skeletons have been unearthed during
the past twenty years, the winds off the ocean disturbing the scanty sand
covering of the native graves. Occasionally I have picked up a skull with
waddy-marks plainly indicated; one, indeed (which was for a long time in
my possession, but afterwards coveted and taken away by a captain of one of
the steamers trading to Port Fairy), having a hole about the size of a florin
knocked clean out on the crown of the head. Corroborees were of frequent
occurrence, and the weird appearance of the lime-ribbed half-nude natives,
dancing and contorting, to the dismal intonations of the voice, and the
slapping of a kind of drum by the lubras, was as diabolical as can be
conceived. The last large corroboree in this neighbourhood took place at
Yarnbuk, when a gatheiing of the remnants of the Port Fairy tribe was
summoned in September, 1859. It culminated in a drunken orgie and a
free fight. The early settlers had some trouble with the blacks, and the
slaughter of a few occasionally was thought lightly of by numbers of the
landowners. I have heard some of the old blacks talk of the brutal treat-
ment some of their fellows were subjected to, one very intelligent man
telling me of how his mother was shot down, and he, as a picinniny,
ftightened to move from the scrub to which he had escaped, for fear of similar
fate. This was in a mission of revenge by the whites for the loss of a
bullock which had been killed by the natives—as he said. The little value
placed upon the lives of the blackfellows can be judged by an incident
which occurred very near Port Fairy, the principal being a Scotchman,
well-known in the early days. He had a native working for him as shepherd,
and, missing some sheep, he was determined to keep watch. He caught a
black fellow red-handed killing one of his animals, his own native being privy
to the theft. He called out to them, and, without compunction, shot one
dead, remarking to the second man, in reply to his declaration of innocence
whilst loading his rifle, “ Wait a wee, me cullen ; I’ll h’ae ye baith,” and
without further ado despatched the second. No wonder the blacks evinced
dislike to the whites when such treatment was extended to them. For years,


several fine specimens of aboriginals dwelt about the town in mia-mias built
near the race-course, and in the Blackwoods; and old residents will well
remember Johnny Kell, Sou’wester, Billy Wallaby, a noted thief (whom I
once saw climb the jail wall and escape, to hide himself in the rocks at
Boarding School Bay, only to be re-captured); Jimmy Cain, and George
Green ; whilst the mimicry of Jimmy Hyde and Billy Youl drew many
a “tixpenna” from the knots of people who were daily amused by their
j imitations of the peculiarities of prominent residents. Messrs W. Rutledge, •
Michael O’Reilly, 0. H. Macknight, and Horace Flower, were especially
caricatured by these natural-born pantomimists, often to the amusement and
the exaction of the coins wanted from the parties themselves. The murder
by George Green of his lubra, in 1860, created a great stir amongst the
blacks, and the white population demanded his punishment; but George, an
athletic fellow of 6 feet or more, escaped from the hands of the law, and
was allowed to remain hidden until the affair blew over. He was a long time
away from this colony, having migrated to N.S.W., and became insane, but
a few years ago he returned, and was resident at Framlinghara Aboriginal
Station, but under another name, 1 believe. To-day there are but few of the
descendants of the Port Fairy tribe remaining, and retribution will assuredly
await the early authors of their too speedy decimation. The hummocks,
from Boarding School Bay to the high hills near the target, give evidence
of that locality being a favourite native camping ground ; for the hundreds of
tons of shells heaped up on the hills, and the stone-ovens which until late
years were to be seen in* the valleys between, betoken the presence there in
time past of hordes of native feasters. Even in the early days of the whites,
it was no uncommon thing to see the lubras fishing among the rocks for
crays and mutton fish, and the success of their labours was an occasion of
envy to the boys and lads who would be trying their luck with indifferent
results. A Mrs Dunlop endeavoured to befriend the natives, and established
a home on Griffiths Island, where up to 1853 she resided, and had a number
of blacks living with her. She tried to educate them, but with indifferent
suuccess, and vacated the two storied mansion under Saddle Hill, disappointed
and poorer. This lady was of an adventuresome character, and her whaleboat
voyages, even as far as Portland, rowed by six natives, were of frequent
incidence. I am reminded of an event where her boatmen were of some
service in a dilemma. The South-west Passage was a favourite bathing-place,
and one summer evening, a solicitor named Thomson was enjoying a swim,
when a largo, shark questioned the-right of his presence in its domain. His
nearest way of escape was to swim on to the Island, which he did, reaching
land exhausted and frightened. To return to the mainland he dare not, so
he remained all night among the rushes on the island. Mrs Dunlop, astir at
daylight, observed from her balcony the nude figure hiding in the rushes,
and despatched her dusky attendants to ascertain the cause; whereupon
they manned the whaleboat and put Thomson across, to recover his clothes
and go to his home. Mr and Mrs James Dawson, in later days, whilst
residing in Port Fairy and elsewhere, befriended the natives in a most
humane and commendable manner, and earned their respect and confidence
in a marked degree.
1 i
I i
■■


The historical society of Victoria
WITH WHICH IS INCORPORATED
The Victoria Branch of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia.
All Communications
to be addressed to
the Secretary.
V. S. P. A. BUILDING,
200 SWANSTON STREET,
JUL 22 1924 V /~ 3


5 //<
,
oJ'fLi# & yi f o —-"
C^/Xst-ZS?
* _ .— t
/ / Olst'
r ,
CimsD
C Xf c, .
,


t *A**k* r( jC H*
/ ... * * f
if* 9: : * r i ' IZ, w . -
kb (Zih*. r 6
7 •' ♦ -ii.
U £ &-■#
ue> p* •*v *r^
> *4*4. **■• v
/ C T * ■r' ■ * ’- V-V "i-“-|^
4 j ?t. y z-ysv /
