

f'q 'iibfi o~
OFFICES OPEN ON FRIDAY EVENINGS-SIX TO EIGHT O’CLOCK




Swan Location Y 806
This Valuable Property is situated within half a mile of the city boundary
and about two miles from the Town Hall, the block has a frontage of about
half a mile to Swan River and runs back about a mile and a half , except on
the banks of said River, the country is generally undulating sandy soil, and
commands a good view of the City, River and Darling Range to the
Eastwards . It is also well adapted for a Suburban town, having communi
ation by River, Road and Rail . The Eastern Railway passes nearly through
to centre of property . The Land in places is adapted for Gardens and water
could be got within' a reasonable depth. Several fine springs on bank of River
We would suggest that the Land be surveyed in blocks of about one third of an
acre each and the town be called East Perth .
FORREST & ANGOVE.
LICENSED SURVEYORS.
Y M szss/r






WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Western Australia is the largest of the Australasian Colonies, having an area of over one million square miles, or about
one-third of the Continent, and includes all that portion lying to the westward of the 129th meridian of East longtitude.
The population of this vast extent of country numbers at the present time about 40,000 souls. The revenue for
the year 1885, amounted to close on <£400,000; the expenditure to £300,000; the balance standing to the credit of the
Colony on the 31st December, 1885, being £89,509 16s. 3d. The principal products are wool, timber, lead, copper, pearls,
pearl shells, wheat, and other cereals; guano, sandalwood, wine, fruits, horses, cattle, &c. The greater part of the country
is eminently adapted for pastoral pursuits, and immense tracks have been secured by squatters from other colonies, it being
an indisputable fact that some of the finest pastoral land in Australia is here to be found.
In their circular of the 12th January last, Messrs. R. Goldsbrough & Co., of Melbourne, give particulars of tb<
shipments from all the Australian Colonies and New Zealand, to the latest dates obtainable, as follows:
Colony.
1885-6.
1884-5.
Decrease.
Increase.
New South Wales
Victoria
214,875
237,523
105,365
188,020
256,065
134 266
43,722
5,364
26,855
20,542
28,901
South Australia
Queensland
49,928
9,199
6,206
3,835
West Australia
Tasmania.
7,561
6,822
77,511
New Zealand
62,341
15,170
686,792
713,770
64,613
37,635
Thus the increase for the season 1885 6 is, for Western Australia, 70 per Cent., and for N.S. Wales the next highest
14 per cent, ; or again Western Australia produced 1 bale to every four persons of the population, against a production in
N.S. Wales of 1 bale to every four and half persons.
The varieties of timber for which Western Australia is especially noted are, jarrah—a hardwood of great durability,
and impervious to the attacks of the white ant and the toredo, or marine
demand for piles, railway sleepers, and similar purposes. Sandal wood is
exported annually amounting to nearly £lOO,OOO, Lead and Copper lodes
ng worm. It is consequently in extensive
largely exported, the value of these woods
being successfully worked; but the recent
boring
also lai
discovery of payable gold in the Kimberley district puts all other mining in the shade. It is almost superfluous to remark
that gold is the one metal that speedily attracts a large population, and that it was the gold discoveries of 1851 that at once
gave Victoria her prominent position in the Australian group, and attracted from Europe her large population. In an
incredible short space of time Melbourne, from being a collection of tents, became a magnificent capital. Shch a transforma
tion we shall probably witness again.
The following is extracted from the Sydney Morning Herald of April 9 ;— “Gold Discovert at Kimberley.—
Perth, Thursday. The barqtxe Westeria has been placed on the berth at Freemantle to convey passengers to the Kimberley
Goldfields. Great excitement prevails throughout the colony relative to the news of the gold discovery. The party who
brought the gold to Derby came in for provisions, leaving 50 men at work when they left. The gold is alluvial. A nugget,
weighing 160 z., is now en route to Freemantle, per Otway, together with another parcel containing 60oz. A telegram received
from a correspondent at Cossack this morning states that the gold is very near the surface. Heavy tropical rains have fallen
where the party is at work. There is every promise of a great goldfield. The following telegram from Mr. W. Mather ,
dated from Freemantle, the Bth, has been received ‘ Forty-two ounces were obtained in one day by two men at die
Kimberley goldfields. Six hundred and fifty ounces of gold are reported to be in the hands of a digger, including al9 oz
nugget, which was found in shallow sinking.’ Further details from another correspondent at Cossack state that very good
news has been received from the goldfields. Carlisle’s party returned in two divisions; the first batch of four men brought
360 z., and the second a smaller quantity. M‘Dermott’s party lOoz. Kielan, who came from Port Darwin, with 240 z., left
mate doing very well. Edgar and two others brought 85oz. Moore and Morrison are reported to be doing very well indeed,
and Hall and Slattery fairly well. The creek where they obtained the first gold they found full of water, and could not
work ; but afterwards they returned to it, and are said to have got 60oz. there. All the men from Cambridge Gulf say that
the road thence to the diggings is rough, and waterless in a dry season.” When the history of this grand colony comes to be
written, this passage will be read with the same interest as the early incidents of the Victorian goldfields now are.
Milton tells us of Satan’s throne, that
“ Far outshone the wealth of Ormus or of Tnd.’ ;


TOWN HALL,


That this wealth exists on both sides of the Indian Ocean is evident, for single Pearls have realised £lOOO in some
instances, and the export of Pearls and Pearl Shells from Western Australia has an annual value of over £25,000,
The Vine, Orange, Peach, Olive, Nectarine, Almond, and other fruits, the cultivation of which, is the occupation of
the industrious population of the Southern Countries of Europe, France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, and Greece, grow luxuriantly
The export of Horses to India, a pursuit which formerly was a source of great wealth to traders in the Eastern
Colonies, has been revived in the Western Colony,
And here it is well to note that Western Australia possesses the first port of call, and the last of departure, to
vessels trading to Indian and Mediterranean Ports. The influx of skilled fruit growers, and the command of the Indian
Market, is therefore a certainty.
Space will not permit of a detailed explanation of the Land Regulations of the Colony ; suffice it to say, that they
are of a most liberal character. In the Central or Home District, land suitable for garden purposes can be taken up for
10s. per acre, in quantities of between 10 and 40 acres, payable by annual instalments of Is. per acre. When the whole
allotment is fenced and one quarter of it under crop, a CroWI). gi ant ISSHBS-
The laws under which land can be taken up for pastoral purposes, have been framed in the same liberal spirit.
It cannot be a subject of wonder, that such an El Dorado has at last attracted the attention of European Capitalists.
The gigantic schemes of Messrs. Waddington and Hordern are now in full process of realization. The latter undertakes to
construct a railway from Beverley to .Albany, a distance of about 234 miles, on the same gauge as the existing lines. For
this he receives a grant of 1 2,000 acres of land, in alternate blocks, for every mile of railway, and is allowed to select the
same in a belt of 80 miles running east and west of the line. He is also bound to introduce 5,000 immigrants into the
colony at a rate of 1,000 per year for five years. Mr. Waddingbon’s railway will unite Perth to Geraldtown, a distance of 350
miles, connecting with the present Government line at Guildford. His agreement also includes the introduction of 5000
immigrants into the colony, on the same terms as Mr. Hordern’s.
The first sod of Mr. Waddington’s railway was turned by the Governor with great eclat on the Ist March last,
The folllowing extracts are from the Sydney Morning Herald of the 22nd March :
“Anew era has commenced in the history of Western Australia. A short time since Mr. John Waddington,
of London, obtained a concession from the Government to construct and work a line of railway for the purpose of opening
up the land. The quantity of land granted was at the rate of 12,000 acres per mile of railway constructed, equipped, and
worked; to be selected in blocks of not less than 12,000 acres, and not to absorb more than half the railway frontage; and
to be situated within a belt of 40 miles on each side of the line. The whole of the land to be reserved from sale during its
construction. This railway will tap the wealthy mineral districts of the north, lying in the vicinity of Champion Bay, with
Perth, the capital, and is to commence at Guildford, distant eight miles from that place, proceeding via Gingin, Victoria
Plains, Upper Irwin, and Dongarra to Walkaway, there joining the proposed Southern terminus of the Government
Northern line. The gauge is to be 3 feet 6 inches, the same as that of the Government lines, and the estimated cost about
£5OOO per mile. New harbour works are shortly to be constructed at Freemantle under the direction of Sir John Goode,
whose engineers are now busy at work surveying. The present railways existing in the colony run from Geraldtown
to Northampton, 30 miles, called the Northern Railway, and the Eastern Railway, from Freemantle to York, 88| miles, the
last section of which was only opened in 1885. The result of these land-grant railways will be to place land in the market
which will prove an attraction to settlers, investors, and immigrants, and the population will be considerably increased,
owing to the fact that 5000 immigrants are shortly to be brought out in connection with the railway. The contractor for the
line has begun work, and survey parties have been sent ahead of him. Plans, sections and estimates have been carefully-
prepared under Mr. Price Williams, 0.E., a well-known engineer in the old country; and it is stated most positively that
the whole work will be completed and open for traffic within three years of the date of commencement of operations. The
value of the land is enormous, as the price has doubled since the signing of the contract, which will give a handsome return
to those who have ventured to invest money in the company.”
The following report of the festivities in connection with the turning of the first sod is abridged from the Perth
Inquirer of the sth instant: —
“ The ceremony of turning the first sod of the Midland Railway was performed by his Excellency the Governor
on the Ist instant. The line of railway will run from a point about two miles beyond Guildford to Walkaway, at the
Greenough, the Government having undertaken to connect it with the northern line. The contracts between Mr. Price
Williams (on behalf of the promoters, Mr. Waddington’s syndicate) and the Government, and the contractor (Mr. E. Keane)
and Mr. Williams were signed only towards the end of last week, so that no time was lost in beginning the work as soon as
possible. We may mention that the first two miles of the line have been surveyed, and that Mr. Keane will begin the
actual work of constructing that portion of the line to-day.
“Just before noon the platform of the Central Perth railway station was crowded with ladies and gentlemen who
had been invited by Mr. Keane to witness the turning of the first sod of the new line of railway, and at six minutes past
12 his Excellency took his seat, and the special train moved off. The pretty little village of Guildford was reached exactly half-
an-hour past noon, and a short stay was made there to pick up a few passengers. Within six minutes afterwards the train
arrived at the spot opposite to which the ceremony of the day was to be performed. Here a temporary platform had been
erected for the convenience of the visitors, and upon his Excellency alighting he was received by a guard of honour,


GOVERNMENT OFFICES AND TOWN HALL.
GOVERNMENT HOUSE.




■
I .
i,-
V
J
7'; |j >, V - V;" A
«*fe -
■ ■; ■ ■ . • • ■; ■■ ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ - • ■ . ■ . . ■■■■ ■;■ ■.'■.■■■. ■ . •■■■ ..■'■.■■■.■ •.- ■ ■ ■ ■ •
■■<■-:■'' • ■ ■ ' ' ' • , ■ ■
• ■ • ;■. :■“■■.;.■;•■ ■:.;■• • ■ ■ : . ;■ - ■ ■■■■ ; - 1 ■■■•■■ • , ;. • ■.■.-■•. ■ ■ ■ .;■•.■■••■
-.;■. , _■ > ■ :.-■■■„■ ' ■ ■- ■ .•■;■ •.... : ■■ .,.:■ : : , ; -.. - ■■■■-.■■■■'•■■•.. ■’-;■■ •: ■’• ■ • 1 ■■;■"■■" ■'
1
1 . ,
i ' ■ ■ ■ ■. ■■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■
■ :• .... : - - ■„ -■' ■ .
. .; ■ •■ ■■ , ■
... ' ;'"' r ,' ;
V .
■ ■••■ ■■■ ■■■" ( \
, v , , ■. ,
■ ' ■ • ,• , ' :
■ ■ '
" • ' ' ' ■ ' ' "■■■.■ ' •' ■
. s> g|i||||g'
_ ; •
.
■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ , ■ , , '■■■■■•
• (1
■ £•
' ']*'
■ ■'.■■■■■. '■■■■.■■...■■■■■ ■■■■■•'■■■
TH
I


composed of the Guildford volunteers, with their band, and the Cadet Corps (“Lady Broome’s Own”). After having
inspected the two corps his Excellency proceeded to the spot where he was to turn the first sod of the new railway. Here
every preparation had been made, and a handsome barrow and spade (supplied by the W. A. Manufacturing Company,
Limited) had been provided, His Excellency seized the spade, and, setting vigorously to work, soon filled the barrow, aimd
the loud cheers of the assembly. He then wheeled it to the end of the plank, emptied it, and, facing round, drew it back to
the place from which he had started, amid the loudly-expressed merriment of all present. His Excellency then called <or
three cheers for the new line, and led off the applause himself in a most hearty manner. The company then proceeded to
the large marquee that had been erected close by, in which was laid the luncheon. About 300 guests sat down at the,
bountifully-provided tables, which were pleasantly shaded from the rays of the sun by an immense awning gaily decora,ten
with flags.”
Much more might be written in proof of the wonderful progress that Western Australia is now making, but enough
has been stated to show beyond a doubt that investors in PERTH have a chance of becoming rich beyond the dreams of avarice
The best investment is EAST PERTH. It will bear inspection
It is the NEAREST LAND to the centre of the Town.
No allotment has less than 66 feet frontage.
It is first-class Building Land, free from rocks, swamps, or gullies, gently undulating, near the City, and commanding
splendid views of the River, City, and Harbour.
It is the CHEAPEST land being offered.
The Title is the West Australian Torrens’.
The Depths of the Lots average over 200 feet.
The Deeds are guaranteed at £2 2s. for the purchaser of one lot, and free to larger buyers.
The Terms are certainly most advantageous and reasonable, with liberal allowances; and last, but not least—
There is Choice of Lots without Auction Sale, and the first buyers have the preference.
Photographs, the Perth Daily Papers, the Acts of Parliaments relating to the Railway Syndicate, and other
information respecting the Colony, can be seen at the offices of the undersigned.
Perth, the capital, is beautifully situated on the North bank of the River Swan, about 12 miles above Freemantie
which is its port, and may be approached by its waters or by land by the Freemantie road and by the main line of railway
which runs through the city. From the bank of the river the land on which Perth is built gradually rises, thus affording
the inhabitants fine views of the surrounding country. The city is well laid out, St. George’s Terrace being about 100 feet
wide. From our illustrations it will be seen that the Public Buildings of Perth are not without architectural merit, and
are an evidence of the public spirit and good taste of its people. In addition to the buildings already constructed and which
our artist has so skilfully reproduced, the Banks and other Commercial Companies are erecting handsome and costly edifices.
The offices of the Bank of New South Wales and the Union Bank, have been completed ; the Western Australian Bank and
tlie National Bank of Australia are erecting new premises, and a tender was accepted a few months ago by the A.M.T
Society for a stately pile to cost upwards of £B,OOO.
THE VENDORS, HAVING PURCHASED EAST PERTH CHEAPLY, ARE CONTENT WITH
MODERATE PROFITS, BEING WILLING THAT PURCHASERS MAY HAVE THE BENEFIT OF RISE
IN PRICES
For the past twelve months so great has been the increase of the population, that it has been found impossible to
find accommodation for all comers. The carpenter and builder have been quite unable to keep pace with the demand for
house accommodation, which it has been and still is no unusual thing for new arrivals to be unable to obtain, as the following
extract from the Perth Enquirer will show :
“Building, building everywhere, yet no house room. The stranger, on Ids arrival in the colony, entering the city
by rail, is struck by the number of new houses which appear on every side, many of which are not completed. In the
suburbs, north, east and west* the appearance is that of a new town, while stacks of brick and stone here and there indicate
contemplated erections. It would seem as if preparations were being made to meet the great exodus from the sister
colonies, and to provide house-room for those who elect to settle down in this fast-rising colony; but upon enquiry it is
found that each house has its owner, or that it has been taken months before a brick was laid, and that an unoccupied house
of any kind is not to be had at any price. We are continually having enquiries for house-room from persons who are
compelled to stay at hotels or lodging-houses, many of whom, for want of accommodation, have made up their minds to
return whence they came. This is an unsatisfactory state of affairs, for every steamer arriving from the colonies brings a
large number of settlers and families, whose first want is somewhere to lay their heads and shelter themselves. At present,
it is simply unobtainable. The construction of wooden houses is not permissible, zinc houses are close and suffocating, while
bricks and mortar are not to be obtained, although steam brickmaking machinery and hand labour are working at high
pressure, and turning out thousands of bricks every week. In this emergency, something will have to be done. Want of
houseroom is the question of the day, and it is a serious one. The building trade is at its height—men are working overtime
to push the work forward ; but the supply is unequal to the demand, while increased prices are asked by builders,, and rents
are necessarily higher.”




Extract from a private letter, dated 20th March.
“There are a great many people coming here, upwards of 150 came by the last steamer, and I see by the papers
that hundreds more are coming. The hotels are overcrowded and there is not a single house obtainable, it was a pitiable
sight to see a number of the new arrivals with their household furniture on their backs looking for a house and finding none,
“ A gentleman of some standing informed me that there were upwards of two million pounds coming out here for
investment Business is brisk, and there is every probability of its continuing so.”
With a short extract from a lecture delivered before his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, President of the
Royal Colonial Institute, on the 16th March, 1885, by Sir Predk, Napier Broome, Governor of the Colony, we will now
conclude.
“ Though it cannot as yet pretend to compare with the splendidly flourishing States of Queensland, New South Wales,
Victoria, and South Australia, its time is coming, and at length it moves. During the last ten years the public revenue has
doubled, real progress has been made, and it is beginning to be seen that, though we may not have the gold mines which have
built Melbourne, or the wide and continuous expanse of wheat growing lands which lie behind Adelaide, we possess solid and
various resources capable of great development. Keen men of business, who are on the look out to be first in at a good
thing, are turning their attention to Western Australia. The capitalists of Victoria and the other Eastern Colonies take a
growing interest in us. Speculators have an idea there is money to be made on our side of the continent ; and I believe they
are right. One result of this new state of things is, that I have just signed a contract for 220 miles of railway on the land-
grant system, involving an expenditure of near a million of money j while two ‘ syndicates ’ are negotiating other similar
enterprises of magnitude in different parts of the Colony.
. “ The good agricultural soil is not continuous in any district, but occurs here and there, yet often in very consider
able tracts. But the productiveness even of ground which appears nearly pure sand is astonishing 5 not only will it grow
wild flowers in profusion, but vines and garden produce appear to flourish on it luxuriantly. There is no part of the world
which can boast finer and more easily grown grapes than Western Australia, which must one day be a great wine country ,
“As far north as Geraldton, the climate, and the not infrequent twenty or thirty miles stretches of good soil, are
everywhere adapted for English garden and orchard produce and cereals, and the orange, fig, and other fruits of the south of
Europe, also flourish to perfection. The rich farms of the older districts are pleasant to the eye, with their wheat fields and
green crops of every description, and their vineyards and orchards laden with the finest fruit. At present the railways of
Western Australia include a line of 112 miles (the last twenty now in hand) starting from Freemantle and running through
Perth, and on to Guildford, York, and Beverley, the centres of agricultural districts.
“ There is now a good deal of immigration from the other Colonies, and the Government has lately devoted £20,00'.»
to introducing immigrants from England.
“ Perth is a pleasant little city, offering its residents a considerable amount of social enjoyment for its size, the
best of boating and bathing on its magnificent water, and as many forest rides and pic-nics as one has a mind to. Town
lots have already risen to a very high price, and the buildings and business of the place are increasing fast. Western
Australia has undoubtedly great mineral wealth.
“ As a field for capital, employed with boldness and shrewdness, I hold there are few parts of the world where such
good openings still present themselves as in Western Australia. As I have said, the capitalists are just beginning to find us
out, and now is the time for those who wish to be the first. Nor is it to large capitalists only that we offer a wide and profit
able field. A large capitalist may do well anywhere, if he has the wit; hut there are not many parts of the
world which hold out such inducement to the small capitalist. I believe that Western Australia’s day is at hand,
and that it will, before long, become a favourite resort of considerable numbers of those of our people who are crowded out
at home, and who desire to try for better fortunes in England beyond the sea.”


St. GEORGE’S TERRACE.
WESLEY CHURCH,


s>
to
93
§
■a
5
■s
cS
CO
1
I
aT
o
as
Is
pH
'p,
o
•s
«
*r
a
®
>
1 a
o
0
1
I
.2
o
£
«8
O
t OQ
► —■,
o
W
§
w-
cu


THE BISHOP’S GIELS’ COLLEGE
IMPEEIAL baeeaoks.


V CePjus
Mmmmwmmmvm
(NO INTEREST.)
TITLE-LAND TRANSFER ACT
(SAME AS TORRENS’)
AsmuTEty m%m to mottASEns or tors
OH MOBS, If OV£B £so,
Buyers of 5 Lots will be allowed 5% Discount.
„ „10 „ (and upwards) „ 10% „
C. J. FACHE,
1 & 2 MONTAGU CHAMBERS,
•*+ Corner * of + Hunter + and * Elizabeth * Streets, +*•
ifilSlf,
Offices open on Friday Evenings 6 to 8,
Having each 66 feet frontage to the Guildford and Perth Railway, the Guildford
Road and Central Avenue, having depths of from 193 to 822 feet
£1 deposit for the first Lot, 10s for each Additional Lot; Balance by Monthly
Instalments of 10s per Lot, irrespeotiue of Prices.
iiASB i» ESTATE AS SIT,




