

ASTWARD
?HO!


4


2^




w


Nihil Obstat;
ROMUALDUS HAYES,
Censor Theologus Deputatus.
Imprimatur:
JOANNES LONERGAN,
Administrator.


EASTWARD HOI
STORIES OF . . . .
Ijounq CRUSADERS
Bq 'Ttliriam Agatha."
REPRINTS FROM THE ? FAR EAST "


Registered at the G.P.0., Melbourne,
for Transmission by Post as a Book.
Wholly set up and printed throughout in Australia by
The Advocate Press, 309-313 Little Lonsdale
Street, Melbourne.


Many sound reasons justify the
publication of these ?Far East?
stories in book form. They
have been written for our Catholic
children, and who will affirm that we
have too much wholesome reading
matter for the young? The stories
themselves evoked a prolonged chorus
of praise from their entranced readers
while the series ran in the ?Far East.?
And, lastly, it would be a pity that
juvenile Catholic literature should be
deprived of any of the writings of
'?uch a bewitcher of children as
Miriam Agatha.? These reasons
alone make it almost a dutv to give
the stories permanent form. We hope
they will circulate widelv among the
rising generation, for, under a garb of
uproarious, rollicking fun, these tales
bear an angelic message of goodness
and Catholic virtue. To have this
message carried afar will be, we are
sure, the greatest reward the writer
herself would covet.




CONTENTS.
Chinese Peter 7
Doreen ? | 5
Terry 19
Tommy?s Circus 23
Pat the Crusader 28
Billy Boy 39
Aunt Ellen 43
Sandalwood Jim 33
That Fancy Dress Ball 59
Something New 55
Six Little Doers 73




PAULETTE and Peter sat very still while the
young priest talked of China. ' But, then, they
alw'ays sat still in church, although outside
they seemed to be two little automatic machines.
Paulette was interested in China, and so was Peter.
It seemed very sad indeed that so many Chinese chil-
dren, not to mention their fathers and mothers had
not heard of God.
Not heard of God! What terrible words! Paulette
and Peter could not remember a time when they did
not know God. Why, they knew Him always?ever-
an?-ever?as far back as their memories went to Baby-
land.
The young priest seemed very sad about it; he
seemed to be reproaching himself and the people in
the church because he and they had done nothmg to
bring the poor Chinese people to a knowledge of God.
lo �k ec * at Peter; Peter looked at Paulette.
What had they done?
?Not even one prayer offered for them,? the young
priest s quiet, reproachful voice said.
?p / Not .^ T ven one P r ayer,? Paulette?s eyes said to
Pe L er. Lot one,? Peter?s answered.
They felt that something must be done, speedily.
I hey must do something.
Afterwards, on the way home from Mass, The
1 wo fas the family called them) had a serious talk.
?c 1 t?� ' Vlth h,m to China,? Peter said, decidedly.
Something s got to be done. I could teach the little


ones to bless themselves, and I know ?Our Father,?
and ?Hail-a-Mary,? and ?I Believe.? ?
?I?ll go, too,? Paulette agreed. ?I could tell them
about Moses, and Joseph, and about the Three Kings,
and the Man Who Was Dead, and Peter, and the
Fishes, and and everything. Do you think
Mother'll let us go??
? ?Course! The priest?s mother?s letting him go.?
?Oh, but he?s big!?
?Well, I?ll be big some day?and?look here,
Paulette, if Mother says no, I?ll just (he lowered his
voice and looked fearfully around) run away.?
?Ooh, Peter! It would be a sin."
But Peter shook his obstinate little head. ?Not for
this. My name?s Peter, and I must do something. I?ve
got to. You know, in the Catechism: ?Go ye, there-
fore.? ?
Paulette?s zeal began to cool.
?What if you get toothache, or a bad dream in the
night, and cry for Mother?? she said, severely. Peter
was terribly ashamed of the bad dreams that made a
baby of him.
His eyes clouded, but only for a moment.
?I?d have to bear it. How do you know? Perhaps
the priest gets toothache, too. Perhaps he gets lonely
in the night ?way over in China. Big people might cry
in the night, but they wouldn?t let anyone know. Only
God and the angels know. I ?I?think (he shuddered
at the recollection of the nervous night-horrors) I could
bear it. I?d try to stand it.?
Paulette blushed, but she was truthful and brave.
?I think, Pete, I?ll wait until I?m big. Then I can
be a nun, and go over. I?m frightened. Perhaps the
Chinese ?the cruel ones ?would kill us. They do,
you know.?
?Coward! Wouldn?t you be a martyr, and go
straight to heaven? I?m" younger?n you, and I?m
going to China.?


?We might get leprosy.?
?Didn?t Our Lord cure the Ten Lepers? So
wouldn t He cure us ? And the Chinese would not
kill us when they would know we wanted to do g-ood
for them.?
Paulette, finding her fears waved away in this
manner, had to fall back on minor arguments.
Its too far. I couldn tgo so far from Mother.?
?Old Baby!?
And and ?they have funny faces. I don?t like
them. And they eat rice, rice, rice all the time. It
makes me sick to think of eating rice every dav.?
Perhaps they think you have a funny face, old
Paulette Meagher, and so you have?funnier?n any
Chinese girl. The priest said their souls are as pre-
cious as ours. Faces don?t matter. And it?s oreedy to
care too much about food.? &
Oh, I know, I know,? Paulette cried in an agony
of shame, ?but I cannot go?now. When I?m bi�- I?ll
go.?
X� U Can t ? ma^e U P a rea l excuse, Paulette
leagher. \ou just don?t want to go?you don?t love
Cod enough.?
?I do so, Peter. I love God lots. But I feel too
little to go. It?s too far.?
?Too little!? scoffed Peter. ?Pm littler!?
Paulette could bear no more, and, covering her
ears, fled from her zealous brother.
That afternoon, when Father was sitting in a
verandah chair reading ?The Catholic Press,? Peter
approached with strategy. He played with the cat but
his eyes were on Father, and as soon as his absorbed
parent prepared to turn a leaf Peter seized the oppor-
tunity to speak?interrupting Father?s reading was an
unheard-ot crime, although one might speak when he
turned leaves.
, . P^ ea se, father, may I go to China to teach the
khmese boys?


?Yes; yes. Of course!? Father said easily, think-
ing the permission was for some years hence.
?Good-o!? cried the little boy, and flew to find his
mother.
Mother and the two big sisters were preparing
?extra-nice? things for tea, because Mrs. Breen was
coming. Mother and Mary were not sure about a
certain recipe, and were wandering if it were a cup or
a cup and a half of flour, and
Peter burst in, forgetting about interrupting
others in their discourse.
?Mother, may I go? Father said yes. I could
teach them their prayers and about Our Lord, and I
know quite well how to baptize. Sister told us. And
if the priest was away I could do it if the man was
dying, and ?
?Dying! What man??
?The Chinaman.?
?What is the child talking about?? Mary said.
?You know you should not interrupt. I was speak-
ing to Mother.?
?Oh,? said Peter, naughtily. ?You are always
talking. I couldn?t wait until you finish.?
?Peter! Don?t be rude!? Mary said with much
dignity.
?Pm not; but, Mother ?
?Don?t listen to him, Mother,? Margaret put in.
?He?s frightfully spoilt. He should be punished now
by sending him away. Then he could knock, and
come in quietly and politely.?
?Pouf! Politely!? scoffed Peter. ?It?s much more
importanter than old things to eat. It?s about souls
and God ?so there!?
Mother put her hand, all floured as it was, on
Peter?s dark head.
?Now, Peter Pan, you must not be rude to your
big sisters, and you did rush in, you know.?


?Beg pardon,? mumbled Peter. ?But may I go,
Mother??
?Where, dear??
?To China.?
?Certainly,? laughed Margaret and Mary. ?Cer-
tainly; go now.?
Peter annihilated them with one glance.
?Father said I may.?
?Oh, well, if Father agreed, there?s no more to be
said,? smiled Mother; and she thought the permission
was for years hence.
But Peter had the ?do-it-now? habit.
?Didn?t think they?d agree so easily,? he said. ?I
thought they could not spare me.? He felt slightly
insulted and somewhat disappointed in his parents.
However, on further reflection he felt sure it was
the nature of the work that induced them to give him
up without a pang.
No one paid much attention to Peter for the re-
mainder of the afternoon; he spent it in his own little
room packing up. Paulette wanted to assist him, but
he drove her out and closed the door.
?You?re not coming; so you?re not in it.?
He rolled his most serviceable clothes in a small
bundle. He took from his Treasure Box the collec-
tion of holy pictures gained as rewards at school ?
they would be handy to stimulate the young Chinese
to great efforts in acquiring Christian doctrine. To
these he added a small crucifix and a bottle of holy
water. Then he wrote on a label;
PETER MEAGHER,
China.
It may seem a vague address to you, but to Peter
China was a place, a spot. There were Chinamen
there, quite a lot of them; and great quantities of rice,
and a few very old priests going about, praying, in
rusty, black gowns; and some dogs?very skinny


ones?and a lot of fans and fireworks; and about and
around all, a Great Noise of jabber-jabber-jabbering.
This was Peter?s idea of China. After Paulette?s ejec-
tion, no one interrupted Peter?s preparations.
Mother and the girls were busy all the afternoon
until Mrs. Breen came. Then they sat and talked to
her; then they gave her afternoon tea, and talked a
lot more. Then it was ?real? tea-time.
Benediction was given only one Sunday in the
month at Peter?s church, as the priest had to visit a
large district. The Meaghers always said the Rosary
after tea, and then spent their Sunday evening quietly
and pleasantly with friends. Don?t blame them if
they played cards some Sundays.
Peter found it dull; no one would talk about China,
or ?better still?listen to him talk about it, so he said
good-night politely and went to his room. No one
begged him to stay up a little longer; no one said, ?It?s
too early for bed, Peter.?
Peter felt slighted. He went to bed, but did not
sleep for some time. He could hear Mary?s voice
(?she?s always talking?), and Margaret?s laugh (?she?s
always laughing?).
The wind wailed outside. O-o-o-h, it cried in the
chimney.
?They?ll be sorry when I?m gone. They?ll wish
they had been kinder.?
Peter shivered. How weird the wind sounded!
And he fell to thinking of Orphan Annie. Mary had
read and re-read the verses for him. After all, Mary
was kind; she?d always read things for you. It was
nice to hear Orphan Annie when one was in the bosom
of one?s family, and the light made everything cheer-
ful ; but in the dark : ?well, ?the goblins?ll get yer if
yer don?t watch out.?
Peter blessed himself hastily. ?There are no gob-
lins, I know. I?ll have to learn to be brave, for
China.?




?Peter dreamt of a plate of rice as large as
a cartwheel.?
(Facing page 13.)


His eyes grew tired; the sign of the Cross had
soothed him. His eyes closed, opened, closed again.
Peter was asleep.
Someone did come to seek him. Mother slipped
away for a few moments. She had noticed Peter?s
aggrieved look. She carried a candle, and its soft
light fell on Peter?s face.
?Poor little fellow; he does look sad. He had a
dull afternoon, and missed his usual walk. lam sorry
I didn?t listen to him; he wanted to talk about China.
After all, it is a mistake to have no time to listen to
little ones? plans and fancies. Mrs. Breen wouldn?t
have cared if we had not made the cream cakes,
and? ?she bent to smooth his hair and draw the coverlet
closely??and poor little Peter felt neglected.?
As she turned away the bulging bundle and the
vague address caught her eyes, and she read:
?PETER MEAGHER,
China.?
She examined the baggage, and she smiled, al-
though the tears came to her gentle eyes. ?Perhaps?
who knows??some day my little Peter will go.?
She stole away quietly, and Peter slumbered on
and dreamt of a plate of rice as large as a cart-wheel,
and that he and a lot of Chinese boys had to eat it.
Next morning Peter wept sorely when he found
that he was not to go to the presbytery and offer his
services to the Chinese Missionary. Alas! He was
to go to school ?to dull, stale, unprofitable school.
His disappointment was so keen that he became posi-
tively naughty.
?Y?r said I could go,? he pouted, rudely.
Father said sternly: ?Don?t speak like that, young
man.?
But Mother, recognising that it was disappoint-
ment speaking, and not her own little Peter, said
gently: ?We did not think you meant to go now. A


little boy could not go, you know. The priest would
not take you. Wait until you are a man.?
?I could help. I could teach the little ones. How
would you like to live in a country where there is no
one to speak of God ? I could help. I could. I?ll run
away,? sobbed Peter. ?I?ll find a China boat, and- ?
Father took one threatening forward step, and
Peter dodged over to Mother?s side and was silent.
?But you need teaching yourself now, Peter. You
must work hard at your lessons, and when you are a
man, come and ask Father and Mother then ? Her
voice trembled a little, and Father looked over sud-
denly: he understood.
Paulette came in timidly: she was afraid of Peter;
he might resent her interference.
?I told him we are too little.?
?We? Another missionary in the family! So
you want to go, too, Paul?? Father smiled.
?Yes, Father, when I?m big I?ll go,? Paulette said,
solemnly. ?I don?t want to go. I?d rather live in Aus-
tralia with you and Mother; but, all the same, when
I?m grown up I?ll go.?
?Please God,? Mother added.
Peter cried and coaxed, and coaxed and cried; but
it was useless. He was forced to unpack the bulging-
bundle. Mother put the label away. ?I?ll keep it for
you, Peter, until you want it.?
Mothers have a wonderful way with them ?more
wonderful than Father O?Flynn's?and, somehow or
other, Peter?s mother reconciled him to his hard lot.
He went to school, realising that, after all his
boasting, he was only a little, naughty boy, with a
temper to tame and lots of lessons to learn; but he
resolved to try hard.
Mother told him a way to help the Chinese Mis-
sions?l suppose your mother has told you?to pray
14


CHINESE PETER.
daily for its success, and to put aside one penny every
month to aid the funds of the Mission.
When you are grown up, Peter, please God, will be
labouring on the Mission, and Paulette too.
I hope some of you will meet them there.
Meanwhile, be Little Missionaries, and help in the
simple, easy way that Peter is practising.


Doreen, too small; you?re you?ll have to
grow big. You are too little' to help. See,
I?m seven!?
Doreen?s round, pink face fell, and her
blue eyes clouded. It was hard to be small: it was
hard to put up with Kathleen?s superior airs.
??l want to help,? she said; ?the priest said all the
little ones could help. I?m nearly six, and I want to
help the China girls to know about God.?
??They are not China girls, Doreen; they are
Chinese girls. It is quite different.? Kathleen was
very clever?oh, very!
?Want to help,? Doreen said, obstinately; ?want
a ?Far East? all by myself!?
?What for, Doreen? You can?t read!?
?Can. Can read the pictures.?
Kathleen laughed cruelly. (Lots of clever people
are like that.) ?You can?t read pictures,? she said.
?Can!?
?You can?t, Doreen. Don?t be silly.?
?Can!?
Doreen, I am sorry to say, lost her temper and
stamped her little foot, and just then Mother appeared.
?What?s all this??
?Doreen is naughty; she?s in a temper.?
?Not in a temper. I can, I can, I can!?
Mother soothed the angry child. ?Now tell me,?
she said, gently.
?Kathleen laughed at me. I always get naughty
if people laugh at me. I always will, for ever and ever.
16


f vt
?Oh, Doreen, you?re too small.?
{Facing page 16.)


EASTWARD HO!
fear, he repeated; she can pick up leaves. Can?t
you, Doreen??
?Yes, Dad, and when I?m big I can go over to help
the China?Chinese?girls to know about God. Can?t
I, Dad??
?Of course,? agreed Father. ?If God wants my
ittle Doreen to work for Him in China when she
grows up> He must have her. Why not??




please put it away. What?s that??


MM
1 ?
1
afi
a
Ri
t J , -1
?W
pi*
?.
L_l 1
TERRY was ten. He had red hair, blue eyes,
and ?tons? of energy. But one day he fell ill
with mumps, and had to take to his bed.
(Terry felt inclined to ?take to? the mumps,
if they could only have hit back.) He was in a
decidedly bad humour. People who are ?really-truly?
sick are patients; people who are not, impatients.
Terry was an impatient.
Fancy being laid up with the silly old mumps
instead of out playing ?footy? with his pals!
He was sitting up in bed, his red hair on end?it
was the kind that won?t keep in place, you know ?his
face swathed in a becoming flannel bandage. He
looked like an aviator who had just fallen out of his
?plane, and wasn?t quite sure if it were to-day or
to-morrow or next week.
Mother came in.
?Terry, dear, Brother Roche has sent a paper to
amuse you.?
?Humph! Amuse me! I know his papers?some
old schooly thing, or something very holy. Put it
away, please, Mother; I feel much worse already.
Brother Roche never had the mumps when he was a
little boy, or he?d know a boy can?t read with them.?
?Read with your eyes, then, sonny,? smiled
Mother.
Terry grinned. ?You are getting smart, Mum;
but do. please, put it away. What?s that ??
?Oh, a jelly; Grandma sent it.?


?That?s better; Grandma makes jolly jellies?fit for
the show.?
He despatched the jelly, and Mother said, gently;
I think it would not be polite to leave Brother
Roche?s paper unopened. It was kind of him to
remember one little sick boy. He has such a big class,
you know, Terry.?
?Wish he?d forgotten,? grumbled naughty Terry.
But after Mother went out he drew the paper
towards him, unwrapped it, and rolled it into a
trumpet. He blew several martial calls upon it, but
the mumps, mild as they were, objected. So he
unrolled the paper and glanced at the cover.
?The ?Far East?! And there?s the Sacred Heart on
it, I suppose because it?s June. I knew it was a holy
paper if it wasn t a schooly one. Holy papers have
big words, and I don?t understand them. I like holy
stories told to me. But to read them There?s
a temple, and one of those rickety things you ride
in. And there san old Johnny with packs on his
back.?
He turned several pages, and then said, gloomily:
It s a paper for Big People. Whatever did Brother
Roche send it to me for? Big People like the silliest
things Oh, gee, what funny little Chow kids!
They have a ?footy.? Guess my team could lick them
holler! Hum ... a gymnasium class. . . . The
big fellows do that at our school. Oh. golly! A
Mon-go-lian Grandma. Poor thing! She seems to
have the mumps. I don?t like this old China paper.
It s all China . . . China . . . China. These little
chaps look jolly in the rickety-what-you-call-it
thing. Oh, here are some Chinese words like on the
packets of crackers. No?it?s a have. ?From My
Letter Box.? Thought he was clever, didn?t he? It?s
not Chinese at all. Can?t catch me. . . . Replies


Letters . . . boys? names . . . humph! . . . Golly! . . .
Gee!
Columbus sighted America 1492.
Cook took possession of Australia 1770.
Terry discovered China 1921.
After ?devouring? every line of the letters and
replies, he was a changed man.
?I always thought that China was a silly old
place, and that Chinamen were not worth troubling
about. Their funny old talk, chong-wong-ling-sing-
see, seems to have no sense. But, of course, they
have souls. And God?s been waiting for China all
these years and years, and hardly anybody bothered
about the poor old place. Well, that was real mean,
anyhow. And God has been waiting and waiting.
And I can help. This paper reckons I can. All these
boys and girls are helping. That?s the best of it.
I can help. I will help. Sure!? He read the pages
over. ?It?s a jolly nice way to help, too ?prizes,
riddles, photos, letters. June? Why didn?t I see it
before? How did these boys know about it
He read as much of the Big People?s part as he
could, and grew more and more enthusiastic.
?It isn?t a schooly paper, and it isn?t exactly a
?holy? paper, but it?s a tophole paper, anyhow.?
Terry gave no more trouble. Mother found him
as sweet as honey and as gentle as a lamb. (What a
pity all mothers and nurses don?t give a dose of ?Far
East? to their impatients!) He smeared several
sheets of paper, and spilt one bottle of ink over
Mother?s second-best quilt, in a supreme artistic
effort to design a badge?a ?stunner? badge, he
called it?for Maureen?s Little Missionaries. He
spent the afternoon waiting to Maureen:
?Dear Maureen, ?I had the mumps, and Brother
Roche sent me the ?Far East,? and now I have not
the mumps. lam sending you my design for the


Badge. Mum said the one on the quilt is better. But
I can?t send it; it is too big. I have red hair. Do
you like boys with red hair, Maureen? Have any
China boys got red hair? Do you think we could
play a football match with those Han Yang young-
sters? I?ll take my team over, if you like. We?d
make a lot of money for you. My team is called
The Emus.? (Emus are good kickers, you know,
Maureen.) Please send me a mite box; I?ve got lots
of relations, who will have to give something to
China. I am sending you all the money in my
money-box. Mother and Dad and Gran are sending
you a do-nation. I?m glad I?m not a China boy,
Maureen; but, still, if God likes them, it is up to us
to get a start on and like them, too. Mum told me
how to spell some of these words, and where to put
in stops. Good-bye, Maureen. I?ll help you for sure,
for ever and ever.?Yours for keeps,
?TERRY.
?P.S.?l?ll say the prayers, too, every night and
every morning. I think girls can pray the best, so
I?ll get all my sisters and cousins to pray, and my
auntie, the nun.
?P.P.S. ?I?ll get my photo taken and send it to
you, Maureen. It should be a wonderful photo.
Uncle Pat says he has been all over the world and
has not seen another boy like me.?T.?


TONMYS,
CI R.C US*
TOMMY lived in a small town somewhere in
Australia. No, you need not guess, because
it?s not where you?d guess at all; it?s in quite
another direction. Tommy was a nice,
naughty little boy, who liked fun better than lessons,
and had a fine taste in cowboy literature. Mother
was anxious about him; she feared his adventurous
spirit would lead him into many dangers.
?Oh, most boys go through a ?Wild Injun stage,? ?
Father said, easily. ?Tommy will turn out alright.?
Fortunately, Tommy?s activities were turned into
a new channel?a safe one, too. Mother was
delighted.
One day Sister introduced the children to the
?Far East,? and Tommy?s generous little heart
became fired with missionary zeal. He gave up his
cowboy yarns.
?No more cowboys for me,? Tommy said,
superiorly, as he threw the erstwhile favourites into
the fire. ?I?m going to China when I?m big.?
He drew on his money-box and took a whole ?Far
East? for himself. He loved it so much, and, uncon-
sciously, ?puffed? it to such an extent that every boy
in the neighbourhood felt life was not worth living
unless he could have a ?Far East? every month.


Mother felt quite pleased, and not a little astonished;
Tommy had not been in a scrape for weeks.?
One Saturday afternoon Tommy?s backyard pre-
sented an animated appearance. There were dozens
of small boys assembled, and a few frightened-
looking little girls. They were seated on old chairs,
upturned tubs and buckets. Planks resting on kero-
sene tins made excellent forms along the fence. The
chairs, tubs and buckets were ?reserved seats, three-
pence?; the forms, ?unreserved, a penny.? A white-
washed line marked the ring. It was Tommy?s Great
Circus.
Tommy, his felt hat dented like an American
soldier?s, and a gorgeous handkerchief knotted
loosely round his neck, rode round the ring on Mrs.
Mooney?s old cow. It was the quietest old cow in
the world. Tommy rode standing, sitting, kneeling.
The girls got frightened and screamed if the cow
came too close.
Tommy?s terrier, ?Dibs,? performed. He played
catchers, and did not miss the ball once. He jumped
and boxed and did several clever things. Pat Ryan
walked the tight rope ?half-way, and then fell down
on the spectators in the front row, but nobody was
hurt. Several boys executed brilliant catharine-
wheels, walked on their hands, and hung by their
toes to the tight rope. It wasn?t tight enough, how-
ever, and down they came; but, being acrobats, they
escaped injury. Paul Mooney was the clown. He
looked well in long white trousers and white coat
with black patches. His face was floured plentifully,
and he wore a funny little cap with a bell on it.
He made lots of jokes, and everybody laughed,
especially those who did not hear them.
Billy Brady?s goat was trotted in later, looking
bored. It was an old goat with fixed habits. It had
24


* �.i
?Tommy rode round the ring on Mrs. Mooney?s
old cow.?
(Facing page 24.)




not made a habit of performing at circuses. ?Dibs,?
the terrier, was coaxed to get on its back, but didn?t
like the pos. He sat ill at ease, with ears down and
eyes sad and thoughtful. The goat didn?t like it,
either, and suddenly, with an angry bleat, charged
into the spectators. Away went chairs and tubs and
buckets; away went the improvised forms; the
kerosene tins banged and rattled, the girls screamed.
And just then up drove Father and Mother in Uncle
Matt?s new car!
Father resembled the crew of the Pinafore in one
respect
What. never? Well, hardly ever; but that day I
really believe he did. Mother said in a very faint
voice: ?Oh, Tommy!?
The goat, meanwhile, was captured, quietened,
and taken away. Some of the girls still cried, refus-
ing to be comforted; others, now that the danger was
past, giggled as girls will. Mother took them in;
the weeping ones were brushed, the rents in their
frocks mended, and, finally, all were soothed with
nice cakes and tea. Father cleared the yard with
one sweep of his arm. (Boys always get the worst
of it, don?t they?)
Father said just one word, ?Clear!? And they
cleared.
?They paid to come in,? Tommy said, sadly.
?What?s the meaning of it, sir?? thundered
Father.
?Circus,? briefly answered his son.
?How dare you bring all those children here?
How dare you play these dangerous tricks??
?We were having a circus. We made four-and-
sevenpence-ha?penny. Jimmy Smith on?y paid a
ha?penny. He promised to pay the other one on
Monday. The goat got frightened? Tommy
smothered a giggle??and had a circus of his own.?


?You cannot be trusted,? Father said, in a cold,
horrible voice. ?Your poor mother has not one
moment?s peace. You knew we meant to be away
for the afternoon. No wonder she begged me to
return early!?
?I didn?t know it would happen,? Tommy said,
humbly; ?and no one was hurt. We wanted the
money for China.?
?For China!?
?To send to the ?Far East? ?you know, my paper.
We wanted to help.?
?I don?t think this afternoon?s performance was a
good way to help.?
?Oh, it was great!? Tommy explained, enthu-
siastically, ?only for the goat. Pat wasn?t hurt when
he fell off the tight rope ?it wasn?t high.?
Father groaned. ?Fell off the tight rope 3? he
gasped. ?You should be thrashed. Next time we go
out we?ll tie you up.?
Mother was more sympathetic.
?But, Tommy dear, you should have told me
about it.?
Tommy shook his head wisely. ?Yes, and you?d
have said ?No.? I thought it was best to have it while
you were away. I was trying not to bother you with
it, and I thought it was a good way to make money
?all the kids were mad to come, and now ??
Tommy?s lip trembled.
?Well, never mind, son; we?ll forgive you this
time: you had good intentions,? Mother hastened to
say; ?but, Tommy dear, next time you organise a
show, let us know. Whatever would we have done
if one of the children had been hurt??
?Oh, they don?t get hurt so easily,? sniffed
Tommy.


Jimmy Smith refused to pay the other halfpenny?
he said the circus was no good; but Mother oblig-
ingly made the takings up to five shillings. Tommy
gave a promise that in future he would put an out-
line of all his money-making schemes before a com-
mittee of two ?Father and Mother.
I hope all our Little Missionaries will do likewise,
and not let their zeal for the ?Far East? lead them
into mischief.


PAT was ten, and for
him the adage,
?Tim'*, flies,? had
no meaning; for
him it didn?t fly, it crawled
on leaden feet. When
would he be big and able to do things? He wanted to do
great things now, not wait until he was grown up. But
no??Go to school; learn your lessons; run and play? ?
that?s all grown-up people expect little boys to do.
Why couldn?t he go to China now? There were
lots of things he could do. Couldn?t he teach the
?Chinese kids? their prayers? They don?t know how
to make the sign of the Cross even. Couldn?t he teach
them that, and thus help the priests who were so few
and had so much work to do?
?How?d you teach them, Pat?? asked wise little
Bride. ?They wouldn?t know what you were saying,
and you wouldn?t know what they were saying.?
Pat?s face fell a little. ?I could show them how
to make it, and I?d soon pick up their funny old lingo.
You can, you know. I learnt lots of words from the
old Dago down at the camp, so I suppose I could
learn China talk, too.?
But Bride was like the rest of the world. She
thought boys could do nothing. ?Wait,? was her
motto.


PAT THE CRUSADER.
Pat and Bride lived with Uncle John. He was a
bachelor, and inclined to be ?cranky.? He wasn?t
actually ?cranky,? you know, but seemed to have
symptoms of that horrible ailment that oftentimes
affects bachelor uncles and maiden aunts. Pat was
a great trial to poor Uncle John, for no mischief was
beyond him; the more un-get-at-able it was, the more
eager was Pat to fall into it. But Bride, with the
shy, Irish-blue eyes, was no more trouble than the
canary in the cage.
It was old Mr. O?Dowd that, unwittingly, laid the
torch to Pat?s imagination, ever ready to be kindled.
Mr. O?Dowd lived in a small cottage, outside the little
town. He read a great deal; he wore large, old-
fashioned-looking spectacles, and Pat thought him
very learned ?and perhaps he was, in some respects,
more learned than many ?men of education,? so called.
Pat loved to sit and listen to the old man. Many a
tale he could tell, ghosts an? all that he had heard
years ago in Irelan?, or that he had read in his dingy
old books. Pat had great reverence for those old
books ?Mr, O?Dowd never by any chance got a new
one. They were all as old and venerable-looking as
himself.
One day he read of the Children?s Crusade to the
Holy Land. Pat was fired at once. His dark eyes
shone, his heart beat quickly. Those children had
not waited to be grown up; they had gone to try to
win the Holy Land from the pagans. They were
martyrs. Why couldn?t children go now to China to
fight the dragon of Paganism and win China for Our
Lord? If they were martyred they would go straight
to Heaven, and then God would give them anything
they asked. And they would ask for the conversion
of China.
It was holiday-time. Pat had plenty of leisure to
formulate his schemes. He had quite a following of


boys, and he took two trusty comrades into the secret
first. His eloquence carried them away; they were
with him, heart and soul.
?It?s no use asking your mothers and fathers; they
won?t let you go: grown-up people don?t understand
things. There is no harm in going without asking
when it is for such a good purpose.?
They solemnly vow r ed allegiance to Pat, and then
the three went about the neighbourhood urging the
small boys to join the Crusade. Some thought it was
a new game?a sham fight of some kind ?and readily
gave their names; but on Pat?s solemn assurance that
they must really go to China, and would probably be
martyred there, they basely withdrew their names and
said Pat was mad.
Pat was a trifle downcast. ?You?d think they?d
want to come,? he said, sadly.
?Oh, they want to come alright,? one of his
trusted comrades said, ?but they are too jolly scared.?
After all their exertions they managed to secure
but one volunteer?little Bobbie Ryan, who was
remarkable for his piety. Pat and the other two had
rather overlooked Bobbie always?he was such a little
?kid??but now his eagerness to join the Crusade
cheered their sinking hearts.
?Now we must be jolly good, you know,? Pat
advised, as he drew up a Rule of Life. ?Cut out
swearing, Tommy,? he added, severely, and poor
Tommy Ryan, whose vice was thus held up before
the public, blushed and promised.
They were to rise early and assist at daily Mass;
they were to be ?very good? to all at home, as they
would be leaving them forever-an?-ever; no money
was to be squandered on picture-shows, lollies, or
comic papers: all moneys to be put into a common
fund, for necessaries for the journey.
?When?ll we go, Pat??


PAT THE CRUSADER.
?Soon?s we?re ready. We?ll get the tram to the
city and stay there awhile, getting fellow r s to join.
Four from here, you know, is a lot for a small place
?we?ll get hundreds in the city. Then we?ll march
about from town to town ?
?But how?ll we get a boat???
?Oh, that'll be easy enough. When they see we
really mean to go, we?ll get a boat alright.? Who
?they? were Pat did not explain: leaders do not
always explain their plans fully to their followers.
In four families during those holidays, fathers and
mothers, big sisters and brothers, uncles and aunts
were astonished at the sudden ?conversion? of the
small boy of the household. Daily Mass, implicit
obedience, eagerness to serve anybody and everybody
?what had happened the erstwhile mischief-loving,
teasing, troublesome small boy?
?Oh, it?s this new association amongst the chil-
dren,? the ?know-all? of the family explained ??the
Australasian Little Missionaries, who are helping to
convert China by prayer and acts of mortification.?
The time was ripe. The four Crusaders had their
schoolbags packed. No good-byes could be said. Why
put fathers and mothers and fond friends to the pain
of saying good-bye?forever? Pat ordered his three
knights to get away quietly, and meet him that after-
noon at the bridge beyond the town. No one would
notice them there.
?We?ll get the tram and go on to the city, and keep
a vigil in the Cathedral to-night: knights always keep
a vigil?l?ve read about it,?
?But,? Billy put in, ?our church here is always
locked at night; suppose the Cathedral is, too? The
sacristan will chase us out.?
?We?ll keep quietly in the shadows, and perhaps
he?ll lock us in, instead of chasing us out.?


All went well.
The little band of four met solemnly at the old
bridge. It was an hour?s run to the city, and, as they
waited for the tram, they spoke little: each seemed
taking a mute farewell of the quiet scene?the little
group of houses in the distance where was Home.
Bobbie Ryan was close to tears.
?Buck up, Bobbie!? the leader said, in forceful, if
not elegant, language; and Bobbie did, and actually
smiled.
Four small boys were missing from the evening
meal, in four houses, some hours later in Yambaville.
?Oh, he?s alright. He?s probably over at Pat?s (or
Tommy?s, or Billy?s, or Bobbie?s, as the case might
be). It?s holiday-time, and they are great pals,?
explained the ?know-all? of the family again; but, in
Pat?s language, she ?came a thud?: they weren?t.
As the evening passed and night wore on three
easy-going fathers and one irate uncle were forced to
part company with their comfortable chairs, soothing
pipes, and entertaining papers, and sent to see if
Tommy were at Pat?s, or Billy at Bobbie?s, or if Pat
were at Tommy?s, or Bobbie at Billy?s. But no, none
of them was anywhere: four small boys were missing
from Yambaville. The local policeman was stirred
up; fathers grew angry, mothers pale, and little sisters
tearful.
Dire were the threats that three easy-going fathers
and one irate uncle formulated against the absent
ones.
?No more picture shows for him!? cried one
parent; ?the abominable things turn the children?s
brains. And no more cowboy yarns. He?s had too
good a time, too much pleasure. When I was a
boy ?
?But,? Mother interposed, ?he hasn?t been to a
32


PAT THE CRUSADER.
picture show all the holidays; he gave them up him-
self. He has been saving his pennies ?
? 1 ? 117 ? . .? | -r , 1 * ))
?To clear out with! Wait until I get him . .
It was dreadful to see Father so roused, but
Mother defended the lost sheep. ?He hasn?t done
anything wrong, I?m sure; he?s been so good lately.
Something has happened him and the other three
poor, little fellows. Perhaps they were swimming in
the Black Waterhole, or fishing in the creek, or . . .?
Meanwhile, the four knights assisted at Benediction
in the Cathedral with great devotion; Bobbie rested
his fair head on the bench before him and hoped the
others would not see his tears. But, of course, he did
not regret going ... he would not turn back . . .
and Mother would soon .. . get over it. She had
the others ?Nora and Jimmy and Dan. After Bene-
diction they knelt in the deepest shadows under the
gallery, hoping, even praying, that the sacristan might
not discover them. Neither did he; they were locked
The hours passed slowly in the great, dim Cathe-
dral, but the little red lamp cheered them; Jesus was
there ... it was for Him they were leaving Father
and Mother and Home. . . . They said several
rosaries, their night prayers, and numberless aspira-
tions. The clock without told them of the slow pass-
ing of the night. How tired they were! How stiff
and cramped! Bobbie?s head sank on his arms; he
was asleep. The other three kept awake manfully.
The noise of the city quietened down into a silence,
broken now and then by a passing tram or motor that.
coming out of the silence, was soon lost in it again.
Shortly after midnight a faint sound startled the
boys?a faint, metallic sound. . . . All the stories
they had heard of poor souls appearing to persons
locked up in the church came upon them, but Pat
spoke in a courageous whisper: ?Nothing can harm


us here,? and he made the sign of the Cross. The
sound came again?muffled this time?from a low
side-window beyond the gallery farthest from the
street. Three pairs of eyes tried to pierce the dark-
ness; a light flashed now and then.
?A man ... is getting in,? whispered Pat . . .
?and there?s another following him.?
?Oh, Pat,? Tommy cried, in an agonising whisper.
??they?re burglars. . . . The altar. . . . What can we
do??
?Hush!? fiercely returned the leader. ?Here, help
me to put Bobbie on the seat. ... If he wakes up
and sees them he might yell.?
?Where?ll we hide, Pat? They might turn their
light this way!?
The men were moving quietly towards the altar.
?Hide! Who?s going to hide? I?m going to sneak
out the window and find a policeman and tell the
priests. One of you must come with me; the other
stay with Bobbie. Which? Quick!?
"I?ll come with you,? Billy offered, bravely.
?So?ll I,? Tommy said, fearfully.
?One must stay with Bobbie, and if he wants to
yell, stop him somehow until we get back. Will you
stay, Tomo? Sit low; they can?t see.?
?Yes?but I?m pretty scared, Pat.?
?You?re safe as a church.? smiled Pat, and he and
Billy vanished into the shadows.
P.C. 0001 was the most astonished man in Aus-
tralia that early morning when two little boys
admonished him to ?shake it up, there were two bur-
glars in the Cathedral.?
?You must get in before they , . . the altar, you
know . . . the Blessed Sacrament is in the Taber-
nacle.?
The policeman did not know Pat?s horror of sac-


?Oh, Pat, they?re burglars!?
(Facing page 34.)




PAT THE CRUSADER.
rilege; to him the men were thieves, and nothing
more. The boys dashed off to the presbytery.
Bobbie awoke, but he did not scream when Tommy
told him he must keep very still. Tommy had to tell him
the others were gone, and the reason of their going.
Bobbie?s innocent eyes were full of pain. ?Oh, what
a pity the men could be so wicked, to try to rob Our
Lord?s own little home on the altar! But, Tommy,
they don?t understand, and I suppose they think the
altar vessels have diamonds and precious stones ?they
have sometimes. Tommy, we must go up to them,
before they touch the holy vessels.?
Tommy drew back. ?What can we do? They
wouldn?t stop for us??
?But, Tommy, we can?t sit here and not try to
stop them. They might not know what the Blessed
Sacrament means, but we do.?
?They . . . they might kill us!? whimpered
Tommy.
?Then that will be as good as going to China to
be killed. It will be better, I think.?
?Oh, Bobbie, you?re good and you?re so game. I
thought you were such a frightened little kid, always.
I?m too scared ?the policeman will be in time; wait
a minute.?
They watched the two dark forms on the sanctuary
. the light flashed across the door. . , .
?I?m going, Tommy?they are at the little door.
Don?t be afraid; they won?t touch me. And if they
do . . , you be glad, Tomo, because I will.?
Bobbie slipped off his shoes; some instinct told
him his only weapon was to surprise them. Perhaps
one moment?s hesitation on their part would prevent
the sacrilege. . . . The priests would soon be on the
scene . . . and then all would be well. Tommy hesi-
tated a moment; then he, too, slipped off his shoes


and followed. Pat had left Bobbie in his care; he
must not be found wanting.
The men had succeeded in opening the door . .
one leant across the altar, his hand outstretched,
touching the silken curtain. . . .
?Stop! Don?t dare touch the sacred vessels!?
The man?s hand fell to his side. Both started and
turned fearfully. From whence came the voice?
A small boy knelt on the steps, the red light from
the lamp making a halo around his fair head. There
was no sign of fear on his gentle face, but a look of
awe, mingled with love and sorrow, as if he prayed:
?Forgive them, they know not what they do.?
A moment the men stood in amazement, a moment
they thought him a spirit come to guard the church,
but a sound outside startled them to life without fear
of supernatural defenders.
?Trapped!? cried one, and, as they dashed past
him, one struck Bobbie a heavy blow across the face;
then both slipped into the shadows about the sanctuary.
A priest, running in through the sacristy door, left
it wide open behind him, and through this the thieves
slipped. Tommy saw them go.
The police arrived; men were stationed at the
window and at the open door, but the thieves were
already gone.
The light was turned on, and as the priest, with a
fervent ?Thank God!? closed the door of the Taber-
nacle, he saw a little boy bending over the prostrate
form of another on the altar steps.
?Oh, Father, is he dead?? sobbed Tommy. ?He?s
as brave as anything! But he went up; he said we
had to stop them before anything happened the
Blessed Sacrament. He was just in time .. . and
then they heard the steps outside and ran away. . . .
One big coward hit him . . . and I hid behind the
pillar. I thought they?d kill me. They ran out the
36


PAT THE CRUSADER.
door after you came through.? The priest lifted
Bobbie to a bench and put a cushion under his head.
Other priests had arrived, also a little group of
people. The policemen searched the grounds, but the
thieves were gone. Pat and Billy joined Tommy in
his tears.
?Oh, will he die??
But the doctor said Bobbie would be quite well in
a day or two. He opened his eyes.
?They didn?t touch the Blessed Sacrament,? he
smiled.
?Thank God!? came from the little group of priests
and people.
In a few sentences Pat explained who they were,
and how they happened to be in the Cathedral at mid-
night. But he hung his head when a sergeant
smilingly told him that all the police stations in the
city had been informed of the loss of four young
Yambaville citizens, and that the entire population of
Yambaville was out scouring bush paddocks and
dragging waterholes.
A taxi-cab and a policeman took Pat, Tommy and
Billy home. Bobbie was given a bed at the presby-
tery. He had had a great shock, the doctor said, and
was not fit to return just then.
After all, the dire threats were not fulfilled, and
the four knights were objects of much attention and
admiration. Bobbie was quite well in a few days. The
parish priest sent for the four boys, and succeeded in
convincing them that it was much better for them ?
and incidentally for the Mission?to wait until they
were men before joining the Mission to China. The
three gave in easily enough, but it was hard for Pat
to abandon his great dream. But the parish priest of
Yambaville was very tactful, and he used quite a lot
of his precious time in ?talking over? Pat.
?A good beating would soon convince him,?


grumbled Uncle John, but the parish priest did not
believe in such drastic measures. He told Uncle John
that Pat was a fine little fellow, and would make a
good man. But Uncle John believed the Italian saying
he had found in one of John Ayscough?s books: ?To
whom God sends no sons, the devil sends nephews.?
Uncle John was going to have no more midnight
dragging of waterholes and scrambling over bush
paddocks. After the holidays Pat was packed off to a
boarding-school. Let us leave him there, finding full
scope in class and playground for his abundant
energy.
And now, my dear, dear little boy readers, do not
try to do extraordinary things, as Pat did. Your
efforts may not have the happy ending his had. Be
content to be a little boy for a few years ?they will
pass all too soon?and to do a little boy?s work for
God and for the conversion of China.


BILLY was a very nice little boy, but he couldn?t
count. He thought there was only One Little
Boy in the whole world. And he was it. His
parents, I am afraid, were not good at arith-
metic, either; they, too, thought there was only one
little boy in the world.
I don?t know, myself, how many little boys there
really are (1 suppose even Mr. Knibbs doesn?t know),
but I am sure there are millions and millions?black
and white and yellow.
This idea of Billy?s made him selfish. He must be
first in everything and have the best of everything.
He wanted ?first turn? in all the games, and he
wanted to be ?the Boss.? If the others objected, he
sulked like a little girl. (Maureen says that?s not fair;
she insists that all little girls are nice. Well, then,
what animal is sulky? ?Brave as a lion,?? ? ?cute as a
fox??oh. I know, sulky as a bear.) Yes, Billy was
as sulky as a bear. I don?t mean one of those pretty
little native bears that live in gum trees, but one of
those big, grizzly, ?Zooy? bears. Now you under-
stand.
Mother and Father were too good to Billy, because
they did not realise how many, many little boys there
are in the world. Everything Billy wished for Father
and Mother contrived to give him. But as he grew


older ?he?s nearly eight now ?it gradually dawned on
them how very, very selfish their little boy was grow-
ing. Mother was ashamed of him when she tound
how disagreeable he was with the children who played
with him. She was doubly ashamed when she had to
acknowledge to herself that he was greedy.
?It?s our fault,? Father said; ?we have indulged
him too much. He thinks he?s the Only Little Boy in
the world.?
?So he is,? smiled Mother; ?but that is no reason
why he should be ruined. He will be unhappy him-
self and make others unhappy all his life if we do not
train him better,?
So they set to to ?train? him.
Billy did not like it, and he was very naughty
sometimes when he wanted his own way.
Joey Murphy showed Billy a mite box, and
explained its usefulness.
?Do you put your own pennies in?? asked greedy
Billy.
?Course!?
?Um! I?d rather buy ice-cream wafers or choc?late
sticks.?
At Christmas, Billy wrote a letter to Santy?such
a ?greedy? letter:
Dear Santy, ?Please bring me
A MECCANO SET,
A MOTOR-CAR THAT I CAN RIDE IN,
NOT A TOY ONE,
A TRAIN,
A BOOK WITH ELEPHANTS IN IT,
A CRICKET SET,
A THREE-WHEELER BIKE,
AN AIR-GUN AND SOME DARTS
A SAILING BOAT,
SOME LOLLIES AND NUTS
and anything else you like. BILLY.




?The sock hung limp. So did the pillow-slips.?
(Facing page 41.)


Billy showed his letter to Mother.
?Oh, I think you want too much, Bill,? she said.
?There are other little boys, you know. Santy may
not be able to spare you so much.?
Billy pouted.
?Aw! he?s got plenty.?
?Do you think you have been good enough to get
all these things??
?Course!? said Billy, and hung up three pillow-
cases and a sock.
On Christmas Eve he went to bed early, and tried
to keep awake to get a peep at Santy. That wasn?t
fair, you know; it?s cheating ?to look.? Anyhow,
Santy did not come until he was fast asleep.
At the first streak of light Billy was up and
fumbling for his sock. He expected the foot of the
bed to be ?stacked? with parcels, as it always was on
Christmas morning, but ?but ?there was nothing.
The sock hung limp, so did the pillow-slips. Oh, no.
there was something. . . . He dived his hand in and
brought out ?
A MITE BOX!
He stared at it. What was it doing there?
He looked under the bed, behind the doors, in the
wardrobe. Was Santy playing a joke? Nothing!
Then he noticed a letter pinned on the sock:
?Dear Bill, ?You asked for too much. Sorry.
Can?t be done. Too many other little boys in the
world. lam going to give you the best Christmas
gift you?ve ever had?a lesson. (Billy groaned.) I think
a mite box is what you want. ?SANTY.?
Billy flung the mite box from him?it narrowly
missed the looking-glass and, flinging himself
amongst the pillows, burst into loud sobs.
Mother came in smiling. ?Well, Bill-o, what did
he bring??


?800, baa! Hoo, hoo!? came in a muffled roar
from the pillow.
"Hullo, lad! Playing wild animals?? cried Father,
cheerfully.
?Not playing anything ... he didn?t bring any-
thing?only a ?a ?a m-m-mite b-b-box.?
Father read the letter, while Mother stroked the
hack of Billy?s head. Then between them they com-
forted him, and at last Billy took heart and ceased
crying. ?I was a b-b-bit gr-gr-eedy,? he confessed.
?I asked for too many things. And ?and ?I?ll try to
be b-b-bettcr.?
Mother?s eyes at once filled with tears. ?It's too
cruel.? she whispered. But Father said: ?Do him
good.?
Billy learned his lesson well. Mother explained all
Santy meant. He tried to be more agreeable with the
boys; he tried to overcome his ?sulks.? All his
pennies went into that mite box. He gave up the
lolly shop. The postal notes Grandma and Grandpa
sent he had changed into pennies?he liked pennies
best ?and dropped them into the box.
And what do you think?
On Little Christmas morning, when he awoke, he
found on his bed a Meccano set, a little motor-car (not
a toy one. one he could ride in), a book with elephants
in it?and this note:
?Dear Billy,?You have been so very unselfish
since Christmas that I think you have learned your
lesson. 1 am leaving you a few things. If you con-
tinue to be good. I shall bring the others next time.
Until then. Billy Boy. good-bye.?SANTY.?




yw [^
?Oh, hullo, Auntie! Back again??
(Facing page 43.)
?Aileen
almost swooned.?
(See page 32.)


:iibi
AUNT ELLEN was critical. She
couldn?t help it: she was made
that way. When she heard that
her nieces and nephews were all
working for the Chinese Mission she be-
gan, not to find fault, but to criticise. This
is the way it was.
She had been spending several months
?up in the mountains,? and had not called
at ?Gunaroo? since the family there deve-
loped ?Chinese fever.? Unfortunately, her first visit
fell on a Wednesday?why ?unfortunately? you will
learn later. Mother received her warmly, gave her
afternoon tea. inquired solicitously after her ailments,
and all went well. Then the children began to arrive
from school.
Nora was first. She was fourteen, very pretty,
and had charming manners. With niecely devotion
she placed a light kiss on Auntie?s withered cheek and
asked her how she did. Aileen burst in next. She
was the plain one of the family, and had none of
pretty Nora?s repose of manner.
?Oh, hullo, Auntie! Back again?? she called, as
if Aunt Ellen were just her own age, or a trifle
younger. Then, without even taking Aunt Ellen?s
hand, she turned to Mother and went on in a tone of
rapture:
?Oh, Mum, we had a bonze afternoon. We had


the penny concert in our room ?for the ?Far East,'
you know. The Senior Girls came over, and, just for
swank, gave thri?pence each. We made twenty-eight
shillings and fivepence. Isn?t it lovely? Sister Francis
had such a pretty drawing on our board ?a little
Chinese girl done in coloured chalks.?
Aunt Ellen?s face had grown hard.
?Do you have these concerts in school hours??
?Oh, three o?clock,? Aileen said, with an offhand
air. ?We have plenty of lessons ?don?t you worry!?
Auntie sat up straight, as if she had just swal-
lowed a volume of Jane Austen. ?A lesson in English
would not have been amiss,? she said, severely.
?English!? scoffed Aileen. I?m going to learn
Irish. There?s a class at the convent. Would you like
to join, Auntie??
Auntie deigned no reply, but told Mother sadly
that she feared Aileen would never have Nora?s
charming manner. And while she gazed admiringly
on Nora, Aileen whispered roguishly to Mother:
?How can I have it if it?s Nora?s?? Aloud she said:
?Aren?t you pleased, Mother, about the concert??
?Of course, dear. Your room will surely win the
competition.?
Auntie wanted to know what the competition was.
She always wanted to know what everything was
about?not that she was inquisitive, she simply
desired information. So Mother and Nora and Aileen
commenced to tell her all about the Chinese Mission
and the ?Far East.? Kevin and Gerry came in then,
overjoyed, bubbling like glasses of iced lemonade on
a hot day; but when they saw Auntie they went
?flat.?
They shook hands with her stiffly and fidgeted
from one foot to the other, while Auntie surveyed
them critically, and gave it as her opinion that Gerry
looked pale and Kevin was inclined to stoop.


?Did it come, Mum?? whispered Gerry, after Auntie
turned her eyes from him.
?Silly!? laughed Aileen. ?How could it? Do you
think the fifteenth can come twice a month? ?
?I thought it might be out early for next month,?
sighed Gerry.
?Go and read this month?s over again,? teased
Aileen.
?He knows it off by heart,? smiled quiet Kevin.
?Don?t you, Ger.??
Auntie again sought information and received it.
Sheila?s entrance?the baby of the family?inter-
rupted. She ran in with glowing cheeks and shining
eyes.
?Oh, Mummie, we all wrote a letter to Maureen
at school to-day, and ? (Full stop at sight of
Auntie.)
?Shake hands with Auntie, dear,? Mother said, and
Sheila extended a fat little hand and turned up a pink
cheek to be kissed.
?And you wrote a letter to-day?? Auntie said.
?Now, why did you never, never write to me, I
wonder??
?Oh, I wrote to Maureen!? the child said, and the
emphasis on the name told Auntie that she was
nobody compared with Maureen.
?Who is Maureen?? asked Auntie.
Aileen burst into a peal of merry laughter. ?Ah,
now you are asking something! Who is Maureen?
That?s it! Who is she? No one knows. Hundreds ?
thousands?of people have said: ?Who is Maureen??
And echo answers, ?Who?? She is like the Bunyip?
everyone knows there is a Maureen, but nobody has
seen her.?
"Aileen,? Auntie said, sharply, ?you have a most ?
er?unfortunate manner.?
?Yes, dear,? Mother said gently; ?you must learn
to speak more respectfully.?


?I will. Mother machree. Bury the hatchet,
Auntie. And, look here, would you like to become a
subscriber to the ?Far East?? The best magazine in
Australia. Letters from me in it, and my photo?and
all for five shillings per annum. Do give me your
name.?
Mother and Nora quietly told Auntie about the
little paper and its high aim, but Aileen would not be
ignored.
?We?re all Missionaries here?even Dad. He has
a mite box of his very own, and every pay day he
goes through his pockets and puts all his pennies in
it. And wait until you see Mary! She?s a boarder
now at St. Enda?s. She?s simply mad about China;
all the girls there are. She?s going to be a nun when
she?s grown up, and she?s going to China.?
Aunt Ellen was aghast. ?Going to China! Surely
her father will not allow anything so dreadful!? she
said to Mother.
?She is only sixteen,? smiled Mother, ?and has
plenty of time to think yet. But if she really wishes
to go when she is old enough, her father and I will
do nothing to prevent her.?
The three little ones slipped away, glad to escape
from Auntie?s vicinity; but Mother, Aileen and Nora
had to sit and listen.
?The country cannot spare priests and nuns and
Brothers,? said Auntie. ?The time is not ripe for
Australia to undertake such work. Why, she is still
a mission country herself. It is not wise; it is not
fair to take our priests. Charity begins at home.
Australia needs them, every one, and ?
Mother and Nora allowed politeness to keep them
silent; not so Aileen. She ?cut in? while Auntie drew
breath:
?Of course Australia needs them, every one. But
46


sometimes it is charity to give what one needs. Any-
how, Our Lord knows better than you.? (Auntie fell
back in dismay. But Aileen believed in freedom of
speech, and went on with her attack.) ?There were
only the few First Priests, but Our Lord gave them
the big task, ?Go, teach all nations.? I suppose there
was plenty of work for them to do in their own
country. I suppose they loved their own land best.
But they didn?t all stay there and try to convert every
single Jew before they went anywhere else. And must
our Australian priests and nuns and Brothers say:
?l?ll stay in Australia until everyone is converted
(they?d wait a jolly long time!), and until there is a
church and a school in every little township, and then
I?ll go to China? Pity poor China if she has to wait
until Christian lands can spare priests and nuns and
Brothers. No country can spare them; they are
generally, each one, doing the work of three. No
country can spare them, but any can give them?and
they do. Australia won?t suffer for giving Our Lord
some of the priests she needs herself. Giving them
to China is giving them to God. Don?t think these
are my words. I heard Sister telling the Seniors
about it ? Aileen paused, her eyes flashing fire
on poor Aunt Ellen.
?Mary,? Aunt Ellen said weakly to Mother, ?this
is an awful child.?
Nora felt really ashamed of Aileen. Her zeal had
carried her away; it was not becoming, surely, for a
schoolgirl to give her elderly aunt such a lecture.
Mother thought, too, that Aileen?s outburst spoke
none too well for her training; but in her secret heart
she was proud of the ?little spitfire,? as Dad called
her, and wished he had been present to witness
Auntie?s defeat ?she knew he loved seeing Auntie?s
theories exploded. Poor Auntie looked as if she had
been in a cyclone. Her appearance was as prim and


proper as ever, but she seemed, somehow, shaken,
dishevelled ?it must have been her soul showing
through.
For the remainder of the afternoon Aunt Ellen was
very cold and formal, and she and Mother talked of
hundreds of things, but never a word of China.
Dad came in later.
His heart sank when he saw Aunt Ellen?she
generally contrived to ?rub him the wrong way??
but he was very kind and hospitable, and succeeded
in interesting Auntie so much that she forgot, for the
time, Aileen?s outburst. She had not intended staying
for dinner, but in her altered mood the world looked
bright again, and, to the girls? horror, she decided to
stay.
?Oh, poor Mother! She will be in a state! You
know it?s ?China Night,? Aileen.?
?Good enough ! I?m glad !?
?China Night? at O?Ryans? meant a self-imposed
fast-day meal?fish and vegetables or soup and vege-
tables, rice and fruit. It was Aileen?s idea. Meat was
cut out, and the price of the joint put in Dad?s mite
box. Dad was quite satisfied. If they had spread a
feast of locusts and wild honey before him and said,
?Come on, Dad; it?s for China,? he would have par-
taken of it and asked for more. (He was a ?lovely?
Dad.) But Auntie loved the fleshpots of Egypt.
?Oh,? Nora said, ?I?ll run to the butcher?s and get
a chop ?
?Stick!? giggled Aileen.
? ?or something,? Nora finished.
?Shop?s shut ?too late!? Aileen cried, with great
satisfaction.
?Well, I?ll get a tin of sheep?s tongues or ?
Tinned tongues Auntie abominates, and would
consider their being set before her an insult of the
deepest.


?Oh,? sighed Nora, ?Mother will be so upset
about it. There?s not even fish?only soup and
vegetables.?
?And cheese and rice, with the most delicious
stewed fruit and fresh fruit. It?s quite good enough
for her ?greedy old thing. I wish we had sharks
fins; that?s what I?d love to give her. It sounds as if
it would suit her.?
?Aileen, you are ?
?An awful child!? interrupted Miss Aileen, in a
voice so like Auntie?s that Nora was forced to laugh.
? ? ? ? ?
Dad said grace, and Mother very sweetly explained
the reason of the fast-day meal. Auntie regarded her
soup with a resigned eye, and looked like a martyr
about to partake of hot lead, while she assured Mother
that she really was not the least particular about food,
and could eat anything. Aileen sat up straight, and
passed things with an air almost equal to Nora?s.
She kept out of the conversation, too, because she
knew her voice was as tinkling brass to Auntie?s ears,
and, for Mother?s sake, she did not wish to give Aunt
Ellen any more shocks ?just then.
Sheila was the offender this time. Her blue eyes
kept a close watch on Aunt Ellen; she seemed fas-
cinated by her ?in fact, she stared, I?m sorry to say.
Mother tried to catch her eye, but without success.
She was just about to whisper to Nora to whisper to
Aileen to tell Sheila when the child sighed with
disappointment, and her clear baby-voice said:
?There, Aileen, she didn?t take a fit. Aileen said you
would take a fit, Auntie, if we gave you rice and soup
for dinner. She said sharks? fins would suit you ?
that?s what the Chinamen eat ?and ?
The dreadful child was hushed; Aunt Ellen turned
a new shade of henna, and Aileen went rose-red.
Poor Mother! Poor Dad! Poor Auntie!


Mother groaned in spirit, and wished she had not
allowed Sheila come to the table; Father was angry
and disappointed. Auntie, to give her her due,
appeared to have ears, but to hear not. Dad and
Mother quickly broke into conversation to cover the
discomfiture of everybody.
After dinner the girls played for Auntie; she liked
good music. Nora played little bits of Grieg in a
graceful, if not very clever, manner. Aileen?s nearest
approach to the classics was ?Spring Song,? and she
took fearful liberties with the grace notes. Auntie
spoke a few words of faint praise, but the uncrushable
Aileen said happily:
* I like up-to-date music?all the popular things?
but Dad won?t buy it for me. Nell Malone gets every-
thing as soon as it?s out, and then she?s sick of each
in about a fortnight. She lent me this. I love it. It
has such a thin Chin-ee tinkle in it. She turned to
the piano and played and sang gaily:
?I?ll soon be there,
In a bamboo chair,
For I?ve got my fare
From here to Shanghai.
Just picture me
Sipping Oolong tea,
Served by a Chinee
?Way up high.?
(Speaking)
?Hock-a-my, Hock-a-my.?
Auntie was not enthusiastic about the song; she
seemed to think it was a pity Aileen could not leave
China out of something?meals, music, or conversa-
tion. She hinted to Mother that perhaps the children
overdid this?er?Chinese ?hobby,? and that it would
be well to let them understand that, if one topic was
all-absorbing to them, it might not be so to their
mother?s guests, and, etc., etc.


Mother took the rebuff sweetly; she felt she owed
it to Auntie on account of the sharks? fins!
??The children are very enthusiastic, and I think
Father and I do allow them to express their opinions
too freely, and then they forget that others are not
so interested in all their doings as we are; but, really,
if you saw the dear little paper you would under-
sta ?
?I?ll get ?
?So will ?
? ?mine.?
u j �
?Let me ?
?Here, Auntie.?
The young Missionaries all spoke at once, and in a
moment Auntie had five ?Far Easts? in her lap. She
picked one up as if she weren?t sure whether it would
bite or kick or scratch.
?Wouldn?t one copy do the family?? she asked in
the cold tones of stern economy.
?No fear!? cried four fresh, generous little voices.
Nora did not speak.
?We each want one of our own,? Aileen explained.
?We pay for it out of our own pocket-money. It all
helps, you know. There is too much borrowing and
lending where Catholic papers are concerned. That?s
not the way to make them go. Sixpence a month is
very little. We?d spend it on something silly if we
didn?t take the paper. Will you become a sub.,
Auntie? Even if you are not keen on the Mission,
the Pope is, and that ought to be good enough for
anyone.?
Auntie looked through the magazine. ?Of course,
it is a grand work??(?Really!? scoffed Aileen, sotto
voce, to Nora. ?I?ll have to cable to the Head House
to tell them the Mission has Auntie?s approval?)??and
Catholics should try and help in every way.? (Auntie


looked over Aileen?s head.) ?I?ll give my subscrip-
tion to you, Nora.?
It was time for the three younger ones to go to
bed, and Aileen mercifully offered to take them and
hear their prayers, instead of Mother. She knew Aunt
Ellen would breathe freely when she was gone.
Father and Mother and Nora did their best to
remove all disagreeable impressions from Auntie?s
mind. They soothed her and smoothed her into good
humour, and she even forgot she had not had a good
dinner. They played cards, and Dad let her win every
time. They listened with apparent interest to all her
complaints against the boarding-house ?up the moun-
tains,? to her opinion of Lloyd George, de Valera and
President Harding. They heard with awe her oft-told
tale of how, in her girlhood, she had ?laid the ghost?
in the old ruined homestead near her father?s house
(?and what so tedious as a twice-told tale??). They
behaved as host and hostess and daughter of the house
should. (Poor Aileen should have been there to learn
her lesson.)
Finally, Mother made coffee?a thing she could do
excellently. Auntie had two cups and a plate of
biscuits, and was at perfect peace with the family?
and the Chinese Mission.
On leaving, she expressed the opinion that it was
edifying to see the dear children so enthusiastic about
the Mission, and that she wished all Catholic children
were encouraged to help on, in their own small way,
the works of the Church, Aileen, who had come
down to say good-night, almost swooned. She was
dumb with wonder. (Just as well; perhaps she might
have said something that would have undone all the
good work of Father and Mother and Nora and the
two cups of coffee!) Auntie bestowed the kiss of
peace upon her, advised her to take Nora as her
model, and went her way.


ON his way to and from school Jim passed the
Railway Yards, and the piles of sandalwood
offended his eyes. It was stacked every-
where, and there were trucks full of it ready to be
sent to the wharves for shipment to China. The
sandalwood piles had not troubled him until he
became a Little Missionary; he had given them not
one thought before.
But one day, as he skipped along to school,
whistling happily, if not very tunefully, a sudden
thought brought him to a standstill and silenced the
merry whistle on his lips.
?And all that stuff is going to China to burn in
their old temples!? His cheeks flamed an indignant
red. ?It?s a jolly shame to let our Australian wood
go there for that. I wouldn?t sell it to them if I
owned it.?
All the trees belong to God, and the thought that
these Australian trees should provide a sweet-smelling
incense for Chinese idols filled his soul with a just
anger. He went on slowly, thinking deeply. And
when Jim thought deeply things generally began to
happen soon after. They began that afternoon.


First of all, he made friends with Tony Satini. A
deadly feud had existed between them for some
months, but they buried the hatchet, and Jim
solemnly promised never again to call Tony ?Spag-
hetti,? and Tony as solemnly not to call Jim ?Ginger
Nut.?
Tony?s brothers and uncles and cousins worked
away out in the sandalwood camp, and his father was
often employed stacking the wood at the yards. Jim
wanted a nearer acquaintance with those stacks in the
railway yard; he wanted to be able to come and go,
even as Tony did when he took his father?s dinner.
Tony promised to call for him the next time he had
occasion to go to the yards. Meanwhile, Jim pur-
chased a few sticks of chalk and cultivated an
important expression.
?You see, Tony,? Jim said, as they trotted along
to the yards, ?I?ve got a big job on; I?ve got to mark
every jolly stick of that sandalwood.?
Tony?s dark eyes opened in wonder, and Jim?s blue
ones sparkled at it.
?True!?
?Who gave you the job??
Jim tapped his chest with a magnificent gesture.
?Yes, I?ve got to mark it. You?ll soon see.?
While Papa Satini partook of the good things
Tony had brought, the two little boys were very busy.
The piles of sandalwood were in a quiet corner of the
yards; the railway men, working at a distance, took
no notice of the two tiny figures so busily employed.
?Watch, Tony!?
Tony watched with a world of wonder in his black
eyes. Jim carefully, reverently traced a very small
cross on the end of the first log, saying as he did so :
?In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Amen.?


?The Cross!? whispered Tony.
?Yes. Now it will burn for Our Lord and not for
idols. See? ?Cos I?ve blessed it.?
Tony nodded, and his eyes ran over the piles of
wood.
?There?s a lot, Jim.?
?Yes,? sighed Jim, ?and there?s more at the
wharves. I?ll have to do it very small, so?s no one
will notice it and chase me away. I?d get Jack and
Tommy to help me, only we might seem too many.
Some of those railway chaps would come poking
round to know what we were doing.?
?I?ll help you, Jim. Every time Father is here
you can come with me. The men know I bring
Father?s dinner. They won?t chase us.?
?Righto!? thankfully replied Jim; and so the two
little boys began their crusade. Many an hour?s play
they cheerfully gave up for this, to them, good but
tiresome work. How their backs ached with bending
over the logs! How tempted they were to give it up!
It seemed such an endless task. And then, when
there was quite a good array of little white crosses,
new loads arrived, and they had to begin again.
?Never mind,? said Jim, hopefully. ?We?re doing
something. W e won?t give up if a billion tons come!?
Easter holidays came, and Jim spent all the time
he possibly could on his job, and was quite happy.
One morning was cold and wet, and he felt
inclined to stay in bed for a while, instead of getting
up and going to Mass as he had promised. He was
dropping off to sleep again, but someone?perhaps it
was his guardian angel?seemed to call ?Jim!?
Jim sprang out of bed, and rushed to look at the
clock over the stairs.
?Gee! Only half an hour.?


He washed and dressed like a lightning-change
artist, and was soon on the road, whistling merrily.
After Mass, on his way home, the big railway gate
was open, and Jim slipped in. He drew his chalk from
his pocket and bent over the logs. He straightened
suddenly, fearfully. What was that? A low, dreadful
groan fell on his ears. Yes, there it was again. Jim
shivered. It was mournful, despairing, like?like ?
oh, not like anything he had ever heard before.
?Perhaps it?s the d-d-devil trying to s-scare me
off,? Jim said aloud, his teeth chattering. ?Fm not
g-g-going.? But, as another dreadful groan sounded,
he flung down his chalk and made off as fast as his
little legs would carry him. Only to the gate he ran,
for his sturdy faith and sterling native spirit stayed
him.
He made the sign of the Cross with fingers that
trembled. ?Fm not running from?anything! Not if
I know it. If it?s Chinese devils, they don?t scare
yy
me.
He ran back (not quite as fast as before), and
although his heart felt like a big block of ice, and his
tongue clove to the roof of his mouth, and his hands
were wet and trembling, and his hair felt like
1,000,000,000,000,000,000 quills, he went on.
Brother Benedict?s stories of spirits, good and evil,
flashed through his mind, making his head ache.
?It might be a s-s-soul. In the name of God ?
Jim began, but he got no further. As he turned round
a pile of wood near the disused goods shed he drew
back. In a sheltered corner, between the shed and
the high fence, lay the still figure of a man. Jim was
on his knees in an instant. . . .
The dull eyes opened, and, on seeing the tender,
compassionating child-face bending over him, the
prostrate figure gasped out: ?Thank God! Ive been
56


trying to hang on . , . all night.
I'm dying.
Did
. . . my mother send you??
?Sure!? said Jim, in a voice that would have
cora-
forted anyone. ?You just keep on
hanging on.
rn
get a doctor? And say ?are you a
Catholic??
?Yes, yes. . . . The priest. . . .
But quick.
? ? ?
I have been waiting for you to bring him to me.
The
night was long . . . long . . .
so long. .
J9
?Hold on, then,? cried Jim. ?Here?s my beads.
Hold the cross. You?re safe. I won?t be a jiffy.?
He did not go back the long way, but by a great
effort scaled the high fence, tearing his clothes and
arms and bare legs. But what were a few rents and
scratches and splinters?
?Please, God, let him live until the priest comes.
Holy Mary, pray for him. . . .?
He sped down the street towards the presbytery
and hailed the first motor-car he met.
?There?s a man dying. I found him. He wants
the priest. Come on to the presbytery. There?s no
one about?put on full speed. My dad?ll pay.?
Not every motor driver would be ready to take as
fare a little boy with torn clothes and bleeding hands
and legs, but this little boy was Jim, and there was a
power in his blue eyes.
While Father O?Malley was being whirled away to
the railway yards, Jim, in a second car, was speeding
for a doctor.
The man died of pneumonia that night in the hos-
pital. He was conscious before his death and made
his peace with God. He told Father O?Malley a little
of the story of his wasted life, and blessed the child
who, as God?s instrument, had saved his soul.
T tramped from M , and had this cold on me
all the time. I knew I was in for a sickness, but hoped
Fd strike the hospital. Bad liquor, poor food, no care


?that?s been my lot. I knew 1 was done for. Last
night I reached the yards, the gate was open . . . I
crawled in. I thought I could get into the shed; it
was locked. I crept into the corner. 1 prayed to Our
Lady and to my poor mother (I broke her heart years
ago with my wild ways) to send me a priest.
It was a long night. 1 thought the boy was an angel
. . . that my mother had sent.?
Jim blushed when Father O?Malley told him about
the angel. ?Oh, gee!? he said; ?me like an angel!?
But he was so happy about the poor man?s repentance.
?And it was all through the sandalwood,? he told
himself happily. ?Some good has come of it.
Jack, his mate, said admiringly the next afternoon:
?Only for you, Jim, that poor man might now be in
hell. (Jack was inclined to justice, not mercy.)
?Oh, have a heart,? Tommy put in. ?Don?t say
hell. There?s Purgatory, you know. Besides, he was
sorry. Couldn?t he make an Act of Perfect Con-
trition??
?It?s not easy to do that,? Jack severely replied.
?Brother Benedict has explained it lots of times. You
ought to know by now. And, besides, if Jim hadn t
found him, the devil might have tempted him to
despair when he was all alone. No one ever goes near
the sandalwood stacks. He might not have been
found for days; there?s only the paddock on the other
side of the high fence, and ?
Tommy?s eyes lit up suddenly. ?I say, Jim, what
were you doing there??
?Got a job there,? Jim answered, drily, and smiled
a baffling, mysterious smile.
All the boys call him Sandalwood Jim now. That?s
why I did.


THERE was such a clatter in the refectory.
Sister Cecilia's canaries wondered at it. They
held their pretty little heads to one side, then
to the other, blinked their shining eyes, and ?deter-
mined to be in the fun, whatever it was?burst into
song. Girls? gay young voices and canaries? swxet
singing made a melody of joy that swelled through
the corridors and rooms of St. Brenda?s.
It was Reverend Mother?s feast-day, and, the rule
of silence at breakfast being suspended, the girls made
the most of the indulgence, and talked delightedly
over the programme Mother Margaret had just
announced.
?Afternoon tea in the Convent garden!?
?Won?t it be lovely!?
?But a ball ?fancy a ball!?
?A fancy-dress ball.?
?Eight until nine-thirty.?
?Then supper. Carriages at ten.?
?Cars, you mean.?
?Aer-o-planes to take us up to the dormitory.?
?And prizes to be given, my dears.?
?Yes, prizes?one for the most original costume.?
?As if we could be original here, with nothing but
our uniforms.?
?I?m glad I brought my butterfly dress back.?


?Molly can wear her ?Erin? ?no chains this time.?
?And Nell can be her partner, as Australia. They
both look sweet.?
?The little ones will be angels and fairies?white
dresses and silver paper will go far.?
?And paper flowers will fix up any amount of lilies
and roses and poppies?a whole garden full of
varieties.?
The chattering continued, and, at the ?Inters.? ?
table, Evelyn Deer, who considered herself a leader,
asked, languidly:
?But who will ?who can ?win a prize for an
original costume with a Convent boarding-school
wardrobe??
Evelyn was tall and graceful and pretty. She loved
?dress,? and chafed at the plainness of her dark blue
uniform, in which, however, she contrived to look
?smart.?
?Original! I?ll go as a Convent girl,? laughed
dark-eyed Susanne Defries.
?I wonder would Sister Rose lend me an old
habit ?
?Mary! Reverend Mother would expel you.?
?Or perhaps Father Fay will give me a biretta and
an old soutane ?
Some of the girls laughed gleefully at a mental
picture of rosy Mary in clerical garb, but Evelyn
chose to be superior.
?Mary McCarthy, you sacrifice good taste, and
even reverence, to be considered funny.?
?Oh,? laughed Mary, ?I am Sir Oracle, and when
I ope my lips?you know ?that?s you, Ev. I?m sure
Father Fay wouldn?t mind.?
?But Reverend Mother would,? cautioned Susanne.
?Better not, Mary.?
?Well, what shall I do? I have no fancy-dress. I
can?t go as an angel or a fairy or a flower. The little
60


ones would think me poaching on their preserves. I
cannot manufacture anything original. And 1 do so
want a prize?they are beautiful books. But ?Never
say die? is our family motto. You?ll hear of me yet.
Wait until the clock strikes eight, and you?ll see some-
thing. 1 don?t know what ?but a brain wave will
come along. You?ll see me walking up for a prize, or
my name is not Mar?ellen McCarthy.?
Lessons went merrily that morning, and Mary
told Mother Margaret that it would be a good idea to
have every afternoon a half-holiday, for the girls
would be in such good humour that they would do
more work in the morning than they do in a
whole day under present conditions. Mary was full
of brilliant ideas like that. But Mother Margaret did
not seem broadminded enough to fall in with this one.
At three o?clock a general move was made to the
Convent garden. Little tables scattered here and
there under the trees looked very festive indeed. The
girls had a pretty garden of their own round the
boarding-school, but they liked the nuns? garden
better. It had a charm that theirs lacked, as if the
prayers and good works of all the saintly women who
had paced its walks had added to the beauty of its
flowers and the sweetness of its atmosphere. A high
wall shut out the world, and old trees spread their
branches lovingly about it. Very seldom were the
girls allowed through the little white gate that led
from the boarding-school grounds to the Convent
garden.
?It almost gives one a vocation to breathe this
air,? Mary said to Susanne. ?I?d be a nun if Reverend
Mother let me in here for a few days!?
The girls chattered (as only girls can) and laughed
and feasted. They were waited on by the Sisters,
who were as so many Marthas. Then Reverend Mother
sat in a big chair, under Our Lady?s tree near


the Grotto, and every girl was ?presented,? and made
her best curtsey. The baby of the school carried the
girls? gift to Reverend Mother, and little Kathleen
Lacy, at her side, bore carefully and proudly the
bouquet of exquisite roses, in which was hidden the
little white card containing the Spiritual Bouquet for
their dear Mother.
The afternoon slipped by all too quickly, and the
dusk came, like an avenging angel, and drove the
girls out of the beautiful garden.
?It?s gone ?that wonderful, golden afternoon,?
said Mary to her friend, as they paused at the little
gate. She blew an airy kiss to the garden, and went
on humming ?A Perfect Day.?
?But there?s the ball yet,?? Susanne whispered
excitedly, ?and our costumes ?
?Do tell me what you are going as,? Evelyn
begged.
Mary interrupted her music to say, dramatically;
?No! seek not to draw my secret from me. ?Tis
locked in the depths of this poor heart, and not all
the fair maids of Arcady shall coax it from me.?
Tea was a pretence of a meal. Everyone was too
excited to eat, and no one was hungry. To quote
Mary: ?How could one eat these plain viands after
feasting on nectar and?what?s the other?amb-er-
something??
Rosary was said pacing the garden paths after tea,
and when the last ?Ave? made its way up towards
the listening stars night had fallen. Some of the girls,
thinking of the ball, were perhaps distract Well,
that is not our affair, and I am sure Our Lady made
excuses for them.
The study hall, emptied of its desks and imple-
ments of torture, had a social, expansive air, like a
professor who had doffed his cap and gown and
donned a dressing-gown and slippers. The Juniors
62


arrived first and flitted about?as the Intermediates
had predicted they would ?angels, fairies, flowers,
gipsies and goblins. The elder girls came a little later,
all admiring one another and crying out in wonder at
some of the really good effects that had been reached.
Joan of Arc, Music, an Irish Colleen, Bookworm,
Cinderella, Mother Hubbard, Seasons oh! and
dozens of others.
Reverend Mother and the Sisters arrived on the
stroke of eight, and Father Fay and his curates a few
moments after.
Just as Sister Angela struck the opening chords
of the Grand March, and all the girls formed into
lines, two figures stepped into the shadow opposite
the study door. The march commenced, and as the
last couple moved off the two figures slipped into the
room and joined the moving lines.
One was a tall girl, the upper part of her face
hidden by a black mask.
On the mask a neat, white note of interrogation,
like this ?
asked everyone the question ??Who is it??
Her dress was made of ?Far Easts,? the coloured
covers making pretty panels up the sides. An
imitation fountain pen, the size of a bicycle ?pump,?
dangled at her side. In her hand she carried a large
bottle marked
INK.
Her head was dressed in a fantastic arrangement of
cardboard, like a large mite box, and dragging behind
her, on a string, came a little white toy dog?Rory.
The second figure was small and thin, and limped
along with the aid of a crutch. On her little, bare
feet she wore heelless slippers (made of cardboard
and in imminent peril of dissolution!). A shabby


kimona shrouded her small person, and two little, stiff
black plaits stood out at each side of her head. One
eye was covered by a black patch. From a heavy
chain round her neck hung a placard bearing the
inscription:
?Help the Han Yang Hospital for Children.'?
When the procession of happy girls turned to
come down the room and discovered this strange
couple at its ?heels,? it stood still. A storm of
clapping from Sisters and girls filled the hall.
?Maureen ! Maureen ! Maureen !?
?Who is it??
?Who are they??
?Who is missing??
A hasty glance along the ranks, a mental ?roll-
call,? and the girls cried; ?It?s Mar? McCarthy and
Susanne. Of course!?
And so it was.
?No one else would think of it,? the girls said.
?Haven?t they done it beautifully??
Mary and Susanne were winners of the beautiful
books, but the little ones were consoled with ribbons,
bonbons, and boxes of chocolates.
A shower of pennies was poured upon the limp-
ing, little Chinese, and she discarded her crutch and
danced until her slippers fell to pieces. Mother Mar-
garet, who was very particular, hurried her away to
put on her shoes and stockings.
Maureen did not dance, but walked about looking
as dignified as a duchess. She and the poodle received
flattering attention.
?Write to me, Maureen.?
?You never answer my letters.?
?How?s The Twin??
?Where?s Cindha??
Maureen had a ready answer for everyone.
Only Evelyn Deer found fault with her.


-
- 1 ,1: H ; '
HK/P k !Sji'? S - iiS| "-'
{ W 2� KANYANCy f /j '.-
A IS* HOSPITAL. I J
_J. ~ ? ~ * - - - ? ,1 - -I J ? *?
?Who is it?? ?Who are they??
(Facing page 64.)




?What a shame to use your ?Far Easts? like that!
I save all of mine,? she said, with a superior air.
?So do I,? Maureen answered, rather snappily. ?I
can put these together again. I am taking care not
to tear them. I haven?t danced ?I have hardly
breathed!?
At half-past nine the refectory was ready as a
supper room. Maureen was called on for a speech,
and made a very happy one. Father Fay said we?ll
see Mary in Parliament some day.
An hour later, St. Brenda?s was in darkness, and
the girls lived again, in Dreamland, the happy events
of the day.


||o m etKi n
LORRIE had a great gift for organising?she loved
?making up things? at school and at home, and
running them off successfully, to the admiration
of her friends. For some days now she had
been trying to think of something new to bring in
pennies for the ?Far East? Hospital Fund. Penny
concerts had been done to death; raffles had suffered
a similar fate; guessing competitions were slowly
expiring.
?Something new!?
Her grey eyes gazed vacantly through the window
and fell on Grandma?s beds of beautiful violets that
she loved so well. Just then the Angel of the Flowers,
who loves the poor, little, sick Baby-Blossoms in Han
Yang and everywhere else, whispered some sweet,
charming thoughts into Lorrie?s little pink ear.
?The garden is lovely now, and Grandma said she
will let me gather some violets to take to poor little
Peggy Maher in the Sisters? Hospital.?
Lome seemed to see the Han Yang Hospital of
Maureen?s dream. She saw the Sisters flitting about
the wards, and little girls?little girls from her own
school?visiting each tiny bed and placing bunches of
violets and other sweet blossoms where the sick
babies? eyes could rest upon them.
?But the flowers couldn?t be sent ?they?d die. And
the little girls couldn?t go over there. . . .?
Lorrie thought and thought, and the angel whis-
pered again;
?Oh, I know?a flower show. A flower show, and
all the pennies can go to China?they won?t die?and


?The Angel of the Flowers whispered . . . into
Lorrie?s little pink ear.?
(Facing page 66.)




the flowers will be helping. And if the girls can t go,
they can send the pennies . .
Lorrie rushed down the steps and danced out into
the garden.
?I?d never have thought of it only for you, you
sweet little, blue darlings,? she told the violets.
?Nearly all the girls have gardens, and Grandma will
give a prize, I know; and so will Dad and Mummie.
It will be great. Flowers and, perhaps, dolls. I must
go at once and see Grandma and Mummie.?
Grandma and Mummie gave a warm approval.
Yes, Lorrie could have the drawing-room, the veran-
dahs, the whole house.
?The girls will pay a fee to enter their dolls and
flowers. And you will give a prize?? she coaxed.
Of course they would ?first, second and third
prizes for the most artistic bunch of flowers and for
the prettiest dolly.
?We could sell flowers not the competition
bunches ?and cakes and tea.?
Certainly they could, agreed the fond Grandma
and Mummie.
Lorrie was superlatively happy; she set about
arrangements at once. With Sister?s approval, notices
were placed in the schoolrooms?
For the Han Yang Hospital for Children.
A FLOWER AND DOLL SHOW
will be held at
?TRALEE?
on Friday Week, at 3 p.m.
Nomination Fee, 6d.
Prizes for Best Bunch of Flowers:
First, A Mother-of-Pearl Rosary; Second, Box of Irish Linen
Handkerchiefs; Third, Big Box of Chocolates.


Prizes for Best-Dressed Doll:
First, Black Cat Brooch; Second, Bottle of Perfume
Third, Big Box of Chocolates.
Sale of Flowers?Posies and Buttonholes.
Refreshments may be had. Visitors? Entrance Fee, 6d.
Organiser: Loretto O?Connor.
Dad, who was very kind and very clever with a
paint brush, designed a few posters, and Sister Cuth-
bert gave them prominent places in the classrooms.
One showed a lovely baby doll dressed as a nurse,
with a gollywog carrying a bag of pennies, both en
route for Han Yang Hospital. Another, a little girl
selling daffodils, with little yellow fairy faces ?fairy
gold for the yellow babies.
The school simmered with excitement; all the little
girls who had pretty dolls gladly ?entered? them, and
carefully searched their wardrobes. Almost every
girl in the school, big and little, was interested.
Those too old for dolls jealously watched their
gardens, and would not allow any flowers to be
gathered for the family use; they cast critical eyes
over the florists? windows to gain some hints on the
arrangement of flowers. Lorrie was kept very busy.
She appointed two companions as secretaries, and
Sister Cuthbert acted as treasurer.
Fathers and mothers, in the kindly way of the
Australian parent, took a keen interest in the
children?s show. Quite a number promised to be
present that afternoon, and Lorrie was advised to
have the show open at night, so that a few dads could
come.
A little friend gave another helpful suggestion:
?You know, Lorrie, at the very last you could have
the prize bunches auctioned. My dad?s an auctioneer,
and he said he?d come if you want him. He?ll get
lots of monev for you.?


?Oh, good! Will he have time? Isn?t he a dear?
The auctioneer?s daughter smiled proudly.
And so the programme grew and grew.
The boys knew all about the show. Indeed,
Brother Killian pinned a poster and a bill on the
notice-board. You should have seen the amused
smiles and shrugs, grins and grimaces, of the boys as
they gathered round to read it.
Doll show!
?Get Brother Killian putting that on the board!?
The funny boy of the school said in a squeaky
voice, supposed to be like a girl?s (but it wasn?t a
bit): ?I must enter the doll dear Mamma gave me on
my birthday. She is so pretty, such a pet. She?ll
win, sure.?
The others enjoyed the little joke, but Dickie
FitzHugh, the brilliant intellect of Brother Killian?s
class, said seriously; ?Some of us should go.?
The boys were dumbfounded for a moment, but
they tried to wither Dickie with disdainful looks,
until they recovered their power of speech.
?Go??
?Us? Us??
?It would be helping. It doesn't matter what
sort of a show it is as long as ?
?A doll show!?
?A mob of girls and dolls!?
?Sit on him, someone!?
?Ring the doctor; Fitzie?s raving.?
?And Brother Killian reckons he?s clever. Oh,
gee!?
?Now, listen, you chaps,? commanded FitzHugh.
?You know what the show is for ?to help build the
hospital for the little sick kiddies in Han Yang.
Very well. Now, do you mean to say that, just
because we consider it a silly affair, and think our-


selves so superior to our little sisters, we should keep
away from the little show and thus withhold our
subs.? I vote we go, and that any fellow who is too
vain should send his sixpence with a friend. Get
that??
?There?s refreshments, Dickie,? called out Fatty
Brown.
After the general laughter had subsided, the orator
went on: ?Yes, as my weighty friend, Fatty, observes,
there are refreshments. We can sample them.
Come on, now; put your pride in your pocket, but
take your money out first. Who?s for the doll show??
FitzHugh?s followers cried out lustily:
?We all are!?
Some of the boys kept up a running fire of fun at
the expense of Dick and his friends, but these good
fellows didn?t mind. The ?conscientious objectors?
were ?bailed up? and ordered to ?shell out? sixpence.
Thursday was very wet, and Lome?s lips took a
decidedly downward curve. But heaven heard the
prayers of the children, and Friday dawmed fine and
blue ?a beautiful day.
Sister very kindly dismissed the classes at three
o?clock, and the gates of ?Tralee? presented a pleasing
sight as the happy children crushed through. The
flowers and dollies w r ere already there, having been
sent in during the morning. An artist friend of
Grandma?s had consented to judge the exhibits.
Lorrie was the happiest Little Missionary in all
Australia and New Zealand that afternoon when she
saw the -whole school of girls invading ?Tralee.?
And the mothers and aunties and big sisters!
How very kind they were to come! And what an
interest they took in the flowers and the dolls, some
of them even finding fault with the judge?s decision!
Everyone bought a posy or a buttonhole; the flower-
-70


sellers were radiant as they jingled their bags of
pennies. The marquee on the lawn was well pat-
ronised, and some of Lorrie?s schoolmates had the
?time of their lives? serving cake and spilling tea over
the patrons.
But hush! hark! What?s that? The tramp of
heavy boots, the sound of boys? voices disputing in
whispers:
?Where do we pay??
?I?m not going in first
?Stop pushing, Fatty.?
?Come on, Fitz.; it?s your funeral.
Grandma and Mother and Lorrie went to the door,
and didn?t they get a surprise!
An army of boys stood on the front verandah and
flowed over the steps, their ears very red, their faces
wreathed in shamed smiles. One or two smothered
a laugh, and were promptly elbowed into politeness
by their obliging neighbours.
FitzHugh swept off his hat like an Irish gentle-
man; the others jerked theirs off in the Australian
way.
?Good-afternoon,? Fitzie said. ?We thought we?d
like to come?er ?to help the cause, you know. Are
there too many of us? We look a lot. If there?s no
room, we?d like to leave our little sub.?the entrance
fee, you know ?
?Too many! There couldn?t be too many boys
anywhere,? Grandma said, heartily. ?We love boys.
It is good of you to come to the little show, and you
are such big fellows.?
The boys glowed at this, and their ears lost that
fiery tint. Grandma and Mummie shook hands with
everyone?they all pump-handled except Fitzie.
The little girls stared, like their own dolls, w-hen
they saw their lorldly brothers coming in as if it were
a sickroom?the Hons tamed.


But the boys were assured of their welcome. All
the mothers and aunties and big sisters showed their
pleasure openly.
?But, Jim,? one little girl ventured, ?you didn?t
say you were coming."
?Oh, Fitzie made it up ?a sort of surprise party.?
The boys bought a buttonhole apiece, admired a
few bunches of flowers, laughed sheepishly at the
stiff array of dolls, and then ?went over the top,? and
charged the refreshment marquee. They spent right
royally, until they had not twopence left among
them. Then mothers and aunties and big sisters
insisted on treating them, and they had a ?jolly good
time.?
Indeed, when the conscientious objectors heard
of it on the following Monday they were fearfully
jealous.
The show was continued at night, and Mr. Woods
actually bid a guinea for the first prize bunch of
flowers, and he sent it down the next morning to be
placed on Our Lady?s oratory in the Sisters? chapel.
It was a great success, that flower and doll show,
and Lorrie is now thinking hard again:
?Something new!?


CHARACTERS.
Mrs. Daly. The loveliest Mother on earth ?except yours.
Mr. Daly. The nicest Father in the world ?except yours.
Mary (aged twelve-and-a-bit). The eldest of the family.
Teddy (aged eleven). The Electric Spark.
Angie (nearly nine). The Delicate One.
Mick and Mack (just seven). The Twins.
Mack, the Quiet Twin.
Mick, the Other One.
Elizabeth (something under five). The Baby.
Sing Lee. A greengrocer.
Shamie. An Irish terrier, rather young and foolish.
CHAPTER I.?ENTER TEDDY!
TEDDY was almost always last home in the
afternoons. He liked to stay at school having
a game with the boys, and then, when he did
start for home, some adventure generally met
him on the way. Sometimes it was a lost dog or a
stray cat looking for sympathy; sometimes a fight he
had to w r atch. or a band or an organ he had to follow;
sometimes it was an old man looking for a street two
or three blocks aw r ay, or?a hundred-and-one other
things that go out of their way to meet a boy and
delay him.
Mary and Angie had been home ?ages.? They
had helped Mother in the kitchen, had minded Baby
Bet, and were now deeply interested in a game of


?Mothers,? in the little cubby house down in the
garden.
Mick and Mack had eaten quantities of bread and
butter and apple jam; had climbed the pepper tree
half a dozen times, and slithered down as many. Mick
had fallen off the coal shed only twice, Mack ren-
dering first aid. They were now playing a game of
chasings with Shamie, the terrier.
Still Teddy did not come.
The garden gate clicked. Someone whistled.
Mary and Angie forgot they were supposed to be
grown-ups; the Twins gave up their game with
Shamie.
?Father!? cried four happy voices, and, with
delighted cries of welcome, the children and the dog
ran for the gate. It was a great game, this race to be
first to Father. The terrier won, but as he couldn?t
be kissed, the prize went to the second, and it hap-
pened to be Angie. How fragile Angie had beaten
her sturdy little brothers and long-legged Mary would
be hard to say, but there she was, receiving payment
of the first kiss. Father picked her up and carried
her. He felt a great tenderness and pity for this
delicate lamb of his flock?he was so big and strong,
and she was so little and frail.
The others followed, all talking together, and
Shamie interjecting with a sharp yap now and then.
?Been good??
A decided ?yes? from the girls and a mumble from
the Twins was the answer.
?Anyone worrying Mother??
?Oh, no,? the girls said readily.
?I only?only fell off ? Mick commenced.
?The coal shed,? finished Mack.
?But I wasn?t ?
?Hurt.?
?And Mother did not get a fright, because ?


?She didn?t see.?
The Twins often supported one another in con-
versation ?as in everything else.
?What the eye does not see ? Father smiled.
?The Crown Prince late again?? he then asked. ?1
think I?ll have to give him a time limit, and impose a
fine if he does not keep within it.?
?Put his fine in the mite box,? laughed the Twins
delightedly.
Father was escorted to the house and Mother and
Baby Bet. There was as much rejoicing as if he had
just arrived after a prolonged stay in the bush some-
where, but the Dalys always made a great fuss and
excitement when Father came home. He was such a
kind, companionable father, although he could look
stern enough when the occasion demanded.
Someone found his slippers and his old gardening
coat, and soon they were out in the garden for a
busy, happy half-hour among the beds. All the Dalys
loved flowers ?even Teddy and Mick.
Still Teddy did not come.
Mother looked a little anxious, and Father a little
displeased. ?I?ll certainly have to insist on his com-
ing home earlier. It?s nearly six.?
?Perhaps he went a message for Brother Paul,?
Mother suggested.
?Oh, he?ll have an excuse, and a thrilling tale to
tell ?he always has. But don?t worry, Mother, he?!l
turn up all right?nothing ever hap ?
Crash! Bang! ! Clang! ! !
The garden gate burst open, and Teddy dashed in
madlv. panting, white-faced.
?What ??
Another figure hurled itself through the gate. It
was a Chinese?a very angry one ?and clinging tena-
ciously to his wide, blue dungaree trousers was
Shamie.


?Me killee you!? screamed Sing Lee.
The quiet, happy scene in the beautiful garden
was rudely broken. It looked more like a comic opera.
Teddy flew to Mother. Mick instantly raised his
spade, resolved to fell the Chinese invader to the
earth. Mack stood beside him, and laid a restraining
hand on his arm. Angie and Baby Bet cried.
?Here!? Father called sternly to Shamie, and the
terrier let go his fierce hold, and slunk behind a may
bush, with a self-satisfied glint in his eye.
Sing Lee talked a lot (Heaven knows what he
said), and darted terrible looks at Teddy as he peeped
from behind Mother?s skirt. But Father managed to
calm him, and asked what Teddy had been doing.
?I did nothing. He chased me.?
Sing Lee ruefully examined the rent in his
trousers. ?Wha? for?? he asked.
It seems it was all Shamie?s fault. He had a great
aversion to Chinese. Now, Teddy liked them. Ever
since becoming an L.M. he had taken a great interest
in everything Chinese. The patient toilers, bending
under their heavy burdens, seemed to fascinate him.
He always greeted them with a cheery ?Hullo, John!?
Some would grin and answer, others ignore his salu-
tation. He tried them with the words he had gleaned
in the pages of the ?Far East???Ting hao,? ?Sho-
tang>? an d ?800 yow jin. ? But, evidently, he did not
pronounce them correctly, or perhaps they belonged
to a dialect unknown to the particular ?Johns? he
asked, for none of them seemed to understand the
words, and he got no ?forrader? in his study of the
Chinese language. Mother advised him not to speak
to them, as they might resent it and think he was
teasing them, but Father said: ?Oh! they are all quiet,
inoffensive fellows; they won?t hurt him.?
On this particular afternoon Teddy stayed at
school, playing cricket with some pals of his, until the
76


deepening shadows warned him it was time to start
for home. He hurried along, to make up for lost time.
?If 1 had a watch, Fd always be early. I?ve coaxed
Dad to get me one ?just a plain one ?and he won?t.
He?ll scold a bit, I suppose. But I didn?t mean to stay
so long. Oh, jimmy! there?s the ?Angelus!??
He snatched off his cap and said the prayer,
hurrying up Waratah-street. As he turned into Old
Ferry-road he broke into a run, and Shamie came
flying to meet him.
?Hullo, Sham., I?m late. Are they having dinner??
Shamrock barked a negative, and then it happened.
A Chinese, carrying the usual two baskets, came out
of Mrs. Ryan?s gate, and Teddy had time to call:
?Hullo, John. Bosker evening.?
John grunted, and then something dashed between
Teddy?s legs, flinging him against the baskets. The
first thing Teddy knew was that Shamie was chasing
?the John? from his own basket; the next thing, that
?the John? was chasing him.
Apples and oranges played marbles on the foot-
path. Teddy ran as he never had ?as he never could
?at the school sports, and all the tales he had heard
of angry Chinamen chasing mischievous boys rushed
through his mind. ?They always carry knives,?
thought poor Teddy. He felt sure a knife would
presently strike between his shoulders and sink right
through?Ugh!
A few more yards and there was the friendly gate.
Would the door be open? Would ?the John? catch
him on the very doorstep?
That?s how it was.
Father put his hand in his pocket. Sing Lee
counted up his loss in wares and dignity, not forget-
ting the tear in his new blue dungarees.
?Ten shillin?,? he said, would cover the lot. Father
paid it without a murmur.


?There! That?s waste,? sighed poor Teddy, when
he had recovered a little. ?That?s waste ?ten shillings
gone into an old pagan's pocket. It should be in a
mite box.?
?You can repay it ?by saving it?and putting it in
the mite box,? said Father. ?If you had come home
in a proper time, this would not have occurred.?
?Yes, Dad,? replied Teddy, with true Australian
nonchalance; ?you?d better get me that watch.?
CHAPTER lI.?SHAMIE?S TREASURE.
The Twins had been named in honour of the great
angels Michael and Gabriel. Michael, naturally,
became Mick, and someone with a rhyming ear then
called the other little fellow Mack, and thus they
remained ?Mick and Mack.
Mack was fond of a quiet life. He loved story
books and gardening, and took a lively interest in
birds, butterflies, and all kinds of insects. In his
portion of the playroom one found a collection of silk-
worms, emperor-gum, privet-hawk, and case-moth
caterpillars. In jars and bottles disported tadpoles,
w r ater-snails, toe-biters, back-swimmers, wrigglers,
and all kinds of watery creatures that I do not know
the names of.
Mick loved playing bushrangers, pirates, cowboys,
and Indians. He had never read a story through in
his life ?and he was seven!?although he loved some-
one to tell him stories; he thought Mack?s collections
of flowers and insects ?rubbish?; he took a family
pride in the garden, but playtime was too precious
to use on still life. Gentle little Mack patiently took
part in all Mick?s thrilling games, although he thought
insects and flowers and stories more interesting.


Mick?s wall in the playroom was covered with bows
and arrows, daggers, and Indian clothes (made by
himself). He was the hero of a hundred-and-one
fights; he loved a fight, but was the best of friends
with his opponents as soon as it was over; he did not
hum-and-haw about peace, as statesmen do when they
settle up after a fight.
Mack hated to hit anyone, or to hurt anyone in
any way; he considered everybody?s feelings. But if
any boy dared to say a hasty word to Mack, he had to
reckon with Mick ?Mick did the fighting for both.
You must not think that Mack was a ?softy?; he was
not. But he had a sweet, gentle soul, and was always
looking for beautiful things, and so did not notice the
ugly ones. He looked for kindness, good temper,
gentleness, truth; and so he found them. The boys
all liked him, and were generally at their best with
him. Of course, Mack could get angry. He did one
day when some boys were teasing poor little Dickie
Grey, who was deaf and dumb. How Mack went for
them! His gentle tongue lashed their souls, and then
his little hands, that were always ready to do a kind-
ness, shot out right and left, to the amazement of the
boys. If anyone hurt a dog or cat, or needlessly killed
a harmless insect, Mack could be as fierce as Mick.
The Twins had a great admiration for their big
brother, Teddy. He was so clever; he could do hard
sums and spell long words (right or wrong ?the
Twins didn?t know the difference). No matter what
question they asked, on any subject under the sun.
he could give them an answer that satisfied.
Teddy?s part of the playroom told its owner was
a sport: a cherished bat, a pair of old pads, a cricket
ball (rather the worse for wear), a football (looking
forlorn these spring days), a set of boxing gloves.
His part of the wall held pictures of cricketers, foot-
ballers, tennis champions, boxers, and all the stars of


the sporting world. Conspicuous amongst these cele-
brities was a picture cut from the ?Far East?: the
picture of the Irish Missioners to China. Many had
found fault with its position.
?1 wouldn?t put it there, Teddo. The priests are
too good to be amongst those.?
Teddy couldn?t see it. ?It might do the sports good
to have their pictures hanging near the Missionaries?.
I?m sure the priests wouldn?t mind. They are sports,
or they wouldn?t go to old China.? So there the pic-
ture hung, as a sun amongst the sporting stars.
Teddy had not decided whether he would be the
champion bowler of Australia, or go to China to help
the priests at Han Yang, when he was a man.
Mary and Angie and Baby had the other end of
the playroom. Mary had books and pictures and
fancy-work in her corner, and a little table, at which
she wrote stories.
Angie had dolls ?all Mary?s old ones as well as
her own?and lots of parlour games to help her when
the ?bad? days made her a prisoner.
As for Baby?s little piece of floor-space, it con-
tained a Teddy bear (with much hair missing), a bat-
tered rag dolly, a tea-set, and a box of odds and ends
?beads, chalk, balls, a drawing-slate, and pencils.
In each child?s part of the playroom a mite box
held a central position. What a race it was to get
one?s box filled first! Even Baby took a delight in
dropping pennies into her particular box, and some-
times Father and Mother helped her and Angie to
?beat? the others.
It was a week since Teddy?s flight from Sing Lee.
Teddy was worried.
?It?s your fault, really, Mr. Shamrock. If you
hadn?t chased the old John And, there, I?ve got
to save ten shillings for Dad?s mite box. If it were
80


for my own, even! Well, I?ve cut out pictures and
comics and lollies, ?cos it?s November. That will
make up a bit. Now, if it were my birthday, I?d get
a pound from Grandfather ?I wish something would
turn up. I want to pay up. I ?don?t like owing Dad
ten shillings.? ?
One Saturday Teddy, the Twins, and Shamie went
out for a ?tramp.? Billy O?Brien tried to coax them
to put it off until another day, and to go in the after-
noon to the Marvel Picture Show Palace. Billy
showed them the advertisements ?wonderful dogs,
and monkeys, and elephants.
?No; we promised to cut them right out this
month, and we will,? said Teddy.
?Course,? chimed in Mick and Mack.
Father had given them permission to go as tar as
Doughboy Creek. Mother did not like these ?tramps,?
particularly such a far-off tramp as this one; but
Father said it did them good, made them sturdy and
independent, and that Mack would take care the other
two did not get into mischief. Father would have
trusted Mack anywhere.
They started after breakfast, carrying lunch in
their schoolbags; they were to be home before dusk.
The tram carried them as far as Fairton, and then
they boarded the old ?bus bound for Cootha. Mack
loved the old ?bus; it reminded him of the stories in
his Christmas book, in which all the heroes went long
journeys by coach ?Mack liked a romantic way of
travelling. Give Mick aeroplanes.
From the terminus they struck off, across a pad-
dock, to the little bit of bushland that clings round
Doughboy Creek. It was a beautiful day. Mack
gathered wild flowers. There were such a lot of dif-
ferent kinds ?pink boronia, springelia. spider-flower,
eggs-and-bacon, granny?s bonnets, puddin?s, padlock
flower, fuchsia, sarsaparilla, and many others. Mack


went ?mooning? along (Teddy?s word), turning over
stones, poking about for insects, dipping his hands
into the water and making a ?cup? to see what little
swimmers he could find.
Mick imagined there were Indians or bushrangers
behind the trunks of the larger trees, and he took
cover every few yards, to prance out suddenly with a
?bang, bang,? of his imaginary revolver, or a ?swish,
whiz? of an imaginary arrow, at the Redskins.
As for Teddy, he swung ahead with a light, quick
step, a stout stick in his hand (for snakes, you know),
and an old song of Father?s on his lips;
?Like a feather, when I?m floating
In my gumtree canoe.?
The three boys drew in deep breaths of the bush-
scented air?such a fresh, life-giving scent, an unfor-
getable scent, that makes city dwellers long for a
whiff of it. There is no perfume like it?warm grass
and ferns, crushed leaves and flowers, all distilled in
the wine of Australian sunshine. Strangers say our
flowers have no scent. Well, I wish they could go
for a tramp with Teddy and the Twins in the little
bit of bushland that still lies unspoiled around Dough-
boy Creek. No scent! Why, the bush is one big sea
of scent!
The wild clematis clambered over bushes, and ran,
laughing, higher and higher, up the big trees, and it
looked down, and poured waves of delicate perfume
over everything. Every leaf crushed underfoot gave
forth a clean scent, that could clear the cobwebs out
of any brain, and bring new life to any lungs. Teddy
stopped suddenly, and that love of one?s own land
that lives in the heart of every good man, woman and
child welled up in his heart.
?Gee!? he cried enthusiastically. ?There?s no place
in the whole jolly world like Doughboy Creek ?
82


The Twins? heart gave a jump of love, too, and, I
suppose, Shamie?s also.
Off came boots and socks, and the four were soon
paddling in the clear, shallow water. Shamie darted
out now and then, and. having an imagination like
Mick?s, he peopled the bush with his natural enemies,
rabbits and hares and rats, and perhaps a stray
Chinese, with his detestable jog-trot and his provok-
ing pair of baskets. Round and round he chased his
imaginary quarry, pausing to sniff under logs, or
scratch under stones and bark with pretended fury.
?Ah! I?ve got yer; out yer come.?
But nothing came, and Shamie barked with delight
and rolled over and over in an ecstasy of joy.
Then Teddy and Mick joined in Shamie?s game,
leaving Mack to his quiet occupation of collecting.
When all were tired they flung themselves down in
the shade of a gum-tree and listened to the laughing
of a pair of kookaburras. The three boys mimicked
their little feathered brothers, and Shamie put in a
yap occasionally.
Teddy, the clever one, said it was twelve o?clock,
but whether he knew by the position of the sun or by
a certain craving for lunch I do not know. He said
it was the sun.
Schoolbags ?no (use not such a plain, everyday
word when out tramping!), swags and ?tucker-bags?
were opened and lunch spread temptingly.
Mack, the thoughtful one, said, just as a delicious
sandwich was near Teddy?s lips: ?What about the
Angelus? We promised to say it every day.?
?Come on, then,? Teddy answered, as he dropped
the tempting morsel; ?you give it out, Mack.?
They jumped to their feet, and there, with the bush
breathing a sweet incense about them, the three little
boys recited the Angelic Salutation.
Lunch came next. What a lunch it was! And


the three travellers sent a grateful thought to Mother
and Mary and Angie, who had all helped to prepare
and pack it. Shamie sat in front of the boys, his red
tongue trembling with anticipation, his bright eyes
fixed expectantly on all three, as if to say: ?After you
with the sandwiches, boys.?
The boys did not forget him.
When lunch-bags were quite empty, and the
crumbs scattered for the benefit of any Doughboy
Creek birds that may have cultivated a taste for
humans? food, our travellers followed the creek
farther.
Now, what followed was all due to Shamie.
I told you that he had a very vivid imagination,
and it suddenly occurred to him that perhaps in pre-
historic days there were dogs, quite large ones, in
Australia. Now', what more likely than that they
might have buried a treasure, the bone of a prehistoric
sheep or goat, in some cunning spot? Very well, then;
why should not Shamie find it? It would look well
in the Museum: ?Found by Shamrock Daly, terrier,
during his excavations at Doughboy Creek.?
Shamie looked about for The Spot.
In the bank of the creek, just below a dead gum-
tree. near a peculiarly-shaped rock, Shamie saw a
likely place.
He began to dig, dig, dig with his fore-paws, scat-
tering show r ers of earth behind him. The boys stopped
to watch him. laughing at his antics.
?He thinks he?s on Treasure Island,? Teddy said.
?Go on, Sham! Fetch him out, boy!? Mick cried.
?Go it; go it.?
Shamie paused a moment to look up and grin and
yap a reply.
At last he tired, and, telling himself that the pre-
historic dog w r as a cheat, flung himself down on the
84


mound of fresh, damp soil he had raised, and lay
there panting.
?I?ll help you, Sham,? Teddy said, and he dropped
to his knees, to carry on where Shamie had left off.
Suddenly the Twins, who had turned to watch a
timid silver-eye, heard a shout.
?Look! look! Mick, Mack!? Teddy was holding
up something; the sun shone on it, and little specks
of it sparkled.
?It?s gold!?
The Twins drew nearer, fascinated.
?It?s just like the little nuggets Uncle Michael
showed us,? Teddy continued.
The Twins were dumb. Gold! Was it worth
thousands, or hundreds, or what? The gold-fever at
once seized them: all three began to dig, dig, dig.
They dug with their hands, and with sticks, until
their fingers were numb. But they found nothing;
disappointment cooled their enthusiasm. ?Perhaps,?
said Mack, the wise one??perhaps it is only a shiny
stone; it may not be gold at all.?
? ?Course it is,? Teddy said, sharply. ?It?s just
like the nuggets we saw at Uncle Michael?s. It is
gold. And good old Shamie found it. Didn?t you,
boy??
Shamie barked ?yes,? and looked distinctly proud
of himself, although he had wanted to find a pre-
historic bone.
They were all weary, and felt a sudden desire for
home. What a lovely thing to tell Father and Mother
and the girls! They had been warned to leave for
home before dusk. Mack took up his bunches of
flowers, that had been carefully set in a little pool of
water to keep them fresh for Mother. He tied them
(one on each end) to a strong stick, to carry on his
shoulder; he packed his specimens neatly in his bag.


Mick selected some suitable switches for bows and
arrows; Teddy carried the nugget.
?Well, Shamie found it,? Teddy said to Father.
?And, you know, it was Shamie tore Sing Lee?s
dungarees. He?ll have to pay?out of his nugget.?
Father sold the nugget, and the six little Dalys
laughed with glee when Shamie was offered a ten-
shilling note and told to pay his debts and put it in
Father?s mite box.
Shamie grinned, and made snatches at the note,
so Teddy was allowed to take it for him and put it in.
?There you are, Sham; we?re out of debt now.
Shake hands.?
Shamie solemnly offered a paw.
Father banked twenty-four pounds for the boys.
All that! Nuggets are precious things, you know,
even little ones.
Teddy wanted to spend his share. He wanted to
buy new boxing gloves and a new cricket set, and (I
should have put it first) a watch, and a new hat for
Mother (a red one, if she?d have it), and some pretty
things for the girls, and You know all the things
you?d want to buy if you had a nugget.
Then he wanted to have a big party, and ask all
the boys in his class.
But Father simply shook his head.
?Never mind,? sighed Teddy, hopefully, ?I?ll have
the party and buy the things when I?m twenty-one.
Only ten years to wait!?
CHAPTER lII.?ANGIE?S POWER.
Poor little Angie had many days of pain, when she
would lie on her tiny, white bed, her face thin and
drawn. All the family, at such times, tried to show
86


their love and sympathy. Even Teddy and Mick
would tip-toe in with a picture or a flower or a home-
made toy to awaken her interest, and Baby Bet would
toddle after them, her eyes like two big, blue O?s,
her mouth like a pink one. She would place her
beloved, battered old dolly on Angie?s pillow. ?There,
Angie, Polly Dollykins will make 'oo better. Polly
Dollykins always makes Baby Bet better.? Bet had
had ?lots? of dollies during Polly Dollykins? life, but
she always went back to the old love; Polly Dollykins
had been all but killed with kindness.
Angie bore her sufferings patiently; not once did
she grumble or complain, not once did she ring the
little bell Mother placed by her bedside, when the
children were away at school, and Mother could not
stay very long with her. Angie expected no ?waiting
on.? and, consequently, the family were one and all
anxious to serve her. and to sit with her whenever
possible.
She was a most obedient little patient, and no
medicine was too nasty if Mother explained it was
to do her good. In fact. Angie, as 3011 have guessed,
was a most extraordinary little girl. I think she was
a saint.
During hot summer days it is hard for a little girl
to lie in bed and be ?good.? but Angie did it. She
had learned to bear her sufferings for Our Divine
Lord?s sake, and to offer them for herself and for
others. Every moment of the hot, weary, pain-laden
days she offered now for the Missionaries in China.
She could never hope to grow strong enough to go
to China to help them, but she could help them by
her patient sufferings.
When Angie had a ?bad turn,? Dr. O?Sullivan
used come to see her, but during his absence on
holidays a new doctor came. He had not Dr. O?SuL


livan?s genial manner ?he was older, and silent and
stern-looking.
Dr. Chester attended her regularly, and tided her
over one more ?bad turn.? All the Dalys knew ?
even Baby Bet seemed to understand ?that one day
(and perhaps very soon) a ?bad turn?' would come
that no doctor could conquer, and that it would take
Angie away from them forever.
Mother had thought Dr. Chester very reserved in
his manner, but one day, instead of hurrying off, as
was his wont, he lingered a moment talking of the
child?s recovery, and then he said; ?She is very
patient?the little one. I suppose??he waved his
hand towards Angie?s oratory, with its sweet, white
roses and twinkling blue lamp ??that has something
to do with it.?
?Yes,? Mother replied, ?that has everything to do
with it.?
?I wish,? he said, and then paused, and Mother
knew he was wondering if he should tell her some-
thing, ask her something; but his natural reserve
mar?e him think the better (or worse) of it. He said
?Good-morning,? and went away.
Angie would be well for Christmas Day was the
grateful thought of the Dalys. Christmas with Angie
in bed would have been dull indeed. Mother thanked
God that the child was with her for another Christ-
mas. ?We must all be very, very happy.?
Holidays came ?and went by electricity! Press a
button ?and a day was done! Such busy, well-filled
days they were. Such cleaning and brushing and
polishing of the old house. All the children helped
and enioyed it.
Evervone had ?a stir? of the pudding and the
cakes. The boys brought in loads of greenery and
decorated the hall, the verandahs, and the dining-
-88


room. There was much mysterious shopping to be
done; presents to be bought secretly and hidden
away. There was the St. Vincent de Paul hamper
to be filled with Christmas goods, and sent down
to Mr. O?Grady, who would see to it that some poor
family received it, and had Christmas cheer fer the
festive da}-s.
All the children provided something, from their
savings, for the hamper.
Mother?s donation was a pudding, cakes, eggs and
lollies. Father sent a ham and some tinned things.
Mary, being practical, bought packets of flour and
porridge foods. Teddy and Mick scoffed at her pur-
chase. ?Flour! If there are children ?and poor
people always have children?they will be dis-
appointed when old, common flour and porridge are
unpacked.? So they put in packets of jelly (the com-
mon kind that all little boys love to make and eat
and peanuts and an assortment of popular, gay-
looking sweets from their own particular shop. ?The
kids will cheer up when their mother opens our
parcel.?
Angie bought three tins of strawberry jam?her
own favourite; and Mack (wise, like Mary) invested
in rice, sago and golden syrup (for the very little
ones, that Teddy said were sure to be in the house).
Baby Bet favoured condensed milk. She was partial
to it herself?could eat it with a spoon! Indeed, she
had been known to appropriate a tin, just opened, to
provide ?a party? for herself and Shamie.
The hamper was packed, blessings and good
wishes filled all the corners, and it was sent off to
Mr. O?Grady, and the Dalys never knew what poor
fami 1 y benefited by their kindness?they did not want
to know. Every year, since Mother and Father had
?set up house,? they had sent a Christmas hamper to
the poor, and as their family grew, so did the hamper.


Father and Mother looked on each child as a fresh
gift from God, a new and precious possession, making
them richer than they were before, and thus making
it their duty to give more to the poor.
Christmas morning!
All up early and away to Mass! The whole family,
except Baby Bet. knelt at the altar rails. What a
happy family they were! On their return to the house
there were presents to be exchanged and Baby Bet's
?Santy-Sock? to be examined and admired.
The Peace and Joy of Christmas flooded the house,
until even the very air felt sanctified. Being earnest
Little Missionaries, they did not forget their Big-
Brothers in China. They had remembered them at
the altar; they remembered them now, and talked
about them, and wondered what Christmas in China
would be like, and whether the Missionaries would
feel very lonely for Ireland and Australia.
?Wish we could fly over,? Teddy said. ?I?d take
them the pudding. It?s a knock-out pudding, all
right!?
?A knock-out?? Mother smiled. ?That does not
sound complimentary to the cook.?
?Oh, but it is. I mean it could knock out any
other pudding in Australia ?in the whole world!?
Angie wondered if ?Santy? visited the Chinese
children.
?Oh, the little pagan ones don?t know anything
about Christmas or Santy. But I suppose the children
the Sisters have in their care know all about good
old Santy.?
?I?d give them all my dollies ?except Polly Dolly-
kins,? said Baby Bet. ?I couldn?t give them Polly.
She would fret for me.?
?Well, we can?t send them puddings or dollies,?
said the wise, eldest sister, ?but we can send them
prayers. Remember them lots of times to-day. And
90


don?t forget the mite boxes are hungry, and want
their Christmas dinner.??
The happiest day must end, and that delightful
Christmas slipped by into eternity.
Mother was very much surprised, one morning of
the following week, when she saw Dr. Chester?s car
at the gate. He had not been to see Angie for some
weeks. The child was well ?as well as she could
ever hope to be.
He came in, and as he said "Good-morning,? she
saw again the look of indecision in his face, as if he
said to himself: ?Shall I? Shall I?? He asked how
Angie was, and the other children, and then said,
abruptly; ?I want to ask your help. Several times I
have been on the point of confiding in you, telling you
my troubles ?
Mother gave him a chair, and sat opposite him,
her sweet face alight with sympathy and motherly
kindness.
?Tell me,? she said, softly.
?I have a daughter,? Dr. Chester said, sadly, ?an
invalid. She is very trying, poor child. Her mother
is dead many years, and I can do so little for her. She
is twenty-three years of age; the accident happened
three years ago ?a motor accident. Your little Angie
is so patient; I have been thinking, wishing that my
poor Barbara ?
Mother did not know what to say. She did not
like to question the doctor ?she was afraid of
frightening away his confidence. Still, she longed to
hear the story of the doctor?s daughter; she longed
to help the motherless girl who fought against her
cross. But he went on with the story:
?She was a beautiful girl, clever, charming and
popular. Every day she seems to rebel more bitterly.
She has gradually cut off all the friends of her happy


hear.
?We have many photos of her,? Mother explained.
?We have had her taken at each stage of her child-
hood ; we know that soon . . . we shall have only
photos . . . left.?
Dr. Chester took the picture. ?May I show her
this? It is very like the child. My daughter is strong
. . she will live for years, probably. She has
actually asked me to . . . give her something
. . painless ... to end it all. She says it
is cruel of me to see her thus . . . and not do it.?
days, refusing, time after time, to see them, until at
last they gave up calling. She says she does not
want them to sit around, pitying her. She longs to
dance, to sing, to play golf, but she has to lie there
day after day
?I have been telling her about Angie, trying to
interest her. Usually she is abrupt, even rude?only
since her misfortune?when I speak about my
patients. But, somehow, I have contrived to paint
Angie in her own heavenly colours, and Barbara asks
about her each day. Have you a picture??
Mother went, with tears in her eyes, for the latest
photo of Angie?the one in which she sits with her
dreamy eyes fixed on a beautiful vision no one else
can see, and her delicate, little face held to one side,
as if she listened to beautiful music no one else can
Mother?s gasp of horror brought a smile to his lips.
?Do not fear,? he said, reassuringly.
?Oh, it sounds so pagan! Poor child, she must
have been distracted when she asked it.?
The doctor?s face looked older as he slowly shook
his head. ?I fear sometimes for her reason
and my own.?
?Has she any religion?? Mother inquired, timidly.
?Well, she was baptized in the Catholic Church?
your Church, I believe; one could not attend Angie


without noticing her pictures and beads . . . and
her extraordinary faith. Barbara s mother was a
Catholic?at least, had been baptized one; her father
was a Catholic, but not her mother. Consequently,
she really knew very little about the religion; Barbara
knows less. 1 ... lam nothing. My parents
were strict churchgoers ?Presbyterians ?but 1 gave
it up before 1 was twenty.?
?It is very sad. Religion would help her. If she
could but know that suffering is sent by God. . .
?I was thinking that, when Angie is well enough,
you would perhaps allow her to come to see Bar-
bara ?
?Yes, yes. 1 shall be delighted for her to go. It
will do your poor darling good to speak with our
angel.?
?I think it will. But??his face flushed?? Barbara
is so peculiar; she has growm so bitter she might be
. . . not gentle with the child.?
?Oh, Angie will understand. She is a strange, wise
child.?
?She is.? Dr. Chester held out his hand. ?Thank
you for your sympathy. I have never spoken of Bar-
bara to anyone ?not to our nearest relatives or
dearest friends ?as I have to you. I have told no one
my fears concerning her. I have told no one of her
threats, her passionate upbraidings. But it has done
me good to speak to you; I knew you under-
stand. My daughter?s accident has broken my heart;
there is no joy, no hope in life for me.?
?In this life, perhaps,? Mother said gently, ?there
may be little joy, little hope for you. But this is only
a passing life. There is the next ?the eternal.?
Dr. Chester shook his head sadly, as one ?without
hope,? and, with an abrupt farewell, left the room.
A week later Dr. Chester called in his car for


Angie. All the famil}' ?even Shamie?assembled to
see her off, and Teddy and Mick announced to the
world in general that they were very fond of motor
driving: Mother was so ashamed of them. But a rare
smile broke over the doctor?s stern, sad face.
?I was a boy myself once. Mrs. Daly,? he said.
?Another day, boys. I?ll take you; to-day, Angie is
coming with me to see a poor, sick girl, who has no
liking for healthy little boys like you.?
Angie looked like the angels we see in pictures.
She was dressed in white, with a baby-blue ribbon to
match her eyes, and her short, golden curls shone like
a halo.
Dear little Angie, go on your errand of mercy! Do
all you can, little one, for the sad people of this weary
old world, for all too soon your own frail, yet
strengthening, presence will be recalled from it.
The doctor did not speak during the drive; he was,
perhaps, thinking of the manner in which his daughter
would receive the child. They stopped at a large,
stone house, surrounded by beautiful gardens and
lawns.
Angie was taken through a spacious hall, up a
wide, shallow stairway, and through beautiful rooms.
She had never been in such a grand house before, but
she was not awed by the priceless things about her:
she was too young to know their value. Even had
she known, Angie w r oukl not have lost her serene,
simple manner, for all the wealth of this w'orld cannot
awe the soul that desires only the possessions of
Heaven. In a long, bright room, on a couch by the
window, lay the invalid girl. Her face had been very
beautiful, but now its beauty was marred by a hard-
ness of expression: there was a cruel glitter in the
eyes, a bitter compression of the lips.
Dr. Chester had opened the door for the child.
94


?This is Angie,? he said, and then withdrew, closing
the door behind him.
Angie walked over to the couch. ?How do you
do?? she said, as politely as Mother could have
wished, and extended her thin, white hand.
?How do I do! You see how,? Miss Chester said
bitterly, ignoring the frail little hand. ?Did not my
father tell you you were to see a poor invalid? ?
Angie did not seem to mind this rude reply to her
polite inquiry; she did not seem to notice the refusal
to take her hand. ?Dr. Chester said he was bringing
me to see his sick daughter,? she replied, simply.
?And weren?t you warned to be very kind and
consoling, and to say pretty things to do me good?
As if that could do me good! Xo; nothing can ever
do me any good, except death. And I am still strong,
so very strong. You are a sickly little thing; your pain
will soon be all over ?
Angie smiled. ?Yes,? she said, gently; ?won?t it
be beautiful to be in Heaven? I wish you could
come with me. Shall I ask God to let you??
The gentle answer, the child?s sincerity, astonished
the girl; her own brutal words made her blush for
shame.
?Dear child,? she said, almost softly, ?my father
told me about you; I wanted to see you, really. You
are the first person I have ever asked to come and see
me. And I have received you so rudely. Forgive
me. I have such a dreadful temper since . .
But you, my father tells me. are in pain for long
weeks, and you never scold, or complain, or throw
things at people!?
Angie looked shocked. ?Do you" she gasped.
Miss Chester laughed, and her astonished father
paused in his hurried pacing of the corridor outside
her room. Was it a laugh? Had Barbara actually
laughed?


?Oh, yes,? cried the unashamed Miss Chester; ?I
do. It gives me some pleasure?and I get so little ?
to fling things at my nurses, and even at my father
sometimes. Poor man!?
Angie sat up very straight. ?That is very wicked,?
she said. ?You must not do it again.?
Again Miss Chester laughed. ? ?Must? to me, you
little baby! But, listen, I want to learn your secret.
Come, tell me.?
?Secret? I have no secret.?
?Yes, you have, little Wise Eyes. Tell me how
you bear pain, how you can lie still, and never com-
plain.?
?Oh, that is easy. Ido it for God.?
Barbara Chester?s face grew grave as the child?s
words rang through her beautiful room.
?I do it for God.? I told you Angie was an extra-
ordinary child, and her unusual appearance and
manner and words had an extraordinary effect on the
rebellious girl. She fixed her dark eyes on Angie?s
face, appealingly. ?Tell me,? she said. ?Child, child,
help me; I cannot bear it; I cannot. Each day it
seems worse; each day seems longer. I have never
pleaded for help before, and now I can ask you?you,
a little, delicate baby. I scold and storm, order and
insult, but with you I can plead, I can pray you to
help me. You have some power . . .?
?God can help you ?only God,? said the strange,
wise child with the spiritual face. All the consoling
things that had been said to her, all the beautiful
thoughts of her own pure mind, came now to help
Angie comfort the doctor?s poor, broken child.
?God sends suffering: it is His gift. We love God,
and we must not refuse His gift. If anyone you love
sends you a gift, you accept it, even if you don?t like
it. It?s the giver you like.? She smiled as she
explained her point naively. ?Now, Teddy bought
96


Mother a hideous tie. It had purple and green and
pink and ?oh, it was ugly. Mother loves soft shades.
But she wore Teddy?s tie all Christinas Day, and he
was so pleased. I'm sure it really hurt Mother to
wear that tie. But she loved Teddy, you see.? Angie
laughed merrily. ??Do you see what I mean? God
has sent you and me a gift?oh! such a nasty old one
?but we mustn?t mind. He sent it. Vv e must wear
it, and pretend it?s lovely, for His sake. We mustn?t
be rude to Him and say we don?t like His gift. _ And
then, of course, a gift from God is so very different
from people?s gifts. Of course, Teddy made a mistake
buying that hideous tie, but he thought it was pretty;
boys don?t understand about colours. He did not
know it would not suit Mother. But God knows what
is good for us, what suits us, better than we do our-
selves. You and I would not have picked out being
sick, and asked for it; but, since it came to us, we
can be sure it is best for us, because God never makes
mistakes when He sends presents.? She laughed
again. ?So, you see, although it seems a nasty old
present, it really isn?t. It is the very best for us. God
always picks the very best things for us. And isn?t
this funny? The harder and nastier the gifts are, the
better they are! And the better the gift, the greater
the Love. So God must love us very, very much ?
you and me ?because He sent us this gift of hard suf-
fering. Sometimes when I want to play and cannot,
sometimes when the pain is bad, I feel inclined to
grumble and fret and cry. And then I say to myself,
?Oh, Angie, God is looking. He sent it.? And then I
try to be glad I cannot play, and be glad I have the
pain, to please Him. We don?t know why God picked
us?you and me?to be sick. He might have chosen
some other tw r o people. But He did not, and that is
what matters. He wanted you to be . . . like
that . . . and He wanted me to be very ill some-


times, and to be a little better other times. . . .
It doesn't matter what He wants, we must be quite,
quite satisfied, because He is God.?
?Angie, do you think it pleases God to see me
like this??
"Oh. no. . . . He is sorry for us when we are
in pain or trouble . . . but He knows it is best
for you, and it pleases Him if you try to be patient
and to like your suffering. You have to suffer now
in order to win your way to Heaven. It is our way
?yours and mine?to get to Heaven. It is an easy
way, after all.?
"Angie,?' Miss Chester said, and her eyes wore a
fixed, far-awav expression, ?where did you learn all
this??
"Everywhere, from everyone?Mother and Father,
the Sisters. Father Breen. . . .?
?It is beautiful; but 1 could not follow it. 1 could
not love my helplessness.?
"\ou can! You must say a little prayer often
millions of times a day.?
?What shall I say??
?Say, ?Jesus, help me!? Will you??
"I 11 try. Will you come and see me again??
?Yes. I?d love to come.?
?Come often, little Angie. Now you are tired.
You must have some?what do you have? Do you
drink tea??
?Of course.? Angie laughed. "I love it. and Mother
lets me have it ?with plenty of milk, and not too
strong.?
So they had tea together. The doctor came in
and looked anxiously at his daughter.
?She has done me good. Father,? Miss Chester
said, almost gaily. ?Don?t look alarmed. Angie said
I must not throw things at you any more.?


The doctors eyes were moist as he stroked
Angie?s short, golden curls.
After that visit Angie and Miss Chester became
close friends. I shall tell you. in another chapter, how
Angie found something to interest her friend ?some-
thing to keep her occupied, something to help her to
be useful.
Can you guess what it was?
CHAPTER IV.?AER-O-PLANES.
The classroom was very still, all the little boys
and girls trying hard to be good. It was a bright,
blue day, with little sunbeams joyously skipping here
and there; one even skipped over the blackboard, and
two others played ?chasings? round the walls. Some
of Sister Veronica?s pupils let their eyes wander to
the windows and the patches of fascinating blue. But
the angels were very busy putting their wings about
the children and turning their lingering gaze back to
the blackboard and duty.
On the mantel stood a white box with gold letter-
ing, and the sunbeams picked out the gold words with
their little fingers:
ANGELS? BOX.
Sister Veronica's class were all Little Missionaries,
and had determined to fill the Angels' Box to over-
flowing. Here was a chance to ?do? a little act of
mortification ?the blackboard was not halt as interest-
ing as the windows.
The class went on laboriously making a?s that were
neither 100 fat nor too thin, neither too straight nor
too ?slanty,? but just the way Sister Veronica liked
them. Only the best a child could do would satisfy
Sister,


Mick and Mack had a dual desk in the corner over
from the door. Mick was wrestling with a temptation
to draw a boat and an aer-o-plane on the other side
of his slate. A?s were dull old things. Mick wrestled
and fought the temptation. Mack was feeling very
uneasy. During playhour he had carried on his
nature-work in the pepper-trees. There were two hats
under his desk, his own and Mick?s. He hoped
the
Suddenly there was a zizz-zizz and a whirr of tiny
wings, and a little squadron of aer-o-planes sailed
about the room. Mack?s face blushed red as the quiet
of the room was broken.
?Ooh, Sister!?
?Beetles!?
?Look at the Kingie!?
?Isn?t he shiny??
?Let me catch 'em, Sister.?
?Mack Daly musta brought them in,
?In his hat.?
?He?s mad on beetles, Sister.?
Beetles may be deaf, but they cannot be blind, for
three of them flew at Sister?s face. Now, Sister did
not like any kind of ?crawly? things, and, although
she was brave, she could not suppress a shudder as
she beat off the clumsy insects. The noise and con-
fusion grew, and at this point a new note, a mono-
tonous, brazen note, added itself to the clamour.
?Locusts!?
?Mack?s got them, too!?
?Look, there?s one!?
No one, not even Sister Veronica, could expect the
children to be quiet while beetles and locusts flew
about the room, dashing stupidly against the panes,
instead of flying out the open windows. All eyes fol-
lowed the little aerial visitors until the last one was
shoo-ed out the window. It took several minutes to
100


restore order, and then, in a very cold voice, Sister
asked Mack if he had brought the insects into the
room.
?Yes, Sister,? said poor Mack, and Sister told him
to remain when the class was dismissed.
Mick looked round with a challenging eye; he
seemed to think everyone in the room except Mack
deserved punishment. Mick wished he could do
something naughty, too, that he might be ?kept in?
to support Mack. He forgot the Angels? Box, he for-
got his Big Brothers, the Missionaries, for whom he
had promised to offer ?acts.? Deliberately he bent
over the next desk and scribbled all over Mossie
Ryan?s beautifully-made a?s. With a surprised, indig-
nant cry Mossie arose: ?Oh, Sister, Mickie Daly has
scribbled on my work.?
Mick also was told to remain after school.
When the class marched out with light, happy
steps, chanting joyously ?Sing-a-Song-o?-Sixpence,?
the two Dalys sat at their desk in the corner. Mick
looked defiant; Mack very contrite.
?Well?? Sister said, and the word fell from her
lips as if it weighed a ton.
?I didn?t know they would get out,? Mack said,
miserably.
?If you had not brought them in ? Sister said.
and paused significantly.
?I wanted them, and I thought they were safe in
the hats. I?m sorry, Sister, and I?m sorry they flew
at you.?
Sister Veronica turned to Mick, but there was no
apology here. ?I meant to spoil Mossie Ryan?s writ-
ing. 1 wanted to be kept in, to be with Mack. I
want to stay with him always, whatever happens him.
He wanted the beetles for his Show. It?s for the mite


box, too, and all the kids knew about it; they need not
have laughed. They could have caught the beetles
and given them back to him?they were his.?
Sister could not but be moved at Mick?s brotherly
love, although it had taken a rather novel way of
showing itself. She asked about Mack's "Show.? Mack
did not otier to explain, so Mick hastened to do so.
"Mack has a ?well, we call it ?The Zoo? and ?The
Menagerie.? He has all kinds of insects?live ones.
He knows how to feed them. And he's having a Show
this afternoon, and a lot of boys and girls are coming.
It?s a penny to go in. The pennies are for the mite
box. He wanted to have a lot of beetles and locusts,
to have a big aer-o-plane flight after. It doesn?t hurt
them; they just fly away. But they are all gone
now.?
Of course, Sister Veronica had to forgive them on
Mack?s solemnly promising her that he would take
greater precautions with his next consignment of
"wild animals.? and on Mick's grudgingly agreeing to
apologise to Mossie Ryan in the morning.
??Run on, then,? Sister said, and she smiled as she
added: ?If I had a penny, I?d go to the Show' myself.?
?You can come for nothing,? Mack said, shyly, but
Sister suddenly remembered that some important
work awaited her at the convent; so she thanked
Mack, but declined his generous offer.
"The Wild Beast Show? w y as a great success. All
the children were greatly interested, and filled with
admiration for Mack?s knowdedge?all except Mossie
Ryan. He said it was silly, and that he wished he
had bought a honeycomb or a raspberry bar with his
penny. But I think it w T as the remembrance of his
slate of beautiful a's disfigured by Mick?s hand that
made Mossie Ryan think ill of everything got up by
the Dalys.


CHAPTER V.?THE RICH OLD MAN.
Old Mr. Carney lived in a beautiful house on the
hill, just beyond the Dalys?. He was very rich. The
children of the neighbourhood told many tales of his
fabulous wealth; of his gold plates and cups and
dishes; of an iron room packed with sovereigns,
packed and sealed, with just a little, secret opening,
through which the gold coins poured on his touch-
ing, in a certain mysterious manner, a certain spot in
a certain panel of the room. The children always
passed his gates slowly with indrawn breath and wide,
wondering eyes. Twas said he had a gold bed and
gold tables and (but he never used it) a gold motor-
car, and that his daughter had turned to gold at his
touch, and was kept in a glass case in the hall, where
anyone who went in might see her?or her form in
gold. But, then, nobody knew anybody who had been
in the hall! In short, he was a modern Midas, but
whether he had ass?s ears no one knew. The Dalys
strongly suspected that he had, for long ago they had
heard Mother say to Father that everything Mr.
Carney touched turned to gold, and Father say to
Mother that Mr. Carney was a modern Midas, ?ass?s
ears and all.?
Teddy and the Twins often lay in wait at the big
gates to prove the truth of Father?s assertion, but Mr.
Carney whirled by in a motor (not the gold one), and
did not appear to have any ears at all. Teddy did
catch a glimpse of an old gentleman very like Mr.
Carney when he went to the city one day with Uncle
Michael, and Teddy said that he wore a bandage
round his head to conceal his secret; but whether this
was imagination on Teddy?s part, or whether he saw
some other old gentleman suffering from earache, had
never rightly been proved.


Father was seated in his canvas deck-chair, smok-
ing contentedly. It was a bright afternoon; the sun
seemed loth to go to bed; he lingered like a naughty
child begging for just another few minutes, and just
another few. . . . And then, when he really con-
sented to go, he went so slowly, and turned to look
back over his shoulder so often, that it was bright
long after the usual time.
Mother was doing a little mending?a little of the
lot of mending that was always in her basket. There
was always mending and darning to be done at Dalys;
knees and toes will work their way through socks and
stockings, and when there are three boys in the house
who prefer sliding down railings to walking down
steps, and ?slithering? down trees to descending in
the manner they went up them ?well, there is a deal
of patching to be done.
Father was tired, but happy; his eyes half-closed
with the restful feeling of being at home, after a day
well spent in working for his dear ones. The garden
sent up a hundred scents to Heaven; the birds sang
their even-song in the camphor trees. Up on the hill
the big, white house lay bathed in a soft, golden light.
?There?s that old Carney,? Father said, his eyes
attracted to the big house, ?with all his money. Pity
he wouldn?t do some good with it.?
?Perhaps he does ?by stealth,? Mother kindly
made answer.
?Humph! He gives a few pounds to the church
at Christmas and Easter. What?s the good of hoard-
ing money? He has no children, either. I believe. I
suppose relatives he has rarely seen, and cannot care
for, will profit at his death. If I had his money??he
took out his pipe to smile ??I?d scatter it. I?d make
it help me in the next world as well as in this.?
?Pity you haven?t a fortune,? Mother smiled.
?Well, I have.? Father returned, proudly. ?But


it?s not the same kind as old Carney?s.? His eyes
fondly looked at Mother and at the children, scattered
about the verandahs and gardens.
Angie was in the swing, the Twins taking turns
to swing her. Baby Betty and Polly Dollykins were
walking amongst the flowers. Baby Bet pretending
she was lost in a very large, gloomy forest and that
she and her poor child were starving. She meant to
take shelter in the Bear?s House at the foot of the
forest path. In real life, the Bear?s House was a small
room where Father kept his tools.
Mary was reading some old copies of the ?Far
East,? and breaking out into little musical bursts of
laughter now and then. Teddy, with Shamie curled
up beside him, sat on the step, but his book was
unheeded, for Father?s words had arrested his atten-
tion. His eyes looked up to the white house, which
in his fancy, now that the last rays of the sun glorified
it, was indeed a house of gold.
All the gold that old man hoarded was wasting,
and little children were in want of friends to help
them; and how can people help them without money?
All that gold wasting, and priests and nuns could not
help the little starving souls and starving bodies
because of the need of gold. Teddy felt inclined to
rush up the hill, force an entrance, compel the secret
panel to yield up its secret and disgorge the contents
of the room.
But that would be wrong. After all, it was Mr.
Carney?s house and Mr. Carney?s money. Teddy
would be locked up, and then Mother and Father and
all the family, even Shamie, would die of grief and
disgrace.
?Won?t do,? Teddy decided, regretfully.
His thoughts still ran on gold, gold, gold. But
Brother Patrick had said prayer is the best gold; it is
God?s gold, and it buys treasures that earthly* gold


cannot. Yes, Teddy could pray, they ail could, and
that was better than gold.
Still
?Td like to get some of it: not take it. Fd like
him to give it.?
Teddy closed his book, and sat so still and
thoughtful that anyone who noticed him and kne\y
his usual habits would think him ill.
The sun at last went right into bed and covered
his head with clouds; every bit of gold left the big
house, and it looked cold and stern, and seemed to
fold its hands over its treasure, and to frown down
darkly on Teddy, as if it defied him to get one gold
piece.
Mother went in to help Kate in the kitchen; Kate
was a servitor of the family, but also a kind of guide,
philosopher and friend. Mary at once put away her
papers and quietly followed Mother to help, too.
That night Teddy lay awake in his little bed near
the window. The Twins, in their cot across the
room, slept soundly. Teddy knelt up in bed to have
another look at the house on the hill. One bright
light, from a middle window, seemed to glare at him
fiercely, like an angry eye; the rest was in darkness.
?I?ll get you yet,? Teddy threatened the watching
eye. He popped out of bed. ?I?ll pray him into
giving some of his money away.?
Away up in the big house an old man, in the room
where the light was, an old man with a stern face,
that, for all its lines, held a wistful sadness, went
carefully through his papers, not knowing that a little
boy knelt until his knees were numbed and his lips
tired with swiftly-spoken prayers and petitions,
storming Heaven to soften his old heart.
Ah, old miser! Beware! It is not burglars you
have to fear these days; your bolts and bars may keep
106


them out; your safes and strongroom may defy them;
the law may protect you from them.
But what defence have you against the prayers
that wing their way to Heaven, the prayers of a little
child, asking a Child there to come and knock gently
at your old heart, to touch that sealed door, and make
it fly open, that the Child may find a shelter there,
and that for the love of Him you will give freely of
your hoarded treasure? Your gold is lying useless
while children starve, and there is no one to bring
them the Bread of Heaven. Tremble for your gold,
old miser! A Child means to steal it! Know that
verily and indeed you have ass?s ears, because you
no more heeded the cry of little souls in darkness
than would that poor, stupid animal. Indeed, the ass
surpasses you, for did not an ass?s breath warm that
Little Child who suffered cold on Christmas Night,
as the children you will not help suffer it to-day? Did
not an ass carry the Treasure of the World across the
desert, away from the slaughterer of little children?
You are a slaughterer of little children. You with-
hold your gold, and let them perish.
The old man worked on, knowing nothing of
Teddy?s designs against him.
One afternoon Teddy came home early from
school, put his bag of books away, refreshed himself
with some cakes Kate had just taken from the oven,
and then slipped behind the camphor laurels and
scaled the fence. He did not wish the Twins to see
him, for he did not want their company just then.
Even Shamie was ordered home, and went, slowly
and dejectedly, with many a lingering gaze after
Teddy?s flying feet.
Before the big gates of ?Warrumbah? Teddy-
paused, but only for a moment. ?Anyhow,? he


reflected, ?if I do no good, I can find out for certain
if he has ass?s ears.?
Teddy followed the well-kept drive, through lawns
and lovely flower-beds, here between lofty trees, there
amongst flowering shrubs. He walked with an
assured air, as if he were the heir of the master of
?Warrumbah.? But, as the way led him round a
clump of beautiful palms, his heart gave a jerk, sudden
as a Jack-in-the-Box, for there, beside a bed of roses,
stood the master himself. He was well wrapped up,
although it was a warm evening; his longish hair, his
cap well drawn down, completely hid his ears.
Teddy dragged off his cap.
?Here, boy!? Mr. Carney cried, querulously, ?take
yourself and your message round the other way to
the back.?
?I?m not ? Teddy began in an insulted tone.
?Then what are you doing here??
?I came to see you.?
?To see me? What for??
The old man had brown eyes, with a red gleam in
them; they burnt into Teddy?s soul, and made him
blurt out the truth. He felt that if a burglar, dis-
guised as a gentleman, had come to rob the house
and had met Mr. Carney on the doorstep, he would
at once have confessed the purpose of his visit when
he met those red-brown eyes.
?What for, boy? What for??
?To see,? gasped Teddy, ?if you have ass?s ears.?
The whole world seemed suddenly struck dumb;
not a leaf stirred in the vast garden, all nature seemed
shocked, and Teddy realised what a terrible thing he
had said. Mr. Carney stood petrified, and Teddy stut-
tered and stammered an explanation.
?They all say?everybody?that everything you
touch turns to gold, and that you are like some old ?
old cove that had ass?s ears.? The red-brown eyes
108


gleamed fiercely, but was there, could there have
been, a little twitch of those thin, tight-shut lips?
?Couldn?t be,? Teddy decided. Perhaps a tiny garden-
fly had tickled his lips.
?Then I suppose I am to show you my ears??
demanded Mr. Carney.
?Aw ?well,? Teddy replied, ?not if you don?t like.
But ?I wanted to ask you about your money.? Teddy
had taken heart again. (?Might as well find all out,?
he thought.)
?The kids about here say that you have tons and
tons of money; that you could buy all Australia, and
have Tasmania just for an apple orchard, if you
liked.?
?Um!? the old man muttered, and his lips closed
tighter.
?But I want to know,? continued Teddy, gravely,
?what?s the good of it? What are you going to do
with it?? His young eyes calculatingly considered the
old, lined face before him, the whitened hair, and.
with the unconscious cruelty of youth, he said:
?You?ll have to die soon; someone else will get the
money. Father said that, most likely, whoever does
get it will waste it. He?s often noticed that when
mis , er?old gentlemen save a lot of money, and
won?t do anything charitable with it. it is a l wavs
wasted by whoever they leave it to. The people who
hadn?t to earn it and save it always waste it.?
The old man stirred at this. ?Your father.? he
said drily, ?must be a sagacious man. I?ve noticed
the same thing myself.?
Teddy was not sure what kind of a man that was.
but, since Mr. Carney seemed to infer he was one
also, Teddy considered it very probable that Father
wasn?t one at all, because Father was the verv oppo-
site of this eagle-eyed old gentleman. (Teddy sup-
posed his eyes had got that look with gloating over


gold dishes and cups and beds and motor-cars, not
to mention gazing on his gold daughter.)
?You came, then, for a dual purpose ?to see my
ears and to know what I intend to do with my
money ??
Teddy had the grace to blush. Whatever would
Mother think of him? Imagine a boy asking an old,
old man two such personal questions! But he had to
admit it was so.
?Well,? Mr. Carney said, ?I have not made my
will yet, for the very reason that we spoke of just
now. I don?t intend spendthrifts to get it.?
?You ought to make your will, though,? Teddy
advised. ?Everyone should. I?ve made mine.?
Again that tiny garden-fly must have tickled Mr.
Carney?s lips, for this time they really did twitch. He
sat down on a rustic chair beside the rose-bed, and
left the boy standing in front of him.
?Yes,? Teddy went on. ?You see, Mick and Mack
?my twin brothers ?and I have some money in the
bank.?
?Good! All children should be taught to save.?
?Oh, we didn?t save it; we found it. Shamie, our
dog, dug up a gold nugget near Doughboy Creek.?
Mr. Carney seemed duly impressed and surprised.
?We?ve got eight pounds each in the bank. So
the three of us made our wills. We were going out
sailing one day with Uncle Michael, and we thought
we might get drowned, so we made them. We put
them in an envelope and gave them to Father to
mind. We all left our money the same?to the
Chinese Mission. And, if we don?t die before we are
twenty-one, we are going to draw it out on our birth-
days and send it to the Mission. I tried to work out
how much mine will be when I am twenty-one and
how much the Twins? will be when they are. But I
couldn?t. The bank fellows will be able to do it all
no


right. I meant to have a big party with mine, and
buy some things I want ?a watch and boxing-gloves
and presents for Mother and everyone. But a party
is over in a few hours, and does no good. And a
watch ?well, when I?m dead, having a watch will be
no good, either, because I?ll have no more time left
to do any good in. It won?t matter to me what time
it is then. But if I gave my eight pounds and what-
ever the interest comes to ?the bank fellows will
knew ?the money will do good for me if I am alive
and after 1 am dead. Look here, Mr. Carney??
Teddy struck his hands together earnestly, like a man
making a speech about something very important ?
?v/hen you make your will, don?t leave all your money
to people who will waste it, and do no good for you
and no good for themselves with it. Make your
money do good for you while you are living and after
you are dead. Make it keep on working for you.
You worked for it; make it work for you. You can?t
do good things yourself ?you cannot nurse sick
people and mind babies and orphans.? Teddy smiled
at the thought. ?You can?t go away to pagan lands
to save souls there. But your money can do these
things for you, by sending others in your place. See?
Dad says all these things about money. He says
what he would do if he had a lot of money; I?ve often
heard him; that?s how I know. Dad says he'd help
hospitals and orphanages and other charitable places,
and that he?d give lots and lots of his fortune to train
priests and Brothers and nuns to work in Australia
and in pagan lands. Then all those priests and nuns
and Brothers would be like his children. Their work
would go on after his death, and he?d have a share
in all the good they did. See??
The old gentleman looked bewildered. He had
never met a little boy like Teddy before ; but this is not
to be wondered at, for there are very few little boys


like Teddy. ?Well,? he said, as Teddy paused for
breath, ?I am very thankful for your advice. When
you grow up, if you are a lawyer, I shall put my
affairs in your hands. But I suppose you think 1
shall be dead then.?
?Course you will!? Teddy answered heartily
?How old do you think I am??
?Aw?about ninety-seven.?
Mr. Carney frowned. ?I shall be sixty next
month,? he said, but Teddy thought he had very
likely forgotten about two decades (at least), for old
people have very poor memories.
?And now ?for my ears ?
Teddy?s cheeks crimsoned, although he was dying
to know. ?Oh ?aw ?never mind ?I ?
Mr. Carney?s lips twitched again. (That trouble-
some little fly!) He took off his cap. Teddy bent
forward.
Mr. Carney carefully turned the side of his head,
brushed back his longish hair, and revealed ?a well-
shaped ear, set close to his fine-looking, white head.
He gravely turned the other side, again brushed back
his hair, and revealed another, the image of the first!
Teddy was very disappointed; he had hoped there
was some foundation for the story.
?I?ll tell all the ki?children it?s not true,? he
promised, in a flat, dull voice.
?Thank you,? returned Mr. Carney, as if Ted had
promised a great favour. ?I suppose,? the old man
continued, ?if this were a novel, I should adopt you
on the spot, give you a large income, distribute m\
surplus goods to charitable institutions, turn this
place into an orphanage (horrid little things, what
noise they would make in my garden!), and betake
myself to a monastery ? He smiled, actually
smiled, at the fancy. ?But it isn?t a novel, so I sup-
pose it ends here.?


Teddy?s blue eyes gleamed with some inner know-
ledge of the situation that Mr. Carney could not be
expected to know. (?Prayer moves mountains, so it
will move misers,? mentally decided young Teddy.)
Aloud he said; ?I don?t want to be adopted, thank
you; I?ve got a lovely father and mother. And I don?t
think they?d take you at a monastery, and orphans are
not horrid little things. I suppose you were a horrid
little boy yourself. You must have been. I?m glad
I didn?t know you then.?
Mr. Carney laughed, and the trees, the flowers, the
house seemed very much astonished, so Teddy thought,
as if they had never heard him laugh before, and had
never expected that he would. The flowers stared,
especially those with black centres like eyes; the trees
murmured amongst themselves, and the house appeared
to lift all its eyebrows; but this, perhaps, was a trick the
sun played on the front windows.
?I?m afraid I was a disagreeable little boy,? Mr.
Carney admitted.
?You should be sorry for orphans, and not call
them horrid. You should be glad you never had to
depend on charity. If orphans had to depend on rich
old men like you, well ? Teddy left the conclu-
sion to the rich old man himself. Mr. Carney?s mouth
opened in astonishment.
?Well, well! You are an extraordinary child, the
most extraordinary I have ever met.?
Naughty Teddy replied: ?You are an extraordi-
nary old man, the most extraordinary I have ever met.
and I?m glad I don?t know any others like you. Good-
bye.?
Mr. Carney called after him: ?Here, boy. Listen.
Come and see me again. Come soon.?
Teddy turned, and all enmity died down as he
waved his hand and called a cheerful ?Right-o!?
The old man walked to the clump of palms to


watch the little figure flying along. Perhaps it
remmdeci him of the days when his old, creaky joints
were young and supple. As he passed on to the house
he plucked a rose, but it did noc turn to gold. In his
bedroom he looked in a mirror and smiled. ?And we
were rather proud of our ears in our family: Mother
very much so.? He brushed his hair back carefully,
and shook his head thoughtfully, even regretfully, at
his reflection. ?After all, John Carney, I believe they
are an ass?s ears,? he said.
CHAPTER VI.?THE BAZAAR.
Miss Chester and Angie had become fast friends;
very often the doctor s big car drew up at Daly?s
humble gate, and Angie was whisked away to the
Chester mansion, to cheer the poor invalid. The bitter
lines softened in Barbara Chester's beautiful face; her
fits of violent temper became less frequent, and finally
ceased. The doc.or seemed twenty years younger;
his stooping shoulders straightened, his step grew
light, and, although his face still wore a sad expres-
sion, it did not look unhappy, despairing, as it formerly
had.
Miss Chester could not know Angie without
knowing the ?Far East,? too, and since she was too
old to be a Little Missionary, she said she would be
a big Sister Missionary to the little ones. She took
a keen interest in the little paper, especially in the
children?s pages. She called back to her couch the
sympathetic friends she had insulted and driven away.
They, too, were told of the work the little paper
was doing to win China for Christ, and they were
pressed into the service. Several of them were not
Catholics, but they agreed that the cause was good,
and they were happy to help it, and to please their
poor friend. Soon a busy little circle gathered round


Barbara's couch on certain afternoons to sew and knit
for the children of the Mission orphanages, and for
the Mission Fathers themselves. Angie and Mary
were of the circle, and little Angie womd sit in a big
chair, her pa'.e face shining with happiness, her knit-
ting needles fi}dng as fast as if she were a little
?Home? girl who had been knitting since she could
toddle. Those thin, delicate fingers of Angie s were
very clever.
Dr. Chester looked in on the busy group as often
as he could, and tried to be home in time for afternoon
tea. His loving eyes would stray from his daughter's
face to the angelic child's, to whom, under God, he
owed his new-found happiness. The faith in God
that he thought belonged only to his childhood was
coming back to him. He had been taught to believe
in a stern, hard God, but little Angie was leading him
to a God of love and mercy.
Barbara could laugh and joke now, and was con-
stantly twitting her father about his ?easy? life, and
advising him to join the Han Yang Medical Mission.
But Dr. Chester shook his head laughingly; ?You?ll
have no one left here, if you and Angie have your
way.?
During May Angie and Mary held a little bazaar.
Angie made dolls, such cute little things, out of clothes
pegs. Mary made all kinds of pretty little bags,
sprays of flowers, and all kinds of fancy things. Teddy
ruined his fingers ?carving? boxes and photo frames?
Teddy said they were carved, but Dad said they were
?dug.? The Twins made dozens and dozens of little
cardboard boxes and baskets for sweets, and Baby Bet
tied pretty coloured papers round them. Mother and
Kate promised wholesome, home-made sweets,
and Father was down for a large consignment of pea-


nuts. Teddy said peanuts would give the bazaar a
Chinese look.
When Miss Chester heard of the bazaar, she sent
piles of pretty things for it a doll dressed as
?Maureen,? another as ?The Twin,? a kewpie as
?Orlando,? and a pretty toy dog as ?Rory.? What
fun these gifts made for the children!
Teddy and the Twins fixed up stalls in the garden.
You should have heard the hammering and sawing
and shouting of directions that went on. But, when
the stalls were finished and the goods arranged, it
was the dearest, daintiest, prettiest little bazaar you
ever saw?and so said the children for miles round
when they saw it.
All the Dalys were ?dressed up? for the occasion.
Teddy was a Chinese, and jabbered a lot of nonsense
that he convinced the poor, innocent Twins was
?dinkum Chow talk.? Teddy sold peanuts, and was
very busy and happy. Mick, dressed in his Indian
clothes, whooped and danced in a little tent, and one
had to pay a penny to see him do it. Mack shyly rang
a little bell at the tent door, and invited everyone in
to see the Great War Chief, Whack-em-Heart-i. Mack
took the pennies as if they were red-hot ?Mack has
no business instincts.
The green tablecloth from the dining-room had
been thrown over the hibiscus clump, and it made a
mysterious little room, where Mary, draped in black
veils, told fortunes. Nine-tenths of her clients were
promised a trip to China shortly; others were filled
with false hopes of meeting someone they loved very
much, but had never seen?someone whose name
commenced with an ?M?; others, again, were glee-
fully assured that they would win the next ?Far East?
competition that would be held. ?Madame Fortun-
tini? giggled a great deal over the fortunes, and so
did her clients. But, young as they were, they under-
lie


stood that no one ?no hand-reader, or fortune-teller,
or crystal-gazer ?could tell their fortune any truer
than Mary Daly could. With Mary it was a lovely
joke; with paid fortune-tellers it is a wicked hoax.
God only knows the future. It is a wonderful, mys-
terious thing waiting for us, that God has planned for
us. If we will only be good and patient, we need not
fear it. No matter what it brings, God sends it, and
so we will trust in Him.
But it was a great joke playing fortunes at Dalys?
bazaar!
Angie served sweets in dainty little bags and
baskets. Miss Elizabeth tried to help, but got in
everyone?s way, and was heartily kissed for it.
Shamie barked and snapped playfully at all the
strange legs he found, to his surprise, in the Dalys?
garden that happy afternoon. Mother and Kate sup-
ported everyone.
The Great War Chief, Whack-em-Heart-i, was in
the midst of a war dance, when the tent ?made from
Mother?s second-best sheets?collapsed. What muffled
laughs and shrieks came from the folds of the sheets!
Mack looked very much distressed, and offered to
give the pennies back. Mack was too conscientious
for business.
?No fear!? cried Mick. ?No money back! They
got extra ?all the fun when the tent fell!?
Dr. Chester found time, despite his busy hours, to
visit the bazaar, to buy something for his own ?little
girl.?
He had his fortune told, and was promised a trip
to China in the ?near future,? and tons and tons of
money.
But there was another grown-up visitor. All the
children?except Teddy?seemed suddenly turned to
-tone when they saw him at the gate.
Why ever did he come? If he touched them with


his skinny hand, wh-what would happen them? The
younger ones (played upon by elders who liked
?thrills?) whimpered and sobbed. Cold shivers ran
down their little backs. Wide, wondering eyes;
parted, questioning lips?what a little sea of fright-
ened faces met the gaze of the visitor!
?Oh, gee!? muttered Teddy. ?I didn?t think he?d
come. What?ll I do with him? Won?t Dad be mad
with me ?and Mother, too? Jings! I wish I hadn?t
told him.?
The old gentleman raised his hat as Mother came
across the grass with a tray of cakes. ?Allow me,?
he said, gallantly, and took the tray from her hands
and carried it to the little table under the wattles.
Mother s eyes and lips were only one degree less
wondering than the children?s round her.
Teddy came up, stammering, and looking very
foolish in his Chinese ?get-up.?
?Mother, this is?er ?l ? he ?swallowed? hank
?It?s Mr.? ?Teddy gathered his courage??it?s Mr.
Carney, Mother. I?l?told him about the bazaar. I
wrote to him.?
Mother made Mr. Carney welcome, and apologised
for Teddy?s boldness. Mr. Carney professed himself
delighted to be amongst the little ones, and spoke
highly of Teddy.
?You have an ?er ?extraordinary little son. He?ll
make his mark in the world. Ah ? His smile
faded, his old face grew hard and bitter, as Dr.
Chester came in sight. The doctor?s face, too, had
changed.
The men glared at one another for a moment, and
then old Mr. Carney smiled again.
?Well, doctor, I feel quite young and happy among
these little people. It is foolish, after all, to
Shall we bury the hatchet?? He held out his hand,
and the doctor gladly put his in it.


The children stared and wondered, but old Mr.
Carney?s smile was quite a nice one, although it
seemed a little out of repair through being so long
without use. But by the time he had had his fortune
told, had treated everybody to ice-cream, and ?cleared
out? all the stalls; by the time he had everyone laden
with gifts, had taken Baby Bet?s confiding hand in
his and kissed her, his smile had become quite perfect.
Any child would trust him then, anywhere!
He went away in the doctor?s car, looking ten
years younger and a million times happier than when
he arrived.
Teddy looked shy and sheepish; he kicked three
holes in the smooth, green grass near the dahlia bed.
?Oh, Teddy, you wrote and asked him to come?
and you didn?t tell me,? Mother said, reproachfully.
?Aw ?well?l guessed Dr. Chester would come.
He?s that young Angie?s friend?and I wanted to have
a rich friend, too! I thought if I told you and he
didn?t come, it would be silly. So I didn?t tell. And
I wanted him to get a chance to spend some of his
money for the Mission. Anyhow, Mum, he and the
doctor seemed ready to kill one another, and then
they made friends, so it?s a jolly good thing he came
Isn?t it??
What could Mother say? She could only sigh
patiently. Sometimes the missionary spirit in her
children brings a mother into all kinds of social diffi-
culties ! But, as Teddy said, the bazaar, thanks to
Dr. Chester and Mr. Carney, was a ?stunning? suc-
cess, and that, in his opinion, was all that mattered.
Mick felt inclined to be jealous of Teddy and
Angie, and wished he could scrape up an acquaintance
with a millionaire or tw r o.


CHAPTER VII.?MICK REBELS.
Mack had a secret. Mick was painfully aware
that he had, and resented it very much; nothing had
ever come between them before. Mick was too proud
to ask an explanation, and Mack too shy to offer one.
But why, Mick asked himself, should he steal off
from the others so often, and be lost to sight some-
times for an hour or more? If he were going after
moths and other silly old things, why didn?t he say
so, and ask a fellow to go with him?
The breach between the Twins widened, until it
became big enough for all the family to see. At first
they treated it as a joke; but when, after days and
days, Mick continued to remember (sometimes) to
put on a lordly air when Mack was near him, and
when Mack began to look very miserable about it.
Mother sought for a tactful way of bringing them
together again.
Where did Mack go after school every afternoon ;
where did he spend a precious hour of his Saturday
holiday; where did he go on Sunday after Mass? Of
course, he had asked Mother?s permission, and she
knew it was for no wrong purpose her little Mack
went on the mysterious journeys; she wondered why
Mick did not share the secret with him. But she could
not find an answer to the problem.
One wet holiday the children were in the play-
room, each occupied in his own way ?the way that
pleased him most. But, gradually, as the rain
increased and the room darkened a little, they all
gathered round Angie?s chair near the fire. Mother
had made a cheery little fire; not that the day was
very cold, but because it looked cosy and pleasant,
and Angie liked watching the ?stories? in the flames.
To-day she was far too busy to look at them; her
fingers were occupied knitting, and. although she was


very clever with her needles, she was not clever
enough to knit without watching the stitches. Mary,
too, was knitting; and Baby Bet, imitating her big
sisters, did wonderful things with two straightened-
out hairpins and a small ball of bright yellow wool.
Teddy had tried to learn to knit some time before,
but even patient Mary had to give him up as a hope-
less pupil. The number of stitches that boy would
get on his needle! Start him with sixteen, and in a
few minutes he?d have forty! So, now, the three
boys watched the girls work, and they all talked
about many things?aer-o-planes, paddymelons, wild
blacks, tadpoles, Dr. Chester and Mr. Carney, stars,
multiplication, rabbits, Purgatory, the new priest, ice-
cream blocks, and St. Joseph. Many and varied were
the subjects they discussed, and Teddy took the credit
of knowing the most about everything; but it was
really quiet Mary who gave the information, and
clever Teddy took possession of it, used it, and made
it his own.
Mick poked the fire savagely. Wet days did not
agree with Mick. They did if he were allowed to
spend them outside, splashing about in the rain and
getting wet to the skin. But Mother had said, no
out-of-doors until the rain cleared. So there they all
were, ?C.8.? (Confined to Barracks), and Mick
grumbled and worried the other children, and was
not a good soldier at all. Even Mother?s promise of
a walk to Wongle Hill as soon as the rain cleared had
not helped to sustain his spirits.
He poked again?more savagely than before.
?Cut it out, Mick,? Ted said, crossly.
Conversation went on again, and this time the
Little Missionaries? work was discussed.
Mick flung the poker down so heavily that it made
Angie start.
?I haven?t been able to do anything decent,? he


growled. ?It?s all right for Teddy?he has Mr.
Carney to help him. And Angie has Dr. Chester and
Miss Chester. It isn?t a bit fair. No one helps me.
I can only save pennies. That?s no good. It's silly!
I?m not going to try any more. So there!?
?Oh, Mickie!? Angie said, reproachfully, and
stopped her work to give his head a sympathetic pat.
?I?ll spend all my pennies?might as well! What
good can my pennies do for a great big, big place like
China? There are millions and millions of people in
it. Pennies ! I?m giving up !?
The other children, even Baby Bet, looked hor-
rified. Was Mick an apostate? And was his conver-
sion ?extremely difficult?? What would Mother and
Father say, and ?Sister,? and Maureen, and ?and ?
everyone? There was a pained silence, and Shamie,
who had been sleeping with one eye open, got up and
whimpered. He did not like the children to be silent
in that strange way. He sat up and howled dismally.
?Oh, Mickie,? Angie said, softly, ?you don?t mean
it??
?Do!? Mick hissed fiercely.
?You are tired and sick of staying indoors. You
are not used to it?as I am.? She smiled wistfully
down into his sullen eyes. But even this slight allu-
sion to her delicacy?made purposely to soften him?
had no effect just then on Mick. He poked and poked
the cheery little fire as if it were to blame.
?After you have a jolly run to Wongle Hill you?ll
be as brave as anything; you won?t be a bit dis-
heartened at the size of China and the size of a penny!
Those millions and millions of Chinese you have to
help to convert will not seem so very many, after all,?
she smiled, as she ruffled his hair, and Mick?s temper
was all but subdued.
?Little coward,? Teddy said, superiorly. ?Going
to give up like that. Greedy kid! You just want to
122


spend your pennies on lollies and stuff. Go on, then.
Do it. Greedy!?
?I don?t!? flashed out Mick, Mick had a violent
temper, but it raised its head only rarely, as Mother
had taught him to control it. But now, at Teddy?s
taunt, Mick felt something burning, raging within
him.
?I don?t want to buy lollies. I?ll show you. I?ll
burn them.?
Before Mary could prevent him, he had snatched
up his mite box ?his poor little, unoffending mite box ?
and thrown it into the heart of the cheery little fire.
A horrified ?Oh!? went up to Heaven from the
souls of five little Dalys ?perhaps from six. Perhaps
Mick, for all his defiance, felt horrified at himself. No
one seemed able to move.
?That?s a sin!? cried Teddy, sternly. ?You?re in
a temper. Say a prayer. Mother told you always to
bless yourself.?
?Let me get it out! Quick! Give me the poker
at once, Mick,? Mary said.
Mick promptly threw the poker to the other end
of the room. Mack rushed round, bent down, plunged
his little hand into the flames, and drew out the box,
scorched, blackened, but not burnt.
Mick?s temper was done. He stared at Mack?s
poor, burnt hand. ?Oh, Mary?look?he?s burnt.
Quick! Tell Mother. Get oil or something. What
does Mother get for burns? Quick, quick, Mary!?
?It?s all right,? mumbled Mack, in a ?queer? voice.
?Don?t frighten Mother, Mary.? He sat down, his
face white and wet. But he caught Mary?s dress as
she attempted to rush past him. ?Promise not to tell
yet. Just say I burnt my hand ?getting something
that fell in the fire. Don?t tell yet. Mick is as sorry
as anything. The pennies wouldn?t burn: it would
not matter if they did. But the box, I wanted to


save Mick?s box. It seems to belong to the Mission;
it seems a part of ?a part of ?
Then Mack fainted.
Mother and Kate soon revived him, attended to
his hand and popped him into bed, for the pain of
the burns made him feel weak and ill. Mother then
came back, took Mack?s vacant seat, and demanded
an explanation. No one seemed inclined to give it.
Mick was sobbing beside Mack?s bed, and refused to
leave it, until Mother explained that it was worrying
Mack and making him worse. Poor Mick came in,
and, kneeling at Mother?s side, hid his shamed head
in her lap, and told her how his temper had con-
quered him once more. Teddy manfully ?owned up??
to his share in the tragedy. He had known that to
call Mick ?coward? meant disaster for someone.
Mother scolded them both soundly; told Mick
some sad stories of little boys who did not learn to
control their tempers, and the tempers grew and
grew, and, when they were men, led them into terrible
offences against God and man.
Mick sobbed, and begged to be punished. He
wanted to put his hand into the fire, too; he wanted
Mother to beat him?hard ?with something. He
looked all around the room for a lash, but there was
only the poker in sight. He begged Mother to beat
him ?hard ?with that.
Mother smiled at this, and the other children, feel-
ing the tension lifted, smiled too, and even laughed
shakily.
Mother lifted Mick on to her lap, and he did no'
feel a bit too big to be there. He felt as little as any-
thing??littler? than Baby Bet. Baby Bet stared in
astonishment to see Mick on Mother?s knee. Mother
very gently went back to the cause of the tragedy?
Mick had been jealous of Angie and Teddy because
they had been able to gather more money than he for
124


the Mission. ?Why, Mick,? Mother explained, ?one
of your pennies, given freely, is worth more than
pounds of Mr. Carney?s money. A penny you meant
to spend and then put into the mite box is worth
hundreds of a rich man?s money. And you must not
think, Mick (none of you must think), that money
will convert China. Money is needed, of course: no
one can live without money; no work can go on with-
out it. But money is not our first thought for the
Mission. The grace of God will convert China. We
cannot buy grace; we pray for it; we beg for it. God
will reward those people who freely give money for
the Mission, or for any good work; but I don?t want
my little people to think money comes first. Prayers
first. Prayer is God?s gold. So, Mick, do not be
jealous of Angie?s friends and Teddy?s millionaire.
Your own little prayers will help the Missionaries
more than Mr. Carney?s money.? The children lis-
tened quietly, and Baby Bet came closer; she did not
quite like to see big Mick in her place. She ?edged
up? until she was leaning on Mother?s knee, and had
one arm round her. ?You have all been such good
little workers,? Mother went on, ?I want you to con-
tinue, but to be free of jealousy and bad feeling. That
is not the way to work for God. Our Lord said we
should do good things, not talk about them. You have
all been little doers of the word. Continue your good
work. Don?t give up, Mick. Suppose the Big Mis-
sionaries said: ?Oh, China is too big; there are too
many people. Pll give up. I?ll pack and go home.
I won?t try any more.? It is very big; it is a big task.
Very, very slowly the work of converting China goes
on ?a little at a time, just like your little penny. Per-
haps the Big Missionaries do feel disheartened at the
thought of the task sometimes. But they don?t give
up. The spirit of the Missionary keeps him at his
post. No land is too big, no country too populous.


The Missionaries are content to see their work grow
slowly, slowly, wearily?when they want to run
quickly and do so much. And they are never jealous.
If some seem to have greater success than others: if
some Missions receive more help from the rich folk
than others, the Missionaries know it is all for the one
great thing?the conversion of heathen lands. So
now, Mick, be a true Missionary?be patient (be con-
tent with a little at a time). Don?t be jealous of your
brother and sister Missionaries, and ?chain up your
temper as if it were a hungry lion. Oh, yes, the Mis-
sionaries have tempers, too, but they keep them well
chained. And now the rain is over. Off you all run
to Wongle Hill. There?s a rainbow, Mick God?s
promise of peace with us. Away now, and see what
nice things Kate and I will have ready for your tea
when you return.?
Mick wanted to be locked up, to be deprived of
the walk; or he wanted to be sent to bed at once and
have no tea. Mother, finding him in such a mood for
penance, very wisely forgave him everything, and
sent him off with a kiss.
That evening Mick told his sad story again to
Father. Father was very much shocked, and, when
he saw poor, pale little Mack with the burnt hand, he
was angry. Mick felt glad. He wanted a beating.
He begged Father to give him one (did you ever
before hear of a boy asking his father for a beating?),
and Father was going to. But the three girls and
Mother and Kate cried; and Mack pleaded from his
bed, and threatened to get up and share in the beat-
ing; and Teddy said it was his fault, too, and he?d
have to get one; and Shamie howled horribly, so that
Father, not feeling equal to beating his three boys,
and not feeling able to withstand the tears of his
women folk and the howls of Shamie, put the strap
away, and forgave Mick, as Mother had done.


?I think,? stammered Mick, ?what started my
temper first was Mack?s secret. I hated him to have
a secret from me.?
Mack called out: ?Right-o, Mick. I?ll take you
with me to-morrow. But you?ll laugh at me and say
I?m silly, and But wait and see!?
CHAPTER VIII.?THE SECRET.
The next afternoon Mack led the way out through
the back gate, down the road; Mick followed in bliss-
ful anticipation. Mack?s hand was bandaged, and
every time Mick looked at it his very soul blushed
for shame.
?You?ll be disappointed, Mick,? Mack warned him.
?It?s nothing exciting.?
?Moths??
?No.?
?Blue-tongued lizard??
Mack laughed and shook his head.
?Er?a new kind of flower near the old Ouarry??
?No.?
?A ?er ?a new cave in the Quarry?one we?ve
never been in??
Laughing again, Mack shook his head. ?You?d
never guess. It?s only old Mrs. Sullivan.?
?Aw!? Mick?s face grew two inches longer with
disappointment. ?What fun's in going there??
?I don?t go for fun,? his brother answered,
seriously.
?What d?you go for??
?To help the Mission.?
?How can that help??
?It helps?you?ll see.?
Old Mrs. Sullivan lived in a little cottage on the


Old Quarry Road; she had lived there years and
years and years. The Daly twins thought her the
oldest woman in the world. But she wasn?t really,
you know. Why ever did Mack go to her old place?
Mick wondered. And how could his going there help
the Chinese Mission? Mick?s steps grew slow and
lagging. There was no surprise in the Expedition,
after all; he might have known.
There was a small garden round the cottage, but
it wore a sad, forlorn look, as little old gardens will
when the little old ladies who loved them grow too
feeble to tend them. But two flower-beds near the
kitchen door showed signs of someone?s care, and the
vegetable bed was cool and fresh.
Mack knocked at the kitchen door. Mrs. Sullivan
always said that the front of her house was at the
back, and all callers knocked at the kitchen door.
?Come in, let ye,? said a soft, old voice, and M:ck
followed Mack into a small, low kitchen. Mrs. Sul-
livan was sitting in a big chair near a dying fire; her
rosary beads were in her fingers. She suffered greatly
from rheumatism, and very rarely was she able to
leave bed or chair to hobble round her little dwelling
and look out sadly down the road. She spent her
days praying and suffering.
?I?ve brought my brother to see you, Mrs. Sullivan
?my twin brother, Mick.?
Mick shook hands very bashfully, and thought
Mack frightfully silly to waste his time on this poor
old woman.
?A fine pair of boys you are, and your mother is
the proud woman, I know. I had twin sons?little
boys like you?long ago. But they grew up and they
went to the war?and got killed on me. I hope and
pray there?ll be no war when you are men.?
?Oh!? Mick said, forgetting his shyness, ?we?re
128


going to China when we?re big. Mack is going to be
a priest, and I?m going to be a doctor.?
?Look at that now!? smiled the old woman. ?IT
be long in Heaven before you are men, please God.
and I?ll pray for you both?Father Mack and Doctor
Mick. It?s a good, long-remembering friend I?ll be
to you in Heaven.?
Mack thanked her for this far-off promise of
favour, and Mick looked awkwardly about. Why ever
had Mack come?
Mack then, to Mick?s intense surprise (and per-
haps slight disgust), busied himself about the kitchen.
He ?washed up? the solitary cup that had held Mrs.
Sullivan?s tea at lunch time; he swept the floor, peeled
two large potatoes, and left them ready in a smal
saucepan. (Mick thought all this a girl?s work and
quite below him.) Mack carried in armfuls of wood
and stacked it neatly beside the stove; he watered
the two flower-beds and the one vegetable-bed. He
brought in a few white jonquils ?the first to bloom
in the garden?and put them in a glass of water on
the table near the old lady?s chair.
?Well, then, it?s you are the comfort to me,? sighed
old Mrs. Sullivan, wistfully. ?You reminded me of
my own little Timmy. ?Twas he was the kind, thought-
ful boy.?
Mack wanted to put more wood on the fire. ?I?m
sure you?d like a cup of tea now. It?s after four. I
could make it?if you?d let me boil the water.
Wouldn?t you like a cup of tea??
?I would, then, but I cannot have you meddling
with fires and kettles. If you got hurted I?d never
forgive myself. Mrs. Rooney will look in soon, and
she will hearten up the fire and make the tea. She
comes in every evening, but she?s late to-day, being
at work, you see, poor soul.?
Mack stood beside the table. There was a small


cup, cracked and without a handle, on it. He looked
in and put his fingers into something that rustled.
?May I count them now, please, Mrs. Sullivan??
?Do, darling.?
Mack tilted the cup and a number of brown beans
spilled out on the table. ?Oh, what a lot!? he cried,
delightedly, and fell to counting them eagerly.
?That?s beautiful, Mrs. Sullivan. I?ll write the
number and put it in the box.?
Mick looked on, at a loss to know? the meaning of
this ceremony. On the mantel stood a white box of
Mack?s own making (Mick knew Mack?s brand!); it
w r as painted white and marked with a golden cross.
Into it Mack slipped a small piece of paper, on which
he had just written something.
Mack found various other ?odd jobs? to do about
the cottage, and wdien he could find no more (nor
invent any) to occupy himself the tw?O little boys said
good-bye, promising to come the next afternoon.
Mrs. Sullivan blessed them and promised to pray for
them.
Outside, along the Old Quarry Road, Mick
trudged sulkily. ?Is that your secret? Is that where
you?ve been going every afternoon for wrecks and
weeks ??
Mack nodded.
?You are a silly! You?re just like an old girl!?
Mack?s sensitive face flushed, but he smiled. ?I
told you that you?d say it was silly ?
?So it is. Girl?s work. Mary w?ould do it?if you
told her. Or Mother would let Kate come down.
Boys don?t want to be working round like that.?
?This boy does,? Mack said, stoutly.
?What for??
?For China.?
?For China! How can that help China??
?Well,? Mack explained, ?Mrs. Sullivan, I am


sure, is one of the best helpers of the Mission, and
it was I got her to help.?
?The best helper! ?that poor old woman who can?t
do anything and has no money ?
?Didn?t Mother tell you that money is not the best
help? You said you wanted a rich friend to help you.
Angie and Teddy have rich friends. I wanted a rich
friend ?and so I thought of Mrs. Sullivan.?
?But she?s poor?as poor as anything.?
?I know, but her prayers are rich. She says
Rosaries all day, Mick?l don?t know how many.
Some she offers for her children who are dead, some
she offers for the souls who die each day, and the rest
she says for China. So that she will not forget how
many, she puts a bean in the cup for each Rosary she
has said for the Mission, and then I count them and
put them on a paper in her box on the mantelpiece.
The box is not to be opened until she is dead. She
says I can open it. She says I can offer the prayers
for China to God from her. I?d rather that than money
from Mr. Carney or the Doctor. She?s in pain all
day, and she offers her suffering for the Mission. So,
you see, she is my rich friend. And then I help her
in the house because?because??Mack?s face flamed
red ??because I don?t like it. But I want to do some-
thing, something a bit hard, for the Mission. I said
I?d tell you the secret. I?d much rather stay at home
after school, or play with you and Shamie, or go col-
lecting. But I thought that it would be a big thing,
a hard thing, to help poor old Mrs. Sullivan.?
Mick was speechless for a moment. He trudged
on a few yards, and then he threw his arm
around Mack?s shoulders. ?I?m sorry I said it was
silly,? he mumbled. ?It isn?t a bit silly. It?s good.
Gee! you are good, Macksie.?
?Oh, no, I?m not,? said humble little Mack. ?But
I want to do something.?


?You are good, and I?ll go with you and help, too.
And you are the best brother in the world, and 111
never get wild with you again, no matter what secrets
you have.?
?I?ll never have another secret from you, Mick.?
And so the breach was healed, and life at Dalys?
went on its busy, happy way.
But the happiness was not to last long.
CHAPTER IX.?TEDDY?S ADVENTURE.
Teddy was lost.
Dalys? house was solemn and still and sad, as if
Death had halted his pale horse at the gate, had come
up the little path among the flowers, and summoned
one of the children to follow him. Mother?s face was
pathetic in its anxiety, but she had not wept; Father?s
was stern-looking. The children crept about like little
ghosts and wept until they had no tears left. Kate
occupied herself cooking Teddy?s favourite dainties
for tea, in the hope that the wanderer would come in
by then. Shamie went from one to another, his short,
questioning bark saying quite plainly to each:
?Where?s Teddy??
It was at dinner-time ?midday dinner ?that Teddy
was missed. Father was angry that Teddy was late.
For some months his punctuality had been something
to marvel at, but to-day he had slipped back into the
old offence.
?Teddy late? Up to his old tricks,? Father said.
?I?ll teach that lad a lesson one of these days.?
Dinner was well over, and Mother became alarmed.
?Something has happened to him,? she said, and her
face was pale and drawn. ?He?s often been late, but
never as late as this. He has always come in before
we?ve finished.?


Mick and Mack were despatched to friends? places,
where it seemed just possible Master ieddy might
have stayed for dinner.
?But he never has stayed anywhere without per-
mission; none of them ever have,? Mother said, wist-
fully. ?They always come home.?
The afternoon dragged slowly, each hour as long
as ten. Surely the clock had stopped. Mick and Mack
stood close to it to listen.
?Tick, lock, Teddy?s lost. Tick, tock. He's gone.
Tick, tock,? said the old clock, and the tw'o little boys
went out again to call through the paddocks at the
back of the house, ?Tedd?y! Tedd?y!? Shamie
went with them and lifted up his voice and howded
horribly.
Mary ran down to the church?he might be help-
ing to ?do? the altar with Mrs. Ryan?but he w r as not
there. She went to Mrs. Sullivan?s?he might be
trying to out-Mack Mack.
Mother?s mind ran on waterholes.
?But there are no waterholes within miles," Father
said.
?He may have gone out Doughboy Creek way, and
the holes will be full after the heavy rains. Of course.
I know he never did go so far alone, but ?
As dusk crept up Father?s anger blazed. ?I?ll hare
to tell the police,? he said, and took up his hat. Just
then Mary came out of Teddy?s room, her face as pale
as Mother?s.
?Mother, I?l?l think Teddy has ?has
?Speak up, child,? Father said, a trifle impatiently.
?I think Teddy has run away!?
Mother sank down on a hall chair, and Father
asked quickly: ?Why? Why do you think so??
?I looked in his room, and some of his clothes are
gone, and his brushes, and the brief bag you gave him.
and his money box feels ?


Father took two strides to Teddy's door; Mother
followed. She looked through Teddy's wardrobe, she
felt the money box?so light, and with such a hollow
rattle.
Mother and Mary listened miserably while Father
breathed threats and denounced his son?s ingratitude.
The serpent?s tooth would have been the mildest pin-
prick to Father that afternoon. But Mother could
think only of Teddy?s safety and his speedy return.
?Oh, he?s safe enough. He?ll be found. Don?t dis-
tress yourself about him. The police will locate him
in a day or two.?
In a day or two! Mother groaned. What might
happen to her poor little boy in that time?
?How afraid he will be when night comes on! He
hasn?t thought of that.?
?Serve him right. I hope he gets the fright he
deserves. I didn?t think he?d do such a thing: I can
hardly believe it. I?d better go and get the police on
his trail at once.?
Mary hung her head and cried. It seemed such a
terrible disgrace to have the police hunting Teddy.
By telephone and telegraph a description of Teddy
was broadcasted about the country, and his sorrowing
family settled down to wait and hope and fear and
pray. At short intervals Father rushed off to the
police station to see if there was any clue.
After tea Baby Bet was put to bed, but the other
children begged so hard to be let ?stay up? that
Mother could not refuse them. They were a comfort
to her, too, for their cheery optimism was catching.
Mack thought an angel might bring him home ?
unknown to Teddy, unseen by anyone, of course.
Mick thought that if bushrangers were about, they?d
be too slow to ?nab? Teddo. ?He?s as clever as any-
thing. He?ll get home alright, Mother.? Now and
134 '


then they knelt and prayed; now and then Sleep
almost caught the children in his net.
They were kneeling saying the Rosary before the
oratory in Mother?s room when the clock struck a
quarter to eleven.
?Nearly midnight,? Mick whispered in an awed
tone ?he had never been ?up? so late ?but Mack
nudged him into silence, and would not encourage
talking at the Rosary. They prayed to Our Lady to
keep their Teddy safe, to bring him home soon. When
Mother commenced the decade contemplating the
finding of the Child Jesus in the Temple, her voice took
on a new note of hope, and the little voices answering
echoed it. Looking up into the tender face of the
statue, Mother thought of the sweetness, the tender-
ness, that no artist could portray ?the sweetness and
tenderness of the face of the Mother of the Christ-
Child. She found comfort in the thought that Our
Lady knew the sorrow of having a lost Child, too.
They had just finished the decade when the doorbell
rang with an alarming peal.
Kate stood up, but Mick was before her.
?It?s Teddy!? he shouted. ?I know it?s Teddy. I
knew Teddy couldn?t get lost.?
He ran to the door, but it wasn?t Teddy. It was a
telegraph boy.
Mother. Kate and the children had continued their
prayers, and when Mick came in with the yellow
envelope no one took any notice of him. He threw
appealing glances at Mother, but she went on ?giving
out? the prayers, so Mick had to kneel down again.
Mother went right on to the Litany: ?Pray for us,
pray for us,? rang out hopefully.
A sigh of hope, of fear, went round the little circle
as Mother opened the yellow envelope.


Mother read the message aloud:
?Teddy safe with me; en route for China. Return
him to-morrow. ?MICHAEL.?
?Thank God! Now, we must kneel and give
thanks to Him and His Holy Mother. ?
?Let me run and tell Father, so?s he can tell the
p?lice,? said Mick. He didn?t think there was any
need for more prayers just then, although he was jolly
glad Teddy was safe and ?all that.? But Dad?s step
was heard in the hall as he returned from his tenth
visit to the police station.
?Teddy?s found. He?s quite safe! He?s with
Uncle Michael,? all the children shouted together, and
Mother?s first tears since the alarm rolled slowly down
her flushed face.
Father made no threats this time against the run
away, but meekly knelt, at Mother?s command, to
thank God for finding his son who was lost.
Teddy had set off early that morning. He carried
all the clothes he could ?stuff? into his bag, and all the
money he could shake out of his box. Teddy had set
out to be a ?real live? missionary?gathering pennies
was too slow a way to help. Time was too slow. He
wouldn?t be a man for years and years. Why not
?cut over? to China at once, while the need of help
was greatest? By the time he was a man nearly all
the hardest work would be done. There was no use
offering his services at Mentone; they?d say he was
too young. Everyone, all grown-up people, thought
children too young to do anything. But, if he got to
China, if he were on the spot, he would be jolly useful.
Couldn?t he help the Christian Brothers? Didn?t he
often help the ?slow kids? in his class? Had he not
explained the mystery of long division to quite a lot
of ?dopey chaps?? Of course, he would be mighty
136


useful to the Brothers. There were so few of them,
and they had so many pupils. Why, they'd be
delighted; and he would be doing something ?big? for
the Mission.
Teddy had enough money to take him to the
capital; trom there, so he planned, he could stow away
on a boat bound for China. His parents would not
let him go, he knew. It would pain them to part with
him. Better slip away quietly.
So he slipped away.
The first part of his journey was very interesting.
Teddy enjoyed it, and had not time to think about the
cruel way he had treated his family.
His first shock came shortly after midday, when
the man beside him, who had chatted so pleasantly,
got off at a little station and did not come back. Why
did Teddy watch so anxiously for him? Why should
Teddy care if this stranger missed the train? But he
did care, for the man had borrowed his little bag of
money. He had borrowed it at the big town they
passed at lunch-time. Money was waiting for him at
the ?next stop?; he had to pay a little debt to a poor
woman; he did not like to keep her waiting until his
return next week. He had forgotten his pocket-book,
but he had telephoned to his manager (he had a very
large place in the city?motor cars ?Teddy believed),
and money would be awaiting him at the little station
a few miles ahead. Teddy felt so big and important
lending the money thirty shillings seemed a very
large sum to him. It happened to be the exact amount
of the debt owed to the poor woman and her ten
starving children! So the man got off, paid the debt,
had a good lunch, no doubt, and returned to the train.
Teddy was too proud to say r he had no more money
except the ?tuppence ha?penny? in his pocket, and.
therefore, had no lunch at all. The pleasant traveller
had easily led Teddy to tell him the amount in his


purse; consequently, his debt was no more and no
less. Poor Teddy was very hungry. Never mind, at
the "next stop? the man s money would be waiting
for him, and 1 eddy could buy some luncli there. Any
misgivings he had at sight of the man s tiushed face
and unsteady hands Teddy quickly stifled. Of course
it was alright. He would not have come back if he
had done anything mean; he could have got into
another carriage without Teddy knowing he was on
the train at all. But he had come back, and now he
was gone again. Teddy saw him hurrying up the
station steps, looking back guiltily over his shoulder
towards Teddy?s carriage. What was he carrying?
It did not look like the same bag. Teddy s eyes
anxiously sought the rack. His bag was gone. In its
place was a battered old thing.
Teddy jumped up fiercely. An old lady, who had
got in a few stations back (Teddy and the traveller
had had the carriage to themselves for half an hour of
the journey), said kindly:
?Did your father get left behind??
?He wasn?t my father! My father is worth a mil-
lion like that cow!?
The old lady looked horrified.
?My boy, try to learn to speak decently to ladies,?
she said, severely.
Again Teddy was too proud to explain. If he had
told the old lady, she would, probably, have told the
guard, and the telephone would have ?got busy? after
the mean thief. But Teddy could not bear to acknow-
ledge his foolishness. He looked in the bag?it was
empty. Teddy thought of his ?best? suit, his new
shirts, his ties and socks ?all ?squashed? into the
limited space of that bag. And the bag itself? It
was quite new.
Anger at the man?s meanness, at his own ?green-
ness,? made the rest of the journey miserable. He
138


had been so sure of himself, he had thought himself
so capable of looking after himself.
The train sped on, on, and so did the hours. Teddy
did not think the clock had stopped; he thought the wnole
world was rushing onwards ten times quicker than it
had ever travelled before. He felt ill. His head ached,
his heart ached, his pride was shattered in the dust.
Oh, what a little fool he had been to leave Mother
and Dad! He drew back into a corner and closed
his eyes, pretending, for the benefit of the curious old
lady and the new people who had got in, that he was
sleepy. But he was the most miserable Little Mis-
sionary in the whole world. Dusk came down. Oh,
that he were home amidst the love and cheer and
laughter of his dear family! How could he get back
without money?
At nine o?clock the train stopped at a small town,
and there was again a cheerful bustle while the pas-
sengers scrambled for food at a small refreshment
room. Teddy got out, and, in his hunger, thought
dreadful things of the mean thief. He felt very ill
and very cold. What could he do? He had no
inclination now to stow away on a boat bound for
China. If an angel had come and told him to have one
wish, Teddy would have said: ??To be at home ?in bed,
with Mother just saying good-night.?
But he must continue the journey. He couldn?t
stay there, with ?tuppence ha'penny? in his pocket.
In the city he could, perhaps, find Uncle Michael ?
Uncle Michael?s business necessitated a great deal of
travelling. Yes, he must go on. He crushed his way
into the refreshment room. The smell of hot coffee
made him hungry, and yet gave him a feeling of
nausea. Jingling his three copper coins to warm his
fingers, poor Teddy sat in a corner, sick, cold, hungry,
sorry, and ashamed. Perhaps he dozed.


A great noise, as of the end of innumerable worlds,
a loud shrieking, as of millions of lost souls (so Teddy
thought), brought him to his feet, his heart beating
wildly. ?What is it?? he cried, to the amusement of
the sleepy-looking boy who was helping to wash up.
?Better hurry up, kid, if you?re goin? in that puff-
puff,? said the sleepy boy.
Where was he? Where
Teddy rushed out on the platform; he ran to the
end of it. The train was fifty yards away?sixty?one
hundred ?it was turning under a bridge. It gave a
derisive screech at Teddy?s wild cry. It was gone!
What should he do now?in a strange town, with
tuppence ha?-penny? Should he ?give himself up? to
the police? Would they put him in a home for wild
boys?
Poor Teddy had often dreamed of travelling by
land and sea and air; of meeting with wonderful ad-
ventures, of being the hero of every one of them, of
beating the ?other fellow? every time.
But now he was only a very little boy, very
frightened and very sorry for all the anxiety he was
causing the best father and mother, the dearest
brothers and sisters, and the kindest old Kate in the
world ?and the best pup, too!
?I know Shamie?ll be howling, and that will make
it worse. He howls like as somebody was dead. Poor
Mother! Oh, I am a horrible boy to have left like
that! Perhaps the fright will kill her. And Dad?
Dad thought I was a ?little man.' He said so. Oh.
I?m meaner than that mean thief who took ray bag
and money. Bags and clothes and money are nothing.
It?s only mothers and f?f ?fathers are any good in
this old world! It was just showing off, too; I didn?t
really think of the glory of God (like Mother always
tells us) or the good of the pagan kids. I just thought
of the fun of going on the train and stowing away in
140


the boat, like the boy in ?The Mysterious Island,? and
the iun of helping the Chinese chaps, and how the
Brothers would like to have me, and all the L..M s.
would hear about it, and write to me, and all, and my
photo would be in the Tar Hast. It was all show-ott
and skite! And now I?m dead scared. I?m a real
dud I?
In the good old days, when all Christians were
Catholics, there was a beautiful custom called
?sanctuary.? Any knight who was pursued by his
enemy ?whether he were innocent or guilty ?any poor
man fleeing from the vengeance of the law ?whether
innocent or guilty ?was sale if he could reach a church
and claim sanctuary. The Church would protect him
and see justice done him. Perhaps some of Teddy?s
knightly forbears had hundreds of years ago claimed
sanctuary.
To a Catholic child the priest stands for help, help
in all troubles, not only of soul, but of body. Teddy
felt that the law was pursuing him ?he was a law-
breaker, a runaway from home. He would find the
priest. Everywhere there was a church, a priest.
The police would deal harshly with him; not so
the priest.
He left the station just as a telephone message
about him was passed on to the local policeman. The
little station was deserted, the little, ill-lit street was
quiet. A few men passed him, but Teddy?s trust in
passing men had been shaken. Hadn?t a seemingly
kind and pleasant traveller stolen his money and his
hag?
A creaking old cab drew up at the station entrance,
and a man alighted.
?I?ll ask him. He looks rich. He won?t want to
steal. I?ve got nothing left, anyhow!?
?Please, mister, can you tell me Gee!? Teddy?s
voice broke.


?Teddo! What the ?
?Oh, Unde Michael, I ? And for the first
time since he had reached the use of reason Teddy
burst into tears ?real big, sobby ones.
As he sobbed out his story a great big policeman
came along the street. He should have been on the
platform to watch the train for a little boy like Teddy.
But the message had been delayed. However, he
meant to inquire if anyone
?Ah!? he said, with a little laugh, as he reached
Uncle Michael?s side.
?It?s all right, Sergeant. He?s not going to China
this time.? (Uncle Michael called all policemen Ser-
geant; he said it made them ambitious.)
So Teddy was found, and Uncle Michael took him
home next day. He confessed humbly his ulterior
motives in wanting to go to China. His humility was
so great that even Father was moved by it. It was
so real. Teddy was simply disgusted with himself?
not at the failure of his plans, but at his own worth-
lessness, as he considered it. He was ill for several
days.
?I think he?s had lessons enough,? Mother said.
And so once again Father was saved using his strap.
CHAPTER X.?WHO'S FOR CHINA?
Mr. and Mrs. Daly sat out on the verandah enjoy-
ing a rest. For once Mother had no patching or
darning on her hands; Father had insisted on her
having a few r idle moments. All the children, even
Baby Bet (accompanied by Polly Dollykins), were
down at the school attending a children?s lecture
and a picture show about China.


?They are very keen on the conversion of China,
aren?t they?? said Father. ?I wonder how long their
zeal will last.?
?Oh,? Mother cried, ?I hope it will last all through
their lives. When they are men and women I hope
they will continue to be missionaries. It seems play
now to us, but you know they are very much in
earnest and do their good work.?
?They do. Poor Teddy is very earnest. He
used to have such an opinion of himself, but the
Little Missionary spirit has changed in him.?
?Well? ?Mother had an excuse for everybody,
even for Shamie when he used to chew slippers and
pipes, and tear the paper to shreds ??Teddy is the
eldest son, and perhaps he was a little too much
inclined to think he knew much more than the others,?
she acknowledged, ?but he has been so good lately,
poor Teddy, especially since ??
?Since The Adventure.?
?I think he deserves the watch at Christmas; he
hasn?t been late for weeks and weeks, and he is more
gentle, more thoughtful for others.?
?Yes, Teddy has certainly improved, and I am
sure the Little Missionary spirit has helped him,?
Father agreed.
?I really believe it has had a great effect on all
the children. Of course, we thought them good and
sweet before, but the missionary spirit has done much
for them. It has taught them restraint, to deny
themselves for others, to be unselfish. It has helped
each to see and acknowledge the good work of the
others. Look at the lesson in values. They will
never be money-grubbers, and I am so very glad of
that. I?d hate to think of my boys and girls growing
up too fond of money, thinking that money means
everything. And. then, their pleasure. The Little
Missionary spirit has taught our children, and


thousands of other children, that pleasure is not to be
sought after constantly. They don?t crave a ?good
time? all the time, as so many children do these days.
Pleasure is not their first thought. They enjoy their
little pleasures, certainly; but see how ready they are
to ?give up? a pleasure for the sake of another. They
were always good, but don?t you think their piety
now is a wonderful thing? I think we should be
very thankful that our children imbibed so readily the
spirit of the Little Missionary. Many other parents
must think the same. Our Angie was always a little
angel, but now ?
?I suppose you think her an Arch,? laughed
Father. ?How you mothers run on in praise of your
children! You never hear me making out lam the
father of little saints.?
?Well, I do not praise them to anyone else,? said
Mother, slightly troubled. ?Surely I can to you.?
?Praise away. Mother. I agree with all you say ?
but don't tell anybody, or they?ll think us mad,?
?Poor Mick, now. Did you ever see so young a
child make such efforts to curb his temper? I hope
and pray that as they grow older they will not lose
their wonderful spirit; I hope our children will con-
tinue to help the Church in her missionary work. Our
generation in Australia has neglected the duty?or
perhaps the time had not come?but our children will
carry it on gloriously, please God.?
Father s lips smiled, but his eyes were serious as
he said: ?I wonder will any of them go.?
?To China??
?Yes.?
?I wonder.? Mother smiled, also, but her eyc>
were serious and sad, too. ?But that?s a long way off.
We?ll have them for many years yet, except,
perhaps ? They looked at one another, but
144






neither said ?Angie,? although each knew the other
meant it. ?Yes, we must enjoy every moment of their
childhood while they are our very own. If God wants
any of them later on, you and I will be only too glad
to give them.?
Both were silent for a few moments, and then
Mother looked up brightly. ?Isn?t it beautiful to have
them now? Let us make hay while the sun shines,
and, surely, in our old age we?ll have one of the six.?
?Here are the whole six now ?plus Shamie. We?ll
enjoy a noise.?
The children came pouring in the gate, all talking
delightedly.
?Oh, Mother ?
?Father ?
?The priest asked us ?
Father called for order, and Mary was allowed
to tell the tale.
"The priest asked all the children in the hall who
intended going to China to stand up ?
The others could not remain silent at this im-
portant part.
?And we all stood up!? they cried in one voice
triumphant.
?All of you?? questioned Mother
?Yes.?
?Baby Bet??
?Yes, and Shamie was waiting outside, and we
asked the priest if we could bring him, too, and he
said yes.?
?Not one to lean on in our old age,? laughed
Father.
?I?m going to be a doctor,? Mick said, ?and Mack
is going to be a priest, and Teddy?s going to teach,
and Angie and Mary are going to be Sisters, and Baby
Bet a nur ?


But Baby Bet here interrupted, and in a very
determined little voice turned down the cause of
China.
?I isn?t going. I?se changed my mind, Mummie.
I?se going to stay with you. I might turn all yellow
and get a pigtail, and so might poor Polly Dollykins
and the Teddy.?
The other children teased and coaxed Baby Bet,
but she would not alter her decision.
?I isn?t going,? she said determinedly, and ran to
Father?s arms.
CHAPTER XI.?GOOD-BYE.
It was Christmas time again. Down in the church
the Crib was being prepared. The little manger lined
with straw was ready, awaiting the tiny white and
gold figure of the Christ-Child; the star hung down
trembling, but dull. Not until Christmas morning
would the sudden glow of light wake it to life.
Behind the stable stretched out the picture of a sandy
plain, dotted here and there with palm trees, and in
the distance a group of large buildings, half hidden
in a purple mist, marked the city. Children came in.
to stand and look at the stable, but the Little Jesus
was not there, so they turned away with a patient sigh
to await His coming. To little children, Christmas is
so long in coming?the days before it are such long,
long days.
Up at Dalys? the house was decked in its usual
Christmas greenery; Christmas bells and Christmas
bush, in great bunches, brightened every room with
their glad message of the love of the Infant Saviour.
146


But the house was strangely quiet; there was no
rushing to and fro of little boys feet, no scampering of
excited paws along the verandah. Even bhamie went
about with drooping head and dull eyes. He knew.
Baby Bet?s dolls and Teddy-bear were sadly neglected;
the child haunted Mother, creeping like a little, white-
faced baby-ghost from room to room. Mary helped
everybody, and made a capital nurse. The boys did
not want to play. Mother sent them on little messages
she had invented to take them away from the house
for awhile, but they hurried bacx; they could not
forget.
In Angie?s room a little blue lamp burnt night
and day before the statue of Our Lady, and a little
red one before the Sacred Heart. But the Dalys did
not prav for Angie to get well. Oh, no; she wanted
to go to Heaven, and they would not hold her back if
they could. To Heaven! No more pains for the
little, delicate body, no more fears for the tender blue
eyes, no more striving to be brave and strong.
?I don?t feel leaving you all, Mother. Do you
mind? Does it seem cruel to be like that? You
see, you?ll all come to Heaven soon. It won?t seem
Eng to me. But lam sorry for you left behind. It
will seem long for you all, I know. But for me!
lam going to Heaven. I keep saying that over and
over when the pain is bad and the medicine nasty; T
am going to Heaven.? ?
She told her brothers and sisters they were not
to cry, and not to be sorry; they were not to say,
?Angie is going to die,? but ?Angie is going to
Heaven.?
?Tell the children I am getting better each day,
because I am. All my life I have been dying, and
worrying you all with my ?bad days.? but now they
will soon be done, and I shall commence to live ?in
Heaven.?


Angie was as happy as a little girl who is going
to see the king. She was ?dressed up,? too, every
day, in her pretty white dresses and blue baby bows.
But Mother had a little brown shroud ready in the
wardrobe.
Have you ever prayed for a joyous death? Angie
must have, for that was the only word to express her
dispositions. You know how joyful, how excited you
are when you are going somewhere with your father.
How delighted you feel getting ready, how impatient
for the moment of departure! That is how it was
with Angie?she was impatient to take her father?s
hand and be off.
The Christmas hamper was packed in Angie?s
room where she could see it; every article was held
up for her inspection.
Dr. Chester came twice a day, but he could do
nothing for her; he came rather to stimulate his own
fortitude, and learn a lesson from his little patient.
He carried messages ?always cheerful?from Angie
to his own poor invalid.
Father Breen came every morning after Mass,
bringing Angie Holy Communion. The Sisters, too,
were constant visitors, and Angie was indeed a
privileged little girl.
Dr. Chester said she might linger as she was for
many days, and Mother was hoping that she would
have Angie one more Christmas; but the Holy Child
wanted her in Heaven on His Birthday; she was
?invited? for that day.
Early on Christmas Eve, just when Mother was
preparing the little white table for Father Breen and
the Guest he brought with him, she noticed a strange
change on the child?s face. She had raised herself
on her pillow.
?Angie!?


?Mother, look out the window. Is Father Breen
coming ??
Mother ran to the window. ?Yes, dear, he is
just turning the corner near Mrs. O?Neill?s.?
?I can wait that long,? Angie said, and sighed,
and sank back again. Mother bent over her.
?I must wait for Our Lord to go with me. Poor
Mother! I know it?s very hard for you. Is the table
ready ??
Mother straightened the white cloth, put the vases
of Christmas roses on either side of the candle, ar-
ranged the holy water and the shining glass.
?I feel a little afraid, Mother. I suppose it is the
devil. I know he tries to frighten people?at the
last. But I won?t be afraid when Our Lord comes.
Poor, poor Mother! lam so sorry for you.? She
smiled gently up into the tender face bending over
her.
?Pray hard for me. The devil is trying to make
me frightened. Bring Kate in to pray. Will Father
and the children soon be home from Mass??
Father Breen hastened his steps when he saw
Mother anxiously watching at the door; Father and
the children saw her, too, and saw Father Breen
hurrying. Snatching up Baby Bet, Father ran up
the street, the children following him.
They all knelt round the little, white bed; the
children, seeing Father and Mother?s eyes were dry,
held back their tears; Teddy bravely said the
?Confiteor.?
Father Breen raised the Sacred Host.
?Domine non sum dignus.? he said.
?Lord, I am not worthy,? whispered little Angie,
as she clasped her little thin hands together.
Father and Mother and the children?even Baby
Bet, who knew Our Lord was there?raised their eyes
a moment, to tell Jesus that they knew it was His


will, that they were ready to give their Angie back
to God. They all knelt silently a few moments while
Angie whispered her prayers of thanksgiving. Then
again a change passed over the child's face. Father
Breen commenced the Prayers for the Dying; Mother
slipped one thin little arm into the brown habit.
Father held the child in his arms, Mother leant over
the other side. The children came quietly, one by
one, to say good-bye to the sweet little sister who had
been the angel of the household.
Baby Bet?s eyes were big and wondering.
Angie found strength to smile.
?Say good-bye to Polly and the Teddy for me,?
she whispered.
When it was Mick?s turn, Angie drew his face
down until she could slip an arm about his neck.
Mother helped her.
?Mind the temper, Mick. Think of Angie when
you want to get in a temper. I?ll be watching you,
and then I?ll ask the Holy Child to make you patient.
All the pennies in my money box and my mite box are
to go into your mite box, and I?ve told Dr. Chester
and Miss Chester they are to have you for their Little
Missionary now, instead of me. Be good, Mick. I
think you?ll go to China some day-?to help.?
Mick sobbed, and the other children at once burst
into tears. Father and Mother, too, could no longer
keep back their tears.
Father Breen prayed on, and for a few moments
Angie lay quiet and still. Suddenly she raised herself
as if quite strong and well.
?Oh, Mother. Dad ?look!? she cried in a voice of
wonder. She held out her little thin arms, and with
a sigh of love, of content, sank back into Dad?s arms.


( r �?%
L _
Jr ,
\y
2
c
r-t-
-a*
rt
j-i
o
EJ
Cl.










