

EASTER
WEEK
1916
General P. H. Pearse
PRICE SIXPENCE




EASTER
WEEK
1916
General
P. H.
Pearse


FOREWORD.
Fifty years ago General Halpine penned the follow-
ing lines: —
“The Fenian cause is dead, they say—
Clean crushed by cowards’ craven sway.
’Tis dead'—that is, for the present day;
’Twill rise again.
That cause in Irish lore appears,
Has lived for full seven hundred years,
Oft quenched in blood, and quenched in tears,
It rose again.”
The love of the Irish race has gone out to the
heroic men and women who made history in Easter
Week, 1916.
Their names will be forever green in the affections
of their country, and with their names will be linked
the one prelate—Dr. O’Dwyer, of Limerick —who sympa-
thised with their objective. For that reason it is meet
that an extract from his speech to the Corporation of
Limerick should have a place in the wreath —poor
though it may be —plucked “all for the love of them.”


LAST POEM OF P. H. PEARSE TO HIS MOTHER.
(Written a few hours before his death.)
I.
Oh! Mother dear, the last few hours
Are slipping fast away;
They’ve told me that the end must come
At dawning of the day.
I begged. I prayed, that I might see
Your dear face once again;
The tyrant’s heart is cold and cruel,
My pleading was in vain;
But tyrants cannot chain the heart,
Or make the thoughts less free,
And Mother, heart and thoughts are full
Of Ireland, and of thee.
11.
Oh! think not, believe not, Mother,
It grieves, me thus to die,
I’ll face the musket proudly,
When my hour comes, by and bye.
A soldier’s death for Motherland,
To fall in Freedom’s fight,
’Tis the death I wished for ever,
And ’tis coming with the light;
No sorrowing shall unman me,
In that grim hour of dawn,
The world holds naught to grieve for—
Save you !
111.
And you—you must not mourn the life
Which I so freely give;
Oh! what matter, Mother, dearest,
That I die, if Ireland live.
Some sacrifice is needed, sure,
That Erin may be free;


We’ll offer up my life for that
To God—from you and me.
And perhaps He’ll take our offering,
And you ’ll live to say with pride: ’
“I grieve not for the boy I lost,
Twas not in vain he died.”
IV.
Ah! well I know the bitter words
That foe and coward will speak,
And well I know they’ll strive to slight
The deeds of Easter Week.
Eet coward and foeman do their worst,
They cannot kill our cause,
And men will rise in every age
Against the tyrants’ laws.
When Freedom’s sun shines out again,
And Darkness yields to Light,
The Ireland of that blessed day
Will know that we did right.
V.
The holy Priest has shrived me now,
My soul is freed from stain ;
The Bread of Life within me
Will rob my death of pain;
And soon before the Father’s throne,
I’ll join the gallant band
Of those who died for Motherland.
And our prayers shall rise unceasing,
To the Feet of Mary’s Son,
And we’ll know no joy in. Heaven
Till our cause at last is won.
VI.
God rest the lads who fell in fight!
My comrades, tried and true.
Oh! Irishmen, must ne’er forget


That unbought, faithful few.
And, Mother, be your proudest boast,
That, in his Country’s need,
When hero-valour fired each breast,
Your son was chosen to lead.
And now, a last and fond farewell—
’Tis not for long we part—
And, Mother, when I face their guns,
I’ll call you in my heart.
THE DYING PATRIOT, P. H. PEARSE
TO HIS MOTHERLAND, ERIN
I.
Mother Erin, I have loved thee
With a love that knew no fear;
I have drawn the sword to free thee
At the flowering of the year.
11.
But a hand was raised to smite me
As I stepped to kiss thy brow;
And the arm that would have freed thee,
By my side hangs helpless now.
111.
I have lived, and loved, and laboured,
With a patriot’s heart and will,
That the dawning years might find thee
Fearless and unfettered still.
IV.
I am vanquished, and my comrades
In the glorious fight have bled;
And the dauntless hearts that loved thee
Rest among the silent dead.


y.
Hut ’twcre nobler thus to perish,
Thus to wipe away thy tears,
With the distant voice of Freedom
Echoing in their dying ears,
VI.
Than to stand in fawning minions
Of the sneering conqueror’s race,
With the clanking chains of bondage
Telling of our deep disgrace.
VII.
When the quenchless fire of Freedom,
Flickering through the gloom of years,
Will have flashed upon the hill-tops,
Conqueror of blood and tears;
VIII.
When a future age will find you,
Dauntless still and undefied,
Men of Erin, oh, remember!
’Twas for Freedom’s cause they died.
IX.
They are gone, and I must follow,
To the golden fields above,
Where the mighty God of Justice
Will reward a patriot’s love.
X.
Sweet it were to live and love thee,
Sweeter far for thee to die,
With the flower-clad hills around me,
Echoing back my last “Good-bye.”
PEADAR MAC TOMAIN,
Maynooth.


SACRIFICE
The hands that fought, the hearts that broke •
In old immortal tragedies,
These have not failed beneath the skies.
Their children’s heads refuse the yoke.
No alien sword shall earn as wage
The entail of their blood and tears,
No shame price for peaceful years
Shall ever part this heritage.
JOSEPH MARY PLUNKETT
VICTORY
0 Victory
How fair thou comest,
Young though, the ages are thy raiment !
Thy song of death
How sweet thou singest,
Coming in that splendour of thy raiment.
THOMAS McDONAGH
TO THE MEMORY OF “THE O’RAHILLY.”
I.
He is dead, alas! Peace to his gentle soul,
For he was loving, kind, sincere, and true.
His noble spirit ever sought the goal
Of native Freedom—dearest land for you.
11.
He loved the mellow accents of thy tongue,
As links that bound him to a brighter past;
When lay of love or warlike song was sung,
In that sweet speech he cherished to the last.


111.
He fain would free thee from the cruel yoke
Of Saxon law, misrule, and studied wrong;
But died—not unavenged—ere yet the stroke
Had snapped the bonds of thraldom’s binding
thong.
IV.
He’s dead! but now his spirit brighter reigns,
Inspiring hope to the.desponding breast.
Death had no terrors, after death no pains,
For patriot souls —the noblest and the best.
y.
Be brave his children, braver still his wife,
Who mourn him sleeping now beneath the sod;
His native land he cherished more than life,
And only loved it less, than he loved God.
VI.
To save the waning manhood of our race
His blood he shed, his very life laid down.
By sacrifice complete he won the grace
Of patriots’ brightest wreaths —the martyr’s
crown.
VII.
Revere his memory! think not ’twas in vain
He strove for Freedom —every nation’s right.
We count not cost, nor reckon loss or pain,
When ’tis for God and Country that we fight.


“A YEAR AGO TO-DAY.”
An incident related to the writer by the proprietress of a little
hotel in County Wicklow in July, 1916 :
I.
A year ago this very day
There came into my little place,
From Dublin Town, I heard them say,
Greeting me with an old-world grace;
And though I knew not who they were,
Or what their mission, yet I knew
They did not breathe the common air,
But to some higher aim were true.
11.
The eyes of one were mildly sad,
As if for hopes beyond recall;
A dreamer’s face the second had,
But proud and falcon-like withal;
And one was gayer than a boy,
Rejoicing in the Summer’s pride,
Quick to waylay each furtive joy,
Eager to scan horizons wide.
111.
They lingered till the day grew old;
The hours flew by on silver wings,
With talk and mirth, and songs that told
The tale of Ireland’s sorrowings.
And when they rose to say “Good-bye,”
And thank me in their boyish way,
I think my eyes were scarcely dry;
I ne’er had known so sweet a day.


IV.
Soon afterwards their names I heard.
Pearse, McDonagh, Plunkett —three
Poets w’hose ardent hearts were stirred
By wistful dreams of Ireland free.
And when the news came they were dead,
That they had paid the martyr’s price,
Ah! bitter were the tears I shed
At that too grievous sacrifice.
V.
These are the chairs they sat upon,
This, the piano Plunkett played
With girlish fingers; now they’re gone,
The room seems haunted by their shade.
They gave to Ireland all they had,
To me, they gave one golden day,
And yet, I am not wholly sad,
Their souls in heavenly gardens stray.
HUGH A. MacCARTAN.
IRELAND’S BEST.
I ponder alone this Summer Eve,
And my heart grows heavy as lead;
I dry a tear with my rough coat sleeve,
For I mourn the martyred dead.
Alone they stood—aye, alone, alone
May their souls in glory rest;
Oh God, I pray around your Great White Throne,
Deal lightly with Ireland’s Best.
11.
In memory sad I see the face
Of one who gave his all
To right the wrongs of a helpless land,
And answer Freedom’s call.


Eternal peace to your noble soul,
Dear Plunkett, may you rest.
Oh God! I pray from Your Great White Throne,
Deal lightly with Ireland’s Best.
111.
And yet again, before my gaze,
Other visions loom;
I see the noble brothers Pearse,
Go bravely to their doom.
Bright was the Saviour’s smile that day:
“Come home, my sons, and rest."
Oh God! round Your Great White Throne they pray
For Ireland and Ireland’s Best.
IV.
I ponder on this Summer Eve,
And still dark visions come,
Yet, strange to say, altho’ I grieve,
I see a “Rising Sun”
From North to South, from East to West,
In matchless splendour dressed.
Oh God, I pray from Your Great White Throne,
Deal lightly with Ireland’s Best.
J. E. MURPHY
(Kinsale).
THE RISING, 1916.
Not for the cause of faithless France,
Nor grasping Britain’s greed,
Nor for the Russian bear’s advance,
Was done this glorious deed.
11.
Against grim foes at home they rose,
In manly patriot pride,
And though that birth was crushed to earth,
For Ireland’s rights they died.


111.
Not by the far-off Dardanelles,
Nor shining Tigris banks,
Nor mid the din of Pagan yells,
Went down their bleeding ranks.
IV.
O'er Sainted ground with glory crowned
Rolled on that battle tide,
And proudly brave, their homes to save,
On Ireland’s soil they died.
Rev. Fr. LIVINGSTONE
(New York).
To Professor De Valera (sentenced to penal servitude for
life in Dartmoor Convict Prison).
Comes a shadow o'er my spirit, and a sorrow-laden breath.
For that noble soul that’s hurried into silence worse than
death.
Oh ! I cannot understand it, how the cold, hard-hearted live,
Holding all that fortune favours, all that luxury can give,
While the greatest heart that ever, in a true, warm Irish
breast,
Beat for Ireland and for Freedom, only knows a felon’s
rest.
11.
De Valera! my beau ideal of what uoble men should be,
Calm, reserved, warm, impulsive, and strong-hearted as the
sea;
Laughter-loving, glad and pensive, sad and happy—all
combined—
Scorning all the hollow shamming, of the modern human
mind,
True to principle and honour, yet as playful as a child,
As a father, soldier, scholar, always quiet, always mild.


111.
What a day of tragic glory that Easter Monday! which
shall be
Handed down in Ireland’s memory, for as long as time
shall be.
And your name, with Pearse, McDonagh, O’Rahilly and
McDermot, too,
Is engraved in Ireland’s memory, with Lord Edward and
Red Hugh.
All is over, and the issue seems, as far as we can know,
’Stead of Freedom, to have brought closer bondage, deeper
woe,
IV.
And the flowers of Irish culture —Ireland’s truest sons —
are lost,
And proud Dublin is bereft of her noblest and her best.
Dare we say their aims were folly—dare we say their cause
was crime,
We who know not what their aims were—they shall be
revealed by time ?
Can we doubt their cause was goodly ? Can we doubt their
aims were true,
When their forces,.De Valera, were led on by such as you?
DUBLIN, 1916.
You poured your spies upon her streets,
You ringed her round with steel;
For four most hideous centuries
She lay beneath your heel;
You dug your forces round the gates,
And built your barracks well,
And in your castled heart devised
Foul deeds—too foul for Hell,


11.
And there you planned the epitaph
Of Ireland, day by day,
And watched our people fade and die,
Our language pass away;
All undisturbed and all secure,
You sat the centuries through,
And boasted of your loyalty,
And fed the world with lies.
111.
But Dublin tore from off her face
The horrid mask she wore,
And all the Nations saw again,
Her beauty as before.
She hurled you from your tyrant seat,
And clothed in flame and lead,
She stood a Capital unslaved,
And risen from the dead.
IV.
And though a few sad days shall pall,
Till she is wholly free,
And tho’ you chain her once again,
God holds her destiny.
For He shall smite you to the earth,
And raise her on a throne;
And for her ages of despair,
That triumph shall atone.
A NEWMAN (Herbert Pirn), Belfast, written before
his arrest, July 10th, 1916.
THE DEATH OF ROGER CASEMENT.
They have hanged Roger Casement to the tolling of a bell!
Ochone, och, ochone, ochone!
And their Smiths*, and their Murrays*, and their Cecils*,
say it’s well.
Ochone, och, ochone, ochone!


But there are outcast peoples* to lift that spirit high,
Flayed men and breastless women who laboured fearfully,
And they will lift him, lift him, for the eyes of God to see,
And it’s well, after all, Roger Casement!
They have taken his strangled body, and have flung it in a
pit!
Ochone, och, ochone, ochone!
And brought fire of the quicklime to waste it every bit,
Ochone, och, ochone, ochone!
To waste that noble stature, that grave and brightening face,
To damn the princely favour that gave our streets a grace,
To put courtesy and kindliness from eminence of place—
But they—THEY’LL die to dust,
While ’twas yours to die to fire, Roger Casement!
PADRAIC COLUM.
*F. E. Smith, Casement’s political opponent in the Ulster controversy,
prosecuted Casement in the treason trial. In no country except England
would a political opponent be made the public accuser. Gilbert Murray is
the translator of Euripides and the advocate of the Eunpidean idea of
magnanimity to a fallen foe. He was in America at the time of Ease-
ment's execution, and he expressed his approval of the act. Lord Cecil
also took it upon himself to explain to the American public the justice
of the hanging. The “outcast peoples” are the tribes of the Congo and
the Amazon, who were delivered by Roger Casement from inhuman toi-
tures.
DARK ROSALEEN’S LAST CHAPLET.
Forty feet deep they dug his grave,
Toll! the bells of Ireland, toll!
They buried the man who Ireland would save,
But none could bury his soul.
Forty feet deep of Irish earth,
The true heart of Pearse they covered,
But over the City that gave him birth,
The wind of his spirit hovered.
His soul, sailing under the morning star,
Heard the desecrate City sigh,
And bearing his brother’s soul afar,
The red wind of deatli rushed by


The winds of Ireland met up there.
At dawn they met; and at dark,.
O’Hanrahan’s soul on their wings they bore,
And the soul of Thomas Clarke,
The watchers down in the City heard
MacDonagh’s soul go by,
But hardly his sleeping children stirred,
So gently he passed them nigh.
The souls of Daly and John Mcßride,
In the mist with Mallin’s went,
And the Lord bade the soul of Thomas ride
On His wind with Eamonn Kent;
And the Lord was for Joseph Plunkett grieved,
And said, “I have a care for thee,
Since many a crown was for Ireland weaved
Like one that was wove for Me. ”
“Men know that I broke not the bruised reed,
Yet they would not let Me live;
My way was hard for My sons, indeed,
And My mind is to forgive.’ ’
“I saw Colbert choose a felon’s path,
That a comrade might go free,
And much is pardoned to one that hath
Loved another as much as he,”
The twelve winds of Erin went to find
The scattered souls of the rest,
And Heuston was found by the gray-green wind,
The wind the wild birds loved best.
The purple winds swept up the Liffey’s tide,
For Connolly’s soul unseen,
And Sean MacDermott’s, the last that died—
God counted in all fifteen.
The lights of Ireland gleamed below,
In the ring of her leaden sea,
And the voice of Ireland chanted slow:
“Only My dead are free.”
“Dear Lord! of a thorn bush my wreath is made,”
So mourned my Dark Rosaleen;
“My Chaplet to-night at Thy feet is laid—
I give Thee my beads fifteen.”


He heard Who dwelt in the highest place,
And His angels silent led
The waiting souls to His holy face,
And He spoke unto the dead:
“There never yet dropped a feeble wing
Too small for Mine eyes to see,
Nor ever was sought by a hunted thing,
A refuge in vain with Me.
I would the black story of England’s way
Were blotted from My sight;
I will show the dawning of Ireland’s day—
The passing of her night.”
Then God, from the step of His high throne,
Went down for many a mile,
And He saw Great England, hard as stone,
And He bent in thought a while:
‘ ‘ Too long hath Ireland the thorn-path trod;
I will turn My face away.
Vengeance is Mine!” said the mighty God,
‘‘ Is Mine ! I will repay, ’ ’
F.M.,
THE CALL.
This poem, by the Countess de Markievicz, appeared in
James Connolly’s paper, “The Workers’ Republic,” one
week before the outbreak: —
Do you hear the call in the whispering wind?
The call to our race to-day,
The call for self-sacrifice, courage, and faith,
The call that brooks no delay?
11.
The storm-beaten rose lifts a pale green shoot
To meet the rising sun;
Young grass plants push up their sword-like blades
To tell us the day has come.
111.
The call of freedom rings loud and clear;
It shouts on the rising gale: ;
“Buckle on your swords with never a fear,
Our foe is stricken and pale.”


IV.
For the dawn light shines in the evening’s sky,
Faint glow from the rising sun,
“Are you sleeping or watching, Oh men of the
Gael?
To arms! Now the day has come.”
V.
Freedom, with wild, tumultuous Aving,
Is beating the bars in vain.
Oh men! are you men of Irish blocd,
That you wait, and watch, and refrain,
VI.
Do you hear the call in the howling wind?
It storms down the mountain side.
For Freedom, for Ireland, for Honour, for Right—
Choose NOW—’TIS THE TIME to decide.
VII.
We answer the call with a singing cheer,
With bayonets fixed we stand;
We are ready and steady, without a fear,
To die for our native land.
C. de MARKIEVICZ.
WHEN DUBLIN AROSE.
I.
When Dublin arose on that Easter gone by,
• On its own stalwart manhood depending,
With the light of a mighty resolve in each eye,
And a pride and a spirit unbending—
’Twas the soul of a nation unconquered that spoke.
Oh! sing for that noble endeavour,
For the pride that we know and the fires that still glow,
And the heart that is dauntless as ever.


11.
The springtime was there, but the blight of the slave
In the heart of our nation was falling;
While far from Ben Edar that frowns o’er the wave
Came the voice of a lone mother calling.
And forth went the word that the hour had come,
And the chiefs were at hand who would lead them;
And they rose in their pride, and like brothers they vied,
To be first in the vanguard for freedom.
111.
Oh! the mourners that morning sang joy once again,
As they vowed their undying devotion;
And the exiles afar who had yearned long, in vain,
Hailed the tidings with joyful emotion.
And fear took the hearts of that traitorous horde
On the minions of tyranny fawning,
For their wiles were outdone, and the march had begun,
On the highway that leads to the dawning.
IV.
They were few when arrayed ’gainst the legions of might,
But they met them with bosoms unfearing,
For death holds no dread for the heroes who fight
For the ideals of truth and for Erin.
Their rifles rang true, their thunder has roused
The wavering hearts and unheeding;
They have shown us the way to the dawning’s bright day;
No faltering move or receding.
V.
Oh, sing! for the triumph that valour has won,
And the soul that inspired their endeavour;
Though some of the heroes are vanquished and gone
From the scene of the combat for ever;
But the fires that they lighted in Erin no more
Shall glow with a light that’s unsteady,
And the Green, White, and Gold shall again be unrolled
And Dublin is waiting and ready.
SEANEEN RISCARD.


WHO FEARS TO SPEAK OF EASTER WEEK?
(Inserted by request.)
I.
Who fears to speak of Easter week,
Who dares its fate deplore,
The red-gold flame of Ireland’s shame
Confronts the world no more.
So Irishmen! remember then,
And raise your heads with pride,
For great men and straight men
Have fought for yon and died.
, 11.
The spirit wave that comes to save
The peerless Celtic soul
From earthly stain of greed or gain
Had caught them in its roll.
Had swept them high, to do or die,
To sound the trumpet call
For true men, like yon men,
To follow one and all.
HI.
Upon their field and stainless shield,
Rich verdure blossomed * bright
With temperance and purity,
With truth and honest right.
So now they stand at God’s right hand,
Who framed their dauntless clay,
Who taught them and brought them
To glory of to-day.


IV.
The storied page of this, our age,
Will save our land from shame;
The ancient foe, and boasted, lo!
That Irishmen were tame.
They’d bought our souls with paltry doles,
And told the world of slaves
That lie, men, will die, men,
In Pearse and Plunkett’s graves.
BEAN RIAGALTA.
“SINN FEIN.”
I.
Erin! land of martyred heroes,
Sorrow wraps thee in its fold,
And the rubies of their life-blood
Add new jewels to the old.
Brave, true-hearted, faithful, fearless,
Future years the tale will tell
How they dreamed and died to free thee,
Loved, not wisely, but too well.
11.
In them lived the grand old spirit
Of the brave Milesian race,
Nobly fighting when outnumbered,
Never fearing death to face;
Poet, dreamer, warrior, chieftain,
Youth’s fair promise, slow of years,
For Shin Fein, Sinn Fein they gathered—
And they claimed the path of tears.


111.
’Twas a dream, oh! noble dreamer.
Thou hast gained the ivory gate,
And the name of brave MacDonagh
Ranks among the good and great;
With him stands St. Edna’s hero,
Who in childhood vowed to be
Consecrate to thee, oh! Erin,
If his death might set thee free.
F.M.
SPEECH OF BISHOP OF LIMERICK AT LIMERICK
CORPORATION.
“Extract.”
‘ ‘ General Maxwell had the effrontery to give me directions
for the government of my diocese, but I hardly think he
will repeat the experiment. He has tremendous powers,
and he uses them ruthlessly. He was trained in Egypt
and South Africa, but he thought, because he had the
military power of England at his back, that I would not
dare disobey him. He did not know much about us Irish
ecclesiastics. We have a tradition. Our predecessors have
shown us how to stand up against English brutality.
“But besides the protection of my Priests against the
military dictator, there was the question of my attitude to-
wards the young men whom he had defeated in Dublin.
AVas I to condemn them, even if their rebellion was not
justifiable theologically? Was Ito join the gang of rene-
gades who were throwing dirt on Pearse and MacDonagh
and Colbert and the other brave fellows whom Maxwell
had mercilessly put to death? Was Ito join in the con-
demnation of the men and women too, who, without trial,
were deported in thousands? The British Government
and their friends ring the changes on the hopelessness of
the rising and the folly of a couple of thousands of badly
armed volunteers attempting to overthrow the British Gov-
ernment in Ireland. There is something in it, and even
from the point of view of our country’s freedom, there is
wisdom in the admonition: —


“Bide your time, your worst transgression,
Were to strike, and strike in vain,
He whose hand would smite oppression,
Must not need to strike again."
The Irish volunteers were too few for the enterprise, but
that perhaps is the worst that can be said against them.
Rebellion to be lawful must be the act of a nation as a
whole, but while that is true, see the case of the Irish Volun-
teers against England. The very Government against which
they rose and which killed them so mercilessly has pro-
claimed its own condemnation
“Does Mr. Asquith imagine that the young men of any
nation w T ould have the patience to bear with the tantalis-
ing perfidy which, after years of strenuous agitation, pre-
tends to concede our claim and passes into law a measure
of Home Rule and then hangs it up and announces, be-
fore it can be put into execution, it has to be amended.
Did he think the Home Rule Act needed amendment? If
so, why did they pass it in its present shape? Or was it
part of the perfidy with which Ireland has always been
treated? In the very height and depth of this juggling the
great European war broke out, and the political leaders in
Ireland took up the cry from their masters in England:
That this was a war for small nationalities, to protect them
from oppression and allow them to live and develop on
their own national lines. No appeal could go deeper into
Irish hearts. It was the dream of our people for genera-
tions. To see it realised they, and their fathers before
them, had suffered poverty, exile and death itself. One
cannot be surprised if the Irish volunteers said: “If all this
is true cf Belgium and Servia and Poland, and all the
other small nations of Europe, does it not hold good for
Ireland? If men are asked to leave home and all its ties
and die in a foreign land for small nationalities abroad,
why not begin at home and make the sacrifice for their own?


“When Lord Wimborne and Devlin and Mr. Red-
mond called on our young men to go to Flanders and give
their lives for Home Rule in Belgium, was it not natural
that, in view of the state of their own country, they should
ask themselves was it all British cant and hypocrisy, and
in their anger and indignation to break into rebellion?
Of course, they were wrong. These reasons might hold
good against any other country, but not against England—
the home of freedom, the chivalrous and disinterested friend
everywhere of small nationalities that take her side.
British Ministers and their allies in Ireland may condemn
the criminal folly, as they call it, of those who raised the
standard of revolt in Dublin, but whether they were right
or wrong, I submit that at least, for a semblance of justice,
people should remember that the Irish rebels only carried
into practice their rulers’ principles, and should be judged
by the same standards that are applied to the Belgians in
revolt against Germany, or the Servians against Austria,
or the Greeks against their own king to compel him to go
to war. If that is true, then the shooting of them by Max-
well was an abominable crime. . . .
“If Germany offered these conditions (Home Rule) to
Belgium, with what scorn they would be rejected, and if
some young men (Belgians), with more courage and patri-
otism in their hearts than wordly wisdom, faced the German
soldiers and fought like men until their ammunition was
exhausted, and when they surrendered were shot in cold
blood in twos and threes for days after, how England would
appeal to Heaven for vengeance on their murderers! One
thing I do know: their own country would never disown
them, and some day or other, when the light of freedom
again broke over their land, the monument to these young
heroes would be set up in the Place des Martyrs in Brus-
sels.
“Who would be free themselves must strike the blow.”
Sinn Fein is, in my judgment, the true principle. ”


POBLACHT NA H EIREANN.
THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT
OF THE
IRISH REPUBLIC
TO THE PEOPLE OF IRELAND
IRISHMEN AND IRISHWOMEN: In the name of God and of the dead generations
from which she receives her old tradition of nationhood, Ireland, through us, summons
her children to her flag and strikes for her freedom.
Having organised and trained her manhood through her secret revolutionary
organisation the Irish Republican Brotherhood, and through her open military
organisations, the Irish Volunteers and the Irish Citizen Army, having patiently
perfected her dicipline, having resolutely waited for the right moment to reveal
itself she now seizes that moment, and, supported by her exiled children in America
and by gallant allies in Europe, but relying in the first on her own strength, she
strikes in full confidence of Victory.
We declare the of the people of Ireland to the ownership of Ireland, and to
the unfettered control of Irish destines, to be sovereign and indefeasible. The long
usurpation of that right by a foreign people and government has not extinguished the
right, nor can it ever be extinguished except by the destruction of the Irish people. In
every generation the Irish people have asserted their right to national freedom and
sovereignty ; six times during the past three hundred years they have asserted it in
arms. Standing on that fundamental right and again asserting it in arms in the face
of the world, we hereby proclaim the Irish Republic as a Sovereign Independent State,
and we pledge our lives and the lives of our comrades-in-arms to the cause of its
freedom, of its welfare, and of its exaltation among the nations.
The Irish Republic is entitled to, and hereby claims, the allegiance of every
Irishman and Irishwoman. The Republic guarantees religious and civil liberty, equal
rights and equal opportunities to all its citizens, and declares its resolve to pursue
the happiness and prosperity of the whole nation and of all its parts, cherishing nil
the children of the nation equally, and obvious of the differences carefully fostered
by an alien government, which have divided a minority from the majority in the past.
Until our arms have brought the opportune moment for the establishment of a
permanent National Government, representative of the whole people of Ireland and
elected by the suffrages of all her men and women, the Provisional Government, hereby
constituted, will administer the civil and military affairs of the republic in trust for
the people.
We place the cause of the Irish Republic under the protection of the Most High God.
Whose blessing we invoke upon our arms, and we pray that no one who serves that
cause will dishonour it by cowardice, inhumanity, or rapine. In this supreme hour
the Irish nation must, by its valour and discipline and the readiness of its children
to sacrifice themselves for the common good, prove itself worthy of the august destiny
to which it is called.
Signed on Behalf of the “Provisional Government
THOMAS J. CLARKE,
SEAN Mac DIARMADA, THOMAS MacDONAGH,
P H PEARSE, EAMONN CEANNT,
JAMES CONNOLLY. JOSEPH PLUNKETT.
Reduced Facsimile of the Proclamation of the Irish Republic


SID MADDEN, Printer, Sydney
