

“ECCE HOMO ”
POLITICAL ECONOMY
The Abolition of Poverty by the Single Tax.
LETTERS ADDRESSED TO
HENRY GEORGE
P. J, GANDON.
SYDNEY:




LETTERS ADDRESSED TO
HENRY G-EORG-E
f
i
P. J. GANDON.
SYDNEY:
H. T. DUNN & CO., PRINTERS, QUEEN’S CHAMBERS, QUEEN’S PLACE.
1890.
POLITICAL ECONOMY
THE ABOLITION OF POVERTY BY THE SINGLE TAX.


“ Le vrai moyen cVetre trompe., c’est de se croire plus fin que
les autres.” — Rochefoucauld.
The surest way of being deceived is to believe oneself more sagacious
than the rest of mankind.


The contents of this Pamphlet were originally written during
Mr. Henry George’s first visit to Sydney, in the form of a series
of letters addressed to him, and intended for publication in the
daily press. The length, however, which these letters reached in
the treatment of the various points raised by Mr. George in
his published works and recent lectures has led to the publi-
cation of the matter in pamphlet.
As will be seen, the intention of the writer has been to
bring prominently before the public, in a condensed form, the
various objections to Mr. George’s views that have been urged by
some of the ablest of his opponents, and which appear to have
been in a great measure lost sight of by those among us in
thes6 colonies who have attempted to refute his arguments
Glebe Point,
May Ist , 1890.




TOE HOMO’IN POLITICAL ECONOMY,
THE ABOLITION OF POVERTY BY THE SINGLE TAX.
HENRY GEORGE ,
Philanthropist and Reformer.
Sm, —When on his introduction to a people to whom he is a stranger,
an individual is honored by the deliberate application to him of the memor-
able words, “ Ecce Homo,” —words associated in the public mind with the
great founder of the religion which takes precedence of all other established
modern cults —and when, moreover, the views which he comes among that
people to assert and propagate have already been subscribed to by thousands
of his fellow men, that individual may very properly expect to be treated
with respect, his premises, arguments and conclusions to be examined with
exhaustive eare, and the tenor of his teachings considered from a standpoint
utterly devoid of prejudice. But if, after such examination, his arguments
should be deemed fallacious and his teachings dangerous—if those things
which he sets forth as a boon to struggling and suffering humanity should
be viewed as calculated to increase rather than alleviate the burdens sought
to be removed, it becomes the bounden duty of those who conscientiously
dissent from the new gospel of the modern Messiah, to make their pro-
testation openly and honestly, and to courteously but firmly draw the
attention of their fellow men to the heresies and dangers of the novel, though
it may be popular, teachings. You, Sir, apart from your world-wide
reputation—a reputation well deserved, if earnestness, eloquence and,
I believe, a sincere and fervid desire to serve your fellow men can
merit one—you, Sir, were spoken of in the words I have alluded to, on the
occasion of your introduction to the Australian people by Mr. Chas. Garland,
M.L.A., the President of the Single Tax League of New South Wales ; apd


I desire accordingly to bring most respectfully and with every feeling of
high regard before you and your numerous enthusiastic followers a series of
considerations with reference to the theories and principles you enunciate—
considerations which, though neither new nor to any large extent original,
appear to have been almost if not entirely lost sight of in the general acceptance
of your teachings. In this difficult and ungracious task I shall place little re-
liance on my own judgment and abilities, except so far as they may enable me
to marshall synthetically into something like consentaneous unity and order
the objections of writers well known and of established reputation, who
have examined your theses with the care that these demand, and with the
conspicuous ability associated with their names. No apology, I think, can
possibly be needed for the citation of the views of such deep thinkers or
industrious students of social problems as the late John Bright, the
“ Tribune of the people,” and the foremost Englishman in the support of
the Northern against the Southern States of America in the great civil war
for the suppression of slavery ; Professor John Pm skin, the profoundly
original writer on Political Economy and the welfare of the industrial
classes, as well as upon abstract Morality and Art; Mr. Thorold Rogers, Pro-
fessor of Political Economy at the University of Oxford ; Mr. W. H.
Mallock, author of Property and Progress, (to whom I am especially
indebted); Mr. M. G. Mulhall, E.S.S., author of the Dictionary of Statistics
and other well known works ; or Mons. Emile de Laveleye, the French
Political Economist. And if I add to this hexahedral galaxy of distinguished
names a seventh to make a Pleiades, in that of the Duke of Argyle, it is
neither because His Grace is an extensive landowner, nor because he holds a
prominent place among the heads of the British and old Scotch nobility ; but
because, firstly, he is an author whom you yourself have complimented on
his philosophical discernment; secondly, he has written in controversy with
you ; and thirdly, his official experience as Secretary of State for India at a
time Avhen the land question was a subject of anxious consideration at the
hands of the Indian Council, must surely have given him some claim to be
heard upon any subject connected with the ownership of land. Notwith-
standing, therefore, your rooted and republican prejudice against what you
are pleased to call “ trumpery titles a prejudice, I think, unworthy of so
generally large-minded a man, since the titles of at least the British nobility
and aristocracy represent not only theoretically, but in the majority of cases
actually, the honor which the people pay, through their accredited head, to
talents, bravery, worth or valued service—notwithstanding this prejudice, I
choose to believe that you will hardly raise a greater objection to my citing
the opinions of George Douglas Campbell, because he happens to be a Duke,
than you would those of our leading statesman, Henry Parkes, because he has
the misfortune to write a “ Sir ” before his name, and after it the letters sig-
nifying Knight Commander of St. Michael and St. George. These, then,
will constitute the authorities on which I shall principally rely, and I


■lection them thus categorically in order that where I may condense or give
the sense in my own words of passages too long to quote verbatim, or even
use sentences without inverted commas, I may not be accused of plagiarising
or of appropriating in any way the investigations, arguments or opinions of
men far abler and more learned than myself.
In commencing the observations I am about, Sir, to address to you, I
gladly take the opportunity to state that not the most ardent and enthu-
siastic of your followers can be more deeply impressed than I am with the
terrible evils you so graphically and sympathically picture. With me, the
realization of the wide spread poverty that exists goes hand in hand with
the appreciation of the urgent necessity for some such work as you have
undertaken, and with an unfeigned admiration of the virile strength and
wonderful comprehensiveness of that work, of its apparent honesty, its
eloquently lucid method, its unequivocal denunciation of all anarchy and
resorts to violence, and the religious sentiment that seems to characterise it
in all its ramifications. lam fully aware that the doctrines which you
advocate are not entirely new, but never before have they been supported
by a mass of facts generalized wdth such consummate skill; and, predisposed
as one naturally is to accept any plausible remedy for a condition of social
affairs so eminently disastrous, it can be no source of wmnder that your
statements and proposals have not only fascinated large numbers of foreign
as well as English-speaking persons, but have enslaved the reason of many
thoughtful and most conscientious men. Holding, however, views widely
different from yours in many points, and believing that your appeal to those
who are least capable or in the habit of forming a sober judgment upon
matters submitted to them is a source of public danger, I shall endeavonr to
show that in various particulars your facts are erroneous, your arguments
fallacious, and your proposals both impracticable and unjust.
Apart from your forcible, logical, and in every way admirable exposition
of the evils attendant on, or resulting from, a policy of Protection—a matter
which appears to me to possess a remote or accidental connection only with
the question of Land Nationalisation or the imposition of the Single Tax—l
find in your works and lectures five distinct propositions definitely
enunciated. But before I take up these, I will touch briefly on the general
question of the absolute equality of all men, and the equal right to a share
of the land of every child that comes into the world, regardless of the ante-
cedents of its parents ; w’hich I understand to be one of your positions.
Such a position I cannot possibly concede ; for it appears to me opposed
equally to human experience, to common sense, and especially to the most
distinctly explanatory part of the whole Decalogue. Nothing would be
easier than to expose the fallacy of your reasoning as to the similarity of
organs and needs between the landowner and the wox - khouse babies, or
between the duke and peasant whose bodies lie on the dissecting table, as
put forward in your article in the Nineteenth Century, “ The Deduction to


Iniquity. ” But as the bearing of all this upon the Single Tax question is
very remote, and as the disquisition would necessarily assume a psycho-
logical rather than a political, social or economic character, I will not
confuse the issue under consideration by any detailed reference to this
portion of your views. It may seem hard that the offspring should suffer
for the sins of their fathers ; but we are told that these shall be “visited
upon the children, unto the third and fourth generations ” a striking
confirmation of the doctrine of degeneracy of breed ; and whereas we
recognize this fact in the case of children brought into the world with
hereditary diseases caused by vicious habits, we should recognise it
equally, however much we may deplore it, in the case of those who are
born of paupers destitute of the means of providing for their progeny.
To those, however, who may be disposed to pursue the subject for
themselves, I would recommend a careful perusal of one of the finest
chapters Mr. Buskin ever wrote —that namely “On Vulgarity,” which
will be found in the fifth volume of his Modern Painters. In this
wonderfully analytic tome—which deals with the philosophy of morals as
manifested in poetry and art—this question of human blood and breed is
most lucidly and ably dealt with. *
Passing now to the five propositions I have already spoken of, I find
them to be these: I.—As the production of wealth grows greater,
the share that goes to the laboring class grows less. 2. —The laboring class
creates its own wages as it receives them ; it being wholly false that wages
are drawn from capital. 3.—Population does not increase faster than the
means of subsistence ; and thus the current explanations of poverty are no
explanations at all. 4.-—Poverty really is caused by the appropriation of
land by individuals. And s.—Poverty would be cured by the confiscation
of the land by the State. I will take these proposition seriatim.
I. AS THE PRODUCTION OP WEALTH GROWS GREATER, THE
SHARE OF THE LABORING CLASS GROWS LESS.
You assert, Sir, that “ material progress does not merely fail to
relieve poverty ; it actually produces itand you are reported in the
daily press to have stated, in your opening lecture in Sydney, “that,
with all the wonderful material advance that during this century we
have been making with accelerated speed, dark and darker clouds are
gathering on the horizon of our civilization; that with all the great
advantages that have so distinguished this century above all that have
* Since the above was written Professor Huxley’s admirable article has come to hand
(February number, “Nineteenth Century”). As an exposition of the fallacies underlying
Mr. George’s reasonings on the subject of “ Natural Rights,” it will well repay perusal.


preceded it, we have failed to make the struggle for existence easier.”
And in support of your assertions you first of all attribute to your opponents
the statement that “ if we will only patiently wait for a few centuries, it
will be as right as it ought to be ! ” Now, I have yet to learn that anyone
has ever said or thought this, and I cannot but characterise such an obser-
vation, however it may tickle the sense of humour in a thoughtless audience,
as unworthy of yourself and of your cause, and as on a par with some of the
abuse and ridicule which has been so plentifully showered upon your pro-
posals and yourself—a mode of argument the easiest and the most flippantly
superficial of any lam acquainted with. Then, although you object to
your opponents marshalling statistics to prove their version of facts, you
yourself appeal to Professor Rogers as “ a man who above all other men has
made the closest study of economic facts from the Middle Ages, who has
patiently taken from old records the things that the so-called historians
have for so long considered of no importance—rates of wages, the prices of
clothing, food, shelter, and so on.” And you proceed to state :—“ He
declares it as a fact that five centuries ago in England there was no class so
low as the lowest class is now—that five centuries ago there prevailed among
the masses of England a rude plenty. That, in fact, there was no well man
who in normal times need fear of inability to keep himself and family. That
to-day, with all our advances, there are millions of English men and women
and little children who live a life harder, more hopeless, and more degraded
than the lowest class of Englishmen ever did before.” Now, Sir, in the
common fairness of controversy you cannot possibly object to an opponent
quoting the same authority as you quote yourself ; and as you appeal to
Professor Rogers in support of your position, to Professor Rogers let us go, and
see what he actually does say. And in doing so, let me commence by quoting
a dictum of the Professor’s which appears to me particularly applicable to
many points about your agitation generally. “It is only,” he says, “ when
the economist becomes arrogant, and avows that he is a guide to all social
action, instead of being the interpreter of certain definite results, that he is
informed by the workman that his conclusions cannot be accepted as final
in the practice of life, and by the statesman that they may consist with the
constitution of another planet, but ,not with this ’’—remarks which would
surely lead to a disavowal of the social action that you advocate, as far as it
it is based upon that writer’s statements. Well, what Mr. Rogers actually
does show is not the simple fact that just five centuries ago the English
workman was better off than he is now, but that from 1260, when trust-
worthy data seem first to be accessible, to 1824, his condition varied in dif-
ferent epochs, sometimes for better, and sometimes for worse, according to
the state of the political atmosphere and the kind of legislation that was
enacted. Referring to the last volume of the History of Prices by Mr.
Newmarsh, “ one of the very few' persons who have been competent to in-
terpret related statistics,” the Professor states that that gentleman


“discovered and announced that the best condition of the English work-
man was during the fifteenth century, and subsequently (but in a less
degree) in the first half of the eighteenth ; the worst in the first half of the
seventeenth, and in the first quarter of the nineteenth. It would be
impossible, within the limits of these articles, to enter on the causes of these
variations, but certain it is that up to the year 1563 the laborer was
exceedingly well off, as compared with the other various members of the
community. But in 1564 an Act of Parliament was passed which put a
very different complexion on all this. A schedule of wages was printed
by proclamation of the Queen (Elizabeth), whereby the ordinary artisan was
to have 9d. a day in summer, and Bd. in winter ; the heads of the craft,
who were to be competent draughtsmen of plans, receiving Is., and the
laborer 7d. in summer (except in harvest time when he was to have Bd. to
lOd.) and in winter 6d. Now up to 1540, the average wages of an artisan
in the country were 3s. a week, and the agricultural laborer’s 25., but for
the 280 years from 1260 to 1540 the average price of a quarter of wheat had
been only ss. lljd. In 1563-4, however, wheat was 19s. 9|d. a quarter,
and food generally was more than three times the old average ; so that if
we suppose the ordinary laborer’s wages to have averaged 3s. 6d. a week
throughout the year, it would have taken him more than forty weeks to
earn provisions which in 1495 he could have got in fifteen. Admitting the
improvement in the health of the working classes, and the cheapness and
familiarity of appliances unknown before, Mr. Rogers still contends, and
justly, “ that from 1563 to 1824 (the year in which the laws directed against
the right of workmen to combine together in order to sell their labor in the
best market—laws which had lasted for nearly five centuries—were repealed),
a conspiracy, concocted by the law and carried out by parties interested in
its success, was entered into, to cheat the English workman of his wages, to
tie him to the soil, to deprive him of hope, and to degrade him into
irremediable poverty.” But in those days the production of wealth did not
increase in such a degree as to warrant your assumption that the pro-
portionate share accruing to the laboring class grew very materially less ;
though, even if it were so, it is scarcely fair to instance the fact as having
any practical bearing on the present day, when every social condition is so
totally different from what it was during the long period Just alluded to.
Had there not been a vast and most portentious change in all these things
since 1824, I should certainly not deem it worth while to dispute your
dictum, even though it might involve inaccuracies of various kinds.
But when we turn to the last three-quarters of the present century—a
period of sixty-five years —we are confronted with an entirely different set
of circumstances. I have not seen the Statistical Abstracts of Mr. Robert
Giffen, the head of the Statistical Department of the Board of Trade, and
President of the Statistical Society (of England); but I have before me the
statement of the Duke of Argyle, with reference to the assumption that “ the


rich are becoming richer and the poor poorer,” that “it did not require the
recent and elaborate statistics of Mr. Giffen to convince me that this
assumption is altogether false . . . that all classes have partaken in the
progress of the country, and no class more extensively than that which lives
by labor . . . that wages have more than doubled—sometimes a good
deal more—whilst the continuous remission of taxes has tended to make,
and has actually made, almost every article of subsistence a great deal
cheaper than it was thirty years ago.” Mr. Maliock, however, has put the
whole matter in a nutshell. He firstly takes as his definition of rich and
poor that adopted by the British Parliament in regulating the payment of
Income Tax, the rich being those who pay the tax, and the poor those who
do not, the total incomes of the latter being less than £l5O a year, on which
to maintain a family. He then shows that whereas between 1843 and 1883
the poorer classes increased only 20 per cent, orit of the total increase of
population, the richer classes increased 200 per cent; and, moreover, that
while the rich increased during that period from 1,500,000 to 4,700,000 =
3,200,000, the poor increased only from 26,000,000 to 30,000,000 = 4,000,000 —-
a striking proof of the general increase of wealth over poverty. But Mr.
Maliock goes much further. He now takes the gross income of the United
Kingdom for the years 1843, 1851, 1864, and from 1880 to 1883, as furnished
by the four eminent statisticians, Mr. Giffen, Mr. Mulhall, Mr. Dudley
Baxter and Professor Leone Levi. He then takes the corresponding amounts
that were assessed to Income Tax in those years, and deducting the latter
from the former, arrives at the gross income, at the different times specified,
of all the persons or families in the country with annual incomes of less than
£l5O. Then, by substracting the payers of Income Tax from the gross
numbers of the population, he obtains the numbers of those among whom
this gross income would be distributed ; and by dividing the gross income
of the poorer population by the numbers of that population, he arrives at
the average income that each family of this class would enjoy. It is not
necessary to burden these pages or confuse the argument by quoting the
various figures concerned, all of which run into millions ; but the result of
this simple arithmetical calculation is to show that, whereas in 1843 each
family amongst the poorer classes in England had only about £4O a year, in
1851 it had £SB, and in 1883 from £95 to £IOO. In other words, the incomes
of those who had less than £l5O a year increased during those forty years
by 130 per cent. Of course, some-sections and individuals among the poorer
classes have bettered themselves much more than others ; still Mr. Maliock
announces, as the result of a further train of reasoning, that it is “impossible
that more than a quarter of their number should have failed to better their
position by at least 100 per cent, during the forty years alluded to ; and
that even of this quarter, a very considerable proportion must have bettered
their position by at least 25 per cent. ”


Side by side with this increase of income must be considered the repeal
of the Corn Laws, and the gradual reduction or total abolition of the
customs or excise duties, whereby almost every article of consumption has
been greatly cheapened in price. At the conclusion of the eighteenth
century, be it remembered, wheat ranged from 100 s. to 150 s. a quarter ; and
every necessary of life, down even to salt and sunlight (when the infamous
window tax existed) was at famine prices, as Sir Henry Parkes so lately
pointed out, down to the year 1846, when Sir Robert Peel erased the Corn
Laws from the Statute Book of England.
The following table of the Eood-supply of the United Kingdom, which I
extract from Mulhall’s Fifty Years of National Progress, is more eloquent
than all the rhetoric of the most brilliant orators, and gives the yearly con-
sumption per inhabitant, of four leading articles of food :
Period. Meat, lbs. Wheat, lbs. Sugar, lbs. Tea, ozs.
1837-40 ... 66 ... 255 ... 18 ... 19
1841-50 ... 72 ... 260 ... 20 ... 24
1851-60 ... 81 ... 301 .. 29 ... 35
1861-70 ... 91 ... 321 ... 41 ... 51
1871-80 ... 96 ... 325 .. 60 .. 67
1881-86 ... 106 ... 356 ... 70 ... 75
Now, the rich landowner though he and his family would certainly con-
sume more grouse or salmon or turtle soup than the poor laborer a-nd his
family, could hardly consume more bread or tea or sugar or (in this country
where it is cheap) more meat —probably indeed a good deal less ; consequently
the above figures represent relatively a larger consumption of these articles
by the poor than by the rich. Mulhall goes on to tell us that two persons
now consume as much meat as did three in the earlier years of the present
reign, while the consumption of wheat per inhabitant has likewise risen 40
per cent., and in tea and sugar the increase is fourfold. The annual expen-
diture of the above four articles of food is now 88s. per inhabitant, against
70s. in the years 1837-40 ; but the people are better able to pay more now,
not only because the wealth and earnings of the nation Brave so augmented
in the interval, but because of the cheapening of food already spoken of.
But “ not only are the people much better fed than at any former period of
English history, but the sum which they expend on food is relatively less, as
compared with earnings,” and the more therefore, they have to spend on
luxuries, or at least on comforts. “If w r e take the working year as 300 days,
we find that in 44 years, down to 1880, it took 52 days of each year to pay
for food, whereas the ratio now is only 40 days. Moreover, the work of 52
days in 1840 provided but a scanty supply per inhabitant, but now we have
a plentiful supply with much less labour. ”
That there everywhere exists, side by side with wealth and affluence, a
large amount of poverty, no reasonable man can possibly deny ; but the


question you have raised is whether this poverty is increasing along with
the increase in production ; and I contend, and I think that I have shown,
that it is not. You, Sir, paint your pictures with the deep shadows of a
Rembrandt, forgetful of the lights of Claude or Turner; and when you come
across existing poverty, you ask with very natural indignation, is not that a
horror and a disgrace to Christianity and civilisation ? But I, Sir, on the
other hand, deploring as much as you do the want and misery that exists,
ask is it not a hopeful sign that within half a century so vast a mass of
poverty has been removed, and may we not claim it as a triumph of our
civilisation that so great an advance has been effected within that period,
after the terrible condition of affairs that existed from 1563 down to our own
times ? And if we furthermore consider how much of poverty is due to crime
and vice, to debauchery, disease and drunkenness, and to many circum-
stances that must alw T ays be beyond the reach of human aid, I think it must
be apparent that the first of your five theses will not only not hold water,
but that it is as full of flaws and feebleness as the flimsiest fleet of arguments
that ever tried to navigate the ocean of debate. Whether or not we choose
to interpret literally the saying ascribed to the founder of Christianity, “ the
poor ye have always with you,” there can scarcely be a question that poverty
must continue to exist to some extent until the whole body politic and social
is purged of every physical, moral and intellectual taint.
lI.—THE LABORING CLASS CREATES ITS OWN WAGES AS IT
RECEIVES THEM ; IT BEING WHOLLY FALSE THAT
WAGES ARE DRAWN FROM CAPITAL.
In support of this proposition, you endeavour to disprove the generally
received doctrine that wages are paid out of capital, and to set up
in its place the theory that they are created by contemporary pro-
duction ; and in both attempts you appear to me to equally fail. It
has never been held by economists that wages are regulated by the
existing sum total of capital, but by the ratio between the amount
of capital devoted to the employment of labor —that is the amount that
can be employed with profit—and the number of laborers to be em-
ployed ; which is a very different thing from simply the amount of labor
that is utilized. Now, as Professor Rogers has pointed out, the materials of
industry and the stock of food constitute the capital of a community, and
money is but tire symbol thereof. Labor, whether of the head or hand, is
engaged in imparting utility to the former, and in replacing the latter as it
is consumed. This latter is that upon which all subsist, not only those by
whom it is procured, but all who have any claim to its consumption. And
these are many, for “ the employer of labor works as truly as the peasant,


with head and hand, though in a different manner. His principal function,
so far as the common interest is concerned, is to interpret the means by which
labor may be continuously employed and the sole dispute between capital
and labor is as to the share which each should receive in the nett residue of
the value of production, after allowance has been made for all expenses, the
one in profits, and the other in wages. From this it is evident that the two
examples you adduce in support of your position—that of a partially com-
pleted ship, and that of the San Joaquin farmers—are entirely fallacious, as
Mr. Mallock has ruthlessly demonstrated them to be. To say that the
artisans and laborers working on the ship have created the value they receive
each week in wages is absurd, for it depends upon subsequent circumstances
whether they have created any value at all. How much value did the men
who worked on the Great Eastern or the Bessamer steamer create, in com-
parison with the wages they were paid ? Or supposing some capitalist were
to build the Eiffel Tower proposed for Sydney, and (although it might be as
well and safely built as that of Paris) the impression got abroad that it were
unsafe, and so the public would not go near it, what value would the work-
men engaged in its erection create then ? Clearly, less than none ; for pro-
bably the Government would compel the capitalist to pay more wages to pull
the tower down again. And if the men created nothing, how could they be
paid out of that nothing ? How, indeed, could they be paid at all, except
out of capital, that is out of the earnings of previous production ? So,
too, with the San Joaquin farmers ; how could they have lived after the total
failure of the crops of 1877, much more have employed laborers, but for
those few other farmers who had sufficient food and grain (that is capital) to
meet the current needs of their neighbours who were foodless and seedless ?
The false position into which you have been led is directly traceable, I think,
to your erroneous conception of the constitution of civilised society, as stated
in the following sentence which I quote from your Progress & Poverty :—“The
fundamental truth that in all economic reasoning must be firmly grasped,
and never let go, is that all society, in its most highly developed forms, is
but an elaboration of society in its rudest beginnings ; and that principles
obvious in the simple relations of men are merely disguised, and not abro-
gated orreversed, by the more intricate relations that result from thedivision of
labor, and the use of complex tools and methods. With respect to this conten-
tion, Mr. Mallock states that “what Mr. George calls his ‘fundamental truth’
is about the most fundamental falsehood it was in his power to formulate.”
Undoubtedly, Sir, I think you have enveloped yourself in an Egyptian, nay
a London, fog ! No doubt, there are some points in which the most highly
developed society is the same as the most primitive, but there are others in
which it is altogether different, and these are the very points that especially
concern the argument. If “fish and berries ” and such other articles of
savage food were as easy of access as though they were in a larder, and so
abundant that they could feed the population of London, or even of Sydney,


without anything being done to keep up the supply, then labor might in a
certain sense be said to “ create its own wages,” even if its production (which
like the coin of the foreign country, must be first exchanged for food, or
clothing, or shelter, or their equivalent in some token of exchange which wecall
money, before it can become wages) proved valueless. But fish do not swim
about the streets of London, nor berries grow in St. Paul’s Churchyard ; nor
even are the corn and mutton consumed in Sydney sown and fattened on the
wood-block pavements. It is only by the most delicate and complex system
of commissariat machinery that a city, town or even many a village or
country district, can be fed; and although, therefore, “ the hundred men
landed without any stock of provisions in a new country” might go to work
immediately and begin to create value, provided that “fish, game, berries,
&c. should be so abundant ” that they could live on these till they had
created something and been able to convert it into the necessaries of life ;
still if the “ new country ” were inland (and therefore without fish), and if it
grew neither game nor berries, but contained only splendid arable or pasture
land, the hundred men would starve unless they had provisions (which are
capital) to fall back upon. And if this be so under such primitive circum-
stances, how much more so would it be under all the complicated conditions of
modern civilised society ? Therefore, I maintain that, generally speaking,
the laboring class does not create its own wages as it receives them, but that,
on the contrary, wages are, as a rule, paid out of capital. “No one has
ever said that capital is essential to all production. All that is said is that
it is essential to some production ; that is to say, the production of civilised
men, by which they are distinguished from, and not assimilated to, savages.”
And in those cases in which capital it necessary to production, wages are
paid out of that capital.
111.-POPULATION DOES NOT INCREASE FASTER THAN THE
MEANS OF SUBSISTENCE ; AND THE CURRENT EXPLA-
NATIONS OF POVERTY ARE NO EXPLANATIONS AT ALL.
In the enunciation of this proposition you appear, Sir, to labor under
a deficiency of perception very similar to that which underlies the previous
one, and you involuntarily furnish, as you do in several other cases,
something very like an illustration of the Laureate’s well-known line :
“ A lie which is half a truth is ever the worst of lies.”
You seem to forget that in the food production of the world there is not
only an ideally possible maximum and. a reprehensively practicable mini-
mum, but —what is of far greater moment and concern—a probable and
reasonable medium. When you affirm that the earth could maintain a
thousand billions of people, your predicate is imperfect, for the word could


is conditional and requires the expression of some condition to qualify it and
render it intelligible. Possibly the earth could maintain a thousand
billions of people, if the thousand billions of people knew how to extract
their maintenance from it. But, as I have previously pointed out, the
sustenance of the people of a country or of any portion of it under
the complex conditions of modern civilised society, is everywhere a
matter dependent on the most delicate commercial adjustments ; and the
sources of supply so furnished are rarely, if ever, opened up in anticipation
of a public need, but follow it, often at a long distance, and only when the
demand has become so crying that the supplying it is likely to be productive
of considerable profit. Thus it has been with the supply of England with
Australian mutton, and thus it will some day be with the supply of Australia
with Canadian and Cape fish ; so that, although the production of food may
seldom, if ever, fall to the minimum, it still more rarely—that is to say,
never—rises to the maximum, and a medium sufficiently high for general
pixrposes is only maintained by the most strenuous exertions. And thus the
pressure of increasing population is, as Malthus has pointed out, always
greater than the practical increase of food production; and it is consequently
felt the most heavily by the poorest class, because under the conditions of
civilisation the individual cannot help himself to “fish or berries,” as the
savage can, but must be maintained under definite conditions of law and
commerce, and (excepting in the case of State or private charity) must pro-
duce something that shall be acceptable to those who provide the means of
sustenance, or convertible to their use, before he can be other than a pauper.
Even labor, however great, is not necessarily a source of wealth ; for one
man might devote six years of his life to the inditing of a twelve-volume
epic, and another as many months to the construction of a twelve-storey
grotto out of cockle shells, and no one might be willing to give either of them
a loaf of bread in return for all their pains.
What you appear to have specially lost sight of is the conditions of pro-
duction in civilised society as compared with primitive life. “ Never,” you
state, ‘ ‘ during the whole course of history has want in any country been
caused by the pressure of population—that is to say in any considerable
country.” But what constitutes a considerable country ? I gather from your
paragraph with reference to Pitcairn’s Island (where, apparently, popula-
tion might increase faster than the means of subsistence), that you regard a
considerable country as one which is not “ cut off from communication with
the rest of the world, and consequently from the exchanges which are necessary
to the improved modes of production resorted to as population becomes more
dense.'” Now, the soil of England does not, and probably could not)* produce
sufficient food for the people that live upon it, yet the people virtually pro-
duce food enough (and to spare, in the savings that form capital) through
the medium of these very ‘ ‘ exchanges ; ” receiving in return for the articles
they produce and export, or for services performed in maritime carriage, or


as interest on the loan of capital, &c., &c,, cotton and corn from America,
mutton and wool from Australia, tallow and corn from Russia, corn and tea
from India, and so forth. But supposing England were at war with America
and Russia, and that the one country, besides withholding her own supplies,
could succeed in cutting off England’s Australian trade, and the other her
Indian ? How would the English people be then situated, with these
“ exchanges” blocked ? In spite of all the commerce that might be carried
on through neutral powers, and all the supplies that might reach England
in neutral bottoms—and all of it necessarily at greatly enhanced prices—
would not England be in very much the position of the
Pitcairn’s Island ; would not the population be greatly in excess of the
means of sustenance ; and would not this explanation of their prevailing
poverty be a perfectly true one ? Or supposing that from some set of cir-
cumstances, at present totally unforseen, and doubtless very improbable,
(such as a sudden and general revolution in foreign trade, or extraordinarily
rapid strides on the part of foreign manufacturers), English wares became
a drug in foreign markets, would not precisely the same thing happen ?
England would then be in the condition of the man who writes the twelve-
volume epic, or of him who builds the twelve-storey grotto. My illustration
may be far-fetched, and my hypothesis improbable, but they are no more so
than your own; and if they do nothing more, they at least point to the
reductio ad absurdum of the arguments you adduce. Undoubtedly, “the
limits of subsistence are widened by discovery or invention ; but the
mother of invention is necessity, not comfort; ” and a variety of extraneous
circumstances may render utterly nugatory even this prolific mother’s pains.
The refutation of your arguments has been unanswerably summed up,
I think, by Mr. Mallock, in the following words : —“ Mr. George, in
speaking of the limits of subsistence, has wholly mistaken what those limits
are. They are neither the powers of nature by themselves, nor the hands
and hunger of men by themselves. They are something far more complex,
and far harder to deal with. They are conditions of society and civili-
sation in one country as compared with another ; they are ignorance and
knowledge, cowardice and courage, force of habit and local attachments.
In a word, they are the limits of human character—the limits, not of the
wants, but of the wills of men,; not of the number of hands that could work
for food, but of the enterprise, the knowledge and the genius that directs
them where to work for it. Many men starve in their own country because
they love it too well to leave it, or because they are too weak to make the
effort required to do so. Many men starve, not because there is no work to
be done, but because they do not know where the work is ; and the more
civilisation advances, the more labor is divided, and the more densely the
world becomes peopled, the more fatal does such ignorance become, and such
knowledge the more difficult.”


IV. —POVERTY REALLY IS CAUSED BY THE APPROPRIATION
OF LAND BY INDIVIDUALS.
Those who are inclined to treat your theses in the flippant and facetious
vein that some have done, might sing with lago :
“ Tis pride that pulls the country down,
Then take thine auld cloak about thee,”
and reply with the inebriated Cassio :
“ Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other ; ”
but, as I commenced by saying, the issues involved in your revolutionary
doctrines are far too serious to be trifled with. The present proposition un-
doubtedly contains a larger modicum of truth than the three I have already
dealt with, and for that reason it is the more dangerous. There cannot be
a question, I think, that in every country, land naturally and originally
belongs to the State—that is to the existing Government (whatever that
may be) in trust for the people ; and the circumstances under which vast
estates, whether in the Old World or in Australia, have in many cases been
amassed are as iniquitous as the legislative conditions which permit the
acquisition of land for mere speculative purposes, and the blocking of all
enterprise upon it until it has acquired a large fictitious value from circum-
stances that the miserly owners of it never so much as lifted their little
fingers to produce. Though there is most certainly exaggeration, still there
is with equal certainty a substratum of truth, in your assertion that “ the
exclusive ownership of land has everywhere had its beginning in force and
fraud, in selfish greed and unscrupulous cunning ; and that it originated, as
all evil institutions originate, in the bad passions of men, not in their per-
ceptions ot what is right or their experience of what is wise.” It is
perfectly true, as you point out with such indignant eloquence, that
“where land is let for years, the user is often hampered with restrictions
that prevent improvement and interfere with use, and at the expiration of
the lease he is not merely deprived of his improvements, but he is frequently
subjected to a blackmail calculated upon the inconvenience and loss which
removal would cost him.” No one with the smallest knowledge of the
subject, even if he do not speak from bitter personal experience, can doubt
the accuracy of your information as to innumerable instances of improve-
ments prevented and productions curtailed by this private ownership —“ in-
stances which run from the prevention of the building of an outhouse, the
painting of a dwelling, the enlarging of a chapel, the widening of a street, or
the excavation of a dock, to the shutting up of a mine, the demolition of a
village, the tearing up of a railway-track, or the turning of land from the sup-
port of man to the breeding of wild beasts (i.e., game). How insecurity of
improvements and possession prevents the proper maintenance of dwellings
in the cities, how it hampers the farmer, how it fills the shopkeeper with


dread as the expiration of his lease draws nigh, have been to some extent at
least, brought out by recent discussions, and in all these directions proposi-
tions are being made for State interference.” And this view is fully main-
tained by Professor Rogers. “The cost of house rent,” he states—and if he
writes this of London, what would he say of Sydney, where the rents are
higher—probably the highest of any city in the world?—“the cost of house
rent is enormous, . . . and the cost is greatly increased by the power
which the law confers on corporations and private proprietors to withhold
land from the market at a minimum of cost. It will be clear if the law en-
courages an artificial scarcity, it creates an unnatural dearness ... it
gives a power of exacting the highest terms possible for the use of property,
by keeping it out of the market till they (the private owners) can enforce
their price. Now, what is an injury to the moderately wealthy is an op-
pression to the poor. It is well known that vile and loathsome buildings,
probably the property of some opulent landowner, yield from the misery of
their inmates a far larger rent than the plots on which the most luxurious and
convenient mansions are built . . . and the law which levies rates on
occupancy, instead of on property, makes the evil worse, for it puts the
minimum of inconvenience on the person who holds the strongest position.”
This the Professor insists upon again elsewhere. “ The artificial stint,” he
says “ of marketable land is the perpetual corner, to use an Americanism,
created or permitted by the law to the injury of the multitude and for the ad-
vantage of the few . . This may be no injury to the middleman, for he will
recoup himself from the necessities of the public, his customers. It may be
no injury to the trader, though there are signs . . . that the public are be-
ginning to see that enormous rents for shops enter into the price of com-
modities purchased in them : and it may be no injury whatever to persons
whose transactions are very large, because the addition of a percentage to
cover office expenses is infinitessimal under such circumstances. But where
rent is the most important and the most increasing part of the cost of sub-
sistence, as it is with the urban laborer, especially in large towns, the mis-
chief is prodigious.”
The taxing of the occupier, instead of the owner, dates from the Poor
Law of Queen Elizabeth, when the occupier was generally the owner, and
the practice had at least the merit of simplicity. But a far greater evil than
this, in its mischievous influence on the fortunes of English industry, is the
law partly inherited from the Norman Conquest, which permits the accumu-
lation of land under settlements, and its devolution by primogeniture or
other forms of entail. As Mr. Rogers again says, “Parliament has by no
means completed its duties to the public. It must sooner or later, the
sooner the better, sweep away the distinction between real and personal
property, forbid the settlement of land, and release conveyances from the
grip of the attorney by establishing a cheap and compulsory registration of
title,” This latter reform we have been the pioneers of in this country,


through Torrens’ Act; but it has been computed that in the United Kingdom
the conveyances of real estate is mulcted in law charges, exclusive of taxes,
of no less than the gigantic sum of £12,000,000 annually !
I have so far endorsed your own position, and sided in the views you
take, in order that I may not be deemed to be prejudiced in favor of land-
owners, ignorant of the amount of distress they actually do cause, or
indifferent to any remedy that may, seem likely to mitigate these evils. But
the point which you insist on is not whether some (or even a good deal) of
poverty is caused by the private ownership of land, but whether all of it is
so caused. The first I doubt not most unprejudiced thinkers will admit;
the second I shall endeavour to show is false. Even Professor Rogers states
that “ the discontent at an unfair advantage conferred by law on the
owners of certain kinds of property exaggerates the impression formed as to
the amount; ” and he shows that in the country districts of England the
miserable condition of affairs has been due rather to the farmers than the
landowners. “The farmers,” he says, “competed against each other for
occupancies, and constantly offered higher rents, which the enforced cheap-
ness of their laborers’ wages enabled them to pay, and the necessities of
the public artificially created by the corn laws enabled them to increase.
They made common cause with the landlord, and worked against the
interests of the laborer and the general public, the body of consumers . .
But it was an open secret that agricultural capital had greatly diminished
and that the cultivation of the soil was gradually becoming slovenly and
imperfect. At last the crisis came, and the foolish payment and receipt
of excessive rent led to disasters in English agriculture to which there is no
parallel in the annals of that industry.” Who, I ask, were the most to
blame—the farmers who offered, or the landlords who accepted, this
excessive rent ?
The question really at issue is, what constitutes poverty ? Poverty is
wholly a relative term, and whether it means anything or nothing in respect
of the present enquiry, depends wholly on the absolute meaning we attach
to it. The question is not, are men poorer because they pay rent to private
landowners ? That, of course, they are, just as they are poorer by paying
their butchers’ and bakers’ bills. The question is, how much poorer are
they ? The main point of your argument is that private ownership of land
robs “ not tradesmen of truffles, but beggars of bread.” You state ex-
pressly (and you repeat the statement in various forms), that “ if the value
of land increases proportionately,” as you contend it does in all progressive
countries where productive power increases, ‘ ‘ all the increased production
will be swallowed up by rent; and wages and interest, \i.e., profit] will
remain as before.” Now, of course such a state of things as you describe is
not inconceivable ; just as there may be usurers in the lending of money, so
also there may be usurers in the letting of land ; but the point we have to
consider is not whether the subject of your contention is possible, but


whether it usually takes place in the times and countries we are dealing
with. The two countries you specially speak of are Europe and America,
and to these I will add Australia ; and if, then, we do not theorise, but
simply look around us and note facts, do we find that merchants, manu-
facturers, bankers, tradesmen, and even the smaller shopkeepers, and
respectable and competent artisans in pretty regular employment, starve,
and that landowners alone make fortunes ? Suppose that gold, or silver,
iron, or coal be discovered on a private owner’s land. A company is formed,
a mine or pit is opened, and the landowner soon rolls in riches. But the
royalty he receives is but a very small part of the gross profits of the under-
taking ; and if he grow rich, it is not because he exacts a large share —
according to you, Sir, almost the whole —of the value of each ounce of gold
or ton of coal produced, but because there are many tons of coal raised, or
ounces of gold crushed from the stone, out of every one of which he takes a
little, while those practically engaged in the industry take very considerably
more. Even M. de Laveleye, who is as bitterly opposed to large landlords
as yourself, dismisses your contention as unworthy of criticism. “ A single
glance round,” he says, “is enough to show' its falsehood.” And he con-
tinues : —“ The value of capital engaged in industrial enterprise exceeds
that of land itself ; and its power of accumulation is far greater than that oj
ground rents ; ” explaining that “ the immense fortunes amassed so rapidly
in the United States, like those of Mr. Gould and Mr. Vanderbilt, were the
result of railway speculation, and not of the greater value of land.” And
the French economist finally caps all in these noteworthy words : —“ In the
Middle Ages the number of persons living on the interest of capital was ex-
ceedingly few. Nearly all the rich lived on the produce of the land. Now,
in countries where civilisation is advanced, as in England, more than half
the rich live on the interest of their capital (!)” In point of fact “the history
of land and rent, as compared with the history of progress generally, is the
history, not of advance, but of constant and steady decline.” And this view
moreover, is singularly confirmed by Mr. Mulhall, through the statistics he
gives in his Fifty Years of National Progress. Taking twelve principal
points of national wealth in the United Kingdom, each as representing 100
in the year 1837, he brings the sum total of 1200 in that year up to 5,334 in
the year 1887. But whereas Trade was at 100 in the former year to 572 in
the latter, Shipping 100 to 683, Mining 100 to 376, Hardware 100 to 512,
Banking 100 to 672, Steam-power 100 to 1,140, and even Instruction 100 to
440 —each of eleven items showing an increase over the 100, varying from
142 in population to 1,140 in Steam-power,—the poor, unfortunate Cinderella
of Agriculture had not only made no forward step, but had retrograded and
decreased from 100 to 94.
In continuing your attack upon private land-holders you appear to
emulate the example of the ingenious legal gentlemen who, in framing the
prosecution of a culprit, indite him firstly for murder, then for attempted


murder, next for manslaughter, after that for a felonious assault, and lastly
for a common assault; with the view of securing a conviction on one of the
lesser counts, in ease he be acquitted on the graver ones. As a sort of
secondary count in your indictment, you contend that private land-owners
do not so much make living dearer, but that they shut out an increasing
portion of the population from the only means of making any living at all;
or, in other words, that they keep land idle, or put it to relatively unpro-
ductive uses, while millions of the poor are longing to occupy it. Now,
however this may apply to other countries, it is certainly not the case with
Australia. In Sydney, rents may be enormous, and living accommodation
proportionately infamous ; and the rapacity of land-grabbers may be as
unbounded as was the case with the owners of the Post Office Street
property, who, not content with the concession to them of an enormous
unearned increment of value which the State had created in the past, had
the unparalled effrontery to claim a further increment, which the State will
probably create in days to come. But as to land for use and occupation, we
know that it has been, and still is, accessible enough to those who know how
to work it; while to those who do not it would be useless, even if it were
given to them free of rent or tax of any kind. For at the time this colony re-
ceived Constitutional Government only about seven million acres had been
disposed of. And whoever may be now the owners of what has,since been
parted with, it has been sold, as was recently pointed out in the Sydney
Morning Herald, by a responsible Government under popular control, and
on the terms decreed by Parliament, as embodied in successive Land Acts.
And whether the proceeds of these sales were large or small, they have been
employed precisely as your Single Tax would be—in public works which
have enriched the whole community, and the value of many, of which in-
creases year by year. And there is still another point that applies particu -
larly to young countries such as this. It is too often assumed that the price
paid for land was at most its then value at the time that the land was
bought. But might it not be more ? Do not men perpetually purchase land
on account of its 'prospective value, and would they give the same price were
it not that they had a tacit assurance that the Government would make
roads, encourage immigration, and so forth ? And was not the money ob-
tained from such original sales of land used for the immediate making of
these roads, &c., for the improvement of the public Estate, and the carrying
on the general work of Government? And should there be nothing
receivable in the shape of interest on capital so sunk, and therefore diverted
from other undertakings, or no return for those things which are so essential
to the development of a young country, namely intelligence, enterprise, and
foresight ? And lastly, as tire counterpart in the old countries of Europe
of all this among us here, we have the fact, as testified by the Duke of
Argyle, that “ the present condition of the soil is the result of generations
of costly improvements, and of renewed and reiterated outlays to keep these


improvements in effective order.” “In one estate alone in England,” the
Duke asserts, ‘ ‘ the outlay on improvements purely agricultural has. for
twenty-one years past, been at the rate of £35,000 a year, whilst,
including outlay on churches and schools, it has amounted in the last forty
years to nearly £2,000,000 sterling.”
V.—POVERTY WOULD BE CURED BY THE CONFISCATION
OF LAND BY THE STATE.
Having already refuted your four assertions as to actual facts, I
now proceed to deal with your theory of the cure for poverty. The con-
sideration of the confiscation of land divides itself into two headings : firstly,
as to its equity and justice ; and secondly, as to its expediency, efficacy,
and practicability. Firstly, then, I have already admitted that abstractedly
and theoretically all land belongs to the State, and that its acquisition at
any time by private individuals—whether through usurpation, seizure, gift,
or purchase—has been a transgression of natural laws and principles. But
we have to deal with a condition of things which in the Old World has been
the growth of centuries, and even in Australia the development of many
years ; and however desirable, therefore, however important, however
necessary, may be some sort of legislation to curtail the arbitrary powers of
landowners and landlords, to guard against the excessive accumulation of
land in the hands of private individuals and of corporations, to checkmate
the tyrannical speculations of landgrabbers, to put landlords on precisely
the same footing as all other creditors, and the claims of real estate for rent
on a par with those of other property or for service rendered ; still the arbit-
rary confiscation of estates, and the deliberate robbery of their owners who
have honestly and innocently inherited or purchased those estates, in accord-
ance with the laws of the country in which they live, and in the belief in the
honor of their Governments and their readiness and ability at all times to
protect their legal property as well as lives, would not only be opposed to
every principle of public honesty and State integrity, but would besmirch
with ineffaceable disgrace and ignominy the history of any country that
could lend itself to an act so base and utterly flagitious. lam neither an
admirer of landowners and landlords, nor any friend to them : on the con-
trary, like most persons except those of their own class, I would have the
very strictest justice meted out to them in return for the oppression they
have almost everywhere exercised over those within their power. But, as
Professor Rogers says, “ the attitude which landowners take, have taken,
and appear likely to take in the future, discourages the defence of what is
their proper right in the minds of competent and disinterested advocates ; ”
and, the Duke of Argyle points out with equal truth, that “ nobody has any
interest in believing that the world is flat, but many persons may have an


interest, very personal indeed, in believing that they have a right to a share
in their neighbour’s vineyard.” It is one thing for any political Society or
young country to refuse to divide its vacant territory among individual
owners—as might have been done by every one of the British Colonies the
moment they received Constitutional Government, coupled with equity of
redemption of all land previously alienated by the Colonial Office in Downing
Street. It is quite another thing for a political society, and especially
an old nation which has for ages recognised and encouraged the private
ownership of land, to break faith with those who have acquired such owner-
ship, and have lived and labored, and bought and sold, and willed, upon the
faith of it. Why, Sir, the very brigands of the Abruzzi would scarcely dare
attempt so vile a spoliation !
Your advocacy of land confiscation was a pure enigma to me until I
read your arguments in favor of the repudiation of National Debts—
arguments which positively appalled me, as coming from a man who takes
his stand on justice and religion. But when I see you enter on so false a
train of reasoning, I cannot be surprised at any conclusions these may lead
you to. You state that “ the institution of public debts, like the institution
of private property in land, rests upon the preposterous assumption that one
generation may bind another generation.” Here, as in so many other
matters, you confuse two separate issues. That which applies to different
generations, applies equally to the different individuals that make up any
given generation; and while it would be preposterous to assume that one indi-
vidual or generation could bind another to any course of action opposed to
law and justice, there is nothing whatever preposterous in the assumption of
such a bond when dictated by honor, law and honesty, and in return for
value received of some kind or another. The illustration of your refusal to
pay the promissory note which your great-grandfather gave to my great-
grandfather with the stipulation that you should pay it, is both far-fetched
and imperfect, because we do not know the conditions under which the bond
was executed; whether they were fair and honest, or dishonest and disgraceful.
The element of plausibility, which instantly appeals to the untrained mind,
is the idea that a man should not be held responsible for promises to which
he was not himself a consenting party ; though such responsibility is accepted
every day in all the operations of life, from those of Governments to private
partnerships and family affairs ; and without such acceptance credit would
be at an end, and society would tumble into anaichy and fall to pieces. But
the idea is presented by itself, and with a careful suppression of the con-
ditions which make it inapplicable to the case in hand. Hereditary debts
do not attach to persons except in respect of hereditary possessions. Are
these possessions to be kept whilst the corresponding obligations are denied ?
You are loud, Sir, on the absurdity of calling on you to honor any promise
which your great-grandfather may have made, but you are silent about
giving up any resources which your great-grandfather may have left. This


may be honesty and honor according to the novel doctrines that you promul-
gate, but according to ancient notions of morality based upon 1 he Decalogue
it would be designated by a very different name.
With respect to National Debts, however, there is no element of uncer-
tainty or doubt. We know for what object such debts have been contracted
—for the preservation of national independence, the acquisition of national
territory, the preparations needed for national defence, or (in this country)
the development of the national resources or estate through the construction
of roads and railways, bridges, harbours and electric telegraphs, and other
important public works. The State cannot be disinherited of the possessions
and benefits thus secured, as individuals may be disinherited of their father’s
gains. In the case of National Debts, therefore, the immorality of your
argument is as conspicuous as the fallacy of your reasoning. Thus argues
clearly, cogently, and I think unanswerably, the Duke of Argyle, and His
Grace adduces a still more shocking example of your depraved, unrighteous
views of national morality. In accordance with your dishonest doctrines of
the repudiation of National Debts, you would have avoided the creation of
such a debt as was necessary to the prosecution of the terrible American
Civil W 7 ar of “ the North ” against “ the South ” for the extermination of
slavery, by an act of national robbery and spoliation. “ If,” you argue
with a prostitution of logic absolutely inconceivable to men who learnt to
lisp in childhood the sacred words, “ Thou shalt not steal”—“ if, when we
called on men to die for their country, we had not shrunk from taking, if
necessary, nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand dollars from every
millionaire, we need not have created any debt. ” Was it not enough that
the greed and wicked tyranny of the slave-owners should have compelled
the sacrifice of a million lives to put an end to it—was it not enough that
the millionaires should have had to contribute the enormous sums they must
in the shape of taxation—and would you have increased this vast amount of
misery and suffering by reducing to beggary a whole class of men whose
only sin was that they were rich, together with their innocent wives and
children, and all dependent on them ? Is this the practice of Christianity
you advocate ? No wonder that the Duke should write with suppressed but
natural indignation “It is indeed deplorable—nothing I have ever read in
all literature has struck me as so deplorable—that at this tme of day . . .
one single American citizen should be found who appreciates so little the
glory of his country as to express his regret that they did not begin this
great contest by an act of stealing ! ”
I have dwelt at some length on the repudiation that you advocate of
public and private obligations, because from this it is clear that no con-
siderations of morality or justice influence you in advocating the confiscation
of all private estates ; but that, on the contrary, you simply appeal to the
covetousness and base passions of undisciplined human nature. It must not
be supposed that the Duke of Argyle is by any means the only author who


has inveighed against the wickedness of your confiscation scheme. Setting
aside the lesser fry, among some of the writers of acknowledged standing
whose books, lectures, or speeches are now before me, Mr. Thorold Rogers,
Mr. Mallock and John Bright have equally condemned your propositions,
while the tenor of Mr. Ruskin’s teachings, written for the most part long
before you had put pen to paper, all goes to inculcate the sacredness of
home and of property honestly acquired, and the regard that every man
should have, not only for the well-being of posterity, but for the honor of
his fathers. In that noble ethical work of his, The Seven Lamps of Archi-
tecture, he writes :—•“ The idea of self-denial for the sake of posterity, of
practising present economy for the sake of debtors yet unborn, of planting
forests that our descendants may live under their shade, or of raising cities
for future nations to inhabit, never, I suppose, efficiently takes place among
publicly recognised motives of exertion. Yet these are not the less our
duties ; nor is our part fitly sustained upon the earth, unless the range of
our intended and deliberate usefulness include, not only the companions,
but the successors of our pilgrimage.” But if, in return for such endeavours
we would win the honor and respect of our posterity, we must ourselves set
them the example by the reverence we pay to those who have gone before
us, not by cancelling their bequests, and despoiling their descendants of
inheritance. “ There is a sanctity,” again says Ruskin, “in a good man’s
house, which cannot be renewed in every tenement that rises on its ruins :
and I believe that good men would generally feel this ; and that having
spent their lives happily and honorably, they would be grieved at the close
of them to think that the place of their earthly abode . . was to be swept
away as soon as there was room made for them in the grave. I say that a
good man would fear this ; and that, far more, a good son, a noble descend-
ant, would fear doing it to his father’s house ; [and that to do it] there must
be a strange dissolution of natural affection, a strange unthankfulness for all
that home has given and parents have taught, a strange consciousness that
we have been unfaithful to our father’s honor, or that our own lives are not
such as would make our dwellings sacred to our children.” This, Sir, is a
very different doctrine from that of your repudiation of the obligations
devolving on you from your great-grandfather ; it is a very different doctrine
from what Professor Rogers speaks of as “ Mr. George’s theory and remedy
of universal confiscation—a confiscation which will include not only palaces
and parks, mansions and farms, but every freehold cottage or homestead in
which working men have invested the savings of their lives.” I leave it to
the unprejudiced portion of the public to determine which is the worthier,
the nobler, the more honorable doctrine of the two.
Though it may seem needless to heap Pelion upon Ossa, yet, in view of
the extent to which your pernicious doctrines have unthinkingly been ac-
cepted, 1 will quote one more expression of opinion from Mr. Rogers upon
this section of the subject, viz., that “to suggest that the owner of land


should be deprived of his property is dishonest, and, were it carried out,
would be disastrous.” And I will finally revert to the Duke of Argyle
upon the question of your “ immoral teachings.” “ Here we have a man,”
he says, “who probably sincerely thinks he is a Christian, and who sets up
as a philosopher, but who is not in the least shocked by consequences which
abolish the Decalogue and deny the primary obligations both of public and
private honor.”
And now let us turn to the second aspect of your proposal for the con-
fiscation of land —viz., its expediency, efficacy, and practicability. I
observe, by the way, that you “ do not propose either to purchase or confis-
cate private property in land. The first would be unjust, the second,
needless. Let the individuals who now hold it still retain, if they want to,
possession of what they are pleased to call their land. Let them buy and
sell and bequeath and devise it. We may safely leave them the shell, if we
take the kernel. It is not necessary to confiscate the land ;it is only
necessary to confiscate rent.” Now, this is a mere piece of prevarication,
thoroughly worthy of your trust, for the success of your doctrines, in
their appeal, not to right-mindedness nor to a sense of justice, but to that
wild, undisciplined, frequently headstrong, and sometimes bloodthirsty
thing, the “ popular imagination ” —that subversion of sobriety and reason
which set up the guillotine in the Place de Greve a hundred years ago, and
shot the Archbishop of Paris and the other hostages in cold blood during the
Communist Reign of Terror, in 1871. When you unblushingly assert that
“ even the most prejudiced can be relied on to listen with patience to an
argument in favor of making some one else pay what they are now paying,”
it matters little whether we talk of confiscating land, or rent, or the man in
the Moon, so only that we teach the masses to rob somebody of something.
This “ appropriation of rent by taxation,” then—a mere gilding of the pill
of robbery and confiscation with somewhat less offensive words—is “the
sovereign remedy” you propose “which will raise wages, increase the
earnings of capital, extirpate pauperism, abolish poverty, give remunerative
employment to whoever wishes it, afford free scope to human powers, lessen
crime, elevate morals, taste, and intelligence, purify Government, and carry
civilisation to yet nobler heights.” In view of such a catalogue of virtues,
one is almost tempted to compare the “ sovereign remedy ” with the cele-
brated American pill which was stated to be “mild as mother’s milk and
searching as a small tooth-comb, and warranted to attend strictly to
business and never go fooling about.” No wonder your favorite authority,
Mr. Thorold Rogers, remarks that “ Mr. George prescribes a single and, in
his opinion, a complete remedy, just as the owner of a patent medicine is
ready to assert and advertise that his nostrums will prevent or cure every
disease to which either sex and every age is subject.”
The demolition of your argument that poverty would be cured by the
confiscation of land by the State, or (what is the same thing) by the appro-


priation of all rent by taxation, has been most ably effected by Mr.
Mallock. Followirg that clear-sighted writer’s line of argument, and
supposing your proposed remedy to act in four ways—firstly, by abolishing
all existing taxation, and thus making living incalculably cheaper to every-
one ; secondly, in case a land tax should exceed the existing revenue, by
returning the surplus to the tax-payers in the shape of public works or
otherwise ; thirdly, by preventing land-owners from keeping land unoccu-
pied, in expectation of a rise in its value ; and lastly, by making rents
themselves lower—l concede to you the first point, in so far that for a time
living would no doubt be cheaper, and certain classes the better off for it,
though this would only be for a time; for if living became cheaper, soon
wages would become less, and things would again be just where they are
now. The second point I reserve for examination later on, and pass at
present to the third one. Here your chief point appears to be not so much
that private property in land makes living dear, as that it tends to shut out
an increasing portion of the population from the only means of making any
living at all ; that is to say, it keeps land idle or put to relatively unpro-
ductive uses, which millions of the poor are longing to occupy, and out of
which, if they did occupy it, they could make an excellent living ; whereas
if land were, either absolutely or practically, the property of the State, any
one who wished to get land would be able to get as much of it as he could
use. Thus, you claim that your system would benefit men in the position of
beggars—-the “ unemployed,” in fact—not the moderately rich, but the
extremely poor ; regardless of the fact that a beggar can no more pay a
pound to the State than he can pay it to a private landlord. Now in making
all land-owners tenants of the State, you do not, it appears, propose to make
them tenants at will, but, on the contrary, to give them complete security of
tenure—to make them, in your own words, practically “ the owners [of the
soil], though in reality they would be the tenants of the whole people.”
Now, suppose a man to hold a piece of land for which he pays a certain rent,
or a tax on its unimproved value. No matter what use he puts this to—
whether, you say, he plant it as an orchard, sow it as a field, build on it a
house or manufactory, however costly, he would have no more to pay
in taxes than if he kept that land idle.” So far, so good, from one point of
view. But supposing he builds upon a part of it, not a manufactory, but a
town, there would be a rise in value, as you yourself have forcibly pointed
out, not only of the land built upon, but of the rest, which is perhaps still
in pasture. This pasture land is still in the man’s possession, and he can
neither be evicted by the State so long as he pays his rent or tax, nor can he
have his assessment raised on what are practically his own improvements.
But though he pays for this pasture land no more than he did originally, he
knows that other people would be willing to pay more to him ; and there is
therefore nothing whatever to prevent his holding this land on speculation,
and sub-letting it on exactly the same terms as he would do were he the


holder of the fee-simple. You say that the value of the land would be deter-
mined by the highest bid that could be made to the State for it at any given
moment. But the piece of land in question is not in the market at any given
moment. From the moment it is knocked down to the buyer, it is his
(subject to the payment of the Government dues) until he choose to part with
it. Meanwhile, no matter how its value be increased (except by unearned
increment, on which the Single Tax would be itself increased), the increase
in value would still be his ; and I fail to find in all your scheme any means
of taking it from him, no matter how greatly the public or the poor might
need it. In fact, there could be none, unless indeed our Mr. Naboth
“might at any moment have his vineyard bought over his head by any
speculating Ahab ” —a permission of procedure that would make every land-
owner, even to the holder of a quarter-acre building block, a tenant at will,
and induce an anarchy in land tenure worse than that of Ireland.
In connection with this branch of the discussion, a letter appeared
recently in the Sydney Morning Herald, from a correspondent, in which he
raises the following point “An artisan, by his industry, acquires a large
sum of money, and invests it in the purchase of unimproved land in a remote
place on the northern shore of Sydney harbour. After a time he builds
several houses on his land, lays out streets, and otherwise improves it. But
he is yet unable to procure tenants for his houses, because of the roundabout
and expensive means of conveyance, and the difficulty of obtaining the usual
comforts and necessaries of life ; butchers, grocers, &c., being nowhere in the
vicinity. He then builds jetties on the fore-shores near his houses that are
built and others in course of erection, lays on Steamers from the Circular
Quay to these jetties to convey the public free, advertises largely, and
otherwise attracts public attention to his enterprise. In the course of 12 or
15 years the locality becomes one of our most popular marine suburbs,
the value of land has increased twenty-fold, tradesmen are everywhere, and
all the modern comforts ; steamboat proprietors are competing with each
other for the traffic. Our artisan thus, after years of labour and anxiety,
reaps a rich and just reward for his incessant industry, energy, and intelli-
gent enterprise.” “How,” this writer asks, “would Mr. George raise a
land tax in such a case as this ? How would he tax the capital value of that
man’s land equitably (i.e., taking the unearned increment of value only into
account), and not tax his industry and intelligence ? ” The problem seems to
me to be only one of the endless complications that would follow on any
attempt to put your principles to practice.
Coming now to the fourth point, it seems clear that “ however a robbery
of the present generation of landlords might for a time benefit the more
opulent and influential of the robbers, private property in land would itself
remain untouched. It would change hands, and it would change in name.
But it would certainly not pass into the hands of the poor ; and if it changed
in anything but in name, the change would be for the worse.” I correct the


“ if,” and assert that the change would be for the worse-— absolutely
I assert, with Mr. Mallock, that “ if the existing aristocracy of the United
Kingdom were dispossessed, and the land were taken by the State, whilst
town land would be no cheaper than it is at present, all other land would be
dearer.” This is proveable by your own admission ; for you say, as I have
already pointed out, that rent would be fixed by the “ highest bidder ”
that it would be “the full competition rent.” Butin your pamphlet on
Ireland you state that under existing circumstances a variety of things,
among which is “ the peculiar bitterness of the complaints against middle-
men and the speculators who have purchased encumbered estates, and
managed them solely with a view to profit, go to show the truth of the
statement that the land of Ireland has been, by its present owners, largely
underlet, when considered from what we should term a business point of
view. . . An aristocracy such as that of Ireland has its virtues as well as
its vices, and is influenced by sentiments which do not enter into mere business
transactions —sentiments which must ojten modify and soften the calculations
of cold self-interest. But with us \i.e. in America, certainly not (as
a rule) in Old England, though perhaps it may be in young Aus-
tralia] the letting of land is as much a business matter as the buying
or selling of pig-iron or stocks. An American would not think he was
showing his goodness by renting his land at low rates, any more than he
would think he was showing his goodness by selling pig-iron at less than
market price, or stocks for less than the quotations.” I fear, Sir, that in
spite of all this plausibility of virtue and love-your-neighbour-as-yourself-
ism, there is far more of the American than of the Englishman about
your entire proposals. For the moral of the whole affair is obvious.
According to your scheme, the landlords would be dispossessed, and the
middlemen left. The State would be harder than the landlords, for it
would certainly evict the landowning tenant the moment that he failed to
pay his land tax ; and the middlemen would be even harder than the State.
Thus, the poor man would be more houseless, homeless and landless than
even now. And so far from State landlordism, or the imposition of your
Single Tax, cheapening rents, not only could it not possibly do so, as I have
just shown, but would fail to benefit those who wished for land in a district
already occupied, as well as those too poor to pay any rent at all. For no
matter who might own the ground of any street that was once completely
built upon, and all its shops were occupied, the street would be barred to
any new tradesman, however anxious he might be to set up in busi-
ness there ; and the fact of the street being really national property, in
which he himself had an infinitessimal share, would give him no more right
to use a single inch of it than would his part ownership of the railways of
New South Wales enable him to go from Sydney to Newcastle for nothing.
He might console himself, under your proposed system, with the fact that lie
had an inalienable right to the soil of the country whereof he was a subject;


but this inalienable right would be nothing but the inalienable right to pay
the Government a tax, if he had the money to pay it with, upon certain
land, if he could get that land, without so much as a stick, or shed, or well,
or water-course upon it.
And what, now, has the late John Bright to say of all this scheme
of land resumption—what is the opinion of that great and worthy “ Tribune
of the People”—“stout champion over the True and Right”—who, as
senior member for Birmingham, was, above all men perhaps who have ever
sat in the House of Commons, the Member for Working Men —whose name
was only less revered and loved in your own country of America than
among his individual constituency of artisans and laborers —who never-
feared to raise his ringing voice in the interests of Justice, even though he
might stand alone against the world, and over whose mortal ashes Punch
thus mourned in noble lines less then a twelvemonth since :
‘ ‘ His virile hate struck hot at high-placed wrong
And crawling crime ; his scorn smote like a dart,
Baseness of Court or crowd, of fane or mart.
Caste’s callous pride, and madness of the throng ”
what, I say, has this late righteous Englishman to say about what he calls
“ the most extraordinary, the greatest, the wildest, the most remarkable of
propositions that we have ever had, imported lately by an American
inventor ? ” Speaking at a meeting of the Forward Liberal Club in Birming-
ham, John Bright is reported by the Daily Post of that great town to have
expressed his opinion of your proposal in as many words, that ‘ ‘ it begins, I
am sorry to say, in what is a general system of confiscation such as the world
hitherto has never yet heard of. And beginning in confiscation, it would
end in confusion and immeasurable evil. ” But not content by any means
with this simple denunciation, he gives the following most forcible illustration
of the tendency of your whole scheme. “ Now, I will just read you,” he says,
“ what the Richmond Examiner (of the Slave States of America)
proposed at one time as a great cure for no end of troubles in
America, and what they called the rotten and most unfortunate con-
dition of things in Europe. This is what they say. It might be
put very much—with a very little alteration indeed it would come
out almost exactly —in the language that has been used in describing this
new convention with regard to the land. This is what the Richmond
Examiner says :—‘ The experiment of universal liberty has failed.’ Well,
our present American importation would say that the experiment of private
ownership in land has failed —the corresponding observation and assertion.
‘ The evils of free society are insufferable. ’ That is exactly what is said of
the ownership of the land. ‘ Free society in the long run is impracticable ;
it is everywhere starving, demoralising, and insurrectionary. Policy and
humanity alike forbid the extension of its evils to new peoples and to coming


generations, and therefore free society must fall and give way to a slave
society—a social system old as the world and universal as man.’ That is
one paragraph. (Laughter.) Here is another. The writer says: ‘Make
the labour capital ’ —please follow me closely in these words— ‘ Make the
labour capital. The free system in Europe is a rotten system. Let us get
rid of that, and make all the labourers as much the capital and as much the
property of the capitalist and employer as the capitalist’s property and
horses are property ; and then the whole system will move with the perfect
ease and harmony which the world admires so much in the southern states of
America.” Well then there was a certain Mr. Cobb in that same region ; and
it appears that “ Mr. Cobb says, ‘ There is perhaps, no solution of the great
problem of reconciling the interests of labour and capital so as to protect
each from the encroachments and oppressions of the other, so simple and
effective as negro slavery ; by making the labourer himself capital the con-
flict ceases, and the interests become identical.’ You see the
difference between these two plans. In the plan now offered it is proposed
to confiscate the whole property of all the landlords of this country, and I
suppose of every other country, making no compensation. I think the
utmost that is offered is that poor widows shall have £lOO a year.
(Laughter.) Well, but what is the proposition of the slaveowners? Not
that the land is to be confiscated, but that all the labour of honest workmen
throughout Europe and throughout the northern States of America should
be permanently confiscated, as the labour of the three or four millions of
negroes in the southern States had been confiscated for generations past.
Well , it is just as great a cruelty, as great a folly, as great an injustice, a
thing as impracticable, to attempt to confiscate the property of all the land-
owners of the nation as it would he to attempt to turn the freemen of that
nation into slaves.
It can be scarcely necessary to remind you, or my general readers,
of the line of policy, totally opposed to the one you advocate, which,
to their lasting honor, was adopted by what you are pleased to call
“ the stupid English people,” in the emancipation of the West Indian
slaves, at a cost to the then-existing nation and its posterity of £20,000,000
sterling. But there is another vindication of the public faith and honor of
Old England, “ stupid ” as she may be according to your own American
ideas, which the Duke of. Argyle has brought forcibly under notice.
“India,” he says, “is a country in which, theoretically at least, the State
is the only and the universal landlord, and over a large portion of it the
State does actually take to itself a share of the gross produce which fully
represents ordinary rent. Yet this is the very country in which the poverty
of the masses is so abject that millions live only from hand to mouth ; and
where there is any—even a partial failure of the crops, thousands and
hundreds of thousands are in danger of actual starvation. Moreover, the
portion of that country which has most grown in wealth is precisely that por-


tion of it in which the Government has parted with its power of absorbing
rent, by having agreed to a “ Permanent Settlement.” But when landed
property had been bought and sold and inherited in Bengal for some three
generations—since 1795—under the guarantee of the Government that the
Rent Tax upon it was to remain at a fixed amount, no public man, so far as
I know, ever suggested that the public faith should be violated. And not
only so, but there was a disposition even to put upon the engagements of
the Government an overstrained interpretation, and to claim for the land-
owners who are protected under it an immunity from all other taxes affecting
the same sources of income.” The Duke points out how, when he was
Secretary of State for India, this matter had (in 1870) to be dealt with by
the Indian Council; and he explains the difficulty that was experienced in
doing so, as “ the Land Tax was a special impost upon rent, and the promise
was that this special impost should never be increased ; or, in its own words
that there should be no augmentation of the public assessment in
consequence of the improvement of the estates. ” Eventually it was decided
that ‘ ‘ there was to be no confiscation by the State of the increased value of
land, any more than of the increased value of any other kinds of property,
on the pretext that this increase was unearned. On the other hand, the
State did not exempt that increased value from any taxation which might be
levied also and equally upon all the rest of the community. In this way
we reconciled and established two great principles which to short-sighted
theorists may seem antagonistic. One of these principles is, that it is the
interest of every community to give equal and absolute security to every one
of its members in his pursuit of wealth; the other is, that when the public
interests demand a public revenue, all forms of wealth should be equally
accessible to taxation.” And, after speaking of the great wealth that had
grown up among the Zemindars of Bengal, and of the discussions that
would have been avoided and the resources that would have been acquired,
if the Indian Council “could have only persuaded themselves that the
Government of 1793 could not possibly bind the Goveimment of 1870,” His
Grace concludes as follows: “ One doctrine has been tenaciously held by
the ‘ stupid English people ’ in the government of their Eastern Empire,
and that is, that our honor is the greatest of our possessions, and that abso-
lute trust in that honor is one of the strongest foundations of our power.”
To that conclusion, Sir, I implicitly and unreservedly subscribe.
But what is Professor Rogers’ opinion about land nationalisation, even
apart from confiscation or the Single Tax ? “ The policy,” he says, “ which
would make the state the universal landlord, even after providing for the
compensation of existing interests, would be only less fatal and foolish than
that which confiscated them without compensation.” And after speaking
of the gigantic functions that such a policy would confer upon the State, and
the vexatious, inquisitorial, and corrupt bureaucracy to which it would
inevitably lead, he points out that “ if the State is to revise its contracts


with its tenants periodically, the tenant will be divested of all motives to
improve his holding; if the new tenancy is to be a permanent one, the state
of things which the nationalisation of land was intended to obviate will
instantly recommence ” —precisely as Mr. Mallock has asserted. Now, as a
matter of fact, so far as young countries are concerned, the question as to
the best method of disposal of territory has been before every one of the
great British Colonies, and before the United States for several generations ;
and the universal instinct of them all has been that the individual owner-
ship of land is the one great attraction which they can hold out to the
settlers whom it is their highest interest to invite and to establish. They
know that the land of a country is never so well “ nationalised ” as by the
development that springs from this attraction of absolute ownership ; and
that under no other inducement cculd men be found to voluntarily clear the
soil of the stifling bush, to drain the pestilential swamp, to water arid
wastes, to enclose their homesteads from the access of wild animals, or to
defend them from the attacks of savage tribes. But even supposing that
settlers could be found willing to devote the years of skill and labor neces-
sary to make wild soils productive, under no other tenure than that of a
long “ improvement lease,” paying for a time no rent (or tax) at all, or else
a very small one ; still, equally the whole area of any given region would
soon be in the exclusive possession, for long periods of time, of a certain
number of occupiers, and would no more be open to the occupancy of the
poor of all the world, or even of that country, than it is now. Though
large holdings of land may or not be prejudicial to the interests of a country,
according to the conditions and circumstances under which they are owned,
and admitting that more often than not they are prejudicial, still experience
has everywhere proved that small holdings—holdings which a man owns
the fee-simple of, and can work without sub-letting—are a benefit;
encouraging, as the absolute possession of them does, the virtues of in-
dustry, enterprise, independence, patriotism and the love of settled order,
honest pride, and thrift. Professor Rogers alludes to “ the phenomenon
which has often been noticed as charasteristic of peasant proprietorship, a
high rate of wages paid to the free laborer,” and he tells us that Elizabeth’s
Act of 1592 prescribed that every laborer’s cottage should have four acres of
land attached to it. It is the subdivision of the soil of Prance into so many
peasant holdings owned by winegrowers and other agriculturists, not the
intrigues and machinations of the political factions, nor the noisy clamor of
the Paris boulevards, that is the real secret of the wealth and power
and wonderful productiveness of that great country —a productiveness
which enabled it to pay off in an incredibly short space of time the millions
exacted by Von Bismarck as the indemnity for the Franco-German war. It
is much the same conditions of tenure upon the sub-Alpine slopes of Pied-
mont and Savoy that have created the sturdy, honorable race of peasant-
yeomen of those districts, who are among the flower of Italy’s real (not


artificial) manhood —men who possess far more title to the name of “ gentle-
man” than many a “log-roller” who disfigures the Parliament of New
South Wales. It is the absence of such land tenure that is one of the most
fruitful sources of the woes of Ireland—a system of tenure which the best
friends of Erin are seeking to bring about, though only by equitable legisla-
tion and honest dealing with existing rights, and not by robbery and con-
fiscation. And in such tenure lies the best hope of Australian progress and
development of our resources—a system by which (whether the existing
owners of thousands of acres of the soil gradually disappear or not) the
thrifty and industrious among the working classes will in course of time
each “ sit under (absolutely) his own fig-tree,” and will have the greatest of
all possible inducements to secure honest, sound, and patriotic legislation,
namely, the stake in the well-being and prosperity of his country afforded
by the actual possession of real estate. To forcibly dispossess the owners
of large landed properties might, in certain instances, be only a just retribu-
tion for their own sins against the public, or those of their fore-fathers,
though even in such cases it does not follow that we have a right to inflict
such retribution —as was admitted by all parties in the negotiations for the
acquisition by Government of the Post Office-street property. But to adopt a
similar course towards the hard-working small selector, the dairy or poultry
farmer, the artizan, perhaps the immigrant who has bid adieu to all he
most cherished upon earth to .make, with the few pounds the
auctioneer has handed him from his entire possessions, a name and
home for himself and his posterity—to practice confiscation towards
these men would be an act of the grossest and most wicked tyranny;
demoralising to the whole body-politic, and making impossible that self-
denying regard for future generations of which Ruskin speaks as being
appreciated in “ the time to come when, as we have laid stone on stone,
those stones will be held sacred because our hands have touched them, and
men will say, as they look upon the labour and wrought substance of them,
‘ See ! this our fathers did for us.’ ” That all property, and land amongst
it, should bear a tax, so far as taxation is necessary for the creation of the
public’revenue, I take to be an unanswerable position ; but as the true and
equitable theory of taxation is that it should be so adjusted as to fall equally
on all classes, according to the benefits they receive from Government —and
for this reason only is the indirect taxation derivable from a few small
customs duties justifiable, so as to touch, according to their means, those
who have practically no taxable property or incomes—the theory that all
taxation should be borne by land alone, in the shape of the Single Tax, is
simply monstrous. It is like the one-eyed Cyclops, Polyphemus, and sorely
needs a Ulysses to destroy it.
There is still one point which, further back, it will be remembered, I
reserved for subsequent examination, and that I have yet to deal with. It
js this : namely, that the best that could be hoped from the imposition of


your Single Tax would be the creation of a surplus revenue which would
enable the Government to build museums, free libraries, and schools, permit
free railway passage, dower the children of the poor with marriage portions,
and, I suppose, buy bassinets for their babies when these made their appear-
ance in due course. Now, however desirable in the abstract it may be to
build free libraries, museums, &c., the only way in which the surplus from
the Single Tax could save from poverty would be by money, or the
necessaries of life in some shape or other, given to individuals for the pur-
poses of private consumption. But this would merely be con verting the State
into a vast charitable institution, and doing, only on an infinitely larger
scale, what it did, with such disastrous effect, for the populace of ancient
Rome, and what Mr. John Poison so strongly condemned ten years ago, in
his work entitled Affluence, Poverty, and Pauperism, with reference to the
“ Holuka, the fund raised every year by the Jews throughout the whole
world., for the benefit of the poor Jews in Palestine,” and out of which the
Rabbis sometimes distribute money and provisions, and sometimes pay taxes
and house rent, “ostensibly in charity, but practically in support of indo-
lence, and in encouragement of poverty,” and which, according to a
Jerusalem correspondent of the Jewish Chronicle at present corrupts and
demoralizes the tvhole Syrian Jewish population. “No one,” says Mr.
Rogers, “disparages kindliness and charity. For certain calamities, such
as those which are relieved in hospitals, they are invaluable. But as a
universal process they would be disastrous, especially if the charity be com-
pulsory, or provided out of the funds which the Government raises by way
of taxation. To adopt such an expedient would be to despair of the
recuperative power of honest industry.” In the very act of relieving
poverty the State would be creating it, and would, as it were, be endeavour-
ing to quench thirst by the administration of sea water. In point of fact,
Sir, your expedient for the abolition of poverty was actually tried in Eng-
land, on a small scale, in the earliest years of the present century, and an
interesting account of this little-known experiment is given by Mr. Mallock.
It appears that a certain philanthropic gentleman left an estate of four
thousand a year to the inhabitants of three villages in Herefordshire.
That is to say, he nationalized (as it were) amongst the tenants what
was once the revenue of the Squire. “ Before many years had elapsed
these three villages had become warrens of paupers. More misery was
produced by this ill-advised generosity than could have been possibly
caused by the most merciless rack-renting ; and so wretched and scandalous
did the state of things become, that a special Act had to be passed through
Parliament to revoke the gift that had caused so much misery.” This ex-
perience was only in agreement with the lessons of experience everywhere,
that State gifts, like charitable donations for purely business transactions,
are always more than compensated by the reduction of what is, without
them, the natural market rate of wages. If, then, the working classes are


not only self-respecting, but wise as well, they will be resolute that the
conditions under which they engage in the general social harmony and social
warfare shall be that those with whom they are associated retain no pauper
privileges and are beguiled with no State gifts—the most insidious of all
the means by which the workman may be led into sacrificing the advantages
of his position.
As I have already said, the evils of land tenure, as it exists at present
in most countries, are great and serious, and remedial legislation is needed
nearly everywhere to counteract them, even if it be not possible to abolish
them entirely. Had these letters not grown to the length they have,
possibly I might have hinted at certain legislative steps and social changes
that appear to me more likely to effect the desiderata that you aim at than
the revolutionary projects that you advocate. And, lest I may be deemed
simply an iconoclast in demolishing your doctrines, I may still, possibly,
take an early opportunity of promulgating my opinions upon various matters
of reform, besides those of land occupancy and taxation, in case the views I
have now put forward should meet with anything like general acceptance.
At the same time, I would point out that it is no part of the office of a
critic to provide a substitute for that which he condemns. The political
critic is not expected to assume the reins of Government; the architectural
critic, to design a church or palace ; the musical critic, to play the fiddle or
sing an aria ; or the critic upon pictures, to paint a portrait or a landscape.
And neither is the literary critic called upon to write a history or biography,
a philosophical treatise or an epic. Suffice it, then, for the present
moment, that I have shown conclusively, I think, that as the production of
wealth grows greater, the share that goes to the labouring class does not
grow less ; that wages are drawn from capital, and are not created by the
labouring class as it receives them ; that population does increase faster
than the means of subsistence that are practically at their disposal; that
poverty is not caused by the appropriation of land by individuals ; and that
it would not be cured by the confiscation of land by the State. But there is
one aspect of your doctrines—and that the most dangerous, perhaps of all,
because it appeals to the easily excited religious sentiment (or, more strictly
speaking, sentimentality, which is a very different thing), and unbalanced
reasoning powers of the general populace—which I have not yet noticed.
You have openly stated, I believe, that if the poverty and distress you see
around you be irremediable, then you would be forced to deny the possibility
of a wise and benevolent God ; and clothing the naked passion of covetous-
ness with the borrowed garb of shoddy righteousness, and making your
pages to bristle with scriptural allusions, you imply that this appalling
want of faith in the wisdom of the Deity must still continue unless you are
the means of suddenly arresting all this mundane evil. You either call
down the Holy Spirit to descend upon your head, as it did on that of the
Saviour in the river Jordan ; or, bearing ostensibly the iEgis of Christianity,,


you proclaim yourself an atheist, Mr. Mallock has so logically and tersely
put this matter, that I quote again his lines verbatim : —“ Does not Mr.
George see, that if the vice and misery that have so long existed in the
world be any solid argument against the goodness of God, the argument
would be strengthened, not destroyed, were this evil to come suddenly to an
end ? As it is, the Theist accepts its presence as a mystery, believing that
there is some reason for it beyond the power of his comprehension ; but
could it be really abolished by Mr. George’s ‘ simple expedient,’ he would at
once ask why it was not abolished before. So far as regards the Deity,
there is but one possible answer. He either did not wish to abolish it, or
He did not know how to do so. Thus, in the one case we should have to
regard Mr. George as more benevolent than the Deity ; or, in the other, the
Deity as more stupid than Mr. George.” The poverty that underlies
civilisation is unquestionably a terrible evil; but so far from its being
relatively increasing, there is irrefragable proof that it is diminishing ; and
the assertion that, as wealth increases, the poor not only get absolutely more
numerous and relatively more poor, but relatively more numerous and
absolutely more poor, has been shown to be wholly false ; whilst “as to the
middle classes—instead of being destroyed by modern progress, they are, on
the contrary, its special and most evident product.” The fact is, you cannot,
by a stroke of Harlequin’s Single Tax wand, transform the Dungeons of the
Demon of Despair into the Sunny Shores of Smiling Plenty—you cannot, as
the adventurer in the old Greek comedy does, take the nation, and, by some
magic bath, restore it instantly from decrepitude, disease, ignorance, vice,
dirt, and drunkenness, to manliness, health, virtue, self-respect, know-
ledge, forethought, wisdom, and sobriety. “It will need,” as Mr. Thorold
Rogers once more says, “ long years of patient and disappointing labor
before the marks imprinted by centuries of wrong-doing and misrule can be
effaced. And furthermore, the renewal, if it is to come, cannot be imposed
from without; it must be developed from within. ”
The best and most earnest men of every country—statesmen, philoso-
phers, political economists, and poets,—are everywhere seeking to ameliorate
the condition of the masses—not, indeed, by inculcating robbery
and spoliation, and counselling the infraction of the Eighth and
Tenth Commandments, but by other, worthier, and more practical
teachings of many kinds. You, Sir, utterly ignore the widely prevalent
badness and perversity of men, which are the cause of so much
poverty and misery in all their various forms ; and the popularity of
your doctrines lies, not in the keenness of your arguments (for to accurately
thinking men they fail altogether to appeal), but in the peculiar character
of your brilliant though wretched rhetoric of self-seeking spoliation. It may
be that the Malthusian theory flatters the rich, but that which you bring
forward flatters the poor, which is a far more dangerous thing, since no
tyranny is more odiously terrible than mob tyranny ; and the danger is in-


creased by your bitter denunciation of land ownership, to the exclusion or
ignoring of all other forms of evil—of rapacity, dishonesty and injustice,
improvidence and drunkenness, vice, selfishness and greed. All other
various facts that are common to so many nations, and that account in a
greater or less degree, for poverty—the numerous facts connected with the
mind, the body, or the opportunities of men—all these you deliberately pass
over, in order that you may fix attention on one solitary fact—namely, that
in all nations individual men, and individual communities of men, have
hitherto been permitted to acquire land and deal with it as their own.
While some element of truth —but truth perverted or misunderstood —
underlies your processes of reasoning, you ride your hobby-horse to
death ; and searching—honestly, I well believe —for light in dark-
ness, you come across a glimmer, and augment it with the burning-
glass till it becomes a flame. Thus, you believe yourself a prophet
and saviour of society, whereas you are the dupe of your own erroneous
arguments and false conclusions.




