



Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


* yt*
& A - v •
c/V


felß
EDITHA:
A POETICAL TALE
W. R. EA SHOWN.
SYDN EY
W. E. SMITH, PRINTER AND STATIONER.


4


\ ;
t>o tnj) Sisfir,
ELIZABETH.
FPON the world's wide waters have I now
Ventured this little waif of mine to cast,
With all the faults that world will not allow
To pass unscathed from many a biting blast.
And tho' it may return to me at last
s
L
\
o
a
)
s
The worn-out subject of a critic's sneer,
Still, as a token of a cherished past
Wherein each page recalls some memory dear
Wherewith thy name is blent, shall give it welcome here.
Tho' if perchance this little work of mine
Should claim a word of merit, 'tis to thee
I would yield up that word, for it is thine:
For thou hast yielded more than worlds to me
In thine affection. Were mine hand now free
To carry out the promptings of my mind,
Not this poor offering thy reward should be—
Not in this humble lay thy name enshrined
Should teach the world a word: For all things true and kind.


4


(# PREFACE. «
IN the character of EDITHA I have attempted to delineate
that of a pure and highly-organised woman, but whose
nature, too deeply susceptible, had that fatal tendency of
sometimes becoming a prey to its own feelings and pre-
sentiments.
Perhaps to this tendency may be attributed, though
indirectly, those hidden agencies—always at work—that
culminated in that one dreadful mistake.
The " Tradition" forms almost a complete tale of itself;
but, placed as it is, nearly at the commencement of the
book, and being an unusually long narrative, might tend
to mislead many readers, not only as to the characters,
but also as to the general drift of the story; hence this
explanation I deem as necessary.
With these remarks I now submit this small "venture
into the fields of literature " to take its chance, and trust
it will meet with some favour.
W. E. E.


4
1^


CONTENTS.
i
5
- 25
- 43
- 65
- 104
INTRODUCTION
CANTO I.
CANTO 11.
CANTO 111.
CANTO IV.
CANTO V.


4
/
I
I
I 1


EDI.THA.
INTRODUCTION.
PH ! were mine now the magic finger,
Whose subtle reportraying power
Would scorn behind quick thought to linger
Recalling scenes from any hour,
Defying time, and piercing space—
One light'ning touch should bid to rise
The shadows of the Past, and place
At once before beholders' eyes,
Like storied pictures on a wall
In vivid light, each passing scene,
So that whereon each glance should fall
Should wonder point " What once hath been ! "
Nor soon would sated gaze defy
Its weird, sad charm, to any eye.
So that each phase of human thought,
Each quick inflection of the soul,
In subtle shades, and shapes be wrought
Like figures on a mighty scroll,
Revealing to the marvelled eye
A wonder, and a mystery—
The workings of the human heart
Displayed in each and every part:
Where good and evil still at war,
A human life doth make, or mar.
When reason, joined to judgment strong,
May pass the right, and choose the wrong.
How may a high aspiring mind
Waste all its power to chase the wind,


While Phantom Hope afar doth stand
And beckons with an eager hand;
How strong Intent, and Purpose deep,
When near its goal may overleap !
How vainly then the looking back
To find the error in its track,
Or nearly reached some happy goal—
Some ultimatum of the soul!
How Circumstance may step between,
Annulling all that might have been;
How Instinct quick may point a way
When Reason halts, and cryeth, " Nay! "
And turneth in its craven fear
To find, too late, that way was clear.
How Impulse quick, a thing may do,
A whole long after life to rue !
How great things dwindle down to small,
And small things grow, and gather all.
How well enthroned doth Virtue stand
With Vice, and Polly, on each hand;
While Love, and Lust, may stand and gaze,
Each mimicing the other's ways.
How Pleasure lifts its golden cup.
Nor heeds the dregs, but drinks all up ;
How Frailty seeks around for aid,
And finds the grave herself hath made ;
How Shame doth hang the drooping head,
And Sorrow weeps her tears instead;
And sweet-eyed Pity bendeth low,
And strives to kiss the face of Woe.
The while cold Charity doth stand,
And tenders forth a meagre hand ;
And pale Despair a space apart
Sits toying with a broken heart;
And black-browed Hate doth stalk along,
And ponders o'er his deepest wrong;
While blear Revenge himself doth foil,
And Anger seeks his own recoil.
How crooked Contempt, and thin-lipped Scorn
Divide the garb that Pride hath worn;
And blind old Justice gropes his way
Among the wrongs that round him lay;


-
And Wisdom points the way to fools,
Yet ne'er abides by its own rules.
How sleek Keligion keepeth warm,
With ample cloak around his form,
Filched from old Honour, standing there
All shiv'ring with his shoulders bare.
How Good, and Evil, try the test
Of strife within a human breast;
While Madness shouts with laughter loud,
And mingles with the motley crowd.
All these, and more, wouldst thou behold,
Each one engaged in its own part,
Could I with magic touch unfold
That mystery—a human heart.
Yet must I now attempt to show
A history strange; and well I know,
iSo dull the verse, so crude the strain,
I ne'er could hope more than to gain
A tribute haply to the zeal
That prompted my rash hand these things reveal




EDITH A.
CANTO I.
' WAS when the Summer's heat had sped,
I And Autumn, with a sweet repose,
J Came stealing o'er the Earth instead
With deeper tints and softer glows ;
And o'er the skies a deeper blue,
So finely tempered to the view;
Which, as the eye extended o'er,
'Twould tempt thee on to gaze the more.
And o'er the Earth, and through the air,
A sunny sweetness everywhere
Yet lingered still as loth to leave,
And seemed to seek a slight reprieve,
To warm and cheer with peaceful glow
Ere yet the Winter's breath should blow.
'Twas such a day, and such a time,
(The only season of the year,
That in dear England's happy clime
Can boast a sky so pure and clear).
'Twas such a day—the glorious sun
Had long since passed meridian's height,
And waning slightly, shone upon
All Nature with a mellow light —
Within a calm sequestered dell
Whereon those sunbeams softly fell.
Oh, 'twas a fair and lovely spot,
Such as but seldom greets the eye,
But when once seen is ne'er forgot
Tho' years may intervening lie.


Along where Iham's vale extends,
Just when the Medway's gentle stream
May be descried in frequent bends
All glittering in the sun's bright beam,
A pretty English home there lay
All basking in the noontide ray.
It stood upon a gentle slope
Below a grove of chestnut trees,
Whose branches formed a leafy cope
Where birds might twitter in at ease,
Which opened on a scene so fair
A paradise seemed centred there ;
Where shrubs and flowers of every hue
In wild untrained luxuriance grew,
With many a shady walk between
Where one might wander on, and find
An ever-changing lovely scene
Disclosed in every turn and wind
Of mossy grots and mounds of flowers,
And verdant slopes and leafy bowers,
Whereon the honeysuckle twined,
And cast its sweetness to the wind,
Which lingered on with balmy breath
And seemed to kiss the flowers beneath:
At times would strengthen to a breeze
And mingle with the higher trees,
Whence straggling leaves, but half embrowned
Came fluttering idly to the ground.
Retiring slightly from the view
The dwelling stood. It could be seen
In glimpses, where the sunlight threw
Its brightest glances in between;
A pleasant pile —tho' somewhat hoar
It seemed with age—and on it grew
The ivy creeping on and o'er,
And that also seemed aged too.
But, 'twas a pleasant, dear old place,
And " Home " seemed written on it's face,
Begirt with those familiar things
The faithful memory ever brings


In foremost recollection when
The distant wanderer seeks again
In fond remembrance to find,
Tho' he may ne'er again behold,
The scenes of youth h'e left behind
Once more in fancy's sight unfold.
Where the chief entrance led upon
A terraced walk, around it grew
A flowering crescent where the sun
Shone cheerfully the whole day through.
Emerging thence —a lady stood,
Of youthful mien and face so fair
The first sweet bloom of womanhood
Had hardly seemed to settle there :
Scarce twenty summers yet had shed
Their radiance o'er her fair young head,
Yet on her youthful features sate
A matron's grace, and air sedate.
'Twas so—and her's the fair pure fame
Belonging to its owner's name—
Editha ! 'twas a name that rung
With praise from many a grateful tongue ;
For kinder voice had never spoken,
Nor kinder deed gave surer token
Of holy sympathy's sweet power.
In need, or dark affliction's hour,
'Twas her's the voice that ever soothed;
'Twas her's the hand that ever smoothed
The sufferer's pillow; her's the tear
For others' woes, or word of cheer
To bid the sinking heart to hope,
To yet once more 'gainst care to cope.
Among the poor of Iham's vale
Thus was she known —and many a tale
Was told of her —and blessings fell
On that dear name they loved so well:
Tho' scarcely two short years had flown
Since they her gentle face had known—
Two fleeting years. One fair Spring morn
Upon the joyous air was borne


The ringing of the marriage hell
For her—that day remembered well—
When all the village flocked to see
That grafting on the family tree
Of him, who, standing by her side,
Then claimed her for his loving bride.
Ah, happy man! that little hand,
So lightly held—so sweetly felt—
No richer prize couldst thou demand
In all the world's wide circling belt.
That little hand—whose soft warm touch
So coyly given, yet yields so much.
Well might his pulse more rapid flow,
Well might his eyes more deeply glow ;
He holds within his grasp a prize
Of worth —unknown to common eyes.
For him alone the task divine
To pierce that inner secret mine—
Her pure young heart—whose treasures deep
Reserved for him to guard and keep.
God grant he ne'er may lack that power;
God grant such cause may ne'er arise
To prove how well, in needful hour,
His hand can keep so fair a prize.
So were they wed that fair Spring morn,
But ere that time came round again
A beauteous boy to them was born.
Thus crowned the love of that fond twain;
And well the little fellow grew,
His face was like his father's too
Could aught enhance so sweet a claim
So should he bear that father's name—
'Twas Roland—nor could fonder sire
With more complaisance gaze upon
A fairer child to his desire
Than this sweet noble-featured son,
To bear the honours of a name
And so perpetuate the same,
And yet rebuild to rank and place
The fallen fortunes of a race


That once had held high power and sway,
And had been mighty in its day.
For he —the sole survivor now,
The last descendant of his line—
Disdained his lofty soul to bow
Submission to his race's decline.
And in this fair sweet boy he found
Great cause for joy, and goodly ground
Whereon his dearest hopes to raise
Of future bright and happy days,
When all the honours of his name
Should yet be known again to fame;
And from the ashes of the past
Would rear a crest that e'er should last,
And brighter, nobler than before,
The ancient name had ever wore :
Tho' glorious once had been their day
It passed—and scarce a tongue could say
How, when, or where, began the tale
Of that high name's descending scale,
Tho' mouldy records feign to show
Its history in a tale of woe—
How one false Knight in deeds of crime
Had reaped a curse, and since that time
The race had waned in wealth and power.
And dwindled with each passing hour.
Thus ran tradition : On a day
This Knight went forth in quest of game
And as it chanced he lost his way,
And to a gipsy's camp he came ;
Inquiring of an ancient crone
His way (Queen of the tribe was she),
She said his Knightship should be shown
By her own grand-child, Zaydalie ;
And thereupon she raised on high
A long and shrill peculiar cry,
And waited till a beauteous maid
Came bounding through the forest glade,
With cheeks aglow, and streaming hair,
With limbs that seemed to scorn compare


So perfect in the untaught grace
Wherewith they moved in rapid pace ;
With eyes that gleamed so darkly bright,
She formed as sweet a picture then
As ever burst upon the sight
Of one among the sons of men :
Nor he unmoved—beheld so fair
A vision burst upon him there.
Intent his gaze on her advance
The maiden saw —and met his glance,
Then drooped her own —and with bent head
Approached the dame with slower tread.
Instructed then was that young maid
To show the Knight from whence he strayed ;
With an assenting courtesy she
Replied : "Sir Knight, please follow me
Nor loth seemed he to take the word
Of one so sweetly seen and heard ;
Then on a threading path the two
Went forth, and soon were lost to view.
Now, as along that path they went,
The Knight his longing eyes did cast
On that young maid with fell intent,
And planned her virgin soul to blast.
And as the trees they walked among,
Advantage took of time and place
To praise, with soft and flattering tongue,
The beauties of her form and face,
And vowed his love was her's alone
If she would list; so vilely well
Pleading his cause in softest tone
That she did list—and list'ning—fell,
And ere she left the woodland shade
Was wooed, won, and alas, betrayed !
The Knight did glory in his crime;
The maiden wept, and said " Alas !"
Yet, still they met from time to time,
And many a stolen hour did pass,


So might she deem herself secure
In love that seemed so true and pure,
And might she list to each false vow,
And watch the smile upon his brow,
And dwell upon each whispered word
Believing fondly all she heard —
The low sweet tone, the soft caress, '
The promise of a future hour
When she his bride. Could she do less
Than yield to him all—all the power
Her young and trusting heart of love
Could give to one so far above ?
Above—he seemed in her rapt sight
Almost an angel pure and bright!
And in his voice: each low-breathed tone
The sweetest sounds her ears had known !
As almost day by day they met
And deemed their secret safe as yet,
And roamed about the forest glade,
Nor deemed such things could be betrayed.
But lo ! it came to pass one day, ,
Their secret did the Queen discover,
And how she passed the time away
In roaming with her Knightly lover.
The poor girl wept, defending him ;
The beldame cursed, denouncing her,
And vowed, to rend her limb from limb
If from the camp she dared to stir
Again to meet that villain Knight,
Whose love had wrought her to such plight
And then a solemn conclave calling
Of all the tribe, to hear the case,
And plan revenge with threats appalling
On the insulter of their race ;
And Zaydalie was placed among
(The centre) of the angry throng,
With bending form, and hidden face,
She sat and bore that deep disgrace ;
And spite her striving to repress
Such tokens of her sore distress,


Her closing- fingers could not keep
The tears that still would force and creep,
The while her heaving bosom told
The tempest that it might enfold.
Ah! well the import of each word
She knew, and trembled as she heard ;
But suddenly all calm she grew,
And from her face her hands withdrew,
And sat all mute and motionless —
Pale and erect—her late distress
Was passed, she only pressed her hand
Just o'er her heart, as to command
Its beatings—and then fixed her eyes
In cold set gleams, and met each glance
As tho' she heard, and could despise,
Their judgment on her sad mischance.
More threat'ning grew the stern debate
On her's, and on her lover's fate ;
And one huge fellow of the tribe
Did taunt the girl with many a jibe.
This fellow had in times gone by
Regarded her with longing eye,
But she had met his coarse advances
With pert replies and scornful glances :
Still he persisted, and one day—
'Twas half in anger, half in play—
She struck him—and then changed his mood
At once, and fired his gipsy blood ;
He pondered to revenge the slight,
And watched the maiden day and night —
And he it was who did discover
Her secret meetings with her lover,
And hastened to the Gipsy Queen
And told all he had heard, and seen ;
Now was the moment come at last,
When he could well revenge the past;
Now was the time, and now the hour,
When he could safely show his power.
" Aha !" he cried —and o'er his face
Smiles—at the thought of her disgrace.


All hideously belied their name
And revelled in the maiden's shame.
"Aha!" he cried, "Is this the maid
Who loves to walk the silent glade,
And wiles away the summer hours
With humming tunes and picking flowers?
Such gentle pastime suits —how well
It needs no answering tongue to tell
While eyes can prove —nor keen the look
Required to read so plain a book.
The wanton sun hath kissed her form
And dallied with her velvet cheek,
And if his kisses were too warm,
The sun was strong —but she was weak.
Oh, I have seen more than ye all,
And can a little tale unfold—
How well a girlish wit can call,
To aid it in devices bold,
The well-feigned guise of honest truth—
The seeming smile —the lip in sooth
That can in tones dissembling well
Conceal the truth it dare not tell.
But I have seen it all I say,
And thus the tale I tell to-day ;
Tho' loth am I such charge to bripg,
I will not spare the wanton thing,
She spared not me —shall I then show
The mercy that she showed not ? No ;
Too oft I wooed in times gone by
The kindly glances of her eye,
And reaped one lesson for my task—
She scorned the man who dared to ask ;
But she must seek her higher game,
(Fit mate for gipsy maid to claim.)
Oh, well she wends her way, I ween,
And softly treads the forest green
To where his lurking steps resort,
And hugs the shame that hath been wrought
With an unblushing cheek and brow,
As tho' such things were common now ;
And there with him she wiles away
The wanton hours of many a day


Deep down in that Knight-haunted glen,
And scorns the love of honest men.
My comrades all —ye mind the day
That villain Knight did come this way :
Date, from the hour since he was seen,
The ruin of your future Queen,
For she was destined such, I ween.
And now to prove my story true,
These letters !" —at these words he drew
From out the game-hag by his side,
A. little package neatly tied,
(As they had been some owner's pride).
" These letters," quoth the coward then,
" Thus vouch my tale—down in the glen
I found them in a hollow tree
Concealed, no doubt, by Zaydalie ;
He leaves them at the trysting spot
When he waits there—and she comes not.
These duly found are hid away
To reproduce another day
When he by chance should absent be
And cannot meet his Zaydalie ;
And then she takes and reads them o'er,
And weeps as though her heart were sore.
I brought them from their hidden place
To prove my tale, and her disgrace,
The dregs of which ye still imbibe,
While such insulters of your tribe
Are strewn about the forest glade
From villain Knight to gipsy maid."
Then paused he in his guileful strain,
And watched the weary look of pain
That crossed the maiden's face, as he
Gave forth his tale of treachery.
An angry murmur rose, and ran,
Throughout the throng from man to man.
Oh, vain to seek for pity then
From those uncouth and wrathful men;
For well, too well, she felt all those,
Once deemed her friends, had now turned


And vain she sought in each stern glance,
For one kind beam. With looks askance
They eyed her as a thing of shame
Unworthy of the gipsy's name ;
And he, the caitiff, eyed her too,
Exulting in his own base heart
At this poor ruin bared to view.
Nor shamed he in his coward's part,
But inly smiled, and gloated o'er
The ruin wrought—the pangs in store
He meditated yet to bring
On her whose lip had dared to fling
The well-reaped scorn it could not hide
For one so base. " Whate'er betide,"
Quoth he, " proud minion, as complete
As my revenge —but not so sweet,
Shall yet your humbled spirit seek
In deeper humbleness to be,
Ruing the scorn it dared to wreak,
And vainly plead to me—to me."
Meantime in angry council still
The chiefs and elders grimly sate,
And many a bitter scheme of ill
Devised against the lovers' fate;
Nor was there one among them all
Whose tongue so free from vengeful gall
'Gainst him that could an atom yield
To one excuse —or somewhat shield
The insult offered to their race
As lightly done—nor time and place,
And opportunity to do
All that was done between the two,
Could plead, in their offended sight,
One thing in favour of the Knight;
Nor should the measure of his guilt
Go unrepaid—tho' blood be spilt;
For crime to crime, and wrong to wrong,
Had ever ranked as high among
The sacred duties of their creed,
As gratitude for kindly deed,


Extreme in either—good or ill,
A friend or foeman's part to fill,
And should they now forego that claim
Content to hold so cheap a name
As to allow so gross a wrong
Unpunished, lurk the tribe among ?
" No, no !" they cry—and 'tis agreed,
If she must suffer, he must bleed.
But when and where, to do the deed ?
And whose the arm to strike the blow ?
Are points for future plans to show.
Suffice, this thing determined on,
Was now enough—it should be done.
" And she—this girl of guileful breast,
This willing dupe, and easy prey,
Whose frailty now to all confessed—
What should be done with her to-day ?
The manly youths of her own race
As brave as he, in form and face,
Was there not one among them all
On whom her roving glance could fall
Wherefrom to choose ? but she must seek
Afar, with wanton eye and heart,
And with a subterfuge as weak
As her own folly, play such part
With strangers —all, all else forgot
Belonging to her sex and caste,
Content to take the shameless lot
Of one whose virtue could not last
The fitting season of her years,
But squanders now in guilty joy
Her life's best honours—nor the tears
That all the future can employ
Shall e'er retrieve —(So deep the stain
Where once Dishonour's blot hath lain).
And she our future destined queen
On whom the tribe so fondly deemed
That nought should ever come between
Our love and hers—so pure she seemed;
But with that seeming only mocked
The hearts that, to all else now locked,


Seek only how to best requite
So false a breast in its own blight.
Tho' if among the gipsy band
One can be found to take her hand
And cloak beneath the marriage vow
The shame that clings upon her now,
And she the while content to bide
At home a simple gipsy's bride:
And swear by all she holds most dear
To be devoted and sincere,
Faithful and true to tribe and spouse,
And sacred hold these solemn vows,
Then hold our hands, and be content
With this, her only punishment:
Transferred shall be her forfeit claim
Of queenship, to some worthier name.
But if to this she will not swear,
And with defiant brow still wear
The bravery she fain would hold,
But shall not, thus do we unfold
Our stern decree, and once gone forth,
Irrevocable: —Hence to the North,
To distant tribes, where wild and stern
Shall be the lesson she shall learn ;
Banished from hence—ne'er to return ;
Banished from kindred, friends, and tribe
Disgraced—cast out —her name a jibe
To all who hear it—this then be
The tribe's decision and decree."
Then ceased the voice of he who spoke
The stern edict —and silence grew
That scarce a sound that silence broke
Along the lately murmuring crew,
And all seemed waiting—then arose
The caitiff spy " just to propose
A little thing," he said, " he thought
Before their judgment could be brought,
In favour to himself ; also,
It would to her some mercy show."


Then softly did the villain smile
In well-feigned pity, thus the while
He spake :—" My friends, I quite agree
In this well weighed, tho' stern, decree,
But yet, methinks, for one so young
A milder sentence from your tongue
Had been preferred. Our laws, tho' just,
(And well preserved, a sacred trust)
Yet still allow the gentle might
Of Mercy's soft persuasive light,
Hath power, and ofttimes most prevails
O'er hearts, when sterner justice fails ;
But as the edict has gone forth,
And half appeased is your just wrath,
List to my words—regret, remorse,
Sweeps o'er my soul with sudden force.
That words of mine hath wrought such cause
To bring the sternness of our laws
Upon the damsel, whose sole sin
Hath been a false Knight's love to win ;
And as regards the Knight, I deem
Your judgment hasty and extreme,
At least, just now, 'twere wiser far
To wait, but not provoke the war;
Let him do that. Be sure he will,
And then your scheme of hate fulfil;
But not too hasty, there are ways
And means enough, whereon to raise
A scheme of retributive ill,
More deadly far than just to kill,
For that too quickly done, and told,
Revenge unsatisfied and cold
Leaves but behind, and nothing more,
And you no better than before.
Thus doubly robbed, in hasty ire,
Quelling revenge in its own fire,
You mar the thing—moreover run
Too great a risk for nothing won.
Let me advise you to delay
Your full decision till you may
With safety, and with just excuse,
The secret schemes of war unloose.


Then wait, and watch, till in your power,
In some unguarded fatal hour,
The Knight shall fall—then let him know
"What 'tis to be a gipsy's foe ;
Or snare your victim 'as ye may,
Be sure deep hate will point the way,
And all such hate may well devise,
Prolong his fears and agonies ;
And watch him in his deepest throes,
As one by one, fresh pangs unclose,
New added tortures, deep and dire,
To feast revenge, and glut your ire ;
And as for me, with willing heart
I promise to perform my part
Alike in council, or in field,
Advice to give, or arm to wield.
And it were well, and wiser too,
The damsel's sentence to review.
Methinks, my friends, your hasty ire
Hath warped your judgment 'neath its fire
And hid discretion 'neath the haze
Such heat engendered thoughts doth raise;
Obscured the vision ; dimmed the sight,
That should discern 'twixt might and right
Now let me ask you to revise
The whole affair with calmer eyes,
And if your cooler thoughts acquit
Your former judgment —so be it;
Then follow out your stern decree,
But prithee, ask no aid from me:
For tho' I charged the girl withal,
I deemed not thus your wrath would fall,
I deemed but only to curtail
Her roving license through the vale ;
And that the tribe would but step in,
And screen her from a greater sin ;
Eegarding still such thoughtless crime
As something to be checked in time
According to her youthful years,
The wrath that shows, but yet forbears.


The privilege of power and might
Withheld, will oft the cause of Eight
Do more to win, than sternest laws
Borne out with a compelling hand,
Could ever gain in such a cause,
Or show the worth of true command.
Bethink you —you have doomed to roam
An exile from her tribe and home
The damsel, once so proud to claim
As future queen —bereft of name,
Of kindred, friends, she wanders forth
A victim to your hasty wrath.
Now list, while I propose a plan
Whereby the welfare of the clan
Need run no risk, or place at stake,
For vengeance, or for justice' sake,
And yet your laws asserted be
And upheld in their dignity ;
On me alone, devolve the task,
The risk, the danger, all I ask
Is to uphold me in my course,
And give me, if I need it, force.
'Tis known to all, I need not tell
Again the tale, 'tis known too well,
How once the maid I sought, and lost,
How well contumely paid the cost;
Let it suffice, the tender claim
Was made and lost, and none to blame ;
But things have turned another way,
And what was then, is not to-day.
Behold, I now th' accuser stand,
And hold the balance in my hand,
While she, in humbler guise sits there,
The woeful picture of despair.
Yes, times are changed, and hearts changed
And well might one the other rue ;
But spite of all, of guilt and shame,
I now renew mine honest claim,
And to the front now take my stand,
And make a firm, and just demand.


Withhold awhile the tribe's decree,
And let the Knight and girl go free,
And if perforce she must be wed,
Let me provide the marriage bed;
Give me full power to hold, and claim,
And rescue from a life of shame.
The girl who spared not, yet must bow
Submissive head to be spared now;
Wed me the girl, and this enforce,
The rest is but an easy course.
Then if the Knight should haply dare—
My knife is keen—let him beware!"
Then rose the maid at this last word,
And turning to the wondering crew,
Addressed them thus —" Well have I heard
All that ye now propose to do.
Now list to me," and as she spoke,
A general murmur slowly broke,
And ran along the astonished clan,
Then slowly stopped as it began.
Oh, well might they in wonder gaze
And her behold in strange amaze,
For as she spake, her ringing tone
Pierced every ear, like music thrown
Afar upon a rising gale
To mingle with the wind's sad wail,
And her dark eyes dilating grew,
And seemed to pierce them, through and through,
And high erect her graceful form
(As tho' to meet a coming storm)
Was reared ; she seemed like one inspired,
A prophetess with fury fired.
She spake —" Now list to me," she said—
" My words, tho' few, upon mine head
Their import lie—this villain vile
Beneath whose seeming honest smile
Lies a black heart as ever ran
With foul false blood in any man;
This coward base, with lying tongue,
Has dared to place himself among


My judges, and in tones forsooth
That could hut mock the ear of truth,
Hath pleaded pity, spoke of shame,
And preached about his gentle claim,
And finished up his tale, to ask
To take upon himself the task
To crush my heart—subdue my pride —
And make of me his slave and bride !
More welcome far, cold death to me,
Than life, shared with such wretch as he.
If I have sinned against the law,
'Tis done, I cannot now withdraw,
And will not, tho' your vaunted force
May seek to turn me from my course ;
No passive victim have you here
To wait your nod, or yield to fear ;
No slave to exile, or to him,
Poor tool of each capricious whim.
If I have erred in thoughtless love,
My full regret my acts shall prove,
But yet methinks, so small a wrong
As mine, had still the tribe among,
Left me one friend my cause to plead,
And give me succour in my need ;
But as it is, mine own weak hand,
Hath power enough at its command,
If not from insult it can save
At least can find for me a grave.
But little more have I to speak,
So heed me well, and do not seek
To stay me in my purpose stern,
Or rue the lesson ye shall learn.
For now I swear!"—as these words fell,
Her hand with sudden movement sought
Her bosom (heaving 'neath the swell
Of unsubdued and bursting thought)
As tho' to quell the tumult there :
But 'twas not so, as it withdrew,
A dagger gleaming bright and hare
Was clenched therein, and held to view—
" For now I swear," she said, " by heaven
Since thus to desperation driven,


This long-, bright blade, with poisoned tip—
More fatal than the adder's grip—
Whose slightest scratch will death produce,
And all the pangs of pain unloose
On him, who would its -keen point dare,
Shall he my friend —so now, beware !
Let all who would molest the Knight,
Pause ere he moves ; by heaven's own light
I've sworn, and nought shall shake my will
And sacred vow, that man to kill.
E'en tho' he shuns the face of day,
Or roams in secret far away,
I'll dog his roaming day and night
With patient heart, and footstep light;
If yet on earth, howe'er remote,
My dagger's point shall reach his throat,
Or in his breast shall find a sheath
And rankle in the heart beneath ;
The deadly chase, I'll ne'er give o'er
Until my victim is no more —
These the last words I have to say
Now take their import as ye may ;
And so, farewell!" Then with a stride
That seemed of conscious power and pride
She turned, and walked the path along
Till screened beneath the woodland shade,
Mending her pace the trees among,
Then sped away through dell and glade.
And none did follow her, they seemed
Spell-bound—or haply they had dreamed—
The thing had been so quickly done ;
They sat aghast, till one by one
Each roused himself, then gathering grew
Strange explanations 'mid the crew,
As only on them seemed to dawn
This thought—"My God, she's gone, she's gone
Then talked they of pursuit —but none
Did follow out the theme begun.


That threat still ringing in their ears
Stayed all pursuit, and fed their fears;
And then they gathered round the fire,
And breathed of vengeance, deep and dire.
And long a weary vigil kept
Far through the night, till upward crept
Lighting the East, pale morning's beam,
Then all retired to think or dream.


EDITH A.
CANTO II
PH ! sweetly fell the evening glow
Upon St. Eoland's Hall;
And the chant of birds from the vale below
And the distant shepherd's call,
Came floating by with a musical flow ;
And a spirit of peace over all
Pervaded earth, and air, and sky,
And a quiet twilight shade,
With a blending hue, and a gentle sigh
From the pasture land to the glade
Breathed softly to all, that the eve was nigh,
With its God-given rest for all made.
Oh! sweetly fell the evening glow
And lingered o'er the vale below,
Withdrawing still each parting beam
From purple hills and glittering stream ;
Now faded all, no one bright ray
Yet still seems lingering on its way,
For where yon grove of trees divide
A gentle slope on either side,
That lingering ray yet still doth shed
A glory o'er each leafy head,
As tho' on there it sought to dwell
A fleeting moment just to rest,
And to the whispering treetops tell
Of secret love, ere to the West
It winged its way in rapid flight
Before the deep'ning hues of night;


And well it might, for lovelier place
Could scarce he found on Nature's face,
For copse, and grove, and leafy bower,
And gentle verdant slopes between,
All richly robed in leaf and flower,
In tranquil beauty formed the scene ;
And that the centre of it all
"Wherein that parting ray did fall.
Oh, surely there —if e'er on earth
A spot could nurse the gentle birth
Of Love's sweet dream, it would he found ;
And so it was —for see, behold
Yon rustic seat with ivy crowned,
Doth not its leafy screen enfold
A secret meeting ? Look again,
The Knight stands there —and, is it true ?
Another maid lists to his strain.
And he the traitor dares to woo
Another maid ! 'tis so, by heaven,
And beautiful is she. Alas !
Shall yet another heart he riven
By vows, false vows, that as they pass
Wither and scathe whereon they light
From this false lover, and base Knight?
And well that traitor's lip could frame
Such vows —they mocked the sacred name
Of truthful love ; yet could he well
In softest tones a sweet tale tell,
And simulate the guise of truth
With speaking eye, and tones in sooth,
So modulated to the theme
Was music to a willing ear,
That all he feigned to be, would seem.
And, ah ! he seemed to her so dear,
As beaming with a glow so warm,
Her lovelit eyes, her yielding form
So closely to his bosom pressed,
With blushing cheek and throbbing breast,
And lips sweet trembling with the tale
The secrets of that breast unveil,
Returns his vows of truth sincere
The kiss that seals a pledge so dear;


And there in loving fancy weave
A future, blissful as the eve
Now drawing placidly around them
A curtain deep, as to surround them,
And hide heneath the twilight haze
Their secret from all outer gaze ;
And they, secure enough they deem,
From prying eyes and ears, the theme
Pursue without reserve or fear,
And little dream a listener near.
Who with strained neck, and glittering eye,
In eager watching lurks close by.
Ah ! had they seen that vengeful face,
They would have turned, and fled the place,
And ne'er had ventured more to tread,
A spot cursed with a thing so dread.
So dread—alas, couldst thou had seen
That crouching form behind the screen
That hid it from the lovers' sight
Thou wouldst have deemed the cause too slight
For fear—some idle prying maid
Perchance crept there, and now delayed,
Fearing to leave her self-sought snare,
And kept unwilling captive there.
Nor doth she seem a thing so dread,
The shrinking form, and bending head,
The rather show a timid grace,
But, ah ! thou hast not seen the face.
Now, now she turns, and if thine eye
Deceived not by the agony
On those strained features, thou will see
That poor young girl is—Zaydalie.
Alas, she fled the tribe's fierce ire
With scornful lip, and eye of fire,
So bravely had she held her part,
Almost exultant throbbed her heart.
At first her step was firm and strong,
And rapidly she sped along.
She feared pursuit, when none appeared;
Her pace grew less; her eye grew weird


With dread forebodings; and her face
Thoughtful and sad —the scornful grace
That erstwhile decked it, now was gone :
That face now seemed but made to mourn.
With murmuring lips as tho' in prayer
Her faltering steps still onward bear
To seek her lover Knight so brave
And from his love sweet succour crave,
And to his heart a soft appeal
Would make. Oh, surely he would feel
And grant, at last, her earnest prayer,
Since all for him had been her care,
And make from promise long delayed
An honoured wife—tho' ruined maid.
And that was how she found him —there,
Breathing of love to one more fair
Than she. Oh, if her heart would break,
And dying, then and there forsake
The false cruel world, kind Death had been
Her best and truest friend, I ween.
'Twas not to be —her first wild throes
Soon changed to something deeper still.
Oh God, that such stern thoughts as those
Should e'er a fond girl's bosom fill.
With nervous hand, and stern set face,
With stealthy tread, she nears the place
Where yet the lovers, too secure
In mutual bliss, heed nothing more.
Still nearer yet, the girl doth stand —
The fatal dagger in her hand—
And in her eye a purpose stern
Gleams forth, and almost seems to burn
In its intensity of will;
With power enough almost to kill,
The hand the gleaming weapon bore :
Now twitched, and trembled more and more-
No w slowly raised—the frenzied thing
Seemed just about to make a spring—
But well for him that moment stern
He started with a sudden turn,


As tho' half conscious in his mind
Of danger lurking just behind.
That movement saved him, had he still
Beneath that boding sense of ill
Paused yet a moment, ere he stirred,
The blow had fell, unseen, unheard ;
But as it was, he half withdrew
From her he wooed, and quickly threw
A searching glance before, behind,
But nothing saw —" 'twas but the wind,"
He muttered; " but methought I heard
A rustle and a half-breathed word;
But 'twas the wind, or fancy seeking
An echo to thy sweet voice speaking,"
He said, and smiling, turned again
To her—but with a look of pain.
"Oh, dearest, let us go," she said,
" This place is looking dark and dread,
And o'er mine heart a weirdness creeping,
So strange, I scarce can keep from weeping ;
I know not what, but let us go,
This place is sad, I feel it so."
Ah ! little dreamed that loving heart
The truth of which her words were part,
Nor deemed they as they turned to go
What thev were leaving then behind
A bosom beating wild with woe,
A frenzied brain, and wandering mind,
A fleeing form, that in the gloaming
Looked like a spectre wildly roaming.
This tale advances now a space;
Twelve months hath sped—the time and place
Almost the same at that last scene,
The only difference between
The hour is somewhat earlier, and
The skies with brighter beams are spanned—
Athwart the vale in mellow light
All Nature still looks gay and bright.
Twelve months had passed away, I said,
And changes had been wrought I ween —


Poor Zaydalie was mourned as dead,
For none had ever heard or seen
Aught that gave tidings of the maid,
Save that the dagger had been found
With broken haft and rusty blade,
Drove deep and firmly in the ground,
As tho' it had been driven there
A sigh and token of despair ;
And surmise and conjecture hung
Awhile on every busy tongue.
The tribe still searched, but all in vain,
No tidings of her could they gain ;
And then they journeyed far and wide,
And lastly left that country side,
Intending northward then to bear
And search the tribes located there ;
For tho' they mourned her still as dead
They would not cease the search, they said.
Meantime within St. Roland's Hall
Hath change, with ever busy hands,
Made no small stir for one and all;
The Knight hath just from distant lands
Returned—nor cometh he alone :
A beauteous bride, o'er whose fair brow
Scarce six quick wedded months hath flown,
Claims all his fond attention now.
But surely in that form so fair
No unknown stranger cometh there,
Remembered well that sweet young face,
Familiar sounds that gentle tone.
Twelve months had sped; the time and place
Almost the same—but she hath grown
More full in her sweet womanhood
Since then, when they together stood
That summer's eve so long ago,
And yet so short —is it not strange
As old Time works for weal or woe,
So we unconsciously arrange
The measure of the fleeting hours
To our mind's eye. No time is ours,


But what is mapped, and marked along
By past events —thus weak or strong
Upon the memory impressed lies,
Time only lags, or quickly flies.
And time had quickly flown with them,
The wedded Knight and lady fair,
Small cause could she such hours condemn
As had been granted to her share,
The golden sands had smoothly ran
Since first her wedded life began ;
The charms of travel by his side,
With all that wealth could well provide
To satisfy each quick desire—
What more could woman's heart require ?
Yet half aweary with the glow
Of pleasure's quick unceasing flow
She sighed for home—and he her lord
Could not say nay when she implored —
And so at home they come at last,
And rest, sweet rest, with greeting smile,
Bids welcome from that gayer past
To joys more peaceful than the while
Had she yet seen. Oh, happier now
Throbs the soft pulses of her heart,
Contented grace sits on her brow
And shows the joy such scenes impart,
Her dream, her pictured dream of this
Is realized, and all is bliss.
Alas, sweet flower, joy while you may,
Within the peaceful summer's ray.
Joy whilst thou canst —for evening's shade
May doom thy petals soon to fade;
Exhale thy fragrance, for the breath
Of night sweeps ofttimes flowers to death,
For those, alas, with sweetest bloom
Fade first, and find the earliest tomb.
And now adown the well kept walk
The Knight and lady wend along,


And in a strain of gentle talk
Beguile the way, the flowers among,
To this and that he points, and tells
Explainingly, the bulbs and bells;
And how he plans the coming year—
Improvements making here and there :
" A hope of beauty, love," he cried,
" Fit to be graced by such a bride."
Thus many a devious path they tread,
By fresh attractions onward led ;
And all unconsciously they rove
And wander idly through the grove
"Where still the seat with ivy crowned,
And many a twisted tendril bound,
Seemed to invite with open arms
The passer-by to taste the charms
Of rest awhile beneath the shade
The creeping ivy there had made.
The lady saw, and knew the place,
And showed it in her smiling face :
The scene awoke a tender glow
Within her breast, " Oh, let us go,"
Cried she, "and in that dear old spot
Talk of those times, almost forgot.
See yonder seat, where you and I
Told our first love in days gone by."
He, yielding to the wish expressed,
Upon the rustic seat they rest,
As on that eve twelve months ago
When vows were whispered soft and low ;
When, with drooped eyes and throbbing breast,
The secret of her love confessed !
"Twelve months ago—the time doth seem
As fleeting as a joyous dream"—
The happy lady thought and said ;
" And we are more than six months wed;
Unlike a dream tho', shall our joy
The long bright hours of life employ;
No passing ray hath warmed to life
The love of her you now call wife ;
No fancied wrong or foolish pride
Shall e'er mine heart from thine divide,


And this dear spot, where peaceful rest
Seems to have made itself a nest,
Will ever dear and sacred he
Symbol of our fidelity ;
Long as the trees above- shall wave,
So shall it last, e'en to the grave."
She spake, and took his hand, and he
A something less than man were formed,
Could not his heart's responses be
To purer, nobler feelings warmed—
E'en tho' he felt within his soul
How all unworthy could he claim
That pure young faith—that o'er him stole
Eemorse, and all awaking shame,
And back upon his guilty heart
The memories of long ago
Came goading, like a poisoned dart
Thrust forward by an unseen foe.
He inly vowed, if heaven would hide
That guilt from her he sat beside,
He would devote, while life should last,
His future to redeem that past,
And noble deeds henceforth, secure
Eemission of those sins of yore ;
And as his hand responding gave
Her sought-for pressure, shone his eye
With a new light, sincere as grave,
Conveyed to her that sole reply,
And 'twas enough.
Oh, thou fond heart,
My pen almost refuseth now
To trace the bitter coming part
So near at hand ; thou deem'st not how
So shortly would thy gentle trust
Be proved—how deeply in the dust
Would thy fond pride all humbled lie,
And seek to hide from every eye
Infutter hopeless misery.
So sat the Knight and lady there
Engrossed in mutual tender care ;


Nor heard they an advancing tread;
Nor saw they through the branches spread,
A female form of aspect wild,
Within whose arms—what seemed a child—
A sleeping infant closely pressed
Against a wan and shrunken breast,
She bore along. Approaching still,
With noiseless tread, the figure came,
A fixed dread purpose seemed to fill
And glitter in those eyes of flame ;
With that set glance upon the two,
A sudden turn, she stands to view.
They saw; and then the lady said,
" Whence this intruder; why so dread
And fierce those eyes are fixed on me ?
Poor creature, I would not harm thee ;
Tell me thy trouble if thou hast
Aught I can soothe, but do not cast
Such baneful eyes. What dost thou seek ?
Alas, thou seem'st so wan and weak,
Thou dost require sweet pity's aid,
Thyself and child —be not afraid
To ask thy boon, or tell thy grief,
And surely thou shalt have relief.
My lord—Oh! heaven, what thee doth ail ?
Why now so silent ? why so pale ?
Your looks are strange, —why gaze at her ?
You seem spell-bound,—you do not stir, —
You tremble—do you ail or fear ?
And who this woman standing here ?
Oh, tell me." But no sound did come
Prom his pale lips, the Knight seemed dumb
And then the affrighted lady stood
Silent as he, and white her face
Became, as the receding blood
Fled to her heart, and left no trace;
And thus the three did stand, and stare,
And in each other's eyes did glare;
Vainly essayed his lips to break
The silence deep, at length she spake,
And]on his ears rang like a knell
The tones he knew, alas, too well.


" Lady, since thus you seek to know
How came I here, my cause of woe,
Look at this infant—it is dead !
Look at its mother —here unwed!
Look at its father, by your side ;
Look at yourself, its father's bride ;
Your answer take. And now, false Knight,
Hear thou thy gipsy love once more ;
Methinks you gladden not, at sight
Of me, as in the days of yore;
But see the little pledge I bring
Born of our love, a little thing,
And it is dead—but it is thine —
And to your arms I will resign
My share of it. Oh, once it smiled;
Hadst thou then seen, it had beguiled
Thee of thine heart, its soft dark eyes,
More soft than thine, but weird and sad,
Seemed ever lit from twilight skies,
Looked into mine, and I grew mad ;
And it is dead. Oh, traitor vile,
Thou'st robbed me —could not thy false smile
Had been content —thou didst forsake
When thou hadst took all thou couldst take
From me; and Grod, I was content
To bear the rue of thine intent
And theirs, and far away I strayed
An outcast ruined, and betrayed,
And never deemed again to see
The eyes that once looked love to me—
I could forgive ; ah, look again,
Have I not wandered back to thee;
And three days have I watched in vain,
And now at last—oh, Gk>d—at last,
We meet! Dost thou recall the past
When thou didst rush with open arms ;
Now thou seem'st filled with dread alarms.
We meet. I thought that I should die
Ere yet again I met thine eye;
We meet, but ere again we part
Take thou the pledge, 't has next mine heart


Lain long and weary; it is thine;
Then take it—take it—think 'twas mine.
Thou dost not move ; oh, coward base,
Then let me tell thee to thy face
Thou art a villain false and fell!
And o'er thine heart I'll hang a spell
That, like a flag thrice cursed, shall wave
And waft thee to an ill-timed grave;
Prophetic now my words I feel,
The future of your race reveal.
Take thou thine offspring—it is thine—
And may its fate around thee twine ;
And take its mother's curse as well,
And both shall drag ye down to hell;
On all thy race the future brings
Still shall they rue the curse that clings,
And in their downward quick career
Their prestige lose of rank and sphere.
Like as the ruin ye hath wrought
So shall be theirs—by thee 'tis bought—
Fate only gives thee back thine own,
And their last days shall mine atone.
So looms the end, then dark the death
When madness draws its latest breath."
With that, she then advanced quite near
To where her former lover stood,
And muttered something in his ear
That seemed to freeze his very blood,
Then laid the infant at his feet
And made a hasty quick retreat;
Her rapid footfalls backward borne
More faintly grew, and she was gone.
Oh, then and there in that dread spot,
Couldst thou had seen it, ne'er forgot;
It would in memory ever lie
A dreaming horrid phantasy.


Behold the Knight, with haggard face,
Stooping to her as prone she lies :
The fair young wife —you could not trace
In those drawn lips, and vacant eyes,
The creature of an hour ago;
From all that stricken face could show,
Pallid and cold, he tries in vain
The frozen pulses to regain—
A feeble flutter comes and goes,
Sometimes her eyelids trembling close,
And then re-opes with vacant stare,
No light of reason shining there ;
And from her lips a wailing moan
So sad 'twould rend a heart of stone.
He gives a helpless look around,
Then lifts her gently from the ground,
And in his arms essays to bear
Her from the spot. Gfood heavens ! see there
He stumbles, almost plants his tread
Upon the infant lying dead.
He had forgot —he must conceal;
So lays his burden down again,
And with a nervous shuddering zeal,
That quickly hides ; once more with pain
The lady lifts and bears away,
Trending to where his mansion lay.
But little more remains to tell
Of this sad tale, tho' tended well;
The stricken lady ne'er again
Kecovered health; and tho' her brain
"Was darkly clouded for a while,
And doubt long hovered o'er her brow,
Yet was she seen again to smile
(True to her gentle trust and vow)
On him —that she forgave him ! Yes;
'Twas shown by many a soft caress.
And so the summer passed away,
And autumn came in sombre gray ;
But ere the trees their leaves had shed
Her spirit from this earth had sped;


And tho' her gentle soul had flown
She had not left him quite alone:
A sweet young life remained behind
To claim his love, and keep in mind
The wife and mother gone before;
And all the pangs for him she bore.
And o'er the Knight a change had come ;
Silent and thoughtful oft he strayed
Around the precints of his home
With head bowed down, as tho' he prayed;
Sometimes with rapid steps would walk,
And strangely muttering, seem to talk
With unseen being close at hand ;
Then suddenly would halt and stand,
As tho' in meditation deep,
And o'er that spot would seem to keep
A watch an hour or so—and then
Would slowly wander home again.
And no companionship had he
Save a huge dog, 'twas one that she
Had patted oft in days before,
And many a time had fondled o'er ;
Tho' oft, when eventide came round,
His steps would wander through the grove,
And haunt the spot where trusting love
Had told its tale, alas, too well,
From lips that never more would tell!
Above him still the trees did wave.
But she, fond heart, was in the grave.
And then upon the rustic seat
Would sit, with her dog at his feet,
And muse away, with saddened face,
And tears adown his cheek would trace.
There was a spot —a little mound—
Close by, where oft in gaze profound
He would in meditation dwell
O'er the dread history it could tell,
For there the gipsy's child did lay,
Buried by whom no tongue could say.


Thus years rolled on, and, if his grief
"Was somewhat softened, one might trace
The soul that could not find relief
All plainly written on his face :
Deep lines, of thought, 'and wasting care,
Had placed their marts unsparing there.
But yet a solace he could find
In the sweet hoy she left behind;
The little fellow grew apace,
Inheriting his mother's face ;
His prattling tongue would oft beguile
His silent parent of a smile
As on the child would fondly gaze,
And watch those gentle winning ways
That coiled around his lonely heart
Like blessed balm —and scarce apart
Were these fond two —his only joy
Was centred in his darling boy.
But grief, remorse, and brooding thought,
Ere he had reached his manhood's prime,
Their evil had too surely wrought,
And aged him long before his time;
And he declined—at last gave way —
And in his chamber dying lay.
Oh! then, on heart and ear did ring,
The gipsy's curse with fearful power,
And to that dying man did bring
Terror, increased in that dread hour.
" Could aught avert that fatal spell
From that dear child he loved so well ? "
So might he ask the holy man
Who stood beside his dying bed :
" Oh! tell me quickly, if you can,
Can aught be done, ere life be sped ?
If that you know, and quickly tell,
I will endow your abbey well,
And half the wealth my son should claim
Bequeathed be in your order's name."


The Abbot (such was he) then said,
" Naught can be done ere life be sped,
Save by deep prayer to that high throne
Where all must bow, for mercy shown.
Where He—the arbiter of all—
Lets not a thing unnumbered fall;
And human deeds recorded, wait
His judgment on the doer's fate.
There, earth-born curses naught avail,
'Tis in his hand —the unerring scale
Of right and wrong—and thence the meed
Accorded to each thought and deed ;
So let thine heart in suppliant prayer
All humbly sue for mercy there.
Hath he not said ' Let all who seek
My presence with a contrite heart
Doubt not; although his voice be weak,
I yet will hear, and grace impart.'
Thy wealth we want not —jet will take
And use it for thy dear child's sake ;
We will devote in pious use
Each portion of the sacred trust,
And with our prayers strive to unloose
Thy tortured soul when thou art dust,
So that it may in blest release
Enjoy at last eternal peace."
Such comfort as these words expressed
The wretched man with eager ear
Seized with a miser's dying zest,
Fearful to lose such treasure dear,
And then with liasteful trembling hands
The wealth bequeathed—then raised in prayer
Till strength was gone, and life's last sands
Eolled from the heart once beating there.
But little more remains to tell—
The gipsy's fate —whate'er befel
The poor mad thing, none ever knew;
But 'twas surmised by not a few


That 'neath the Medway's seething tide
The mystery held of how she died.
Tho' still her haunting spirit roved
(As told by many a country maid)
About the spots in life she loved;
And oft at twilight through the glade
She might be seen, with stricken face,
Gliding about from place to place—
Sometimes beside the little mound
She stood with ever drooping head;
Then might be heard a thrilling sound,
Like as a mother o'er the dead,
Mourning her loss—at times less wild
She seemed, as o'er a sleeping child,
Chanting a gentle lullaby,
And then the tones would sink and die.
Thus ran the tale, and endeth so
That strange tradition—if the curse
Died with the dying, time will show
Revealed to thee in future verse.
Suffice it now : The little heir
Developed 'neath the guardian care
The Abbott promised to extend,
And did, and proved a faithful friend.
At length a noble youth became
As ever bore his father's name ;
He loved, was wed, and lived a life
Of peaceful joy, and free from strife,
And heirs to him were also born
"Who lived a parent kind to mourn.
Then to the race dark days began,
And through each generation ran ;
Their prestige lost of wealth and power,
And dwindled with each passing hour
Until of almost all were shorn,
When he, last of his race, was born ;
A sweet young stripling he appeared
As e'er a parent's bosom cheered ;
But orphaned young, and he became
Ward to the Abbey—'twas the same


His forbears had with wealth endowed,
And since that time had ever showed
A strong adherence to the race,
Who still retained the right to place
Within their pious charge and care
The guardianship of each young heir.
Young Eoland grew, and reached in time
A noble type of youthful prime,
Well gifted with each manly grace,
As true in heart, as fair in face —
In course of time to love aroused,
And 'twas Editha he espoused;
'Tis on their history now I ween
My pen shall paint the living scene.


EDITHA.
CANTO 111,
XD ETURN we now to that fair scene
I Where opened first our humble lay,
Where softly fell the sunny sheen
Of a declining autumn day.
The chestnut trees, the shrubs below,
Shone brightly 'neath its ruddy glow;
The quaint old mansion in the rear,
With ivied wall and rugged face,
Stood like an ancient hoary seer
Surveying with a tranquil grace
The calm retirement of a scene
That long a peaceful home had been.
Nor could a fairer spot he found—
Tho' thou might search the country round—
Than where the young Editha stood
In her sweet pride of womanhood,
Upon the terrace 'midst her flowers,
Companions of her leisure hours,
Where softly now the evening sun
Glanced o'er, and smiled on every one.
And she the fairest thing of all
Whereon that glancing light did fall,
As there she stood in silent grace
And seemed to think of some one dear,
For smiles were on her fair young face ;
And in her eye there shone a tear;
But she was watching, and that drop
Was but the essence of a thought,
A loving one, that would not stop
Until to sparkling light 'twas brought;


And there it lingered till it fell;
And as it fell a murmured name
Was softly breathed, as tho' to tell
For whom that little tear-drop came.
Editha waited for her lord,
And thus his absence now deplored :
" Oh, will he never, never come !
It was not thus he stayed from home
When in our early marriage vow,
Yet scarcely greener than 'tis now,
Our love ; —hut I'm a foolish thing,
And too fond of imagining ;
For well I know 'tis true as ever,
His love for me—and naught can sever
Fond hearts like ours —so close entwined
That naught could sweeter, stronger hind."
She ceased, and then she turned her gaze
Afar beyond the distant hill,
And seemed to watch the glowing rays
Of sunset, where they lingered still.
And thus she stood, a little space,
With watchful eye, and thoughtful face.
But suddenly a changing shade
Her features crossed ; whate'er it was,
Her altered mien and face betrayed,
It sprung from some deep hidden cause,
And in her eyes a strangeness rose,
And settled there; and then she seemed
In memory seeking to unclose
A something she had thought, or dreamed,
It might be years ago ; but still
The thought was there, and now unquell'd
It seemed to rise against her will,
And o'er her soul it grew and held,
And cast its shadow o'er her face—
That face so lately sweetly smiling.
Ah, me ! that aught should e'er displace,
For darker gleams, that ray beguiling;
But still those darker gleams were there.
Nor wouldst thou deem that face so fair


Thou didst behold a short time hence
The same ; so quick the influence
Of evil grows with rankling power ;
So swift, that like the lightning blast,
Whereon but lately bloomed a flower,
Is now to desolation cast.
Who hath not felt that sudden dread
Of unseen danger lurking near,
Whereon the next footfall might tread,
It might be there, it might be here ?
And from that very doubt there grows
A kind of boldness in its place
That prompts you onward to unclose,
And front that danger face to face.
'Twas such she felt, and to the task
She bent herself, her soul to ask
From what strange cause, from whence arose.
This boding sense of hidden woes ;
Till now, all life had ever seemed
So happy ; but she must have dreamed
When thoughts like these, a home could find
Within a pure and virtuous mind.
The world must be a world of ill
When thoughts like these, could bosoms fill.
What thoughts ? Ah ! she alone could tell
Who only felt their force too well.
But she alone, who, standing there,
Seemed given to a dark despair.
Were not those thoughts prophetic ? Ah !
Who can tell what Time may hold
Within her pregnant depths afar,
Waiting the future to unfold.
What eye could pierce the shrouded veil,
And live to tell the fearful tale ?
Yet haply in the human breast
Such power may half exist, tho' pressed;
Clogged 'neath the burden of a life
Of gross desires, and hourly strife,
And contact with the kindred earth,
Whence we derive our common birth.


Yet still, strange moments sometimes fall,
When Time half lifts her mystic pall ;
Then, then, what may the mind not bring
When brooding o'er some little thing,
What subtle force within the soul
Leaps forth, defying all control,
When Past and Future seem to blend,
Whose shadows o'er that soul descend;
Through whose far reaching gloom appears
The shapeless ills of coming years.
Are there not times—and those who feel
Such times are those who feel the most—
When o'er the consciousness may steal
A thing that may be ; tho' 'tis lost
To grosser natures, 'tis a sense
With them instinctive, and a power
Whose deep mysterious influence
May half foreshow some future hour.
'Tis so, altho' a strange belief;
But those who feel it, deem it true ;
It forms the source of many a grief
Before the time that grief is due.
Then happier far, in simple bliss,
To travel on life's path unknown,
Than antedate a thing like this,
And reap a grief before 'tis shown.
Now see! Behold the setting sun
In farewell gleams o'er nature cast,
Proclaims afar the day is done,
And that these glances are the last.
So sinks into his golden rest,
And tinges o'er the glowing West,
And through the mellow skies diffuse
The last bright vestige of his hues.
Where, mingling with his waning light,
The deep'ning shadows of the night
Come stealing over all, and throws
O'er nature's face a soft repose.


Oh ! now it is, when oyer all
That peaceful calm so softly stealing
Extends, and seems to hold in thrall,
And fills the soul with deepest feeling.
When o'er the touched -and yielding heart
There grows that calm expansive power,
That seems to gain from every part
That breathes around in this sweet hour.
When o'er the consciousness a sense
Of what we may be gently brings
A purer, nobler influence,
To lift the soul to higher things.
The shades of Night are gathering fast,
The day-gleams now have lived their last,
And twilight hastens to give way
Before the night's advancing sway;
And twinkling stars, now palely peeping,
Look down on nature calmly sleeping.
And through the silent atmosphere,
The only sound that strikes the ear
Is but the whisper of a breeze,
Along the grove of chestnut trees.
But where is she, that being fair,
We saw so lately standing there ?
Still striving with an unknown woe
Within the sunny evening glow;
Now vanished with that faded light,
As tho' the shadows of the night
Had, jealous of the glows of day,
Swept all its loveliest things away;
Or shrouded 'neath a dusky guise
The beauty that its power defies,
For still the sleeping flowers are there—
But where is she, that lady fair ?
Along where yonder pathway wends
A winding course its way between
A belt of shrubs, just where it ends
A little wicket gate is seen;


A large yew-tree on either hand,
Like two stern guardians seem to stand,
With branches pointed to the sky,
As tho' e'en heaven they would defy,
Or aught beneath that would invade
The precincts of their gloomy shade.
But there is one who hath so dared,
As tho' aught or naught she cared ;
Beneath that dusky shade she stands
All motionless, with tight clasped hands,
With gleaming face, and pleading eyes
Uplifted to the dark'ning skies,
As tho' to seek for succour there
To save her from a dark despair.
Editha ! what thy grief may be
Thou knowest —lift thy soul to heaven,
And tho' thy prayers may wordless be
Sweet pity shall be surely given.
Whate'er her grief I cannot tell,
She only knew —and knew too well —
Whate'er the grief, whate'er the cause,
A waking dream of madness 'twas.
But see ! what means that sudden start,
That flashing eye and beating heart,
As tho' awaking from a trance ?
See now ! What means that changing glance,
So eager in its lightning gleam,
That through the night's o'erhanging pall,
Impenetrable as it would seem,
That piercing glance would pass through all,
As tho' it sought for some one near,
Yet with a kind of doubtful fear.
It might be fancy thus deceiving —
A cruel fancy if it were —
Thus mocking with a fond believing
Only to crush the hope that's there.
But is it fancy ? Hark ! a sound
Like rapid footfalls on the ground,
Each moment more distinct and clear,
Now grow upon the list'ning ear ;


ED/THA.
Still nearer jet it seems to gain,
Advancing swiftly up the lane.
Near—nearer yet —now bold and free
It comes —it is—joy ! joy ! —'tis he.
A murmured name—a close embrace—
So close that in its tight'ning grasp
He well might wonder what could place
Such strength into a woman's clasp.
Ah ! had he seen that glancing eye,
So softly now, so sweetly beaming,
He ne'er had thought, or wondered why,
Had he but seen its late cold gleaming.
But why that sudden drooping lid,
Beneath whose lashes now lie hid
Beams, that he ne'er had sought in vain
To read therein. Again, again,
The old sweet tale —wherever shone
The love that beamed for him alone.
But why that swift relaxing clasp ?
That sinking form ? and why that gasp ?
Fond man, 'twere vain for thee to guess.
There lay within that short caress,
Thou deem'st so sweet, a hidden thing
Beyond thy mind's imagining :
Like as a stream's arrested course,
Wherein whose waters gathering, grow
Into a strong resistless force,
And, bursting, threaten all below.
So 'twas with her—the o'er pent soul
Had burst the bonds of all control,
And spent the force of that excess
In one wild burst of tenderness,
And nature had at last giv'n way.
And now, as tlio' in death, she lay
Insensible to all alarms
Within those strong encircling arms.
And he —oh, heaven ! what grief is this
Thus breaking rudely o'er the bliss
Of one short moment ? She, so fair,
But now so fondly resting there,


EDITHA.
The loving partner of his heart,
So near—and yet so wide apart.
Is this all real, or fancy's seeming ?
Or is she dead ? or is he dreaming ?
So came npon his soul the dart,
And sent the life-blood to his heart,
To curdle there an icy stream,
When Hope hut lent as cold a gleam.
Oh ! what to do —or how to bring
The life back to that lovely thing !
Oh ! what to do —a sudden thought —
A flash—like inspiration caught!
Along where yonder pathway led
He hastened now with hurrying tread,
And thence that precious load conveyed
To where a little fountain played,
Where, glitt'ring o'er its marble stand,
A tinkling shower, so cool and clear,
Now seemed to murmur " Stretch thine
And take—for life—for life is here."
Oh, now, with eager outstretched palm
He gathered up the liquid charm,
And lightly sprinkled o'er her face,
Nor waited long its power to trace,
For, as the magic life-drops fell,
A quick effect began to tell—
A movement as of struggling pain—
But now she seemed to lapse again
Into her former state enthralled,
And Roland more and more appalled.
Oh ! fondly, passionately, now
He covers o'er her cheek and brow
With burning kisses—each caress
Yet more intense in tenderness—
As from his inmost soul it came,
And, intercepting in its track
Its power from soul to soul, would claim
To bring that wandering spirit back.
As tho' responsive, now a start
Once more that struggling sense of pain
Arose, as from her heaving heart,
And now she wakes to life again.


ED IT HA.
Joy! joy!—those eyelids now unclose
From their unnatural repose,
And, dreamily, the wandering eyes
Reveal the thoughts that faintly rise.
Where —where is she ? Who holds her now
And whose that kiss upon her brow ?
And whose that voice—whose loving tone
Strikes to her heart ? It is her own—
It is her own—her husband dear.
But whence came he—and why now here ?
These thoughts, and others in their train,
In quick succession through her mind
Revolve—a mazy, tangled chain,
She now seems striving to unwind.
Slowly, at first, the power to think
Returns with memory, and now draws
From out its web each sep'rate link,
Unwinds the chain, and finds the cause.
But with that knowledge also came
That former dread she dared not name.
But why dread now ? Is he not here ?
What now hath she to do with fear.
Her own fond husband by her side ?
'Twere foolish—-weak—she would not hide,
But tell him all. "Oh ! dearest love,"
She thus begun, and kissed his cheek;
" Oh, let me tell thee ere we move
What I have felt, nor deem me weak,
But let me tell thee " then a pause—
She seemed to hesitate; and then
She shuddered from some hidden cause,
And thus her tale commenced again :
" Oh ! Roland, I've had such a dream "
But still she stopped, the words did seem
As tho' they never could be spoken,
And so that tale was left —unbroken.
Instead thereof, with loving smile,
She said, '' Oh, 'tis not worth the while ;
'Twere foolish, weak, and selfish, too,
My dearest love, to weary you
With such vain fancies, foolish things,
And thou just home —nay I will not,


For at thy smile they've taken wings ;
In sooth that dream I have forgot."
Again she sought his fond embrace
And clung to that sweet resting place,
As tho' to seek a refuge there
From every worldly thought and care,
And softly murmured—"Dearest, why
Didst thou not hasten—vainly I
Have waited; why, why didst thou stay,
I've watched for thee the livelong day ?
This morn I saw the sun arise
And tinge with red the eastern skies ;
And then I said this is the day
My love has been a week away;
This is the day he promised me
No longer would his absence be ;
And little Roland called thee too,
As tho' the little fellow knew
His father dear was coming home;
But still thou didst, thou didst not come.
I saw the sun's declining ray
And watched it as it disappeared ;
Yet still thy ling'ring feet did stay,
And then I doubted and I feared;
For then I thought that ill had come,
And that thou never wouldst come home.
She ceased, and waited his reply
With glowing cheek and glist'ning eye ;
And he —howe'er his wondering mind
Might haply seek to trace or find
Consistency in each strange phase—
Oh, this strange welcome —he but guessed
'Twas one among the many ways
Whereby a loving woman's breast
From deep suspense, too long sustained
Upon a nervous brooding thought,
Had haply somewhat overstrained
Its power—and now relaxed —but sought
Expression in the wild o'erflow,
Where nature suddenly set free


Could scarce consistent action show
In such mixed feelings—thus deemed he.
But yet, howe'er such thought might find
A fleeting lodgment in his mind,
He felt how sweet the power he held,
That e'en in absence had compelled
Itself so well to he confessed
Within so fair and fond a breast;
And as she ceased her loving strain,
He kissed her o'er and o'er again,
And sought in soothing words to cheer
Her breast from every doubt and fear ;
And then to her he thus explained,
The reason he had been detained :
" 'Tis the first time, since we were wed,
I have been absent from mine home,
And 'twill be long ere hence my tread
Again with distant foot may roam.
Mine homeward step was but delayed
An hour or so, because I stayed
A short while with an old school friend—
Young Raleigh. You have heard me tell
How far our friendship did extend
In days of old —I loved him well;
I would resume the tie once more
That bound us in the days of yore,
And made him promise soon to come
And see us in our rural home.
Oh! he hath changed since last we met —
More manly, and so handsome too—
The sunny smile is there tho' yet,
The same bold heart that e'er I knew,
The same free hand, and mirthful eye;
But thou wilt judge thyself ere long
His qualities, and whether I
In partial praise hath been too strong."
"Nay, Roland, hath thine heart no fear
To bring that handsome fellow here ?
Hast thou no fear—thy lovely wife ?
Nay, do not smile ! thou knowest full well


That name is, during our married life,
The one wherein you love to dwell
The most; and surely, surely I
May use the name you call me by
A hundred times within a week—
Nay, do not smile, but tell me true,
Hast thou no fear ? Thy friend may seek
He's won your heart —to win mine too."
" Oh, darling !" Roland gaily cries,
" I have no fear upon that head
" That heart, you mean," his wife replies.
" That heart is what I should have said,"
Spake Roland —but within his tone
A shade of sadness seemed to steal,
As tho' a thought he could not own
To her, nor to himself conceal,
Had dared intrude. Yet, tho' he strove
In tones whose cheerfulness had fled
To still seem cheerful —as to prove
His faith in her—that thus he said :
" Oh, thou art but a foolish thing,
And too fond of imagining ;
Tor well I know, 'tis true as ever,
Thy love for me, and nought can sever
Fond hearts like ours so close entwined,
That naught could sweeter, stronger bind.'
Editha trembled as she heard,
And o'er her face a paleness came
At each strange sentence, word for word,
For were they not the very same
She had that afternoon but spoken
To her own heart. Now, as they fell,
They seemed to breathe a deeper token
Of what —she knew not —like a knell
They seemed to fall, or dark portent
Of coming danger. What they meant
She could not guess —she could not tell—
But yet she trembled as they fell.
'Twere strange that words so dear as these.
So fondly uttered, should not please ;


'Twere strange when he hut spoke of bliss
Should lurk its dread antithesis.
E'en as a snake all coiling lay,
Still gathering venom on his fang,
Unseen by his unwary prey,
Still lives his time, —the deeper pang
Inflicting when the time doth come
To strike, and strikes too surely home.
So thus, alas, we often find
Within the purest thinking mind
A thought may come —we know not whence
We only feel its influence,
Nor stay to ask, Why is it thus ?
We only know it lives in us —
Perchance it may die out amid
Thoughts more engrossing, or lie hid
Within itself, till Time discloses
That thought among our deadliest foes is.
And wouldst thou seek or know the cause,
Ask ye the heart's mysterious laws ;
And thou wilt find to thine own cost
The least will gain who seeks the most;
For what thou deem'st the sweetest thing
Will oft enclose the sharpest sting.
And so she trembled ; 'gainst his heart
Fond Roland felt that sudden start,
And in his palm the little hand
Still shook —he could not understand
The cause, but deemed the cool night air
Perchance had chilled her standing there.
And so he said, " Come, dearest, come,
Let us within the dear old home,
For little Roland waits us there.
Oh! how I long to see my boy,
And kiss his chubby face so fair,
And hear his little laugh of joy.
And has he missed me, did you say ?
And did he speak my name to-day ?
And will he, when he sees me come,
Be glad, think you, that I am home '?


Come, dearest, come, the air grows chill,
The night winds sigh o'er yonder hill,
And now I hear a growing breeze
Among the grove of chestnut trees.
Now let ns hasten-—let us go ;
Let night winds sigh, and breezes blow
Where'er they list. But come, dear, come.
Let us within the dear old home."
Now o'er the earth night's mystic pall
Sinks deeper, darker over all;
A calm so settled and so deep
Pervades; as tho' in death —not sleep—
All nature lay, and breathes around
A weirdness in its depth profound ;
And dimly outlined 'gainst the skies
Strange shapes and forms, like phantoms,
Anon the night winds seem to sigh
And whisper as of things gone by,
Then dies away with feeble moan,
And all seems doubly dark and lone.
'Tis such a night! With hurrying tread
A traveller, 'lated on his way,
Might feel within a lurking dread
Of things unseen that round him lay,
And envy those within their home
Who hath no cause, like him, to roam.
'Twould be a welcome sight to him,
Those gleaming lights, altho' so dim,
Yet no less welcome. Blessed rays !
To light and cheer such lonely ways.
Well would he watch each window pane,
Whence shadows flit and flit again,
And vaguely picture in his mind
The glowing warmth that lies behind;
And feel within his soul once more,
Like hope rekindled, on before
To plod again his lonely way
With heart more light, and almost gay.
But let us hasten now and steal
A glimpse of what those lights reveal.


See Roland in that big arm-chair
With feet outstretched before the fire,
He loohs a handsome fellow there
As eye could see, or heart desire :
With full broad chest and noble brow,
Rare beauty and great strength combining,
Such is the man before thee now
Developed, at his ease reclining ;
Now from his hazel eye, there dances
The light of love, within whose glances
A mirth so joyous and so glad,
That who, beholding, could be sad ?
He takes young Roland on his knee
And fondles with a father's glee,
And from his pocket many a toy
He draws and gives his darling boy,
And takes him in his fine strong arms
And tosses him on high, and charms
That urchin's soul with delight—
He laughs and crows with all his might;
His father laughs —enjoys it too,
As tho' such fun he never knew.
But now Editha comes to take
That laughing urchin right away :
" Too long e'en now he's been awake ;
To bed, to bed, and no more play—
Now bid papa a sweet ' Good-night,'
And one more kiss, then off we go.
Now, Roland dear, hold not so tight
Your little son —for well you know
The darling child must want to sleep,
Altho' I know you wish to keep
Him up still longer —'twill not do,
Or other nights your rashness rue."
This to her spouse, who still delays
The parting kiss in various ways,
And pleads for fun a little longer,
Which she, of course, denies the stronger;
At length he bows to her dominion,
Yet still holds to his own opinion,
But inly feels he must obey
That gentle tyrant's household sway.


The kiss is given, " Gfood-night " is said,
And little Roland's put to bed.
Returns Editha with a face
Aglow with smiles—thou scarce could trace
In this dear picture of a wife,
(This lythe young thing of light and life),
The creature that thou saw'st of late,
Pale, watching by the wicket gate,
As now she, bending o'er his chair,
" Begs leave some little thing prepare
For his refreshmenthe the while
Consenting with a merry smile,
" The lightest morsel just to take,
If only for the giver's sake ;
But that, on only one condition,
That she will share that light nutrition."
Editha flies —as quick as thought
The light repast to him is brought;
Now sitting by him, side by side,
Could eye behold a fairer sight ?
He in his manly strength and pride,
And she so graceful and so light
In every movement, as she leans
Her arm on his, and fondly gleans
From every look of his the thought
Ere fairly to expression brought,
And curiously anticipates
His tale, ere he that tale relates.
In sooth her questions fly so fast
He deems such things can never last,
And smiling, thinks when she has done
His " plain unvarnished tale " to tell.
Vain thought—for she has now begun
To give her own, and show how well
She wiled that weary week away,
And how she marked each hour, each day,
And when at last this morning broke
With what a happy thought she woke —
The sun peeped in, as tho' to say,
Arise, I bring a joyous day;


Then how she sang the morning through,
And little Eoland laughed so too ;
And then, at last, ah, how she waited
And watched for him —until she thought—
But now she ceased with breath abated
And cheek all pale —wh'ate'er hath brought
That paleness—she doth not impart
To him, he only feels the chill
Pass like a swift electric dart
Prom her to him, and deems her ill,
As anxiously he scans her face
And reads therein the lurking trace
Of sorrow, pain, or it might be
Excitement, or sweet care for him :
He deems the last—and even he
At that thought feels his eyes grow dim ;
But quickly checked the half-formed tear
That springs from a belief so dear,
As now he strives in tones more gay
To turn her thoughts another way ;
Nor vain the effort, even now
That shade hath almost left her brow,
A brighter hue supplies the place
Of recent sadness in her face ;
She seems to now hath caught his vein
Of gaiety—as in a strain,
Gayer than he, as scarce repressed,
Some rising impulse in her breast
Hath bade her spirits freely flow,
Whate'er might be their depth below.
She cries—■" Oh, love, we will be gay,
And joy shall laugh all care away ;
I have a wish, I know not why,
Or whence it comes —ah, smile not so,
Or if you will, do not deny
The recompense you surely owe
To grant this little wish—nor deem
It strange, however strange it seem.
Oh, sing to me that little song
You sang to me in days of yore;


Oh, sing it now, for I so long
To hear that little strain once more.
You used to sing it, you know when,
In our betrothal—you know how
I loved to listen to you then —
And you will not deny me now ;
And I will promise when 'tis done
That I will try and sing you one."
Eoland consents ; 'tis sweet to hear
Pleadings so soft from lips so dear,
And in his heart he feels once more
That glowing ardour—oft before
He felt the same in those bright days
When from her eyes the sweetest praise
In silent eloquence was given
As his reward —like rays from heaven
They seemed upon his soul to dart,
And lighting up each deep recess
Sent flooding through his inmost heart
A glowing sense of happiness,
And tho' 'twas then a lover's thrill,
'Tis now revived—he feels it still.
As with a witching grace she flings
Across the harp's melodious strings
Touches, so exquisitely sweet,
The very soul would rush to meet.
The prelude done, he now begins
In manly tones, and thus he sings
Oh, meet me alone when the sun hath unfurled
His bright banner of gold o'er the dawning of day,
When the shadows of night back again hath been hurled
To their caverns of darkness and gloom far away ;
When the first hues of morning gild mountain and stream
And a mantle of beauty o'er nature is spread,
And the sweet notes of joy from the thousands that teem,
Are resounding from earth to the skies overhead.
As we roam o'er the mountain all joyous and free,
We will cull the bright hopes of a future ' to he.'


Oh, meet me alone in the softness of eve,
When the daylight and darkness, like lovers, have met,
Have embraced, and then lingered, reluctant to leave
Their own mingled beauties of shade and sunset;
When repose stealeth o'er with a mystical spell,
And the night queen ascends to her star-spangled throne
Shedding loveliness down over streamlet and dell;
Then meet me, dear maiden—oh, then meet me alone.
As the Angel of Peace looketh down from above
Our full hearts shall respond to the breathings of love.
The song is done —the due reward
Accorded ; —could the happy bard
Had heard, or seen, that mutual kiss,
He ne'er had asked for higher bliss.
That words of his could e'er produce
Effects like these—their present use —
That even he, that happy hard,
Might he forgiven a wish to share,
Not an exclusive sole reward,
Erom that so sweetly given there.
But see, gay Roland takes her hand!
And urges now his just demand—
" That she, in turn, will likewise sing
Eor him some pretty little thing."
" What shall it be ?" Editha cries ;
" Whate'er you please, dear," he replies ;
" I've little choice—your songs to me
Are all so sweet, whate'er they he —
So choose among the songs you know
The nicest one." " Then he it so,"
Editha cries, '"I'll sing—hut, stay—
I've learnt, while you have been away,
A new one, called ' The Railing Star !'
I fancied—tho' such fancies are
Foolish—hut yet the words did seem
A strange significance to hear,
Like vague faint shadows of a dream
I could not catch, so dim they were,
Recurring to mine inward eye,
As oft I read the verses o'er


With a most strange persistence, why
I cannot tell, for ne'er before —
But 'tis a foolish fancy, dear ;
I know it is—and you shall hear
That little song —oh ! sweet to me
The words and air both seemed to be —
Although a somewhat mournful thing,
Scarce suiting this glad evening ;
Yet I will sing it, as 'tis new,
It pleased me, if it does not you ;
I promise that, when it is done,
To try another gayer one."
Once more across those tuneful strings
Her skilful fingers lightly sweep ;
Enchantress ! well she knows the springs
Of hidden melody they keep,
For, at her touch, like magic rise,
Sounds, were they heard in Paradise,
E'en angel eyes might deign to glisten —
E'en angel forms may stay to listen
And linger —even heaven to share —
At such unwonted music there.
Now rising to the listening ear,
With those rich notes its sweetness blending
Her voice, in tones so soft and clear,
Tho' low at first, but now ascending,
More firmly grows, and now combine
Music and voice in strains divine: —
" Oh, swiftly cleaving falling star !
Say whither bound thy rapid flight;
Seem'st Earth so lovely from afar,
Or dost thou seek, through shades of night,
A home more bright ?
Oh, thou wert beautiful! But why
Didst thou not stay, with guardian beam,
To twinkle through the midnight sky,
Than thus —than thus, with light'ning gleam,
Elit like a dream ?


Or art thou, as some deem thee still,
A lover's wish—the death or birth
Of these an omen—good or ill—
That thus thou droppest to the earth
Of doubtful worth ?
Thousands have watched thine earthward flight-
Thousands have wondered as ye fell;
But who hath read thy signs aright—•
And whither bound—and where ye dwell—
Ah, who can tell ?
We miss thee, tho' another star
Now twinkles in the milky way
Where thou didst once—oh, lovelier far !
Then why, lost orb, didst thou not stay
With bright'ning ray ?
Oh, thou wert beautiful on high !
More beautiful thy downward flight ;
Alas ! alas ! 'twas but to die,
And fade for ever from the sight
Into the night.
Oh, emblem of a future day
To some ! be not so to mine eyes ;
But with a milder, purer ray,
Oh, let me live, at last to rise
To Paradise."
As the last notes, all quiv'ring, hung
With ling'ring sweetness on her tongue,
Editha seemed to feel the glow
Expressed in that melodious flow,
And in her soul she seemed to rise,
And almost taste that Paradise ;
For still she sighs, and holds her heart,
As tho' to still that throbbing part;
And in her eyes a light divine,
As tho' a thought from heaven had fell
Upon her soul, to glow and shine,
And hold it in a trance-like spell.
But Roland speaks. With sudden start,
She turns, and clasps him to her heart,


EDITHA.
With, that sweet light still in her ejes
That even he, with some surprise,
Grazes upon her. Ne'er before
Had she so beautiful, and loving, seemed
As now. Who could that face explore,
And love not ?—ah ! or seen, not dreamed
Of it, as of a vision bright
Forgotten never to the sight ?
Tho' all might fade and melt away,
Still, still that face would ever stay
And haunt him with its sweetness still
Through years of either good or ill,
Retaining still its chastening power —
In any mood—in any hour.
Away ! nor let us longer dare,
With list'ning ears, and eyes beholding,
To watch for other phases there
Of love's sweet mysteries unfolding;
Too long, already, have we stayed,
And heard what ne'er should be conveyed
To others than those mutual ears
To whom such language most endears ;
And seen what most should be concealed
From all, except to whom revealed.
Too sacred, far, be theirs alone,
That mystic light on whom 'tis shown —
Too sacred, far—away ! away !
Ere yet another phase convey
To o'er inform the curious eye
The limits of propriety.
Away ! for see yon misty cloud
Envelopes Earth as with a shroud
Through which the stars' receding light
Grow dim and weirdly to the sight.
Away! away! Goodnight—goodnight.
-ivJfrgs. -■


EDITHA.
CANTO IY
PEEP-TINTED Autumn now hath sped,
And Winter, with his sombre brow,
Hath stalked the earth with iron tread,
And holds a sole dominion now.
Behold him, on his icy throne,
Around him cast his mantle white ;
Monarch of all, austere and lone,
He grimly sits, and shows his might,
While subject Earth, beneath his sway,
In frozen bonds around him lay.
No longer now, on topmost tree,
The thrush pours forth his wonted song;
And the blythe blackbird, where is he
Whose note resounded far along
The verdant valley's leafy shade
In long cadences, sweet and clear ?
Where is he now ? The silent glade
Seems strangely lifeless, dull and drear ;
Tho' voiceless, yet he lingers still
Beneath the shelter of the hill,
Where yet the holly branches grow,
Despite the winter's frost and snow ;
Where ripe red berries peep between
Small caps of snow, and leaves so green ;
Or hides him in an ivy clump
That grows around some ancient stump ;
Or, 'neath the hedgerow up the lane,
Appears—then disappears again ;
Or tamely lurks about before
Some homely little cottage door


To pick the crumbs some urchin may,
Perchance, have cast him through the day
High sweeps the breath of Winter now,
With swirling snowflakes fiercely cast
On all around ; each leafless hough
Stands bare and shiv'ring to the blast,
While whistling by, with dismal scream,
The wild fowl wings his rapid flight
To where some little frozen stream
Invites him with delusive light
To whet once more his hungry beak
Against the ice—food, food to seek.
'Tis such a day. Along the lane
That leads from Iham's snow-clad vale
A horseman rides with slackened rein
All heedless of the passing gale.
But can he pass ? A drift of snow
Hath blocked the road he wants to go ;
He pauses, gives a glance around,
And clears the hedgerow at a bound.
Dismounting, now his docile steed
He guides across the whitened mead,
Where gathered drifts rise here and there,
With many a treacherous bed between.
Well might that traveller pause with care-
Nor haste to tread that path unseen —
For well he knows that, once astflay,
Among the drifts that round him lay,
Small chance hath he to 'scape the fate
Of one who reaps a truth too late.
But see, he skirts the hill around,
And reaches now the higher ground ;
He stops, and mounts his steed once more,
And fronts the hedgerow, as before :
A bounding stride, and now again
Resumes his course along the lane.
Careering high o'er hill and vale,
Still onwards sweeps the winter gale—


Now waving high the trees among —
Now drives the snow like spray along—
And seems to send its fiercest throes
Along the way the traveller goes,
Who sits astride his we'll trained steed,
Nor wind, nor weather, seems to heed,
But wends along with absent mien,
As though his thoughts were far away,
Or dwelling on some former scene
That holds him, as it were, at bay,
For he, the Present —that, the Past —
Can only meet in memory now.
He shakes his mantle to the blast;
But that hath sped—where, where ? and how ?
But who is he who dares thus face
The perils of this hour and place ?
'Tis Poland, bound from home again—
Affairs of import call him hence ;
He goes, but not with tranquil brain,
For on his brow some influence
Of doubt, or dread, now seems to lower,
And holds it with a grasping power.
He goes, but not with trusting heart,
For fell suspicion's dreadful shade
Hath clouded o'er that brighter part,
And dared its sacred seat invade.
" Oh, bitter thought!" these words he mutters,
As to the winds; these thoughts he utters :
'' Oh ! have I lived to curse the day
My boyhood's friend e'er came this way;
And have I lived to think of her
As one within whose harbouring breast
Such guilty thoughts could ever stir.
Ah, God, methinks it would be best—
And better far—all, all to end :
Myself, my wife, and traitor friend
In one fell swoop. Oh, horrid thought,
What fiend of ill thy shape hath wrought
Away ! Oh, thou just power on high,
Within whose keeping all things lie,


By thine own sacred precious gift
Of Reason, give me power to lift
Myself above the vile control
Of thoughts like these, and bend my soul
To ponder well and weigh this thing.
Have I just cause wherewith to bring
A charge against ? If that I err
In blaming him, and judging her,
Then I—oh, wretched thought! —am still
A man to shun, for who could trust
A breast whom such slight cause could fill
With doubts like these, vile as unjust;
And she —if she but knew it—how,
How should I shrink beneath her scan.
I ne'er could meet with open brow
As erst: she would despise the man
Whose feigning heart dared not to ask
And trust the love it sought to hold,
But hid beneath a doubting mask
Its venom in an asplike fold.
It shall not be. Away, thou fiend!
If for a little space I leaned
To thy foul whisperings, deem it not
Thy breath can taint the sacred spot
Wherein my true love lies enshrined
Purest and sweetest, now as ever
Around my heart, so close entwined
No power of thine shall shake or sever.
Oh, sweetest darling, twine thee still!
Thy breast shall never know the ill
Mine own hath felt. If I have done
Thee wrong, that wrong I will redeem
Ere yet its shadow hath begun
To fall upon life's young dream.
I will requite thy gentle love
With one as pure, and not shall move
Mine heart from thine. Oh, I could weep
That thus I have allowed to creep
Into my soul such thoughts of shame
Unworthy of my manhood's name.


Oh, I could weep, but that such tears
Would ill befit my sterner years;
But yet, half like a boy again
I feel, and scarcely can restrain
My full soft heart from brimming o'er
As then it did, in days of yore,
When aught of joy or deep distress
Had stirred it to its full excess.
Oh, hasten now my willing steed
And bear me lightly on my way,
And thou shalt reap more glorious meed
Than thou hast had for many a day.
This journey done, thou shalt employ
Thy teeth on what ye most enjoy ;
A good warm bed, and corn to spare,
Shall be thy guerdon and my care.
To-morrow night, if all goes well,
Thy steps resounding in the lane
Shall strike thy mistress' ear, and tell
Her loving lord is home again,
And thou and I my good old steed
Shall be rewarded for our speed.
So, onward !" Thus in cheerful tone
He speaks, and gathers up his rein
With tighter grasp. All doubts o'erthrown
He feels himself a man again,
And gaily pats his good old steed
And urges him to greater speed,
Who seems to scorn the clinging snow,
And sends aside with proud disdain—
'' My master wills that I must go,
And go I must." Thus, in such strain
The old horse with responsive bound
Seems to reply, and strides along,
Stretching across the frozen ground
With pace more vigorous and strong.
So speeds the traveller on his way,
Whose heart and brain alike at rest,
His thoughts back to that home convey
Where wife and child —and he, the guest—


Wait his return. Within his mind
He pictures all he hopes to find :
A joyous smile, a welcome dear
From lips that breathe a love sincere.
Within that haven of the soul—
His home, his centre —there the whole
Of earthly hopes converge and dwell,
More dear by far than words could tell.
Oh, well each pleasure he recalls
Enjoyed within its sheltering walls :
There his young wife, so good and fair,
Attending to each household care,
Her graceful form and smiling face
Pervading all and every place,
Familiar brings each far off scene,
And swells his heart with longing keen;
And there his child with prattling tongue
Busies himself all things among,
Either in mischief or in play
Annoys, or pleases as he may,
All dear alike his little ways
To claim a parent's love and praise ;
And there his friend, too, who hath been
His comrade in full many a scene
Of winter sport with horse and hound
Through mead and mere the country round
The winter nights how oft beguiled
In learn'd discussion, or had wiled
With schoolboy days, recounted o'er
The parts that they together bore—
The scrapes, the sport, the task severe,
In turns engaged the tongue and ear.
His wife the while sat list'ning by,
And swift her busy hand would ply
On some strange fabric by her side,
And 'twixt the two her thoughts divide,
And still this friend at his request
Had lingered there a welcome guest—
Still talked of going, yet had stayed,
And almost there his home had made.
Tho' something strange of late had come —
'Twas like a damp or creeping chill


Seemed to invade tlxat peaceful home,
And unexplained each mind did fill
With almost coldness in his eye
And voice. His wife and friend that morn
Had hade a sudden, short ' good-bye ' —
Had quickly turned, and then was gone.
Well he remembered as he rode
That parting, and that thought did goad
Him on to get his journey o'er
And hasten home with smiles once more —
A smile, in sooth an easy thing,
To rob remembrance of its sting.
Meantime, Editha sits at home
And gazes out the window pane
Whereon the snow like flecks of foam
Is driven, leaving many a stain;
And blotched and blurred the glass appears —
Aye, blotched and blurred, else those dear eyes
Belie the glance, and gleam through tears,
So deep the haze that o'er them lies.
The room is silent, save the sound
Of little Roland softly creeping
His mother's knee around, around ;
But she, alas, is weeping, weeping:
The room is silent, save the creeping
Childish rustle, and her weeping
Oh, piteous sight on such a day,
So cold without, so sad within.
More welcome far the mad storm's play,
The howling wind and tempest's din ;
More welcome far the impassioned soul
In such congenial conflict waging ;
The grief that will not brook control,
Nor seeks to stem its inward raging.
So let such elements combine,
War as they list, soon nature's forces
Expent their proper bounds define,
And so resume their wonted courses.


Butjsilent grief is worst of all,
And silent tears the worst that fall;
Alas, behind that tear-dimmed eye
Who knows the things that hidden lie.
That pale drawn face and choking sob—
Who knows the pangs within that throb '?
The world has never seen or shown
Within that darkened cell—alone,
The heart—they live, and feed and feed,
Nor lose one drop that heart doth bleed.
Such bitter tears Editha weeps
While little Eoland 'round her creeps.
Oh, see how silently he moves ;
Poor child, he too seems full of care ;
He turns his face to her he loves
And seems to seek a refuge there.
His solemn little face upturning
To her's, he takes her listless hand
And fondles o'er with infant yearning.
Poor child, he cannot understand ;
He only sees his mother's eyes,
He only feels how full of woe,
He only seeks to sympathise,
His loving little heart to show.
" Mamma !" the little fellow cries :
If that she hears she heeds him not,
But still looks out with absent eyes,
As tho' all else she had forgot
But her sole grief. Again, again
He lifts his little voice in vain.
But now he whispers very low—
" Oh, dear mamma !" sweet lisping tone,
That sound hath pierced thy mother's woe.
And o'er her heart like music flown ;
Within those outstretched arms he flies,
And nestles closely to her breast.
Oh, who hath seen a mother's eyes
Beaming through tears as she caressed
The little form she loves so well,
The nestling face she deems so sweet,


And seen the look of love that fell
When bending o'er those lips to meet,
And felt once more his past arise,
And seen once more his mother's eyes ?
He surely then may speak of heaven.
That look shall linger on his soul,
Tho' years of ill that soul hath riven,
And blankly dark around him roll
Tempests of evil; and altho'
Callous of heart, and warped with care,
That memory still shall live and glow,
And haply save him from despair,
And guide him on, perchance, and shine
A beacon and a light divine.
Within Editha's fond embrace
The boy now lies with happy face;
But see, the snow hath caught his eye
Dashing against the window pane !
He clasps his hands with gleeful cry
And laughs aloud, yet gives her pain,
Eor she, too, sees that driving snow,
Which to her mind recurring, brings
Its interrupted thread of woe.
And opes afresh her sorrows' springs;
And in sad strains she tells her grief
Into her child's unwitting ear.
She knows he cannot give relief,
But yet 'tis sweet to feel him near—
" The only heart I've left me now,
Whereto mine own heart can reveal,"
'Twas thus she spake, and kissed his brow,
" And thou, my love, canst only feel:
If thou couldst understand —but no !
I would not have thee share my woe.
Oh, cease thy mirth my darling child,
Dost thou not fear the tempest wild ?
Canst thou behold the fierce clouds driven,
Shutting the earth away from heaven,
And hear the rushing of the storm,
And trembles not thy little form ?


Oh, listen to the mad wind's shriek,
And paleth not thine infant cheek ?
Its wrathful power we both may dread
Its beats upon thy father's head ;
And peril waits him by the way
In many a form. Oh, God above,
Guide thou his onward feet to-day,
And guard the life of him we love.
Oh, how he went away this morn,
And scarce a word at parting said ;
And coldly kissed me, and was gone
Ere I had time to raise my head.
But it was cruel. I called ' good-bye ' ;
He heeded not, but sped away,
Nor turned nor made the least reply,
Seeming as tho' he feared to stay.
His pace did quicken up the hill:
Had he but turned—but no. Ah me !
I gazed until my heart grew chill,
And watched him till I could not see
For blinding tears. He used to stop
When he was wont to go that way,
And linger on the green hill-top,
And wave his hand, for I would stay
And watch him as I did this morn ;
And when he turned we both would wave.
For then it seemed when he was gone
He yet was near —the impression gave
To my fond breast. How different fell
His parting on my heart to-day.
With whispering fears it seems to tell
Of something that I cannot stay —
Some brooding ill—l cannot think !
It seems upon some dreadful brink
I stand, and have no power to keep
Myself from falling—where ! oh where !
I cannot tell, it seems so deep,
Like to a yawning grave —despair !
No, no ! A great and pitying God
Ne'er striketh with an unjust rod ;


And tho' his arm may sometimes fall,
His care still reaches over all;
And tho' heaven's face is turned away,
And tho' mine heart is sad to-day,
The sun will shine on me again.
But haply I have been too vain
In all my selfish love and pride
For him, and thee my darling boy,
And turned my thoughts too much aside.
Forgetting in mine own deep joy
The things that not to earth belong,
And thus my soul hath done a wrong.
Ah me! I could not help but love,
And surely heaven will not reprove.
But why this coldness on his part—
I cannot understand it ? Why,
What have I done to change his heart
And reap such coldness from his eye,
Whose altered glances on me cast,
Recall more strongly to the past
Whence kindest beams would ever shine
Seeking their own return in mine ?
But why this coldness ? Can it be
His love is dying out for me,
And that my charms are growing old,
And that his heart is growing cold,
And that his glance hath not belied
The changes that it could not hide,
And that he pines away to roam
And leave his now uncherished home.
Uncherished, no ! it cannot be,
'Tis dear to him as 'tis to me ;
There's not a thing around these walls
But some sweet memory recalls ;
There's not a spot these walls around,
There's not a tree, or shrub or flower,
There's not a sight, and not a sound,
That speaks not of some bygone hour,
Where fond recurring memory dwells
On all it seeks, on all it tells.


'Twas here —how well can I recall—
'Twas on a gentle summer's eye
He led me here, and told me all
Mine own fond heart could well believe.
We stood upon yon rising knoll,
And listened to the evening chime
That from the abbey faintly stole
And rippled on in pensive time,
And rose and fell; we listened on
Full in the glow of setting sun,
He slowly sank, his parting ray
Yet lingered on the distant hill,
And as we watched it melt away
The sounds did cease and all grew still;
But, oh, so still. In that sweet hour
So peaceful, yet so full of power,
Our hearts did seem to fill and blend,
And each felt each was more than friend;
And then he took my hand and led
Me 'neath yon oak, whose branches' spread
Just touch upon the chestnut grove,
And there he told his tale of love;
And told me of his boyish days—
The wild tradition of his race—
And how he hoped one day to raise
Into its former rank and place
The old ancestral house and name,
And wipe from off its once fair fame
The curse that like a plague hath clung
Since when it left the gipsy's tongue.
And well do I remember how,
With crimson face and knitted brow,
He told the tale and how I wept.
Alas, poor Zaydalie, thy fate
Too well avenged, too surely kept,
A crime too soon, a curse too late.
And then I took his hand and vowed,
As long as heaven to me allowed
Life, strength, and love, all should be spent
To aid him in that brave intent;


And since that hour our lives have been
As one —and when his home I shared
More firmly grew the bond between,
And strengthened on, all unimpaired
Till now, and through those past sweet years
Mine eyes ne'er wept but happy tears.
Ah, no, his home he loveth still;
I know, I feel, some cause of ill,
Perchance, hath wrought his moody brow—
Some care he likes not to avow
To me, for fear the news might pain,
And thus he bears alone the strain.
Oh, 'tis to that fond shielding love
His brow, so seeming cold, belies
The heart beneath, yet still doth prove
The deep devotion it denies;
And I the while have been deceiving,
Mocking mine heart with foolish fears,
And reasoned with a false believing,
Thrusting aside the proof of years,
His love for me; and I, his wife,
Who deemed that not a care or thought
Could shade or brighten o'er his life,
And on his brow in signs be wrought,
That I could read not. Oh, ah me !
The eyes of love not always see ;
God send thee safely home again
Mine own brave heart—with gentlest smiles
I'll wean the burden from thy brain,
If that thou hast, and share thy trials ;
And I will soothe thee in thy need,
Else were I not thy wife indeed."
'Twas thus Editha thought and said,
And brighter now her glances sped
Upon her boy, as on her breast
Reposed he in a slumber deep,
And fondly thought as she caressed
How happy looked he in his sleep.


But she must wake him, or 'twould show
Scant courtesy to her guest below ;
Her absence long, it would seem strange,
And tend, perchance, to disarrange
That sense of confidence and cheer
That should to welcome guest appear.
There was a spacious room below,
An antique place of carved old oak,
Whose curves shone with a ruddy glow
That from a cheerful fireside broke.
A well-appointed homelike room,
Whose teeming comfort well compared
Against the outer winter gloom—
And to the inmate now who shared
Its cheering warmth, thus so it seemed,
As o'er the fire he idly dreamed,
So might a casual glance infer,
Yet might such glance most deeply err—
A closer view, a doubt might find
If dreaming wholly filled his mind ;
As there he sat with musing eye
Intently fixed —at times a sigh
Escaped him, or a muttered word
As tho' some thought more deeply stirred,
His face, tho' handsome, did not seem
As one that would inspire esteem
Or manly faith, at least just then,
As so he sat with musing ken,
Tho' 'twas a face that one might view
With ever-changing judgment too,
As its expression varied —so
Its impress to the eye would show,
Of gentle blood and cultured mind
Could plainly be at once divined ;
A form well knit and features fair
Above which curled crisp wavy hair:
And as he sometimes turned his head
A full expression could be read,
And then your judgment of the man
Would be embodied in that scan,


And thus appear, of nature bold,
Daring in purpose, hard to hold;
Of liberal hand—an eye whose glow
The art of pleasing well could show.
A heart formed both for good or ill,
Just as the humour seized his will ;
A good companion with a friend,
And could to any purpose lend.
Susceptible in heart and mind,
Yet ever changing as the wind ;
A man whose impulse ever strong
Would lead him on to right or wrong.
And this was Raleigh, Roland's friend,
Who came, two months ago, to spend
The promised visit, and had stayed
And almost there his home had made.
Now by the fire he brooded still
With thoughts at variance with his will,
And each in turn appeared to chide
Some deeper purpose in his soul,
Where conscious wrong the cause supplied,
And struggled hard to gain control.
Whate'er it was his face well told
The conflict that his mind did hold.
But suddenly, as half in fear,
He turned aside with list'ning ear,
And hastily he seized a book
With altered mien and placid look,
And all at once the open page
His thoughts intent seemed to engage.
As steps advancing draw quite near,
And through the opening door appear
Editha and young Roland too.
Advanced they to the silent guest,
Who then perceived, and, rising, threw
His volume down with pleasing zest.
With pleasant glances on them thrown
He greets them in a laughing tone ;
Makes kind enquiries—she the while
Returns his greeting and his smile.
With quick arrangement deftly now
She settles to some task in hand,


Her busy fingers proving how
A good housewife can time command ;
And Raleigh takes his book again
And reads to her in gentle strain,
With frequent pauses and comments,
As each or both opinion vents.
And thus in social pastime they
Beguile the winter hours away;
And evening comes—with brighter glow
The ruddy embers gleam and throw
A cheering warmth throughout the room—
With half reproach Editha feels,
Compares she to the outer gloom
Her absent lord; as this thought steals
From her fond bosom to her eyes
The tears of love, unbidden, rise.
Displeasing now to her sad ear
Her guest's soft sentences appear,
Altho' in tones of fluent ease
He strives his utmost power to please,
But in the striving fails to gain
A meet repayment for his pain,
And in Editha's shrinking sight
A different man appears to night
Than e'er before. She knows not why,
But yet she fears to meet his eye—
Distrust, suspicion, seems to blend
And lurk around her husband's friend ;
So, with a plea of illness slight,
Retires she with a cold "good night,"
And in her chamber, drear and lonely,
Pours forth her soul to Him, who only
Can to her fond and troubled breast
Sweet comfort give and holy rest.
With gentle footsteps, then, she creeps
To where young Roland calmly sleeps,
And lays her darling's head with care
Upon her breast to nestle there.
Thus, close entwined, like two sweet flowers
They slumber through the midnight hours—
Virtue and innocence at rest—
The child upon its mother's breast.


The morrow came. So broke the day,
Solemn and still—the white-robed earth
A silent tribute seemed to pay
To morning's light, and hailed its birth,
Reposing grandly 'neath the thrall
Of tyrant winter's mighty pall.
The snow had ceased to fall —the wind
Had howled itself away to rest,
Leaving a cold grim peace behind
Of power implacable possest,
The dull grey sky hung heavy still
With clouds half charged with pending snow,
That waiting only quite to fill
Ere show'ring to the earth below.
So woke the morn. Editha rose
And looked abroad with anxious eye ;
She marked the morning's grim repose ;
She saw the dull and heavy sky;
All nature seemed to bear a part
In unison with her sad heart.
Her absent lord, her half-feared guest,
With troubled doubting filled her breast;
Praying for one's return to-day,
Rearing the other's dreaded stay.
'Twas with an effort that she shook
From off her face its troubled look,
And met her guest at morning meal
With looks of cheer she did not feel;
But he seemed cheerful, too much so,
Thought poor Editha, and she tried
To simulate with equal show
The mirth that deeper thoughts did hide ;
Thus each feigned confidence where each
Felt tho' they could not see the breach.
Oh ! 'twas relief to her wrought mind
When he (she almost felt it kind)
With dog and gun prepared to go,
And o'er the lately fallen snow
"Would try," he said, " some favourite ground
Where game was likely to abound.
He might be gone some time; would she
His absence mind, or lonely be?"


Editha, smiling, said, " Oh ! no;
Go, get some game—your skill now show."
So he departed on his quest,
"While she with household duties plied
Her busy hand ; she deemed it best
With active task to set aside
The thoughts that upward still would_force
If she allowed them freer - |
Yet still throughout that weary day |
She could not rest; her child at play
Could not to lighter thoughts beguile,
Or e'en provoke a cheerlul smile.
At length the evening closed around
And gloomy twilight thickened fast,
And then she listened for the sound
Of welcome steps; they come at last.
Ah ! no, 'tis only he, her guest,
Returning from his hunting quest;
Yet still she welcomed him and smiled,
And then enquired for all his game.
He said the birds were all so wild,
And that the hares were not so tame,
And so, of course, the sj ort was bad ;
And that, in sooth, he nothing had.
He felt ashamed, he must confess,
To tell her of his non-success.
And then a pleasant jest she made,
And asked him why so late he stayed,
Since birds and hares alike had been
IJncourteous to such sportsman keen.
" But, come," said she, " our evening meal]
Prepared and set, awaits you now ,
Ana you must very hungry feel
Alter your weary hunt, I trow.
So, come." And thither then they bent
Their footsteps, talking as they went.
Editha's mind had undergone
A change. No longer sad she seemedj
As on that gloomy opening morn,
For now her eyes with pleasure beamed,


Or seemed to, as with manner gay
Presiding o'er the steaming urn,
In lively tone she talked away,
As tho' all thought or care to spurn
Except for him, her absent one.
And he, she said, would never stay
Beyond (his business being done)
A moment, but would haste away
Straight for the home he loveth well,
With all it holds—wife, child, and guest,
His only thought—and 'twill impel
His homeward course with speeding zest.
I thought, perchance, continued she,
He had been home this eve ; but no,
'lis now too late, and haply he
Had farther than he deemed to go,
Or else his business is delayed,
And hence the reason he has stayed ;
And Raleigh said he thought so, too,
She had also expressed his view.
Now evening wore along apace,
And each held each accustomed place,
(Young Roland was in bed asleep);
Editha, at the table sitting,
O'er work that ever seemed to keep
Her hands in busy constant flitting.
The light fell on her half-turned face,
And lit it with a cheerful grace,
As o'er her work she slightly bent,
With thoughtful brow and eye intent;
But he sat listless by the fire.
Perhaps his hunt had made him tire,
Editha thought, but naught expressed,
She did not like to mar his rest,
And so she o'er her work did bend,
And heeded not that weary friend.
But was he weary ?—did he rest ?
Or rightly had Editha guessed ?
A good glance would have told her, No !
Tho' he was silent—strangely so !


Nor was lie reading, tho' a book
Lay in bis band; witb a fixed look,
His vision seemed more inly turned
Witb a deep light—'twas one that burned
As though it gazed upon a thought
Whose fevered heat thereon had wrought
Its quick infection to the eye
That would not let it hidden lie.
His knitted brow, and flushing cheek,
Told more than his pale lips dared speak ;
At length a climax seemed to gain,
And then he sighed as tho' in pain,
And gave a low unconscious moan,
But in so sad and drear a tone
Editha wondered at the sound,
And quickly turned her head around
And met his look so fixed and dread
That o'er her heait a sudden chill
Swept; yet she conquered, as she said,
" Oh, surely you indeed are ill!
What can Ido ? You seem in pain!
You sigh and moan !—yet not complain ;
But tell me." Then she rose and went
Nearer, and half o'er him bent,
And looked deep in his burning eyes,
And there beheld —well might she shrink
With backward step and pained surprise
At what she saw, but feared to think.
And he rose, as she backward stept,
And in his eye a fierce flame leapt;
Thus for a moment did they stand,
Like as a serpent and his prey,
Their eyes were fixed-—she raised her hand
As tho' to ward that look away,
And sank into a chair close by ;
She could not meet that burning eye,
And, trembling, waited. Then he spoke,
And from his lips these accents broke :
" Oh, God !" he said, "I cannot bear
The torture that this heart doth wear ;
You ask me do I suffer ? Look!
Is not my face an open book


That thou canst read ? Yet dost thou seek
From my closed lips, and wouldst compel
My heart to show; now it must speak,
Or burst within its silent cell.
I love thee! Nay, shrink not from me,
I would not harm thy gentle head;
Thou canst not change the things that be,
Nor kill the words that hath been said,
For they from my too vital heart
Hath sprung, and bear a living part,
Consuming in their fervid heat
All else that in that heart doth beat;
Now kindling on my lips and breath,
Unquenchable. Nay, look not so!
For thee I've borne a living death,
And struggled that thou shouldst not know ;
And hid it from thee till, at last,
My heart rebels against the Past,
And it must speak ! Full well I know
I should have gone long, long ago,
And fled the spell whose pleasing power
I thought to break at any hour ;
But still I stayed and lingered on
Until the power to go was gone ;
And he—my friend, —as to enhance
And give me this too tempting chance,
Must needs on some far journey go,
Withdrawing thus the only stay
That had withheld my love's o'erflow
That waited not; in headlong sway
See how it swept my soul to thee.
Editha, love, oh speak to me !
Oh, speak to me ! if that thy tongue
Breathes but the scorn thou might'st deem just,
For have I not, unheeding, flung
The name of friendship in the dust,
That, the weak ladder of my soul,
Could never reach the lofty goal
Where now I stand, and can descry
Extending o'er me—still above,
Breaking upon my longing eye
The blissful heaven of thy love,


Whereto mine heart now cries to thee.
Editha, love, oh, speak to me!
Oh, speak to me ! but tell me not
Of honour's holiest ties forgot;
Have I not thought all thou canst urge,
And battled with my soul in vain ?
But, like the ocean's swelling surge,
My love but sweeps me back again.
Now, stranded on the beaten shore,
Whose fatal charms I cannot fly,
A yielding slave, I fight no more;
Erom thence mine heart can only cry
Aloud, Editha, now to thee :
Oh, pity take, and speak to me !"
And now he ceased his words of fire,
And stood before her like as one
About to hear a sentence dire
For some dread deed of darkness done.
With half averted face he stands,
His head bowed in his trembling hands,
And waited now, with spirit meek,
Submissively, till she should speak ;
And she—oh ! who could tell the throes
That shook her being as she heard ;
At first, her mind indignant rose
At the base insult it inferred,
But later on, at his distress,
She felt her anger growing less,
And, ere at last his words were done,
They from her heart had pity won,
And in her face it could be seen,
As, almost with an air serene,
She thus begun :—" Well have I heard,
And wondered at, each guilty word ;
And canst thou stand and crave reply,
Nor quail before a virtuous eye ?
Art thou so void of honest fear
Thou listeth not with shrinking ear ?
If so, then thou art base indeed,
Nor worthy even Pity's meed !
What wouldst thou have ? Thou knowest
The sole reply my heart can make —


All that a virtuous lip can tell—
Nor more nor less —and thou must take
Content with that thine heart must hide
Or rue the folly it doth hide.
Thou speak'st of love, yet know it not!
Else would thy selfish pleading tongue
For ever mute consent to rot —
Or rather from its root he wrung—
Than so insult the holy shrine
And drag the name of Love divine
Down to those burning depths of shame
Where guilty passion feeds the flame,
And withers 'neath its scorching breath
All nobler instincts of the soul,
Without whose blessing Life were death—
And Death itself a hopeless goal.
Thou lovest me! Yet wouldst thou bring
Such ruin on mine honest heart,
And see a guilty shamefaced thing
To thee responding! Thou dost start!
And well thou mayest! Such would be
Thy vile creation, did I dare
The gifts that heaven gave to me
So fling away without a care.
But I will put thee to the proof
If thou dost love ; in love's behoof
So will thy future actions show
How pure a source its waters flow.
I tell thee not of friendship wronged
To him—to me, —and thou a guest
To whom all kindly claim belonged
While thou wert here ; within thy breast
The thought will ever rankle there.
The kindly welcome freely given,
How well requited by thy care,
How well by ruthless hand now riven
From all a friend could hold most dear
To all the deadliest foe could fear.
But I will prove thee! If thy breast
Sincerely holds such love for me,
Thy future well shall bear the test,
A noble manhood waits for thee.


Thou wilt go hence without delay
To other scenes far, far away,
To where new vistas opening wide
Invite thy manly strength and pride;
There follow up a brave career
With heart of hope, and never fear,
For the great God who sees us now
W 7 ill mark thy willing heart and brow,
And bless thine efforts. He will know
And soothe thee in the hour of woe,
And these, my words, in future hours
Shall fill thine soul with braver powers.
Full many a time shalt thou recall,
And bless the hour when they did fall
Upon thine heeding heart and ear,
Giving thee zeal to hope and cheer,
And 1 will pray for thee —altho'
Thy wandering foot be far away ;
Take thou this comfort. With thee go
Wafted along from day to day
The prayers my pitying heart shall send
For blessing on an erring friend ;
And with each effort thou shalt make,
Think thou 'tis for a dear friend's sake,
And that will give thee courage strong
And help thee on to noble deeds,
And in the foremost rank among
Thy name shall ring as one that leads.
And haply we may meet again
When thou hast passed thy trial of pain
Then in that hour thou shalt atone
For this, and then thine heart be shown
How true and brave. In that great end
I shall be proud to call thee friend.
Now I must leave thee, and good night,
'Tis meet I see thee not again ;
Thou must be gone ere morning's light,
And so avoid all needless pain.
Oh, brace thee nobly to the strife,
So that the morrow's opening ray


May gleam upon a noble life
Begun, and hie th.ee on thy way
With brave strong will and hope in view.
What may thine hand not dare, and do ?
Oh, let the past be dead to thee :
The future opens fair and free—
'Tis all thine own —go, do thy best,
And leave to Giod the rest —the rest;
And now —Good-bye." She turned to go,
And he —" Oh God !" he cried, " not so
Must be our parting ! Stay, oh stay
One moment! List! One word from me
I will not long thy step delay,
And not offend I promise thee."
And as he spoke the tears did trace
Adown his now repentant face.
She hesitated at his cry,
And waiting stood. Gould she deny
To that poor soul a boon so slight
As one last word, ere parted quite,
And so she waited. " Thanks !" he cried.
" Oh, thou art kind, and more than just
To wretch like me, more fit to hide
Mine humbled spirit in the dust,
Than dare to hope thou couldst accord
Across the gulf extending wide
Aught that thine hand could ill afford,
Nor lose some part of virtuous pride,
Or dare aspire mine eyes to raise
Except to worship from afar
In lowly homage, silent praise,
As oft I viewed some lovely star
Soaring above the earth so high,
Lighting a gloomy midnight sky.
So deep the space that lay between,
I ne'er could hope more than to gaze
And deem it bliss that I had seen,
And learned the beauty of its rays.
So thus mine heart doth view thee now;
No baser passion's sullying shade
Obscures the light of thy pure brow
Erom my soul's vision. Thou hast made


A different man of me to-night,
And raised from darkness into light
A soul benighted with the curse
Of idle thought, and all that clings,
Changing from badness into worse,
And worse to worse, so downward brings
In easy, false and treacherous way
The servile soul beneath its sway.
Oh thou, dear angel, hast in time
Redeemed me from a deed of crime,
And, grateful to thy staying hand,
I will do all thou dost demand,
And bend me to the noble task
"With all the zest e'en thou canst ask.
And when to-morrow's breaking dawn
Tells thee mine erring foot hath gone,
Think thou, and may the happy thought
Rest on thy mind with peaceful glow.
Think thou the good thy words hath wrought,
And that I bless thee as I go,
And that a soul reclaimed goes hence
Rilled with awakened fire intense,
Whose emulating glow shall light
It on to deeds of future fame,
And, in the zeal-us cause of right,
Reap Honour's mantle to my name.
Oh, thou dost weep, and 'tis for me,
And for each precious drop that falls
Shall spring the germ whose fruit thou'lt see
In the ripe Future that now calls
From out the darkness of a Past
Of idle thought and wasted power.
My soul! It is awake at last,
And thou shalt see that future hour;
But ere I say to thee good-bye,
One boon—Oh, thou wilt not decline,
'Twill in my memory ever lie
A token and a thought divine—
Give me thine hand that I may swear
Upon its gentle pressure given,
To do, as God my life shall spare,
All I have said, by holy heaven.


And look me in mine eyes the while
And give me one last parting smile,"
He said ; and she — could she do less
Than yield her hand for one last press
To him so sad and pleading there,
Since he no more could hope to win
From her. Ah, heaven forgive, if 'twere,
It were at least so small a sin.
Oh, fatal moment! Neither heard
Upon the yielding snow outside
A hasty tread, as, undeterred
By aught that fear might seek to hide,
He took the hand extended now
And deeply murmured o'er his vow,
Nor deemed they through the casement low,
Whose half drawn curtains left a space
Through which the light in softened glow
Streamed out, now shone upon a face
So fierce, from whose portending brow,
Knitted o'er eyes upon them bent,
Looked on the scene between them now
With dreadful gaze, and fell intent.
'Tis her fond husband home again.
And such a home. Doth it enclose
A scene like this ? Alas ! how vain
His dream of welcome. Thus it shows
No phantasy of mind, o'erwrought
By doubting fear or brooding thought,
But all too real—for there she stands
Yielding to him her willing hands.
Oh, Glod ! for this had he returned
With bounding step and breast that burned ?
Alas ! the glow of new-born trust,
Sprung from suspicion deemed unjust,
Had filled his mind with all the zeal
A love-atoning heart could feel,
And spurred him on his homeward way
With thoughts that would not brook delay.
And when his home, at last in sight,
Thronged his fond breast with visions bright


Of all within —it seemed so long
Since last he stood with them among
That, like a wanderer's return,
He viewed each old familiar scene,
Longing to know, yet feared to learn
If all was as it once had been.
'Twas a mixed feeling—as almost
Of something risked, or won, or lost,
And then a strange and pausing fear
Broke o'er his heart with sudden force.
What might that home, to him so dear,
That near-reached goal of his hard course.
Now lying so quietly at rest,
Enfold within its dreaming breast,
Checked his first feelings of delight.
Still on he rode with anxious gaze,
Now turned a bend, and on his sight
The gladdening view of those bright rays
Streamed out with reassuring glow,
And hope rekindled in his breast.
Straight to that light he thence would go ;
One glance to set his mind at rest
Before he made his presence known
To those within. Oh, too well shown.
Revealed from that too fatal view,
Was that his wife and friend so true ?
He saw them both together stand;
He saw him take her willing hand
And murmur o'er it. She the while
Looked at him softly and did smile.
He saw him raise her hand and kiss,
And then —no more, no more of this.
Crash through the casement burst he then,
As might a lion to his den,
When some intruding thing might dare
Molest his late vacated lair,
And he returned to find it there ;
And in his fearful raging eye
Shot forth the vengeance now so nigh.
So stood he then before the two
Who shrank from that appalling view.


Had they been guilty they no more
Or less could show, as this too sure
A semblance in each whitened face
Admits their crime, and his disgrace,
So seeming to his jealous eye
He inly vows they both shall die.
No—one ; but she shall view the deed
And live to reap her own vile meed ;
A bounding stride, and in his grasp
Young Ealeigh struggles, but in vain.
Those mighty arms like some huge asp
Around him twine with tight'ning strain,
So fatal in their close embrace,
As shown by Ealeigh's ghastly face,
Distorted, fearful now to see
In helpless writhing agony.
Editha saw the fearful sight,
Nor could she move, as helpless quite
She crouched with horror-frozen face
In one far corner of the room,
Mute witness in that dreadful place
That deed, most dire of mortal doom
To all. Oh, now she sees him lift
The crushed, limp form, and raise on high,
And with a movement strong as swift,
Hurl through the casement there to die.
" There, traitor, take thy self-sought doom.
And fellow fiends howl round thy tomb,"
He cried, and stretched his arms on high,
And seemed to crave for victims more,
And cast around a glaring eye
For her —he sees —and crosses o'er
To where she crouches white and wan.
Oh, God, that thus these two should meet!
Was that his wife he looked upon ?
Were those the eyes he deemed so sweet,
And he her husband standing now
Before her with his Cain-like brow,
Where now that face so true and kind,
The reflex of a noble mind?


Alas ! things of the happy past,
Now swept away by passion's blast,
For ever gone ; no more on earth
Behold their grace and beauty's worth.
Two wretched beings of despair
Are left of all what once was there,
Each gazing in the other's eyes
With concentrated look intense,
No answering beam to each replies;
But with a shuddering conscious sense
Of hearts divided now for ever,
Of blasted hopes and ruins blight
Whose deepening curse shall leave them,
Shine in their eyes with ghastly light.
Her dream ! her dream ! 'tis come again
To scathe here sight and freeze her brain.
As on that eve when she did wait
Down by the little wicket gate.
Prophetic then this vision swept
Across her soul; altho' untold,
Still in her secret heart had kept
Nursed in its warm and silent fold
Till now; and oh, 'tis come again
In fuller force in eye and brain,
Oh, God ! but in a deadlier guise ;
The shadows will not pass away ;
That dreadful face, those baleful eyes
That gleam on hers still, still they stay.
Alas, poor soul, no dreams at all
Upon thine heart doth now recall;
No phantom scene forboding wrought
Upon a secret, brooding thought;
But terribly and sternly real
As fate could send and thou canst feel.
Oh, who could deem that mutual glare
Could spring from love so pure and fair,
Or guess each fearful haggard face
Had ever smiled in winsome grace,
Or look upon that dreadful scene
And think the past had ever been.


The husband now with gesture slow,
Pointing to where young Raleigh lies,
Speaks with a measured tone, and low,
Still gazing deeply in her eyes:
" There lies thy paramour ! and thou
Canst join him when and how thou wilt-
Congenial task. Go, soothe his brow—
The dying partner of tliy guilt!
Go, show him how a faithless wife
Can yet he true to traitors vile!
Go, bring him if thou canst to life!
Hang o'er his neck and sweetly smile,
Or else bemoan his death and weep,
And o'er his tomb thy vigils keep !
But never more, thou wretched thing,
Canst thou be aught to me; thou liast
Severed mine heart; henceforth I fling
Thy memory to the bitter past —
The past where I, poor trusting dupe,
Lived in the love i deemed so pure,
A willing slave, content to stoop,
Yielding to thee mine heart's best store
In sacred trust, and thou liast used,
To my dishonour, and abused.
Oh, woman cruel, go now thy ways ;
One path 110 more we two can tread.'
Go, fill the measure of thy days,
E'en as thou wilt; —to me thou'rt dead.
And as for me—far hence I go,
But whither thou shalt never know;
Content so that mine eyes ne'er rest
On thee again with sight unblest.
This home —a home no more to me —
Such as it is, I give to thee.
Live in it if thou wilt, or sell,:
The gold it brings will pay thee well.
Fit ending to the stdry told :
A husband wronged, his birthplace sold
By faithless wife for guile and gold;
Each take the path fate brings to view,
And God have mercy on us two!


No more have I to speak or tell,
But bid thee now a last farewell."
80 saying l , then he turned from her,
And strode away with hasty tread ;
And she—oh, if her tongue could stir
Within those lips so cold and dead,
She yet might save —haste to explain
That dire mistake, and not in vain,
For he would hear. Oh, striving now
As fast as trembling limbs allow
To follow in his quick retreat.
Yain effort, for her tottering feet
Refuse to do their office more
Than bear her feebly to the door.
And there she lifts her voice on high
In one long wailing eager cry:
" Oh, Roland, husband, come to me !
Come back and leave me not I pray;
'Tis a mistake, I swear to thee,
And thou art wrong. Hear what I say,
And I am still thine own true wife.
Oh God ! come back. I cannot bear
That thou shouldst leave me. Take my life
If thou believ'st not all I swear;
But oh ! come back to me again."
Alas, poor soul! too late, too late,
Thy cry unheard, or heard in vain,
Unanswered, like the voice of Fate,
Returns its echoes to thine ear
To smite thine heart with grief and fear.
One effort more, a sudden thought
Flashing her brain her mind hath caught:
The room where little Roland lies
Juts o'er the road where he must go.
Once there she could attract his eyes,
Herself and her sweet darling show
At the small window. From the lane
They would be seen; oh, not in vain,
For both would beckon him and cry
Come back. And he could not deny


That little pleading voice so dear;
And surely, surely he would hear
And turn again. With this quick thought,
The last poor hope despair hath wrought,
New strength infused. . Oh, now she takes
A night-lamp in her trembling hand,
And with all haste her way she makes,
Tho' poor the speed at her command.
Nearing the room by slow degrees,
Now wildly springing as she sees
The open door. It had that night
Been closed, when she with footsteps light
Had left her darling calmly sleeping,
His gentle dreaming face just peeping
From out the coverlet so white,
An angel seeming to her sight;
And she had kissed him as he slept,
And had for very fondness, wept,
And then the door had softly closed,
Thinking how sweetly he reposed.
But now that door was opened wide,
What evil new could it betide ?
Ah! now, the cruel truth doth break,
Her last, and fondest hope to take,
For see, where slept her boy so fair
An empty cot but waits her there !
The little soft forsaken nest
Yet warm, where lately he had pressed,
Alone now greets her maddened stare
And floods the cup of her despair;
Beside the empty cot she stands
And feels it o'er with nervous hands,
So soft and warm where he did lie
"Robbed, robbed!"—couldst thou had heard the cry
That rose from that poor mother's breast,
Cleaving afar the calm night air,
Thou wouldst have deemed no tongue possessed
Such utterance of deep despair—
No human tongue —so wild it rose,
Filling the night with untold woes.
One note of anguish, loud and long,
Seemed more to some lost soul belong—


Some tortured spirit from the tomb
Burst forth and wailed a hopeless doom.
One dreadful note, and then, no more —
A brooding stillness as before.
Long might'st thou list; no other sound
Disturbed the depth of night profound,
Left in its weirdness dread and deep
Seemed fraught with things that could not
Lurking unseen amid the gloom,
Breathing of fear and mortal doom.
So passed the long dark hours away,
And slowly broke another day;
But almost ere the morning's light,
The story of that fateful night
Had, tingling in each village ear,
Blanched many a rustic face with fear.
A poor old servant man and maid
Had thence the dreadful news conveyed :
Their story ran, The night before—
When each to wonted rest had gone—
A sudden strange confused uproar
Had on their drowsy ears been borne ;
A crash, then voices quick and stern,
A struggling sound and then a fall.
And as they rushed the cause to learn,
A hasty tread and then a call,
Their lady's voice smote on their ears
With anguished tone, increased their fears.
Then hastened they, and on the stair
Saw her with face of white despair.
From thence an open chamber door
Entered with haste, and then they heard
One dreadful scream. Oh, ne'er before
Had such wild note of horror stirred
Each palpitating heart with fear
Or pierced with dread each shuddering ear.
They followed at the fearful sound,
And then their stricken lady found;
Half on the empty cot she laid,
Nor sign of breathing life displayed.


The empty cot—the child was gone —
And she was lying there alone.
They raised her then with gentle hand
And tried all things at their command,
And called for help, and none did come,
And all the house seemed still and dumb.
Then searched they through the rooms below.
Nor lingered long upon that quest;
They saw all that that room could show,
Each trace of that last scene impressed —
Disorder scattered everywhere.
What ruthless hand had late been there ?
The shattered casement gaping wide,
Through which the air of night swept chill;
The prostrate bleeding form outside ;
In sooth it were enough to fill
Their souls with fear, and hasten too
Their parting from so dread a view.
Their steps retraced, yet tried once more
The stricken lady to restore ;
But all in vain. She must be dead.
Thus crowned their fears, and then they fled.
So broke the news along the vale
From mouth to mouth at early dawn ;
Scarce but an ear had heard the tale,
Scarce but a tongue its burden borne.
The Abbot had at break of day
(Apprized he of the news the first)
Attended, thither bent his way
To aid or haply know the worst—
The worst —what tongue could guess or tell!
They found young Raleigh, true, not dead,
Tho' crushed and stiffened where he fell;
But not past help, the Abbot said.
But where the lady ? She was left,
Apparently of life bereft,
All prone upon the little bed;
But now she must be hid or fled.
Recovered from her death-like trance,
And, maddened, wandered off perchance ;


She must be found. In vain they sought,
And at each shrewd conjecture caught;
The house, the grounds, each likely spot,
They sought again and found her not;
Nor could they find; that day, the next,
Their fruitless search still all perplexed.
From days to weeks, a month had passed,
And then they gave it up at last.
Meantime young Raleigh's shattered frame.
Beneath the Abbot's kindly skill,
To health returned, tho' ne'er the same ;
He somewhat had of vigour still.
Some weeks had passed away, and now,
"With strength returned, he could not rest,
But strode about with moody brow,
With self-accusing thoughts possest.
The Past—the dreadful Past would rise
For ever present to his eyes;
Nor to his waking moments kept,
But haunted ever while he slept.
Again, again reacted o'er
That scene, nor always yet the same,
But shapes more dreadful than before
Upon his nerveless heart made claim.
Nor could he calmly meet the eye
Of any one of human kind.
But shrank from question or reply
Like one with guilty-laden mind.
At last no longer could he rest,
And to the Abbot bent his way;
A deep resolve his soul possessed,
And one that would not brook delay.
" Kind friend," he said, "for all thy care,
The thanks of my most grateful heart
Accept. May heaven thy life long spare
Its well spent hours; now we must part.
Thou know'st my case; but for thine aid
And gentle care my life had paid
The penalty of that deep crime
I had no power to check in time.


But now, restored to health again,
I can no longer here remain;
The wasting hours speed quickly by,
And in a vile repose still I,
The slave of each accusing thought,
Sit idly brooding here for nought,
While they, poor victims of my wrong,
Unjustly bear my curse along;
Or, lonely wandering far apart,
Despair in each divided heart.
Oh, check me not; I must away
Ere dawning of another day;
And I must search ; —they shall be found,
E'en though I search the world around,
And all that dire mistake be shown ;
'Twas mine—the crime—and mine alone.
Oh, could I curse mine erring heart
That could not quell so vile a part!
And could I rend with scorn the tongue
Erom whose vile sound these ills have sprung
Nay! screen me from all honest eyes,
For even I myself despise—
A viper, nursed in warmest fold,
Too true my venomed instinct told.
Nay, let me now no longer stay;
Thou know'st not yet what my delay
Might mar. Oh, I may be too late
In my atonement, and their fate."
" Then," said the Abbot, " if thou wilt,
Then go, my son, 'twas thine the guilt—
Altho' thou didst somewhat redeem
Thy fault, thyself, in her esteem —
And act at once upon the thought
That she, sweet soul, for thee had wrought.
Yet 'twas thy crime, and thine the debt
Of reparation owing yet;
And thine the task, tho' thou might'st spend
Thy life to gain so great an end.
God aid and guide thee to success,
And may He all thine efforts bless.
Mine eyes could view no sweeter sight
Than see this wrong by thee set right;


My soul could find no greater joy
In aught on earth than to employ
Itself in kindest thoughts of cheer
To welcome a return so dear.
Then go, my son ; God aid and speed,
And on to hope thy footsteps lead."
'Twas thus replied the holy man
In warm approval of the plan;
He, deeply versed in human ways.
From long experience and deep thought,
Had pierced the many tangled maze
Of action by deep passion wrought.
And well each impulse of the soul
Responded to his mind's control,
Subservient to that higher sense
It yielded to no influence,
Save where skilled judgment, calm and clear.
Might safely point, Thy way lies here.
And yet withal a breast whose glow
In generous action well could show
How, with such nicely balanced mind,
One could be sternly just, yet kind.
Who fitter to wield Wisdom's tongue —
To help the aged or guide the young ;
Who fitter in deep Sorrow's need
To pour the halm from Pity's meed,
Or with soft words of hopeful cheer
In some wild gloomy night of fear
Give comfort to some troubled breast
By woe or haply crime oppressed.
Now to young Raleigh's mind he seemed
A man to be more than esteemed,
As with bent eye and reverent head
He heard all that the old man said :
Wise words of counsel as they fell,
Seemed to his brooding heart of care —
Of future hopeful days—to tell
Of hearts united as they were ;
Of guilty love atoned, forgiven;
Of that dread past all swept away,


And Peace, like softest beam from heaven,
Gilding a purer opening day ;
And rose within his swelling breast
The new-born hope his eye confessed,
There in a kindling light it burned
As on the old man's face it turned,
Who, as he ceased his counsel grave,
The young man took the hand he gave
With eager palm, and cried he then,
<l Oh, noblest of all noble men,
For each kind word that thou hast given
May blessings fall on thee from heaven,
And may thy kind and holy zeal
Be paid with everlasting weal.
Now eager to my task I go
With strengthened heart and freer flow;
Each quickened pulse responsive wakes
To that high hope that o'er it breaks,
By thee inspired—and 'tis to thee,
Whatever may the issue be,
Long as my grateful heart may live
Its dearest thoughts shall memory give."
So Raleigh on his quest departed;
If sad of brow, yet hopeful hearted.


o 0
o \»/^3XI/o - !(;' y/ Q \t< o \|-^ 0 \|^ o \|Z O
EDITH A.
—'"s"'
CANTO Y.
—-*
T ONGr weary years with measured tread
J—' In solemn march had passed away,
Yet still the ivy clung and spread
Along those ruined walls so grey.
The haunting owl his home had made
In undisputed sway of all,
Save when the night winds round it played
Or shrieked along its empty hall.
Then hooted he with mocking cry,
And joined the wild wind's revelry.
Well might the passer hear with dread,
And hasten on with quicker tread;
Well might the rustic swain with fear
Pause ere he passed that place too near,
As haply from his home had strayed
To woo or meet some village maid.
And now with homeward step belated
He rues the reason he had waited,
As doubtfully he picks his way
And widely skirts that ruin grey
That outlined 'gainst the morn's pale sheen,
Lay grim and ghostly just between
He and the humble cottage door
He gaily left some hours before.
So might he dread that ruin grey,
And seek to pass another way,
For there (so weirdly runs the tale),
When Cynthia's waning face on high
Through rifted clouds grows dull and pale
And midnight winds begin to sigh,


Then through that dim and spectral light
There can he seen a form of white—
A female form of beauteous mould,
But from whose eyes a light as cold
As that pale moon, gleams fixed and dread.
O'er features whence all life has fled.
Some say it is that lady fair,
The bride -of that false Knight of old,
Whose troubled spirit lingers there,
Waiting the last sad leaf unfold,
On whose dark page yet, to fulfil
The gipsy's curse, lies brooding still.
And oft at midnight's silent hour
That shrouded form is seen to glide,
Sometimes around the o'er-grown bower,
Or where the chestnut trees divide.
And when the nightly breezes sigh,
Then can be heard her mournful cry,
Wailing of those gone long before —
Wailing the doom still yet in store
On he, whose tread is yet to fall
Once more within that ruined hall.
But others hold that form to be
Of her, the gipsy Zaydalie,
And that her sad and unknown tomb
Such restless spirit could not hold,
Until fulfilled had been the doom
Her wild prophetic words foretold.
And 'tis Tier voice whose mournful wail
Still mingles with the rising gale;
And 'tis her form whose vigils deep
Watch o'er a thing that will not sleep.
Thus ran the village stories round
Of that grey ruin, sad and lone,
To greater credence gaining ground
As years rolled o'er each crumbling stone;
For since that night, when bitter wrong
Had worked its deadly course along,
Nought had been heard of those who fled
Or were they living yet, or dead,


None knew; each fruitless search long past,
All hope to find had sunk at last;
Tho' Raleigh had one day returned—
'Twas after five years' weary quest—
And sooth the little he had learned
But gave a weak and doubtful zest
To further search a vague, faint clue,
No sooner found than lost to view.
Yet still he wandered forth again,
'Tis said, with an unsettled brain,
For in his silent way he seemed
Like one who ever inly dreamed —
Whose half-formed thoughts or visions dull
Could only but themselves annul.
Yet, so he went, and since that day
Ten years or more had rolled away;
Yet still, mysterious silence holding
The fate of those its depth enfolding,
Blent with the past her shadows dim,
Sinking to memory's deep'ning haze,
Told of a story dark and grim
That happened once in earlier days.
So thus, when fifteen years had cast
Their greyness o'er that once fair spot,
It breathed of nothing but the past —
Of vanished lives and scenes forgot.
Yet still the old house reared on high
Its hoary frontlet to the sky;
Altho' forsaken now by all,
Except the ivy on the wall
Still spreading o'er each crumbling stone
Seemed now to claim as all its own,
And closely clung with firmer hold
As tho' it sought all to enfold,
And shelter now the poor old head
That erst had sheltered it instead.
'Twas eventide ; the golden ray
That closed a gentle summer's day
Glanced through those ancient trees once more
As bright as in the days of yore.


It touched the ruin's rugged face
And lit it with a placid grace,
And burnished up the old grey eaves
And sparkled 'mid the ivy leaves,
And seemed to kiss the shrubs below
And bathed them in a tender glow,
Investing all in that sweet hour
With beauty's soft, tho' fleeting power.
The busy hours of day were past,
The birds' sweet voices, hushed and low,
Were trilling now their notes, the last,
While basking in the sunset glow.
But in the old deserted grove
Sad silence reigns—that deep, dim aisle
Where erst the evening song of love
Was wont the listening ear beguile,
Beneath whose sheltering branches' spread
Fair forms once sought the trysting spot,
No longer echoes to their tread ;
The trees still wave, but they come not;
No longer heard, no longer seen,
As 'twere such things had never been.
The sunset beams glance through in vain,
And, finding nought, withdraw again;
Now faintly stirs the evening breeze,
And sighs and rustles through the trees ;
And dimmer grows the fading light,
And sad and weirdly to the sight
The lone, dark stems But hark! a sound
Breaks o'er that silent depth profound—
Now ceased; but no, it comes again !
And nearer —from yon wooded lane.
Where summer leaves lie thick and dead—
It sounds—and 'tis a human tread!
And see approaching now a form—
A man, of aspect strange and sad,
Whose frame seems scathed by many a storm,
Yet shows the vigour once it had;
Nor doth the monkish garb he wears
Seem suited to the mien he bears,


As gaunt and tall he stalks along,
With pace, tho' slow, yet firm and strong;
And tho' his locks of iron-grey
Too surely tell of life's decay,
His lofty head and stern-set face
Bear yet a proud majestic grace,
As tho' within its owner held
A spirit stricken, yet unquelled;
And in his keen and piercing eye
A look as tho' it could defy
E'en yet, tho' blent with gleams so deep
That tells of thoughts that will not sleep;
Where settled grief or fond regret,
Or some sweet memory ling'ring yet,
Still struggles with a dark despair
That holds a deep possession there;
And yet withal, an air resigned —
A wearied look, as though his mind
Had, from too long conflicting thought,
At last its own exhaustion wrought,
And cannot find respite or rest
To ease the burden from his breast—
Throws o'er this man, whoe'er he be,
A strange, sad air of mystery.
Perchance a monk turned from his way
To closer view that ruin grey.
But see ! he pauses—seems to wait
Just by the broken wicket gate,
As tho' some sound had smote his ear,
And told his mind to doubt or fear.
But no ; he passes on again ;
And was it weariness or pain
That caused that deep and hollow moan,
And o'er his face that paleness thrown ?
And is it the deep twilight haze
Such dimness to his eye conveys ?
Why stands he now in that lone spot ?
The deep'ning night draws on apace;
But still he seems to heed it not;
What doth he now in this lone place ?
What charm hath that old fountain now ?
No tinkling shower so cool and clear


To thirst allay or cool the brow
Springs forth; then why ? What doth he here
The dry and useless basin lay
Encrusted with its own decay;
There once the lillies grew and spread,
Now long dank grass grows there instead;
And beauteous flowers once bloomed around,
Now withered leaves but strew the ground,
And darkly falls the gath'ring gloom!
Yet still that tall strange man of care
Stands like a shadow o'er a tomb,
Mourning the hopes deep buried there.
Now hasten with thy sable pall,
Oh, Night! with darkness shroud the earth !
Befriend Despair ! let pity fall
From thy black brow, for Pity's dearth!
Come with thy darkest cloud, and hide
Yon weak and crouching thing of clay.
Let tempests o'er thy bosom ride,
And reckless winds howl as they may,
And drown those bursting sounds of woe
In wildest din ; let no thing hear
How stern strong breasts can labour so,
And agonise to form a tear.
Oh, Thou who, ever present, moves
'Midst Thy creations! Oh, just God!
Still, tho' Thy mighty hand reproves
Frail, erring man, stay, stay Thy rod,
In mercy ! through the darkness deep,
Oh, gently move —stretch forth and save,
And with a loving guard still keep
Our failing feet. Each self-dug grave
Gapes wider when Thy darkness falls,
And white Despair still beckons on,
Luring the sinking heart that calls
To its own doom. Oh, Mighty One !
As Thou art merciful and just.
Stretch forth and save thine own weak dust!


Old Time still treads his ceaseless round;
Months, seasons, years—all melt away
Of things that were. What can be found ?
Not e'en the hours of yesterday.
Each laden moment headlong cast
To join the myriad phantom'd past
Of human things —hopes, joys and fears.
What are they ?—nought but fleeting breath
That comes and goes in sighs and tears :
To-day, all life ; to-morrow, death;
Yet Old Time halts not on his way.
Unheeding still he sweeps along
The human race. Who ? What are they ?
Poor finite atoms placed among
The lower elements of life
To wage their little hour of strife,
Still bearing out some abstract law
And fill Old Time's devouring maw.
We come and go, we come and go ;
What else ? Can human wisdom show ?
Who are the wise ? Come, let him tell
His gage of worth, and —it is well.
Old Time still wends his even way,
And summer months hath passed away ;
And autumn leaves in many a shower
Attest the winter's coming power.
The elms along the Abbey lane
Sway, sighing to each fitful blast—
Sounds like a far-off mournful strain,
The requiem of a summer past.
A little off the road, where stand
Two large twin trees grown side by side,
Whose branches, interlaced, expand,
And give a shelter deep and wide ;
A narrow well-worn path leads there,
And ceases at a rustic chair;
And recent traces plainly show
Of frequent steps that come and go.
The mad Monk's chair, the rustics say,
And his the foot that comes this way.


But who is lie who holds such claim
And bears such fearful sounding name ?
In sooth it were a thing to know —
More than the shrewdest tongue could show,
Or deepest guess each'mind could frame,
The myst'ry still remained the same.
No one could tell; 'twas only known
He came —a stranger —and alone.
'Twas late one summer's night, when all
Was hushed within the Abbey wall;
And in his sanctum sat the chief,
Still pond'ring o'er some well-worn leaf,
Nor recked of the late-grown hour,
He only felt the author's power;
But with a start he raised his head :
" What sound was that ?" he inly said—
" A knocking at the Abbey gate ?
What step is this that comes so late ?"
He heard the porter hastening go,
Then voices mutt'ring strange and low;
Then through the paved court-yard the tread
As of a stranger being led ;
Then rising, wide the door he threw,
And slowly walked to meet the two :
A tall and muffled form he saw;
And something felt akin to awe,
For 'neath that dignity of mien
Spoke something more than could be seen.
Yet stern withal, as to repress
Aught that a prying thought might guess ;
And round that stranger seemed to cast
The shadows of a tragic past —
Compelled respect, and such was shown
Within the Abbot's courteous tone.
As he returned the greeting grave
And welcome to the stranger gave,
And though his face the thought might wear-
What mission deep had brought him there—
Forbore the question, he divined
'Twas something not of common kind.
And so in silence led the way
To where his inner sanctum lay;


For there within its deep recess —
Held sacred for most secret use,
No wandering foot might dare to press,
Nor curious eye vain glance unloose—
He might reveal his mission strange
Securely from all outer range.
Long sat the two ; what passed between,
No mind could guess nor eye could glean
'Twas only known some mystery deep
Was placed within the Abbot's keep,
Who guarded well the trust reposed,
Nor aught of that he knew disclosed.
The stranger stayed, but rarely mixed
With those 'midst whom his lot seemed fixed
But coldly distant to each one,
He never seemed to seek or shun
Companionship from those around,
Or heeded aught from sight or sound.
As in a crowd he stood among,
Not of them—with a silent tongue
And heedless ear —and passed all by;
Tho' 'twas not scorn that filled his eye
With that strange light that ever seemed
To almost freeze on whom it gleamed ;
For tho' his voice was seldom heard,
Yet, ever as he spoke, each word,
With a strange courtesy, seemed to blend,
And made each man a " would-be " friend.
But none approached with proffered cheer
To one so distant, yet so near;
Tho' many a pitying glance was thrown,
And many a wordless kindness shown
On him, who ever seemed to be
Beyond all other sympathy.
He went alone ; whate'er had been
Of his past life the former scene
No outward sign by him displayed
To other eyes a clue conveyed.
Absorbed within his own closed mind
He seemed to all things now resigned,


As one who had outlived the day,
When hope or fear could soothe or sway ;
Yet still retained that innate pride
Of manhood, seeking still to hide
All that might tend to wound or shake
The stricken heart that would not break.
Observant to each day's routine,
At matins or at evening prayer,
That stately form was ever seen
With deep-bowed head and reverent air.
At length, familiar grown, he stood
As one among the brotherhood,
And wonder almost ceased to find
Whereon to gaze. They deemed his mind
Somewhat diseased or over-wrought
By too close study and deep thought;
And though his habits still were strange,
And tho' his foot might freely range
Among all places sad and lone,
Surprise was ne'er or rarely shown.
Sometimes along the lane he strode
With hurried step, as tho' a thought
Within had acted like a goad,
And thus to quicker motion wrought ;
Or by the well-worn rustic chair
Would linger with abstracted air
As tho' some charm were hidden there;
Or if afar his foot would stray,
'Twas ever to that ruin grey.
But it was noted when he came
From thence, he never seemed the same;
It seemed as though that ill-starred place
Had stamped its curse upon his face;
More deeply graved each care-wrought line
More fiercely bright his eyes would shine;
And those who saw him thus, would say
The stranger seemeth worse to-day.
So time rolls on. The Autumn sun
Sinks coldly 'neath yon distant hill;


Another day is nearly done,
And evening cometh bleak and chill.
Already now the deep'ning west
Gives promise of the hour of rest:
A dying breeze sweeps o'er the vale,
The remnant of an autumn gale ;
And twilight spreads with deeper shade,
And mystery hangs o'er dell and glade ;
Each far-off scene blends shapeless now
'Gainst night's advancing sable brow.
Hark ! Listen to that breaking sound !
Now far away, now softly near.
Doth it not tell to all around—
Doth it not say—that God is here ?
Ding on, ring on, sweet vesper bell;
Our hearts chime with each rising tone,
As softly on the breeze ye swell,
And bid the hour of prayer be known.
'Tis ceased; and lo ! the dusky night
Is closing round —now silent all.
The stars above gleam palely bright,
And cold, damp dews begin to fall;
And here and there amid the gloom
Small steady rays of light illume,
Like beacons to the distant eye,
Tells where some humble home doth lie.
The Abbey stands all dark and lone,
Like some huge shapeless thing o'ergrown;
The tall elm trees and high black wall
Seem wrapt about it like a pall.
Yet still within that gloomy pile,
So seeming cold and dark the while,
High comfort reigns, no stint is there
Of cheering warmth and goodly fare.
All holy duties now complete,
Each one takes his accustomed seat,
And grouped around the plenteous board,
To nature's claims pay just accord.


But still there is one vacant chair —
The stranger's form is absent there.
Conjecture dwells on every tongue,
Why tarries he so late to-night ?
" Perchance he is detained among
The village folk, some hapless wight
Requiring holy aid or cheer—
Is haply why he is not here.
It must he so; some urgent case
Hath kept him from his wonted place;
He ne'er was known to miss the time
At matins or at evening chime;
Some pressing need hath called him hence
Caused his delay and our suspense."
So surmise they, and in each tone
A deep concern is plainly shown;
The stranger with his gloomy face
Hath found within each heart a place,
Altho' he ne'er had sought regard,
It came, like an unclaimed reward.
That deep, reserved, and care-lined brow
Is dear to them ; they miss him now,
And listen for his measured tread
With anxious ear and oft turned head.
"Retrace our steps an hour or so;
'Tis when the dim and fading light
Begins to leave the earth below,
Before the dark approach of night.
Around the ruin deeper still
The shadows creep, and bleakly chill
The evening air begins to fall,
And settles damply over all.
Still can be heard the muffled sound
Of footfalls on the leaf-strewn ground,
And can be seen along the lane
That tall and dusky form again,
Retreating from that spot so grim
That seems to hold such charm for him,
But later than his wont, the time
Is near the stroke of evening chime ;


He surely hath the hour forgot,
Else why still near this fatal spot.
With frequent pause he stops and stands,
And holds his head between his hands,
As tho' within, the o'er-strung brain
Could scarce endure its mental strain.
Oh, wearily each movement tells
The care-worn soul within that dwells
The clinging thoughts that will not leave
One moment for that soul's reprieve ;
But, fiend-like, ever tug and tear
The quiv'ring pulse that still must bear.
But hark ! that distant sweet-toned sound
Breaks o'er the silent air profound;
The vesper bell —the hour of prayer—
And still his foot is ling'ring there.
He starts 1 that sound recalls him now
To outer things; his changing brow
Reveal the efforts of his soul
To gain once more its own control.
The mastery of his own dark mind
Brings back once more the air resigned;
The pale stern brow and lip compressed,
Tho' still might haply tell the rest.
With mending pace he moves again
Along the now fast dark'ning lane ;
His wonted measured tread soon takes
Him on to where a dim light breaks.
The lane ends there and joins the road
That leads toward the monk's abode.
He turns the bend ; he starts ! what sound
Was that, proceeding from the ground
Or in the road, or in the lane ?
He knows not. There it is again—
A human voice—a long-drawn moan ;
And surely 'tis a woman's tone.
And in the lane, just near the end,
Within that little grassy bend,
A woman's form lies pronely there,
Unsheltered 'neath the cold night air.


EDITHA
He sees —advances—offers aid ;
But no response to him is made.
He strives to rouse ; he lifts her head;
But everything of live seems fled.
Oh, surging through his breast, a flood
Of feeling, sends the rushing blood
Tumultuous, throbbing through each vein,
Back, back to manhood's days again.
The touch of that poor woman's head
Revives what he had long deemed dead;
Breaks through the ice of dim dark years,
And fills his eyes with pitying tears,
And flushes o'er his late cold brow
The softness that it must avow.
A woman lying helpless there
Demands from him the tenderest care ;
His own warm cloak, with ample fold,
Will something shield from damp and cold-
He loosens from himself with haste,
And round that still cold form 'tis placed.
What next ? A moment's thought. Not:
From where he stands, gleams like a star
A small clear light. He knows that there
Reside an ancient rustic pair,
Two kind old souls as ever stood
On earth to do a deed of good,
Beneath whose roof, a shelter kind,
He knows 'tis but to seek and find.
Once more he lifts the yielding head,
And gathers up the cold damp hair
That loosely o'er her face is spread.
Her face, it might have once been fair;
But oh, so worn and faded now
It seems to him, the cold white brow —_
But dimly seen, so dark the night—
Hath a strange something; who can tell
What makes him tremble at the sight,
And bids his bosom so to swell ?
Oh, now he clasps her waist around
And lifts her gently from the ground,
And bears her lightly hence to where
That little light still shines so fair.


Within a chamber dimly lit,
A poor old dame with noiseless tread,
Now to and fro is seen to flit
About a little humble bed.
With gentlest hand —oh, here is shown
True woman's office, her's alone —
With gentlest hand and pitying air
She tends the poor worn sufferer there,
And all of comfort she can find
Need not he asked from one so kind ;
'Tis there, and her's the willing hand,
And watchful eye to note and mark
How far experience can command
To aid the warmth in life's dull spark—
Aye, dull; hut see, the poor thing moves,
Thus well the good dame's treatment proves.
Who, eager, anxious, notes each phase
Wherein the slightest hope to raise.
The sufferer turns —essays to speak,
Tho' hut a whisper, faint and weak;
Yet 'tis enough some joy to give,
And yield the hope she yet might live.
With hasteful, yet with gentle tread,
The old dame leaves the humble bed,
And opes the chamber door with care,
And quickly passes through, to where
An aged man sits by the fire,
And waits to do the dame's desire;
Nor long he lacks his humble share
To help some dainty thing prepare.
The stranger stands in silence by,
With folded arms and watchful eye ;
He ventured once—'twas but to ask
How fared she in her christian task;
Took the reply she kindly gave,
And then resumed his silence grave.
The dame has left them to resume
Her watch within the sufferer's room;


The old man sits beside the fire,
Still musing, waiting her desire.
The stranger stands with resting arm
Upon the mantel; tho' his face
To casual glance seems cold and calm,
Yet who might guess the thoughts that trace
Across that stern, unbending brow,
That seems so fixed and rigid now.
The deepening eyes concentered beam,
But inly turned, as in a dream,
Or on some far-off scene of old
That memory only can unfold,
Nor seem to chain his thoughts the while,
His brow unbends, a gentle smile
Plays o'er his lips ; he starts ! 'tis gone !
That sound hath roused him ; who could deem
So sweet a smile had e'er been worn
On lips so stern as these now seem.
But yet all trace hath not forsook
His face ; his eyes yet bear a look
Of softness, as he turns his head
At those low sounds, and strains to hear*,
As tho' such sounds spoke joy or dread,
As tho' that room held something dear.
The door re-opes, the dame appears ;
Her eyes betray her inward fears.
She beckons to the aged man
And bids him use what haste he can :
" Go, bring the village leech; his skill
May haply save, if 'tis God's will."
Then, turning to the monk, she said :
"Your presence, sir, is needed now
In holy office near her bed,
She hath not long to say, I trow."
He goes ; the old dame leads the way
To where that woman dying lay,
And leaves him standing there alone
Beside the bed of her unknown.
He looks upon the white, worn face,
Where lingers yet the mournful trace,


Where beauty's bloom divinely fair
Had once so sweetly rested there ;
But now so wasted, wan and pale,
Doth it not tell its own sad tale ?
The long dark hair, tinged o'er with grey,
Speaks more than worlds of words could say.
Those eyes, alas ! they gaze at him ;
No wonder that his own are dim ;
In their deep light what sees he now
That o'er his trembling lip and brow
Convulsive sweep, like some wild blast
Of sudden force o'er nature's face ?
A moment's whirl, and it is past,
And nought remains but its deep trace,
Where desolation's blank repose
But only tells just what it shows.
'Tis past with him; a paler cheek,
A lip compressed, a sterner eye,
Shows what it may—'twere to seek
To pierce what still beyond might lie.
She speaks ! and at the feeble tone,
More darkly pale his face hath grown ;
She says : " Thou kind and noble man,
My life is in its last dark span ;
But if a dying breath hath power
To bless or curse in its last hour,
Take thou the first, and with thee live
All that my latest breath can give ;
But for thy generous aid and care,
I had expired unpitied there ;
All unprepared I had been driven
Before the judgment bar of heaven.
Now, God be praised ! that I am here,
Thou'lt give me holy strength and cheer
To meet the end I feel so nigh
With an unburdened breast; for thou,
A priest of God, wilt- not deny
To give thy prayers and aid me now."
She spake ; and he—so changed his tone,
He scarcely knows it for his own—
Replies : " Oh, daughter, have no fear;
My God—thy God—waits thee here.


If that thy sins weigh heavy now
Upon thy fainting heart and brow
In this dread hour, repent and tell,
And with thy soul all shall be well;
Thy wearied heart shall find its peace,
Thy burdened soul shall find release,
Thy fainting spirit take its rest
"Within the haven of the blest.
Behold this emblem; raise thine eyes,
And it shall waft thee to the skies."
And as he speaks he holds above
That mighty pledge of heav'nly love—
The cross —she sees, and speaks again,
But wearily, as tho' in pain :
" My sins on earth hath many been,
Through many a strange and varied scene ;
I had a home—nay! start not—near
To where thou find'st me —oh, so dear;
A husband, child, I loved, how well
These lips of mine can never tell.
Alas ! that love he deemed not true,
That deed of wrong I did not do ;
I was not false— not false —I swear!"
" Nay, woman, heed thy words —beware !"
He sternly cries. " Didst thou not know
Thine hour is short, for weal or woe ?
What dost thou say ?—thou wrong'st him not ?
Thou didst; thine heart hath not forgot;
Or if it hath, thy memory lies.
The hour, the place, recall thee now;
Didst thou not gaze into his eyes ?
Didst thou not smile ? did he not bow
Upon thine hand ? didst " God, look down
On these two souls ! Oh, hide thy frown,
For mercy's sake ! Their mutual eyes
Intensely fixed, to each replies;
Her murmuring lips the words still bear,
" Not false, not false, my God, I swear !
And thou " '' No more, no more," he cries;
"lam thine own; dost thou not see ?
Nay, I will smile. Look in mine eyes,
Editha, darling; lam he—


Thy Roland! Oh, mine own true wife!
Mine, mine at last! my love, my life!
We never more will part; thy face —
Have I not yearned, sought every place —
'Tis sweet as yore. Found, found at last!
What care we now —forget the past.
Yes, thou art now mine only care ;
Our hearts shall on each other wear
Till death—cold death; thou shalt not die.
We both will live, love —thou and I.
We will go hence; there is a spot
Far, far from here, thou know'st it not —
A beauteous place —our boy lies there
'Mid lovely scenes, where flowers so fair
Bloom sweetly o'er his little grave.
'Twas there I nursed him till he died;
Hadst thou been there, I could not save.
We will return ; nought shall divide
Us three ; but ah ! " Oh, softly pressed
Within his arms, and breast to breast,
He holds and gently rocks, and smooths
Her hair, as 'twere a child he soothes;
And she —those yearning, wistful eyes,
Yet soft and dim as evening skies—
Couldst thou had seen —a sweet wan smile
Lights up her dying face the while—
The last fond glow that gentle heart
Shall ever give, so soon to part,
The bliss it feels but cannot hold,
All. all within that smile is told;
She feels the time is now so near
When life must go, now, now so dear.
She speaks; and tho' the soft low tone
Is softer still, 'tis feebler grown :
" Thank God, I see thy face again.
Thou hold'st me in thine arms ; thine heart
Beats next to mine. Oh, not in vain
My prayers; but ah, too soon to part.
Cold death now claims me; yet awhile,
I hear thy voice, I see thy smile;


Thy lips upon mine own hath pressed,
Thine heart still beats against my breast;
I am thy wife, thine own true wife,
Thou know'st now. God gave me life
And strength to Etieet thee at this hour;
But now, alas ! my failing power
Can only bid thee to be blest;
I fear I cannot tell the rest.
Nay, raise me higher, better so ;
I must be quick: Couldst thou but know
How far I wandered —searched for thee
In lonely grief through long dark years,
And how I yearned once more to see
Our child's sweet face (alas ! thy tears
Fall on my cheek) ; at last I grew
Too weak to search, and then I knew
The end was near, and all hope fled;
I thought both thou and he were dead;
And then —and then —I only tried
To see once more before I died
The dear old home I loved so well,
And nearly reached, and then I fell.
Oh, God be thanked that thou didst come;
At last mine heart hath found its home.
But I must leave thee now; I see,
I hear, our child —he calls for me ;
He stands amid those scenes so fair
Thou told'st me of—that lovely spot
Where beauteous flowers bloom everywhere;
And thou didst say I knew it not.
How sweetly beautiful he stands;
He sees, he stretches forth his hands,
And beckons me ; I cannot stay;
He calls again; I must away.
Oh, Boland, husband, kiss me now;
I must go hence, sweet love ; but thou —
Thou wilt come soon." The soft sweet eyes
Now drooping with a light so dim,
Alas ! no more will ever rise
To bend their loving look on him.
Those parted lips will never move
Again to tell their tale of love;


The beauteous smile upon her face,
Unchanged, still keeps its own set place.
He gazes on the still cold brow,
And folds her closer, closer now,
And gently smooths the long loose hair,
And sways him to and fro as 'twere
A little child he hushed to sleep
And sought to soothe its slumbers deep ;
And dimmer grows the little room,
The dying taper's fitful ray
Seems only to increase the gloom,
And mocks itself at last away;
The timepiece ticks against the wall
As though 'twere monarch now of all.
Long might the old dame wait, I trow,
With watchful ear and anxious brow,
For that low call she dreads to hear,
And listens for with growing fear ;
For now the murmuring sounds hath ceased.
Yet why not cometh he —the priest —
For aid. Alas ! if all on earth
Could now be brought, 'twere little worth.
But hark ! the sound of many feet
Sound near with quick uneven beat;
They come, they come —the village leech,
Her aged partner —help at last—
Vain help, false hope ; what aid can reach
Where madness is, and life is past ?
And other forms bring up the rear.
The Abbot and his monks appear;
All enter, and with whispers low,
The dame reveals all she doth know.
The leech with thoughtful face prepares
To now assume his duteous cares ;
He softly taps the chamber door;
But no reply —he taps again,
And somewhat louder than before;
Still no reply—he taps in vain.
In answer to each wondering eye,
He slowly opes ; with sudden cry:


" Bring lights, bring lights! what mystery deep
Is this, that doth such darkness keep ?"
Alas ! the truth is soon revealed :
Within the shadow, half concealed,
Still sways he there —still closely pressed
Her lifeless form against his breast,
And rolls his eye with vacant gleam,
As 'twere in madness or a dream;
His murmuring lips her words still bear—
" Not false, not false, my G-od, I swear!"
The Abbot sees in that one glance,
And guesses all. With cautious tone
He turns to them: " Let me advance ;
This thing to me is plainly shown."
He moves a step : " Dear brother, see
I am thy friend, and seek for thee.
Now let me aid ; I know thy grief,
And can, and will, give thee relief."
No answering light in those strange eyes ;
No recognition in his tone,
As speaking thus he now replies :
" My joys are hers, my griefs mine own.
What wouldst thou have ? dost see this hand ?
Beware its power! Why dost thou stand
And gaze at me ? I know ye not.
Ah, prithee now, I had forgot.
I tell ye, sirs, that she is mine ;
She is my wife, mine own sweet bride ;
Didst ever hear her voice divine ?
She sleepeth now; nought shall divide
Us two. Thy courtesy still is great;
I thank ye all. What, lingering still ?
Once more I bid ye not to wait.
She only sleeps; she is not ill.
When she awakes, far hence we go ;
Our home lies distant, far away,
Where beauteous flowers for ever grow.
Our child waits there. Speak not I pray ;


Thou wilt disturb her gentle sleep.
Ah, now methinks I too feel strange—
A drowsy numbness seems to creep.
Ha, ha! sweet love, thou couldst not change.
So might the lofty heavens fall."
He sinks—he leans against the wall;
His arms relax their clasping hold,
His eyes grow dim, his lips are cold.
They gather round and hold him now ;
But death is stamped upon his brow;
Each quick revulsion o'er his soul
Hath reft it from its own control,
Like some strong tree that bears the strain,
Repeated o'er and o'er again,
Of tempest strong and fitful blast,
At length is topled o'er at last.
So 'tis with him, as now he lay
Beneath the power no hand could stay.
Both dead—within his arms she lies
United now to part no more;
So may their mounting spirits rise
To join their loved one gone before,
'Midst blooming flowers and scenes so fair ;
So may their spirits mingle there,
And find at last eternal rest
Within the regions of the blest.
'Tis over now —the last sad scene
Of lives that might have happy been,
Had not that one mistake arose,
The cause of their after woes;
For both were formed from nature's mould,
As true fond hearts as earth could hold.
'Twas not to be; their lives were cast
To be swept o'er by passion's blast.
Who could forsee the fatal hour ?
It came—they sunk beneath its power.
No more; their history now is done —
A race extinct; the morning sun


Soars from the caverns of the Past,
Stretching afar his bright'ning ray.
New lives, newhopes, new fortunes cast,
On old Time's wheel. Another day
"Springs forth, and earth seems fresh and new.
As tho' no "Past had ever been
To bring to retrospection's view
Aught that might mar Day's opening scene. •
W. R. SMITH, PRTXTER, BRIDGE STREET, SYDN'EY.


BY >-
°W*:®E fSMITH
. 28 i&.smocEsrxr,
&i&,gu/auPt.$y$QQf
