

Boys! See
AMERICA
Wit h th e
YOUN G AU ST RAL IA LEAGUE


young Australia League Headquarters
Perth, Western Australia
Completed portion opened November 23, 1924. When the extensions planned are
completed, all the features on the left of the entrance will be repeated on the right.
As it stands to-day, the building, land, and furniture is valued at £32,000.
The completed structure will represent an outlay of about £50,000.


Foreword
It is the purpose of this publication to convey some information on the
Young Australia League. For some time the activities of the organisa-
tion were confined to Western Australia, but during recent years it has
.become well known in every State of the Commonwealth, for since 1924
boys from every capital city have been enrolled under the banner of
the Y.A.L.
If we were asked to describe the League in the briefest possible
phrase, we might say, “The League makes better Australians.”
Its ranks are open to boys in their teens without any distinction
regarding politics or religion.
Since its inception, thousands of boys have participated in tours
conducted by the League, some of them being merely from town to town,
others from State to State, and four to overseas countries.
These tours have been carried out under the slogan of “Education
by Travel,” but they represent only one of the many activities of the
League, which seeks to provide opportunities to develop the many-sided
possibilities of the average Australian boy. The organisation was
founded in Perth, where the League is one of the recognised features of
the city. It is here the headquarters are located, the activities being
housed in a building valued at £32,000. It is hoped that this will be but
the first of a series of similar buildings in every State capital.
The membership of the League is of two kinds—regular and
auxiliary. The regular members are those who participate during their
spare time all the year round in the activities of the organisation. The
auxiliary members are those enrolled especially for tours, and this
membership is open to lads attending school in any part of Australia.
The League has conducted four Overseas Tours as follows:—1912:
Around the World. 1915: New Zealand, United States, and Canada.
Overseas tours were suspended owing to the war and not resumed
until 1924, when 50 boys made an Empire tour, taking in Great Britain
and Canada, with brief calls at New Zealand.
In 1925 the European Tour was carried out by 140 boys, taking in
Great Britain, France, Italy, Switzerland, and Belgium.
The fifth tour is now open to boys from any part of Australia,
and the details will be found in the following pages.


On the Move to America
THE YOUNG AUSTRALIA LEAGUE, which has launched so many
successful State, Interstate and International Tours, invites 100 boys
to visit the United States and Canada under the banner of the
organisation.
THE details of the proposal are set
out in full in this booklet, but here
are the main points. The tour has
been planned for schoolboys and those
who have just finished their scholastic
careers. The ages are to be from 14 to
17, but in very exceptional cases the age
limit may be waived.
The tour is open to any decent-living
boy in any part of Australia.
The dates have been shaped so that
the trip may be made with a minimum
of enroachment on school time—the
tour includes the greater part of the
chief vacations of the year.
The distance covered will be 22,000
miles, 8,500 of which will be on land.
The contingent will be organised and
led by the Founder of the Young Aus-
tralia League, Mr. J. J. (“Boss”)
Simons, who has had nearly 7,000 boys
under his control on various tours.
The advance plans will be carried out
by the Deputy-Director of the New
South Wales Division of the League,
Mr. E. R. (“Wap”) Marie. He arrived
in San Francisco on March 29.
Offers of co-operation to facilitate the
travels of the party to the United States
have been received from the United
States Government, and the honor of a
reception at the White House, Washing-
ton, has been promised.
A visit to the Moving Picture Colony
at Hollywood has been arranged, and
the leading stars of the film world have
offered to act as hosts and hostesses to
groups of the visiting boys.
Every courtesy has been promised by
the Government of our sister Dominion
Canada, where Ottawa, the Canberra of
Britain’s oldest Dominion, will be
visited.
The land tour will begin at San Fran-
cisco, and the party will travel south-
wards through California, calling at Los
Angeles and Pasadena, thence to Ari-
zona, El Paso (New Mexico), and to
San Antonio and New Orleans, thence
to Birmingham, taking in Atlanta, Rich-
mond, and Washington, D.C.
After leaving the United States capi-
tal, the itinerary will lead to New York,
across the Canadian territory into Mont-
real, Quebec, and Ottawa, then to
Niagara Falls, Buffalo, and other cities
to Chicago. From Chicago, Canadian
territory will be again entered, and the
tour continued through Winnipeg to
V ancouver.
This itinerary shows that the forward
route from the Pacific to the Atlantic
will be on United States soil, and the
greater part of the return journey to the
Pacific Coast will be through Canada.
Every care will be taken to ensure the
right type of boy being chosen. The
League has its own way of ascertaining
the fitness of those who may apply be-
fore making a final selection.
The cost of the trip, which embraces
everything, including a standard League
uniform, will be £195/10/-, accepted, if
desired, in instalments —a deposit of
£6O with application, and the balance
in five equal sums each of £27/2/-.
Applications should be made imme-
diately, addressed to the League Head-
quarters, Perth, Box 219, G.P.0., or to
the New South Wales Division, Box
2889, G.P.0., Sydney.
After applications have been filed, the
leader of the party will visit the various
State capitals for the purpose of inter-
viewing applicants and making final
selections.
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


THE KING AND THE LEAGUE
HIS MAJESTY THE KING has
been good enough to express a
keen interest in the work of the
League. In 1912 he received the contin-
gent of League boys at Buckingham
Palace, and a report of
the reception says:
“His Majesty and the
Prince of Wales walked
down the ranks and in-
spected each hoy. At the
conclusion of the inspec-
tion he remarked that the
uniforms were the neat-
est that he had ever seen.
He then addressed the
boys, complimenting
them on their appear-
ance, commending the
League for the work it
was doing, and congratu-
lating the lads on their
good fortune in partici-
pating in the tour.”
The Prince of Wales
at this time was just
eighteen years of age.
When he visited Austra-
lia eight years later, and
met League boys, in
Perth, he recalled the
meeting.
In 1924, when 50 boys
organised by the New
South Wales Division
were touring Great
Britain, they were ex-
tended a similar compli-
ment, and the King said he was much
impressed with the League movement,
as the boys returning should know more
than most of their age. He knew the
great benefits of travel from his own ex-
periences. Her Majesty, Queen Mary,
speaking to Mr. John Tucker, one of the
co-directors of the tour, described the
Young Australia League movement as
an excellent scheme for educating the
Empire’s young manhood.
On May 30th, 1925, 140 boys who
were making a tour of Europe were also
honoured with a reception by His
Majesty. The London “Times” of June
Ist in its report said:
“The boys, who numbered 140, pre-
sented a smart appearance in their uni-
form. The King walked
through their ranks, ac-
companied by Mr. J. J.
Simons, the founder of
the League, whom he
congratulated on the suc-
cess of the tour.
“His Majesty, address-
ing the cadets, said: ‘I am
very glad to see you
here to-day, on the eve
of your departure. I
know you have seen
many things of much in-
terest and value since
leaving Australia. I look
back with pleasure to my
own travels over the
world, when I was even
younger than most of
you, and the experiences
gained during those im-
pressionable years have
been of the greatest help
to me. I am sure that
your experiences will
prove equally beneficial
when you are called upon
to occupy responsible
positions within the Em-
pire. In 1912, I well re-
member meeting Mr.
Simons and a similar
party of the Young Australia League,
and probably many of you are related
to those boys and have learnt from them
the educational advantages that travel
can give.. I congratulate you on your
smart appearance, and I am glad to
hear that your conduct and behaviour
throughout this tour have been exemp-
lary, and a credit to the schools you
represent. I wish you good-luck and
God-speed and a safe return to your
homes, with the happiest recollections
of the Mother Country and the different
His Majesty King George V.
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


parts of the world which you have visit-
ed.’ The boys were afterwards enter-
tained in the palace and each was pre-
sented, on behalf of the King, with a
sprig of mimosa. Mr. Simons also re-
ceived autographed photographs of the
King and Queen.”
The autographed photographs refer-
red to in the “Times” report are among
the proud possessions of the League at
Headquarters, and, in a beautiful frame
of highly polished Australian wood,
hold a place of honor in the 1925 gallery.
The photographs are stated to be the
only autographed pictures of Their
Majesties housed in any but Vice-Regal
establishments in the Commonwealth.
SMOKING BARRED
THE League discourages smoking
among boys. It is, therefore, a strict
rule on tour that boys are not allow-
to smoke. In some organisations the
rule is announced but not enforced With
the League, it is strictly adhered to, and
boys who feel they cannot refrain from
smoking are advised not to enter for the
tour.
It has been announced publicly in the
countries to be visited that the party is
made up exclusively of non-smokers,
and any departure from the rule cannot
be permitted.
Federal Doorway: History in Stones
AT the conclusion of the Interstate
Tour for Western Australian boys
organised from Headquarters last
year, a meeting of parents decided to
express their appreciation of the work
of the Founder of the League, Mr. J. J.
(“Boss”) Simons and his fellow officers
by donating what is to be known as a
Federal Doorway, to the Headquarters
building.
In the original plans a space was left
unwalled between the first reception
room and the approaches to the Audi-
torium and Lower Hall. In this, the
Federal Doorway, which will have
unique features will be built. The design
is of bold proportions and embraces an
archway supported by tiers of stone
brought from historical points in each
State of the Commonwealth. The arch
will be supported on the right by a
block of stone, each from New South
Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Papua
and on the left from Tasmania, Vic-
toria, Western Australia, South Aus-
tralia and the Northern Territory. The
arch and key stone will be composed of
blocks taken from Canberra.
The stones have been selected from
places having a deep historical signifi-
cance. For example, that from New
South Wales has been hewn from the
spot where Captain Cook landed, that
from Tasmania was taken from Risdon,
the site of the first white settlement, the
stone from Melbourne is from the place
near where Batman erected the first
white man’s house at what was to be-
come the capital of Victoria. The stone
chosen from the other points is of equal
historical significance.
When the work is finished it will
form an expression in stone of the unity
of purpose of the Australian people and
furnish at the same time, a reminder of
the history of our cpuntry. It will prob-
ably be the most unique doorway instal-
led in any building in Australia. The
work of raising funds was carried out
by a committee of which Mr. T. Lalor
was President; Mr. W. H. (“Bill”) Gee,
Secretary; Mr. J. W. Vivian, Treasurer,
and the following members: Messrs. E.
C. Gould, E. King, Mesdames J. W.
Vivian, S. Durack and L. Wilson.
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


Events in England and Scotland, 1925 Tour
Receiving the Flag at Manchester. Reception in the Highlands of Scotland— a padre at Kihlock Rannoch
addressing the bogs in Gaelic. At the famed Winchester School. The mined Chapel of Holyrood.
Another flag from the people of Bradford. Inspecting ancient Stonehenge.


Celebrities Who Greeted the 1925 Tour Boys
HIS GRACE THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY. —With flags
flying and the band playing inspiring music, the contingent marched
Into the presence of His Grace at, historic Lambeth Palace. In speak-
ing to the boys after they had inspected the Palace he said: “The tra-
ditions and history of this building are as much yours as they tire
ours. What belongs to England belongs also to you, for we all share
in the heritage of the race.” He concluded by wishing the boys wel-
come to England in the name of the Church of which he is the head.
This was the second occasion when a League party was received at
the Palace, the first being in 1912. when the official flag of the League
adopted only the year previously, was dedicated in the presence of the
Church of England members of the tour of that year, when the first
oversea party of boys was travelling.
HIS MAJESTY KING VICTOR EMMANUEL was Hie first to extend
a reception at Rome, The function took place on the first Sunday
morning at the Italian capital. The contingent headed by the hand
marched through the streets of Rome, and was received by the guard
at the Palace, with whom compliments were exchanged. The reception
took place in one of the beautiful state rooms. The King, who was
dressed in the uniform of a general, addressed the party in the name
of the Italian people. He conversed in Italian with one of the hoys
of the tour (Hector Yergonai. whose parents originally came to Aus-
tralia from Italy. During the conversation, he expressed the hope
that favorable opinions of Italy would lie carried away, and that the
League would again arrange a visit by Australian boys. At the invi-
tation of the King the hoys made an inspection of the Palace.
THE PIUXCE OF WALES evinced a keen interest in the League,
and expressed a desire to meet the visiting boys. He received them
at St. James’ Palace, and, after shaking hands with each officer and
boy, he delivered a brief address of welcome, concluding by saying:
"I hope you enjoy your stay in England as much as 1 enjoyed my
visit to Australia.” The Prince had previously met boys in the League
uniform when they were visiting England in 1912; again, in 1920, he
came in contact with Leaguer-, (hiring his tour of Australia. That ho
had vivid recollections of hi-- visit to the Commonwealth was indicated
by the enquiries he addressed to his young guests. The reception
at St. James' Palace wa- held in the lirst. week in the old country, and
during the subsequent days of the tour the Prince made enquiries
regarding the welfare of the hoys and the progress of the tour.
PRESIDENT DAUMERGE, the head of the French Republic, extend-
ed an official reception to the boys, during which he commended the
work of the League in its effort to maintain the fraternal spirit, which
was quickened during the anxious years of the war. One of the notable
('vents at Paris was when the boys placed a wreath at the Arc de
Trinmphe in honor of France's unknown soldier. The function was
attended by Marshal Foch, General .Toff re, and General Gonraud
(Military Governor of Paris). General Gonrand. at a subsequent
reception, referred to his association with Australian soldiers at Galli-
poli. A reception was also given by President Painleve. the head of
the Chamber of Deputies, and subsequently the party was welcomed
by a number of Senators at the French Senate, where the system of
government tinder -which the republic is ruled was explained.
PRIME MINISTER MESSOLTXI, evinced a lively interest in the
visit of the boys to his country, and expressed his anxiety to tender
ft reception, but while the party was in Rome he was suffering from
a serious illness. He issued an order that every possible facility
should he extended to the boys, to whom he sent the following mess-
age: “I welcome you to Italy. lam an admirer of the Australian
people. I send yon my cordial greeting, and hope that on your return
you will assist In creating bonds of friendship between our two coun-
tries, whose mutual collaboration would be most beneficial in its
results to both.” Further evidence of his interest In the boys is
preserved at League Headquarters in the shape of an historic stone
from the Appian Way given to the party by his order. The souvenir
is said to he the work of a slave sculptor of about 200 B.C.


Salutations From National and Other Leaders
POPE PIUS XL —Although only twelve of the members of the party
were Catholics, His Holiness the Pope showed his interest in the visit
to Rome by giving a special audience to the full contingent. The
party was presented by Mr. Dormer, the Secretary to the British Lega-
tion. The boys were formed up in three sides of a hollow square, and
His Holiness, accompanied by his staff, walked down the ranks, speak-
ing to each boy. Ascending the Papal Throne, he delivered a speech
of welcome, concluding with the words, "Finally, may God's blessings
accompany you m your travels, and through the course of your lives.”
It was said in Rome that our contingent represented the largest body
of Australians to receive such au audience. The visit coincided with
what is known at the Vatican as Holy Year, when ceremonies and pil-
grimages, which only occur four times each century, were in progress.
KING ALBERT OF BELGIUM and Queen Elizabeth took a parental
interest in the boys during their stay In Brussels, daily enquiries re-
garding the health of the party being regularly received from the Royal
Palace, at Laeken. At an afternoon reception given in honor of the
boys, His Majesty King Albert, Queen Elizabeth, 11.1i.H. Prince Leo-
pold (the heir apparent to the throne ), and Princess Marie Jose were
present. The members of the Royal family spent nearly two hours
with the boys, moving among them, conversing regarding the tour and
Australia. His Majesty, in his speech of welcome, referred with grati-
tude to what Australia had done for Belgium during the war. He
expressed his whole-hearted support of the idea of "Education by
Travel,” and congratulated the leaders of the League on their work
in this direction.
PRESIDENT OOSGRAVB manifested a keen interest in the tour, and
issued a cordial Invitation for the entire contingent to visit Ireland.
As this was impracticable, a delegation composed of boys of Irish
extraction visited Dublin. They were received by the head of the
Free State with every courtesy, and, in his address to the delegation,
Mr. Cosgrave said that he had the greatest admiration for the Aus-
tralian people, and for that reason he had exceeding pleasure in meet-
ing sons of citizens of the Commonwealth. He presented the party
with the flag of the Irish Nation as a token of goodwill. Under the
guidance of the Minister for External Affairs (Mr. Desmond Fitz-
gerald) and Colonel O'Reilly (A.D.C. to the President), the boys were
shown around the city, and were privileged to attend a sitting of the
Dail, the title given to the new Irish Parliament.
PRESIDENT MUSY, the head of the Swiss people, received the travel-
lers at the Federal Palace, Berne. He delivered a cordial address of
greeting, welcoming the boys to Switzerland, and asking them to con-
vey to the people of their country a greeting and an expression of the
hope that it would always enjoy prosperity. After the reception, (he
Federal Palace was inspected, and an official attached to the President’s
staff explained the working of the Swiss Constitution and its relation-
ship to that of Australia in excellent English. Through the courtesy
of the Government, interesting excursions were made to Interlaken
and Grindehv.ild. where the experiences of tobogganing, unique for
Australian boys, were enjoyed. Experts at ski-ing gave exhibitions,
and the skill of mountaineers on the Alphine horn demonstrated. The
party left Berne for Basle en route to Brussels.
THE HON. STANLEY BALDWIN (Prime Minister) and members of
his Government were present at a number of receptions in London.
The Prime Minister officially received the visitors, and performed the
ceremony of handing over a valuable silk flag—a replica of the King’s
Color — the gift of Brigadier-General Sir Henry Page-Croft. In making
the presentation, Mr. Baldwin referred in appreciative terms to the
purpose of the League, the valuable work It was doing for the boys
of the Empire, and expressed the hope that it would be responsible
for the organisation of other visits to England. The Secretary of
State for the Dominions, the Hon. L. S. Amery, attended no less than
three official functions which marked the visit of the party to the
chief city of the Empire. In accordance with the wish of the Prime
Minister, many other courtesies were extended by various officials.


BOYS’ TOUR TO AMERICA
EMBRACING UNITED STATES AND CANADA
RARE OPPORTUNITY TO TRAVEL
Organised by the Young Australia League Inc. Headquarters; Perth, Western Australia
Prospectus
Issued by the Governing Council, of which the following are the officers:
General President: Lionel T. Boas, Esq., J.P.
Founder and Honorary Director: J. J. Simons.
Esq.
Hon. Treasurer: F. I. Bray, Esq.
Musical Director: Ronald Rees, Esq.
Executive:
Messrs. F. Curran, R. E. Davidson, D. Ding-
wall, W. H. Gee, E. F. Shackloek, W. B. Shel-
ton, V. Steffanoni.
Auditors (Perth) : Messrs, J. L. B. Weir & Co.
Commercial Union Chambers, Perth.
Hon. Solicitors:
Messrs, Richard S. Haynes & Co., St, George's
Terrace, Perth.
F. Curran, Esq., G. R, Brown Buildings.
Murray Street, Perth.
Bank: The Commonwealth Bank of Australia,
Perth,
NEW SOUTH WALES DIVISION
Offices: Hudson House, Bligh Street. Sydney.
Tel. 85854. Postal Address, Box 2889, G.P.O.
Deputy Director: E. R. Marie.
Secretary: W. E. Stannard.
Musical Director: Holey Bed well.
Hon. Solicitor: A. L. Parker, Esq.
Messrs. Dibbs, Parker & Parker,
Barrack Street, Sydney.
Auditors : Messrs. Smith, Johnson & Co.,
Martin Place, Sydney.
Bank: Commonwealth Bank of Australia,
Martin Place, Sydney.
VICTORIAN REPRESENTATIVE
Mr. Keith Dureau, c/o Brown & Bureau,
Temple Court, Collins Street, Melbourne.
The plan is to organise a group of typical Australian boys, numbering about
100, from 14 to 17 years of age, to be drawn from all parts of the Common-
wealth, to visit the United States and Canada, with brief calls at Tahiti,
Honolulu, and Fiji Islands en route.
OBJECTS OF TOUR.
The chief objects of the tour are:
1. “Education by Travel,” a slogan which is
adopted in the belief that actually seeing
countries and meeting people adds consider-
ably to the storehouse of general knowledge.
2. To assist in creating a better under-
standing between the different sections of the
English-speaking world.
3. To provide an opportunity for the boys
to see something of the industrial progress of
the countries visited.
4. To visit the historical points associated
with the development of the United States and
Canada.
5. To perform acts of courtesy of the kind
which indicate a respect of one nation for an-
other.
6. To establish contact with the various
educational institutions such as Colleges, Uni-
versities, and other seats of learning.
WHOM THE TOUR IS FOR.
The tour is shaped for decent living, healthy
boys from 14 to 17 years of age. It is neces-
sary that a form testifying to the good charac-
ter and general health of a boy nominated
should accompany the application, to be sign-
ed by a clergyman, a member of Parliament,
a head teacher, or a Justice of the Peace. The
form will be found in this booklet, and should
be filled in to accompany the application.
TOUR DIRECTOR.
The tour will be under the personal direc-
tion of the founder and Hon, Director of the
League, Mr, J. J. Simons, who has led three


Overseas Tours and who lias at different times
been the head of the boys’ touring parties,
embracing in all nearly 7000 boys.
SELECTION OF BOYS.
Applications for inclusion should be made
immediately. The boys will be selected by per-
sonal interview with the Tour Director, who
will visit the different cities at a time which
will be notified to parents of boys on whose
behalf applications have been received. Selec-
tions will not be finally made until after the
personal interview.
CAKE OF BOYS.
Through long experience and the assistance
of officers who have grown up with the work,
a system of care and control has been develop-
ed which gives a maximum of security. This
is largely responsible for the fact that, al-
though so many boys have left their homes
under the care of the League, there has never
been a case of serious accident or incident to
mar the pleasure of any of the forty-five State,
Interstate or Overseas Tours conducted by the
League. A medical man will be on the ship
for the voyage, and in each city where boys
are quartered a daily visit will be made to the
contingent by a qualified medical man.
ORGANISATION AND DISCIPLINE.
The party will be divided into four com-
panies, each of about 25 boys, .and each com-
pany will be under the command of an adult
League officer, who will be responsible to the
director of the tour for the immediate control
of the lads allotted to his special care. The
director will, as on former tours, take a direct
personal interest in each hoy. Each company
will he divided Into four sections, and four
senior boys will be selected as prefects, and it
will be their duty to be immedately responsible
for the discipline, neat appearance and general
discipline of the section to which they are
allotted.
OFFICIAL STAFF.
The Tour Director (Mr. .T. J. Simons) will
be assisted by staff officers and four company
commanders. The relationship of the officers
and boys will be one of brotherhood rather
than of a coldly-offlcial character. The great
success of the many tours of the League has
been largely due to the spirit of brotherly com-
radeship which prevails. From the director
down, the policy each officer and prefect fol-
lows is one which develops in the minds of the
boys that those in charge are really elder
brothers sharing the pleasures of the trip to-
gether without any official gulf existing be-
tween the adults and the young travellers.
With this idea In mind, the prefix “Sir” in con-
versations between officers and boys has been
dropped in favor of some more familiar ap-
pellation. Thus the director is addressed as
“Boss,” another officer as “Pop,” another as
“Wap,” and so on. Most of the titles thus
used have a history, the origin of which is ex-
plained when the tour begins. The plifti is,
therefore, to secure discipline not by imposing
Irksome official conditions, but by the creation
of an atmosphere which will bring obedience
born of affection for their officers rather than
of Tear. The officers will all be chosen from
the number in the service of the League who
have themselves been boys on tour and who
have grown up with the Organisation. The
officers give their services voluntarily, and in
addition pay their quota to the cost of the
tour.
DRAFT ITINERARY.
Reservations have been made for berths on
the Makura, leaving Sydney on December 27,
and calling at the under-noted ports as fol-
lows :
Wellington, December 31st.
Raratonga, January sth.
Parpeete, January 7th.
San Francisco, January 18th.
The Itinerary will be shaped approximately
thus: San Francisco to Los Angeles, with sub-
sidiary trips to Pasadena, Long Beach and
other Californian points, thence to Grand Can-
yon of Arizona, to El Paso (New Mexico) on
to San Antonio, and New Orleans, to Birming-
ham. taking in Atlanta. Charlotte, Richmond
and Washington, D.C. (the Canberra of the
United States). After Washington. New York,
thence to Montreal. Quebec and Ottawa, the
Dominion capital, on to Toronto, down to Buf-
falo, Cleveland. Detroit and Chicago. From
Chicago Canadian territory would be again
traversed, taking in the points between Winni-
peg, Banff and Vancouver.
DURATION OF TOUR.
The duration of the tour will be about six
months. For the return journey reservations
have been made on the Aorangi, leaving Van-
couver on May 29th and subsequent ports as
follows:
Honolulu, June sth.
Suva, June 14th.
Auckland. June 17tb.
Sydney, June 22nd.
ADVANCE ARRANGEMENTS.
These will be under the direction of the
Deputy-Director for the New South Wales
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


Division of the League, Mr. E. K. (“Wap”)
Marie. “Wap” wms the Advance Director for
the memorable tour of Europe made by 140
boys under the banner of the League in J 925
He wjll leave Sydney on October 27th.
“GET TOGETHER” GATHERINGS.
The happiness of the party will depend a
great deal on the spirit of comradeship. It is
proposed, therefore, to organise “Get together”
gatherings so that the boys and officers may
get to know T each other prior to embarking. As
will be readily recognised, it will also be neces-
sary to have the party moving with precision
as a combined body, and to enthuse members
with that pride in appearance necessary to
properly represent our country abroad. It is
also important that a few days before sailing
should be spent by the boys in contact with
and under the direction of the officers of the
League so that they may become imbued with
the spirit and tradition of the organisation of
which they will become members for the tour,
and to train the sections in co-ordinated move-
ments. With this in mind, it is proposed to
arrange for the groups from each State to live
together at a place to be fixed at Sydney. The
assembly for this purpose will take place some
days before embarking. Officers from head-
quarters will take charge and will be respon-
sible for the care and embarkation of the
boys. It will thus be seen that under this
proposal boys will be taken over by League
officers some days before the day of embarka-
tion, and from that time the full responsibility
for maintenance and care will be borne by the
League.
PHYSICAL DISABILITIES.
When a boy is nominated it will be assumed
that he is not suffering from any physical dis-
ability which w’ould prevent him from march-
ing or any other activity relating to the move-
ments of the group, and that he is not subject
to recurring diseases such as malaria, rheu-
matic fevers or fits. Although it is not obli-
gatory it wmuld facilitate matters if applica-
tions are accompanied by a note from a doctor
to the effect that the boy is physically fit.
ACCOMMODATION ABROAD.
Accommodation will be provided by different
methods, the latter being governed by local
conditions at the various points visited. The
lines followed will he those adopted on the
European Tour of 1925, where at some cen-
tres accommodation was provided in barracks
and other buildings comfortably equipped for
the purpose. In some centres the boys w r ere
billeted, being received as guests of local citi-
zens, thus being afforded the ‘opportunity of
getting into close contact with the family and
home life of the people in the various coun-
tries visited. From experience in former un-
dertakings it is known that comfortable quar-
ters can be arranged where each hoy will be
provided with a single bed and appointments
organised on the same basis as in a perman-
ent college.
LEAGUE UNIFORMS.
The entire party will travel in the standard
uniform of the League. This is the adopted
dress of the organisation, and all uniforms to
that pattern remain the property of the League,
for uniforms are never sold. For the tour, a
complete uniform and cap, tailor-made to self-
measurement forms, supplied by each applica-
cant, will be issued by the League for use dur-
ing the tour without extra charge. The cost of
the uniform is included in the price of the
tour.
CLOTHING REQUIRED.
On previous tours it has been found that
unless a list of clothing required is issued there
is a tendency to overburden the boys with un-
necessary artictles. A list of requirements will,
therefore, be Issued some weeks prior to em-
barkation as a guide to parents. The chief
articles needed will be one plain suit of
clothes; one overcoat, to special pattern; one
waterproof cape, to special pattern: one knock-
about jersey, special pattern: one second-best
pair pants for use on steamer; one blazer,
special pattern; one light motor dustcoat, to
special pattern. A detailed list of undercloth-
ing, boots, etc., will be supplied later. The
above list being intended to represent only the
chief articles required, it is thought as the
League supplies the uniform that the cost of
clothing will be about £2O.
SMOKING AND ALCOHOL.
The League, being primarily a boy’s organi-
sation, discourages smoking and the use of
alcohol. The use of tobacco or alcohol is for-
bidden on tour. Unless the boy is prepared to
abstain, it is advised that his application
should not be filed.
COST FOR BACH APPLICANT.
Tiie entire cost of the trip will be £195/10/-
for the Journey, involving nearly 22,000 miles of
travelling. Payments may be made in full, or
on the instalment plan. If on the instalment
plan, applicants will be expected to pay £6O
deposit to accompany application; the subse-
quent instalments will be at the rate of £27/2/-
per month, to be paid not later than the
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


£
S.
a.
Deposit with
application—Instal-
ment .. ..
CO
0
0
July 5 .. ..
27
2
0
August 5 . .
27
2
0
September 5 .
27
2
0
October 5 ..
27
2
0
November 5 .
27
2
0
£195
10
0
sth day of each month. Under this system the
scale of payments will work out as follows:
For this sum the League undertakes to pay
for the duration of the tour all fares, travel-
ling expenses, meals en route, accommodation,
laundry, clothing repairs, medical expenses for
temporary illness, and to pay cost of League
uniform and cap to he made to measure for
the tour; the uniform to be returned to the
League at the conclusion of the tour. For the
purpose of this undertaking, the League’s re-
sponsibility is to be regarded as operating from
the time the entrant is taken over by the
officers until he returns to his home port. A
reduction of 7J per cent, will be made in cases
Where brothers nominate, i.e., the cost for
brothers will be £lBO/17/9.
REFUNDS.
Should a boy, on whose behalf payments
have been made, be prevented from making the
trip a refund to the full amount will be made.
The League reserves the right to deduct an
amount of not to exceed 5 per cent, from any
withdrawal made after September 30th, unless
a satisfactory reason can be given for such
withdrawal.
APPLICATIONS.
Applications with deposit and form men-
tioned in the third paragraph of this prospec-
tus, may be sent immediately. Should more
than the maximum number apply, preference
will be given in the order of date of which the
applications are received.
POCKET MONET.
Just prior to the tour, pocket money may be
remitted to the League to be taken care of and
Issued as instructed. As practically all the
needs of the tour are met by the League, a
large allowance is not considered necessary,
but the amount, of course, will be governed
by the discretion of parents.
FURTHER INFORMATION.
Masters, teachers or parents requiring fur-
ther Information are requested to address en-
quiries to any of the undernoted addresses;
J. J. SIMONS
Box 219 G.P.0., Perth, or
E. R. MARIE
Box 2889, G.P.0.. Sydney.
Extending the League
WHILE considerable prominence is
given to the work of the League
in connection with tours, this
represents but only a part of the activi-
ties of the organisation.
The regular members of the League
participate during their spare time all
the year round in various departments,
which make for the improvement of the
boys. These activities are not intended
to replace ordinary education, but to
supplement-it.
The Governing Council of the League
has adopted a plan of expansion under
which it is hoped to have suitable build-
ings occupied in every city of the Com-
monwealth. This scheme was adopted
in 1925 when Mr. E. R. (“Wap”) Marie
was appointed Deputy-Director of the
New South Wales Division.
Next year it is proposed to establish
a division at Melbourne from which
city constant requests for the extension
of the League have been received.
The idea is to operate in all parts of
the Commonwealth. Although perman-
ent offices have not been established out-
side of Sydney and Perth, boys from
every State in the Commonwealth have
participated in the tours. Under the
officers of the New South Wales Divi-
sion, 1200 boys from the Mother State,
Queensland and Victoria have taken
part in Interstate Tours, but it is hoped
that shortly each of the States will have
a -separate Division controlled by its
own officers.
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


TYPICAL BOYS OF THE 1925 TOUR.




Do Tours Unsettle?
Consideration of a
Frequent Question
THE FIRST OVERSEAS TOUR conducted by the Young Australia
League was that of 1911-12, when a group of forty boys was taken
around the world, spending nearly nine months travelling.
When the undertaking was proposed, the question most asked
was ; “ Will the tour unsettle the lads ? ”
Frankly, the officers of the League
had doubts themselves as to what kind
of answer could be given. They were
fortified in the belief that the effect
would not be detri-
mental by the old
practice in England
of arranging what
was called the grand
tour of Europe, which
was considered the
final touch to the
complete education of
an English gentle-
man. There were,
however, not any pre-
cedents in Australia,
and the first tour was
in the nature of an
experiment.
Nearly 300 boys
have travelled over-
seas as members of
the League and the
careers of all of them
have been kept under
the constant notice
of the officers.
Sixteen years have
elapsed since, the first
tour. The observa-
t i o n s are therefore,
spread over a consid-
erable period. Many
of the boys of the
first tour are to-day fathers of families,
one of them boasting seven children.
The majority are in responsible posi-
tions, most of them practising profes-
sions, owning their own businesses, or
performing managerial duties.
A FORT STREET BOY
VINCENT VERNON
The boys who made the 1925 tour to
Europe furnish the most recent ex-
amples. It is impossible, of course, to
give in detail the careers of each of the
boys, but we have
selected one from the
New South Wales
section and another
from Victoria.
The New South
Wales boy chosen for
reference is Vincent
Vernon. He was born
on June 15th, 1911,
therefore, when the
European Tour Con-
tingent sailed in De-
cember, 1924, he was
13J years of age. The
tour involved losing
about two full school
terms which repre-
sented an interrup-
tion in his regular
studies. /That this
did not detract from
his subsequent schol-
astic achievements is
borne out by the fol-
lowing details in re-
gard to* his studies.
At the close' of the
tour he returned to
his old school Tam-
worth (New South
Wales) High, in August, 1925.
His subsequent record was; First in
year —yearly examination, 1926.
Passed Intermediate Certificate Ex-
amination, November, 1926, as follows:
French A., Latin A., Mathematics, 1.A.,


Mathematics, 11. A., Science A,. English
8., being the best pass at the Tamworth
High School.
In the final year he obtained the prize
for Dux, also a prize for first in Mathe-
matics and the prize for second in
Languages.
On January 31st, 1927, he entered the
Fort Street Boys’ High School, Sydney'.
The next half-year, the Conduct and
Progress report issued, showed that
among the Form 4.8., students of the
fourth year, there being 32 in the Form
and 105 in the year, his position on the
examination records was, Second in the
Form, Third in the year. He was first
in the class for
Physics, his percent-
age being 100. The
percentages for the
other subjects were:
English 61, Classics
(Latin) 63, Modern
Languages (French)
80, Mathematics I. 69,
Mathematics 11. '74,
Mechanics 72. The
report also contained
the following record;
Conduct, good. Pro-
gress, very good.
Remarks, doing excel-
lent work. Attend-
ance, four days
absent, the latter
through illness.
I The other example
selected is that of
Lade Pawsey. This
boy had a very pro-
mising scholastic re-
cord when he left for
the European Tour,
having won a Junior
Government Scholar-
ship at the Camper-
down Higher Ele-
mentar}' School. After passing the
Intermediate University Examinaton,
he entered Wesley College, Melbourne,
in 1923. '
His record at Wesley being: Leaving
Honors, 1924, four subjects; one first-
A VICTORIAN SCHOLAR
LADE PAWSEY
class honor (next to Exhibitioner); two
third class honors; one pass. Won a
Senior Government Scholarship (£4O
per year during the course). In Decem-
ber, 1924, he left with the League on
the European Tour. He returned too late
to enter the University that year, and
resumed studies at Wesley College in
August and did Leaving Honors again.
Tw r o subjects, two second class and
honors and passed two new Leaving
pass subjects, winning a Queen’s Col-
lege Entrance Scholarship and entered
the Melbourne University'. In his
Science Course, 1926 (the year follow-
ing the tour) the results were: Four
subjects, three first-
class honors, one
second class, next to
Exhibitioner in Mix-
ed Mathematics. £6O
Queen’s Scholarship
awarded on these re-
sults.
Second year re-
sults : Three subjects,
two first-class honors,
one second class, next
to Exhibitioner in
Pure Mathematics 11.
and awarded a £6O
Scholarship. In seven
subjects he won five
first-class and two
second class.
His father, writing
in March last, said:
“A part altogether
from the wonderful
educational results
from the tour, I am
convinced that it set
him up physically and
in no way, as you
will see, unfitted him
for study. Wishing
you every success in
the splendid work you are doing.”
A number of examples from practi-
cally all the States of the Commonwealth
with similarly encouraging results could
be given in response to the query, “Do
the tours unsettle the boys?”
Y.A.L. TOUR OF AMERICA


“THE Y.A.L —TELL ME ABOUT IT”
IF you would like to know more of the
Young Australia League, write for
free pamphlet entitled “The Y.A.L.—
Tell Me About It.” This, by a series of
questions and answers, expresses in a
clear, concise manner, the ideals and
purpose of this unique boys’ organisa-
tion. Here is a short extract from the
booklet:
“What is the League’s Attitude
Towards Religion?”
The League is undenominational. It
does not subscribe to the teachings of
any particular creed. Each boy is ex-
pected to do in regard to religious obser-
vances what it is thought his parents
would have him do if they had been
travelling with him.
“Does the League Teach Any
Religion?”
No, not unless being taught to do good
and to play the game can be regarded as
icligion, but each boy is taught to re-
spect the belief of his comrade, who may
have been born in a home where a dif-
ferent creed was taught. It is remem-
bered that no boy, whether Jew, Catho-
lic, or Protestant, had any choice as to
which religion he would be born into,
just as he had no choice as to the color
of his hair with which he came into the
world. The League’s attitude is one of tol-
erance and respect tor all religions which
strive to make the world better, and it
believes it is a good thing to help each
boy to follow the faith of his family.
SO ME POINTS ABOUT
LEAGUE TRAVELLING
HERE are a few of the advantages of
travelling with the League:
By organisation and large num-
bers, fare and other concessions can be
obtained which are not available to in-
dividual tourists.
Travelling with a semi-official status,
and accredited by the Commonwealth
and other Governments, the boys receive
courtesies and compliments not usually
bestowed on private parties.
The spectacle of youths travelling in
search of knowledge has an appealing
force which causes many doors locked to
the average tourist to swing open spon-
taneously.
The boys are under the control of a
leader, assisted by a staff of officers who
have dedicated the greater part of the
spare time of their lives to the service
of the youth of the Commonwealth.
Moving as a disciplined body and
coming in contact with the great leaders
of other nations are influences in them-
selves which have a high educational
value.
TWO BIG TOURS COMPARED
NOW that the plans for the next
League Overseas Tour • have been
issued, comparisons may be made
between the details of the record tour
of 1925“ and that under contemplation.
Here are a few points of interest to
those who love making comparisons.
The 1925 tour was launched for 100
boys, but extended to embrace 140. The
next tour is launched for 100 boys, but
may be expanded to 150.
The next tour will cost about £5O
more, due to two chief reasons; second-
class fares will be paid this time as
against Bay Liner fares. Land travel in
America is much dearer than Europe, as
all world travellers know.
The number of days spent on land in
1925 was 123. For the next tour the
days will number 131, exclusive of those
spent at New Zealand, Honolulu and
other ports en route.
The mileage on the next tour totals
22,000 —13,500 on sea and 8,500 on land;
as against the last tour —26,000 on sea
and 4,500 on land. There will, therefore,
be 4,000 more miles of land travelling.
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


Former American Tour Scenes
En route— Boys at Tahiti. On parade, 1915 Exposition, San Francisco. In Albuquerque, new mexico. At
Luther Burbank's garden, Santa Rosa. Amid Canadian snows. With Charlie Chaplain for a day.


Mr. Lionel T. [“Pop"] Boas, J.P.
General President Young Australia League
The boys all him “Pop”. He has been General President for eighteen years.
The first General President of the Young Australia League was Mr. John
Tucker, one of the leading educationalists of Western Australia, and prin-
cipal of the Thomas-street School, Perth.
Mr. Lionel T. (“Pop”) Boas succeeded to the position in 1910, and has
held office continuously since. He has, therefore, presided over the affairs
of the League for a period of eighteen years.
Mr. Boas Is a native of Adelaide and a son of Kabbi Boas, who was the
head of the Jewish community of South Australia for over forty years.
“Pop” was educated at Prince Alfred College, Adelaide, and came to Wes-
tern Australia in his early twenties.
He joined the League at the beginning and has borne a great part of
the burdens of the organisation. He has also participated in most of the
Interstate Tours conducted from Headquarters, but it has never been his
good forune to take part in an overseas venture. With characteristic un-
selfishness he has always elected to remain at home.to carry the responsi-
bilities of the League during the absence of the lending officers abroad.


One of the chief motive forces of the young Australia League
“Wap” Marie
Advance Director of the next big tour
A great measure of success of an overseas tour depends upon the prepara-
tions ahead. These are in the hands of Mr. E. R. (“Wap”) Marie, who left
for the United States and Canada on March 10th.
He is affectionately known as "Wap" to the entire League membership,
and has been associated with the organisation since early boyhood. It was
largely due to his gifts of energy and foresight that the European Tour of
1925, was such an unqualified success.
At the close of his triumph in connection with that big tour he was
promoted to the position of Deputy-Director to the New South Wales
Division of the League, and it was mainly through his efforts that the or-
ganisation has become such a force in the Eastern States of Australia.
“Wap” will make a second visit to the United States, leaving Sydney at
the end of October to continue (he preliminary preparations which he began
earlier in the year.
This is the third Overseas Tour with which he has been connected, Ms
first being that of 1915, in which he was the bugler, and his second, that of
1925, when he was Advance Director, n position which he holds in connection
with the trip now, being organised.


Leaders’ Opinions of the Y.A.L.
LACK year the work of the League
comes into contact with leaders of
every phase of thought throughout
the Empire.
The following are extracts from
opinions expressed by three leaders pro-
minent in public life:
“Every citizen should be proud of the
Young Australia League; they should
realise that as Australians they have a
specific duty to perform. In being strong
and loyal citizens they would be an ex-
ample to many and of real worth to the
community. The office of Prime Minis-
ter is open to all League boys, and I
sincerely hope that some of them may
sit in Parliament some day.” —Prime
Minister, Hon. S. M. Bruce, July Bth,
1927.
“One of the greatest pleasures of my
visit to Australia is the opportunity to
renew the acquaintances made two
years ago with the Young Australia
League and its founder in London. I
knew well the admirable work Mr.
Simons had been doing, but I did not
know until I came to Australia that the
League, through Mr. Simons, had under-
taken further the task of enlisting young
men to come to Australia from the Old
Country. I am delighted to be associa-
ted with an organisation held deservedly
in such high esteem, not only in Aus-
tralia, but in the Old Country as well.”
—Hon. L. S. Amery, M.P., Secretary of
State for the Dominions, October 14th,
1927.
“I had no idea the League was so
beautifully housed, and it is a delight to
meet members in such a noble, substan-
tial spacious and impressive building. I
see in the Young Australia League
movement an effort on the part of its
founder, who is to be warmly com-
mended for what he has done, to
broaden the outlook of its members, and
it is the ideals for which the League
stands —service, comradeship, duty, dis-
cipline and order —which attract me to
the League, for unless democracy can
work along such lines as these, it must
fail. I could not conceive of any better
contribution to the sum of human wel-
fare than the training of boys and young
men in ideals such as those of tfie
League.” —Hon. Sir Joseph Cook, High
Commissioner for Australia, 1921-27,
September 20th, 1927. !
“HOW LITTLE I KNOW!”
THAT travel, accompanied by official
receptions and courtesies from many
sources, might give boys inflated
ideas, or in common language, “swelled
heads” was one of the possibilities sug-
gested when the League motto of
“Education by Travel” was first car-
ried into action.
This is a story from one of the over-
seas tours.
The steamer carrying League boys on
the last stage of a world itinerary was
between Colombo and Fremantle, when
an officer and a boy were heard discuss-
ing the experiences of the preceding six
months.
“What was the chief thing you learn-
ed on your travels?” asked the officer,
and the boy answered, “How little I
know.”
“And how will you remedy that?”
was the next question, and the boy said,
“by Swotting and Swotting when I get
home.” And he did “Swot” and “Swot,”
and won his way to professional success.
There is always hope for the boy who
has been convinced that he has yet much
to learn, for there is much more promise
in the boy who remarks, “How little I
know,” than in the boy who says, “I
know enough.”
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


League Boys. A Day in Belgium, 1925
British Monument at Waterloo. Scene at the reception by King Albert of Belgium. Honouring Belgium's
war heroes at the National War Memorial. Leaning Brussels, Railway Station. Street march in Brussels.


BOYS WHO HAVE BEEN
WHAT THEY THINK OF Y.A.L. TOURS
Would you like to ask them? As the purpose
of this booklet is to introduce the Young Aus-
tralia League to a number of people who have
perhaps hardly heard' of the organisation, it
was thought advisable to give the names and
addresses of boys who took part in the last
tour to Europe.
These are given hereunder in the alpha-
betical order of towns so that parents desiring
to get first-hand information from those who
have toured under the banner of the League
may be able to make enquiries.
The names of Western Australian boys who
took part in the tour have not been included,
for there is hardly a town or village in the
West where there are not one or more boys
who have been on Interstate or Overseas tours
with the League.
VICTORIA
Armadale— HOHMTJTH, CLEMENT: “Umara,’'
Osment Street, Armadale, Victoria.
Auburn— NICHOLLS, lAN M,: 3 Bay View
Avenue, Auburn, Melbourne, Victoria.
Bendigo— SIDDALL, HARRY: Webster Street,
Bendigo, Victoria (Wesley College).
Brighton— SlNCLAlß, ARTHUR G.; 40, North
Road, Brighton, Victoria (C. of E. Grammar
School).
Brighton— SlNCLAlß, COLIN D. : 40, North
Road, Brighton, Victoria (Wesley College).
Camberwell— HOßSFALL, JOHN B.: 59, Broad-
way, Camberwell, Victoria (Scotch College).
Camberwell— McDEßMOTT, LOUIS: “Wim-
mera,” Albion Road, Camberwell, Victoria
(Malvern C. of E. Grammar School).
Camberwell— WALLACE, WINSTON W.: 61,
Broadway, Camberwell, Victoria (Melbourne
Grammar School).
Canterbury— VlAL, RONALD G.: 24, Canter-
bury Road, Canterbury, Victoria (Scotch
College).
Canterun —GlLLAM, GEORGE: “Wingadee,”
Vauxhall Road, Canterun, Victoria (Scotch
College).
Caulfield— HlGSON, HERBERT C.; 15, Warora
Road, Caulfield, Victoria (Scotch College).
Caulfield— LAWßENCE, RICHARD: 5, Palm
Avenue, Caulfield, Victoria (Malvern C. of
E. Grammar School).
Caulfield— STOßEß, HAROLD: 11 Flower
Street, Caulfield.
Dobie— KlNG, RICHARD W.; Dobie, via Ara-
rat, Victoria (Ararat High School).
Baglehawk— STEWAßD, JAMES: Lethby Rd.,
Eaglehawk, Victoria (late Wesley College).
Echuca —MACTIER, COLIN A.: Cromdale,
Echuca, Victoria (Echuca High School).
Essendon—COLCLOUGH, RICHARD R.: “Car-
lourie,” 125, Edward Street, Essendon, Vic-
toria (Scotch College).
Geelong—AlßMAN, WALLACE I.; 11, Anderson
Street, Geelong West, Victoria (Geelong
College).
GeeIong—GRIFFITHS, DONALD R,: “Moni-
kie,” 20, Park Street, Geelong, Victoria (Gee-
long College).
GeeIong—GRIFFITHS, WM. R.: “Monikie,” 20,
Mark Street, Geelong, Victoria (late (Gee-
long College).
Geelong—VIRQONA, ETTORE R.: 60, Sydney
Parade, Geelong, Victoria (Scotch College).
Hawthorn—HAßßlSON, HARRY; 10. Mary
Street, Hawthorn, Victoria (Scotch College).
Kensington—GlßDWOOD, ARCHIBALD J.; 6.
Footscray Road. Kensington, Victoria (Wes-
ley College).
Kew—BOUGHTON, JAMES S.: “Hadlow,”
Florence Avenue, Kew, Victoria (Wesley
College).
Kongwak—COLE. NEVILLE H.: 63, Collins
Street, Melbourne, Victoria; or Kongwak.
Victoria (late Scotch College).
Kongwak—SCOTT, FREDERICK: “Coonalble,”
Kongwak, Victoria (late Scotch College).
Kongwak—SCOTT, JOHN: Kongwak, Victoria
(late Scotch College).
Malvern—WATEßS, JOHN: “Hythe,” 71, Pinch
Street, Malvern East, Victoria (Wesley Col-
lege).
Malvern—WALKEß. EDWARD M.: “Kent-
ville,” 29, Manning Road, East Malvern, Vic-
toria (O. of E. Grammar School).
Manly—WOOD, NORMAN ; “Kurramboola,”
The Orescent, Manly, New South Wales, or
86, Chaucer Street, St. Kilda, Melbourne,
Victoria.
Melbourne (City)—COLE, NEVILLE H.: 63,
Collin Street, Melbourne, Victoria.
Melbourne (City)— DUREAU, KEITH: C/o
Brown & Dnreau, Flinders Lane, Melbourne,
Victoria.
Melbourne (Auburn) —NIOHOLLS, lAN M.:
See under Auburn.
Moonee Ponds—SLOBOM, ANDREW R.; 104,
Eglinton Street, Moonee Ponds, Victoria
(Scotch College, Glenferrie).
Naroghid—PAWSEY, J. LADE: Naroghid, Vic-
toria (Wesley College).
Northeote—WEATE, HECTOR G.: 39, Spencer
Street, Northeote, Victoria (Hornbury
School).
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


Prahran—NOßWOOD, EDWARD K.: 214, Punt
Street, Prahran, Melbourne (Wesley College),
Quambatook —MANN, BRUCE B.: Quambatook,
Victoria (Scotch College).
St. Hilda-EPSTEIN, ALAN L.: 17, Carlisle
Street, St. Kilda, Victoria (Technical School).
St. HiIda—JENKINSON, GLEN F.; “Wendou-
ree” 419 Inkerman Road, St. Kilda, Victoria.
St. KiIda—THOMSON, DONALD K.: “Oraigel-
lachie,” Orrong Road, St. Kilda, Victoria.
(Wesley College).
St. Hilda—WlSE, ARTHUR S. V.; 72, Alma
Road, St. Kilda, Melbourne (Wesley Col-
lege).
Surrey HiIIs—BYRNE, GEOFFREY: G/o Mrs.
Healy, Albert Crescent, Surrey Hills, Mel-
bourne, Victoria.
Tallangatta—PATON, KENNETH C.: Bingara,
Tallangatta, Victoria (Brighton Grammar
School).
Toorak—MacMlLLAN, HEW C.: Toorak Road,
Toorak, Victoria (Scotch College).
Weerite—FOWLlNG, GARNET T.: Weerite
Street, Weerite, Victoria (Camperdown
Higher Elementary School).
NEW SOUTH WALES
Barraba—VEßNON, VINCENT H.: C/o Bank
of N.S.W., Barraba, N.S.W, (Tamworth
High School).
Cheltenham—NOSSlTßß, PHILIP: “Jananbe,"
The Boulevard, Cheltenham, N.S.W. (Barker
College).
Clovelly—BßOWN, COLIN: 58, Burnie Street,
Clovelly, Sydney, N.S.W. (Fort Street
School).
Croydon—MILGROVE, WALTER B.: “Koor-
inda,” Malvern Avenue, Crolydon, N.S.W.
(Sydney Grammar School).
Croydon—SEAßL, JOHN: 12, Malvern Avenue,
Croydon, N.S.W.
Coogee—BEEGLING, ALLAN: 12, Byron Street.
Coogee.
Coogee—PAYNE, PRANK: 10, Major Street,
Coogee.
Darling Pt. (Sydney)—EDOLS, EDWARD: St.
Mark’s Road, Darling Pt., N.S.W. (King’s
School, Parramatta).
Double Bay (Sydney)—DeMURALT, ED-
WARD : 54, Manning Street, Double Bay,
N.S.W. (Cranbrook School).
Edgecliff—MANT, RICHARD O.: 2, Albert
Street, Edgecliff, Sydney (0. of E. Grammar
School).
Florida North (Mooree)—GßACE, LYALL:
Florida North, Mooree, N.S.W.
FinIey—McALLISTER, NORMAN M.: “Myrtle
Park,” Finley, N.S.W. (Scotch College, Mel-
bourne).
Gordon —HINDER, FRANCIS H.: “Carlton,”
Nelson Eoad, Gordon, N.S.W. (0. of E.
Grammar School).
Goulbourn —CHlSHOLM, JAMBS W.: Kippilaw,
Goulbourn, N.S.W. (King’s School, Parra-
matta).
Henty—YOUNG, LINE P.: Hayes Street,
Henty, N.S.W. (C. of E. Grammar School).
Killara —McKAY, THOS.: Northcote Avenue,
Killara.
Millthorpe —OATES, THOMAS A.: “Bosewick,”
Milltborpe, N.S.W.
Moss VaIe—WOODHILL, KEN: Moss Vale.
Moree— GRACE, LYALL F.: Florida North,
Moree, N.S.W.
Mosman—BARNES, WINSTANLEY : “Redleaf,”
31, Heydon Street, Mosman, N.S.W. (C. of E.
Grammar School).
Mosman—GILDER, COLIN P.; “Woodelme,"
Cross Street, Mosman, N.S.W. (Armldale
School).
Mosman—REEVE, FREDERICK A.: St. Luke’s
Rectory, Mosman, Sydney (C. of E. Grammar
School).
Mosman—ST. HEAPS, JAMBS S.: Bradley
Head Road, Mosman, Sydney (Abbotsholme
College).
Mosman —ST. HEAPS, GEORGE : Bradley Head
Road, Mosman, N.S.W. (Abbotsholme Col-
lege).
Newcastle— SAWYEß, NORMAN T.: “Merin-
gal,” Macquarie Street, Newcastle, N.S.W.
(Hamilton School).
Sydney—GUßß, THOMAS; C/o S. Bennett
Ltd., 49, Market Street, Sydney.'
Sydney—BUßLEY, KEITH: C/o Mr. F. Burley,
Berlei House, Regent Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
Sydney—JONES, PHILIP SYDNEY: 40 Bays-
water Road. Darlinghurst (Sydney Gram-
mar School).
Sydney—JOHNSON, STANLEY R.: “The As-
tor,” Macquarie Street, Sydney (Granbrook
School).
Sydney—LEVITUS, REUBAN : "Scholamvllle,”
Bundarra Road, Sydney, N.S.W.
Sydney—WOODS, JOHN G.: “Hillside,” Camp-
bell Street, North Sydney, N.S.W. (0. of E.
Grammar School).
Vaucluse—STlßLlNG, SAMUEL E.: Belingra,
The Crescent, Vaucluse, N.S.W. (Cranbrook
School).
Wallendbeen —KlLEY, JOHN : “Darah,” Wal-
lendbeen, N.S.W.
Waratah —lSßAEL, CECIL: “Hillside,” Bridge
Street, Waratah, Newcastle, N.S.W.
Woollahra —LEVY, NORMAN H.: Benelong
Crescent, Woollahra, Sydney, N.S.W. (Scots
College).
Young —McFARLANE, JOHN H.: “Glensloy,”
Young.
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


QUEENSLAND
Redcliffe— JACKSON, WILLIAM: Sutton St.,
Brisbane, Queensland (Scots College).
Redcliffe— JACKSON, JOHN: Sutton Street,
Brisbane, Queensland (Scots College).
Lutwy-che— RUSSEL, ALAN REID: Thistle
Street, Lutwyche, Brisbane.
Toowoomba— ALKE, GOEBEL: Pertli Street,
Toowoomba, Queensland (Toowoomba High
School).
Wooloowin— TOßßANCE, JOHN S.: Welling-
ton Street, Wooloowin, Brisbane, Queensland.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Burnside— WELCH, JOHN C.: 10, Greenhili
Road, Burnside, S.A. (The King’s College).
Morgan —NAlßN, ROBERT: Railway Terrace,
Morgan, S.A.
Rose Park— LEAK, LINDSAY W.: 84. Watson
Avenue, Rose Park, S.A. (late Prince Alfred
College).
Semaphore COLES, PHILIP D.: W T oolnough
Road, Semaphore, S.A. (Prince Alfred Col-
lege).
Tranmere— BLUNDELL, JOHN A.; “Lichfield,”
Magill Road, Tranmere, S.A. (Prince Alfred
College).
Schools Represented
NEW SOUTH WALES
Armidale School
Abbotsholme College
Barker College
Cranbrook School
Fort Street School
Hamilton School
Katoomba Intermediate High
King’s School, Parramatta
Scots College
Sydney Grammar School
Church of England Grammar (North Shore)
Tamworth High School
Yanco Agricultural' College
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Bunbury High School
Christian Brothers’ College
Fremantle Boys’ School
Guildford Grammar
Modem School
Narrogin School of Agriculture
Nedlands Park State School
Perth High School
Scotch College
Thomas-street State School
Wesley College
VICTORIA
Ararat High School
Brighton Grammar School
Camberwell Grammar School
Camperdown Higher Elementary
Echuca High School
Geelong College
Hill’s Business College
Hornbury School
Melbourne Church of England Grammar
Melbourne Grammar School
Malvern Church of England Grammar
Scotch College
Technical School
Wesley College
Xavier’s College
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
King’s College
Prince Alfred College
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane Boys’ College
Scots College
Toowoomba High School
PASS IT ON
IF you know of others who may be
interested in this proposal, kindly
pass this booklet on, or send the
name and address with a request for in-
formation to be posted, either to Box
219, G.P.0., Perth, or Box 2889, G.P.0.,
Sydney. Victorian inquirers may obtain
information from Mr. Keith Bureau, the
League’s representative, c/o Brown and
Bureau, Temple Court, Melbourne.
APPLY NOW
THE time to apply for inclusion in
the next overseas tour—planned for
. the United Stales and Canada—is
NOW. If applications for more than the
required number are received, priority
will be given .to the order of date in
which the names have been recorded.
Send application to the address closest
to your home. Addresses for Sydney,
Melbourne and Perth are on Page 8.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by The People’s Printing and
Publishing Co., 38-40-42-44 Stirling Street, Perth, W.A.
BOYS’ TOURS WITH THE Y.A.L.


League Happenings in 1927
SOME indication of the League ac-
tivities for a single year may be
gained from a list of a few of the
happenings last year.
The undernoted events do not nearl} r
cover the entire programme, but con-
tain just a few of the important hap-
penings.
January—7so boys from four States,
including Queensland and Western Aus-
tralia, assembled under the banner of the
League at Melbourne, some travelling
from as far West as Derby, Western
Australia, and as far North as the Gulf
country of Queensland.
Easter —120 boys organised by the
New South Wales Division toured Tas-
mania calling at Melbourne en route.
May 18th to 23rd —250 boys from the
country districts of Western Australia
assembled at Perth under the League
for the purpose of participating in the
celebrations in connection with the visit
of the Duke of York.
June—4o boys from New South Wales
visited Queensland.
June —At a meeting of the Governing
Council at League Headquarters, it was
decided to organise another Overseas
Tour to begin at the end of 1928.
July Bth—The Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth, the Hon. S. M. Bruce,
P.C., M.H.R., visited the League Audi-
torium at Headquarters, Perth, and
dedicated stained glass windows instal-
led in memory of three leading Federal-
ists, Lord Forrest, Sir Edmund Barton
and Alfred Deakin.
August 26th to Sept. 3rd —187 school
boys of Western Australia, mostly from
the metropolitan districts, made a tour
of the Goldfields and wheat belt areas.
October —Reception at League Head-
quarters to the High Commissioner for
Australia (Sir Joseph Cook) and Lady
Cook, tendered in recognition of the
guests’ services to League boys of the
1925 European Tour.
October 14th —The Hon. L. S. Amery.
Secretary of State for the Dominions,
performed the ceremony of dedicating
the stained glass window in memory of
Captain Cook at League Headquarters,
in the presence of a distinguished as-
semblage of citizens.
November—A crowded meeting of
bo} r s, parents and supporters assembled
at the League Rooms, Sydney, to launch
a movement for the organisation of
Coo-ee City Carnival in aid of the New
South Wales League Building Fund,
the founder of the League, Mr. J. J.
Simons, being present. The responsi-
bility of organising the Carnival was
placed in the hands of the Deputy-
Director of the New South Wales
Division of the League, Mr. E. R.
(“Wap”) Marie.
December 4th —Memorial celebrations
held at League Headquarters following
the League custom to honor the memory
of 89 League boys who gave up their
lives in the Great War. The speech of
the day was delivered by His Excellency
the Governor of Western Australia, Sir
W. R. Campion, K.C.M.G., D.S.O.
December 26th —335 boys from New
South Wales, Queensland and Victoria,
left Sydney for Western Australia under
the command of Mr. E. R. (“Wap”)
Marie, and were received at League
Headquarters.
During the year 1735 boys participated
in tours in different parts of Australia
under the banner of the League, and
during the same period arrangements
were made to introduce 100 boy migrants
from Great Britain to be placed on
farms in Western Australia under the
care of the League. Of this number 36
arrived during 1927 and arrangements
made for the reception of the remainder
during 1928.


Group of Boys of the Band which is part of the New South Wales Division of the League. Similar uniforms will be worn on the forthcoming tour.
