

EDUCATION
AND THE
UNITED NATIONS
A REPORT OF A JOINT COMMISSION OF THE COUNCIL
FOR EDUCATION IN WORLD CITIZENSHIP AND
THE LONDON INTERNATIONAL ASSEMBLY




EDUCATION
AND THE
UNITED NATIONS
A REPORT OF A JOINT COMMISSION OF THE COUNCIL
FOR EDUCATION IN WORLD CITIZENSHIP AND
THE LONDON INTERNATIONAL ASSEMBLY


COPYRIGHT, 1943, AMERICAN COUNCIL ON PUBLIC AFFAIRS
M. B. SCHNAPPER, EXECUTIVE SECRETARY AND EDITOR
2153 FLORIDA AVENUE, WASHINGTON, D. C.
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES


Introduction
The issues treated in Education and the United Nations are of tremendous
concern to the people of the United States. As the citizens of one of the most
powerful of the United Nations, we necessarily have an important responsibility
in the shaping of policy on these issues. We have an obligation to consider the
facts and views presented herein and to formulate our own policies.
The report is being carefully studied by the Liaison Committee for Inter-
national Education. In the near future, the Committee will transmit to London,
as part of an international exchange of ideas, its conclusions with regard to the
proposals in the report. Designed to provide an agency whereby various organiza-
tions can coordinate their activities in the field of international education, the
Commitee is composed of representatives of some twenty national educational
groups in the United States.
It is gratifying to the Committee that the problem of educational reconstruc-
tion is receiving increasing attention in the United States. Various new and old
groups are considering ways and means of adapting education to the requirements
of a lasting peace. The Commission to Study the Organization of Peace, for
example, has recognized the importance of education in its various reports. The
United States Committee on Educational Reconstruction has sponsored certain
studies and institutes bearing on post-war educational reconstruction. The Cen-
tral and Eastern European Planning Board is deeply concerned with educational
reconstruction in Czechoslovakia, Greece, Poland, and Yugoslavia.
The present report is deserving of very careful study by all who are inter-
ested in the role of education in the post-war period. It has the special merit of
being presented by a Commission with unusually wide representation. It reflects
a profound understanding of conditions in the various European countries and of
the ideas of educators who have had direct experience with the war.
GRAYSON N. KEFAUVER
Dean, School of Education, Stanford University
Chairman, Liaison Committee for International Education




Comments
In this shrinking world centralized forms of government and democracies
can no longer live in peace side by side. The world of the future will either be
totalitarian or it will be democratic. We have been through dark days, when it
looked as if the cause of self-government might be lost. Fortunately, as always,
the free spirit of men everywhere is again asserting itself. We can now look
forward confidently to a new era of popular government and international
goodwill.
We had the same opportunity twenty-five years ago and we “muffed” It,
partly because of our inability to suppress selfish ambitions but largely because
we did not give education and mutual understanding that primary place in the
world organization which we have long recognized as essential in the successful
practice of self-government in domestic affairs. True there were the valiant
efforts of the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation under the
League and the International Bureau of Education. But on a starvation diet
and with little official recognition they could not possibly be more than moder-
ately successful.
Many people both here and abroad now realize some of these fundamental
mistakes. There has therefore been much discussion in this country as to the
necessity of a strong division of education in the new world organization to be
and the part which education should play in building international understand-
ing. Nowhere, however, have we had a more comprehensive analysis of the
problems to be confronted or a more challenging conception of the future place
of education in the international scheme of things, than is found in Education
and the United Nations. It is worthy of serious study and extended consideration.
GEORGE F. ZOOK
President, American Council on Education
Washington, D. C.
* ♦ *
At the very time this document was being prepared by the Joint Commis-
sion in Great Britain, the Educational Policies Commission—appointed by the
National Education Association of the United States and the American Asso-
ciation of School Administrators —was formulating a report on the same subject.
The two Commissions worked independently. Their statements, however, are
in substantial agreement on most major matters of policy and in many detailed


recommendations as well. This is not mere coincidence. Rather, it is evidence
that when people with democratic backgrounds begin to think seriously about
achieving the war aims and establishing enduring peace, they come to similar
conclusions regarding the essential role of education in those processes.
Both organizations urge that the peacemakers after this war realize that the
shaping of the minds of men is no less important than political and economic
arrangements. Both agree that education for understanding of international af-
fairs and world citizenship must begin as soon as possible, in each of the United
Nations, in order to develop clear understanding of the common purposes of
these nations and to preserve their unity through the trying years ahead. Both
call attention to the need for educational reconstruction in the Axis-occupied
countries of Europe and the Far East; both would make such reconstruction the
common responsibility of the United Nations.
The reports of both organizations recommend a permanent international
organization for education as an integral part of whatever world government
may be developed. They agree, on the whole, in specifying the functions of
such an organization: to advance educational standards; to promote education
for world citizenship and international cooperation; to appraise teaching materi-
als; to foster intellectual cooperation, exchanges of teachers and students, tours,
and international broadcasting; to prepare materials for common use in all coun-
tries; and to encourage research on problems of international significance. Both
groups propose that an international charter or platform for education be officially
adopted and they agree on most of the points proposed for inclusion, notably
that all children and youth should have equal access to educational opportunities
at all levels.
Each Commission was senstive to some things which the other treate4 only
briefly. The British Joint Commission is more keenly aware of the need for
educational reconstruction in the countries occupied by Germany and Japan;
it devotes one-fourth of its space to this subj ect. The Educational Policies Com-
mission gives more attention to the role of education now, during the war, in
developing an informed and aroused public opinion in each of the United
Nations regarding the aims of the war and the issues of the peace.
The Joint Commission makes the suggestion of grants-in-aid by an inter-
national organization to the less wealthy nations to enable them to attain an
acceptable educational minimum. The Educational Policies Commission pro-
poses that the international organization send an advisory commission, on re-
quest, to aid any nation to develop its educational system.
At such points the two Commissions do not disagree. They supplement
one another. On only one important matter is there disagreement, namely, on
the question of compulsory control of education in postwar Germany by edu-
cational officials of the United Nations. The British Joint Commission favors
such control. The Educational Policies Commission’s report does not. The
reader of both documents will at least have a good understanding of the issues.
WILLIAM G. CARR
Secretary, Educational Policies Commission
Washington, D. C.


FOREWORD —Gilbert Murray 3
THE COMMISSION’S BACKGROUND 7
PREFACE 11
i
DESTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION 21
Belgium, 24; Czechoslovakia, 25; France, 27; Greece,
29; Luxembourg, 31; The Netherlands, 32; Norway,
33; Poland, 35; The U.S.S.R., 38; Yugoslavia, 40;
The Far East, 42; Other Areas, 44; Recommenda-
tions, 44.
ii
RE-EDUCATION IN ENEMY COUNTRIES 49
General Principles, 49; Appointment of a High Conu-
missioner for Education, 50; General Functions, 51;
Selection of Teachers, 53; The Universities, 56; New
Ideas in Education, 58; Youth Movements, 58; Adult
Education, 61; Voluntary Organizations, 66; Looking
Further Ahead, 69; Conclusion, 70.
in
EDUCATION AS A FOUNDATION FOR THE
POST-WAR SYSTEM 72
A Moral Purpose, 75; Organization of Education, 76;
Education for World Citizenship, 78; Auxiliary Means
of Communication, 80; Adult Education, 81; The Uni-
versities and Institutions of Equivalent Standing, 82;
Cooperation Between Learned Societies, 84; Youth Or-
ganizations, 84; The Teacher, 85; International
Organization for Education, 87.
IV
OUR WORK 91
Lectures and Summer Schools, 92; A Nansen Pioneer
Camp, 93; To Promote a Wider Understanding, 94;
Action on This Report, 96.
v
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 99
VI
RESOLUTION 106
APPENDIX I
NORWEGIAN TEACHERS’ DECLARATION 108
APPENDIX II
A UNITED DECLARATION 111




Foreword
At the end of 1941 the London International Assembly and
the Council for Education in World Citizenship appointed a Joint
Commission to consider and report upon the place of education,
science and learning in post-war reconstruction. It was in many
ways a very remarkable body. Indeed at any other time or place
it would scarcely have been possible for such a group to meet
throughout a whole year as we have been able to do during the
war which has brought us all together in London from so many
parts of the world.
The London International Assembly is an unofficial assembly
of people from all the United Nations. It has appointed to serve
on the Joint Commission members from Belgium, China, Czecho-
slovakia, Fighting France, Great Britain, Greece, the Nether-
lands, India, Norway, Poland, the United States of America and
Yugoslavia. They included members of several of the Allied
Governments’ principal officers of the Ministries of Education,
which some of those governments have established in London,
university professors, representatives of the arts and science, and
teachers from schools of many kinds.
The Council of Education in World Citizenship had already
begun a similar inquiry with the help of some of its friends from
Allied countries and was therefore invited to co-operate. It is a
council of representatives appointed by each of the British associ-
ations of local education authorities and of teachers. It was repre


sented on the Joint Commission by, among others, members from
the Universities, University Departments for the Training of
Teachers and Teachers’ Training Colleges, the County Councils’
Association and Association of Directors and Secretaries for Edu-
cation, the Headmasters’ Conference, Headmistresses’ Associa-
tion, National Union of Teachers, Assistant Masters’ Association,
and Workers’ Educational Association.
We were therefore able to draw upon a very wide range of
experience and we approached our task from many angles and
with many points of view; but all of us served in a personal capac-
ity and we were not bound by nor, of course, did we commit in any
way the various official or private bodies with which we were
associated.
Altogether there were fifty-six of us and, in addition, observ-
ers were appointed by the Board of Education, the British Council
and the Royal Institute of International Affairs. I was asked to
be Chairman and Mr. C. W. Judd, who is the Secretary of both
the Assembly and the C.E.W.C., undertook the secretaryship of
the Commission and drafted our report.
This report of our first year’s work has now been presented
to the London International Assembly and to the Council for
Education in World Citizenship and both bodies have unani-
mously recorded their general approval. They have since sub-
mitted it to the Allied Governments for their consideration.
Meanwhile some of the issues we considered have already become
the subject of popular discussion. It has therefore been decided
that without waiting for the conclusion of our work, this report
upon the first part of it should be published as a contribution to
that discussion, on issues which we believe to be vitally important
in any plans for post-war settlement.
It has been said of the statesmen who drew up the Treaty of
Versailles that, whilst they were greatly interested in the political
settlement, they paid far too little attention to economics and none
to education. This time “freedom from want” is one of the few


war aims the governments of the United Nations have so far de-
clared and there is already considerable discussion of the economic
and financial arrangements that must be made. But unless equal
attention is paid to the restoration, extension and improvement
of education in all countries it is by no means certain that we can
achieve any greater prosperity after so much destruction} and,
above all, it is idle to hope for an enduring peace without some
solid foundations of education for world citizenship.
During this first year our Commission has been principally
concerned with three main problems, the restoration of education
in the countries that have been under Axis oppression, the re-
education of Germany, and international arrangements for the
advancement of education. We have worked steadily throughout
the year and there are certain main propositions that we feel we
must advocate with all our strength and for which we now seek
the widest possible support; but the subject is vast and we claim
neither to have covered the whole ground nor to have said the
last word on any part of it.
We know that various groups, both national and international,
have been making somewhat similar studies in the United States
and we offer our report to them as a contribution to that inter-
change of studies on these subjects that we should like to establish.
We have some reason to hope that it will be found that they and
we are in general agreement upon the main objectives, but we
have done no more than sketch them in broad outline and we
should greatly welcome an opportunity to collaborate with com-
petent bodies in America in working out such proposals in much
more detail.
Although the U.S.S.R. is represented by observers in the As-
sembly, we were not able to secure participation of any Soviet
representatives in our inquiry. We believe it, however, to be es-
sential that understandings should be reached as soon as possible
with Russia on these as on all other important aspects of post-war
settlement.


For reasons of personal security it was deemed to be unwise
to give publicity to the names of some members of the Commis-
sion who come from occupied countries and have relatives still in
the power of the Nazis. It was therefore decided to omit the
complete list of members of the Commission from the report now
published for general circulation.
GILBERT MURRAY.
Chairman of the Joint Commission
President of the International Committee
on Intellectual Cooperation


The Commission’s Background
The London International Assembly was formed in Septem-
ber, 1941, “to serve the common cause of all those nations that
are resisting aggression by providing greater opportunities for the
people of Great Britain and of each of the allied and associated
nations —(a) to understand more fully each other’s history, eco-
nomic development, institutions, way of life and national aspira-
tions, and (b) to consider the principles of post-war policy and
the application of those principles to the problems of national and
international affairs.” The Assembly “is not committed to any
policy and does not seek to support any specific proposals; it is
an unofficial organization, independent of all Government control,
and its purpose is to provide opportunities for study and research
and a full exchange of views.” It does, however, from time to
time commend to the earnest consideration of the Governments
of the United Nations proposals that meet with the general assent
of its members.
The members are elected by a General Purposes Committee
and are chosen to represent so far as possible the chief aspects of
the national life of each of the United Nations, e.g., Parliament,
the armed services, religious bodies, law, education, arts, science,
agriculture, commerce and industry, trade unions, journalism, etc.
The present officers are: President , The Right Honorable Vis-
count Cecil j Deputy President , Monsieur Henri Rolin, Senator,
Professor of International Law at the University of Brussels,
member of the Permanent Court of Arbitration; Honorary Vice-


Presidents , Monsieur Thanassis Aghnides, Greek Ambassador in
London} Professor Rene Cassin, Fighting French National Com-
missioner for Justice and Public Instruction} Monsieur Jan
Masaryk, Czechoslovak Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
and Deputy Prime Minister} Monsieur August Zaleski, Chief of
the Civil Chancellery of the President of the Polish Republic}
Joint Chairmen of the General Pur-poses Committee, Professor
Arthur Newell, President of the American Outpost} Miss K. D.
Courtney, Vice-Chairman of the League of Nations Union Execu-
tive Committee; Secretary , Mr. C. W. Judd.
Five Commissions were appointed in the first year to prepare
for the consideration of the Assembly reports and recommenda-
tions on political warfare, proposals for the trial of war criminals,
future international organization and security against war, social
and economic reconstruction, and the place of education, science
and learning in post-war reconstruction.
* * *
The Council for Education in World Citizenship is a British
council of representatives appointed by all the national associations
of local education authorities and of teachers and by other impor-
tant educational bodies. The Chairman of the Council is Dr. Gil-
bert Murray, 0.M., formerly Regius Professor of Greek in the
University of Oxford.
The main purpose of the Council is to promote throughout
the educational system such studies and such teaching as may best
contribute to mutual understanding, peace, co-operation and good-
will between all peoples and so lead eventually to the building of
a world commonwealth.
In pursuance of these objects, the Council undertakes special
inquiries and prepares reports and recommendations for the con-
sideration of teachers, organizes summer schools and lecture
courses for teachers and senior pupils, and publishes study outlines
and other papers. It provides books and material for use in the


schools and finds well-qualified lecturers for special occasions.
Several hundred schools have formed study and discussion groups
which are associated with the Council, and in the universities and
teachers’ training colleges it assists the work of the British Univer-
sities League of Nations Society, now carried out by the Student
Federation for International Co-operation.
Between meetings of the Council its work is directed by an
elected Management Committee and is promoted by correspon-
dents in schools and other educational institutions.
At Oxford in January, 1941, the Council held a conference
with representatives of Allied Ministries of Education and uni-
versity professors and teachers from the Allied countries. The con-
ference examined the effect of enemy occupation on education,
and, in the name of the whole teaching profession of Great
Britain, the Council sent a message of encouragement to the teach-
ers in the occupied countries, expressing its profound admiration
for their fearless defense of truth. A small Oxford Conference
Continuation Committee was appointed to examine the measures
of assistance that will be required after the war in restarting the in-
tellectual and educational life of the occupied regions, and the
measures that should be planned now to promote after the war
by inter-governmental action and private initiative the general
advancement of education and, in particular, of education for
world citizenship. This work was subsequently merged in that
of the Joint Commission with the London International Assembly.
* * *
On the basis of very detailed and well-documented reports
compiled from governmental and other sources by each of the
national groups whose territory has been in whole or part occu-
pied by the enemy the London International Assembly, at its
meetings in October and November, 1941, examined the actual
position in those countries, the policies of the occupying powers,
the effect on every aspect of the national life and the resistance


of the peoples. On November 17th special consideration was
given to those sections of the reports which were concerned with
education, and, on the proposal of Dr. Gilbert Murray, as a mem-
ber of the British group, it was unanimously agreed to invite the
Council for Education in World Citizenship to join with the
Assembly in setting up a Commission whose task it should be to
prepare, for the consideration of the Assembly and of the Coun-
cil, a report and recommendations concerning the place of educa-
tion, religion,* science and learning in post-war reconstruction.
The Assembly expressed the hope that the Commission would
seek the collaboration of other interested and competent bodies.
The invitation was gladly accepted by the Council for Education
in World Citizenship, members were appointed by both bodies,
and it was agreed between them to invite Dr. Gilbert Murray,
President of the International Committee on Intellectual Co-
operation, to be Chairman, and Mr. G. W. Judd, Secretary of the
Council and of the Assembly, to be Secretary of the Commission.
The first meeting was held on February 4th, 1942.
Consideration of the place of organized religion in post-war reconstruction was subse-
quently transferred to another Commission established by the London International Assembly
to report on that subject.


Preface *
Many years ago Comenius wrote:
“And now, I see my country, her churches and her schools
all in ruins. Yet when the fire of war was spreading beyond her
borders to seize first the neighboring countries and then the whole
of Europe, and was threatening the Christian world with disaster
and desolation, I had no greater comfort than I found in the an-
cient promises of God concerning the supreme and final Light,
that it should in the end put darkness to flight. And if any human
aid were needed for this I thought that it could only come from
the better instruction of the young in all matters from the most
elementary and fundamental, if they are to be delivered from
the mazes of the world.”
We believe you shared his vision and his faith when, at a dark
hour of this great war, you invited us to consider and report upon
the place of education, religion, science and learning in post-war
reconstruction.
Wherever the invading armies of the Axis have carried the
evil of Nazi-Fascist tyranny, ministers of religion, teachers, stu-
dents and pupils, and all who are or might become the spiritual
and intellectual leaders of the people have been among the first
to suffer death or persecution and among the most intrepid fight-
ers in the moral and physical struggle for the defense of liberty
and truth. The lives of the martyrs cannot be restored. Many
*Preliminary statement of the Commission’s report to the officers and members of the
London International Assembly and the Council for Education in World Citizenship.


cultural treasures of the ages that were the great inheritance of
the whole civilized family of nations have been most wantonly
destroyed and can never be replaced. But the minds and bodies
of countless young people tormented and starved in every im-
prisoned country, can be restored. Churches, universities, schools
and libraries can be rebuilt and re-equipped. These things must
be done and we have felt it to be our first and imperative duty
to consider by what means those countries that have suffered the
vile plague of enemy occupation can best be assisted in the full
reconstruction of their moral, cultural and intellectual life and in
the speedy of scientific and educational work.
In our endeavors to ascertain the extent of this problem we
have been greatly assisted by many of the Allied Ministries of
Education which have supplied us, through the various national
groups in the London International Assembly, with the latest in-
formation in their possession and with detailed answers to a ques-
tionnaire. In presenting our recommendations on this subject we
have thought it to be our duty to give first a brief survey of the
situation at the present time, so far as we can ascertain it. We
fully realize, however, that the tremendous problems this already
presents may be very greatly increased if victory is delayed or
new destruction on a wide scale results from further military oper-
ations on the Continent or is savagely perpetuated by retreating
Axis forces. Such possibilities only increase the urgent need for
the Governments of the United Nations to undertake as soon as
possible the necessary preparations for the work of reconstruction.
It was not within our terms of reference to examine the mili-
tary, political and economic measures that should be taken by the
United Nations in order to make it impossible for Germany and
her accomplices ever again to plunge the world in war; but we
did consider it to be most clearly a part of our duty to study the
possibility of re-educating the peoples of those countries so as
to bring them ultimately into the comity of civilized nations. We
therefore directed our attention next to what has been in many


ways the most difficult of all the problems before us: the recon-
struction of education in the enemy countries after the war.
We have considered primarily the situation that is likely to
arise in Germany after the victory of the United Nations, and
their responsibilities toward it during the period of occupation
which we assume. Much has already been written about Nazi
education. It is admirably surveyed in the short paper by Pro-
fessor E. R. Dodds, Minds in the Making , from which we quote
the following passages:
“An official definition of the purpose of the new education is
given in the Education Ministry’s Amtsblatt of January sth, 1935:
it is ‘to incorporate German Youth in Home, Folk and State by
awakening sound racial forces, and cultivating them with a con-
scious political aim.’
“This curious piece of jargon was translated into plainer terms
by the German Minister of Education when he told an inter-
viewer that ‘the whole function of all our education is to produce
National-Socialists’ ( V olkischer Beohachter y February 13 th,
1938). To ensure that it shall discharge that function, the entire
educational system has in seven years been re-modelled from top
to bottom. At the top the aim is, in the words of the Rector of
the University of Berlin, ‘to eliminate the dregs of a past liberal
age,’ and so produce ‘a National-Socalist university in a National
Socialist state’; at the bottom, in the words of a leading German
educationalist, the elementary school must become ‘the people’s
school of ideology {Weltanschauung) under the protection of
the State,’ while in the secondary school, according to the Minis-
try’s Handbook, the humanistic ideal of culture ( Bildung ) must
be replaced by the ideal of ‘the German man, determined by his
blood and his historic destiny. . . . not until our day could the
head of a great nation say to the assembled youth of his nation:
The Movement has formed you; from the Movement you have
received your uniform; and in the service of the Movement you
will remain your whole life through. That is the wonderful thing;


in you the first link of our people’s education is forged: with you
the chain begins, and it will reach its end only when the last
German sinks into his grave.’
“That is, as Hitler says, the wonderful thing—that education,
the great liberating force which has been at work since the Renais-
sance transforming the face of Europe, will become henceforth,
if the German plan prevails, the instrument of fixation and the
supreme assurance against change. In the German youth of to-
day the first link is being forged; and what in 1649, in 1789, in
1848, even in 1933, was the dynamic of revolution will be to-
morrow the palladium of a new Byzantinism.”
The German plan will not prevail, but in thinking of the
kind of Germany with which we shall have to deal after the war
we shall ignore at our peril the fact that those aims have been
ruthlessly pursued already for nine years “with all the brutality
that duty demands.” Everything has had to make way for the
mass production of fanatical Nazis. Thousands of professors and
teachers have been dismissed, libraries have been purged, associa-
tions of students, broken up, prayers have been abolished in the
elementary schools, and the time available for religious instruction
severely cut down. All religious youth associations have now
been dissolved and their members required to join the Hitler
Youth, whose official educational Handbook associates the Chris-
tian Church with Free Masonry and Marxism as three forces
which “seek, more or less, power over the whole earth” and
therefore “cannot acknowledge the human ties of race, commu-
nity or nation without abondoning their own aims.” At the same
time a very carefully selected elite of boys are trained as Party
Leaders in the new National folitische Erziehimgsanstalten and
in the Hitler Schools which devote one third of their time to
physical training, one third to Hitler Youth activities, and one
third to lessons in order that they may become, in the words of
Dr. Ley, “Great in knowledge, blind in obedience, fanatical in
faith.”


In the secondary schools, courses in “biology” or, in plain
terms, anti-semitism have been made compulsory for all pupils
from the lowest classes to the highest, “at the expense if neces-
sary of mathematics and foreign languages.” In the elementary
schools only German history is taught and, according to recent
Ministerial instructions, “the heroic spirit and the idea of leader-
ship in its Germanic form are to fill the whole hstory teaching,
excite the children, and arouse and strengthen their will to fight”
{Wehrwillen) . And, as one writer frankly admits, “the teacher
must in history lessons be deliberately one-sided. He must edu-
cate his pupils so that they may recognize the rights of their own
nation only.”
We believe, with Professor Dodds, that, broadly speaking,
the American historian Charles Beard was right, as regards the
young generation of Germans, when he wrote in Foreign Affairs
in April, 1936: “If the Hitler regime continues for several years,
the German people will be a people almost totally ignorant of
the outside world and indifferent to all ideas and interests not
contained in the Nazi creed.”
That is the nature of the problem that must be faced and, in
our own examination of it, we have not ignored the fact that its
roots lie further back in the history of the German people. Some
of the writings of Fichte about the necessity of educating “cruel
warriors” are remarkably like the stuff talked and written by the
Nazi leaders today, and Nazism is undoubtedly only the latest and
most violent form of the vaunted Kultur of the German people,
of their militarist tradition, Pan-Germanism and disastrous wor-
ship of their own race.
We were exceptionally fortunate in having the collaboration
of Professor Dodds as a member of the Commission until his
appointment to the Foreign Research and Press Service. He pro-
vided us with memoranda on the German educational system and
on the purposes pursued by education in Germany before 1914,
in the days of the Weimar Republic and under the Nazi regime


that were of the greatest assistance to us; but the conclusions to
which we have come are entirely our own, and he shares no re-
sponsibility for them.
We are similarly indebted to Dr. Minio Paluello and to Mr.
C. S. Wang, who contributed to later sessions most illuminating
papers on education in Italy and Japan and the kind of educa-
tional reforms that it would be desirable to ensure in those coun-
tries. But in this first report we have, in the main, confined our
attention in this part of our work to Germany.
We have considered the task allotted to us to include much
more than the mere reconstruction of educational and cultural
systems and institutions as part of the general process of recon-
struction after the war. It seemed to us proper to consider also the
kind of education that should be provided in all countries in order
that a new generation may be able to create the new world pro-
claimed in the Atlantic Charter and other statements of our war
aims. The fulfilment of so large an aim will undoubtedly require
that we should give to children in the schools the best possible
instruction in every subject taught them. But, if we are less con-
cerned with the teaching of mathematics, science and engineering
than might be expected, it is because we believe that man’s me-
chanical inventions have outstripped his growth in social conscious-
ness and organization, so that today the integration of all “sub-
jects” in the training of good citizens is more important than the
methods of teaching any one of them separately. It should in our
view be one of the primary aims of education to prepare the hearts
and minds of men for the winning of the peace that should follow
the winning of the war.
Writing in the Educational Survey in 1932, Sir Alfred Zim-
mern said:
“We are constantly being told —and with truth —that the
future of the world depends upon the younger generation; for
upon the influences which mold men’s minds in youth depend the
actions that they undertake and the policies they espouse in the


future years. It follows therefore that, since at the time when
the present generation of statesmen and voters was at school few
or no influences directed towards international co-operation were
brought to bear on them, it would be little short of a miracle if
the peoples and their Governments were prepared in this genera-
tion to take a long step towards the international goal. The League
of Nations was founded practically without intellectual prepara-
tion. The fact preceded the idea. There were good and sufficient
reasons for this. The war had created a vacuum into which the
League seemed to fit. But the fact remains that the League
entered upon its career without the benefit of the long intellectual
incubation through which the ideas of the Renaissance, the Refor-
mation, the Italian Risorgimento, the German Reich, the demo-
cratization of the British electorate, and similar large scale changes
in modern civilization passed before they issued as practical proj-
ects and political or social realities. The League in the first genera-
tion of its history is like a building in which work is being carried
on on the first floor amidst a forest of scaffold-poles whilst labor-
ers are still engaged on patiently laying the foundations.”
We felt bound to consider how sound education can this time
be made a sure foundation of the post-war system. In this part
of our inquiry we have profited from the work that the Council
for Education in World Citizenship had already started in Janu-
ary, 1941, at its Conference at Oxford with professors and teach-
ers of the Allied Countries and representatives of their Ministries
of Education. At the Conference and in later discussions of the
Continuation Committee, the Council had already begun a critical
examination of what had been attempted, what more might have
been attempted, and the value of what had been accomplished
between the two wars to promote education for a peaceful and
democratic order based on free co-operation. Its inquiries had
covered both governmental and inter-governmental action and the
work of private agencies, and it had examined evidence submitted
by Dr. Gilbert Murray, the President of the International Com


mittee on Intellectual Co-operation; by M. Henri Bonnet, for-
merly Director of the International Institute of Intellectual Co-
operation in Paris; by Dr. Maxwell Garnett, who had for nearly
twenty years been Secretary of the British League of Nations
Union —one of the most successful of these Unions in educational
work; by the Rev. Gwilym Davies, Honorary Director of the
Welsh League of Nations Union Education Committee, who had
followed at Geneva and Paris all the more important meetings of
the intellectual co-operation organizations, and of the major in-
ternational associations interested in the problems of peace through
education; and by Miss Marie Butts, General Secretary of the
Bureau International d’Education, which, with the support of
some governments but with all the limitations of a semi-private
organization, had made great efforts to undertake at least some
part of the work that might have been carried out by a real League
of Nations Education Office.
In our discussions on this matter —as, indeed, on all other sub-
jects—we have been especially privileged to have as our Chair-
man Dr. Gilbert Murray. His wisdom and his wide experience
have guided and inspired us in all our deliberations. It has also
been of great assistance to us to have as one of our members one
of the former principal secretaries of the Institute of Intellectual
Co-operation in Paris. We ourselves have considered a large
number of memoranda and proposals submitted to us, including a
scheme by Dr. Leimdoerfer for a great elaboration of that part
of the work of the International Committee on Intellectual Co-
operation which was concerned with education for international
co-operation.
It was not until 1923 that the League of Nations, at the in-
stance of a British Delegate, Dame Edith Lyttleton, began to
concern itself with education through its Committee on Intellec-
tual Co-operation—and then only with the methods by which
young people could be taught “to regard international co-opera-
tion as the normal method of conducting world affairs.” We do


not, of course, in any way belittle the work achieved by the Inter-
national Committee on Intellectual Co-operation, the “League of
Minds,” as Paul Valery once described it. Indeed, we look to the
re-establishment of all those activities of the Committee which
brought together many of the leaders of thought in all parts of
the world. We are nevertheless convinced that the time has come
when education must be given a far larger place in the considera-
tions of Governments and, in our view, they should prepare to
establish as soon as possible a great international agency to pro-
mote the advancement of education generally and, in particular,
of education for world citizenship.
Our Commission held its first meeting on February 4th, 1942.
We have since then met twelve times, including meetings over
the whole of one week-end at St. Hilda’s College, Oxford. As
our numbers are so large and all of us are very busily engaged in
other work, it has not been practicable to meet more often, but we
have found it possible to ease our work considerably by appointing
several small committees which have met frequently to draft pro-
posals for our consideration after each section of our work had
first been thoroughly considered in full commission.
It was your wish that we should seek the collaboration of any
other responsible bodies engaged in similar inquiries and we were
delighted that one of our members, Dr. Maxwell Garnett, was ap-
pointed Chairman of the Committee set up by the British Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science to consider post-war
university education. We were able to persuade Professor F. E.
Weiss, the Honorary Secretary, to join us; and our own Secretary,
Mr. C. W. Judd, became a member of their Committee. While
we did not feel that we could exclude university questions from
any proper examination of the subject remitted to us, we have
nevertheless considered Dr. Garnett’s Committee as the body pri-
marily concerned with university questions and —now that its
membership has been enlarged to include a much wider represen-
tation of university professors from the allied countries —we pro-
pose, so far as possible, to leave to them examination of all further


questions concerning the universities, representing to them from
time to time such considerations as may arise in the course of our
own discussions.
In April the New Education Fellowship convened a confer-
ence. of educationists from the Allied countries to draft a Chil-
dren's Charter and a committee was appointed to prepare exposi-
tory memoranda dealing especially with the educational implica-
tions of the charter. We therefore invited the Chairman, Mr. J.
Compton, to serve on the Commission and he has since attended
our meetings or been represented by Miss Clare Soper, the Inter-
national Secretary of the Fellowship.
As will appear from the final section of our report, if our pro-
posals win your approval, It is our intention to invite a number of
great voluntary organizations to confer with us separately on the
special aspects of reconstruction in which they are likely to be
directly interested and in which some of them may have to play
a very vital role.
In addition to the members of the Commission we have had
the great advantage of the presence of several important observers.
The Royal Institute of International Affairs, which assists the As-
sembly in various ways, has been good enough to send an observer
to our Commission to provide liaison with its work. •Further, since
April, both the Board of Education and the British Council have
been good enough to send official observers to our meetings and, if
we have your authority, we would wish to submit our proposals to
them and to the educational authorities of all the United Nations.
We now have the honor to lay our first report before you and
to express the hope that it will receive the full endorsement*
both of the London International Assembly, representing en-
lightened public opinion in all the United Nations, and the Coun-
cil for Education in World Citizenship, representing the national
association of local education authorities and of teachers, and many
other educational bodies in Great Britain.
*The resolution adopted by the London International Assembly and by the Council for
Education in World Citizenship will be found at the end of this report.


Chapter I
Destruction and Reconstruction
The Nazi German’s behavior in the occupied countries fol-
lows logically from the doctrines on which all young Germans
have been reared. It is perhaps worth while to recall one or two
passages, chosen more or less at random, from Mein Kampj:
“The first stages of civilization were not based so much on the
use of tamed animals as on the employment of human beings who
were members of an inferior race.”
“A peace that would be guaranteed by the triumphant sword
of a people endowed with a power to master the world.”
“. . . when the most superior type of manhood will have suc-
ceeded in subjugating the world to such an extent that this type is
the sole master of the earth.”
Sole masters of the world! And, as the loquacious Dr. Ley
has told them since the war for world mastery began:
“The German race, that is our faith! It has higher rights than
all others. A German laborer is worth more than an English lord.
We have a divine right to rule, and we will assure ourselves of
that right.” (Speech at Lodz, December, 1939.)
“It is a fight for the destruction of England, the leadership of
the world and the domination of our race. If there be a God and
a higher Providence, then must He give to the higher race, that
is, to us, higher rights.” (Speech at Chemnitz, February, 1940.)
“A lower race needs less room, less clothing, less food and
less culture than a higher race. A German cannot live under the
same conditions as a Pole or a Jew.” {Angrijf, January 31, 1940.)


And so the armies have gone out to loot and destroy, to plun-
der and kill those they would not or could not enslave. We very
much doubt if, even now, the free peoples of the world have any
real conception of the enormity of the destruction that has been
wrought and of the crimes that have been perpetrated by the Nazi
armies and their faithful imitators from Italy, Bulgaria, and the
other Axis states. Nor, perhaps, do they realize that it is not just
wanton destruction, blood lust, but the coldly calculated diabolical
pursuit of a deliberate policy. Vast areas of Eastern Europe are
being methodically, systematically depopulated by famine, huge
enforced migrations and wholesale massacres —carefully planned
and executed—to clear the soil for the expansion of the master
race. The unexpected difficulties and prolongation of the war
have necessitated various deviations in the bald and rapid execu-
tion of their full European plans. Owing to the bombing of
German factories and armament manufacturing centers it has been
necessary temporarily to maintain and even to extend some indus-
tries in the occupied countries. It has been necessary in some
countries to make at least the appearance of concessions in order to
attempt to recruit skilled labor for the Reich. But in bold outline
the plan is clear.
The Nazis do not, of course, treat all countries alike. Parts of
Poland, Alsace-Lorraine and Luxembourg have been incorporated
in the Reich. The Dutch and Scandinavians are regarded as poor
and distant relations} their spirit of independence must be broken
or sapped by Quisling Governments, but they may be allowed to
be the slave overseers. Dutchmen, no longer Dutchmen but sec-
ond-rate Germans, must be prepared to leave their homes and be
settled in Eastern Europe to guard the boundary areas against the
eternal enemy, the Slav of Russia —what would be left of it! The
French may be intermediaries in sapping the resistance of the
Americas; they may be allowed to keep up some appearances. But,
in one way or another, all Europe—most of it reduced to ex-
ploited agricultural colonies —is to serve the German Reich.


To pursue this policy successfully it is first necessary to destroy
or reduce to impotence and blind obedience the leaders of each
nation and all who might aspire to take their places. This means
not only the political leaders, but all who are highly esteemed in
the life of the country: the trade union leaders, the clergy, who
might strengthen the souls of the people and so increase their
power to suffer and resist, and the intelligentsia, the professors,
teachers, and even the high school pupils. Indeed, in every coun-
try the intellectual leaders and the teachers have been among the
first to be attacked. They are the trustees of the history of the
nation —it must not be passed on. Throughout history they have
been the pioneers of progress: they could inspire resistance now.
They stand for the freedom of the human mind; the mind of the
enslaved race must bend to the conqueror’s will. Moreover, to
take Poland as an example, the Polish lands, according to the Gov-
ernor General Frank, “are to be turned into an intellectual desert,”
so “the Poles do not need any universities or schools.” They are
to be the hewers of wood and drawers of water. “We do not con-
sider it necessary,” declares Frank, “to carry on the Polish
libraries’ work, as only nations with a historic destiny write books.”
So no new books must be published without the Governor
General’s license —which, of course, he only gives for German
propaganda. Libraries must be despoiled. All books that could
remind the Polish people of their greatness must be destroyed.
So, too, their monuments. Instead there is encouraged a policy of
deliberate demoralization, gambling dens with low stakes “to en-
able the broad masses to play” (Krakauer Zeitung, April 6, 1941),
pornographic literature, disreputable theaters and vice.
But the Poles, the Slavs, denounced as “the eternal enemies of
the Germans,” have been degraded to the lowest rank in the racial
hierarchy; the distant cousins who may do some of the dirty work
for the master race have to contend with cunning as well as brutal
suppression. From time to time great appeals are made to their
youth. Attempts have been made to induce a few young Quislings


to take part in peripatetic youth manifestations across Europe, ap-
pealing to the youth of Europe with catchwords of the New Or-
der, a new age that is to be an age of golden opportunity for all
youth who will have the vision to throw off the shackles of their
elders and co-operate with the young German Reich. A few stu-
dents are encouraged and assisted to study at German universities
—for the students of Luxembourg who always studied abroad, and
of Czechoslovakia, now deprived of its own ancient seats of learn-
ing, no other opportunity exists for university work. School chil-
dren are taken to Germany for holidays from Belgium or from
Holland, feted and return laden with presents.
The results are meager in the extreme. Everywhere the schol-
ars, young and old, maintain the fight. Thousands of professors,
teachers and students have suffered death or the concentration
camps or joined guerrilla forces in the fight for human dignity
and the freedom of the human mind. But terrible destruction has
been done. We have endeavored to make some brief survey of
the position in each of the occupied territories and a first rough
estimate of the magnitude of the tasks of restoration that would
be required even if the war were to end today. We base ourselves
in this section of our report upon material made available to us —
in many cases from the Ministry of Education—through each na-
tional group represented on the Commission, and on the admirable
survey, Axis Oppression of Education , issued by the Inter-Allied
Information Committee.
BELGIUM
Up to now only the University of Louvain has suffered great
material damage; here in May, 1940, the Germans destroyed a
dozen university buildings, including notably the famous library
which was also burned down by the Germans in August, 1914.
Rebuilt, thanks to the whole world, it has once more been de-
sroyed in similar circumstances. Even if Belgium is capable of
meeting the cost of reconstructing the buildings, she will need the


friendly collaboration of the Allied countries in re-establishing the
collection of books which represent an indispensable intellectual
asset, not only for Louvain University life, but also for the cul-
tural development of the whole country. At the time of its de-
struction the library contained 900,000 books of which 15,000
have been saved, and 800 manuscripts of which only 15 remain,
811 incunabula, 200 prints and 22,000 photostat reproductions of
manuscripts, and a notable series of manuscripts in the Coptic lan-
guage which have also been destroyed.
In the short campaign in Belgium there was no great damage
to school and university buildings and, apart from the tragic loss
of the Louvain Library, none that Belgium could not herself
make good.
Throughout the country the spirit of resistance shown by the
universities and schools has been most marked. After a long dis-
pute the German authorities finally closed the Free University of
Brussels “in consequence of the hostile attitude of the professors
toward the New Order,” and many of its members, deans of facul-
ties and other academic leaders were arrested. Four months later
the Germans tried to arrange for the re-opening of the university
but the professors, realizing that the itnention was to make it a
State University and later to Nazify it, stood by their Council.
They lost their salaries but the Germans lost the battle of the Free
University.
In the schools the Germans have tried to stamp out all patriotic
thought, thinking and behavior ; and many teachers have been im-
prisoned or deported to Germany for anti-German activity. School
textbooks have been rigorously censored and in some schools the
use of textbooks has been discontinued altogether. Hundreds of
books have been removed from public libraries.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Before the war began Germany had already given ample proof
of her barbarism by her treatment of all intellectual life in Czecho-


Slovakia. At the moment of the occupation on March 15, 1939,
a strict censorship destroyed at one blow every vestige of freedom
of speech in the press, on the radio, in the theater, and in the
cinema 5 schools were placed under German control: Czechoslovak
scientific workers were prevented from having any direct contact
with the scientific world outside; French and English scientific
works were banned from entry to the country.
Once the political sovereignty of the country had been de-
stroyed, the universities, as the visible symbol of the nation’s cul-
tural sovereignty, were soon attacked. The story of November
16th and 17th, 1939, is so well known that we would do no more
than refer to it here. In all the free nations, November 17th is
now observed as International Students’ Day in memory of the
several thousand students who between the 16th and 18th of No-
vember were seized from their beds, arrested in their laboratories,
rounded up in the streets, flogged and tortured —irrespective of
sex. Many were shot, thousands were packed into trucks and
driven to the concentration camps of Dachau, Buchenvald and
Oranienburg. The University of Prague was closed, first for three
years and now permanently. A similar fate overtook the universi-
ties, institutes of university standing, and the students in other
towns throughout the Protectorate. University buildings were
laid waste, libraries were looted, systematically and according to
previously prepared plans, the archives of the Senate were de-
stroyed. All students not already in concentration camps were
given 48 hours in which to find manual work or be sent to Ger-
many for forced labor. A great number of university professors
and other intellectual leaders of the nation have been executed.
Sixty per cent of the elementary schools have been closed in
Bohemia and Moravia, and in the remaining schools in those prov-
inces the average size of classes is between eighty and ninety.
There is reason to believe that as many as seventy per cent of the
higher elementary schools have been closed. New curricula are
designed to secure the quickest possible Germanization of the


country. Every Czech child is expected to understand and to
speak German fluently at the age of twelve.
Any Labor Exchange is entitled to conscript any child of ten
or over, even during school term, and to send him or her to work
anywhere it chooses. Children of fourteen are sent into mines or
factories and kept there permanently. Only about one-third of
the usual number of pupils were admitted to the secondary schools
this year and girls are now completely excluded; so too are the
children of former politicians or of “progressive” parents.
Teachers, like the professors of the universities, have been
brutally treated.
The Germans and Hungarians have between them systemati-
cally despoiled the whole country, taking away valuable books and
documents, museum and other learned collections, optical and
other apparatus for the production and popularization of artistic
works, the property of the State, provinces, communes, cities,
churches, gymnastic and other associations and private individuals.
FRANCE
We have no exact evidence of the material damage inflicted on
schools and academic institutions during military operations, but
it would not appear to have been on a scale beyond the resources
of liberated France to repair in a reasonably short space of time.
Alsace and Lorraine. Here the policy has been the complete
Germanization of youth as rapidly as possible; but great difficul-
ties have been encountered. For example, all boys and girls were
ordered to join the Hitler Jugend and the Bund Deutscher
M.'ddchen; but no leaders could be found, in spite of lavish bribes.
Finally civil servants were compelled to send their boys to Ger-
many to be trained for this work. In the schools the first new
timetables prescribed for each week: two (or three) hours of po-
litical instruction (National Socialism, racial theories, etc.), four
hours of history (beginning with the Treaty of Versailles), two
hours for geography, mathematics and physics, two hours of


“biology” (anti-Semitism), two hours of singing, one or two les-
sons in Latin and English and twelve hours of German. French
was forbidden.
Zone Interdite. As part of the deliberate policy of splitting
up conquered countries this zone is directly administered by the
Nazi authorities in Brussels.
Occupied Zone (i.e., the part occupied before the recent total
occupation of the country). Here the Germans, their decrees
sometimes reinforced by circulars from Vichy, have tried to im-
pose a reform of the schools, to ban a great many textbooks and to
introduce others. But because of active opposition, “attentisme”
and shortage of paper little progress has been made, very few, if
any, new textbooks have yet been introduced and the lack of them
has given many teachers an excuse to go on using some of the old
books.
I nthe Vichy Zone. Petain and his Government have tried to
reform education along Nazi lines, paying great attention to new
youth movements formed on Nazi models.
In both zones all free youth organizations have been sup-
pressed, but there is good reason to believe that many continue to
exist and meet in secret. According to a recent report from
France, “Strange as it may seem, it is above all the youth of school
age which still comes under the influences conforming to the true
French traditions and aspirations. As far as possible, primary and
secondary school teachers, the immense majority of whom are
hostile to the Government and to the policy of collaboration, are
imbuing their young pupils with a patriotic spirit.”
University professors are at one with the teachers. Many have
been arrested and some executed; but no ruthlessness has suc-
ceeded in driving the true French spirit from the schools, the
lycees and the universities.
Many stories have been told of the high-spirited acts of de-
fiance by the students, sometimes ridiculing decrees aimed at Jews
or other fellow students, at other times organizing patriotic dem


onstrations in the streets, like those who marched through Paris
behind two fishing rods and crying “deux gaules ”
GREECE
According to authoritative information twenty-four towns in
Greece have been partly or totally destroyed by military opera-
tions, air raids and earthquake. A careful calculation suggests that
the schools for between 90,000 and 100,000 children must have
been wiped out. Moreover, in the territories occupied by the Bul-
garians, where there were probably some 200,000 school children,
only a few schools are still open, and these are all Bulgarian
schools —an abomination to the Greeks. The Bulgarians are trying
deliberately to exterminate all Greek culture in this part of the
country and Greek schools have been destroyed or are rapidly be-
ing ruined by use as barracks and stores. Their equipment, such
as desks, windows, libraries, scientific apparatus, etc., has almost
certainly been destroyed. So it will almost certainly be necessary
to provide new schools for at least 150,000 boys and girls and
equipment for at least 300,000.
The famine and deaths resulting from it, massacres and en-
forced migration have increased still further the huge task of re-
construction, for many hundreds, probably thousands, of children
are orphans or have been lost. They wander homeless and starv-
ing about the streets and countryside, and for those that survive it
will be necessary to provide boarding schools. Further, supple-
mentary schooling in one form or another must be arranged for
the children, both of the elementary and the secondary schools,
who have not been to school since the outbreak of hostilities and
who in the meantime have been drafted into some form of work.
There will be a great shortage of teachers, for many young
masters have been killed or maimed for life in the war, thousands
have been sent to forced labor camps and made to take up manual
work, and the flow of new teachers from the training colleges must
have been severely interrupted. It is unlikely that many satisfac


tory volunteers from other countries could be found to help meet
this shortage for, unless they already know modern Greek, it
would take at least a year of residence, or a much longer period of
study abroad, before they could be sufficiently conversant with it.
Instead, it has been suggested to us that, at the end of the war,
young people in Greece who have matriculated should be enrolled
as elementary school teachers, without further training, and that
they should later be given the opportunity to attend special one-
year training colleges, in which they would follow a condensed
course, combining professional training and supplementary study
of their own subjects. Friends of Greece in America and Britain
could help to promote such a scheme by founding scholarships to
enable unqualified teachers, hastily recruited at the end of the war,
to undertake later such a course of training if they had shown
themselves likely to make good teachers. It is estimated that if
the cost of living is at all comparable with pre-war costs, the value
of such scholarships need not be more than fifty pounds, on the
assumption that the cost of instruction would be borne by the State.
It would also appear to be worthwhile to investigate the possi-
bility of founding in Egypt and perhaps in this country, during the
war, a training college for young Greek people aspiring to return
to their native land as teachers, or to arrange special courses for
them, under their own instructors, at some British training college
or university training department.
Our Greek member suggests that a large extension of adult
education will also be necessary, including both primary and sec-
ondary evening schools. The former, it is suggested, could be
staffed voluntarily by pupils from the senior forms of secondary
schools, and the latter by students from the universities and train-
ing colleges and, where these are not available, by teachers re-
leased in rotation for this work. Further, it is suggested that, to
bring the people back into contact with the free world from which
they have been cut off, very extensive schemes of popular educa-
tion should be adopted; that all Greek intellectuals, poets, writers


and scientists would be anxious to give their services free or at a
merely nominal fee, and that a British organizer who would advise
on administration could be of some assistance.
The valor of Greek soldiers and the service of her sailors in
the cause of the United Nations will not go unrequited; but her
intellectuals have been no less valiant in their fight. Both the
Universities of Athens and Salonika have now been closed and
many professors and students have been murdered as hostages, but
the flame of Greece burns brightly and her students still'defy the
enemy machine guns to hold their patriotic demonstrations in the
streets.
We are greatly impressed by the spirit in which our friends
from Greece are prepared to tackle all the problems of educational
reconstruction in their own country after the war; but clearly it
will be an immense burden to repair all that can be repaired of the
damage inflicted by all three invaders—Germans, Bulgarians and
Italians —a burden that Greece ought not to be left to bear alone.
Greece, like all other territories, has been plundered, valuable
manuscripts from Mount Athos and other monasteries, antique
marbles, coins and much besides have all been carted away. In the
schools deliberate attempts are made to corrupt the morals as well
as the morale of her youth, and famine overshadowing all its
other trials will inflict upon this generation scars that can never be
completely healed.
LUXEMBOURG
No material damage has been suffered by the schools, but Lux-
embourg parents are faced with a concentrated effort to wean the
loyalty of their children and to train them as members of the Nazi
Reich. All schooling is subordinated to activities of the Hitler
Youth. All the youth associations, including the Scouts and
Guides, have been dissolved. All school children must take part
in all the demonstrations and activities of the Nazi party, includ-
ing the Labor Service, which are sometimes carried out under con


ditions of physical and moral slavery. Several high schools have
been closed. The great Episcopal Seminary has been transferred
to Trier. All headships in secondary schools, with one exception,
have been filled by German officials. The only Luxembourg head-
master is a notorious traitor. The teaching of French has been
forbidden in the elementary schools and greatly curtailed in the
secondary schools. Some subjects have been completely eliminated
from the curricula, leaving German, arithmetic, mathematics, some
elementary geography and history (on National Socialist lines).
The rest of the time is supposed to be devoted to community sing-
ing, school expeditions and physical culture, with the result that
the standard of education has fallen very sharply. Only those
who give proof that they are whole-hearted supporters of the Nazi
regime are allowed to proceed to university courses, and then only
to universities in Germany chosen for them by the German au-
thorities.
However, the loyalty of the young people of Luxembourg
has not been broken or sapped. When the cal-ling-up of four
classes of young men for German military service and the total
annexation of the Grand Duchy were proclaimed, young people
played their full part in a general strike. Teachers were among
those shot by the Germans in reprisal, and at Esch-Alzette, 105
boys of the Industrial School and sixty young high school girls
were arrested for joining the strike or demonstrating in the streets
and have been deported to Germany.
THE NETHERLANDS
No university buildings, colleges or schools will need to be re-
built in Holland —unless, of course, there is further destruction.
And the treatment of education by the Nazis has been mild, com-
pared with their behavior in other countries. Nevertheless, the
State University of Leyden, the oldest and most famous of the
Dutch Universities, has been closed. Professors from all the uni-
versities have been imprisoned or sent to concentration camps.


In the schools the textbooks, especially of history, have been
revised in order to eliminate anything to which the Nazis took
objection, and there is a gradual introduction of Nazi teachers, but
the spirit of young people remains true. Indeed the Dutch Nazis
have recently complained of the meager support they receive from
the younger people and have attributed this to the much too demo-
cratic educational system that existed in Holland.
We have no information about the situation in the Dutch East
Indies.
NORWAY
Military operations in Norway have not, so far, involved the
destruction of many schools or other educational institutions, and
the damage that has been caused should not be beyond the re-
sources of Norway to repair. And while public and private prop-
erty has been stolen and wantonly destroyed—German officers are
known to have used valuable books as fuel—there does not appear
to have been much looting of the universities, public libraries, etc.
But a good deal of uneasiness is felt about endowments for schol-
arships and public funds for research. This is a problem that may
concern many occupied countries, and lists should be prepared
showing how such capital was invested before the war. This is of
special importance to countries like Norway and Denmark, where
so much research work is normally financed by public funds, estab-
lished through private munificence, or by grants from the State or
certain municipalities (e.g., in Norway the Nansen funds of nearly
seven million kroner} the Michelsen Institute, five and a half
million kroner, and the Institute of Comparative Research in Hu-
man Culture, two to three million kroner} and in Denmark the
Carlsberg fund of nearly one hundred million kroner).
The destruction in Central and Southeastern Europe has been
so great that it will take some time to recover. The disastrous fall
in educational standards in Germany will make itself felt increas-
ingly after the war. It is therefore mainly in Western and North


ern Europe that any serious research work is likely to be possible
in Europe for some years. For this reason it is all the more im-
portant that, to avoid waste of time and money, plans should be
ready for preventing if possible the theft of educational and re-
search endowments, or for speedy restoration, and also for meet-
ing the problems created by the revaluation of capital caused by
inflation.
Although no educational institutions have been formally closed
down in Norway, their work has been constantly interrupted, espe-
cially during the last year. In the summer the Germans began to
requisition school buildings for troop barracks and hostels on a
very large scale, and one girls’ school had, for example, to be
spread out over no fewer than 55 small private houses! Univer-
sity work has been somewhat less interrupted, but the students
have felt obliged to boycott the lectures of Nazi professors. There
has been some forcible revision of textbooks in the schools, but it is
perhaps the loss of time that is the chief loss suffered by education.
The moral gains have been tremendous.
It is no exaggeration to say that the magnificent fight waged
by the teachers against Quisling’s plans for a “Teachers’ Front”
aroused the whole of Norway: it hastened the final breach of the
Norwegian Church with the Quisling regime j it made it impos-
sible for Quisling to proceed to the formation of other “fronts”—
a Labor Front, Peasant Front, Fishermen’s Front, and so on —
and so brought to nought all his dreams of a totalitarian sovereign
State, allied to Germany in the war against Bolshevism. As the
President of the Board of Education in Great Britain said in his
message broadcast to the Norwegian teachers through the Nor-
wegian Broadcasting Service on May 4th, 1942, “ The men and
women of letters in this country admire you for your action, which
made the name of teachers to be respected among all other profes-
sions as leaders of the people .”
The story is by now too well known for it to be necessary to
reprint it here in detail. It is fully set out in the Norwegian


Survey of May Bth, 1942, issued by the Royal Norwegian Gov-
ernment Information Office. We would only draw attention to
three aspects of the epic tale. First, the remarkable manifestation
of faith in their democratic way of life that has led 12,000 out of
Norway’s 14,000 teachers to risk all—and, in spite of all, to endure
until this day in their struggle against every attempt by Quisling
and by the Reich Commissioner, Terboven, with all the terror of
the Gestapo at his service, to force them to join a totalitarian front
and to educate the children or Norway in Nasjonal Samling prin-
ciples. Secondly, and no less remarkable, the bond between the
teachers and the pupils who since the early days of the occupation
have defied the regime, taking part in school strikes, flaunting
patriotic emblems, suffering—indeed often seeking imprisonment;
and publicly demonstrating in towns and villages their solidarity
with the 1,300 teachers all over the country who were arrested and
sent to concentration camps —5,000 of them later to be sent on the
infamous S.S. Skjerstad to forced labor in the north. And, thirdly,
the “Teachers’ Declaration,” read aloud by the teachers to their
pupils on April 9th, 1942, in every Norwegian school open on that
day. We believe it is a document of historic importance and an
inspiration to teachers throughout the world now and for the
future. The full text will be found in Appendix II of this report.
POLAND
In twenty years of regained liberty Poland recovered the
ground lost in a century and a half of partition under foreign rule.
At the outbreak of the present war there were no fewer than 1,659
nursery schools, 28,881 elementary and 789 secondary schools
and, in addition, 2,085 vocational schools or courses, 641 con-
tinuation classes, and 28 universities and institutions of equivalent
rank. All this has been destroyed.
In the territories incorporated in the Reich first religion and
then education have been persecuted. Polish schools of every kind
were closed, only German schools were allowed; everything that


was, however slightly, connected with or reminiscent of national
culture was removed. All manuals, handbooks, Polish maps and
other school equipment were destroyed, as well as school libraries.
Deprived of all possibility of a Polish education, young children
had to stay at home amid all the depressing circumstances of a
brutal occupation. Polish education was for a time carried on
secretly, but this was gradually stamped out by increasing terror-
ism. Teachers were deported, shot or sent to concentration camps.
In the so-called General Government, too, large numbers of
Polish teachers were arrested, shot or sent to concentration camps,
but a certain number of Polish elementary schools still exist. Their
difficulties are immense. Reading books for beginners, books of
excerpts from Polish literature, manuals of Polish history, geog-
raphy books and maps have been confiscated. So, too, have all
works in Polish or about Poland in the school libraries. The Ger-
mans insist that the chief instruction shall be in arithmetic, natural
history and manual work; they keep a constant watch on the
schools to insure that no patriotic influence is exerted by the teach-
ers. There is a great shortage of staff. School buildings are con-
stantly being commandeered by the Germans for other purposes.
No school buildings are heated even in the coldest weather. Some
of the Warsaw schools, obliged to work in shift system, can only
provide for each set of pupils two hours of instruction a day.
Polish secondary education no longer exists. Of the 789 sec-
ondary schools, those buildings that remained after the bombard-
ments were mainly requisitioned by the army, while a few were
used for German schools, or —in the eastern territories —Ukrainian
and Lithuanian schools.
Vocational schools, where they are allowed to remain open,
have had to give up all academic work and general education, and
all advanced technical courses. Only a few are allowed to give
more than the most elementary mechanical training. All equip-
ment has been carried away or destroyed.
Universities and other institutions for higher education were


closed at the moment of the occupation and have not re-opened.
Whole groups of professors have been sent to concentration camps.
One hundred are known to have died as a result of enemy action
in the first two years of occupation.
Polish libraries were wrecked in the bombardment, others
have been deliberately pillaged or destroyed, still others have
been ruined through negligence in transporting their contents to
Germany.
Museums have met with the same lot. In the General Gov-
ernment they have been closed, and for the most part robbed by
way of “legal” confiscation or simply pilfered. Anything the
Germans could by any stretch of the imagination attribute to Ger-
man culture was confiscated and sent to Germany} everything else
was confiscated and destroyed. Private collections suffered a simi-
lar fate and many of their contents have been stolen by German
officers.
Scientific societies and institutions have been dissolved and
their property ruined or confiscated. Laboratories have been de-
stroyed—sometimes by experts sent from Germany for this pur-
pose.
The result is that the losses so far incurred and the damage
inflicted will make the restoration of Polish education an exceed-
ingly difficult task. So many school buildings, laboratories and
libraries have been totally destroyed—especially in Warsaw —
that their full reconstruction within any reasonable period of time
will be practically impossible without the help of other countries.
It is estimated that as many as 50,000 persons in the educa-
tional services have been killed by the Germans, and the difficul-
ties of replacement will be great. Then there will be the problems
of providing education for the boys and girls, amounting to many
thousands, who have been deprived of it during the war; of re-
building on a colossal scale not only the buildings totally destroyed
but the many others that have been ruined by use as stores and
barracks; and of a mass production of books, and especially of


textbooks of history, geography and Palish literature. It is esti-
mated that to provide only two copies of each book per form it
will be necessary to produce 1,000,000 copies of textbooks. Fur-
ther, it will be necessary to reprint books destroyed in libraries
and private houses, to restore laboratories, libraries and museums.
And, first of all, provision must be made for the feeding, health
and physical education of the children and young people who have
suffered the privations of these days, while special arrangements
must be made for hundreds, probably many thousands, of school
children whose parents have been killed.
the u. S.S.R.
No complete picture of the situation is available, but some ma-
terial has been published in The Molotov Notes on German
Atrocities (notes sent by M. Molotov to all Governments with
which the U.S.S.R. had diplomatic relations on November 27th,
1941, and January 6th, 1942), and The Third Molotov Note on
German Atrocities (April 27th, 1942), both published by H.M.
Stationery Office. Further information is found from time to
time in such publications as Soviet War News. They are a story
of bestiality almost without parallel in the history of the world.
In this sea of ruin, blood and frightfulness behind the German
lines practically nothing can have been left of education or of Rus-
sian learning or culture. But everywhere the spirit of the Russian
people rises triumphant, teachers and students take their places in
the armies and guerilla bands, small children seem to know no
fear of death if they can serve their country.
Some idea of the conditions created may be inferred from such
passages as these from the Molotov Notes:
“The irreplaceable relics connected with the life-long work
of Tolstoy, all his manuscripts, books and pictures, were either
stolen by the German soldiers or thrown away and destroyed. One
of the staff of the museum requested a German officer, Schwarz,
to cease heating the place with the personal furniture and books


of the great writer, but to use firewood for the purpose. Schwarz
said, ‘We don’t want firewood, we shall burn everything con-
nected with the name of your Tolstoy.’ ”
“When the invaders destroyed the Korelenko Library in
Kharkov they paved the dirty roads with books from the library
‘to facilitate the passage of German automobiles.’ ”
“During the occupation of the town of Istra, the German
troops made an ammunition dump of the famous ancient New
Jerusalem Monastery . . . one of the outstanding historical and
religious monuments of the Russian people.”
“On the very first day of occupation the Fascist monsters drove
into the fields 200 schoolboys and schoolgirls who had come to the
village to help collect the harvest, surrounded them, and brutally
shot them down. They took a large group of schoolgirls back to
the rear ‘for the gentlemen officers.’ ”
“The local German commandant’s office in Kerch ordered the
parents to send their children to school, and in compliance with the
order 245 children with exercise books in their hands set off to
take their places in class. None of these children returned home.
After the liberation of the town, the bodies of these 245 children
were found in a deep ditch five miles from the town. They had
been shot by the invaders. Documents and photographs relating
to this monstrous crime are in the possession of the Soviet Govern-
ment.”
“The extent of the destruction by the Nazi incendiaries is seen
from the following data, taken from many such instances: In 23
regions of the Moscow region occupied by the Germans, they com-
pletely destroyed 537 villages, partly destroyed 928, completely
destroyed 38,423 dwelling houses in villages and 5,140 dwelling
houses in towns, 947 schools (out of 1,220 existing schools), 159
hospitals, 54 kindergartens and creches. ... In 25 districts of the
Tula region the German army during their occupation completely
burned down 316 villages, 16,164 peasant houses, 299 schools.”
There are many other examples of the way in which the Nazi


armies have acted on the clear instigation to acts of vandalism con-
tained in a notorious “Order of the Day” of Field Marshal von
Reichenau: “No historic or artistic treasures in the east are of any
importance.”
YUGOSLAVIA
Yugoslavia has to suffer the depravations of four invaders:
Germans, Italians, Hungarians and Bulgarians. Before the war
the elementary schools had the task of “bringing up and educating
children in a spirit of national unity and religious toleration and
making them loyal and active members of the State and of so-
ciety.” How well they succeeded was well manifested when
student demonstrations led the way for the overthrow of the
regime and the renouncing of the pact with Germany, saving the
soul of the country at the cost of a bloody struggle in which they
are taking their full part.
As soon as Yugoslavia was occupied and dismembered the only
virtue of education in the eyes of the invaders was as an instru-
ment of disunity.
In the so-called Croat Independent State, Pavelic and his fol-
lowers have made great efforts to Nazify all young people. In
most parts, Serbs and Jews are forbidden any education. Such
few Serbian schools as are left in Moravia and Herzegovina have
to carry on with very few teachers, because “teachers and profes-
sors appointed by Belgrade have been compelled to leave their
posts for political reasons.” Many patriotic teachers and educa-
tional officers have been shot by the Ustashi, put in concentration
camps or driven from the country.
In Slovenia, after it was partitioned between Germany and
Italy, there were mass deportations and the Germans in Southern
Styria abolished all Slovene schools, while the Italians dissolved
all students’ organizations, including the Sokol. According to
latest information, out of 4,421 teachers, 360 have been deported
to Serbia, 800 have fled from Nazi brutality, while large numbers


of those who were left have been flung into concentration camps
for refusing to accept Nazi or Fascist rule. The situation is wors-
ened by the frontier between Germany and Italy which prevents
Slovene students attending the University of Ljubljana, now an-
nexed to Italy. Many Slovene students have been shot, and,
according to one source of information, over 10,000 boys and
girls have been deported to Germany.
In Serbia the worst rage of the Germans has been concentrated,
for here, according to the Frankjurter Zeitung , Serbian youth
still live “in the tradition of the legendary past.” Many teachers
and professors are fighting in the ranks of General Mihajlovic or
are prisoners of war. Hundreds of them have been killed. Ac-
cording to early information, in 1941 over 500 Serbian students,
including some girls, were shot for alleged conspiracies, sabotage,
and helping the chetniks. One of the most brutal acts of German
repression occurred in Kragujevac in October, 1941, when all the
boys and girls, with their teachers, from the sixth, seventh and
eighth forms of the town’s secondary schools were butchered by
machine gun fire. Such atrocities have been justified by Germans
on the grounds that “Serbian students were and are still the lead-
ers of destructive elements.” (Wiener Tageblatt y December 7th,
1941.)
Under the Hungarians there has been no less brutality. Many
Serbian teachers and students were hanged at Pancevo last year,
together with “other rebels.” In Subotica “numberless students
and school children were rounded up and at once shot in front of
the Grammar School” (official statement of the Yugoslav Gov-
ernment, May, 1942). As Cardinal Hinsley said in a speech last
December, “The Hungarians aim at the destruction of every form
of Yugoslav culture in the school, in civil life, in the Church.”
Under the Bulgarians in Southern Serbia, all Serbian teachers
have been driven out of the country or have fled to central Serbia.
The Bulgarian language is the only language permitted and it
alone is used in the schools.


In this tragic condition it is clear, although all exact evidence
is lacking to us, that such education as is left in Yugoslavia will be
of the most pitiable kind. Immense problems of rebuilding, staff-
ing and the provision of books will have to be solved at the end of
the war.
THE FAR EAST
We have left until last the position in the Far East, where
Japan, not Germany and her European satellites, is the chief ene-
my, and where, long before the European end of the Axis entered
the war, the Japanese had set an example of barbarism hard to
equal even in the annals of Nazi crimes.
In 1937, the University of Nankai, one of the most beautiful
of Chinese Universities, was entirely destroyed by the Japanese
within the first month of their aggressive war on China. The
students of this University had led many demonstrations against
the claims of the Japanese militarists, and on many occasions had
paid for their resistance with their lives. So on July 29th the
buildings were bombed and shelled —long after they were evacu-
ated by the Chinese —until nothing but rubble was left. The Uni-
versity of Shanghai was shelled and closed, and the Tsing Hua
University in Peiping was used as a barracks or military hospital.
According to recent arrivals in Chungking, “the auditorium, in
which many of the chairs had been smashed by the Japanese, is
being used as a meeting place for the troops. The library is devoid
of its treasures and most of the foreign books were carted away and
shipped to Japan, while another portion, together with the most
valuable Chinese volumes, was transferred to the puppet Peiping
University. Chinese periodicals published during recent years
were all put on a bonfire. The office of the librarian has been
turned into a guest room and the reading room into a dining hall.
The eastern half of the biological laboratory is a stable, while the
classroom attached to it is a bar. The building of the Chemistry
Department was most heavily damaged. All the equipment of
the Engineering Department is being used in the enemy’s work


shop at Hankow. The new southern residential quarters have
become Japanese brothels.”
In all, in the first year of the war, twenty universities and col-
leges were destroyed or occupied by the Japanese. It is scarcely
surprising that the Japanese should have shown such great hatred
for the Universities and Colleges of China, for the students of
China have been the leaders of her regeneration, breaking down
illiteracy, building up a sense of national unity, working and fight-
ing to make their country happy and free. During the war many
of the universities have migrated to Free China and there they
are still training in the same spirit young men and women who
will be leaders in the vast task of reconstruction after the war.
Altogether twenty-five out of China’s 108 institutions of higher
learning have been forced to suspend work; fourteen were com-
pletely razed, fifteen seriously damaged through aerial bombard-
ment. Even now the bombing of colleges continues.
Throughout the occupied regions the Japanese have tried to
reorganize education as a means of pro-Japanese propaganda.
Local Bureaus of education have been set up with Japanese “ad-
visers” in control. The teaching of the Japanese language is, in
principle, compulsory in all schools and is supposed to be taught
by a Japanese, who is also made responsible for the “thought and
morals” of the pupils. Textbooks have been rewritten to bring
them into line with Japanese views on history, politics, interna-
tional relations —and “virtue.” The pupils are constantly obliged
to attend parades and mass meetings. Much emphasis has been
placed on the re-education of teachers in short-term normal
schools, some of which are obliged to pay their students for at-
tending! Since December 7th, 1941, most foreign mission schools
have been closed.
With a mixture of bribery and brutality, educators are offered
free trips to Japan and Manchukuo to study Japanese educational
methods while at the same time arrests and torture of students
and teachers are widespread.


We have it on good authority that after the war about ninety
universities and technical institutions, 1,000 secondary schools,
100,000 primary schools and 3,000 public libraries and other aca-
demical institutions will have to be repaired extensively, although,
since many educational institutions now have their headquarters in
Free China, only about one-half may need to be repaired or rebuilt
Immediately at the end of the war. About ten per cent will have
to be rebuilt entirely. The most urgent need in Chinese schools
after the war will be for scientific equipment and technical text-
books, and it is to be hoped that other countries will help to supply
these,
OTHER AREAS
In the Philippine Islands only the elementary schools have
been reopened, and then only in the big towns, where they can be
kept under strict surveillance by the Japanese. The Japanese lan-
guage has been officially substituted for English, which is no
longer taught. The University Library at Manila was purged
and all books deemed inimical to their so-called new order were
burned by the Japanese.
We have no evidence of the position in Burma, Malay, and
British or other Allied possessions in the Pacific or —very much
nearer home —in the Channel Isles.
RECOMMENDATIONS
This brief survey has been justified if it has recalled to your
minds the magnificent resistance of the schools and the magnitude
of the tasks of reconstruction —in our opinion far beyond all possi-
bilities of private charity and endowment and, in each of the most
seriously devastated countries, a burden far greater than it should
be left to bear alone. Just as the universities and schools have been
the spearhead of resistance, so we believe they must be one of the
main foundations of a new and better order, and for that reason
we plead that the work of educational reconstruction must be a


combined effort of all the United Nations and one of their first
tasks when hostilities have ceased. We propose:
(1) That Governments be asked to recognize that the urgent
tasks of educational reconstruction in the occupied countries, as
soon as they have been set free, must be one of the chief rsponsi-
bilities of the United Nations, and
(2) That for this reason, a United Nations Bureau for Edu-
cational Reconstruction should be appointed now to prepare, and
so far as possible put into operation, the necessary plans for meet-
ing those needs which are too great for any one nation to bear
alone.
(3) That the costs of educational reconstruction, over and
above such reparation of damages inflicted as may be charged to
enemy States, should be borne by the United Nations and that, in
proportion to their size and wealth, the principal burden should be
borne by those States that have suffered least material damage.
(4) That priorities in the provision of educational material
and assistance should be carefully considered and due regard paid
to those countries that have suffered most.
(5) That the United Nations should demand the restoration
of all educational and scientific books, material and equipment,
and all cultural treasures removed by the enemy—both States and
individuals—from the countries they have occupied.
(6) That where such property has been destroyed, or for any
other reasons cannot be restored, it should be replaced by some
equivalent, and that such replacement should be kept entirely apart
from questions of war indemnities.
(7) That a clear warning should be issued by the United Na-
tions that no enforced transfer of educational or other investments
from the occupied countries, whether to enemy States or to neutral
countries, will be recognized; and that the Bureau of Educational
Reconstruction should be charged with the restoration of endow-
ment funds, such as endowments for scholarships and for research


work, which have been lost in the course of the war or as the result
of currency depreciation.
(8) That, for the training of new scientific workers and uni-
versity and higher teaching personnel, a sufficient fund should be
provided for the establishment of scholarships open to students in
their own countries or, where necessary, abroad. And that, in the
awarding of such scholarships, due regard be paid to those who
stayed behind in their own countries and suffered the terrors and
hardships of the occupation.
(9) That, as soon as possible after the cessation of hostilities,
England and America and the other democratic countries that have
escaped invasion should offer hospitality to large numbers of those
children and young people from the occupied countries who will
be in urgent need of more peaceful conditions, rest and food for
the restoration of their bodily and mental welfare; and assist as far
as possible in establishing and provisioning vacation colonies,
school camps, cohvalescent homes, orphanages, etc., in those coun-
tries themselves. Among others large numbers of Jewish chil-
dren have been separated from their parents and homes. Many
of them will be destitute and those who came from Germany will
never be able to return. Their needs will call for special attention.
(10) That our Commission should inquire from the Allied
Governments and consider with great social, philanthropic, medi-
cal and other associations the part which voluntary organizations
and private individuals could best play in assisting the restoration
of educational, cultural and scientific life in those countries that
have suffered most in the course of the struggle.
(11) That special attention be drawn to the deplorable short-
age of teachers that will exist in greater or lesser degree in all
the liberated countries and to the plans that some of the Allied
Governments are already making to meet this difficulty by training
teachers during the war or by special, short, intensive courses for
new entrants to the profession at the end of the war.


Among the many matters that it would be essential for the
United Nations Bureau of Educational Reconstruction to consider
are:
The Provision of School Books and Equipment: What is the
minimum required to restart work immediately? Which will be
the more practicable, having regard to local resources and to ship-
ping space, to print books in England or America for transport or
to send printing presses (where required) and paper so that the
books may be printed in the liberated country? The writing of
the necessary books now or the selection of pre-war books to be
revised and reissued. The reservation of the necessary shipping
space in consultation with the other inter-allied bureaus concerned
with this matter.
The Provision of Buildings and Building Material: In this
connection it has been suggested to us that prefabricated buildings
might be prepared and that, if made of plastic material, they
would be more hygienic and therefore of considerable advantage
in some of the regions likely to be left in the worst sanitary condi-
tions as a result of the war.
The Provision of Teachers: We have noted the schemes
adopted by some of the Allied Governments for the training of
doctors, scientists, social welfare workers and others during the
war and think that similar schemes for the training of teachers
should be urgently considered. Among other suggestions made
to us we might mention the following: (a) that teachers of Polish
origin in the United States might be recruited to work as teachers
in Poland for a period of years after the war provided they have
a good knowledge of the Polish language j that similar arrange-
ments might be made in the case of other countries 5 (b) that in
countries where the shortage of teachers will be greatest men now
in their armed forces in this country might be given some oppor-
tunity to equip themselves for the work of teaching and be offered
short intensive courses of training immediately at the end of the
War, or even during the war if military circumstances permit 5 (c)


that after the war some of the great establishments of the Empire
Air Training Scheme in Canada might be used for the rapid train-
ing of teachers in really large numbers from all the United Na-
tions where the number of teachers has to be rapidly expanded.
Inquiries might be made as to the teachers of English that will
be required where courses of English have been suspended and the
teachers have disappeared, and this matter would be all the more
urgent if agreement should be reached —on the lines proposed by a
majority of us later in our report —for the adoption of English as
an auxiliary means of communication to be taught in the schools
of all countries, at least of Europe.


Chapter II
Re-education in Enemy
Countries
We have heard evidence and considered memoranda on the
history, the more recent organization, aims and content —and the
appalling results—of education in the universities, colleges and
schools, the youth movements, and other educational agencies in
Germany, Italy and Japan. It is our intention to make similar
studies of education and of the problems of re-education in Bul-
garia and other enemy states, but in the time so far at our disposal
we have thought it best to devote our attention principally to Ger-
many wherein we recognize to be, in Europe, the chief of all our
problems. We believe, however, that in presenting our proposals
for the reorganization and reorientation of education in Germany,
and for the re-education of the German people, we advocate cer-
tain general principles that could with advantage be applied, in
greater or lesser degree, in all the enemy countries which we hope
to make the subject of later reports.
The unanimous recommendations of the Commission with re-
gard to Germany are set out below:
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Unless the Nazi system is extirpated, and unless the traditional
militarism dominant in Germany and its supporting elements are
overthrown, there is no hope for a peaceful Europe. We believe
that the first essential condition of the re-education of Germany is
that the whole Nazi organization should be destroyed, that the
power of the German army should be broken, that justice should


be meted out to the war criminals, that the fullest possible restora-
tion of stolen property should be carried out, and that the reality
of defeat should be made manifest to all the German people so
that they shall learn that aggression does not pay and shall place
upon their present leaders inescapable responsibility for the just
fate that overtakes them.
While it is not our business to consider the exact terms that
should be laid upon Germany as a condition for ending hostilities
against her, we are nevertheless agreed that no fundamental re-
education of the German people can be achieved if the peace im-
posed upon them is one of such vengeance that they would be
placed in a position of permanent inferiority. We take note of
the assurances that have been given that it is the intention of the
United Nations to spcure.for the German people, as for all other
peoples, the material benefits of the Atlantic Charter and that
they look forward to the ultimate inclusion of a free and peaceful
Germany in a general system of co-operation.
For the attainment of this object we believe the re-education
of Germany and the moral and spiritual regeneration of her peo-
ple to be of no less importance than their physical disarmament.
The Allied Governments have pledged themselves to secure this,
and we commend the following proposals to the earnest consid-
eration of all who are in a position of responsibility.
APPOINTMENT OF A HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR EDUCATION
Education must be regarded as one of the surest foundations
of peace and, for the advancement of education and the cultiva-
tion of a right attitude of mind in all countries, we look toward
the formation of an International Organization for Education with
wider representation and much greater powers than the Interna-
tional Committee on Intellectual Co-operation. Before Germany,
however, can co-operate in such an enterprise the German people
must first be re-educated and, in our view, they must re-educate
themselves. No one else can bring about that change of feeling


and of purpose that alone can enable them to become loyal and
trusted members of the community of nations. Certainly such a
spiritual change cannot be dictated by conquering powers, but they
can and should do whatever may be possible to create the condi-
tions in which the re-education of the mind and character of the
German people may be most likely to succeed.
For a period Germany is likely to be directly administered by
occupying powers and they should, in our opinion, exercise their
control of education through a High Commissioner for Educa-
tion,* who should be chosen in advance and ready to start work at
the moment the occupation begins. His purpose should be to
eradicate the Nazi and militarist influences in education and to
inspire, to facilitate and to supervise measures by the German
people for their own re-education.
As the High Commissioner could only exercise his powers and
perform his duties during the occupation of Germany, we hope
that the occupation will not end until the High Commissioner is
satisfied that his work can be taken over by the Germans.
GENERAL FUNCTIONS
Among the immediate measures taken to exterminate the Nazi
system should be the dissolution of the Hitler Youth, the closure
of the Nazi Party Schools and a scrutiny of all teachers and ad-
ministrative staffs in the Ministry of Education, universities, col-
leges, schools and other educational institutions. For notorious
Nazis occupying key positions in the educational system dismissal
should be absolute.f The rest should be engaged on a temporary
basis of probation, pending investigation into their past record and,
responsibilities for Education will have to be undertaken by the United Nations
m any other enemy countries they may occupy and, in our view, it is desirable that in each
case these responsibilities should be exercised through a High Commissioner—or possibly in
certain cases an Adviser—for Education.
tin this connection it is not irrelevant to note in the "Frankfurter Zeitung of May 31,
1939, that according to the estimate of a German official 45 per cent of the entire teaching
staff of the universities and technical colleges was replaced between 1933 and 1939. More-
over, it is known that in 1933 special committees examined the political records of 160,000
•chool teachers, and that large numbers of them were dismissed.


more especially, the manner in which they continue to exercise the
responsibilities temporarily entrusted to them.
The High Commissioner should order such measures imme-
diately he assumes office unless they have already been taken by
the German people themselves.
If, as would seem to be highly probable, there is widespread
chaos in Germany at the end of the war, then one of the first re-
sponsibilities of the High Commissioner should be to make the
best arrangements he can for as much education as possible to be
carried on. This may well have to include co-operation with the
proper authorities to ensure the provision of food, clothing and
shelter for school children, teachers and students. In this period
the work of the High Commissioner would be largely a matter of
improvisation. He would have to accept the assistance of such
German teachers and administrators as had been retained in their
posts and were willing to collaborate with him, but in this initial
work he might well have an opportunity to discover men and
women in Germany who would later be of the utmost assistance to
him in carrying through a more fundamental reorganization of the
educational system.
The High Commissioner should be assisted by a Commission
whose members would be chosen from the allied or neutral coun-
tries. They should at the earliest opportunity conduct a thorough
examination of the whole educational system in Germany and rec-
ommend what further measures should be taken in order to eradi-
cate Nazi and militarist teaching and to provide that general
framework of education in which the ideals of the Atlantic Charter
are more likely to find support. In this connection they should,
among other matters, report whether having regard to the general
trends of public opinion in Germany, it is desirable that the High
Commissioner should promote or discourage a return to greater
decentralization, including a restoration or partial restoration of
the position occupied by confessional schools in Germany before
the Nazi regime.


The desirability of providing for equality of educational op-
portunity should be one of the guiding principles of the High
Commissioner.
As the representative of the occupying powers, the High Com-
missioner would retain full responsibility and should not fail to
issue such orders as might be found necessary to eradicate Nazi
and militarist influence, including orders for the removal or ap-
pointment of German educational authorities, the dismissal of
teachers, the suppression of certain school books, etc. But, to have
any chance of lasting success, positive reform must not come as the
dictation of foreign conquerors; it must be a movement supported
or tolerated by German opinion.
Without relinquishing his right to issue orders and vetoes, the
constant aim of that High Commissioner should be to encourage
and assist in every possible way the foundation of properly consti-
tuted German educational authorities and organizations of teach-
ers, who desire to give to education in Germany a humane and in-
ternational purpose and through whom and with whom he could
work to achieve this aim.
SELECTION OF TEACHERS
There is already a great shortage of teachers in Germany,
which will be accentuated after the war. It may, however, be
assumed that by no means all teachers or professors who have
stayed on under Nazi rule were in sympathy with Nazi ideas.
The conditions of elementary school teachers in Germany
have been very unsatisfactory. Indeed, it has been suggested to
us that “most of them would give active support to any Govern-
ment which guaranteed decent salaries, and freedom of associa-
tion, removed their sense of inferiority by admitting trainees to
secondary and, in suitable cases, university education and protected
the school against external interference.” If, with the encourage-
ment and assistance of the High Commissioner for Education,
these reforms can be carried through by a new regime in Germany


which desires peace and co-operation, it will probably meet with
little opposition and a good deal of willing support from the teach-
ers in the elementary schools.
It will in any case be inevitable to retain, of necessity, great
numbers of existing teachers and of officials. Their work, how-
ever, like that of their colleagues, should at all times be open to
inspection by the Commissioners as well as by the appropriate Ger-
man authorities. Special attention should be given to teachers
from those families that have always supported the militarist
classes.
The High Commissioner should explore ways of making up
the necessary numbers of teachers from old teachers of the
Weimar period, from Germans who have lived long abroad and
who are accustomed to democratic methods, from the ranks of the
anti-Hitler movement, from teachers who have been expelled or
have become refugees, and—for certain subjects —from nationals
of other countries, especially Holland, Switzerland, and the Scan-
dinavian countries. Certain members of the Commission have
suggested the possibility of the United Nations finding a number
of men and women prepared to spend several years in Germany
as teachers in order to help in the re-education of the German
people.
As a temporary measure for meeting a part of the shortage of
teachers, it might be arranged that some teachers should teach in
one school in the morning and another in the afternoon. Dif-
ferent groups of children could also use the same building on a
“staggered” system. Spare time resulting from such expedients
could with profit be used for games and sports, for seeing films of
an educational character, for radio lessons and lessons on special
subjects, and for many voluntary activities organized by the boys
and girls themselves. Such activities have been almost entirely
lacking in Germany and could provide an invaluable training for
democracy.


TEACHING MATERIAL IN THE SCHOOLS
Even the child’s copybook can be used to teach the most per-
nicious doctrines and the simple first primer in arithmetic to prove
that two British and two Russians do not equal four or, of course,
one German. Certain subjects do not lend themselves so readily
as others to the inculcation of political doctrines or the teaching of
bogus sciences, but it will be necessary for the Commission to carry
through a very thorough censorship over all books, maps, slides,
films, pictures and other apparatus already in use, and new publi-
cations. After a time this work might be delegated to competent
German educational authorities, but the commissioners should
continue to examine all textbooks and other visual aids to teaching
and to report upon them to the High Commissioner, who should
retain the right of veto.
Some textbooks and other material will, of course, still be
suitable for use in the schools and, in case of need, it may be neces-
sary to tolerate the use of others for a time until they can be re-
placed. But from the very first purge carried out by the High
Commissioners or the new German educational authorities them-
selves, there is bound to result a great shortage of books for use
in the schools. To meet this need and until new books can be
written in German, the High Commissioner might be well ad-
vised to arrange for the reprinting of some of the books in use
under the Weimar Republic.
It might be worth while for German exiles during the war to
prepare new textbooks, but such books would need careful ex-
amination before their adoption for use in Germany.
No less important than the actual textbooks are the school
libraries. These must be purged of books glorifying Nazism, race
and war j and we can think of few better fields for investment than
the outlay of a considerable sum of money in stocking the libraries
of German schools with the writings of some of the great thinkers
and scientists both of Germany and of other countries, to which


inquiring German youth may turn in the period of disillusionment
and bewilderment that will follow the breaking of the walls in
which their minds are now imprisoned. Such books should include
those which demonstrate the horrors and futility of war and pro-
vide a new inspiration for Germany’s contribution to the building
of a humane and co-operative world.
To help in bridging the intellectual gulf between Germany
and the free world and to give to German youth a new purpose in
life, the fullest possible use should be made of films of every kind
(scientific, cultural, historical, geographical and even entertain-
ment films) and radio lessons, talks and feature programs. Such
aids may be particularly effective in the secondary schools. The
High Commissioner might be well advised to set up a small tech-
nical bureau to work with the German school authorities in the
development of such programs.
It would be a mistake to insist too exclusively on subjects which
have a “modern” or utilitarian value. The traditional “humane”
culture of Europe forms the most potent factor in European unity
and the maintenance of that historical continuum which we call
“Christian civilization.” Indeed, the study of the history and lit-
erature of that Graeco-Roman civilization from which our own is
derived serves already as a link between the more educated classes
of different nations and might well be an inspiration toward
greater unity.
THE UNIVERSITIES
The extreme nationalism of the professorial body was no-
torious, although some no doubt obeyed without question the
wishes of the Government which appointed them. The High
Commissioner should, however, ensure the removal of (a) all who
gave active support to the Nazis or to racialism in any form be-
fore 1933, (b) all who have held high office under the Nazis as
Rectors, Dozentenfiihrer and the like, (c) all professors of Ras-
senbiologie and similar bogus sciences. He should scrutinize


carefully the credentials of all persons appointed to university
posts since 1933.
Vacancies might be filled by similar means to those suggested
for augmenting the number of school teachers, but tact would be
essential in the reinstatement of emigre professors. Probably
they should in general not return except by definite invitation
from their university or the competent German body. Many will
not wish to return.
The High Commissioner should maintain, through his Com-
missioners, a certain scrutiny of the universities and secure the
removal of any teachers who are either a danger to European
peace or intellectually incompetent. Nazi militarist student socie-
ties must be abolished.
We do not recommend any purging of the books; but it should
be the concern of the High Commissioner to ensure the ample
provision of books banned by the Nazis and of new books written
from a non-Nazi and non-militarist conception of philosophy and
economics. Great care will be needed to insure by courses of study
and special textbooks the eradication of past teaching on racial
matters.
It is desirable that admission to the universities should not be
restricted to any one section of the community, and the High
Commissioner should promote whatever measures may be desira-
ble and practicable, whether by means of scholarships or other-
wise, to make equally available for all classes such university
education as can be provided in Germany after the war.
It seems quite possible that, instead of foreigners flocking to
the German universities, as they did before 1914, in future many
German students will have to seek competent university teaching
abroad. In our opinion, such students who are fortunate enough
to secure admission to the universities of Great Britain, America
or other democratic countries could, on their return, bring an im-
portant reinforcement to the democratic elements in Germany,


especially important in the case of students entering the teaching
profession.
NEW IDEAS IN EDUCATION
The collapse of the Nazi regime is likely to be followed by a
period of great bewilderment, with widespread disillusionment
and cynicism and many and, often, violent reactions against exist-
ing methods. The breakdown of rigid regimentation should be
welcomed, in the schools no less than outside. The Commission-
ers might tactfully bring to the notice of German teachers methods
that have been found useful in other countries. For example,
greater freedom, self-discipline and responsibility for the pupils,
as a training for democracy, might usefully be introduced.
Similarly the new German school authorities should be en-
couraged to promote much greater co-operation with parents j
meetings of parents and teachers, lectures and radio talks should
be arranged to explain to parents new aims of education and to
win their interest and support.
We should be glad to see more attention paid in the schools to
the social sciences.
YOUTH MOVEMENTS
The “Youth Movement” has, for several generations past,
been exceedingly strong in Germany. The Free Youth Move-
ment of Weimar days was largely a revolt by young people against
militarism, materialism and the established order of society that
held out so few opportunities for the employment of youth’s crea-
tive and artistic faculties or for fulfilment of the urge for greater
comradeship. On the whole, it had no positive policy for political
or economic action, and many of its members were probably tricked
by the pseudo socialistic window dressings of the Nazi program.
Be that as it may, the love of German youth for the comrade-
ship of movements, for open-air activities and for the glamor of
marching and songs, flags and processions was exploited to a very


remarkable degree by the Nazis, who have now regimented the
whole German youth from the cradle to middle age in the organ-
izations of the party. Through these the Nazis have to a great
extent countered and, indeed, largely eliminated the influence of
the home, the Church and other agencies. Every boy and girl is
compelled to give to party work practically the whole of leisure
time as well as a good many hours each week that would pre-
viously have been devoted to lessons. They have no training in
the free and individual use of leisure time and, when the Hitler
Jugend are disbanded—as they must be immediately at the end of
the war —it will be very urgently necessary to substitute some
other form of organized youth activity, if only to prevent the
young people of Germany from turning to all sorts of mischievous
and lawless activities and to save them from falling victims to the
appeals of new political and militarist charlatans.
In our view, supervision of the organized leisure time activities
of German youth should be made the responsibility of the High
Commissioner for Education, who should seek to develop such
activities as will provide a definite education of body, mind and
character for the service of a high ideal of citizenship.
As in formal education, there will be rigid limits to what the
High Commissioner can himself accomplish. He should forbid
all organizations and manifestations of youth calculated to serve
a militarist, narrowly nationalist or anti-social purpose. He should
do all that he can to assist the formation and the success of other
movements that will help‘the young people of Germany to sub-
stitute self-discipline for regimentation, and service to their peo-
ple and to the world community for the training of a Herrenvolk.
But the new movements, their leaders and the ideas that inspire
them must be developed by the young people of Germany them-
selves, and cannot be imposed by the representatives of the con-
quering powers. Their main task will be to create the conditions
in which new leaders with new ideas may emerge and hope to work
successfully. Apart from that they can do little except by way of


tactful and friendly advice, and by making it possible for the youth
of Germany to make contact once more with the free world out-
side, from which the German youth may perhaps themselves draw
fresh ideas and strength. Ultimately we hope for the emergence
of a new and democratic German state which will provide for all
the youth of Germany full opportunities of self-development and
service for humanity.
The period immediately following the end of hostilities will
be the most difficult. Some of our own friends in the former free
youth movements in Germany, exiles for many years, might be
persuaded to go back and help. But, for the most part, the leaders
of those days who have survived the persecution and the war will
be too old to lead the youth of Germany again. The ranks of the
Hitler Jugend are full of young people whose whole training has
been in the Nazi creed,j many of them at the end of the war may
be completely disillusioned, but there must inevitably be a lapse
of some time before a sufficient number of them have found a new
purpose in life, a peace of mind and strength of character that will
enable them to become leaders. Some few German boys and girls
who have been educated during their exile in British or American
schools might go back and succeed in winning the confidence and
leadership of groups of young Germans.
For the most part, it will be necessary for the High Com-
missioner to improvise in this as in most other things. His main
object should be to keep some form of youth organization in be-
ing, reducing its demands on the time of boys and girls, and com-
bining practical service for the community with occupation for
leisure hours, rather than a direct inculcation of new principles. If,
as would appear probable, there has been great destruction in
Germany and disease and even starvation are widespread at the
end of the war, then the youth organizations could be used for
urgent tasks of reconstruction, for clearing bombed sites, rebuild-
ing, roadmaking, distributing food and fuel and clothing, nursing,
cultivation and reforestation, etc. The experience gained by such


bodies as International Student Service in Germany after the last
war and during the years of great depression should be called
upon. And, in organizing such practical tasks as these, as well as
games and sports and remedial physical exercises, it should be
possible to use the services of suitable British and Allied person-
nel, military and civil, including volunteers from leaders of the
Boy Scouts and other youth movements in the United Nations.
We would especially recommend that, in place of military
training and “war games,” every possible encouragement should
be given, both in youth organizations and in the universities and
schools, to games and sports and other projects that provide for
chivalrous adventure: above all to those pursuits that develop
character, the team spirit and consideration for other people, as
well as physical fitness.
ADULT EDUCATION
Until now we have been concerned with the re-education of
young people, boys and girls at school, students at the universities
and members of the youth movements —scarcely any of whom
have any experience or very much knowledge of anything outside
Hitlerite Germany. What about the great mass of the German
people? Here our problem is closely interwoven with political,
economic and social policies, outside our own particular inquiry.
All that we can do is offer a few tentative suggestions as to the
kind of measures that might be promoted by the High Commis-
sioner, on the broad assumption that in one way or another a new
and peaceful order will gradually arise in Germany. The expe-
diency of such measures and the degree to which they can be car-
ried out at any particular time must depend upon the internal
conditions of the country and the general policies pursued by the
occupying powers.
Our report envisages a period during which Germany would
be ruled by the occupying powers, for the Quislings have been
utterly discredited and we cannot imagine that the United Na


tions, having won the war, would copy the Germans by attempting
to impose their own puppet government or governments on Ger-
many. Neither should they attempt to force upon the German
people “education” for any particular form of State. While the
occupying powers enforce the physical disarmament of Germany
and forbid the teaching and training of German youth in militarist
and aggressively nationalist doctrines, the German people must
work out their own salvation. The main purpose of the High
Commissioner with regard to adult education should be to help
the German people to bridge the gap between themselves and the
great currents of thought in the free world so that they may find
their own way back into the main stream of civilization.
We are fighting for freedom of thought and the right to free
expression in the spoken and the written word, and when once the
Nazis and all they stand for have been thoroughly discredited in
the eyes of the German people by the defeat of Germany and the
fact of occupation, we hope the German people themselves would
have no further use for Nazi books and similar writings. There has
been enough burning of books, and censorship is repugnant to us,
but we shall be dealing with a very sick people, and exceptional
measures will be necessary for a time. We believe, therefore, that
it would be wise—and a rough measure of retribution—for the
High Commissioner to arrange for all copies of Mein Kampf and
other canonical writings of the Nazi party to be collected and
pulped down for new paper to be used in reprinting books de-
stroyed by the Nazis in the countries they have occupied. More-
over, we look forward to the day when the publication in any
country of books and papers likely to stir up passions leading to
war will be a criminal offense under international law and we
therefore recommend that, in the meantime, the High Commis-
sioner should exercise, upon his own responsibility, a right to veto
the publication and circulation of such material.
In place of the books discarded or removed, it will be Impor-
tant to ensure—and as quickly as possible—that the Germans have


something else to read. The High Commissioner should there-
fore promote on a very large scale the republication of many
books suppressed by the Nazis and the publication of translations
of the books of other countries —books of every kind, especially
books on political, social and economic questions representing many
different schools of thought, scientific works and also literary es-
says and novels. There is likely to be a tremendous demand when
once the barriers are overthrown. It would in our opinion be use-
ful to arrange now for some German exiles who understand the
mentality of their own people to prepare translations of certain
books. Other German exiles might profitably be asked to write
books now for publication in Germany after the war, but it would
be wise, for practical reasons, to avoid any appearance of flooding
Germany immediately after the war with books written by
refugees.
Particular care must, of course, be taken to insure the publica-
tion of suitable books exposing the falsifications of history, the
false race theories and the sham ethics and political philosophy
that have been accepted by the masses as the latest results of sci-
ence. If some Germans in exile would write frank accounts of
what Germans are doing in the countries they are occupying, such
books might have great value in Germany after the war. Better
still would be similar books written, sincerely, by Germans who
had themselves seen these things.
Because we wish to promote intellectual freedom we think it
desirable that a certain measure of control should be exercised by
the High Commissioner over the press —and especially the daily
papers and weekly periodicals that exercise a mass influence over
an unthinking public that reads little else. One of the indispens-
able measures in the eradication of the Nazi system will be the
immediate confiscation of the whole of the Nazi press by the occu-
pying powers. Many papers have been stolen by the Nazi party
and these should as quickly as possible be returned, at least provi-
sionally, to their rightful owners, provided such persons can fur


nish the High Commissioner with satisfactory proofs that they
have not themselves been active Nazis. Further, we recommend
the appointment of a central body of control (e.g., Presse Kam-
mer) in which the occupying powers should at first hold a major-
ity of seats. Its business should be to prevent the press being used
for any new anti-social or militarist campaign, to stop such agita-
tions immediately—if necessary by advising the High Commis-
sioner to suspend the offending paper or to deal with any vested
interests behind it. We should look forward to the gradual trans-
ference of power to the representatives of the press in the Presse
Kammer and to the emergence of a free and self-disciplined press.
But during the transitional period the High Commissioner should
not use his powers in order to suppress any point of view—only
the beginnings of a definite campaign of an anti-social nature. Po-
litical controversy in the press would have a useful part to play in
the political education of the German people.
For the same reasons we would like to see similar arrange-
ments made for the control of broadcasting and of the film indus-
try. Everything possible should be done to popularize films and
broadcasts of many kinds from or about other countries. For
great masses of the people this might do more than books to open
up new and wider horizons.
We would like to see a vast extension of organized adult edu-
cation undertaken, for example, by such bodies as the universities,
the trade unions and educational and religious organizations—
above all by bodies such as the Workers’ Educational Association
in Great Britain, which would help the harassed German worker
to find fresh inspiration and strength of mind through the serious
study of philosophy, history, economics and social institutions
without at the same time trying to pump into him any one set of
political doctrines. We cannot emphasize this too strongly. “Some
people ask why we shouldn’t indoctrinate for democracy, includ-
ing an international democratic order. ... They do not see that in-
doctrination and democracy are contradictions in terms.”


When once the shock of defeat has released the minds of the
German people from the spell of Nazi propaganda, then one of
the main aims of education should be to compel them to think for
themselves rather than to make them too facile converts to any
new creed.
While we utter this emphatic warning against the indoctrina-
tion of any one social or political creed, we are nevertheless fully
aware that, in every country where adult education in political and
social studies has succeeded, the demand for such education by the
people has been due, above all else, to a sense of purpose. They
have demanded it because they have been conscious of social or
political ideals which knowledge might help them to achieve. We
believe therefore that, in Germany, the success of such measures as
we propose will depend largely upon how far the United Nations
—with their very different social and political systems —are nev-
ertheless able to agree upon a body of political and social ideals
which can provide the inspiration for the kind of education we
advocate and to which the German people no less than others can
subscribe.
The High Commissioner should do all he can to facilitate the
organization of adult education classes all over the country, in the
evenings and during week-ends, during the day for the unem-
ployed and for longer periods at camps and hostels during the
holidays. Many teachers would volunteer to lead such classes, and
it would be easier to employ teachers and students returning from
exile for this work among German workers than it might be to
reintroduce them into the schools.
At the longer courses for picked students, carefully chosen
teachers and workers from America, Russia, Great Britain and the
other allied countries might be invited to lecture and to lead dis-
cussions.
As soon as conditions permit, we would like to see the creation
of international people’s high schools, such as those so well de-
veloped in Denmark, in which German workers could live and


study with others from democratic countries and from which they
could return home to become teachers and organizers of adult
education in Germany. Such high schools might, for example,
be established in Sweden and Switzerland and, perhaps, in the
United States of America; and might with advantage be connected
with the International Labor Organization. Meanwhile, in the
development of adult education centers in Germany, we trust that
the High Commissioner would enlist the help which the Interna-
tional Labor Office, the World Association of Adult Education
and the democratic organs of adult education in other countries
should be able to provide from their long experience and from
their former contacts in Germany.
VOLUNTARY ORGANIZATIONS
We have consistently maintained that the occupying Powers
and their High Commissioner for Education, if one is appointed,
will for the most part be limited to a negative function. They can
and must forbid education for dictatorship and war. The inevita-
ble psychological reaction of the German people to the fact of
occupation will make it impossible for the representatives of the
occupying Powers themselves to re-educate the German people.
That re-education must be self-education, but we have suggested
various ways in which the High Commissioner might give practi-
cal assistance, exert some indirect influence and even now, during
the war, in certain matters prepare for this work. Much more
direct assistance might be accepted by the German people from
voluntary organizations in the allied countries which in no way
represented the Governments of those countries.
Here the utmost caution will be needed. By sending their
representatives to Germany, educational, relief and philanthropic
organizations might make a solid contribution to the work of re-
education and give proofs of a desire for friendship and under-
standing which could help the German people to renounce their
past and turn their eyes toward a better future in which they could


deserve the friendship and esteem of other nations. But great
harm could be done by well-meaning sentimentalists who shut
their eyes to the past and allowed the German people to think
that the policy of occupation pursued by the United Nations was
not supported by their peoples. It might be worth considering
whether any medical, relief or education mission or the like—
other than carefully selected Government missions—should be
allowed admission to Germany for some time after the war unless
its members had first worked in one of the regions devastated or
brutally persecuted by Germany during the war.
When the academic independence of learned and scientific
bodies has been restored, and trade unions, religious, social and
educational organizations of one kind and another have been re-
established in Germany and can be counted upon as useful and
reliable factors in a new democracy, their position could be
strengthened by admission or readmission into the appropriate in-
ternational federations of voluntary societies. But here again great
care should be taken. A certificate of the bona fides of any such
organization might be issued by the occupying authorities, and
such certification might possibly be made a condition of election.
Since such hopes as we have for the future of Germany must
be based mainly upon the education of a new generation in re-
formed schools, we attach special importance to any help that the
voluntary organizations might give in this field. Before the chil-
dren can be given a fundamentally different education large num-
bers of teachers must be re-educated, and that process might be
assisted by bringing the German teachers more rapidly than other
sections of the community into renewed contact with teachers in
other countries. The professional associations of teachers and
other educational bodies could do much to help German teachers
to learn from the educational experiences of other countries.
The recollection of German barbarities during the war may
well make it impossible to admit any German organization to full
international partnership for some years; but we understand that


certain educational organizations in Great Britain might be pre-
pared to invite German teachers to meet British teachers very soon
after the end of the war in order to try to win their confidence and
support in further action to eradicate Nazism, Fascism and their
supporting elements. We should welcome such an initiative if the
British teachers chosen for such a meeting were sincere and plain
speaking men and women who could be relied upon to make their
position clear beyond all ambiguity.
If the voluntary societies are able to do more than render as-
sistance to the liberated countries whose needs must come first, it
is with and for the German children that they should above all
direct their work. The children of Germany bear no responsibility
for the war and, subject to the general considerations we have sug-
gested regarding the type of voluntary worker who should be
allowed into Germany in the immediate post-war years, we should
be glad to see volunteers from the democratic countries going to
Germany to help care for the German children after the war.
Large numbers of these children will probably be in great need,
and there will be ample work for doctors, nurses, psychologists,
qualified teachers of remedial exercises, experienced club leaders
and many others.
We believe that at the end of the war England and other
democratic countries outside the continent of Europe will open
their doors to children who have escaped the Nazi terror in the
occupied territories and are in dire distress, so that they may find
here that rest and rehabilitation which will enable them to go back
as useful future citizens of their own countries. But as soon as the
state of public opinion permits and suitable arrangements can be
made for their reception, we believe that German children, too,
should be welcomed in England and the other democratic coun-
tries, not for forced doses of indoctrination but as natural, normal
visitors to the homes of the people and on longer visits to the
schools so that they may be allowed to see for themselves what
life is really like in these countries. They should be given the


opportunity to make real friendships with other children and so
come to feel that they can be partners in building a better world.
If such visits are possible before the end of the period of occupa-
tion, it will probably be desirable to arrange them through the
voluntary organizations and not through the Board of Education
or other departments of state.
When public opinion and other conditions permit, we should
be glad to see German children in ever-increasing numbers tak-
ing part in international games and camps and conferences.
LOOKING FURTHER AHEAD
We do not attempt to prophesy the pace of events, how long
the occupation of Germany will last or whether it would be pos-
sible or desirable, before the end of the period of occupation, to
transfer to the International Organization for Education, which
we hope to see established, the powers and responsibilities of the
High Commissioner for Education. But at some stage, if progress
is made, Germany must become a willing partner in educational
work.
When that stage is reached, be it soon or in the very distant
future, we would like to see German teachers in very large num-
bers taking the fullest possible advantage of the kind of educa-
tional opportunities to which we look forward elsewhere in this
report (e.g., summer schools and vacation courses, travel abroad
to study foreign schools and teaching methods, exchange holiday
visits, and the interchange of duties for a year or so at a time).
Then, too, we should hope to see German teachers once more col-
laborating with the teachers of other countries in removing from
the history textbooks of each country any unbalanced view of his-
tory likely to give offense to any other country. We hope that
German historians would collaborate in the writing of a great his-
tory of Europe (see the last section of Chapter III).
When this stage is reached we should like to see the boys and


girls and the students of Germany, in proportion to their numbers,
flocking to international camps and games and conferences, mak-
ing exchange holiday visits with other countries and visiting the
schools and universities of other countries for longer periods of
study abroad.
Most of this work has been done before 5 we look forward to
the day when it can be done on a far bigger scale so that it may
affect far greater numbers of young people. But this time, too, we
should like to see plans carried through on a scale never yet con-
templated for exchange visits between the common people of all
countries, including Germany, schemes that the trade unions,
chambers of commerce and voluntary associations might do much
to promote with the financial assistance of the state.
CONCLUSION
We repeat that unless the Nazi system is extirpated and un-
less the traditional militarism dominant in Germany and its sup-
porting elements are overthrown, there is no hope for a peaceful
Europe. And until the 69,000,000 Germans in Central Europe
can be re-educated as citizens of a democratic state, seeking to
serve constructive purposes in a co-operative world, then the rest
of Europe must stand forever armed in self-defense. The re-
education of Germany is therefore one of the most fundamental of
all the problems which will confront the United Nations and we
hope that even now, during the war, there may be some in high
office, Ministers of Education and others not directly absorbed in
the paramount effort of fighting the war, who may be able to de-
vote some thought to preparing for the very grave responsibility
which will fall upon them.
Education in any country is conditioned by the whole life of
the country and the major interests it pursues. Therefore, in the
last analysis, the possibilities of re-education in Germany and the
nature of that re-education will depend upon issues far outside


the scope of this report. The absolute power of the United
Nations will give them a decisive influence on the development
of internal conditions in Germany, and upon the policy they pur-
sue toward Germany will depend the possibility of there emerging
a new German state, with such social and economic conditions as
will enable it to provide for all its people, without distinction of
class or creed, a fuller and a happier life of peaceful development
and service to the community and the world at large, than they
have ever known before. Only in so far as the German people
have grounds to hope for such a future will they be able to re-
educate themselves as good citizens of Germany and of the world
community.


Chapter III
Education As A Foundation
For The Post-War System
As citizens of the United Nations, our first concern has been
to' consider the plans that should be made now to meet the tre-
mendous needs for assistance that will be found after the war in
all the countries where our enemies, in relentless war against the
principles for which we stand, have destroyed the culture of ages,
smashed the whole machinery of education and singled out for
massacre or persecution professors, preachers, teachers and all
who might be the spiritual and intellectual leaders of their people.
Next we have considered the problem of how the re-education of
our enemies is to be effected so that, ultimately, they may co-
operate with us to free the world from the menace of further
aggression.
The task of reconstructing the cultural, educational and scien-
tific life of the devastated countries would, in itself, call for the
combined efforts of the United Nations for a number of yearsj but
we are concerned to ensure that this unity in action shall endure,
for—in President Roosevelt’s words—“it is useless to win a war
unless it stays won.”
All history points to the lesson of how easily a coalition forged
to meet the challenge of a desperate enemy may drift asunder
when once the victory has been won. War-weariness, a desire to
be left alone and to forget, the immense problems of internal re-
construction that will command the attention of each nation in its
own domestic affairs —all these will tend too quickly to dissolve


the bonds that at present unite us in a common purpose. We have
also to remember that the vast masses of the people in each of the
occupied countries have not shared our experience of a united war-
time effort here in these islands. Greatly daring, a few of the
most politically conscious of the people in many of the occupied
countries have found the means to enter into secret contact with
each other across the frontiers; many thousands of workers have
been forcibly removed from one part of Europe to another and
some of them have thus been brought together, under the vigilant
eye of the Gestapo, as slaves of the New Order; but still, for the
most part, each nation has been imprisoned separately. Their peo-
ples endure untold privations. Half-starved and wracked with
care, they are subjected to every cunning form of propaganda by
enemies who exercise their wiles to sow distrust and rivalries be-
tween them and who would have them believe that they have been
betrayed to their fate by feeble-hearted allies who are slow to take
risks to aid them, and by many of their own people who have fled
to refuge here and in America.
We, who know, cannot pay too high a tribute to the courage
of the people in all the occupied lands, to their spirit of active re-
sistance, and to the integrity with which they strive to reject all
forms of propaganda, no less than to their physical endurance. But
those experiences must leave some mark upon them and we must
be careful not to overestimate the feelings of solidarity that will
exist between them at the end of the war. And it will be they, the
great masses of the people, who will chiefly determine the future
of each of the liberated countries after the war.
We must also take into account the natural feelings of those
who return from exile after the war. In their joy at returning to
their own lands and their own people, it would be natural that
some of them should recall all that was strangest abroad, their
trials and discomforts even the petty misunderstandings that
were perhaps inevitable under war-time conditions.


On the other hand, those who return full of enthusiasm for the
cause of the United Nations may find that their views are not
readily acceptable to some of their compatriots who think they
have had an easy time during the war compared with the suffer-
ings endured by those who could not get away.
And what of the other United Nations that are still and will
remain free? Remembering the years of disillusionment that fol-
lowed the last war, we are bound to ask; Will the British people
who have hazarded an Empire in war, and who may yet be called
upon for still more bitter sacrifice of life before the war is won,
be willing to accept their full share of the responsibility for main-
taining the peace of the world, with all that this implies? Faced
with immense tasks of readjusting their internal economy and ex-
ternal trade, weary of war, confronted with problems of constitu-
tional development in India and other parts of the world, will the
British Empire realize the over-riding importance of securing the
peace that has been won, of maintaining the necessary forces for
that purpose, and of devoting unceasing thought to the ever-
changing problems of international affairs?
Will America, this time, remain a co-operating world power?
Will her people have the understanding of the importance and
complexity of international relations and the patience to exercise
continuously the role of a major partner in helping to shape the
course of affairs? Can the continued strength of the British Em-
pire and of the United States of America, so essential for the main-
tenance of peace, be reconciled with the aspirations of the colonial
peoples? Can the British Empire, the United States of America,
China and the U.S.S.R. find a common purpose, so that the poli-
cies they pursue will bring greater unity and not disharmony and
the possibilities of future war?
It does not follow that influences which prevented a fuller
unity between the victors after the last war will necessarily oper-
ate to the same degree after this war. But we are bound to believe
that unless some great purpose beyond the winning of the war can


animate the hearts and minds of men in all the United Nations,
there is a very great danger that when once the urgent tasks of
reconstruction have been completed, our countries may once more
drift asunder, all our plans for destroying the power of our
enemies to wage aggressive war and for the re-education of their
people may come to nought and the world once more may drift
to war.
We believe therefore that the peace of the world must ulti-
mately depend upon the growth of an over-riding purpose that
will embrace but be greater than all separate national interests,
upon a spirit of solidarity, a sense of world citizenship and a posi-
tive desire “to seek first the welfare of the whole world-wide
society of mankind.” Moreover, it must be an ever-present active
purpose, dominating the actions of everyday life. Today “there’s
a war on,” and, with that thought, we willingly accept the minor
inconveniences of life; but unless we knew in our hearts that there
is also a war to win —and acted on the knowledge—there would
be little chance of seeing victory. So too, after the war, we should
not keep our ease for long if, with the thought that “there’s a
peace on,” we sought each one of us our own personal ease or
pleasure, without remembering all the time that there is a better
world to build if we wish the peace to endure. To make the peace
secure, to free the world from want and bring to life the high
promises of the Atlantic Charter will call for the utmost effort
from all men.
It is our aim in this concluding chapter to suggest how that
spirit may best be inculcated in the rising generation so that their
education may provide a sure foundation of the post-war system.
A MORAL PURPOSE
The crisis of our age is first of all a moral crisis. Our first con-
cern must be to reawaken social consciousness and to substitute
for the selfish pursuit of individual happiness a passion for social
justice, a readiness at all times to subordinate the narrower inter


ests, whether personal, family or national, to the pursuit of a
greater common good. For such a way of life the teaching of the
Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man is, for many of
us, our chief source of strength. But we fully realize that others
find their inspiration in other forms of religious or non-religious
philosophical thought.
There are members of the Commission who hold strongly that
all education should have a sound religious foundation. Others
hold a different view. But, however we may differ in this, we
all agree that all truly civilized men hold in common certain
principles. They believe in the dignity of the human person and
the oneness of the human family. These principles and the rules
of conduct derived from them should be inculcated not only by
the example of the daily practice of parents and teachers, but also
in the form of either religious instruction or moral lessons, or both,
according to country and school, for the organization of such teach-
ing in every country must, in our view, be completely in the hands
of the people of these countries.
ORGANIZATION OF EDUCATION
In the Atlantic Charter and other statements of the war aims
of the United Nations there has been set before us a vast goal of
social achievement which could require for its fulfilment the
united efforts of all our peoples for at least a generation. But
good intentions and the will to carry them out will not suffice to
build “a better future for the world . . . which will afford assur-
ance that all the men in all the lands may live out their lives in
freedom from fear and want.”
To provide prosperity after the immense impoverishment of
war will require that every man shall be so educated that he may
be able to make the fullest contribution of which he is capable. To
build an ordered peaceful world men must have knowledge and,
especially, the knowledge that they are members of one great
community which they have the power to organize for peaceful


ends. We are therefore concerned both with the advancement of
education generally and, in particular, with the promotion of edu-
cation for world citizenship.
In our view, in order to achieve any such objectives as the
Atlantic Charter sets before us, it will be necessary that every
Government shall:
(a) Ensure free access —together with such maintenance
grants as may be necessary —to all education, including the higher
technical and university stages, for all who are capable of benefit-
ing from itj
(b) Ensure for all teachers a period of training so arranged
that they will make closer contacts with the lives of other people
and so themselves gain a wider experience of life;
(c) Take whatever measures may be necessary to raise the
status of the teacher to that of other great professions and to en-
sure that all teachers, irrespective of the age of their pupils or the
type of school in which they are called upon to teach, shall enjoy
equality of status.
Such a program will entail the raising of the school-leaving
age in many countries and the provision of schools, including day
continuation schools, and other educational facilities which might
be beyond the means of some states. But as with individuals so
with states: we are convinced that the world cannot afford to leave
any state or any section of the citizens of any state deprived of
the advantages of a fully developed system of education, without
which they will be unable to make their full contribution to the
enrichment of the world and may, moreover, more easily be made
the tools of despotism and war-like policies. We therefore believe
that the provision of the standard of educational facilities that is
everywhere required in the general interests of the world, must
be the joint responsibility of all the nations and that the Inter-
national Organization for Education should be enabled to make
grants in aid where such grants are required.


EDUCATION FOR WORLD CITIZENSHIP
Above all, if the better world of the future is to endure, its
peoples must be educated in the spirit of co-operation and good
faith, justice and mercy upon which it must be based; they must
recognize their responsibilities as well as their rights, and the duty
of defending the new order; they must know more than their
forefathers about the characteristics, needs and problems of other
parts of the world, and understand whatever institutions and
machinery are devised for international government and co-opera-
tion. We therefore unanimously endorse the United Declaration
adopted by the International Conference of Teachers, held under
the auspices of the Council for Education in World Citizenship
in August, 1942 (see Appendix II of this report). But we would
emphasize that such training for world citizenship is not only a
matter for the schools. The influence of parents and home life, of
the churches and other agencies may, and often does, have a still
larger share in moulding character. There should be the fullest
possible understanding between them as to how each can best help.
In school much may be learned in occasional special lessons,
given, for example, by visitors with great knowledge and experi-
ence of a wider world outside the school and country of the pupils.
Most valuable work can be done by means of studies and practical
activities voluntarily undertaken by the pupils themselves in their
leisure time, in school societies and discussion groups. And for
boys and girls in the senior forms of secondary schools it may of-
ten be desirable to arrange short courses providing a systematic
introduction to the further study of politics, economics, govern-
ment and public affairs. But for the great majority of boys and
girls while still at school we do not advocate the introduction of
any new “subject” into the curriculum.
We find ourselves in complete agreement with Dr. Walter
Kotschnig when he writes:


“It hardly needs to be stressed that the simple addition of a
course or two in ‘international relations’ or in ‘world history’ to
the already heavily crowded curricula of the American public
school or college is altogether inadequate for the purposes of
effective international education. Nothing short of a new empha-
sis in the teaching of all subjects can achieve the desired results.
Every major subject has something to offer toward an under-
standing of the modern world. Geography, a subject sorely neg-
lected in the American public school, offers unique opportunities
for the study of the distribution of raw materials, of international
means of communication and similar elements relevant to an
understanding of international relations. Foreign languages,
taught beyond their mere mechanics, offer a valuable key to some
of the imponderabilia in national character. Even arithmetic, by
a judicious choice of examples and problems, can do much to
further an international outlook. If the Nazis draw many of their
examples from military aviation, if Communist Russia teaches
percentages in terms of achievements obtained under her various
Five-Year Plans, there is no reason why the American boy or girl
should not learn percentages in figuring the financial contributions
of the various member States to the League of Nations or the out-
put of oil in the various parts of the world. Since mathematics
comes with difficulty to many youngsters, they are not likely to
forget these data! Social science courses will take on new signifi-
cance if, going beyond the worn-out pattern of family, local com-
munity, State and Federal government, they bring out the place
of such institutions as the International Labor Office in their at-
tempts to improve standards of living throughout the world. A
course in general science is not complete without bringing home
the fact that present-day world-wide interdependence is largely
the result of the inventive genius of the scientist. Teaching of
this type, which breaks down the narrow departmentalization of
learning, means the end of provincialism in thought. It will help
us to see the world as a whole. Rather than to view individual


parts or aspects of it, the younger generation and adult students
will learn to comprehend its general pattern both in time and
space. They will not only learn to understand the international
scene, but they will gain a better grasp of American problems,
many of which reveal their true meaning only if seen in their in-
ternational context.”
Moreover, we find ourselves in like agreement with the views
expressed by the national associations of local education authori-
ties and of teachers in Great Britain in their 1927 “Declaration
Concerning the Schools of Great Britain and the Peace of the
World.” For, as they too clearly saw, “the facts of international
co-operation, while they form the culmination of modern history,
will concern also geography and, indeed, have their bearing upon
all school subjects each of which has its world aspect and each of
which points to the unity of the human family.” We agree with
them that such instruction, properly given, may serve some of the
chief purposes of education. Thus it may increase the architec-
tural consistency of the curriculum and help to build up the co-
herent body of knowledge—the “single wide interest” on which
strength of character largely depends. At the same time it can
provide a strenuous intellectual discipline just because it links up
so many other studies and leads to some consideration of those
more abstract conceptions that lie below the surface and are usu-
ally more difficult—and more valuable —than the beginnings of
disconnected subjects.
AUXILIARY MEANS OF COMMUNICATION
Furthermore, we believe it to be of the greatest importance
that, so far as possible all the peoples, of Europe at least, should
be able to speak a common tongue. We have taken note of the
decline in the teaching of Latin which once served as a means of
communication between all well-educated people in Europe and
have also noted the position of French as the European “langue
de culture” after the decline of Latin, and the increasing use of


English as an international language among citizens of the United
Nations during the present war. We recommend that all Govern-
ments should (1) choose some auxiliary means of communication j
(2) ensure that in at least all European countries, including Ger-
many, it shall be adequately taught—quite apart from the study
and teaching of languages—to all school children before they
leave school.
We may mention that the majority of the non-British mem-
bers of the Commission were in favor of the adoption of the
English language as being the most suitable auxiliary means of
communication. In view, however, of the complexity of the ques-
tion due to linguistic as well as political reasons, the Commission
proposes to continue the study of this problem and to postpone
to a later date its final recommendation as to the choice of the
auxiliary means of communication referred to above.
ADULT EDUCATION
Not until they have left school and begun to earn their own
livelihood will many young people with a practical rather than
academic bent begin to take a pride in learning their own skills
and, moreover, for the first time begin to see themselves—
through the work they do —as members of a closely knit society.
Therefore, among the educational services to be provided for all
who are capable of benefiting from them must be, in every State,
a highly developed system of adult education. Such services must
provide the worker with an opportunity to acquire greater skill in
his own trade or craft so that he may contribute more to the com-
mon weal. But they must also provide opportunities for the study
of the humane and other non-vocational subjects, such as history,
economics, science, social questions and international affairs.
The Workers’ Educational Association and University Exten-
sion classes in Great Britain, the People’s High Schools in the
Scandinavian countries, the magnificent work of adult education
that has been undertaken voluntarily by the Students’ Unions in


Norway—such schemes as these, most of which have their parallel
movements, equally successful, in many countries, provide a rich
variety of successful experience upon which to build. But we look
to a vast extension of such schemes, of holiday courses with pay,
of subsidized travel abroad for purposes of study, and of many
other means, adequately subsidized by the State and, where neces-
sary, assisted by the International Organization for Education.
We realize, however, that great numbers of the people will
in all probability remain outside such schemes of organized study
and we therefore desire to see in every country a movement for
popular enlightenment that will seek to arouse their civic and
international conscience and to make them more fully aware of
the responsibilities of citizenship. In our view such popular en-
lightenment should be recognized as one of the functions of the
Ministry of Education which, for this purpose, would make full
use of films and plays, radio broadcasts, the press and illustrated
brochures, and large-scale arrangements for exchange visits and
subsidized travel. As part of the scheme it would be necessary to
facilitate the circulation of suitable films between all countries and
to promote the closest possible collaboration in the field of broad-
casting.
THE UNIVERSITIES AND INSTITUTIONS OF EQUIVALENT STANDING
The Commission has exchanged representatives with the Com-
mittee of the British Association on Post-war University Educa-
tion and, in the Committee’s interim report, which has just been
published, we note in particular and propose at a later stage of
our work to examine carefully the following proposals which are
concerned with the contribution that the universities could make
to the many objects that we have in mind:
(a) That entry to the universities should, as a rule, be de-
ferred until after a year of approved national or international
service—a provision that we might wish to see applied also to


the teachers’ training colleges where these exist apart from the
universities;
(b) That candidates for admission to a university should be
tested in their general knowledge and in the special knowledge
required of entrants by each university department} and that an
ever-widening group of universities should accept each other’s
tests of general knowledge, so that it would be easier for a pupil
or students from one country to proceed to a university of an-
other country within the group }
(c) That the award of entrance scholarships should depend,
more than at present, upon a candidate’s character}
(d) That freedom of thought and expression, indispensable
in every university, should be guaranteed to all undergraduates
in the discussion of world affairs}
(e) That every university should require its students to be
able to make themselves understood, by speech and writing, in
some one auxiliary means of communication}
(f) That graduate scholarships, sufficient to cover passage
money and all other necessary expenses, should aid the exchange
of students between one country and another}
(g) That the universities should take a greater part in the
work of adult education.
We have also noted as a subject to be considered by our Com-
mission, the proposals which the committee puts forward for
counteracting “the tendency of university studies to split up into
a growing number of separate specialisms... increasingly divorced
from the life of the community,” and for ensuring “that every
undergraduate is faced by the need for working out a philosophy
of life.” It is in our view much to be desired that students of arts
and theology should receive some introduction to the elements of
scientific knowledge and some training in scientific methods of
thinking, and that students of natural science should receive a
similar introduction to philosophy and the social sciences.
We whole-heartedly welcome the recommendation of the


committee that there should be created an International Educa-
tion Organization such as we ourselves propose, “as one of the
organs of any post-war society of states (or other international
authority).”
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN LEARNED SOCIETIES
We look to the resumption of the work of the International
Committee on Intellectual Co-operation in promoting the fullest
possible co-operation between universities and other academic
bodies, research institutes and learned societies of all countries
and, in the meantime, welcome the work undertaken by the Asso-
ciation of University Professors and Lecturers of Allied Coun-
tries in Great Britain to maintain such contacts as are possible be-
tween the United Nations during the war. We should be glad
to see an inquiry undertaken into the probable advantages of
arranging for the direct representation of such professional asso-
ciations in the directing bodies of the intellectual co-operation
organization after the war.
YOUTH ORGANIZATIONS
The development of a fine sense of social responsibility, the
practice of international friendship through vast international
jamborees and journeys abroad, and some instruction in inter-
national affairs, have been a marked feature of the Boy Scout
and Girl Guide movements —everywhere suppressed by the Nazi-
Fascist overlords. We hope to see a great restoration of these
movements in the liberated countries after the war. We know
that even now, in France for example, some troops keep together
although officially banned and unable to wear uniform. When the
day of liberation comes, Scouts and Guides in many countries
should be able to play a very big part in many practical jobs of
reconstruction. And, of course, there are a number of other youth
organizations that also have an international membership, as well
as innumerable other bodies confined to one nation, all of which


serve similar ideals. Each has its own particular contribution to
make and we welcome the diversity of their methods, appealing to
boys and girls of different types. We would most certainly rec-
ommend no regimented uniformity by the state or any other
body. But we would plead for encouragement and assistance by
the state and by the international authority for all such move-
ments existing to train character, mind and body for a high ideal
of social service and the responsibilities of citizenship in the local,
national and world community. Camping sites and equipment for
visiting guests from other countries, hostels for international gath-
erings, greatly reduced railway fares, the opportunities for leaders
to exchange experiences on aims and methods 5 all of these could
and should be provided by the state and international authority.
Moreover, in the great extension of educational facilities we
desire to see in every country, it will be necessary to provide day-
continuation schools, and these, in our view, should provide much
more than merely intellectual training. They will, we hope, be
the natural center for the leisure time activities of their students
so that the work of most of the youth organizations could be built
around them.
In the immediate post-war period the youth organizations,
including for these purposes the various student bodies, will have
a great part to play in rebuilding sound minds and sound bodies in
stricken Europe and in breaking down the prison walls of the
mind imposed by foreign conquerors, so that young people may
once more come to know and understand each other across the
frontiers. We propose to invite representatives of all these great
associations to confer with us on this subject.
THE TEACHER
In the course of our report we have indicated in broad outline
the measures that we believe to be indispensable if the men and
women of tomorrow are to have a real chance to implement the
high promises of the Atlantic Charter. They call for action which


will, we hope, be taken by farsighted statesmen in all countries,
for the co-operation of many great bodies and, above all, for a
response that we are confident will be fully forthcoming from the
teachers themselves.
In the final analysis everything depends upon the parent and
the teacher, and we are concerned in this report primarily with
the teacher. We do not ask that any teacher should try to impart
to his pupils any view of life in which he does not believe. The
whole idea is repugnant to us, for the first qualification to be de-
manded of any teacher should be sincerity, and every teacher
should be able to say to his pupils, as did the Norwegian teacher
in the hour of trial: “I will never ask you to do anything I con-
sider to be wrong, nor shall I teach you anything which in my
opinion is not in accordance with the truth.”
But we insist on two things. First, that all boys and girls,
before they leave school, must be made familiar with a generally
agreed body of facts* concerning the nature of the local, national
and international community which they are about to enter as
responsible citizens. And secondly, that they should be taught
certain generally accepted principles of good life in that com-
munity. For such teaching to be fully effective, however, it is
necessary that the teacher set an example of citizenship by taking
a full part in the life of the community; his own attitude, express-
ing itself unconsciously throughout the day and every day, may
well have a far more lasting influence on his pupils than any
amount of direct instruction.
We propose at some future stage of our work to consider more
thoroughly and from the experience that has been gained in each
of the countries represented on the commission, the relation of
the teacher to the community and the distinction that must be
drawn between, on the one hand, the teaching of agreed facts
*We do not, of course, expect that all children should be made familiar with all these
facts! But according to their age and experience they should be given a sufficient introduction,
so that their interest may be aroused and they may be led to study the subject further for
themselves after they leave school.


and the cultivation of a deep concern for citizenship—which we
consider to be essential for the continued well-being of society,
and—on the other hand —the use of the schools for the advance-
ment of controversial policies, a practice we should no less em-
phatically deplore.
During the past quarter of a century the great associations
of teachers have already succeeded in improving considerably the
conditions of service in the profession} but the best of them have
by no means limited their activities to questions of pay and status.
They have been deeply concerned with the general extension of
education and with research into the methods of teaching many
subjects. They have themselves practiced world citizenship
through their wide international contacts, through their great in-
ternational federations and through their work in other voluntary
organizations. And many of them have themselves done much
to promote the teaching of world citizenship, by agreeing upon
revisions of school textbooks, by co-operating with local authori-
ties and Ministries of Education in matters connected with the
teaching of the principles of international co-operation, and in
many other ways. We look forward—especially in our proposals
for an International Organization for Education—to an extension
of such collaboration between representative bodies of teachers
and the national and international authorities.
We believe that the great professional national and interna-
tional associations of teachers will have a vital role to play in
all the work to which we look forward in this report, and we pro-
pose to invite the British associations of teachers to take all prac-
ticable steps to lay the foundations for a renewed contact of the
teachers’ associations of all the United Nations as soon as cir-
cumstances permit.
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR EDUCATION
We submit—
(a) That the social objectives of the Atlantic Charter can be


achieved only if there is a general raising of educational standards ;
(b) That such an educational advance must be a matter of
international agreement and will require financial assistance for
some of the poorer states 5
(c) That only in so far as the rising generation can be edu-
cated for world citizenship will it be possible to maintain the soli-
darity of the United Nations and to ensure peace;
(d) That for these reasons it is urgently necessary that the
United Nations should agree to establish as soon as may be prac-
ticable an International Organization for Education, and should
forthwith undertake the necessary preparations for that act.*
In our view such an Organization should be one of the princi-
pal parts of any new international authority that may be created
at the end of the war on a world scale or for any group of states.
It should be able to draw upon the wisdom of Governments, edu-
cation authorities, teachers, parents and students associations, each
of which should be represented upon it, and thus be able to com-
bine with the authority of the Governments the active participa-
tion of those upon whom will chiefly fall the task of carrying out
its decisions.
Among its many other tasks the International Organization
for Education would—
(a) Prepare international agreements upon minimum educa-
tional standards;
(b) Advise, inspect and report upon the carrying out of such
agreements;
(c) Make financial grants in aid of educational expansion to
states requiring such assistance;
*The International Organization for Education which we here recommend must not be
confused with the temporary Bureau for Educational Reconstruction which we have suggested
should be set up as soon as possible to prepare for the urgent tasks of immediate post-war
reconstruction. Whether the permanent International Organization for Education should be
designed to grow out of the temporary Bureau is one of the matters that should, in our opin-
ion, now be considered by the Governments concerned.


(d) Provide a bureau of research and information on educa-
tional organization and methods}
(e) Recommend methods whereby the peoples of all coun-
tries can best be educated in the knowledge of international co-
operation and the spirit of world citizenship, and prepare, inspect
and report upon such international agreements as may be con-
cluded for this purpose;
(f) Carry out on behalf of the member states such inquiries
and such undertakings as they may agree upon for further ad-
vancement of education generally, and in particular of education
for world citizenship.
Among the many proposals that should be investigated as soon
as possible by an authority of this kind we would mention here
only a few examples:
(1) The desirability or otherwise of prescribing set textbooks,
of banning textbooks antagonistic to the principles of post-war
civilization, the preparation by a group of eminent historians of a
Great History—at least for Europe—from which the writers of
school textbooks in all countries would willingly draw their ma-
terial;
(2) Extension of the teaching of the social sciences, including
the elements of anthropology as a preventive of racial prejudice;
(3) The promotion of holiday travel, exchange visits, periods
of study abroad, etc., for teachers, pupils and students, and per-
haps especially for students preparing to be teachers. And study
tours for educational administrators;
(4) The establishment of one or more international universi-
ties and international institutes of education for picked men and
women preparing to occupy educational positions of special re-
sponsibility in their own countries, an international academy of
international studies for entrants to the higher ranks of the diplo-
matic and international services, summer schools on international
affairs, and more specialized courses for journalists and members
of other professions;


(5) The greater use of the radio and of the film, pictures,
story books and similar visual aids in the promotion of interna-
tional understanding^
(6) The establishment of a world radio news service;
(7) The granting of much greater assistance to youth move-
ments by way of reduced rates of travel, arrangements for ex-
change visits, the provision of well-equipped international youth
centers and camps, and the organization of a World Council of
Youth Movements.
We hope to prepare a further report setting out in greater de-
tail our proposals for the creation of an International Organiza-
tion for Education to which we unanimously attach the greatest
possible importance.


Chapter IV
Our Work
Hitherto we have been considering large issues of policy that
must be decided by governments and we have ventured to offer
certain suggestions as to the action that should, in our view, be
taken. What about ourselves? Is there any contribution that we,
as a private and entirely unofficial group of educationists from
the various United Nations, can make to the promotion of such
principles as we have enunciated? We believe there is.
It has been difficult to find the time to attend to the work of
the Commission when all of us, without exception, are very fully
employed on other tasks. And we frankly admit that it has some-
times been very difficult to concentrate our minds on such prob-
lems as, for example, the re-education of Germany after the war,
when we have been depressed by war developments or —in the
case of many of us —preoccupied with thoughts of our people at
home in countries occupied by the enemy. Nevertheless we are
all of us glad to have had this opportunity to work together; it
is an experience we would not willingly have missed and one we
would like others, in one form or another, to share.
Here in Great Britain during the war there are professors
and teachers from nearly all the United Nations and in very large
numbers from some. There are also many hundreds of school-
boys and schoolgirls temporarily exiled from their own lands. No
less than five Polish, twenty Belgian, six French, two Czecho-
slovak, one Soviet and three Norwegian schools have been estab-
lished and many other children from allied countries are attend


ing British schools. Here, it seems to us, is a great opportunity to
begin the practice of feeling that we really are United Nations.
LECTURES AND SUMMER SCHOOLS
Through the Council for Education in World Citizenship, the
League of Nations Union, the Student Federation for Interna-
tional Co-operation and other bodies, many of us who come from
other countries have already had the opportunity to lecture in
university and training college clubs and societies and to adult
audiences of many kinds. Also on the invitation of local education
authorities and of the heads of schools, as well as through arrange-
ments made by the Council, we have given many talks to boys and
girls in British schools, as part of their school work in their clubs
and societies associated with the Council, and have been able to
help the Council to find other people of our own nationality who
are able and competent to undertake such work. Others of us
have taken part as members or speakers in the Council’s Summer
Schools or its International Conference of Teachers 5 and we wel-
comed the opportunity in the summer to find boys and girls from
our own countries to attend the Council’s Conference at Sherborne
for some three hundred “sixth formers.”
Those of us who were able to attend the International Sum-
mer School at Lynmouth to whose findings some reference is
made elsewhere in this report, look back upon it as a particularly
happy and useful experience, and we were glad that teachers from
our various countries, including teachers from the Czechoslovak
and Polish armies, were able to take part.
The Council’s members on the Commission wish especially to
record their warm appreciation of this collaboration and, from
personal experience, to testify to the immense advantage that such
personal contacts have brought to its work in promoting interna-
tional understanding by means of lectures and discussions in the
schools and vacation courses for teachers, students and senior
pupils.


The representatives of both the London International Assem-
bly and of the Council for Education in World Citizenship hope
to make it an important function of the Commission to carry on
and extend such work in the coming year, and were very glad
to learn that the Chairman of the National Youth Committee, Mr.
Chuter Ede, M.P., Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Edu-
cation, had assured representatives of the Council that there would
be a wide demand in youth centers and clubs for such speakers
from the Allied countries as we could find. Some of us have al-
ready been able to arrange for some of our young people to take
part in Inter-Allied Youth Weeks, organized by County Youth
Committees,
A NANSEN PIONEER CAMP
For many years the Education Committee of the League of
Nations Union, and in more recent years the Council for Educa-
tion in World Citizenship, held each summer a number of Inter-
national Camps for boys and girls to which they invited groups
of young people from their countries and foreign leaders. Taking
as their inspiration the life and work of Dr. Fridtjof Nansen,
these Nansen pioneer camps were held in wild moorland or rough
mountain country where the young pioneers for a fortnight drew
fresh strength from the grandeur of the countryside, led strenuous
days of trekking and woodcraft pursuits, taught each other their
national games and songs, their dances and their folklore around
the flickering campfire at night, and opened their hearts and their
minds in discussions on the meaning of the world around them.
Moreover, they undertook some serious, disciplined study of the
life and problems of the various countries from which they came
and of international relations.
Here in the solitude of the wide open spaces, many of these
young people—some of them from crowded cities —found a
deeper purpose in life, and dedicated themselves to a high ideal
of world service.


For lack of staff it was impossible for the Council to hold any
of these camps in 1941 and 1942, but we most fully endorse the
recommendations made by its International Conference of Teach-
ers at Lynmouth this year that another Nansen Pioneer Camp
should be held in 1943, and we would most gladly co-operate in
the organization of such a camp and give to some of the boys and
girls and young leaders from all our countries the opportunity to
take part. Indeed, we can imagine few liner ways of using the
opportunity that exists in Great Britain during the war of build-
ing up a real solidarity of feeling and of purpose between young
people of the United Nations.
A suggestion has been made by some of the Council’s repre-
sentatives on the Commission that the ideal site for such a Nansen
' pioneer camp might well be the Norwegian School at Dromtochty
Castle. If the Council approves, we would gladly approach our
various national authorities and the British Council to see if some
financial support and temporary staff could be provided in order
to enable the Council to organize such a camp in 1943 at Drom-
tochty Castle or elsewhere. We understand that apart from such
provision as it might be necessary to make for the railway fares
and maintenance of some, at least, of the boys and girls attending
the camp, the sum of money required for actual organization
would not be very large.
TO PROMOTE A WIDER UNDERSTANDING
At the best such plans as these will directly affect only some
of our boys and girls and a very small proportion of the total num-
ber of British children. We are, of course, all of us aware of the
fine work of many bodies and notably of the British Council, but
much more must be done to turn to good and lasting account for
the future the opportunities that the disasters of war have created.
We ourselves have decided that the representatives of each
non-British group on the Commission should prepare:


(a) Lists of professors, teachers and research students from
the allied countries who would like to receive personal introduc-
tions to their British colleagues or those from other countries now
in Great Britain and engaged in similar work, so that such intro-
ductions may be arranged through the Council for Education in
World Citizenship, the International Federation of University
Women or other bodies.
(b) Lists of their schools in this country that would welcome
visits from British and other Allied teachers or children and lists
of schools or other groups of children who would welcome hos-
pitality in British schools and homes, so that such visits and hos-
pitality may be arranged.
(c) Particulars of films (especially 16 mm. silent films),
slides, books, charts, diagrams, etc., illustrating various phases of
life in their countries which would be available for showing in the
schools and elsewhere.
(d) Particulars of paintings, drawings and models which
could be lent for exhibition in the schools.
(e) Particulars of parties of children who might be prepared
to visit British schools as choirs to sing their national songs, groups
to present short simple plays or to give exhibitions of national
dances, or sports teams.
If sufficient Information is forthcoming, we propose to ask the
Council for Education in World Citizenship to publish for us a
pamphlet showing the various opportunities that are open to the
schools and to send copies to the national educational authorities
of the various countries as well as to the local education authori-
ties and public and secondary schools of Great Britain. We would
also wish to discuss the whole scheme with representatives of
the Board of Education and local education authorities and of the
British Council, with a view to ensuring the greatest possible
measure of success.
As a further development of such a scheme we have in mind
the possibility of a really important, comprehensive and well


planned United Nations Exhibition for boys and girls. Exhibi-
tions have already been organized by the British Council, and
we would like to submit for their consideration and that of the
Board of Education that such an exhibition in London or some
other convenient center would be equally welcome to school chil-
dren and that a nucleus of it should later be sent round the coun-
try to be seen by pupils from as many schools as possible. In such
an exhibition as we have in mind, each of the United Nations
would illustrate its history, life and culture, giving special promi-
nence to the contribution that each nation has made to civilization
through the work of its painters, writers and scholars, its men of
science, its explorers, its doctors and its men of action in many
fields of constructive human activity, in order to spread among
the British people—and particularly young people—a better un-
derstanding both of the debt that all the nations owe to one an-
other and of the need for collective action against such enemies as
famine, disease and evil men.
Finally, we have examined and fully endorsed the proposal
made by the Council’s International,, Conference of Teachers at
Lynmouth that the Association of University Professors and Lec-
turers of Allied Countries in Great Britain, the London School
of Economics, the International Relations Departments of the
Universities of Oxford and Wales, and the Royal Institute of
International Affairs, should consider the need, and the possibility
that now exists, for establishing in Great Britain an international
institution of university character for research and teaching in all
subjects related to international affairs and for the provision of
popular extension courses in those subjects,
ACTION ON THIS REPORT
If this report secures your approval we trust that you will sub-
mit it to the Governments of the United Nations, who alone
could carry out its major recommendations, and that you will au-
thorize us to present it with your full support to their Boards of


Education and Ministries of Public Instruction by means of depu-
tations, or otherwise, as may be most convenient and effective.
We should wish also to submit it to a number of distinguished
educationists and public men with a view to securing their support
and their advice in any later and more detailed discussions on
the methods of carrying out certain of the broad principles we
have proposed.
We should, however, be glad to see our proposals much more
widely discussed and, for this reason, suggest that the report
should be published—with the omission of certain paragraphs
which we would indicate —and should be distributed as extensively
as possible. Public interest has been aroused on questions of edu-
cational reform, and we believe that it would be to the general
good that the kind of proposals we make on matters of public
policy should be publicly debated. We believe they would find a
very wide measure of support and we should do whatever we
could to commend them by means of meetings and conferences
of teachers and educational articles in the educational
journals and more general periodicals and daily press.
Furthermore, it is obvious that certain great medical, relief
and philanthropic organizations, student and youth societies and
juvenile organizations, or their adult workers, would be called
upon to play a great part in some of the work of reconstruction on
the continent that we have touched upon in this report. We there-
fore propose to invite them to appoint representatives to confer
with us on these matters.
During the coming year we hope also to consider in greater
detail than has yet been possible, and with expert advice, the prob-
lems of re-education in Italy, Japan and other enemy countries
and to submit to you our recommendations as to what policy
should be pursued toward those countries with regard to educa-
tion, as we have reported now with regard to re-education in
Germany. In addition, we intend to prepare and submit for your
consideration certain supplementary papers treating in greater de


tail some of the proposals we have set out in this report. We have,
for example, already invited the Welsh Committee for Education
in World Citizenship—which has now appointed representatives
to take part in the future work of our Commission —to make a
special study of our proposal for an International Organization
for Education and to draft a supplementary paper on that subject,
examining from the experiences of the past twenty years the work
that such an organization might have done and could reasonably
be expected to undertake in the altered circumstances likely to
prevail after this war, and suggesting in greater detail a possible
constitution and procedure.
Finally, we would draw your attention to the fact that in the
United States of America a number of official and private studies
are being conducted on the very questions that we have examined
in this report and on similar subjects.
We have already made a number of inquiries and, if our re-
port meets with your approval, there are certain bodies in America
to which we should send copies, for we believe it to be of the
greatest importance that there should be the fullest possible con-
sultation with them. Indeed, if the opportunity occurred it would,
in our view, be most desirable for one or more of our members to
visit America for this purpose as soon as possible.


Chapter V
Summary of Recommendations
It has been said of the members of the Peace Conference of
Versailles that most of them were almost wholly absorbed in the
political problems of the peace treaty but not sufficiently concerned
with that economic intercourse between the nations which should
have been the life-blood of the new body politic, while they ig-
nored almost entirely the need for educating the hearts and minds
of men to inspire and operate successfully the great system they
devised. Certain it is that in David Hunter Miller’s two-volume
book on “The Drafting of the Covenant,” all the references dur-
ing all the discussions he records in so much detail that have any
bearing whatever on education could be put into a couple of his
fourteen hundred pages. The only mention of international edu-
cation appears to have been made by a delegation from the Inter-
national Council of Women, led by Lady Aberdeen.
In the course of the report of that delegation’s appearance be-
fore the Commission there is the following statement: “Mrs. Schi-
voni asked that the League should establish an international edu-
cation bureau. Mrs. Fern-Andrews, of the American School
Citizenship League, supported her.” That was all. President
Wilson dismissed this deputation, that had admittedly put for-
ward also a great many requests affecting the status of women,
with the words, “... that if it were not possible to accede to all the
requests it was only because the League could not begin by ar-
ranging all the affairs of mankind.”
This time, when the challenge to the whole moral and intel


lectual roots of our civilization is so clearly seen, the restoration,
protection and advancement of sound education must surely be
among the major tasks of those who are called upon to settle the
affairs of the world after the war.
The great principles of freedom and justice, co-operation and
good faith upon which our civilization is founded, are the basis
of all good life in the family and school and within the state as
well as in the world community. We make no distinction. Those
of us who are here in exile long to return home. Our country is
always in our minds. We are prepared to give our lives that it
may once more be free. And for all of us, from the great free
nations of the world or from the imprisoned countries, true
patriotism is a force we deeply cherish and would pass on to others
through our schools. Not for us a dull world of uniformity in
which all national differences are obliterated; we rejoice in the
rich diversity of a world of free peoples in which each national
group preserves its own tradition and can develop along its own
lines. But it is the task of others to consider how the national
heritage may best be taught; our task has been to consider how
the individual can best be educated as a member of a society that
includes but is wider than his own country.
We do not know what forms of organization may be estab-
lished between the States, what regional federations or confedera-
tions may be formed, but we know that the world today is one
society, interdependent for its well-being and for its very ex-
istence in the age of modern weapons, a world in which, as Presi-
dent Roosevelt has said, “there is complete unanimity of spirit
among all youth, all kinds and kindreds who fight to preserve
or regain their freedom. This is a development of historic impor-
tance. It means that the old term ‘Western civilization’ no longer
applies. World events and the needs of all humanity have joined
the culture of Asia with the culture of Europe and the Americas
to form for the first time a real world civilization,”


It is for that world, so that its unity may endure, that we
must educate the rising generation, so that each may seek his coun-
try’s greatness in the measure of its contribution to the world,
and the day may come to which President Wilson told a com-
mittee at the Paris Peace Conference he looked forward “when
men would be as ashamed of being disloyal to humanity as they
were now of being disloyal to their country.”
We must educate men fit for such a society while we ourselves
strive to create a society fit for such men.
We have recently come across some words that one of the
distinguished Honorary Vice-Presidents of the London Interna-
tional Assembly, Professor Rene Cassin, wrote in 1932 in con-
nection with the Moral Disarmament Committee of the World
Disarmament Conference and we repeat them here for they go
to the root of this problem of education for a world community:
“A living social unit can exist only if each of its members is
either consciously or unconsciously aware of what he has in com-
mon with his neighbors; the strength of the family or national
bond lies precisely in the belief of the members of the group in
the existence of a common origin, common interests and a com-
mon ideal, and in the necessity of common rules to govern them.
On a still higher plane, the League of Nations, already a political
reality, will not be in possession of its full spiritual powers until
the individuals belonging to the various national groups have a
common bond of belief, and when the constitutional, civil and eco-
nomic institutions of these various groups have been brought into
harmony with their international obligations.”
There must be, he declared, “a feeling of mutual goodwill as
between the members and responsible leaders” of the separate
communities within the larger unit, a goodwill “somewhat in the
nature of a religion,” and he continued:
“Humanitarianism arises out of a moral impulse toward good-
will and out of the aspirations of the heart. Without such lofty


elements, no human society worthy of the name can exist, but
there is danger that, in the sphere of action, humanitarianism may
be no more than a vague faith, void of all definite content, and
at the mercy of the storms roused in the depths of human nature
by the struggle for existence or by the outbursts of passion.
“At this stage rises the urgent need for an intellectual solu-
tion of the problem, by which the mind may be educated to nur-
ture the generous instincts of the heart and to assist them in their
development. There exists already an international machinery,
still very imperfect, for dealing with economic and financial prob-
lems 5 every day sees an additional link in the network of legal
obligations binding State to State. What chance is there of achiev-
ing any success in the effective moral disarmament of the members
of the various national communities , unless we can provide some
machinery of an international character for the intellectual train-
ing of the masses as well as for the elite? . . .We must accustom
people to Spenser Vhommed We need less sentimental humani-
tarianism and more real humanism.”
It has been one of the main purposes of our report to suggest
such “machinery of an international character.”
And so we arrive at the end of this first stage of our work
and await your decision. We believe the time has come when
our proposals, if you approve them, should be put forward for
the consideration of the Governments. In his message to the Con-
servative Party Conference on October Ist, Mr. Churchill said
that we must not “be taken unawares when victory on the field of
battle has, at last, been won. It is right and desirable that informed
forethought should be given to the complex problems of rehabili-
tation and reconstruction that will await solution.” And more re-
cently General Smuts has declared that one of the reasons for his
coming to London was that “with the coming of the offensive stage
of our war effort, our thoughts should also begin to turn to the
end and to the conditions that may follow the end of this greatest
tragedy in the history of our race,” to “the most important of all


the problems before us —the winning of the peace to follow the
winning of the war.”
In particular we would wish to commend our proposals to
the earnest consideration of the President of the Board of Educa-
tion and the Ministers of Education in the Allied Governments,
including those now temporarily established in London, for how-
ever vast or attenuated their immediate work may be, they have
vast responsibilities for the future, stretching far out into the in-
ternational sphere.
The President of the Board of Education, Mr. R. A. Butler,
has himself spoken of the importance of education for world
citizenship and, this month, is reported to have told teachers at-
tending a short course on “The Growth of the English-speaking
Peoples” that they are now called upon to live a wider life and
that they need to keep in touch with world events and the ideas
and ideals of the community. He called upon them to train the
children in their charge for the responsibilities of world citizen-
ship; and by the measures he has already taken to provide for
them courses of lectures on some of the allied countries he has
gone far to enable them to respond effectively to his call. The
Board of Education was, Mr. Butler said, working on a world
canvas and its aim was to impart knowledge, or the ability to
acquire knowledge, from which an understanding of the British
family of nations and of the world would spring.
We understand that when Mr. Butler last received a deputa-
tion from the Council for Education in World Citizenship he was
good enough to express his interest in our Joint Commission and
to say that he would carefully study its report. We are told that
he also uttered a warning against the danger of indulging in fan-
tasies and spoke of the importance of combining realism with
ideals. We believe it will be found that in our report we have
avoided all extravagances. We are concerned only with the hard
facts. First, that the task of restoring what has been destroyed is
far beyond all private enterprise and charity and must call for the


concerted action of the Governments. And secondly, that civiliza-
tion could hardly survive a third world war. Truly men must
learn or -perish .
Our principal recommendations are:
1. That Governments be asked to recognize that the urgent
tasks of educational reconstruction in the occupied countries, as
soon as they have been set free, must be one of the chief respon-
sibilities of the United Nations, and
2. That, for this reason, a United Nations’ Bureau for Edu-
cational Reconstruction should be appointed now to prepare, and
so far as possible put into operation, the necessary plans for meet-
ing those needs which are too great for any one nation to bear
alone.
3. That, in any period during which Germany may be oc-
cupied, the occupying powers should exercise their control over
education through a High Commissioner for Education who
should be appointed in advance by the United Nations and be
ready to start work at the moment the occupation begins.
4. That the principal duties of the High Commissioner for
Education should be to insure that the Nazi and militarist influ-
ences are utterly eradicated from German education, and to in-
spire, facilitate and supervise the re-education of the German
people.
5. That in order that the United Nations may remain united
after the war, their peoples must be inspired by a dominating
motive to build a better world and that, for this reason, it will be
necessary to provide greatly extended educational facilities, sub-
sidized where necessary by the community of nations, and educa-
tion in the principles of world citizenship.
6. That for the advancement of education generally and for
the promotion of education in world citizenship it is urgently
necessary that the United Nations should agree to establish as soon
as may be practicable an International Organization for Education


and should forthwith undertake the necessary preparations for
that act.
7. That such an organization should be one of the principal
parts of any new international authority that may be created after
the war on a world scale or for any group of States, and
8. That it should be able to draw upon the wisdom of Gov-
ernments, education authorities, teachers’, parents’ and students’
associations, each of which should be represented upon it, so that
it may thus combine with the authority of the Governments the
active participation of those upon whom will chiefly fall the task
of carrying out its decisions.


Resolution
The report of the Joint Commission was considered by the
London International Assembly in plenary session on December
14th, 1942, and on January 18th, 1943, when the following reso-
lution was unanimously adopted:
“This Assembly records its general approval of the First Re-
port of its Fifth Commission, the Joint Commission with the
Council for Education in World Citizenship, on ‘The Place of
Education, Science and Learning in Post-War Reconstruction’ and
commends the report to the earnest consideration of the Govern-
ments and educational authorities of the United Nations.
“In particular the Assembly would draw the attention of those
Governments and educational authorities to the urgent impor-
tance of
(a) Establishing a United Nations’ Bureau for Educational
Reconstruction, to prepare to meet those urgent needs of
educational reconstruction in the enemy-occupied coun-
tries which must be one of the chief responsibilities of the
United Nations after the war.
(b) Appointing now for each of the enemy countries they in-
tend to occupy, a High Commissioner for Education
whose task it should be utterly to eradicate the Nazi,
Fascist and militarist influences in education, and to in-
spire, to facilitate and to supervise measures by the peo-
ples of those countries for their own re-education.


(c) Preparing plans for the establishment of an International
Organization for Education to promote the advancement
of education generally and, in particular, of education for
world citizenship so that education may provide a sure
foundation for the post-war system.
“The Assembly moreover invites the Council for Education
in World Citizenship to join with it in reappointing the Commis-
sion to continue its work during the coming year along the lines it
has itself proposed.”
At its meeting at County Hall, London, on January 2nd and
3rd, 1943, the Council for Education in World Citizenship
adopted the same resolution, mutatis mutandis, subject to agree-
ment with the London International Assembly upon certain minor
alterations, mostly of wording, in the report. These were finally
agreed upon at the meeting of the Assembly on January 18 th and
by the Management Committee, on behalf of the Council for Edu-
cation in World Citizenship, on February 10th, 1943.


Appendix I
Norwegian Teachers '
Declaration
On April 9th, 1942, in all the schools at which education was
resumed on that date, a remarkable demonstration took place. As
the children assembled in the classrooms each teacher, before be-
ginning the day’s lessons, read to the pupils in his or her class the
following declaration —a manifesto of faith and courage which is
likely to occupy a historic place in the annals of the teaching
profession:
“On February 9th the Norwegian ‘Teachers’ Front’ was estab-
lished. I handed in my resignation because I was of the opinion
that membership of the Front would lay upon me duties which my
conscience would not allow me to fulfill. lam still of that opin-
ion, and have recently sent the following declaration to the School
Board: ‘I maintain my protest against membership of the Nor-
wegian “Teachers’ Front.” I must at the same time, out of loy-
alty to my calling and my conscience, declare that I desire to
continue to teach in accordance with the wishes of my pupils and
their parents. I ask that this be made known to the higher
authorities.’
“I made this declaration because to be a member of the Nor-
wegian ‘Teachers’ Front’ and to teach are two fundamentally dif-
ferent things. For the same reason lam unable to recognize the
Ministry’s view that anyone who teaches is thereby a member of
the ‘Teachers’ Front.’ ‘Each child’s soul that we unfold is a new
province for the country,’ says one of our dearest national songs.


We teachers, together with the home and the Church, have the
responsibility of seeing that this unfolding takes place in Christian
love and understanding, and in harmony with our national and
cultural traditions.
“We have been entrusted with the task of giving you children
that knowledge and training in thorough work which is necessary
if you are to receive full and many-sided development as human
beings, so that each one of you can take his or her place in the
community for the benefit of himself and others. We have been
given this calling by the Norwegian people, and the Norwegian
people can call us to account for it. We also know that the sum
total of the knowledge and working capacity which a country dis-
poses of are the greatest and most durable of all its sources of
wealth. It is our duty to protect those values. We would be
untrue to our vocation if we did not devote all our energies to the
service of this task, especially in this period of affliction through
which we are now living. Every restriction on the activity of the
school undermines the foundation on which our people’s future
must be built.
“The teacher’s vocation, however, is not only to give the chil-
dren knowledge. He must also teach the children to believe in
and desire that which is true and just. He is therefore unable to
teach anything which is in conflict with his conscience without be-
traying his calling. Anyone who does so is committing a wrong
both against the pupils whom he should lead and against himself.
That, I promise you, I shall never do. I will never ask you to do
anything which I consider to be wrong , nor will I teach you any-
thing which in my opinion is not in accordance with the truth. As
hitherto, I will let my conscience be my guide, and I believe that I
will then be in agreement with the great majority of the people
who have entrusted me with my educational duties.”
Perhaps one of the most Impressive things about this declara-
tion was the note of comradeship and solidarity between the teach


ers and the children. The children of Norway, too, have learned
during the past eighteen months, in the hard school of experience,
to value and to fight for many things which years of instruction in
“civics” might not have made them appreciate so well. The part
they have played in the Norwegian struggle for freedom along-
side their parents and teachers is described more fully in the
special Norwegian Survey , issued by the Royal Norwegian Min-
istry of Information on May Bth, 1942.


Appendix II
A United Declaration
The following declaration was adopted by the International
Conference of Teachers, Lynmouth, in August, 1942:
“1. This International Conference of Professors and Teach-
ers from Belgium, China, Czechoslovakia, Fighting France,
Greece, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, and the U.S.S.R.;
from Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Australia, Canada and
South Africa, with refugee anti-Fascist teachers from Austria, Ger-
many, Hungary and Spain, convened by the Council for Educa-
tion in World Citizenship and meeting at Badminton School, Lyn-
mouth, from August 13th to 20th, 1942, desires first of all to
render humble and solemn homage to all those professors, teach-
ers and other intellectual workers who daily risk their lives or have
already fallen in the fight for the defense or liberation of their
own lands and the freedom of the human mind, and pledges itself
as a body of soldiers and citizens to fight and work until victory
has been won.
“2. The Conference profoundly believes that there exists for
all teachers a double responsibility. As citizens they must strive
to create a state of society in which the children whom they teach
may grow up to live their lives in freedom from fear and freedom
from want and to contribute the best that is in them to the welfare
of their fellow men. As teachers they must strive to ensure that
all children everywhere shall enjoy such social conditions and re-
ceive such education as shall enable them to develop to the full


their natural gifts of spirit, mind and body for the service of their
fellow men in a society in which service to the community rather
than personal profit is the main incentive.
“3. Firmly persuaded (a) that only through a system of
“Government of the people, by the people, for the people” in
national and international affairs may these aims be fully achieved,
(b) that the survival and progress of the human race depends ulti-
mately upon man’s power to use the resources of the earth and the
discoveries of science for the common weal, upon a sense of world
citizenship, knowledge and understanding of international affairs
and a desire to act upon the principles of freedom, justice and
mercy, co-operation and good faith, the Conference declares that
all young people should be taught these principles as the founda-
tion of the good society in home and school and in the world com-
munity; be led to understand something of the nature of the in-
heritance of religion, culture and science, to which each race and
nation has contributed and of which they are trustees, and should
so come to seek their country’s greatness in the measure of its serv-
ice to mankind; and learn something of the political and economic
interdependence of all men everywhere, of the institutions that
are created for the government of local, national and international
affairs and of the responsibilities of citizenship toward them.”
