

i&nmrd Sljnmafi Imwau
OBUT , AUGUST 18, 1953




iEbuiarh ottjomaa Hrennan
OBUT, AUGUST 18, 1953




Reprinted from The Medical Journal of Australia,
June 12, 1954, page 919.
HObituatp*
EDWARD THOMAS BRENNAN.
The death of Edward Thomas Brennan, D. 5.0., M.C., M. 8.,
B.S. (Melbourne), D.T.M. (Sydney), which occurred at
Cronulla, near Sydney, in August, 1953, removed an honoured
and vivid personality from the Australian medical scene.
Tom Brennan had wide affiliations —for he was perhaps the
most experienced Australian tropical medical administrator,
he was one of the best known men in New Guinea and the
South-West Pacific, he was a distinguished veteran of the
two wars, and he was known to medical colleagues in all
parts of Australia. He is consequently widely mourned.
Brennan was born at Stawell, Victoria, on April 13, 1887,
and spent his youth in the picturesque Victorian township
of Beech worth. He attended the Beech worth Grammar
School and later received his medical education at the
University of Melbourne, where he was a student of Trinity
College. His student days were a pattern of his future life:
he seemed to be in everything, knew and was liked by
everybody, and lived an apparently carefree existence, while
yet proving his ability.
He graduated in 1909, and after a year as resident medical
officer at the Ballarat Hospital, joined the staff of the
Fremantle Hospital, where he became medical superinten-
dent. He remained at Fremantle until 1914, when he
enlisted in the army at the outbreak of the first World War.
There can have been few medical officers of the First
Australian Imperial Force who were better known than Tom
Brennan. He enlisted in 1914 and was the original regimental
medical officer of the Eleventh Battalion. This was part
of the Third Infantry Brigade, which made the first assault
on Gallipoli on April 25, 1915. In the rough and tumble
of the landing and the subsequent advances and with-
drawals, units were greatly mixed up. Brennan established
a regimental aid post at the steep cliff of Steele’s Post, where
the only means of evacuation of wounded was down a sand-
slide into Monash Gully. It is recorded in the Official History
that “he took the ration bags from the wounded as they
came down the slide and sent back food and water by men
going up again”.
On May 4 he took part in a desperate enterprise for which
he had volunteered. A reconnaissance and raiding party
had been specially chosen from the Eleventh Battalion under
Captain (later General) Deane, which was to land from
boats on the beach below Gaba Tepe, a prominent exposed
point some distance south of the Australian line and an
important Turkish observation post. Brennan with his
stretcher-bearers landed at dawn with the infantry, and
Page Three


Edward Thomas Brennan.
they all raced across the beach under heavy fire to a bank
where he formed an aid post. Some men were killed and
wounded, and Beane, finding that he could not advance
beyond the bank, signalled the navy to send boats again
for a withdrawal. Heavy casualties were expected as the
medical officers and stretcher-bearers with wounded crossed
the beach to the boats, but, as the Official History says, “to
the surprise of all, the Turks did not during the embarkation,
fire a shot at the wounded men or those assisting them”.
Brennan was always a cheery, spirited, make-the-best-of-it
companion and friend of everybody; and in those hot and
thirsty days of Gallipoli’s summer he was the life of the
party along his front, and his morale-lifting enthusiasms
and personal interest in officers and men were worth a
regiment. On many a morning headquarters on the beach
would receive a deputation, in the form of the medical
orderly from the Eleventh Battalion, requesting urgently
medical comforts (and don’t forget the rum) for the walking
sick and wounded “who don’t want to be evacuated”.
Brennan was regarded by his senior officers as the perfect
regimental medical officer; and was held by all ranks of his
unit, as of those he later commanded, in admiration and
affection.
After Gallipoli Brennan was promoted to the rank of
major and served in France with the Seventh Australian
Field Ambulance, and later was lieutenant-colonel com-
manding the First Australian Field Ambulance. He was in
all the big and little pushes of the Australian front, the
Somme, Hindenburg Bine, Passchendaele and the rest. He
always wanted to be in the thick of everything. One of us
remembers him dropping in one day in 1917 much excited:
“They say the Germans have retreated from Bapaume. Bet
us go up and see the place. It will be out of bounds for us,
of course, but we can make it.” As he expected, it proved
to be an interesting and thrilling interlude, with humorous
accompaniments. When out of the line he instituted early
morning cross-country runs for all who would go, himself
participating. For his gallantry he was awarded the
Military Cross and later the Distinguished Service Order,
and was four times mentioned in dispatches. To many who
look back to the first World War and its gallery of medical
officers, Tom Brennan is the first to spring into memory;
and all would proclaim him the winner of the supreme
laurels of a war doctor —the affectionate memory of all,
without exception, who served with him.
After his discharge from the army, Brennan joined the
Royal Australian Navy, and was for two years surgeon in
H.M.A.S. Sydney. During this time he became acquainted
with the charming American woman, Miss Ruth Todd, of
Tarrytown, New York, who later became his wife. He left
the navy to join the medical service of the Territory of
New Guinea, in which he was to serve with distinction for
almost twenty years. The former German colony, occupied
by Australia early in the war, was now held under mandate,
and his service commenced in the difficult formative years of
the new administration.
During the first two years of his service in New Guinea
Brennan held the position of travelling medical officer, which,
for its action and adventure, suited him well. A 45-foot
Page Four


Edward Thomas Brennan.
schooner, the Lady Betty, had been refitted for his use, and
with an all-native crew he sailed round the scattered islands
and the coast of the New Guinea mainland on his medical
work. During this period his future wife arrived from New
York, and they were married at Rabaul, and spent the first
two years of their exceedingly happy married life with the
little ship for their home. A colleague of those days
remembers the pride and satisfaction which Brennan
invariably radiated over everything that concerned his work
and his new command, feelings which were joyfully shared
by his wife. He had a navigator’s qualification and was
captain and engineer of the craft; so, as he said, a nautical
beard was warranted. His enthusiasm for the tropical seas
remained undiminished by trying adventures among the
treacherous reefs of Melanesia.
He was later stationed at Madang, in charge of the main-
land division of the medical service. Here the opportunity
arose to display again the administrative ability for which
he had gained a reputation during his war service. Under
hard pioneering conditions and isolation he also constantly
displayed the ceguanimitas and joy of living that, together
with helpfulness to others, were his hall-marks. A brother
officer, recalling a visit from Brennan to his isolated station
at this time, writes: “He came breezing in on a gust of
enthusiasm, pleased with everything—the view, the
bungalow, the sea-breeze —even the food. The expression
joie de vivre had meaning for Brennan, and he let some of
it overflow to his fellows. To the tropic dweller of some
years’ standing, soured by service frustrations that Brennan
could brush off with a laugh, he was as good as a holiday.”
The kerosene refrigerator was introduced to the Territory
during his Madang days, and though life had been sweet
to him before, it seemed that, with hard butter for breakfast
and cold drinks at night, its last minor blemishes had
vanished. For Brennan was something of a gourmet—
though never a gourmand. Any day for him could be a
feast day, and any place a possible site for carnival. So
his laughter and good company were as unmeasured in bush
camps and lonely posts as they had been on the hillsides of
Gallipoli and the battlefields of Prance, or in the more
luxurious settings of Giro’s and the Ritz, the Imperial
Services Club or his homes at Rabaul and Cronulla.
In 1928 Brennan was appointed Director of Public Health
for the Territory, and in 1933 a Member of the Legislative
Council of New Guinea. He held these positions till the
Japanese invasion in 1942. The added responsibility sat
easily upon him, and the assumption of authority altered
his genial bearing not a whit. He was a clear-thinking,
direct administrator of the type of his old friend, Field
Marshal Sir Thomas Blarney. He made quick and apparently
effortless decisions, expected rapid action, and supported and
encouraged the work. As one of his officers said, ”he had
a remarkable aptitude for grasping essentials and coming
to a quick decision —usually the right one—settling a prob-
lem between one cigarette and the next that would give
lesser mortals days of agonising indecision. This had its
disconcerting side for the slow-witted. For one would go to
him with a half-baked plan for discussion, but before one
had more than broached the subject he was likely to be on
Page Five


Edward Thomas Brennan.
the telephone making arrangements for immediate action—
that is if he approved. If not, one would soon know about
that too”. His work was done without show or fuss or
posturing and with a minimum of paper, and it lacked long
pondering and furrowed brow. And so, to those who knew
nothing of his wide responsibilities, and the difficulties
inherent in the scattered islands and their primitive peoples,
and the trials of staff and finance in building his service,
his job seemed easy. For he always had time and good
humour. He was a most satisfactory man to work for, and
inspired respect and loyalty in his staff.
His headquarters were now at Rabaul, and his residence
on the hill at Namanula, with its sweeping view, was a
place of happy family life, good cheer and gracious hos-
pitality. The Brennans’ eldest daughter, Betty Anne, had
been born at Madang and her sister Mary in the United
States. The youngest of their three girls, Dorothy, was
now born at Rabaul, completing the devoted family. Brennan
travelled widely during his leave periods—to the Bast and
Europe, to the United States, where Mrs. Brennan’s family
resides, and to Melbourne, the home of his own people.
Brennan liked the native people and they liked him, and
this formed a solid foundation for his work amongst them.
He was interested in them as human beings, and they were
his charges and patients, quite apart from the interest he
took in their culture and institutions. He treated them
with his characteristic courtesy and goodwill, and did not
regard them as children, or as some lesser beings. They
always knew where they stood with him, and even in the
worst conditions he lacked the impatience and irritability
that are only too likely to arise in response to their devious-
ness and opposition. The numerous native assistants and
servants, police, village councillors and others with whom
he was well acquainted brought their troubles to him, and
sought his advice on all sorts of problems. He always knew
about their families and affairs, and wherever he went there
were seemingly interminable conversations in pidgin with
native friends. On a visit to his war-devastated territories
after the war, he was greeted with affecting joy wherever
he went. In places he knew, it appeared that he remembered
all the names on the census lists, as he asked after this one
and that, openly mourning with them the lost ones of the
unhappy years of enemy occupation. It is certain that, in
Melanesia, nobody could ever hold more adequately his
honoured title of “the big doctor”.
At the outbreak of the second World War, Brennan
enthusiastically sought a post in the Australian Imperial
Force, and one was readily kept open for him. But his
physical condition no longer fitted him for active service;
so, after exhausting every means he could think of, he
reluctantly returned to New Guinea. In 1940 he sent his
family to Australia, and combined military duties with his
usual work. On the threat of invasion, he was appointed
Assistant Director of Medical Services, with the rank of
colonel, at Port Moresby. Rabaul fell to the Japanese soon
after he left it, and most of his local friends lost their lives,
either in the assault or at sea during their evacuation as
prisoners. In the strenuous months that followed, during the
establishment of Port Moresby as a fortress and advanced
Page Six


Edwaed Thomas Bbennan.
operational base, Brennan suffered severely from a vascular
condition of the legs that had caused his rejection for active
service earlier. He steadily refused to be relieved and
remained on duty until he was finally not able to walk, and
it was feared that the amputation of a leg would be neces-
sary. He was evacuated by air to Sydney, where he remained
in the Concord Military Hospital for many months, and was
then discharged from the army.
Through this trying period his blithe spirit was not
quenched, and he was no sooner able to get about again,
albeit with some distress, than he sought work. He at once
received the position of Deputy Director of Medical Services
for the Allied Works Council in New South Wales, for
which his experience especially fitted him, and remained in
this post until it was abolished in 1945. Within a short time
he was chosen as Chief Medical Officer for U.N.R.R.A. in
the South-West Pacific, and subsequently received appoint-
ment with the Repatriation Department in Sydney. In 1950
Brennan visited Papua and New Guinea as a member of a
Commonwealth Advisory Committee on the hospital services.
His fellow members were his tropical friends, the late W. B.
Kirkland and John Gunther, and his useful tour, on which
he revisited old scenes and renewed old friendships, was
one of undiluted happiness.
Brennan was a keen and competent doctor, and though
his work was mainly administrative in later days, he retained
his interest in clinical medicine. He was not an academic
type, though he ardently fostered research in the Territory
during his term of office. Field workers who visited New
Guinea gratefully remember his warm welcome and unstinted
help and encouragement. He was interested in education
for tropical medical officers, and lectured at the School of
Public Health and Tropical Medicine. For many years he
was a member of the Advisory Council of the School.
Brennan was intensely interested in people and had friends
in all walks of life. Though essentially a man of action, he
loved talk; but it was talk concerned with action. Philo-
sophical discussion had little appeal for one so full of life
that speculation about its meaning would seem but waste
of breath. Like Goethe’s Bgmont his fashion was to live
generously, and he might have agreed with Egmont that
“he is already dead who lives for his own safety”, or asked
himself “Do I live merely to think about life?”. He did not
readily express his inner beliefs or aspirations, and it
always seemed that these, too, were translated into action
and expressed in his open-hearted, generous and helpful life.
It is not possible to think of anyone who lived life more
fully, or with greater appreciation for its essential good-
nesses; and as he freely gave friendship and service, so
he reaped love and appreciation. Increasing illness and
distress, in his later days, did not dampen his enthusiasms,
and knowing only too well the hazards that beset him, he
remained undaunted and content. He is deeply mourned —by
his wife and daughters, by his brother, Dr. Kevin Brennan,
Chief Health Officer for Victoria, and other members of his
family, and by a very wide circle of devoted friends. They
will never forget him, for, as an old friend said, “It seemed
that the Town got darker when he went”.
Page Seven


AUSTRALASIAN MEDICAL PUBLISHING CO. LTD.
SEAMER AND ARUNDEL STS., GLEBE, SYDNEY
