



MOE
ASS(
LINC
MAR
MAC
SAE.
ET
PRESERVED PEAS, in 11b. tins.
PRESERVED BEANS, in lib, tins.
PRUNES, Finest Quality, in 21b. jars.
MUSHROOMS, in 11b. tins.
WHITE BEANS, in casks of 2 cwt.
WHITE WINE VINEGAR, in 1 doz. cases.
FINEST FRENCH SALAD OIL.
FRENCH CHOCOLATE, Finest Quality.
PATBS DB FOIE GRAS and TRUFFLES.
ASSORTED SYRUPS (French.)
WINE CORKS AND CORKING MACHINES.
13 Macquarie Place.
V. D. (Vergniaud) CLARETS, NosqO, 1,2, 3, 4.
KRUG CHAMPAGNE. " ” :


EDWARD TRICKETT
ELIAS LAY COOL
« ,/y
AUSTRALIA’S
fzgiis
CHAMPION OARSMEN. '|C|M
\. V'"
By CHABON,
OF THE “S-FFZTF-F HAIL.”
IT. R. WOODS & CO., MACHINE & GENERAL PRINTERS,
13 BRIDGE STREET.
a. s s 2.
FStcG


JOHN A. WILKINSON,
Wine Grower & Merchant,
(Too la Ito Mint Cellars,
If 9 P/tt-St,Sydney.
YINEYARD—
Coolalta, Branxton, New Soutli 'WaleSo
QUARTS. PINTS, PER GAL.
s. "d. s. d. s. d.
Coolalta Hermitage, extra quality ... 30 0 17 6 12 6
No. 1 Coolalta Red ... ... ... 21 0 12 6 8 0
No. 2 „ „ 16 0 9 6 6 0
Burgundy 21 0 12 6 8 0
Port 21 0 12 6 8 0
Yin Ordinaire ... ... ... ... 120 76 40
RED WINES.
WHITE WINES.
Muscat 30 0 17 6 12 6
Do. No. 2 21 0 12 6 8 0 7
Do. Brown 21 0 12 6 8 0
Sherry 21 0 12 6 8 0
No. 1 Coolalta 21 0 12 6 8 0
No. 2 „ 16 0 9 6 6 0
Yin Ordinaire ... ... ... ... 120 76 40


M 3i5 S/FBIO6
s-srr


The Oldest Established
DRAPERY WAREHOUSE
IN THE COLONIES.
Edward Hordern &
668 BRICKFIELD
IyEHY Article imported direct from the Manufacturers,
and sold at the lowest possible rate ol profit. The
stock being always well assorted you can rely upon getting
anything you require.
o~rcie~rs f trotyl tihe CoTLTttry Tecetve
Special
IDWABD iOlßlli & SOIS,
IMP OR TERS,
Wholesale and Eetail Drapers,
668 BRICKFIELD HILL.


rpHE following article lias been written with the
object of placing our Champion Oarsmen in a
fair position before the public. It has been thought
that should its object be attained, and the public
career of Trickett and Laycock be better understood
and appreciated, an appeal for pecuniary assistance
towards their expenses might be made with a
reasonable hope of success. The pamphlet is dis-
tributed gratis, and the expense of publishing
10,000 copies have been defrayed by the advertise-
ments which are attached. The work has been done
out of a pure love for the sport, and if it should
attain the expected result the writer will be more
than repaid for his labour. Perhaps an apology
is necessary for the fact that part of the following
article has already appeared in the columns of the
Sydney Mail , but the pamphlet would have been
incomplete without its insertion. The thanks of
the writer is also due to Messrs. H. P. Woods & Co.,
Publishers, who have rendered every assistance, and
who have taken the risk of publication.
April 12th, 1882.


•5“ H. D A H M S, -e
(Late Twemlow),
JffMtllUl W*tdM**fc*t*
AND M ANIJFACTURING JEWELLER,
Optician, Electro - Plater, Gilder, &c.,
107 OXFORD STREET, SYDNEY.
©OPMTIY ORDERS PDKGTDALLY JLTTIMIIO TO,
H. D. begs to inform the Public that he has gained his practical
experience as workman with some of the most eminent Firms, namely :
Dent, London; Henri Robert, Paris; Schwepp, Frankfort; and
T. T, Jones & Son, Sydney.
“A friend in need is a friend indeed”—so said Mrs.
Johnson to her sister-in-law, when she explained how much
improved matters had been at home, ever since her husband
had been getting his boots and shoes at H. HILDER’S Boot
Emporium, 670 GEORGE STREET. At one time, she remarks,
he was so irascible that nothing would please him, but ever
since this fortunate event, a change came over him, and there-
fore, out of gratitude, hopes both her sisters, her cousins, and
her aunts will take the hint by not forgetting to call on this
great public benefactor. The address is H. HILDER,
670 GEORGE STREET, next Edward Hordern & Sons,
Drapery Establishment.


A PLEA FOR OUR CHAMPIONS.
j|jN the occasion of the Balmain Regatta of 1874, Sir Hercules
la. Robinson, who had then but two years’ experience of Australia
and Australians, spoke as follows :—“ Why is it, I would ask, that
an Englishman landing in Australia at once finds himself more
completely at home than he does at any part of the world out of the
old country 1 ? And why is it that, out of all our numerous
descendants, Australians the most closely resemble the parent
stock ? In great matters such as language, religion and laws, the
Anglo-Saxon race is very much alike in every quarter of the
globe. Why is it, therefore, I repeat that there is a closer family
likeness between Englishmen and Australians than there is
between Englishmen and Canadians, or between Englishmen and
the inhabitants of the United States, or between Englishmen and
their descendants at the Cape of Good Hope, or any part of the
world outside Australasia 1 Why, the reason is this, that here at
the antipodes you resemble the people in the old country not only
in the serious business of life but also in its amusements.” Like
most of the public utterances of our respected ex-Governor, his
remarks on this occasion were peculiarly happy. Why Australians
should possess this characteristic more than any other of the
British colonists, it is hard to say. Perhaps it is that being so
wrapt up in business pursuits and money making, which is but
natural to the people of a young nation, they crave in their
hours of for some more gentle and pleasing excitement,
and find it in our sports and pastimes. It is well for us that in
the race of wealth we are able to pause and find rest and recrea-
tion in such amusements. But apart from this consideration, for
many reasons they should be encouraged. The majority of these
pastimes do admirable duty as a substitute for physical educa-
tion. Though certaiuly not so effective in muscular development
as the perfect system which has worked so much good in Ger-
many, yet they serve the purposes of recreation, and fulfil an


1* ★ ★ *
1 if Jr
i ■; : *
HOP BITTERS
Contain Hops, Buchu, Mandrake, & the Purest & Best
4c rii it
Medical Qualities of all other Bitters.
/ Do not suffer yourself or lot let your friends suffer, Will be paid. for a Case
but use and urge them to use Hop Bitters. they will not cure OV help.
i
/
voinnna, vmum & go., m fiii stmt,
SOLE AGENTS FOR THE COLONIES OF AUSTRALASIA.
A MEDICINE, NOT A DRINK


important part as an agreeable agent of healthy exercise and
muscular development. Training for athletic sports has for long
been looked upon with a considerable amount of suspicion ; but it
has been proved beyond doubt that, when conducted with reason-
able care, it is productive of an immense amount of good. Apart
from the moral effect of a self-imposed abstinence from the many
little luxuries which have become almost indispensible in our
modern mode of living, the early hours and regular diet, there is
in the severe work and change of living an influence which seems
to renovate the whole body, and confer a lasting benefit on the
system. Dr. John Ed. Morgan, of Manchester, has perhaps done
more than any other man in England to dispel the bugbear which
has so long existed regarding the supposed injury resulting from
training. The question was drawn attention to in a highly
coloured and sensational correspondence in the columns of the
Times, in the year 1867. Statements were made of the per-
manent injury done to young men who were yearly pressed into
the University eights, and of their early death. An instance was
quoted in which the whole of the oarsmen of one crew were stated
to have died within a short period of an hard-earned achieve-
ment, There were not wanting able defenders of so popular a
sport as rowing ; but, as there were no statistics to refer to, the
discussion resolved itself into a question of statement against
statement. As may be imagined, the practice of training received
a severe shock in the public mind. Dr. Morgan, however,
resolved to inquire into the matter more fully, and the result is
his intensely interesting work entitled “ University Oars.” After
much patience and very great labour he succeeded in obtaining the
written opinion of almost every living oarsman who had taken
part in the University contests since the year 1829, and respecting
those who had died, he ascertained from their relatives the
information he desired. The result was satisfactory in the
extreme. He found that the percentage of those who were
supposed to have received injury was ridiculously small ; that the
statement of the death of a whole boat’s crew had no foundation
in fact; and that, taking the whole 294 oarsmen who took part
in the University races between the years 1829 and 1869, their
term of life compared with the ordinary expectation of life
according to Dr. Parr was so conclusively in their favour that it
did not leave the slightest doubt as to the permanent benefit
derived. The following extract, from a work entitled “ The


BUZACOIT & ARMSTRONG.
IMF OUTERS % VENDORS OF
English & American Sculls & Scull-Oars
8 to 15 FEET,
Fmmsw MateiJW SevLMfS*
AMERICAN ASH OARS & SWEEPS
7 to 24 FEEI,
iwty lipfelte for Yachts, Salliaig I tiling Boats.
AMERICAN COTTON CANVAS AND DUCK.
Burgees for the Sydney Boyol and Brinee Alfred
Yacht Clubs,
fACIfIC BUBBEB PAINTS
In all Shades and Colors, from Is. per can.
Tarr & Wonson’s COPPER PAINTS
In and 1 -gallon cans.
BUZACOTT AND ARMSTRONG,
Market & Sussex Streets, Sydney,
USTZE-A-IR PYEMONTT DBKIX3C3-E


Intellectual Aspect of Athleticism,” may not perhaps be out of
place : —“ That while average classmen is thirty per cent., among
cricketers it rises to forty-two, and among rowing men to forty-
five per cent.; nay, the very elite of the University —the men who
obtain the open fellowships—are more often found in the College
eight or eleven than any other section of the community.” It
may be mentioned that this has been endorsed by Dr. Morgan,
who has published in his work statistics of the relative honours
gained by those who do and those who do not take part in athletic
sports. Much more evidence might be adduced, but the foregoing
is sufficient to calm the fears of those over-anxious parents who
jealously regard the interference of manly and healthy sports
with their children’s intellectual progress. It may be asked,
what has the foregoing to do with the present subject ? Indirectly
it has a great deal, for, in drawing attention to the importance of
this branch of sport, we can with greater confidence advocate the
claims of its representatives. In this colony in particular rowing
has been a sport second to none in popularity, and one to which
all classes are devotedly attached. Whether all this enthusiasm
and excitement in the worship of muscle is carried to an extrava-
gant extent, or whether, in the honourable pursuit of a manly
sport, we are drifting to the time when in peaceful battles alone
the world will find its heroes and champions, we know not; but
this is certain, that so long as we have such honest and true men
as Hanlan, Trickett, and Laycock to represent us, so long may we
turn from our more serious occupations, and with genuine pleasure
join in the excitement, enrolling ourselves among the subjects of
our athletic king. Year by year the spirit of competition in
manly pastimes grows more popular ; but there is much to be
done before it can be looked upon with unbiassed favour and
approval. Gambling, hanging like a black cloud over most
of our national games, is an evil having so firm a root that we
have yet to learn how to combat it, and cope with its fascinating
influences. It has been said that over £lOO,OOO changed hands
over the last Hanlan-Trickett match, though twice that sum would
be nearer the mark, and that, it should be remembered, was in a
race in which the competitors contended for the proportionately
absurd sum of £2OO. Who will question the responsibility and
trust placed in the hands of two men placed in such a position ?
Yet in the race in question, as well as the great majority of
others, we have every reason to believe that the men were true to


NOTICE. I
TO LOVERS OF THE WEED.
Why smoke bad Tobacco or Cigars ?
Iff if 11 fif M lipiW it nil
149 KING STREET,
Opposite UTli-ea/tre a.l Sta.ll Eixtrance
■*« ftftß WOUWTSD, *O. AffSSflS FITTED. **■
149 King Street, Sydney
mills NEWEST and NEAREST COAL MINE to SYDNEY supplies the CHEAPEST, CLEANEST,
and THRIFTIEST Household and Steaming Coal in the Colony,
USs. FUSE TON NET, delivered within City Bounds.
This new Coal, with a good draught, and range and bars kept well free from ash, makes a
stronger, more lasting, and cleaner fire than any other. It neither has the objectionable smoky
flare and soot of Newcastle coal, nor does it splinter and fly off like the Western, but it affords that
domestic desideratum of some kinds of English coal of heating an iron or cooking a steak as
thoroughly and cleanly as a charcoal or breeze fire, while it imparts to the steak none of that dis-
agreeable odour of the unwholsome fumes given off by a breeze or gas fire.
A LIBERAL DISCOUNT ALLOWED TO WHOLESALE CUSTOMERS.
A. B. BLACK, Contractor, 347 George-street. Depot—Woolloomooloo Wharf-
COALCLIF P COAL.


themselves, their supporters, and above corruption. Few are
aware of the spirit of chivalry and honour which too often blushes
unseen in the career of many of our athletic heroes —men who
centre all their hopes in the distinction of pride of place, yet
whose names are treated as synonyms of dishonesty and treachery.
Such has been the fortune and fate of Trickett and Laycock.
Will those who remember the morning of 14th November 1880
ever forget the effect of the news in Sydney that Trickett, upon
whom the hopes of the Australians had rested, had fallen an
easy prey to the insatiable appetite of the Canadian ? A stranger
on that morning would have supposed that some serious calamity
had befallen us, and that the colony was steeped in mourning.
Not young enthusiasts alone, but men of business engaged in the
more serious affairs of life, felt that with Trickett’s defeat our
Colonial life had suffered a blow rarely equalled, the more severe
since it was totally unexpected, and the sympathy with the
champion who had served us so well and truly was a secondary
consideration, and the deep sorrow we felt was at the fall of our
own expectations, and after our arrogance in assuming that under
all conditions and circumstances our representative should prove
superior to all, we certainly in our grief presented but a ludicrous
figure. Impatient of the delay of a few hours which would
bring us the expected good news, we pressed the electric wire
into service and cleared the path of that mystic messenger which
brings us into such close relationship with our friends in old
England. Throughout the length of the longest telegraph line
in the world, its sentinels awaited the signal to flash the news
that two men of muscle had struggled from Putney to Mortlake
and that one had dashed a plank through the waters of old
Thames some few seconds faster than his rival, and when we
heard the news, with what derision was it received, but the cable
had too truly done its work. Within two hours of the time when
10,000 voices cheered the popular Canadian as he dashed past
the post which proclaimed his victory, there were sad hearts in
Sydney bewailing the fate of their champion, their own expecta-
tions, and in too many cases their empty pockets.
Since then evil rumour has with its black tongue, been
very free with the good name of the once respected and esteemed
ex-champion. A few men who had invested a few pounds on
what they believed to be a certainty, sought consolation for their


IABOHE, Fill & Co..
AGENTS FOR
Hamburg Magdeburg Fire Insurance
Company,
Dresden General Marine Insurance
Company,
LOSSES XIST THE COLOLTY.
E. KIRCHNER & CO.,
<s\\ o 1 p
S 3 Wyitysird Street
ell
IMPORTERS OF BRITISH, AMERICAN, AND CONTINENTAL
Hardware, Piiite, (His, if.
Sole Agents for Oscar Kropff’ s AE rated
Water and Ice Machinery.


losses in abusing the man whose friendship they sought in his
more prosperous days. Friends only in name so long as they
could make use of him. These evil reports when once started
have not lost much in their journey. At the present time both
with Trickett and Laycock there is a doubt and suspicion as to
their integrity of purpose and character in the public mind, and one
of the principal objects of this pamphlet is to not only give these
rumours a most thorough and complete contradiction, but as far
as we are able prove them to be utterly false. Trickett
and Laycock have done nothing to forfeit the slightest
respect or good opinion of their friends or the general public.
They are representative Australians of whom none need be
ashamed, but rather in the manner in which they have conducted
themselves as our champions we have every reason to be proud }
and that they should require apologists at all is a matter much
to be regretted, but as recipients of the public favour it is to their
own interest that the charges made against them should be
disproved, and if by doing so we are able to restore to them the
confidence of the public we confess to have earned an ample
reward and fulfilled the purpose of this pamphlet. It has been
asked times without number what has kept Trickett during his
absence from Australia for the past eighteen months, and how
have his family subsisted in Sydney during that period ? It is
a well known fact that Trickett’s finances were in anything but
a prosperous condition when he left Sydney, and that since his
race with Hanlan he has won but a trifling amount, the result of a
couple of successful races. What supports him p Then we have
the common intelligence that he is not only at the present time in
command of a considerable amount of money, but that his wife
has just completed a terrace of houses, significantly pointed to as
the result of his losses. This, from an idle rumour, is at the
present time the almost unanimous opinion of the many who take
an interest in the matter. The facts of the case are simply these.
It should be remembered that shortly after Trickett’s race with
Hanlan, the British public, with a generosity which should com-
mand our admiration and gratitude, subscribed for Trickett, in
recognition of his manly and honourable bearing during his stay in
England, a testimonial of over six hundred sovereigns. This
sum, it should be observed, was not contributed by a few indivi-
duals interested in the race, but by a large number of citizens,


THOMAS WIIIII,
Engineer, Irocfoundar, and General Smith.
op
Mining, Tram, and Rail wag Rolling Stock, Chilled
and Annealed Wheels and Axles , ( superior to Steel),
rm & buegeae mof sates
Strong Boom Doors and Frames, Banker’s Cupboards, Deed Boxes,
Stoves, Wrought and Cast Girders, &c., and Ironwork of every
description.
■WORKS—OLEBB FOUNDRY, OLBBE. and SUSSEX-ST.
Office and Show Rooms—22o Pitt Street, Sydney,
Opposite Tsutteresull’s-
J. WENBORN,
wmrcm --i.vjf clock
Jeweller and Silversmith,
813 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
{ Opposite Railway Station. )
laablmlle JmUny, IWiea Mi I eiiig Hip.
REPAIRS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION CAREFULLY EXECUTED.


including many of the highest rank and social position. Since
then the ex-champion has made at least £2OO in the races he has
won. This amounts to £BOO. Dui’ing his stay in America, the
most of the time he was the guest of a Mr, Read, the host of one
of the largest hotels in Toronto. Before he left England he
remitted nearly the whole of the sum subscribed for him to his
wife, and acting on the advice of a few friends, gentlemen
well-known and respected in Sydney, she invested the sura in
the building of a small house of modest pretensions in Windsor-
street, Paddington. The house was built and a considerable
Slim is actually still due upon it. This is the terrace of houses
we have heard so much about, and the only property which
Trickett or Mrs. Trickett possesses or have any interest in. For
the past twelve months, a few gentlemen admirers of the ex-
champion have allowed Mrs. Trickett a slight sum sufficient to
live comfortably until her husband returns. It is a pity that
such family matters should be required to be paraded in print,
but it has become an absolute necessity. It is done at the
present time with full permission, and we hope in giving it a full
contradiction, we will hear the end of it. Trickett, with what
he had in hand and won in America, has but eked out an
existence for some time ; and if all knew what troubles he has
had to contend with, and how he has persisted in spite of all
obstacles to attain the object of his ambition, he would not want
either sympathy or practical support. We can assure our readers
that they may place the utmost reliance upon the result of our
enquiries, and that, as far as the reports we have mentioned are
concerned, they are utterly false. Lay cock seems to have been
even more unfortunate than Trickett for, possessing fewer friends,
he seems to have at the same time many more slanderers ; and
if there is anything that could possibly tend to discourage a man
in an honest career and tempt him to dishonesty, it is in the
cruel and unreasonable manner in which Laycock has been
slandered and branded as a cheat. Throughout a long and
perhaps intimate acquaintance with the writer, there has been
many opportunities of observing the character of the Shark
Islander in all its phases. By his peculiar manner, he was never
with the Australian public such a popular man as Trickett, and
never will be. Yet with the British public he was chosen
favorite from his first race. He is personally not a man to make


SEWING » KNITTING
c o t t o ar
IS THE BEST
MADE
FOB HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN.
Alexander’s
Alexander’s
Alexander’s
“ SUIT ”
“ SUN ”
Extra Quality
Extra Quality
KNITTING COTTON,
Three and Four Ply,
is noted for
SIX CORD COTTON,
unsurpassed for
GLACE COTTON,
unsurpassed for
Machine or Hand
Use.
Machine or Hand
Use.
Superior Quality.
Sold by all Wholesale and Retail Storekeepers
Colonies.
throughout
the Australian
E. F. & J. ALEXANDER & 00.,
GLASGOW.
Sole Agents for the Colonies — LOW DEN & GEE, Sydney.
KING & PITT STREETS.
-|( THE CELEBRATED CORNER. )|-
The rendezvous of Aquatic Men, where the best
information can be obtained on Rowing and
other sporting matters. Look out for the grand
contest to take place in September next, whan
the undersigned hopes to taring together the
Best Scullers of the World.


friends. His disposition is too phlegmatic and reserved, and he
has lost many a good friend by his somewhat bluff and too
straightforward manner. He is thoroughly grateful for any
kindness shown him, but it does not find expression in words.
Unlike most men, he is peculiar in his indifference to public
applause but at the same time he appreciates to its full value any
recognition of his efforts on the part of the public other than the
howling and yelling of the mob. If his career is critically
examined from first to last, it will be found honest and un-
tarnished to a degree, and it is scarcely to be wondered at that
the man who has been accused of the most dishonest motives in
actions in which he had the best intentions should be soured in
temper, and disgusted with the experience of being tossed about—
at one time a hero, and at another a rogue. Two races in which
Lay cock has competed have done much to injure him in reputation.
The first was his great race with Rush on 12th April, 1878, over
which there was so much dispute as to who had really won. It is
well known that Laycock’s own backers credited the reports then
prevalent, refused to complete the last deposit of stakes, and
decided to forfeit the amount paid down. Had it not been for
the efforts of a gentleman amateur, Mr. D. Murray, who, though
not distinguished by exploits on the water, has always endeavoured
to assist in sustaining the character of rowing as an honourable
sport, the race, which proved to be one of the most exciting and
interesting we witnessed, would not have been rowed.
To the surprise of many, Laycock won ; but can it be credited
that, though previously he was expected to lose the race inten-
tionally, after he had won it he was accused of winning it unin-
tentionally ? Were it not for the fact that many to this day
believe the latter statement to be true, we would hardly pause to
notice so unreasonable and illogical an accusation. Laycock, by
a magnificent spurt, won the race within a short distance of the
winning post. Is it reasonable to suppose that a man who desired
to impress the public with the idea of a fair defeat would allow
them to witness so fine an exhibition of his powers, and give so
convincing a proof that his store of energy and strength was far
from being exhausted ? The second race in question was also
with Rush, but of a later date—on 2nd September, 1881. Laycock
was beaten from start to finish, and, as the odds were laid
to a ridiculous extent on him, he again became the subject of
abuse. But the most superficial examinations should scatter


Railway Bridge.
REGENT HOUSE,
IMPORTER OF
GLASS (all sizes cut to order) : Pirte, Sheet, Stained, Ornamental,
Cathedral, Hammered (flat and rolled.)
TURPENTINE, WHITE and RED LEAD, RAW and BOILED
OILS, BRUSHWARE, KEROSENE OIL, VARNISHES,
Colours for House and Coach Painters, Plasterers, &c.
PAPERHANGERS’ CANVAS, GOLD AND SILVER LEAF,
PAPERHANGINGS, WOOD-PRESERVING OIL, TAR,
RESIN, CEMENT, &c., &c.
KALSOMINE, all shades colours. CHAMPION’S genuine
WHITE LEAH. WOOD PRESERVING OIL.
PAINT HEADY FOR USE, any shade required.
ALL ORDERS PROMPTLY EXECUTED by Rail, Steamer,
to City or Suburbs.
Shop Fronts and Sashes Glazed.
Warehouse : 369 George st.
Is the Most Central OIL and COLOUR GLASS and PAPERHANGING
STORES for the following districts
Ashfield Callan Park Glebe Randwick
Annandale Croydon Glenmore-road Redmyre
Burwood Darlington Marrickville Stanmore
Belmore Double, Rose and Moore Park Surry Hills
Balmain Rushcutter Newtown Summer Hill
Botany Bays North Shore Homebush
Bondi Enraore North Sydney Waverley
Canterbury Enfield Pyrmont Woollahra
Cook’s River Elswick Paddington Potts’, Darling,
Concord Five Dock Redfern Miller’s and
Camperdown Forest Lodge Rookwood Glebe Points.
Coogee
Daily Delivery to the above places.
Every man ills own Painter. Mixed Paint, all shades and colour.
Sashes and Glazed Shop Fronts,
GEO XH. Or 3E3 HU. 3VE IEJ 3FL IF* DE3C "ST,
REGENT HOUSE, Railway Bridge.


suspicion to the winds. There is only one reason for selling a
race, and that is that a larger sum of money can be made on the
certainty of the result than made the usual chances of success.
To do this the favorite must be the one who turns traitor, and
his first consideration is to influence the opinion that his chances
are beyond dispute, and especially that he is well and fit for the
event. Yet we find that Laycock made it a matter of no secrecy
whatever, that for some days prior to the date of the race, both
he and Power, who was training with him, were seriously
indisposed. It was the common talk of the town. The man
who would attempt to delude the public and sell a race under
such circumstances must be a born idiot. These are the trifles
upon which the reputation of men who wish to serve the public
honorably and well are outraged.
The foregoing are the only charges worth noticing which
can be brought against the Champion, and it will be seen that the
evidence, instead of substantiating them, shows them to be most
absurd and unworthy of evidence. Hanlan, Trickett, and Laycock
are the representative men of many honest straightforward athletes
who value the distinction of popularity and position much more
than a tempting bribe, and who but want the confidence of the
public to bring their comrades to the same sense of honor and
integrity. Extravagant as the homage paid to these champions
may appear, we hope it may be long before we may see it cease*
We would leave to better hands than ours to draw the moral of
the present worship of muscle, but we trust that it has not so
demoralized us as to deserve the sarcasm of our Poet Laureate,
who writes :
“ Bow down in the ashes, a son of the Yank—
A trader in shell fish—has driven a plank
A head of the plank of our Trickett,
The country is steeped in the shadow at last,
Our national life is a thing of the past;
We’re beaten at Sculling and Cricket.
And this in a land where a Dailey was born,
Forgive me, my friend, if a flavour of scorn
Is here with a colour of sorrow ;
I’m often, you see, like a man that is ill,
When I know in our worship of animal skill
We’d starve a new Wentworth to-morrow.”


470 G-EOTIaE STREET
(Opposite Fruit Markets)
4Mi and gaits, 635., m§„ P#.
IN#* cf §nsland | rcusqrs to (6s 6d, M)s, %%§ 6d
Garments thoroughly Shmijk. Perfect Fit Guaranteed.
|| SADDLE AND HARNESS MAKER, |
14 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY.
By Special |||||||| Appointment
To His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, His Excellency the Right Hon.
the Earl of Belmore, His Excellency Sir Hercules Robinson, K.C.M.G., and
His Excellency Lord Augustus Loftus, K.C.M.G.
BEST COURSING MATERIALS OF NEWEST DESIGNS ALWAYS ON HAND.
Awarded First Prize for Gentlemen’s Saddles at the Agricultural
Exhibitions, 1869, 1870, 1878, and 1875.


It does not require much research to prove that if as a com-
munity we are devoted to manly sports, they are kept in their
proper place and rarely allowed to intrude among our more
intellectual pursuits. They have their proper places, and each
possesses the strongest claims for unanimous patronage and
support. To place them both on any terms approaching equality
would perhaps be considered by most people as extravagant, but
if space would admit the most interesting information could be
adduced in favor of physical education as a powerful auxiliary
towards intellectual culture. The nation, whose people have been
distinguished in the practice of manly sports and pastimes, will
ever be found in the front rank in the march of science, in
literature, better as soldiers, as artizans, in every respect happier
in the enjoyment of life than a frivolous, indolent and weakbodied
people. It is this which gives us encouragement in urging the
claims of Australia’s greatest and most celebrated champions,
their countrymen have already done a great deal for them,
but on the other hand they have done much for Australia. A
gentleman, but lately returned from England after an absence
of three years from the colony, found throughout England
that our cricketers, commencing with Mr. D. Gregory’s first
Eleven together with Trickett and Laycock, have, next to the
Exhibition, done more in the old country to advertise Australia
and draw attention to the Colonies than any other event that
has occurred. What is the result ? When once attention is drawn
to these colonies, inquiries as to their resources must follow as a
matter of course. This in the course of time must lead to the
result which we have for so long desired : a larger population, by
diverging a part of the vast stream of immigration which has set
in of late years towards the Hew World. In their share towards
this result, though it may have been done but indirectly, Trickett
and Laycock have just claims for recompense, though as our
representative Athletes alone, they should claim the good feeling
and consideration of every Australian. Examine their conduct
during their visit to England on the last occasion, and it will be
found replete with the most interesting incidents creditable to
themselves and to the country they represented. Trickett, it will
be remembered, left these shores under the most auspicious cir-
cumstances with the good will and best wishes of all who knew
him, and with the supposed prospects of certain success. Laycock


P. J. POLLE’S
CASH
TAILORING
ESTABHSHMENT
728 GEORGE STREET,
SYDNEY.
A large and well-assorted stock of Tweeds and
Coatings direct from the manufacturers,
always on hand.
All Garments Cut in the Most Fashionable Styles.
PERFECT FIT GUARANTEED
Note tlio ikddrc)S,<s
728 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY
Near Haymarket.
Try the OXFORD SUITS to order from £3 3s
The Oxford Trousers from 12s 6d to order


left shortly after without ceremony, with scarcely a friend, and
with barely sufficient money to take him to England. He landed in
London without friends, and little more than a five-pound note in
his pocket. He speculated upon gaining a few friends, but it is
probable that he would have been woefully mistaken had not
Trickett sought him out, and taking his old rival by the hand got
him support and friends. In the coui’se of a few months how
events changed ! Laycock started well, and was soon on a pros-
perous career, which for brilliancy and extraordinary features has
never been equalled. Trickett, on the other hand, on whom so
much depended, fought his battle and was defeated. Ruined and
broken-hearted, his best friend was the one whom he assisted.
Laycock lost all on this race that he had previously won ; but
from that time the men became inseparable friends. In the Hop
Bitters contest it is well known that Laycock divided his prize of
£5OO with Trickett, though the noble gift from the English people
to the ex-champion enabled him to refuse the generous offer.
Trickett’s vicissitudes seemed to cling to him. Broken-down,
one misfortune followed another, till at last as an oarsman he
seemed to have been completely played out. Of Lay cock’s posi-
tion, perhaps, no other words could explain it better than the
following extract from a leading article in the London Sportsman
of 20th November, 1880, coipmenting upon his projected race
with Hanlan :—“ ‘I am well,’ adds Laycock, in his bluff hearty
fashion ; * and though I am not such a fast puller as Trickett,
let me show Hanlan and the British public that the Australians
can pull well enough to prevent anyone playing with them on the
journey.’ Pussilanimous friends have urged him not to attempt
a match against such a redoubtable oarsman as Hanlan, pointing
out that it will be better for him to go home with the credit of
four successive victories than risk a winding-np defeat. But the
brave-hearted Shark Islander is inflexible. He desires one more
cut-in for Australia, and that he is prepared to make if only the
slightest chance is afforded. As we have already said, his
patriotism and valour are admirable in the extreme, and must
command the widest respect and applause. Were the match to
take place and Laycock to sustain defeat, we feel positively
certain that he would be heartily greeted right from Mortlake to
Putney on the journey home, just because he demonstrated
such loyalty to a defeated confrere, and such an abiding


The Undersigned Furnishes Houses
j 3 «
1 2
O 3
THOMAS WRIGHT,
p* a.
o
«id
% gp
M • OHH
Sb’OO
gN geo
«« _!<
%|l
iSig
s«ft°
gStf-,
hBI-S
Wo
5C
oc «H c 3
(S °s
« S'
JL
*
3 «
527 GEORGE STREET, BRICKFIELD,
S Y D M E Y-
(Formerly of George Street)
GEOBU LAN!)
IMPORTER OIF 1
•hT CHINA, GLASS^IId EARTHEPfARE
Begs to announce that he has EE-OOMMENOED BUSINESS in the
SYSIISY ARGADB,
Where every article in the above line will be sold at lowest possible price
Goods Delivered Daily.


jealousy for the honour of his country. What would
happen were he to prove victorious it would be diffi-
cult to guess.” Nothing could be more flattering. The
expression of opinion was but in keeping with the remainder
of the leading sporting journals in the old country. Of his race
with Hanlan, we shall have something to say further on. He
left shortly after for Australia, Trickett accompanying him as
far as Gravesend, remaining a stranger—away from his home,
undecided in all his intentions but one, and that was, not to
return until he had made another attempt to regain and bring
back to Australia his lost laurels. Laycock was received back
with an ovation such as been rarely equalled in Sydney, while
Trickett, the once popular champion, but now almost forgotten,
was leading a vagabond sort of life, away from his family and
home, awaiting for the covetted opportunity which should give
him the chance of attaining his object. In endeavouring to place
the merits of these oarsmen befoi’e the public, our intention is
first to make them understood and show that they have done
nothing to forfeit the confidence formerly placed in them, and
secondly, we urge their claims for pecuniary assistance. It is
the opinion of many that this race of Trickett with Hanlan is a
mere waste of money, and that to subscribe the stakes is but
surely adding to the already well-filled coffers of the Canadian.
That Hanlan is so eminently superior to Trickett and Laycock
there should be but one opinion in the matter. This is no doubt
plausible by a mere glance at the result of their last races. The
real facts of the case are, that as yet we have had no test
whatever. The Australians were beaten men before they started,
and if our readers will bear with us, we will endeavour to
prove it.
That Hanlan has the advantage of some mechanical con-
trivances not generally known other than his immediate supporters
was at one time a popular impression; the idea was scouted by
many who seriously thought over the matter ; it has been ridi-
culed and burlesqued—by one representing a steel bar in the
bow of the boat with a magnet at the winning post, by another
exhibiting some fancied motive power ; by the assistance of a
tow-line from a friendly dolphin, together with many other
absurdities. It is evident that the opinion has prevailed that
Hanlan’s speed was not the result of ordinary means, and it is


■n bit fSKERTS
Corner of King & Pitt Streets,
SYDNEY.


certain that there are still a large number who are sceptical on
the subject, and who like our well-known Skipper Mat. Byrnes
believe “ Thar’s something in it.” Now that the bitterness of
our disappointed hopes is not so fresh, and we are less likely to
feel that prejudice, which strong sympathies must engender in a
lesser or greater degree, it will perhaps not be uninteresting to
discuss the question whether Hanlan’s career entitles him to the
designation of a phenomenon among scullers, and to examine what
he has done to merit the distinction. That our Champions (who
by their more ardent admirers were thought almost invincible)
should be defeated in the zenith of their fame was thought im-
possible, but to be defeated by a man of Hanlan’s weight and
stature was certainly a consummation so little anticipated that
some immediate explanation was indispensible. Trickett must have
turned traitor, thought the mob andthey were satisfied. Trickett was
overtrained, said the critrics, and the favorite was abused, but in
course of time, when Laycock came to the front and met his
confrere’s fate, opinion changed. That we should be represented
by two rogues, was too much even for the great unwashed; for
would it not reflect on themselves - i was made an honest
man for a time, and Laycock a hero, there was nought to do but
find some other explanation, and hence the credence given to
what has been known as Hanlan’s secret.
Three circumstances in connection with Hanlan that have
been somewhat prominently before the public mind have perhaps
been the principal cause in creating a doubt as to the genuiness
of his rowing. First his supposed diminutive statue ; second, the
complete assurance, amounting almost to a foregone conclusion
with which he and his supporters treat each event in which they
are concerned ; and lastly, his apparent immense superiority over
his opponents ; more noticeably Hawdon, Elliott, Trickett and
Laycock. To a casual reader these circumstances really appear
incomprehensible and unanswerable, but if subjected to a critical
examination, they will be found to exhibit a vastly different com-
plexion. Great stress has been laid upon the supposition that Hanlan
is so small a man. Though shorter by 6 inches than Trickett,
he is considerably above the average stature, and he is of that
height and weight which has perhaps yielded a larger number of
champions to the athletic field and to aquatics than all others put
together. There is a popular saying among rowers “ that a good


MK€ELSmm
78 KING STREET, SYDNEY,
OPPOSITE NEW ARCADE.
The above Company are now prepared to take, all descriptions of
Portrait work ; also Landscapes, Gentlemen’s Residences, Public
Buildings, Shipping, Tombstones, Machinery, &c.,
on most liberal terms.
VIEWS OF SYDNEY BOTANIC GARDENS, &G., ALWAYS ON HAND.
B. GO ODE, Manager .
mitsf®wsff©3iaiasnr 9 9
STUBBS SMITH,
having purchased the business of the late
n. mwmm bvuabd
346 GEORGE STREET,
at a Considerable Discount on Cost IPrice, intend Clearing Ottt all
their ready-made stock of
Gre M-tllS.© 223.033.TTIT'OfWriaa.g; -^-IP;sP>^2*ol
—AND—
Soys’ anti Clotliirtg
AT COST PRICE
and, therefore, are now able to compete with any of the Large Advertising Firms
of the City.
They further beg to inform their patrons that they Intend Carrying on the
Business as usual.
VAnmn aniei
Will be carried on as before, with the exception that the prices will be at least,
20 PER CENT LOWER, as their Motto will be
SMAXiL PROFITS -A-dSTIO QUICK BETURITS
Wote the Address—346 GEORGE STREET,


little man has no chance with a good big man,” meaning that
both being equal in strength and endurance, the length and reach
of the taller man give him a great superiority and advantage.
This rule however requires confirmation, and if we overstep
the narrow circle of our colonial sculling, it will be found that
instead of the prizes going to the heaviest and tallest watermen,
experience shows it to be more often the reverse. Of late years,
being favoured with representative oarsmen of such splendid
physique as Trickett, Laycock, and Rush, we have been inclined
to accept them as the heau ideal of what a champion of the oar
should be, without taking a broader and fairer view of the matter.
Even our second-class scullers have contributed to this impression,
for at least half-a-dozen of them average over 6 feet in height. It is a
characteristic peculiar to our rowers of the present time, and it is
a question whether in physique the present professional oarsmen
of the colony will ever be surpassed, even if again equalled. It is
in regard to this prejudice in favour of big men that Hanlan has
demonstrated a most important result —that it is not necessary
for a sculler to be possessed of extraordinary length or reach in
order to use the slide to its full advantage, and obtain the
maximum length of stroke. In reality height and weight have
less to do with the chances of a sculler than is generally supposed.
The man to whom the Canadian must sooner or later succumb
may be a giant in stature, but it is just as probable as not that his
victor in turn will be one of average height. Hanlan’s size need
therefore cause no surprise. Robert Coombes, once champion of
England, and one of the fastest and finest exponents of the oar in
the old country, weighed but Bst. 121bs. in racing trim, and was
but 5 feet 4 inches in height, George Hosmer, who finished
third in the Hop Bitters contest on the Thames, and who is one
of the fastest scullers in the world for two miles, weighs only
lOst. For the enthusiasm and extraordinary confidence of
Hanlan’s supporters it is easy to account, being the natural result
of their proteges' brilliant career; and now, in referring to the
defeat of Trickett and Laycock, it is but fair to remind our
readers that, though it is well to accept an honourable defeat in a
becoming manner, it does not follow that a single victory should
silence a foe or settle a question of superiority. It is not
characteristic of a Briton to submit to a single reverse ; the weak
point should be ascertained and strengthened. Over-confidence


Fashionable High Class Wall-
Paper Warehouse.
H. H. GROTH,
White Lead & Color Merchant
Rubber Faint and Kalsomine Store,
& V* o csosca STBESI,
SYDIffSSY.
HADDOW & CO.,
LATE
B®° JSsta.bZish.ecL 1838. USk
BHU HISBSffiSH
-A-G-lEmSTTS —
JOSEPH BOYD & SON,
1 Change Alley, Pitt Street North, Sydney .


begets negligence, for which there is no better antidote than
defeat; and, apart from all other considerations, we believe we
are not far wrong in stating that a single test can rarely be taken
as a true idea of the calibre of an athlete. Hanlan, in addition to
being a most accomplished sculler, has been especially favoured
by fortune in the circumstances of his last races. That he should
have succeeded at all in inducing Trickett to give up his right to
row in Australian waters was a gain which he no doubt has since
estimated at its true value. Of all climates, the English during the
month of November was the one which an athlete accustomed to
the sunshine and mild temperature of New South Wales should
have avoided, and of all athletes Trickett, who was known to
suffer from bronchial affections, the last. This was felt to be the
case when the match was proposed, and on the date being fixed
for the 15th November it met with general disapproval. As the
time drew near, however, the apparent adverse circumstances
under which our champion would contend were forgotten, the
confidence in him became as strong, perhaps stronger than ever,
and we viewed the matter as though Trickett was rowing under
as favourable circumstances as ever he did on the waters of the
Parramatta. But what was the case ? The Field of 20th Nov., 1880,
says of the weather : —“After the arrival of Hanlan and Trickett
on the Thames, the weather was fairly propitious until late in
October, when the temperature suddenly fell in a most unlooked-
for manner, and heavy snowstorms, accompanied by bitter east
winds, gave us all a foretaste of arctic winter before its time.
Well might the Transatlantic scullers ask if we always had such
‘ cruel ’ weather at this season of the year.” But it will be
urged, why was Trickett so confident and sanguine of success
till the last moment ? Surely if aught ailed him, his friends
would have quickly known it; this would appear to settle the
question, was there not proof to the contrary ? and it must be
borne in mind that in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, if a
champion felt some slight ailment as the time of his struggle
drew near, he would be most likely to put a good face on the
matter and attribute it to one of the many changes that an
athlete is subject to during the process of training. There is a,
general disinclination among men of spirit to acknowledge that
they have “ gone wrong,” more especially at the last moment;
they readily find an excuse and succeed too often in not only


-Hie TIE I IB FULTOlsT^
|| 111111
(Registered Copyright.)
Is the most novel, attractive, legitimate method of advertising yet
introduced . Intending advertisers should go and see it, at the
Post Office passage between Pitt and George Streets .
For terms, apply
M. MM€BMW S €0.»
119 PITT STREET, SYDNEY


r
Trickett, was far and away behind his accustomed form. The
London Sportsman of 16th November, 1880, says : —“Weeks ago
we thought he was bringing himself down ‘ too fine,’ and on the
occasion of his indisposition which necessitated his excursion to
the Isle of Wight and France, did not hesitate to tell him
that he was what is technically known as * going off training.'
He had worked himself up to a pitch of muscular tension, which
nature refused to sustain for any length of time, and a relaxation
set in. Probably he was suffering from one of those relapses
yesterday There was a wheeziness about him
now and again, which was by no means pleasing to his supporters
and friends Trickett was loudly greeted, much
deceiving their friends but themselves. As early as Bth October
1880, “ Tim Whiffler,” an English correspondent of the
Melbourne Leader, says : —“ I hear strange rumours from those
likely to know concerning your man Trickett; that he is ‘ all to
pieces,’ all are agreed, and what is worse, he is suffering from a
fit of the ‘ blues ’ whatever that may be.” This was five weeks
before the race. As to his appearance on the day of the struggle,
the following opinions from the most impartial sources cannot
fail to convince the most sceptical that our old friend, Ned
of the cheering was kindly meant, for on his pale anxious face
was stamped in singularly plain language to any one who knew
the A B C of training, the gloomy presage of certain, utter and
hopeless defeat. Everybody felt and said plainly after they had
seen him that Trickett could not win,” Again, on 22nd
November : —“ We do not believe Trickett when he encountered
Hanlan was in a fit condition to accurately demonstrate the
amount of pace which could be assured by the adoption of
inboard leverage.” The Newcastle Daily Chronicle of the 16th
November says : —“ The Australian looked jaded and worn when
at the mark, and despite the assurances of his friends to the
contrary, we consider that he was overdone in his preparation,
and that he rowed weak from the very beginning of to-day’s race.”
L The Field says : —“ Trickett, on the other hand, seemed to be
ailing, at any rate many people thought him stale and over-trained,
as unquestionably he was over-anxious.” Says “Anglo-Australian
in the European Mail : —“ I turned to Trickett; his face was
pale and haggard, and I there saw what to my eyes was an
over-trained man, stale and fagged with too much hard work ; a


M.J. LAMBERT&Co„
Wholesale and Retail
WIHE m SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
MM fiaietom Stfi®!®
I©|l ||iiii| of j|l©| til
ill
AGENTS FOR ALEX. MONRO’S PRIZE BEBEAH WINES.
DO. SCHWEPPE’S MINERAL WATERS.


man whose pallor was unmistakeable, and whose dull skin
seemed to cover muscles, grand indeed in their size and pro-
portion, but too wiry—a man who, in trainer’s language, was too
fine, and had trained off.”
Many more might be quoted, but these are sufficient for the
present purpose. Of the race from the published description it
might be summed up in a few words : —“ Trickett started splash-
ing, rowed fairly well for a mile, and then fell to pieces.”
That such an account should be written of the ex-champion is
exceedingly strange to those who have been at all familiar with
his previous career ; but that it would be necessary for his victor,
under such circumstances to require the assistance of some
mechanical contrivance would be stranger still.
There is Laycock’s race, however, to be accounted for;
it might be said that this second event clenched the argument
and settled for good the question of Hanlan’s superiority. So it
would but for the remarkable circumstances under which the race
was rowed. In the depth of a winter unequalled in severity fox
many years, amid snow and ice, the river frozen, and rowing
only accomplished at rare intervals, and then at considerable
risk ; no exercise on land unless knee-deep in snow —this not for
days, but months, was Laycock’s portion. His opponent, a
native of a northern clime, where for a certain period of the year
the rower may drive his sleigh over the exact same course where
in the summer months he sculls his outrigger. Who shall say
that under such circumstances these two men met on equal
terms P For nearly nine months Laycock had been in almost
continuous training. It is astonishing to contemplate the
amount of work he got through in that time, and how he stood
it. He would gladly have returned home covered with laurels
after his victory in the Hop Bitters contest, had he not felt con-
vinced that Trickett’s performances in England were no guage of
his abilities. He challenged Hanlan and then his troubles com-
menced. Sick and tired of the incessant and severe routine of
training, each postponement saw him less and less fit for the
work before him, till at last he writes on the 26th January, the
date of our National Regatta, and a glorious summer’s day in
Port Jackson : —“ I am sick and tired of staying here any longer.
It is still terribly cold out rowing ; my fingers get that cold I can
scarcely hold on the sculls, the water in the boat freezes, long


-MU SO O TTI S H *-*■
Imperial Insurance
C^FIW,
£1,000,000.
This Company is now prepared to accept TTITE
.RISKS at Loivest Rates.
LOSSES PROMPTLY AND LIBERALLY SETTLED
IN SYDNEY.
J. GRAHAM NIXON,
Chief Agent for
if Bridge Street, Sydney.
COUNTRY AGENTS WANTED
Mr. J. OBAHAM NIXGN, (for many years in the service fo
the Australian Mutual Tire Society, and other similar institutions J,
has much pleasure in informing his friends and the public
generally that he has started btisiness as
IWSOfMWE /VNE QEflEflAt MEfJT,
AT
17 BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY,
and hopes by strict attention to the instructions of his clients to
merit their support.
Houses, Land, or General Merchandize. Bought and Sold either by
Public Auction or Private Contract.
INSURANCES EFFECTED WITHOUT TROUBLE OR EXPENSE
TO PROPONENTS.


icicles hang on to the outriggers, and by the time I get back the
box is full of ice.” The result of such exposure might be well
anticipated, and the following extract from a letter dated 11th
February, bearing the London postmark of three days before his
race with Han lan, need cause no surprise:—“Just a few lines,
the last you will receive from me in England, to let you know
that I have gone clean crooked. Since I last wrote I have had a
bad feverish attack of billiousness, cold sweats breaking out on
me, which make me quite weak, combined with which I have
caught cold, so that between the two I reckon I have lost all
chances of winning; I may recover a little, still I cannot be in
anything like first-class trim. With any sort of a row my tongue
sticks to the roof of my mouth.” It may be mentioned that on
asking Laycock if he should not have telegraphed his state of
health to his Sydney friends, he replied that he had strong hopes
of success notwithstanding his indisposition, and if he had
won after advising his friends that the contrary was probable,
nothing would have saved him from disgrace. He was right.
It must be remembered that Hanlan’s great reputation in England
up to the time of his race with Trickett rested principally on the
fact of his victories over Hawdon and Elliott; these were the
representative oarsmen of England, and it is easily understood
how the natural pride of their fellow-countrymen should exalt the
skill of their victor. The man, thought they, who vanquished the
representative oarsmen of the very home and birthplace of the
sport, the “ amour propre ” of England, must indeed be something
out of the common —a phenomenon. But where were these
scullers with the Australians f Their position was humiliating in
the extreme; for, with such scullers as our oarsmen have to
contend with on our own waters, they could only be classed as
third-rate men. With Hanlan’s victory over the Australians his
reputation seemed to reach a climax. He was a marvel never
before equalled in the annals of rowing; peculiarities in his
sculling and the speed of his boat were discovered which never
existed ; and the great majority sat down satisfied with the con-
clusion that Hanlan had demonstrated beyond the slightest doubt
his superiority over all others, and it was utterly absurd for any
oarsman to attempt to lower his colours. We do not accept the
conclusion. Hanlan is no more a phenomenon than Coombes,
Chambers, Renforth, Kelly, and last, but not least, Green. He


Wholesale and Retail
COAL and FUEL MERCHANT.
Depots—
K&y Sydney*
2Droi*i
Stotta* Street, Wewteww*
3f*ei»t, STertfc S&ere.
Best Benge aai glean Seal In Large or
Small Quantities.
Best Mountain Coal, 20s. per Ton.
Best Newcatle Coal, 235. ~
Berrima Coal, for House purposes, equal to Newcastle
Coal, delivered in Town at 19s. per Ton, Cash on
delivery. Suburbs, Extra Cartage.
ORDERS BY POST PROMPTLY ATTEIRED TO.


has a style of his own ; so have the Australians. He may be the
fastest sculler in the world, but he must meet our champions upon
more equal terms than on the last occasion before we will credit it.
We trust we have shown sufficient reason for the supposition
that it required neither a marvel nor a phenomenon in sculling,
nor even the assistance of some secret motive power, in order to
defeat Hawdon, Elliott, Trickett, and Laycock in the races we
have mentioned. But then the first authorities on rowing matters
in England were almost unanimous in their opinion of Hanlan’s
superiority over the Australians. To this we answer that the
judgment of the English critics has of late been so much at
fault that they lack the weight and influence of former times*
Their pet and ancient theories have been scattered to the winds,
and at the time they were compelled to base their conclusion on
a style of rowing in which they had little or no experience.
Hanlan’s form alone, said they, was sufficient to stamp him the
first of scullers. If such was the case, why was it not found out
before his races with Hawdon and Elliott ? Before the matches
were made there were innumerable opportunities of observing his
rowing. In Laycock’s race with Blackman, the late George
Drewitt, considered one of the best judges of rowing of his time
on the Thames, backed the Englishman at heavy odds, notwith-
standing that he had witnessed the daily practice of both scullers.
“ Pendragon,” of the London Beferee, remarked, shortly after the
appearance of the Australians on the Thames, “ that if they
started in a race with Thomas and Cannon (two third-class
scullers), Laycock would probably be a poor third, and the Lord
only knows where Trickett would be.” The Field referred to
Laycock as “ rowing a short niggling stroke, dipping deep, with
little body swing.” It gave him poor expectation of success
in his races, and as each foe succumbed to his insatiable
appetite, it was profuse in its excuses, for its opponents, or
rather its own faulty opi -lions. At last when the short niggling
stroke seemed inclined to mow down all comers, the only acknow-
ledgement of the Australians’ superiority that could be extracted
from its columns was the quaint remark at the conclusion of a
report that “ this sculler, Laycock, seems to be a better man than
was first anticipated.”


Ska
THE Teas of the Calcutta Cta_
are the produce of upwards of Fifty of the most
Celebrated Indian Tea Estates which , blended together,
make the most perfect Tea the world can produce. They are
blended by competent Tea Tasters, assisted by Analytical
Chemists of the highest standing.
Technological Museum,
Melbourne, August 31s£, 1881.
Report on three samples of Indian Tea received from
Cljc Calcutta Cca Saaoctatton.
“ The above samples have been carefully examined by us. They are
and we may add that even the loivest quality of your Tea has a higher
extract than any Faclcet Teas we have examined.
(Signed) J. COSMO KEWBEEY.
FEEDEEICK DUNN.
SUB if ill ilßilii ill iTiiiißlPiii®
2s. 6d. y js.j and js. 6d. per lb.
IS Ckaylott© Syimey*


The London Sportsman “placed ” the men in the final heat,
of the Hop Bitters’ Contest, Ross, Lay cock, Smith, and Hosmer
not one of which was correct, for it will be remembered that
Laycock led the van with Ross, Hosmer, and Smith, in succession.
So it was with the majority of events during that most interesting
season. Even in brilliancy of career, Hanlan cannot surpass
Laycock ; for did not the Australian oarsman, within a period of
seven months, conquer twenty of the finest oarsmen of the world,
including the very men on whose defeat the Canadian huilt his fame.
There is no necessity to waste our time in speculating as to the
probabilities of inflating our boats with gas, or bringing to our
aid hidden springs and engines. We but render ourselves ridi-
culous. Our men are getting aged, and it may be long before
we see their equal again, let them be able to display the Australian
style of rowing under ordinary conditions of climate, and we have
little fear that they will render a good account of themselves —
better perhaps that most people may anticipate. They will find
that after all Hanlan is but flesh and blood, though of the first
quality. He has been fortunate in inheriting a well-knit frame
and sound constitution. It is in the good use of this noble gift
alone that will be found the true solution of his success and what
has been known as Hanlan’s secret.
During the present season in England our scullers will have
all the advantages of fine summer’s weather. Both have
improved, and are lengths faster than during their last visit.
Everything is in their favour, and if ever Trickett had a chance
of bringing back the Championship it is now. By a cablegram
received a few days back by his family he was in the best of
health and in good spirits. More than half the amount of his
stakes must be subscribed by an early date if we would see the
match take place at all, and it is necessary that he should be
assisted immediately. With regard to Laycock, he has fair
claims for a part at least of his expenses, and they are very
heavy, and as yet wholly defrayed out of his own pocket, which


8 A LB BATS.
FAT STOCK-
Harrison, Jones and Deylin, |
| OFFICES—
Macquarie
Place.
Mondays and
Thursdays.
WOOL AND SHEEPSKINS—
nl ||kt!m
WOOL ST0RE8-
Macquarie
Place.
Mondays and
Tuesdays during
Season, and every
second Monday
during off Season.
HIDES, TALLOW, HAIR,
HORNS, &c.~
WOOL BROKERS,
* i
FAT STOCK SALESMEN,
i TALLOW AND HIDE
STORES—
Circular Quay.
Fridays.
LEATHER-
SALE YARDS —
Homebush
Sydney,
and
Tuesdays.
CrMAIN & METAL BROKERS,
GRAIN—
GRAIN 8T0RE8-
Fridays.
\ s d :br e ic.
Macquarie
Place


is not deep by any means. He does not draw any salary during
his absence, and he has to support his family in Sydney. In
every sense he is one of our representative champions, and will,
no doubt, judging from his past career, acquit himself honorably.
The public in the past have been generous to him, but that has
been for past services. Oarsmen unlike cricketers have no gate
money to recoup them their expenses, and solely depend upon
the liberality of that portion of the public who derive some
pleasure from their performances. Rowing has become so
popular that were Trickett to defeat Hanlan, Sydney would be
scarce large enough to hold the champion. If then it is a matter
which concerns us so much, we should surely do our share in
finding the sinews of war. In conclusion, we trust that we have
succeeded in the object for which this pamphlet was published.
We have endeavoured to show the advantage as well as the
necessity of encouraging our sports and pastimes; we have
endeavoured to prove that it is mainly in the success of the
champions which contributes to the popularity of each sport,
and in consequence, the champions are public servants and
deserve recognition. In giving a complete denial to the rumours
concerning Trickett and Laycock, we trust we have succeeded to
the satisfaction of our readers, and we hope to have convinced
the majority that we cannot judge of the relative merits of our
champions by their last tests with Hanlan. We have endeavoured
not to exalt them to a ridiculous extent but to keep them in their
proper place. To build a nation, we want men of muscle as well
as those of intellect. Both will yield its heroes. Of the former,
in Trickett and Laycock we have men in every way worthy of
respect and confidence. They have proved themselves possessed
of pluck and spirit of the highest degree; and as in the
address presented to Laycock by the citizens of Sydney we can
safely say of both men, “ You have eloquently demonstrated that
neither distance nor time has deteriorated the English race in
this portion of her Majesty’s dominions, and that the representa-


THE FAMOUS
The Laboratory, Wrexham,
' Sept. Ist, 1880.
Messrs. A. G. Thompson & Co.,
Dear Sirs,
My analysis of five samples of The Royal Blend Whisky, chosen by myself
in your cellars from bottles, jars, and casks, shows them so be absolutely uniform in character, and
of great purity.
In addition they possess an attractive aroma and bouquet suggestive of fine old wine, are
remarkably clean and soft upon the palate and quite free from that bugbear of Whisky drinkers—
fusel oil.
Yours faithfully,
John Moss, F.X.C., F.C.S., &c.
£
I
02
0)
r c3
£
tw
O
a>
o
.g
Ph
Q
Uj
QQ
K
cc
W
$
<r d
O
Qc
zn "-"C*
pi O'
r-
p-i
I
w
M
&
*
hS ,
I
a. 5;
t Co
CD
V 1
Tjffi Fjpons BWip WJHgKY
May be had in Bottles, Flasks with cups, Jeroboams, Demijohns,
and Quarter Casks.
Sole Agents for New South Wales.
22 BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.


tive Australian still possesses those characteristics which are
inseparable from the name of an Englishman.” We now leave
the matter in the hands of our readers, confident that the
merits of our champions will be appreciated as they deserve, and
that such appreciation will be shown in a substantial recognition
of their services.
H. R. Woods & Co. General Printers, 13 Bridge-st., Sydney


AT f
&\6 LI o
Fg ioio
•PUBLISHED ■WEEKLY-
Guaranteed Circulation
DISTRIBUTED GRATUITOUSLY.
FIRST ISSUE—WEDNESDAY, APRIL 19th.
18ne ui Safe Means to (Irattsiig.
size of the Paper.
The “Sydney
5,000 Copies.
PUBLISHING OFFI6E, - 3 BRIDM 1 ,, SYDNEY,
if |||ne of the |||o6t popular |||edium6 |k
for the public.
A shoet Leading Article will appear every issue. Any topic of general
interest will be briefly commented upon. Amusing incidents and pleasing
Stories will be inserted.
The Paper will be distributed gratuitously all over Sydney, both in Places
of Business, Boarding Houses, Hotels, and Private Dwellings,
thus making it
The Proprietor hopes that these GREAT ADVANTAGES will
be sufficient inducement to the ADVERTISING PUBLIC of New
South Wales, and he trusts that the liberal support already promised will
enable him to increase the circulation three-fold, besides enlarging the


H, R. WOODS & CO.,
ittijograpfne, Copperplate,
LETTER-PRE&S PRINTERS,
Rulers, Designers,
BOOKBINDERS,
PUBIrI^pEI^.
Ipeeount §ook Ifanufaetufcrd.
COMMERCIAL
TMMaiTMICM
A SPECIALTY.
Qixotccttons Jjreely Given
FOR ANY
CLASS AND STYLE OF PRINTING.
13 BRIDGE STREET,
SYDNEY.


SINGER'S SEWING MACHINES.
tlie Medals, and 'Trophies
AT THE
S3T X) IST Ej YT ABOADiI.
O
cs
as
«ac
sc
o
h“
! «o
>
us gn
gz
sc
MS
i o
oz
a
< S 3
SC
fUJ
a
o
SS
>»
UJ
Z
a
>-
®s
iiiJ
3=
I
SINGER'S SEWING MACHINES
ABE MABIS OHLT SX
THE SINGER MANUFACTURING COMPANY.
Head Offices;
M UNION SQUARE, NEW YORK, U.S.A.
Chief Office in Europe;
39 FOSTER LANE, LONDON.
Wholesale Depfft for Nciv South Wales :
No. 1 DARLING- STORES, HARBOUR ST., SYDNEY.
s
I
N
o-
E
R
SINGER'S SEWING MACHINES
All the latest, Improvements,
SINGER'S SEWING MACHINES
FOB
Largest Variety of Work,
SINGER’S SEWING MACHINES
FOB
Strength and Beauty of Stitch *
SINGER'S SEWING MACHINES
FOB
Mm.hroldery, Braiding, and Quilting *
SINGER'S SEWING MACHINES
FOB
Flatting, Minding, and Frilling,
SINGER'S SEWING MACHINES
Kilting, Cording, and Muffling,
160 FIRST PRIZES.
Easy Terms—2s, (id. Weekly.
S
I
Is T
G
E
R
AGENTS IN EVERY TOWN.
Offices in Sydney :
Thk SYDNEY ARCADE } & No. 1 DARLING STORES, HARBOUR STREET.
[ '"HI
ae
m
so
:-<
[ C3
ss
m
-<
30
O
S>
C 3
m
S -
35 <
O > >
a {;
22 2
IS: \
O rn )
* © ?
«,* ® ;
jpn (
m <■
C 3 (
jsw z >
ps? I
S o 5
3ES z ;
CD 5 \
m i I’
-Hi '
o -
S 3 >
m
OB
g
S ;
o
cs 1
S 3
Local J)ep6ts :
NEWCASTLE. HUNTER STREET.
BATHURST, WILLIAM STREET.
GOITLBURN, AUBURN STREET.
TAMWOETE. DEBT STREET.
GRAFTON, VICTORIA STREET.
LISMORE, WOODLARK STREET.
PARRAMATTA, CHURCH STREET.
NARANDERA, HaY.
BRISBANE, 227 QUEEN STREET.
SYDNEY ARCADE, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
c® \
•Hi \
S 3
f*l <
m
-HI
«
At the SYDNEY AECADE,
The Most Splendid Collection of Medals, Gups, and Trophies in the
World awarded
SINGER'S SEWING MACHINES.
