

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE,
Hobart, Tasmania,
JANUARY 8, 1892.
PROCEEDINGS OF SECTIONS.
Section
Anthropology.
11.—EFATE, NEW HEBRIDES.
REY. D. MACDONALD.
'■ - /




Section Ct.
11.—EFATE, NEW HEBRIDES.
By REV, D. MACDONALD.
Birth and Childhood.
On the clay of the birth of a child a number of women
assemble, and one old woman called the Mitamauri, or Mate-
raaure, has charge of the proceedings. She lakes the leaves
of a plant used in ceremonial or religious purification called
nasuafa , and performs an operation called koro on its leaves,
that is, she makes a prayer or incantation, which is finished
by breathing several times upon the leaves. Then the
assembled women attach these leaves to their waist cinctures,
and are not allowed to surata, that is, to go away from that
house about their ordinary business tjll after the performance
of another ceremony on the fifth day after the birth, when
they remove the leaves of the nasuafa from their waist
cinctures. The ceremony on the fifth day is the horoing of
the noas (native cabbage) leaves, which are then cooked and
given to the mother of the child for the first time to be
eaten. When it is known that the child is a male some
man in the village raises the cry used by men only. This is
regarded as the expression of a wish that the child may,
when he grows up, be a man indeed ; if a female, he raises
the peculiar shrill sounds made by women in laughing—as
before, expressing a wish that the child may grow up to be
a perfect woman. On the 30th day, when the child is to be
taken out of the house to the shore, if it is a female, one
goes before with a small nala (female carrying basket) and
intei (red pow r der, tumeric), and paints or marks any objects
on the way with the intei, and finally hangs up the nala and
intei on the shore ; if a male, a bow is thus hung up and
left instead of the nala. On all these occasions there is a
feast. The woman is isolated and regarded as unclean till
the thirtieth day, on which day, for the first time, the mother
and the child go out of the house and are both purified with
sea water. According to Efatese notions the sea is the great
purifying medium. This particular purification on the
thirtieth day of the child is called naselian ; they selia hi the
child ; as to the mother, she is said to los, i.e., wash or bathe


in the sea, or in sea water. The child is washed in sea water
in a vessel, in which also gravel is put. This completed, a
great shout is raised, and the Matemauri is dismissed with
presents or payment for her services.
The name in Efatese for uncleanness is nimam (dialect,
namafu), and that of childbirth is called nimam nafiselan.
The men are afraid of it, and keep away from the house in
which the birth has taken place. They say that men by
going to or near the house would contract the nimam or
uncleanness, and that in consequence “ their eyes would be
darkened (that is, they would be weak) in war,” and that if,
having contracted it, they went to their plantations, the yams
would rot, boa, i.e. literally, stink. This applies to the day
of birth. A sacred man ( natamole tabu), who inadvertently
goes near such a house, immediately purifies himself by a
religious ceremony, as the uncleanness would be fatal to his
sacredness or holiness ( natabuen ).
With respect to infanticide, if the child was born and the
parents wished it killed it would be buried alive. Deformed
newly-born infants w r ere treated in this way. No cannibalism
accompanied this practice, though a feast was held. Abor-
tion was much practised. Violence was applied to the child
in the womb either by the mother by the matemauri, this
latter accompanying the manipulation with the koro. A
plant called naltasu tabu was sometimes eaten by a woman
who had just given birth to a child, in order that she might
not again conceive while bringing up the child born. Various
reasons are given for the general practice of infanticide,
which may be summed up thus : to avoid the necessity of
self-denial, expense, and trouble.
The child is named by a fixed rule, as follows:—The name
consisted of two parts, the tribal prefix denoting the tribe of
the father, and a general term which was often suggested by
the circumstances of the time of birth, or by its being borne
by a relative. Any one hearing the name of a child, male or
female, at once knows the tribe ( nakainaga) of its father.
Thus let the child’s name be Turi tamate—tamate means
peace, and Turi denotes that the father of the child is of the
Nakainaga naui (yam tribe). Tamate (a very common name)
may be given, and no doubt originally was given, because
peace was prevailing at the time of birth, Turi naru ( naru,
“ war,” literally “ arms ”) is another example, the child
having been born in time of war. And so all children have
names given to them, of which the first part denotes the tribe


of their father. The native expression is “ the yam tribe bisi
(begets) Turi ,” the naroa tribe bisi Mako,” &c.
The mother carries the child on her back, slung in a fine
mat made for the purpose $ the father carries it in his arms.
Suckling is continued two or three years. Nothing is applied
to the child’s head to regulate its shape. The child is lovingly
cared for in infancy by its mother. Later, when a boy,
he does very much as he likes, and as he belongs to his
mother’s tribe, and not to his father’s, it is his mother’s full
brother, his maternal uncle, who has to instruct him. Such
a boy going much with his father is often spoken to thus :
What do you mean by going with another (meaning his
father) ? Go with your 1010 ( aloana —his uncle) that you
may learn from him.
Maturity.
No certain age can be mentioned as that at which either
boys or girls reach maturity. As to circumcision it was not
much practised in Elate, but more in the Shepherd Islets,
It was performed with a bamboo kbife by anyone who could
do it. So far as 1 can learn, the reason for the practice was,
that the boy might grow big and well proportioned. AVhen
they saw a boy lanky and ill looking, they would say, “ Let
us circumcise him that he may grow well and fill out.” And
they say that pigs, when cut, grow fat and fill out in the same
way. On the fifth day the boy bathed in the sea, and on
returning to the house was smeared with the red intei (tumeric)
powder, and a feast was held. Only in the case of the son
of a chief was there singing and dancing at the feast.
Connected with it were no mystic rites, no badge, new name,
marks, or hair-cutting, or freemasonry, or privileges, A
betrothed girl, on reaching maturity, was taken with ceremony
and feasting to the house of her betrothed husband, with
singing and dancing.
Marriage.
In the case of children, the parents of the boy propose to
the parents of the girl, and if the proposal is accepted a
feast is held and the children are betrothed. The betrothed
girl remains with her parents and in their house until she
reaches maturity, when, as just said, she is publicly and with
great ceremony conveyed to the house of her husband, the
feasting lasting five days. Marriage is by purchase.
Persons belonging to the same tribe ( Nakainanga ) are not
allowed to marry ; thus males and females of the Nakainanga


naui (yam tribe) may not marry, and so of all the tribes.
Children take their tribal classification, not from the father,
but from the mother, that is, they belong to the tribe of the
mother. In war they do not necessarily join the mother’s
kin, and those of the same nakainanga may sometimes be
opposed in battle. As to the law of inheritance of land or
property, the relatives seem to inherit, and a widow is regarded
as a part of the property of the deceased inherited by them.
A son-in-law and his mother-in-law avoid each other; the
mother-in-law covers her face so as not to be seen by him,
and if passing where he is keeps as far away as possible, and
crouches low so as not to be seen. A son-in-law and his
father-in-law also will not touch each other—though the
restriction is not so great in this as in the former case, as they
may be near and looking at each other. But if they
inadvertently touch each other they have to go through a
ceremony in which a pig is killed, to cleanse themselves from
the stain. Two reasons for this are given—the one being
that if they touch each other the son-in-law will be poor, or
become poverty-stricken; the other (and proper one) being
that if they do they will be nimam, and their eyes will be
darkened (they will be weak) in battle. The wife has to
weave or plait mats, cook, and also make her own plantation,
and keep it in order. Her treatment greatly depends on the
disposition of her husband.
The Trihe.
If by a “ tribe ” is meant a Nakainanga , what constitutes it
is descent from the same mother in the female line, and the
Nakainanga, as such, has no chief. Of the people of a village
there may be several chiefs. The office of a chief is handed
down by the chief to a successor whom he appoints and who
is publicly, with pig-killing and feasting, designated or
appointed. But the chief does not appoint his own son, but
in preference to all others his sister’s son, who by the law of
the nakainaga is considered nearer and dearer to him than
his own son, and to be his proper heir. The reason is that
his sister’s son is of the same nakainaga as he, being of his
mother’s (his sister’s*), whereas his son is of a different
nakainaga , being of the same as his mother (his wife’s). The
power and authority of a chief can only be exercised within
certain defined limits. In matters involving religious con-
• That is, his sister by the mother’s sister.


siderations the chief’s power is limited by the priest, or
natamole tabu, and in purely civil or political matters by the
council of the old men and influential men of the community.
There was of course no • written constitution or laws, but
the customs handed down from antiquity were rigidly adhered
to. To the question, “Is there a'tribal council? ’it must be
replied that this word tribal has to be defined before the
question can be answered. The tribe, i.e., the nakainaga,
is a family, all the members of which are considered as closely
related to each other, and bound to treat each other well.
All the members of a nakainaga in a particular place were to
a large extent responsible for the conduct of any one member;
for instance, they had to pay a fine incurred by him, if he
could not pay it himself. Hence, as above said, a boy was
carefully instructed by, not his father (who belonged necessarily
to another nakainaga), but by his aloana (his maternal uncle)
his mother’s full brother, who was necessarily of the same
tribe and who regarded him as his heir. Now the older
members of the nakainaga were ibp fathers, so to speak, of
the family nakainaga, and exercised a kind of parental
authority over it. But if by “tribe ’’ be meant the whole
people of a village, no definite statement can be framed
applying to all such communities. But generally the chief
had to consult the leading men in the village, that is virtually
all the people, before taking action, as otherwise they might
not support him in it. As to infractions of tribal law, the
mind of the tribe having been ascertained, its chief declared
the sentence, which might be a fine or death.
Social and Domestic.
The huts were built by erecting a wooden framework and
covering it with thatch. The thatch might be reeds or long
(sword) grass and cocoa-nut leaves plaited, or the former
alone. The usual shape of the hut was that of a ship turned
upside down, with only one opening in the middle of one side
for an entrance. Food was usually abundant, though there
was a time of scarcity (comparative) every year, from
December to March, while the yam crop was ripening. The
principal articles of food are yams, bananas, cocoanuts, sugar-
cane, and breadfruit, also fowls and pigs. The yam is
cultivated with great care and labour, and in a manner that
could in no way be improved upon by the highest European
skill and industry. Every year a new piece of jungle is cleared,
burned, fenced in, and cultivated. Both husband and wife


work at this, each having a separate plantation in addition to
helping each other. The fencing is usually done by the men.
Only one principal meal is cooked each day, in the evening,
and eaten about 7—B p.m., the men eating by themselves.
Before eating this meal one of the men offered a portion of the
food to the spirits (natemate), till which had been done, no
one began to eat. When hungry, one would say, “ give the
offering to our natemate and let us eat.” The food is cooked
in an “ oven,” that is a hole in the ground lined with heated
stones; the food, wrapped in leaves, is laid on these, covered
with heated stones, and then the whole covered with earth,
&c., until thoroughly baked. The ornaments worn on the
head were a bunch of feathers, and sometimes pigs tusks
attached to the hair round the base of the skull. Tortoise-
shell rings were attached to the ears. A white smooth shell
was inserted in the septum of the nose. Armlets were of
tortoise-shell, pigs’ tusks, or th epanipin, an elaborately woven
armlet. Shells were also hung round the neck. Cords dyed
with some dye obtained from the sea were wound round the
waist or the legs. The clothing of the men consisted of a
hand-woven mat girdle round the loins, to which was
attached a bark cloth waist-cloth. This bark cloth was made
in the same way as the similar cloth in other parts of the
Pacific. The dress of the women was not so decent, consist-
ing of a belt of strings to which was attached a woven mat of
small dimensions, terminating in a bulky fringe. The men
often had a fillet round the head. The hand-weaving of
mats and the making of bark cloth employed the women,
who had also all the household cooking and a share of
plantation work to do. The men had to do a share of
plantation work, the cooking at the public ('/area) house of
the village, to make canoes, to cut down the logs for napeas,
haul them to the village malel, hollow them out, and set
them up, and to fight in war. The natives are well
nourished.
Wizards.
The general name for this class of persons is natemate tabu.
The man is made a n. tabu by a communication from the
natemate. The natemate are of two kinds, the spirits of
deceased men, and the spirits whose origin is unknown. The
latter give the necessary character to the n. tabu. One of
them, for instance, appears to him in the form of a snake or
lizard, or in a dream. In the former case he makes a small
sacred enclosure called butut , and puts the snake or lizard


into it, when it becomes a stone. When he wishes to cure a
sick person, or to cause some one to die, he takes an offering
to this stone (in which the natemate is supposed to dwell), in
the butut. It is the natemate that makes efficacious his koro
or incantation, whether this latter be for the discovery of
theft, the recovery of the sick, or the death of some one. A
peculiar class seems to claim the power of making rain. But
the above is generally true of all classes of n. tabu whatever
their special differences, though it leaves untouched all details.
By the above means a n. tabu finds out why, for instance,
the natemate are afflicting someone, perhaps the spirits of his
deceased relatives. He directs the sick to appease these
angry spirits by a sacrifice of a pig or a fowl, and to perform
the duty his neglect of which has made them angry. The
n. tabu is rewarded or paid for his services. 1 should say
that the angry spirits are supposed to possess the man afflicted,
and that the n. tabu exorcises them, on the above sacrifice
having been made, and after his koro. He bids them marua,
that is, cease from the man for- the reasons he has recited.
This is called lualua, that is, the expelling or putting out the
natemate.
Deaths.
Natural death is supposed to be caused by the natemate.
The n. tabu who are able to visit the spiritual world, or rather
the under world inhabited by the shades, say in the case of a
man whom they have tried to cure in vain, and who is about
to die, that they in the exercise of their natabuen visited the
world of shades, and attempted to bring away the shade of
the sick mart from there; and that the assembled shades drew
the shade of the sick man into the cave where they dwell and
shut the door, telling the n. tabu to begone, as the man was
theirs (i.e. that he could not be saved from death). The
underlying idea undoubtedly is that the man is doomed to
death by fate or by the natemate because of some fault.
When life is extinct there is a long continued wailing. The
body is washed, anointed with oil, and carefully dressed.
Nesei (bright scented) leaves are fixed in his girdle, and a
crown of feathers fixed on the top of his head. The girdle
is called “ the girdle of the nakainaga." Friends in the
village are then at liberty to come and put presents of cloth
on the body ; these are presents from them to their deceased
relatives in the world of shades that he is about to visit.
When he reaches Hades each will know the present that is
his and strip it off him, leaving him at last with only his own


nafona nakainaga. Then all who wish approach the corpse
and attach a neluho (rope for tying a pig) to the fingers of
the dead. Each neluho represents a pig about to be killed,
the spirits of which offerings he will take with him to Hades.
In the middle of the wailing some women (near relatives)
cover themselves with ashes, or take shells and scrape the
skin off their cheeks and temples. They wrap themselves in
filthy old mats for clothes. The chief mourners blacken their
faces.
In case of a chief, his ataji (successor) leads a few men to
dig the grave; while this is being done, a dead and fearful
silence is maintained in the village. To the sound of the big
drums ( napeas ), the body is carried out and lowered into the
grave; this done, a pig is killed. After the grave is filled
up the kali (digging-stick) is carried six (or some even number
of times, according to some) times round the mound, and then
carried to the sea, all keeping out of the way of its carrier,
into which it is thrown. A stone is set up at the head of
the grave. Such a grave is called zakkes in Efate. It is
sacred. On Mai on the fifth day the karan (cutting instru-
ment) used in digging the grave is taken to the sea, all the
community assembling there. After it is thrown in the sea,
all bathe. Then the sea shore for a mile or two is pronounced
“ tabu,” and no fishing or bathing allowed in it. The chief
mourners up to this time have remained in the house. Eeasts
are held every fifth day up to the hundredth day, when a
great feast is held, and after that the intarnate is to be prepared
for perhaps two or three years, during which a napea has to be
cut down (a big log), hauled to the village malel, hollowed out,
the face of the dead carved upon it, set up in the malel, and a
series of festivals (feasting, dancing, singing) held. On Efate
the chief mourners remained in the house thirty days; on
the conclusion of the intarnate the napog, that is, insignia
of the chief, is buried in his grave. On Mai they buried
some yams, &c. in a bucket with the body, and also one or
two weapons, as a club, bow, and tomakawk. On Efate it
was usual to see a little basket hung over the grave with food
in it. Human beings used to be killed at the death of a chief.
One was thus killed on Efate about five years ago. On Mai,
about six or seven years ago, on the death of a chief, three of
his wives (one of them the sister of one whom I have trained
to be a teacher, and who is a splendid fellow) were buried
alive in the same grave with him. On the death of another
chief, three men were killed and their bodies sent round to


neighbouring villages to be eaten. On Efate, sometimes a
dog was killed instead of a human being, immediately on life
becoming extinct.
The Spirit World.
The spirit world is below, and is called Abokas. It is
down under the surface of the earth and beneath the sea.
In Efate the entrance to it is at the western side of the
island at a place called Tukituki. At a point on the coast
there is a remarkable tree. The departed spirit climbs this
tree, which is close to the sandy beach, on which there is
always thundering a heavy swell. He calls a spirit, whose
name is Tafatokei. Tafatokei ascends from the under-world,
and comes out of the sea. At the same time the sea sends a
big wave up to the roots of the tree; this wave receding
carries the ghost with it. If he has been buried through the
day he has to wait on a certain rock till sunset, when he is
admitted to Hades among the other natemate. Hence, to
keep the departed spirit from so having to wait, the Efatese
do not bury till evening. At the entrance or gate of Hades
a tremendous being named Sara, or Sara-tau, has to be
passed; with him are four officers, Vaus, Maaki, Maseirut,
and Maseasi. Vaus asks as to the new comer, “Who?”
If Maaki answers “ I don’t know,” Maseirut clasps him
round and holds him, while Sara cleaves his forehead, and
twist his head backside foremost, and Maseasi gouges out his
tongue from the root. If Maaki says “He is one of ours,’
Sara lets him pass untouched. Even here the Nakainaga
comes into play; Sara is said to be of the Nakainaga
namkat (a kind of yam), and to allow any of that Nakainaga
to pass unharmed.* People of other nakainagas put a fillet
of namkat leaves round their heads to deceive him ; but he
discerns their hypocrisy from the withered aspect of the
leaves. Some of the nakainagas pass him unharmed by
stripping off from their bodies tatoo marks and presenting
them to him ; these marks were sometimes cut into their
flesh in mourning for the dead, and sometimes in the worship
of a being called Wote, as it seems—certainly in the former
case. Another curious practice was, at the death of a chief,
to kill a dog, which dog was to accompany him and “ Koha
Sara,” that is, to drive away Sara, so that his master might
pass unharmed into Hades.
Though the spirit has been admitted into Hades, it is still
able to revisit its former abode in this world, and to punish


men for faults. Thus, a man is sometimes doomed by the
natemate for desecrating the grave of a chief by merely
walking over it; or for spitting near some fatu tabu , “ sacred
stone; ” or some man and woman are both doomed for com-
mitting adultery in some sacred place, alia tabu, to which
they have gone, so that men should not see them (such places
being much feared and avoided). Again, if a man is wdcked
and oppressing others, the natamole tabu goes to the grave,
“ namatigo tabu” of the chief, and presents an offering and
beseeches the natemate to destroy him for his wickedness ;
such a man’s fate is evil, —a shark eats him, or his canoe drifts
or founders, and he is drowned, or he falls from a tree and is
killed. A man in fear or distress calls upon the natemate ;
thus, if one is out in his canoe and a storm arises, he prays
to them, saying, “ Mama (as the case may be, or 1010 =
maternal uncle) father, cause this storm to cease, and bring
me safe to shore, and I will kill a pig (in sacrifice, or to
appease your wrath) to you,” the idea being that the
threatening ruin is coming upon him because he has offended
by his deeds. So, if he is sick, or in pain, he calls upon the
natemate, and is willing to make any sacrifice to appease
their wrath ( turi namaieto ni natemate = appease the wrath
of the natemate).
Abokas, or Hades, is a dark place, and contrasted with
this (the upper) world which is called Emeromina , that is,
“ place of light.” It is gloomy and sad. There is a great
stagnant pool in it, or marshy place, called Ra-les, gloomy
place, or lake. It is considered, as above indicated, that
death is a punishment. Accordingly, when a man is behav-
ing wickedly, they say, “ they (i.e. the natemate} have already
planted for him the nales (a plant with thick dark leaf) on
Ra-les ,” or, “ his soul has rlready gone to Wora Tuk ”
( = place of the pit). Everything is shadowy and unreal
in that fearful place. When the natemate makes an oven
and cooks food, on opening the oven nothing but dirt is found
in it. A story is told of a man who died and went there, his
wife also died, and when he saw her in Hades, he attempted
to embrace her, but he became mere dust on her bosom, and
failed in the attempt. One is reminded of Virgil’s words,
though spoken not of attempted embraces, but of an
attempted war cry in Hades,
“ Inceptus clamor frustratin' Iriantes.”
It is said that Hades consists of several stages, one below
the other, and that a man dies in all six times, each time


descending to a low stage. The first time he dies in this
world and descends to A bohas. On entering Abokas he is
admitted among those who have died before him, and
recognises those whom, he had formerly known in the world
and is recognised by them. His mother, however, treats him
with everv evidence of contempt and hatred; on the contrary
his paternal aunt treats him with great kindness. A man
who has been buried with honour, many pigs killed, much
food offered, &c., is comparatively well oft' in Abokas. As
the manner of his burial depends on his character among his
fellows and the amount of property he had acquired by
his industry, it is a great object of ambition with the natives
to have a good memory behind them and a large amount of
property that they may be honourably buried and corre-
spondingly happy in Hades. A worthless fellow is liable to be
buried with the burial of an ass, and to correspondingly suffer
in Hades. Wild with hunger there he can only get a hard
kind of shellfish to eat; in eating it his jaws are torn and
bleeding, and he has time to bethink himself of the evil fate
his worthlessness has brought upon him. After an indefinite
time one dies in Abokas, and descends to the next lower
Hades called Magalululu. Again, after an indefinite time
he dies there and descends to Magatiro. Then in like
manner to Magaseasea. Then to Magatika. In Abokas he
is a natemate. In the succeeding places he, it seems, turns
into lower forms, as those of rats or snakes; but this is doubt-
ful. Finally he disappears from Magatika like the down of
a certain plant carried away though the air,ora puff of white
vapour lost in the atmosphere, or the husk of a certain fruit
floating away out to sea.
Mythology.
The idea of a creator, or of creation, in the strict sense of
their words, does not appear to have existed among the
people. But it is said that two beings —men —Mauitikitiki,
and his sulina (offspring or grandson) Tamakaia were the first
men, Mauitikitiki having a wife. A contest for superiority arose
between Mauitikitiki and Tamakaia, and Tamakaia proved his
superiority by, among other things, hauling or fishing up the
various islands constituting the world known to the Efatese
ancients, from the sea. At first the sky was close to the
surface of the earth. According to native story, a woman
was raking out the stones of her oven with a pole which
stuck in the sky; she then smote the sky with the pole, and


angrily bade it ascend out of tlie way. It ascended and
ascended far beyond her wish, and kept on ascending not-
withstanding her entreaties to the contrary. At the beginning
a chief on Meli had two children which were always crying
and never sleeping, because the sun never set, and there was
no darkness or night, but only perpetual day, and therefore
no sleep and no.rest from labour or vexation in the sweet
oblivion of sleep. He set out in search of night and dark-
ness, and, after going round the island, was directed to the
most eastern point to a place called Baulelo. Here, having
his bamboo ready, he caught the darkness of night and sleep
as it arose from the sea, and enclosed it in his bamboo.
Returning home he dispensed at every village on the way
these blessings which thus became the common inheritance of
all. According to one story, all things as yams, pigs, See.,
came down from Heaven, which is said (like Hades below) to
consist of several stages, one above another (six heavens).
The story runs thus : —The people of Heaven used to come
down, take off and la}’ aside their wings, or “ sails,” and fish
at low water by night. In the morning, putting on their
wings, they chanted a song and reascended. A man watched
them and hid the wings of one, a woman, who therefore
could not reascend, and whom he took to wife. She bore
two sons who had no name ; she said, let them be called by
whatever name by which they address each other. Thus, the
one was called Karisibum, and the other Makatafaki. She
afterwards found her wings and returned to the sky. Her
two sons, after they had grown up, were able to follow her.
They brought, or let down in a large basket, the different
kinds of yams, &c., with which the world is filled. The
basket, let down by a rope and swinging about, at last became
fast between two mountains, from whence the things in it
were taken to all the surrounding places. This is evidently not
a creation story. Among the first men at the dawn of the
race, it was being disputed whether men should renew’ their
youth perpetually (mulu), or die (mateJ, having begotten
children who should take their places. A bird called Pilake
(the name means “ mortal terror ”) burst upon them, exclaim-
ing, “ What are you talking about ? I have already buried
my father and mother : beget those who shall grow up and
multiply instead of them.” Thus was established the present
order in which men die and one generation succeeds another.
Another bird called Man-tangisi-nerei ( i.e . “ the bird that
bewails men”), on hearing this doom of death pronounced by


of deliverance also, as may be seen from the above.
Philology.
Pronouns.
Separate. Verbal.
I Kinan A.
Thou Nago Ku.
He, she, it Nai I,
We (exclusive) Kinami Au.
We (inclusive) Nigita Tu.
Ye Kumu Ku.
They Nara Ru.
We two (exclusive) Ara,
We two (inclusive) Ta.
Ye two Ko ro.
They two Ra.
Numerals.
Cardinals. Ordinals,
1 Sikei Be,
2 Rua Kerua.
3 Tolu Ketolu,
4 Vate Kefate.
5 Lima Kelima.
6 Latisa (lima tesa) Kelatesa.
7 Larua (lima rua) Kelarua.
8 Latolu (lima tolu) Kelatolu.
9 Lifiti (lima bate) Kelifiti.
10 Rualima (rua lima) Keralima,
Distribution.
Sikeskei One by one.
Ruarua, &c.
Multiplication.
Bakasikei One time, once.
Bakarua, See.
How many ? Bisa, or bia?
Who? Sei? (dialect) Fei?
Pilake, bewailed men with tears : hence the red marks under
its eyes to this day. The general name Natemate denotes
both the spirits of dead men which have lower divine powers.
and afflict men by possessing them, for instance, and those
spirits (or deities ) whose origin is unknown. These latter
give the natabuen to the natamole tabu (sacred men). The
natemate natamole (spirits of dead men) have, however, powers


What? Sava? Sa? (dialect) nafete,
This Ua, se, ke na, naga, nis, kis, &c,
That Uan, netu, &c.
Paradigm of Verb “go,” ban.
Present and Past Indicative.
Singular.
1 A ban I go.
2 Ku ban Thou goest.
3 I ban He goes.
Plural.
, fAu ban (exclusive) ... We go.
1 \Tu ban (inclusive) We go.
2 Kuban You go.
3 Ru ban They go.
Past.
1 Aka ban I went.
(As before, suffixing ha to the verbal pronoun).
Pluperfect.
1 Akai ban I had gone.
(As before, suffixing kai to the verbal pronoun).
Future.
1 Aga no ban I shall go.
2 Kuga no ban Thou shalt go.
(And so on, putting ga no immediately after verbal proi
so on, putting ga no immediately after verbal pronoun).
Present Progressive.
A bo ban I am going.
(And so on, putting ho after verbal pronoun).
Subjunctive, Permissive, Conditional.
Present and Future.
1 Aga fan I may (&c.) go.
(And so on, putting ga after verbal pronoun).
Perfect.
1 Agai ban I may have gone.
(And so on, putting gni after verbal pronoun).
Imperative.
Singular.
2 Ba fan Go thou.
Plural.
2 Ko ban Go ye.
The 3rd person is expressed by the subjunctive.
Infinitive.
The verb in its simplest form is often put after another in


the infinitive, which, however, is usually expressed by the
subjunctive ; as, I told him to go —iga fan (that he should go).
The infinitive is expressed also by the verbal noun now to be
considered.
The Verbal Noun.
Nafanoen, or nafanoan(a) (the original form), the going.
This is composed of the article na, and the formation ending
en , or an, and may be formed from every verb in the language.
The o in nafanoen belongs to the word ban, which pronounced
fully is bano, to go. Nafanoen anena, his going. When the
verbal noun is used without the article it is the verbal adjective
with passive sense, as tea fanoen , what is for going, nabua
fanoen, a road to be gone on.
The simple form of the verb placed after a substantive, or
substantive pronoun, without the verbal pronoun, is an
adjective, as tea ban, that or those going—the going ones,
natomole bano, the men going, or going men.
The verb “ to kill ” with a pronominal object:
As this and all other verbs are conjugated exactly in the
same way as the above “ ban,” to go, it is only necessary here
to show how the pronominal object is attached to the verb.
Thus, if we take for the verb “to kill,” bunu, literally “to
make an end of,” and which signifies to extinguish, to finish,
to kill, &c
Bunuau Kill me.
Bunuako Kill thee.
Bunuea Kill him, her, or it.
Bunuagami Kill us (exclusive).
Bunuagita Kill us (inclusive).
Bunuamu Kill you.
Bunuera Kill them.
Bunu natamole ... Kill men.
List of Words.
(The article prefixed is in italics).
Man natamole.
Woman nagurum.
Head nabau na.
Hair of nalulu na.
Eye nameta na.
Nose nugusu na.
Tongue namena na.


Ear wataliga na.
Hand warn na.
Thumb kin Jiba.
Foot natuo na.
Bone wafatu na.
Blood witra na.
Fire 7/akabu.
Water woai.
Sun Cdo,
Moon atelagi.
Father afa.
Daughter waniwa waguruni.
Mother pile na.
Son wani na wanoi.
Brother tai na.
Sister gore na.
Cousin tai na.
tai na.
Uncle aloa na.
Aunt mim.
Give tu.
Take tabe.
Make bati.
Bear sela.
Burn tapara ki.
See libi.
Hear rogo.
A .
WILLIAM GRAHAME, JUN.
ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA.
