





Egyptian
vlbclatbe;
WM. 110 BY FLETCHER, M.A.
PTfcST-
Sketches
E. A. Petherick & Co., 144 Runpee Street.


ADELAIDE :
BURDEN & BONYTHON
PRINTERS.


PREFACE.
During the months of September and October, 1891, I delivered a
course of lectures in the Victoria Hall entitled “The Wonders of
Ancient and Modern Egypt.” These lectures were illustrated by a
series of limelight pictures of the scenery of the Nile, and of the monuments
and inscriptions of Ancient Egypt, which made my task as a delineator
of a somewhat dry theme much easier than it would have been without
such aid. These lectures subsequently appeared in the columns of The
Advertiser under the title “ Egyptian Sketches,” They were only
slightly re-edited, and I did not attempt to hide the freer style of the
lectures under the more ponderous diction of an article. At the request
of many readers I have arranged with the proprietors of The Advertiser
for the preservation of my sketches in a somewhat more permanent and
portable form. The newspaper columns have been re-arranged in
pamphlet size without any resetting of the type. This will explain the
width of the margins of this small volume and will account for the
modest price at which it is sold.
I regret exceedingly that I cannot send forth my collection of
sketches adorned with pictures and maps, but I must refer those of my
readers who wish to see Egypt in a book to the sumptuous volumes of
Eber’s “ Egypt,” or to that most interesting description of a voyage to
Wady Halfah and back by the late Miss Edwards, entitled “A
Thousand Miles up the Nile.”
I desire to emphasise here, what I have stated in the sketches, that
all my opinions as to dates and historic coincidences are tentative.
Fresh light is coming from the study of Egyptian remains every year,
and no one ought to be too confident as to the truth of his working
hypotheses. I have done my best to be honest in both forming and
expressing my opinions, but I hold them with a light hand, and shall
esteem it a favor if any reader can supplement my knowledge or correct
my conclusions.
If any profit arises from the sale of these sketches I shall devote it
to the purchase of books on Egypt for the public library.
W. R. F.




CONTENTS.
chapjckr page
I.— The River of Egypt 1
ll.— The Land of the Double Obown 10
lll.— Fifty Centuries Ago 19
IV.— Pyramids and Tombs 27
V.—Thebes and the Great Pharaohs 37
Vl.—The Royal Mummies 46
Vll.— Thirty Centuries Ago 57
VIII,— The Story op the Exodus 66
IX.— The Times op Decadence 76
X.—The Times of Cleopatra 85
XI. —Modern Egypt 95
Appendix—Report Antiquities in Museum 107




fiiiiiiiSiiiffi
EGYPTIAN GATE
New J
Empire
XVII.
XVIII.
XIX.
1700
1600
1350
1280
Apepi
Thotmes 111.
Rameses 11.
Merenpthah
Joseph’s Exaltation
Moses
Exodus
Middle f
Empire (
XXL
Shepherd
Kings
( Abraham’s Visit
\ Joseph a Slave
Lower J
Period \
XXII.
XXV.
XXVI.
XXVII.
XXXI.
Ptolemaic
Herhor
Shishak
Tirhakah
Necho
Hophra
Cambyses
Alexander
Cleopatra
David and Solomon
Rehoboam
Hezakiah
Josiah
J eremiah
Persian Invasion
Greek Conquest
Mohammedan
Conquest
dates are only approximate, and must be regarded as
subject to modification.




EGYPTIAN SKETCHES.
CHAPTER I.
THE RIVER OF EGYPT.
INTRODUCTORY.
It has recently been my privilege to deliver
to the public of Adelaide a course of lectures
on ancient and modern Egypt. I have thus
been leo to review my notes of travel in that
land and to read extensively the works of
explorers and travellers. I propose in a few
chapters to give the results of that reading,
and to try to picture the various aspects of
that country in different phases of its in-
terminable history. I do not pretend to be
in any sense an original investigator. My
sojourn there was limited to one season and it
was far too short to make me an authority on
such difficult questions as Egypt suggests. I ac-
knowledge my indebtedness to those who have
given many years to patient research among
its ancient treasures. I hope that in due time
the shelves of our public library may con-
tain such standard works as will guide and
help an inquisitive student. No man can
dare to be original in collecting facts, and he
must be cautious in collating them. Fresh
facts are coming to light every year which
must perforce cause even the best books to be-
come antiquated very soon. The labors of the
Egyptian Exploration Society add a new
volume of researches every year. Many private
explorers are at work, and their discoveries and
speculations have to be taken into account.
Old records are continually being read in new
lights. The science of “Egyptology” is
rapidly progressive, and no reader ought to be
content to rest in the comfortable assurance
that he has obtained certitude. He must
accept and hold all his theories with a very
slack hand, and, unlike certain politicians,
must be quite prepared to admit that he has
changed his mind.


I would recommend to my readers who wish
to know more of Egypt than my few casual
papers can pretend to give, to study especially
“The History of Egypt under the Pharaohs,”
by Brugsch Bey. Those who may very natur-
ally be repelled by such an unimaginative dis-
cussion of dry details will find all they wish in
Miss Edwards’s charming volumes, “A Thou-
sand Miles up the Nile” and “Pharaoh’s
Fellahs and Explorers. ’ ’ To these may be added
Professor fiber’s well-known novels, “Uarda”
and “ An Egyptian Princess,” which contain re-
liable pictures of Egypt under Raineses the
Great and Cambyses.
In these papers I intend first to give a few
general facts about the Nile Valley, and then,
with the monuments as my guide, to
give a series of successive pictures of
the civilisation of Egypt at different
points in the long line of centuries
during which her history can be traced, from
the time when the subjects of Khufu were toil-
ing in erecting his preposterous pyramid to the
events of the rebellion of Arabi and the battle
of Tel-el-Kebir.
TYPICAL EIVEKS.
Of all the famous rivers on the face of this
earth there is none that can compete with the
Nile for absorbing interest, and of all the coun-
tries which are renowned in history not one is so
fascinating as the “ land of the double crown”
through which the Nile wanders. Other rivers
may be much more beautiful, other lands may
be more varied and picturesque, but none can
touch that love of mystery which is in all of us,
like that narrow strange strip of country which
the Nile has rescued from the burning deserts
of Africa. It will, I grant, never compete with
the Rhine in the estimation of holiday tourists.
It has no castled crags, no terraced slopes for
vines, no dreamy legends of knights and ladies,
and no woodland glens whose leafy bowers
fairies may still be deemed to haunt. It is
utterly unlike the Ganges, which rolls on
through an immense basin which is one vast
sea of verdure, and where thousands of villages
are scattered on every hand. It is not like our
own Murray, whose banks are fringed with
venerable gum trees and whose career lies in
the future, when a score of Renmarks shall
be theihomes of a busy, happy, peaceful people,
“ dwelling every man under his own vine and
figtree.” The Rhine, the Ganges, and the
Murray, which I select as typical rivers, have
all their own special attractions; but in its own
way the river of Egypt surpasses them all. It


is in Egypt that we obtain the first clear view
of mankind in its earliest civilisation. From
the queer uncouth hieroglyphics of Egypt
came originally the germs of our own methods
of writing and printing. From Egypt the
Greeks learned much both of science and
literature, and their exquisite skill in architec-
ture was borrowed from the Nile. It was in
Egypt that the idea of political liberty was
born; for would we trace back our inherited
notions of personal freedom, our hatred of
slavery, and our glorious consciousness that “a
man is a man for a’ that” we must go back to
the night of the Exodus, when Moses headed an
inspired peaceful strike of the slaves of Goshen,
and led forth the workers into the desert.
SACKED HISTOBY.
Egypt, too, has a close connection with
sacred history. When the Patriarch
Abraham, sore pressed by famine, visited
it 18 centuries before Christ, he found
there a strong empire, a fully developed
civilisation, and a Pharaoh who could
point to 13 dynasties of predecessors. We
all know the story of Joseph, who was sold
into slavery but who rose from being a
menial to be the grand vizier of the monarch,
and who married an Egyptian wife,
and whose father-in-law was priest
of that very temple whose fine obelisk
now stands on the banks of the
Thames. Moses was a student in the Univer-
sity halls of Seti or of On, and carried his
learning into that wonderful legislation which
nursed the Jews into liberty. The Exodus of
the Bible was an event in the annals of the
Nile quite as momentous as in the annals of
Israel. Solomon “made affinity’ with one
Pharaoh, and if you look on the wails of Thebes
you will find the picture of his successor, Re-
hoboam, among the captive princes whom
another Pharaoh had disgraced and conquered.
To Egypt Jeremiah fled when Jerusalem was
destroyed. In Egypt the Old Testament was
translated into Greek, a version which was the
popular Bible of Jesus and St. Paul, of St.
John and Apollos. To Egypt Joseph and
Mary and the infant Jesus took flight when
Herod’s jealousy caused danger to the young
child’s life. To Egypt we probably owe the
Epistle to the Hebrews ; and it was in an
Egyptian corn ship that St. Paul sailed on his
memorable voyage to Rome. Every reader of
the Bible must perforce feel no small interest
in the land which admittedly underlies all the
sacred story of revelation.


ITS PERENNIAL INTEREST.
To know Egypt is, in fact, to find a new
commentary on the Bible. Nor is the history
and importance of Egypt at an end. It is a
country which has not only a past like the
valley of the Euphrates, but also a future. It
is a perennial region. It has a soil which is
never in danger of being exhausted though
cropped three times every year. It lies in the
very centre of the Old World, where the three
great continents meet. It is a stopping place
in the great highway of nations. It is the key
to the world-wide politics of the coming cen-
turies. It is the gateway between the north
and the south; between India and Aus-
tralia on this side the globe, and the dear old
motherland on the other. We cannot help
noting also that this gateway, this magnificent
strategical centre, this keystone in the arch of
political destiny, is in the hands of British
statesmen, and that before three years are
gone by the Suez Canal will be virtually the
property of British subjects. It is not gene-
rally known that the shares which Lord
Beaconsfield acquired for England do not bear
any profit or carry any voting power with
them. On January 1, 1894, they will rank
with the other shares of the company, and will
secure for British interests a predominance in
the councils of the directorate. England’s
rule is beneficent, and I venture for that
reason (and also because I believe it will be for
the benefit of the whole world, and even of
jealous France herself, and because it will
raise the downtrodden peasants of the Nile
into liberty) to hope and trust that the day is
far distant when British control shall come to
an end.
ARCHEOLOGICAL DIFFICULTIES.
My own interest in Egypt has always been
keen, and some 30 years ago, when I was, like
many other young men, more venturous than
prudent, I made a vigorous attempt to grapple
with the problems of its history. I plunged
into its archaeology, and found myself
struggling in a veritable Serbonian bog that
well nigh choked me. My education having
been neglected in never having been taught
Coptic or Arabic, I was unable to wade through
that bog. I scrambled lo the shore and got out
safely, a sadder and a wiser man. Years went
on, and in the meantime European scholars
with Oriental erudition hal been surveying
and examining that bog. They found out by
degrees where firm footing was to be got.


They laid planks over the morasses. They
showed how Old Egypt was revealing herself
in her monuments, and read for us her quaint
records of the past. The old fascination came
over me again. I was a second time tempted
to wade into that bog, and this time I suffered
no manner of harm, and have come forth
neither half drowned nor suffocated, but fresh
and hopeful, and with many an interesting
memory to be my companion during lonely
hours of thought. And now in this series of
papers I am venturing to take even an Ade-
laide public with me back into that romantic
darkness of the past, and I trust that no one
will be any the worse for our expedition.
At the beginning of the year 1890 I found
myself starting off on a visit to England,
which I had not seen for 19 years. Before
setting forth I had many conversations
with his Excellency the Earl of Kintore
and with his Honor Chief Justice Way
as to how I could make my journey useful
to my fellow-colonists. His Honor asked
me whether, if the Governor gave me a
commission to enquire how far it was possible
to introduce objects of antiquarian interest
into South Australia, I would accept of such a
commission. I replied that I would do my
best. The commission came in due time, and
also several letters from his Excellency intro-
ducing me to the leading statesmen of Cairo.
My commission was a great pleasure to me,
for it enabled me to combine work with
holiday gratification, which has a tendency to
surfeit one who takes too big a dose without
work as a corrective. Unfortunately our Go-
vernment did not give me any authority to
spend even a sixpence. I had to make en-
quiries, nothing more. This did not satisfy
me. Being in Egypt I felt compelled to make
my bricks even if I had no straw, and to
emulate the obedience of the old Jewish
workers by toiling for the mere pleasure of doing
one’s duty. I wanted to lay the foundations
of an antiquarian museum in this very new
community, and I was determined to do it. If
I could not buy I was able to beg, and begging
with his Excellency’s commission as my
credential I did not find very disagreeable
work. I was, moreover, fairly successful in my
begging. Through the friendly assistance of
Sir Evelyn Baring and General Sir Francis
Grenfell, I was able to obtain for South Aus-
tralia a valuable collection of casts of famous
antiques. These are a donation from the
Khedive of Egypt to the public of South Aus-
tralia, and are but the beginning of other kind-


nesses yet to come if we show that what has
been done is really appreciated. I regret ex-
ceedingly that, in consequence of the crowded
condition of the museum, no room has yet been
found for any public exhibition of what
has been sent us. I am glad to announce,
however, that the Government are about to
begin the first half of a new wing, so I hope in
due time to have the opportunity of arranging
a very small Egyptian room for the benefit of
the public of South Australia.
FAK DISTANT DATES.
It is not easy for any one and especially for
an Anglo-Australian to get at the best point
of view for looking at Egypt. Its antiquity is
so immense that it bewilders us. When Abra-
ham came out of Ur of the Chaldees Egypt
was already a hoary nation with venerable
antiquarian monuments. We call Herodotus
the “Father of History,” but when he visited
that land he found that its palmy days were
long past and gone, and its history was too
hard for him to decipher, and his dragoman
stuffed him with idle tales of a far off past.
Homer describes the city of Thebes in all its
glory, but Thebes was only an upstart after
Memphis had played her part for a thousand
years. When I went from Egypt to Italy and
saw the Roman ruins on the Bay of Naples I
could not bring myself to think of them as
really old, and as for the castles and abbeys of
England they were quite creations of yester-
day to one who had been trying to leap from
century to century in Egyptian history, like
an acrobat amid his ropes and poles. A small
party of us was standing amid the desolate
black and rose-colored granite cliffs of the
desert near Philse. The rocks were sculptured
with effigies of vanished Pharaohs, recording
their titles and their deeds, and how they had
come hither to quarry huge blocks for their
temples further down the river. We were
looking at an obelisk which was half cut out of
the side of the cliff. That obelisk is 95 ft.
long and 11 ft. square at the base. We were
speculating as to how a modern engineer wculd
set to work if he were trying to complete what
some Pharaoh of the nineteenth dynasty had
begun. “How long ago was that?” said a
young Australian lady, who, putting her
fingers into the wedge holes which had once
been drilled for wooden wedges, added, “these
holes look as if the workmen cut them only
last week.” “They were made 14 centuries
before Christ,” she was informed. An Ameri-
can girl standing by threw in her comment


most aptly. “I tell you what it is, if one
wants to enjoy a trip to Egypt one must get
into a B.C. state of mind, otherwise it is no
use coming here.” A countryman of hers was
listening, and expressed not only his own
honest opinion but that of many others when
he added, "I guess you’re about right, for I
can’t get my mind around these old numbers
at all. All dates B.C. seem to me much of a
muchness.” It is quite true that no one can
properly enjoy a voyage up the Nile who does
not indulge in a good deal of preliminary read-
ing. The “ B.C. state of mind” does not come
by instinct; like a hypnotic sleep it must be
induced and cultivated. To some it comes
easily, to others not at all. To an Englishman it
comes more naturally than to an Australian or an
American, for he has been accustomed to ivy-
clad ruins and quaint cathedrals and tombs of
kings, and museums rich with treasures from
the buried cities of Egypt and Assyria. An
Australian has never seen anything older than
the oldest living inhabitant, except it be a
gum-tree. He has been born into a country
without a history, and without a single relic of
the past to remind him of those other ages
when men lived and struggled for and won
the priceless crown of freedom. People in
Europe complain of young Australia as being
utterly lacking in the faculty of reverence. I
deny the impeachment in its bald form, for
where there is the spirit of religion there must
be reverence, and Australia has not yet sold
her birthright and thrown God overboard. I
must, however, admit that) there is some truth
in the charge. I plead guilty, but put in a plea
of extenuating circumstances. How can you
expect a young man whose notion of antiquity
is formed from the tumble-down cottages of
the early settlers, or the quaint sketches of our
city in the year a.d. 1840, to be filled with
veneration for what has never been presented
to him. The mind of man, like the silkworm,
spins the silk of thought according to what
it is fed on. Australia is called to a rich
banquet of hope, and so her youth is naturally
exuberant and buoyant; but such hope, with-
out experience, may issue in disastrous rash-
ness, and a little more reverence would do her no
harm.
I believe that I am privileged to introduce
into this city what is perhaps the oldest relic
in Australia. It is a broken tablet of the great
conqueror Thotmes 111., who overran Pales-
tine and carried the standards of Egypt into
Syria long before Joshua invaded the land of
Canaan. It would be prized in any museum.


It was found by Mr. W. M. Flinders Petrie, I
believe, at the mouth of the Fayoum. I am in-
debted for it to a wealthy and generous gentle-
man in London, Mr. Hughes Hughes, to whom
it belonged, and who presented it to our museum
at Mr. Petrie’s request. Its story I am not
yet quite in a position to unravel, but anyone
can see the clear-cut cartouch of the great
conqueror, and as he looks at the sharp edge of
the incisions will wonder at the way it has
been preserved. One glance at such a venerable
relic will do more to assist anyone to get into a
proper “B.C. state of mind” than a great
amount of reading. The stone is broken and
incomplete, but I do not apprehend much diffi-
culty in putting the fragments together and
supplying the missing portions.
NILE SCENERY.
A few weeks ago I had a voyage up the
Murray, and as 1 steamed past those steep
limestone cliffs which abut upon the banks, I
was strongly reminded of the Nile. The cliffs
of the Murray are however only on one side at
once, those of the Nile are never absent from
view. The geologist would find a similar
attraction whether he were on our river or on
the river of Egypt, for the limestone hills are
in both cases crowded with fossils, but even
he would say that the Murray fossils are quite
young compared with those of the Nile. An
irrigation engineer would cast his eye over the
numerous billibonars and flats, and would ask
why the waters of the Murray should not be
made as useful as the waters of the Nile, and
would recall the endless contrivances
he had seen there for running tiny
streams over the thirsty banks, shadoofs
and shakiehs, and even Californian pumps.
But for every other species of traveller
the resemblance would soon come to an
end. In Egypt are to be seen no forests,
no shady copses—nothing, in fact, but barren
naked desert, which impinges on the narrow
strip of green garden land which fringes the
river. When the cliffs open and give a peep
into the hill country beyond, the glens are
wild, treeless, sunbaked, and drear. It is a
land in which rain hardly ever falls, and never
in such measure as to have any effect on vege-
tation. The mighty river rolls on through a
rainless desert, and so great is its flood that it
seems to need no showers to fill it. Sailing up
the Nile you may make your way without let
or hindrance for about 588 miles above Cairo.
There you will come upon a network of granite
rocks, which are studded about its bed and fret


and fume the current into a series of pretty
rapids. These are called the First Cataract,
but the name is very misleading, for there is no
such thing as a real cataract to be seen. There
the scenery is very lovely, and in that poetic
region is the famous island cf Philse, sacred to
Isis. Beyond, again, is another 100 miles of
smooth water, and then another cataract, and so
on again and again and again. Other rivers get
less as one ascends them, but the Nile waxes
stronger and deeper the further you go, and
when you have reached the furthest limit where
Egyptian conquerors ever planted their spears
it is a bigger stream than it was at Thebes or
Cairo. From one end of this long course to
Memphis there is a narrow strip of land
on either side, except when the cliffs rise
sheer from the surface, which is wonderfully
fertile. Sometimes this is only a few yards
wide and sometimes, though rarely, it extends
for three or four miles. Wherever Egypt is
green that greenness is bright and fresh;
wherever it is not green it is utterly barren.
The land is either very good or of no use at all.
On this green strip three crops a year are
reaped, and so rich io the soil that that tiny
country supports its millions of people, and
exports to the rest of the world cotton and
sugar, and dates and oranges, and in olden
time used to help to feed great Rome itself.
Villages and small towns abound and each one
makes a striking picture with its quaint huts
and tall minarets seen against a background of
palm trees. The scenery is montonous, but yet
it has an attraction of its own, for the views,
though similar, are never alike. The river is
always busy. Boats and barges of antique
build, just like those which were in fashion
in the days of the early Pharaohs, abound,
each one carrying an enormous latteen sail,
shaped like a swallow’s wing. These boats are
for the most part crowded with peasants, and
with them are to be found donkeys and buffaloes
and goats, and even camels. The donkeys
seem quite used to such passages, and jump on
board a little boat with much alacrity and with
no thought about paying their fare. Every
now and again one meets one of those
luxurious floating houses called “dahabeahs,”
in which wealthy Englishmen and Americans
who have abundance of time and money
are wont to make the voyage of the Nile ; and
very pretty they look, especially when one sees
a pleasant party of ladies and gentlemen
lounging on the upper deck, enjoying the
modern dissipation of afternoon tea. These daha-
beahs are the modern form of the royal barges


in which the Pharaohs and the great men of
their day were wont to go up and down from
Thebes to Memphis and on to Alexandria or
Pelusium. But anon one sees a cloud of smoke
round the next curve and there comes
into sight one of Cook’s or Gaze’s steamers.
You spell out its name and find that it is
“ Raineses the Great,” or “ Amenemhatbut
how either of those famous persons would
have stared if he could have beheld a boat
ploughing its way up stream when the south
wind is blowing in its teeth, with no rowers to
propel it and with an ugly black cloud instead
of a fairy-like sail!
CHAPTER 11.
THE LAND OP THE DOUBLE CROWN.
Egypt is called on her ancient monuments
“The Land of the Double Crown.” Her
Pharaohs are depicted crowned with two dia-
dems one over the other, the one red the other
white. This is meant to indicate that they
were kings of two Egypts which the Nile has
made. Upper Egypt is the long narrow strip
which reaches from Philse to Cairo. Lower
Egypt is what we call the Delta. In coming
down the stream we find that at Cairo the whole
character of the river changes. We pass from
the land of the one crown to that of the other.
The limestone cliffs which in the upper reaches
hem in the valley, now recede into the dis-
tance, and between them the Nile slowly crawls
along in a hundred channels and canals till it
reaches the sea by seven different mouths, of
which only two are now useful for navigation.
Here green fields spread out far as the eye can
reach, and the vast plain is only broken by
mounds of ruined cities and countless clusters
of palm groves. This is the “ Delta,” and
in this delta the chief wealth of Egypt has
always been gathered. It reaches from Alex-
andria to Port Said, and fills up the triangle
by those two cities and Cairo. This
region is of especial interest as the ch.ef home
of the Biblical stories of Egypt. “The land
of Goshen” is here. The “ treasure cities” of
Pithom and Rameses are here. This is the
“field of Zoan” where Jehovah “did such
mighty works.” Here is the birthplace of
Moses, who floated in his ark of bulrushes on
one of these weedy canals; and here was the


refuge of the holy family when they fled from
the cowardly cruelty of the Judsean king.
Here too the Grecian conqueror, Alexander
the Great, built the city that still bears his
name ; and here too Mons. Lesseps has dug his
wonderful canal. It has ever been the camp-
ing ground of the soldiers of the Pharaohs, and
on the eastern boundary of this Delta, between
the canal and Cairo, was fought the last great
Egyptian battle of Tel-el-Kebir, of which I
shall tell the story in another chapter.
ISMAILIA.
Here too the traveller from Australia will get
his first peep of Egypt. He will land at Ismailia.
This town lies in a pretty lake-like basin in the
middle of the canal. It is a very modern
creation among the ancient cities of the Nile,
and has a decidedly French appearance.
Weatherboard and mud and stucco have
been made use of to fashion this up-
start settlement, and it looks as raw
and new as Goodwood or Broken Hill. I
landed there early one morning from the
steamer “Victoria,” and was soon made aware
how the place is haunted by the genius of the
great engineer. “ That,” said our guide, “was
Mons. Lesseps’ house,” pointing to a pretty
mansion among the date palms. “He laid out
this town, he had his chief offices here, he in-
tended to live and die here.” This intention
he has, however, not attempted to carry out,
having preferred to transfer his energies to the
Isthmus of Panama, which he has found more
awkward to cut through than this sandy level
desert. The captain of the tugboat was a
Frenchman, and gave his orders to the French
engineer in the same language. A French
agent of Mons. Lesseps was on board, a,nd he
was very affable and chatty. “We French
have had it all our own way in the manage-
ment of this canal, but we know that in a few
years it will be very different. The British
shares which Lord Beaconsfield bought from
the Khedive have hitherto carried no dividends
or voting power, but on January 1, 1894, they
will be on a par with all the other shares. The
majority of the capital of the company will
then be in the hands, not of England, but of
British people; I think I shall clear out then.”
We asked him why he would throw up such a
situation, and said something about his ser-
vices being too valuable to be dispensed with,
and that it was not likely that there would be
any sweeping changes. “Yes,” he said, “ I
know that; but I shall not feel comfortable,
and shall go back to France.”


Tne town is well laid out. with wide streets,
bearing French names, running under shady
avenues. It has two fair hotels, kept, of
course, by Frenchmen. Through the middle
runs the Sweetwater Canal, which comes all
the way from the Nile at Cairo and then flows
on to Suez. In the centre of the town is a
small shady square with comfortable seats under
the trees, and scattered about are some fine an-
tiques, which were brought from the ruins of
Pithom. I believe some of them were found in
the ground that was being cleared for Mons.
Paponot, who was connected with the canal.
He selected a mound which was convenient
and dry, and had no notion what an interesting
site it was. Mons. Marriette was also ex-
ploring some other nameless mounds just
about the time when Lesseps was digging
his canal. He came upon some noble granite
statues of Rameses 11., and upon some bricks
inscribed with his name, and also the name of
the town “ PirToum” or Pithom. Subsequent
explorers in digging further have unearthed a
vast series of “store chambers” built by the
same monarch, and built moreover in some parts
of good bricks, and in others of bricks
without straw. The brick chambers have
been covered up again, but the statues now
adorn the pretty little garden square of Is-
mailia. As I stood looking at them it came in
upon me with full force that I was really in
Egypt, the old biblical Egypt, for there before
me was the image of the famous Pharaoh who
ground down the Hebrews into slavery,
and that idolatrous image was origi-
nally set up in the midst of the toil-
ing serfs whom he oppressed. The chil-
dren of Israel had probably assisted in
dragging it from its raft and fixing it in posi-
tion. I tried to spell out the hieroglyphics
which are carved in the solid granite. I could
not then make much out of them, but I
managed for the first time to spell out the
name of the mighty Pharaoh, who is as famous
in Egyptian history and romance as he is in
the Bible records. He has covered Egyjit
with mementoes of himself, and his name en-
dures as the greatest of Egypt’s warriors,
the wisest of her Pharaohs, and the most ambi-
tious of her builders. These interesting sta-
tues have been photographed, and copies may
now -be purchased for half-a-franc. They show us
what manner of man this renowned Rameses
was. Fortunately, however, we are not depen-
dent on statues alone, or on painted bas-reliefs.
We are able to gaze upon the likeness of this
man taken from his actual mummy, which is


now lying in state in the museum at Ghizeh,
near Cairo. How his mortal remains came to
be there is a story of most romantic interest. I
will not attempt to tell it in this chapter, but
will reserve it for fuller treatment when I
come to describe the Egypt of the 19th
dynasty.
RAILWAYS AND DONKEYS.
The past and the present are strangely
mingled in Egypt, for as soon as we bade fare-
well to the stony Pharaoh we found ourselves
amid a crowd of donkey boys, all wanting to
take us to the station of the very modern rail-
way which leads to Cairo. These donkeys re-
joiced in many and various names, which their
noisy young drivers yelled out in chorus to
attract our attention. Of course, one was
“Rameses the Great,” who was a long-suffer-
ing animal accustomed to many blows.
Another was “Mr. Spurgeon,” and another
“ The Bishop of London,” and another “ Glad-
stone,” and another “Mrs. Langtry.” As
the station was very near and the road shady
we preserved a strict negative impartiality and
went on foot. That railway is intensely in-
teresting to those who will look with the
mind’s eye upon the prospect, but not other-
wise. To a blind tourist it has few charms,
and he longs to get to the end of the journey
and reach gay and brilliant Cairo. The
scenery is flat; desert and green patches
alternate for many miles. The people look
ragged and unkempt and impudent. The
Sweetwater Canal, which runs along the
railtrack, does not always deserve its
luscious name, and occasionally offends one’s
nostrils, and is mantled with scum. One
gets tired in time of the monotony of mud
villages, quaint strings of camels, and oddly-
dressed crowds at the roadside. But if we look
out, determined to see what may and can be
seen, we note how all the verdure for the first 20
miles is the gift of that canal which brings the
rich Nile water into the desert. We examine
our map and see that we are going through the
veritable land of Goschen; we draw up at
various stations and find that we are stopping
to take in water at Pithom and Bubastis.
Our route by train is actually along the very
track by which the Israelites came out of
Egypt, and as we see great caravans of natives
with all their stuff upon their camels and
asses, we picture that mighty historic exodus,
when the slaves of Pharaoh struck, not for
higher wages, but for liberty and the rights of
manhood. But we see more than this. On&


station is called Tel-el-Kebir, and looking out
of the window we can see the line of Arabi’s
entrenchments, which the English won so gal-
lantly and saved Egypt from itself, and, not
far off, a neat and pretty cemetery, filled, not
with Moslem tombstones, but with snow white
crosses bearing the names of English soldiers
who fell in that memorable onslaught.
THE PYRAMIDS.
There is one sight, however, which attracts
and fascinates everybody on that railway jour-
ney. Once when I made that journey we found
ourselves shut in with a young couple on their
wedding tour. They did not pay any heed
to the route of the Israelites, or the exploits of
Sir Garnet Wolseley, not they ; but even they
craned their necks out of the window to catch
sight of the citadel of Cairo and the Pyramids
of Ghizeh. The sun was setting, as it usually
does in Egypt, in a luminous splendor behind
the desert, going down to the mythical Amenti,
the region of darkness, and there, in that
western glow, we saw, a few miles before reach-
ing Cairo, the solid points of the three largest
pyramids, and on the left hand the slender
minarets of the citadel shining like burnished
metal. Our reserved and affectionate couple
became quite loquacious in the questions that
now began to flow forth. They wanted to know
who Pharaoh ,was, why he built those pyra-
mids, how old they were, how big they were,
and whether it was true that they were
Joseph’s granaries in which he stored corn during
the seven years of plenty against the time of
famine that he anticipated. I am afraid
I did not conduce to the clearness of
their ideas when I told them that the
pyamids were more than a thousand
years older than Joseph, and not to make up
their minds as to their purpose till they had
paid them a visit, and seen for themselves what
they were like, and had explored their passages
and chambers, and had stood upon the top.
CAIRO.
There is little or no twilight in Egypt, and
the vision of the pyramids soon faded away in
the afterglow which overspread the western
sky, and a few minutes afterwards we found
ourselves amid the noise and bustle of the
great city of Cairo, and before long were enjoying
the delicious confusion of settling down at
“Shepherd’s” Hotel. My first business in
that city was to make arrangements for a trip
up the Nile, and concurrently with that to do
what I could to get the authorities to give


some practical response to the commission
with which his Excellency had entrusted me.
I found the place full of visitors. It was the
height of the season, and the hotels were
crowded with English and American tourists
with a sprinkling of Germans and Italians.
Among the visitors were no fewer than four
European Crown princes. The winter climate
of Egypt is superb, being bright, sunny, and
cool, and it is becoming more and more
fashionable as a pleasure resort in the dreary
months of December and January. When
Scotland is shrouded in mist, and Switzerland
is mantled with snow, and the pleasant gardens
of Germany are leafless, Cairo is at its
best. It is at all times a gay and
brilliant city, but in the winter it is the
centre of a ceaseless round of excur-
sions and social festivities. Every week
the two great rivals, Cook and Gaze, dispatch
a steamer up the river. Every day a coach
and four starts for the pyramids. Twice a
week steamers run to Sakkarah and at all
hours of the day a stream of carriages and
donkeys may be seen carrying tourists to the
bazaars, or to the citadel, or to Heliopolis, or
to old Cairo, or to the museum on the other
side of the Nile, Cairo is not an old place for
Egypt. A shadowy history can be traced
back to the time of Christ, when it existed
under the imported name of “ Babylon,” but
its real history goes back only for about 1,000
years, when the Mohammedan invaders of the
Nile valley settled on that spot as their fortress
capital, whence they could hold and govern
Egypt better than from any other place.
They called it “El Kahira,” “the victorious,”
which we shorten down into Cairo. In Cairo
are to be found the richest remains of
Mohammedan art in the world. In Cairo may
also be found the rarest and most curious
Christian relics that can be imagined, for the
Coptic Church of to-day is the lineal descendant
of the ancient Egyptian Church, the Church of
Origen, of Athanasius. In Cairo are gathered
the choicest monuments of ancient Egypt, and
the museum of Ghizeh is by far the richest in
the world in such things. Cairo is a city of
fascinations for people of every taste—from
the learned antiquary to the mere lounger. It
is a sort of eclectic city borrowing its charms
from Paris, from Naples, and from Damascus,
like and yet unlike to all three.
Most people who go to Cairo have very
little care for the Egypt that lies beyond its
suburbs. Everybody makes an excursion to
the pyramids, and some enjoy the fun of


climbing to the top, and then have a walk to
the Sphinx and gaze with proper wonderment
on its battered face. A smaller number visit
the more distant pyramid field of Memphis,
and a yet smaller stream goes to Heliopolis,
whence Cleopatra’s Needle came originally. A
smaller, but by no means insignificant stream
is ambitious to make the trip of the Nile and
see what is to be seen there. “What is there
to be seen if I go up the Nile ?” said a young
man to me as we sat talking on the balcony of
the hotel. “Ruins,” I replied. “Then I
shall not- go, for I like new things and hate
ruins.” “You had better come,” I replied,
“and live in Australia, then. There is not a
single building in my city, or in its great
neighbour Melbourne, which is as old as I am,
and lam not yet an old man.” “ What else
beside ruins?” he proceeded. “Tombs,” was
the answer. “That settles me; ruins and
tombs are altogether too musty for me, and as
I have no room for mummies in my portman-
teau I will be content with Cairo.”
TOMBS AND RUINS.
Tombs and ruins are, however, very interest-
ing when one has learned how to look at them.
Egyptian ruins are not at all like the ivy clad
abbeys and castles of England and Germany.
They are bare barren piles of stones with
nothing poetic about them, but they have a
grandeur and a beauty of their own which is
very fascinating to those who have eyes
trained to see them aright. The Egyptians
were in their own way a very thoughtful and a
very religious people. To them the unseen
world was more real than the seen, and the
future to-morrow more vivid than the present
to-day. They thought more of their temples
built for their gods than of their own halls of
assembly. The great Pharaohs built their
palaces of wood and paint and sun-dried bricks,
but their tombs were either erected of solid
stone, or were like grander palaces excavated
into the rock. They had a notion that a man’s
future destiny depended on the preservation of
hismortalbody, and so they became skilled in the
art of making mummies which have defied the
ravages of time, but not the hand of man. Their
great cities consisted of a crowded assortment
of showy and fragile structures, around a group
of temples built so solidly that they seemed
destined to last for ever, and behind these, and
usually on the western side, was the cemetery
of the people, in which a second city lay con-
cealed, larger, more real and more imposing
than the city of the living. There are many


such clusters of ruins with their atten-
dant cemeteries in this strange land. The cities
are to be found on both banks of the river, but
the cemetery is nearly always on the western
side. The setting of the sun in the heavens
and the setting of the sun of human life were
looked upon as concurrent phenomena,
symbolic of each other, and predictive of a
glorious morrow when the sun would come
forth refreshed from his battle with Set in the
underworld, and when the soul would arise into
the heavenly life of Osiris.
MEMPHIS AND THEBES.
The two greatest cities of Egypt were
Memphis and Thebes. Memphis lay opposite
Cairo, and the line of pyramids marks where its
enormous cemetery lay. It was founded about
44 centuries before Christ. Thebes was
situated 450 miles higher up the river, and its
cemetery lay on the slopes of the arid hills over
the river. It was founded perhaps 2,000 years
after its rival, and by that time pyramids
had gone out of fashion and rock chambers
had come in, so that there are no
pyramids near Thebes. Memphis has utterly
vanished, but its cemetery remains one of the
wonders of the world. It was too near Cairo
for the Moslem builders to resist the tempta-
tion to make it a quarry. Thebes still shows
us in its mighty ruins what a splendid city it
must have been, and its cemetery is one inex-
haustible storehouse of antique treasures.
Memphis was in its glory in the days of
Abraham. Thebes was at the height of its
fame in the days of Moses. Memphis was the
capital of Lower Egypt, and its diadem was a
red crown. Thebes was the metropolis of
Upper Egypt, and its diadem was a white
mitre. The crown of the Pharaohs was, as I
have remarked, a double one, and signified
that the man who wore it was monarch of the
whole land from the Cataract to the sea.
These two cities have played no small part
in the history of the world. For many cen-
turies the Pharaohs of Egypt kept quietly
within the narrow limits of their own land.
They were content with their rich valley, and
did not meddle with the outside world. After
a while, however, the spirit of ambition unfor-
tunately came into their minds, and they
aimed at making Egypt the mistress of the
known world. They had their navies in the
Mediterranean, and again and again overran
Palestine and Syria with their armies. They
connected the Nile with the Red Sea, and long
before the Suez Canal their ships passed from


Memphis to the Indian Ocean. They pushed
their conquests south into Ethiopia, and laid
all their neighbors under tribute, and were for
the time the greatest monarchs of their age.
The Pharaohs have gone. The last of them
was Cleopatra of infamous memory, and she
was not of true royal blood. Egypt
has changed her masters, but she is still
as important as ever. Alone of the great
Empires of the world she remains strong in her
gift of eternal youth. Babylon and Nineveh
and Carehemish, her ancient rivals, are buried
under the sands. Rome has faded into com-
parative obscurity. The Moslem conquerors
planted near Memphis their seat of Empire,
and in a fashion that Empire survives. And
now by the irony of destiny that far off bar-
barous island of Britain is dominating her
politics with an influence which gives hope that
Egypt may at last become as free as other
lands, and that her peoples may rejoice in equal
laws, in even-handed justice, and a blessed
Christian prosperity. It is the stolid and per-
sistent character of the native Coptic Church
which has saved Egypt from being utterly
corrupted by the fatalism of the Moslem in-
vasion, and now it is in the leavening of society
there with a wider and more liberal conception
of our divine creed that the hope of Egypt is
to be found. England has almost left Egypt
out of her modern missionary enterprise, but
where England has failed in her duty America,
her daughter, has stepped in. Almost single-
handed one American society is covering the
whole land with a network of benevolent agen-
cies. It is planting its schools, is training its
native preachers and teachers, building its
colleges, and carrying on a noble crusade. The
hundreds of visitors who come to Cairo know
little or nothing of the work that is being done.
I can, however, testify at once to its magni-
tude, its efficiency, and its importance. And
just as the native Christians in India played no
small part in preserving India for England in
the time of the mutiny, so will the native evan-
gelical churches of Egypt ever manifest a
strong and wise loyalty to the governing in-
•fluence of England.


CHAPTER 111.
FIFTY CENTURIES AGO.
The civilisation of the Nile Valley is the
earliest of which we have any monumental
history, and I purpose in this chapter to intro-
duce my readers to the Egypt of 50 centuries
ago. In order to do this I must ask them to
accompany me on two venturesome expedi-
tions, the one in space and the other in time.
The trip through space is to the pyramid field
of Memphis, the trip through time is back to
the age of Cheops or Khufu. The former is, I
need hardly say, a most delightful excursion,
whether taken in reality in a carriage and pair
from Shepherd’s Hotel in Cairo, or taken in
imagination from a verandah chair in a South
Australian villa. I hope to act as guide and
dragoman, and will do my best to make the
trip both interesting and instructive. The
story of a trip to the pyramids is an oft told
tale, but there is always something fresh to be
learned from a visit to those memorable
tombs. I intend also to ask my readers to
make a long long journey down the centuries,
into the past ages of the world, and I warn
them that to do that requires some mental
exercise for those who dwell in a land like
Australia, which has no history to stimulate
curiosity over venerable ruins and famous
sites. A good illustrated book may assist in an
easy imaginary visit to the Egypt of to-day, but
there is no escape from the necessity for effort
if we would visit the Egypt of the past.
THE RAILWAY OP TIME.
We are all more or less familiar with the
facts of sacred history, and it will help us in
our historic expedition into the past if we
make use of well-known Bible incidents as our
stations by the way, and count the centuries
as milestones. We will travel back, without
stopping, past eighteen milestones, to the dawn
of the Christian era. We awake from our
sleep in this express train, and, looking out of
the window, see Joseph and Mary and the
babe, Jesus, resting under a tree by the mouth
of a spring. Not far from them is a grand
city, venerable, almost deserted, but not in
ruins. In the city we see three or four great
stone fingers pointing to the sky, which some-
how seem familiar. We look at them care-
fully, and note that these needles are very like
the one which Londoners are now so proud of
as it stands rotting and crumbling in the murky
valley of the Thames. The actual obelisk which
is now in London was taken to Alexandria


twenty-five years before. They belonged to an
ancient temple of the sun at Heliopolis.
“When was that temple built?” we ask, and
the only answer is “A long long time ago, by
an old Pharaoh before the time of Joseph.”
“ When did he live ?” “ When we have passed
sixteen more century milestones we shall pro-
bably meet with him.” .
We go travelling backwards, a little more
slowly, so that we may note what is to be
seen. At the 2nd century milepost b.c. we
get out in Alexandria, and see a learned
college of Jews busy making a royal book.
We ask what they are doing, and are informed
that their countrymen begin to find Hebrew a
tough and dead language, and so they are trans-
lating the Old Testament into Greek, which
was a language “ understanded of the people.”
The wearers of the double crown at this time
are Greek Pharaohs.
Again we get on board, and when next we
halt we have passed three more centuries, and
we see Egypt in terrible confusion. The great
and insensate conqueror from Persia, named
Cambyses, the son of Darius, is harrowing the
land, burning the villages, insulting the gods,
murdering the people, and spreading havoc on
every side. It is an awful picture, and it
strikes us as we look at it that we are
beholding the fulfilment of the weird prophecies
of Jeremiah, the Jewish prophet. The
Pharaohs now are not Greeks but Persians.
Further back still we travel, past in-
numerable Pharaohs and dynasties of Pharaohs,
and halting at the 9th century milestone we
see a proud Egyptian potentate coming back
from his wars with triumphal pomp. He has
been into Palestine, and there among many
other unfortunate chieftains, he has run against
the King of Judah and humbled him, and if
we take a trip up to Thebes we may see how
the royal artists have been carving on the walls
of Karnak a figure of this Bible king with his
hands tied behind his back and with a most
woeful expression on his face. It is a gross
and conceited exaggeration, for Jeroboam was
never taken captive at all, but we must be pre-
pared all along the line to find the Pharaohs
so puffed up with vanity as to magnify all their
geese into swans.
SOLOMON.
At the next milestone (No. 10 b.c.) the out-
look is more cheerful, for Solomon the gorgeous,
is taking home to Jerusalem a bride from
among the royal maidens of the land. Egypt
now looks at her best, for she is peaceful and


prosperous and gay. We are surprised at see-
ing this sudden change, and it reminds us of
what the history of Europe illustrates to-day,
namely, that royal marriages are a very poor
cement in building up an edifice of political
ambition. “ Solomon made affinity with
Pharaoh King of Egypt.” His son, as we
have seen, was caricatured as a prisoner by the
next Pharaoh.
Again we go backwards, and the next halt is
at the 14th century stone 8.c., or the 33rd
from our starting point. Now the outlook is
indeed interesting, but we can only just glance
at it. The tribes of Israel have gathered on
the shore of the Red Sea. A great storm is
raging. Pharaoh is marshalling his chariots.
At the word of command the Israelites march
into the swamp of the Yam Suph, which the
east wind has cleared for them. Pharaoh goes in
after them, and we hear a few hours after the
desert air ringing with the anthem of a
liberated people. “Sound the loud timbrel
o’er Egypt’s dark sea; Jehovah has triumphed,
His people are free.”
JOSEPH.
We could, and intend hereafter to, linger at
this resting-place, but we again go back, and
now the milestones are so old that they are
blurred and uncertain. Even Old Mortality
and Mr. Pickwick would be puzzled to make
them out. I fancy we have passed four more,
and,we see a well-known man whom we have
read of since we were children, playing the part
of the great ruler of Egypt. Joseph, the
Hebrew, is the Grand Vizier of the Shepherd
Pharaoh Aphopis. He has had given to him a
new name, Tsaphnath Paaneah, and taken
to himself a wife, and his father-in-law
is the priest of that very temple where we saw
the holy family resting near by. We look
carefully and see still the old London obelisk,
only this time it looks beautifully new, the
granite shines beneath its polish, and its top is
tipped with gold.
Our chronological expedition now carries us
into dim misty regions, but somewhere about
two stones beyond, we see the venerable
patriarch Abraham and his aged but still
sprightly wife, Sarah, entertained as the guests
of another and older Pharaoh. The London obe-
lisk is nowhere visible now ; we have at last got
beyond it. We have noticed, however, at each
stage in our long journey that on the western
horizon, beyond the Nile, the long line
of pyramids stretching for 20 miles behind
Memphis, not one of which has been added to


the list. Age after age the whole regiment has
remained as a guard keeping watch over the
land. Age after age the grand old Sphinx has
sat crouching under the shadow of the two
largest of these pyramids, gazing towards the
east, waiting day after day for the rising of the
sun. It is a symbol of man’s hope of rising into
another life when he has set with Turn, the
setting sun, and has conquered the darkness of
Hades through the divine Jielp of Osiris, and
risen again as Horus.
BEFORE ABRAHAM WAS.
And now we lose the Bible as our suggestive
guide, but our journey is far from ended yet.
Dynasty after dynasty of vanished Pharaohs
rush past. We count them on our fingers—
“ 13th, 12th, 11th, 10th.” It is getting very
misty as the crumbling milestones of this region
flit by. “9th, Bth, 7th, 6th, sth.” Oh, here
it is getting clearer; we seem to be coming
into a brilliant daylight. We look out and see
that some of the pyramids are missing, and
those that are there shine in their virgin new-
ness, and the Sphinx looks radiant in the morn-
ing light. “ Fourth dynasty.” Here we halt.
Egypt is like a vast beehive. It swarms with
people. Its engineers are engaged in the
greatest architectural battle the world has ever
seen. They are manufacturing mountains as
the last resting places of their Pharaohs.
The pyramids are being built, and the Sphinx
is looking on with its stony smile. We have
come a long way, but before we get out let us
note how far we really have come. Learned
men differ in counting the century milestones.
Piazzi Smyth, of Edinburgh, says we have only
come 21 since the birth of Christ. The his-
torian Brugsoh Bey says we have come 37.
Marriatte says we have been asleep and have
really come 42. My own idea is that we have
come 34, that is, 53 since we first started. I
promised to take my readers back “50 centuries
ago.” I have done more than keep my word,
for I now ask them to land and look around at
Egypt in or about the year 3440 B c., when a
certain great Pharaoh named Cheops, or more
properly Khufu, is on the throne, and is busy
building the pyramid, working his quarries up
the river, and setting an army of men to dig
in the mountains of Sinai for gold and silver
and copper and precious stones.
ACROSS THE NILE.
And now let us take our land journey in
space, which will be less fatiguing and more
interesting than our astral expedition into the
regions B.c. We assemble in the midst of the


noisy, merry thoroughfare where stands Shep-
herd’s Hotel. A notable English firm, which
has an office in King William-street, in Ade-
laide, and also one close by Shepherd’s, in
Cairo, sends a four-horse drag for our accom-
modation and as many carriages as we need.
Cook & Son’s driver is clad in scarlet, and his
postboy carries a horn which he blows lustily.
The donkey boys look on with serious ohatter-
ings, for their monopoly of the road to the
pyramids has been sadly broken in upon. In
vain they proclaim that their donkeys are
severally named Rameses the Great, or Cleo-
patra, or Thotmes, or Dean Stanley. We
prefer the solid and safe comfort of the drag,
or of the open barouche, to the most romantic
of all the asses. Besides, we want to ex-
change ideas as we drive along, which is a very
difficult process when marshalled in a proces-
sion of donkeys; each of which donkeys is
attended by a chattering boy, and he probably
has another boy to attend on him, and all are
intent on backshish.
We drive through the new and fashionable
quarter of European Cairo, with its pretty
houses, its shady gardens, and its grand
palaces, and come before long to the
bridge which leads to the other side
of the Nile. This bridge is one of the sights
of Cairo. It is a fine and most convenient
specimen of modern engineering, and as we
note the crowds of camels and horses and asses
and all sorts of vehicles that block the roadway
we wonder what the people did before it was
built. Every morning for an hour that bridge
is silent. One of the segments of it swings on
a pivot, and during that hour it is opened for
shipping to pass beneath it or athwart it.
Meanwhile the waiting crowd gathers at each
end in a vast picturesque congested mass of
men and animals waiting for the signal.
When the signal is given the scene baffles all
description. It is the most exciting, amusing,
and noisy comedy that can be conceived.
From both ends the crowd rushes to the
passage, everything at full speed except the
camels, whom nothing will disturb out of their
dignity. It iwould seem as though the comedy
must become a tragedy, but somehow or other
all usually goes well —even the goats seem to
know the value of the imported discipline of
municipal police.
Our knowing drivers have, however, so timed
our expedition that we get to the bridge before
the daily crisis, and we are soon on the other
side. We see stretching before us a long and
shady avenue of lime trees, which, we are


told, were planted all along the way to the
pyramids when the Prince of Wales visited
the land 25 years ago. We see before us, some
five miles off, the great pyramids which we are
going to visit. They do not look very large or
very wonderful, for the pyramidal form is pre-
cisely that one which, of all others used in
architecture, has a tendency to dwarf its own
magnitude.
MUSEUM OP GHIZEH.
After a mile and a half have been passed we
see on our right the gateway of a spacious
and showy palace in the midst of a well-kept
garden. This is the new museum of Ghizeh.
All the treasures that used to be crowded in
the chambers of Boulak have been removed
here. It is by far the finest archaeological
museum of Egyptian antiquity in the world.
It is perfectly bewildering in its extent, and its
interest is so great that the visitor gets satiated
with historic curiosities long before he is half
through. The central hall of that museum is the
last resting place of the great -Pharaohs of the
nineteenth dynasty. There lie in quiet state
ThotmesllL, Rameses 11., Seti 1., and many
others. There are to be seen the jewels which
adorned Pharaoh’s daughters. There are the
mementoes of a civilisation as old as the
pyramid itself. In one of my future chaptei s I
intend to take my readers in there, but for this
time we must be content to hasten on, for
our goal is the top of the “throne of Khufu.’
Very fresh and charming is that drive in the
early morning. On each side stretches the
green land of Egypt, with its numerous
channels and creaking water-wheels and
shadufs and sakiehs. The crops are wonderful,
and with such an abundance of Nile water to
feed them are able to defy the sun to embrown
them before the proper time. This greenness
in Egypt is intense. It may be the effect of
contrast with the barren desert beyond, but,
be that as it may, we feel, as we ride on, that
Dean Stanley was right when he spoke of this
strange region as being “unutterably green.”
As we draw nearer we note that the green
plain comes to a sudden termination against a
low platform of limestone, just as sharp as the
boundary between the waves of the Bay and
the sandhills at Glenelg. That platform is the
cemetery of the vanished city of Memphis,
which of old stretched along the western
bank of the river on our left. In that plat-
form millions of human beings have been
buried —some in common graves, some in
decorated tombs, and some under the


pyramids, which lie in groups for 20 miles
in different parts of that va>t cemetery. In
that platform are to be found also the graves
of thousands of cats, and ibises, and hawks,
and in a sepulchre which will vie even witn
the pyramids in awakening our astonishment,
the tombs of the Sacred Bulls, which were
deemed the living incarnation of the Deity.
THE PYRAMIDS.
We see before us as we advance not three,
but nine or ten pyramids, which cluster around
the two highest. They all have their own tale
of interest to tell; but travellers usually pay
little heed to anything hereabouts except the
one “Great Pyramid” and the “Sphinx,”
which we see like a huge ball on the edge of the
desert plateau as we draw nearer. If any one
ask why it is that this one pyramid has secured
such a disproportionate share of attention,
when it is only a little larger than its nearest
neighbor, my answer must be, “ wait and
see.” He will find that this pyramid is a great
puzzle to all who look at it. He may say it is
only a huge tomb, and perhaps he is right ;
but still it is a puzzle, and puzzles are
fascinating things. People generally improve
by practice in any art that they attempt, but
it was not so in this case. This pyramid is the
oldest of the group and is nevertheless the
best. It was an effort of genius to conceive it
and construct it, and that effort has never been
surpassed or even equalled. Its mechanical
adjustments are marvellous. Its chambers are
lined with slabs of polished granite which even
a hydraulic machine would groan in lifting to
their resting place far up in the interior. Its
recondite angles and mystic numerical pro-
portions are such that there is no doubt that
the designers understood something more of
astronomy than we can easily give them credit
for. Its exquisite workmanship, its mys-
terious symbols, and its freedom from all
idolatrous imagery, for it is utterly devoid of all
hieroglyphic writing, or carven pictures, or in-
scription of any kind, completely captivated the
well-known Astronomer Royal of Edinburgh,
and led him to seek to find in the pyramid
the key to all sorts of mysteries both sacred
and scientific, and also the title deed, written
by a divine hand, of the British race to inherit
the promises of Ephraim, and to possess as well
the gates of the whole civilised globe. I con-
fess that, at one time, I was much interested in
the romantic religious sermon that he
educed from that ingenious mountain of stone,
but further knowledge has dispelled my dream.


The remorseless unimaginative accuracy of the-
measurements 6f Mr. Flinders Petrie, while
sustaining the correctness of Piazzi Smyth in
general, have demonstrated that the figures
are not sufficiently exact to build an inspired
theory upon them. Besides, the entire scheme
of the Scotch astronomer is based upon taking
as a date for the building of the pyramid the
year 2170 B.C. That date will not fit in with
other facts. It is too recent by about a
thousand years. It is impossible to squeeze
the history into so short a space. For reasons
which I shall explain hereafter I have taken as
my date 3440 b.c.
THE MENA HOTEL.
Just at the foot of the platform, after entering
upon the desert and bidding farewell to the
green valley, we see on our right a grand hotel.
It strikes us as an anomaly to find a gorgeous
and aesthetic hotel amid the tombs of the
Pharaohs, but it is a very convenient anomaly.
The reason of its existence is that this ancient
graveyard is famed for the extreme purity of
its air. Microbes seem to dread Egyptian
mummies, and bacteria fight shy of G-hizeh,and
at the “Mena Hotel” invalids from Europe
and America seek and find a clear, delicious,
and salubrious climate at the very time when
London is wrapt in fogs and New York
mantled with snow. The Mena Hotel boasts
its tennis court and its cricket-ground, and a
stable in which are kept, ready for hire, not
only horses, but camels and asses. It is a
favorite place for afternoon tea, and about 4
o’clock it is the daily scene of much modern
gossip and gaiety. Tourists recite their
exploits among the tombs in the same way as
at Griindelwald, they tell of their adventures
among the glaciers. Theorists discuss the rival
dates of temples and pyramids over a genial
cigar. The ladies are never wearied of telling
over again the story of how the Arabs amused
them and helped them and cheated them as
they climbed up the 204 steps to the summit.
To stay at the Mena Hotel is a
new sensation in this blasts world, but
I may also add it is a very expensive
sensation. They say that no doctors’ bills
ever trouble the denizens of this desert hotel,
so we may take that as a set off against its
alarming reputation for costly living. How-
ever, it is well for us to rest here awhile, and
by a careful examination of maps and plans, to
E repare for a visit to the famous cemetery of
lemphis, and especially for the ascent and
exploration of the great pyramid and a walk


amid the drifting sand dunes to the Cyclopean
Temple of the Sphinx. The host of the hotel
will even, if we like, provide us wich camels or
donkeys to take us all the way to Sakkarah, at
the other end of the cemetery, where we shall
find quite as much to interest us as here, and see
a pyramid even older than this of Khufu.
There also we shall find the cavern sepulchres of
the Sacred Bulls and the graceful, happy,
Arcadian tomb of Tii and his wife. Of these
things I shall write in my next sketch.
CHAPTER IV.
PYRAMIDS AND TOMBS.
In my last chapter I endeavored to set before
my readers the astounding fact that in visiting
the cemetery of the pyramids we come face to
face with the men of 50 centuries ago, and can
learn what manner of men they were as we look
at the work they did. I stayed my pen as I
conducted my readers to the famous modern
sanatanum at the edge of the cemetery, called
the Mena Hotel, named after the first Pharaoh
of the First Dynasty, who was buried some-
where hereabouts, though his grave has never
been found.
ACRES OP MASONRY.
A steep incline up a good road leads from
the hotel to the northern face of the Great
Pyramid. The distance is only a few hundred
yards, so it is soon traversed, and we halt at
the foot of that famous artificial mountain.
Our first impression is disappointing. Of
course it is big, but it does not look anything
like its true size. It does not command our
awe as the first sight of Cologne Cathedral
does, or the first view of St. Peter’s when the
curtain at the entrance is pushed aside. It
looks far less imposing at the first glance than
the Colosseum at Rome, with its mighty sweep
of terraced galleries, but in reality the Colosseum
could be buried and hidden in the mass of the
Pyramid. The tallest stone buildings in the
world are the twin spires at Cologne, and they
would project only about 50 ft. above the top
of this sepulchral throne of a dead Pharaoh,
Three of our Post-Office towers, one on top of
the other, if buried inside either the Great
Pyramid or its neighbor would just show the


signal lamps or the chequered mail flag above
the apex.
We look up at the pile and gradually begin
to grasp its enormous size. We usually
measure walls by square yards, but we will
disdain yards for a while and talk of acres of
masonry. Each side of that edifice measures
615 acres, and if the visitor will stand at the
corner and make his eyes perform ocular
gymnastics, and take in two sides at once,
he may have the rare and unique opportunity
of gazing on 13 acres of solid stonework at one
and the same moment. Originally, the top-
most stone was a blunt point; if in those far-
off days, before that stone was sent rolling
down, he could have balanced himself on one
leg up there, and had looked down, he would
have taken in at one glance 26 acres of masonry,
tapering upwards to a height of 480 ft. All
this is very bewildering, but what makes it
more interesting still is the fact that this
monstrous creation of human skill and industry
is actually duplicated, for the pyramid of
Shafra is very nearly as large as the pyramid
of Khufu.
I can easily imagine any one doubting these
figures ; then let us begin our experiences by a
walk round this concern, and see what is to be
seen. It is not by any means a light matter to
accomplish, especially as the whole crowd of
chattering Arabs are impatient to haul us to
the top and then hurry us'through the interior.
We start at the north-east corner and go along
the north side, clambering over great mounds
of stone chips and sand. Up on the 17th step
from the bottom we see a line of Arabs and
visitors going along parallel with us. They
are making their way to the entrance, which is
nearly in the middle of the north side. We
see them disappear into a tiny hole, like
rabbits into a burrow. Meanwhile, we come
upon a place where the rubbish has been cleared
away, and see before us, on the level founda-
tion platform, two or three immense blocks of
white marble. These are three of the original
casing stones which escaped the violence of the
Arab builders by being buried in the rubbish
of their destructive energies. We note their
immense size, their accurate fitting, and their
perfect polish. They weigh about 30 tons
each, and are fitted to each other so closely
that the joint measures only one-hundredth of
an inch, yet those builders managed to fill that
joint with cement. As we look at those stones
we find that, if we are to conceive what this
pyramid once looked like, we must picture it as
covered with a marble veneer 6 ft. thick, and


wrought as true and smooth as a drawing-room
mantel.
By the time we have reached the corner we
measure off our distance and find that we have
walked 755 ft., or a length about ten times as
great as the floor of the Town Hall; and each
of the other sides is the same length within
one-fifth of an inch. This extreme ac-
curacy has been ascertained by the discovery of
the sockets into which the great stones at the
angles were set so that they could not be shaken
even by a moderate earthquake, and we may
examine each of these sockets in turn. Talk-
ing of earthquakes, reminds me how successful
these old architects were in their precautions.
When I was in San Francisco I saw in the
newspapers very frequent advertisements of
houses to let warranted “ earthquake proof.’
I enquired what that meant, and was told that
they were built of wood, and the joints
were so loosely adjusted as to allow of some
moderate amount of play if old Mother Earth
got uneasy. Not thus did the architect of
King Khufu argue. He tried to defy the sub-
terranean forces, and he seems to have suc-
ceeded. An earthquake has actually occurred.
It has rent the very platform on which the
pyramid stands. A deep fissure may be seen
close to the casing- stones, but it hao not dis-
turbed this human mountain one hair’s
breadth.
INSIDE.
To enter and explore the pyramid is not
either an easy or an agreeable task. The
passages nearly all run at a very awkward
angle, and as they are composed of a limestone
which becomes almost as smooth as marble by
wear, there is an element of danger in their
slipperiness. The best defence against this
risk is to make the expedition in stockinged
feet or in tennis shoes. The size of the passages
is about 40 in. square, which is about the size
of an ordinary opening in a modern fireplace.
The air is close and stifling, and the fine im-
palpable dust gets into one’s eyes and nose and
mouth. Of course it is everywhere pitch dark
The pencil of light which comes in at the
entrance cannot bend upwards into the dense
masses overhead. Every one carries a candle
and matches, and so is prepared for the tricks
of the Arabs, who sometimes blow out the
lights in awkward places and then demand
backshish. I cannot undertake in a few para-
graphs to say much about the innumerable
points of interest in this enigma of tunnels.
Such questions as these will suggest themselves,


however. How were huge masses, such
as granite coffins, to be moved up or
down these smooth slopes? The great
coffer is too big for the passages, and the
pyramid must have been built around it where
it is, therefore Khufu’s mummy must have
been subsequently brought in, and then buried
in the coffer. The first ascending passage is
plugged up with a huge granite cork, around
which a forced entrance has been quarried.
That plug is too large to have been taken in
afterwards, and too large to have rested any-
where except on the sloping floor of the grand
gallery, where it must have been in everybody’s
way, and yet there it is, a solid fact. That
grand gallery is a place utterly unlike any
other in the world. It is very narrow, very
long, and absurdly high. Its width is only 7
ft., its height 28, and its length 150. What
was its use ? It is a passage, but why of such
a form and on such a slope? Just at the top it
is level, and if you strain your eyes into the
darkness and look at the top corner of the
ceiling you will notice a soar on the roof. That
is where Vyse discovered a passage hole to
certain mysterious “chambers of construction”
over the central chamber. These chambers are
interesting for many reasons, but chiefly
because in them have been found the name of
King Khufu himself. They were never in-
tended to be visited by anyone, and so the
masons did not trouble themselves to scrape the
quarry marks off the stones; and now anyone
who can get up there may see frr himself in
red paint the ancient royal cartouche, which
was daubed on the block as it lay in the
quarries at Syene, and indicates —“This is the
king’s, and is meant for the king’s chamber.”
THE HIDDEN CHAMBERS.
A friend of mine, an enthusiastic Egypt-
ologist, was ambitious to see those marks.
Standing at the top of the gallery passage he
asked his Arabs if he could go up there.
“No, no man goes there now ; sheikh say no,
too dangerous; if gentleman fall sheikh have
lot of money to pay.” “ But I want to go up,”
said my friend, “and I will give you a
sovereign when I have been there.” “ Very
well, master, if you break bones I cannot pay
money; very, very dangerous; but, master,
you come here to-night at 12 o’clock and you
shall get up there.” My friend then finished
his exploration of the king’s chamber, saw the
coffer with its marks of the diamond drill and
diamond saw, went again into the queen’s
chamber, and then retired to the hotel to rest


and enjoy himself till the unhallowed hour of
midnight drew nigh. The night was dark,
but he found his way to the entrance, and there
was his Arab guide and two others with him.
They had no ladders, but my friend thought
these must have been sent on before, and went
in and up the long slope till he stood on the
level edge at the top of the gallery floor. Even
then he found no ladders and no scaffolding
poles, or indeed anything to assist in the
enterprise. He looked suspicious, and thought
his sovereign was safe unless filched from him.
“ Master really wants to go up there ?” “Yes,
really.” Then the leader, divesting himself of
his outer garment, in which was concealed a
ball of twine, stood in the corner of the
gallery with his back squeezed into the angle,
took the string in his teeth, and with his hands
and feet against the smooth walls, began to
ascend. My friend trembled, as indeed he
might, as he saw that Arab dis-
appearing upwards into the darkness with
nothing to hold on to, and yet holding on.
He spoke not a word, even the Arabs were
quiet. It was a long five minutes. The ascent
was slow but apparently sure. At all events,
he called out from the dim darkness that all
was right. With the string he hauled up a
rope, and this rope was made fast to a beam
left there by Colonel Vyse, and my friend had
then to haul himself up to that weird hole, and
then, crawling on all fours, creep into the
chambers of construction, and then had the
rare chance of spelling out the famous name—
a circle, which is kh; a chick, which stands
for u; a horned snake for f; and another
chick for another u —Khufu.
ON THE TOP.
But it is time we got to the top of this
pyramid and had a look around. To get up
there is by no means a difficult task, especially
with three lithe Arabs to assist each person,
two in front and one in the rear, and another
to carry your umbrella, coat, or fieldglass. It
is a gigantic broken staircase with 204 treads
in it of unequal height, averaging more than
2 ft. each. It is an awkward process to mount
such steps 204 times, for they are just high
enough to make it necessary to climb. The
bodily condition of the average tourist being
peculiar with the novelty of his surroundings
and the exertion, he will probably abjure
mathematics. If however he can calculate and
climb at the same time, he will note this very
odd coincidence, that every time the area of
the rung of the ladder he is on is less than the


base area by a 25th, there is a course of
thicker stones. Why such an odd arrangement
should have been thought of I do not know. It
was first discovered by Mr. Petrie, who has
made by far the most complete examination of
this pyramid on record.
The view from the summit is wonderful. It
cannot be called beautiful, but just as a
wrinkled human face, on which a long lifetime
of adventure is written, may be more fascinating
than the dollish perfection of a pink-and-white
belle, so this view will hold its place in the
memory far longer than pictures of mere
scenery. We are standing on our pinnacle
just at the edge of the Desert, so that the view
to the east is all green as an English farm,
while the view to the west is an endless ex-
panse of desolation. North and especially
south, along the edge of the valley of verdure,
stretches the line of pyramids, group beyond
group, till they are lost to sight, and every one
of those pyramids was built before Moses
played his part in the drama of the country.
At the foot are arranged thousands of tombs
clustering round the two giants, and yet this
cluster is only a small portion of this mighty
cemetery. Yes, the cemetery is there, but we
look in vain for the great city to which it
was attached. Memphis, the city sacred to
Ptah, the city famous in both sacred and pro-
fane history, the greatest city of the world 50
centuries ago, has utterly vanished. It lay
down there along the green strip on the western
bank of the green plain, but now its site is
occupied by paddy fields and fellahs’ huts, and
groups of palm trees; and, as we look at it, we
see a railway train rushing along among the
fields where once were busy streets and
august temples, and somewhere there was the
palace of King Khufu.
A VERY ANCIENT STATUE.
This king is to us, as we sit up there, but a
very shadowy personage, but an incident
happened to me when in Cairo which helped to
make him more real to me than I had expected.
There is a learned Scotch physician in Cairo
named Dr. Grant, only we must add his title
when speaking of him and call him Dr. Grant
Bey. He is an earnest Christian and a zealous
antiquarian. He has a fine private museum in
his house in Cairo, which he is ever ready to
show to strangers. He was very friendly with
our party, and we were frequently at his house.
One evening he showed us a rare curiosity. It
is an alabaster statuette about 2 feet high, not
stiff and conventional, but free and lifelike. It


represents a youth of pleasing countenance but
without much vigor in his face. As a work of
art it is a good illustration of how the most
ancient Egyptians were better artists than
those that came after them. Egyptian art
subsequently became formal and stilted and
geometrical, but in the times of Khufu they
had not crystallised their skill into such painful
regularity. “That,” said my friend, “is the
oldest statue in the world. There are three or
four nearly as old in the museum, but none can
beat that. See, too, how perfect it is.” On our
asking for the history of that youth he
said that his name was Shaf Sene-
fru. He was the last scion of the
royal house of the Third Dynasty. He ought
to have been a Pharaoh, and perhaps be was
for a short time, but Khufu stepped up on to
the throne in his place. Khufu was an adven-
turer. He had not a drop of royal blood in
his veins, but he made his title legitimate by
marrying that young man’s sister.” In Egypt,
we must remember, a pedigree on the mother’s
side was worth far more than a brilliant line of
paternal ancestors. I looked on that rare
curiosity with immense interest. I wondered
how Dr. Grant got it, but he was not willing
to say much on that subject. I wondered still
more how he kept it, but the explanation of
his having it is that the Egyptian Government
does not interfere with possession till an attempt
is made to take things out of the country.
This young man, Shaf Senefru, held a high
place at the court, and died during the time
when this pyramid was building, and his tomb
and the tomb of his mother are among those
down there at the foot of this royal throne of
Khufu.
TOMB OP TII.
It would be a matter of no small interest if I
could take my readers on a tour among those
crowded pyramids and tombs, but I must for-
bear. I purpose only to take them to
one, which will help them more than
anything else I can show them, to realise the
actual every day life of those old Egyptians.
Away to the south can be seen the pyramids of
Sakkarah about 15 miles off, and this tomb is
there, not far from the burial place of the
famous sacred bulls. It is the private tomb
chapel of a certain functionary named Tii, who
lived not very long after Khufu, that is within
200 years of him. That is a long time ago, but
we know almost as much of this man Tii as if
he had died yesterday, and an Adelaide paper
had given us a column of his biography.


This man lived under the monarchs of the
Fifth Dynasty, and was the confidential adviser
of three successive Pharaohs. He was to them
what Joseph was to their successors many
centuries afterwards. He too, like Joseph,
was of humble parentage, but he managed to
rise in royal favor till he became “ Chamber-
lain ” and “Master of the secrets of his lord,”
and even married a wife who was a member of
the royal family. People in Egypt seem to
have had a great weakness for titles, and as
with the Germans, the husband’s title seems to
have been shared by the wife. This man had
a long string of titles ; he was “ President of
the gate of the palace,” “Secret counsellor of
the King in all his assemblies,” “ President of
all the royal works,” and “Presidentof the State
department of writing.” He thus combined in
himself what in this colony is distributed
between the Attorney-General, the Chief
Engineer, and the Prime Minister. But
this was not all, for he was a very high priest,
one of the chiefs of the prophets and a
“guardian of the mysteries of the divine
speech.” How he managed to do all things
necessary to so many offices I know not. He
must have been “ the G.0.M.” of his day, who
could do anything and whom no one could tire
out. His royal wife was called Nefer-hoteps,
and we have many portraits both of her and
her husband. She has her own special and
appropriate titles of honor. She is called
“the beloved of her husband,” which shows
his sense, and * ‘ the palm of amiability towards
her husband,” which shows her sense.
CURIOUS PICTURES.
This worthy coup!e have left us a perfect art
gallery of illustrations of their manner of life.
They caused a “Mastaba”or tomb chapel to
be built and decorated, and by fortunate cir-
cumstances that chapel has been buried in
sand and has only come to light in our day.
The tomb was deep down in the rock beneath,
but curiously enough it contained, when
discovered by Mons. Marriette, an empty
sarcophagus, but no Tii and no wife, and none
of the family. The chapel consists of three
chambers and an open courtyard, and from
floor to ceiling the walls are covered with
pictures. Among the things which the
Khedive has sent to this colony are
several exact reproductions of those curious
pictures, which will be on view as soon
as there is space in our museum. Hundreds of
figures of men and animals are to be seen in
the tomb —oxen, asses, goats, dogs, monkeys,


pigs, weasels, ducks, geese, cranes, pigeons, and
wild fowl, fishes, crocodiles, and hippopotami.
A most interesting list, but quite as interesting
in its omissions. Tii never rode on a horse and
had not started a carriage, and what is still
more strange, camels as well as horses were
unknown in Egypt then. We have a list of
the estates of Tii, and a bevy of maidens come
in on some festive occasion bringing a great
supply of what look like Christmas hampers of
food things for their master and mistress.
Pe see his cooks at work cutting up these
things and making ready. We see his scullions
fattening geese by stuffing them as they do to-
day in Strasburg. We see his men ploughing,
harrowing, and reaping, and his women
winnowing and bagging the corn. We have a
peep into his cattle yard and find that the
cows of that day sometimes needed roping
when being milked, and that those venerable
calves were as skittish as are calves in Austra-
lia. We find that Tii had quite an array of
workshops where his men are engaged building
boats, making domestic furniture, and even
blowing glass. There is a quaint flavor of hu-
mor about these scenes. A man is driving a herd
of donkeys, and he is saying, “ People love those
who go quickly, but whip the lazyand again,
as he misses a conscience in one of his asses, he
says, “ If thou couldst but see thine own con-
duct.” A man reaping in a field is saying,
“ This is reaping, when a man does this sort of
work he becomes gentle, and so am I.” Tii had
a pet monkey and the keeper of it was a pet
dwarf, and two pet dogs like our kangaroo
dogs, and their keeper was a pet hunchback.
The best of all the pictures is Tii off for a
hunting holiday. In those days the hippo-
potamus was to be found in those parts and Tii
seems to have delighted in the dangerous
sport. We see him going out among the
swamps and reedbeds with his party in two
boats, and they seem to have capital sport and
to make a good bag of game.
IDYLLIC PEACE.
What strikes one at once in looking at these
scenes is their peaceful idyllic character. There
is no note of war or conquest; no chariots, no
captives, no foreign faces; not swords but
ploughshares, not spears but pruning- hooks
are what we meet with here. We seem to have
got away into a region in which a paternal
eontentedness prevails all round, Egypt had
not yet awoke to the lust of tyranny. Her
Pharaohs were content with her own
rich valley. Her people were industrious


and clever, and the land yielded her
increase for their sustenance. Money
did not exist, but all wealth was counted in
corn and cattle, and all wages were paid in
corn. We may speak of this pretty poetic
vision of the great nobleman Tii and hiA
property as a picture of serfdom, but it was
serfdom in such a form that it suited an infan-
tile age like that we have been looking at.
Our age and our feeling are very different.
We would rather have liberty and a struggle,
than be well-fed serfs under a paternal govern-
ment. lam afraid, however, to allow of any
such picture of bucolic peace as being a true
representation of the scenes that must have
been enacted during the building of the Pyra-
mid of Khufu, 200 years before. That
structure must have been erected at the
cost of countless human lives, and be
cemented by human blood. The Pyramid is a
very wonderful building, but it is a very sad one
also. It is a preposterous monument of
egotism, an egotism which prompted tha
Pharaoh to sacrifice other people’s lives and
much treasure to gratify a mere whim, or to
secure his own well-being in the mystic land
of Amenti.
THE SPHINX.
It is very interesting to find what a hold the
other world had on these old Egyptians. Those
who built these tombs really believed in a
future life, in a coming judgment, in the
justice of the awards, and in a resurrection out
of Hades into a new and better life. That
Sphinx down there is, as I have already
hinted, the most eloquent expression of this
hope. Look at him, for it is to be spoken of
not as a female, but as a representative of the
God Harmachis. See how he gazes towards
the east with wide-opened eyes. He is seated
among the graves of the west, but he is look-
ing away to the coming sunrise over the
eastern hills. He is an embodied hope. He is
a statue of victory— of man’s victory over doubt
and death, of the victory of righteousness over
sin, of good over evil in the universe. And
there he has sat crouching for these 52 cen-
turies, and men have forgotten the calm lesson
of victory which he taught those who could
read his riddle. This venerable monument
fell into neglect long, long ago. That very
Pharaoh, Thotmes 111., whose hieroglyphics I
spoke of in my last paper, and who lived
before Moses, came one day into this wilder-
ness to hunt. He got tired, and would fain
rest and worship under the smile of the


Sphinx. The sand interfered with his royal
piety, so he vowed to clear away the sand
and restore the ancient aspect of the
statue. He kept his word, and a tablet
stands there between the arms of the Sphinx,
which Thotmes 111. erected. The Sphinx
was originally carved out of a knoll
of limestone in the time of Shafra,
who built the second pyramid and
the granite temple close by. It was the
climax of his religious faith. Shafra was not
content with erecting a tomb for himself along-
side his royal kinsman Khufu, he must carve
that knob of rock, which was in the way, and
an eyesore, into a symbol—a symbol, not of
death or of the grave, or of sorrow or despair,
but of that hope of life which dwells more or
less in every human breast, and to which so
much reality has been given by our
Christianity. The broken tomb of Jesus is,
however, a more eloquent symbol of life than
any sphinx could ever be. Many scholars
argue for a much more remote antiquity for the
Sphinx,and assign it to the ages before Menes.
If this be the case, its symbolism is all the
more impressive.
CHAPTER V.
'THEBES AND THE GREAT PHARAOHS.
The story that I am intending to unfold in
this chapter and that which is to follow is of
unique and surpassing interest. 1 know of
nothing in history that can compete with it for
romance. That truth is stranger than fiction
is a proverb whose most vivid illustration is in
the “ Story of the Royal Mummies.”
In my last chapter I introduced my readers
into the midst of the Egyptian people 53
centuries ago. In this sketch I take my stand
much nearer to our own day, and ask those
who are interested in wedding dry chronology
with the more vivid parts of the narrative, to
take a leap forward and imagine themselves
among the subjects of the Pharaohs of some 20
centuries later. Taking the Bible as our hand-
book for easy reference, the times of which I
now am writing are those years which inter-
vened between Joseph and Moses. I do
not intend at present to make any
further reference to the children of Israel,


but as we conjure with the less known
names of Thotmes, Hatasou, and Rameses,
we may think of the Hebrew settlers
in Goshen growing into a mighty community.
They have not much to do with politics, but
are meanwhile toiling at agriculture, tending
their flocks, and working at the tasks which
the successive monarchs who wear the double
crown have kept putting upon them.
I must now ask my readers to come with me
some 400 miles up the Nile to the City of
Thebes. The ancient capital, Memphis, has
meanwhile been eclipsed by a younger and
more splendid rival. Many dynasties of
Pharaohs have lived and died since Khufu
built the Great Pyramid, and Tii constructed
his cheerful tomb. The more modern kings
have affected a liking for a new site for their
seat of government, and have chosen a wide
stretch of green land which swells out on both
banks of the river, as their abode. Just there
the hills ‘ rise higher than usual in Egypt,
and recede further from the water. They are
as barren as ever, but being larger have a
grander and wilder aspect than elsewhere.
Memphis was on the west bank, but Thebes is
to be on the east bank. Thebes, however, was
a sort of double city, and the splendid gay city
on the east had a splendid but gloomy counter-
part on the west. I have before this men-
tioned how the Egyptians liked to bury their
dead in the land of Amenti, behind which the
sun sank every day to his rest. Burying the
dead was a marvellous process among those
people, and the cemetery of Thebes developed
a second city which was as ornate and as
gorgeous as the capital itself. The “ City of
the living” was made more attractive by being
face to face with “ The City of the dead.”
THE CITY OP THE LIVING.
The city of the living was adorned with some
of the grandest buildings the world has ever
seen. The ragged villages of Luxor and
Karnak are the modem representatives of this
once famous metropolis. These villages are
but ordinary specimens of the small towns on
the Nile, but the ruins which bear their names
are of surpassing interest. Nothing on the face
of this world can compare with the Temple of
Amen at Karnak for solid grandeur and
sublimity. Its central pillared hall is one of
the wonders of the world even in its present
condition of utter ruin. The temple at Luxor
is not much inferior, and being actually on the
very edge of the river bank is not only grand
but picturesque. These two temples were


originally connected by an avenue of sphinxes,
and constituted one vast architectural whole.
Around this double temple, which was some
two miles in extent, clustered the palaces of
the Pharaohs and their nobles, and the dwel-
lings of a city which must have contained
nearly a million cf inhabitants.
THE CITY OF THE DEAD.
But the city of the dead —the other Thebes
—was not much behind it in architectural
aspect, and seems to have occupied the thought
and care and attention of this singular people
far more than the temporary homes of the
living. Let me try to set it before you in bare
outline. Fronting the river were a series of
enormous mortuary chapels, which were used
as colleges for priests, as university halls for
students, and as museums for historic memen-
toes. They were used by the Pharaohs as
Westminster Abbey is used by England, as a
place in which to enshrine the statues and
records of the deeds of the dead heroes who
lay sleeping in their tombs behind the
hills. Four stupendous ruins remain to tell
us of the ambition of those kings for pos-
thumous fame; one is the Temple of Seti 1.,
which, says Ebers in his novel “Uarda,” was
probably the college where Moses learned all
he knew of the wisdom of the Egyptians.
Another was the Ramesseum, built to com-
memorate the royal fame of Rameses the
Great. Another is called Medinet Habou, and
is doubly interesting to us when we see inside
its great hall the ruins of an ancient Christian
church. The fourth has all vanished except
the two celebrated sitting statues of Ameno-
phis, one of which used to utter mysterious
meanings every time the sun rose, and was
called the “ Singing Memnon” by the Greek
travellers. It is a curious thing to stand by
the calf of the leg of one of those statues and
see, scribbled on the smooth surface of the
royal shin, verses of Greek poetry, and Greek
names scratched thereon before the Christian
era. Round about these buildings was a vast
congeries of human habitations, for it may be
easily imagined that an Egyptian cemetery
must have given employment to quite an army
of workers—stonecutters and sculptors, makers
of coffins and shrines, and amulets and charms,
embalmers skilled in the processes of making
mummies, and decorators ready to adorn the
sepulchres of the dead with pictures of the life
they had lived, or with wild details of
the adventures of the soul in the regions
of the dead and the awful assize of


Osiris. Behind this living city of the dead
came the hills, all honeycombed with tombs.
Rows upon rows of graves could be seen even
from the other bank of the river, and some of
these rock tombs had ornate facades which
must have been very conspicuous. Among
these is the famous tomb at Deir-et-Bahari, of
which I shall have a good deal to say in my
next chapter. But we must go further west if
we will understand this curious cemetery. Let
us climb the rocky slope and cross over the
first crest of hills. We shall then find our-
selves in a deep desolate valley, hot, arid, and
cheerless, and this is the famous valley of the
tombs of the kings. I never saw or could
have imagined any place on this earth so
utterly barren and naked, and as it is now so
it must always have been, for the sun here
shines pitilessly and rain seldom or never falls.
In this valley, which forks like a Y, the
Pharaohs of the new Empire have taken a
fancy to be buried, and in a neighboring valley
they have been placing their queens.
TOMB OF SET! I.
Pyramids have by this time quite gone out
of fashion, and in their place huge rock
chambers have come into vogue. These royal
tombs are not mere halls, but vast abodes cut
out of the rock and decorated with funeral
pictures. Let us go for instance into the one
built for Seti I. The entrance has no
sculptures to mark it, for when one of
these tombs was finished it was blocked
up, and the shingle of the mountain side was
allowed to fall over it, and not a trace was
left of the fact that a king had been laid to
rest there, or had started thence on his journey
into the regions of the gods. Inside, however,
all was arranged with costly care and
skill. Passages are found leading to stair-
cases, and then ending in pitfalls set in
the path, and sham walls concealing what
lay beyond. If we pierce those walls
we find that “beyond” consisting of pillared
halls, fresh passages and deeper decents,
until at last we find that this enormous
catacomb has extended 470 ft. into the moun-
tain, and has descended 180 ft. from the mouth.
Of course all is dark there, and the visitor has
to be armed with candles or torches or a mag-
nesium lanthorn, but what is to be seen in the
dim light will never be forgotten. It is not at
all like what we saw in the tomb of Tii. The
dead man is no more to be seen in the midst of
his family. No sign here of merry-making, or
feasting or hunting, or milking cattle or making


■furniture, or building ships ; no bucolic farm-
yard scenes, no more damsels bringing presents.
We see all around us enormous and fantastic
pictures of gods and chimeras, and gorgons,
and awful forms such as haunt one in a night-
mare. Great serpents drag their interminable
length along over walls and ceiling, and when
the head is reached it is probably spit-
ting venom. Mortal sinners are to be
seen pitched into the fires of hell or being de-
capitated for their crimes. Every thing horrible
and creepy and uncanny stares at one like
ghosts from the walls of those chambers, and
one wonders at the faith that could have
inspired, and the taste that could have
executed such an endless and crowded
panorama of the visions of a diseased
and fantastic imagination. The meaning is
obscure till we find how all this conduces to a
more cheerful end. This is all intended to
magnify the victory of the royal soul in the
judgment of Osiris. The difficulties of his
passage among the regions of the dead are
magnified that his final entrance into the
peaceful realms of the gods—a justified soul
whom no demon can or ever could touch—
may be made more conspicuous. The ordeals
past, the dead man is absorbed into Osiris and
dwells for ever in the impersonal peace of a
pantheistic solution of the problems of being.
There are many of these tombs in these
valleys, and I cannot but think that Isaiah, the
Jewish prophet, obtained thence his imagery
for that weird and eloquent picture of the
royal dead, where he describes the kings all
lying in glory, each in his own house, and
awaking from their slumbers when they see
Nebuchadnezzar coming down among them.
I do not hint that the prophet thought that
the Babylonian king was buried in the
land of the Nile, but in his 14th chapter
he uses for poetic drapery what he had
heard of the sepulchres of the Pharaohs.
The valley contains the tombs of the kings
of the Nineteenth Dynasty, but the curious
fact has yet to be stated that the
kings themselves were never to be
found there. All this labor seemed
to have been in vain. An empty sarcophagus
perhaps may have turned up, but not often
even that. These underground sacred palaces
when discovered, were tenantless and deserted.
This notable and unexpected fact should be
carefullv borne in mind, for it is the first
incident in the “Story of the royal mummies.”
For years people had been wondering
over the fate of those mummies. They were


thought to be lost, irrecoverably lost, and
no one ever dreamt of finding them, but in
archaeology, as in other things, the French
proverb often proves itself true, “It is the un-
expected that happens.”
TOMB OF RAMESES VI.
One of these royal tombs has been destined
to a singular fate. It was commenced as the
last abode for the mummy of Rameses VI.
The entrance passage was being made on a
larger scale than usual, but before any very
serious work was accomplished or much painting
had been done the work was stopped. Perhaps
Pharaoh died and wanted his tomb too soon.
Perhaps in a fit of disgust he fancied it would
not be quite as snug as he liked and began
another. Anyway this tomb is about the best
known and the best remembered of any in the
valley. Amid the rubbish at the mouth are to
be found fragments of modern bottles, bearing
the romantic names of “Bass” and
“Guinness.” The ancient Egyptians under-
stood how to preserve the delicate little
sardines of the Delba in oil, but the
tins to be seen there to-day are redolent of fish
too freshly stale to deceive any antiquary.
The jackals haunt that spot continually in the
evening, searching for legs of fowls, and
scraps of turkey, and rind of cheese. In fact,
it has become the lunching ground of all the
tourist parties who visit that inhospitable
region. One day it may be a company of
Cookites who are there, the next it may be a
troupe of Gazites, or as they get called
“Gazelles,” who gain possession, and on
another an independent party. Very grateful
indeed was the shadow of that rocky tomb in
that weary land as I remember our camping
there. We were a large company, and sat on
broken stones down each side of the passage
tired, hungry, and especially thirsty. Our
Arab attendants were busy bustling about.
At the mouth was a crowd of eager natives
with their loincloths bulging out with con-
cealed burdens of antiques which they wanted
to sell, some forgeries, but mostly undoubtedly
genuine, for though a scarab may be manufac-
tured it is another thing to make up a
mummy’s head or a lady’s wig of ancient date,
or a cat with the proper odor of venerable
spicy sanctity. Our dragoman every now and
then drives them back, calling them a
lying cheating crew, forgetting that he
himself was detected a day or two
back in an attempt to palm off some
scarabs as real which I saw him buy from a


native at ss. per dozen. Lunch over the
whole company takes its ease for half an hour,
and then our dragoman delivers an oration in
queer broken English with a considerable dash
of humor in it.
“ Ladies and gentlemen—lt is now time to
be off. You have seen the tombs of the kings ;
you must now come with me to see work of a
great queen. I can’t show you her tomb,
which would not be proper even if I knew
where it was, but I will show you her portrait
and what she did. She was the sort of woman
that no one would like for one of his wives.
She would give the man stick instead of the
man giving her stick. Are you ready?”
“What was her name?” said our American
girl who suggested the necessity of getting into
a B.C. state of mind. “Her name was
Hatasou,” which suggested a number of puns
which I will not repeat. “She was a queen of
the Seventeenth Dynasty, and was brother of
Thotmes 111. If any of you don’t like the
climb or are afraid of meeting this terrible
lady’s ghost, you can go back by the mouth of
the valley, and I will send a boy with you, but
those who like come with me.” So we mounted
our asses and climbed in a long file out of that
awful glen till we reached the ridge, whence
we saw lying before us the whole plain of
Thebes with the Nile cutting it in two. At our
teet was a very singular temple, utterly unlike
all others we had seen, clinging to the sides of
the cliff, which is usually known as the temple
of Dier-el-Bahari, which is the name of a
modern Arabic village near by.
A QUEEN-KING.
Before, however, we go into it we must en-
deavor to put together a few fragments of
history. At the time of which I am now
writing there were reigning the first kings of
the famous Seventeenth Dynasty. The
Pharaoh’s name is Thotmes I. He has a wife
and three children, that is, a daughter named
Hatasou, and two boys, both named Thotmes.
The father dies, and one of the sons comes to
wear the double crown, and is known as
Thotmes 11. He was a quiet, easy-going sort
of man, but his sister was of a very different
order. She was the Jezebel or Lady Macbeth
of that old time. She became co-regent, as-
sumed the royal title, and took the first place
in the government. As one looks at the two
portraits of the brother and sister side by side
the contrast is astonishing—the woman is the
man, the man is the woman. Egypt now
began to make great strides under this capable


woman, and important works were commenced
and carried out which remain to this day. I
do not know whether or not she erred for her
brother, but she dearly loved power, and we
are not surprised to find that he soon disap-
pears trom the scene and the lady is left alone.
She then begins to wreak her spite on her poor
dead brother, and tries to blot out his memory
by erasing his name from the monuments and
putting in either her father’s or her own. She
now had it all her own way. She added to her
titles. She assumed male attire. She had
herself called a king, and spoken of as “ he ” and
“him.” She is depicted crowned with the tall
flumes of Amen Ha. She calls herself “Son of
the Sun,” “ the Good God,” “ the Lord of the
two Lands.” The sculptors were doubtless
puzzled, and sometimes these masculine and
feminine titles were mixed queerly together,
and this personage “beloved of Amen” is
marked as a lady. She was a great builder,
and adorned Egypt with some of the best of the
monuments.
As we descend into the Temple of Dier-el-
Bahari, which this blue-stocking built, we are
struck with the sculptured pictures. We see a
perfect fleet of ships. On the decks of the
ships are piles of sacks, foreign trees in baskets,
apes, baboons, dogs, slaves, and leopard skins.
In some of the pictures these ships are being
laden, and we see at once that the land where
they are anchored is not Egypt. It is some
remote region where the natives build their
huts on piles or in trees, as they do to-day in
New Guinea. It is a region where incense
trees abound, where spicy breezes blow soft on
some unknown isles. The Egyptians are try-
ing to bring back the animal and vegetable
treasures of that land to their own Nile banks,
that they may be naturalised there in the
Botanic, or the Zoological Gardens of the City
of Thebes. In others of the pictures these ships
have come home safely from their voyage to
the land of Punt. It must have been a great
day of rejoicing when they came back, for a
splendid aquatic procession was organised on
the Nile. The whole city was moved. The
Queen-King was there in state. The wild
natives of the land of Punt performed their
war dance. A great religious feast was
inaugurated, and lest the memory of Queen
Hatasou and her expedition down the Red
Sea to the mystic land of Punt should be
forgotten the whole story was pictured in
detail on the walls of the new temple which the
queen was having built among the tombs of
the Theban Cemetery. It was a thing which


she evidently thought she would like to
remember after her passage into the land of
Amenti.
THOTMES THE GKEAT.
Queen Hatasou had a younger brother whom
she suffered to live, and allowed a seat upon
her footstool. Younger brothers will not,
however, always keep young, and the time
came when this tremendous woman had to
reckon with him. He had a different spirit
from the other brother. He was not to be
trifled with. As he grew towards manhood
his name appears on the monuments, subordi-
nate to his sister’s. By-and-bye she disap-
pears ; how, we know not. He may have
deposed her ; she may have slept in Osiris in a
proper fashion ; but at any rate she vanishes,
and her brother proceeds to have her name
erased from the monuments, and it is simply
because his sculptors did this work in too
shallow a fashion, that we can trace his sister’s
career without much difficulty. He had seven
years of joint rule, and then she is no more
heard of, and the brother was left to reign
alone.
Now this man, Thotraes 111., was the greatest
of all the Pharaohs. He was the conqueror of
the world, and carried Egyptian arms far away
into Asia beyond the Euphrates. Palestine
and all the lands of Syria and Babylon became
a series of provinces of the mighty empire
which he built up. He extended the power of
Egypt also far up the Nile into the Soudan.
Nothing could resist his might. He seems
also to have been a patron of literature, and
like Solomon a man learned in natural history.
He was, like his sister, a great builder, and
far surpassed any previous Pharaoh in the
daring ambition of his architecture. He
reigned for 54 years, and died and was buried,
and left behind him a name as the greatest
monarch in all the world, the greatest in fact
that up to that time the world had ever known in
any country or empire. He was buried, but
no one knew where, and no one knows
where even to this day. He was not
placed in the Valley of the Kings
—at least no tomb of his has been un-
covered. The great man passed away, but
as I shall narrate presently, he now rests in a
glass case in the museum at Ghizeh. The
great monarch Thotmes 111. is one of the heroes
of the “Story of the Royal Mummies.”
This man, Thotmes 111., belonged to what is
called the Eighteenth Dynasty. He was suc-
ceeded by other kings in the proper line, and


they were all Pharaohs of a high average. Not
long after a furious religious agitation broke
out which seems to have been an attempt on
the part of an earnest but eccentric king to
reform the national religion in a healthy and
pure fashion. This controversy tore Egypt to
pieces. It is interesting to us when we re-
member that the Israelites were all this time
growing into a proper readiness for the great
religious movement under Moses, and that this
new Egyptian religion was strongly like
Mosaism in its simplicity and purity. However,
be this as it may, the old conservative priestly
power was up in arms. The more modern cry
of the church being in danger was aroused.
The priests of Amen, the old Sun God of
Thebes, put down, by all the means they could
command, the heretic creed of the new Sun
God, with his robe of purity and his diadem of
beneficent rays. The name of this eccentric
Pharaoh was Amenophis IV., or, as he liked to
be called, Kuenhaten. His tomb has very
recently been found at Tel-en-Amarna, but no
account of it has been published. The old
religion was once more restored, and shortly
afterwards the Eighteenth Dynasty passed
away, about the 14th century B.c.
This chapter of my sketches must be read in
conjunction with that which follows, for
together they purport to tell the story of the
royal mummies. In what I have written I
have described the empty tombs and one or
two of the personages who ought to have been
found in them. There remains yet to be told
how the great Pharaohs were hidden away,
and how their mortal remains have been dis-
covered.
CHAPTER VI.
THE ROYAL MUMMIES.
In my last chapter I gave some account of
Thebes, the capital of Upper Egypt, and of
some of the great Pharaohs who reigned there.
I took my readers very hastily over the annals of
the nation during the interval between Joseph
and Moses and laid down my pen just as I had
come to the most famous of all the royal dynas-
ties. If any of my readers desire to obtain a
vivid and accurate picture of this brilliant
period, and of the doings of the court of
Rameses, I recommend to their notice the novel


called “ Uarda,” by Professor Ebers. It will
be read once for the sake of the story, but it
will bear a second or a third reading for the
sake of the information it contains.
RAMESES THE GREAT.
Egyptian history now takes on a vivid and
fascinating phase. There rises before us the ma-
jestic line of kings which is called the Nineteenth
Dynasty. In that period our interest in Egypt
reaches its climax. Never was there such an
outburst of monumental splendor on the banks
of the Nile as then. Never was Egypt more
brilliant in her internal affairs; never was
literature more cultivated ; never was her
military glory more resplendent. The grandeur
of that time became the sort of golden age to
which subsequent centuries looked back, as the
Jews did long after to the reigns of David and
Solomon. Rameses the Great was the “Se-
sostris” of the Greeks, the ideal monarch of the
land of the double crown, the man who recon-
quered Asia and rivalled Thotmes 111. in mili-
tary prowess. This Augustan age has ob-
tained a new interest for us in these later days.
We know now that it was a daughter of this
royal dynasty that rescued Moses ; that Moses
was brought up as the darling of the court of
which Rameses was the head ; that Moses de-
fied Rameses and had to flee for his life;
that Rameses himself was the “Pharaoh of
the oppression,” his son, Seti Merenpthah,
the “ Pharaoh of the Exodus.” We know, too,
that it was in this dynasty that the royal
mummies began to be buried in the desolate
valley I have previously described. The miss-
ing mummies were thus not those of ordinary
Pharaohs, but of the very greatest of them all.
Yet now it is given to any curious Australian
tourist to Egypt to gaze into sightless eyes of
Thotmes 111., of Seti 1., of Rameses IT., and
of many others as they lie in state in the
Museum of Ghizeh.
I could occupy a whole series of papers with
giving a mere outline of this remarkable
period, for the abundance of our material is
perplexing. From the deserts of Nubia to the
Mediterranean and the land of Goshen, the
country is dotted with statues, temples, and
cities built by the ambition of that one • man,
Rameses. He has had his portrait executed
hundreds of times, and in all sizes, from the
enormous colossi of Ipsambul and Tanis to the
most delicate scarabs. He has caused his ex-
ploits to be engraved on the temples, and
whole poems written by the poet laureate of the
age are transcribed on to the walls —the hugest


manuscripts in the world. We know all
about the man and what he did each year, and
how many sons he had, and how many
daughters. We have his likeness as a boy, as an
amorous youth, as a warrior, as a
hale old man, and now we have himself
to look at. He had moreover a very
long reign. It must have seemed to his con-
temporaries as if the common Oriental adula-
tion, “O, king, live for fever,” was being
realised in his case. He outlived all his sons-
save one, and when they died they were not
by any means youths. He seems to have been
made nominal co-regent with his father, Seti
1., when about 10 years old. Twenty years
after that his father died, and Rameses at the
age of 30 mounted the throne. Though thus
in his full manhood when he became Pharaoh,
in reality he wore the double crown for 67 more
years, dying at about the age of 97. It is,
however, not quite certain whether the
20 years of his co-regency are to be counted
as part of the total reign of 67 years. I know
of no monarch in the history of any country,
ancient or modem, who can boast of such a
marvellous record. His reign began with wars,
but the latter half was comparatively peaceful,
and Rameses ruled Egypt with the set deter-
mination of making the Nile the one great
country in the world and himself the greatest
figure in its fame. He has, however, stamped
his preposterous conceit and egotism upon the
country quite as manifestly as he has his
ability. A more boastful man never existed.
Under his son, Merenpthah 11., the Exodus
took place, but of that I say nothing in this
chapter, reserving that story for my next sketch.
After that the sun rapidly declines, and the
famous Nineteenth Dynasty goes out in
confusion and dismay. Egypt has passed
its meridian, and henceforth is going
down the hill. It will have many diffe-
rent revivals before its ancient history
closes, but never again will its splendor
equal that of the days of the Thotmeses and
Ramesides.
THE TWENTIETH DYNASTY.
The Twentieth Dynasty was composed of a
long line of kings who were all called Rameses.
Eor the most part they were feeble monarchs,
but they tried to gain some borrowed lustre
from the name of the great man who had given
such fame to that name. The pride of the
Egyptian royal family was its ruin. So par-
ticular were they about maintaining the blue
blood of nobility unpolluted by Egyptian ad-
mixture, that marriage between brother and


sister was common in the national annals.
This, of course, led to a degenerate offspring,
and the race deteriorated till some sudden
alliance with some strong adventurous foreign
potentate, or with a princess from Nineveh or
Carchemish introduced a fresh strain into the
family stream. The race of the Ramesides thus
got weaker and weaker and more and more luxu-
rious, and it was evident that a crisis was im-
pending.
BODY- SNATCHING.
In the last years of this dynasty (the
XXth) we get a curious peep into what was
going on in Egypt, which will help us to
understand better the story of the royal mum-
mies. We find that there arose an organised
band of thieves whose aim was to violate the
tombs of the rich men, and especially those of the
kings. Some people who had no business to be
found in such company, were among the culprits.
These tombs with their golden jewels and price-
less gems were veritable mines of treasure,
but to rob them was at once a confession of
shameless infidelity to the national religion,
and of a disregard for the sacred name of
ancestors. It became quite a fashionable
crime, and, as tne villains were to be found
even among the relatives of the Pharaohs, and
others high in society, it was not easy to bring
them to book. The records of more than one
famous trial have come down to us, and we
may imagine how electric society must have
been with this peculiar dishonest species of log-
rolling going on in its midst. It is always a dan-
gerous thing openly to bury treasure. I have
even heard of modern foundation-stones being
removed after the ceremony of laying them
has been finished —the copies of The Adver-
tiser and Register , &c., have been there all
right, but the sovereign, the half-sovereign,
the crown, and the half-crown have gone, and
might be found, if looked for, in the nearest
public-house till.
Just at the time I have named a great
change took place in Egypt. A peaceful re-
volution passed over the scene. The sceptre
passed away from the hands of the outworn
royal family into the grasp of the family of
the high priests, just as the sceptre of Rome,
dropped by the Caesars, was picked up by the
Popes. The name of this first priest-king,
who made his case legitimate by a royal mar-
riage, was Her-hor. He was a peaceful wise
monarch, and seems to have saved the land
from anarchy. Body-snatching and tomb-
breaking, one may be sure, would be an offence
to his sacerdotal calling. He was determined


to put it down, but he did so in a peculiar
fashion. We have an actual confession of
pious theft, which is both naive and amusing.
On the front of a noble coffin we read how the
deceased was rescued and placed in a secure
spot, how sundry rich jewels were found with
the mummy, how it was deemed not advisable
to bury the gems again, and so they «vere
abstracted as of more use to the living than
the dead; and how the body, now impoverished,
was piously and safely deposited or hidden
away and left to the care of Anubis and
Horus and Osiris. Remember this little last
dying speech and confession, for it, too, will
throw much light on the story of the royal
mummies as it unfolds before my readers.
Body-snatching is thus a very ancient game
to play on the banks of the Nile, and it has
been going on ever since, and even now is quite
a fashionable amusement. Through the ages
the aim has been plunder, and so it is now
with the modern Egyptian, to whom their
ancient cemeteries are veritable “ Mount
Morgans” or “ Broken Hills.” The inquisi-
tive and more learned peoples of modern Europe
and America have, however, had a higher aim
than gain. They have wished to rescue a
jburied history from oblivion, and to give back
in a new and scientific form the lost fame for
which the old Pharaohs sighed, and for which
they wrought. Seti and Rameses, now that
they are found, are dowered with a new and
imperishable immortality. Still, this body-
snatching is a curious business. It is an odd
sensation to stand on a mound of rubbish and
see bits of dirty sponge-like stuff, and shreds
of cerements and human bones lying all about.
You pick up one of these spongy bits and find
that it is fibrous muscular tissue. You get
interested and poke into the sand, and then,
turning round, see a youngster holding a head
in his hands, which he wants to sell you for
10 or 20 piastres, or the hand of some name-
less beauty torn from her mummy. I confess
that one’s emotions get strangely mixed ; but
somehow one gets over the awkwardness of
one’s feelings, and is quite ready to pocket a
rare scarab, or an amulet, or a papyrus roll if
fortunate enough to get one.
MUMMY HUNTING.
When I went up the Nile we had on board
General Sir Francis and Lady Grenfell. The
general is the Sirdar or Commander-in-Chief
of the Khedive’s army. He is a learned and
enthusiastic antiquary, and one series of
tombs near Assouan is called “Grenfell’s


Tombs,” because he first opened them. When
we came to Luxor the great municipal folk
of that remote town wanted to do honor to the
grandee. They did not get up a ball or a
levee, but arranged for the opening of a
special and promising mummy in the presence
of himself and his lady. The ceremony took
place on the terrace roof of one of the consular
houses. Unfortunately I missed being present,
but the general told me afterwards all about
it. The mummy was that of a princess or
lady of rank of Ptolemaic times. It
had come from Ekhmim, and was in
perfect preservation, to all appearances.
The unrolling took place. The result was
a disappointment. No special treasures were
found. The body had been badly preserved,
and would not hold together. The only thing
worth having was a very beautiful but very
fragile mask, which had lain over the face, and
which was given as a special compliment to
Lady Grenfell. I went shortly after to visit
the scene of this curious and fashionable dis-
interment. I found ray way to the top of the
house, and there lay the fragments of the poor
princess in utter confusion. A Yankee had
bargained for the coffin lid and I could not
trace him. I wanted to get a look at the
inscription and to find out the lady’s name and
exact rank. There lay the head and the hands
and the feet. I looked at them with much
curiosity. The Arab grandee or mayor offered
me all those fragments if I liked to have them.
I could not resist the temptation. The ancient
head was forthwith wrapt in a parcel with one
of the hands, and giving him my thanks I
came down the stairs and found my way to
the steamer. Lady Grenfell, hearing my story,
said that, as I had got the lady herself, she
would give me her veil or mask, and so com-
plete my curious package. I thanked
her ladyship, and have brought them
both to Australia the head safely,
the mask in a sadly ruinous condi-
tion, which I am afraid no skill can
piece together. The story of this mummy
is no part of the story of the royal mummies,
but it may help us to understand the keen
interest which all the learned world is feeling
in the recent discovery at Deir-el-Bahari. The
head of this mummy is now in a glass case in
the gallery of the Adelaide Museum, and also
her hand, with a turquoise ring on.
THE ROYAL MUMMIES.
About 10 years ago the authorities of the
museum at Cairo were piqued and annoyed by


finding that travellers were getting from the
Arabs a number of very curious relics. Rare
scarabs and papyri, and other things, were find-
ing their way into the museums of Europe from
some unknown source of supply. These relics
all belonged to the Rameside period, and that
made Herr Brugsch and Mons. Marriette all
the more keen in their sense of being out-
witted. It was evident that the Arabs had a
secret hoard of genuine and very valuable
relics, which they were gradually scattering.
A rumor even came floating down the Nile
that a certain Arab, who was known to be a
consummate rascal, had actually offered a
Yankee tourist “to sell him Rameses the
Great for 1,000 piastres.” The traveller took
this for a piece of bombast, and, as the man’s
character was well known, nothing more was
heard of the bargain. Finally it was made
certain that there were four brothers named
Abd-er-Rasoul who knew all about it
if only they could be made to
tell their secret. One of these precious
specimens of humanity, whom the police had.
long wanted, was forthwith apprehended.
Egyptian justice is not always according to
rule, and I dare not justify the means used to
get this man to tell the truth. However, it
was all in vain. He was silent as the tomb it-
self. The brothers outside got uneasy lest the
brother inside should “split,” and began to
quarrel among themselves. Backshish was a
very potent argument, but each one wished, if
he did tell, to get the whole of the handsome
bribe which the authorities at the museum
offered to the one who would turn upon the
rest. At last this was settled, and one of the
brothers offered to reveal the hiding-place of
their treasure. And the rascal is now living
there among the tombs in a neat cottage, which
is kept up by the annual backshish which he
receives, while his brothers are hungry paupers
and live by donkey-driving.
IN THE TOMB OE HEE-HOE.
No time was to be lost. Herr Brugsch Bey
set off at once to Thebes to take the matter in
hand. He expected to come upon a good 1 1 find,”
but had no expectation of such a wondrous
treasure-trove as he really did come upon.
When I was in Cairo I got the whole
story from the lips of Brugsch Bey himself,
who likes to tell it over and over again
to a sympathetic visitor. I curtail and put
into my own words much of what he said. The
party reached Thebes on Wednesday, July 6,
1881. “You remember the temple of Queen


Hatasou at Deir-el-Bahari, behind the two big
statues, and how the hillside is honeycombed
with tombs. Well, the place to which we were
taken lies a short distance to the left, high up
the hillside. There was nothing whatever to
mark the site as anything particular, and I
thought the fellows were fooling us. At last
Mohammed Abd-er-Rasoul led us to a wild
and desolate corner in the cliff’s face. He
looked sullen and vicious and fit for mischief,
but I had my rifle with me and plenty of cart-
ridges. I had one companion with me from
our museum staff, and he was the only one I
could trust. Behind a huge rock the men
pointed to a spot where the stones had been
evidently arranged by hand. ‘There,’ he
said, ‘is the place; there.' He did not want
to do anything, so I hastily got a few Arabs
and set them to work hoisting out the loose
stones which seemed to fill up the mouth of a
well. This proved to be a plain straight pit 6
ft. square. A palm tree log was thrown across
and a rope and pulley attached, and when the
shaft was clear we were let down. We noticed
some handwriting on the wall near the bottom
which has since been copied by my camera,
and which helps to explain the deposit.”
“At the bottom we found a passage running
westward. We lit our candles and followed it.
For 23 ft. we found nothing. At that point it
gave a turn at right angles to the north. Here
was our first find, for there lay in a tumbled
heap the magnificent funeral tent or canopy of
tjueen Isemkheb. This tunnel ran on
for 60 ft. and then we arrived at
the top of a flight of stairs. We won-
dered what it was all coming to. Down the
steps we went, and on into the heart of the
mountain. At the foot of the steps we came
upon fragments of mummy bandages and
pieces of cases. It was evidently here that
the Arabs were wont to break up and divide
their spoil. Soon after we came upon cases of
porcelain, funeral offerings, metal and alabaster
vessels, draperies, and trinkets. We cast a
hasty glance around, and hurried on. Beyond
these we saw, all at once, a number of coffins and
mummy cases. Some were of great size and piled
up against the walls. Then we came into the
tomb chamber itself, and I never shall forget
the sight or my sensations. All round us
were grouped a pile of mummy cases. Some
of these were resplendent with polished gild-
ing, and I could see my own face reflected in
them. I took a hasty glance round with my
candle. I spelt out rapidly one and another
well known names who had figured in my


uncle’s history of the Pharaohs. I saw there
Queen Nofretari, whose splendid coffin is
12 ft. high, and at last ‘ Ra-user-ma Sotep-
en-Ra.’ As I spelt out that name
I felt my head swimming round. I could look
no more. I was like one drunk. I said, “Let me
fet out and think and they drew me up, and
sat down by the mouth of the pit to recover
my composure. We had expected at most to
find the mummies of a few petty princes or
priests, but to come all at once upon the mortal
remains of Thotmes 111., Seti 1., Rameses 11.,
the great heroes and conquerors and architects
of this strange land, was a stroke of fortune for
which we were quite unprepared. It was like
one dream. I soon went down again and took
stock of all this treasure. The chamber was
23 ft. long and 13 wide, and was piled to the
roof with mummy cases of all sizes, but all
well preserved. Just fancy coming on nine
kings, six queens, and a whole host of high
priests and grand dignitaries at one swoop.
Such an event makes a lifetime.”
A STRANGE FUNERAL.
“What did you do with all this treasure ?”
we asked. “ How did you get it out? Were
you not terribly afraid ?”
“We came up to make arrangements for the
immediate removal of the kings. The valley
was as still as death. A long line of vultures
sat on the cliff near by, fancying we had some-
thing for them. The odor had summoned a
troupe of hyenas, who were howling not far
off. A number of villagers had assembled.
We sent them to fetch more; we en-
gaged a large company. Every strong man
in Luxor was sent for. Early next morning
we had 300 Arabs under employ, each on a a
thief, each one vexed at our success. One by
one the coffins were hoisted to the surface.
Each coffin was then securely sewn up in can-
vas and matting. Two squads of Arabs were
told off to each king, one to carry his majesty,
the other to watch lest the royal treasure
should be stolen. Halfway to the river,
where the steamers were waiting, is an over-
flow channel, and here the precious burdens
had to be put on to boats, and beyond the
channel another lot of bearers was in readiness.
It was a wonderful sight to stand at the mouth
of the pit and watch the long line of bearers
carrying their ancient kings across that
historic plain. Such a funeral was never seen
or heard of in all the annals of all the nations.
The temples built by these men were there in
ruins, and now the monarohs themselves were


being carried along by those sullen Arab
laborers.”
“We got them all safe on board, and then
we set off for Cairo. Our late helpers squatted
in groups to watch us. The news had spread
down the hill. There was a wild and spon-
taneous display of feeling. As we passed
the towns and villages the people gathered on
the banks and made frantic demonstrations of
grief. A strange wail went up from the men,
the women were screaming and tearing their
hair, and a few of the dervishes plunged into
the water to try to reach us. At night fires
were kindled and guns were fired to keep off
the evil spirits of Amenti, who were supposed
to be watching the proceeding. All, how-
ever, passed off safely, and our precious
cargo arrived in due time at Cairo.”
HOW CAME THOSE MUMMIES THERE ?
“How came those mummies there?” I
asked. “That,” said he, “was at first a very
difficult question to answer, but now that the
various inscriptions have been deciphered, we
can trace the history of the changes of the
resting places of these kings pretty well. You
know what a wild time the period of the
Twentieth Dynasty was, and how body-snatch-
ing came into fashion, and how the priestly
kings of the Twenty-first Dynasty tried to save
the royal tombs from desecration. Take the
single case of Rameses himself. We can fol-
low his mummy to no lewer than seven resting
places—l. He was buried in his own tomb. 2.
He was removed to the tomb of his father Seti I.
3. Then he was taken to the tomb of Ansera,
a queen of the Seventeenth Dynasty. There
he remained for 10 years, and then (4) was re-
moved by Pinotem, whose own mummy is
here, to the tomb of Amenhotep. He was
only allowed to remain there for six years, and
then (5) was taken back to the tomb of his
father Seti. We do not know how long he
stayed there, but some kind friend of the next
dynasty (6) gathered all these royal personages
as a last refuge into the family vault of the
Her-hor, or Twenty-first Dynasty. There he
lay for 3,000 years, together with some 30
notable persons, undisturbed and unseen,
and unknown, and unsuspected till those
rascally brothers got hold of the secret,
and dug into this famous chamber of
Her hor. lam glad we found them out.
They had already done mischief enough. We
have reason to believe that Queen Hatasou
was among the dead down there, but her
mummy has been broken up and her trinkets


sold. Nothing remains of her except her
shrivelled liver, which was in a casket.
Rameses’ seventh resting-place is in our
museum.”
THE MUSEUM AT GHIZEH,
It is an event in a man’s lifetime to visit that
great central hall in the museum at Ghizeh. It
is an immense and handsome chamber, shaped
like a Greek cross. It is entirely given up to
the treasures found at Deir-el-Bahan, and they
are arranged without crowding, and with all
due effect. Radiating from the centre are the
great kings, lying calm in death in their glass
cases. Thotmes 111., the great general; Seti the
First, who commenced the oppression of the
Israelites; Rameses 11., the great conqueror,
the friend and the persecutor of Moses;
Rameses 1., the founder of the dynasty; Ra
Sekenen, the first of the “kings who knew
not Joseph,” torn and mangled on the battle-
field. Queen Makara, who died in giving
birth to a little girl, and, as you look into the
coffin, thereis thetiny mummy of the little'wee
bit of royalty that caused such domestic
trouble 3,000 years ago. No man can gaze
unmoved on such a strange collection of relics !
I visited that place again and again. It had a
strange fascination, and I was far from
envying the spirit of stoical nonchalance
with which some would look on the great
dead, and their sneers or their jokes were
terribly discordant. I shall have a good deal
to say about Rameses the Great in my next
sketch that may not altogether redound to his
credit; but meanwhile let us do homage to the
mighty dead who lived on this earth for nearly
five score of years, who reigned longer than
any other royal personage on record, whose
prowess was celebrated over the whole world,
who was the most ambitious royal builder that
even Egypt has known, and who stands forth
so conspicuously as the “Pharaoh of the op-
pression.” He was the man who put forth his
power to strangle the babe Liberty in its birth,
but that babe was a child of the Most High.
It could not be destroyed, and in the reign of
his successor took place that great event, when
the Israelites came out of Egypt, and freedom,
as a living principle of national and human life,
became a living thing and emerged into the
practical and religious politics of the world.


CHAPTER VII.
THIRTY CENTURIES AGO.
THE BIRTH OF LIBERTY.
In my last chapter I told briefly the story of
the finding of the royal mummies. In this
sketch I intend tc narrate something of what
was going on when those shrivelled forms were
living men. The sojourn of the Israelites in
Egypt was contemporary with those very
monarchs whose remains have been unearthed.
There is a perennial interest attaching to the
exodus of the Hebrews from their slavery in
Egypt. This arises not only from the romantic
character of the story, but from the world- wide
results that have followed. The exodus was
the first occasion in history of the assertion of
the rights of man as man. The storms that
swept the Yam Suph'and made a passage for
the fugitives, and the lightnings that flashed
over the tw o hosts, were the birth throes of the
novel idea of political liberty. In the exodus
we learn that peoples, not monarchs, are the
true subject of history.
If we compare our own times with those of
Egypt 30 centuries ago, we must admit that in
some things that far off time was abreast of
ours. In architecture Egypt was sublime ;in
pomp and ceremony and brilliant luxury, no
court to-day could vie with the court of
Rameses the Great; in science, in art, in
literature the old land of the Nile could boast
of learning and skill, and the names of great
poets. But, in all Egyptian history, in all the
records of the deeds of the Pharaohs, in all the
dreams of her wise men, there is not a single
trace of the idea of a man having rights as
well as duties, and being by virtue of his man-
hood, a free being—free to look upon his fellows
as brethren, free to look up to God and pray.
It is this inspired thought of our manhood
as a divine thing, which is at the basis of
our modern society, and marks it otf from all
ancient civilisations. It is this which, in one
way or another, is moulding and influencing the
struggles of humanity. It is the developing of
this idea which is causing the blind but noble
unrest of our times. A sublime Christ-like
human brotherhood is the natural flower of the
tree of liberty, and we are all waiting for its
blossoming. But, as we wait and long, let us
not forget that the first seed of that tree was
planted in the heart of that one man Moses 30
centuries ago, and that it began to sprout when
he led his countrymen forth from their slavish
contentment in the fat fields of Goshen, into the


arid, difficult, but glorious freedom of the desert..
If that seed had not been sown this century
would never have tasted the fruit.
BIBLE QUESTIONS.
Before entering on our subject I must re-
mind my readers of what, as readers of the
Bible, we might be led to look for and expect
in deciphering the tangled problems of
Egyptian history. 1. There was a race of
Pharaohs, of whom we read in Genesis, who
were friendly to the Israelites, and under whom
they settled in Goshen. In the court of one of
these Joseph was the grand vizier. 2. We
are told again and again that the sojourn of
the Israelites in Egypt was about 400
or 430 years, which may serve as a
sort of measuring-tape among the broken
fragments of history. 3, In the book of
Exodus we read how there arose “another king
who knew not Joseph.” Of course this cannot
be taken literally, for Joseph must have been
dead three centuries on any method of reckoning,
I would ask you to paraphrase it and read,
“ There arose another dynasty of Pharaohs
who had no thought of carrying out the policy
of their predecessors towards the Hebrews.”
4. We know that Moses was 80 years old at
the Exodus, so it is evident that the Pharaoh
who was the father of that kind-hearted
maiden who rescued the babe from being
drowned in the Nile, and the Pharaoh who de-
fied Moses and was the victim of the plagues,
were two different persons. 5. The Exodus
was a marvellous event, however we take it,,
and we should expect to find some traces of
such a great national shock in the history of
the land. The Egyptians never actually re-
corded anything which they did not like. De-
feats and disasters are never told on the monu-
ments. All their history is painted in colors of
golden glory. We ask ourselves, however,
whether we can read an unwritten story be-
tween the lines. 6. The Pharaoh of the
Exodus lost his son and heir in the visitation
of the last plague. Is that event in any way to
be traced in the dim records of the time ?
My readers can well understand that if I
were to attempt a full answer to all the ques-
tions I have suggested I should overtax both
my own ability and their patience. Besides, I
should have to manipulate a vast mass of very
dry material, somewhat difficult for mental
digestion, and as a beginning should have to
give a lesson in how to read hieroglyphics,
which is a gymnastic performance almost as
puzzling as reading Chinese. I will try to give-


results rather than processes, and my readers
must trust to my honesty in working out those
results. My position as a writer of these
sketches is like that of a certain witness be-
fore a judge, who when he began to give his
reasons for his evidence was cut short by his
honor, and told to tell what he knew and what
he had seen, and never mind his reasons. What
he saw was a fact —his reasons might be wrong.
A DYING CONQUEROR.
It has been my privilege when lecturing on
Egyptian subjects to exhibit several pictures
illustrative of my theme. Some of these I pur-
chased in London, but the most important
have been prepared in Adelaide. One of these
is indeed a curious picture. It is not beauti-
ful, or aesthetic, or a thing to be remembered
at midnight, but it is nevertheless very
interesting, and the very horror of the picture
is its attractiveness. It is a photograph of a
mummy, the oldest of the royal mummies
found at Deir el-Bahari. It does not give us a
representation of a grand and proud calmness
like what we may see in the shrivelled remains
of Rameses or his father ; one will see instead
a man with an awful agony on his face —his
mouth is open, his jaw is shattered, there is an
ugly hole in his.forehead, two or three of his
ribs are broken, his collarbone has been cloven
in two, his tongue is half bitten through. That
is the mummy of the Pharaoh Ra-Sekenen.
Few people have probably ever heard of that
man, but I promise any one of my readers that
he will not forget him after once seeing him.
That mangled mummy introduces us at once
into a curious and remote chapter of history.
It is a pictorial comment on the short state-
ment that “there arose a new Pharaoh that
knew not Joseph.” I must go back a little to
make this clear. The long line of Egyptian
history is broken in upon by the invasion of a
race of foreign conquerors from Asia, who
were called “Shepherd Kings” or “ Hyksos.”
Who they were, or where they came from, is a
learned puzzle. My own idea is that they were
of the same race as that obscure king in
Genesis named Chedorlaomer. and came from
Babylonia. However, they held the country
for 500 years and became quiteEgyptianised in
time. The country conquered them, just as
Ireland is said to turn all Englishmen who
settle there and live there, into true Irishmen
in two generations. They became Egyptian
kings, and built temples and put up obelisks
and carved sphinxes, just like other Pharaohs.
England transformed the Norman kings into


Englishmen, and so Egypt, when ruled by these
Hyksos or Shepherds, had her revenge by
giving them a varnish of true Nile coloring.
There was one of these Hyksos Pharaohs who
was called Aphophis, and he was the man who
hanged his chief baker and promoted his chief
butler, and who adopted as his grand vizier
the Hebrew youth named Joseph. This man
wore the double crown, but he had his centre
of government in the Delta not far from the
land of Goshen. Now, he had a sort of vassal
at Thebes who was the governor of the pro-
vince. His name was Ra-Sekenen. Ra-
Sekenen was a proud man, and deemed,
like the famous pretender of Scott’s novels,
that he was of truer blood than the Pharaoh
up in the north. The two began to quarrel.
We find it hard to get at the rights and wrongs
of the quarrel, but I rather think that the
Pharaoh had the worst of it. It was a deeper
quarrel than appeared on the surface. Ra-
Sekenen was the representative of the national
party that wanted to re-establish the old
Egyptian royal house. He was on the side of
the old national religion, and did not like the
religious novelties which the Hyksos Pharaohs
had introduced. The old gods, the old priests,
and the old traditions of the land were sup-
posed to support him against the novel and
simpler gods of the court. Baal or Set was the
chief deity of the Delta, against Amen and his
co-deities, who were the idols of the Upper
Valley.
This quarrel became serious. It led to a
great war. It led at last to the overthrow of
the whole dynasty of the Pharaohs with whom
Joseph and Jacob were familiar. It led to
the expulsion of the Hyksos, and the coming
into power of a new race of Pharaohs “who
knew not Joseph.” All this is matter of his-
tory, but the details are obscure. Let my
readers remember this bald sketch, and then look
on the actual fact presented in the aspect of Ra-
Sekenen’s mummy. He hoisted the standard of
rebellion. He came on against Aphophis. He
had assumed the style and title of a Pharaoh.
Somewhere —I know not where —the armies
met. The two kings confronted each other.
Ra-Sekenen fared badly in the battle. A
terrible stroke upon the jaw brought him to
the ground. His foes came around him with
savage glee and dispatched him where he lay.
One aimed a blow at his head and split his
■skull, and another inserted his spear into his
brain just over his eye. The fallen hero was not,
however, defeated. He died, like Nelson, when
■victory was attending his arms. A fierce fight


took place over the body. It was rescued by
his friends and hastily carried to Thebes.
The embalmers, however skilled, would have
no easy task before them in dealing with such
a subject. Still he was a king, and had died
in the moment of victory, and so all proper
honor must be paid to his remains. He was
embalmed in a fashion, and, if the body was
mangled, some amends were made by putting
him into a very splendid coffin. This coffin
was modelled into a vivid likeness of the man
as he had been. It was in fact a portrait
statue carved in wood, adorned with
plates of gold, and with a calm and peace-
ful inscription on the front. No word
was to be read of his terrible end r
nothing but a pious prayer that the
deceased Pharaoh may have given him by the
good gods “a quiet repose, and oxen, and
geese, and bread, good store, and good water,
and enjoyment and happiness.” This mummy
case was among those found by Herr Brugsch
Bey, and is the oldest of the royal coffins. It
was not opened till five years after, in 1886, and
great was the surprise of every one to find
such a contrast between the calm splendor of
the outside, and the awful confusion of the in-
side of that sarcophagus. It was a new
chapter in history suddenly laid bare. It
may interest us to know that Ra-Sekenen was
net surprised into this fatal encounter. At
all events this old Pharaoh had found time to
get himself shaved on the very morning of the
battle.
THE NEW PHARAOHS.
The Hyksos dynasty that favored the
Israelites never got over the victory which
cost Ra-Sekenen his life. The war lasted
some time, but it ended in the accession to the
throne of the double crown of a race of
monarchs, who, however powerful and famous,
were strangers to the kindly policy of the 17th
Dynasty, and ignored the Israelites. The seat
of government was removed to Thebes. The
splendor of the court was no longer seen in the
Delta. The Israelites, not yet oppressed,
were left free to grow and multiply in
Goshen. The 18th Dynasty ran its course
without interfering with them, and so
the Bible makes no mention of those
great Pharaohs. Thotmes 111. with his con-
quering armies must often have gone through
the very midst of Goshen on his way to the
seat of war in Palestine or Syria, but the
scriptures take no heed of him and his doings.
The Bible is absolutely silent till the actual


oppression begins, and the Pharaohs show them-
selves alarmed at the rapid growth of the
Hebrew settlers, and are determined to put
them down by making them useful as slaves,
and by murdering all the new-born babes. It
is, however, a mistake to imagine that all the
children of Israel were engaged in tne toils of
the brickfields. We know that among them
were many who were skilled in working in
brass and fine embroidery. We know that
they had great herds of camels, and that on
those camels were packed an enormous amount
of very valuable things. We know too that
they carried arms with them and were able to
engage the hosts of Amalek in a fierce battle
in the valley of Rephidim. When the taber-
nacle had to be built the people willingly
offered of their treasure for the purpose, and
among that treasure were precious stones and
golden vessels and costly fabrics. It would
seem that a sort of compact was enforced,
just as was the case when the Suez Canal was
dug on the edge of that same land of Goshen,
by which each village or settlement was
obliged to find so much labor or so many
laborers. If such labor was not forthcoming
the pressgang of the Pharaoh would take it,
and in any case the toilers were paid no wages
except their food.
THE “PHARAOH OF THE EXODUS.”
In my last sketch I had a good deal to say
about Rameses the Great. In this one we are
principally concerned with his son, who is
known in history as Seti Merempthah.
Rameees was the “Pharaoh of the Oppression.”
His son was the “Pharaoh of the Exodus.” It
is to be regretted that his mummy was not
among his notable kinsmen in that strange
grave at Deir-el-Bahari, Why he was not
there I cannot explain or even guess. Bible
readers may be tempted, at first
thought, to jump to the conclusion
that we have in this facta clear and undesigned
coincidence with Scripture, and that his body
was not there simply because he was drowned
in the Red Sea. This would doubtless be a
romantic and poetic climax to the story, but
unfortunately it is not borne out by ocher facts.
If I could take my readers to the Valley of the
Royal Tombs behind Thebes we might go into
the tomb where he once lay, but from which he
has been taken away by unknown hands. We
are, however, permitted to see his portrait as
it is carved on one of the walls of Thebes. In
it we can trace the family likeness to his father
in spite of the stiff aspect of the carved face.


It represents him when he was a young man,
and we shall at once note how he was evidently a
man of a far less vigorous type than his father
—a man who while devoid of the splendid am-
bition of his ancestors was quite their equal in
pride and vanity. He was, in fact, a man who
would make a fair average monarch as long as
all things went well with him, but who would
be utterly baffled by difficulty—a man without
force of character, but like other weak men
very obstinate and wilful. Another portrait
statue of him is in the British Museum,
and it also bears the same charac-
teristics. And history confirms and suggests
this interpretation of his portraits. He came
to the throne when Egypt was at the very
meridian of her wealth and pomp and power ;
when within and without there was peace.
He led her downward into disaster, and landed
her in a catastrophe from which she never re-
covered.
Let me ask my readers to follow me as I try
to set before them a few names and figures.
Rameses, as I have already said, lived to be a
very old man. He outlived most of his sons—
in fact, he seems to have left only one behind
him, and he was about 60 years of age. His
name was Merempthah, or Menepthah, that is,
“ beloved of the god Pthah. ” Now, if a man
comes to a throne when he is 60 he cannot be
expected to have a very long reign. In the
course of nature he must pass off the scene
before long and leave the way clear for his son.
As a matter of fact he did have a fair share of
regnant years as the wearer of the crown,
for, as far as I can make it out, he reigned for
25 years, dying at the age of 85.
Rameses had an enormous harem and a pre-
posterously large family; but it would seem
that Merempthah, when he came to the throne,
had only one wife and no children. But in the
very year in which he first wore the double
crown a son was born to him. This son was
called after his father and after his great-
grandfather, Seti-Menepthah. The name
“Seti” was one that the Egyptians did not
like, because “Set” was looked upon as a
foreign god, being in fact the Syrian Baal,
but it tells us that the royal family of Egypt
was not of the purest Egyptian blood.
Just as our own Royal family is quite as much
German as English, so the household of the
Pharaohs had a great many Asiatic strands in
it, and had a natural liking for the gods of
Canaan. The old man seems to have had a
great love for this firstborn son, so long
awaited, so often prayed for. His very name


seems to show that, for “ Set” was “the giver
of life.” and his other name was his father’s-
name. Moreover he was the very image of
his father, so like indeed in their portraits that
one might easily be mistaken for the other as
young men.
A PROMISING PRINCE.
During these early years, while this lad was a
child, the land was at peace, but there were
present some very ominous social growlings
which portended confusion. The Israelites
were not the only nation that was settled in
the Delta, and had to work as slaves. There
were also some others called the Shasu and
others who were akin to the Jebusites. When
the boy was 8 years old things became very
serious. These slaves went on strike. The
wide land of Goshen was in a ferment. We
do not kn<3w very much about this affair, but
in a private letter written just at that time we
have a mention of this uneasiness, and then we
read “such is the state of affairs with us to-
day, but no one knows what will happen to-
morrow.” What did happen was this—that a
huge rebellion or strike took place (with which in
all probability the Hebrews were not mixed up) r
that an army was led to put down the
rebellion, that Merenpthah, the father, got
frightened and kept out of the battle, that
his generals had to do the work for him,
that while the Pharaoh was safe behind the
walls of Memphis a great battle was fought,
that the slave-rising was utterly crushed, and
Merenpthah, the royal coward, took all the
glory to himself.
One can easily imagine that things after this
would go hard with the poor toilers, and that
their groaning would become very pathetic.
Merenpthah and his little son did not, however,
remain in Lower Egypt. He took him away
south and settled far beyond Thebes in
Ethiopia, and left all matters of state to his
underlings. He seems to have hated all
bother, and his personal policy was to avoid it.
The records here are, I admit, obscure, and
further discoveries may give us light upon
the darkness of this interesting time. As far as
I can make them out, this unambitious Pharaoh
stayed for several years, ten or twelve, far
away from the scene of action, preferring to
trust to his generals and governors rather than
to himself. Meanwhile his boy was growing
up into manhood. The father was now too old
and too inactive to hope to do much, but all
his hopes were set on his son. He was matur-
ing his plans for the sake of this only son.


Things meanwhile got very unsettled down the
valley. The slaves again began to become
troublesome. Neighboring tribes got turbulent
and insolent. The old king was too old, the
young man was too young for much to be ac-
complished. He played a waiting game. The
boy seems to have been fashioned after the
type of his grandfather Rameses, and to have
been gifted with tremendous energy and cour-
age. He was appointed commander-in-chief,
and well did he fill the post. He felt the stirrings
of a restless ambition in himself, and longed to
distinguish himself. Up in Nubia is the
grand temple of Ipsambul, which was one of
the greatest of his giandfather’s works. The
youth paid a visit to that temple and placed
an inscription on (I believe) the calf of the leg of
Rameses, which says that he came there “in
order to render homage to him who had given
him valour,” which was but a poor compliment
to his own father.
The father and this promising son, now 20
years of age, set off for the Delta. At every
point in the journey the prowess of this young
man showed itself. He was irresistible. The
dangerous inaction of 12 years was now at an
end. Merempthah was going to rise to great-
ness on the tame of his young son. Down in
the land of Goshen there was another fierce
battle with the Jebusites, and they were
utterly beaten. Peace and order again pre-
vailed, and they were entirely due to this
young prince, who was his father’s right hand
and chief adviser. One may easily imagine
how an indolent old man like Merempthah
would glory in having such a son, how his
whole being would centre around him, and
how the firstborn of that Pharaoh was no
ordinary prince, but the idol of the court and
the hope of the nation.
WHERE WAS MOSES ?
But where was Moses all this time ? What
was he doing? Two may play at a waiting
game as well as one. He too was waiting,
waiting for the right moment, and for the call
from above to undertake his great work. The
court had doubtless almost forgotten him,
since he had been absent from Egypt for 40
years. If any recollection of him remained it
would be qualified by the thought that he too,
like the Pharaoh, was an old man and must be
sinking into senility. Some old men are, how-
ever, always young, and so it was with Moses.
He was quietly waiting, keeping sheep, and
thinking and wondering and praying. What
was the result of all this waiting is told us in


the Bible, and in my next sketch I will give an
outline of the Egyptian background of the
story. I wish all my readers, however, dis-
tinctly to understand that these historical out-
lines are only of a tentative character. Every
year some new inscriptions are being discovered,
or old ones are being deciphered, which tend to
modify or correct accepted conclusions. My
chief authority for what I am advancing con-
cering the reign of Merempthah is the Ameri-
can Egyptolgist, Paine, who has contributed a
series of valuable articles on Egypt to the
Century magazine.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE STORY OF THE EXODUS.
In my last sketch I drew the outlines of
Egyptian history at the time immediately be-
fore the Exodus. I stated that the Pharaoh
then reigning was named Menepthah or
Merempthah, and that he had a son named
Seti Menepthah, and that they were both hold-
ing their court in Upper Egypt. Times were
turbulent, and the old monarch, after waiting
his opportunity, had, with the aid of his son,
established some measure of tranquillity in the
Delta. All this time Moses was in
retirement in the eastern desert, where
he had been living for 40 years. He
too was resting and getting ready for the
time when the inspired call would come to
him. He was in the land of Midian among
the granite cliffs of Sinai keeping sheep,
nurturing his great thinkings and communing
with his divine friend. Doubtless he knew all
about the politics of Egypt—he knew that
Rameses the Great was dead; he knew the
character of Menepthah ; he knew of the re-
bellions among the Asiatic subjects of
Pharaoh. If his own people had been mixed
up in the affairs of the Delta, he would learn
that it was no use trying to fight against
Egypt. When the time came they ought to
leave Egypt voluntarily, and there ought to
be an exodus, not an armed rebellion. A
peaceful revolution is always better and more
permanent than one which comes about amid
the smoke and din of battles and bloodshed.
The appeal to arms should be the last, not the
first resort, in any case of national difficulty.
Peace has her victories as well as war, and th&
laurels of- such victories never, never fade.


THE SUPERNATURAL.
I am nob now attempting to enlarge upon,
the mystic and supernatural side of the story. I
am trying to give the human, the historic back-
ground of the Bible drama. I believe most
emphatically in the constant presence of the
mysterious spiritual forces of God in mundane
affairs. The Gospel of God rests on the
supernatural at every turn. I do not seek
to diminish faith therein, but to augment
it, by showing how the divine plans have been
interwoven with the intricate and seemingly
natural course of events. Because Moses was
skilled in Egyptian learning; because he was
well acquainted with the politics of the double
crown ; because he understood the degradation
of the slavery of his people ; because he had
been pondering these things for forty years
because of all this he was able to understand the
sign of the burning bush, and to receive the
call of God to be the champion of his people.
But had not he waited too long ? Had nob
the message been neglected ? Would it not have
been better to have sprung his plan when
Pharaoh was resting in inactivity, and before
this fiery genius of a son had appeared on the
scene ? So one might think; but remember the
old saying, “The wheels of God grind slowly
but they grind surely.” The call did not come,
and Moses was still waiting. And now
another cloud arises on the horizon of Pharaoh.
Away, behind the pyramids, to the north-east
there is a fresh rebellion, or rather an in-
vasion. The young warrior Seti has to turn
his attention thither. The army is drawn
away eastward. The poor Hebrews are in
some measure left to take care of themselves.
They are a mean-spirited lot in the eyes of the
court, and cannot fight; and so even the garri-
sons are withdrawn, and the fortresses of
Goshen are left quite undermanned. Now
is the time. The message comes at last and
Aaron and Moses stand before Pharaoh and
demand from him the liberation of the Hebrew
slaves. “Thus, saith Jehovah, the God of
Israel, let my people go.”
THE DEATH OP THE PRINCE.
It is nob my intention to narrate over again
the long story of the duel between Moses and
Merempthah, which lasted nearly twelve
months. I wish to hasten on to the close
where the interest reaches its climax. Every-
body will remember the awful tragedy of the
last plague. Painters and poets have vied
with each other in depicting what Egypt must
have been like, when there went up the wild


wail of lamentation from so many homes, for
the firstborn had been stricken in the hovels of
the people, and the firstborn of Pharaoh as
well, “even he that sat upon the throne with
his father.” After what I have said of that
brilliant youth who had championed the royal
cause so well, we can easily understand the
grief of that last stroke in the conflict between
Moses and Mermepthah. No words can pedict
it. No wonder that the command went forth,
“Up, get you gone!” No wonder that the
Egyptians should almost bribe the Hebrews to
be off. No wonder that all opposition was
hushed. The Crown Prince was dead —the
hope of the nation was cut off. The old man
and his wife Isinefert were left to mourn ; the
darkness of a dark sunset was to be his inevi-
table fate. In the agony of his despair he
would be rid of his troublesome slaves at any
cost, and then consider what was to be done.
The story of the exodus is one of undying
renown, but it is only of late years that it has
been understood. Even yet all the points con-
nected with it are not cleared up, and we
await with anxiety the discoveries of every
year. It is a marvellous thing that all know-
ledge of Egyptian history and customs tends to
set forth more vividly the grand old story.
It has not been proved false in a single par-
ticular. It [has been completely taken out of
the region of romance, and ranged among the
veritable facts of history. In spite of all that
the so-called “higher critics” assert on the basis
of language, I am more and more convinced that
we have in the book of Exodus a set of contem-
porary documents which, in the main, are the
same to-day as they were in the time when they
were written. I will not attempt a graphic
description of the entire history, but will content
myself with two or three facts which will help
my readers, as they have helped me, to under-
stand it.
FRESH PACTS.
1. We know now the starting place of th e host.
The city called Rameses, built as a treasure
city by the great Pharaoh, has been discovered
and by innumerable inscriptions has been
proved to be a great and strong stone fortress,
one of a line of defences erected against the
awkward and troublesome Asiatics. It was
not far from the modern cotton town of
Zagazig, where the train stops for refreshments
on the way to Cairo from Ismailia.
2. This discovery has been made almost
certain by finding not far off the twin
city of Pithom, with Rameses’s name stamped


upon the bricks, and numerous statues. This
city was the first camping place of the fugitive
host. Every schoolboy knows that if you get
two points in a straight line you have no diffi-
culty in laying down that line.
3. In Psalm Ixxviii., 12, we read of “the
marvellous things that were done in Zoan,”
and we are led to infer thence that the court
of Pharaoh was then held in that city, and not
in Memphis or Thebes. That city, which now
lies hidden among vast and desolate marshes,
has been partially explored by Mr. Petrie, and
from his description it must have been not
only a very very old city but a very great city
as well, and an inexhaustible mine of anti-
quarian wealth. So we must fill up the Bible
story by picturing the two old men, Moses and
Aaron, going continually backwards and for
wards between the tents and houses of Israel r
which lay all along the modern line of railway,
and Zoan, which was about 30 miles to the
north. If the court was being held at
Bubastis the distance would be even less.
4. A few years ago a geological expedition
was sent out under Professor Hull to examine
all those parts. He has discovered and proved
that the land at Suez is rising. The rate is not
great, not so great as that which threatens
great Melbourne, and will make it an in-
land town in the course of a thousand
years. It is barely a foot in a century,
but when we come to talk of what took place
30 centuries ago. that slow upheaval must
count for something. The district through
which the canal passes is low, sandy, and
marshy, and if we conceive of the land as being
25 or 30 ft. lower down than it now is, we
must take into account that the sea ran in
shallow swamps far inland, than the isthmus
was very much narrower than it now is, and
that it was a much more difficult task to slip
out of Egypt into the desert, than it is to-day.
5. We must also remember the terrible
disaster of the death of the firstborn. I have
already said a great deal about the prolonged
ceremonies and superstitious care connected
with the dead. The days of mourning were by
no means confined to the royal limit of
fashionable European Courts. Mummies
could not be made in a day. It took about 70
days at least to get through the funeral rites.
With so many notable victims on hand the
embalmers must have had their hands full.
This helps us to understand how the Israelites
were able to marshal their host, how they
were enabled to complete their enormous pre-
parations, and corrects the impression which


we so easily form, that all the events of the
Exodus took place in one night.
THE PASSAGE OF THE SEA.
Everything now falls into its place. Pharaoh
was 30 miles away grieving over his only son.
Along the valley of Goshen the Israelites were
busy. Their meeting place was Rameses,
where most of the host would assemble. Their
march for the first two days brought them into
the district of Succota, not far from Pithom.
Thus far they had got when Pharaoh, taking
alarm at their departure, comes down from the
north. He has his chosen chariot force of 600
with him, his bodyguard, his ornamental
lifeguard, but his proper army was mostly
away at the extreme north-east. He
comes hurrying down, but the Israelites
had been moving on to Etham. If Pharaoh had
not been on their heels they would have gone
on east, and been in the desert in a few hours,
but they would have left their rear open. So
the pillar of cloud moves south, and they come
to Pihahiroth. They are now, however, in a
worse fix than ever. The low sand dunes rise
high on their right. The swamp of reeds is on
their left curving round in such a way as to
shut them in. They seem hopelessly at the
mercy of the enraged monarch and his furious
charioteers. But “ man’s extremity is God’s
opportunity.” The winds and the storms obey
His behests. A strong east wind sweeps the
“ sea of weeds ” dry, driving the waters upward
and downward. The ground though called
“dry” was oozy, and the pillar of fire
leads the host forward into the won-
drous ford. The Egyptians are upon them.
In the softsandymud “the chariot wheels drave
heavily.” The footmen have the advantage
over the mounted veterans. The storm beats
in the faces of the pursuers. The morning
dawns upon Israel safe upon the eastern
shore, and the changed wind brings the waters
back upon the puzzled soldiery, and they are
lost in the sea. The eastern shore rings to the
anthem of liberty, sung for the first time in the
history of the world; the western shore is
plunged into a new disgrace, and a deeper
gloom than even that of the death of the first-
born.
WHAT BECAME OP PHARAOH?
And what became of Pharaoh ? The
Israelites do not seem to have known. All
that they saw was that the army was engulfed,
and not a single Egyptian had landed on the
desert shore. Whether any escaped by retreat


they could not learn, and perhaps did not care
to enquire. We know that this Pharaoh was
an old man; that he was not a brave man; that
he preferred to do his deeds of valor by proxy ;
that on a previous occasion he had run away
from battle because the gods forbad him to go
into danger. My readers will not be sur-
prised, therefore, to learn that we know a good
deal of his subsequent life, and that he was
buned in his own tomb in the Valley of the
Kings after the lapse of a few sad years over-
clouded with the shadow of so many disasters.
But I must not dismiss Merempthah with such
a short and scant notice as this. His subse-
quent history has for us a most romantic in-
terest. Till I was enabled to trace it I felt
that the noetic climax of the Exodus had been
spoilt, when I learned that Pharaoh had not been
drowned but had run away. But now the
climax, though very different, is marvellously
touching. This Pharaoh was not a great builder.
He has left not a single notable edifice, but he
had a curious habit of making use of the
temples and statues of other Pharaohs for his own
purpose. We have a great number of inscrip-
tions which carry us back to his reign. They
are to be found at Zoan, at Thebes, at Silsilis,
and many other places. They are not well
done, and often have been so hurriedly exe-
cuted that one can read the inscriptions of
other Pharaohs beneath his. They are of in-
tense interest, however. They show us the
broken-hearted old man recording here, there,
and everywhere his mourning for his only son.
After the Exodus life was empty for him.
What was a double crown to an old man too
feeble to bear its burden, and with no son to
succeed him ? At first we see him and his
queen thus grieving, but after a while the
queen appears no more, and we must picture
this haughty Pharaoh as a lonely desolate old
man with no one at hand to comfort him, and
tormented with a grief which is indeed pitiable.
I select two of these inscriptions for more
detailed description, and am glad that I am
able to have them reproduced in a visible
form. They will probably be new to most of
my readers, and to those who are students of
the Bible are of wondrous interest. I take
these illustrations from an article by Mr. Pain
in the Century Magazine for September,
1889, to which I am largely indebted. They
are selected out of several which mutually
corroborate each other.


THE MOUENING PHAKAOH.
Far up the valley the Nile flows through a
narrow gorge. Here the rocks close in upon
the stream as though they would dam it up,
as indeed they once did. The famous sand-
stone of which the temples of Thebes were
built was obtained here. The quarries whence
the blocks were cut were of immense extent,
and the visitor may wander bewildered among
their remains. It became a habit of the
Pharaohs to make use of the smooth rook faces
left by the quarrymen for pictures and inscrip-
tions. Some of these are nearly as old as the
Eyramids, but those of the Nineteenth
•ynasty are the most numerous, and, to us, the
most instructive. Our first illustration repre-
sents Merempthah making offerings to the gods.
It is in two registers, or stories. In the lower
one you will see Merempthah, crowned with the
mitre crown, offering a sphinx, or the symbol
of hope in death, to Horus the god of life,
and Ma the goddess of truth. His name is over
his head. He is accompanied by a young man
bearing a fan, and if we read the list
of titles over his head we find it to
be “ heir to the throne, royal secretary, chief
of the soldiers, the royal son of his body
begotten, beloved of his father." There is no
name given, but this youth is followed by his
“ka,” or his “ double,” or his “ astral self,” or
his “ghost,” indicating that he was dead.


Behind him is an old prime minister, a great
friend of Merempthah’s, called Nehesi, also
dead. Now this shows us that the prince was
dead before his father, and also that ne was an
only son, no living brother being found to take
his place. Now look at the upper half of the
picture. Again you have the same Pharaoh
presenting an image to two of the gods. Be-
hind him this time is his queen, and you may
read her name, Isinefert, and behind her is
once more the same firstborn son, with all his
titles, only this time the name is added—
“ Seti Merempthah, gone among the justified.”
From which we learn that when that rock was
inscribed the old man was alive, his
queen was alive, but his son was
dead, and his old friend Nehesi too, but
he seems to hope that Nehesi, the friend of the
great Raineses, will befriend the lad in the
next world at the judgment of Osiris. Those
who have themselves wept tears of sorrow over
the death of a promising son, or over some
brilliant youth suddenly called away, may
imagine the depths of tenderness, the agony of
grief, which that quaint old picture gives us in
illustration of the story of our Bibles.
AN INTERESTING TABLET.
The next illustration is still more curious,
and gives us a deeper insight into the hidden
background of history which we are trying to
Eenetrate, It is called “The tablet of four
undred years.” The original of this tablet is
safe somewhere, so safe that no one can find
it. It was found at Zoan, where Merempthah
was living at the time of the plagues. Mons.
Marriette found it when excavating there. He
read it and copied it, and then was so afraid lest
it should be injured, or broken up, or stolen,
that he buried it again. It was originally in
the inmost shrine of the great temple there;
where it is now no one can say, for Mons.
Marriette died shortly afterwards and carried
the secret with him to the world of Amenti.
To us who are uninitiated it does not seem very
attractive, but its interpretation is like a new
comment on several totally distinct and
separate passages in the Bible. It represents
the great Rameses, the father of Merempthah,
offering wine to his deceased ancestor —Aa-pet-
peh or Aphophis. Our temperance friends may
object to this part of the inscription, for it
reads that Rameses is “ giving wine to
his beloved god that he may make him a giver of
life,” but let them consider who this beloved
god is, and they will forget the dangerous
color of the wine when it is red. This god is


his great human forefather, Aphophis, who
was no other than Joseph’s Pharaoh, and with
whom Rameses claims kinship, and who is now
among the justified in Osiris.
That is the first point; but more interesting is
the seventh line, which savs that this tablet
was put up in the 400th year on the 4th day of
the month Mesori, after this Pharaoh had
gone among the gods. Now, we all know how
much dispute there has been among Bible
readers as to whether the Israelites were 430
years, or 215 years, in Egypt. Some passages
seem to count the 400 years from Abraham,
and some from Jacob’s going down into Egypt.
Here it is settled for us. From the end of the
reign of Joseph’s patron to some year in
Rameses’s reign is 400 years, which gives
us, within narrow limits of error, the same
period that the Bible does for the sojourn of
the children of Jacob in the land of bondage.
The Egyptians were bad chronologers, and this
priceless tablet is a great heln in settling dates.
After this my readers will be anxious to
examine this “stone which cries out” so
curiously, but before looking at it I must note
another feature of this marvellous tablet.


TWO PICTURES IN ONE.
We see 12 lines of writing and two pictures
on the tablet. The lines 8,9, 10, 11, 12 seem
to have nothing to do with what goes before.
The two pictures also are quite distinct. To
make a long story short, the small picture
and the last five lines are the work
of Merempthah, while the others are the
work of his father Rameses. He either
found space ready for him, or he mani-
pulated the monument to serve his pur-
pose, and saved the expense and trouble of
getting such a large stone for himself. This,
as I have already said, was a very common
practice with him, and in this particular in-
stance we are glad he has been so economical.
Now when we look at the second picture, un-
luckily we see a portrait without a head, which
has been broken off. We can, however, easily
imagine the head to be there. It is no other
than that of the heir to the throne, the fan-
bearer at the king’s right hand, the commander
of the archers, royal scribe, general of the
cavalry, &0., &c.” And then it goes on to give
his name, “ the Prince Seti, deceased, born of
the lady of the house, the princess deceased.” I
say it is a portrait of this interesting prince
that is here broken, or rather of his double, his
ghost, his “ ka,” who is already in Osiris, and
has already joined the god Set, after whom he
was named, and to whom this ghost of royalty
prays “ Grant thou me a long time in thy ser-
vice to follow thy person.”
Now as we look at this monument let us note
what it suggests. It was erected in the very
town where the young man died. His mother
is by this time also dead. His father (now aai
old man) records, on this tablet of his own
father, how his son has gone to join the grand-
father in his mystic reception among the gods.
THE GROWTH OF FREEDOM.
This is the last record of this king. He him-
self died not long afterwards, leaving a sad
heritage of confusion and anarchy to his suc-
cessors. The glory of Egypt waned into
obscurity under that unhappy man, who defied
the living God and contended so obstinately
against the cry of his subjects for freedom.
That battle between him and Moses is typical
of a grander conflict which has been going on
ever since, and will go on, till every band of
slaves shall have followed the cloud banner of
Moses into that spiritual liberty which is man’s
inspired birthright. That battle once begun
cannot cease till oppression kisses the dust,
for God is on the side of the weak The war-


fare may seem to us to progress slowly, bub the
eye of divine wisdom looks out from the pillar
of cloud and directs the hosts as He will. In
the fulness of time, and not before, came He
who is a greater champion even than Moses —
our divine master. Again, in the fulness of
time, Europe burst asunder the chains of
superstition, and in spite of inquisitorial
torments, and prisons, and bulls said she would be
free. Again, in the fulness of time, a small
band of exiles left old England for a new
England over the waves, seeking nought save
freedom to worship God, and from that small
exodus has arisen the mighty popular empire
of the States of America. Yet again,
in the right time, in our own days, a
new group of loyal and obedient and
liberty-loving peoples has been formed in
these southern seas, and we have to take our
part in conserving and developing the germs of
national freedom which have been planted
here. And as we thank our God for all our
blessings, let us never forget that under Him
we, and all the world, owe to that grand in-
spired man, Moses the Hebrew, all the liberty
we possess and all the hopes of a more perfect
freedom which are involved in our developed
Christian faith. Christianity is the world’s
charter of a holy liberty, signed and sealed by
the mediatorial King of Heaven, just as the
legislation of Moses was the Magna Oharta
of the children of Israel.
CHAPTER IX.
THE TIMES OF DECADENCE.
The most popular heroine of the decadence
of ancient Egypt is, without doubt, the famous
Queen Cleopatra. She is not, however,
deserving of the important place she occupies
in public opinion. She was not a great ruler like
Hatasou, nor was she in any sense a worthy
queen; but her beauty, her fascination, and the
fact that she bewitched by her charms great
Csesar himself, and, after him, the noted
triumvir Mark Antony, have created a
universal interest in this Egyptian cele-
brity. She was the last of the long line of
the sovereigns of Egypt, as Menes was the first.
Menes reigned about 44 centuries B.c. Cleo-
patra died 30 years before our era. Between
these two 31 dynasties of Pharaohs can be


counted. As I intend to give a brief sketch
in this and the next paper, of Egypt in her
decadence, this woman, who was the last
wearer of the double crown, may serve as a
fitting figurehead. I call her “ the last of the
Pharaohs,” bub in this I am not strictly correct.
She was really a Greek, nob an Egyptian.
The last of the proper Pharaohs had been
laid in his tomb some three centuries before
this notorious queen sat upon the throne.
The dynasty of the Ptolemies, to whom
Cleopatra belonged, were the descendants of
one of Alexander’s generals who was made
governor of the Nile. They took on an
Egyptian varnish, but they were foreigners
after all. They wrote their names in hierogly-
phics, they built ornate and beautiful temples,
they kept up the worship of the old gods, they
tickled the imagination of the dwellers on the
Nile with splendid shows, but just beneath
the veneer was a very different sort of stuff.
The modern traveller sees a great deal to
remind him of the Ptolemies, and of Cleopatra,
the last of the race. The most’perfect temples
on the Nile are naturally the most recent.
Karnac and Luxor are ruins, but the temples
of Edfou and Denderah are so perfect that one
might set to work to get them ready for their
ancient ceremonials in a month. The island of
Philae is the one place on the Nile that deserves
to be called beautiful, and it owes all its
florious structures to the times of the
'tolemies. Many of the remains of a more
venerable Egypt are so broken and fragmentary
that the sightseer gets wearied of them, but no
traveller can ever erase from his memory the
exquisite charm of the Temple of Isis at Phil*,
or the pillared hall of Esneh.
THE PERSIAN INVASION.
Let me ask my readers to remember that in
our last sketch we were dealing with the
fourteenth century B.c. In this paper we leap
forward about a thousand years. With the
Bible in our hands, we had Moses and Aaron as
our companions; now we shall have got even
beyond the times of Jeremiah and Daniel and
Ezekiel, and are in the midst of that interval
which falls between the Old and New Testa-
ments. Then we were dealing with the 19th
Dynasty ; now we have gone beyond the 30th
and are among the Ptolemies. I pass over
without a word this immense stretch of history,
which is gradually becoming as well known as
the history of Anglo-Saxon England, and ask
all who have patience to follow me. at one bound
to transport themselves into the times of Darius


the Mede, of whom we read in the book of
Daniel., The Pharaoh’s name is Psamatik,
and he is making a last despairing effort to
save Egypt from the impending avalanche of
an invasion from the upstart empire of the
Persians. The Bible, in the person of Ezekiel,
has given us an awful description of what
was coming. It is to be found predicted
in his 30th chapter, but the horrors had not
yet come to pass.
THE TOMBS OP THE SACKED BUBLS.
Before touching on the historic scenes of
that period, let me ask my readers to come
with me and visit once more the ancient
cemetery of Memphis, near where the tomb of
Tii is, which I described so fully in a previous
sketch. We are in the midst of a desolate con-
fusion of graves, pyramids, and sand dunes.
Peeping out of the sand are a few battered
headless trunks of some sphinxes, which pre-
serve some trace of having once been an
avenue. We descend along a sloping cause-
way, like a railway cutting amid the sandhills,
and find ourselves at a rude wooden door which
is kept locked. It is fearfully hot in that
trench, though the desert air is always fresh,
but when the door opens we find ourselves in
an atmosphere which is thick and heavy. It
feels as though there was a charcoal fire some-
where which had no chimney. “Oh dear,”
said one of our party to our guide, “ this is
horrid ; you don’t expect) us to go in there; I
shall be choked.” “Then you can wait out
here till we come back,” said old Mohammed.
However, she went in with us. It was in-
tensely dark, and we were all furnished with
candles. Through a narrow passage our pro-
cession of candles' wound its way, and then
we found ourselves in a long lofty tunnel
going 1,000 ft. into the rock. This tunnel
had chambers or vaults excavated at short
intervals on both sides, and each chamber con-
tained one immense coffin. Each coffin was
cut out of a single block, either of granite or
diorite or limestone. The size of these
strange coffins was appalling. One of our
friends, note-book in hand, took out
his footrule and began to measure, and this
was the result—l 3 ft. long, 7 ft. wide, 11 ft.
high, or about half the size of an ordinary
parlor. These concerns were carved out of
one block, and after they had been finished,
and without the lid, weighed about 130,00 G
lbs. It was a strange sight to wander along
that gallery. It was like finding oneself in a
cemetery of giants. Such a sight is nowhere


else to be seen in the world. We wander
from chamber to chamber; we climb up a
ladder to get inside one of these coffins, and
note how five or six people could be shut in
quite comfortably sitting on chairs. We see
how some of these coffins have been polished,
and tvyo or three of them are covered with in-
scriptions, but they are all empty, and were so
at the very time when this weird home of the
mighty dead was discovered by Mons. Marriette
a few years ago.
STORY OF CAMBYSES.
Who were these giants? is the question
which our readers will ask ; and my reply is—
“ They were not men at all, but bulls. These
tombs are the burying places of the Sacred Bulls
of Memphis, and were more venerated than
any royal tomb, just because these bulls were
deemed to be living incarnations of the great
and beneficent Osiris, and the place where they
were laid was a holy sepulchre. At last we
halt at one coffin, which shows among its un-
couth letters the name of Cambyses, the terrible
Persian invader, and there, in spite of the
stifling heat, we sit down to look and rest and
talk. East and west our view is unbounded in
the vague darkness of the tunnel, with
other chambers dimly visible as the stragglers
of our party move about with their candles.
In our company was a dry old fossil, a baronet
from England, travelling with his two daughters.
He had once been an Oxford student, and had
a sort of mummified museum in his brain of
memories of what he had read in his youthful
days. An inquisitive lady from America
would make him a special object of attack,
and provoked him sometimes into loquacity by
her odd blunderings. “ Does not Herodotus
tell us that Cambyses broke into this coffin,
and cut up the bull’s mummy inside, and so got
a hornet’s nest about him ?”
“ No,” said our baronet, “you are in
error. Heredotus tells no such thing.
The old traveller says that when Cam-
byses came down from Upper Egypt he
was annoyed at finding the people making
merry over having found a new Apis bull, and
ordered the bull or the god to be brought to
him. I will read you the passage, for I have
my Herodotus with me. ‘ When the priests
returned, bringing Apis with them, Cambyses,
like the harebrained person that he was, drew
his dagger and aimed at the belly of the
animal, but missed his mark and stabbed him
in the thigh. Then he laughed and said to the
priests—“ Oh, blockheads, and think ye that


the gods become like this creature of flesh and
blood, and sensible to steel. A fit god indeed
for Egyptians ! But it shall cost you dear
that you have made me your laughingstock.”
He then ordered the priests to get the
bastinado. Apis, wounded in the thigh, lay
for some time pining in the temple. At last he
died of his wounds, and the priests buried him
secretly, without the knowledge of Cambyses.’
So much for Herodotus.”
“ Cambyses must have been somewhat
clumsy with his bowie knife to make
such a bad hit as that,” said his ques-
tioner but the baronet went on unmoved.
“This story of Cambyses has however
always been looked upon with suspicion by
scholars. It seemed to sensible men such an
absurd thing for any man to do. I admit that
Cambyses brought with him from Persia an
awkward reputation for not being compos
mentis, and more fit for a lunatic asylum
than a throne. Herodotus indeed hinted
plainly that he was not quite in his right
mind, and this story of how he attempted
to stab the sacred bull seemed to bear it out.
At any rate he was of a furious and insensate
temper, and his wiser deeds and acts of
shrewder policy were interspersed by deeds of
iconoclastic fury and cruelty. That his name
should occur on that granite coffin among the
reverend worshippers of the sacred bull shows
him, I fancy, in a more tolerant mood, and
has led many to doubt the story of that rare
old gossip with the classic name of Herodotus.”
We were discussing and talking over these
matters when our lady friend interjected her
conclusion, “Then this is not the proper bull
after all ; I feel getting mixed. It’s dreadfully
hot in here.”
THE SEQUEL TO THE STOKY.
The sequel to this story I will tell my readers
as we worked it out on board the steamer in the
evening. We noticed, as we came near the
entrance, that the walls of the tunnels are
adorned with niches where an immense number
of votive tablets were formerly placed. These
have been taken away to Paris, which is a
spoliation which every one must regret. Some-
times it is a good thing to have such
precious relics safe in a good museum,
but, where the antiques lose their meaning
by being transported, and when they would
have been quite safe if left alone, I regret the
national greed or jealousy that has secured
them for any one collection. These tablets
were votive memorials, set up by celebrated


visitors, stating in what year, of what Pharaoh,
they had come there, and are of inestimable
value. Some few still remain in position, and
so can be studied on the spot. Now one of
these tablets tells us that the famous bull,
which represented the deity when Cambyses
was at Memphis, did not die till the fourth
year of hissuccessor. So after all Herodotus may
have been right, and Cambyses may have stabbed
it. When Marriette, the famous French ex-
Elorer, discovered these extraordinary tombs
e prepared to take many of his treasures
away to France. He was suddenly called
away to Paris and had not time to look after
his extraordinary and queer luggage, so he buried
14 cases in the sand, there to await his return.
Before he came back there came travelling for
pleasure through Egypt “a young and august
stranger,” who had the rank of an arch-
duke, but of what country we are left
to guess. This stranger had a deep
royal purse, and we know that the Arabs have
an unlimited appreciation of backshish. Be
that as it may, the Arabs revealed the secret
of the 14 cases. One was opened, and when I
mention that it contained the perfect mummy
of a sacred bull, my readers may understand
one reason why the Frenchman had hesitated
about packing it in his portmanteau. This
bull was a curiosity, because it was the only
one which had escaped the indignant puri-
tanism of the early Christians in Egypt, and
the discoverer set great store by it. When
this little treasure was examined it was found to
be the identical Apis that Cambyses had stabbed.
There was no doubt about it. Inscriptions
settled the date, and a post-mortem settled the
nature of the injury. The bone had been
wounded seriously, so the royal arm must have
been like that of an athlete, but kindly nature
had healed the wound, and the insult to Osiris
had been avenged. The august stranger swept
off the whole 14 cases and sent them off to
Trieste. lam not sure where the contents are
now, but if ever I go to Vienna I shall look for
them in the museum there, and perhaps I may
find them.
WORSHIP OP ANIMALS.
Before passing away from this story I must
say something about this strange worship of
dumb animals, which culminated in the
splendid ceremonials which must have tor-
mented and puzzled the poor bull who was un-
fortunate enough to become the petted idol of
a whole nation, and also about Cambyses and
his times which will show us a very different


Egypt from tnat of Rameses the Great, and
introduce us to the Egypt of Cleopatra.
The religion of the land of the double crown
was a veiled pantheism. It was not, strictly
speaking, idolatry at all. Nor was it mono-
theism. in the sense in which Moses taught
that great principle. Nature was God. The
forces of nature were the visible forms of the
unseen, unknown One. All things were full
of God, and all that passed over the face of
nature showed not His handiwork but Him-
self. In a scorching land like Egypt it was
natural that the sun should hold the chief
place in men’s thoughts about the vast and
infinite regions beyond common experience.
Day after day he rose in splendor amid a cur-
tain of fleecy clouds ; day after day he shone
in terrible but beneficent clearness; and when
evening came, day after day he set in the midst
of a brilliant display of colorings. Nearly all
the gods of Egypt are in some sense names of
the sun. Ra, Turn. Horus Osiris, Harmachis,
and Amen, are all sun gods, and it is hard to
distinguish between them. The moon and the
stars and all the processes of nature were also
forms of the divine thought, or presence, or
energy. Man, like the sun, rose, ascended,
set in death, and passed through the under-
world to a new life. The orb of day was thus
a parable of human life, and, as I have before
stated, the Sphinx was but an emblem of how
dying man looks forward to a new uprising in
some blessed future realm, where Osiris, ohe
good one, will gather his own.
Thus all nature was a sacred parable to an
Egyptian, It was the acted drama of the un-
seen powers. You can see, therefore, how
they came to pay a sort of reverence to all
sorts of creatures, and how among a supersti-
tious people this became a gross and absurd
idolatry. Crocodiles and cats, vultures and
goats, hawks and beetles, came to be treated
as divinities to whom a due and proper reve-
rence ought to be paid.
THE SACRED BEETLE.
Take as an illustration the beetle. This is
one of the commonest sacred objects in all
Egypt. It was enshrined in the names of
kings. It was carved over temple doors. It
was placed in the heart of the dead. It was
wrought into seals and charms. It is the
origin of all the scarabs that have ever been
fabricated. It is a symbol of life, of rejuven-
escence, of eternal generation. And this is how
it has come about. There is a large and rather
ugly beetle in Egypt, which has a curious


instinct. The male and female are very un-
like each other. The male has two large horns
and three small ones; the female has none.
The male takes upon himself the laborious
duty of rolling together a sort of disk, or cake,
or rissole of wet mud at the water’s edge.
This ball he then half carries, half pushes up
the banks with wonderful patience till he
has got it high and dry above all
marks of last year’s inundation. It is his
present to his mate, who proceeds to lay her
eggs inside this ball of mud. In due time
this egg is hatched, and there is visible
a tiny worm which forthwith becomes a
chrysalis, which is nothing but one of nature’s
mummies. This minute mummy comes to life
again, and wings its way through the sunshine,
and in its turn provides for another generation
of the Scarabceus Sacer. To us this is certainly
a very curious fact, and one which makes me
feel that Darwinism is only one, out of
many keys, which are needed to unlock God’s
great casket of marvels. To the Egyptian it
was much more. The tiny creature seemed to
him to be making an image of the sun
and worshipping it. His labor was rewarded
by the sun’s rays kissing the hidden germ, de-
posited by,his mate inside, into life. That life
was only evanescent, and soon passed into a
mummy. The silent mummy in due time
burst its cerements and ascended as a winged
creature of light and power towards its home
in the sunbeams. Think of all this, and we
shall have a new respect for an Egyptian
scarab, and may even see that there may be
deep and tender meanings in the worship of a
loathsome beetle when elevated into a symbol
of immortality.
THE MARKS OF A SACRED BULL.
In a similar way other animals got into a
curious aristocracy of divine honor, and among
others the bull; which may serve, by the way,
to let in some light on the proceedings of the
Israelites when Aaron made for them a golden
calf. The Bull of Memphis was an em-
bodiment of Ptah, the Creator, or ‘of
Osiris, the good god of the nether
regions of night and judgment. He was
indeed a most wonderful creature, and there
could be only one in the world at once, and
there was always that one if only men knew
where to find him. When found he was housed,
not comfortably, as bulls would naturally like
to be, but in royal splendor. He was fed by
the proudest of priests. He was taken out for
a walk as if he had been an infant born of


Queen Cleopatra herself. His bellow-
ings were divine oracles. His greedi-
ness was a mark of divine favor.
And when he died he was embalmed
and buried in the grand mausoleum of which
we saw a very small portion just now under-
ground. The funeral of an Apis bull cost from
£II,OOO to £20,000 of our money, and it was
indeed a trouble to give the holy creature a
suitable resting place. And near where the sacred
cattle reposed, there the illustrious dead liked
to be laid also. In the cemetery of these bulls
Marriette actually found the mummy of one of
the sons of Raineses the Great, named Khamus
—a man who did not care for statecraft, or
war, but gave himself, as we should say, “ to the
church,” and to the highest section of the most
ritualistic party. No other man is known to
have been so honored as to be buried actually
within one of the vaults of an Apis bull. But
when a bull died in such an odor of sanctity,
where was another to be found ? The people
were in deep mourning; a wail went up from
the land ; every herd was searched for a new
idol. The marks by which he was to be
known were 28 in number. I cannot
recount them all, but at all events (1) he must
have a black coat; (2) on his forehead must be
a triangular white mark; (3) on his back the
upstanding hairs must be arranged so as to re-
present a vulture, which was an emblem of
maternity; (4) on his right flank there must
be a white crescent; (5) the hairs of his tail
must be of two colors ; and (6) under his tongue
there must be a mole or excrescence shaped
like the sacred beetle. The other marks I
need not recount. We may imagine that it
must have been no easy matter to find a new
Apis, but as one was always forthcoming I
fancy the priests who had to decide must
sometimes have had a blind eye, or a very vivid
imagination, or both. If we take the average
life of a sacred bull at 15 years we may easily
imagine how much room they would take in
the cemetery, when each animal had a separate
vault or chapel. The enormous cavernous dens,
where we were nearly stifled just now, are all
belonging to the late Pharaohs. There were
others far larger discovered by Marriette, but
these are now again choked up and buried, but
I imagine that very many more are yet con-
cealed beneath the mysterious sand drifts of
Sakkarah. It may interest my readers to tell
them, when they visit the museum, to look at
the foot of the coffin which once contained the
mummy of Rempsit Nefert. They will see a
rude painting of the mummy of the deceased


being safely carried to the judgment throne of
Osiris on the back of a sacred bull.
CAMBYSES.
And now let us leave the bulls and their
graves, and look into the royal palace. The
only Pharaoh I have named in this paper is
Cambyses, and he is not an Egyptian. Egypt
has quarrelled with Babylon, and after that
city was taken, as Daniel tells us, by the Modes
and Persians, Egypt got into a quarrel
with the Persians. If Cyrus had in-
vaded Egypt things would have gone
differently, but Cambyses was a furious
wild destroyer. To conquer with him meant
to uproot. He it was who first began the
work of knocking down the glorious edifices of
Karnac and Memphis. Egypt was the scene
of utter woe and confusion for many years,
two or three short dynasties of native
Pharaohs arose, under whom she had some
.gleams of sunshine, taut her course was down-
ward. At last there appeared on the scene
that . mighty young man from Macedonia,
whose ambition it was to conquer and hold the
whole world. Alexander grasped Egypt, and
founded a new city at the mouth of the Nile,
which, more than all the invading armies, in-
jured by its competition, the ancient capitals.
A new Egypt began to be—an Egypt
which was more than half Greek. Alex-
andria never was an Egyptian city;
it was Greek. Its Pharaohs, among whom
were the Ptolemies and the Cleopatras,
were not true Pharaohs, but Greek kings and
queens. She rose to a great height of splen-
dour and fame, but it was another Egypt, with
other creeds, other customs, and other aspira-
tions. The real ancient Egypt had passed
away 200 years before, with Cambyses. The
name Pharaoh lingered on for a few hundred
years, but even that passed away with the death
of Cleopatra, the last of the Ptolemies, who
succumbed to the omnipotent power of the
rising empire of Rome a few years before the
birth of Christ.
CHAPTER X.
THE TIMES OF CLEOPATRA.
In my last chapter I told how the sceptre of
the Pharaohs passed from the grasp of native
Egyptians into the hands of the Persians.


The course of Egypt after that was rapidly
downward. After it had been subjugated by
Alexander the Great, it was ruled by a race of
Greek Pharaohs called the Ptolemies, the last
of whom was Cleopatra, who died 30 years B.c.
I purpose in this sketch to show my readers
some of the last gleams of Egyptian splendor,
as they may be seen in the days of Cleopatra
and the Ptolemies.
TEMPLE OF DENDERAH.
Let me now ask them to come with me some
350 miles up the Nile and visit the Temple of
Denderah. It is not a very old temple, as
things go in Egypt. It took, like the Cathedral
of Cologne, some few hundred years in build-
ing, and those years cover the times of the
Ptolemies, and the early Roman Empire. It
was, in fact, being constructed when the New
Testament was being written. It is a wonder-
fully impressive structure, complete in every
chamber. It was not long ago in danger of
being absolutely buried in the sand, which had
surged against its massive outer walls like the
waves of the sea against the rocks. It has now
been cleared out, and a village which stood on
the roof has been removed. Let us sit down
for awhile on the sand hillocks behind the
temple and see what is to be seen. The walls
are covered from end to end with immense
figures in relief. Processions of gods and
goddesses and kings seem to encircle the place.
Their faces are all hacked and scarred by the
furious zeal of the early Coptic Christians.
They evidently planted long ladders against
the wall, and set to work with pickaxes to
obliterate the faces of the idolatrous images.
There are, however, so many of these pictures
in stone that we are not surprised that some of
them should have escaped destruction, and
one of these happens to be a portrait of the
famous Queen Cleopatra, and her son
Cassation. As we look at it we shall not
be inclined to think that the royal beauty
has been flattered by the artist. We
even wonder how such a person could
succeed in bewitching the great Julius Caesar,
and after him Mark Antony. We must make
allowance, however, for the mannerism of
Egyptian portraiture. The artists of the Nile
adopted severe geometric and conventional
rules in drawing the human figure, and rarely
attempted to give a natural picture. More-
over, she is dressed not as a mortal woman, but
as a goddess, and so is adorned with an amount
of headgear which may have a symbolic mean-
ing, but would be awkward, ugly, and uncom-


fortable to wear. She has the attributes of
three goddesses at once on her head-first, the
vulture of Maut, which sits upon her hair like
a bonnet, but which, as a lady remarked as she
looked at it, is too warm and comfortable a sort of
fashion for Egypt; second, the horned disk of
Athor, which represents the full moon between
a pair of cow’s horns ; and thirdly, the throne
of Isis on the top of the moon. Her hair falls
in a cluster of plaits beneath the vulture’s
wings. This way of wearing the hair is com-
mon to this day among the women of Nubia,
and I have seen how each separate tail is
fastened off with a lump of Nile mud daubed
over with yellow ochre. We do not suppose,
however, that this famous queen used any-
thing less precious than gilded wax. Wigs
treated in this way have been found in the
tombs, and may be seen in several museums.
Beneath the goddess we may, if you will
look, see the woman. Her profile is clear cut
and beautiful. Her face is not suggestive of
any of the finer qualities of womanhood. We
could easily, underneath the affected smile,
see that there is a mind of no ordinary
character, and would suspect that a genuine
woman’s heart did not beat in that bosom.
Shameless pride is at once apparent, for this
queen is here paraded with tiiple divine
adjuncts, and there, not far off, is a kindred
sculpture which represents that son which she
bore to the great Roman, Julius Caesar, and
who carries his name—Csesarion.
THE KEY TO THE INSCRIPTIONS.
We note, too, over her head her name.
Royal names are always written in a sort of
oval frame, like a shield. This has been
called a “ cartouche,” and every Pharaoh had
his own separate and peculiar cartouche.
Whenever, in a long inscription, we find one of
these frames we may know at once that we
have a royal name. This throne name of
Cleopatra has another renown, quite indepen-
dent of her character, or her deads, or her
romantic death. It was through it that the
first streak of light broke in upon the tangled
and impenetrable mist of Egyptian hiero-
glyphics. The story is a strange one, and will
be told as long as the world lasts. In the
British Museum is a black slab of basalt which
was found at Rosetta. It contains an in-
scription three times repeated, once in hiero-
glyphics, once in demotic, and once in Greek.
The Greek was easily read, but not so the
others, though it was known what they con-
tained. However, it was noticed that every now


and again a group of characters, consisting of
a bale of goods, a knotted cord, a lion, two
Nile reeds, &c , was enclosed in a frame, and
that it must mean “ Ptolemy.” Nobody could
get any further, but in due course another
inscription was found at Philae which was
known to be about Cleopatra. It contained
frames where her name ought to occur, and in
this frame were a lion, a reed, a hawk, a
mouth, and an egg, and some others. Here
was the key at last, and it was seen at a glance
that a bale of goods meant p, a knotted cord o,
a lion 1, a hawk a, and then it was guessed that
the egg was added as a sign of gender and
meant that the whole group was a woman’s
name. This was the modest beginning of the
vast and erudite efforts of scholars to read the
old picture writing of Egypt. Cleopatra, the
last of the Ptolemies, was the innocent means
of opening the door of the great mystery. To
fet the meaning of a dozen signs out of 3,000
id not seem much, but it set enquirers on the
right track.
THE LEGEND OF OSIEIS AND ISIS.
I remarked just now that on the head of the
portrait of Cleopatra at Denderah was the
sign of the goddess Isis. Isis was, of all the
deities of the Egyptian Pantheon, the one
that was most in fashion at the time of
Cleopatra, and as I intend to take my readers
in imagination up the Nile to the beautiful
island of Philse, and which was the especial
sanctuary of Isis, I must say something about
her and the legends that attached to her name.
Once upon a time, or rather before there was
any time at all, there existed in the land of
the Nile four beings, but whether they belonged
to the gods or to men seems uncertain. They
were children of the vague deities called Seb
(time) and Nut (space). Their names were
Osiris and Typhon, and their two sisters were
Isis and Neptnys. Osiris the good and Isis the
beautiful were married, and ruled together in
the land of the double crown. Osiris was wise
and clever; he was a great orator, a great poet,
and could make sweetest harmonies. His
queen loved him with a passionate fervor.
Typhon was filled with hatred and jealousy,
for he had a soul black as night. He plotted
the ruin of his gifted brother, whom he hated
all the more because his home was cheered by
the presence of a wonderful boy-god named
Horus, He got 72 foul-hearted demonic men
to help him to ruin Osiris, which they did by
making a very beautiful box, shaped like
what was afterwards known as a mummy


case. Then it came to pass that there
was held a family merrymaking, and Typhon
said that the box should be given to
the one whom it exactly fitted. Osiris
who had no guile in his heart, laughing, lay
down in it, whereupon his wicked brother
slammed down the lid, nailed it last, and his
72 men carried it to the river and threw it in.
The river bore it down the current —down, far
down, till it floated out into the great ocean,
and was cast ashore on the rocks of Canaan,
near Jaffa. Poor Isis was terribly distressed.
She put on mourning and went to search for
this precious ark. Long, long time she
wandered, but at last she found it and set sail
with it to the dear old land. As soon as she
was alone with her treasure she opened it and
laid her cheek against that of her dead
husband, and bathed it with kisses. She then
left it, as she thought, in safety, and went to
seek her boy Horus to arouse him to avenge
the cruel deed of the wicked uncle. In her
absence Typhon found and stole the body, and
cut it into 14 parts, and scattered them all over
Egypt, dropping the head at Abydos, the
hands in one place, the feet in another, and the
heart far up at Philae. When Isis heard of
this she was disconsolate, but, like a true wife,
did not despair. She set to work to find these
fragments, and wherever she found one she
caused a tomb of Osiris to be builded, so that
there are 14 tombs of the good god in the land.
Osiris, however, all this time, while so much
trouble was going on above ground, was
really alive and well and very blessed in
the nether regions. He was accepted as
the good king of Amenti. Meanwhile
his son Horus, the bright fiery youth, armed
himself for revenge upon his wicked uncle.
They met. For four days they fought, and a
terrible struggle it was, for both had the
strength of gods. Typhon was, however, con-
quered and captured, and the divine son
brought his prisoner to his mother Isis. She
was proud of her son and of his victory, but
she had a woman’s heart of pity, and she
pardoned the wicked prisoner and gave him
his life, for was he not her brother ? and then,
Osiris coming to life again, she was united to
her long lost husband.
THE EGYPTIAN TRINITY.
Such is the famous allegory of Osiris and Isis
and Horus, the divine Egyptian trinity. It has
many meanings, which I should weary my
readers if I traced them in detail. It is a picture
of the great war of good against evil, and in this


view Osiris is a saviour, while Typhon is a
devil. It is a picture of the annual history of
the Nile. The river is Osiris. Isis is the
fertile land. Typhon is the hot sun which dries
up the stream and divides it. Horus is the
force which sends down a new Nile to revive
the drooping land. But especially is it a pic-
ture of the human soul, and an allegory of the
struggles and sorrows and spiritual victories
which man has t® go through. Every dying
man went into the under world to be judged
by Osiris, and took his name, and if acquitted
rose into new life. Hence Osiris, Isis, and
Horus were the gods beloved and feared of all
others in Egypt, for they were the divine
names for goodness, for pity, and for saving
and helping power. The riddle of the Sphinx
is solved. It is Horus waiting for Osiris to
rise victorious over the powers of darkness.
ASSOUAN TO PHIL.E.
I should have liked to have taken my readers
inside the great temples of Dendera and Edfou,
and acted as their guide from hall to hall, from
chamber to chamber, down through narrow
tunnels into the crypts in the walls, and up
along decorated staircases to the moonlit
shrines on the roof. They would have seen the
incidents of this famous legend of Osiris, Isis,
and Horus everywhere. As I have already
said these two temples are not ruins, they look
simply as if they had been deserted and neg-
lected. Instead of this let us hasten far up
the river to visit the Island of Philse, which
was, of all other places except Abydos, the
home of this legend and the centre of this wor-
ship. We go beyond Thebes for more than 100
miles, and finally halt at Assouan because we
are told that Philse is on the upper side of the
Cataract, and our steamer cannot go up the
stream any further.
Assouan is a pretty place, perhaps the pret-
tiest we have seen as yet. Opposite to it is a
range of cliffs containing a series of very old
tombs indeed, nearly as old as the Pyramids,
which General Grenfell opened at his own ex-
pense. He pointed them out to me, and said
that under the drifting sand, which has come
like a cascade over the edge of the cliffs, there
is evidently a long line of similar tombs which
are awaiting exploration, and suggested that I
should immortalise this colony by arranging
for excavation. I declined the expensive Dait
with thanks. At Assouan we land and trans-
fer ourselves to the backs of Nubian donkeys.
There is a little railway from here to Philse,
which is part of the Egyptian system of


defence, and makes the commander-in-chief
independent of the cataract’s noisy defiance.
The easy-going folks among our party prefer a
hot ride in a train, but we prefer a desert trip
on the backs of asses. The ride is very
interesting. The track leads among rocks and
sand drifts. The rocks are granitic, and are of
all sorts of fantastic shapes, and on them are
sculptured the names of royal pilgrims and
conquering generals, who have come up hither
to the very edge of Egypt, in a long succession
through 50 centuries. It was hereabouts that
I saw that half-cut obelisk to which I referred
in my first paper. Hence came all the granite
which is now built into the heart of the
pyramids, or carved into sphinxes at Karnac.
Hence came the obelisk of Thotmes 111. in
London, which has got the fanciful name of
“Cleopatra’s Needle.” In this region there is
eternal sunshine, and, except before dawn, it
is never cool. It is wild and desolate, but
has a certain beauty and freshness of its
own. Our ride is about seven miles long,
and every step of the journey is full of
incident. The Nile is invisible, hidden away
behind the rocks to our right. At last
one of our donkey boys, grinning from ear
to ear, calls out, “There, Philae, sare,” and
points to a Ijrace of lofty towers surrounded
by a palm grove. We hurry on and are soon
on the brink of the river with the island of
Isis close at hand. But how different the
river looks ! How beautiful the view ! The
current is rapid and is broken up by a vast
number of tiny islets and jutting rocks, which
vex the sober stream into foaming anger.
Palms and other trees in profusion mingle
with the rocks. A forest of ruins, graceful in
form and unlike any we have seen elsewhere,
covers the island. The sky of course is bright
and clear, for that island knows no rain, no
fog, and no drenching mists. Water, water
is everywhere, rippling in endless shallows and
dashing over the rocks, but not a drop ever
comes down from the skies. It is a picture of
fairyland, beautiful exceedingly, but with a
beauty utterly unlike all other places I have
ever seen.
THE ISLAND OF PHILAC.
We find a boat waiting for us, and leaving
our donkeys for the present, we get on
board and a couple of coal black Nubian
boys row us across. Some others, hoping
for backshish, plunge into the stream with a
palm-tree log as a life-buoy, and cleverly paddle
alongside, sitting astride their submerged boat


and using their feet like ducks. It is alto-
gether a quaint scene and not easily forgotten.
We landed at the north end of the island, and
there found awaiting us those who had come
up the other side of the Nile by train. A
number of pretty little Nubian children attach
themselves to our party, and one little
quaint thing of about 7, singled out my
wife and said in very broken English, “Me
take care of you.” And she was true to her
duty. No rude boy could come near without a
rebuke, which was doubtless forcible if we
could have understood it. No other child
could dare to whisper backshish, for all seemed
to dread this fierce little beauty. She took
her charge’s hand and led her on, pointed out
the loose stones, and when luncheon
came made a seat for her of a
carven fragment, and squatted in waiting
obedience close by on the ground. She
was as nimble as a mountain goat, and without
doubt if her special charge had fallen into the
water would have gone in after her, as much at
home in the currents as a seagull.
Philas is a delicious wilderness of ruins, all
sacred to Isis. There is nothing very old here—
nothing, that is, older than the Ptolemies, but
the site and the fame of the enchanted island
.goes as far back as can be traced. On this
spot, too, the old Egyptian idolatry lingered
long after it had been conquered elsewhere by
Christianity. The last psalms ever sung to the
ancient gods were heard here. The worship of
Isis did not cease here till 600 years after
Christ. The place was so far away and so
secluded that the din of clashing creeds was
not heard till all the novelty of the change had
quite died out in the rest of the Nile Valley.
I cannot attempt in words to give any ade-
quate idea of the ruins that we traversed. A
few lines must suffice to introduce to my
readers what can only be learned from pictures.
At the south end of the island, which is only
400 yards long altogether, and less than half
that in breadth, is a ruined landing-stage,
where of old the sacred processions were mar-
-shalled. Thence we pass into a vast court
with colonnades on either hand, and abundant
crude brick ruins of an early Coptic Christian
village everywhere spoiling our foothold. Be-
fore us rise the two lofty towers, still complete,
and with little that is ruinous about them save
the ugly marks of the chisels and pickaxes of
those who supplanted the ancient religion.
There, of colossal size, are sculptured pictures of
the dethroned gods, and one of the Ptolemies
-swinging his battle-axe over the heads of a


batch of unhappy prisoners. We pass through
this mighty gateway and enter a second court
surrounded by columns and chapels, and with
another gateway between two lower towers be-
fore us. We go into the inner court, and there
a deep rich silence broods like that of an ancieno
cathedral cloister. More chapels, more
chambers, tempt us to linger. Some of these
are bright with color, and all are covered with
pictured stories. One was the library of the
temple; would that we could find the books,
but they have served to cook Nubian dinners
many years ago. In one chapel we
find inscriptions which show it to have
been dedicated to the divine boy Horus.
We can trace his mystical career from baby-
hood onward. “As a baby he is being
nursed in the lap of Hathor, the divine foster-
mother. As a young child he stands at his
mother’s knee and listens to the playing of a
female harpist. As a youth he sows grain in
honor of Isis, and offers a jewelled collar to his
nurse.” This Isis looks like a complimentary
portrait of one of the earlier Cleopatras, and
near by are the sculptured images of two
favorite greyhounds, which one of those
haughty beauties may have patted and
caressed. I could only take a very hurried
glance at all I saw. There was a party in this
inner court sketching. They had come in a
dahabeah, and were going to stay a week
there. I could not but envy them, and had no
shield on which to receive the darts of con-
tempt with which they looked on us, a com-
pany of steamer tourists, who had suddenly
intruded on their poetic solitude.
pharaoh’s bed.
Near the river on one side is a lovely kiosk,
which in architecture is famous as showing
how Grecian influence could modify the solid
Egyptian style into grace and lightness.
There is nothing memorable about it except
its beauty. It is the pearl in this entire
casket of temple gems. It is almost as
familiar to strangers as the Pyramids, for it
is the centre of a hundred pictures, en-
gravings, and photographs. It is commonly
called “ Pharaoh’s bed.” There we halted for
luncheon. Our leader, who kept the place
clear of intruders, was thrusting back among
the crowd of chattering urchins our little
maiden. Her assumption of dignity was
amusing. It seemed as though she would
defend her charge from our own dragoman. She
was allowed to pass in with us, and did so
as proudly as Cleopatra herself. As we sat in


the shade of those columns, listening to the
ripple of the waters beneath, we discussed
together the legends of the holy isle, the story
of the Ptolemies, the sad fate of Cleopatra the
last monarch of ttie ancient Nile, and the
struggles of the Early Christian Church. Of
course we ascended to the top of the towers
and got a view of the whole island, and the
broken lake-like reaches of the Nile, calm
above, but below rushing into rapids; and then,
all too soon, the word was given to make ready
for our return to Assouan.
“shooting the cataract.”
Our return was not at all like our coming.
We arrived on donkeys, but we arranged to go
back by water, and to go through the excite-
ment of “shooting the cataract.” This process
has no great risk about it, but there is just
enough of danger to give spice to the adventure.
Some of our ladies said they would go back by
train, but by degrees they all got over their
fears, and ultimately nearly all our large party
was broken up into little knots of voyagers,
each such knot being deemed enough for one
boat. We went quietly in some large barges to
the head of the rapids, and there we all landed
and stood together on a cliff looking down
upon an angry surging current that rushed in
foam down a steep incline. It was a sight to
be remembered indeed, especially as we saw
about 60 men and boys, each with his palm log,
gathering on a sandspit to our right, and at
the word of command from their sheikh plung-
ing into the stream, and, sitting astride of their
logs, enter fearlessly into the grip of the current.
Away they went, rushing past us in a long
procession, bobbing up and down, but never
dislodged. Such a proceeding would have
taxed the courage of the boldest swim-
mer, but these fellows are almost like water
sprites, and they call the cataract their mother.
Then they all gathered around us, each with
his log, and formed a picturesque circle, which
so tempted one of our friends that he used his
last plate in his camera to preserve the memory
of the occasion. Of course backshish followed,
and we made ready for our voyage. Only five
persons were allowed in each boat, and each
boat was manned by a captain and five others.
The captain sat at the tiller, and showed us by
his every look and movement that he had a
difficult and risky task to do, but that he
meant to do it properly and well. We did not
attempt that channel where the ragged boat-
men had been performing, but, working our
way around rocks and passages, got nearly to


the other side of the river. Then came the
first of the “ gates,” as they are called. We all
held our breath. Before us was a narrow in-
clined plain of rushing water, and at the
bottom of it a rock right in our course. The
boat drew near the bank; the fifth man jumped
ashore with a rope. He ran ahead of us as we
darted through, and quick as thought gave a
hitch round a knoll of granite which he knew.
The captain was motionless as a statue. At
the right moment the rope was stretched, the
helm ported, and we turned sharply round in
the eddies and were safe in calmer water. Our
sailor jumped on board and we rowed on in
peace. Only, however, for a short distance,
for we had to go through a similar crisis
three times more. It was, I admit, very ex-
citing, and I confess I thought seriously
when I noticed how our safety hung
on the strength of an old rope, and wondered
what would happen if that rope broke.
However, it did not break. We safely shot the
rapids, and had a delicious sail in the quiet
evening light amid the romantic islets which
stud the Nile bed all the way to Assouan.
Thence we commenced our voyage down the
river to Thebes, and back to Cairo, whence we
had started 28 days before. We broke the
journey at Luxor and left our party to go on
without us. At Luxor there happens to be an
hotel, and we determined to rest there and
have a more leisurely survey of the enormous
fields of ruins which mark the site of ancient
Thebes.
CHAPTER XL
MODERN EGYPT.
A witty Frenchman, quoted by the late Miss
Edwards in her charming book, “ A Thousand
Miles up the Nile,” has put Egypt into an
epigram—“A tour in Egypt is a donkey ride and
a boating trip, interspersed with ruins.” This is
as true as it is terse, except that comfortable
victorias are competing with the donkeys in
Cairo, and that steamers are fast superseding
the expensive but fascinating old-fashioned
dahabeahs.
CAIRO.
Cairo is one of the most attractive cities I
was ever in. It is like a rich Oriental dream
actually realised. The city is divided into


two parts—one of these is very much Euro-
peanised, having wide streets, fine houses,
beautiful gardens, luxurious hotels, and shops
with plateglass windows ; the other is just the
opposite—its streets are narrow, its shops are
mere booths, its houses are quaint and tiny, its
bazaars are the same as are described in the
tales of the “ Arabian Nights,” and its open-
air scenes are a ceaseless masquerade of oddi-
ties. Both in the newer and the older Cairo a
never-ending stream of people, seemingly of
all the nations under heaven, is ever flowing
backwards and forwards, and to watch it
is quite amusement enough to wile away
as many idle hours as the traveller likes
to encourage. Bat an intelligent visitor will
not have many idle hours to dispose of ; there
is so much to be seen and so much to be
learned. In the city are innumerable mosques,
some crumbling into ruins, others thronged
with worshippers. The queer old Coptic
churches tempt a Christian student to ferret
them out, and to brave narrow alleys and un-
mentionable smells in the effort. The Citadel
is in itself a group of marvels, with its own
mosques, halls, and barracks, and above every-
thing its grand view of the city, which is re-
markable as perhaps the finest panorama of a
city in the world. Just over the Nile is the
immense museum of Ghizeh, which contains by
far the best collection of antiquities anywhere
to be found, including the royal mummies, and
where one may spend days of interested
sight-seeing. Outside the city and within easy
reach are the smaller ruins of Heliopolis, or
On, where Joseph found his Egyptian wife; the
tombs of the Caliphs and of the Mamelukes;
the oldest Cairo, once called Babylon ; the
great pyramid field of Khufu and Chefren,
and the wilder ruins of Memphis at Sakkarah.
If one’s taste lies in the direction of religious
eccentricity we may make a choice between
the dervishes who serve God by howling, and
their rivals who serve him by whirling, both
which exhibitions are open to tourists on
certain days of the week. One mosque has
attached thereto a rare collection of Arabic
curiosities, and another is the university of
Arabic culture. In fact we may make a choice
as to what sort of a place we will spend the day
in, and as to what centuries we will go back to.
We may go there on a donkey, in a carriage,
on board a steamer, or in a queer Nile boat.
The traveller will find also in any one of the
large hotels a most varied company, and
no one need suffer any lack of society if he
will but forget for a while the stiff rule


of society, and never mind waiting for an
introduction. As a rule he will find a better
average of intelligence in a Cairene hotel than
in any similar establishment elsewhere, for
people go to Egypt not because of its dreamy
scenery or its aesthetic indolence, where the
idlest of idle novels is a fitting companion, but
because they want to know something about
the most interesting old land in the world,
and to enjoy themselves in finding it out. It
is a perfect paradise for artists and sketchers,
who would like to make a picture of every
thing they see, and those who go there armed
with pocket cameras soon find their stock of
sensitive plates exhausted. It is by no means
a cheap country to travel in, and as the bulk
of the tourists on the Nile are pretty well off,
an impression is made on the native mind that
all their visitors are as rich as Haroun-al-
Rashid, and that to fleece them is a duty as
well as a privilege. This makes it very hard
for a traveller who is forced to economise and
who is not able to treat all francs as
piastres. The Americans, to whom a dollar
is like a shilling, have a careless way of fling-
ing money about them which soon spoils any
country for other travellers, who are reminded
by custom as well as arithmetic that a sniffing
only contains twelve pennies, and who would
like to make their shillings go as far as
sovereigns.
OLD CAIRO.
Cairo is not an old city as things go in Egypt.
There was a city hereabouts in the time of
Christ called “Babylon,” but modern Cairo is
only about a thousand years old. It was
founded as a Mohammedan city by the fierce
Moslem rulers, who saw that it was rightly
placed for the capital of their newly-acquired
prize. It was built largely of old material, and
the temples of Memphis, and the pyramids be-
yond the Nile were handy quarries whence good
stone could be got without much trouble. One
may frequently see some rare old inscription
stuck into the side of a house; the inscription
may carry you back to Rameses or Thotmes,
but the house is only a few centuries old. The
early Christians themselves had no reverence
for the carven memorials of a vile heathenism,
and so unfortunately took no care of the relics
of the past. But the early Mohammedans had
a double hatred to animate them, and tore to
pieces all things, whether carved by heathens
or Christians, which contained any sculptured
likeness of any living thing in heaven
above or the earth beneath. It was not in


their eyes a sin and a shame to pull down a
temple to Amen however splendid; they
rather deemed it a matter to be proud of
that they were commissioned to act as the
agents of indignant Allah and wipe out
one more abomination from the face of the
earth. They were always intense fatalists and
fanatics, and their fanaticism knew no logic.
Their fatalism is also outside all bounds of
reason. Illustrations of this habit of mind
are very common. The Egyptians are good at
constructing new things, but hesitate to re-
pair what is old. If a mosque, however
beautiful, begins to crack, and the rich old wood-
work to decay, they will say most devoutly,
“It is the will of Allah —He alone is the
eternal.” They will not mend it or replace
the old work with new; but instead they will
readily build a new mosque by the side of the
old. Hence some of the grandest buildings
in Cairo are falling to decay. The splendid
mosque of the Sultan Hassan, which is the
cathedral of the city, is split from top to
bottom, the roof of the fountain is falling to
pieces, the rich decorations of the walls
threaten to fall on one’s head, the marble
pavement is cracked and out of the square,
and all this for the want of a little money and
labor to keep things in order. Immediately
opposite tins mosque another stands, equally
grand in design, more splendid in scale, and
designed to rise to a greater height, but un-
fortunately it too is a ruin simply because the
funds ran short. One-tenth of the money
already spent would have made the other mosque
what it ought to be and might be —a thing of
beauty ; but the spirit of fatalism has caused
two ruins to testify to its power to curse.
ON THE RIVER.
A trip up the Nile is now brought within the
reach of a much larger number of persons
than formerly. It used to be necessary to hire
a large rowing and sailing boat called a
“ dahabeah,” Such a boat is very comfortable,
and if anyone has plenty of time and money is
still the best way of visiting the land. They are
made to hold four or six or eight persons. The
party must of course have a dragoman, who
looks after everything, who will see to it that
a proper store of fowls, pigeons, and vegetables
is laid in at every village, who will defend
its passengers from clamorous donkey boys, and
will act as interpreter. Under him will be the
captain, the cook, the servants, and the crew.
In the Nile valley the cool north wind blows
more frequently than any other, and such a


boat can sail up the stream without difficulty.
If the winds be perverse the crew will use the
towing rope and pull the boat along, or take to
the oars or the pole. Coming down the stream
is always easy and rapid, for the old Nile current
never tires. Such a boat can be got for four
persons for about £lO per week. A voyage on a
dahabeah will take two or three months, but
the advantage of it is that the traveller can
stop when and where he likes, and have abun-
dant opportunity for reading and writing and
sketching.
COOK AND GAZE.
Most people now go by steamer. The rival
firms of Cook and Gaze have laid hold upon
the valley, and out distance all comers. They
have their own lines of vessels and each firm says
its steamers are the best, its arrangements are
the most complete, and as you read the adver-
tisements one would think that each firm had
the absolute monopoly of the river and that
the other did not exist. The old Pharachnio
spirit of boasting has not quite departed from
Egypt yet. This statement is amply borne
out by a certain clever advertisement, in hiero-
glyphics, with an English interlinear transla-
tion, which I came across. I reproduce the
English verbatim, but unfortunately Adelaide
does not possess a fount of Egyptian type to
give the original.
“King of the Upper and Lower Egypt,
JOHN, Son of the Sun, COOK and his Son,
the Lords of Egypt, the Pharaoh of the boats
of the north and the south, he fills the heart of
his lady in the two countries Majesty her,
VICTORIA,Queen Mistress of lands all living
for ever; made he boats, brought he the
soldiers of Majesty her to Wady Halfah : he,
the great man, lord of the Nile, gives he bread
into the mouths of the people of Thebes.”
A ticket up the Nile and back in one of
Cook’s luxurious steamers cost, last year, £SO.
This provided for 21 days on the voyage, and
included board, lodging, donkeys, backshish,
guides, and everything. A cheaper and quicker
trip may be made by postboat, which starts
from Assiout to Assouan. In this case one
must go to Assiout by train and thence take
the steamer. These boats are more rapid but
inferior in comfort, and do not stop for the
convenience of sightseers. By this means one
may have 14 days on the Nile for £2O, and may
have a good look at Thebes at all events.
You will not be long in Egypt without hear-
ing of the famous duel between the rival firms.
I heard a characteristic story the other day


anenb this. In a village school a visitor was
examining the children, and for want of some
more scholarly question asked the boys,
“Who is the greatest man in the world?”
“The Khedive,” was the answer; “and who
is the next ?” “ Cook,” was the reply. “ Who
is the third?” “Don’t know, sir,” which was
not complimentary to the rival firm.
THE FELAHIN.
As you go through Egypt you will not fail to
be struck with the squalor of the people in the
villages and their unsesthetic appearance. The
houses are mere mud huts. The people have a
sort of hang-dog aspect. Hard work and little
pay seems the rule of the toilsome life of the
Egyptian peasantry. This is no new thing.
It has been the case ever since the Pharaohs of
the pyramids laid violent hands on the labor
necessary for those grand but preposterous
edifices. The common people have always
been the victims of oppression. It is a satis-
faction, however, to know that never in all
their history have they been less oppressed by
Kerty than now ; never have they had more
rty; never have they been more respected
than has been the ease since the battle of Tel-
el-Kebir, when the country passed under
British control. Much yet remains to be done
before Egypt is what it ought to be, but in
dealing with a country which is poised in its
politics as delicately as a spring balance, it is
needful to make haste slowly. England is the
armed protector of the State, but Turkey hates
our wise meddlesome administration, and
France is inflated with jealousy. Every step
that England takes in settling the army, or the
revenue, or the courts of justice is an annoy-
ance and an offence to our excitable Gallic
neighbors. They deliberately made a mistake
in 1882 in letting England in as they did, and
now acknowledge it with bitterness.
THE EEBELLION OP 1882.
To understand the Egypt of to-day I must
tell in brief the story of that memorable year
in the history of the country when the bom-
bardment of Alexandria took place and the
battle of Telel-Kebir was fought in
the land of Goshen. It would be a
very long story if I were to go into de-
tails concerning the political and diplo-
matic events of that year. I must put what I
have to say into a few sentences. The famous,
the clever, but extravagant Khedive, Ismail,
got his finances and his affairs generally into
such confusion that his superior sovereign, the


Porte, was compelled by the English and
French to depose him. Egypt owed so much
money to Europe that it was impossible for the
European nations to let her alone, hence their
action. His eldest son Tewfik, the late Khe-
dive, was appointed in his place. The court
was a nest of intrigue and corruption and lying
and bribery, and the young man thus elevated
to the throne was not to be envied, though he
was the modern successor of the Pharaohs.
Taxes were frightful in amount and severity,
and if a man did not pay he was treated to the
bastinado. The army was recruited by forced
conscription, and when a man went away as a
soldier his fellow villagers mourned over him
as already dead. To avoid conscription it was
no uncommon thing for a man to sacrifice a
finger of his right hand, or even his right eye, so
as to escape the living death that otherwise
threatened him. At this time there arose an
unprincipled upstart who did his best to upset
the Government, to turn out all Europeans,
to repudiate all the debts, and to set himself at
the head of affairs. His name was Arabi and
his post was commander-in-chief. Things got
worse and worse, and before long actual rebel-
lion broke out against the Khedive. The French
and English fleets came into Alexandria and
did their best by quieter means to restore
order. Arabi never calculated that either
fleet would actually fight and went on plotting
against his own sovereign, against the
Europeans, and maturing his plans to murder
all the native Coptic Christians in the upper
valley. He was considerably strengthened by an
untrue version of his movement, which he
persistently represented as the uprising of a
national Egyptian party, and some people in
England were loud and liberal in upholding
him. It is now known that the movement was
nothing of the sort. It was a selfish blood-
thirsty tyrannical plot, as hostile to the
liberties of the people as to the European
residents.
BOMBARDMENT OF ALEXANDRIA.
The two fleets were in the harbor. A paper
warfare was going on, and in the meantime
Arabi was increasing his fortifications and
mounting his guns. He was remonstrated
with and told to stop this aggressive work.
He paid no heed. He was told again and
again, with like result. At last the British
admiral said he would open fire on a certain
day if the work went on. The French admiral
telegraphed for instructions. The answer was
vacillating, and when the memorable time for


united action came, he steamed away toward
Syria. So it came to pass that the British
fleet had to do the whole business alone. The
guns opened fire and the forts were silenced,
and then Arabi’s true plans came out. He
introduced a reign of terror. Alexandria
was full of rapine, murder, and looting,
and the bluejackets had to land
to quell the confusion. Arabi never expected
this, and was surprised to find himself en-
gaged in a war with England, who had come
to the assistance of his own sovereign. All
this took place at Alexandria, and then Arabi
prepared to bar the advance of the British
forces upon Cairo. He raised an entrenched
camp and a few skirmishes took place. Mean-
while the British admiral set sail with nearly
all his forces. It was thought that he was
going to attack Rosetta, but he steamed right
past, took Port Said and the canal, and made
the base of his operations to be Ismailia. This
was a wise and weighty stroke of policy, and
it proved as effectual as it was well contrived.
Arabi had to change his plans forthwith, and
began to concentrate his army on the line of
railway to Cairo. Various smaller battles
took place, and at last the two hosts lay about
seven miles from each other. It was in the
very midst of the land of Gosehen, in the very
line of the ancient march of the Israelites.
Arabi was at Tel-el-Kebir, behind a few strag-
gling mounds rising out of the gravelly plain.
He formed with some skill a strong en-
trenched position. The traveller may see
the lines of his trenches on his right
hand as he rolls along in the railway
to Cairo. Arabi had four times as many
troops as the invaders had, he was close upon
his base of supplies, he had a splendid position,
he was filled with confidence. But he did not
know with whom he had to deal. General
Wolseley was no ordinary foe to meet with,
and with him were a number of others who
were determined to make short work of this
meaningless rebellion.
TEL-EL-KEBIK.
It was the evening of September 12, 1882.
There was no moon and the night was dark.
The English forces were encamped at Kas-
sassim. The camp broke up'in the middle of
the night and began to advance noiselessly
toward Tel-el-Kebir. No lights of any kind
were lighted, no word was spoken, the orders
were whispered from rank to rank. It was
not easy in the darkness to keep line, but the
troops, did so fairly well. They came on to


within a few hundred yards of the enemy’s re-
doubts and saw the dawn was beginning to
tinge the east. The word of command went
forth, they were not to fire but to take all the
works at once at the point of the bayonet. All
was ready and the word “Forward” was
given, and then with a wild cheer the whole
army advanced. The surprise was complete.
Arabi had never dreamt of a midnight march.
Of course there was resistance. In some
quarters the Egyptians fought desperately, but
in half an hour the whole line of the forts, with
all the guns was taken. The battle of Tel-el-
Kebir was gained and Egypt was saved from
itself. Arabi mounting his horse put spurs to
its flank and rode so hard toward Cairo that
his horse dropped down dead. Had
that victory been delayed three days,
one of the bloodiest massacres on
record would have been perpetrated, for Arabi
had already given his orders for the butchery
of the 250,000 Copts in Upper Egypt, and
other calamities would have followed. His
wild purpose was the absolute destruction of
Christianity in both Upper and Lower Egypt,
and embraced the slaughter of all the native
Christians, as well as the expulsion of all
foreigners, French and Italian as well as Eng-
lish. This plan embraced the looting of the
freat museum in Cairo, the burning of the
luropean quarter in that city, and the creation
of a chaos like to but far greater than, that of
Alexandria. This last danger was averted in a
curious fashion. I mentioned that Arabi
escaped towards Cairo. Wolseley knew nob
what mischief he might be up to there. There
was the great citadel and a large garrison was
quartered behind its walls. The fortress was
invincible except by modern artillery. Arabi
entrenched there, in the very centre of things,
would have been an awkward factor to deal
with.
After the battle the cavalry was ordered to
move forward. They numbered about 900, and
rode hard and fast till they came to the heights
of Abbassiyeh, with Cairo full in view. Both
men and horses were dead beat. They were
sure to be discovered very soon, and if dis-
covered attacked, and they were utterly un-
able to show fight. Eight thousand men fresh
and hostile lay within the city. What was to
lie done? And now we meet with another
illustration of that strange quality of the
British race which we may call “coolness,” or
“ boldness,” or “ cheek,” just as we like. They
wanted at all events to gain time, and while
doing that thought they might do a little


more as well. These wearied men sent an in-
stant summons to the garrison to surrender
immediately and unconditionally. A reply
came back —the city was willing to do so. The
8,000 submitted to the 900. But now what
was to be done? How were they to accept
surrender without awakening treachery when
they manifested their own absurd weakness ?
One hundred and fifty of the least tired horses
were selected, and these were told off for a
further ride to the citadel —some five miles
away, on the other side of the city. Major
Watson was at their head. They came to the
city, passed through the gate and up through
the narrow streets of Cairo, right up to the
massive gates of the fortress. In those alleys,
overhung by long rows of windows, it would
not have been difficult to cut off every one of
that small band. They passed the great mosque
and halted at the angry gate. Leaving his men
there drawn up in file, Major Watson walked
in, with the Egyptian troops watching him on
every hand. “ Where is the commandant ?”
asked the major. “ Asleep,” was the reply.
“ Then go and wake him up and tell him to
surrender.” They obeyed the first order, and
the commandant came—sleepy, but servile.
“ Will you kindly turn your men out and hand
me the keys ?” said the Englishman. “ Cer-
tainly,” said the Egyptian; “ certainly.” And
it came to pass that within the hour, and with
abundant apologies for being so slow in pack-
ing up, that the army of 8,000 of the soldiers of
Arabi filed out and down the hill, and the 150
tired Britishers, who could hardly sit in their
saddles and had been waiting lying on the
ground, passed in and took possession of the
grand old fortress. The major is an Irishman,
and when he tells the story adds as his own
comment —“And they ca-al that foightin’.”
I often thought of that scene as I wandered
about that palace and fort. The British
soldiers are there still. The gilded halls of the
citadel palace are turned into barrack hospital
rooms, and on more than one Sunday I have
gone to visit the patients there, and in the
great durbar chamber or hall of assembly I
have been twice called upon to conduct service
among our troops. I trust that they may
never leave that citadel at the dictation of
French jealousy or religious suspicion ; never
through mere European diplomacy or political
bribery ; never till the work be properly done
which has been set before our nation by a
Divine Providence—the work of restoring
Egypt to herself and awakening self-respect in
her own conscience.


SIGNS OF PROGRESS.
Already immense progress has been made in
needful reforms. British energy and justice
have been called in to control the finances,
the public works department, the Customs,
and above all the army. The courts of
justice have been taken in hand since I
left in spite of the silly protest of France.
The museum is still open to much needful
change and reform, but those will come. I
mentioned just now how the army used to be
recruited by forced conscription. Three years
after the occupation in 1882 Sir Evelyn Wood
was the “sirdar,” or commander-in-chief. His
successor, Sir Francis Grenfell, told me how
one day Sir Evelyn asked the railway authori-
ties for free passes for all his troops. He
wanted to give them a holiday to visit their
native villages. The authorities were amazed
and thought he was a fool. “You will lose
your whole army, they will never come back —
the slaves will run.” “We shall see,” said
Sir Evelyn. “ Give me the passes, and I shall
expect all the men back at their posts and in
their cantonments on such a date.” He got
the passss, and all the men turned up after
enjoying a pleasant holiday, the first in the
history of this down-trodden land. He then
went on to tell me how at the battle of Tel-el-
Kebir he had seen evidences how some of the
soldiers of Arabi had been tethered by a chain
to the gun they served. I asked Sir Francis
the last time I saw him how he was getting on
now with his new Egyptian army. 44 1 have got,”
he said, 44 four whole regiments of volunteers,
and could get more if I wanted them.” May
God grant that England may not surrender the
duty put upon her, till the work is done and
Egypt has taken her place among the free and
progressive nationsof the world.
f? ,
|0 JUN/993 1/5 );
V A </ II


■
■
, .


APPENDIX.
Report on Commission concerning Egyptian Antiquities for the
South Australian Museum, presented to His Excellency
THE FARL OF KiNTOEE.
1. On the Bth day of January, 1890, I received your Excellency’s
commission, given under the seal of this province, requiring me “to
inquire in Egypt, Syria, Europe, or in England or elsewhere as to
the best means of procuring objects of archaeological interest, illustrative
of ancient Egyptian or Babylonian civilisation, and generally to do and
execute all other matters and things whatsoever deemed necessary by
me for the accomplishment of the duties entrusted to me by this
commission.”
2. In carrying out the duties thus entrusted to me I spent two
months in Egypt at the commencement of the year 1890, visiting Cairo,
and thence ascending the Nile to the First Cataract. I was most
courteously received by Sir Evelyn Baring, Her Majesty’s Ambassador
to the Court of the Khedive, and by him introduced to Sir Colin Scott
Moncrief, the head of the Department of Public Works, and to General
Sir Francis Grenfell, the commander-in-chief of the Egyptian army.
Both of these gentlemen are members of the board which has charge of
the antiquities of the country, and to both of them your Excellency’s
commission was an object of much interest. Sir Francis Grenfell is
himself an enthusiastic Egyptologist, who has devoted much time and
money to exploration, and he entered with much cordiality into my
plans for obtaining information which might be of real service to the
colony. I had the pleasure and the privilege of voyaging with him up
the Nile from Cairo to Philae, and during my passage up that valley, so
crowded with archaeological mementoes, I was materially assisted by
him in understanding the difficult problems that were presented to me.
Through him I was also introduced to Dr. Emil Brugsch Bey, a
recognised authority on ancient Egypt, and the sub-director of the
museum at Cairo. Mons. Grebaut, the director, was not in town.
3. I found on inquiry that a stringent law is in force to prevent the
exportation of objects of antiquity through unauthorised channels.
This law is inoperative as respects small articles, however valuable they
may be, as no examination is made of passenger’s luggage when leaving
the country. Hence jewels, scarabs, and papyri of great value are
continually finding their way to the public and private collections of
Europe and America. When, however, numerous examples exist of
any special work of art permission is freely given by the authorities of
the Ghizeh Museum for their removal to foreign countries, and the
goods, after being examined, are sealed in their packages by the
directors. This law is a wholesome check upon the of the
Arabs, and on the undue scattering of those treasures of antiquity, the
best of which ought to be collected in the capital of the country where
they are found.


4. The famous museum of Boulak is no more. The building became
far too small for its purpose, and its contents have been removed to the
showy and roomy palace of Ghizeh, on the other side of the Nile. Here
the objects are displayed to great advantage, and there is abundance of
room for additions; but every lover of antiquity is alarmed as he notes
the fragile character of the building. It is by no means fireproof, and,
in a time of political riot, might be easily entered and looted. The
antique jewels and gems are of sufficient value, even to an untaught
mob, to be a dangerous temptation.
5. The directors, being anxious to encourage the study of Egyptian
antiquity, have arranged for the sale of casts of some of the most noted
sculptures in the collection. These, for educational purposes, are quite
as good as the originals. They have also opened one chamber for the
sale of genuine antiques, selected from their enormous stock of
duplicates. This is a guarantee to the inexperienced purchaser that he
is not being made the victim of some clever forger. I'here are so many
forged articles, especially scarabs, in the market that great skill and
caution are required in making a bargain with the native dealers, and
it is well to avoid them altogether, unless under the guidance of a
practised judge of Egyptian antiquities.
6. Before I left Cairo I obtained a promise that the Archaeological
Department of the Government would not only give me information in
reply to the “ inquiries” which I was instructed to make, but would
consider the question of presenting the colony which I represented with
some articles of educational value. I was made aware, however,
that grave difficulties existed to prevent any such favor being shown to
a British colony, and that it was not wise to arouse the suspicious
sensitiveness of other nations, who also have colonies, and who are not
altogether favorable to the predominance of British influence in the
valley of the Nile. I could not deny the existence of these difficulties,
of which I had abundant evidence, and could at that time do nothing
more than express my thanks to my patrons for their good intentions,
and my hopes that they would be able to treat me generously.
7. Shortly after my arrival in London, I received a letter from Sir
Colin Scott Moncrief, enclosing one from the “ President of the Council
of Ministers ” written in French and Arabic. The French form of it is
as follows = —“ Sur la demands faite par le Ministers des Travaux
Publics dans sa note ci contre en date du 11 Juin, 1890, No. 61, le
Conseil des Ministres a, dans sa seance du Lundi 28 Charral, 1307 (16
Juin, 1890), approve la cession par le Gouvernment Egyptien a la
colonie Anglaise du Sud de I’Australia d’une partie des nombreuses
anticpiites Egyptiennes dont I’Egypt pent se dispenser, comme il est
explique dans la susdite note. Je prie votre Excellence de vouloir bien
donner a cette decision la suite qu’elle comporte.” This letter was
addressed to the Minister of Public Works, and bears date June 18th,
1890. I replied stating that I would again visit Cairo in the following
November, when I should be happy to confer with the directors of the
museum, and to receive on behalf of the colony the gifts so generously
offered.
8. Shortly after I had arrived in London I put myself in communica-
tion with the officials of the Egyptian Exploration Society, whose
offices are situated at No. 17 Oxford Mansions. I obtained much
valuable information, but was told that the antiques which the
Egyptian Government allows the Society to take away from Egypt are
the property of the subscribers, and are annually distributed among the
different countries according: to the amount of money given locally by
the constituency of the society. I was gratified to learn that some


valuable art treasures have been sent to Sydney, where some liberal
subscribers have their residence. If subscriptions are sent from South
Australia a proportionate share of the results of any future excavations
will in due time be allotted to this colony.
9. I paid several visits to the British Museum. The collection of
objects of Egyptian, and especially Assyrian, antiquity is of unique
interest. The directors of the museum do not profess either to give or
sell anything they possess. They have arranged, however, with Signor
Brucciaui, of 40 Russell Street, Covent Garden, to provide casts of a
great number of the best of the ancient marbles and bronzes in the
museum. These can be obtained at a very moderate cost, and would be
of great value in our local museum. Among these casts are to be found
reproductions of Assyrian, Grecian, and Roman marbles, as well as of
the statues and inscriptions which have been brought from Egypt. I
visited the workshops and saw the stock of casts, and I obtained a
priced catalogue of the works which Signor Brucciani executes for the
museum. I did not go to Paris, but I learned that casts of sculptures in
the Louvre can easily be obtained there.
10. I was fortunate in meeting in London with Mr. W. Elinders
Petrie, who has already done so much for the study of Egyptology by
his numerous explorations and discoveries. He had but recently
returned from Egypt, having been engaged for some months excavating
the ruins at the mouth of the Fayoum. He had brought back with him
a large collection, the greater part of which was the property of two
gentlemen at whose expense he had been sent out to Egypt. At his
suggestion I communicated with these gentlemen, and one of them,
W. 0. Hughes Hughes, Esq., 5 Highbury Quadrant, responded with
great generosity. He offered me what was certainly the most interest-
ing object in the collection, viz.: the fragments of a lintel or stela of
Thotmes 111., from Garob, at the entrance to_ the Fayoum. The
fragments are covered with inscriptions, which will be fully explained
in Mr. Petrie’s forthcoming book entitled, “ Illahum.” Mr. Hughes
also gave me a case filled with antique pottery of various ages, which I
have not yet been able to examine.
11. I was tempted to go beyond the authority given in your
Excellency’s commission, and refund to Mr. Petrie the cost already
incurred in the transport of some few articles from Egypt, and which
he generously offered to give me if I would accept them. These I have
offered to the Board of the South Australian Museum on the mere
payment of the expenses incurred. The shipment of all these articles
was undertaken by Sir Arthur Blyth. .
12. In November last I again visited Cairo. I found that during
my absence a number of casts had been prepared, which were offered
for my acceptance. These I gladly took possession of, and arranged for
their packing and shipment to Adelaide. Dr. Emil Brugsch Bey was
then in charge of the museum at Ghizeh, during the absence of Mons.
Grebaut on sick leave. Mons. Grebaut did not return in time for me
to confer with him, and, in his absence, Dr. Brugsch Bey could not
apportion to me any of the promised originals. He undertook, however,
to arrange with Mons. Grebaut, and forward a parcel to me in
13. Mr. Flinders Petrie came to Cairo while I was there, and greatly
assisted me in making a few purchases in Cairo, which I brought away
* Since this report was written I have received a large parcel of antiques,
which will be arranged as soon as the completion of the new wing to the
Adelaide Museum affords the much wanted room.


under the seal of the Egyptian Government, and which I also offer to
the South Australian Museum at cost price. He urged me strongly to
secure for the colony photographs of the monuments and inscriptions of
Egypt before the valuable remains of antiquity are spoilt by the
numerous clumsy depredators who attack them. This, however, I did
not feel justified in doing without more specific instructions.
14, All these various articles and curiosities have arrived in South
Australia, and have been delivered to the custody of the museum, and I
trust in due time arrangements will be made for their being made
available to the public of this colony.
15. I trust that my efforts to make such inquiries as your Excellency
enjoined upon me will meet with your approval. I regret that in con-
sequence of the short interval between the receipt of your Excellency’s
commission and my departure I was not able to confer with the Board
of the museum as to the best course for me to follow in order to carry
out your Excellency’s injunctions. I hope, however, that a beginning,
however small, has been made of an antiquarian department of our
national museum, which may ultimately embrace antiquities from
other countries besides Egypt, and that the presence among the
colonists of South Australia of even a small collection of objects, which
may remind them of the great nations that have passed away, will prove
of benefit to all.
WM. EOBY FLETCHER, M.A.
Adelaide, April 24th, 1891
||ii J nH
Burden & Bbuython, Printers, Advertiser Office, Adelaide.




*
■
