



ELAINE IN THE FOREST
R ight , on the edge of a big forest there was one of the
prettiest cottages you could imagine. In it lived little
Eia ine and her mother and father. The garden was large, with
wide lawns, and beds of lovely flowers.
You would have thought
Elaine would have been happy to
Is, but this was not so. She badly
play there all day with her dol
wanted to explore the forest,
could do so, her parents said,
Of course when she asked if she
"No."
For weeks and weeks Elaine longed to know what it was
like in the forest, and then, one day, when no one was looking,
she climbed over the wall, and slipped quietly among the trees.


C 17025
Very soon she was deep in the forest with the great trees
casting gloomy shadows all round her. She almost wished she
had not come, but curiosity drove her on. The further she went
the darker and quieter it became.
Suddenly a shrill hoot echoed through the trees. Elaine
stopped in terror, with a cold, prickly feeling running down her
spine. Fearfully raising her eyes, she saw above her, a huge
squat owl looking crossly at her from among the branches. She
ran from him in terror.


She was now in the heart of the forest. How she would
have loved to have found herself safely home once more!
The trees seemed to close around her, and reach out long-
fingered hands to snatch at her! She felt they had turned into
big ugly monsters with horrible, snarling faces.
All around her the forest was unfriendly and terrifying.


f
Elaine was now thoroughly frightened, and looked round
for a way of escape. She ran this way and that, but everywhere
there were trees. She had long ago wandered from the path
that led into the forest from the garden wall.
Suddenly, as she raced helter skelter in the direction from
which she thought she must have come, her foot caught in the
root of a tree, and she tumbled head over heels down a slope
into a little valley.


Over and over Elaine rolled, until she came to rest In a
small clearing.
"Ho! Ho! My little one. And where do you come from?"
big, booming voice demanded.
Ela ine looked up, and there she saw a dear little house on 1
wheels, which you know is called a caravan. Sitting on the top
door step was a fat, kindly, old man, peering at her in surprise.
Near him on the fire his dinner was cooking in a large iron pot.
Beside him stood his axe, with which he cut wood for a living.


Elaine was so glad to see someone friendly that she blurted
out the whole story.
"I came into the woods when I was told not to," she cried
in a trembling voice, "and now lam lost. Oh, I wish I'd done
as mummy and daddy told me!"
"You are right, my dear," said the old man. "You should
never do anything your parents tell you is wrong or not good
for you. They want to keep you safe and well, and see that
you grow up a good girl. They always know what is best for
you. You see now what trouble you get into when you disobey."
The old man smiled at Elaine. "And now I will give you
something to eat, and then take you home before your parents
miss you," he added.


Quickly the old man prepared a meal for Elaine. The little
girl was so hungry after her adventures that she ate it eagerly.
Very soon, however, tiredness overcame her, and she had
hardly finished eating before her eyes closed, and she was sound
asleep. •
The forest round her was no longer unfriendly, and seemed
to smile down on the child as she lay curled up on the grassy
bank.


V ' - \ V '% \ Wjl MM \ yK« y /// 1
Tenderly the old man gathered Elaine in his arms. Soon
he was striding through the forest with her towards her home,
singing a little lullaby as he went.
The rays of the late afternoon sun glinted through the
branches on to the pathway, and seemed to dance before him.


Reaching her cottage wall the old man gently lifted Elaine
over, and put her down under a tall gum tree. Then he quietly
stole away.
Shortly afterwards Elaine awoke with a start to find herself
home
"I must have been dreaming," she murmured, "but it seems
as though it really happened," for her old friend's advice was
still ringing in her ears.
Then she jumped to her feet and ran in doors, to find that
her parents had not missed her.


Elaine was never quite sure afterwards whether it was aH
dream or not. But she made up her mind, that whatever
happened in the future she would not disobey her parents again.
So you see she really learnt her lesson.
Instead of looking over the wall and longing to explore the
forest, she invented games to play in the garden, and had great
fun giving her dolls tea parties.


1 1 1 /09B8 ml { t\. T / H
jaBBPW MTJm
\jjB
Mi/ if VmP
tLAi I ’W AT __ > j^Jw
mUJil y
A 'JitSk
i» mr~ r vt *P
Copyright 1944
Published by
FRANK JOHNSON
350 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY. AUSTRALIA
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by The Pinnacle Press, 431 B Kent Street, Sydney.
