

Electoral Reform.
AN EXPOSITION OP THE THEORY AND
PRACTICE OP PROPORTIONAL
REPRESENTATION.
By E. J. NAN SON, M.A.,
PROFESSOR OF MATHEMATICS IN THE UNIVERSITY
OF MELBOURNE.
MELBOURNE:
T. E. VERGA, PRINTER, 154 LIT. COLLINS STREET.




t7 'ftfp S\6LIO
(Tlic (tbconi imb Mriuticc
0 0 -o IK
Proportional
PROFESSOR NANSON.




PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION.
are two systems of election now in force in Vic-
toria. First, the block vote which was used in the Federal
Convention election, and is now proposed for the election of
Federal Senators. Second, the one-member district system which
is in general use in English speaking countries for political
elections, and is now proposed for the election of Federal Repre-
sentatives.
Neither of these systems ensures the rule of the majority,
and on this point we have the teachings of experience as well as
the reasons of the scientist. In both systems the party which
is in a minority in the State may secure a majority of the seats
in the Elected House. But in the block system this evil is
aggravated by the fact that a minority of the voters may elect
the whole of the members. It is not merely that the will of the
majority of the people may be thwarted, that majority may be
wholly excluded from Parliament. This is what must inevitably
happen when the minority votes solidly on a ticket, and the
majority scatters its votes by running too many candidates.
The object of reformers is to remedy this defect, and to ensure
that the party which is in a majority in the State shall also be
in a majority in the Elected House. The reformers also secure
that the party which is in a minority in the State is also repre-
sented in the House, but by a minority as it ought to be, by
a minority proportional to its strength in the State. This is but
right and just, and that it is right and just has always been recog-
nised by such Statesmen as Bright, Gladstone, and Disraeli.
These Statesmen always strongly opposed the block vote because
they knew it was unjust, and they supported the district system
because they believed it would produce equity. That these
Statesmen were mistaken in their belief has now been abun-
dantly proved by experience.


Of this experience the most notable example occurred in 1871,
at Newhaven, U.S., when 42 Municipal Councillors were elected
in 42 one-member districts. In the whole electoral body the
Republicans were to the Democrats as 26 to 16, but in the Coun-
cil Chamber the Republicans were to the Democrats as 14 to 28.
Thus, the votes cast were practically as 2 to i, whilst the mem-
ders elected were as Ito 2. A striking example also occurred at
Geneva in 1841. Here, the Liberals were in a majority, and the
Conservatives in a minority. But the Conservatives carried
threee-fourths of the seats, each by a narrow majority, whilst the
Liberals carried one-fourth of the seats each by an overwhelming
majority. Thus, the party which was in a minority in the Canton
had a majority of 3tol in the Elected House. The intense dis-
satisfaction caused by this glaring injustice had no little influence
in bringing about the revolution of 1846.
The object of the Statesmen mentioned was the rule of the
majority combined with a fair representation of the minority.
This object can be attained in one way only. That way is the
use of the preferential or contingent vote and the use of the prin-
ciple of the quota. By these means, properly applied, all votes
can be made practically equal, and the rule of the majority can
be assured.
All the elector is concerned with is the method of voting.
It is an insult to say that a Victorian cannot understand this,
for the preferential or contingent vote is used all over Queens-
land. To the uninitiated the method of getting out the result
of the election is apparently complicated, but to the initiated
it is perfectly simple and straightforward. To the elector this
is a matter of little or no concern. The citizen who drops a
letter into the pillar-box need not, and often does not, know
the details of the process by which that letter reaches its
destination. The passenger by the ocean greyhound knows but
little of all the vast mechanism by which he is carried safely
into port. The real question, the essential point, is this. Is
the method true, does it do what it professes, is it fair to all
concerned ? Such are the important issues now before the
intellectual and political leaders of Victoria.
To ensure electoral freedom the preferential or contingent
vote must be used. Each elector has one, and only one, vote.
The voter is furnished with a list of all the candidates. He


marks the candidate he likes best with the figure “ one,” the
candidate he likes second best with the figure “ two, ” the
next with the figure “ three,” and so on, to just as many
names as he pleases. But the voter who fails to mark all
the names runs the risk of throwing away his vote. The
object of the preferential vote is to prevent waste of voting power
which may occur in two distinct ways. First, by splitting
which happens when a party runs too many candidates and loses
through scattering its votes. Second, by concentration which
happens when a party polls for a popular candidate, votes far and
away in excess of those necessary to secure his election. Of con-
centration a good example is furnished by the Convention election,
in which Sir George Turner polled twice the number of votes neces-
sary to secure his election. Here was a great waste of voting power,
of power that might have elected to the Convention a second
Labour candidate or a representative of the country party. By
using the preferential vote the individual elector secures freedom,
freedom to vote as he thinks right without risk of losing his vote,
freedom from the toils of the machine politician without whose
aid and guidance he is at present like a mariner without a
compass.
To secure electoral equality or one vote one value the prin-
ciple of the quota must be used. The quota is the smallest
number of votes which entitles a candidate to election. It is
found by dividing the whole number of valid votes by one more
than the number of seats and increasing the quotient by one.
All votes polled by a candidate in excess of the quota are of no
use to him. The principle of the quota asserts that in a one-
member district any party with more than half the votes is
entitled to the seat. In a two-member district it asserts that
any party with more than one-third of the votes is entitled to
one of the seats. In a three-member district it asserts that any
party with more than one-fourth of the votes is entitled to one ot
the seats, and so on. Thus, in a seven-member district a party
with more than one-eighth of the votes is entitled to one of the
seats ; a party with more than two-eighths or one-fourth of the
votes is entitled to two seats; a party with more than three-
eighths of the votes is entitled to three seats; and a party with
more than four-eighths or one-half of the votes is entitled to
four of the seats.
The principle of the quota then secures the direct representa-
tion of all prominent parties in the State, of each in proportion


to its strength. It means, therefore, the rule of the majority.
It means, practically, one vote one value throughout the State.
The quota is the true price in votes of a seat in Parliament. The
The principle of the quota practically secures the election of all
members on the same terms. In systems in which there is no
quota, members are elected on far different terms. In the Con-
vention election Sir George Turner paid nearly twice the price
in votes paid by Mr. Higgins. At the general election in
February, 1883, in Victoria, 813 votes sufficed, on the average, to
seat a Constitutionalist in the one-member districts, but 2468
votes were required, on the average, to seat a Radical.
The object of the preferential quota system is to enable the
voters to divide themselves into as many absolutely equal
unanimous electorates or quotas as there are seats to be filled.
The voters begin by dividing themselves, by means of the
“ ones” written on their voting papers, into as many unanimous
groups or electorates as there are candidates. The groups so
formed are in the first place unequal in size, and in the second
place, they are too numerous. There are then two things to
be done. First, the groups which are too large are to be cut
down in size. Second, the number of groups is to be diminished
by weeding out the weakest. Now, these two things are done by
the electors themselves by means of the preferential vote. The
Returning Officer is merely the agent of the electors in this
matter. He obeys the definite written instructions of the voters,
and by carrying out those instructions he effects the requisite
cutting down and weeding out. There are two simple principles
which govern the whole process. First, whenever any group
exceeds the quota, that is, whenever more than a quota of voters
agree in supporting the same candidate, then each member of
that group transfers an equitable portion of his vote to the
candidate he likes next best. This is the cutting down process.
Second, when no group exceeds the quota, that is, when no
candidate has more than a quota of supporters, then the candi-
date with the smallest number of votes retires, and his sup-
porters transfer their votes to the candidate they like next best.
This is the weeding-out process. It is the principle of the ex-
haustive ballot in its simplest form.
In the cutting-down process Gregory’s principle is applied.
Supposing that a candidate has two quotas of votes it is clear
that he only requires half the vote of each of his supporters.


Hence, each of his supporters transfers half his vote to the candi-
date he likes next best.
Similarly, if a candidate has a quota and a half, he requires
two-thirds of the vote of each of his supporters. In this case
then each of his supporters transfers one-third of his vote to the
candidate he likes next best.
The weeding-out process is perfectly simple, both in theory and
practice. It is now partially in force in Queensland. It is
merely the principle of the “ Second Ballot ” carried out in an
eminently practicable form to its logical conclusion.
In each of these processes a parcel of voting papers is divided
into a number of smaller parcels. Every step of the election is
merely a sub-division of this kind. The very first step in an elec-
tion is a case in point. The one parcel of voting papers formed
by the ballot box is broken up into as many smaller parcels as
there are candidates, all the papers having the same name
marked “ one ” forming a smaller parcel by themselves.
When a candidate is excluded or weeded out he may have a
number of parcels of voting papers. These are broken up and
distributed, one after the other, in the order in which they came
to him.
When several candidates have each more than a quota of votes
their surpluses are distributed in succession, first the largest, then
then the next largest, and so on.
When any surplus exists it is distributed before any further
exclusion or weeding out takes place. But, nevertheless, any
distribution of votes once entered upon is completed, notwith-
standing that a surplus or surpluses may thereby be created.
When by breaking up and distributing any parcel a candidate
is raised above the quota, no papers are transferred to that can-
didate from any subsequent parcel. The object of this simple
rule is to avoid all unnecessary handling and rehandling of voting
papers.
For a similar reason when a candidate with a surplus has more
than one parcel the Gregory principle is applied, not to the whole
of his parcels, but only to the last parcel which came to him, to
the parcel which actually raised him above the quota. Any votes
that he has just before the receipt of this last parcel are perma-
nently retained as part of his quota. In this way the number of
papers which have to be dealt with on the Gregory principle is


reduced to a minimum. Thus, a candidate may have, say, half
a dozen parcels and be short of the quota by 20 votes. If a
seventh parcel of papers, equivalent to 30 votes, now comes to
him from any source he only needs two-thirds of the strength of
each of these papers. Accordingly, the whole of the papers in
the seventh parcel are handed on, each to the next name thereon,
each with one-third of its previous value. This previous value,
be it observed, is necessarily the same for all the papers in the
parcel.
By these two processes, the process of cutting down and the
process of weeding out, the electors build up for themselves
absolutely equal unanimous groups, or quotas, each returning
one member. That they cannot built up more groups than are
required is obvious from the principle of the quota. They
will generally build up exactly the number of groups required.
But if many of the electors fail to exercise all their prefer-
ences the required number of groups may not be obtained.
Should this be the case the remaining seats are filled by a dif-
ferent process. In no circumstances is any candidate elected on
less than a quota of votes. The seats for which a quota has not
been obtained are filled one after the other, each by a candidate
elected by an absolute majority of the whole of the voters. For
the seats to be filled in this way all candidates as yet unelected
enter into competition. The matter is settled by a reference to the
whole of the voting papers. If any unelected candidate now
stands first on an absolute majority of all these papers he is
elected. But if not, then the weeding-out process is applied
until a absolute majority is obtained. The candidate who gets
the absolute majority is elected. Should there be another
seat, the same process is repeated. If an absolute majority
of the whole of the voters cannot be obtained for any candi-
date, then the candidate who comes nearest to the absolute
majority is elected.
Those who desire to test the proportional scheme for them-
selves, those who desire to obtain a thorough grip of the subject,
cannot do better than go through the whole of the details of an
election, real or imaginary, conducted by themselves. To all
such persons, and it is hoped that they may be numerous, a few
practical suggestions may be offered.
Voting cards, not voting papers, should be used. Separate
boxes should be provided to hold, in their proper order, the


parcels of each candidate. Elastic bands should be used to keep
together all cards belonging to the same parcel. The parcels
are to be dealt with one at a time. No two parcels are ever to be
re-united into a single parcel. The election is a process of dis-
integration all through. Blank cards should be provided to be
tied up with each parcel shewing (a) the owner of the parcel, ( b )
the common value of each card in the parcel. A record should
be kept of every step which is taken. In commercial lan-
guage every transfer should be journalised and the proper
debit and credit entries made in the ledger. There should be
in the ledger an account for (a) ballot box, ( b ) each candidate,
(c) lost votes. The ledger must balance at every stage of the
election. In making ledger entries all fractions are to be omitted.
Lost votes arise through electors failing to express sufficient pre-
ferences. When there is no next name to which a paper can be
transferred, the paper becomes exhausted. On the exclusion of a
candidate an exhausted paper becomes a lost paper. On the
election of a candidate an exhausted paper is not necessarily lost.
The unexhausted part of the parcel which produces a surplus
may, or may not, be less than the surplus. In the former case all
the unexhausted papers in the parcel are handed on to the next
name, and some exhausted papers become lost, In the latter
case Gregory’s principle is applied to the unexhausted part of the
parcel and no papers are lost.
The full details of an imaginary election are given for the satis-
faction of those who desire details. They are given in order to
shew that the working out is a mere piece of arithmetic in which
every step is taken in obedience to a simple and just law, and that
nothing is left to chance or to the discretion of a Returning Officer
who might possibly wish to take a hand. The whole process can
be audited like the books of a commercial institution, and, in
fact, every intelligent elector who looks carefully into the pub-
lished results is a possible auditor. It is to be emphasised that
a knowledge of the various details is of no more practical import-
ance to the average elector than is a knowledge of the mechanism
of a locomotive engine to the railway passenger. The passenger
takes his ticket in full confidence that he will be carried safely
to his destination. So the elector may cast his preferential vote
with full confidence that it will travel unerringly to its final desti-
nation.


To shew how the scheme may work out in practice imagine an
election to select 7 out of 15 candidates. Borrowing a nomen-
clature devised by Miss Spence, let there be 5 parties, as shewn
in the Table, constituted as fallows :—
Colour, with 35 voters and 4 candidates, one of whom, White, is
popular, and polls 24 “ ones.”
Form, with 44 voters and 4 candidates, one of whom, Square,
is strongest in popular favour and polls 32 “ ones.”
Place, with 20 voters and 3 candidates.
Qualities, with 14 voters and 2 candidates.
Pursuits, with 12 voters and 2 candidates.
Colour
35
Form
44
Place
20
Quali-
ties
14
Pur-
suits
12
White
Black
Yellow
CD
Square
■a “
a : O
0 1 13
« O
Oval
City
Town
Village
Justice
Mercy
Science
c
<
I.
24
6
3
2
32
-16
5 4
10 3
3
3
9
7
4
11
3
10
2
II.
24
-8
6
2
3
3
2
3
16
!5 7
6
9
7
4
11
3
10
2
III.
16
8
3
6
2
5
-5
16
*5 7
3 3
6
-6
9
2
7
2
4
-4
11
3
3
-3
10
2
2
-2
IV.
16
11
8
16
18 10
-2 2
n
9
14
12
V.
16
11
6
8
-8
16
16 : 12
11
9
14
2
12
VI.
16
i?
-1
16
16 12
n
9
16
12
1
VII.
16
16
16
16 12
i 2
11
7
9
-9
16
13
VIII.
16
16
16
16 14
2
18
- 2
16
13
IX.
16
16
16
16 1 16
1
16
16
13


There are in all 125 voters. As there are seven seats, and
each voter has one vote only, any candidate who gets 16 votes
is sure of election. For, when seven candidates have each got
16 votes there are only 13 left out of the 125 for an eighth man.
This number, 16, is found by dividing 125 by 8, that is by one
more than the number of seats, and increasing the quotient by
one. The number so found is called the “ quota.”
The numbers of “ ones ” or votes polled by the various can-
didates are shewn in line 1. of the Table, which therefore shews
the “ first state of the poll.”
In an actual election in Victoria this “ first state of the poll ”
could be arrived at with the same rapidity as was the result of
the recent poll on the Commonwealth Bill. In both cases but
one fact has to be gleaned from each voting paper. The results
from all parts of the colony would be posted in Collins Street
on election day. These results would shew exactly how the cat
was going to jump. The final results, as regards parties, would
be obvious to all observers, although the results as regards indi-
vidual candidates would be far from clear. But this, although
of vast importance to the candidates themselves, would be a
matter of small concern to the great mass of the people.
Square and White having both polled more than the quota are
elected. Each has a surplus or excess over the quota. The
former has a surplus of 16, and the latter has a surplus of 8.
These surpluses are now to be distributed—first, the larger one,
then the smaller one.
Square has 32 votes, but only requires 16 to elect him. He
therefore needs exactly half a vote from each of his 32 sup-
porters. Therefore, each of the 32 has half his vote left for the
candidate he likes next best. Accordingly, each of the 32
voting papers is handed on, each with the value one-half, each
to the next name thereon. It is found, on looking at these 32
papers that on 20 of them Round is marked “ two,” on 6 Oblong
is marked “ two,” on 6 Oval is marked “ two.” Thus, Round
receives from Square 20 voting papers, each valued at one-half.
This gives Round 10 more votes, and so Round rises from 5 to
15. Similarly Oblong rises from 4 to 7, and Oval from 3 to 6.
Thus we get the “ second state of the poll ” shewn in line
ii. of the Table.
Next, White’s surplus has to be distributed. White has 24
votes, but only requires 16 to elect him. He therefore needs


exactly two-thirds of a vote from each of his 24 supporters.
Therefore, each of the 24 has one-third of bis vote left for
the candidate he likes next best. Accordingly, each of the 24
voting papers is handed on, each with the value one-third, each
to the next name thereon. It is found on looking at these 24
papers that on 6 of them Black is marked “two,” on 9 Yellow
is marked “ two,” on 9 Red is marked “ two.” Thus, Black
receives from White 6 voting papers each valued at one-third.
This gives Black 2 more votes, and so Black rises from 6 to 8.
Similarly Yellow rises from 3to 6, and Red from 2 to 5. Thus,
we get the “ third state of the poll ” shewn in line in. of the
Table.
No candidates except White and Square have now so much
as the quota. Hence, the exhaustive ballot now comes into play.
The lowest on the poll retires. Thus, Art with 2 votes retires.
These 2 votes are not wasted but used to help Pursuits, the two
voters having naturally given their second preference to
Science. Mercy is now the lowest with 3 votes. He retires and
the 3 votes are not wasted but used to help Qualities to elect
Justice. Village is now lowest with 4 votes, and therefore retires.
These 4 votes naturally help Place, and go, in accordance with
the instructions of the voters, 2to Town and 2 to City. At this
stage Red is lowest with 5 votes. These go, 3 to Black, 2 to
Yellow. Oval is now lowest with 6 votes and these pass, 3 to
Round, and 3to Oblong. In disposing of Red’s 5 votes we dis-
tribute first the 2 votes he got from the ballot box, then the g
papers, each with the value one-third, which he got from White,
and in disposing of Oval’s 6 votes we distribute first the 3 votes
he got from the ballot-box, then the 6 papers, each with the value
one-half, which he got from Square. After these simple applica-
tions of the exhaustive ballot, we get the “state of the poll,”
shewn in line iv. of the Table.
Round is therefore elected with a surplus of 2 votes. We have
now to revert to the cutting-down process. Round has been
raised above the quota by the receipt from Oval of 3 votes.
These 3 votes are found to be the 3 votes which Oval originally
got from the ballot-box. On examination it is found, as might be
expected, that Oblong is marked “three ” on the 3 voting papers
in question. As Round wants only 1 of the 3, the 3 papers
are passed on, each with the value two-thirds, to Oblong. This
gives Oblong 2 more votes, and so we get the “ state of the poll
shewn in line v. of the Table.


No candidates, except White, Square, and Round, have now
so much as the quota. Once more, then, the exhaustive ballot
comes into play. Yellow with 8 votes now retires. These 8 are
made up of three parcels—first, the 3 papers which came from the
ballot-box to Yellow ; second, the 9 papers with the value one-
third which passed from White to Yellow; third, the 2 papers
which passed with unit value from Red to Yellow. The first 3
papers raise Black from nto 14. Then the g papers, each with
the value one-third, raise Black from 14 to 17 and so elect him.
Next, the third parcel of 2 votes or papers would pass from Yellow
to Black; but, as Black is already elected, we look for the next
names and find them to be the same, viz., Justice, on the 2 papers.
Thus 2 votes pass from Yellow to Justice, and elect Justice.
Thus we have the “ state of the poll ” in line vi. of the Table.
The cutting-down process has now to be applied. Black has
been raised above the quota by the receipt from Yellow of a
parcel of 9 papers each with the value one-third. As Black
requires only two-thirds of each of these to elect him, the whole
g are passed on to Science, each with one-third of the previous
value, that is, each paper is passed on with the value one-ninth.
Thus we get the “state of the poll” shewn in line vn. of the
Table.
Once again exhaustive ballot applies. Town with 9 votes now
retires. The g would naturally flow to City. But we distribute
first the 7 which Town got from the ballot-box, then the 2 which
Town got from Village. The 7 pass from Town to City and elect
City. Then the 2 pass, not to City, who has now no need for
them, but to Oblong. We then get the “state of the poll” shewn
in line vm. of the Table.
Finally the cutting-down process has once more to be applied.
City has been raised above the quota by the receipt from Town
of a parcel of 7 papers, each with unit value. As City requires
only 5 of the 7 to elect him, the whole 7 are passed on to Oblong
by Gregory’s principle, each with the value two-sevenths. This
gives Oblong two more votes, and we have the final “ state of the
poll” shewn in line ix. of the Table. Oblong is elected to the
seventh seat, Science being the runner-up with 13 votes.
Thus, the 7 seats are filled by candidates elected by equal
unanimous quotas or groups of electors. Colour, with a trifle
over two quotas, gets two seats; Form, with a little less than
three quotas, gets, with the help of Place, three seats. Place,


with a trifle over one quota, gets one seat and helps Form.
Qualities, with a little less than one quota, gets, with the help of
Colour, one of the seven seats. But the Pursuits party, which has
less than a quota and receives practically no help from any
other party, gets no representation.
This, surely, is electoral justice and fair play. All voters are
represented save the 12 who support Pursuits, and these amount
to less than one-tenth of the whole. No votes are lost or
ineffective except the Pursuit votes.
Contrast with this the results of the block system. With
strict party voting, which has been assumed throughout, each
of the five parties would put forward seven candidates. The
seven seats would all be secured by Form with 44 votes out of a
total of 125, and the remaining Bx, or more than two-thirds of the
voters, would be wholly unrepresented. This result is attained
by strict party organization which means the utter extinction of
individual freedom.
Tactic and the party list are absolutely necessary in the block
vote. They enable the strongest party, which may be a mere
minority of the people, to crush all opponents, to crush the real
majority, because that majority may have the misfortune to be
disorganized and divided. But, with the preferential vote and
the quota, tactic and organization are alike helpless and un-
necessary. With or without them the real majority can get what
it is justly entitled to, the supreme control. But the minority
also can get what it is entitled to, and that is a fair hearing, not
merely in the turmoil of the hustings, but in the calmer atmos-
phere of Parliament. It can get all this, not as a mere crumb
from the table of the machine politician who runs the winning
ticket in the block vote system, but as a matter of right and
justice.
In the preferential system the members elected are not merely
the spokesmen of the dominant party. They represent, so far
as their numbers will allow, all the principal opinions prevailing
in the State, each in its due proportion. This result is attained,
not by imposing an expensive organization on parties, but by
the automatic action of machinery provided by the State, by
machinery which gives full and adequate effect to the wishes
of the whole of the electors. In this way, and in this way only,
can the true will of the people be ascertained and a substantial
and necessary addition made to the edifice of Democracy.




