

The Fire Underwriters' Association
of South Australia.
Pirie Chambers,
32 Pirie Street, Adelaide.
ELECTRICAL
WIRING RULES.
Revised Issue November 1924.
Copies may be purchased at the Offices of the Association.




JUNE, 1925 EDITION.
Electrical Wirin g Rules.
PREPARED AT INTERSTATE CONFERENCE, MELBOURNE,
February, isss.
Adopted by the Institution
May, toss
revised after Conferences with
the Fire and accident Underwriters of Australia
AND
The regulations Committee of
the State Electricity Commission of Victoria.
September, isxs.
Sc&n«l):
F. W. WHITE, Frint«r,_B44 Kent Btre*t.
|9?s f
REVISED NOVEMBER, 1924.
Published by
institution of Enginrrrs, Australia.
HEADQUARTERS I
MACLEAY HOUSE.
16 COLLEGE STREET, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
June, isxs.


Electrical Wring Rules
of
The Institution of Engineers, Australia.
These Rules are based on the Code in use for many
years in Australia and which was originally founded
upon the Wiring Rules of the Institution of Electrical
Engineers, London. The present issue is the outcome of
the Conference of the Uniform Wiring Rules Committee
of the Institution, held in Melbourne in February, 1922;
also of the Conference between representatives of the
Institution and of the Council of the Fire and Accident
Underwriters of Australia, held in Sydney in February,
1923; and finally of the Conference between the Institu-
tion’s Committee and the Regulations Committee of the
State Electricity Commission of Victoria, held in Mel-
bourne in September, 1923.
Resulting from these various conferences the Rules
were issued for general adoption throughout Australia,
being revised in November, 1924, at an Interstate Con-
ference held in Sydney.
CONSTITUTION OF THE WIRING RULES’
COMMITTEE OF THE I.E.Aust.
A Committee is attached to the Division in each State.
These Committees represent all sections of the Elec-
trical Industry and are constituted as follows:
Two members representing the Institution.
One each representing—
The Supply Authorities.
The Fire Underwriters’ Association.
The Electrical Contractors.
The Electrical Warehouses.
The appointments to the Committees are made by the
accredited Trade Associations or Authorities concerned
at the invitation of the Institution.
The Committees in the various States are regularly in
touch through a Federal Secretary, and ail Committees
meet in conference for a general revision of the Rules
every second year.


THE FOLLOWING AUTHORITIES HAVE
ADOPTED THESE RULES.
The Council of the Fire and Accident Underwriters of
Australia.
City Electric Light Company, Brisbane.
City of Perth Electricity and Gas Department.
City of Sydney Electricity Department.
Electric Supply Department, Newcastle.
Fremantle Municipal Tramways and Electric Lighting
Board.
The Adelaide Electric Supply Company, Limited.
The City Electric Supply Department, Melbourne.
The City of Launceston Corporation.
The Electric Light & Power Supply Corporation, Ltd.,
Rozelle.
The Electric Supply Company of Victoria, Limited,
Ballarat.
The Hydro-Electric Department, Hobart.
The Melbourne Electric Supply Company, Limited.
INTERPRETATION OF RULES.
The Rules shall be interpreted by the Fire Under-
writers’ Associations or other Authorities concerned,
but should a difference of opinion arise appeal may be
made to the local Honorary Secretary of the division of
The Institution of Engineers, Australia, for submission
of the question to the State Wiring Rules Committee of
the Institution. A ruling by that Committee will then
be forwarded direct-to the enquirer.
The following are the addresses of the Division
Honorary Secretaries:—
Hon. Secretary, Adelaide Division, I.E.Aust,
Austral Chambers, Currie Street, Adelaide.
Hon Secretary, Brisbane Division, I.E.Aust.,
Empire Chambers, Wharf Street, Brisbane.
Hon. Secretary, Melbourne Division, I.E.Aust.,
Collins Court,
370 Little Collins Street, Melbourne.
Hon. Secretary, Newcastle Division, I.E.Aust.,
Howard Smith’s Building, Watt St., Newcastle.


Hon. Secretary, Perth Division, l.E.Aust.,
Professional Societies’ Rooms,
333 Murray Street, Perth.
Hon. Secretary, Sydney Division, l.E.Aust.,
Macleay House, 16 College Street, Sydney.
Hon. Secretary, Tasmania Division, l.E.Aust.,
Hydro-Electric Department, Hobart.
NOTICES.
FIRE INSURANCE OFFICES.
Prior notice of the introduction of wiring should in
all cases be given by the insured to the Fire Insurance
Office insuring the risk. The Rules provide for ordinary
fire and accident risks, but in all cases where such risk
is of an unusual character, the special precautions or
more strict requirements of the Fire Insurance Office
must be adopted.
SUPPLY AUTHORITY.
When the supply is to be obtained from an external
source, notice must. Ije given to the Supply Authorities
concerned before wiring.


General Rules for Wiring
FOR THE
Utilisation of Electrical Energy
Note.— Where applicable, the definitions and regulations
of the British Engineering Standards Committee
have been adopted.
1. The Rules embody the requirements and precautions
framed to secure satisfactory results with a supply of
electrical energy at low pressures not exceeding 2SO
volts, and also with such additional requirements as arc
indicated therein, for medium pressures exceeding 250
volts, but not exceeding 650 volts. They include only
such requirements and precautions as are necessary under
ordinary conditions, and they are not intended either to
take the place of a detailed specification, or to instruct
untrained persons.
(a) They necessarily deal with existing approved
materials, appliances and methods, but they are not in-
tended to discourage invention or exclude other materials,
appliances and methods which may be developed in the
future; and -the Rules may be revised from time to
time, to include those materials, appliances and methods
which may be considered suitable by The Institution of
Engineers, Australia, due regard being had to any neces-
sary modification of rating or loading.
2. (o) Reference should be made to the State regula-
tions (if any) for securing the safety of the public.
Where they apply, the above special regulations should
be considered to be definite requirements which may be
additional to the General Wiring Rules, and should be
considered to be a desirable standard to be adopted where
corresponding special conditions exist.
(b) Where .medium pressures are used, adequate
precautions must be taken either by earthing or other
suitable means to prevent any metal other than the
conductor (such as the cases of switches, fuses, starters,
and the frames of dynamos and motors) from becoming
electrically charged.
3. Prior notice of the introduction of wiring should
in all cases be given by the insured to the Fire |
Insurance ©ffice insuring the risk. The Rules pro-
Low and
Medium
Pressures.
Latitude.
Regulations.
Factories and
Workshops,
Mines,
Theatres,
etc.
Earthing,
etc.
a "
Fire
Insurance
Offices.


vide for ordinary fire and accident risks, but in all
cases where such risk is of an unusual character,
the special precautions or more strict requirements
of the Fire Insurance Office must be adopted.
4. When the supply is to be obtained from an ex-
ternal source, notice must be given to the Supply
Authorities concerned before wiring.
Supply
Authority.
DEFINITIONS OF CERTAIN TERMS USED IN
THE RULES.
The term Inspector means the Inspector of the
Authorities concerned.
5. System. —An electrical system in which all the con-
ductors and apparatus are electrically connected to a
common source of supply.
6. Three-wire System—
(а) Outer Conductors. —Those between which there
is the greatest difference of potential. This use
of the word outer must not be confused with the
use of the word when applied to the external
conductor of a concentric main.
(б) Neutral Conductor. —That which is at a poten-
tial intermediate between the potentials of the
other conductors.
7. Earthed. —Connected to the general mass of the
earth in such a manner as will ensure at all times an
immediate and safe discharge of electrical energy.
8. Dielectric. —Any material which offers high resist-
ance to the passage of an electric current.
9. Uninsulated Conductor. —A conductor without pro-
vision, by the interposition of a dielectric or otherwise,
for its insulation from earth.
10. Bare. —Not covered with insulating material.
11. Bunched Conductors. —When more than one con-
ductor is contained within a single duct or groove, or
when they are run unenclosed and not spaced apart from
each other.
(a) Aerial or Outdoor Conductors. Conductors
supported on insulators in the open air.
12. Fuse-switch. —A quick-break switch with fuse
forming an integral part of the switch,
13. Point.' —ln wiring. The termination of the wiring
for attachment to a fitting for one or more lamps or
other consuming devices.
14. Single-pole Switch. —A switch controlling one
conductor only of a circuit.


15. Multiple Switches. —Switches linked together me-
chanically so as to operate simultaneously, or in definite
sequence whether under one or more covers.
16. Switchboard. —An assembling of switches, fuses,
conductors, measuring instruments, and other apparatus,
mounted on a supporting base for the control of electrical
machinery and circuits.
17. Grade of Insulation, 250 volt cable. —Vulcanised
rubber cable is said to be 250 volt cable when the
minimum radial thickness of its dielectric is that shown
in Col. 4 of Table IV., and when its minimum insulation
resistance is that shown in Cols. 4 and 5 of Table VI.
after application of a pressure test of 1000 volts for half
an hour.*
18. Grade of Insulation, 650 volt cable. —Vulcanised
rubber cable is said to be 650 volt cable when the
minimum radial thickness of its dielectric is that shown
in Col. S of Table IV., and when its minimum insulation
resistance is that shown in Col. 6 of Table VI. after
application of a pressure test of 2500 volts for half an
hour.*
19. Protected Machine. —One having end shield
bearings, and in which there is free access to the interior
without opening doors or removing covers.
20. Semi-enclosed Machine. —One in which the ven-
tilating openings in the frame are covered with—
(a) Grids, expanded metal, or wire gauze, with
openings of not less than 1 inch so as not to
obstruct free ventilation.
(b) Wire gauze in which the openings are less than
i inch but not less than 3-32 inch, or with
perforated metal having holes not less than 3-16
inch (dia. or width).
(c) Screens with smaller openings than the above.
21. Totally-enclosed Machine. —One in which the
enclosing case and bearings are dust-proof, and which
does not allow circulation of air between the inside and
outside of the case.
22. Pipe-ventilated Machine. —An enclosed machine in
which the frame is so arranged that the ventilating air
may be conveyed to it through a pipe attached to the
frame, the ventilation being maintained by the fanning
action produced by the machine itself.
23. Forced-draught Machine. —An enclosed machine in
which the ventilating air supply is maintained by an
independent fan external to the machine itself.
* The pressure test and insulation test must be applied as
specified in Rules 47 and 48.


Separate
control for
light.
Interruption
of current
in neutral
conductor.
GENERAL ARRANGEMENT.
LOW PRESSURES.
24. Every system must be protected by main switches,
and main fuses, or main fuse switches, under the control
of the Consumer. These switches must be mechanically
connected so as to ensure a simultaneous break of all
poles. They must be easily accessible, and placed as
near the generator or the point of entry of the supply
as circumstances permit. Where the service fuses are
placed outside a building, any cable required for the
connecting lines of the supply authority with the service
fuses must be of not less cross sectional area than
7/.036. From the service fuses, leading-in conductors
shall be run of a size proportioned to the stated maxi-
mum demand of the installation, but the minimum size
of such leading-in conductors, which may be run for a
maximum distance of 20 ft., must be a stranded con-
ductor of not less cross sectional area than 3/.036.
Where the length of such run exceeds 20 ft., a minimum
size conductor of 7/.036 must be installed throughout.
Where the service fuses are placed inside the building,
the portion of the service line between the point of
entry of the supply and the supply authorities’ fuses
shall not exceed 10 feet in length, and the conductor
shall have a cross sectional area not less than 7/.036
(7/20 S.W.G.) copper cable, and shall be protected by
being drawn into metal tubing. When more than one
consumer is connected to a single service, the various
consumers’ main switchboards must be distinctly labelled
for purposes of identification. In large buildings, such
as residential and business flats, and connected to under-
ground services, the whole of the consumers’ main
switchboards must be controlled by a master switch,
placed in a position conveniently accessible, and as near
an entrance or exit door as circumstances permit.
The master switch must be protected by glass-fronted
locked case.
25. Where energy is used for purposes additional to
illumination, and where failure of light might cause
panic or be otherwise dangerous, the lighting must be
controlled by independent service fuses, but in no case
may any other installation, whatsoever, be connected to
the supply fuses,
26. Where the supply is given from the three wires of
a three-wire system, the neutral conductor, whether
earthed or not, must never be interrupted unless the
outer conductors are simultaneously interrupted;* hence
* In practice a three-wire linked switch should interrupt the
outer conductors slightly before breaking the neutral.


no fuse or unlinked switch may be included in the main
neutral conductor. No single-pole switch or starter shall
be placed in the neutral or earth conductor of any
installation.
27. Where the supply is given to two-wire circuits
from a three-wire system with unearthed neutral or from
a two-wire system with both poles insulated, each main
two-wire circuit must be controlled by a double-pole
linked switch with a fuse on each pole.
28. No fuse may be placed in the neutral conductor of
a multiple-wire system, but fuses must be placed on both
conductors of two-wire circuits branching therefrom.
This does not prevent the use of a disconnecting link in
the neutral conductor for testing purposes.
29. In the case of other multiple-wire systems similar
principles shall be applied as in Rules 26, 27, 28.
30. Where the pressure between the outer conductors
of a three-wire system exceeds 2SO volts, and the three
wires of the systems or two pairs of wires are brought
into premises, the supply for low pressure must be given
from two pairs of terminals arranged so as to minimise
the danger of shock, and the wiring from these terminals,
including that behind distribution boards, must be kept
distinct throughout in separated circuits which must no.
be bunched.
(a). Where the supply is given from an outside
source through more ton one pair of terminals, the
extreme voltage between any set of terminals must be
distinctly marked.
31. Where energy is taken from all the conductors of
a three-phase system, the conductors must be protected on
each phase i>y an automatic circuit-breaker, or by a fuse
in conjunction with a multiple pole, linked switch or by a
fuse-switch.
32. Conductors must radiate from distributing centres,
and in large systems feeders will be necessary between
centres and sub-centres. In sub-circuits for lighting,
except where otherwise provided (See 32 (/) and ( g ) ),
the current must not exceed 8 amperes for pressures up
to 125 volts, nor 4 amperes from 125 to 250 volts, and
the maximum number of points on any sub-circuit must
not exceed 10.
(o) For the purpose of calculating the current of a
lighting circuit, no Lamp Holder must be rated
at less than 60 watts, more powerful lamp
points, if any, being allowed in full.
(6) Heaters requiring not more than 600 watts, and
Motors not exceeding 1-3 H.P. capacity, shall
be permitted to be connected to a lighting sub-
circuit not having more than 9-60 watt lamps.
Two and
Three-wire
Systems
Control.
Multiple-
wire
Systems.
Two and
Three-
wire Systems
Interruption
of Current.
Introduction
of Multiple-
wire System
into prexnfees.
Voltage to be
marked.
Protection
in Polyphase
Systems.
Current in
Circuits and
Sub-circuits
for Lighting.
Calculating
permissible
number of
points.
Small heaters,
etc., on light-
ing circuits.


They may be connected by means of a flexible
direct to a ceiling rose, provided the apparatus
is fitted with a two-pin plug, or they may other-
wise be connected by means of an adaptor to a
flexible fitted with a screw lamp socket of
approved pattern specially provided for the
purpose. The flexible conductor supplying the
same must not be less than 23/36 S.W.G. Only
one such attachment shall be permitted on any
installation. Alternatively a heating or similar
point up to 1000 watts loading may be served
through a 2-pin wall plug on a mixed lighting
and power circuit provided the number of light-
ing points does not exceed six of an aggregate
loading not exceeding 360 watts. In such case
the flexible connection to the heater must be
of 40/36 S.W.G.
( c ) Sub-circuits for heaters must not carry more
than 24 amperes up to 125 volts, nor more than
IS amperes from 125 to 250 volts.
(d) Excepting in the cases specifically stated herein,
I’ower Plug points shall each be rated at not
less than 1000 watts. When installed in Private
Residences, the number of heaters allowed on
a Circuit or Sub-Circuit may be as set out in
Rule 103 (&). In Factories and Workshops the
full actual rating of the apparatus shall be
allowed for, but in such cases each point shall
be rated at not less than 500 watts.
(e) Every sub-circuit must be protected on each
pole by a fuse. Every distribution board in
which each circuit is not controlled by a double-
pole switch must be fitted with a double-pole
switch to control all circuits branching there-
from. Mains and feeders must be protected
on each pole by a switch and fuse, or circuit-
breaker, or fuse-switch (Rules 24, 26, 28).
(/) For electric signwriting, outline and decorative
wiring, when in use outside a building, the final
sub-circuits must not exceed 1200 watts, or 25
amperes at any voltage.
(g) The number of points and current allowed
when a circuit is controlled by a multi-way
switch shall be determined by the maximum that
can be in use at any one time.
33. Where protected from mechanical injury by metal
conduits (Rule 63), or by a covering of tough rubber
compound (Rule 65), conductors of opposite polarity
may be bunched. Where the protecting tubing or casing
is non-metallic, lengths of conductors of the same
polarity and free from joints, carrying small currents
Heating
Circuit.
Number of
heating points
allowed on a
circuit-
Control
Signs and
Decorative
Lighting.
Demonstration
or effect
lighting.
Bunching.


for incandescent lighting, from sub-centres, as in Rule
32, may be bunched. If the supply is alternating, and
the protection iron or steel, the lead and return con-
ductors must be bunched.
34. Earthing conductors (earth-wires) must be of
stranded copper of a cross-sectional area not less than
that of a 7/.036 (7/20 S.W.G.) conductor, except that
for circuits up to 12 amperes, a No. 7/.029 (7/22
S.W.G.) may be used. Where the cross-sectional area
of portable leads is less than that of a 7/.036 (7/20
S.W.G.), the earthing conductor may be equal in cross-
sectional area to the live conductor. The earth-wires
must be suitably protected from mechanical injury, and
they must be efficiently and permanently earthed. In all
cases the connection of the earthing cable must be visible
and accessible. The sectional area of the earthing conductor
in no case shall be less than half of that of tire conduc-
tor necessary to supply the connected load. Where an
efficient earth, or earths, such as water-pipe, cannot
be obtained, a suitable earth plate or pipe shall be
provided to the satisfaction of the Authorities con-
cerned. The place selected should be permanently wet.
or at least damp. Suitable clips must be used to which
earthing conductors must be connected,
35. (a) Gas-pipes must not be used to obtain anj
earth connection.
(b) Combined gas and electric fittings must not
be used.
(c) If disused gas-fittings are adapted for electric
light, they must be entirely disconnected from
the gas-pipes. Converted fittings must be
cleared of metal borings and sharp edges before
wiring,
( d ) The minimum distance between conductors
or their insulating material, metallic sheath-
ing, or tubing, whether earthed or not,
and gas-pipes, telephone, bell, or other wires
not forming part of the system, shall be one
inch in those cases where the pipes, etc., run
parallel to conductors. In the cases of crossings,
a non-conducting distance piece must be securely
fixed between the two, and this distance piece
shall be of such a size as to extend at least one
inch on each side of either pipe.
36. Fuse-boards, motors, starters, and resistances in i
situations where highly inflammable materials are stored j
or worked, such as timber yards, wood-working shops,
etc., must be provided with covers which, if of wood,
must be lined with non-inflammable material. In places
where inflammable or explosive dust or gases are liable
Earthing.
Gas-pipes and
Gas fUtintrs.
Inflammable
Gases nod
Dust.


to be present, dynamos, arc lamps, mercury vapour lamps
and wall plugs and sockets must not be used. In such
situations incandescent-lamps must, with their holders, be
enclosed in air-tight fittings of thick glass; switches,
fuses and resistances should preferably be located outside
such places, but where this is impracticable they must be
enclosed in flame-tight incombustible cases strong enough
to resist internal gas explosions; and motors, with their
live parts, starters, terminals, and connections, must also
be similarly enclosed. Circuits within safes and strong-
rooms must be controlled by multiple switches placed
outside and adjacent to the door.
37. Except where completely enclosed in metallic
casing, no switch, ceiling-rose, fuse, wall plug and
socket, or other electrical accessory may be mounted
directly upon any surface liable to become damp, but
must, in addition to its own mount, be fixed upon a base-
block impervious to moisture.
38. In bathrooms and damp or other places where the
operator may be in connection with earth, special pre-
cautions must be taken to prevent the possibility of
personal contact with any metallic part of the system.
Where flexible drop-lights are used the lamp must be at
least 8 feet from floor.
(a) Lighting or power points in chilling or refrigerat-
ing rooms must be controlled by a double-pole switch
placed outside the room.
CONDUCTORS —SIZE AND CONDUCTIVITY.
39. Except for wiring fittings, the size of any con-
ductor must not be less than 1/.044. The size of fit-
ting wires must not be less than 1/.036.
40. Subject to Rules 39 and 43 being complied with,
the minimum size of the conductors within a building
will be determined as follows:
(a) For lighting circuits, by the permissible drop in
volts, which, under ordinary conditions, must not
exceed 2 per cent., plus a constant allowance of
1 volt (Wire Tables 11. and 111., Col. 7).
(b) For power and heating circuits, by the rise in
temperature, in accordance with Wire Tables 11.
and 111., Cols. 4,5, and 6.
41. Insulated copper conductors must be of annealed
copper, and they must have a conductivity not less than
that laid down by the Engineering Standards Committee
(Rule 57), and the copper must be protected by tinning,
or other effective methods (Rule 56), from contact with
(he insulating material if such contains sulphur.
Circuits
within
safes, etc.
Damp
Surfaces
Bathroom?.
Chilling
and
Refrigerating.
Size
Lighting
Circuits.
Power and
Heating
Circuits
Conductivity.
Sulphur.


42. All insulated copper conductors, having a greater
cross-sectional area than 0.003 square inches, must be
stranded.
43. The maximum permissible currents for the various
sizes of conductors up to 1 square inch in cross-sectional
area are shown in Columns 4, S and 6 of the Tables 11.
and 111., which allow for a rise of temperature of 20
deg. F. (11.1 deg. C.) for rubber insulated cable and
SO deg. F. (27.8 deg. C.) for impregnated paper
cables. For sizes below 0.005 square inch in rubber and
0.017 square inch in paper the tables are based on a
current density of 4000 amperes per square inch.
The Tables refer to situations where the temperature
of the air does not exceed 80 deg. F. (26.6 deg. C.), and
thus the normal maximum running temperature is 100
deg. F. (37.7 deg. C.) for rubber, and 130 deg. F. (54.4
deg. C.) for paper cables.
Rubber insulated cables should not be allowed to attain
to a permanent temperature higher than 120 deg. F.
(48.8 deg. C), or for a short period 130 deg. F. (54.4
deg. C), and impregnated paper to a higher temperature
than 176 deg. F. (80 deg. C). The figures, therefore,
in the latter cases, allow of a margin of 30 deg. F. and
46 deg. F. respectively.
Where the temperature of the air exceeds 80 deg. F.
(26.6 deg. C.), or in any case where the dielectric of
the cable is not suitable for the maximum temperature
stated above, the permissible current should be reduced
accordingly.
The further limitation of the size of conductor by the
permissible drop in volts is dealt with in Rule 40.
Note. —The figures given in the Tables apply to single
cables run in pairs in iron conduits or in wood casing,
and to single cables sheathed with tough rubber com-
pound and to concentric, twin, and three-core cables of
any finish run singly.
CONDUCTORS—INSULATION.
44. Conductors, except as provided in Rule 72,
must be specially insulated with material which does not
rapidly deteriorate at the highest temperature to which
it will be subjected; for instance, rubber must not be
allowed to exceed 130 deg. F. (54.4 deg. C.), and paper
or fibre 176 deg. F. (80 deg. C). They must also
comply with the following conditions: —
i. If the conductors are of a sectional area equivalent
to No. 37/.072 (37/15 S.W.G.) or smaller, there
must be applied to each coil in as permanent a
manner as practicable, a label setting out in
prominent and legible characters the following
information: —
Stranding.
Wire
Tables
Temperature.


(a) The manufacturer’s name and address.
( b ) The length of wire.
(c) The date of manufacture.
(d) The gauge of conductors.
(e) The insulation resistance per statute
mile after 24 hours’ immersion in water
at sixty (60) deg. F. and one minute's
electrification at .... volts (the voltage
to be plainly marked on the label, or
details of the test voltage applied, or
other definite and comprehensive de-
scription of quality).
ii. The marks “600 Megohm grade” or “2500 Megohm
grade,” as the case may be, shall be indelibly and
legibly applied to the wire at least once every yard; or,
in the case of wires that are taped, such marks shall be
indelibly and legibly applied to the tape at least once
every yard.
45. The insulating material off any conductor other
than a flexible must be throughout either; —
Class A. —A non-hygroscopic dielectric*, such as
vulcanised rubber of the best quality, which only
needs mechanical protection (Rules 63 to 66), or
Class B. —A hygroscopic dielectric*, such as impreg-
nated paper or fibre, which must be encased in a
waterproof sheath, generally of soft metal, such
as lead, drawn closely over the dielectric.
46. The radial thickness of vulcanised rubber must not
be less than that given in Cols. 4 and 5 of Table IV.
The radial thickness of dielectrics of Class B must not
be less than that given in Col. 4 of Table V., and the
radial thickness of the lead sheath not less than that
given in Col. 5. The dielectric must not soften suf-
ficiently, under working conditions, to allow displace-
ment of the conductor from the centre.
Note.— The provisions regarding the radial thickness
of dielectric as per Col. 5 of Table IV. shall not
apply where the difference of potential between
the conductor and earth does not exceed 250
volts.
47. The dielectric must be such that when the insulated
conductor has been immersed in water for 24 hours, it
will, while still immersed, withstand a pressure test of
1000 volts for half an hour in the case of 250 volt
cables (Def. 17) ; and one of 2500 volts for half an
hour in the case of 650 volt cables (Def. 18). The
testing pressures must be alternating pressures at a
frequency of 50 to 100 supplied from an alternator
capable of giving an output of not less than 5 kilowatts.
* Dielectric does not include braiding or taping.


48. The minimum insulation resistance, when corrected
to a temperature of 60 deg. F. (15.6 deg. C), must be
that given in Cols. 4 and S and 6 of Table VI. for
vulcanised rubber, the test being made after one minute’s
electrification at not less than 500 volts, and after the
insulated conductor has been immersed in water for the
24 hours immediately preceding the test, and while still
immersed.
49. Each insulated member of a twin or multiple
conductor must have the insulation resistance given in
the table for single conductors of the same size.
50. Conductors insulated as in Class A must be taped
and braided if drawn into conduits, and at least braided
if laid in casing.
51. Where colours are used to distinguish the con
doctors, the following are recommended: —
Continuous current :
+ Red
Black
Neutral Yellow or White.
Alternating current :
(a) Phase Red
(bj Phase Yellow or White
(c) Phase Blue
Neutral Green
52. Concentric conductors must, in all respects, con-
form to the requirements laid down for single conductors ,
the insulation resistance for the dielectric separating the
two conductors must be that given in the Table for
single conductors having the same diameter as the inner
conductor. The insulation resistance of the dielectric on
the external conductor, when insulated, must be that
given in the Table for single conductors having the same
diameter as the outside diameter of the external
conductor.
FLEXIBLE CONDUCTORS.
53. Flexibles must be made up so that the total cross-
sectional area is not less than equivalent to 1/.036 (1/20
S.W.G.), and they must be composed of wires twisted
together on a short lay, no wire being smaller than a
1/.0076 inch dia. (36 S.W.G.L The carrying capacities
of various sizes of flexible conductors are set out in
the Table.
54. The insulating material used as the dielectric must
be pure rubber equal to washed Para rubber or vul-
canized rubber of the best quality. The pure rubber
must be laid on in two layers, care being taken that the
edges of each layer overlap, and the radial thickness of
the dielectric must not be less than 20 mils. Each coil
of pure rubber flexible must be tested in air for IS
Insulation
Resistance
Teat
Twin and
Multiple
Conductors.
Taping and
Braidir :-g.
Distinguishing
Colours for
Conductors.
Concentric
Conductors.
Size
Dielectric
and Tests.


minutes with a pressure of 1500 volts alternating between
the conductors at a frequency of SO to 100.
Note. —Notwithstanding anything contained in these
Rules, flexible cord for portable apparatus made to the
Specification of the National Board of Fire Under-
writers of the United States of America will, subject to
the approval of the Authorities concerned, be permitted
for use with the portable apparatus intended for the
same pressure as that for which such cord was
manufactured.
55. Vulcanised rubber flexible must be insulated with
one layer of pure rubber and two layers of vulcanised
rubber; the minimum insulation resistance and radial
thickness of the dielectric must be those specified in the
Table for 250 volt or 650 volt cable, having similar
cross-sectional area of conductor. The pressure tests and
insulation tests must be applied before braiding, and as
specified in Rules 47 and 48, with the exception that
the pressure tests may be applied for 15 minutes only.
56. Insulating material containing sulphur must not be
in direct contact with copper wires (Rule 41).
COPPER CONDUCTORS.
57. The data for the resistances of copper conductors
are based on the standard defined by the British En-
gineering Standards Association.
JOINTS AND CONNECTIONS.
58. Joints constitute a source of weakness and must
be avoided wherever possible. When joints are unavoid-
able, they must be accessible, and be mechanically or
electrically sound to prevent heat being generated, and
must be soldered, except where approved insulated con-
nectors are used, or wherever flexibles are joined to
other conductors (Rule 71). Soldering fluids containing
acid or other corrosive substance must not be used.
Connections between conductors should preferably be
made in junction boxes of_ an approved type. Looping
in must be employed to avoid tee joints.
59. Junction Boxes must be so constructed that:
(o) The conductors cannot be readily short-
circuited.
(i>) The insulation between opposite poles is rigid
and durable.
(c) The connections do not heat,
(d) If used in damp places they are of water-tight
pattern.


60. In jointing conductors the braid, tape, or lead must
be carefully removed without damage to the dielectric
and for a sufficient length to ensure a thorough union
between the dielectric and material used to insulate the
joint. If the insulating material is not waterproof, the
joint must be enclosed in an impervious sleeve or box,
with water-tight inlet where the conductors enter. Care
must be taken to exclude moisture during the work of
jointing.
61. Where conductors are connected to switches, fuses,
or other appliances;
(o) The whole of the separate wires forming the
stranded or flexible conductor must be contained
within the terminal, but the dielectric must not
be bared back further than to allow the con-
ductor to enter the terminals properly.
( b ) The braid, lead, or other covering must be cut
back from the end of the dielectric.
(c) The exposed ends of the dielectric of Class B
must be protected from moisture which might
creep along the insulating material within the
sheath.
( d ) In damp places the strands must be soldered
until solid to prevent moisture creeping along
the conductor beneath the insulating material.
62. All conductors, except flexibles and those having
less than seven strands, must be soldered into proper'
cable thimbles for connection to terminals. Where the
type of terminal renders it impracticable to use a thimble,
it is imperative that the strands be soldered together
for connection. Where there is any possibility of stress
on the thimbles the conductors must be secured, in
addition to the soldering, by some mechanical device such
as one or more set-screws. Alternatively, approved solder-
less terminations or tags may be used.
TUBED WIRING.
63. Conductors (excepting flexibles), insulated as in]
Classes A and B (Rule 45), may be cased in steel 1
conduits with details and accessories in accordance with
the British Standard Specification, No. 31, for steel
conduits for electric wiring, or in brass or copper
conduits. All conduits must comply with the following
conditions;—
(a) They must be electrically and mechanically
continuous throughout. Plain slip sockets do not
Jointing
Conductors.
Connection
at
Terminals.
Cable
Thimbles.
Metal
Conduitt
The alteration in the design of conduit fittings, necessitated
by this clause, shall take effect as from the Ist January, 1926.


Comply with this Rule, some form of screwed* or
grip joint being necessary, giving ample and per-
manent electrical conductivity and mechanical
rigidity throughout.* Class B Conduit must
be used when protecting conductors any one of
which is conveying current at SO amps, or more.
(6) The conductors must in all cases be mechanically
protected throughout their entire length, and in
the case of switch loops run in the cavity be-
tween lath and plaster, on wooden partitions, pro-
tected either by steel conduit or by an approved
flexible tubing of strongly woven non-inflam-
mable material extending the whole length of
the switch loops and brought through and fasten-
ed at each end.
(c) They must have all open ends bushed to prevent
abrasion.
( d ) They must be earthed (Rules 34 and 35). In
dry places, isolated single lengths of conduit on
consumer’s side of service fuses need not be
earthed if adequately enamelled or otherwise
insulated externally.
( e ) In damp places, or where exposed to the
weather, or liable to become wet by hosing, they
must be water-tight.
(/) They must be efficiently drained if liable to
internal condensation. Ventilating outlets must
be provided at the highest and lowest points of
each such circuit to allow a circulation of air
through the conduit.
( g ) In the event of conduit of the sizes above one
inch external diameter not being procurable,
ordinary galvanized or black piping of the same
internal diameter may be substituted, provided
care is taken to free it from all internal burrs or
other projections. Tees, elbows, and other fit-
tings used therewith must have rounded internal
surfaces, and be free from roughness or pro-
jections at angles, or otherwise.
CASED WIRING.
64. Conductors (excepting flexibles), insulated as in
Classes A and B, may be cased in wood in dry places
under the following conditions: —
• In no case may the thickness of the metal of the fitting be
less than that of the Conduit on which it is to be used.


(a) Wood casing must not be buried in plaster or
cement, nor fixed immediately below, nor in
contact with, water-pipes. Wood casing will not
be permitted in lift wells, laid under floor, in
hollow walls, or in places where liable to
damage by rodents.
(b) Conductors of the same polarity carrying
currents from final sub-centres may be bunched
(Rule 33).
(c) Wood casing shall be so constructed that the
width of the fillet between the grooves shall be
at least half an inch, and the thickness of the
outside shell shall be at least one quarter of an
inch.
Note.— ln all cases where enclosed wiring or armoured
conductors are used, particular attention is drawn to the
necessity for enclosing the conductors in their protective
device close up to all terminals, meters, and the service
cut-out boxes.
UNCASED WIRING-TOUGH RUBBER
COMPOUND CONDUCTORS.
6S. Insulated conductors, protected by an outer rein-
forcing cover of tough rubber compound not less than
50 mils, thick, and capable of resisting abrasion, acids,
oils and alkalis, may be used without conduits or wood
casing when not exposed to mechanical injury or damage
by rodents, provided that—
(a) The resistance of the covering to fire is equal
or superior to that of vulcanised rubber.
(b) The covering encloses the insulated conductors
as a whole or each insulated conductor,
separately.
(c) They are supported by means of clips, saddles-'
or clamps of such form as will not indent or
damage the sheathing.
( d ) They are protected by steel conduit where’
buried in plaster, cement or brickwork, or where:
on the face of walls up to a height of 4ft. 6in,
(e) They do not come into contact with damp brick-
work or plaster.
(/) Where laid across the joists at any angle, they
are attached to the side of soft wood strips of
not less than 1 inch by 1 inch dimensions.
Where laid parallel with the joists, they are
attached to the side of same. Clips or saddles
must not be spaced more than 18 inches apart.
In Roofs,


between
floors and
ceilings.
( g ) Where not running parallel to the joists, they
are passed through holes in the joists at approxi-
mately right angles to the same and a distance
of not less than 2 inches from the underside of
the floor. Where run parallel with the joists,
they may be laid flat on the ceiling. No junction
or connections will be permitted beneath floors,
(/i) They are protected by wood or metal casing or
conduits where exposed to mechanical injury
such as on walls, up to a distance of 4 feet
6 inches from the floor. Clips or saddles must
be spaced not more than 9 inches apart on ceil-
ings, or more than 12 inches apart on vertical
runs.*
Note. —Such conductors laid between floors, and in
roofs between lath and plaster, or other hollow par-
titions and walls, need not be protected.
UNCASED WIRING—ARMOURED
CONDUCTORS.
66. Conductors (excepting flexibles), insulated as in
Classes A and B, and efficiently armoured with steel
armouring or cased with brass, copper, or equally hard
metal of substantial thickness may be used without
conduits or wood casing. The armouring or casing must
be earthed (Rules 34 and 35).
UNCASED WIRING—UNARMOURED
CONDUCTORS.
67. Conductors, insulated as in Clause (o) (Rule 45)
may be used without mechanical protection (i.e., without
conduit, casing, armouring, etc.) in situations where,
owing to moisture, heat or the presence of fumes, en-
cased wiring is deemed unsuitable. Cables of 7/.044 and
upwards may be run likewise in open roofs of works and
factories.
(а) In such cases the wiring must be in view, and
must not be exposed to mechanical injury or
damage by rodents.
(б) They must be supported at reasonable intervals
and also at each end of the run with insulators
of non-absorbent material in such a manner as
to secure the permanent spacing of the con-
ductors from each other, and from walls,
ceilings, and all structural metal work and metal
piping. Wires of a sectional area not greater
than 7/.036 must be supported at intervals not
exceeding five feet.
Surface
work.
Armouring.
Wiring to
meet
exceptional
conditions of
atmosphere,
etc.
Spacing.
• The effect of these additions is to allow Tough Rubber
Compound Wiring to be installed in the same manner as Lead.
Alloy Wiring,


(c) Where carried lower than 8 feet from the 1
floor and where passed through walls, partitions
or under floors, they must be protected by
conduit.
68. Unarmoured conductors having a sheathing con-
taining not less than 95 per cent, pure lead (the
remainder consisting of rarer metals) and of a thickness
of not less than that specified in the British Engineering
Standards Committee report, No. 7 (1922), on “British
Standard Copper Conductors,” may be used, provided
that:—
(а) They are supported by means of clips, saddles
or clamps of such form as will not indent or
damage the sheathing, and, if metallic, of some
metal other than copper.
(б) Such conductors laid between floors and in
roofs, between lath and plaster or other hollow
partitions and walls need not be protected,
except where liable to damage by rodents.
( c ) They are protected by steel conduit where
buried in plaster, cement or brickwork.
( d ) They do not come into contact with damp
brickwork or plaster.
(e) Where laid across the joists at any angle they
are attached to the side of soft wood strips of
not less than 1 inch by 1 inch dimensions.
Where laid parallel with the joists they are
attached to the side of same. Clips or saddles
must not be spaced more than 18 inches apart.
(/) Where not running parallel to the joists they
are passed through holes in the joists at ap- 1
proximately right angles to the same and a'
distance of not less than 2 inches from the
underside of the floor. Where run parallel with
the joists they may be laid flat on the ceiling.
No junctions or connections will be permitted
beneath floors.
( g ) They are protected by wood or metal casing i
or conduit where exposed to mechanical injury ’
such as on walls, up to a distance of 4 feet 6
inches from the floor. Clips or saddles must
be spaced not more than 9 inches apart on
ceilings or more than 12 inches apart on ver-
tical runs.
(h) The metal sheathing of the conductors is
earthed and made electrically continuous
throughout by means of wiped joints, or alter-
natively by bonding clamps specially designed
for the purpose and forming part of boxes pr
Protection
through
' Walls, etc.
Lead covered
Conductors.
In roofs.
Between
floors and
ceilings.
Surface
work.


similar fittings entered by the cenductors. The
continuity of the sheathing shall comply with
Rule 69, and the earthing with Rules 34 and 35.
All wiring of this description must be handled
and installed strictly in accordance with the
makers’ specifications and instructions, provided
that such do not in any way conflict with these
Rules.
69. The resistance of the metal sheathing between any
two points of a completed installation shall not exceed
2 ohms.
UNCASED WIRING—FLEXIBLE
CONDUCTORS.
70. Flexibles (Rules 32 ( b ) and 90 (c) and ( e ) )
may be used: —
(a) For connections to lifts, subject to their being
supported by porcelain insulators, and of such
length that they will not come into contact with
the bottom of the lift well when the lift is at
the lowest point of its run. Flexibles in such
positions shall be specially covered and must be
adequately reinforced in such a manner that all
mechanical strain is taken off the conductor.
( h ) For pendant and portable appliances when
suspended from ceiling roses or other approved
supports, provided that when in positions in
which there is a liability of the person handling
flexibles making electrical contact with earth,
the flexible must be protected with an earthed
metallic shield, or a vulcanised rubber hose, or
the like.
(r) Unarmoured flexible pendants must be hung
clear of fixtures, fittings, goods, and materials,
and slack conductors are strictly prohibited. In
all premises, such as butchers’, confectioners’,
fish, and fruit shops, stables, hide and tallow
stores, public dining rooms, public kitchens,
where flexible conductors are likely to be
exposed to the action of flies and other insects,
such conductors must be specially protected.
Rigid fittings must be used under verandahs,
doorways, and all places exposed to the weather.
(<f) No flexible extension shall be taken more than
9 feet across a ceiling to drop light or other
fitting.
(e) Not more than two pairs of flexibles shall be
connected to a ceiling rose unless the rose be
specially designed for multiple connections.
(/) When used for shop windows, flexibles and all
wiring must be of a permanent character.
Lifte
Pendants.
Protected
Pendants.
Flexibie
Extensions.
Shop
Window^


71. Connections between flexibles and other con- 1
doctors must be fitted only by means of screw terminals
in junction boxes, porcelain or other connecting boxes,
or ceiling roses, and not by soldering. Where flexibles
from fittings unavoidably pass into ceilings they may be
enclosed in conduits, and must terminate in a junction
box or ceiling rose fixed as near as possible to the point
of entry into ceiling.
UNCASED WIRING—BARE CONDUCTORS.
72. Bare conductors (Def. 10) may be used indoors
under the following conditions :—•
(a) As collector wires for travelling cranes and
similar appliances, but they must be so sup-
ported upon insulators as to prevent contact
between the conductors themselves, or between
the conductors and the walls, or structural or
other metal work, should a collector wire be
displaced from any insulator.
(b) The insulation at each straining point (i.e., at
the end of each wire) must consist of double
insulation with proper straining gear.
(c) The current must be under complete control by
means of a multiple switch and fuse or multiple
fuse-switch in all supply conductors.
( d ) Lightning arresters, if required by the
authorities concerned, must be fitted on each
pole if the bare wiring extends to a position
exposed to lightning.
( e ) As trolley wires for locomotives, cranes, and
similar appliances, but they must be insulated
by means of double insulation with proper
straining gear between each wire and earth at
their points of support.
(/) Wdll rosettes or brackets used as supports for
span wires must not be fixed within 1 foot of
any gas-pipe.
(<?) As accumulator connections, but such con-
ductors must be well spaced from each other
and from all structural or other metal work,
and be rigidly supported on insulators.
PROTECTION IN SPECIAL POSITIONS.
73. Where conductors pass between partitions or under
floors, they must be protected in accordance with Rules
63, 65, 66 and 68. With low pressures they may alter-
natively be protected in accordance with Rule 64. Where
conductors are laid beneath wooden floors, the boards
covering same must be fastened by screws near the edges.
Connections.
Travelling
Cranes.
Straining
Points.
Control.
Lightning
Arresters.
Locomotive
Cranes.
Spacing.
Accumulator
connections.
Partitions
and Floors.


74. Conductors where exposed to injury (e.g, where
passing out of floors), must be specially protected by
stout conduits or casing, and where passing through
walls, partitions, or ceilings, they must be enclosed in
porcelain or other protecting conduits.
75. Conductors passing through party walls or fire-
resisting floors must be provided with special protection,
such as a close-fitting porcelain or other incombustible
tube, to prevent the spread of fire. When the end of
the tube is outside the building, it must be bell-mouthed
and the openings turned downwards (Rule 117 ( g ) ).
SWITCH AND DISTRIBUTION BOARDS.
76. Main and distribution switch and/or fuse boards
must comply with the following conditions:—
(a) They must be:—
1. Fixed in dry situations;
2. So arranged that a fire thereon cannot spread,
whether occurring at the front or back, and
when placed on or within 6 inches of a
wooden wall or 18 inches of a wooden ceil-
ing, a thickness of hard, insulating, fire-
resisting material is to be placed between
switch or distribution boards and the wall
or ceiling and must extend at least six inches
beyond the board all round, except where
such boards are enclosed as under Rule 85
( b ). Wires, etc., passing through this
material must fit the holes through which
they pass as tightly as possible.
1(6) Their bases must be of incombustible and in-
sulating material, and fitted with moisture-
proof bushes at the point of support if the
material is hygroscopic;
(c) The possibility of a permanent arc must be pre-
vented, either by sufficient spacing of all live
parts, or by the use of separating partitions.
((d) For pressures not exceeding 250 volts, the
minimum clearance between live metal parts of
fuses of opposite polarities, or between any live
metal and any earthed metal, must be 21 inches.
( e ) The minimum clearance between any bare live
metal at back of the board and the surface of
the wall, upon which such board is fixed, must
be 21 inches, provided that not more than four
pairs of wires, each having a cross-sectional
area not greater than that of a 7/.036 cable,
are connected to the back of such board,


(/) In those eases where more than four pairs of
wires are connected to the back of the board,
or where each cable connected thereto has a
cross sectional area greater than that of a 7/.036
cable, the minimum clearance must be increased
to four inches.
( g ) In the case of boards with no bare live metal
at the back thereof, the minimum clearance
between any such board and the surface of the
wall upon which it is fixed, shall be 14 inches
up to and including a two circuit lighting and
a two circuit small power board. All switch
boards of this type serving more than two
circuits shall have a minimum clearance of 2i
inches, provided that in no case shall there be
a clearance less than one mghbetween the board
and anytubingaLthe back thereof.
(b) Where conductors carrying more than 4
amperes are connected by other means than
cable sockets to lift control, switch or distribu-
tion board terminals or bus bars, a sleeve or
binding of some approved fire-resisting material
shall be placed over the bared conductor for a
distance of at least one inch from such ter-
minal or bus bar.
(t) Switches shall be so arranged that their blades
or moving parts are disconnected from the
supply in the “off” position.
O') In every case in which switches and fuses are
fitted on the same pole, these switches shall be
so arranged that the fuses are disconnected from
the supply when their respective switches are in
the “off” position.
77. Fibro-cement switch or fuse boards may be used
provided they comply with the following conditions: —
(a) Fibro cement with metallic reinforcing will not
be permitted.
(b) The front, back edges, and all holes must be
varnished so that they will not absorb moisture.
There will be no objection to painting the face
of such boards after being varnished with a
non-conducting paint, should it be desired.
(c) No lever operated switch, other than a tumbler
switch, shall be mounted on fibro cement of less
thickness than 4 inch.
( d ) They must be rigidly supported, but in no case,
must the area of contact between the board and
each support, which must be non-hygroscopic,
be less than i sq. inch.
Fibre-cement
panels.


(e) They must be supported at points not greater
than 12 inches apart, if under J inch thick.
(/) Insulated wires may be taken through without
bushes, but if bare conductors are used
the holes must be bushed with some non-hygro-
scopic insulating material. All holes must be of
ample size to allow free access for the wire,
and must in no case be less than I inches
diameter.
(g) All apparatus must be held on with bolts and
nuts.
(7i) To ensure mechanical strength, the following
table must be adhered to, viz.:—
Capacity of Switchboard Minimum Thickness
in amperes. of Board.
Up to 50 amperes i inch
Over SO amperes I inch
78. Switch and fuse boards must be so constructed
and placed that all their parts which may have to be
adjusted or handled are readily accessible.
(a) No switches or fuses, except those required by
the operator during a performance, shall be
allowed within a biograph operating room. Any
necessary switch or fuse apparatus must be
placed as far as possible from the projector and
film.
79. Connecting conductors on main boards must be:—
(a) Permanently accessible from either the back or
front of the board;
( b ) Symmetrically placed and spaced apart;
(c) So proportioned that there shall be no ap-
preciable rise of temperature when the current
flows through them;
( d ) So arranged that the course of every conductor
may, where necessary, be readily traced;
( e ) So arranged as to prevent the access of acid
fumes from batteries to the board.
80. Main switchboard circuits must be labelled for
identification.
81. No fuses may be placed at the back of switch-
boards.
82. The cases of instruments, if metallic, must be in-
sulated from the circuits, but they may be earthed if
desired.
83. Every voltmeter or pilot lamp with its connecting
wires must be protected by a fuse on each pole.
Accesaibil ity.
Connections.
Labels.
Fuses behind
Switchboard*-
Metal Cases.
Voltmeter
Fuses.


84. Combination switch and fuse boxes must be so
arranged that, if the fuses are of open type, it is not
possible to operate the switch with the fuses uncovered.
85. Where fuses are grouped together, the case of
the distribution board :
(o) Will, if glass-fronted, be a sufficient protection
from the fused metal, provided that the dis-
tance from cover to fuse exceeds one inch.
(ft) Must, if made of wood, be lined with fire-re-
resisting material, and a minimum clearance
of one and a half inches must be provided.
SWITCHES AND CIRCUIT BREAKERS.
86. Switches and circuit-breakers (Rules 2 (6), 36 and
37), whether fixed separately or combined with lamp-
holders or fittings, must comply with the following re-
quirements ;
(a) Overheating must not take place at the point l
of contact or elsewhere, when the full current
flows continuously.
(ft) They must be so constructed or arranged that i
the contacts cannot accidentally close when left
open.
( c ) They must be incapable of forming a perma- 1
nent arc when breaking circuit, and they must
be tested with pressures and with currents 50
per cent, in excess of those which will
be used on the - circuits for which they are
intended.
(d) The bases must be of incombustible, non-con-
ducting and moisture-proof material.
(e) Circuit-breakers must be so arranged and
placed that no combustible material is en-
dangered by their action. . Where fixed to
switchboards it is advisable that circuit breakers
should be as near the top thereof as possible,
(/) Unless placed in an engine-room or in a com- ,
partment specially arranged for the purpose,
they must have their live parts covered. The
covers must be of incombustible material, and
must be either non-conducting or of rigid
metal, and clear of all internal mechanism. For
more than 6 amperes, at pressures exceeding
125 volts, metal covers must be lined with in-
sulating material, which must be securely at-
tached.
ig) In positions where thev are liable to injury,
or to come into contact with goods, they must
be further protected by an open-fronted box or
other suitable guard.
Combination
B oxe.«.
Fuse Box
Covers.
Overheating,
Construction
Size.
Base:-.
Locaticr..
Covers.
Boxc*,


( h ) Handles must be insulated and so arranged
that the hand cannot touch live metal, or be
injured through an adjacent fuse blowing.
(j) Switches having a handle projecting through an
open slot in the cover may be used, provided
that a suitable shield is fitted to the satisfaction
of the Inspector.
(/) Multi-pole switches having opposite polarities
under one cover will not be allowed, unless of
a type approved by the Inspector.
( k ) On main and distribution boards switches must
be connected on the live side of the fuse.
(0 The use of pendant switches is not permitted.
87. Maximum Automatic Circuit Breakers must be so
constructed and arranged as to close the circuit without
risk to the operator and to effectively interrupt the cur-
rent in the circuit before it so exceeds the working rate
as to involve danger.
FUSES*
88. Fuses (Rules 2b, 36, 37 and 8S) must comply with
the following requirements :
(a) No overheating of any part must take place
when the full current flows continuously.
( b ) They must effectually interrupt the current
when a short circuit occurs, and they must be
so proportioned to the current to be carried
that no conductor protected by them can be
raised in temperature above that specified in
Rule 44. When the working current (Table 11.
Col. 4) does not exceed 10 amperes, the fuses
must be proportioned to interrupt the current be-
fore or when the current through the conductors
rises to three times the working current; for
working currents above 10 amperes the fuses
must be proportioned to interrupt the circuit
before or when the current through the con-
ductor rises to twice the working current.
The use of fuses of the enclosed type is re-
commended, and in any case each fuse must
be individually protected. No fuse smaller than
one having a working capacity of three amps.
♦NOTE: On or after the Ist January, 1926, the further instal-
lation will not be permitted of Anchor, Bow, Chamber or other
types of fuses which require the connecting of the fuse wire to
terminals mounted on the base block. Fuses of all sizes,
thereafter installed, must be of the removable and safe-replace-
jment type of an approved design.


to fuse at nine amps., heed be inserted for
final sub-circuits.
(e) The terminals must be so spaced apart or'
screened that an arc cannot be maintained
when the fuse is blown.
( d ) The bases must be of incombustible non-con-
ducting and moisture-proof material.
(e) Unless placed in a compartment specially ar-
ranged for the purpose, or in engine-rooms, in
positions where no danger is likely to arise
when a fuse operates, fuses must be provided
with covers to retain the fused metal. These
covers must be of incombustible material, and
must either be non-conducting or of rigid metal,
lined with insulating, incombustible material,
and clear of all live parts. Small, close-fitting
covers must be suitably ventilated.
(/) Fuses must not be placed in wall plugs and
sockets, ceiling roses or lampholders. i
89. Branch fuses must be grouped together in acces-:
sible positions in sight, and they should preferably be :
symmetrically placed and labelled for each circuit.
WALL PLUGS AND SOCKETS.
90. (a) Wall plugs and sockets (Rules 36 and 37)
must be:
1. Capable of withstanding a test with pressures ■
and with current SO per cent, in excess 1
of that for which they are intended. They
must be constructed so that they cannot readily
be short-circuited. The clearances must be
such that an arc cannot be started if the plug
is pulled out while the current is flowing.
2. So arranged that the live end of the coupling :
is not exposed to accidental short circuiting
or injury. A hand shield should preferably be
provided on the plug portion, and the entry of
the flexible should be at the side (See British
Standard Specification, Report No. 73, Dec.,
1919). Wall plug and sockets, where the lat-
ter are fixed, must have incombustible bases,
and in damp places they must be water-tight.
Where the socket is attached to a floor, it must
be so arranged that no dust or water can ac-
cumulate, that all contacts are well below the
floor level, and that any possibility of danger
from contact of live metal with carpets is
avoided. Provision should be made to facili-
tate inspection.
Terminals.
Gases.
Covers.
Positions
prohibited.
Branch
Fuses.
Tests and
Construction.
Fixed Plugs.


3. So arranged that the terminals are relieved ol
the direct pull of the conductor.
4. When used for medium and low pressures,
every wall plug and socket must be inde-
pendently controlled hy a fixed switch on
the live side of the plug and adjacent to it,
A wall plug and socket combined with a switch
for low pressures, complies with this rule. To
avoid leaving the flexibles alive, it is prefer-
able that the portable fittings themselves should
not be provided with switches, but where such
switches are used, at least one lamp of a group
must be controlled only by the fixed switch on
the live side of the socket. Portable appliances,
using pressures exceeding 250 volts, must be
controlled only by wall switches. Woven con-
tact mats and electric table cloths must be con-
trolled from wall switches, and have red pilot
lamps or other approved indicators in circuit.
(6) The use of bayonet lamp-holder adaptors is
permitted, provided that the current consumed
by the apparatus connected thereto does not
exceed li amperes.
CEILING ROSES.
91. Ceiling roses (See British Standard Specification
Report, No. 67, Aug., 1914), (Rules 37, 70 b, and 88/),
must be used for low pressures only, and:—
(a) The bases must be of incombustible, non-con-
ducting and moisture-proof material;
( b ) The covers must be of incombustible material,
and must be either non-conducting, or of rigid
metal, clear of all live parts;
(c) The terminals must be relieved of the direct
pull of the attached conductor and fitting, and
be so arranged that no short-circuit can take
place;
(d) They must not be used for attachment to
more than two pairs of flexibles, unless speci-
ally designed for multiple pendants.
FITTINGS FOR SUPPORTING LAMPS.
92. Wherever brackets, electroliers, or standards, re-
quire to have the conductors threaded through tubes or
channels formed in the metal work, these must be of
ample size and have no sharp angles or projecting edges,
which would be liable to damage the insulating material,
and the open ends should, where possible, be bushed.
In cases where lamps or fittings are suspended by means
of flexible conductors, suitable cord-grips must b; used,
which will not tend to chafe the insulation of the con-
ductor or to press the cores of the conductor into con


tact with one another through the insulation. Wheil
the weight of a fitting, lamp and shade exceeds 2 lbs.,
additional support must be provided, independent of the
flexible conductor.
93. Where possible, the conductors should preferably
be carried without joints through the fittings to the
lamps; but where connections at the fittings are un-
avoidable, special care must be taken to make the
joints equal in conductivity and insulation to the rest
of the work.
_ 94. Fittings for gas-filled lamps of 200 watts capa-
city and over must be ventilated.
LAMPHOLDERS.
95. Lampholders (Rules 37 and 100) must: —
(o) Be incombustible;
(b) Not be hung from flexibles exposed to the
weather;
(c) Not contain a switch if they are to be used
for pressures above 2SO volts;
( d ) Be fitted with cord grips unless attached to a
fitting. For large lamps it is advisable that
the conductors near the lamp terminals be
spaced apart;
(e) Be of approved design for lamps taking more
than li amperes.*
96. The use of switch holders or key sockets is not
permitted. (This rule is to take effect as from the 30th
June, 1925.)
97. A portable hand-lamp must be provided, with a:
guard, which must not be in metallic contact with the
lamp-holder.
ARC LAMPS.
98. Arc lamps (Rule 36) must be: —
(o) Guarded by lanterns or globes arranged to in-1
tercept falling particles of carbon; '
Note. —Lanterns or globes may be dispensed
with where an open arc is essential, as in pho-
tography, and where no combustible material is
present, as in a foundry; but the flooring im-
mediately under the lamp, if of a combustible
nature, must be protected from falling particles
of carbon. Open inverted arc lamps, in the
Joints.
Gas-filled
Lamps.
Key Sockets.
Hand Lamps.
Globes and
Guards.
•Contractors are warned that on and after the Ist January,
1926, the capacity of the Bayonet Type Socket and Adapter will
be limited to 1 ampere.


presence of combustible matter, must have
metal reflectors rigidly attached beneath the
arc, which at all times must be below the level
of the upper edge of the reflector. The re-
flector must project at least 15 inches, and in
hazardous risks 21 inches, measured horizontally
beyond the arc on all sides.
(b) Insulated from their support;
(c) Fixed so that their cases cannot come into
contact with any metallic object;
( d ) Controlled by linked switches and protected
by a fuse on each pole;
(e) When arc lamps are suspended from pulleys
and are lowered for the purpose of cleaning
and re-carboning, stranded conductors must be
used for the leads if such leads go direct to
the lamp. ,
INCANDESCENT LAMPS.
99. Incandescent lamps must be:—
(a) Placed apart from combustible materials un-
less specially protected: shades made of com-
bustible materials must be kept free from con-
tact with the lamps and their holders by suit-
able guards or supports; the use of celluloid
or similar material for shades or candle tubes
is strictly prohibited;
( b ) Fitted with guards if placed in positions where
goods are liable to be stacked in contact with
them;
( c ) They, with their holders, must be enclosed in
air-tight fittings of thick glass, if placed in
positions where they are likely to be exposed
to:—
i. Inflammable vapour or gas, such as may be
found in stores containing volatile spirits
(benzine, petrol, etc.), cleaning pits of motor
garages, etc.
ii. Excessive dust or flyings, such as may be
found in dust rooms and raising rooms.
100. The use of cord-grips on portable appliances is
recommended, and especially for large lamps it is ad-
visable that the conductors near the lamp terminals be
spaced apart.
101. Lamp caps, of which the insulating material is
hygroscopic, must not be used


102. The connections to the terminals of the lamp
tube of mercury vapour lamps must be so constructed
that loose contact or overheating cannot occur. The
resistance and solenoid must be completely enclosed in
a metal case, and any apertures in the case for ventilat-
ing purposes must be on the sides only and covered with
fine wire gauze.
In the case of gas-filled lamps of 300 watts capacity
and over, the insulation of the conductors within a dis-
tance of at least 12 inches of the holder, shall be of
fire-resisting material. Such lamps shall be placed well
clear of all inflammable material.
HEATERS AND COOKING DEVICES.
103. Heaters (Rule 32) must be:—
(o) So constructed and mounted that their sup-
ports and connections cannot become overheated,
precautions being taken with regard to their
surroundings, as in the case of non-electrical
heating appliances. They must not be placed
in close proximity to combustible material, un-
less suitably protected.
( b ) In private residences the capacity of Mains,
Main Switches and Main Fuses and Sub-mains,
controlling groups of final circuits of heating
points, may be calculated according to the fol-
lowing rating;—
5 amperes for the first power point;
2 amperes for each additional point;
provided that the minimum size cable under the
above diversity factor rating is 7/.029, and the
minimum size switch and fuse control is 18 am-
peres. This rating does not apply to the capa-
city of the wire required for final circuits, where-
in each power point must be allowed for at a
minimum of 1000 watts, with a maximum of 15
amperes on any final circuit. Each flat or sub-
let tenement to be treated as a private residence.
For 100-110 volt systems the above amperage
shall be doubled. Each point to be controlled by
double-pole 10 ampere switch if serving appara-
tus of over 1000 watts.
( c ) Flexible conductors to all heating and cooking'
devices using more than 3 amperes, must not be
of smaller section than that of 40/36 S.W.G.
{d) Electric irons and all other portable appliances!
with unearthed frames must not be installed i
where the operator is in contact with a conduct-
ing floor, or the appliance is used within touching
i Mercury
Vapour
and
Gas-filled
Lamps.
Mounting
and
Location.
Capacity
of Mains,
Switches
and
Fuses.
Conductors.
Dangerous
positions.


Kitchen
cooking
devices,
bath-heaters,
domestic
appliances
in laundries*
Ranges,
Stoves and
Ovens—Supply
distance of earthed metal,* unless the frame is
effectively earthed through a third wire.
( e ) Where the surroundings are such that it will be
possible for personal contact to be made between
any part of the device and earth, the following
precautions shall be observed: —
i. Metal-covered switches, if used, must have the
cover and also the handles (if of metal)
earthed.
ii. Fuses shall be of the cartridge plug or other
similar replacement type, and of such design
that they can be replaced readily without
risk of shock.
iii. Devices shall have all metal work, which does
not form part of the electrical circuit, per-
manently connected to earth.
iv. All metal work forming part of the electrical
circuit shall be so protected that it is im-
possible to touch it whilst current is
switched on.
if) Supply may be two-wire, three-wire or three
phase four-wire, and of such maximum balanced
limitation as the Supply Authority may decide.
Supply, when brought into consumer’s pre-
mises, must be taken from separate pairs of ter-
minals, arranged to minimise danger of shock,
and the wiring from these terminals, including
that behind distribution boards, must be kept
distinct (Rule 30). If more than one pair of
conductors is required, the separate circuits, each
consisting of one outer and one neutral conduc-
tor, may be run in one conduit, but each circuit
must be switched and fused in pairs at the main
board, or distribution board, before entering the
circuit. All “outers” must be coloured red, and
all wires be easily indentified at each end.
Manner of connecting the circuits with the
stove, etc., may either be:—
* “Earthed metal” is defined as follows:
(a) In dry surroundings having a wood floor, any metal
object other than that connected with the electrical
system.
(b) Any metal work or piping, including that connected
with the electrical system, in laundries, bathrooms, lift
shafts, the immediate neighbourhood of running ma-
chinery, and all places where even a slight shock might
lead to a serious accident.
It is further laid down that the minimum distance to be
allowed between the Portable Device, when fully extended, and
any earthed metal shall be 6 feet.


i. By terminating the wires (run in conduit) at
wall switches and 3 pin plugs situated ad-
jacent to the stove. Connection therefrom to
stove to be made by means of flexible, pro-
tected by wire braiding, the braiding to be
used for earthing, and to be mechanically
connected to the stove and to the plug, in
such manner as to obviate the conductors
and insulation being stressed. The three-pin
plug to be of such design as to prevent the
possibility of wrong insertion, and the third
pin to be used as an earthing connection.
The earthing to be positively done by means
of a continuous ground wire as set out in
Rule 138 (0 in regard to motor frames, etc.
ii. Alternatively, that conductors and conduit are
brought directly into the terminal enclosure
of the stove. In such case, the conduit must
be securely attached to the stove, which
must not be capable of movement, or change
of position.
ig) Switches.—Except where the design of the
switches upon the oven makes adequate provision
otherwise, metal covers and metal switch-knobs
must be effectively earthed in such way as will
prevent their being removed unless the earthing
wire is first disconnected.
(A) Switching of Elements.—Each element shall be
controlled by a s.p. quick-break switch of an
approved form. (Rotary types, in which the
handle can be readily unscrewed and the cover
fall off, are not regarded as satisfactory.) It
must be ensured that all switches shall be on the
“active” conductor.
(i) Protection of Elements.—All current carrying
parts of elements must be efficiently protected so
as to prevent liability of contact therewith, or
of short circuiting of same.
The protecting guards, if of metal, must be
fixed in position and make efficient contact with
the earthed framework of the stove. This is
regarded as the more necessary in that occasion
arises in some stoves for having more than one
outer conductor within the oven.
O') Fuses. —If provided on stoves, must be con-
veniently located and of the safe replacement
hand-grip type, having no bare metal exposed.
Switches.
Fuses.


104. Portable heaters using low pressures must have
at least one section controlled solely on the live side of
the connector, and, if using medium pressures, must be
controlled solely by wall switches. These switches must
be on the live side of the connector. It must be assumed
that each heating point may be loaded to at least 1000
watts.
105. Electric irons, and similar non-luminous electrical
appliances, should be protected by some form of auto-
matic cut-off approved by the Inspector, which will
operate in the event of the appliance exceeding the
maximum safe temperature. Where not so protected
some indicating device, such as a red pilot lamp, or
audible indicator approved by the Inspector, must be
connected in circuit therewith.
RESISTANCES, CHOKING COILS, AND
ALTERNATING-CURRENT TRANSFORMERS.
106. (a) The live parts (Rule 36) of the above must
be; —
i. Carried on frames or supports, and, unless
otherwise guarded from approach, enclosed
in cases. These frames, supports, and cases
must be of incombustible material efficiently
insulated from the conductors.
ii. Amply ventilated or oil-cooled. Where there
is any danger of inflammable dust or flyings
entering, apertures in the cases must be pro-
tected by fine-mesh wire gauzes or by finely
perforated sheet metal.
iii. So proportioned that their cases cannot attain
a temperature exceeding 176 deg. F. (80
deg. C.).
iv. So fixed that no unprotected combustible
material is within 6 inches of the frames or
cases containing them, or within 24 inches
measured vertically above them.
( b ) Auto-transformers for lighting purposes are
not permitted on circuits operating at more
than 250 volts.
(c) Double wound transformers with a secondary
voltage not exceeding 12 volts may be used in
connection with ordinary bell installations, pro-
vided such transformers are capable of with-
standing a short circuit of the secondary coils,
through 10 feet of No 20. copper wire for one
hour, without overheating. Such transformers
must be protected by a fuse on each pole.


MOTORS.
107. Motors (Rules 2 ( b ) and 36), rated at more
than one-third of a horse-power, must conform with the
recommendations of the British Engineering Standards
Association, Specification 168, and must comply with the
following requirements-
(o) They must be protected from damp, dust, and
mechanical injury.
( b ) They must be so placed that no unprotected
woodwork or combustible material is within a
distance of 12 inches from them, measured hori-
zontally, or within 4 feet, measured vertically,
above them, unless they are of the totally en-
closed type (Def. 21).
( c ) Where mounted upon wood flooring, they must
have a sheet of metal inserted between them and
such flooring. If elevated over wood flooring,
they must either rest upon a metal plate or have
a metal tray suspended immediately below them.
( d ) In positions exposed to inflammable dust or
flyings, or where inflammable materials arc
xnanipulated or stored, they must be totally
enclosed, pipe-ventilated, or semi-enclosed (Def.
21 and 22). In such situations, any ventilating
openings in the cases of continuous current
machines must be protected by fine-mesh wire
gauze or by finely perforated sheet metal, and all
slip rings, commutators and brushes must be
totally enclosed. Inspection openings, fitted with
plate glass or fine-mesh wire gauze, are allowed.
Induction motors may be protected machines
(Def. 19), but slip rings or brushes or any
sliding contacts must be completely enclosed in
metal cases.
(e) They must be controlled by a multi-pole switch
and protected by a fuse or overload breaker on
each pole. All motors on lifts, hoists, and con-
veyors exceeding S h.p. must be protected by an
automatic circuit-breaker on each conductor, such
circuit-breakers to be mechanically linked, when
connected, as in Rule 26.
(/) Every continuous-current motor must be fitted
with a starting switch, with a no-volt release
and a series starting resistance.
( y ) The shunt circuit of any motor must be so
connected that the field is excited before the
starting resistance is cut out.
Protection.
Combustible
Materials.
Wood Floors.
Inflammable
Dust.
Control.
Starting
Gear.
Shunt
Circuit.


(h) Every 3-phase alternating-current motor of 3
h.p. and over must be provided with a suitable
starter. Every installation, having motors of a
total capacity exceeding 3 h.p., must be provided
with a main no-volt circuit-breaker which will
ensure the opening of all phases simultaneously
in the event of the failure of the supply, or
alternatively, each motor starter must be pro-
vided with a no-volt release operating in a
similar manner.*
(i) Motors and starters must have their frames
connected to earth. In no case must the conduj'.
be used as the earth conductor,
(;) They must be provided with suitable terminal
blocks, which must be protected.
( k ) Every single-phase motor of 1/3 h.p. or over
must be provided with a suitable starting switch.
GENERATORS.
108. Generators (Rule 36), (See British Standard
Rules for Electrical Machinery, Report No. 168), must —
(а) Not be placed in positions exposed to inflammable
dust or flyings, nor where combustible materials
are manipulated or stored;
(б) Be protected from damp, dust, and mechanical
injury.
( c) Be so placed that no unprotected wood-work, or
other combustible material, is within a distance
of 12 inches from them, measured horizontally,
or wdthin 4 feet, measured vertically, above
them;
(//) Have a sheet of metal inserted between them
and such flooring, where mounted upon or above
wood-flooring;
(c) Be controlled by a double-pole switch and pro-
tected by a fuse or circuit-breaker on each pole,
except with earthed concentric wiring;
(/) Be provided with a suitable terminal block
attached to the djmamo. All terminals must be
covered.
ACCUMULATORS AND OTHER BATTERIES.
109. The room in which the accumulators or primary
batteries are placed must be well ventilated (Rule 36).
♦ This Clause relates to installations having individual Motors of
3 h.p. or over.


110. The case of each cell must stand on insulators.
Glass cells having a base measuring more than 18 inches
in length or breadth must have intermediate supports.
111. Bare conductors (Rule 72 ( g ) ) must be used for
end and regulating cell connections.
112. The method of control must be as described in
Rule 107 (e).
113. Portable accumulators with celluloid cases must
be so arranged and placed during recharging that if they
become ignited the fire cannot spread.
TESTING.
114. The current must not be switched on until the
finished work has passed the following tests, which are
to be made with not less than twice the working
pressure:—■
The insulation resistance between conductors and be-
tween conductors and earth of the whole or any part of ■
the wiring must not be less in megohms than 30 divided
by the number of points under test.
Separate tests must be taken of the insulation of the
sub-circuits, and these tests must be made on the instal-
lation as a whole and on its individual sub-circuits.
Any motor, heating appliance, arc lamp, etc., together
with its control gear, or other accessory apparatus, must
have an insulation resistance on the live parts of not less
than 1 megohm from the frame or case.
In the case of lighting circuits, the whole of the lamps
having been connected to the conductors, and all switches
being on and fuses in circuit, the insulation resistance of
the whole or any part of the installation must not be less
in megohms than 25 divided by the number of lamps.
115. The value of systematically inspecting and testing]
apparatus and circuits cannot be too strongly urged.
Records should be kept of all tests, so that any gradual
deterioration of the system may be detected. Cleanliness
of all parts of the apparatus and fittings is essential.
116. Before making any repairs or alterations, the]
circuits which are to be handled must be entirely discon-
nected from the supply. All dead and disused wires and
fittings, which do not conform to these rules, must be
removed from the buildings wherever possible.
AERIAL CONDUCTORS.
117. All aerial conductors fixed to the outside of a j
building must be stranded, and those other than the
neutral service wires must be insulated for a distance of
Insolation.
Connectors,
Control.
Portable
A ccumulators.
Insulation
resistance to
earth.
Testing of
Circuits.
Inspection.
Repairs.
Aerial*.


not less than 7 feet from the building. They must be
supported on suitable insulators and run in an approved
manner. In places where lightning storms are prevalent,
external conductors entering, or connected to, or travers-
ing the building or buildings, must, where required by
the Authorities concerned, be provided with approved
lightning arresters.
(а) An aerial conductor for a span not exceeding
75 feet between supports shall be not less than
7/.036 cable, or for greater spans shall not be
less than 7/.044 cable. The distance between
points of supports shall in no case exceed 135
feet. In no case shall the height from the ground
be less than 10 feet.
(б) Every support on an aerial line must be of
durable material and properly stayed against
forces due to wind pressure and change of
direction of the line, and all conductors must be
so spaced that they cannot touch each other,
(c) The aerial line must be 7 feet above any roof
which is accessible to traffic, etc., and at least
2 feet above the highest point of all other roofs
over which it passes. It must be efficiently sup-
ported on porcelain insulators; button insulators
will not be accepted for the purpose.*
( d ) At point of entry to a building the connection
of an aerial must be drip looped outside, the
holes through wall being bushed with incom-
bustible non-absorbent tubes slanting upward
towards the inside (Rule 75).
TEMPORARY WIRING.
118. Temporary wiring will not be allowed without a
permit. The Authority concerned may give a permit for
a temporary installation to be connected for a period of
not more than one month. In the event of any such
installation being required for a period exceeding one
month a fresh permit must be obtained.
119. At the expiration of the permit period the tem-
porary installation must be entirely removed.
120. Each circuit shall be protected by fuses and the
entire installation controlled by a multi-pole switch.
Such switches and fuses shall be mounted on incom-
bustible material, protected from weather and moisture,
and securely fixed.
121. Temporary installations, which involve an increase
of the loading of any existing installation by more than
Lightning
Arresters.
Aerial Span.
Aerial
Supports.
Entry to
Building-,
Permit and
Period.
Removal.
Control and
Protection.
Temporary
Additions to
Existing:
Installations.
♦This Rule shall not apply to service wires crossing a
verandah where such wires are under the constant supervision
of the Supply Authority.


25 per cent., shall be entirely controlled by separate main
fuses and switches.
122. All temporary fuses and switches must be readily
accessible and under the control of a responsible person.
123. All wire used shall be of the 600 megohm grade.
124. Where suspended the wires must be supported by
approved insulators placed not more than 40 feet apart.
125. No single circuit shall serve more than 60 lamps,
nor shall the maximum loading of any circuit exceed
2400 watts.
126. If the leads are looped into the lamp-holders they
shall be securely bound together for a distance of at
least 1 inch above the lamp-holder.
127. All joints shall be soldered and insulated.
Installations Supplied from Privately-Owned Gene-
rating Plants at Pressure Not Exceeding 50 Volts.
128. Every installation must be protected by a double- 1
pole main switch, and a main fuse on each pole.
129. All apparatus must be adequately protected by,
switches and fuses, which must be fixed in accessible
positions, free from possibility of mechanical damage.
The bases and covers of fuses must be of incombustible,
non-conducting, and moisture-proof material.
130. Conductors in dry places may be fixed with two'
insulators or with cleats. Conductors must be fixed at
least 4 inch clear of all brick, cement, or iron work,
and all damp surfaces. Wiring, which may be subjected
to mechanical damage, must be provided with additional
protection.
131. All wiring must be fixed clear of gas-pipes and
fittings.
132. The carrying capacity of wires and cables must
not exceed that allowed under Rules 39 to 43.
133. Conductors must be of tinned copper, and must be
insulated with at least one coat of cotton, one coat of
pure indiarubber, one coat of felt tape, then braided and
compounded,
134. In special cases additional protection, both as
regards insulation, protection, and fixing of conductors
may be required by the Inspector.
135. The insulation resistance to earth or between con-
ductors of any installation shall not be allowed to fall
below 0.25 megohms when tested at a pressure of 100
volts.
Accessibility
of Control.
Wire.
Suspension.
Capacity of
Circuits.
Festooning.
Joints,
Control.
Switches
and Fuses.
Wires,


156. No conductor of less sectional area than a .0015
(No. 18 S.W.G.) wire shall be used.
137. All conductors must radiate from distributing
centres. No final sub-circuit for incandescent lighting
may carry more than 8 amperes. A single-pole switch
and fuse, both fitted in the positive conductor, is con-
sidered suitable protection for sub-circuits.
Additional Regulations in Reference to Supply at
Pressures in Excess of 250 Volts, but not
Exceeding 650 Volts.
138. The pressure of supply to any consumer shall not
exceed the limit of low pressure, except for special pur-
poses, for which a medium-pressure supply may be given,
upon the consumer undertaking to comply with the con-
ditions hereinafter prescribed, and upon the undertakers
forwarding to the Supply Authorities written notice of
their intention to give such supply, and the undertakers
shall not give any such supply unless they have found
that the consumer’s installation complies with the fol-
lowing conditions, viz.:—
Where energy is supplied for power purposes, the
supply to every installation under these Rules shall be
arranged and controlled as follows;
(a) From the Supply Authority’s terminals or
meter, connection must be made either to an
approved type of combined automatic overload
and no-volt circuit-breaker, and having a trip on
each pole, or to an efficient hand-operated main
switch and to main fuses of the safe-replacement
type on each pole. Where the full-load supply
exceeds 2SO amperes, an automatic overload
switch or circuit breaker must be used.
Isolating links must be inserted between
an oil switch or oil circuit-breaker and
the supply terminals. Bus-bar connections
must be provided from the circuit-breaker
or main switch, together with fuses or
other automatic cut-off devices for protection
of circuits leading therefrom. Where the switch-
board appliances are not back connected the
space between the wall and the back of the
board need not exceed 2i inches. Where switch-
board appliances are back-connected a minimum
spacing of 4 inches must be provided between
any live metal and a wall. Where the size of
switchboard exceeds 24 inches x 24 inches, or
4 square feet, the distance from wall must be
increased to 12 inches. Boards exceeding 10
square feet in area must be mounted on standards
Pressure of
mpply to
tonsumers,
fee.
insumer’s
ain Switch
id Distribu-
dh.
oard.
tance
ween Wall
Back of
tch-boards.


supported by the floor, and must have a clear
space of 2 feet 6 inches between the wall and
any live metal. All stays and conductors must
be so arranged as to allow of head room of not
less than 6 feet. The spacing between live parts
of opposite polarity of switches or of fuses, un-
less effectively screened, must not be less than
3i inches. Every installation must be provided
either with a main no-volt release attachment,
which will insure the simultaneous opening of all
poles of the supply, or, alternatively, each motor
must be provided with a no-volt attachment
operating in a similar manner.
( b ) Each individual motor circuit must originate
at a distribution board, which is either incor-
corporated with the main switchboard, or is con-
nected thereto by means of sub-main circuits.
(c) The size of the conductors forming the con-
nections to motors or otherwise in connection
with the supply on the consumer’s premises shall
be in accordance with Tables 2 and 3 of these
Rules.
All conductors, except flexibles and those hav-
ing less than seven strands, must be soldered into
proper cable thimbles for connection to terminals.
Where the type of terminal renders it imprac-
ticable to use a thimble, it is imperative that
the strands be soldered together for connection.
Where there is any possibility of stress on the
thimbles, the conductors must be secured in ad-
dition to the soldering, by some mechanical de-
vice, such as one or more set screws. Alterna-
tively, approved solderless terminations or tags
may be used. (Rule 62, Solderless Termina-
tions.)
( d ) The consumer’s wires, and any service lines
upon the consumer’s premises, must be com-
pletely enclosed in strong metal tubing, united
by some form of screwed or grip joint, giving
ample and permanent electrical conductivity and
mechanical rigidity throughout, and all free ends
of such tubing shall be provided with suitable
bushes firmly fixed therein, or shall have equiva-
lent approved protection. Where conduit is run
at the floor level, or where protecting conduc-
tors carrying SO amperes or over, seamless con-
duit, Class B, with screw couplers, must be
used. In butchers’ chopping rooms, dairies,


ants, &c.
lendosed
nductors.
otective
vices for
•tors, &c.
trol
tch.
ninal
(ks.
(ling
breweries, stables, and places liable to be damp,
Class B conduit must also be used.
(e) All moving contacts and bare conductors in con-
nection with electrically-driven cranes and simi-
lar appliances must be so placed and guarded as
to prevent danger so far as is reasonably prac-
ticable to the satisfaction of the Inspector.
(/) In special circumstances, and after application
to and consent by the Supply Authorities, con-
ductors may be run on insulators inside pre-
mises.
(g) Every sub-main circuit or motor circuit must
be protected at its origin by an efficient fuse or
other automatic cut-off on each pole, but where
the rated full-load current of any motor exceeds
60 amperes, automatic maximum current circuit-
breakers must be used. All circuit-breakers
must be provided with an overload trip coil on
each pole.
( h ) The design of any fuse must be such that the
replacement of it will not involve the touching
of any charged metal parts.
(i) Motors, switches, starting devices, automatic
circuit-breakers and fuses must be enclosed and
protected so that there will be no danger of
shock being received in the ordinary handling
thereof, or of a fire being caused by their norma!
or abnormal action. Where only one motor is
installed it shall not be necessary to provide a
separate switch for the motor, if the switch
controlling the installation be readily accessible
by the person in charge of the motor.
(j) Every motor shall be controlled by means of an
efficient switch placed in such a position as to
be easily handled by the person in charge of the
motor, and connected so that by its means all
pressure can be cut off from any regulating
switch, resistance, or other device in connection
therewith.
( k ) All motors in which the full-load current does
not exceed 100 amperes must be provided with
suitable terminal blocks, which must be pro-
tected.
(l) The frame of every electric motor, all metal
tubing, and any metal forming the cover of, or
enclosing any portion of an electric line, if
such cover be without an efficient insulating lin-
ing, must be effectively connected with earth in


such manner as not to allow of difference of
potential between the earthing connections and
the general mass of the earth being set up. All
earth connections must be in sight and easily
accessible. The earthing cable must be stranded,
continuous from motor and starting frames to
earthing point, securely fastened to supports, and
enclosed in metal tubing where liable to mechani-
cal injury. The carrying capacity of the earth-
ing conductor must be not less than one-half of
the carrying capacity of the conductor to be
protected. Minimum size of earthing conductor
7/.036 (7/20 S.W.G.).
( m ) A notice must be fixed in a conspicuous posi-
tion, at every motor and switchboard in con-
nection with the supply, forbidding unauthorised
persons to touch the motor or apparatus, and
stating that the maintenance of the consumer’s
lines and apparatus in a safe condition in ac-
cordance with the regulations under the Electric
Light and Power Act, is a condition under which
the supply of electricity is given and continued.
139. Unless special permission is given in writing by
the authorities concerned, prior to the commencement of
work, the circuits of any electric traction system employ-
ing an earthed return, must under no circumstances be
taken into, on, or through any building for light or power
purposes, save in the case of the power and car houses or
other buildings forming part of the system.
Warning to
Unauthori.sec
Persons.
Supply fvorr
Tramway
Mains.


APPENDICES.
CONDUIT TABLE. Pag
Extracts from British Standard Specification, No. 31,
for Steel Conduits for Electrical Wiring (Rule 63) 47
Standard Dimensions of Steel Conduits before Enamel-
ling or Galvanizing 48
Permissible Number of Conductors 49
ELECTRICAD WIRE TABLES.
Tablel.—Dimensions, Weight, and Resistance of Solid
and Stranded Circular Conductors 50
Table ll.—Current Carrying Capacity and Corres-
ponding Fall of Pressure —Vulcanized Rubber
Cables 51
Table lll.—Current Carrying Capacity and Corres-
ponding Fall in Pressure—lmpregnated Paper
and Lead-covered Cables 52
Table IV.—Dimensiens of Dielectric and Protective
Covering of Cables—Rubber Insulated 53
Table V.—Dimensions of Dielectric and Protective
Covering of Cables—Paper Insulated 54
Table Vl.—lnsulation Resistance of Cables 55
Table Vll.—Dimensions and Resistance of Conductors
for Flexible'Cords 56


CONDUIT TABLE.
Extracts from British Standard Specification, No.
31, for Steel Conduits for Electrical Wiring
(Rule 63).
1. Steel conduits for electrical wiring shall be either
close joint, brazed, welded, or solid drawn. They shall
be of mild steel, free from burrs, flaws, or other defects.
They and their accessories, when these are made of steel
or iron, shall be stove-enamelled or galvanised inside and
out by an approved process.
2. Two classes of steel conduit for electrical wiring
are recognised as standard;—
(o) Plain.
( b ) Screwed.
Class (a) consists of light-gauge conduit of the
thickness and dimensions given in the annexed
Table. The socket joining the lengths of tubing
is a sleeve, and neither the ends of the conduit
nor the socket are screwed.
Class (b) consists of heavy-gauge conduit of the
thickness and dimensions given in the annexed
Table. Both ends of the conduit are screwed
with the Whitworth form of thread.
The couplers are also screwed inside throughout
their entire length with a right-handed thread of
Whitworth form, but having the number of
threads per inch given in the annexed Table.
The screwed portions of both conduits and
couplers are not enamelled.
3. Both classes of conduit shall be manufactured to
the respective outside diameters given in the annexed
Table.
4. Both classes of conduit shall be manufactured in
straight lengths of 10, 12, or 14 feet.
5. Both classes of conduit and accessories shall be
manufactured to the respective thickness given in the
annexed Table.
6. The average thickness of steel conduits should be
determined by weighing not less than one hundred feet
(100). The weight shall fall within the margins given
in the annexed Table.


Outside Diameter in
Inches
i
i
1
11
li
2
Threads per Inch .. ..
18
16
16
16
14
14
Depth of Thread in
Inches
.0356
.0400
.0400
.0400
.0457
.0457
Minimum Length of
11/16
I
I
1
li
li
Thread on end of
Conduit, in Inches
Norains
1 Thic
kness.
Class “A”—
S.W.G
19
18
18
17
16
16
(inches) .. ..
(.040)
(.048)
(.048)
(.056)
(.064)
(.064)
Class “B”—
S.W.G
16
IS
IS
15
14
13
(inches) .. ..
(.064)
(.072)
(.072)
(.072)
(.080)
(.092)
Weig
Maximum
ht per
28.9
100ft. i
40.8
n lbs.
55.4
79.9
108.7
146.7
Class “A”
Minimum
23.6
34.4
46.6
68.9
95.4
128.
Maximum
42.2
S6.9
78.1
99.3
132.1
202.4
Class “B”
Minimum
37.4
51.0
69.8
88.5
119.0
184.7
Combined length of re-
cessed portions of plain
21
2i
3
3i
4
5
sockets in inches
Thickness of plain socket
in inches
.060
.072
.072
.084
.096
.096
Length of Coupler in
inches
li
li
li
li
2
2i
Thickness of Coupler in
inches
.128
.144
.144
.144
.160
.184
(before screwing)
Minimum Radius of
Bends in inches .. ..
li |
2 1
2i
31
51
8i
CONDUIT TABLE.
Standard Dimensions of Steel Conduits Before Enamelling
or Galvanizing.


Size of Conductors.
External diameter of conduit.
i”
«”
r
1”
11”
li”
2”
New
Standard.
1/.044
Old
Standard.
1/18 S.W.G.
3
5
7
12
20
30
SO
1/.064
1/16 S.W.G.
2
4
6
10
16
24
40
3/.029
3/22 S.W.G.
2
4
6
12
]20
30
50
3/. 036
3/20 S.W.G.
2
3
4 !
8
j 14
"12
20
32 —
7/. 029
7/22 S.W.G.
1
2
4!
8
16
24
7/.036
7/20 S.W.G.
1
1*
3
6
10
14
18
7/.044
7/18 S.W.G.
1
1
2*
4
6
8
12
7/.0S2
7/17 S.W.G.
—
1
1
2*
4
6
9
7/.064
7/16 S.W.G.
—
1
1
2*
4
6
9
19/.052
19/17 S.W.G.
—
—
1
2*
3
Si
8
19/.044
19/18 S.W.G.
—
—
1
1*
3
5
8
19/.064
19/16 S.W.G.
—
—
—
1
1
2*
4
19/.083
19/14 S.W.G.
—
—
—
1
1
2*
4
1/.044
CONDUI
1/1& S.W.G.
T—Cl
4
.ASS
6
“B”
10
16
26
46
1/.064
1/16 S.W.G.
3
4
8
14
20
36
3/.029
3/22 S.W.G.
3
S
10
16
26
46
3/.036
3/20 S.W.G.
2
4
6
12
16 |
30
7/.029
7/22 S.W.G.
2
3
6
10
14
22
7/.036
7/20 S.W.G.
1
2*
S
8
12
16
7/. 044
7/18 S.W.G.
1
1
3
6
7
10
7/. 052
7/17 S.W.G.
■
1
2*
4
5
8
7/. 064
7/16 S.W.G.
—
1
2*
4
5
8
19/.0S2
19/17 S.W.G.
—
1
1
3
4
6
19/.044
19/18 S.W.G.
—
1
1
3
4
6
19/.064
19/16 S.W.G.
—
—
1
1
2*
4
19/.083
19/14 S.W.G.
—
—
1
1
1
4
PERMISSIBLE NUMBER OF CONDUCTORS.
These Numbers Must Not Be Exceeded.
CONDUIT—CLASS “A”
NOTES, —The external diameter is that by which the size of the
conduit is known.
For wires having radial dielectric thickness of 62 mils,
take one size larger up to and including 7/.052.
In each case the nearest old standard gauge of wire is
named.
*ln these cases two additional conductors may be inserted provided
the external diameter of same does not exceed one half the diameter
of the conductors mentioned in table.


Nominal
Area.
1.
Old
S.W.G.
Standard
(nearest).
2.
Effective
Area.
3.
Number
and
Diameter
of Wires
comprising
Conductor.
4.
Overall
Diameter*
5.
Weight
per 1000
Yards.
6.
Resistance
per 1000
Yards at
60 deg. F.
(15.6 deg.
C.)
7.
sq. in.
sq. in.
in.
Sul
lb.
i
ohms.
0.0010
1/20
0.00102
1/.036
0.036
11.77
23.59
0.0015
1/18
0.00152
1/.044
0.044
17.58
15.79
0.0020
. 3/22
0.00194
3/.029
0.062
23.37
12.36
0.0030
3/20
0.00299
3/.036
0.078
36.02
8.019
0.0030
1/16
0.00322
1/.064
0.064
37.20
7.463
0.0045
7/22
0.004SS
7/.029
0.087
54.39
5.281
0.0070
7/20
0.00701
7/.036
0.108
83.81
3.427
0.0100
7/18
0.01046
7/.044
0.132
125.2
2.294
0.0145
7/17
0.01462
7/. 052
0.156
174.9
1.643
0.0225
7/16
0.02214
7/.064
0.192
264.9
1.084
0.0285
7/14
0.02850
19/.044
—
'
—
0.0400
19/17
0.03960
19/.0S2
0.260
475.5
0.6063
0.0600
19/16
0.05999
19/.064
0.320
720.3
0.4002
0.0750
19/15
0.07592
19/.072
0.360
911.6
0.3162
0.1000
19/14
0.10090
19/.083
0.415
1211.0
0.2380
0.1200
37/16
0.11680
37/.064
0.448
1403.0
0.2056
0.1500
37/15
0.14780
37/.072
0.504
1776.0
0.1625
0.2000
37/14
0.19640
37/.083
0.581
2360.0
0.1223
0.2500
37/13
0.24650
37/.093
0.651
2963.0
0.09738
0.3000
37/12
0.30240
37/.103
0.721
3635.0
0.07939
0.4000
61/13
0.40640
61/.093
0.87
4886.0
0.05908
0.5000
61/12
0.49850
61/.103
0.927
5994.0
0.04816
0.6000
61/.112
0.60620
91/.093
1.023
7290.0
0.03961
0.7500
91/.101
0.74350
91/.103
1.133
8942.0
0.03229
1.0000
127/.101
* 1
1.03760
127/.103
1.339
b I
12481.0
0.02314
BRITISH ENGINEERING STANDARD.
ELECTRICAL WIRE TABLES, 1922 REVISION.
TABLE I.
Dimensions, Weight, and Resistance of Solid and Stranded
Circular Conductors.


Nomina]
Area of
Conduc-
tor.
1.
Old
S.W.G.
Standard
(nearest).
2.
Num ber and
Diameter
of Wires
comprising
Condu ctor
3.
Single
Gabies
run in
Pairs.
I
4.
Concentric
or Twin
Cable.
1 5.
Three-
core
Cable,
6.
Approx.
Total
Length in
Circuit
(Lead and
Return) for
i-volt Drop
7.
Sq. in.
0.0010
1/20
1/.036
amps.
4.1
amps.
3.5
amps.
feet
30
0.0015
1/18
1/.044
6.1
5.2
30
0.0020
3/22
3/.029
7.8
6.7
30 .
0.0030
3/20
3/.036
12.0*
10.3
—
30 r 4
0.0030
1/16
1/.064
12.9 —
11.1
30 —
0.0045
7/22
7/. 029
18.2
15.7
13.6
30
0.0070
7/20
7/.036
24.0
20.6
18.0
33
0.0100
7/18
7/. 044
31.0
26.6
23.2
39
0.0145
7/17
7/. 052
37.0
32.0
27.8
46
0.0225
7/16
7/. 064
46.0
39.0
34.0
55
0.0285
7/14
19/.044
—
—
—
—
0.0400
19/17
19/.0S2
64.0
55.0
47.0
71
0.0600
19/16
19/.064
83.0
71.0
59.0
83
0.0750
19/15
19/.072
97.0
83.0
69.0
90
0.1000
19/14
19/.083
118.0
100.0
83.0
98
0.1200
37/16
37/.064
130.0
118.0
90.0
103
0.1500
37/15
37/.072
152.0
126.0
105.0
111
0.2000
37/14
37/.083
184.0
149.0
126.0
122
0.2S00
37/13
37/.093
214.0
170.0
146.0
132
0.3000
37/12
37/. 103
240.0
188.0
—
145
0.4000
61/13
61/.093
288.0
220.0
—
162
0.5000
61/12 j
61/.103 1
332.0
249.0
—
173
0.6000
61/.112
91/.093
384.0
—
—
183
0.7500
91/.101
91/.103
461.0
—
186
1.0000
127/.101
127/.103
595.0
—
—
202
BRITISH ENGINEERING STANDARD.
ELECTRICAL WIRE TABLES, 1922 REVISION.
TABLE II.
Current Carrying Capacity and Corresponding Fall of Pressure—
Vulcanized Rubber Cables.
NOTE. —See Kules 40 and 43, particularly with regard to limitation
of the capacity of conductors by the permissible drop
in volts.


Nomina)
Area of
Con-
ductor.
1.
Old
S.W.G.
Standard
(nearest).
2.
Number anc
Diameter
of Wires
comprising'
Conductor.
3.
Single
Cabins
run in
Pairs.
4.
Concentric
or twin
Cable.
6.
Three-core
Cable,
6.
Approx.
Total
Length in
Circuit \
(Lead and
Return) for
1-volt Drop,
7-
Sq. in.
0.0010
1/20
1/.036
amps.
4.1
amps. |
3.5
amps. |
feet
30
0.0015
1/18
1/.044
6.1
52
—
30
0.0020
3/22
3/.029
7.8
6.7
—
30
0.0030
3/20
3/. 036
12.0
10.3
—
30
0.0032
1/16
1/.064
12.9
11.1
—
30
0.0045
7/22
7/.029
18.2
15.7
13.6
30
0.0070
7/20 *
7/.036
28.0
24.0
21.0
27
0.0100
7/18
7/.044
42.0
36.0
31.0
27
0.0145
7/17
7/. 052
57.0
49.0
43.0
28
0.0220
7/16
7/.064
75.0
65.0
56.0
32
0.0285
7/14
19/.044
—
—
—
—
0.0400
19/17
19/.052
104.0
89.0
76.0
41
0.0600
19/16
19/.064
135.0
116.0
97.0
48
0.0750
19/15
19/.072
157.0
135.0
111.0
S3
0.1000
19/14
19/.083
191.0
162.0
134.0
57
0.1200
37/16
37/.064
210.0
177.0
146.0
60
0.1500
37/15
37/.072
246.0
204.0
170.0
65
0.2000
37/14
37/.083
296.0
240.0
203.0
72
0.2500
37/13
37/.093
343.0
265.0
233.0
78
0.3000
37/12
37/.103 |
385.0
302.0
258.0
85
0.4000
61/13 1
61/.093 |
464.0
354.0
—
95
0.5000
61/12
61/.103
S40.0
405.0
—
100
0.6000
61/.112
91/.093 |
624.0
—
—
105
0.7500
91/.101
91/.103
738.0
—
—
109
1.0000
127/.101
127/.103 !
932.0
—
—
121
BRITISH ENGINEERING STANDARD.
ELECTRICAL WIRE TABLES, 1922 REVISION.
TABLE III.
Current Carrying Capacity and Corresponding Fall in Pressure.
Impregnated Paper and Lead-covered Cables.
NOTE.—See Rules 40 and 48 concerning the limitation of capacities
in certain circumstances.


CONDUCTORS.
DIELECTRIC.
PROTECTIVE COVERING.
Thickness of Rubber for
Pressures.
Thickness of Lead
for Pressures.
Thiokness of Tough Rubber
Compound for Prenures.
Nominal
Area-
©Id S.W.G-
Standard
(nearest).
2.
Number and
Diameter
of Wires,
Up to
250 volts.
Up to
650 volts.
Up to
250 volte
Up to
650 volts.
Up to
250 Volts.
Up to
250 volts.
Up to
650 volts.
Up to
250 volts.
i.
3.
4.
S.
Single.
4.
Single.
7.
Twin.
«.
Single.
9.
Single.
X9.
Twin,
11.
Sq. in.
8.0010
1/20
1/.036
in.
0.034
in.
0.055
in.
0.040
in.
0.050
in.
0.040
in,
o.oso
in.
0.050
in.
0.050
0.001 S
1/18
1/.044
0.034
o.oss
0.040
0.050
0.040
0.650
0.050
0.050
0.0020
3/22
3/.029
0.036
0.056
0.040
0.050
0.040
0.050
0.050
0.060
0.0030
3/20
3/.036
0.038
0.0S7
0.040
0.050
0.040
0.050
O.OSO
0.060
0.0030
1/16
1/.064
0.036
0.0S7
0.040
0.050
0.040
0.050
0.050
0.060
0.0045
7/22
7/. 029
0.039
0.058
0.040
O.OSO
0.050
O.OSO
O.OSO
0.068
0.0070
7/20
7/.036
0.041
0.0S9
o.oso
0.060
0.050
O.OSO
0.050
0.060
0.0100
7/18
7/.044
0.043
0.060
0.050
0.060
O.OSO
0.050
0.060
0.060
0.014S
7/17
7/. 052
0.046
0.061
0.060
0.060
0.060
o.oso
0.060
0.060
0.0220
7/16
7/. 064
0.049
0.062
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.060
0.080
0.028S
0.040Q
7/14
19/17
19/.044
19/.0S2
0.0S6
0.063
0.060
0.060
0.080
0.060
0.060
0.100
8.0600 :
19/16
19/.064
0.062
0.06S
0.070
0.070
0.080
0.060
0.060
0.100
0.0750
19/15
19/.072
0.066
0.066
0.070
0.070
0.080
0.060
0.069
0.100
0.1000
19/14
19/.083
0.072
0.072
0.070
0.070
0.090
0.080
0.080
0.120
0.1200
37/16
37/.064
0.075
0.075
0.070
0.070
0.090
0.080
0.080
0.120
0.1580
37/15
37/.072
0.08Q
0.080
0.080
0.080
0.090
o.oeo
0.080
0.130
0.2000
37/14
37/.083
0.088
0.088
0.080
0.080
,0.100
0.100
0.100
0.150
&2S00
37/13
37/.093
0.095
0.09S
0.090
0.090
0.110
0.100
0.100
0.150
0.3000
37/12
37/.103
0.102
0.102
0.090
0.090
0.120
0.100
0.100
0.175
0.4000
61/13
61/.093
0.114
0.114
0.100
0.100
0.130
0.120
0.120
0.200
0.5000
61/12
61/.103
0.121
0.121
0.110
0.110
0.140
0.120
0.120
0.225
0.6000
61/.112
91/.093
0.125
0.125
0.110
0.110
—
0.130
0.130
0.250
0.7500
91/.101
91/.103
0.131
0.131
0.120
0.120
—
0.130
0.130
0.250
1.0000
127/.101
127/.103
0.141
0.141
0.120
0.120
0.150
0.150
0.2S0
BRITISH ENGINEERING STANDARD
ELECTRICAL WIRE TABLES. 1922 REVISION.
TABLE IV.
DIMENSIONS OF DIELECTRIC AND PROTECTIVE COVERING OF CABLES.
RUBBERINSULATED.


CONDUCTORS.
DIELECTRIC.
LEAD COVERED CABLES.
Nominal
Area.
L
Old
S.W.G.
Standard
(nearest).
2.
Number
and
Diameter
Size of
Wires.
3.
Thickness
4.
Single.
Concentric
Triple
Concentric
Twin
Three Core.
Thickness of Lead.
Thickness
of Lead.
5.
Thickness
of Lead.
6.
Thickness
of Lead.
7.
Thickness of Lead.
Circular
Conductors
8.
Segmental
Conductors
9.
Circular
Conductors
10.
Segmental
Conductors
il.
Sq. in.
1
In.
In.
In.
In.
In.
In.
In.
In.
0.0010
1/20
1/.036
0.050
0.045
—
—
—
—
0.0015
1/18
1/.044
0.050
0.04S
—
—
—
—
—
0.0020
3/22
3/.029
0.050
0.04S
—
—
—
—
0.0030
3/20
3/.036
0.050
0.045
—
—
—
—
—
0.0030
1/16
1/.064
0.050
0.045
—
—
—
—
—
—
0.0045
7/22
7/.029
0.060
0.050
—
—
—
—
—
0.0070
7/20
7/.036
0.080
0.060
0.070
0.090
0.070
0.070
—
0.0100
7/18
7/. 044
0.080
0.060
0.070
0.090
0.070
0.070
—
0.0145
7/17
7/.052
0.080
0.060
0.070
0.090
0.070
0.070
0.080
—
0.0225
7/16
7/.064
0.080
0.060
0.070
0.090
0.070
0.070
0.080
0.070
0.0285
7/14
19/.044
—
—
0.0400
19/17
19/.0S2
0.080
0.060
0.080
0.090
0.080
0.080
0.090
0.080
0.0600
19/16
19/.064
0.080
0.070
0.080
0.090
0.080
0.080
0.090
0.080
0.0750
19/15
19/.072
0.080
0.070
0.080
0.100
0.080
0.080
0.090
0.080
0.1000
19/14
19/.083
0.080
0.070
0.080
0.100
0.090
0.080
0.100
0.090
0.1200
37/16
37/.064
0.080
0.070
0.080
0.100
0.090
0.080
0.100
0.090
0.1500
37/15
37/.072
0.080
0.070
0.080
0.100
0.090
0.080
0.100
0.090
0.2000
37/14
37/.083
0.080
0.070
0.090
0.110
0.100
0.090
0.110
0.100
0.2500
37/13
37/.093
0.090
0.080
0.100
0.110
0.110
0.100
0.120
0.110
0.3000
37/12
37/. 103
0.090
0.080
0.100
0.120
0.120
0.110
0.130
0.120
0.4000
61/13
61/.093
0.100
0.090
0.110
0.130
0.130
0.110
0.140
0.120
0.5000
61/12
61/.103
0.100
0.090
0.120
0.140
0.140
0.120
0.150
0.130
0.6000
61/.112
91/.093
0.100
0.100
0.130
0.150
—
—
0.7500
91/.101
91/.103
0.110
0.100
0.140
0.160
—
1.0000
127/.101
127/.103
0.110
0.110
0.150
0.170
—
—
—
BRITISH ENGINEERING STANDARD
ELECTRIC WIRE TABLES. 1922 REVISION.
TABLE V.
DIMENSIONS OF DIELECTRIC AND PROTECTIVE COVERING OF CABLES.
PAPER INSULATED.
NOTE.—Column 4 gives the thickness of the dielectric between any
one conductor and the next conductor or the lead sheathing.


CONDUCTOR.
Minimum Insulation Resistance, Megohms
for a Mile Length at 60 deg. F,
(16.6 deg. C.).
Rubber Insulated for
Pressures.
Nominal
Area of
Cable.
1.
Old
S.W.G
Standard
(nearest).
2.
Number
and
Diameter
of Wires.
3.
Up to 250 Volts.
Up to 650 Volts.
600
Megohm
Grade.
4.
| 2500
1 Megohm
Grade.
1 5.
650
Volt
Grade.
6.
7.
Sq. in.
Mghms.
Mghms.
Mghms.
Mghms,
0.0010
1/20
1/.036
2000
5000
5000
0.0015
1/18
1/.044
2000
5000
5000
0.0020
3/22
3/.029
1250
4500
4500
0.0030
3/20
3/.036
1250-
4500
4500
0.0030
1/16
1/.064
2000
5000
5000
0.0045
7/22
7/. 029
2250
4500
4500
0.0070
7/20
7/.036
900
4000
4000
0.0100
7/18
7/.044
900
4000
4000
0.0145
7/17
7/. 052
900
4000
4000
0.0220
7/16
7/.064
900
3500
3500
0.0300
7/14
19/.044
7
7
7
0.0400
19/17
19/.0S2
750
3000
3000
0.0600
19/16
19/.064
750
3000
3000
0.0750
19/15
19/.072
600
3000
3000
0.1000
19/14
19/.083
600
3000
3000
0.1200
37/16
37/.064
600
3000
3000
0.1500
37/15
37/.072
600
3000
3000
0.2000
37/14
37/.083
600
2500
2500
0.2500
37/13
37/.093
600
2500
2500
0.3000
37/12
37/. 103
600
2500
2500
0.4000
61/13
61/.093
600
2500
2500
0.5000
61/12
61/.103
600
2500
2500
0.6000
61/.112
91/.093
600
2500
2500
0.7500
91/.101
91/.103
600 |
2500 I
2500
1.0000 I
127/. 101
127/.103
600
2500
2500
BRITISH ENGINEERING STANDARD.
ELECTRICAL WIRE TABLES, 1922 REVISION.
TABLE VI.
INSULATION RESISTANCE OF CABLES.


Number
Resistance per 1000 yards at 60 deg. F.
i
Current
Carrying
(16.6 deg. C.)
Nominal
Area.
Diameter
of Wires
1
Maximum
Maximum
allowable
comprising
1 Capacity.
Standard j
allowable
Conductor.
1
for Plain
Wires.
Tinned
Wires.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Sq. in.
Amps.
Ohms.
Ohms.
Ohms.
0.0010
23/.0076
4.1
24.2
24.6
25.1
0.0017
40/.0076
6.1
13.9
14.2
14.4
0.0030
70/.0076
12.9
7.94
8.10
8.26
0.0048
110/.0076
18.9
s.os
5.15
5.25
0.0070
162/.0076
24.0
3.43
3.50
3.57
BRITISH ENGINEERING STANDARD.
ELECTRICAL WIRE TABLES, 1922 REVISION.
TABLE VII.
DIMENSIONS AND RESISTANCE OF CONDUCTORS
FOR FLEXIBLE CORDS.


The Numbers refer to Rules.
A
Abrasion 63(c)
Accessibility—
connections 79
flexibles 70
fuse-switches .. .. 12, 24, 122
fuses 88, 89, 129
joints 58
linked switches 24
switchboards 76, 77
temporary wiring 122
Accumulator rooms, ventilation
of 109
Accumulators 109-113
celluloid cases 113
control 112
end connections 11l
insulation 110
portable 113
Accumulator connections —bare
conductors 72 (g)
A.C. Motors 107(d)
Adapters 90(6)
Aerial conductors .. .. 11(a), 117
Arcing 76(c), 86(c), 90(a)
Arc lamps—globes and guards 98
cases 98(c)
control 98(d)
insulation 98(6)
prohibited 36
protection 98(a)
Armoured conductors 66
Auto-transformers, prohibited 106(6)
Authorities, supply—notice to 4
B
Bare, defined 10
Bare conductors—
allowed 72
preferred 11l
spacing of 72(a), 72Cff)
Bases—
ceiling roses 91(d).
circuit breakers 86(d)" v
distribution boards 76(6)
fuses 88(d)
sockets 90(2)
switchboards 76(6)
switches 86(d)
Bath heaters—precautions .. 103(c)
Bathrooms, precautions .. .. 38
Bell mouths 75
Bell transformers 106(c)
Bends, sharp—prohibited .. .. 63(g)
Biograph operating rooms .. 78(a)
Braiding-
required 50
to be removed 60, 61(6)
Branch fuses 89
Brushes, to be enclosed .. .. 107(d)
Bunched conductors—
allowed 33, 64(6)
defined 11
prohibited 30
required 33
Bushed ends 63(c)
C
Cable—
-250 volt, defined 17
pressure test 47
650 volt, defined 13
pressure test 47
thimbles 62
Calculating permissible number
of points 32(a)
Capacity conduits .. .. Page 43
Capacity of circuits 125
Caps of lamps 101
Cases —
arc lamps 98(c)
celluloid 113
distribution boards .. 85(a), 85(6)
mercury vapour lamps .. .. 102
resistances, etc 106(a)
Cased wiring-
metal conduit 63(a)
metal casing 63(6)
wood casing 64
Ceiling roses —
bases 91(a)
covers .. .. 91(6)
flexibles 91(d)
mounting 37
terminals 91(c)
Celluloid—
accumulator cases 118
prohibited 99
Centres, distributing 82
Chilling rooms—precautions .. 38
Choking coils 106
Circuit breakers —
arrangement 86(c)
bases 86(d)
boxes, guard 86(g)
covers 86 (f)
construction 86(6)
handles 86(7t)
location 86(e)
maximum 87
overheating 86(a)
required 107 (h)
size 86(c)
Circuits—
capacity of 126
inspection 115
testing 114
within safes 86
Colours for conductors .. .. 51
INDEX.


Combination boxes, arrange-
ment 84
Combined gas and electric
fittings—prohibited 85(6)
Combustible materials .. .. 99(a),
106(a-n0, 107(6), 108(c)
Concentric conductors, re-
quirements 52
Conductivity—
conductors 41, 57
joints 93
Conductors—
aerial ll(o), 117
armoured 66
bare 72
bunching 33
bunched—definition 11
colours for 51
concentric 52
copper—standards 57
distance between and metal 76(c)
earthing 34
flexible 70
heating and cooking devices 103(c)
jointing 60
lead covered 68
neutral defined 6(6)
neutral —interruption of cir-
cuit in 26
outdoor 11(a)
private plants .. 133, 136, 137
protection in special places 73
74, 75
size 39, 40, 48 Tables
temperature 44
twin and multiple 49
unarmoured 67
uninsulated—definition .... 9
Conduits—
drainage 63(/)
metal 63
porcelain 74
Connections—
accessibility 68, 78, 79
accumulator 72(g)
in junction boxes 58, 59
mode of making .. .. 58, 71
to switches, etc 61
to terminals 61, 62, 86(fe)
Connectors 58, 111
Construction, junction boxes.. 59
Construction, wall plugs and
sockets 90 (a-i)
Contact mats 90A-4
Control-
accessibility 122
accumulators 112
arc lamps 98(d)
bare conductors 72(c)
circuit 82(c)
dynamos 108(c)
heating circuits 32(c)
motors 107(c)
portable heaters 104
private plants 128
separate, for light in large
buildings 26
Control-
temporary wiring 120
three-phase systems 81
two and three wire systems 27
wall plugs 90A-4
Cooking devices 103
Copper conductors, standards 67
Cord grips 90A-3, 91(c), 92, 100
Covers—
ceiling roses 91(6^
circuit breakers 86(/)
distribution boards 86
fuse boxes 85
fuses 88(c)
switches 86(/)
Cranes, locomotive —bare
conductors 72(c)
Cranes, travelling—bare
conductors 72(d)
Current in Circuits for
Lighting 32
D
Damp places—
dynamos 108(6)
junction boxes 59(d;
lead covered conductors .. 68(d)
metal conduits 63(c)
motors 107(a)
precautions .. .. 38, 59(d), 61(d)
prohibited practices 37
wood casing 64
Definitions 5-23
Demonstration or Effect
Lighting 32(g)
Dielectric—
definition 8
kinds 45, 54
not to soften 46
Distance pieces 35(d)
Distinguishing colours for con-
ductors 61
Distributing centres 32
Distribution boards—
bases 76(6)
cases 85
location 76(a)
wiring behind .. 30, 79(a), 141
Domestic appliances 103
Double insulation 72(6)
3ouble-pole—
fuse switches 27
linked switches 27, 36, 38(a), 98(d)
switches, dynamos 108(c)
motors 107(e)
Drainage of conduits 6S(/)
Drop in volts —lighting circuits 40(a)
Dust, protection from .. 86, 99(c),
107(d), 108(a)
Dynamos—
control 108(e)
location 108(a)
protection 108(6)
terminals 108 (/)
wood floors .. .. 108(c), 108(d)
II


£
Earthed defined 7
Earthed conductors, interrup-
tion 26
Earthing—
armouring 66
conductors 34
domestic appliances .. 103(d &e)
dynamos 2(b)
lead coverings 68(/t)
medium pressures .. 2(b), 138 U)
metal cases 200
metal conduits 680 0
motors 2(b), 107(f)
precautions to be taken .. 2((
Elements in ranges, etc. —
switching 103(/i (
protection 103(i'
Enclosure—
fuses 36, 85, 88(6
joints 60
motors 107 (d
slip rings 107 (d
switches 36, 86(f)
Entry to building—aerial con-
ductors 117(d
Extensions, flexible 70(e !
F
Factories, regulations for .... 2
Feeders 82
Festooning, temporary wiring 126
Fibre-insulated cables 45
Fibro-cement switchboards .. 77
Fire insurance offices, notice
to 3
Fire resisting material—
behind switchboards .. .. 76(a)
for gas-filled lamps 102
Fittings—
gas-filled lamps 94
joints 93
rigid 70(c)
tubes and channels 92
ventilation 94
wires, size of 39
weight of 92
Fixed plugs 90(a-2)
Flexibles—
accessibility 70(b)
allowed 70
ceiling roses .. 32(b), 91(c), 91(d)
connections 71
drop-lights in bathrooms .. 88
extensions 70(d)
insulation 54, 65, 66
insulation resistance 55
joints prohibited 71
pendants 70(b)
pressure test 54, 65
prohibited 70(c), 01(d)
protection 70(b)
shop windows 70(f)
size 53
uncased wiring 70
wall plugs and sockets .. 90(a-3)
Floors, protection .. ..78, 74, 76
Floors, wood 107(c), 108(d)
Forced draught machine,
defined 28
Fuse boards 76, 77, 78
Fused metal, protection .. .. 88(c)
Fuses —
accessibility .. 2(b), 36, 37, 85,
88, 89, 129
bases 88(d)
behind switchboards 81
branch 89
covers 85, 88(e)
enclosed 88(b)
enclosure 36, 88(e)
grouping 85, 89
in biograph operating rooms 78(a)
mounting 87
overheating 88(a)
positions prohibited .. ..26, 88(f)
proportioning 88(b)
protection .. .. 36, 88(b), 129
ranges, stoves and ovens .. 103())
required.. .. 25, 27, 72(c), 107(e)
108(c)
25
short circuits 88(b)
sub-circuits 88(b)
terminals 88 (c" 4
voltmeter 83
Fuse-switches —
accessibility 24
defined 12
required .. 24, 27, 29, 31, 32, 72 (c)
G
Gases, Inflammable 36
Gas and electric fittings com-
bined 35(b)
Gas-filled lamps 94, 102
Gas fitting, converted 35(c)
Gas pipes—
distance from conductors .. 35(d)
prohibited as earth connec-
tions .. 35(a)
prohibited from touching
conductors 35(d)
spacing from rosettes .. .. 72(/)
Generators 108
Grade of insulation —250 volt
cable 17
Grade of insulation —650 volt
cable 18
Grips, cord 100
Grouping, fuses 85, 89
Guards 86(g), 98, 99(a, b
H
Hand lamps 97
Hand shields 86(f), 90 (a-2)
Handles, switches .. .. 86(fe), 86(f)
Heaters 103
conductors 103(c)
dangerous positions .. .. 108(d)
location 103(a)


Heaters—
mounting 103(a)
non-luminous 105
on lighting circuit 32(6)
pilot lamps 105
portable control 104
precautions 103(e)
protection 103(a)
small 32
Heating circuits (sub-circuits) 32(c)
Heating circuits—size of con-
ductors .. 40(6), 103(6 &c), Tables
Heating points allowed, num-
ber of 32(d)
I
Incandescent lamps 36, 99
Incombustible material—
Bases—
ceiling roses 91(a)
circuit breakers 86(d)
distribution boards .. .. 76(6)
fuses 88(d)
sockets 90(a-2)
switchboards 76(6) .
switches 86(d)|
Covers— u
ceiling roses 91(6)1
circuit breakers 86(/) I
fuses 88(c)
switches 86(/)
frames 106 (a-i)
lampholders 95(a)
linings 85(6)
Induction motors 107(6)
Inflammable—
gases and dust precautions 36, 99(c)
materials, dynamos 36, 108(a) (c)
motors 107(6) (c) (d)
resistance 106(a-4)
Inspection—
apparatus and circuits .. 115
elbows 63 (g)
fixed plugs 90(a-2)
openings 107 (d)
Insulation—
accumulators 110
arc lamps 98(6)
conductors 44, 62
fiexibles 54, 65, 56
grade of 250 volt cable de-
fined 17
grade of 650 volt cable de-
fined 18
joints 93
Insulation —
materia! 46
metal cases 82
to be durable 44
Insulation resistance—
fiexibles 66
paper insulation .. .. 48, Table
test (concentric conductors) 52
test (multiple conductors) .. 49
test (single conductor) .. 48, Table
to earth .. 114, 135
Insulation resistance-
vulcanised rubber insulation
48, Table
insulators—
for accumulators 110
for bare conductors .. .. 72 (a-g)
Insurance offices, fire 3
Interruption of current —
\ earthed conductors 26
i neutral conductor 26
| two and three wire systems 29
Irons 105
Isolating links 28
J
Joints —
accessibility 58
conductivity 93
enclosure 58, 71
how effected 60
prohibited in fiexibles .. .. 71
soldering 58
J temporary wiring 127
Junction boxes—
-1 construction 59
required 71
short circuits 59(a)
Key sockets—lampholders .... 96
L
Labelling, switchboard circuits 80
Lamp caps 101
Lampholder adapters 908
Lampholders 37, 95-100
approved design 95(a)
key sockets 96
material 99(a)
Lamps, arc 98
Lamps, gas-filled 94, 102
Lamps, hand 97
Lamps, incandescent 99
I .amps, pilot 105
Lanterns 98(a)
Latitude 1
Lead covering to be earthed 68(/t)
Lead sheathed conductors .. 68
Lighting circuits —
current 32
drop in volts 40(a)
maximum current .. .. 27, 28
separate protection 25
size of conductors 40 (o)
Lighting sub-circuits, maxi-
mum current 82
Lightning arresters .. 72(d), 117
Linings to be incombustible 85(b)
Location—
arc lamps 36
dynamos ..36, 108(a)
metal conduits 68(e)
motors 107(a) (6) (a)
switchboards 76(a)
wall plugs 36


Locomotive cranes —bare con-
ductors 72(c)
Low pressures—general ar-
rangement 24
M
Machine —
forced draught—defined .... 23
pipe ventilated —defined .. 22
pipe ventilated—required .. 107(d)
protected—defined 19
semi-enclosed —defined .. .. 20
semi-enclosed —required .. 107(d)
totally enclosed—defined .. 21
totally enclosed—required
Main- 107 f 6 >' < d >
fuse switches required .. .. 24
linked switches required .. 24
Mains, protections 82(c)
Marking terminals 30(a)
Material-
combustible .. .. 99(a), 106 (.a)iv
107(b), 108(c)
lampholders 95(a)
switches 86(d)
Mats, contact 90(a-4)
Medium pressures .. 1, 2(b), 30,
90(a-4), 106(b)
Medium pressures, additional
regulations for 138
Mercury vapour lamps—
cases 102
overheating 102
prohibited 36
use 102
Metal cases, insulation .. .. 82
Metal casing 68
Metal conduits —
allowed 63
bunching 33
earthing 63(d)
location 63(c)
protection 68, 67(c)
required 67(c), 71, 73
Mines, regulations for 2
Motors—
alternating current 107(Jt)
combustible materials .. .. 107(b)
control 107(c)
enclosure 36, 107(d)
Inflammable dust 107(d)
location 107(a) (b) (c)
on lighting circuits 32(b)
protection 107(a)
shunt circuits 107(g)
single phase 107 (fe)
spacing 107(b) (c)
starting gear 107(/)
ventilation 107(d)
wood floors 107(c)
Mounting-
ceiling roses 37
fuses 37
heaters 103(a)
switches 37
wall plugs .. . . 37
Multiple conductors, insula-
tion resistance 49
Multiple wire systems, 26, 27, 28,
Multiple switches —
accessibility 24
defined 15
required 24, 27, 31, 32(e)
36, 98(d)
voltage to be marked .. .. 30(a)
N
Neutral conductor-
colours 51
defined 6(b)
Notice of wiring 3, 4
Notices, warning 142
O
Outer conductor, defined .. .. 6(a)
Overheating—
fuses 86(a)
mercury vapour lamps .. 102
resistances 106(a)
switches 86(a)
P
Paper insulated cables—
insulation resistance .. .. 48
partitions, protection between 78
protection 45
temperature rise 43
thickness 46
Pendants—
flexibles for 70(b)
protected 70(c)
Permissible number of points 82(a)
Permits 118
Pilot lamps, required, 90(a-4), 105
protection of 83
Pipe ventilated machine —
defined 22
required 107(d)
Plugs, wall 36, 37, 90
Point—
defined 13
maximum number allowed 82
maximum number allowed
for heaters 32(d)
power plug 32(d)
Polyphase systems, protection 31
Porcelain conduits, required, 74, 75
Portable —
accumulators 113
appliances, flexibles 70(a), 90(a-4)
heaters, control 104
Potential above earth 46
Power circuits, size of con-
ductors in 40(b)
Power plug points on circuit 32(d)
Pressure test —
flexibles 54, 55
250 volt cable 17, 47
650 volt cable 18, 47
Pressures, low and medium .. 1
Pressures, low —general ar-
rangement 24
Pressures, medium .. 138


Private plants, rules for, 128-137
Prohibitions—
auto-transformers 106(6)
bunched conductors 80
celluloid 99(c)
combined fittings 35(6)
damp places (see Damp Places)
flexibles 70(6)
fuses in neutral 26, 28, 81, 88(/)
. gas pipes as earth con-
nections 35(c)
gas pipes touching con-
ductors . 35(d)
joints in flexibles 71
sharp bends 63(g), 92
slip sockets 63(c)
soldering 71
soldering fluids 58
sulphur 56
supply from tramway mains 139
Switches
26, 36. 86 (f). 90 (c-4), 95(c)
switches in neutral 26
switches unlinked 26
wood casing 64(c)
Proportioning fuses 88(6)
Protected machine, defined .. 19
Protected pendants 70(c)
Protection —
arc lamps 98(c)
armouring 66
conductors 63(6)
dynamos 108(6)
earthing conductors 34
elements in ranges, etc 103(»)
feeders 82
flexibles 70(6)
floors 73, 74, 75
fused metal 85(c)
fuses .. 86, 88(6'
heaters 103(c)
incandescent lamps .. .. 36, 99
inflammable gases .. 36, 99 (c)t
lighting circuits (indepen-
dent control 25
mains 32
master switch 24
metal conduits 63, 67(c)
motors 107(c)
of wiring 138(d)
paper insulated cables ~ .. 45
partitions 78, 74
party walls 75
polyphase systems 31
private plants 133, 184
resistances 86
sulphur 41, 56
switches 86, 860
temporary wiring 120
through walls 67 (c.
tough rubber Compound .. 65
2 and 3 wire circuits, 26, 27, 28, 29
voltmeters 83
vulcanised rubber cables .. 45
R
Radiators, portable 104
Ranges, stoves and ovens .. 103(/-t)
Rating of heaters and ap-
paratus 82(d), 163(6;
Reflectors, required 98(ci
Refrigerating rooms, pre-
cautions 38(a)
Regulating cells 11l
Regulations, factories, work-
shops, mines and theatres .. 2(c)
Repairs 116
Resistance of metal sheathing, 69
Resistances 106
Resistances protection 36
Rubber compound protection 65
Rubber insulated cables,
temperature, rise in .. 40(6), 43
S
Safes, circuits within 36
Screwed conduits 63(c)
Semi-enclosed machine—
defined 20
required 167(d)
Service fuse 25
Service main 25, 117
Sheathing to be removed 60, 61(6)
Shieids for arc lamps .. .. 98(c)
Short circuits—
ceiling roses 91(c)
fuses 88(6)
juiction boxes 59(c)
wail plugs 90(c-2)
"hint circuits of motors .. 1070?)
Signs and decorative lighting 82(7)
Single-phase meters 107(6)
Single-pole fuse-switches
required 24, 27, 81
Single-pole switches—
defined 14
required 24, 27, 36
Size—
conductors .. 39, 40, Tables
fittings, wires 39, Table
Size—
flexibles 58
resistances, etc 106(c)m
Slip rings, enclosure .. .. 107(d)
Slip sockets, plain, pro-
hibited 63(c)
Small heaters 82(6)
Sockets 86, 37, 90(c)
Soldering-
fluids prohibited .. .. .. .. 68
joints 58, 61(d)
prohibited 71
Spacing—
bare conductors 72 (/ & g)
conductors 95(d)
dynamos 108(c)
flexibles 70(6), (c), 110
motors 107(6), (c)
resistances 106(c)t
rosettes from gas pipes .. 72(/)
switchboards 76(c), 88(6)
terminals 76(6), 88(c)
three-wire systems 80


Spacing—
XJnannoured conductors
67(b), 68(a). (g )
Span, aerial 117(a)
Special regulations 2
Stardaros for copper con-
ductors 57
Starting switches required
107(f), (b). (k)
State regulations 2
Straining points—bare con-
ductors 72(b)
Stranding required 42
Sub-circuits—
< urrent 82
fuses 82, 88(b)
maximum current 82
testing 114
Sulphur, protection .. .. 41, 66
Supply—
-3 wire systems 26, 30
authorities, notice to .. .. 4
for ranges, stoves and ovens 199(f)
from tramway mains .. .. 139
Supports, aerial .. .. .. 117(b), (c)
Suppoits for resistances, etc. 106(a)
Surfaces, damp, precautions 88
Suspens’on—temporary wiring 124
Switchboard circuits to be
labelled 80
Switchboards—
accessibility 78
bases 76(6)
ccmcnt-fibro 77
clearance between live
metal 76 (d)» (e)» (/)
combination boxes 84 _
connections 79, 86(b) ■
construction 76 m
defined 10 r
distance from wall .. •• 76(g)
fibro-cement 77
fuse box covers 85
fuses behind .. .. 81
in biograph operating rooms 78(a)
labels 80 .
location 76(a)i
metal cases 82
spacing 76(c), 79(6
voltmeter fuses 83
Switches 86, 140
bases 86(d)
boxes .. 86(g)
connections 61, 86(b)
construction 86(6)
contacts 86(6)
covers ». 86(/), (j)
double-pole required—
for bare conductors .. .. 72(c)
for dynamos 108(e)
for motors 107(e)
for ranges, stoves and ovens 103(g)
for safes 86
enclosure M
handles * •• 86(b), (0
hand shields 86(0
location 86(e)
Multfpole—
defined 15
required .. 24, 27, 81, 86, 98(d)
material 86(d)
main 24
mounting 37
overl'eating 86(a)
pendant .. 86(0
prohibited
26, 86(0, 90(a-4), 95(c)
protection .. 36, 86(g), 129, 140
single-pole defined 14
size 86(c)
spacing 141
starting, required 107 (/), (h), (k)
testing 86(c)
unll. deed—prohibited 26
wall plugs and sockets .. 90(a-4)
Switching of elements in ranges,
etc 103 (JO
System defined 5
T
Tables Pages 42-50
Taping—
removal 60
required 60
Telephone wires—distance
frem conductors 35(d)
Temperature-conductors .. ~ 44
Temperature rise in cables .. 48
Temporary wiring .. .. 118-127
Terminals 107(f), 108(/)
ceiling roses 91(c)
connections 80(a)
marking 80(a), 62
protected 1070), 108(/)
spacing 76(c), 88(c)
Terminations of metal con-
duits 68(c)
Testing 114-116
circuits 114
dielectrics 64
finished work 114
inspection 116
insulation resistance .. .. 114
pressures 47, 114
repairs H 6
sub-circuits 114
switches 86(c)
wall plugs 90(a)*
Theatres, regulations for «. 2, 26
Thickness of dielectric—
cables 46, Table
flexible* 56
rubber compound 66
Thimbles, cable 62
Three-phase systems, control 81
Three-wire systems—
defined 6(a), (6)
protection 26, 27, 28
supply 26, 27, 28, 29
Tinning required 41
Totally enclosed machine-
defined 21
required 107(b), (d)


transformers 106
bell 106(c)
protection .. 106 (a-2)
trip coils 87
Travelling cranes—bare
conductors 72(a)
Tubed wiring 68
Tubes and channels 92
Twin conductors, insula-
tion resistance 49
1 wo-vire circuits, protection 27
Two and three-wire systems,
control 27
U
Unarmoured conductors .. 67, 68
Uncased wiring
65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72
between floors and ceilings 65(g)
in roofs 65(/)
surface work 65 {h)
Uninsi lated conductors, defined 9
Unlinked switches, prohibited 26
V
Variations from copper
standards 67(c), (d), (e)
Ventilation—
accumulator rooms 109
fittings 94
mercury vapour lamps .. .. 102
motors 107(d)
resistances, etc 106(a)«
Voltage, to be marked .. .. 30(a)
Voltmeters, protection .. .. 83
Vulcanised rubber insulation—
insulation resistance .. 48, 65
Vulcanised rubber insulation—
thickness 46
quality 4B
W
Wall plugs 86, 37, 90
adapters 90(6)
bases 90(a-2)
construction 90(a-l)
contact mats 90(a-4)
control 90(c-4)
fixed 90(a-2)
flexibles 90(a-3)
location 36
mounting 37
required 90(a-4)
short-circuits 90(a-l)
switches 90(a-4)
testing 90(a-l)
Warning notices 142
Wire, grade 123
Wire tables .... 43, Tables 11.-S'II.
Wires, private plants 130
Wiring-
cased 64
exceptional conditions .. .. 67
notice of 3, 4
point, defined 13
protection of 138(d)
tubed 63
uncased .. 65, 66, 67, 70, 71, 72
Wood casing-
allowed 64
prohibited 64(a)
on brick and plaster .. .. 64(d)
Wood floors —
dynamos on .. .. 108(d)
motors on 107(c)
Workshops, regulations for ~ 2
