

ELECTRIC
COOKERY
RECIPES
PRICE 1/6


ELECTRIC
COOKERY BOOK
Being an indispensable handbook
for the Housewife or Cook, and
giving recipes of 160 dainty dishes
which can be prepared without
trouble and at small cost ...
Electric Cookery
Saves More Than It Costs!
Published for
STATE ELECTRICITY COMMISSION OF VICTORIA
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY - - - DISTRIBUTION AND SALES
238 Flinders Street (opposite Railway Station)
Melbourne, C.i


HOW TO MEASURE
Level cupful.—Fill cup with spoon and
level off with blade of knife.
Level teaspoon. —Fill and level off with
back of knife.
Half teaspoon. —Fill and level off with
back of knife, and divide in half length-
wise.
To measure butter or fat, pack solidly
into spoon or cup and level with knife.


INTRODUCTION
KEEPING a home in beauty and comfort is a desire that lies
close to the heart of the home-maker. For all that, in
these challenging times, her horizon cannot be entirely
bound by housekeeping duties. Life is swift and alluring ....
There will always be books to read, music to hear, pictures to
see .... A world of interest lies outside the door.
Generations of us have longed to learn the secrets of magic—
have dreamed of having services performed by powers not of our
own hands. Now, quietly, there has entered homes a great
working power—not the magic power of dreams, but the electric
power of reality. It is ready to do those things we have dreamed
of having done by the wave of a wand—to transform house-
keeping so that the hours of the day shall be fairly divided between
work and play ... to make our dreams come true. This is the
Electric Age!
In this book is attempted the task of rendering that great
household service, Electric Cookery, more efficient and valuable.
A collection has been made of recipes suitable for use in the
average household, and in addition are set out details of cooking
methods, appropriate temperatures and times, and generally useful
hints for the fast increasing number of Australians who cook
electrically.


THE ELECTRIC RANGE
Oven
The greatest economy in electric cooking is in the work of the
oven. Since it is almost airtight (electricity produces no
fumes, and there is no need to provide ventilation to the degree
necessary in other stoves), and the walls and door are specially
insulated against heat losses, the oven retains its heat for a long
time, even after the current has been switched off; in fact, it
is hardly ever necessary to use full or “High” heat after the
required temperature has been initially obtained, and a great deal
of cooking can be done with the current entirely switched off.
Another reason for the economy of the electric oven is the
saving in shrinkage in the cooking of meat, whilst a further
advantage is the equal heat distribution which gives even browning
and therefore perfect cooking results. It is also labour-saving,
since constant attention is not required. Its absolute cleanliness
immediately appeals. It is the most hygienic method of cooking,
since there are no fumes from electric heating, and the food cannot
be contaminated in any way.
The chief point to be considered in order to obtain good
cooking results is the correct temperature. This can easily be
controlled by the switch, and it is not necessary to move the
position of dishes in the oven. The electric oven is fitted with a
thermometer, and this helps the cook to obtain the very best results,
as it tells her the heat of the oven without opening the door. This
latter operation is always unpleasant, and causes a certain loss of
heat, which invariably tends to spoil the foodstuffs (particularly
pastry, etc.) being cooked. It should be remembered, however,
that the use of a thermometer, while desirable, is not essential
in electric cooking, as owing to the simplicity and reliability of
an electric oven, any cooking operation can always be repeated
by switching on and off by the clock. Of course, after the first
batch, the oven having been already heated, the time factor will
be different as compared with that
required to heat an oven from “Cold.”
“High” heat, on both top and bottom
elements, is always used to heat the
oven. Different types and sizes of
ovens naturally vary in the time they
take to heat; the directions and tem-
peratures given herein are but a general
guide.


When the required cooking temperature has been obtained,
the top oven element is usually turned off and the bottom element
switch is turned to “Medium” or “Low” heat, according to the
type of food to be cooked.
At “High” or “Medium” heat, the oven temperature rises,
and a very hot oven can be maintained; at “Low” heat a moderate
to hot oven temperature can be maintained.
With small cookers which use less electricity, it may be
necessary to switch on “High” heat for a little longer time during
cooking.
Moreover, the heat does not disappear for some time after
switching off, and advantage can be taken of the heat thus retained;
for instance, if the current is switched off from a very hot oven,
small cakes can be baked or casserole cooking or stewing of fruit
can be done.
The small ventilator which is constructed for the purpose of
liberating any unwanted odours that may be produced in the
cooking should never be closed or stuffed up.
The simplest way of using your oven is therefore as
follows:
1. Prepare the oven by arranging shelves as they will be
required for cooking. Remove the griller dish from the
oven when the dish is not required for use.
2. Switch both elements on to “High” heat. Never in any
circumstances allow the oven heat to exceed 600 degrees.
3. Leave both elements on “High” heat until the required
temperature is reached.
4. Place food in the oven. Then switch top element off
and leave bottom element on “Medium” or “Low” heat
as required. Once the correct baking temperature has been
obtained, it is seldom necessary to use the top element.
5. For most dishes the making ran hp finished with no current
for the final 15 to 30 minutes according to the dish and
the heat-retaining properties of the type of range used.
6. Do not keep food in the oven when not
in use.
7. Cook by time and temperature. Peering
into the oven, basting meat and moving
foodstuffs is quite unnecessary.
B


Temperature Chart
Very Slow 300° 350°
Slow 350° 400°
Moderate 400° 450°
Hot 450° 500°
Very Hot 500° 550°
Hotplates
The heating elements on the top of a range are used for
boiling, frying, etc. They are simply coils of wire which attain
a high temperature when electricity is passed through them. They
are usually wound in spiral fashion and are enclosed in a metal
cover or plate, hence the name “hotplate.” While they are some-
times regarded as being “slow,” at the start, it must ever be remem-
bered that fast cooking is not necessarily good cooking; also that
the hotplates retain their heat for a considerable time after switch-
ing off. This enables economy to be practised as the switches can
be turned to “Low” or even “Off” prior to the completion of the
cooking in hand.


A further reason why the electric hotplate is so economical
is because the heat is applied only to the bottom surface of a
saucepan, and not to the sides. The result is that boiling of eggs,
vegetables, etc., requires comparatively little water, thus saving
both time and current. Eggs, for instance, can be boiled very
quickly if the bottom of the saucepan is only just covered with
water, and the saucepan covered with a closely fitting lid. Simi-
larly, most vegetables can be cooked with much less water than
usual, and further savings can be made by the use of ordinary
steamers, since the boiling plate then does double or treble work.
Always remember to switch off boiling plates when they are
not being used.
In the case of failure to function of a hotplate or oven
element, the local electrician or electric supply authority should
be notified.
The illustrations on these two pages show the positions and
names of the various parts of the electric range.


Thermometer
Different foods need to be cooked in varying degrees of heat.
The housewife cannot accurately gauge those degrees of heat;
hence the presence of the thermometer in the electric range.
Electric cookery has eliminated the guesswork which has been up
till now inherent in cooking, and has brought it to an absolutely
accurate science by means of this same thermometer. Variations
in cooking results do not occur for varying weather conditions or
differences in the quality of fuels do not obtain in the case of an
•electric range. The use of the thermometer guarantees the same
results, day by day, year in and year out.
Having once mastered the art of cooking by the thermometer
no cook would think of reverting to the old-fashioned methods
of guessing. Temperature cooking is exact cooking; it is pleasant
cooking, for there is no peering into hot ovens; it is cheap cooking,
for it prevents the escape of heat which takes place with other
methods when the oven door is constantly opened.
Switches
Heat supply to an electric range is controlled by means of
switches clearly marked and each controlling a separate part of
the range. These switches, which give “three-heat” control, are
plainly marked, and are of the rotary type (i.e., they may be turned
in either direction). As they are turned they indicate positively
the degree of heat required; e.g., at the first turn “Full” or “High”
heat is indicated, meaning full current, maximum heat; the next
turn indicates “Medium”, meaning half current; the third turn
indicates “Low”, or quarter current, and therefore still further
reduced heat; the final turn “Off”, as it indicates, cuts off the
current, and the heat becomes less as the elements cool.
All switches should be turned “Off” when the range is not
in use, and when it is being cleaned it is most important to see
that no switch is “On”. Switch knobs
usually point downwards when “Off.”
It is usual for each switch to be pro-
vided with a separate fuse, so that if
an unexpected defect should develop
and cause the fuse to “blow”, the cur-
rent to that portion of the range will
be cut off, and no harm can ensue to
the user, leaving the rest of the range
free to finish the cooking.


Switch—'Element Control
Explaining what each abbreviation represents on the switch
panel (Moffat Electric Range).
Ov. —Top
Top Oven Element
Oven—T
Ov. —Bottom
Bottom-Oven Bottom Qven Ekment
Oven—Bottom
Oven—B
R—Front ]
Front—Right [Right Front Hotplate
Right—Front )
L—Front
Front—Left Left Front Hotplate
Left—Front
Bright } Ri ® ht Back Ho ‘P late
Back—Left M Back Hotplate
Back-Top } Back Hot P late
Right Right Hotplate
Left Left Hotplate
Front Front Hotplate
Grill Outside Grill Element
Utensils
Most electric hotplates are of the enclosed type and the kind
of utensil used on them is very important. To obtain quick and
economical boiling, and successful deep frying, the pans should be
quite flat, so that by perfect contact with the hotplate they may
pick up all the heat. If there is an air space between
the utensil and the hotplate, the boiling is naturally
retarded; therefore, always select substantial makes
of saucepans, kettles, frying pans and other vessels,
so that there is no fear of buckling with use.


Suitable utensils of aluminium are specially made for use
with electric cookers (e.g., triple saucepans and steamers), and the
purchase of a few special pots of this sort will always ensure
economy and convenience.
Cooking utensils do not become discoloured when used on
electric ranges; thus the cook is saved still further work in the
kitchen.
Wherever possible, saucepans, etc., should be the same size
as the hotplates on which they are used; otherwise there may be
undue delay in heating where the saucepan is much larger or
wastage of heat where it is much smaller.
A very desirable utensil for use in conjunction with an electric
range is an electric jug. This appliance, which is very cheaply
priced, is a boon for boiling water economically and quickly. As
most ranges have a power point installed on them, the jug can be
just plugged in when required.
When the bottom of a
pot is quite flat it
makes complete contact
with the hot-plate, and
full heat is transferred
all over its surface,
as indicated by the
arrows.
This diagram (at left)
shows the effect with a
pot having a buckled
or wavy bottom. Heat
is directly transferred
only at the points of
contact.
Here is an extreme
example of a badly
made pot. Due to the
curved bottom, heat
is directly transferred
only at the centre.


Using the Range
Electric cookery is simplicity itself, and once the few new
rules—common to any form of cooking—are mastered, the cook
has no further worries.
Details regarding special applications of cookery are given
under their appropriate heads, and herein are stated a few points
which are of more general interest:—
1. Before using (when the range is first installed), heat the
oven by turning the top and bottom elements on “High”
until the temperature reaches 400°. Then turn both
elements off and allow to cool. This will remove any
odours which may be in a new oven.
2. Never heat the oven above 600 degrees; it will destroy
the thermometer.
3. Use suitable cooking utensils.
4. Plan all meals so that full use of the oven may be made,
and full advantage taken of the economy of cooking on
retained heat.
5. Open the oven door only when necessary. Cook by time
and temperature rather than by opening the door and
judging with the eye.
6. Reduce heat as soon as possible and in accordance with
times and temperatures stated in recipes, so that full
advantage may be taken of retained heat. This applies
both to oven and hotplate cooking.
7. See that all switches are turned off when cooking is
completed.
Cleaning the Range
Electric cookery is in itself the cleanest form of cookery,
and, in addition, the range, after the day’s work is done, can be
very speedily restored to “showroom attractiveness” by wiping
over with a clean cloth dipped in soapy water. The black finish
on tiie range may be restored by the application of a cloth, slightly
oiled.
The best time to clean a range is about one hour
after cooking has finished, as the warmth retained
facilitates cleaning.
Before cleaning, see that all switches are turned
off.


Keep Food Fresh
Health !
ELECTRIC
REFRIGERATION
ELECTRIC Refrigeration is the
economical, modern way of keep-
ing food cool, fresh and healthful. It
eliminates all fuss and bother
operating automatically at a fraction
of the cost of old-fashioned methods.
Most important of all, it safeguards
health by keeping food ALWAYS at
Electric Refrigeration provides the
only means by which food may be
kept at the SAFE temperatures
necessary for perfect food preserva-
tion. It maintains AUTOMATI-
CALLY a temperature that never
rises above 50 degrees, and so checks
the growth of bacteria.
Inquire about an Electric Refrigera-
tor for your home—there are several
beautiful models.
STATE ELECTRICITY COMMISSION
OF VICTORIA
Showrooms t 238 FLINDERS ST., MELBOURNE, C.l
and Country Centres throughout the State
Electrically
—and
Safeguard
the Family’s
the ideal temperature for correct
food preservation.


SOUP
Where stock is made from fresh meat, the meat should be
cut as finely as possible so that the juices may be readily extracted
in the cooking process. It further aids this extractive operation
if the meat is put in cold water and gradually brought to the
boiling point by the use of the smallest hotplate. Any scum which
settles on top of the water should be skimmed off from time to
time so that the remaining liquid is quite clear. After reaching
the boiling point, the hotplate should be turned to “Low” and the
liquid allowed to simmer for about four hours. Further supplies
of water may be added during the cooking operation, but salt
and seasoning should be left until the soup is almost finished and
ready to serve.
Celery Soup
1 cup rice 1 quart strong white stock
3 pints milk Salt
2 heads celery Pepper
Method: Boil rice in milk until it will pass through sieve.
Grate the white parts of celery heads, add to stock and mix with
rice milk, simmer till rice is quite tender, season with pepper and
salt to taste.
Chicken Broth
Chicken i cup cooked rice
Water Pepper
1 small onion Salt
Method: Cut chicken into pieces and cover with cold water,
add onion. Simmer for 3 hours with element at “Low” or until
meat is tender. Cool stock, remove the fat. Add cooked rice,
reheat, season and serve.
Mulligatawny Soup
1 cup cream or milk 2 tablespoons curry powder
2 or 3 quarts white stock 1 dozen small mushrooms
White flesh of chicken Salt
Boiled rice Pepper
Method'. Make stock and flavour to taste. Dice
mushrooms with chicken. Simmer in stock for
hour, with element at “Low.” Mix the milk with
curry powder and add to soup while boiling. Serve
with boiled rice.
c


Mutton Broth
1 lb. neck mutton 1 turnip
2 shanks 1 carrot
3 ozs. barley 1 onion
4 pints water 2 teaspoons salt
Chopped parsley Pepper
Method: Remove fat from meat, cut into small pieces. Wash
barley, put water, meat bones, barley, salt and pepper into cold
water. Bring to boil slowly, add diced vegetables, then simmer
for 2|-3 hours with element at “Low.” When cold remove fat,
reheat, and serve with chopped parsley.
Onion Soup
2 cups chopped onions 1 teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons butter Pepper
2 tablespoons chopped parsley 4 cups vegetable stock
Method: Fry onions in butter, shaking frequently, when
tender, add stock, boil for five minutes, and add seasoning and
parsley.
Pea Soup
1 pint stock or water Piece of bacon bone
3 tablespoons split peas 2 teaspoons flour
A piece of carrot i teaspoon mint
A piece of turnip Salt
A piece of onion Pepper
Method: Wash peas, soak overnight in sufficient water to
cover. Put them in saucepan with stock, bring to boil, add vege-
tables cut up roughly and bacon. Simmer 2 hours with element
at “Low.” Rub through sieve, return to saucepan, reheat, blend
flour smoothly with a little water, add to soup and stir till boiling,
flavour with salt, pepper and mint. Serve with croutons.
Scotch Broth
1 sheep’s head Piece of celery
2 pints water or water to 2 ozs. barley
cover Salt
Piece of carrot Pepper
Piece of turnip Caramel if necessary
Piece of onion Finely chopped parsley
Method: Wash head well and soak at least £ hour in salt
water. Drain away water and put into a saucepan with water and
salt. Bring slowly to the boil on “Medium.” Simmer for 2to
3 hours on “Low”. Prepare vegetables and cut into dice, add to
soup one hour before serving. Lift out the head, remove meat


and cut into dice. Return diced meat to saucepan. Season and
flavour. Colour if necessary with a little caramel. Serve
garnished with chopped parsley.
Tomato Soup
2 lbs. tomatoes i teaspoon soda
1 quart boiling water 1 dessertspoon flour
1 pint milk Butter, pepper, salt.
Method: Peel and slice tomatoes, and pour the boiling water
over them. Boil for 30 minutes with element at “Low.” Add
soda, and when foaming has subsided, add milk, season with butter,
pepper and salt, and thicken with flour. Sweetening may be added
if desired.
Clear Vegetable Soup
1 pint first stock Salt
Piece of carrot Pepper
Piece of turnip Caramel if necessary
Piece of celery
Method: Put stock on in saucepan, prepare vegetables and cut
into even sized fine dice, add to boiling stock. Simmer half hour
with element turned to “Low.” Season to taste, remove fat, colour
if necessary, serve very hot.


MEAT
There is overwhelming evidence in favour of electricity for
cooking meat. It has been proved that meat thus cooked loses
less weight than when cooked in any other way. This is due to the
fact that the heat is absolutely even, and also because there is so
little air circulation in the oven that very little evaporation takes
place. The same set of conditions ensures that meat cooked in
the electric oven will be more tender, juicy and appetising than
if done in other stoves.
A good result will be obtained if the joint of meat is weighed
and the following time allowed (Oven 450° at start of cooking) :
For Beef, 15 minutes to the lb. and 15 minutes over.
For Mutton, 15-20 minutes to the lb. and 20 minutes over.
For Lamb, 18-20 minutes to the lb. and 20 minutes over.
For Veal, 25 minutes to the lb. and 25 minutes over.
For Pork, 25 minutes to the lb. and 25 minutes over.
This rule applies to joints between 4 and 10 lbs.; smaller
joints always require a proportionately longer time than larger
joints.
The best way to judge the time for smaller joints is to take
into consideration their thickness. For instance, half a leg of
mutton, if it is the thick end, will take almost as long as a whole
leg weighing nearly twice as much. In the case of larger joints,
a proportionately shorter time of 10-15 minutes per lb. would
be allowed, and in the case of several large joints being cooked
at one time, the average weight of the joints would be taken into
consideration and not their aggregate weight. Meat should be
cooked quickly at first, so that the great heat may seal the outside
and keep in the juices; afterwards it should be cooked slowly to
make the inside of the joint tender.
Roasting
The chief point to remember in roasting is that the meat
should be quickly browned in order that the crust thus formed
may retain the juices. Turn on the top and bottom oven elements
full until the thermometer points to 450°, then put the roast in the
oven, leaving both elements on full from 5 to 10 minutes to sear
the meat. Then turn off the top element altogether
and leave the bottom element at “Low”. Do not
use any water in roasting pan.


Roasting ( Continued )
Allow from 15 to 25 minutes to the pound for roasts, accord-
ing to size and the kind of meat being cooked. (See table above.)
Long, slow cooking will give the desired result—a nice casing of
browned meat round the outside, with tender inner fibres and
the inside meat just cooked and no more. In the case of a York-
shire pudding, it is necessary to switch on to “High” heat for a
short time before the pudding is put in, so that it may be baked
in a hot oven. Meat cooked in an electric oven remains quite
moist and full of gravy, so that there is no need for basting. It is
therefore unnecessary to open the oven door from the time the
joint is put in until it is done.
Grilling
Electric grills are so excellent, and grilling so much more a
wholesome, digestible and less greasy form of cooking than shallow
frying, that, under the conditions of the electric grill, the frying
pan, except for egg mixtures such as omelettes, etc., is rarely used.
Grilling retains all the juices, makes meat more tender and
delicious than frying. It is not necessary to heat the oven while
grilling—only use top oven element or special grill element when
fitted. For steaks, chops, pork tenderloins, sausages, etc., put the
meat on the rack of the grill pan, preheat top oven, element on
“High” for 10 minutes. Jplace meat under element and grill with
switch on “High” and slightly open, for 10 to 15 minutes,
turning once. For bacon and eggs, put pan four to five inches
from element. When the bacon is almost done, drop in the eggs,
finishing very slowly with the element at “Medium” or “Low”
heat. Never pierce the lean meat with a fork when turning, or
much good juice will escape. The element is too hot if there is
a considerable amount of smoke.
Boiling
Boiling is one of the easiest methods of cooking meats. In
making soup the meat is put in cold water to draw out the juices;
in boiling it should be put in hot water
so that the meat and not the water
may retain the juices and flavouring.
The boiling water closes the pores to
retain the nutriment, thus forming a
sort of coat on the surface of the meat.
Fresh meat may simply be wiped with
a cloth before boiling, but salt meat
should be soaked in cold water.


Have the pot clean; put in enough water to cover the meat, and
when boiling, put in the meat. Boil hard for five minutes, then
draw the pot aside and cook slowly. Simmering will continue for
some time after switching off, since there is a considerable amount
of heat retained in the hotplates. This means that the cook can
switch off some time before cooking is finished in order to econo-
mise in current.
Braising
Braising is a combination of roasting and stewing and is one
of the best methods of cooking large pieces of tough lean meat.
A quantity of vegetables should be put in a covered roaster and
the meat placed on the vegetables. Cook slowly in the oven; the
meat will absorb the flavour of the vegetables; when quite tender
the meat is removed from the roaster and put in a quick oven to
brown. The vegetables are served with it.
Stewing
Stewing consists of cooking meat (cut into small pieces
and browned in pan on hotplate) in a little water in a closely
covered vessel until nearly done. Thickening and vegetables may
be added. Add boiling water as required and finish cooking slowly.
Frying
The secret of the success of frying is to have the fat hot
enough to harden the outer surface of the meat immediately, and
deep enough to cover the meat. Foods that are fried in the fat
of the right temperature will not absorb the fat and so become
indigestible. The chief trouble lies in the fact that the fat is too
often allowed to penetrate the food, in which cases the results to
digestion are very serious.
Sauteing
Sauteing is the most common form of frying. It consists in
cooking with a little fat in a shallow pan. Sauteing should be done
quickly, the food being turned over lightly and often.
Fricasseeing
To fricassee meat, saute it first to keep in its
juices. Stew it until tender, and serve with sauce
made from the juice in the pan.


Corned Beef
Rinse the corned beef in cold water; tie it into shape. Put in
saucepan and cover with cold water. Heat to boiling point and
simmer on “Low” until tender, about 30 minutes to the pound.
One-half hour before meat is done, add cabbage cut up. Serve
with the corned beef.
Fried Brains
Blanch one or two sets of brains. Divide into portions, roll
in seasoned flour, dip in egg and bread-crumbs, and wet fry. Serve
hot and garnish with bacon rolls and parsley.
Grilled Steak
Method: Preheat top oven element for 10 minutes, with grill
pan and grid immediately below. Grease grid with butter, place
steak on it. Grill with element at “High” and door slightly open,
from 10 to 15 minutes, turning once. Serve with melted butter,
pepper and salt.
Irish Stew
1 lb. neck chops Salt
1 large onion Pepper
4 potatoes 1 pint water
Method: Trim chops, cut meat into neat pieces, but do not
remove all the fat. Put into a saucepan with water, pepper and
salt, and bring to the boil on “High” heat. Remove scum. Peel
onion and cut into rings, add, and allow to simmer f hour on
“Low” heat. Peel potatoes and put on top of meat, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and simmer l| hours. Serve the meat on a
hot dish, pour gravy and onions over and place potatoes round
the dish. Remove fat from gravy if necessary.
Lamb Cutlets with Carrots
Cutlets from a neck of lamb Frying fat
Bread crumbs Bunch of carrots
1 egg A little butter
Seasoned flour Chopped parsley
i cup boiling salted water
Method: Trim neatly sufficient cutlets for a dish, dip in
seasoned flour, egg, and breadcrumbs, pat crumbs lightly on to
them with a broad knife. Fry in a good quantity of fat until a
nice brown. Meanwhile wash and prepare carrots, cutting them
into thin slices like French beans. Put into boiling water, cover


closely, and boil till tender. Drain cutlets on paper, arrange them
in circle on hot dish, place carrots in centre and sprinkle with finely
chopped parsley. Serve with good brown gravy.
Roast Beef
Method: Wash beef, weigh, and for cooking time allow 15
minutes to each pound and 15 minutes over. Put in baking dish
with lJr-2 tablespoons of fat. Bake in oven 450°; leave both
elements “High” for 5 to 10 minutes to sear the outside of the
joint, then turn the top element “Off” and the bottom element to
“Low.” Turn the meat over once.
Roast Mutton or Lamb
Method: Wash lamb, weigh, and for cooking time allow 20
minutes to each lb. and 20 minutes over. Put in baking dish with
Ito 2 tablespoons of fat. Bake in oven 450°; leave both elements
“High” for 5 to 10 minutes, to sear outside, then turn top element
off and bottom element to “Low.” Turn the meat over once.
Roast Veal or Fork
Method: Wash meat, weigh, and for cooking time allow 25
minutes to each lb. and 25 minutes over. Put in baking dish with
a little fat. Bake in oven 450°; leave both elements “High” for
5 to 10 minutes to sear outside, then turn top element “Off,” and
bottom to “Low.” Turn the meat over once.
Casserole Steak
lbs. blade-bone or skirt 1 piece of carrot
steak 1 piece of onion
Seasoned flour Parsley
Water or stock
Method: Cut steak into neat pieces, dip each piece in seasoned
flour, prepare and dice vegetables. Put
meat and vegetables into a casserole
dish, cover with water or stock. Put
into oven 350°, leave both elements
“High” till thermometer registers
450°, then switch top element “Off”
and bottom to “Low”. Time for cook-
ing 1£ to 2£ hours, according to the
cut off the steak.


Steak and Kidney Pie
3 sheep kidneys 1 tablespoon butter
2 lbs. steak 2 teaspoons flour
i onion Salt, pepper
Water Short crust
Method: Cut the steak and kidneys into small pieces, mince
onion, put in a saucepan, cover with water and simmer with element
on “Low” for about 1 hour—or until meat is tender. Melt butter,
mix the flour in it, and add to the stew with the seasoning, cooking
it three minutes. Put into pie dish, cover with short crust, glaze
with beaten egg. Bake in oven 550°, below centre. Turn top
element “Off” and bottom to “Low.” Time to cook, about 30
minutes.
Veal and Ham Pie
1 lb. cooked fillet veal i teaspoon mixed dried herbs
1 lb. cooked ham 1 teaspoon chopped parsley
2 hard boiled eggs A little grated lemon rind
Stock Salt, pepper
Rough puff pastry
Method: Cut veal and ham into slices, put a layer of each
in the bottom of a pie dish, then a layer of slices of hard boiled
egg. Sprinkle over some of the parsley, herbs, lemon rind, pepper
and salt. Continue in this manner till dish is full. Pour over a
little stock, cover with pastry, decorate and glaze. Bake in oven
550°, below centre, with top element “Off” and bottom at “Low.”
Time to cook, about 30 minutes.
D


FISH
Boiled Fish
Bream or Schnapper 1 tablespoon salt
I tablespoon vinegar 4 quarts water
White of 1 egg Parsley
Method: Trim fish, wash and dry. Add salt, vinegar and
parsley to water boiling in flat saucepan on “High” heat. Put
fish in and draw saucepan off element, for the water must not
boil after the fish is put in. Switch element to “low” and cook
till tender, from 10-20 minutes according to the thickness of the
fish. When quite soft, lift out with fish slice. Place stiffly-
beaten whites of egg in little heaps on slices of lemon round the
dish. Sprinkle with finely chopped parsley, and serve with
parsley, egg, or oyster sauce, served in sauce boat.
Boiled Whiting (An Invalid Dish)
1 whiting i pint milk
1 teaspoon cornflour 2 eggs
A little butter Pepper and salt
Method'. Boil whiting lightly, then flake it. Free the fish from
skin and bone, put it in a basin, pour over it the milk, add a piece
of butter, and when cool add the beaten egg yolks. Stir well
together, season to taste with salt and pepper. Whisk the whites
to a stiff froth, mix them in lightly, pour the mixture into a
souffle or other deep dish, and bake in oven 450°. Serve very hot.
Fish Cake
i lb. cooked fish 1 teaspoon chopped parsley
1 oz. bread crumbs i pint milk
2 ozs. suet Salt, pepper
1 egg
Method : Remove all skin and bone from the fish, break it up
into small flakes, add the suet finely chopped, bread crumbs,
parsley, pepper and salt. Beat the egg into the milk and add
them to the mixture. Butter a souffle tin, coat it
”‘ v WVVi»»*W VWWk **
with browned crumbs. Turn the fish cake into this,
place a greased paper over the top. Bake in oven
300°, top element off, bottom element “Low”, for
about 1 hour. Turn it on to a hot dish and serve
with anchovy or tomato sauce poured round.


Fried Fish
Any white fish Breadcrumbs
Seasoned fiour Fat
Egg
Method: Wash fish and wipe dry. Cut into small pieces, dip
each piece in seasoned flour, then in the beaten egg and lastly roll
in fine breadcrumbs. Fry fish in hot fat, with element switched
to “Medium” for 5-12 minutes, according to thickness, turning
once. Drain fish on paper. Serve garnished with slices of lemon
and sprigs of parsley.
Grilled Fish
Clean and dry fish. Cut into pieces, place 2 oz. of butter in
grilling pan and place directly under top oven element, which is
turned to “High.” Melt butter, then dip fish in butter and grill
on both sides for about 15 minutes.
Salmon Cutlets
1 tin salmon Salt, cayenne pepper
2 ozs. butter Anchovy essence
2 ozs. flour Seasoned flour
i pint milk .Egg
Lemon juice Breadcrumbs
Method: Drain salmon, remove skin and bone, and break into
small flakes. Melt butter in saucepan, stir in flour and cook for
two minutes. Add milk, stir till sauce thickens and leaves the
sides of the saucepan clean. Remove from the element, add the
salmon, squeeze of lemon juice, salt, cayenne and anchovy essence.
Spread the mixture on a plate. When cold divide into equal
portions, shape into cutlets, dip each one in seasoned flour, beaten
egg and breadcrumbs. Have fat heating on element with switch
at “High.” When a blue smoke arises, wet fry cutlets till golden,
drain on paper, and serve garnished with sprigs of parsley.
Sardine Rolls
i lb. flaky pastry Salt
1 tin sardines 1 egg yolk
Lemon juice 2 tablespoons water
Cayenne pepper
Method : Roll out pastry fairly thin and cut into strips. Bone
sardines, place one on each piece of pastry, sprinkle with salt,
cayenne and a little lemon juice. Brush edges of pastry with
water and roll round sardine. Place rolls on buttered tray, glaze
with beaten egg yolk and water. Bake in oven 550°, top element
off, bottom element “Low,” for 25-30 minutes.


WASH ELECTRICALLY
5
Sf
for a
Penny a Week
Imagine banishing all the drud-
gery of clothes-washing for a penny
a week! Wouldn't you do this if
you had the opportunity? You can,
if you let electricity do the wash-
ing!
Washed electrically, the largest
of ordinary weekly washes can be
finished in two hours, at a cost of
one penny for current. So little
labour is involved that even if you
are accustomed to having someone
do your washing, you’ll find it
better to do it all yourself with the
washing machine. Think how much
money you could then save!
Electric washing machines cost
surprisingly little.
Enquire from:
State Electricity Commission of Victoria
Showrooms: 238*242 Hinders Street (opp. Railway Station)
Melbourne, C.i
and Country Centres throughout the State


POULTRY
Roast Chicken
Chicken Bread sauce
Thin slices of bacon fat Rolls grilled bacon
Veal forcemeat
Method : Pluck and truss chicken, weigh and for cooking time
allow 15 minutes to each lb. and 15 minutes over. Stuff with veal
forcemeat, cover the breast with slices of bacon fat. Put into
roasting dish with a little fat. Roast in oven 450°. Leave both
elements “High” for 5 minutes. Then turn the top element off
and the bottom to “Low.” Turn chicken once. Serve accom-
panied by thin brown gravy, bread sauce, and rolls of grilled
bacon.
Roast Duck or Goose
Duck or goose Sage and onion stuffing
Apple sauce Brown gravy
Method : Truss bird for roasting, stuff with sage and onion
stuffing. Place in roasting dish with a little fat and put in oven
450°. Leave both elements “high” for 5-10 minutes, and then
turn the top element off and the bottom to “low.” Time, 1-3
hours according to the size of the bird.
Sage and Onion Stuffing
2 cups breadcrumbs 2 teaspoons finely chopped sage
4 small onions Salt, pepper
2 teaspoons butter A little milk
Method: Mix dry ingredients together, rub in the butter. Add
onions parboiled and cut into small pieces. Add sufficient milk
to bind.
Roiled Fowl
Fowl 1 piece of carrot
Lemon Egg or parsley sauce
Bunch of herbs
Method : Truss bird, rub over with cut lemon to whiten. Wrap
in buttered paper and put in saucepan quarter full of boiling
water. Leave the element switched to “High” for 5 minutes, then
turn to “Low.” Add carrot and herbs to the water, and simmer
from \-2\ hours according to age of bird. Serve with egg or
parsley sauce.


Casserole of Chicken
1 chicken -Green peas in season
1 lb. bacon slices U pints stock or water
2 carrots Seasoned flour
1 onion
Method’. Divide chicken into neat joints and dip each one
into seasoned flour. Place in casserole dish. Cut carrots into
small dice and slice onion. Add to casserole, also the bacon and
the peas. Pour over the stock and put lid on dish. Place in oven
350°, leave both elements “High” till thermometer registers 450°,
then turn the top element off and the bottom to “Low.” Time to
cook, about 2 hours.
Spring Chicken with Mushrooms
1 small chicken A few chillies
i lb. small mushrooms Pepper and salt
1 small onion A little butter
Milk A little cornflour
Method: Cut the chicken into neat joints and fry in butter
until a light brown colour. Season with pepper, salt, whole chillies,
onion chopped very finely, and the peeled mushrooms. When
fried sufficiently, cover with milk and simmer slowly, element
turned to “Low” for 30 minutes. Dish up vrof chicken, thicken
the sauce with a little cornflour, boil and pour it over the chicken.
The chillies and mushrooms should be left in the sauce. Young
rabbits may be cooked in the same way.
SAUCES
The type of sauce to use should be chosen according to the
meat, fish, or vegetables you are serving. Serve the richer sauces
with the plainer foods and the simple sauces with the richer foods.
It is very important that sauces be prepared carefully and accu-
rately. If not, they are apt to spoil your otherwise delicious food.
Anchovy Sauce
1 oz. butter 1 tablespoon anchovy sauce
i oz. flour i pint milk
1 teaspoon lemon juice Pinch cayenne pepper
Method : Melt butter, mix in flour, and add milk; bring to
boil on element switched to “High.” Remove from element and
beat in lemon juice, anchovy sauce and cayenne.


Apple Sauce
1 lb. apples 1 oz. sugar
i oz. butter Half cup water
Method: Peel, core and slice apples, and put in saucepan with
butter, sugar and water, and stew till soft. Beat smooth and
serve in sauce boat.
Bread Sauce
£ pint milk 1 oz. butter
1 small onion White pepper
i cup breadcrumbs Nutmeg
Method: Cut onion in halves and scald in the milk, and let it
infuse for an hour. Strain and return to the pan with bread-
crumbs and seasoning, till the breadcrumbs have absorbed the
milk.
Brown Sauce
£ oz. butter i pint stock—seasoned to taste
\ oz. flour 1 small onion
Method: Chop the onion, melt the butter in a pan and fry
the onion a pale brown. Add the flour and allow it to brown also
without burning. Draw aside and add the stock and stir over
element turned to “Medium” until boiling. Strain.
Curry Sauce
1 tablespoon chopped onion 1 teaspoon curry powder
1 tablespoon butter 1 cup boiling water
1$ tablespoons flour i teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon lemon juice
Method : Cook the onion in the butter till slightly brown.
Add the curry powder and flour and mix thoroughly. Add the
water gradually. Bring to boiling point. Add salt and lemon
juice, and strain.
Horseradish Sauce (economical without cream)
i pint milk Salt
1 heaped teaspoon cornflour White pepper
1 large stick horseradish i pint vinegar
3 good teaspoons mixed
mustard
Method: Grate the horseradish, mix the cornflour with the
milk and boil five minutes. Add mustard, pepper, salt and
vinegar, and serve with roast beef.


Mint Sauce
2 tablespoons chopped mint 1 tablespoon boiling water
1 tablespoon sugar i cup vinegar
Method : Wash and dry mint, remove stalks, chop finely and
add sugar. Pour on boiling water. Add vinegar, stirring well,
and serve with roast lamb.
Onion Cream Sauce
4 onions Pinch of nutmeg
i pint milk 1 bay leaf
Pepper 1 oz. butter
Salt 1 dessertspoon flour
Method: Put milk in saucepan, add onions and other
ingredients and boil until onions are tender; rub through a sieve,
melt the butter and stir in flour; add milk and stir till boiling. A
quarter of a cup of cream or unsweetened condensed milk added
at the last improves the sauce.
Parsley Sauce
1 pint white vegetable sauce 1 dessertspoon finely chopped parsley
Method: Make sauce, add chopped parsley, serve with boiled
mutton, boiled fish or boiled fowl.
Tartar Sauce
2 egg yolks 1 teaspoon mustard
1 cup olive oil i teaspoon sugar
2 tablespoons vinegar A few chopped olives and gherkins
1 tablespoon chopped capers Salt, cayenne
Method: Beat egg yolks, then add mustard, salt, cayenne and
sugar, mix well. Add oil, a! drop at a time, beating well. When
quite thick, beat in a little vinegar, beat in remainder of the oil
and vinegar. Then add chopped capers, olives and gherkins.
White Sauce
2 level tablespoons flour pinch salt
1 level tablespoon butter Cayenne pepper
i pint milk
Method: Melt the butter in a saucepan, add the
flour, and cook two minutes. Add milk and stir till
boiling. Cook 2 minutes. Season to taste
salt cayenne. WlCv


USES FOR WHITE SAUCE
Thin To cream starchy vegetables such
as potatoes.
To make cream soup.
Medium To cream non-starchy vegetables such
as carrots, onions, peas, cauliflower,
etc.
Thick To prepare scalloped dishes.
Very Thick .. To make croquettes and souffles.
SAVOURIES
Anchovy Fingers
6 anchovies White pepper
i teaspoon chopped parsley Paprika
1 small chopped shallot Lemon juice
6 fingers butter toast
Method ; Bone the anchovies and wash them in warm water.
Sprinkle the toast fingers with the shallot and parsley, and lay
anchovy on each. Sprinkle with lemon juice, pepper and paprika.
Put a small piece of butter on each. Place under griller with
switch turned to “High,” heat thoroughly.
.Baked Tomato Savoury
1 lb. tomatoes 3 or 4 eggs
3 ozs. breadcrumbs i teaspoon chopped parsley
2 ozs. butter Pepper, salt
Method : Skin and slice tomatoes, well butter a pie dish, and
line with a good layer of breadcrumbs. Put in a layer of
tomatoes, small pieces of butter and a little pepper and salt.
Proceed thus until the dish is three parts full. Place a piece of
buttered paper on top, and bake in oven 325°, top element “Off,”
bottom element “Low” for 45 minutes. Remove it from oven,
break enough eggs over the top to cover, and put a piece of
buttered paper over it. Return to oven for 15 minutes. Sprinkle
with finely chopped parsley and serve very hot. This dish may
be served as a vegetable if the eggs are omitted.
E


Cheese Straws
3 ozs. grated cheese i teaspoon cayenne pepper
3 ozs. flour 2 ozs. butter
1 teaspoon baking powder 1 egg
\ teaspoon salt Lemon juice
Method: Sift dry ingredients, rub in the butter till it
resembles breadcrumbs, add grated cheese and mix into a fairly
stiff dough with beaten eggs and lemon juice. Roll out, cut into
strips, place on greased tray. Bake in oven 500°, current off, rack
below centre. Time, 6 minutes.
Macaroni Cheese
6 ozs. macaroni i teaspoon mustard
4 ozs. cheese 1 tablespoon tomato sauce
2 cups milk (scalded) Salt, cayenne
3 tablespoons batter Breadcrumbs
3 tablespoons flour
Method: Boil macaroni in salted water till tender, with the
element switched on “High.” Then turn to “Low.” Melt butter,
mix in flour, and add milk, then cook till thick. Add cheese and
seasoning. Place macaroni in well buttered dish, pour sauce on
it and sprinkle with breadcrumbs. Bake in oven 400°, with top
element off and bottom element “Low.” Time, about 20 minutes.
Sardine Savoury
1 tin sardines 4 slices bread
i cup milk 1 oz. butter
1 egg Salt, cayenne pepper
Method: Cut bread into shapes, and dip in the egg and milk
beaten together. Fry in butter on element switched to “High,”
until a golden brown on each side. Warm sardines, sprinkle with
salt and cayenne, place on bread, and serve immediately.
Stuffed Tomatoes
6 tomatoes 1 teaspoon parraesan cheese
2 ozs. breadcrumbs Milk or beaten egg
li ozs. cooked ham Browned breadcrumbs
1 teaspoon parsley Pepper, salt
A little marjoram A little nutmeg
A little thyme
Method: Cut a small piece off the top of each tomato and
take out the inside. Chop the ham and parsley, mix them with
the breadcrumbs and herbs, salt, pepper and nutmeg. Add enough
beaten egg or milk to bind the stuffing together. Put a little into


each tomato and sprinkle over each the parmesan cheese mixed
with an equal quantity of browned breadcrumbs. Place them on
a greased tin with a little piece of butter on the top of each. Bake
in oven 400°, top element off, bottom element “Low.” Time,
about 20 minutes.
Welsh Rarebit
2 ozs. dry cheese Mustard
i oz. butter Salt, cayenne pepper
1 tablespoon milk Buttered toast
Method : Grate cheese, melt butter in saucepan, add milk
mixed with mustard and cayenne to taste, stir in cheese and
seasoning, but do not allow to boil. Have ready some toast, either
buttered or dry as desired. Spread the mixture on and place it
under the grill to brown. Serve very hot.


VEGETABLES
GENERAL HINTS
1. To make vegetables crisp and fresh, soak in cold water before
using.
2. Save water left from cooking vegetables to make soup.
3. Do not allow potatoes to stand in water after they are cooked.
Drain immediately and keep hot over water.
4. Small amounts of left-over vegetables can be used for salads,
fritters and croquettes.
5. Soak new potatoes in salted cold water, and their coats will
loosen and scrape off easily.
6. Potatoes will be dry and mealy if salt is not added till nearly
cooked.
7. If your fingers are stained from preparing vegetables, dip
them in very strong tea and wash in warm water, or use a
lemon cut in half and rub on hands.
8. Most vegetables are better cooked the day they are gathered.
Always cook them in freshly boiled water, and keep water
boiling until done.
9. Vegetables are rich in vitamines, and should never be over-
cooked. The value of the mineral element cannot be over-
estimated, for it serves as a balance for meat and other acid-
forming foods, thus reducing the acidity of the blood and
keeping the body tissues in a state of health. These mineral
elements are vital, because without them in the food, the
blood becomes impoverished and the natural tissue waste is
not compensated.
10. All vegetables are put into boiling salted water, and cooked
cooked slowly with the lid on the saucepan (except old
potatoes, which are put into cold salted water).
11. Salt should be used in proportion of 1 heaped teaspoon to
every quart of water.


DINNER COMBINATIONS OF
VEGETABLES AND MEATS
Roast Beef should be served with Turnips, Carrots and Cabbage.
Roast Pork should be served with Baked Apples and Turnips.
Roast Lamb and Mint Sauce with Green Peas and Carrots.
Roast Veal should be served with Cauliflower and Parsnips.
Fish with parsley sauce is generally served with Peas.
Tenderloin is served with Turnips.
Spiced jelly should be served with any meats instead of pickles.
With fresh Ham, Turnips should also be served. Smoked Ham
goes well with Tomatoes.
Pickled Pork, Corned Beef and Sausages are served with Cab-
bage.
COOKING TIMES
Potatoes Boil from 25 to 30 minutes.
Turnips „ „ 40 to 60 „
Beetroot „ from Ito 2 hours before peeling.
Parsnips „ from 30 to 50 minutes.
Onions „ >■ 45 to 60 „
French Beans „ » 30 to 40 „
Broad Beans » >. 30 to 40 „
Spinach „ » 20 to 30 „
Green Peas „ „ 20 to 30 „
Asparagus „ „ 20 to 30 „
Asparagus
Wash and cut off hard end, and tie together in small bundles.
Stand in saucepan, upright, and cover in boiling water almost up
to tips. Add salt after 10 minutes. When cooked, remove and
drain well, and serve with melted butter.
Cabbage
Cut cabbage into four, and remove hard stalk from centre.
Soak in cold water for half an hour. Add \ cup boiling water,
and boil for about half an hour, or until tender with
element turned to “Low”. Drain and serve with melted
butter.
Carrots
Scrape, plunge into boiling salted water, and
cook till tender with element turned to “Low.”
Drain and serve with melted butter.


Cauliflower
Place a head of cauliflower, from which leaves are removed,
in saucepan, with boiling water, and boil for about 35 minutes,
with element turned to “Low.” Serve with cream sauce.
Marrow
Pare very thinly and remove seeds, cut into pieces, and boil
from 15 to 30 minutes, with element turned to “Low.” When
cooked, strain and mash, and season with salt and pepper. Serve
with melted butter.
Onions
Remove outer covering of onions, add salt to boiling water,
and cook for f hour till tender, with element turned to “Low.”
Serve with white sauce and chopped parsley. Add 1 teaspoon
sugar as well as salt—it is a great improvement to flavour.
Peas
Shell peas and place in casserole, cover with boiling water,
add salt, pinch of soda, and little sugar. Cover with lid and cook
gently for half an hour at temperature of 350°-400°, top element
off, bottom element “Low.”
Potatoes (Old)
Choose potatoes all one size. Wash and wipe dry. Peel
thinly and remove specks. Place in saucepan with a little water,
put lid on, and bring slowly to boil; simmer gently until tender,
with element turned to “Low”. Strain, mash with butter, add
salt, pepper and parsley, and serve.
Potatoes (New)
Scrape, add salt to boiling water, and drop in potatoes. Add
mint, and boil for 20 minutes. Serve with melted butter.
Poked Stuffed Potatoes
6 medium sized potatoes I tablespoon cream
1 oz. grated cheese 4 teaspoon salt
1 oz. butter 1 teaspoon chopped parsley
Method: Scrub potatoes and bake in oven 450°, both
elements off, for about 40 minutes. When soft, cut off tops,
scoop out middle and with mixture of butter, cream, salt and
pepper fill potato cases. Sprinkle with grated cheese and return
to oven. Turn top oven element on “High” until browned; serve
sprinkled with parsley.


Casserole Potatoes
Choose fairly large potatoes, peel and place in casserole dish,
sprinkle with salt and add cold water to depth of 1 inch. Put on
tightly fitting lid and cook in oven at 400°, top element off, bottom
element “Low,” for hours, according to quantity.
Potatoes in Jackets
Choose even sized new potatoes, prick well, place on pyrex
plate or straight into oven on rack bar. Bake in oven 450°, top
element off, bottom element “Low.” Time, hours. Split
and serve with butter, pepper and salt, and garnish with parsley.
Potatoes—French Fried
Pare potatoes and place them in cold water until needed. Dry
them thoroughly with a towel and cut into lengthwise pieces. Drop
them into hot fat and remove when lightly browned. It is better
to fry only a few at a time, letting those that are done remain in
the oven to keep hot in a colander. When all are done, sprinkle
with salt and serve at once.
Parsnips
Scrape, add salt to boiling water, and cook for | hour, with
element turned to “Low.” Serve with white sauce and parsley.
Tomatoes Grilled with Bacon
Wash tomatoes well, dry and cut in half. Put bacon in pan
and grill, with element at “High.” Lift on to hot dish, then grill
tomatoes in dish till soft. Garnish with bacon and serve
immediately.
Tomatoes, Grilled
Wash tomatoes well, dry and cut in half. Sprinkle with salt
and pepper, and little bread-crumbs, and grill slowly, with element
at “Medium,” till soft. Serve with steak or chops.
Turnips
Peel thickly enough to remove the woody fibre under the
skin. Add salt to boiling water, and cook about | hour, with
element turned to “Low.” Serve with white sauce.


Hot Water
Always Available!
A plentiful supply of hot water is perhaps the greatest
convenience a home can have, but until the perfection of
the electric hot water system, hot water was apt to be an
expensive luxury for the ordinary home.
Electric
Hot Water Systems
An electrical hot water system supplies AUTOMATI-
CALLY an ever-ready supply of hot water for the bath-
room, kitchen and laundry. A cylinder is placed above the
ceiling or in some other convenient position, where it is
both out of sight and out of mind.
Special low rates for electricity make the electric hot
water service a most economical proposition. It may be
easily installed in existing buildings.
State Electricity Commission
of Victoria
Showrooms: 238-242 Flinders Street (opposite Railway Station)
Melbourne, C.i, and Country Centres throughout the State


SALADS and DRESSINGS
Fruits and green vegetables for salads should be thoroughly
chilled, clean, crisp and dry. All should be cut in attractive shapes
and suitable sizes. Add enough dressing to season well. As a rule
a better flavour is obtained when foods are covered with dressing
and allowed to stand at least one hour before serving. When more
than one food is used, cover with dressing separately, let stand
to season, then combine just before serving. If oil dressing is
used, a good flavour may be obtained by covering the salad in-
gredients with French dressing, let stand to season, then use boiled
dressing or mayonnaise, as desired, to combine the salad. This
applies particularly to cooked vegetables, meat and fish. Salad
greens are such vegetables as lettuce, watercress, etc. In pre-
paring them for salads, wash thoroughly in several waters, drain
and dry. Lettuce, watercress, celery, beetroot, radishes, tomato,
cucumber, or garlic may form the ordinary plain salad. Gherkins,
anchovies, olives, capers, hard-boiled egg and nasturtium can be
used as decoration. Herbs should always be finely chopped.
Banana Salad
Bananas Lettuce
Dressing Parsley
Nuts
Method : Cut in halves, lengthwise, or cut in three, crosswise.
Dip in dressing, then roll in chopped nuts ; cocoanut or dates may
be added. Serve on lettuce, and garnish with parsley and nuts.
Beetroot Salad
Cooked beetroot i pint vinegar
3 cloves 6 peppercorns
i nutmeg 1 blade mace
1 teaspoon salt 1 dessertspoon sugar
Method: Put vinegar, cloves, mace, nutmeg, peppercorns,
and sugar in saucepan. Bring to boil and simmer 10 minutes with
element turned to “Low.” Cool. Slice beetroot into glass dish,
pour vinegar over, and serve when cold.
Fruit Salad
This should be served at luncheon, supper or dinner as either
a salad or a dessert course. As a salad course, combine with
dressing (French or mayonnaise) and serve on lettuce leaves. As
a dessert course, flavour with wine, and serve in fruit glasses.
Decorate with whipped cream, and crystallised fruits.


Lettuce Salad
Lettuce Beetroot
Tomato Hard-boiled egg
Method: Remove coarse outside leaves of lettuce, wash and
dry inner leaves. Shred finely, place in glass bowl, together with
layers of tomato and beetroot. Mask with salad-dressing, and
garnish with egg cut in slices.
Lobster Salad
1 cold cooked lobster Lettuce
French dressing Olives
Mayonnaise 2 hard-boiled eggs
Method: Cut lobster into pieces, spread with French
dressing. Arrange on lettuce leaves, mask with mayonnaise and
garnish with lobster claws, olives and hardboiled eggs.
Mayonnaise
2 egg yolks 1 teaspoon sugar
\ to i cup oil i teaspoon mustard
2 tablespoons vinegar Pinch cayenne
i teaspoon salt
Method: Mix flavourings with egg yolks. While beating
constantly add oil drop by drop until mixture is thick, then thin
with a little of the vinegar. Add remainder of oil, slowly, and
finally bring mayonnaise to correct consistency with the remainder
of the vinegar.
Cream Dressing
3 hard-boiled egg yolks Cayenne
1 teaspoon salt 3 tablespoons vinegar
1 teaspoon sugar 1 cup whipped cream
Method: Pound egg yolks, add flavourings, work in vinegar
gradually, and lastly fold in whipped cream.
Potato Salad
Cold boiled potatoes Lettuce
Mayonnaise Chopped parsley
Method ; Dice potatoes. Arrange on lettuce leaves.
Mask with mayonnaise and garnish with finely
chopped parsley.


Tomato and Cucumber
1 cucumber Vinegar
1 lb. tomatoes Mayonnoise
2 apples Walnut pieces
Salt Paprika
Cayenne
Method : Peel and slice tomatoes and cucumber, sprinkle
with salt, cayenne and vinegar, mix together, then drain. Cover
with sliced apples and nuts, saving a few of the latter for garnish.
Mask with mayonnaise, and garnish with nuts and paprika.
PASTRY
The secret of making flaky, tender, crusted pies and pastry
lies chiefly in the handling of the dough, or, rather, the not hand-
ling of the dough. The more the dough is handled and worked,
the tougher and more rubbery the product becomes. The follow-
ing hints are of vital importance for success:—
1. Cut the cold fat in the dry ingredients with a slight stroking
motion. Do not bear down and pack the dough.
2. Aim towards adept manipulation—handling and rolling the
dough as little as possible. Always roll the dough from the
centre in every direction rather than rolling back and forth.
This eliminates unnecessary rolling and shapes the dough as
desired for the finished crust.
3. Use cold fat and ice water; if possible chill the dough before
rolling, as chilled dough expands more in the oven and
therefore will be flakier.
4. Start with a hot oven (500-
550°), which turns the water
in the pie crust into steam,
forcing the layers of dough
apart into flakes.
5. Short crust is used for meat
and fruit pies and tarts.
Flaky pastry for pies, saus-
age rolls. Puff pastry for
patties,, etc.


Flaky Pastry
i lb. flour i cup water
1 teaspoon baking powder Pinch salt
4 ozs. shortening (butter,
lard, etc.)
Method : Sift flour, rising and salt, divide shortening into
four equal parts. Rub into flour until it resembles bread-
crumbs. Pour in water in a steady stream. Mix well, turn on to
floured board, knead till elastic. Roll out, keeping edges square.
Spread on second quantity of shortening, leaving half inch
margin. Sprinkle lightly with flour, fold in three, the top to
centre and bottom to the top. Keep square at edges, and always
closed side to the left. Roll out pastry and keep on using same
method till shortening is used up. Then roll and sprinkle with
flour only, fold and then roll into shape required. Bake in oven
550°, top element off, bottom element “Low.”
Puff Pastry
i lb. flour Yolk of egg
| lb. butter Squeeze of lemon juice
i cup water Pinch salt
Method: Sift flour and salt together, beat egg yolk, lemon
juice and water together. Place butter in comer of a floured
cloth and squeeze the water out. Place butter on a plate and
flatten into a square with the blade of a knife. Add liquid in a
steady stream to the flour and make into a rather soft dough.
Turn on to a slightly floured board, and knead very well until
elastic. Roll pastry out into an oblong. Place butter on half the
pastry, brush round the edges with white of egg. Fold the top
half over the butter. Have edges coinciding. With the rolling
pin close the edges and turn the pastry with the closed side to the
left. Roll out, roll in one direction only. Fold in three, top over
bottom. Allow to stand on floured plate for 10 minutes. Repeat
this process of rolling and folding 7
times, between each rolling allow to
stand on plate in a cool place for 10
minutes. For seventh roll, roll pastry
to size and shape required. Bake in
oven 550°, top oven element off, bot-
tom to “Low”. Time, 20-30 minutes,
according to thickness.


Short Crust (Ordinary)
i lb. flour 4 lb. fat or butter
1 teaspoon baking powder \ teaspoon of salt
i teaspoon salt i to i cup water
Method : Sift flour, salt and baking powder, rub in the fat
till it resembles bread-crumbs, then mix with water, keeping as
dry as possible, knead slightly on floured board. Roll out to size
and shape required. Bake in oven 500-550°, top element off,
bottom element “Low.”
Short Crust (Good')
6 ozs. flour 2 tablespoons water
i lb. butter Squeeze lemon juice
1 egg yolk Pinch salt
Method : Sift flour and salt together. Beat yolk with water
and lemon juice. Rub butter into flour until it resembles bread-
crumbs. Mix into dough with liquid. Turn out on to floured
board, knead slightly. Use as required. Bake in oven 500°, top
element off, bottom element “Low” or off, according to the
thickness of the crust.
Apple tleur
6 ozs. good short crust Vanilla essence
li lbs. apple puree Carmine
1 tablespoon castor sugar Crystallised fruits
i pint cream
Methods'. Make short crust and line a fleur ring placed on
a greased tray. Put a buttered paper inside ring, on pastry, and
add a small cupful of rice or any cereal. This paper and rice are
to prevent pastry from rising. Bake in oven 500°, top element
off, bottom element “Low,” for 15 minutes. Remove paper and
rice, and bake another 10-15 minutes. Cut rough edges, remove
ring and cool. When quite cold, fill with cold apple puree. Add
sugar and vanilla to cream and whip well until it begins to thicken.
Pour half on top of apple puree. Colour remainder a pale pink.
Pipe round edges with cream and decorate centre with crystallised
fruits.
Apple Pie
1 lb. short crust Butter
2 to 3 lbs. of apples Lemon rind
Sugar A few cloves
Water
Method: Peel and core applies, slice thinly and place in pie
dish with a little water, a few cloves, pieces of lemon rind, a few
lumps of butter and sugar to taste. Roll out pastry 1 inch larger


all round than pie dish, cut off strip about 1 inch wide. Line edge
of dish, placing cut side out. Moisten strips with water and cover
with short crust. Mark edges with spoon or fork. Glaze with
white of egg, sprinkle with icing sugar. Bake in oven 500°-525°,
top element off, bottom element “Low.” Time, about 30 minutes.
Cheese Puffs
Cream puff mixture 4 tablespoons grated cheese
i cup cream Salt, cayenne
Method : Make cream puff mixture, place in half tesopoonful
on greased tray. Bake in oven 500°, top element off, bottom
element “Low.” Time, about 30 minutes. Split and allow to
cool. Whip cream stiffly, fold in grated cheese, and season with
salt and cayenne to taste. Fill puffs and serve on a bed of lettuce
leaves.
Lemon Tarts
Good short crust Lemon butter
Method : Line small tart tins with good short crust, and prick
with fork. Bake in oven 500°, top element off, bottom element
“Low.” Time, 8-10 minutes. When cold, fill with lemon butter.
Oyster Patties
i lb. puff pastry Lemon juice
Oysters Anchovy sauce
1 oz. butter Salt, cayenne
1 oz. flour A little cream
i cup milk
Method : Roll out pastry, dip a sharp cutter in boiling water
and cut into shapes. Place patties on greased tray and bake in
oven 550°, top element off, bottom element “Low.” Time, 15-20
minutes. Make sauce with flour, butter and milk, season with
salt cayenne, and anchovy sauce. When boiling, add oysters.
Remove from element and add cream and lemon juice. Fill
cooked patties with mixture, reheat, decorate with cayenne and
parsley, and serve with slices of lemon.
Pastry Boats
Good short crust Savoury or sweet filling
Method: Roll out paste, and line boat-shaped tins. Prick
pastry with fork. Cook in oven 500°, top element off, bottom
“Low.” Time, 8-10 minutes. Allow to cool, then fill with sweet
or savoury fillings.


Sausage Rolls
Mincemeat or sausage Chopped parsley
Salt Flaky pastry
Pepper
Method : Sprinkle mincemeat with parsley, salt, and pepper,
and mix well. Make pastry and roll out into oblong shape, and
cut into portions about 4 inches by 3 inches. Add mincemeat to
each portion, fold, mark and glaze. Place on greased slide. Bake
in oven 550°, top element off, bottom “Low.” Time, 15-20
minutes.
SWEETS and PUDDINGS
The type of pudding or dessert to be served should coincide
with the rest of the meal. If the first part of the meal consists
of heavy food, your dessert should be of the lighter variety, and
when the preceding courses are light, serve a heavy and sub-
stantial dessert.
Angel 'Budding
1 lb. stoned dates 3 teaspoons baking powder
I lb. nut meats Pinch salt
1 cup castor sugar 3 egg whites
Method: Sift salt, sugar and baking powder together, add
to chopped dates and nuts. Beat egg whites stiffly and fold in
dry ingredients. Put mixture into buttered dish and bake in oven
400°, top element off, bottom element “Low.” Time, about 30
minutes. Serve with whipped cream.
Apple Charlotte
li cups breadcrumbs i to i cup sugar
3 cups cooking apples H teaspoons ground ginger
chopped finely 2 ozs. butter.
Method : Line a buttered dish with crumbs, add
a layer of apples, sprinkle with crumbs, sugar, cinna-
mon and dot with butter. Continue until the dish is
full, having a layer of crumbs on top. Bake in oven
450°, top element off, bottom element “Low”. Time,
about 35 minutes.


Apple Meringue
6 apples i pint water
4 egg whites Lemon juice
i lb. castor sugar Cherries and angelica
\ lb. loaf sugar
Method : Well boil the syrup, peel the apples and core
carefully. Cook them very gently with the syrup in a casserole
so as not to break them. When tender, put them on a buttered
baking tin. Whisk the egg whites very stiffly and stir in the
castor sugar. Turn this mixture into a forcing bag and force it
round the apple (starting at the base) until all is covered. Dredge
over with castor sugar. Bake in oven 350°, current off. Time,
about 20 minutes. Decorate with cherries and angelica, and
colour the syrup pale pink and pour round.
Apple Thudding
Apple puree 6 ozs. self-raising flour
3 ozs. butter i cup milk
1 lb. sugar Pinch salt
2 eggs
Method : Put apple puree into buttered dish, cream butter
and sugar, add beaten eggs, then sifted flour and salt, lastly milk.
Spread mixture on top of the apple and bake in oven 425°, top
element off, bottom element “Low.” Time, about 30 minutes.
Baked Apple Dumplings
i lb. short crust A little sugar
3 medium sized apples A little butter
A few cloves
Method : Prepare apples by washing, removing core and
peeling thinly. Make pastry and divide into three equal parts.
Roll into small rounds, and stand an apple in each round of
pastry. Put a small piece of butter, one or two cloves and about
half a teaspoonful of sugar in each of the apples. Then work
pastry round apple, using palms of
hands. When apple is nearly covered,
brush edges with water and continue
working pastry until apple is com-
pletely covered. Place on greased tray,
closed end down. Glaze with sugar and
water, and bake in oven 525°, top
element off, bottom element “Low”.
Time, about 30 minutes.


'Baked Custard
1 pint milk 1-2 tablespoons sugar
2-3 eggs Grated nutmeg
A little butter A little essence, vanilla or lemon
Method: Beat eggs and sugar, add milk and essence. Grease
a pie dish with butter and pour the custard in. Place small
pieces of butter on top and sprinkle with nutmeg. Bake in oven,
350°-400°, current off. Time, 30-40 minutes.
Bread and Butter Budding
Slices of stale bread Grated nutmeg
Butter 2 eggs
Sultanas 1 pint milk
Essence Sugar
Method : Beat eggs and sugar, add milk and essence. Spread
slices of bread with butter, cut into finger lengths. Grease a pie
dish with butter, put the buttered bread in, in layers. Sprinkle
each layer with sultanas. Have pie dish half full of bread, pour
uncooked custard mixture over. Sprinkle with nutmeg. Bake
in oven 400°-450°, top element off, bottom element “Low.” Time,
about 30 minutes.
Caramel Flour
1 quart milk I egg
1 cup brown sugar Small piece of butter (size of
2 tablespoons cornflour walnut)
Pinch salt Vanilla essence
Method: Put butter and sugar in a saucepan to brown. Heat
milk, add cornflour which has been blended with a little cold milk.
Add brown sugar and beaten egg. Cook until this is thick. Cool
and serve with whipped cream.
Casserole Pears
Pears Cinnamon
Sugar A little water
Method: Peel pears, leave whole with stalks in. Grease
pyrex dish with butter, put pears in with about 3 tablespoons of
water. Sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon. Cover and bake in
oven 400°-450°, current off, or with bottom element at “Low.”
Time, 30-40 minutes.


Common Sauce
1 cup water 2 teaspoons flour
1 teaspoon butter A little nutmeg
1 cup sugar Flavouring
Method: Blend flour with a little of the water, put the
remainder of the water and all other ingredients into a saucepan,
bring to boiling point with the element turned to “High,” stir in
flour, turn element to “Low,” and cook for about 10 minutes till
sance is thick, stirring all the! time.
Creamed Rice
3 cups milk 2 ozs. butter
6 tablespoons rice Salt
2-3 tablespoons sugar i cup cream
Method : Scald milk and add salt and rice; pour into buttered
dish, add butter, broken into pieces. Bake in oven 350°, top
element off, bottom element “Low.” Time, about 1 hour. Pour
cream over and serve immediately.
Cup Pudding
2 eggs H teaspoons baking powder
1 cup butter Ripe fresh fruit or
j cup sugar Whole cooked fruit
| cup milk
Method: Grease cup shapes, put fruit in each. Cream
butter and sugar, add beaten eggs gradually, then sifted flour and
rising, and lastly milk. Beat well. Pour mixture over fruit
until cups are a little over half full. Steam for 1 hour with
element turned to “Low.”
Date Pudding
10 ozs. flour Pinch salt
5 ozs. suet Grated lemon rind
8 ozs. stoned dates Grated nutmeg
4 ozs. brown sugar £ cup milk
2 teaspoons baking powder 1 egg
Method: Sift dry ingredients, add shredded suet
and prepared fruit. Beat egg, add milk and stir into
dry ingredients. Put into prepared basin or cloth,
and boil 2-2% hours with element turned to “Low”.
Serve with sweet white sauce.


Fig Pudding
3 ozs. butter 1 egg
3 ozs. sugar Little essence
6 ozs. flour i cup milk
3 teaspoons baking powder 4 ozs. preserved flgs
Salt
Method : Prepare steamer, basin, and double thickness of
greased paper. Sift flour, rising and salt. Cream butter and
sugar, add beaten eggs gradually, add sifted flour, then milk and
essence, lastly chopped figs. Put into basin with double thickness
of greased paper on top. Cover, place in steamer, and steam \\
hours with element on “Low.”
Floating Island
Soft custard Vanilla essence
1 egg white Pinch salt
2 tablespoons sugar
Method: Pour custard into serving dish. Add pinch salt to
egg white and beat stiffly. Add sugar, gradually beating all the
time, flavour with vanilla. Drop meringue into custard in large
spoonsful.
Foaming Sauce
1 cup butter i cup boiling water
2 cups sugar Flavouring
2 egg whites
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add whites of eggs,
unbeaten, and beat well together, then add water and flavouring.
Set in pan of hot water and beat till quite smooth.
Fruit Fritters
Fruit, pineapple, apples or 2 egg whites
bananas Pinch salt
1 tablespoon melted butter i cup tepid water
4 ozs. flour A little castor sugar
Method : Peel and core apples, and cut into rings. If
bananas, peel and cut across, then lengthways, making four pieces
in each. Sift flour and salt together, make a well in the centre,
and pour in the melted butter. Work in the flour gradually from
the sides with a wooden spoon. Add the liquid gradually and
continue beating until all the flour is worked in from the sides.
Beat egg whites stiffly, fold into the batter half at a time. Have
fat ready, dip fruit in batter and wet fry a golden brown. Drain
on paper, and serve sprinkled with castor sugar.


Golden Sauce
1 cup castor sugar 2 cups water
i cup butter 2 tablespoons cornflour
1 teaspoon vanilla essence
Method ; Blend cornflour with a little of the water, and put
all ingredients into a double saucepan and cook till creamy,
stirring constantly. Have element turned to “High.”
Hermit budding
2 cups cake crumbs 1 teaspoon cloves
1 cup hot coffee 1 teaspoon cinnamon
i cup treacle 1 teaspoon carb. soda
1 cup raisins Lemon sauce
Method: Pour coffee and treacle over cake crumbs. Sift
together flour, soda and spices, and add them to the crumbs. Then
stir in the raisins. Put into a prepared basin, cover with double
thickness of greased paper. Steam hours with element turned
to “Low.” Serve with lemon sauce, made as follows:
2 tablespoons lemon juice 1 tablespoon cornflour
2 tablespoons sugar Small cup water
Mix cornflour with cold water, then boil together for 15 minutes
the water, sugar, and cornflour. Add lemon juice and serve.
Marguerite budding
3 ozs. butter Salt
3 ozs. sugar 1 egg
6 ozs. flour 3 tablespoons marmalade
3 teaspoons baking powder i cup milk
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add beaten egg, gradually,
then sifted flour, rising and salt. Add marmalade, lastly milk.
Mix well. Put into prepared basin, place double thickness of
greased paper over top, cover, and steam for hours with
element turned to “Low.”
Orange Custard
2 cups soft custard 2 tablespoons castor sugar
4 sweet oranges Meringue or whipped cream
Method : Peel oranges, and divide
into sections. Place in serving dish,
sprinkle with castor sugar and chill.
Chill custard, and pour over oranges;
garnish with meringue or whipped
cream.


Pancakes
2 cups milk 1 teaspoon baking powder
1 tablespoon sugar Pinch salt
1 cup flour 2 eggs
Method: Sift dry ingredients, make a well in centre, add
gradually beaten eggs and milk, beat thoroughly until all the flour
from the sides is worked in. Burn out pan with element at
“High,” grease with a little butter, pour in sufficient batter to
cover bottom of pan. Allow to brown with element turned to
“Medium”. Loosen pancake from side and bottom of pan.
Sprinkle with castor sugar and squeeze of lemon juice. Roll up
lightly. Pile on hot dish. Add a little more butter to pan for
each pancake. Serve immediately.
Plum Pudding
7 ozs. breadcrumbs 5 ozs. flour
6 ozs. suet 2 eggs
4 ozs. currants 2 teaspoons baking powder
4 ozs. raisins A little grated nutmeg
4 ozs. sultanas A little grated lemon rind
4 ozs. brown sugar 1 gill milk
2 ozs. candied peel Salt
Method: Prepare bread-crumbs, and all the other ingredients.
Slice candied peel thinly, sift flour, baking powder and salt
together, shred suet finely, rub into flour, add all dry ingredients.
Beat eggs and milk and pour mixture into dry ingredients. Mix
into a rather stiff dough, put into prepared basin or cloth. Boil
3 hours with element at “Low.” Serve sweet white sauce or
custard separately.
Prune Pudding
2 lbs. prunes i cup sugar
2 egg whites
Method: Cook prunes, and stone
them. Beat with fork, add the stiffly
beaten egg whites and the sugar. Put
in baking dish and place in oven at
375°, turn top element off, and bottom
to “Low”. Time, about 20 minutes.
Turn out on glass dish and serve cold
with whipped cream.


Queen Thudding
8 tablespoons bread or cake Raspberry Jam
crumbs 2 egg whites
1 pint uncooked custard Pinch salt
4 tablespoons sugar
Method: Warm custard and pour over crumbs and stir well.
Pour into greased pie dish. Bake till set, temperature 350°-400°,
top element off, bottom element “Low.” Add a pinch of salt to
the egg whites, beat stiffly, and fold in sugar. Spread custard
and pile meringue on top. Return to oven, turn top
element to “Low,” and bake till golden brown.
Soft Custard
1 pint milk 2 tablespoons sugar
3 whole eggs or 2 whole Essence of vanilla
and 2 yolks
Method: Warm milk, beat eggs and sugar together, pour
warm milk over eggs. Then put liquid in a double boiler or a
jug in water, stir over element with a wooden spoon till custard
begins to coat the spoon, strain, cool and flavour.
Steamed Ginger Pudding
i lb. flour 2 tablespoons milk
i lb. suet i teaspoon carb. soda
3 ozs. sugar 2 tablespoons treacle
li teaspoons ginger 2 tablespoons sultanas
Nutmeg
Method: Sift flour, soda, ginger and nutmeg. Shred suet
and rub it into flour, add sultanas and sugar. Mix treacle and
milk and stir into dry ingredients with a wooden spoon. Tie
carefully in floured cloth, or put into a prepared steamer, place in
boiling water, and boil for 2 hours with element turned to “Low.”
Suet Pudding
10 ozs. flour A little grated nutmeg
4 teaspoons baking powder A little grated lemon rind
3 ozs. shredded suet i cup milk
Salt
Method’. Sift flour, baking powder, and salt to-
gether, rub in suet, add flavourings and mix with
milk. Put into prepared basin, cover with greased
paper and steam 2\ hours with element turned to
“Low”. Serve with melted syrup sauce or jam sauce.


Yorkshire budding
8 ozs. flour 1 pint milk
Pinch salt 2 tablespoons fat
2 eggs
Method: Sift flour and salt into a basin. Make a well in
the centre and drop the eggs into it. Work a little flour into the
egg, using a wooden spoon. Add milk gradually, stirring all the
time in the centre of the basin. When half the milk is added,
beat the mixture well, add the remainder of the milk, and allow
to stand for half an hour. Heat 2 tablespoons of fat in a baking
tin, pour the mixture in, bake in oven 450°, top element off,
bottom element “Low.” Time, 40-45 minutes. Cut in pieces and
serve with roast beef.


GIVE REST
tv
f to those thred\
houndss y
Small Electric
Appliances
Help!
*
The electric griller is ideal
for quickly preparing small
meals. Grills, boils and fries
right on the table.
With this electric
toaster you can make two
crisp brown slices at
once—right on the break*
fast table I
The electric iron is the
greatest labour-saver of
all the small electrical
appliances. It is the
ideal gift.
An electric kettle boils
water for tea or for other
purposes without fuss or
bother. Safety cut-out
prevents damage If the
water all boils away.
This electric jug provides
the quickest and cheapest
way of boiling water. It
boils in a few minutes.
State Electricity Commission
of Victoria
Showrooms: 238-242 Flinders Street (opposite Railway Station)
Melbourne, C.z, and Country Centres throughout the State


CAKES
There is probably more space in Cookery Books devoted to
cake recipes than any other food classification. Although each
recipe may be different, they can be divided into two classes—
cakes without butter, and cakes with butter. Sponge cakes (with-
out butter) are to be preferred for children, as butter, when
heated, becomes more difficult to digest.
GENERAL HINTS
1. Measure all ingredients carefully and accurately.
2. To make eggs whip quicker, add a dash of salt. Of course,
the ideal cake mixer is an electric one.
3. Do not stir cake batter; beat it from the bottom. Some cakes
require more beating than others.
4. Have pans ready and the ingredients measured before mixing
the cake.
5. Have oven ready for use when batter is mixed.
6. Grease tins with lard for preference.
7. If oven is too hot at first, an outside crust will form before
the cake rises to its full height, and in continuing to rise will
lift the crust and break it.
8. Cakes put in the oven at too low 1 a temperature cause excess-
ive steaming and makes them heavy.
9. Do not use top oven element when baking.
10. Do not open oven door when baking. Follow the recipe tem-
perature and time and your own good judgment.
11. Never jar or move a cake in oven before it is well baked.
12. If cake cracks open on top too much flour has been used,
providing, of course, correct temperature has been used.
Similarly, if cake drops, not enough flour has been used.
13. When cake sticks to tin, try placing it on a
damp cloth for a few minutes.
14. Sprinkle flour over cake lightly before icing
to keep from running.
15. To prevent boiled frosting from hardening, add
a pinch of cream of tartar.


STEPS TO FOLLOW IN CAKE-MAKING
1. Having worked the butter until soft and creamy, gradually
work in the sugar a little at a time. It is necessary to make a
thorough blending of the ingredients from the start to ensure
the proper texture in the finished cake. The finer the grain
of the sugar itself, the better the blend, and the finer the
resulting cake. (Run sugar through! flour sifter).
2. Beat the eggs thoroughly to entangle a maximum amount of
air, which will expand in the oven and lighten the cake.
3. Carefully fold in the stiffly beaten egg whites so as not to
lose this entangled air. Make each stroke count —down, up
and over. Do not stir.
4. A thorough and complete baking prevents any collapse on
cooling,
5. Time of baking depends on size of tin and depth of batter.
Use standard cups and spoons and measure absolutely level.
6. A prolonged cooling on a rack before frosting prevents any
steaming and resulting sogginess.
Brownies
1/3 cup butter 1 egg
1/3 cup sugar 1 cup self-raising flour
1/3 cup molasses or treacle 1 cup chopped nuts
Method ; Cream butter and sugar, add treacle and beaten egg,
lastly flour and nuts. Drop into greased tin or patty papers. Set
half a nut on top of each, and bake in oven 450°, current off.
Time, 15-20 minutes.
Butter Sponge
4 ozs. butter 6 ozs. self-raising flour
4 ozs. sugar 3 eggs
Essence 3 tablespoons milk
Method: Cream butter and sugar,
add beaten eggs, then sifted flour,
lastly milk and essence. Pour into
prepared sandwich tins. Bake in oven
450°, current off. Time, 15-20
minutes.


Cheese Cakes
i lb. short crust or flaky i quantity plain cake mixture
pastry Jam
Method: Make pastry and roll it out thinly, and line patty
tins with it. Spread jam on each, then put in small portion of
plain cake mixture. Decorate the top with thin strips of pastry.
Bake low in oven, 450°, top element off, bottom element at
“Medium.” Time, 15-20 minutes.
Chinese Chews
1 cup sugar 1 cup flour
1 cup melted butter 1 teaspoon baking powder
2 eggs 1 cup chopped walnuts
2 tablespoons milk 1 cup chopped dates
1 teaspoon vanilla
Method: Beat eggs and sugar, add melted butter, then sifted
flour and rising. Mix well. Add milk and essence, lastly
chopped nuts and dates. Spread in buttered pan -J inch thick.
Bake in oven 375°, top element off, bottom element “Low.” Time,
about 20 minutes.
Cinnamon Slice
4 ozs. butter 1 heaped teaspoon cinnamon
4 ozs. castor sugar 3 eggs
6 ozs. self-raising flour 3 tablespoons milk
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs, then
sifted flour, lastly milk. Place in prepared shallow square tin.
Bake in oven 425°, top element off, bottom element “Low.” Time,
20-30 minutes. When cooked, remove from oven, turn out on to
cooler. Spread bottom of cake with softened butter, sprinkling
quickly with cinnamon and sugar.
Cocoanut Macaroons
1 cup castor sugar 4 egg whites
1 cup cocoanut 1 tablespoon flour
Method: Beat egg whites stiffly, add sugar gradually, fold
in flour and cocoanut. Place on greased slide in heaped teaspoon-
ful. Bake in oven 350°, current off. Time, 20-30 minutes.
Coffee Cake
i lb. butter Essence of Almond
i lb. sugar Cinnamon
\ lb. self-raising flour Almonds—blanched and grilled
4 eggs Soft white icing
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs gradually,
then sifted flour, lastly essence, and if necessary a little milk.


Place in deep tin, and bake in oven 425°, top element off, bottom
element “Low.'’ Time, |-1 hour. When cold, ice with soft
white icing, sprinkle with cinnamon, and then with grilled
almonds.
Cream Puffs
1 pint water 4 ozs. plain flour
2 ozs. butter 3 large or 4 small eggs
Method: Put water and butter into a saucepan, bring to
boiling point, draw off element and stir in sifted flour, using a
wooden spoon. Return to element, and stir till the mixture
leaves the sides of the saucepan and forms one lump. Beat eggs
and when mixture cools add the eggs gradually, beating well all
the time. Place spoonsful of the mixture on a greased tray.
Bake in oven 525°, top element off, bottom element “Low.”
Time, 30-40 minutes. When cooked split to let out steam and
when cold fill with whipped and flavoured cream. Sprinkle top
with icing sugar.
Devil*s Cake
1 cup grated chocolate 1 teaspoon vanilla essence
1 cup milk 2 cups flour
2 cups brown sugar i cup butter
3 egg yolks 1 teaspoon carb. soda
2 egg whites 1 tablespoon boiling water
Method: Beat milk with 1 egg yolk, put into a saucepan, add
grated chocolate, 1 cup brown sugar and vanilla essence. Mix
all ingredients and cook on small element till thick. Put aside to
cool. Cream butter and other cup of sugar, add two beaten egg
yolks. Add sifted flour, and beat in first mixture. Add stiffly
beaten egg whites, lastly soda dissolved in boiling water. Pour
into a deep greased tin, and bake in oven 400°, top element off,
bottom element “Low.” Time, 1-1$ hours, according to depth
of tin.
Egg Sponge
3 large eggs 2 tablespoons boiling water
1 cup flour i cup castor sugar
1 teaspoon cream tartar Essence
J teaspoon carb. soda Pinch salt
Method: Beat eggs well, add sugar, beat till thick and sugar
grains have disappeared. Add sifted flour, rising and salt. Pour
water and essence in at side of basin. Lightly mix all together,
pour into prepared sandwich tins. Bake in oven 400°, current
off. Time, 10-20 minutes, according to size of tin.


Fruit Cake
1 lb. butter 2 ozs. cherries
1 lb. brown sugar 1 lb. sultanas
li lbs. plain flour $-1 lb. currants
2 level teaspoons baking 1 lb. seeded raisins
powder 4 ozs. candied peel
1 level teaspoon cinnamon 4 ozs. blanched almonds
A little spice and nutmeg hi cup milk, sherry or brandy
i-1 pkt. mixed spice A level teaspoon salt
8-9 eggs
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs gradually.
Then add sifted dry ingredients with fruits alternately, lastly
liquid. Put into papered tin, hollowing out centre. Bake in oven
375°, top element off, bottom element “Low.” Time, 3-4 hours.
Colour with Parisian essence if liked.
Ginger Drops
1 cup treacle i cup butter
2 tablespoons milk 1 teaspoon soda
1 tablespoon ginger hi cup flour
Method: Warm treacle and butter, sift £ lb. flour, soda, and
ginger, add to butter and treacle, add milk and if necessary extra
flour to make a fairly soft dough. Roll into small balls, drop on
greased tray and bake in oven 375°, current off. Time, about 20
minutes.
Ginger Nuts
i lb. flour i lb. sugar
3 ozs. butter 3 teaspoons ginger
3 tablespoons treacle I egg yolk
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add egg yolk and treacle,
add sifted flour and salt gradually, mixing well till paste is
smooth. Divide into equal quantities and roll into small balls.
Put on buttered tray and bake in oven 400°, current off. Time,
10-15 minutes.
Glory Ginger Sponge
i lb. butter 1 egg
i lb. brown sugar 1 cup sour milk or i cup fresh milk
| lb. flour 1 teaspoon ground ginger
1 teaspoon carb. soda 1 teaspoon cinnamon
1 tablespoon golden syrup
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add sifted flour, cinnamon
and ginger. Keep back one heaped tablespoon of this dry
mixture. To what remains add beaten egg and milk in which
is dissolved the soda and golden syrup. Grease and flour tin, then
pour in mixture and sprinkle the top with the tablespoon of dry
mixture. Bake in oven 350°, top element off, bottom element
“Low.” Time, about 1 hour.


Honey Cakes
i cup honey 1 egg
i cup butter 1 cup raisins
\ teaspoon cinnamon 11 cups flour
1 teaspoon boiling water 1 teaspoon soda
1/3 teaspoon cloves
Method: Heat butter and honey until honey melts white.
Add spices. Cool and add beaten egg, part of flour, then soda
dissolved in water, lastly raisins. Add remainder of flour, and if
necessary a little extra, sufficient to make a dough that will hold
its shape. Drop into greased tins and bake in oven 425°, current
off. Time, 15-20 minutes.
Honey-Comb Meringues
2 egg whites 4 tablespoons castor sugar
Pinch salt 1 small cup Kellogg Flakes
Method: Add pinch of salt to egg whites, beat till very stiff,
add half the sugar gradually, beating well. When stiff and
holding its shape, fold in second half, also the Kellogg Flakes.
Bake in oven 350°, current off, rack below centre. Time, about
45 minutes.
Kisses
2 eggs 4 ozs. sugar
4 ozs. plain flour Salt
4 ozs. cornflour Raspberry Jam
2 teaspoons baking powder Icing Sugar
4 ozs. butter
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs gradually,
then flour sifted with salt and rising. Mix well together, put in
rough lumps on greased tray, keeping lumps of mixture as near
the same size as possible. Bake in oven 425°, current off. Time,
about 7-10 minutes. Cool, and stick two together with jam,
sprinkling with icing sugar.
Meringues
2 egg whites 4 tablespoons plain or castor sugar.
Essence
Method: Beat egg whites so stiffly that when
basin is turned upside down the egg whites will not
slip. Beat sugar in gradually and add essence. Place
in teaspoonful on tray covered with greased paper.
Bake in oven 300°-325°, current off. Time, 1-14-
hours.


Orange Cake
6 ozs. flour 1 tablespoon boiling water
2 teaspoons cream tartar 2 ozs. melted butter
1 teaspoon carb. soda 2 oranges
5 ozs. castor sugar 3 eggs
Method : Beat eggs till frothy, add sugar and beat till thick,
sift flour and cream tartar, dissolve soda in boiling water. Melt
butter, and add to soda and water, then add orange juice, to make
up to f cup liquid. Add flour to egg mixture; and pour liquid in
at side of basin. Add grated rind of one orange and beat all well
together. Pour into sandwich tins which have been buttered and
floured. Bake in oven 400°, current off. Time, 15-25 minutes,
according to the depth of the tin. When cold, put together with
whipped cream, sweetened and flavoured, and ice with orange
icing.
Prince Albert Cake
1 cup brown sugar 1 teaspoon cinnamon
4 cup butter 1 teaspoon cloves
2 eggs 1 cup chopped raisins
1 cup flour i cup sour milk
i teaspoon carb. soda
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs
gradually, then sifted dry ingredients, next sour milk, lastly
raisins. Mix all well together. Put into prepared shallow tin,
and bake in oven 425°, top element off, bottom element “Low.”
Time, 25-30 minutes.
Raspberry Buns
1 lb. flour 1 egg
2 ozs. castor sugar A little milk
3 ozs. butter 1 teaspoon baking powder
Pinch salt Raspberry jam
Method: Sift flour, rising and salt, rub in butter. Add well
beaten egg* gradually, and sufficient
milk to make a light paste. Roll out,
cut into small rounds, put a little jam
on each, wet the edges and pinch them
together. Place buns on a greased
tray, joined side under, and sprinkle
a little crystallised sugar over the top.
Bake in oven 450°, current off. Time,
about 15-20 minutes.


Hot Water~Qui
m
m
m
WM
m
?sS
A Useful
Accessory
to any
—with an
ELECTRIC
JUG
TO boil water quickly and more
economically than by any
other method, use an Electric
Jug! It is a most useful accessory
to the electric range, and on nearly
all popular types a power point is
provided, so that an Electric Jug
or any other appliance may be
easily connected.
A typical Electric Jug will boil
34 pints of water in five to six
minutes at the cost of a fraction
of a penny.
Electric
Range !
Think how useful it would be in
heating water for meals, for after-
noon tea, for shaving, and for a
hundred and one other purposes!
The price of an Electric Jug is
very low.
State Electricity Commission
of Victoria
Showrooms: 258-242 Flinders Street (opposite Railway Station)
Melbourne, C.i, and Country Centres throughout the State


Small Sponge Cakes
3 ozs. castor sugar 2 eggs
3 ozs. flour Essence
Small teaspoon baking
powder
Method : Butter well some sponge cake tins, and coat them
all over inside with flour and sugar, mixed in equal proportions.
Beat eggs, add sugar and continue till the mixture is quite light
and thick. Sift flour and baking powder, and fold into the eggs,
and add essence. Half fill tins with the mixture and dredge over
with castor sugar. Bake in oven 400°, current off. Time, about
10 minutes.
Spanish Cake
i cup butter 3 teaspoons baking powder
1 cup castor sugar 1$ cups flour
2 eggs 1 teaspoon cinnamon
i cup milk
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add beaten egg yolks, add
sifted dry ingredients, then the milk and beat well. Lastly fold
in stiffly beaten egg whites. Put into prepared sandwich tins and
bake in oven 425°, current off. Time, 10-15 minutes. When
cold put layers together with lemon filling and ice top with butter
icing.
Suliana Biscuits
1 lb. butter i lb. flour
| lb. sugar 1 teaspoon baking powder
4 ozs. sultanas Pinch salt
Method : Cream butter and sugar, add beaten egg, then sifted
dry ingredients, lastly sultanas. Roll out, cut into shapes, and
place on a greased tray. Bake in oven 450°, current off. Time,
10-15 minutes.
Strawberry Short Cake
2 cups self-raising flour i teaspoon salt
1 cup butter Whipped sweetened cream
2 tablespoons castor sugar Strawberries
2 eggs and little milk, or
i cup milk
Method : Sift flour and salt, rub in butter till it resembles
bread-crumbs, add sugar, add egg, beaten with a little milk, about
2 tablespoons. Put into prepared sandwich tins. Bake in oven
350°, top element off, bottom element low, time about 30 minutes.
When cold, put together with whipped cream and strawberries,
spread cream on top, and decorate with whole strawberries.


Swiss Roll
3 eggs 1 teaspoon cream tartar
4 ozs. castor sugar \ teaspoon carb. soda
4 ozs. plain flour 2 tablespoons boiling water
Essence Jam
Method: Beat eggs until light and frothy. Add sugar and
beat until thick and creamy. Sift flour and cream of tartar, and
add to the mixture, at the same time pour in essence and water
in which soda has been dissolved. Mix all well together. Line
Swiss roll tin wth greased paper, pour in mixture. Bake in oven
400°, current off, time about 15 minutes. When cooked, turn on
to a clean dry tea-towel sprinkled with castor sugar. Roll up, and
after 2 or 3 minutes unroll, then re-roll without towel. When
cool spread with jam or lemon butter.
ICING FOR CAKES
'Boiled Icing
1 cup granulated sugar, \ cup water. Boil till it thickens, take
off the range, and beat in the white of 1 egg, well beaten.
Butter Icing
1 cup icing sugar, butter size of one egg, flavouring. Boiling
water to make right consistency, beat and flavour. Beaten white
of egg can be used instead of water.
Orange Icing
1 egg, juice of orange, grated rind
1 orange, 4 cups confectioner’s sugar.
Beat egg and add orange juice and
rind. Add enough sugar to make it
the right consistency to spread. Beat
until smooth.


BREAD and SCONES
Now that electricity has provided so simple and economical a
method of baking bread, many housewives have adopted the prac-
tice of putting aside one day in each week for preparing sufficient
supplies of bread, pastries, and cakes to last the ensuing week,
stored in air-tight tins. In doing so they are merely taking advan-
tage of the well-known fact that bread can be cooked most easily—
and most perfectly—in the clean, hygienic heat of an electric oven.
While the dough is rising, teacakes or pastry can be made, as
these require a good heat. The bread itself requires a temperature
of about 500° for the first 15 minutes, after which the current
should be switched to “Low.” When the bread is cooked the
stored heat in the oven may be used for baking small cakes,
biscuits, or fruit and custard.
Alternatively, the residual heat may be utilised in the last
stage of cooking the bread. The latter takes 1$ to 1£ hours, but
the current may be switched off entirely during the last 20 minutes
or so.
To make good bread is the ambition of every cook, and it is
a very simple matter if the exact temperatures are maintained—
always easy with an electric range—and good ingredients used.
White or Standard Bread
2 lbs. flour 1 teaspoon sugar
1J pints tepid water 1 teaspoon salt
1 oz. baker’s yeast
Method: Sift flour and salt into a basin, put yeast and sugar
together into another basin and work them together until yeast
becomes liquid. Add the water and pour the mixture into the
flour, then knead the dough with the hands until it becomes
smooth. Cover the basin' with a cloth, and set it in a warm place
to rise for about 2 hours. Then turn the dough out on to a floured
board, and knead in so much flour that it no longer sticks to the
hand. Divide into four pieces, and put them in greased and
floured tins, and put them in a warm place for
another 15 minutes. Bake in oven 500°, turn the
top element off, leave the bottom element “High”
for ten minutes, then turn to “Low”. They will take
about £-1 hour to cook. After 30 minutes the cur-
rent may be switched off.


'Wholemeal Bread
1 lb. wholemeal 1 oz. butter
1 lb. white flour i pint milk
2 tablespoons baking powder | pint water
1 teaspoon salt
Method : Sift dry ingredients into a basin, rub in the butter,
mix with liquid, using sufficient to make a rather moist dough.
Divide into four parts, make each piece into a round loaf. Place
them on a greased sheet. Bake in oven 500°, top element off,
bottom element “High” for 10 minutes, then “Low” for IS
minutes, then off. Time to cook, about 45 minutes.
Fancy Bread
1 lb. flour 1 egg
i oz. yeast 1 oz. butter
1 teaspoon castor sugar \ pint warm milk
Pinch salt
Method : Cream the yeast and sugar together, add the milk
and the well beaten egg. Rub the butter into the flour, and pour
in the yeast mixture. Beat all well together till mixture leaves
the sides of the basin. Put in a warm place to rise for hours,
then make into fancy loaves, plaits, twists, etc. Let these prove
for another 10 minutes, then brush them over with beaten egg.
Bake in oven 500°, top element off, bottom element “High” for
5 minutes, then “Low” for 15 minutes, then off. Bake 30 minutes
for plaits or twists, and about 40 minutes for small loaves.
Cheese Scones
2 cups self-raising flour 2 ozs. butter
1 teaspoon salt i cup grated cheese
Pinch cayenne pepper i cup milk
Method: Sift dry ingredients, rub in butter, add grated
cheese, mix with milk. Turn on to floured board, cut into rounds,
place on floured tray, glaze. Bake in oven 550°, top element off,
bottom element “High” for 2 minutes, then off. Time, 5-8
minutes, according to size.
Currant Scones
i lb. self-raising flour 2 ozs. butter
1 oz. castor sugar 2 ozs. sultanas
Pinch salt Milk
Method: Sift dry ingredients, rub in butter, add sultanas.
Mix into a rather moist dough with milk. Turn on to floured
board, cut into rounds, place on floured tray, glaze, and bake in
oven 550°, top element off, bottom element “High” for 2 minutes
then off. Time, 5-8 minutes according to size.


Iron Electrically
V*
y.
ELECTRIC
PEDESTAL IRONER
SIT DOWN TO IRON . . . that’s the
modern labour-less way! Do eight hours
ironing in two or three! Say good-bye to
arduous pressing ... to the fatiguing
labour of lifting a heavy iron. And give
everything you iron the professional finish
you would obtain from a good laundry!
While an ordinary iron presses merely a
few square inches at once, the pedestal
ironer will press many times this area. The
pressing is done mechanically—there is no
labour on your part.
If your ironing is at all extensive—and it
is in most homes!—you’ll be wise to enquire
about an electric pedestal ironer. Let us
tell you all about it!
this
NEW
way!
Don’t forget
there’s the or-
dinary Electric
Iron, too!
The ordinary elec-
tric iron is the most
popular of all elec-
trical appliances—
and deservedly so!
State Electricity Commission
of Victoria
Showrooms : 238-242 Flinders Street (opposite Railway Station)
Melbourne, C.i, and Country Centres throughout the State


Drop Scones
1 cup self-raising flour i-J cup milk
1 egg 2 tablespoons castor sugar
Method: Sift flour and sugar, beat egg and make up to f cup
liquid with milk. Add gradually to the flour, beating well all the
time. Preheat a 1,700 watt element on “High” for 4 minutes.
Rub over with a buttered paper, drop the scones on to the element
—about a dessertspoonful at a time. When first batch bubbles
and is ready to turn, reduce from “High” heat to “Low.”
'Wholemeal Scones
2 cups wholemeal self-raising Pinch salt
flour 1 egg
1 oz. butter Milk
2 ozs. castor sugar
Method: Sift dry ingredients, rub in butter, beat egg and
add with sufficient milk to make a fairly soft dough. Cut into
rounds, place on floured tray, and glaze. Bake in oven 550°, top
element off, bottom element “High” for 2 minutes, then off.
Time, 5-8 minutes, according to size.
BISCUITS
Biscuits
i lb. self-raising flour 1 egg
1 lb. butter Essence or flavouring
4 lb. sugar Nuts or cherries
Method: Cream butter and sugar, add beaten egg and
essence, lastly sifted flour. Mix into a fairly stiff dough, roll out
thinly, cut into rounds or fancy shapes, place on greased tray,
glaze, and decorate with nut or cherry. Bake in oven 450°,
current off. Time, 8-12 minutes.
Almond Biscuits
4 ozs. cornflour 3 ozs. castor sugar
2 ozs. self-raising flour 1 teaspoon almond essence
5 ozs. butter A few almonds
Method : Cream butter and sugar, sift dry ingredi-
ents, and add, lastly, essence. Put in small lump in
greased patty tins, place an almond on top of each,
and bake in oven 425°, current off. Time, about 15
minutes.


Cheese 'Bubble Biscuits
6 ozs. plain flour 4 ozs. grated cheese
1 teaspoon salt 2 ozs. butter
i teapsoon cayenne Water
Methods: Sift dry ingredients, rub in the butter, add grated
cheese, and mix into a fairly stiff paste with water. Roll out to
paper thickness, cut into various shapes as desired, place on
greased tray and bake in oven 450°, current off. Time, about
8 minutes.
Ginger Biscuits
4 lb. butter 4 cup flour
\ cup brown sugar \ teaspoon baking powder
1 egg 2 teaspoons ground ginger
i cup golden syrup
Methods: Cream butter and sugar, warm syrup and add it,
then beaten egg, lastly sifted dry ingredients. Roll into balls,
place on greased tray and bake in oven 425°, current off. Time,
10-15 minutes.
Shortbread Biscuits
i lb. flour 2 ozs. castor sugar
6 ozs. butter Pinch salt
Method: Sift flour, sugar, and salt, rub in butter, and knead
well till mixture forms a smooth paste. Roll out and cut into
shapes with fancy cutter. Place on greased tray and bake in oven
375°, current off. Time, 20-25 minutes. The biscuits should be
quite a pale colour.


FRUIT BOTTLING
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
1. All fruits should be fresh.
2. All jars, bottles, tops and rubbers must be sterilised. Place
them in a pan of water, put them on boiling element and
bring to the boil.
3. Next, place a panful of boiling water on the element, turn
switch to “Low” to keep boiling, and dip fruit in. Have
another pan handy full of cold water in which to cold dip
fruits.
4. Make a syrup of one cup of sugar to three cups of water.
5. Pack jars according to instruction, overflow with syrup, place
rubbers and lids on jar, but do not screw tops down.
6. Place wire rack on the second rung from the bottom of the
oven.
7. Turn both elements on “High” until the oven reaches 250°.
8. Place filled jars in oven, seeing
they do not touch, and turn the top
element ofif and the bottom element
to “Low”. Watch the
thermometer and see
if the oven remains at
250°; if not, turn
bottom element to
“Medium”.


Strawberries, Blackberries, and Raspberries
Clean berries, pack into jars and cover with syrup. Place in
oven, snap top element off and bottom element to “Low,” and
maintain temperature of 250° for 45 minutes for pint bottles and 1
hour for quart bottles.
Peaches, Apricots, and Nectarines
Scald in water long enough to loosen skins, then in cold
water, then pack in jars. Fill with boiling syrup. Same direc-
tions as above.
Pears and Apples
Peel, halve and scald for two minutes, dip in cold water, pack
jars, and fill with boiling syrup. Same directions as above.
Pineapple
Peel and dice. Place in bottles and fill with syrup. Oven
250° for 1 hour.
Plums and Cherries
Clean and pack into bottles, fill with boiling syrup, and oven
250° for one hour.
SICK ROOM DIET
Barley Water
Three tablespoons barley, 4 cups cold water. Soak over night
and boil 2 hours. Season with lemon juice.
Oatmeal Gruel
One cup oatmeal, 4 cups boiling water, 1 teaspoon salt. Add
oatmeal and salt to boiling water; cook 10 minutes. Cook in
double boiler 3 hours or steamer. Strain and dilute with milk.
Junket
One cup milk, little sugar, $ junket tablet, 1 teaspoon cold
water. Warm milk and add dissolved tablet in water, then add
sugar, stirring gently. Leave till set.
Beef Tea
Put 2 lbs. steak cut up in double boiler and add 1 quart water.
Let stand an hour, then place on range and simmer for 2 hours.
Flavour.
Egg FHp
Beat 1 egg yolk, 1 teaspoon sugar together until light. Add
egg white beaten up stiff, stir well, pour in glass and add vanilla,
and as much milk as glass will hold.


USEFUL KITCHEN HINTS
Before boiling a cracked egg rub moistened salt over the shell.
This will prevent the white from running out.
Never use fresh and sour milk for the same cake.
A very little vinegar, cooked with coarse meat, helps to make
it tender.
When applied with a dry cloth, salt will remove the stain from
silver caused by eggs.
To grill a steak, dip the meat in a small quantity of salad oil,
or rub very hot beef dripping into it. Lift a steak always by the
fat, not by the lean, or else the juice will run.
Put any orange peel at hand into the water when boiling a
pudding cloth. The peel collects all grease and the cloth is easier
to wash. Never use soap.
For scalds or burns, paint over at once with white of egg.
HOUSEHOLD HINTS
lnk REMOVING STAINS
Wet the spots with milk and run on salts of lemon.
Fruit
Pour boiling water on the part.
Mildew
Rub with lemon and expose to sunshine.
Iron Rust
Rub with salts of lemon and wash thoroughly.
Paint
If wet, rub with vaseline and then with benzine. If dry,
soften with vaseline and rub with benzine.
Machine Oil
Rub with cold water from outside of spots towards centre,
being careful not to spread. First put on wax; second, place on
absorbent paper; third, press with hot iron.
Scorch
Wet with cold water and lay in sunshine.
Grass
Soak in alcohol, and then rub.
Grease Spots
Cover with a piece of coarse brown paper and then pass over
them a warm iron. The paper if soft will absorb the grease. Then
use petrol.


Index to Sections
Biscuits 66
Bread and Scones 63
Cakes 63
Fish 22
Fruit Bottling 68
Icing for Cakes 62
Meat 16
Pastry 39
Poultry 25
Salads and Dressings .... 37
Sauces 26
Savouries 29
Sick Room Diet 69
Soup 13
Sweets and Puddings .... 43
Vegetables 32
General Index to Dishes
Almond Biscuits 66
Anchovy Fingers 29
Anchovy Sauce 26
Angel Pudding 43
Apple Charlotte 43
Apple Fleur 41
Apple Meringue 44
Apple Pie 41
Apple Pudding 44
Apple Sauce 27
Apples (Bottling) 69
Apricots (Bottling) .. .. 69
Asparagus 83
Baked Apple Dumplings .. 44
Baked Custard 45
Baked Stuffed Potatoes .. 34
Baked Tomato Savoury .. 29
Banana Salad 37
Barley Water 69
Beetroot Salad 37
Beef Tea 69
Biscuits 66
Blackberries (Bottling) .. 69
Boiled Fish 22
Boiled Icing 62
Boiled Fowl 25
Boiled Whiting 22
Boiling 17
Braising 18
Bread and Butter Pudding 45
Bread Sauce 27
Brownies 54
Brown Sauce 27
Butter Icing 62
Butter Sponge 54
Cabbage 33
Caramel Flour 45
Carrots 33
Casserole of Chicken .... 26
Casserole Pears 45
Casserole Potatoes 35
Casserole Steak 20
Cauliflower 34
Celery Soup 13
Cheese Bubble Biscuits .. 67
Cheese Cakes 55
Cheese Puffs 42
Cheese Scones 64
Cheese Straws 30
Cherries (Bottling) 69
Chicken Broth 13
Chinese Chews 55
Cinnamon Slice 65
Clear Vegetable Soup .... 15
Coconut Macaroons 55
Coffee Cake 55
Common Sauce 46
Corned Beef 19
Cream Puffs 56
Creamed Rice .. 46
Cream Dressing 38
Cup Pudding 46
Currant Scones 64
Curry Sauce 27
Date Pudding 46
Devil's Cake 56
Drop Scones 66
Egg Flip 69
Egg Sponge 56
Fancy Bread 64
Fig Pudding 47
Fish Cake 22
Flaky Pastry 40
Floating Island 47
Foaming Sauce 47
Fricasseeing (Meat) .... 18
Fried Brains 19
Fried Fish 23
Fruit Cake 57
Fruit Fritters 47
Fruit Salad 37
Frying (Meat) 18
Ginger Biscuits 67
Ginger Drops 57


Ginger Nuts 57
Glory Ginger Sponge .... 57
Golden Sauce 48
Grilled Fish 23
Grilled Steak 19
Grilling (Meat) 17
Hermit Pudding 48
Honey Cake 58
Honeycomb Meringues ... 68
Horseradish Sauce 27
Irish Stew 19
Junket 69
Kisses 58
Lamb Cutlets with Carrots 19
Lemon Tarts 42
Lettuce Salad 38
Lobster Salad 38
Macaroni Cheese 30
Marguerite Pudding .... 48
Marrow 34
Mayonnaise 38
Meringues 58
Mint Sauce 28
Mulligatawny Soup 13
Mutton Broth 14
Nectarines (Bottling) .... 69
Oatmeal Gruel 69
Onion Cream Sauce 28
Onion Soup 14
Onions 34
Orange Cake 59
Orange Custard 48
Orange Icing 62
Oyster Patties 42
Pancakes 49
Parsley Sauce 28
Pastry Boats 42
Parsnips 35
Peaches (Bottling) 69
Pears (Bottling) 69
Pea Soup 14
Peas 34
Pineapole (Bottling) .... 69
Plum Pudding 49
Plums (Bottling) 69
Potatoes French Fried ... 35
Potatoes in Jackets 36
Potatoes (New) 34
Potatoes (Old) 34
Potato Salad 38
Prince Albert Cake 59
Prune Pudding 49
Puff Pastry 40
Queen Pudding 50
Raspberries ('Bottling) ... 69
Raspberry Buns 59
Roast Beef 20
Roast Chicken 25
Roast Duck or Goose .... 25
Roast Mutton or Lamb .. 20
Roast Veal or Pork 20
Roasting (Meat) 16
Sage and Onion Stuffing .. 25
Salmon Cutlets 23
Sardine Rolls 23
Sardine Savoury 30
Sausage Rolls 43
Sauteing 18
Scotch Broth 14
Shortbread Biscuits 67
Short Crust (Good) .... 41
Short Crust (Ordinary) .. 41
Small Sponge Cakes 61
Soft Custard 50
Spanish Cake 61
Spring Chicken with Mush-
rooms 26
Steak and Kidney Pie .... 21
Steamed Ginger Pudding .. 60
Stewing (Meat) 18
Suet Pudding 50
Stuffed Tomatoes 30
Strawberries (Bottling) .. 69
Strawberry Short Cake .. 61
Sultana Biscuits 61
Swiss Roll 62
Tartar Sauce 28
Tomato Soup 15
Tomatoes Grilled with
Bacon 35
Tomatoes, Grilled 35
Turnips 35
Tomato and Cucumber ... 39
Veal and Ham Pie 21
Welch Rarebit 31
White or Standard Bread . 63
White Sauce 28
Wholemeal Bread 64
Wholemeal Scones 66
Yorkshire Pudding 51
General Index to Dishes—(continued)
