

EMIGRATION
TO
NEW SOUTH WALES.
THE PETITION
Of Merchants, Ship Owners, Bankers, and
Traders, of the City of London, and others,
interested in the prosperity of the Colonies
of Australia.


To the Honourable the Commons of Great Britain in
Parliament assembled .
THE PETITION of the undersigned Merchants, Ship Owners, Bankers,
and Traders, of the City of London, and others, interested in the pros-
perity of the Colonies of Australia,
Showeth,
That your Petitioners, deeply impressed with the importance to this Country of its Colonies
generally, and with that of New South Wales especially, deem it their duty to pray the particular
attention of your Honourable House to our commercial relations with this valuable dependency,
which, in little more than fifty years, have grown to so great importance as to have given employ-
ment, during the past year, to no less than 116 Vessels, with a tonnage of 48,911 tons outwards,
from London and Liverpool, besides other Ports of the United Kingdom, independently of Biitish
Vessels, freighted homewards or employed in the intercolonial traffic of that Settlement.
That the value of British Manufactures and other Goods exported to New South Wales in
that period, amounted to £1,729,518, in return for which that Colony has sent to this Country,
independently of Oil from the Fisheries, 6,894,863 lbs. of Wool, which is nearly equal to one fourth
part of the importation from all parts of Germany and Russia.
Your Petitioners are persuaded that this activity and commercial energy are in no small
degree attributable to the Regulations, established by the Earl of Ripon in 1831, by which the
proceeds of the sale of Waste Lands in New South Wales were first wisely applied to the promotion
of spontaneous Emigration. This measure was announced to the British Public, and also to the
Colonists of New South Wales, in various documents now before Parliament, and particularly in
1836, when a select Committee of the House of Commons recommended that it should be confirmed
by an Act of the Legislature.
The knowledge of this measure so promulgated, and the conviction that it was deemed an
implicit compact, the violation of which would be no less prejudicial to this Country than to the Colony
itself, have induced very many of Her Majesty’s subjects to become the purchasers of Land in
New South Wales.
It is, therefore, with extreme concern your Petitioners now learn, that notwithstanding the promul-
gation of the above Regulations for the sale of Land and Emigration founded thereon, which has been
conducted to as late a period as 1839, with great advantage to the Colony and to many thousands
of indigent persons, who have been conveyed thither free of expense, the Board of Commissioners,
constituted for the purpose of giving greater efficiency to Emigration to the Colonies generally,
have not sent in the present year one single Vessel to New South Wales, in consequence, as is
alleged, of the want of Colonial Funds, applicable to that purpose.
It appears, however, by the Report of a Committee of Council in New South Wales, that on
the Ist of January, 1838, there was a balance of the Crown Land Revenue of £230,341 12s. 2%d.
“ applicable to Emigration and, assuming that no other expenses have been charged to the Fund
than such as are consistent with good faith and the principle upon which it was raised, there is
reason to believe, that, at the present time, an unexpended balance would be found to a very much
larger amount, and fully adequate to the conveyance to New South Wales of a considerable addition
to its free population, probably of not than twenty thousand souls.
Crown Lands
and Emigra-
tion, 1831.
p. 15 and 16.
No. 328.
On the dispo-
sal of Crown
Lands, 1836.
p. 4—5.
p. 9—16 to 20
No. 512.
Emigration,
p. 63.
Despatches
and enclosures
Nos. 4 and 5.
1837. No. 358
Report, p. 14
and 15. 1837.
No. 358.
1839. p. 3.
536.
2 Appendix.


Crown Lands
and Emigra-
tion, 1831,
No. 328.
1840,
No. 211.
Proceedings
of Legislative
Council, New
South Wales,
1839.
And in a Petition, now before your Honourable House, the Colonists of New South Wales
complain that they have observed, with the deepest concern and affliction, that, notwithstanding the
virtual promise of His late Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies, that these bunds should be
devoted solely to the encouragement of Emigration, a large proportion of them has been proposed
to be applied (and which your Petitioners believe has been since applied) to defray charges for
Police and Gaols, which, until 1835, were always borne by the British Treasury.
These charges will, with the present year inclusive, have amounted to the very heavy sum of
nearly £400,000. They appear to have been estimated at more than £lOO,OOO for the year 1840.
The circumstances of the Colonists your Petitioners believe to be wholly inadequate to such an
imposition, their ordinary revenue not exceeding £240,000 per annum, which nevertheless cannot
but appear to your Honourable House to be an exceedingly large amount to levy from a popu-
lation, which barely numbers one hundred and ten thousand souls. It amounts to half the Revenue
raised in all Her Majesty’s North American Colonies, with a population of one million and a half.
Your Petitioners have reason to fear that an inevitable reaction to the prejudice of the
commercial and manufacturing interests of this Country cannot fail to ensue, unless timely measures
be taken to avert the consequences of the evils and discontent that have arisen from this simul-
taneous disturbance of an established system of Emigration, and the appropriation of an undue pro-
portion of the public revenue of New South Wales to defray Police and Gaol establishments, neces-
sary, chiefly for the restraint of British Convicts, Charges which the Colonists feel ought, in equity
and justice, to be borne by the British Treasury, and which has been solemnly protested against by
Members of the Legislative Council there, as arbitrary and unjust.
These considerations would in themselves be a sufficient justification for praying the attention
of your Honourable House to the subject; but your Petitioners are also impelled by higher motives,
believing that our good faith, that good faith upon which, under Providence, our great prosperity
as a people is founded, will be compromised in the estimation of the inhabitants of our Colonies, by
a departure from the plighted word of the Government.
It is to our moral ascendancy over the minds of these our Colonists, that we should look for
the permanency of our relation with them. Situated at a vast distance from the parent State,
your Petitioners feel that these Colonists can be firmly united to it by no surer ties than those of
gratitude and a sense of her impartial justice.
Your Petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that your Honorable House will take such measures
as in your wisdom shall seem meet, for the remedy of the evils complained of, and as shall prove to
the Colonists of New South Wales, that their rights and interests are as jealously guarded as if
they were directly represented in the British Parliament, and convince our fellow subjects
in that Colony, that the Government, in its measures towards them, is swayed and regulated by
those principles of good faith, which it has been an object of national pride so to uphold, that they
should mark, in an especial manner, all our public transactions.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
London , May, 1840.


Extract of Lord Howick’s Letter to the Secretary of the Treasury, dated 1 bth of July, 1831.
See page 15 Crown Lands, fyc. No. 328—1831.
“ Lord Goderich is of opinion that it would not be wise so to burthen the Colony as to check
the progress of improvement and the developement of its resources for the sake of a small immediate
saving to this country ; and he would more especially call the attention of their Lordships to the
impolicy of applying to the ordinary current expenses of the Colony that portion of the territorial
revenue which arises from the sale of land. The funds derived from this source should be looked
upon, not as forming a part of the income of the Colony and available for the purpose of meeting its
annual expenses, but as capital which should not be permanently sunk, but invested so as to produce
a profitable return.”
Extract of a Despatch from Lord Glenely to Sir Richard Bourke, dated 23 rd of March, 1837.
No. 358.—1837. p. 65.
“ I have to request that, in furtherance of the proposal contained in the enclosed letter, (from
James Stephen, Esq. to the Secretary of the Treasury, 9th of January, 1837)* you will, at the com-
mencement of each financial year, transmit to the Secretary of State a statement of the balance (if any)
of the fund applicable to emigration, remaining unexpended at the close of the preceding year, together
with an estimate of the probable amount of the funds to be derived from the sale of Crown Lands
within the Colony, and applicable to the service during the ensuing year. You will consider
yourself at liberty to appropriate one-third of this sum to the payment of bounties on Emigrants
introduced by private Settlers, on the terms of your Government Notice of the 28th October, 1835,
and the remaining two-thirds will be expended under the direction of the chief Agent for emigration
in this country.
“ The extent of the revenue raised from these sales of unsettled Crown Lands in New South
Wales exceeds the most sanguine anticipations entertained at the time when the existing regulations
for the disposal of Land were promulgated by Lord Ripon, in 1831.
*****************
“ The arrangements, however, for the employment of these funds have not hitherto kept pace with
the rapidity of their growth, and Lord Glenely considers that some more efficient agency should,
without delay, be provided for securing the full benefit which ought to accrue both to the Colonies
and to this Country from the due administration of the means thus rendered available for
emigration.”
* No. 358, p. 66. Extracts from the Enclosure.


