

EMIGRATION TO WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
The above Map of Western Australia is taken from one published several years since, omitting the different tours laid down in that map, and merely marking the
principal features. Since that period many new and important surveys have been made, and many new rivers discovered; but the maps not having yet been forwarded to this
country, we are unable to lay down the new discoveries, with the exception of two, the confluence of the Williams and Hotham Rivers, forming the Murray ; and the new road
to King George’s Sound.
<c A glance of the Map of New Holland, a transient observation of its extent and position, and a superficial acquaintance with the rapid ad-
vances made by our settlements on its coast, will suffice to awaken in the least inquisitive and speculative mind, magnificent ideas of the future destinies
of that vast country. In the eloquent words of a colonial writer, who has not exaggerated the capabilities of his adopted country, ‘ With eight thou-
sand miles of sea-coast, and a series of splendid harbours unsurpassed in the wide world; with every variety of climate and of soil; with a territory
abutting upon India and China on the one hand, and stretching towards the Southern Pole on the other; with a vast ocean, extending immeasurably to
the eastward, rich in the hidden treasures of the deep, and studded like the evening sky with ten thousand populous isles, all fair to the eye as Eden,
and exhibiting in their half-civilized population the very form and pressure of primeval antiquity, who can doubt that the destinies of Australia are
inconceivably high ?’ ” — Asiatic Journal, XCII. 225.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Climate. —The salubrity of the delightful climate of our Australian Colonies, both to the human race and the brute creation, as well as its
remarkable effects in diminishing the dangers peculiar to the female sex, are too well known, and have been tested by too long and varied experience to
render it necessary to dwell upon them. The public are not, however, so generally aware that the position of the Swan River Colonies has secured to
them-what is common to the western coasts of all great Continents, a moderation of temperature and a regular supply of dews and showers wholly un-
known to the eastern shores. In fact, droughts (so fatal at Sydney) have never been felt in Western Australia! while the uniform fall of refreshing
dews during the hottest summer months, and the regular and heavy showers which occur about three days out of every ten during the winter, enable the
farmer to calculate upon his crops with a certainty which does not elsewhere exist.
Soil. —lt has been repeatedly stated that the average of the land on the western coast is able to support three times the number of sheep which
can be maintained upon the average of the eastern. It is to be remembered that while the supply of water is, in the latter country, confined in a great
degree to the rivers, Western Australia abounds in springs of the best description. The soil outside the Darling Range of Mountains, which run pa-
rallel to the coast at a distance of about thirty miles, is well fitted for agricultural purposes ; but, for pastoral, is not equal to that behind the range. The
level of the latter is about five hundred feet above the former, and presents, as far as has been yet explored, (many thousand square miles) an unbounded
supply of the finest agricultural and sheep land, intersected by numerous streams and rivers. Falls have recently been discovered on the Murray River,
just above the navigable part, (about forty miles from the mouth) capable, in the driest season, of driving one hundred mills within a distance of less than
two miles. It is intended immediately to establish a town near this spot.
The price of Government land is five shillings per acre, for the fee simple ; but there is still enough to be procured, at one shilling to two shillings
per acre, from settlers, who, at the commencement of the colony, obtained larger grants than their capital enabled them to employ to advantage.
Society. —Western Australia is a free province. There is not a convicted felon within 1,500 miles of its borders. It is not our wish to de-
preciate the other Australian colonies ; all of which must ultimately tend to spread wealth and civilization throughout the southern hemisphere. More-
over, experience has shewn not only that there is room enough for all to thrive and prosper, but that every additional colony is a material benefit to those
already in existence. But when the intended emigrant seeks for grounds whereon to found his choice—a choice which must fix the prospects of his sub-
sequent life, we should fail in our duty did we not place before him the fact, that Western Australia is not only free from that most awful and hopeless
curse to a country, a felon population, poisoning society at its very source, but is in fact composed of a class of emigrants far superior in rank, educa-
tion, capital, and moral feeling to those who have gone to any other colony in existence. We trust we shall not be accused of hostile feelings towards the
penal settlements when we warn our countrymen against allowing themselves and their families to become the victims of the desperate attempt now making
to dilute the iniquity of those colonies by sending among them a free population, an attempt which has been justly compared by an eminent Prelate to
the project of curing a district infected with the plague by sending a number of healthy persons to reside in it. How hopeless the task is of overwhelming
by the number of respectable emigrants the fearful leaven of vice and reckless immorality there prevalent, will appear from one or two extracts: —
« The picture presented to their minds would be one of the most painful reflection. It would appear to one who would look down upon the
community as if the main business of us all were the commission of crime and the punishment of it; as if the whole colony were continually in motion
towards the several courts of justice; and the most painful reflection of all must be, that so many capital sentences, and the execution of them, have not
had the effect of preventing crime by way of example. In my opinion one grand cause of such a state of things is an overwhelming defect of religious
principle in the whole community.” — Charge of Mr. Justice Burton, at Sydney Sessions, 1835.
“ From a comparative statement of crime to population, given in a statistical work, published at Berlin, it appears that in the United States
of America, the proportion is one offender in every 3,500 persons; in New South Wales one in every twenty-two!”— Asiatic Journal, XCII., 229.
“ Drunkenness does not, we regret to say, seem at all to decline, more especially with the lower order of the free population.”— Hobart
Town Courier, June 16, 1837.
This is the state of things in the convict colonies and their vicinity. Now let us turn to the Swan River.
The total number of persons charged with offences in Western Australia, between July, 1835, and January, 1836, was five.'
Commerce. —The accompanying map will show the advantages possessed by this Colony over others; but we shall refer our readers to the
following statement; —
“ King George’s Sound is a settlement that well deserves the praise I had heard bestowed upon it; it possesses every natural advantage the most
sanguine emigrant can desire, and is blessed with a climate it is impossible to eulogise too highly.”
“ Let anj' man of common sense examine a map of Australia, he will see, at once, the geographical superiority of its position, either as re-
spects India or Europe. It is so completely within reach of Cape Leeuwin, that a breeze of a few hours will secure a passage round this only difficulty,
and a ship may then go away with a flowing sheet to any part of our possessions in the East Indies. * * * We left Hobart Town fifteen days
ago, and we have not yet advanced one-third of our voyage. I may further say, that during the whole of that period, we have been plunging about
in westerly gales, and some days have made a distance of only five miles. “On the contrary, at King George’s Sound, during the whole of the last


winter the communication was never interrupted with Swan River; a ship has only to watch her opportunity of putting to sea, and in twenty-four
hours she may be sailing north, with a fair wind to any part of the eastern or western world. The south-east trade will secure her passage to the
latter.” “If you want a harbour, where can you obtain one more complete as to safety, than that in King George’s Sound ? It is, in many respects*
superior to the Derwent at Hobart Town; for the entrance being narrow, the shores might be fortified to resist any invading maritime force, and these
fortifications would be a»ain commanded by heights in their immediate vicinity. If you want climate, I maintain that the climate of King George’s
Sound is equal to any climate in the world. As a sanatorium for India, it would be invaluable. The weather is neither so bleak, so boisterous, or so
trying to the constitution as that of Van Diemen’s Land, and yet it is far cooler than the climate of Sydney, particularly during the summer months,
the hottest period of which never raises the thermometer above 74°. The range, whilst I was there, during the month of November, (their summer)
was from 70° to 73°.” “ Further, I may ask, does not every ship, on her outward-bound voyage to Australia, pass the very threshold of the harbour ?
and who will deny that a merchant must find it much more profitable to dispose of a cargo at the nearest port, than to proceed 1500 miles farther to the
eastward, in search of a market, and remain there probably six months longer before he can attempt to return ?” “It is surely quite impossible to
deny these stubborn facts. In short, I cannot help suspecting, that our friends to the eastward are fully aware of the truth ; and the prejudice at Van
Diemen’s Land, which, I must say, obtained against Swan River, was only proof to me of what I now assert.” “If an Indian takes a voyage to
Hobart Town, he feels no small degree of anxiety, I assure you, about his return. The southern passage cannot be attempted, except in the very
height of summer; and, as I have already said, we are at this moment an instance of the difficulties to be experienced, even at this period of the year,
when sailing to the westward.” — “ Voyage to Swan River, Sfc. Sfc., by Colonel Hanson, in the years 1831-2.”
If we add to this the circumstance of the new line of steam communication between Europe and India by the Red Sea, by which the Isle of
Socatra is to become, as it were, the General Post-office for the eastern and southern world ; the superior advantages of the position of Swan River
are manifest. We rejoice to learn that so convinced have our Indian friends become of this fact, that a company has been formed in Calcutta to send
passage-ships regularly three times a year to the Australian Colonies, always “ touching first at Swan River.” The project of establishing a College at
Swan River for the education of the youth born in India has also beeen much canvassed at Calcutta, and seems likely soon to take effect. A magnifi-
cent stud, the property of an Indian company, has recently been brought there by Mr. Prinsep for the purpose of breeding horses for the Indian cavalry.
It is not part of our system to assert as ascertained facts what can only be the subject of conjecture. We shall not therefore state, as has been incautiously,
to say the least of it, done respecting some other colonies, that the country abounds in coal, metals, slate, &c., because, although there is no doubt that
those substances do exist in Australia, yet, in the infancy of a colony, their exact position and circumstances cannot have been proved. This, however,
we may say with certainty, that as far as experience has gone, and the geological features of a country can enable us to judge, it is more than pro-
bable that they exist in circumstances which will soon render them an important article of commerce. Lime, brick clay, salt, freestone, granite, &c.,
are abundant; as well as a stone possessing qualifications which, in the words of an experienced miller, render it “ equal to the finest French burr.’’
For these details we must, however, refer to the works mentioned hereafter. As an instance of the increasing prosperity of the colony, we may state
that its last export cargo, (in the 7th year of its existence as a colony) was of value near £B,OOO : of which one-half was .whale and
seal oil, and whalebone, obtained on the very coast by a few open boats, the first effort of two spirited little companies, formed at Perth and
Freemantle. A complete whaling establishment has since gone out from England, under the management of Mr. Sampson, one of the
earliest and most enterprising colonists. Steam flour and saw mills have also been taken out in the same vessel. It appears, by late ac-
counts, that the wheat of the colony has been pronounced at the Mauritius superior to that of Sydney, Van Diemen’s Land, or the Cape.—
The timber, including the mahogany and blue gum, (the latter growing, as described by Captain Bannister, to 150 feet before a branch, 42
feet in girth, and as straight as a wand,) is so highly prized for naval purposes that, in the dockyards in this country, it is purchased by
government at a price above 50 per cent, higher than African oak : it also possesses all the anti-dry-rot and other properties of teak. The in-
digo plant and a species of tea tree grow wild. Cotton, flax, hemp, tobacco, &c. may be cultivated to any extent. The native bark possesses the tan-
ning properties in a high degree —in some species one-third stronger than English oak bark. Salt fish will soon become an article of trade, from the abun-
dance of snapper, cod, salmon, herring, and other fish, which frequent the coast and rivers. The wines of the colony promise highly, as every species
of grape thrives there remarkably well. Turtle abound on the coast; and a company has been formed for the collection of that valuable article of com-
merce the “ beche de mer,” which is found in quantities a short distance north of Swan River.
Cattle, Sheep, &c.—ln all countries where the soil, climate, and price of land admits of sheep being kept in large numbers, and without re-
quiring shelter, they yield a greater return than perhaps any other speculation; while at the same time the attention which is requisite on the part of the
proprietor does not increase with the numbers, and is of an easy and agreeable nature. It is obvious that the profits will increase in proportion as the
wool is fine and the animal subject to fewer diseases. It is now admitted that the soil and climate of the interior of Western Australia are likely to rear
wool of as fine a description as any other known portion of the world, while there is absolutely no disease whatever indigenous to that country ; and any
that are imported by infected flocks from elsewhere are, by common care, completely eradicated. All species of stock appear to thrive remarkably well.
Horned cattle, of which there is a particularly fine breed in the colony, acquire, in nine months, the size which in Europe they require twelve to attain.
Horses do better, and are liable to fewer diseases than in any other country where that animal is known. Goats multiply with astonishing rapidity, seldom
producing less than three at a time. The Cashmere goat, so valuable for its hair, has been introduced with success. In fact, the soil and
climate appear peculiarly adapted for the support of animal and vegetable life.
Vegetable Productions. —Almost every plant of the European as well as tropical regions comes to perfection in the colony; and most
crops may be produced all the year round by having an upland and a lowland farm and garden. Every year witnesses the successful introduction of
some new class of the vegetable world. For a list of those which were thriving in the colony within the 6th year after its foundation we refer to the
following; —
Extract of a Letter from a Lady at Perth, FVestern Australia, dated January 17 th, 1836.
“We have had an abundant harvest, and every thing is getting on surprisingly—such beautiful vines and fig-trees loaded with fruit, where five
years since a spade or plough had never turned the earth. There are some spots in the colony that in a few years will be a perfect Eden. You may
depend upon it, a few years more will make a wonderful alteration in this part of the world. * * * “ Brewing now is very general. Eggs, butter,
and poultry get very plentiful. Fish and wild-fowl in abundance. Happily, we have no convicts, and scarcely any crime. The natives all friendly
and peaceable. The other morning I counted thirty boats on the river at one time, all employed; and now we can go from hence to York in less than
two days on foot, the road is so good. The further they explore into the interior, the finer the country; and vineyards are forming up the country,
just the same as at the Cape. Shaddocks, guavas, limes, oranges, peaches, pomegranates, almonds, figs, bananas, all thrive well; so do the quince,
loquat, apples, pears, raspberries, and plum-trees ; but these are at present all young, and I think it quite wonderful we have such a variety in so
short a time.” “ Very nice carts are made here, wheels and all. Cart-harness can be got here. In short, the colony is now so well and so abun-
dantly supplied with almost every thing, and at such a cheap rate, that it will not do to have much sent out.”


Harbours.—King George’s Sound harbour has been already noticed. Augusta enjoys an excellent harbour, perfectly sheltered. Cockburn
Sound and Gage’s Roads are also very fine and perfectly safe roadsteads, merely taking the precaution in winter, before a gale of wind, (of which a
day’s notice is always given by the barometer,) to anchor under Garden Island. A glance at the map will show that a short cut between Melville Water
and the Sea will enable shipping to enter that superb basin without crossing the rocky bar, which, at present, in some degree obstructs the mouth, and
thus to unload at the very wharfs of Perth, and lie in a sheet of water perfectly land-locked, with a depth of from 8 to 10 fathom, for an extent of 12
miles by 3. A similar trifling expense will, when necessary, render' available the numerous other estuaries along the coast.
Natives.—The recent accounts from the colony justify a confidence that a permanent good understanding, as well as a friendly and useful in-
tercourse, has been established between the settlers and the aborigines. Contests must occur during the first few years of the establishment of a colony,
and one or two such did take place at Swan River some years since. But it is obvious that the duration and consequences of such must greatly depend
on two circumstances—the character of the settlers and the number of the natives. Western Australia has been singularly fortunate in both respects; the
settlers being of a class of society greatly superior to the other Australian colonies, and the natives comparatively few in number. Hence ; while in the
30th year of the History of Van Dieman’s Land, a war of extermination was still raging with unabated ferocity between the settlers and the natives; we
find in the 7th year of that of Western Australia, the natives acting as the intelligent guides, messengers, and even harvest labourers of the colonists,
while in some instances the flocks have been intrusted to the charge of native boys. We should add, that a school and a model farm have been established
for their education ; by which they may be, in the course of time, instructed in the useful arts of life. It is not to be expected, however, that with all
the fascinations of their lovely climate to strengthen the attractions of an idle, sporting life, the present race, or, perhaps, even their immediate descend-
ants, will ever be induced to become a laborious and steady peasantry : sufiice it, that they are a harmless, an amusing, and an occasionally use-
ful people.
EXTRACTS.
great pleasure in being able to state that the labouring classes have materially improved within the last two years in steadiness and
sobriety .’’—Fourth Annual Report of the Western Australian Agricultural Society, Swan River, December 21, 1835.
“ We have sincere pleasure in congratulating your Excellency and ourselves upon the very friendly intercourse which has been established and
we hope, cemented, between the settlers and the aboriginal inhabitants. **** They now have the utmost confidence in us, assisting- as stockkeeners
&c.; and are trustworthy messengers with any letters and parcels to any distance..— 2d Report of the Western Australian Corresponding Committee. ’
“ In reply to your enquiry, as to the amount of capital requisite for a settler in this district, my opinion is, that TLOOO would be amnle (with
out purchase of land) for a settler of a respectable class. From F2UO to TSOO would be sufficient for a man accustomed to labour more esneciallv
if assisted by one or two sons, old enough to work; but we have several instances of persons who with no other capital but their own savings or
by having a small flock of sheep intrusted to them in shares, are doing well and advancing to a state of prosperity. 1 came over to York in the vear 1832
with 5o pure Merino ewes and ewe-lambs. This small flock has increased to 320 ewes ; and of these about 200 will lamb within 2 months of the
present time (hebruary, 1836,) The coarse, or mixed flock, has increased in the same proportion. The other flocks established in this district have
increased in about the same proportion. —Report of Mr. Bland, see do. n 1 aave
The harvest is all over, and promises extremely well—threshed two bushels of his wheat by measure, and the weight was 132 lbs or 66
to the bushel; and I hear the same favourable report from all quarters. —Letter of W. H. Mackie, Esq., Perth, January 23, 1836. See do.'
« The farm buildings are generally good, substantial, and sufficient. **** A brewery has recently been established on a small scale at Perth
supplying very good beer at a moderate price. A malt-kiln is also in progress on the Swan, which promises well. From what we anticinate in I
year or two, little or no spirits or wine, will be required on the farms. **** The weight of the best wheat, grown this season, is, per bushel 66 bs
that of inferior kinds, 60 to 62 lbs. per bushel. —Report of Messrs. Bull, M‘ Dermott, Sfc. —see do. P ’ wilbs.,
“ I' he f ex P enence of mor<! than. six years, since the formation of this colony, proves that no country can be more favourable to horticulture
The abundant and regular supply of ram which falls from May to November, brings all sorts of vegetables, which grow in the open air in England
to perfection here in the uplands; but it is the great number,-and peculiar nature of the springs of water, and the soil and situ Lon L wffich theF
which gives the settlers at Swan River advantages which, I believe, are not to be found in any other British colony of equal temperature ” ** *
“Melons water-melons, cucumbers, &c. grow here in such abundance, that they are already the cheapest food we can get for pigs and poultry- even
the finest 1 ersian melons, Ispahan, Housanee, &c., produce a greater weight of fruit on the same extent of land, (springy,) than Ljuld be the
produce of potatoes or turnips in England By means of upland and springy lands, or, in other words, winter and summed gardens,^ wecanW
almost all sorts of vegetables in perfection, throughout the year.” * * * “ I planted ten pounds of potatoes in February, which produced in June
following one hundred weight; these were planted again in October following, and produced in December, only eleven mon hs from tee Zt pknting
fifteen hundred weight and some pounds.”— Report of Mr. Drummond, Government Botanist, see do. planting,
~ “ 3,° U WI J I the f ® w “Ounces l have stated in the former P ar t of my letter, how greatly vegetables and fruits have fallen in price since
the first settlement of the colony; they will still continue to fall in price, as we have soils and climate so well adapted to their growth; a climate duX the
winter semen sufficiently cool to bring tbo greeter part of those vegetable, common to England to the greatest perfection i and, Jnrin. the -urn™ ,e.
7;. •*** **— ,o
°“ urrcd ’ fte " d v ““ -* -**• **» -»
to on to L the f 1 ! mate ’ r , t 0 reraark > that tke concurrent testimony of every individual who has spent a round of the seasons in this country has
“ ThrmLfttiP I," 7 ’ WLICh aS T be ? omC better ac( l uamted Wlth the steady and uniform changes which those seasons bring.” * , *
“ Through the whole summer, a land breeze from the east prevails in the morning; the sky is beautifully clear, and the air pure.” * * * « The
winter months are June July, and August; the two latter the most rainy. There are sometimes smart frosts, Lid now and teen a little ice all traces
of which disappear on the rising of the sun. Snow is unknown. Hailstones, of very large size, fall. A fire is Ling tees*
winter months, mornings and evenings. The rams seldom continue more than three or four days, falling chiefly in heavy showers with squaUs and
sometnnes stoims o thunder and lightning, and now and then severe gales from the north-west. The intervafs of fine weather are from five to ten
dy . Du mg the other quarters of the year, nothing can be more delightful than the climate generally; and its invigorating influence on the human con
“on, especially of the Europeans, renders it more fit for invalids than any other in the world.” * * * “ Several ZrotoL
suffering fiom pulmonary and bronchial affections, asthma, phthisis, haemoptysis, or spitting of blood, hopeless of recovery in Europe are now per’
fectly recovered or living in comparative health.” * * * “ Hooping-cough was imported in 1833, but has disappeLd sfnee iLk sLI-LLi
mea= e= are unknown. Vaccination has not hitherto succeeded. Cases of fever are seldom met with.” * * * “ Few of the labouring P c las«e*
are now without comfortable dwellings ; food is plentiful, and vegetables of every kind are raised in great abundance ; wTth a fine climate teeefore
obnoxious to no paiticular diathesis, the average mean temperature being from 60 to 64, the inhabitants of Western Australia are as healthy a com


munity as any in the world. My range of practice includes a population of about 1,000 persons, and it may be well to observe, that at this moment I
have not a single sick person on my list.” “ The experience of seven years has brought us to rely on a steady and uniform return of the seasons : the
agriculturist is enabled to carry on his operations in the field, both in seed time and harvest, with less interruption from inconstancy of weather, than
in any other part of the world yet known. No excess of rains or long continued droughts occur to mar the fair prospects which cheer his labour;
he may safely calculate on the result.” * * “N 0 epidemic has yet appeared among any description of stock, which thrive remarkably well, in
suitable districts.”-— Report of Mr. Harris, Colonial Surgeon, see do.
“ The profits on sheep have averaged, heretofore, about 70 per cent- per annum.”— Report of Banking Committee, see do.
“ The breed of horned cattle introduced into the colony is, lam told, very valuable. I confess myself to be ignorant upon this subject; but
the sixty head I saw at the Governor’s farm appeared to me splendid animals. The horses imported are also of the finest blood. Mr. Henly has one,
an entire horse, which he values, and I am told with good reason, at £ISOO. In fact, I may say, that every branch of the breeding department is
thriving wonderfully.” * * *
“ The pasture upon Mr. Brown's property is so exceedingly rich, that I am told his flocks were, many of them, getting blind from sheer fat-
ness ; and I beg it to be understood that, in stating this fact, I am stating nothing very marvellous, such is the common result of overfeeding, and I
can safely declare that, in my life, I never tasted finer mutton than was produced from his grass.” ****
“ A fishing establishment has been formed at Rottenest Island, which promises to furnish an excellent article for exportation. The snapper, a
fish about the size of a cod, is caught in great abundance upon the coast; and, when cured, is, I think, equal to any salt fish I ever tasted. The
salmon is also an excellent fish for the same purpose, which is, I believe, caught in the Swan River. A small dock-yard near Perth is also giving
proofs of maritime science, under the auspices of Governor Stirling. Two vessels are now on the stocks, one of them, I believe, is private property ;
but the other, of about fifty tons burthen, is intended as a government schooner, to ply between the capital and the minor settlements on the coast.”
“ Whilst writing on the subject of supplies, I could wish that you had seen an entertainment, given by the Governor to the ladies and gen-
tlemen of the colony. I think you would have acknowledged that the whole affair would have done credit to any part of the world. We qua-
drilled and waltzed until midnight, sat down to a sumptuous supper, laid out for a hundred and fifty people, returned to the dance, enlivened by cham-
paigne, and separated only when the rising sun began to smile upon our orgies.” ****
“The inhabitants of the Swan River may justly pride themselves on the individual respectability of each emigrant; and it is certain that
they may sleep safely, with all they possess, under a ‘Wicket opening with a latch.’
“From all I could learn during my stay at Hobart Town, I am thoroughly convinced, that the life of a settler there is, in the first instance, as
miserable as in other newly established colony. Log houses are much the same I fancy, in all parts of the world; but at Swan River and King George’s
Sound, you feel that you are surrounded by honest men; that your life and property are safe, however large or small the latter may be, and that al-
though you may not have quite as much labour at your command, you are tolerably sure of reaping the fruits of it. What are the proceedings, for
example, of a new settler and his family, when they first arrive at Hobart Town ? He obtains land under certain regulations, together with a number
of convict servants, to asssist him in the management of his property ; he then proceeds into the interior, and commences to locate himself probably
at a distance of twenty miles from any sort of society, except that of his own circle, and he knows that his labouring servants, both male and female,
are unhappily of abandoned characters; he must, therefore, watch them with a lynx’s eye, to obtain any thing like decent labour. Further than this,
I was told, by persons best qualified to know the truth, that these convicts having no spur to action beyond the fear of punishment, were literally re-
quired to be driven to work; and as the means of punishing them before a Magistrate would involve the necessity of a long and ruinous absence to
the settler, it was only resorted to in cases of extreme necessity, where every other means of inducing good conduct had failed. Compare this, I say,
with the establishment of Mr. Tanner, one of the most distant settlers on the Swan; he had erected a most comfortable wooden house, by means of free
and industrious servants. His wife and family were as comfortable as it was possible to imagine them to be, under similar circumstances; his female
attendants were as correct, and as well behaved, as they could be found in any family at home; and our party sat down to as comfortable a dinner,
as I ever partook in my life. Every thing appeared prosperous and thriving. I walked over his grounds in the immediate vicinity of the house ; and upon
crossing a knoll within a few hundred yards of his residence, I came suddenly on his farm yard, with all his stock and servants comfortably housed,
and one of his principal men busy as the proprietor of a shop, which served as a little emporium of supply to the whole neighbourhood. I may say,
that in this infant colony, the crime of robbery is unknown. Indeed I saw no precautions against it. My own house at Perth was unlocked during
the whole of the time I was at Swan River, and I felt that my property was as safe as if it was deposited in the Tower of London. Now, I will ask
any fair and unprejudiced inhabitant of Van Diemen’s Land, whether he could leave his house in the woods with that confidence of safety which I
have just described, and whether a mother, when she quits her residence for a day, in many parts of the country, is not compelled to send her family
to the protection of the nearest neighbour, or suffer the greatest possible anxiety during her absence.” —A voyage from Madras to Swan River, Sfc., by
Lieut.-Colonel Hanson, in 1831—2.
“ The banks of the rivers, especially of the Swan, present scenery much admired by all who have visited the country. In some parts both
borders exhibit extensive meadows, ornamented with trees and flowering shrubs. Elsewhere, high precipitous banks look down on grassy plains on
the opposite side. These banks are enamelled with a profusion of the amaranthine tribe of plants (the everlasting flower), and crowned with noble
mahogany and other lofty trees. *** But the interior of Western Australia is particularly valuable for its sheep pastures. These are extensive tracts of
undulating surface, covered with a short sweet grass, and are found to be admirably suited for Merino flocks. *** The seed time is long and favourable,
and lasts from early in May to the end of August. The writer has had, indeed, a good crop of wheat sown so late as the 15th of September; but it
grew on alluvial soil—and land should be of this description, or in good condition, to admit of seed being put in so late even as August. Expe-
rience, however, has proved that the earlier the seed is sown the better. Showers commence in March, and increase in duration and heaviness till
August, from which period to November they gradually diminish. In September there is heavy rain, and fine showers fall in October and November.
By December the grain is ripe, and therefore suffers nothing from lack of moisture. There is little or no rain in December, January, and February;
but in these mouths the dews are heavy. The grain (which sheds little) may, consequently, be left without injury a long time in the fields, to suit the
convenience of the farmer. Hay is cut in November, and may be made up six hours after cutting, without risk of its heating the stack, It is appa-
rent, from what has been said, that the farmer is highly favoured in both seasons —in seed time and in harvest. *** A piece of alluvial land, measured
with exactness, and sown with wheat, gave, the first year, a produce at the rate of forty-three bushels; and the second year, of very nearly sixty-
one bushels, to the English acre, without the aid of manure. The latter is a return which farmers consider equal to that of the best land in Eng-
land, under the most improved culture. Some oats, being the second crop raised from the same description of land, cultivated two years in succes-
sion, were, by an experienced farmer, judged by the eye to yield from ten to twelve quarters the English acre. The barley grown in the colony is
mostly Cape barley —a large four-sided grain, giving a heavy produce. It makes fine malt, as has been ascertained: for, from a bushel and a half of it
(dried in the sun) and one pound of hops, twenty gallons of good ale and fifteen of small beer have been brewed. As vegetation in Western Australia
continues throughout the year, a succession of crops of potatoes and other vegetables may always be had wherever irrigation can be secured.
“ A prevalent cause of distress among the early settlers arose from their having generally brought out with them little ready money, compared
with other property. This was chiefly owing to the Government regulations admitting of land being assigned to those only, who introduced la-
bourers and various kinds of property required by farmers. Many of the settlers, therefore, to the extent of their means, were in this way amply
provided; but, having understood in England, that money would be of little use in a new country, numbers, without questioning what they wished to
be true, incautiously expended most of their means in the property that would entitle them to obtain land in the colony. However, when they had been
some time in the settlement, they discovered that there—as in other places—money was needful; and, on wishing to procure some by the sale of part
of their property, they found it difficult to do so without loss, in consequence of most other settlers having brought out similar investments.”


“ On approaching Fremantle from the sea, the site of the town is indicated by a handsome octagonal building of white cut stone, erected near
the edge of a precipice which overhangs the mouth of the river. On landing, the stranger has the pleasure of entering a small but neat town, with
wide streets, some of which have been macadamized. Fremantle contains several hdtels, where travellers may partake of excellent accommodation and
a good table.”
“ The town of Perth is much more scattered than that of Fremantle, and is partially concealed by some fine trees which have been left
standing. In this town are several comfortable inns. *** Perth contains several good shops, and merchants’ stores. Horses and boats can be ob-
tained here, as at Fremantle, on hire.”
“This village (Guildford) has a very interesting appearance, and covers a considerable space of ground. Each cottage is surrounded by its gar-
den, and has fields neatly fenced contiguous.”
“ The state of society among the agriculturists themselves is, in general, of the most friendly description. A kind and cordial feeling is that
which for the most part prevails, and a readiness to do good offices for each other. Much social intercourse is kept up, and the laborious occupations
of farming are combined with a refinement of manners and taste, which has surprised and delighted many who have visited the colony. *** To the
ladies generally, of the settlement, the meed of praise is due. Some of them are highly educated as well as most amiable women. They have not neglected
to cultivate and maintain, as opportunity has occurred, those elegancies and accomplishments in which they have excelled; and music, especially, forms
a most pleasing part of the evening recreations of several families. The town of Perth is particularly favoured in regard to its social circle, and much
friendly intercourse is kept up. The town of Guildford may also be named as furnishing excellent society. The colony is highly privileged in its legal
institutions, which afford all the advantages of English law, without the heavy expense attending it here at home.”
“ Those who may be about to emigrate cannot be too often reminded that judgment, perseverance, and fortitude, are as essential to their
success as good climate, and soil, and moderate means. It is true that the colony having attained to its present position, much of the difficulty of the
enterprize is removed, and many may now prosper who would not have done so originally ; but without some portion of those valuable qualities above
specified, the emigrant, under the most favourable circumstances, ought not to expect success. A colonist, at Swan River, who had seen a great deal
of vicissitude, in a recent letter to a friend in England writes thus:— ‘ We have laid the foundation for all new comers to build on: we have purchased
dear-bought experience—knowledge to guide all who may feel a wish for enterprize. Were it in our power to recal the time that is past, and were we
now to come here, with about £lOO in cash, together with a few of the many useful things we brought out, we should be certain of prosperity.”—
The state and position of Western Australia, fyc.; by Captain Frederick Chidley Irwin, fyc.
“ 1 I,ave met several individuals here who, on leaving England, were great sufferers from dyspepsia, and disorders of the digestive organs,
generally from the nervous affections which so often accompany these—from hypochondria, from asthma,’and from bronchial diseases who have re-
covered their health in a remarkable degree since their arrival. Some of slight figure have become more robust and stronger. Parturition with the
female sex is expeditious and safe ; being accomplished by the efforts of nature alone, within from three to six hours. No woman has died in child-
birth in this colony since its commencement, nor am I aware of any who died within a month after. Children thrive remarkably well, and I may add
every description of live stock, although collected from different climates—England, India, South America, Africa, &c., and various plants and vege-
tables, collected from as many different sources, find here a congenial temperature.” —Letter of Wm. Milligan, M.D.
“As a proof of its salubrity, during three years his Majesty’s sloop Sulphur was employed upon that station, not a single death, and very few
important cases of disease, occurred; notwithstanding the very great exposure of her men, not only to wet, but also to night air, in consequence of
her boats having been a great deal employed at a distance from the anchorage. When exploring the country for several days, and sometimes weeks
these people have been exposed to the sun, fatigued in the evening, after a day’s excursion, slept in the open air, and that repeatedly in wet weather
without suffering in the slightest degree.”— Letter of J. W. Johnson, M.D., Surgeon, H.M.S., Sulphur.
“ The Colony is thriving, and we make no hesitation in saying, that it is already the nucleus of what will hereafter be a great empire
Swan River is eminently, favoured by nature.”— Metropolitan Magazine, August, 1835. 5 1
“ A fine an excellent climate, a good situation, and an increasing population, make this colony one of the best to which settlers can di
rect their attention. —-Liverpool Journal, August, 8, 1835.
, “ Wcstcrn Austraha is, as respects soil and climate, one of the finest countries in the world, and one of the most fit for supplying a prosperous
colony. The New British Province of South Australia,” published by the South Australian Association. PJ ° P P
The following publications upon Western Australia ought to be in the hands of every person contemplating emigration :
First, Second, and Third Reports of the Western Australian Association.—“ The State and Position of Western Australia,” &c., by Captain F.C.
Irwin. —“ Moore’s Letters on Swan River.”—“ Evidences of an Inland Sea,” &c., by same author.
V ° y .? ge *? 8 "T; Riv f’” & , c ” }’y Lieutenant-Colonel Hanson, &c—“ Journals of Expeditions in Western Australia during the vears
1829-30-1 and 2.—Map of Australia, published by J. Arrowsmith, price, mounted, 165.; Map of Western do., by do., 10s. P


