











EMIGRANTS GUIDE
TO
NEW SOUTH WALES PROPER,
AUSTRALIA FELIX,
OR, PORT PHILIP,
AND
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BY J. C. BYRNE, ESQ.,
AUTHOR OP
"TWELVE YEARS’ WANDERINGS IN THE BRITISH COLONIES."
STfoelftf) Tuition, &du*3eD, a i£tap.
LONDON:
EFFINGHAM WILSON.
COMMERCIAL AND COLONIAL BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
11, ROYAL EXCHANGE.
LIVERPOOL : WAREING WEBB.
LEEDS : BAINES AND NEWSOME.
MANCHESTER : MESSRS. THOMSON.
BIRMINGHAM I JAMES BELL.
GLASGOW : THOMAS MUIUIAY.
1849.


PREFACE
TO THE TWELFTH EDITION.
The Author of “ Twelve Years’ Wanderings in the British
Colonies,” after having laboured long and energetically in
the cause of Emigration and Colonization, feels more than
compensated by the interest evinced by all classes on the
subject, and the tardy recognition of the fact that Emi-
gration is the great remedy for the increasing pauperism
and accumulating difficulties of this country.
But the progress of the cause of Emigration is but one
step in advance; a knowledge of our Colonies must be
acquired by the people at large, for Britain’s Colonies
are essential to her ultimate security, prosperity, nay,
salvation. In them lie the germs of great nations, that
will in future ages exercise a mighty influence over
the position of mankind. They only want to be known
to be appreciated; and in the furtherance of this great
object, the Author of “Twelve Years’ Wanderings in the
British Colonies,” has resolved to give to the public a
series of “ Guides” to those Britisli Colonies, favourable
as seats for Emigration ; at such a price as to be available
to all, and containing the greatest possible extent of con-
densed and valuable information, the result of practical ex-
perience.
The Author will at all times be happy to afford every
information, practical advice, and assistance to intending
Emigrants, by parties addressing him at 11, Royal Ex-
change, London.
May \st, 1«4!J.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Chaps! The Necessity of Discretion in the Choice of a
Colony—Prospects in Australia for Mechanics and
Tradesmen—Men of Education without Means not re-
quired—The Course that should be observed on resolving
to Emigrate, and in conveying out Funds-r-Advice as to
Outfit, Conduct on Board, and on First Arrival—The
Emigrant likely to be taken in—Course of Conduct—
Free Passages granted to Australia, and Emigration Com-
missioners’ Rules—Advice on the Choice of a Colony to
Capitalists—Cost of Passage 1
Chap. ll. —New South TVales Proper, —Original Settle-
ment—Progress—Population—Climate—Soil—Produce
—Grain imported—Number of Sheep, Cattle, Horses, &c.
—lmports and Exports 20
Chap. lll.—Sydney; its Population, Public Buildings,
Corporation, and Character—Habits of Drunkenness—
Prospects of sober Persons—Wealth of some Convicts—
Sheep and Cattle Farming—Breed of Horses—Price of
Stock—Sydney Markets—Prices of Provisions and Goods 32
Chap. IF.—Government of the Colony.—Revenue and Ex-
penditure—Provision for Religion and Education—Mode
of selling Land—Rates of Wages . . . .45
Chap. V.—The Prospects of mere Labour in New
South Wales—The Society for the Promotion of
Colonization—National Emigration and Colonial
Reform 49
Chap. VI . —Australia Felix, or Port Phillip. —Original
Settlement—Soil and Capabilities—Evidence on the sub-
ject of Climate 57


TAGS.
Chap. VII.—-Imports and Exports—Revenue and Expen-
diture—Land Fund—Mode of Disposing of Land—Coun-
ties—Population—Produce—Land under Cultivation-
Returns of Stock ....... 68
Chap. Vlll.—Aborigines—Melbourne, Geelong, and Port-
land—Mode of Government of the Colony—Melbourne
Markets—Rates of Wages—Scale of Rations, and De-
mand for Labour 76
Chap. IX. —South Australia.- —Original Settlement and
Extent—Early Difficulties—Land Speculation—Gover-
nors Hindmarsh and Gawler—Extraordinary Expenditure
of the latter—Universal Bankruptcy—Appointment of
Captain Grey; Revival of the Colony—Votes in Aid of
it, by the British Parliament—Major Robe’s Adminis-
tration ......... 86
Chap. X.—Mode of Government—lnternal Communica-
tion—Aborigines—Climate—Mode of Selling Land—
Land Fund—Land under Cultivation Imports and
Exports—Produce of Wool—Returns of Stock—Reve-
nue and Expenditure—Estimates for 1848—Population
and Occupation—Number of Houses—Rates of Wages
—Demand for Labour, and Persons required , . 94
Chap. Xl.—Adelaide Places of Worship—Religion—
Markets Prices of Exports— Freights 3lining and
Minerals—Description of the Burra Burra Mine—Pros-
pects of the Colony . . ■ 108
APPENDIX.
Exports of Minerals from South Australia—Sales of
Copper Ore at Swansea—Value of Mineral Shares at
Adelaide Master and Servants* Act in force in
South Australia—New Regulations for granting of
Leases, and Management of Crown Lands beyond the
Bounds of Location in New South Wales and Australia
Felix 130


EMIGRANT’S GUIDE
TO
AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
The Necessity of Discretion in the Choice of a Colony—
Prospects in Australia for Mechanics and Tradesmen —
Men of Education without Means not required—The
Course that should be observed on resolving to Emi-
grate, and in conveying out Funds—Advice as to
Outfit, Conduct on Board, and on First Arrival—The
Emigrant likely to be taken in—Course of Conduct—
Free Passages granted to Australia, and Emigration
Commissioners’ Rules—Advice on the Choice of a
Colony to Capitalists—Cost of Passage.
Amongst a considerable proportion of those who
resort to emigration as a means of improving their
position and prospects, the Australian Colonies are
treated of and regarded as one and the same in all
respects, whereas they are distinct and dissimilar as
regards soil and climate, and are widely separated by
distance. The three districts of Australia most to be
recommended, and whither emigration chiefly tends
at present, are New South Wales Proper, Australia
Felix, and South Australia. Legitimately speaking,
Australia Felix, or Port Phillip, forms at present a
B


portion of the vast colony of New South Wales ; but
it is about to be separated financially and politically,
as it is at present geographically, and erected into an
independent colony.
Between the three colonies there is a considera-
ble scope for choice to the intending emigrant,
who should pause and weigh well the advantages
that each oiler before he resolves which to adopt.
This is especially necessary for tradesmen and me-
chanics. In all new countries the demand for those
classes must be limited : squatters in the solitudes,
tending their flocks and herds, do not require or
consume those articles of luxury or expense, con-
sidered by many, in old countries, almost as neces-
saries, and which numerous artisans are taught to
fabricate. What is of luxury and show in Australia
is to be found in Sydney—concentrated in that
youthful city of 50,000 inhabitants; and there all
whose trades depend on appearance, or administer to
luxury, must seek employment. But even in Syd-
ney the demand for this class is small; for the mer-
chant imports and sells all required at a small profit.
There is nothing like substance of production in a
new country. The principal shops to be met with in
Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, and all the colonial
towns arc those occupied by ready-made clothes
dealers (generally Jews,) drapers, haberdashers, iron-
mongers, tailors, shoemakers, and cabinet-makers.


Auction rooms are numerous —remarkably so; and
every description of property is disposed of at them.
The merchants at their wholesale stores supply the
settlers, chiefly without the intervention of retail
dealers, with what they require for their stations, in
the shape of tea, sugar, ironmongery, and slop goods;
the latter being entirely imported ready made.
The mechanics and tradesmen most in request in
the towns of Australia, and in the interior, are but-
chers, bakers, bricklayers, blacksmiths, carpenters,
cabinet-makers, masons, painters and glaziers, plas-
terers, sawyers, shipwrights, tailors, shoemakers, and
wheelwrights; to this list may be added printers, but
they are already very numerous in the colonies. Even
in those occupations most required, the demand for
labour of a skilful description is not extensive, and
any large arrival of such, would not only have the
effect of reducing the wages of those employed, but
would, in all probability, leave many without engage-
ments. At various periods since the foundation of
the Australian colonies, there has been such an influx
of mechanical labour, so totally disproportioned to the
demand, that, after many hardships, numerous mechan-
ics were compelled to throw aside, at least for a time,
their trades,and adopt pastoral or agricultural pursuits;
and it would be well, in case of emergency, if every
emigrant was resolved and prepared to do the same, for
innewlands all mustadaptthemsclves to circumstances.


The Australian Colonies are completely flooded
with clerks, men of. education without means, and
professional persons; for those classes, therefore,
they present no inducement, except that which con-
sists in the cheapness of all the necessaries of life.
The parties really required in the Colonies, and who
would be sure of success, are mere labourers and shep-
herds, farmers with small means, and persons possessed
of sufficient capital to become sheep and cattle pro-
prietors of extent.
When a party, in any position in life, resolves to
emigrate to Australia, the first thing necessary is to
obtain every possible information of the present state
of the colony; this may be done through the means
of the latest works, or through societies which are
being established in London for the gratuitous aid
of the intending emigrant. The next should be to
turn the entire of the worldly goods, household and
other, of the intending emigrant into hard cash ; fur-
niture, beds, and all such things would be cumbrous
and expensive. The purchase of goods for the colonial
market on speculation should be avoided : it is more
than probable that the emigrant would lose money
by the venture, or meet with very considerable delay
in realizing after arrival. The means of all, small or
great, should be conveyed out in a tangible shape —
in money.
British sovereigns pass for their full value in A us


tralia, the currency being the same as in England;
but, if any considerable sum is taken out in gold, care
should be taken to insure it, which can be done at a
small premium. To those who understand the ex-
changes, or, indeed, to any class, the Joint Stock"
Banks in London connected with Australia present
every facility for forwarding money to the Colonies,
letters of credit being granted by them to any amount,
and their security being unquestioned. These banks
are—The Royal Bank of Australia, Moorgate-street;
The Union Bank of Australia, in Broad-street; and
The Bank of Australasia, in Austin Friars. There
is also The Bank of South Australia, but this concern
is solely connected with South Australia, and with
none of the other Colonies.
The outfit of the intending emigrant is of import-
ance. No class requires much woollen clothing.
One cloth suit, with a top-coat for men, and cloak
for women, is sufficient. Ban-agon, fustian, jean,
moleskin are the most suitable. Light linen trousers,
jackets, and waistcoats, with blue shirts, are advisable.
A large stock of clothes, particularly woollen, will be
found cumbrous, and liable to injury. Silks, and
some other kinds of ladies’ clothes, are all hut certain
to be spoiled, unless closely packed in tin, afterwards
cased with wood. The personal baggage of emigrants
should, in every case, be reduced to the smallest pos-
sible dimensions, and the boxes containing it be
n 3


sound, strong, and water-tight. As of necessity,
fresh water on board ship must be economized, the
only chance passengers have of procuring water to
wash clothes is when rain falls heavily, which it does
within the tropics, it is then caught in the canvass
awnings of the ship, and preserved in casks; but, as
this is only a matter of chance, it must not be de-
pended on. The average duration of the voyage to
Australia is four months, and, as cleanliness must be
observed for the sake of health, the stock of linen and
underclothing of persons of both sexes, and of every
rank, should be abundant. In the case of persons of
the labouring class of either sex, the following list
might b(#a guide :
Adult Male's Outfit for Australia:
Eight coloured cotton shirts, six pair grey cotton
hose, two pair worsted hose, six handkerchiefs, four
towels, one pair strong boots, two pair shoes, three
light canvass or duck trousers and jackets, two com-
plete suits of moleskin, lined and strongly made, and
one substantial woollen top-coat, which will be found
most useful in the interior of Australia, especially in
watching and tending sheep.
Adult Female’s Outfit for Australia:
Six shifts, four cotton petticoats, one stuff or serge,
and two woollen ditto; six pair of cotton hose, two
pair of woollen ditto ; four day and four night-caps ;
three pair shoes, six pocket-handkerchiefs, .and three


neck ditto; four bed-gowns or night-dresses, one pair
stays, six towels, three gingham or print dresses, one
stuff or woollen ditto; two small shawls or capes, a
warm cloak, and two bonnets at least, one of which
shouldbeastrongcoarsestraw. A less quantity than the
under-linen in the foregoing lists should not be taken.
Besides the above clothing, there are other ar-
ticles of outfit emigrants require : —razors, combs,
and brushes for the hair, shoe-brushes and blacking,
three pounds of soap per adult, two pair sheets, one
pair blankets and coarse coverlet, a strong oblong chest,
to contain the bulk of the clothing, and one of small
dimensions, for the emigrant always to keep' at
hand, the other being usually stowed away in the
hold, and access allowed to it at convenient intervals.
Feather or largo hair-beds should not be taken ; the
emigrant had better supply himself at the port of
departure with a common flock bed to fit the berth
assigned him, any other description would be de-
stroyed on board.
It is necessary that all steerage-passengers should
supply themselves* also with knife and fork, a strong tin
plate or two, a tin quart and pint-pot, the former having
a crook attached to the front to hang before the fire if
required, a couple of spoons, and a tin two-gallon ves-
* In the Government emigrant ships, parties are supplied
with these utensils, as also bed and blanket, out of the one
P°'md sterling required to be lodged by all emigrants.


sol to hold one adult’s allowance of water. It would be
useless to attempt to give any detailed list of articles
required by cabin passengers or persons of means, but
they can easily judge of what is necessary from the list
furnished, by comparison. A good stock of coloured
shirts, strong linen jackets and trousers, and a good
supply of under-clothing for ladies and children, are
in all cases advisable ; further, they should not encum-
ber themselves by a provision for years, as clothes are
not considerably dearer in the colonies than at home ;
aud the mildew, damp, and injury they are subject lo
in a voyage of long duration, fully repays the emigrant
for purchasing after arrival in his adopted land.
In the choice of a vessel, all emigrants should be
particular, and if possible secure their passage by
a ship regularly trading to the Colony, and with a
captain who has been some time in the vessel. Few
can imagine, except those who have experienced it,
the excess of suffering that can be inflicted on pas-
sengers by commanders whilst at sea, and they assume
such a different appearance and manner on shore,
that no possible circumspection can guard against the
chance of engaging with one; the only infallible rule
is, to secure a ship regularly in the trade, and then
the captain, for his own sake, will act well to preserve
a character for his ship.
Once on board, all classes of passengers should
observe the strictest regularity, and submit implicit!} -


to the directions of the captain and officers, and the
rules enforced for the government of the emigrants.
Under any circumstances, the authority of the captain
should be supported by all, the safety of the ship is
in his hands, and he is accountable for all results.
Vessels bound to Australia with any considerable
number of passengers are compelled by law to carry
a surgeon, and in emigrant ships, under the Land
and Emigration Commissioners, the power of this
officer is supreme in all that respects the passengers.
The quarters of the married emigrants are usually
interposed between those of the single males and
females, for the preservation of morality; and the
steerage passengers are expected to cleanse their
berths, and at convenient opportunities air their beds,
clothes, &c.: all this materially promotes health, and
every assistance should be given by the well disposed
for their own sake in ventilating and purifying be-
tween decks.
In the confined quarters of a ship, where so many
persons of different dispositions are brought together
for the first time, it is but natural that some unplea-
santness will occur; but quarrels should be avoided
with care, all exercising mutual forbearance; other-
wise discord will increase until comfort will be at an
end, the vessel will become a hell afloat, and the
character of her passengers will suffer seriously in
the estimation of the population of the Colony in


which they land. Nothing tends to make a voyage
pass rapidly and pleasantly, so much as unity and sym-
pathy amongst the passengers; and it shouldbethebu-
siness of all, particularly heads of families, to promote
such a state of things by every means in their power.
The regulations enforced in all ships under the
directions of the Land and Emigration Commissioners,
are excellent; the emigrants are obliged to rise at
seven o’clock, at once convey their bedding on deck,
breakfast at eight, clean the docks by nine and the
sleeping berths, prepare the children for inspection by
the surgeon and for school; (a teacher being always
selected from amongst the passengers;) constables
are appointed to preserve regularity; the emigrants
are divided into messes, the chief of which is respon-
sible for its order. No gambling is allowed, and spirits
are strictly forbidden to bo brought on board; no
smokingis allowed below; dinner is taken at one o’clock,
tea at six; all lights, except one general lamp, are ex-
tinguished by eight, p.m.; and all are bound to be
in bed by ten, p.m. A watch is kept at night be-
tween decks by selected emigrants, to preserve order,
assist the sick, and attend to the ventilators. Sun-
day must be observed with decorum, and the surgeon
inspects the emigrants to see that they are cleanly
and decently clad; religious service is performed for
those who wish to attend it. The following liberal scale
of rations is enforced in all the Commissioners’ ships.


Thursday ..
Friday
Saturday ..
Wednesday
Tuesday ....
Monday ....
Sunday ....
Mu
C*J
Mu
cr
Biscuit.
O'
Beef.
w
s
<*-
o'
Pork,
£ .
• - *«- • • • **-
cr
Preserved
Meat.
*i
- - «-
**
*-
*+-
O'
Flour.
CO
O
to ** to
•
to
;
to
o
N
Raisins.
>■
tr-i
bJ
b
H-> « W
r
O
Suet.
• CCM •
:
:
Ipint
r
Peas.
b
S3
. •
:
O'
Rice.
hH
*
0
: : ~ : : : - '
o'
Preserved
Potatoes.
~ : - •• - = -
i
c
N
Tea.
W
ta
: :
O
N
Coffee weight
when roasted
<1
o
• **• **• • *+- •
O'
Sugar.
*5
>
• w •
:
CO
O
N •
Butter.
0
w
CO CO CO
CO
CO
CO
Co
qrts-
Water.
Half-a-pint
• •
•
••
'
Vinegar.
Half-an-ounce
• •
o
pr
>
Mustard.
•Two ounces
■
Salt.


The provisions are served out daily by officers con-
nected with the ship, in the presence of the constables
selected from amongst the emigrants; and any default
in quality or quantity is to be represented to the
Surgeon-superintendent.
The personal baggage of one adult emigrant is to
be limited to twenty cubic feet measurement, or half
a ton weight, divided into boxes of two-and-a-half or
three feet long, and twenty inches wide. All extra
luggage pays freight.
Whether the emigrant goes out at his own private
expense, or at the cost of the Commissioners he is
equally at liberty to engage himself to whom he will
on arrival in the colonies. Emigrants are usually
permitted to live on board and receive rations for
three days after arrival. It is strongly recommended
that all emigrants’ effect engagements as soon as pos-
sible ; in no case should extra wages be demanded,
for new arrivals, unaccustomed to colonial life, can in
no case be so useful or entitled to such high wages as
those who have been some years in the country.
The great object with all the labouring classes of
emigrants should be, to secure a good master and a
comfortable home within the located parts of the
colonies; emigrants on first arrival are not suited for
shepherds or stock-keepers in the distant interior, be-
yond the frontiers. Families in all cases should cling
together and provide, if possible, against separation;


and parents especially should endeavour to guard
against their daughters being removed beyond the
reach of their influence. It would he well for me-
chanics and artisans instantly to visit the different em-
ployers in their various trades, and if the}' fail in
obtaining work, and have no capital to establish them-
selves or remove to another large town; they had
better at once reconcile themselves to accept an
engagement at anything that offers. In Australia,
hundreds of mechanics have at various periods aban-
doned their trades and adopted pastoral or agricul-
tural pursuits with ultimate benefit to themselves.
But it is not absolutely necessary that the mechanic
continue at what he may have been compelled to
adopt for a time; when opportunity offers, he may
return with advantage to the practice of his trade.
Above all things, emigrant mechanics ought not to
hang in idleness or partial employment about the
towns; they soon fall into bad habits, and tend by so
doing to injure their own character and reduce the
reasonable remuneration of labour by forced and un-
healthy competition. In the interior of all the Aus-
tralian Colonies, carpenters, wheelwrights, bricklayers,
and blacksmiths are useful, and in request; and if a
single man of any of those trades push his way into
the interior, he cannot fail of doing well, always pro-
viding that he be ready to turn his hand to any-
thing.
c


Emigrants arriving in the colonies with capital
should be particularly cautious as to the course they
pursue; they will meet with many who under the guise
of friendship will be ready to take advantage of them,
and in too numerous instances, the very letters of in-
troduction that persons usuallybear, maybe the means
of placing them in the hands of persons who offer their
advice with apparent candour, in order to induce the
stranger to purchase stock, land, houses, as the case
may be, holding forth brilliant prospects, when, if the
truth were known, the seemingly disinterested gentle-
man is seeking to secure a customer at a high figure
for something he or some friend of his has to dispose
of. In all cases the new arrival, if he have capital,
should pause and acquire a thorough practical know-
ledge of men and things around him ; he can invest
his money at interest in one of the Joint Stock Banks
for six months; and, if he intend to turn sheep-
farmer, cattle-breeder, or agriculturist, put a few
pounds in his pocket, settle his family in the capital
for a few T months, and wend his own way into the in-
terior, plainly clad. Thus by association and per-
sonal observation, the man of means, groat or small,
will acquire knowledge at a small expense that will
prove invaluable to him, and the time and money
thus spent, will be the best expended in his life. If
the emigrant pursue a contrary course, ho will pay
dearly for it, perhaps at such a rate as materially to


affect his future prospects. There are a hundred ways
in which he may be deceived in land, in stock, or in
the purchase of a business; for instance, the sheep
bought may he apparently from the best flocks in
the colony, but they may be the refuse of a settler’s
stock, and. not worth half what a fair draft would be :
in their dealings in the sale of property of any kind,
the old colonists, especially in New South Wales
Proper, are not scrupulous, their sole object is to pro-
cure by any means—honest or dishonest —the highest
possible price. In the purchase of land, emigrants
should be especially cautious in New South Wales as
respects questions of title, for although the colony has
only been in existence such a short time, yet in some
instances, particular spots of land have changed
hands as many as a score times. All should see and
ascertain by personal observation the real quality of
land before they purchase it, and be certain of a plen-
tiful supply of good water in all seasons: without this,
land otherwise desirable becomes perfectly worthless,
especially for homesteads.
All classes of emigrants who have .anything to lose
require the exorcise of strict care to preserve their
means from the designs of the many, who they will
find anxious to take advantage of them in New South
Wales, persons who prefer a life of dishonesty to one
of honour and fair dealing. It would be impossible to
expose the many ways parties may be deceived; but.


as a general preservative, it would be well for a newly-
arrived colonist to be excessively careful in all his
dealings. As regards South Australia, and Aus-
tralia Felix, these colonies bear a much better
moral character than New South Wales Proper; but
yet extreme caution is necessary in the dealings of
all men of means, until they have acquired a perfect
knowledge of the country.
There is at present an extensive emigration being
carried out to the Australian Colonies through the
Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners, of
7, Park-street, Westminster, who grant free passages
to certain classes. As the funds that support this
system are derived from the sale of Waste Crown
Lands in the Colonies, every regard is paid in the se-
lection to secure those persons whose services are most
required in the Colonies, viz. good agricultural labour-
ers, shepherds, female domestic and farm servants, and
dairymaids; a few country mechanics, such as black-
smiths, carpenters, bricklayers, and wheelwrights, are
also forwarded ; but the greatest objection is advanced
against those who, by being long resident in large
towns, become incapacitated for the active duties of
a country life. With a free passage is included provi-
sion and all necessary medical aid.
It is absolutely necessary that all applicants for
free passages be of good character, and be well re-
commended for industry, sobriety, and ability in their


callings, and that they have not been in the habitual
receipt of parish relief. In no case are the ages of
parents to exceed 40, and the ages of single persons
not accompanying them, must not be less than 18,
or more than 35. All persons in ill health or with
any bodily or mental defect arc excluded. No family
is taken with more than two children under seven,
or three under ten years of ago, and the separation of
husbands and wives, or parents and children, is
strictly forbidden. Single males and females are
taken in about equal proportions.
All applicants for free passages arc bound to find
their own outfit, to have not less than the following
quantity of clothes, and before they receive an order
to embark, they arc to pay for each adult, the sum of
one pound sterling, and for each child under 14, ten
shillings, towards the expense of bedding and mess
utensils for the voyage, which are furnished by the
Commissioners.
Quantity of Clothes required by a Male.
Two complete suits of exterior clothing, six shirts,
six pairs of stockings, and two pairs of shoes.
For a Female.
Six shifts, two flannel petticoats, six pairs of stock-
ings, two pairs of shoes, and two gowns.
Each person is also obliged to bring two pounds of
soap, and their own towels and sheets.
c 3


On the voyage the emigrants in the Commissioners'
ships are victualled in messes of six or eight, two
children under fourteen counting as one adult; wo-
men nursing are allowed a pint of stout per day; and
a full supply of wine, sago, and medical comforts for
the sick are on hoard. On arrival in the Colony they
are received hy a government officer, who gives them
every advice and information, directs them how to
procure employment, and informs them of the rates
of wages. They are permitted to remain on hoard
fourteen days at the expense of the Commissioners.
In quitting their native land, in leaving behind
them the Old World, emigrants should also’ cast aside
all home ideas, all prejudices and passions of the
past, and he fully prepared to fall into the ways and
habits of those amongst whom they cast their lot.
Religious prejudice unfortunately runs high in the
Australian Colonies, and all emigrants should he care-
ful to guard against such; it involves those who take
part in religious disputes in misery of mind, and in
many cases affects their worldly substance: emigrants
should proffer and be prepared to receive the hand of
friendship and brotherhood from all.
A few words of advice to persons of means as to a
place of settlement. The large capitalist will find
employment for his means either in the elder dis-
tricts of New South Wales Proper, or in the mineral
country of South Australia: in the latter, if he be


inclined to dig for wealth in the bowels of the earth;
but for the person with means about £2,000, who
intends to embark in business, turn sheep-farmer,
cattle-owner, or farmer, Australia Felix and South
Australia are the places to settle in. For some rea-
sons the former is preferable, the climate being cooler,
the soil richer, and the country better watered. Half
the battle in emigration lies in the proper choice of a
colony in connexion with a person’s means; know-
ledge should be sought, and care taken in coming to
a result, which will affect permanently the future pros-
pects of the emigrant. To the Australian Colonies
the price of passage varies according to the ship and
other circumstances. The price for a steerage pas-
sage is from £ls to £2O. Intermediate passage, £3O
to £4O. Cabin passage, £SO to £7O. In all cases,
provisions included; and in the cabin, wines and
spirits.


CHAPTER II.
NEW SOUTH WALES PROPER.
Original Settlement—Progress—Population—Climate—
Soil— Produce—Grain imported—Number of Sheep,
Cattle, Horses, &c. —Imports and Exports.
New South Wales originally embraced the entire
of the eastern coast of New Holland, and extended
into the interior as far as the forty-first parallel of
longitude; but of late Australia Felix, or the Port
Phillip district, has become financially separated, and
will become politically so as soon as the Colonial
Office can spare time to frame a constitution for it.
The Dutch have undoubtedly the credit of dis-
covering New Holland, and there is little question
but they penetrated at an early period through the
islands in the Indian Seas to the eastern coast.
Captain Cook was the first British navigator who
visited the shores of New South Wales, and he took
possession of it in the name of Great Britain, erect-
ing a mound of stones and flag at Botany Bay
to commemorate the fact. Exclusive of Australia
Felix, New South Wales extends from Capo Howe
northwards to the Gulf of Carpentaria, and embraces
a line of sea-coast exceeding two thousand miles.
Upon the return of Captain Cook to England,
after taking possession of New South Wales, in con-
sequence of his glowing descriptions of the new land.


it was resolved to found a Colony there; and for this
purpose several vessels were despatched from Eng-
land towards the close of the year 1786. The ex-
pedition entirely consisted of convicts, troops, and the
necessary officials, and arrived at Botany Bay in the
year 1787, but then removed to the shores of Port
Jackson as soon as its noble extent was ascertained.
Captain Cook originally considered it a mere boat-
harbour, from the apparent narrow entrance. Port
Jackson, on the shores of which the city of Sydney
is built, is a magnificent estuary or arm of the sea,
extending inland some fifteen miles, with numerous
bays and coves stretching off in every direction, with
deep water close alongside the shore, and safe an-
chorage for the fleets of all nations. The Colony for
the first few years experienced many difficulties, but
under the judicious care of Governor Phillip these
were overcome, and every encouragement was given to
well-behaved convicts to become cultivators of the soil
on their own account. For years the exclusively penal
character of the country continued, none proceeding
thither but convicts, the troops and officers necessary
to control them, their families, and a few merchants.
The first considerable number of sheep imported
into the Colony was introduced by a Mr. M‘Arthur,
who found soil and climate to answer so well that he
brought the possibility of Australia supplying Eng-
land with wool under the notice of George the Third


and his ministry, who rewarded his exertions with a
grant of 20,000 acres of land, at a place called
Camden, within twenty-five miles of Sydney. From
the period of the introduction of sheep by Mr,
M'Arlhur to the present time the attention of the
colonists has been chiefly turned to pastoral pursuits,
with so much success, that one-third of the entire wool
imported into England now comes from Australia.
The located parts of New South Wales, within which
land is disposed of by the Crown, consists of twenty-
one counties, viz., Argyle, Bathurst, Bligh, Brisbane,
Camden, Cook, Cumberland, Durham, Georgiana,
Gloucester, Hunter, King, Macquarie, Murray,
Northumberland, Phillip, Roxburgh, St. Vincent,
Stanley, Wellington, Westmoreland; beyond these
districts the sheep and cattle farmers are squatters on
the soil. At the chief towns of many of those coun-
ties, assize-courts and courts of quarter-sessions are
held, and every facility exists for the administration
of law and justice. From the period of its founda-
tion, down to the year 1821, the progress of the
Colony was slow but sound; the large commissariat
expenditure, rendered necessary by such a number of
prisoners undergoing sentence, tending to increase
materially the wealth of the colonists. Of necessity,
in the early days of the settlement the entire support
of the convicts devolved upon the Government; but as
soon as a free population began to assemble, the autho


rities adopted tho expedient of assigning the convicts
to those who required them, for their mere support
and clothing, thereby providing cheap labour for the
colonist, and relieving themselves from a burden. In
1821 the first census of the population was taken; viz.—
Males 21,093
Females ..... 8,090
Total . . . 29,783
Of these there were.
Free ...... 15,909
Bond 13,814
29,783
Of the free population exhibited by the return of
1821, 7,224 had been born in the colony, and a
considerable portion of the remainder had undergone
the penalty of transportation, but in process of time
had become free. The disproportion of the sexes in
the colony has at all times been remarkable, and
originated in the fault of the Government permitting
such a difference to exist in the number of males and
females transported ; it has been the cause of incal-
culable sin and evil, by the promotion of unnatural
crimes of all kinds, from the practice of which New
South Wales is scarce as yet purged. In the early
days of the Colony, such was the want of females,
that many officers and officials were obliged to marry
female convicts; that course being approved of by the
authorities, the female continuing at liberty during


good conduct. This practice, commenced of necessity,
was permanently continued as a matter of policy; and
until transportation was abolished, the marriage of fe-
male convicts was promoted.
From 1828 the progress of New South Wales has
been extremely rapid ; at that period a free emigrant
population began to arrive, and many men of capital
were induced to carry their means thither by the
prospect of large grants of land, which were freely
bestowed, until Lord Ripon abolished the system in
the year 1834. As an indication of the progress of
the colony, the population returns are the best guide.
The census of 1828 exhibited.
Males . . . 27,611 •)
Females . . 8,987 I Or, Free . . 20,930
f Bond. . 15,668
Total . . 36,598 J
The census of 1833 :
Males . . . 44,688"1 Or, Free . . 36,318
Females. . . 16,173/ Bond. . 24,543
The census of 1836 :
Males . . . 55,5391 Or, Free . . 49,265
Females . . 21,567 f Bond . . 27,831
The census of 1841:
Males . . . 87,298 ) Or, Free . . 101,749
Females . . 43,558 S Bond . . 26,977
Since 1840, the number of the convict or prison po-
pulation of New South Wales rapidly decreased, as
transportation to the Colony ceased that year; and
the convicts gradually became free by the fulfilment


of their sentence, or by the indulgence of conditional
pardons for good conduct. At the present time the
number of convicts in New South Wales does not ex-
ceed three thousand; and these will soon be free.
The iron-gangs and road-gangs that once disgusted
the traveller, are no more; the “ Female Factory ”at
Paramatta is closed, and many of the convict-gaols and
depots are converted to general purposes ; in fact, the
felon-character of the Colony is rapidly disappearing.
The last census taken in the Colony was in 1846 ;
but official statements of the arrivals, deaths, births,
and departures bring a correct return of the population,
including that of the Port Phillip district of Australia,
down to January, 1847, when the numbers were
Males 118,927
Females 77,777
Total . . 196,704
Of the entire population of the country, about one-
fourth is concentrated in Sydney, and another fourth
is dispersed over a vast area of country beyond the
bounds of location, engaged in pastoral pursuits.
Situated in the southern hemisphere, the seasons in
New South Wales are the reverse of those in Europe;
the summer in England being their winter. Spring
and autumn are neither of long continuance ; and the
months when most rain usually falls are June, July,
and August; at other periods thunder-storms and
tropical showers occur, but they are not regular. The
D


climate is dry and peculiarly healthy; bronchial com-
plaints are unknown, and diseases of the lungs and
chest infrequent. This is attributable in a great mea-
sure to the scarcity of surface-water in New Holland,
and the dryness of the climate. It is generally re-
marked by persons who have visited India and other
countries, that they have never suffered the same op-
pression from the heat in Australia that they have done
in other places in the same latitude; there is an elas-
ticity and exhilarating character in the atmosphere
unknown elsewhere. During the summer months,
hot winds occur, but seldom last twelve hours; they
blow from the interior, and arc supposed to originate
in passing over vast deserts. Whilst they last the hot
winds are destructive, parching and bunting up the
herbage and tender plants ; but they arc not found to
affect the general health of the population. The ther-
mometer, at times, attains the extreme elevation of
105° in New South Wales; but the average is between
70 and 80, and the heat is in rare instances such as
to prevent agricultural labour, or any other out-door
employment. Frost and snow are, it may be said,
unknown. Altogether the climate of New South
Wales is especially healthy, particularly for parties
born in Groat Britain; and, as a proof of this, the
fact may he adduced of the assurance offices charging
no extra premium for residence in that country.
.When the vast extent of New South Wales is taken


into consideration, it must be admitted that but a
small proportion of it, comparatively speaking, is suited
for agricultural purposes; however, it is sufficient to
absorb the labour of a population of many millions.
Water being a grand object in all warm climates, but
especially so in Australia, in many parts of which it
is scarce, agricultural land is generally sought and
found in the vicinity of rivers and creeks; but this is
not exclusively the case; and numerous fertile hills of
small elevation are to bo met with in various parts of
the Colony. In some districts there is a considerable
breadth of good land, particularly in the neighbour-
hood of Hunter’s River and the Hawksberry, to the
north of Sydney, and at Illawarra, to the south. Much
the greater proportion of the good land available for
cultivation within the boundaries of location is already
sold and occupied, or the property of the large grantees,
who, previous to 1834, acquired vast tracts of crown
land by free grant. The soil in and about Sydney,
for some fifteen miles, is poor and sandy, in its natural
state densely clothed with scrub and brushwood, much
of which is nowremoved to give place to market-gardens
and gentlemen’s seats: the neighbourhood of the capi-
tal making valuable what otherwise would ho worthless.
The soil of New South Wales produces tobacco,
wheat, barley, oats, and maize in perfection; cotton
can be grown to the northward; the mulberry is found
to succeed well, and with it the silkworm will be cul


1839 .
TOTAL VALUE.
£285,110 0 0
1840
. . 217,063 0 0
1841 .
. 201,632 0 0
1842
. 113,070 0 0
1843 .
. 112,387 0 0
1844
. 65,442 0 0
1845 .
. 39,855 0 0
1846
. 63,764 0 0
1847
. . 52,740 0 0
tivated; many fruits and vegetables peculiar to tem-
perate climates flourish, whilst most tropical ones at-
tain perfection; and the vine answers admirably, and
at no distant date wine and brandy bid fair to form
two of the staple exports of the Colony. Already it
is cultivated extensively: according to official returns,
there were planted with the vine, within the bounds of
location, in 1848, 894 acres, producing 59,324 gal-
lons of wine, and 1,402 gallons of brandy. Although
wheat of excellent quality is grown in New South
Wales, yet, in consequence of the value of labour, and
the large proportion of the population engaged in pas-
toral pursuits, a considerable amount of grain is im-
ported ; but the quantity is on the decrease, as the
following returns will show;—
VALUE OF GRAIN IMPORTED INTO NEW SOUTH WALES IN
THE FOLLOWING YEARS :
The principal supplies of grain are from Van
Dieman’s Land and from Australia Felix, whence,
also, potatoes in large quantities are imported. Some


COUNTIES.
HORSES.
HORNED
CATTLE.
TICS.
SHEEP.
Argylo . . .
3,432
23,268
970
289,993
Bathurst . .
3,184
27,168
853
236,033
Bligh . . .
927
9,035
151
120,988
Brisbane .
1,322
11,125
211
174,969
Camden
5,508
33,433
3,510
35,117
Cook . .
2,107
9,095
2,719
14,758
Cumberland
11,820
23,895
8,323
7,912
Durham ,
4,705
39,874
3,821
104,804
Georgiana . .
2,524
27,928
703
135,685
Gloucester
2,113
20,545
1,013
54,341
Hunter . .
1,180
4,885
800
7,168
King ....
1,339
15,792
792
107,509
Macquarie .
1,824
19,438
1,253
9,307
Murray
2,821
23,036
1,872
285,028
Northumberland
4,293
28,208
4,518
10,382
Phillip . . .
803
8,814
292
85,279
Roxburgh .
2,100
16,000
630
183,000
arc grown in New South Wales ; but they are indiffer-
ent in quality, and soft and moist in their nature.
The grand staple of New South Wales being its
wool, the chief attention of the population is turned
to it, and with so much success, that, at an early period,
Australia bids fair completely to supply England with
wool of a superior quality. It is almost incredible to
believe, that, in a country where, sixty years since,
sheep and cattle were unknown, there should now he
found millions of them scattered over an area of many
hundred thousand square miles. The following is a
correct return of the live-stock in the Colony at the
latest period to which it is made up, 1847:
D 3


COUNTIES.
HORSES.
HORNED
CATTLE.
PIGS.
SHEEP.
St. Vincent , .
1,734
27,827
1,078
56,940
Stanley .
167
1,030
222
4
Wellington. .
1,100
22,791
474
119,686
Westmoreland.
1,587
9,800
623
41,780
HORSES.
HORNED CATTLE.
PIGS.
SHEEP.
3,614,043
27,307
861,391
0,145
Beyond the boundaries of location, or in the Crown-
Lands Commissioners’ districts, there was a total, in
Jan. 1848, of
According to these returns, there is exhibited, in
New South Wales Proper, an aggregate of more than
five millions of sheep, and twelve hundred thousand
head of homed stock. This is completely exclusive
of Port Phillip. According to the best calculations,
the average increase of the total stock of the Colony
is about 30 per cent, per annum; making allowance
for the vast number slaughtered for the butcher, and
those that are melted down into tallow, and exported:
this fact may give some idea of the continually increas-
ing demand for labour to tend these flocks and herds.
Admirably adapted for a grazing country, as sheep,
cattle, and horses, alike find on the soil, in a state of
nature, ample pasturage all the year round. New South
Wales presents manifold advantages to those who de-
sire to follow a pastoral life.
The imports and exports of the Colony are more
considerable in proportion to the extent of its popu-


IMPORTS.
Value of Articles
Value of Articles
YEAR.
the Produce or
the Produce oriValue of Article
Manufacture of
Manufacture of
the Produce o
Total
the United King-
other British Do-
Manufacture o
Value.
dom.
minions.
Foreign States.
£.
£.
£. .
£.
1844
629,510
154,572
147,178
931,26C
184
5
786,514
156,491
290,849 *
1,233,854
1848
1,111,238
88,638
430,646
1,630,522
1847
1,269,183
95,118
617,722
1,982,023
EXPORTS.
Value of Arti*
Value of Arti-
Value of Arti-
Value of Arti-
cles the Pro-
cles the Pro-
cles the Pro-
cles the Pro-
duce or Ma-
duce
or Ma-
duce or Ma-
duce or Ma-
Total
nufacture ol
nufacture of
nufacture
of
nufacture of
Value.
New South
the
United
other British
Foreign
Wales,
Kingdom.
Dominions.
States.
£.
£.
£.
£.
£.
1844
864,709
119,197
64,266
79,943
1,128,115
1845
1,289,062
100,901
110,160
75,863
1,555,986
1840
1,201,433
120,424
80,499
79,183
1,481,539
1847
1,649,031
136,385
15,865
68,765
1,870,084
lation than that of any British possession, or, in fact,
of any other country. The quantity of British ma-
nufactured goods imported for the year 1846, would
be equal to about 51. 15s. sterling for every white
person in the Colony. The following is the return
in value of the imports and exports into and from the
Colony of New South Wales, inclusive of Port Phillip,
for the years 1844, 1845, 1846, and 1847 :


CHAPTER III.
Sydney; its Population, Public Buildings, Corporation,
and Character—Habits of Drunkenness —Prospects of
sober Persons—Wealth of some Convicts —Sheep and
Cattle Farming—Breed of Horses—Price of Stock—
Sydney Markets—Prices of Provisions and Goods.
The city of Sydney is built upon a promontory or
neck of land stretching out into the estuary of Port
Jackson, and is surrounded on three sides hy water.
The streets towards the extremity of the promontory
rise in terraces, and the view from some of them is
not to be equalled ; hundreds of ships lie still, as
if sleeping on the calm waters of the port_ beneath ;
busy thousands congregate at the wharfs and in the
chief thoroughfares; whilst numerous rocky promon-
tories clothed with verdure are dotted with the villas
and country mansions of the Sydney merchants. The
streets of Sydney all run at right-angles, and are
generally broad convenient thoroughfares; the houses
are many of them built of wood, but this mode of
structure is now discontinued; in places they are
isolated single dwellings, standing in the midst of
small gardens; but the chief streets are lined with
continuous ranges of stone or brick edifices, some
being shops and stores of noble dimensions, where
every article for common use or luxury is to be met


with. There are not a few handsome and spacious
private houses, but the number of licensed places of
resort for the sale of spirits is perfectly astonishing,
and the rents paid for them quite as much so.
The population of Sydney and its immediate
suburbs on the first of January, 1848, fell little, if at
all, short of 50,000. Of this large number of persons
there may be said to be none engaged in manufac-
turing employments. General trade, mercantile and
shipping matters, mechanical labours, and such-like,
occupy the population. The greater proportion of
the mechanics and artisans in the colony are all
concentrated at Sydney; and there are also to be met
the men of means, and the men without means, but
with a good education, unwilling truly to become
colonists, and make themselves useful by pushing
into the interior and adopting some pursuit in which
their labours would be required. Sydney is overrun
with young and old clerks and professional men, who
are a complete burden to the community, who seek
the shores of the Colony to benefit themselves, yet if
without means or friends seldom secure the same rate
of remuneration bestowed upon a mechanic.
The wharfs of Sydney are spacious and convenient,
affording every accommodation that could be found
in docks, stores being erected at hand, and ships of the
largest size lying close alongside at all times of tide,
the rise and fall being only a few feet. The public


buildings of Sydney consist of the Government-house,
an exceedingly handsome structure; a spacious
Market for every description of produce ; a convenient
Police-office; a monster Gaol at the outskirts of the
town, with a large and massive Court-house ; a public
Hospital of extent; a cathedral Church unfinished; a
Roman Catholic Church of cajiacious dimensions, the
interior of which, including the roof, is beautifully
fitted with polished cedar; and numerous religious
edifices less worthy of notice.
In the year 1842, Sj'dney was incorporated, and
now possesses full municipal rights, controlling all her
local matters, with the exception of her police, the
management of which the government still retains, as
well as the income arising from the licences for pub-
lic-houses. Rates for local purposes, repairing the
streets, lighting, watering, &c., are levied under the au-
thority of the corporation, which consists of a mayor,
aldermen, and town councillors, elected hy the bur-
gesses, possessing a qualification in right of tenancy of
twenty-five pounds .annual value. The streets of Syd-
ney are now lighted with gas, and the inhabitants
supplied by means of pipes with water of a very' fair
quality.
Amongst a population so constituted as that of
Sydney, which for more than half a century was the
head-quarters of the penal settlements of Great Bri-
tain, there must be a large proportion of sin and


vice ; this is unquestionably the case, and drunken-
ness prevails to an extent perfectly appalling; men
and women alike indulging in boundless potations of
strong fiery nun. Where wages are generally high
and the necessaries of life most moderate in price, the
means of intoxication is within the reach of all, and
a vast proportion take advantage of it, especially
those who have at one period been convicts. It is a
thing of every-day occurrence for a labouring man or
mechanic to arrive from the country with the savings
of twelve or eighteen months, amounting to some £4O
or £SO, and proceeding to a public-house, place the
amount in the landlord’s hands, requesting him to
notify them of the fact as soon as it should be all
spent. The donor then enters on his spree, treating
all around, and indulging himself so deeply as to
remain in a partial state of intoxication whilst one
shilling of the money remains; as soon as that disap-
pears, the nervous and enervated drunkard, perhaps
labouring under the effects of delirium tremens, once
more seeks the interior to procure the means for
another similar debauch at no distant date. Immi-
grants from association too frequently fall into the
habits of the old convicts ; and therefore the utmost
care should he observed by all in guarding themselves
against the probability of such a contingency. It is
in the power of every man who sets himself deter-
minedly to work on rough or smooth, as they may


offer, to realize sufficient in a few years in New South
Wales to become an employer and a person of means;
but unfortunately the greater proportion of the la-
bouring class squander their earnings on drink,
reducing themselves in character and constitution.
Yet there are many exceptions to this rule, on the
banks of Hunter’s River, William’s River, the Hawks-
berry, and Woollongong, in the neighbourhood of the
towns, are to be met many small proprietors and
farmers who have all raised themselves by their own
exertions, and several of the largest stock owners
have at one period belonged to the labouring class,
and worked with their own bands. The means of
living are to be obtained so cheap that all can save,
those especially who are employed in country pursuits.
Since the original settlement at New South Wales
there are many instances of persons who have been
convicts realizing vast wealth; indeed there are many
individuals of that class now living in Sydney, and
numerous others, who, if they have not secured great
means, have at least attained a comfortable position
as regards the world’s goods. Previous to the cessa-
tion of transportation, there was necessarily a large
commissariat expenditure, which gave some of the
emancipated convicts peculiar facilities for acquiring
wealth. The system of granting lands was also in
force, and thus pieces of ground in and around
Sydney were acquired, or bought from the grantees


at nominal prices by emancipists, which afterwards
turned in complete fortunes, realizing thousands of
pounds. But by far the greatest wealth was accumu-
lated by those emancipists who kept public-houses,
or sold grog “on the sly, ” when a licence could not
be obtained by them, from their bad character or other
causes. The profits of grog-selling even in a legiti-
mate way were some years since perfectly enormous,
and are even now considerable ; but those profits w'ere
of old largely increased by dishonest practices, and
further added to by the advantageous bargains publi-
cans made with their customers, for their plots of
land or other property, whilst the latter were in a
state of intoxication. There is in Sydney a small plot
of land, about one quarter acre in extent, which was
disposed of in the year 1819, for a three-gallon keg
of rum, the same piece of ground has since been sold
for two thousand pounds sterling in the year 1839.
The celebrated Samuel Terry, originally a convict, who
died worth upwards of half a million sterling, made
most of his moneyas a publican. In connexion with
the death of this man, there is a fact worth relating :
Terry resided in Pitt Street, Sydney, and had in his
employment a young lad, thirteen or fourteen years
of age. This boy, it appears, had on some occasion
discovered in his master’s bed-room a cast-iron pot,
full of gold coins of various kinds, which Terry, in his
miserly eccentric moods, loved to contemplate; the
B


chance was too much for the boy; he carried off the
pot and buried it in a part of the garden. The gold
was soon missed, every search, every inquiry made,
hut in vain ; suspicion fell not on the boy, until in his
own folly he took some of the coins to a watchma-
ker to have bored, in order to wear as buttons; dis-
covery followed; the lad was tried, convicted, and sen-
tenced to death, the laws in New South Wales being
at that period remarkable for severity. Previous to
execution, Terry, who dearly loved his gold, but
failed to find it, the boy refusing to name the place
where it was deposited, induced the gaoler to coin-
cide in his exertions with the boy, and solemnly
assured him that he would be pardoned in case he
revealed where the gold was. Trusting in Terry’s
assertion, confirmed by the gaoler, the lad revealed
the fact; but the truth once ascertained, the hard-
hearted miser left the criminal to his fate, but not
before the latter had in startling accents, invoked
God’s anathema on his deceiver. In due course the
boy suffered on the gallows, but the effect of his im-
precations and the consciousness of having done deep
wrong, rankled in the debilitated old miser’s breast,
and ho sunk into the grave soon after his victim. The
greater portion of Terry’s wealth passed into the hands
of Terry Hughes, a nephew, and a Mr. Hosking, both
of whom married Terry’s step-daughters. 111-gotten
wealth soon goes ; the great mercantile Sydney


house of Hughes and Hosking failed in the year 1843,
and Terry Hughes now lies in a Sydney gaol on a
charge of fraudulent insolvency.
There is, perhaps, no similar instance of such vast
wealth accumulated by an emancipist, yet there are
now several very rich old convicts in Sydney, indeed
the wealthiest men in the colony; the house property
of the capital is nearly all in the hands of eman-
cipists.
In pastoral pursuits a large portion of the popula-
tion are employed. The cattle run wild in the bush
or open country, and are collected once or twice a
year, according to circumstances, for the purpose of
counting them, drawing off fat stock for market, and
branding the calves, which are always permitted to
run untramelled by the mother’s side. The returns
frgm the sale of cattle would in no case warrant the
expenditure of money to erect fencing to secure
stock ; paddocks are only constructed for the use of
working bullocks and horses in use. Cattle in the
course of a few months, during which it is necessary
to watch them, become used to a run of country; and,
if there is water there, seldom wander from it, unless
driven away, or mixed up with a passing herd. The
brand used in marking calves is red hot; the im-
pression is made upon the rump-side, or shoulder,
and [never obliterates. Cattle stealing is, of course,
much practised in a country where there are so many


temptations for numerous persons born and bred in
crime,* but the publicity of brands, and the difficulty
of finding a market for ill-gotten stock, is a great bar
to depredations. Sheep are tended in flocks all day
by shepherds, and guarded at night by watchmen, to
secure them against a kind of native dog, or fox,
which is very destructive. The number of sheep
embraced in one flock entirely depends upon the
nature of the country over which they are depas-
tured : the more thickly wooded or hilly a country is
the smaller the extent of a flock. There are seldom
more than three flocks of sheep at one station, to
which, besides the shepherds, there is attached a
hut-keeper, who prepares their meals for the men,
moves the hurdles for the sheep, and sweeps the
yards, watching, or rather sleeping, in a box by them
at night, with a good dog or two at hand. Extra
hands to dress and shear the sheep are usually en-
gaged on occasion ; shearing, if performed by the
shepherds, is always paid extra for.
One sheep proprietor often possesses numerous
stations contiguous to each other, or in different
parts of the country. In most instances there is
a home station, where the master or overseer re-
sides, and where the stores, farming stock, &c., are
kept. At the head station is grown grain sufficient
for all; and from it, weekly or monthly, rations are
sent to the out-stations, which are scattered about in


the most convenient spots for the concentration of the
flocks—on the bank of a river, creek, or beside a
natural water-hole. There is seldom, if ever, any
tillage at out-stations, nor have the men at sheep-
stations the advantage of milk. So careless, in
general, are those engaged in pastoral employment,
that they do not take the trouble to break up a small
plot of ground for vegetables, although the richest
soil may be close at hand; they content themselves
with the never-varying bush fare, damper and mutton
or beef, with green tea to wash it down. Damper is
bread baked in the ashes, unleavened. The lands on
which sheep and cattle are depastured are almost ex-
clusively crown lands in their natural state; it would
not pay to purchase land for pastoral purposes. The
increase of both sheep and cattle in New South
Wales is very great; a flock of breeding ewes gene-
rally yields considerably over one hundred per cent.
Black cattle increase rapidly, but not in the same
proportion. The horse stock of New South Wales is
in some respects unsurpassed. Originally horses
were introduced from England, from South America;
and from India were brought Arabians. The three
breeds combined have produced a strong, well-formed
animal, capable of great fatigue. The endurance of
Australian horses is remarkable. It is no unusual
thing to ride a horse several hundred miles, at an
average rate of sixty miles per day, giving the animal
e 3


throughout the journey nought else but what he can
pick up on the natural pasturage of the country —no
hay, no corn.
With a quantity of stock of any kind in Australia,
the run on which they are grazed is generally dis-
posed of, or the purchaser must have secured else-
where another run for their accommodation. The
average price of a flock of well-bred fine-fleeced sheep
of ages, lambs under six months given in, is about
eight shillings per head, with station, hut the value
of the run materially alters the price. The same
or a similar flock of sheep, without station, would be
worth about six shillings per head ; fat wethers about
seven shillings per head. The average weight of
fat sheep in New South Wales is sixty to sixty-five
pounds each. Fat stock are worth in Sydney about
10s. per cwt., of prime quality; milch cows, £2 to
£4 per head’; working bullocks, £6 to £lO per
pair; mixed herds of cattle, calves under six months
given in, 255. to 355. per head. Horses, draught,
£2O; hacks, .£ls to £18; common stock horses,
£8 to £l2. The following are the prices in the
Sydney markets by last advices :
Sydney, February 6. —We continue to receive a
fair supply of wheat from the country, and the
quality is superior to any we have ever seen grown
in the colony. Prices may be quoted at from 4s. to
4s. 3d. per bushel of sixty lbs. Of imported there


have been no sales. Maize is dull of sale at Is. Bd.
to Is. 9d. per bushel. The demand for flour con-
tinues steady, without any disposition to speculate,
and the price of fine remains firm at £ll (cash) per
ton of 2,000 lbs. Bran is in demand at Is. per
bushel. Potatoes realize, at the wharves, £6 to £ti
per ton. One hundred and sixty loads of fruit have
paid dues. Peaches sold at 6d. to 2s. per basket;
nectarines, at from Is. to 2s. fid. per basket; bananas.
Is. 3d. to Is. fid.per dozen ; water-melons, 2s. 6d. to
4s. per dozen ; rock-melons, 6s. 6d. to Bs. per dozen ;
apples, 2£d. to 6d.; and pears, 1 Jd. to 4d. per dozen ;
Orleans plums, 3d. per dozen; grapes, l£d. to 4d.
per lb.
Fodder. —The supply of hay during the week
amounted to 100 loads; no alteration has taken
place in the price, 3s. Cd. to 4s. 6d. per cwt. bv the
load. Straw and green bedding remain as last
quoted. A rise of 2d. per dozen has taken place in
the article of grass, owing to the continuance of the
dry weather.
Dairy Produce. —Thirty-five cwt. of butter was
brought to the market, where the settler realized Bd.
to 9£d.; of cheese about a ton and a half, averaging
4d.; and of bacon and hams three quarters of a ton
realized 4£d. per lb. Eggs fetched from 6d. to 7d.
per dozen.
Poultry. Nine loads have paid dues at the


s.
d.
t.
d
Butter, fresh ...
per lb.
1
0
to 1
2
Milk
per quart
0
3
Candles, colonial
... per lb.
0
4
Currants ...
JJ
0
G
Cheese
• • 9i
0
C
Itaisins
99
0
C
Coffee ...
...
0
10
to 1
4
Tea
1
G
to 2
G
Sugar, moist
... »
0
2 A- to 0
4
Ditto, refined
if
0
G
to 0
7
Soap
... )?
0
5
Starch
0
4
Tobacco, colonial
... »
0
9
Ale, AlIsopp’s,in bottle...
per doz.
10
0
to 12
0
Porter
... jj
10
0
to 12
0
Sherry wine
»
20
0
to 40
0
Port
... *)
20
0
to 40
0
Cape
»
10
0
to 1G
0
market. Geese realize 65., ducks 45., and fowls 2s.
to 3s. per couple. Eggs may be quoted at 6d. per dozen.
Butchers’ Meat. —Beef, 2d. to 3d.; mutton, l|d.
to 3d.; veal or lamb, 4d.
Bread. —2 lbs. loaf, best quality, 2Jd. to 3d.
The prices of imported goods, English, are about
twenty-five per cent, increase on home rates; but all
other articles are very cheap, as the duties are mere
ad valorem per centages, except in the case of spirits,
brandy bearing a duty of 6s. per gallon; gin, 6s. per
gallon; rum, 3s. 6d. per gallon ; foreign tobacco, Is.
per lb. There is no duty on home grown tobacco,
and but 3s. duty on home distilled spirits.
The following are the prices of some articles of
general consumption by retail:—


CHAPTER IV.
GOVERNMENT OF THE COLONY.
Revenue and Expenditure—Provision for Religion and
Education—Mode of selling Land —Rates of Wages.
The colony of New South Wales is ruled by a
governor-in-chief, appointed from home, assisted by
executive and legislative councils. The present go-
vernor is Sir Charles Fitzroy. From the period of
its foundation to the year 1843, the colonists of New
South Wales had no voice in the control of their own
affairs, the members of the two councils being ap-
pointed by the crown ; but in that year a constitution
was conferred upon the colony, granting a partly re-
presentative assembly, to be composed of thirty-six
members, twelve of whom are appointed by the crown,
twenty-four by the people. The franchise is twofold,
freehold and occupancy ; two persons can qualify out
of the same place, landlord and tenant; the latter
upon a yearly value of £2O per annum, the former
upon a gross value of £2OO. In the constitution con-
ferred there was a reservation made of £BO,OOO per
annum, over which the council have no control; viz.
£30,000 for the purposes of religion and education,
and £50,000 for the payment of the salaries of the
governor, judges, and the chief executive officers.
Notwithstanding the reservation, the representative


council have effected a vast reduction in the expen-
diture, and seriously curtailed the salaries of nume-
rous officials. The council make laws for the internal
government of the colony, subject in the first instance
to the approbation of the governor, and ultimately of
the queen. The council is presided over by a speaker,
who is elected by a majority of its votes; the go-
vernor possesses no seat in it, but opens and closes
it, after the manner pursued with the British parlia-
ment. All money-bills must emanate with the exe-
cutive. Since its opening, the popular party have
possessed a majority in it, and the result has been
highly favourable for the colonists. At present the
council have no power of interference with the crown
lands, which are solely administered under orders from
home, and various acts of parliament. Port Phillip
district at present returns six out of the twenty-four
elective members.
The following are the estimated receipts and ex-
penditure for the present year with the estimated
revenue: —
The ways and means for the year 1848
are estimated at .... £308,550 0 0
And the charges thereon at . . . 298,228 4 3
It is estimated that there will remain a
surplus of revenue over expenditure, of £10,323 15 9
Which, it is expected, will bo sufficient to cover any
failure of revenue, or unlooked-for expenses during the
year.


HEAD OF REVENUE.
Sydney.
Port
Phillip.
Total.
£■
£■
£.
/"Duties on Spirits imported ..
56,000
22,000
78,000
1 Duties on Tobacco imported
Customs... -< Ad valorem duty on foreign
42,000
15,000
57.000
i goods imported
28,000
6,500
34,500
Miscellaneous
2,500
500
3,000
128,500
44,000
172,500
Duties on Spirits distilled in the Colony....
15,500
—
15,500
Post Office Collections
14,000
5,200
19,200
Auction Duties and Licences to Auctioneers
4,600
2,200
6,800
Licenses to Distil and Retail Spirits
22,000
6,000
28,000
Rents of Tolls and Ferries
6,000
—
6,000
13,000
600
3,500
200
16,500
800
Tonnage Duty on Shipping
Assessment on Stock by Commissioners of
Crown Lands
9,000
7,000
16,000
Miscellaneous Receipts
5,000
250
5,250
218,200
68,350
286,550
Estimated Balance on the 31st December, 1847
Total..
20,000
306,550
There is no established religion in the colony, all
are assisted by the state; Church of England, Ro-
man Catholic, Presbyterian, Wesleyan, and Baptist.
When a congregation of three hundred individuals
are brought together, their pastor becomes entitled
to a salary of £l5O per annum; a grant of land,
two acres in extent, if available, for the site of a
church and schools, and pecuniary assistance in the
erection of the former. Aid is also afforded to edu-
cation without religious distinction : in public-schools
attached to the different creeds the poorer class of
children are educated, and the teachers are entitled


to a small stated sum per pupil, according to the
attendance of the latter.
Religion is, as far as pecuniary matters go, pros-
perous in New South Wales; there are numerous
clergymen of the different persuasions; many edi-
fices of size; a Protestant bishop at Sydney, one at
Hunter’s River to the northward, and one at Mel-
bourne to the southward. The Roman Catholics
have an archbishop, the Right Rev. Dr. Folding, at
Sydney: appearances are all in favour of religion in
the Colony, it would be well if there were the reality.
The crown lands of New South Wales are dis-
posed of under the authority of a British Act of Par-
liament; they are put up for sale by auction when
required within the hounds of location, and sold to
the highest bidder, at not less than an upset price of
one pound sterling per acre. The lands are sold in
fee right to minerals included. The surveyed un-
sold crown lands are let also by auction, and leases
granted in no cases exceeding fourteen years. The
rate of wages at present in New South Wales is high;
but they will probably undergo some reduction, in con-
sequence of a most serious fall in the price of wool,
equal to thirty per cent., for that article is the great
staple of the country.
The general wages for a shepherd or agricultural
servant is from £lB to £25 per annum, according to
circumstances, with a ration of 10 lbs. flour, 10 lbs.


best meat, 2 lbs. sugar, and 4 oz. of tea per week,
with the use of a hut or lodging free. Female do-
mestic servants get .£ls to £2O each; married
couples (useful) without family, or one child, £3O
to £35 per annum; all with rations and house ac-
commodation.
Mechanics and artisans in small numbers may find
employment at the following rates, finding them-
selves in all respects: —Blacksmiths, 6s. per day;
cabinet-makers, 7s. ditto ; coopers, 6s. ditto ; coach-
builders, Bs. ditto; engineers, 7s. ditto ; plasterers, 6s.
ditto; carpenters, 6s. ditto ; printers, 7s. ditto ; sad-
dlers, 6s. ditto; ship-joiners, 6s. ditto; masons, 6s.
ditto; bricklayers, ss. to 6s. ditto ; wheelwrights, ss,
ditto; bootmakers, for making pair Wellington boots,
Bs. per pair; making and closing, Iss. to 165.; pair
shoes, 4 s.; tailors, ss. to 6s. per day.
CHAPTER V.
The Prospects of mere Labour in New South Wales—“The
Society for the Promotion of Colonization”—National
Emigration and Colonial Reform.
At length has public attention, of necessity, been at-
tracted to Australia, as a great field for Colonization ;
and myriads are now directing their attention to the
antipodes, with the intention of there taking refuge
from the increasing taxation i and competition of this
T


country. Free emigration has also been revived to
some extent, partly in consequence of the increased
Land Fund of South Australia and Port Phillip, and
partly owing to Lord Grey’s long deferred approba-
tion of a plan, proposed by the colonists, for the pur-
pose of raising money by debentures to carry out free
emigration to a limited extent, and afford some supply
of labour to the employers of New South Wales. It
is, and has been, at all times too much the fashion
in this country to drive everything to a mania. There
have been mining manias, foreign loan manias, rail-
way manias; and it is much to be feared that a pauper
emigration mania is at hand, which bids fair to over-
whelm the labour-markets of our Australian colonies,
bringing consequent disappointment to those who
emigrate, and causing a revulsion that will seriously
militate against the progress of healthy colonization.
Many persons are anxious to promote the wholesale
emigration of mere paupers; some from philanthropic
views of benefiting the condition of those who emi-
grate ; some from their desire to lessen the poor-rate
in their parishes; and, above all, many from a wish
to reduce labour to the lowest possible rate in New
South Wales, because they and their friends have vast
sums there invested in sheep, cattle, and land. Many
of those parties-have associated themselves in London
under the name of " The Society for the Promotion
of Colonization,” and are exclusively directing their


attention to promote the emigration of the labouring
classes, without making any effort to obtain those
great colonial reforms, which are absolutely necessary
in order to induce men of capital to proceed to Austra-
lia. The Hon. F. Scott is chairman of the committee
of “ The Society for the Promotion of Colonization,”
and the Messrs. Boyd, with their friend, Mr. Logan,
its most energetic supporters; besides these, there
are numerous other men, connected by property with
New South Wales, all anxious to reduce as far as
possible the standard of wages in the colonies.
Unquestionably, it will not pay to grow wool, and
give shepherds more than £2O per annum in New
South Wales; but there are very many persons con-
nected with the Colonization Society who, either di-
rectly or indirectly, were at one period assignees of
convict servants, whose labour they had for the mere
support of those wretched men who were governed by
the lash. Transportation has ceased to New South
Wales. No more convicts are assigned—no more
flesh and blood, bone and sinew, are given to the flock-
masters of New South Wales for their personal ag-
grandizement ; they are compelled to pay for labour,
and throw aside the lash. And this many stock-pro-
prietors deplore ; and it-is not long since they actu-
ally petitioned for the resumption of transportation,
which the Government declined to concede.
The Author must here remark, that the Messrs.


Boyd, resident in New South Wales, one a brother and
another a cousin of gentlemen on the committee of
The Colonization Society, have never been assignees
of convicts, because they settled in New South Wales
after the transportation system had ceased ; but they
are equally interested, with all other New South
Wales stock-proprietors, in the reduction of labour.
The Author will in a few words exhibit the position of
many gentlemen on the committee of the Colonial
Society, especially the Messrs. Boyd ; and be it un-
derstood at the same time, that the chairman, the
Hon. F. Scott, was some time since appointed agent
for New South Wales, through the influence of the
pastoral interest of the colony.
The Wakefield system, theoretical as it is, exists in
Australia. This system, on the plea of concentration
and civilization, makes land dear —one pound per
acre. Previous to the year 1846, those interested in
pastoral pursuits in Australia merely depastured their
flocks and herds on Crown lands, by right of a licence
of ten pounds per annum, and a small assessment per
head on sheep, cattle, and horses. These licences
were terminable annually, so that the interest of the
holder was of but a very transitory character; yet,
these licences were often disposed of by squatters for
considerable sums of money, stock being considered
of comparatively little value, if the land they fed on
was not acquired at the same time.


About the year 1841, several banks, insurance
companies, and private individuals of influence in
England were induced to turn their attention to-
wards embarking money in sheep and cattle in Aus-
tralia, and hundreds of thousands of pounds were sub-
sequently invested in this way. The acquisition of the
influence of those parties, and especially the Messrs.
Boyd, and their connexion, so increased the power
of the New South Wales’ stock owners or squatters,
that they were at once emboldened to turn their
attention towards securing permanency of tenure, at
mere nominal rents, of those lands over which their
sheep and cattle depastured. In this they have fully
succeeded, through the agency of the Honourable F.
Scott, the Messrs. Boyd, and numerous other persons
of influence in England : the Wakefield system has
been set aside in favour of the large squatter, but not
of the agriculturist of middling means, or the labour-
ing man wishing to acquire land; to them the soil is
still disposed of at one pound per acre, whilst the
possessor of 4000 sheep, or 640 head of cattle, can
obtain land enough to depasture his stock upon for
ten pounds per annum, with a seven or fourteen
years’ lease, according to the situation of the lauds.
In a state of nature it generally requires in New
South Wales three acres of land to feed a sheep;
thus a squatter can get on fourteen years’ lease
twelve thousand acres of land for ten pounds per
f 3


annum; for which the man desiring to cultivate it
would have to pay, if purchased by him, £12,000,
which, at the colonial rate of interest, would be
worth £960 per annum; and all this because the
squatters of Australia were well represented at home,
brought their influence to bear on the Colonial Office,
whilst the men of the labouring class, desirous to in-
vest their money in land in Australia, had none of
influence to support their rights. At the present
moment about two thousand squatters have on lease
in Australia an extent of country about twice the area
of the entire of Great Britain and Ireland. Some
men, especially the Messrs. Boyd, have hundreds of
thousands of acres on such leases, which the squatters
regard (as in reality all but as valuable) as freeholds,
because they consider that iu the course of fourteen
years so mixed up will • become all the population of
those colonies in the maintenance of those leases, that
Great Britain will not be able to disturb them, unless
she desires to risk a civil war, and the complete sepa-
ration of those colonies from her. Thus the squatters,
of New South Wales especially, having secured to
them land for next to nothing —illimitable estates,
and stock having been of late years exceedingly
low in price—now only have to obtain cheap labour
to make their condition a truly enviable one indeed.
To exhibit how some of those gentlemen set about
obtaining cheap labour, it is only necessary to state


that in the year 1847 Benjamin Boyd, Esq., of Syd-
ney, imported two cargoes of savage cannibals from
the New Hebrides’ islands in the Pacific, under an
indenture to serve him for years as shepherds on his
squatting estates in New South Wales, in order to
bring them into competition with white labour; and
it is to be particularly remarked, that so little atten-
tion was paid to morality, civilization, or anything
else by the importer, that amongst the savages so in-
troduced there was no admixture of females. The
introduction of a continuous stream of those savages
was proposed, a steamer actually laid on for the trade,
when the energetic protest of the clergymen of most
denominations in Sydney, joined by individuals of
every rank, caused the attention of the New South
Wales Assembly to be drawn to the matter: the trade
was stigmatized as nought else but a slave-trade, and
immediately put an end to !
Of necessity, therefore, is the attention of the
Messrs. Boyd especially, and all other squatters in
New South Wales, directed to obtaining, through
means of the Colonization Society, a boundless sup-
ply of labour (the larger the better for them) from
this country, in order to make their illimitable estates
and flocks and herds more valuable.
As a practical man, one who has dwelt in and tra-
velled through most of Great Britain’s colonies, the
Author lays this practical exposition of facts before


the public, and calls upon it to receive with caution
everything emanating from "The Society for the Pro-
motion of Colonization,” of No, 7, Charing Cross, un-
til they adopt a different course of proceeding.
Now the most active members of that society are
working for their own individual benefit, directly or
indirectly. But let them seek to compel the Colonial
Office to reduce the price of waste land in Australia
to five shillings per acre, as recommended by the
New South Wales legislature on several occasions, so
as to place it within reach of the labouring man ; let
them agitate the country so as to force the govern-
ment to hold out the waste lands in Australia at the
reduced price of five shillings per acre, as a bonus in
return for the money expended by emigrants in their
own passage, that of their families, and such labour
as they may lake with them', in order to induce men
of limited means to go to Australia, instead of the
United States; and above all let them move the public
and parliament to obtain what is absolutely necessary
for the prosperity of our Colonies—responsible govern-
ment—and then indeed they will be entitled trulv to
the name they at present assume, “ The Society for
the Promotion of Colonization.”


CHAPTER VI.
AUSTRALIA FELIX, OR PORT PHILLIP.
Original Settlement —Soil and Capabilities—Evidence on
the Subject of Climate.
Australia Felix or the Port Phillip district, in-
cludes the entire south-eastern portion of New Hol-
land from the one hundred and forty-first parallel of
longitude. The country extends further south than
any other part of the mainland of Australia. Port
Phillip, from which it takes its name, is a largo
bay or small inland sea, sixty miles in length
by thirty in breadth, originally discovered by Lieut.
Murray in 1802, and shortly afterwards visited
by the well-known navigator Captain Flinders, in
H. M. S. the Investigator. A few years after the
discovery of the bay, an expedition was despatched
from England for the purpose of founding a penal
settlement on its shores ; but, in consequence of not
finding fresh water on a first search, the destination
of the party was altered by the commander, who pro-
ceeded to the shores of the Derwent River in Van
Dieman’s Land. The entrance into Port Phillip is
by a channel two miles wide, between two bluff bold
headlands; and the mainland of Australia Felix is
divided from Van Dieman’s Land by a strait studded
with islands.
Separated from the originally settled parts of New


South Wales by a vast extent of territory, it is only
of recent years that the country became generally
known and appreciated. As early as 1827, Messrs.
Hume and Hovell crossed the entire of Australia
Felix, and-reached its southern shores; but their ex-
pedition had no results as to settlement. In the
years 1833 and 1834, in consequence of the increase
of their flocks and herds, and the difficulty of pro-
curing for them suitable pasturage, the attention of
the settlers of Van Dieman’s Land was turned to the
mainland of New Holland, which several visited for
the sake of personal observation, and finding their
expectations surpassed by the appearance of the
country, they crossed with their flocks and herds.
The tide once set in, numbers flocked across Bass’s
Straits to the land of promise, which the description
of the original settlers represented the new land to
be, and rapidly occupied the country. One settler,
named Batman, located himself on a beautiful green
hill overlooking the present site of Melbourne, and
purchased from the aboriginal tribes around the right
to the land for a few blankets and tomahawks.
Beyond the jurisdiction of the Van Dieman’s Land
government, they interfered not in the settlement,*
but the Sydney authorities laid their grasp on it,
as soon as its capabilities were ascertained, and the
necessary officials for the control of a small settle-
ment were forwarded from Sydney.


It was not until many Van Dieman’s Land people
had located themselves, and their flocks and herds,
that the first parties with stock, from Sydney, pene-
trated overland, but the route once open and the
splendid nature of the southern country ascertained,
the migration was rapid and extensive.
In 1837, Sir Thomas Mitchell, the Surveyor-
General of New South Wales, first visited the district,
a country which he classed as unquestionably the best
in Australia, and bestowed upon it the term Felix, or
Happy, which it now bears. The accounts of the soil
and climate given by Sir Thomas Mitchell had the
effect of securing public attention, and, both at home
and in the colonies, promoting emigration thither.
In June, 1837, the first land sale in the district
took place, and about one hundred half-acre allot-
ments were disposed of in the town of Melbourne, at
prices varying from fifteen to ninety-five pounds ster-
ling, according to situation.
Australia Felix, bounded on the west by the 141st
parallel of longitude, is enclosed on the north by the
rivers Murray and Hume, and by a supposed line
from Mount Koskiusko to Cape Howe; the south-
eastern and southern sides are washed by the waves
of the Pacific Ocean. The area comprised within
these boundaries exceeds one hundred thousand
square miles, or is about equal to the size of Great
Britain and Ireland united. The soil of this vast


country, called but a district in Australia, is in many
parts of surpassing richness, equal to any land in the
world. Thoproportionofland available for agricultural
purposes is very much greater than in South Wales
Proper; indeed, it would not be saying too much
to set down thirty per cent, of the entire as arable
soil. Unlike many other countries, it is a peculiarit}'
in Port Phillip, that the best land is either totally de-
void of or very lightly timbered. This is accounted
for by the fact, that the soil is chiefly composed of
decomposed volcanic matter; and the extinct craters
may yet be traced in some instances converted into
small lakes.
The soil of Australia suited for cultivation is not
confined to the banks of rivers or creeks, but extends
generally in all directions; it is capable of raising all
kinds of cereal produce, including maize; tobacco
thrives, the mulberry flourishes, as likewise the pal-
ma christi, or castor-oil plant; and the vine answers
admirably.
A few extracts from the evidence of gentlemen on
the Port Phillip soil, before a committee of the New
South Wales Legislative Assembly, in the year 1843,
will be valuable.
“James Malcolm, Esq., an extensive settler and
stock-owner in the Pori Phillip district, examined.
"Question. What population do you think the
district of Port Phillip is capable of maintaining?


“ Answer. I cannot answer tliat question ; but I
should certainly say a very largo population.
“ Q. Do you think any given area in that district
would support as large a population as a similar area
in any part of Great Britain ?
“ A. I think it would ; I have been through many
parts of England, through the county of Kent, and
other agricultural counties; and also through Scot-
land ; and 1 have seen in Port Phillip, large tracts of
land as rich as any I have seen in Great Britain.
“ Q. Equal to the very best parts of Great Britain P
“ A. Yes; the district from Lake Colac, for about
two hundred miles, is very rich; I do not think there
is richer land in any part of the world ; it is as good
land as ever plough was put into.
“ Q. -And already cleared ?
“A. Yes, there are thousands of acres adjoining
Lake Colac clear of timber, and of the richest land I
ever walked or rode over; it is about forty-five miles
from Geelong, between that and Portland.
“ Q. Is it well supplied with water ?
“A. Yes, with streams and lakes, one of which is
twenty miles in circumference.
" Q. Are you of opinion that the field is almost
unlimited for the eligible settlement of immigrants ?
“A. 1 should say so; all the way to Port Fairy;
and the Glenelg River is as good as that part I have
spoken of, taking the south sides of the lakes; the
G


other side is not so good, but it is a good grazing
country. I have been over a tract of country from
Lake Colac to Portland Bay, which 1 never saw the
like of; a great part of it is too rich for sheep.
Q. “Do you think the district of Port Phillip
would afford an eligible field for the settlement of
small farmers, who might arrive with their families,
bringing with them a small capital ?
"A. I think there is no part of the world where
persons of that class could do better than in Port
Phillip, Many of my shepherds, after they have been
a few years in service, and have saved perhaps, one
or two hundred pounds, have turned farmers on their
own account.
"Q. Is the tract of country you have spoken of
on the borders of Lake Colac, subject to drought P
“A. No, there are regular rains ; it was nine years
last May since I went to Port Phillip, and during
that time we have always had regular rains. I have
a farm within sixteen miles of Melbourne, from which
I have had for the last four years excellent crops.
“ Q. Do you know many instances where immi-
grants who have come out as labourers, have suc-
ceeded in establishing themselves as farmers, stock-
owners, or land-owners ?
"A, Yes; several in my own service.
" Q. Are there numerous instances of the kind ?
"A. Yes, I have known a good many.
“ Q. Do you think if the labouring population


generally, in Port Phillip, were to abstain from ex-
travagance they might become independent ?
“A. They might all become so. I have known
many immigrants who have saved money and taken
farms; I have also known not a few instances of per-
sons of this class clubbing together for the purchase
of sheep or other stock, till they were able to divide it,
and go each upon his own hand; in one instance, two
brothers joined together and purchased a few sheep ;
one shepherded, whilst the other kept the hut; they
thus managed the sheep between them, and they are
now men of property. The expired convicts from
Van Dieman’s Land, very seldom save money.”
“ William Dumaresq, Esq., Member of Council,
examined.
“ Q. You have been engaged to a considerable
extent in agricultural and pastoral pursuits P
“ A. Yes, in pastoral pursuits.
“Q. Are you able to speak of the character of the
Colony in respect to the prospects of emigrants to
this Colony as compared with the prospects of persons
emigrating to Canada ?
“ A. I consider this to be one of the most favour-
able countries I have seen for the purposes of emi-
gration. I was three years in Canada, and was not
by any means pleased with that country as one hold-
ing out favourable prospects for emigrants. I formed
that opinion principally from the consideration that


during more than half the year the ground is covered
with snow, so that field-operations cannot be carried
on; and during all that time of comparative idleness
men acquire habits not advantageous to them as
settlers. I was employed with my company of the
Royal Staff Corps, making the Canal of the Ottaw'a,
to which work the Government sent all the emigrants
that arrived at that time. The workmen were all dis-
charged in the month of October, and from that time
until about May, no works were carried on. During
the interval of time, the recently arrived settlers could
do nothing but fell the trees on their little plots, and
build their huts as the snow disappeared ; they plant-
ed their potatoes, and came again to the canal-works
for employment in the summer. This country, on
the contrary, is open for the constant employment of
labour all the year round.
“ Q. Is the summer as hot in Canada as it is here ?
“A. No, I should not say it was.
" Q. Is the heat of the summer in Canada, a damp
or a dry heat, is it oppressive ?
“A. It is very hot during the day and oppressive,
from the rapid evaporation of the moist surface.”
" Thomas Walker, Esq., merchant, stock and
landed proprietor of Sydney, examined.
“ Q. You have resided in New South Wales for
a number of years P
“ A. Yes, for upwards of twenty.


“ Q. What parts of the Colony would you particu-
larize as presenting the most eligible localities for
settling immigrants P
“ A. Throughout the interior, a considerable popu-
lation may he maintained by pastoral pursuits, and
the coast districts are capable of maintaining a very
large agricultural population.
“ Q What do you think of the valley of the Murray,
the largest of our rivers, two thousand miles long ?
“ A. That is in the interior.
“ Q, Then there is the Bega country ?
“ A. Yes, and I could not think of finishing my
enumeration of agricultural tracts, without including
Australia Felix, in which district there is an immense
extent of country suitable for agricultural purposes,
and for the maintenance of a dense population, and
which has been so well described by Sir Thomas
Mitchell, the Surveyor-general of the colony, as ‘ a
region more extensive than Great Biitain, equally
rich in point of soil, which now lies ready for the
plough in many parts, as if especially prepared by
the Creator for the industrious hands of Englishmen.’
“ Q. You have been in many parts of the globe—
Do you think Australia Felix is equal to the average
of European countries with respect to its capability
of supporting a population P
“A. Yes, in point of soil; the great drawback is
(he deficiency of surface water. The country, in my
o 3


opinion, is capable oC maintaining a much larger po-
pulation than we are likely to have in it for centuries
to come; and when it has been peopled to a certain
point, artificial means will be resorted to, to serve an
adequate supply of water.
“ Q. What then is your opinion of the eligibility
of that country, Australia Felix, for the settlement of
an agricultural population P
“A. I think it is particularly well adapted for an
agricultural population ; the climate is better than in
this part of the Colony (the Sydney districts,) and
they have more rain.”
As regards climate, Australia Felix, or Port Phillip,
has decidedly the advantage of any of the Australian
colonies ; situated further south than any other portion
of the main land of New Holland, the heat is consi-
derably less than at Sydney or Adelaide. During nine
months of the year, a south-west wind prevails, which
brings up the clouds from the Southern Ocean, until,
coming in contact with the projecting shores of Aus-
tralia Felix, they discharge themselves in rain over
the district, flooding it with copious showers. June,
July, August, and September are the wettest months,
but occasionally, in summer, sudden thunder-storms
occur, when the rain falls in a perfect, deluge.
In the summer months the thermometer attains at
times ninety-five in the shade; but this is seldom, and
even at these periods, the heat is not felt as oppres-
sive; there is always a lightness and buoyancy in


the atmosphere never met witli out of Australia.
The seasons are the reverse of what they are in Eng-
land, and spring and autumn are of short continuance.
The winter is mild in the extreme; no snow falls,
and but a slight hoar-frost at intervals of a morning
crisps the herbage, disappearing before the first warm
rays of the sun. The evenings and mornings in
winter are cold, sufficiently so to appreciate the com-
forts of a woollen coat and a cheerful fire; but the
noon-day is warm, the thermometer sometimes rising
to 80° in the shade; the change of temperature is
rapid, but not trying to the constitution. The hot
winds prevalent in Australia, generally, are but
slightly felt at Port Phillip, and never continue be-
yond a few hours, without seriously injuring the grow-
ing crops, tender plants, shrubs, or flowers, as is
the case more to the northward. Throughout the
year the pasturage in its natural state in Australia
Felix is perfectly sufficient to fatten stock of all
kinds without ulterior aid, and to fatten such stock
in point of quality as are not equalled in Australia,
nor surpassed in the world; this fact, singular in
itself, will give the best idea of what the climate of
Australia Felix really is.
Before quitting the subject of soil and climate it
may be well to remark, that greater part of the Port
Phillip district displays undoubted evidences of vol-
canic origin ; and over the splendid country between
Geelong, Lake Colac and the Glenelg River, there


are scattered numerous small isolated mountains or
peaks, on the summits of which are yet to be dis-
cerned and traced the extinct craters that at one
period poured out volumes of lava on the surround-
ing land. Some of these craters are now transformed
into small lakes, and the lava, by process of decom-
position, has formed a soil unsurpassed in point of
quality.
CHAPTER VII.
Imports and Exports—Revenue and Expenditure—Land
Fund—Mode of Disposing of Land—Counties—Popula-
tion—Produce—Land under Cultivation—Returns of
Stock.
The first year of the official settlement of Australia
Felix may be set down as 1837, for it was at that
period that the necessary executive officers for the
control of a young Colony were sent down from
Sydney ; and it was in the June of that year that the
first land sales took place, all purchases from the
aborigines being considered as nought, the crown
claiming pre-emption of the soil. From that period
the progress of the colony has been unprecedented ;
she cost the mother country not one farthing for her
settlement, but she put into the coffers of New South
Wales, avast surplus, after paying her own expenses,
and the immigration which was carried out for her.
In 1837, the exports of Australia Felix only
amounted to in value £12,180, which was almost


exclusively in wool and oil. The imports for the
same year were in value £108,939, in part consist-
ing of live stock from Van Dieman’s Land.
In 1840, when the tide of emigration had fully
set in to Australia Felix, the exports were in value
£154,600; imports £392,000; in 1841, exports
£139,130; imports, £335,250; the difference be-
tween the exports in these two years, is in part to be
attributed to re-exportation of imported goods in the
latter year.
In the year 1844, the imports were in value
£151,062, a healthy proportion when compared
with the exports of the same period, which exceeded
in value £250,000. The imports and exports for
the last three years have vastly increased: those for
1847 were—lmports, £437,696. Exports (same
year), £668,511.
The great staple of Australia Felix, is wool, and
the rapid increase in its production and export is
truly remarkable.
In 1837 the exportation of wool from the dis-
trict amounted to, in gross numbers, 175,000 lbs.;
in 1840 it had increased to 930,000 lbs.; in 1845 it
reached 5,500,000 lbs.; whilst in 1847 it amounted
to 10,210,038 pounds weight. At this rate of
progression, the Colony would soon be in a po-
sition to supply the mother country with all the
w'ool she requires.


Wool in
value
. £505,805
0
0
Live Stock
a
... 41,604
0
0
Beef and Pork
«
... 11,974
0
0
Tallow and Soap
a
... 18,620
0
0
Skins and Hides
it
... 3,267
0
0
Grain and Flour
a
... 3,354
0
0
Butter, Cheese, Candles
a
... 3,313
0
0
Oil and Whalebone
tt
.., 1,230
0
0
Sundries
a
... 19,294
0
0
In the twelve months ending Jan. Ist, 1848, the
exports of the colony were as follows ;
The ordinary revenue of the colony in the year
1837 amounted to £2,358. los. 10d., and the re-
venue derived from the sale of lands for the same
period was £3,712. 14s. In 1841, the ordinary
revenue collected in the Port Phillip district was
£81,673. 10s. 4d.; but this was at a period of un-
natural excitement and prosperity; the ordinary
revenue subsequent to 1841 suffered a considerable
decrease, but has revived again, and is now in a most
healthy prosperous state, for the year 1,847, exceeding
£BO,OOO in amount, and leaving a balance over the
expenditure, approaching £lO,OOO. From the foun-
dation of the colony of Australia Felix down to the
close of the year 1847, it would appear by revenue
returns, that the ordinary revenue of the Colony for
the ten years it has been settled, officially, has not
only been sufficient to defray all expenses, but has
absolutely left a balance ajtproaching in amount
£40,000 in the aggregate.


CROWN LAND REVENUE.
Country & Sub-
urban Lands.
Town
Allotments.
Total.
1838
1839
1840
1841
1842
£.
£.
25,287 17 9
50,986 11 11
154,584 6 3
68,435 7 0
2,000 0 0
£.
11,906 14 0
9,008 2 8
82,543 10 3
2,716 14 3
729 12 8
£.
37,194 12 0
59,994 14 7
219,127 16 6
71,152 1 3
2,729 12 8
286,294 2 11
110,617 8 2
393,911 11 1
The sums raised from the settlers of Australia.
Felix, under the head of the land revenue, have bean
truly extraordinary when the population are taken
into consideration; the following are the official
returns for five years, ending 1842.
From the year 1842 down to the year 1846, the
land revenue was very small, but in that year it re-
vived; and in 1847, produced a sum exceeding
£65,000 in amount.
The proceeds of the land fund are in all cases ap-
propriated in aid of immigration ; hut a considerable
proportion of Port Phillip land fund went to pay for
immigration into Sydney and New South Wales
proper, instead of into Australia Felix. The sums
actually appropriated for immigration into Port
Phillip down to the close of 1842 were in


£. i. d.
1838 844 0 0
1839 11,824 11 4
1840 27,019 12 6
1841 125,905 12 10
1842 37,892 8 4§
Total £ 204,440 5 0*
The balance of the land fund applied in the Syd-
ney district was £189,465, a perversion of their
funds the people of Port Phillip had a just right to
complain of, and which would not have taken place
if the colony possessed a representative assembly of
their own.
During the years 1839, 1840, and 1841, tho.go-
vernment, by bringing but small portions of land into
the market by auction, at a time there was a great
demand for it, raised the price to an extravagant
pitch, so much so, that the town allotments sold in
Melbourne in the year 1840, brought an average of
£445 per half-acre allotment. The consequences of
the mania that induced the Colonists to give such
prices were fatal to many; in the face of the vacil-
lating policy pursued by the Colonial Office at home,
in frequently altering the land regulations, land
soon found its real value, and those who invested at
high prices were ruined. Land has now found its
real and true level in the district of Port Phillip ; the
sales of 1847 exhibit no extravagant or speculative


prices or purchasers; every buyer, almost without ex-
ception, invests his money for a permanency in land
for building a homestead, or for agricultural pur-
poses ; land speculation is avoided by all: this is a
healthy state of things, and it is to be hoped that it
will continue. The mode in which all crown lands
in the Port Phillip district are disposed of, is, by
auction; country lands being put up at an upset
price of one pound per acre; suburban and town
lots at upset prices, fixed upon by the executive,
according to situation and circumstances. All un-
sold waste crown lands, and lands beyond the bound-
aries of location, are leased according to the terms of
regulations, which will be found attached in an Ap-
pendix.
The located portions of the colony of Australia
Felix are divided into three counties, viz., Bourke,
the capital of which is Melbourne, the chief town of
the district; Grant, the capital of which is Geelong,
a sea-port on the shores of Port Phillip Bay, forty-five
miles from Melbourne; and Normanby, the capital
of which is Portland, on the shores of a bay of the
same name, opening into the Southern Ocean.
The county of Bourke, including Melbourne, con-
tained a population, according to the census of 1846,
of 17,360; the county of Grant, 3,870; the county
of Normanby, 6,740. The districts beyond the
bounds of location, are, the Western Port district,
H


according to the census of 1846, with a population
of 3,525 ; the Murray district, with 1,658 ; and the
Gipp’s Land district, 852.—Total population of Aus-
tralia Felix in 1846, 32,895. Since that period, an
addition by immigration of at least twenty thousand
persons was made to the population up to the Ist
January, 1849 ; the chief influx of persons being
from Van Dieman’s Land, and consisting of persons
who had just acquired their complete or partial free-
dom, and who are permitted to leave the Colony, on
condition of not returning to Great Britain or Ireland.
The disproportion of the females to the males is not
so great in Australia Felix as in New South Wales
Proper, in consequence of the former place having
been settled by a free population; the present pro-
portion of the adult females to the adult males is as
about five to seven, but the disproportion is being
annually reduced in consequence of the strict regula-
tions enforced by the Crown Lands and Emigration
Commissioners in England, as to a proper proportion
being sent out of both sexes.
The produce of Australia Felix at present chiefly
consists of wool, tallow, horns, hides, mimosa bark,
for tanning, and various kinds of grain, viz. wheat,
barley, oats, and Indian corn, or maize. Potatoes
are also extensively raised. The mulberry is now
attracting attention and being propagated ; the
palrna christi, or castor-oil plant, is now cultivated.


and thrives admirably. Tobacco is found to answer,
and the vine is being extensively grown, and much
attention turned towards it. Although a considerable
proportion of the population are engaged in pastoral
or commercial pursuits, the agricultural produce
raised is more than sufficient for the consumption of
the inhabitants, and there is a considerable quantity
exported to Great Britain, Sydney, and the New
Zealand colonies.
In the year 1848 there were under cultivation, in
the countyof Bourke,upwards of 19,000 acres, 10,000
of which were under wheat. In the county of Grant,
7,000, chiefly wheat and potatoes ; and in the county
of Normanby, 9,600 acres, 6,000 acres of which were
also under wheat and potatoes.
In 1848, the actual number of acres under the
cultivation of the vine were, in the
Acres.
County of Burke 52
County of Grant 48
County of Normanby 1
Total 101
The increase of stock in the Port Phillip district is
truly remarkable. The returns made up to the Ist
January, 1848, were as follows :


HORSES.
HORNED
CATTLE.
PIGS.
SHEEP.
County of Burke
1,750
27,317
2,347
130,090
„ Grant
610
8,202
450
242.900
,, Normanby
607
11,846
268
139,651
Without the
Boundaries of
Location ....
11,286
296,896
2,216
3,885,718
Total ....
14,153
344,261
5,281
4,398,359
The average annual increase of the Port Phillip
flocks and herds, including all sexes, cannot be taken
at less than thirty-two and a half per cent., allowing
for consumption of every kind, and losses from
disease or otherwise. Thus it will be seen that the
stock doubles itself in less than three years.
CHAPTER VIII.
Aborigines—Melbourne, Geelong, and Portland—Mode of
Government of the Colony—Melbourne Markets —Rates
of Wages—Scale of Rations, and Demand for Labour.
The native inhabitants of Australia Felix are rapidly
disappearing from the face of the land, and in a few
years the probability is, that they will have become
as great a curiosity as they are at present in the
old settled parts of New South Wales; although
every effort has been made by the executive to pre-
serve them, and a protectorate establishment has been


supported at a large annual cost. The aborigines of
Australia are a migratory race, existing by means of
hunting and fishing; cultivation of any kind is un-
known to them, and there are few native roots avail-
able for human food. Snakes, worms, vermin of all
kinds, are consumed by the aborigines; their food is
devoured in a partly raw state, roasted on wood-ashes,
or baked in a circular heated excavation in the earth.
In the interior the natives are to be met with com-
pletely denuded of all clothing; in the vicinity of the
towns they are but partially covered by a cincture of
some kind round the waist, and an old blanket, or
’possum rug, thrown over the shoulders. The abori-
gines wander over the face of the country, although
many attempts have been made by the executive to
collect them around permanent stations, and induce
them to adopt the habits of civilization.
From the first settlement of the district collisions
between the aborigines and whites were of frequent
occurrence; the settlers trespassed on the hunting-
grounds of the natives, occupied them with sheep and
cattle, which the latter often killed in consequence of
the scarcity of game. The whiles were not inclined
to see their stock slaughtered with impunity, and,
with the aid of fire-arms, they rapidly swept the
aboriginal race from the face of the land; entire
tribes, that ten years since numbered three or four
hundred, arc now extinct; others, partly annihilated,
h 3


and broken in spirit, offer no resistance to the occu-
pation of their land, submitting with apparent resig-
nation to their fate. Strange it is that there is no
instance of an aboriginal native of New Holland per-
manently adopting the habits of civilization, although
many individual attempts have been made to bring
about such a result. No admixture of races is
taking place, for, where a native woman has a child
born of a white father, it is immediately destroyed
by the tribe. The aborigines truly seem destined by
Providence to utter extinction at no distant date.
The executive of the Colony takes no cognizance
of offences committed by the natives on one another,
but claim jurisdiction in all cases between the two
races. This fact unquestionably is leading to the
more rapid destruction of the aboriginal tribes.
Melbourne, the capital of the Port Phillip district,
is situated on the northern bank of the Yarra Yarra
river, about eight miles from the bay in which, off
William’s Town, ships of large burden lie. Vessels
of two hundred tons can come up the river to the
town ; and, if a small rock at the entrance was re-
moved, any ships could enter. The town is built
upon the sides of two hills, which gradually slope
towards one another at a, short distance from the
river’s bank. The streets are laid out in parallel
lines, crossing one another at right-angles. Many of
■the houses arc built of wood, and detached from one


another; but there are numerous lines of brick and
stone edifices, shops and private houses, which, for
beauty and extent, might vie with the buildings in
many of our provincial cities. There are several
very extensive religious edifices, especially the epis-
copalian and Roman Catholic churches. Melbourne
is now a Protestant bishop’s see.
The public buildings, although not numerous, are
convenient. The Custom-House, Treasury, and Su-
perintendent’s office. Gaol and Court House, are the
chief of these. The two latter are noble buildings,
erected at a large expense, and reflecting much credit
on the colony. The Union Bank of Australia has a
large and handsome establishment in one of the main
streets of the town. There is also a large Mechanics’
Institute finished, and a bridge across the river in
course of erection. Melbourne possesses a municipal
corporation, about 2,100 houses within its boundaries,
and a population exceeding 12,000. The corporation
have the power of levying and expending rates for
all local purposes; and since municipal institutions
have been conferred on the town, it has improved
considerably.
Geelong is the capital of the county of Grant, and
lies on the shores of Port Phillip Bay, about forty-five
miles from Melbourne. Its population exceeds
2,500 ; it is rapidly increasing in prosperity.
Portland is the capital of the county of Normanby,


and lies on the shores of a bay of the same name.
Several ships load there annually for England with
wool, tallow, oil, and other produce. The population
exceeds 900. Besides these, there are several other
towns of smaller extent: Belfast, Williams’ Town,
Warnamhool, &c.
At the present time, Australia Felix is an integral
part of New South Wales, and is represented in the
Legislative Assembly of that colony by six members,
one for the town of Melbourne, five for the country
districts. A superintendent, Mr. La Trobe, with a
salary of £1,500 per annum, represents on the spot
the Chief Governor; and there are all the departments
necessary for a separate province. The population
have, for many reasons, long been clamouring for an
independent government, which the present Secretary
of State has promised to concede to the colonists.
Melbourne is distant from Sydney, by land, 610
miles ; there is a land-mail twice a week, which occu-
pies seven nights and six days on the road.
It is not surprising that all home produce in Aus-
tralia Felix should be cheap, with its rich and fertile
soil. Meat is, at seasons, to be had for almost
nothing, when the process of boiling down for tallow
is going on; for instance, legs of mutton may be had
for sixpence each, as it is not worth while to put that
part into the melting vat, it being so fleshy. Im-
ported goods arc also cheap, the duties being very


moderate, leviable on the ad valorem value. The
following is a return of the Melbourne markets, and
a price current of the goods in general demand:—
VEGETABLES. £■ S. d.
Potatoes, per cwt 0 3 6
Onions, ditto 0 10 0
Carrots, per bunch 0 0 1
Parsnips, ditto 0 0 1£
Cabbages, each Id. to 0 0 3
Greens, per bunch 0 0 1
Radishes, ditto 0 0 1
Cucumbers, each Id. to 0 0 2
Capsicumbs, per lb 0 0 4
FRUIT.
Bananas and Plantains, each 0 0 3
Pears Id. to 0 0 2
Quinces Id. to 0 0 1|
Melons, each 3d. to 0 0 5
Apples, per lb 4d. to 0 0 C
Damsons, ditto 6d. to 0 0 8
Plums, ditto 6d. to 0 0 9
Grapes, ditto Gd. to 0 0 9
Hay-oaten or Barley (grain left in), per
ton £2 10s. to 4 0 0
Bread, 4 lbs. loaf Gd. to 0 0 7
Beef, per lb 0 0 2
Mutton, ditto IJd. to 0 0 2
Pork, ditto 0 0 4
Lamb, ditto 0 0 3
Veal, ditto 0 0 3
Butter, fresh Is. to 0 1 4
Ditto, salt Bd. to 0 1 0
Eggs, each 0 0 1
Fowls, per pair to 0 3 0
Ducks, ditto 3s. to 0 4 0
Geese, each 6s. to 0 8 0


£. s. d.
Turkeys, each ss. to 0 7 0
Milk, per quart.... 003
Wheat, per bushel 45.6 d. to 0 6 6
Barley, ditto 4s. to 0 5 0
Oats, ditto 4s. to 0 4 6
Maize, ditto 2s. to 0 3 0
Flour, per ton £ll. 10s. to 13 0 0
Bran, per bushel Bd. to 0 0 10
LIVE STOCK.
Fat Bullocks, each £2. 10s. to 3 10 0
Working Bullocks, per pair £7 to 9 0 0
Milch Cows, each £2 to 3 5 0
Steers, each £2 to 3 0 0
Mixed herds of ages, under six months given in,
each £l.7s. 6d. to 2 0 0
Ditto, ditto, right of station given in, £l. 12s. to 2 10 0
Sheep, wethers fat, each 6s. to 010 0
Ditto, clean Ewes, prime, each, in flocks. -7s. to 0 9 0
Mixed clean flocks, each Gs. to 0 8 0
Ditto, ditto, station given in, each 6s. to 0 10 0
Well-hrcd Rams, each 2 0 0
Horses, (draught,) each £l7 to 22 0 0
Horses, (harness,) each £l4 to 20 0 0
Horses, (good hacks,)cach £lB to 25 0 0
Ditto ditto, (colts,) each £ls to 17 0 0
Ditto ditto, (stock,) and inferior £8 to 12 0 0
SUNDRIES FOR EXPORT.
Beef, per tierce (prime mess) 2 18 0
Bones, (best,) per ton 4 10 0
Ditto, (inferior,) per ton 1 12 0
Hides, each 0 7 0
Horns, per hundred (120) 0 8 0
Sheep Skins with wool, each ’ 2s. to 0 3 0
Tallow, (beef,) per ton 28 10 0
Ditto, (mutton,) per ton £3O to 33 0 0
The want of labour is more severely felt at Mel


bourne than in any other part of the Australian Colo-
nies ; but at present there is no great scarcity of mecha-
nics or tradesmen. Miners are likely to he soon in re-
quest, as of late several valuable mineral discoveries
have taken place, and coal exists in abundance in this
Colony. The following is a table of rates of wages
at present current: —
Blacksmiths, per day 7s.
Whitesmiths, ditto 7s- Cd. to Bs.
Cabinetmakers, ditto 7s.
Carpenters, (house,) ditto Cs.
Coachbuilders. ditto - Bs.
Coopers, ditto Cs.
Coppersmiths, ditto Bs.
Engineers, ditto 7s.
Millers, £IOO per annum and house.
Iron and Brassfounders, per day 7s.
Painters and Glaziers, ditto Cs.
Plasterers, ditto Cs.
Plumbers, ditto 9s.
Printers, ditto 7s.
Saddlers, ditto 7s.
Shipbuilders, ditto Cs.
Shipjoiners, ditto 7s.
Turners, ditto 7s.
Upholsterers, ditto, Cs.
Wheelwrights, ditto Cs.
Wireworkers, ditto 12s.
Boot and Shoemakers, making Wellington boots,
per pair 11s.
Making and closing ditto, per pair 20s.
Ditto, shoes, per pair ss.
In this table, carpenters, joiners, bricklayers, and
stonemasons are not mentioned, the number of these
in the Colony fully equalling the demand for them;


in fact many are employed at other pursuits in the
Bush; but the current rate of wages for these four
trades varies from five to seven shillings per day, ac-
cording to circumstances.
The rates of wages for agricultural, pastoral, do-
mestic, and other servants, including females, are as
follow: £. £.
Shepherds, per annum 20 to 30
Hut-keepers, ditto 20 to 30
Stock-keepers, ditto 26 to 36
Ploughmen, ditto 30
General Farm Servants, ditto 25
Man and Wife for General Purposes, ditto 40
Gardeners, ditto 35
House Man-servant, ditto 30
House Female-servant, ditto 20 to 25
Cooks, ditto 40
Grooms, without rations, ditto 70
Heaping by the Acre, with rations 1
All these in the latter table, except grooms, are
supplied with rations gratis, independent of their yearly
wages. House-rent they have none to pay in the in-
terior; and if in the towns, the master finds accommo-
dation gratis.
The weekly scale of rations usual in the Colony is
twelve pounds best flour, twelve pounds fresh meat,
two ounces of tea, and half a pound of moist-sugar,
besides vegetables and milk ad libitum, if they are at
the station. Some of the distant sheep-stations are,
however, without cattle to milk, and have no land
cultivated for vegetables ; in fact, some are without any
cultivation whatsoever.


The great want of the Colony is agricultural and
pastoral labour; shepherds and fanners. At the pre-
sent time, the hundreds of emancipated felons, whom
the settlers and squatters of Australia Felix give free
passage to, from Van Dieman’s Land, are eagerly
sought, and engaged as shepherds and labourers at
from £2O to £35 per annum, although many of them
understand nothing whatever about sheep or cattle.
Free people may easily take their place.


CHAPTER IX.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Original Settlement and Extent —Early Difficulties—Land
Speculation—Governors Hindmarsh and Gawler—Ex-
traordinary Expenditure of the latter —Universal Bank-
ruptcy—Appointment of Captain Grey; Revival of the
Colony—Votes in Aid of it, by the British Parliament—
Major Robe’s Administration.
The shores of South Australia were first explored by
the celebrated navigator Captain Flinders, in his Ma-
jesty’s ship the Investigator, in the year 1802. Diffi-
cult of approach, by reason of the numerous islands
and detached rocks that lie off them. Captain Flin-
ders was debarred from visiting many parts of the
main land, but he landed on Kangaroo island at the
entrance of Gulf St. Vincent.
The Colony has its limits defined by Act of Parlia-
ment, and is comprised between the 132nd and 141st
degrees of East longitude, and extends from the shores
of the Southern Ocean inland to the 26th degree of
south latitude. The extent of land within these
boundaries exceeds 300,000 square miles, which is
about three times the size of Great Britain and Ire-
land, but the northern parts of the Colony are barren


and desert, useless for the purposes of man, and
supposed to form portions of a vast internal desert in
the centre of Australia. It was about the year 1833
that public attention was first turned in England
towards the foundation of a settlement on the shoves
of Gulf St. Vincent, and in the year 1834, an Act of
Parliament was obtained for erecting the province of
South Australia into a British Colony on the princi-
ples or rather theory, of centralization, as advocated
by Mr. Edward Gibbon Wakefield. According to
the Act of Parliament, constituting the Colony, it was
necessary that £35,000 should be raised in England
by the sale of colonial lands within a limited period;
and as an inducement to original purchasers, the
price of land although fixed at one pound sterling
per acre, was in their favour lowered to tw-elve shil-
lings per acre, until the necessary sum was raised.
The proceeds of the land fund were, according to the
Act, ultimately to be devoted to the purposes of
emigration.
In 1835 as soon as the £35,000 was raised, com-
missioners were appointed to carry out the provisions
of the Act. These were authorized to borrow
£BO,OOO at ten per cent, interest, for the preliminary
expenses of the settlement, the amount being secured
on the crown lands of the Colony. It was further-
provided that a representative legislature be granted
to the colony, when its population would amount


to 50,000 persons, and no land was to be dis-
posed of otherwise than by sale, but all parties were
at liberty to purchase to any extent in fee. On
no account were convicts to he sent into the Co-
lony, and all religious creeds were to stand upon
the same footing, no established church being re-
cognised.
The first ship with emigrants for the settlement
left London in the early part of 1836, and was soon
followed by the Buffalo store-ship, with Captain
Hindmarsh, the first Lieutenant-governor, on board.
This vessel also convoyed out all the materials neces-
sary fora new settlement; Captain Hindmarsh landed
from her on the shores of Holdfast Bay, in the neigh-
bourhood of Adelaide, on the 28th December, 1836,
proclaimed the Colony, and took possession of it in
the name of the British crown.
Besides the Lieutenant-governor, there were sent
out to the Colony the necessary officials of all
kinds, and on behalf of the Commissioners of South
Australia, J. H. Fisher, Esq., proceeded thither to
represent them, under the title of Resident Com-
missioner.
The surveys of the capital, Adelaide, were com-
pleted under the direction of the Surveyor-general,
Colonel Light, by March, 1837, when an allocation
of the town lots to purchasers took place, the re-
maining sections being then disposed of by public


auction at prices varying from two pounds ten up-
wards.
The early days of South Australia were times of
difficulty: dissensions arose amongst the officials, espe-
cially between the Governor and Commissioner; the
survey of the country land went on but slowly ; the
population were huddled together at Adelaide, unable
to get possession and cultivate the soil, provisions of
all kinds were exorbitantly dear, and wages high.
The spirit of centralization that had drawn together
a large body of persons in a new land, but precluded
them from tilling, for the time being, the soil, ulti-
mately led to land speculation and house building on
a most extensive scale in the capital. Land specu-
lation resulted in a mania that affected all the colo-
nists, the most ridiculous prices were given for town
lands, and the speculators counted their gains by
thousands. But whilst thus engaged, the funds of
the colonists, large as they must have been, were
being rapidly drained away to pay for provisions of
all kinds, live stock and other imports ; and the inha-
bitants only awoke from their trance of prosperity to
find themselves penniless bankrupts, with lands and
houses they could find none to purchase.
To bring about this result the executive largely
aided ; no proper provision had been made for a cer-
tain supply of necessaries for so considerable a number
of persons ; dependence had in a measure been placed
i 3


on private enterprise, and as at the time there was
a scarcity in the neighbouring Colonies, everything
rose to a most extravagant pitch: it was not until
May, 1838, that the settlers first got possession of
their country lands to enable them to commence cul-
tivation, and seed was hardly to be procured for
money; moreover, the spirit of gambling that had
been generated prevented numbers leaving the capi-
tal to proceed to their lands and raise produce. The
differences amongst the authorities led, in June, 1838,
to the recall of Governor Hindmarsh, and shortly
afterwards to that of Mr. Fisher, and the abolition of
the office of Resident Commissioner; Colonel Light
also resigned his post of Surveyor-general, and was
succeeded by Major Frome, of the royal engineers.
In October, 1838, Colonel Gawler arrived at the
colony as successor to Captain Hindmarsh, also armed
with authority as Commissioner. In July, 1838, an
amended Act of Parliament for the settlement of the
Colony was passed, empowering the Commissioners or
their representative in the Colony to borrow all such
sums as might be necessary to carry out efficiently
the project of settlement, the amount to be secured
on the revenue derivable from the sale of waste lands,
and in furtherance of this Act the Commissioners gave
Colonel Gawler power to draw upon them to an un-
limited extent. When the new Governor arrived, he
fotmd the expenditure proceeding at the rate of some


.£33,000 per annum, but this he rapidly increased: in
the quarter ending March, 1839, the expenditure was
.£8,954 ; in the last quarter of the same year it was
£34,291. No regard was paid to private interest or
the progress of agriculture ; the most ridiculous public
works were commenced, the labouring classes em-
ployed at the most exorbitant wages to erect build-
ings that an infant Colony could well do without.
Notwithstanding remonstrances from home. Colonel
Gawler continued in his course, drawing bills on the
Commissioners for immense sums, so as to meet the
expenditure, which for the last quarter of 1840 actu-
ally reached £60,165. 14s. 4d. The ability of the
Commissioners to meet Colonel Gawler’s bills was at
length brought to an end, and the bills, dishonoured,
were returned to the Colony. This was all that was
wanting to complete the ruin of the entire population ;
the land mania had been rapidly bringing about a com-
mercial crisis; monetary distress was becoming gene-
ral ; the value of property of all kinds was reducing;
hut when the government became bankrupt, with a sum
of about £300,000 due to the public, it put a climax
to all, none could meet their liabilities. Then came
a revulsion; the population fled from Adelaide, scat-
tered themselves over the land to raise from the earth
the means of subsistence, for they had now no other
means of procuring it, and from that period may be
dated the real progress and prosperity of the Colony ;


the hand of strained, forced centralization once bro-
ken, the resources of the country soon developed
themselves.
As a necessary consequence of his acts, Colonel
Gawlcr was recalled, and left the Colony in the May
of 1841, about the same time as Captain Grey, his
successor, arrived with strict instructions to reduce
the expenditure at once. The Board of Commission-
ers in London was also dissolved, as useless and ineffi-
cient; the House of Commons, in March, 1841,
voted the sum of .£155,000 towards the liquidation
of Colonel Gawler’s dishonoured hills; and in 1842 a
further sum of £59,936, the original amount of
£85,000 borrowed on bond by the Commissioners,
was transferred, with the consent of the bondholders,
to the charge of the consolidated fund, at the reduced
rate of 3| per cent, per annum, on the condition of its
resumption by the Colony, when its revenue had im-
proved, and was capable of hearing the charge, which
already is the case, and the consolidated fund was,
in 1847, relieved from the burden. Over and above
these vast sums, upwards of £30,000 waj due in
the Colony by Colonel Gawler’s administration, for
which no hills had been issued. This sum Captain
Grey was directed to provide for by the issue of local
debentures at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum in-
terest.
At the period of Captain Grey’s arrival, in such a


distressed state was the Colony that he was compelled
to apply to Sir George Gipps, the Governor of New
South Wales, to advance a sum of £3,000 to enable
him to carry on the government of South Australia.
Under the fostering and energetic care of Captain
Grey, South Australia rapidly became prosperous,
agriculture was promoted, the harbour thrown open
as a free port to the commerce of the world, and the
expenditure reduced from £IBO,OOO to £30,000 per
annum.
Previous to the departure of Captain Grey from
the Colony in 1845, to assume the government of New
Zealand, the extensive mineral discoveries had taken
place, which have since poured such wealth into South
Australia; and when Major Robe succeeded Cap-
tain Grey, the latter had the satisfaction of leaving
the Colony on the high-road to prosperity, and with
the best wishes, but sincere regrets of its population.
The government of Major Robe, which continued
to the early part of the present year, 1848, has only
been signalized by the passing of two measures, on his
proposition, by the legislature of the Colony, which
have met with considerable opposition. The first of
these measures was the imposition of a royalty tax
upon all minerals raised; the Act of Council was
approved of by Lord Grey, but the measure is now
about being abandoned on the strenuous representa-
tions and remonstrances of the colonists.


The second measure referred to is that by which a
state provision is made for all religions and education,
according to the relative numbers of each creed, with
preference for none. Previously, the voluntary system
prevailed as regarded religion and education, and being
found to work well, the change introduced by the
Governor, adopted by the Council, and approved of hy
Lord Grey, has not met with the general approbation
of the population ; hut as the system has not yet had
time for a trial, it certainly is rather premature to
pass an opinion on it.
The present governor. Sir Henry Young, succeeded
Major Robe, who removed to another appointment
at the Mauritius: the former has hut lately arrived
in the Colony.
CHAPTER X.
Mode of Government —Internal Communication—Abori-
gines—Climate—Mode of Selling Land—Land Fund—
Landunder Cultivation—Imports and Exports —Produce
of Wool—Returns of Stock —Revenue and Expenditure
—Estimates for 1848 Population and Occupation—
Number of Houses —Rates of Wages—Demand for
Labour, and Persons required.
The Colony of South Australia is ruled by a Lieu-
tenant-governor, with the aid of executive and legis


latlve councils. The members of the former are
the chief officials of the Colony, who are also mem-
bers of the legislative council, together with a few of
the principal colonists. In the case of both councils
all the members are nominated by the Crown, the
Governor for the time being having power to suspend
them pending the approbation of the Colonial Secre-
tary. The legislative council, of which the Governor
is president, has the power of making laws for the
Colony, subject to the approval of the Crown. The
Governor has the initiative of all proposed acts,
financial and other. The laws of the Colony are
similar, in most respects, to those of England, more
especially the criminal laws. No penal statutes are
in force, as is the case in New South Wales and Van
Dieman’s Land.
A mail per fortnight runs between Melbourne and
Adelaide, via Mount Gambier, close to the Glenelg
River. This completes an internal regular commu-
nication between Adelaide and Sydney.
The aborigines of South Australia are fast disap-
pearing before the advent of civilization, notwith-
standing the care of the Protectors and their staff,
supported at considerable expense to the Colony.
The natives are migratory in their habits, cannibals,
and practisers of infanticide. In no material respect
do they differ from the aborigines of Australia Felix ;
therefore what has been said of the latter fully applies


to the former. The climate of South Australia is
nearly similar to that of New South Wales Proper;
Adelaide itself is situated nearly in the same latitude
as Sydney; but on the southern coast the rains are
more frequent and certain than on the eastern.
South Australia, as far as is known of it, is not
subject to the droughts which at times afflict New
South Wales Proper. According to a rain-gauge,
carefully kept in Adelaide for seven years, it appears
that, in the entire of that period, not one month
elapsed without rain, the greatest quantity generally
fejl in June, July, and August, and the mean yearly
average of seven years’ observation was 19 J inches,
on 110 days. The climate is, beyond doubt, dry,
and very healthy. Consumption and bronchial
complaints are almost unknown. The thermometer
at times rises to a great height, 102° in the shade; but
this never lasts long, and field labour can always be
pursued. Hot winds occur at times, and inflict,
whilst they blow, considerable damage on delicate
plants, flowers, the growing crops, &c. They seldom
exceed in duration twelve hours, and give place to
cool refreshing southerly winds, which re-invigorate
the frame. The hot winds blow from the north-
ward.
The crown lands of South Australia are disposed
of by auction in a similar mode to that pursued in the
other Australian Colonies, at not Jess than one pound


sterling per acre. Since 1843, the last year of commer-
cial distress and difficulty in the Colony, the increase
in the land fund has been remarkable, and evinces
the prosperous condition of the Colony. In 1843
the land fund amounted to .£613.
Acres. £.
In 1844 there were sold 3,428, producing 5,686
„ 1845 „ 69,658, „ 72,902
„ 1846 „ 81,000, „ 75,000
The immense increase in the land sales for the two
latter years are, in great part, attributable to the
extensive mineral discoveries that took place during
that period; but there was also in those years, and
in 1847, a considerable quantity of land purchased
for purely agricultural purposes, the soil being su-
perior. The land under cultivation for eight years,
ending 1847, was as follows :
Acres. Acres.
1840 2,503 | 1844 26,918
1841 0,722 1 1845 26,218
1842 19,790 | 1846 33,292
.1843 28,690 | 1847 42,100
In 1848, the number of acres under cultivation
considerably exceeded 60,000, but there are no
official returns as yet furnished. The produce raised
from the land under cultivation chiefly consisted of
wheat of a superior quality. The land actually en-
K


closed, according to the last advices, was upwards
of 90,000 acres, and there was a large extent in
process of being fenced in. A considerable propor-
tion of the population having turned their atten-
tion to agriculture, South Australia bids fair to be
a grain-producing country, more especially as the
wheat hitherto raised has been of a character un-
surpassed in the European markets. It is no
unusual thing to meet with samples of South Aus-
tralian wheat weighing sixty-six pounds to the bushel
measure.
The following are the import and export returns
for seven years, to the latest period they have been
officially furnished :
IMPORTS.
In value. In value
1841 £229,925 1845 £168,161
1842 169,533 1846 304,321
1843 93,148 1847 410,825
1844 . 106,660
EXPORTS.
In value. In value.
1841 £40,561 I 1845 £131,800
1842 29,079 1 1846 287,059
1843 66,169 I 1847 310,348
1844 82,268 j
The following are the returns of exports, the pro-
duce of South Australia, for the first quarter of
1848:


Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Animals, living, viz.
£
Sheep
100
40
00
23
Corn, viz. Barley ....
281 qrs
500
858 ditto
640
30
Pollard ....
3 tons
20
Wheat ....
3,207 qrs
5,078
,, Flour
202 tons 12 cwt.
3,138
230 cwt
188
227
202
Ore—Emery
08 tons
700
Lead
120 tons 3 cwt. .
1,850
Copper
4,082 tons ....
70,380
360
20
Tallow
1,094 cwt
3,010
435
Wool, bales, 7077 •. •.
1,720,025 lbs. ..
79,005
£172,592
Abstract Returns of Imports and Exports at Port Adelaide,
for the First Quarter o/1848.
IMPORTS.
£. s. d.
Total Imports 49,913 2 0
Imports re-exported 5,691 16 0
Imports consumed in the Colony.. £44,221 6 0
99
TO AUSTRALIA.


EXPORTS.
£. s. d.
Total Exports 178,282 16 0
Imports re-exported 5,691 16 0
Exportsthe produceof theColony£l72,s92 0 0
The season for shipping’ wool being the first quarter
of the. year, the amount of wool appearing in the
foregoing return is large: altogether wool may, with
copper ore, be considered the main staples of the
Colony. The following return exhibits the increase
in the export of wool during five years, ending
1846;
VALUE OF WOOL EXPORTED TO GREAT BRITAIN.
£. s. d.
1842 29,749 0 0
1843 45,568 9 8
1844 42,769 5 9
1845 72.235 0 0
1846 105,941 0 0
The decrease apparent in 1844, when compared
with 1843, is not to be attributed to any falling-off
in the production, but merely to the fact of a quantity
of the wool that, in the usual course of events, would
appear in the returns of 1844, being shipped before
the close of the year 1843.
The increase of lire stock has fully kept paqe with
the increase in the production of wool. The follow


ing are the returns of stock down to the latest period,
from the year 1838 :
Horses. Homed Cattle.
1838 480 2,500
1839 800 7,600
1840 1,060 15,100
1841 1,650 16,696
1842 1,850 20,000
1843 2,000 25,000
1844 2,150 30,000
1845 and 1846
1847 2,600 38,000
Sheep. Pigs and Goats.
1838 28,000 780
1839 108,700 1,700
1840 200,160 3,400
1841 242,000 6,000
1842 300,000 8,000
1843 350,000 10,000
1844 450,000 12,000
1845 and 1846
1847 620,000 19,000
From being a grain-importing country under the
theory of centralization advocated by Mr. Wakefield,
South Australia rapidly became an exporting one,
when the population were thrown upon the resources
of their land, and dispersed over it. In the year
1841 South Australia imported grain to the value of
.£70,000 ; in 1842, grain in value, £29,682. os. od.;
in 1843, the amount had decreased to, in value,
£3,519. 25.; and in 1844 the importations of grain
totally ceased, for the population produced wheat at
3s. per bushel, a much lower price than it possibly
k 3


could be imported at. Since that period the Colony
has largely exported grain; and in the year 1847
several cargoes were forwarded to Great Britain, the
Mauritius, and the Cape of Good Hope. In the
London market the samples have been unsurpassed
in quality, and brought prices equal to, if not exceed-
ing, the best Dantzic wheat. The character of a
considerable proportion of the colonial population is
favourable to the formation of a prosperous and per-
severing agricultural class. There are numerous
German families among them, who turn their atten-
tion altogether to tillage and the growth of the vine.
The following are the Revenue and Expenditure
Returns for seven years, and the Estimates for the
year 1848, for the expenditure of the Colonial Go-
vernment ;
£. £.
1841, Revenue.... 22,720 Expenditure.... 104,471
1842, Ditto 22,074 Ditto 54,444
1843, Ditto 24,142 Ditto 29,842
1844, Ditto 27,878 Ditto 29,453
1845, Ditto 37,878 Ditto 31,752
1846, Ditto 48,015 Ditto 36,931
1847, Ditto 66,946 Ditto 67,799
DETAILED ESTIMATES OF EXPENDITURE FOR GOVERN-
MENT FOR THE YEAR 1848. £. S. rf.
Governor and Establishment 1,924 0 0
Executive and Legislative Councils 655 0 0
Colonial Secretary’s Department 2,129 0 0
Treasury 835 0 0
Registry 427 0 0
Audit 705 0 0


£. s. d.
Customs’ Department 2,695 0 0
Crown Lands 795 0 0
Survey 3,396 15 0
Public Works 1,441 13 0
Post-Office 1,727 16 0
Harbour 2,427 0 0
Colonial Storekeeper 200 0 0
Out-Stations and Magistrates 1,130 0 0
Country Foot Police 945 0 0
Metropolitan Police 2,786 0 0
M ounted Police 6,819 13 0
Town Surveyor, Inspector of Weights and
Measures, Inspector of Slaughter-houses,
and Office Kent 385 0 0
Aboriginal Protectors, and their Department 1,741 6 8
Medical Department 887 7 0
Lunatic Asylum 527 0 0
Judicial and Law Establishments 1,922 0 0
Insolvent Court, ditto 255 0 0
Resident Magistrates’ Court 770 0 0
Bench of Magistrates 155 0 0
Sheriffs’ Department 1,673 0 0
Advocate-General’s ditto 660 0 0
Coroner’s ditto 170 0 0
Colonial Chaplain 350 0 0
Religious and Educational Purposes for dif-
ferent Sects of professing Christians .... 2,221 0 0
The Jewish Persuasion 5 16 0
Public Works and Improvements 9,462 0 0
Maintenance of Destitute Poor 600 0 0
Interest on Colonial Revenue Securities .. 3,003 0 0
Rent of Courts of Law, and Law Offices.... 300 0 0
Expenses of Medical Witnesses 50 0 0
Purchase of two Fire-engines 500 0 0
Purchase of Types and Presses for Govern-
ment Printing 600 0 0
Unforeseen Expenses 500 0 0
Total £57,766 6 8


Males.
Females.
Total.
South Adelaide
2,902
2,668
5,570
North Adelaide
929
914
1,843
Milner Special Survey . ....
706
493
1,194
North of Gaivler Town ....
348
no
458
“Wakefield and Hutt Rivers.
631
131
762
Moorunde
58
8
66
W ellington
93
12
105
Mount Crawford
320
210
630
Little Para River
462
369
831
Port Adelaide
816
713
1,529
South-West of Adelaide ..
965
892
1,857
South East of Adelaide
688
584
1,272
East and N, East of Adelaide
526
443
969
Sturt and Onkaparinga Rivers
212
176
388
O’Halloran Hill
392
320
712
South of Onkaparinga
334
248
582
Sources of Onkaparinga ...
780
672
1,452
Meadow’s Special Survey...
Finnis’s and Angus’s Special
301
243
644
Survey
308
167
475
Encounter Bay
158
107
265
Port Lincoln
85
47
132
Kangaroo Island
—
—
70
North of Rivoli Bay
230
21
251
South of Rivoli Bay '..
248
15
263
Yankalilla
91
47
138
Cape Jervis
92
40
132
Total
12,670
9.650
22,390
The ordinary Revenue was calculated to yield a
large surplus over and above the expenditure for 1848,
although the latter was a considerable increase on that
of the previous year.
The population of South Australia, according to
the census taken April, 1846, was as follow. The
different districts, and their population, are set out
separately: —


The following is the number of each religious per-
suasion :
Church of England 11,945
Church of Scotland 1,958
Lutheran Church (chiefly Germans) .... 1,524
Wesleyan Methodists 2,246
Other Protestant Dissenters 2,888
Roman Catholics 1,649
Jews 68
Mahommedans and Fagans 52
The married males amount to 3,847; females,
3,811 ; the single males, 8,823; single females, 5,839.
The adult males, from twenty-one upwards, number
6,814 ; those between the ages of fourteen and twenty-
one, 1,088. The females above fourteen amount to
5,136. In order still further to develope the position
of the population of this interesting and rich colony,
it may.be as well to give the occupations as returned
in the census of 1846.
OCCUPATIONS.
Land proprietors, merchants, bankers, and stock-
holders 1,153
Clerks and overseers to the above 162
Professional persons • 109
Clerks and assistants to the above 35
Manufacturers, brewers, millers 82
Clerks and assistants to the above 46
Shopkeepers and retail dealers 338
Clerks and assistants to the above 160
Brickmakers 77
Bricklayers 89
Smiths 152
Carpenters and joiners 362
Masons 92


Shoemakers 225
Cabinetmakers 24
Plasterers 38
Harness-makers 19
Tailors 62
Tanners 19
Miners 269
Sawyers and splitters 240
Shepherds, and others, in charge of sheep 1,120
Stockmen, and others, in charge of cattle 215
Carriers and their assistants 134
Gardeners, farm-servants, and persons employed in
agriculture 1,402
Mariners and fishermen 85
Domestic servants 818
Labourers, not included in the above definitions .. 726
All other persons not included in the above 13,993
The number of houses in the entire colony were,
according to the census, —stone or brick, 1715;
wood, 1,272; temporary dwellings and tents, 1,189 ;
total, 4,176. From April, 1846, to Jan. 1849, tbe
Colony would not have received a less accession by
immigration, and casual passengers from Britain and
the Colonies, than fifteen thousand persons. A large
number of these were miners, much required to work
the inexhaustible wealth that discoveries of ores of
the richest quality made every month more apparent.
The rates of wages payable in the Colony are consi-
derable, when the price of provisions is taken into
account. House-rent is only paid in the town ; for
in the country a hut is soon erected. Many of the
pastoral servants live throughout the year in tents, or
under a tarpaulin erected on a few forked sticks;


and they suffer no inconvenience from the weather,
owing to the salubrity of the climate.
The following were the rates of wages general in
the Colony in September, 1847 :
Blacksmiths—3os. to 355. weekly—well employed.
Bricklayers —6s. to 6s. 6d. per day, ditto.
Carpenters—6s. to 7s per day, ditto.
Masons —6s. to 7s. per day, ditto.
Labourers—lss. to 255. weekly.
Shoemakers and Bootmakers earn from 30s. to 455.
per rveek, and find plenty of employment.
Shepherds are much in request, at wages varying,
according to distance, from 10s. to 12s. per week,
with weekly rations, consisting of 10 lbs. flour, 10 lbs.
fresh meat, 2 lbs. sugar, and lb. tea.
Hutkeepers —6s. to Bs. per week, with like rations.
Farm Labourers are readily engaged at from 10s. to
14s. per week, according to ability, with rations above-
mentioned, and opportunities of earning more at har-
vest time.
Tinsmiths find plenty of work; and those who em-
ploy journeymen give them 30s. per week or more.
Domestic Servants are in great request for respect-
able service, at £l4 to £lB a-year, many being en-
gaged weekly or monthly, at rates varying from ss. to
7s. per week, all with board and lodging, of course.
Cooks, or other male domestic Servants, get £lB
to £25 per annum, with board and lodging. Liveries
are rare, but good living is not so.


Miners employed on owners’ account get 255. to
30s. per week; but really experienced men engaged
upon tribute and tut-work have frequent opportuni-
ties of earning considerably more.
The demand for mechanics and tradesmen is limited,
for a great proportion of the clothes consumed are im-
ported ready made. Those generally in request are,
carpenters, blacksmiths, and shoe and boot-makers;
but tbe persons really in demand are miners, shep-
herds, farm-labourers, and domestic servants, more
especially strong young females.
CHAPTER XI.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Adelaide—Places of Worship—Religion—Markets—Prices
of Exports—Freights—Mining and Minerals—Descrip-
tion of the Burra Burra Mine—Prospects of the Colony.
The capital of South Australia is Adelaide, situated
in latitude 34° 56' south. The town is built on either
side of the River Torrens, a torrent at one period of
the year, a chain of ponds at another; the land
rises gradually from the river banks, and terminates
in elevated terraces, which command an extensive
prospect. Adelaide is about seven miles from Hold-
fast Bay, a low level plain intervening, flooded at
times; but the port, a free one, in which vessels of
considerable tonnage can lie, completely land-
locked, is more to the north, and about the same
distance from the city. All goods have to be con


veyed by land-carriage from the port to Adelaide;
but it is proposed to construct a canal for shipping;
this, however, is a thing of time.
The country around Adelaide resembles a gen-
tleman’s park, lightly timbered, and closed in by
elevated ranges of hills; the soil is good, but the
town is badly supplied with ftater. Adelaide is
divided by the Torrens into north and south ; the
latter of which is the principal division, containing,
according to the census of 1846, 5,570 inhabitants,
whilst the northern numbered a population of 1,843.
The government offices, some of which are ex-
tensive, and the chief places of business, are on the
south side of the Torrens ; a bridge effects a com-
munication between either side. There are nume-
rous places of worship in Adelaide : Church of Eng-
land, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Baptist, Wes-
leyan, Calvinist, and Lutheran. There is a Bishop of
the Church of England resident, and a Roman Catholic
Bishop, besides numerous clergymen of every deno-
mination. All creeds are assisted from the Colonial
funds, according to the number of communicants
The Adelaide markets are well supplied with pro-
visions of all kinds, at extremely cheap'rates, as will
be found by the following market return.
Adelaide, Farm Produce. —'Wheat, 4s. to 4s. 3d.
per bushel: fine flour, £l2 per ton ; seconds, ditto,
£ll ; oats, 4s. 6d. to 55.; English barley, ss. to
L


ss. 6d.; Cape ditto, 3s. 9d. to 45.; pollard,
£6. 10s. per ton, or Is. 6d. per bushel of 20 lbs. ;
bran, Is. 3d. per bushel; malt, 7s. per bushel. The
two-pound loaf, 3d.
Poultry and Dairy Produce. —Fowls, 3s. to 4s.
per couple; ducks, ss. per pair; turkeys, ss. to Bs.
each ; geese, 6s. to'7s. each ; pigeons, Is. 6d. per
pair; butter, lOd. to Is. per lb.; bacon, Bd. to lOd.;
hams, Is. to Is. 2d.; pork, 6d. toBd.; lard, Bd.; sau-
sages, Bd. per lb.; cheese, Bd. to Is.; eggs, lOd,perdoz.
Butchers' Meat. —Beef, 2d. to 3d. per lb.; mut-
ton, Id, to 2d, per lb ; lamb, Is. 3d. to 3s. per quar-
ter; veal, 4d. to sd. per lb; calves’ heads, 2s. to
2s. 6d. each ; ditto feet, Bd,to Is. 4d. per set; tripe,
6d. per lb.
Vegetables. —Potatoes, Bs. 6d. to 9s. per cwt. or
Id. per lb.; cabbages, Is. 6d. per dozen; green
peas, 3s. 6d. per peck; onions, 6d. per lb.; carrots,
3d. per bunch ; turnips, 4d. per dozen ; chillies, 2d.
to 4d. per dozen; celery, 4d. to 6d. per head;
leeks, 6d. to Is. per bundle.
Hay. —Oaten hay, £2. 15s. to £3. ss. per ton ;
meadow ditto, £2 to £2, 10s.
Cattle. —Fat oxen, 14s. to 16s. per 100 lbs.,
sinking the fat and offal; working steers, £4 to £5;
dairy cows, £2 to £4; calves, £1 to £l. ss. each;
sheep, ss. to 7s.
Fruit. —Apples, Is. to Is. 3d. per lb.; grapes,
4d. to 6d. per lb.; pomegranates, 6d. to 9d. each.


ADELAIDE.
WHOLESALE PRICES CURRENT. 1848.
ARTICLES OF EXPORT.
Bacon per lb 6d. to 9d.
Bark per ton.
Barley bushel. 3s. 6d. to 4s.
Barleymeal 50 lbs.
Beef tierces 555.
Biscuit cwt. 14s. to 16s.
Bran bushel Is. Id.
Bricks 1,000 40s.
Butter, salted per lb. 10d.
Candles, moulds do. sd.
dips do. 4£d.
Cheese do. 6d. to lOd.
Flour, fine per ton £ll
seconds do. £lO
Gum do.
Gum timber per load
Hay per ton £2. 10s, to £3.105.
Hides each 6s. to 10s.
Maize per bushel Is. lOd. to 2s. 2d.
Oats i do. 3s. to 4s. 6d.
Oxen. .••...••.•■ ....•• • each £l.los, to £2,105.
Pollard per 20 lbs. Is. 2d.
Potatoes per ton £6 to £8
Sheep, fat each 7s. to 10s.
Slates per 1000
slabs per foot
Starch per lb. sd.
Tallow per cwt. 30s. to 40s.
Wheat per bushel 4s.
Wool, Ist quality. per lb. Is. to Is. 4d.
2nd quality do. 7d. to lid.
■ in grease do. 4d, to 7d.
Whalebone per ton.


FREIGHTS.
To London.—Ores, 60s. to £4 per ton ; wool, 1 Jd. per lb.;
wheat 2s. Cd. per bushel of GOlba.; oil, £5 to £5. 105.
per ton ; measurement goods, £5,
To Swansea.—Ores, £4, 10s. per ton.
To Mauritius.—Wheat, Is. 6d. per bushel; flour, 50s. per
ton.
To Sydney.—Heavy goods, 15s. per ton ; wheat, 6d. per
bushel ; measurement goods, 17s. Gd. to £1 per ton.
To Van Dieman’s Land. —From 10s. to 30s. per ton.
Although minerals were known to exist in South
Australia from the period of its settlement, yet it was
not until the year 1845 that any idea was formed
of the invaluable ore that was plentifully scattered
over the district. The mineral which has been most
worked is copper; but lead, tin, and iron are all
plentiful; gold also exists, and there are two mines
worked about ten miles from Adelaide. Numerous
copper-mines are being opened in various parts of
the Colony, and with great success, the exports of
ore are increasing rapidly, and sopn bid fair to re-
duce the price in the English markets, and seriously
affect the mining properties of Great Britain. The
average production of English copper is from 8 to
11 per cent., whilst much of the South Australian ore
yields from 30 to 40 per cent. As yet no coal has
been discovered in this Colony, which is a serious
drawback ; but there is little doubt that coal does
exist in the country. At present the copper ore is
exported in its raw state, chiefly, to Swansea.
The first mine opened in the Colony was ihc


Burra Burra mine, the land on which it is situated
was purchased in a block of 20,000 acres by a body
of Colonists, who after a short time divided the
block into two parts of ten thousand acres each ; on
one of these is the Burra Burra mine, on the other
the Princess Royal mine. The ground for the Burra
Burra mine was first opened in September, 1845;
and it is now admitted to be the most valuable and
productive copper mine in the world. It is situated
aboutninety-six miles from Adelaide, to the northward
of which it lies ; and the employment given to per-
sons in carting the ore to the Port of Adelaide, is
the means of distributing considerable funds amongst
the agricultural population, who engage themselves in
this occupation when disengaged on their farms.
As the Burra Burra mine has been the only one
which has been extensively worked, or has had time to
develope its wealth, it will be well to give the following
Report of the Association who are proprietors of it:—
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN MINING ASSOCIATION.
At the General Annual Meeting of the above Association,
held at the offices of the Company, Rundle Street, Adelaide, the
19th day of April, 1848; Ciiari.es Beck, Esq., Chairman,
the following Report and Accounts were submitted by the
Directors to, and approved by the Meeting, and ordered to be
printed.
The Third Annual Report of the Directors of the South Austra-
lian Mining Association to the Shareholders at the Annual
General Meeting , held the 1 9th April , 1848.
It is with extreme satisfaction that the Directors meet the
Proprietors with their Third Annual Report, particularly as
L 3


they are enabled to state to them that, however flattering the
affairs of the Association have hitherto proved, they have at no
time equalled the prospects of the present period.
By the annexed return of ore, it will appear that the quantity
raised during the last six months was COG!! tons, hut it is to be
observed that during the summer half year, the loss of a month
is occasioned by the Christmas holidays, which will account for
the apparent decrease when compared with the former six months’
work. The total raisings for the past year were 13,533 tons.
The quantity carted to the Port during the last six months was
0310 tons, averaging 338 tons per week;.the largest quantity
carted in one week being 527 tons.
The general appearance of the Mine is very encouraging; the
large raisings of the last year having been produced from within the
limits of the 20 fathom level. All the ore discovered below that
to the 30 fathom level is left for future raising, there being plenty
of good ore ground above the 20 fathom level to employ the
hands for some time to come. The ore produced continues of
good quality, consisting of carbonates and oxides.
On the 31st March last, the establishment at the Mines con-
sisted of 8 officers, a surgeon, and the following miners, mecha-
nics, and labourers, viz.—223 miners, 35 miners’ labourers, 2
timber men, 8 mining labourers, landers, 60 surface labourers,
123 ore-dressers, 50 boys dressing and picking ore, 14 carpenters,
5 blacksmiths, 5 strikers, 4 sawyers, 2 masons, 13 carters and
stable men, and 7 hoys horsewhim drivers; total, 507.
Since the last Sleeting, advices have been received of the sale
of 3122 tons of ore, averaging £23. Bs. 7d. per ton ; the highest
price being £32. 135., and the lowest £ls. The last 950 tons
produced an average of £2B. 18s. 7d., being £9. 2s. 4d. per ton
more than the average of the 947 tons reported as sold at the
last Meeting, and exceeding the average price of the 800 tons
reported at the Meeting in April last by £l2. 18s. 7d. per ton.
And the Directors feel much pleasure in assuring the Proprietors
that they are of opinion that the ore shipped this season, and
that yet to ship, will fully realize the highest average above-
mentioned.
The Directors have caused a return of the dividends declared
and paid during the past nine months (amounting to £73,920)


to be prepared and annexed to this Report; and they are desirous,
if circumstances will admit, of making the dividends uniform in
amount, and paying them on fixed days. To this end, the Di-
rectors propose (while the present prospects of the Mine continue)
paying dividends of £2OO per cent, on the capital stock on the
Ist day of every third month.
The Directors refer to the annexed Balance-sheet, which shows
the cash transactions of the Association since the last balancing,
30th April, 1846, to the present period. In explanation of the
items, “Sundry Creditors,” £30,316, the Directors have to observe
that from this amount must be deducted the amount of Bills
receivable, Sundry Debtors, and Cash in hand, on the other side,
amounting to £10,755, which would reduce the liability to
£27,561. This amount has been incurred in part payment of
wages on the ore at the Mine, and the wages and cartage on the
ore now at Port Adelaide, and on which the usual drafts have
not been made; but on its shipment the Directors will be in
funds sufficient to relieve this liability, and possess a balance of
£34,000, exclusive of large remittances expectant during the
next two months.
The Directors have much pleasure in stating that the nett
proceeds expectant on the ore shipped, to the period of making
up the statement of the Company’s liabilities and assets, in
September last, as far as yet ascertained, exceeds the amount
therein estimated. At the next Meeting, the Directors will sub-
mit a similar statement of the liabilities and assets of the Com-
pany as that produced at the last meeting, and have no doubt it
will prove equally satisfactory.
It will be necessary to elect five Directors in the place of
Messrs. Beck, Graham, Peacock, Stocks, and Allen, who retire.
CHAS. BECK, CHAIRMAN.
Adelaide , 14f/i April, 1848.


itunns UP ORB REFEREED TO IN THE ABOVE REPORT, CALCULATED AT 21 CWT. TO THE TON.
Return of tho Stock of Ore on hand, the produce of the Burra Burra Mines, at the Half-year ending the 30th day of September,
1817, with the quantity raised since that period, to the 31st March, 1848, showing the quantities sold, shipped, and remaining
on hand at the Port, on the Hoad, and at the Stines,
1S47:
Sept, 30
On hand at Port Adelaide
tons
787
cwt.
10
qr
2
tons
cwt.
qr
1847:
Sept. 30
Sold at Adelaide ....
tons
cwt.
qr
lb
tons.
2528
cwt
19
qr
3
lb
25
On the road to ditto ....
On hand at the Mines....
371
7092
16
14
0
2
8251
20
0
1848:
MarchSl
Shipped for Sale
On hand at Port \
Adelaide )
4463
742
3481
d ..
4
9
0
2
23
3104
18
3
8
1848 :
March 31
Raised since the 30th September last
6068
12
1
On hand at the Mines
0
0
8666
14
1
23
14320
11
I
14320
u
1
0
Adelaide, 31*fJ/arcft. 1848.
CIIAS. BECK, Chairman.
HENRY AYRES. Secretary.
Return of the Dividends declared by the South Australian Mining Association, from the 24th day of June, 1847, to the 31st day
of March, 1848, inclusive, showing the Amount paid on the several dividends and the Balances due thereon.
No. of Dividend.
"When Declared.
Per centage on Capital Stock.
Amount.
Paid.
To Pay.
Fifty
Fifty
One hundred
Two hundred
JS.
6,igo
6,160
12,320
24.640
24.640
£. t.
£.
s.
8th July,
Fifth..
2,640
0
,
Totals,... 5
Nine Months.
Six hundred.
73,920
68,360
0
5,560
0
Adelaide. 31 st March. 1848.
CHARLES BECK, Chairman. IIEJJKV AVERS,
Secretary.


CASH BALANCE-SHEET OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN MINING
ASSOCIATION.
From 30th April, 1846, to the 31st March, 1848.
T>rs. £. s. d.
To Profit and loss .. 7,606 16 3
Capital stock ... 12,329 0 0
Rent of land and
buildings 256 0 2
Sale of ore 83,106 10 5
Draftsagainst 5,341
tons of ore
shipped to Eng-
land for sale .. 69,441 0 7
Unclaimed dividends—
First .. £lO7 10 0
Second 107 10 0
215 0 0
Fees received on
transfers, &c. .. 45 5 0
Sundry creditors .. 38,316 7 3
£211,306 19 8
Crs. £. s. d.
By landed property
with improve-
ments 15,718 12 3
Wages and sundry
accounts con-
nected with the
working of the
Burra Burra
Mines, including
timber, bags,
fixed machinery,
horses, tools,
implements. &c. 74.030 2 0
Cartage of ore .... 44,803 10 7
Charges, being ex-
penses of esta-
blishment, offi-
cers’ salaries, &c. 3,565 19 11
Discount & interest 3,047 0 2
Shipping expenses
and port agency 2,944 7 8
Office furniture .. 186 8 1
Third dividend (in
part payment of
12,320/.) 12,095 0 0
Fourth ditto (ditto,
ditt0,24,640/.).. 22,160 0 0
Fifth ditto (ditto,
ditt0,24,640/.).. 22,000 0 0
Sundry debtors .. 712 18 7
Bills receivable .. 9,840 0 0
Cash in hand .... 202 19 11
£211,306 19 8
CHARLES BECK, Chairman,
HENRY AYRES, Secretary.
JOHN WATERHOUSE,
Adelaide, WILLIAM PEACOCK,
3lrt March. 1848. WILLIAM PAXTON, )
AUDITORS* REPORT.
We have compared the entries in the books of the South Australian
Mining Association for the year ending 31st March, 1848, with the vouchers
produced before us, and confirm the above account as a correct abstract of
the balances of that date.
. FREDERICK WICKSTEED, | . ...
* GEORGE TINLINE, Auditors.
Adelaide, 10rt April, 1848.
By order,
Handle-street. Adelaide, HENRY AYRES, Secretary.
SOrt April, 1848.


The first dividend of the company was declared in
the month of May, 1847, its amount was 60 per
cent, on the paid-up capital; a similar dividend was
also paid the following month, and several other
dividends have been since declared.
The value of this extraordinary mine, whose
shares, with only £5 per share paid up, bring £l6O
each, in the English market, may well entitle it to a
full description. The following is from the pen of a
party who visited it in the month of December,
1847.
“ The Burra Burra Mines are situated in a kind of
basin, and are surrounded by hills of moderate eleva-
tion on every side, except the Burra Creek, towards
which the ground slopes gradually. Near the creek
is the smelting-house and charcoal stores. The
former, a large substantial building of stone, is at
present occupied by a number of miners, with their
families; and on all sides around the mine are huts,
likewise occupied by miners. The miners have also,
for want of houses, excavated little caverns, di-
vided into apartments, in the steep banks of the
creek. Many of these, which we visited, are fitted
up in the neatest style imaginable, and form cool
and comfortable habitations. They extend for about
three miles on both sides of the creek, and contain a
population of four or five hundred persons.' The
township of Kooringa lies over the hill to the south


of the Burra, about half a mile from the mines, with
which it is connected on the side of the creek by the
miners’ cavern-houses. It is pleasantly situated on
the face of a hill, on the western bank of the Burra
Creek; but the miners are in a more open country,
and their locality is preferable for a residence. The
road from Adelaide enters the township by a small
valley to the southward of the mines. The road to
the mine turns the hill immediately at the entrance
to the township ; and there is another road along the
bank of the creek. The first object of attention to
the right is the only inn of the place, kept by Mr.
Abraham Wren. The original extensive premises,
built of wood, were in ten days to be superseded by
a splendid edifice of stone, with the outer walls three
feet, and the inner walls two feet in thickness, built
by Henderson, in his usual thorough style. It is in
form of a square, and contains a travellers’ room
twenty-five feet in length, suites of apartments for
families, bedrooms, and all the usual appurtenances.
Furniture to the value of £l,OOO has been ordered;
no expense will be spared in rendering it fit for the
most fastidious travellers of both sexes; and the
cellars, which are probably unequalled in the pro-
vince, already contain £1,500 worth of choice li-
quors. Along the same line of street occur in order,
the stores of Messrs. Hegarty, Marks, Boord, and
Brown, which supply everything, as the saying is,


from a needle to an anchor. We bought a few arti-
cles, and had much pleasure to find that there was
scarcely an advance on Adelaide prices. Mr. San-
der’s baking establishment, Mr. Hill and other
butchers, are in the same street. Already three
dairies, one of which we visited, have been estab-
lished in the neighbourhood of the township, which
supply milk of excellent quality. The only great
deficiency at the mines and township is vegetables,
there being as yet little or no cultivation, though the
soil, like almost the whole of the country between
Kooringa and Adelaide, is abundantly rich and fer-
tile. We were told that some farms have recently
been taken for the purpose of cultivation. We
should remark that twenty or thirty good stone cot-
tages have been built at Kooringa, by the Mining
Association; and that they intend building an inde-
finite number more in sets of ten, until the whole
demand shall be supplied. A new inn is about to
be established at the lower end of the township.
We should not omit to mention, that there are se-
veral teachers in the township, but none are of a
superior class. We believe that if the Directors of
the Association would give sufficient land for a
school, (which, according to the principle that pro-
perty has its duties as well as its rights, they ought
to do,) there is sufficient public spirit and money to
erect proper premises for a school and master’s


house. It is high time that something were done.
The population of the township and mines, accord-
ing to good authority, is upwards of two thousand ;
and there is as large a proportion of children as in
any part of the world, the greater number of whom
are growing up practical heathens. An efficient
educational establishment is the more necessary, be-
cause so many young boys are early called to work
at picking ore and driving bullocks. It will be ne-
cessary to devise some mode of instructing these
youths, so as to interfere as little as possible with
their precocious labour, So great is the scarcity of
adult labourers, that nearly a third of the drays we
met were driven 6y boys of from ten to fifteen years
of age.
“ One great improvement in Kooringa we must not
omit to mention—the erection of a Wesleyan chapel,
which was opened on Sunday week. It is doubtless
destined to be of great benefit to the community. It
is the only place of worship at present in the township;
hut we believe it is in contemplation shortly to build
a church in connexion with the Church of England.
“ A brewery has been established on the Burra
Creek, on the Bon Accord mine land, just beyond the
northern boundary of the survey, by Mr. Birrell, who
manufactures excellent ale. Another brewery is about
to be established by Mr. Clarke. Good water is ob-
tained from wells fifty feet deep.
M


" Turn we now to
“THE MINES.
“Proceeding from Mr. Wren’s hotel, we passed
through a gorge of the northern hill, and in a few
minutes found ourselves in view of the ‘ eighth wonder
of the world.’ As we said before, the mines are chiefly
in a basin, about fifty acres in extent, nearly sur-
rounded with low hills lying confusedly around ; con-
fused and irregular hills are indeed the prevailing fea-
ture of this district. The workings, however, are
comprised in the space of little more than six acres ;
but this space, on a working day, is a most animated
and astonishing scene. The first tiling that strikes
the eye is immense piles of earth, intersected with
vast heaps of ore laid out in a similar style to the
broken stones on a Macadamised road. Over the
heaps are placed five or six great horse whims, some
of which ply night and day. One, in particular, at
Kingston shaft, never rests, except on Sundays. Like
Goldsmith’s celebrated article of furniture, it has dif-
farent employments and uses by day and by night.
During the night it raises ore, and during the day it
raises water for cleaning it. No less than thirty shafts
have been sunk, most of them to the water, and of
course the operations downwards must be suspended
till a steam-engine, which has been ordered, arrives.
The deepest shaft is the Kingston, which is sunk
thirty-five fathoms below the surface, and which con


tains ten fathoms of water. Between the shafts are
the sheds for separating and washing the ore. The
ore is washed on a very simple principle. A lever
and rod are suspended above troughs filled with water,
and a sieve containing the ore is attached to the rod.
The cleaner, by jerking the sieve up and down in the
water, causes the ore, the heavier body, to sink, and
the refuse on the surface is then taken off.
“It was stated by a good authority, that there is
sufficient ore now on the surface, independent of what
is on the road, at the port, on shipboard, and in Eng-
land, to pay tbe shareholders two hundred per cent.
(£25,000) every month till June next. In the last
few weeks the average quantity taken away has been
nearly a hundred tons per day, and as the quantity
brought from the mine to the surface is upwards of
eighty tons daily, very little impression is made on
the accumulations at the mine.
“ We now attempt to relate our labours in thread-
ing the mazes of the vast souterain. We can assure
those who read this that it is not every one who can
do it. The man who attempts such a great enterprise
should be young and active, should be sound and lithe
in limb, and should possess good lungs, and no little
perseverance. Above all, he should not be stout, for
some of the holes are so narrow that not more than
thirteen stone can squeeze through, unless it belongs
to a practical miner. The first process is to divest


the ordinary habiliments, and to arm cap-a-pie in a
miner’s working dress; then every man should have
a candle, with a piece of soft clay as a candlestick.
The first step is a teazer —you have to descend a per-
pendicular ladder, canying your candle, and as you
find it rather awkward, you have rather an unpleasant
sensation that some one or two of the half-dozen fel-
lows above you may descend by the run, and take you
along with them a few hundred yards below. You
descend and find it only twenty fathoms; you follow
on through galleries dotted with copper, down little
shafts, and irito great vaults, and chambers, and caverns
like Vulcan’s forge, where men are seen with candles in
their hats, or stuck on the rocks, hewing away at the
most splendid copper ores that ey T es ever beheld.
Sometimes you go down perilous descents, and creep
on your hands and knees, or, like the snakes, wriggle
and writhe through holes with your head downwards;
all the time perspiring most refreshingly. You then
come upon men who are working upon a great shaft
near the water, and the rocks or earth continually
falling down, dashing upon the waters, give you a
vivid impression of the disagreeable situation you
would be in if you should tumble in. Ever and
anon we came to beautiful little malachite arbours,
which the miners called their gardens, every side of
which being a bright green, formed delightful spots
in which to rest. A few of the miners grumbled be


cause they had only Is. 3d. per pound of tribute,
(from which sum the tribute ranges to 2s. 6d.,) and
protested that they did not make quite £lO per
month; but an old Cornish and Columbian captain,
unconnected with the mines, who was present, told
us that the miners were habitual grumblers ; and we
learned afterwards, that some of them made as high
as £4O or £SO per month, and that the superintend-
ent sends as much as £2OO and £3OO in a week
into Adelaide, to invest for the fortunate and indus-
trious. We must, however, mention, for the honour
of the men, that the grumblers were a small excep-
tion. In some of the vast caverns, thirty, forty, and
fifty feet wide, when surrounded on every side with
malachite, red oxide, green and blue carbonates,
mingled in rich confusion the miners, asked our ex-
perienced friend if he had ever seen or heard of any-
thing like the Burra, and evidently were far from sur-
prised at his most energetic negative. After four or
five hours’ hard travel through this labyrinth, we at
last re-ascended, leaving, for want of time, a great
part of the mine unexamined; and here truth and
justice demand that we should announce the conclu-
sion which the experienced mining captain who ac-
companied us, gave in our hearing when he came
up. He had been previously prejudiced against the
mine, having been assured that it would soon be
worked out; but he was of a totally different opinion
M 3


after he saw it. He said, the vast quantities seen
on the road, would give the impression that the
Burra must be exhausted ; but seeing what is at the
mines, you can scarcely tell that any quantity has
been taken away. There is ore in sight which will
last for two years, independent of the new ground
which the steam-engine will open up. We may here
remark, that, before steam-engines were employed
in Cornwall, they could scarcely go below thirty
fathoms; now some mines extend to a depth of three
hundred and twenty fathoms.
“ We cannot close this brief notice without doing
justice to the great exertions of Mr. Burr, the ta-
lented superintendent, who has introduced a most
admirable and methodical system, and who has
nearly cleared the mine of bad characters. He is
well supported by Captain Roach and Bryan, whose
underground operations are upon an excellent plan.
We remarked that the mine is particularly well ven-
tilated and well timbered.
“ We had almost forgot to mention, that two new
lodes have just been opened at the Burra Burra; one
of them, containing the finest ore, was discovered by
the workmen who were levelling ground for a new
whim. The direction of .the lode appeared to be
east of north.
“The Bon Accord mine, purchased by Mr. More-
head, from Sydney, on behalf of an Aberdeen com


pany, situated close to the north of the Burra Burra
workings, has hitherto been a failure; and at the
time we visited it, the workings were abandoned.
The general opinion at the Burra seemed to be, that
the search for ore was made too far to the west of
north, and that the lodes were easterly. Mr. More-'
head went up a few days ago with a Cornish captain,
who we trust will be more successful than Captain
Eye. It is certainly singular that the lodes of the
Burra Burra could not be met with at so short a
distance.
“ There is a scarcity of timber in the neighbourhood
of the Burra Burra mines, which will be most
seriously felt in the course of a few years. This, we
are told, is the chief cause why smelting is not likely
to succeed there. A gentleman further north has
commenced planting gum-trees (600) in the neigh-
bourhood of his chief station, and we recommend
the proprietors of the Burra survey to follow his ex-
ample. A new smelting concern is about to be
commenced, by Messrs. Penny and Owen, at Tot-
hill’s Gap, thirty miles to the south of the mines,
where there is plenty of timber.”
Between the mineral wealth of South Australia, its
agricultural and pastoral capabilities, the prospects of
the Colony may truly be said to be promising. The
wealth flowing from the mines has already given in-
creased activity to every branch of industry. Name


rous new farms were laid out in the year 1847, and
the number of land proprietors in fee increased from
1269 to 1714, an addition in one year of 445; each
of which on an average brought into cultivation six-
teen acres, and enclosed sixty acres of land. It will
appear, therefore, that the class of small farmers is
increasing rapidly, and these in reality form the
strength and sinew of a new country. In the sum-
mer months the farmers employ themselves in cart-
ing ore to the coast, and when the rains become
frequent, they return to their farms, being enabled
with their gains in carting to purchase or rent more
land. There are upwards of 750,000 acres of land
surveyed in the Colony; of these, about 400,000 are
disposed of, and there is little doubt hut that the pre-
sent located districts are capable of supporting a very
large population.
Agriculture has in some degree been checked by
the scarcity and consequent high price of labour, and
many contemplated government works have been sus-
pended, not from want of funds, but from want of
hands. In the August of 1846, there was in the trea-
sury of the Colony about .£90,000, the produce of land-
sales, besides some £20,000 in England, the greater
proportion of which would be devoted to the promo-
tion of emigration. The revenue for 1846 amounted
to £48,000, the expenditure only to ,£36,000: that
for 1847 would also exhibit a large increase; and it


was confidently expected that the exports for the
year ending March, 1848, would considerably ex-
ceed the imports, large as the latter had been. And
this has been the result of the exertions of a limited
number of theAnglo-Saxon race, who, for the first five
years of their settlement had to struggle against the
incubus of the theory of centralization, gross misgo-
vernment, and a bankrupt executive: when such has
been the case, what does not the future of this Colony
foreshadow, if well governed, and possessed of all
the advantages of an independent representative local
legislature, which the present colonial minister has
promised to the Colony P


FROM SOUTH AUSTRALIA, during the year ended the 5th January, 1848,
compiled from the most authentic sources. N.B. The whole are Copper, except
where otherwise specified. Each Mine is particularized.
Ship.
i
3
CO
4
a
3
Q.
«
[ S.A. Cmpy.
0*
es
tl
a
S
c
0
Parringa.
G. Osmond.
| Adelaide.
Value.
Britannia
Abberton
Reward
VV aratah
Royal Archer
tons
308
m>
234
35''$
352$
2U0 i
tons
tens
tons
tons
t. c. qr.
t. c.
tons
£
9480
3044
7000
7860
7920
8825
4410
370
0675
601 iO
8140
8840
600
9880
280
1912
5000
6040
5180
350
6000
2500
550
1000
7530
5000
1600
4820
30
7000
8000
840
31)5
800
6400
3000
1600
1200
800
1800
5000
4935
j
394
"37*
283
37V
421
.‘{0
449
Princess Royal
230
73
Heloise
Briton
Phantom
Kingston
Trafalgar
H ope
Royal George
Phantom
*128
28*
250
277
-■■■
272
325
150
35*
i . .
|
28
62
141
1
236
‘lOO
to
241
3 18*
Elizabeth Thomson
Duchess Northum-
Rachael
352
378$
43
”40
290
134
50
60
40
90
225
*i
95*11 0
2 4 2*
19 3*
Elizabeth Jane
Competitor
Rosetta
Hooghly
Juno
Phantom
Dorset
Henry
Timbo
"210
32 J*
20T
1332
62 2
129
202
121
98 15 1
117 0 0
338
320
100
306
Total in tons of 21 cwt,
for yr. ending Jan 1848
Total for the year ending
Jan. 10, 1847 1
6825
4227
136 8
70 0
28|
1
£181,336
• Silver Lead Ore. f In 1846 the export of lead included those from Wheal
Watkins. Total tons, 1847 - 9060. Total tom, 1846 - - 6707.
Exports of Minerals—Sales of Copper Ores at Swansea—Value of
Mining Shares at Adelaide—Master and Servants' Act in force in
South Australia,
STATEMENT OF EXPORTS OF COPPER AND LEAD ORES


Coppbb Obb Sales.—
•The followin
g parcels of South Australian Copper
Ore have been sold at Swansea, during tbe month of September last.
Amount
21 cwts. Produce
Price.
of each Parcel,
Sept. 7. Kanmantoo
62 ..
16 ..
£9 13
0 ..
£59 8
6
0
„ Ditto ....
15 ..
131 ..
8 3
6 ..
122
12
6
Sept. 21. Burra Burra
73 ..
3l| ..
19 17
0 ..
1449
1
0
„ Ditto ....
60 ..
30* ..
19 9
6 ..
1368
10
0
„ Ditto ....
57 ..
32| ..
20 1
6 ..
1144
5
6
„ Ditto ....
50 ..
33} ..
21 0
6 ..
1051
5
0
„ Ditto ....
39 ..
20} ••
18 12
0 ..
725
8
0
„ Ditto
48 ..
28 ..
18 0
6 ..
865
4
0
„ Ditto ....
40 ..
28 ..
17 10
0 ..
700
0
0
Ditto
72 ..
23J ..
14 9
6 ..
1042
4
0
„ Ditto ....
72 ..
32J ..
20 14
0 ..
1490
8
0
„ Ditto ....
81 ..
31J ..
20 16
0 ..
1684
16
0
,, Ditto
47 ..
34J- ..
21 11
6
1014
0
6
„ Ditto
48 ..
271 ••
17 1
6
819
12
0
„ Ditto ....
18 ..
20} ..
18 15
0 .
337
10
0
„ Ditto
43 ..
28} ..
18 1
6 .
777
4
6
„ Ditto
17 ..
28 ..
17 19
0 .
305
3
0
„ Kapunda
50 ..
27 ..
16 17
6 .
843
15
0
„ Australian
40 .
20 ..
12 10
6 .
501
0
0
Name of Mine or
Company .
No. of
Shares.
Capital.
Paid up.
Present
Price.
£.
£.
£.
S.
d.
Burra Burra
2,464
12,320
12,320
150
0
0
Princess Royal ....
400
20,000
14,800
40
0
0
Mount Remarkable
1,000
25,000
22,500
17
0
0
Adelaide
2,000
10,000
10,000
4
5
0
North Kapunda ..
436
21,800
21,800
15
0
0
Royal Mining Co. ..
10,000
100,000
10s.
0
15
0
Enterprise
1,000
3,000
2,000
3
0
0
Greenock Creek ..
300
1,000
1,000
6
0
0
Montacute
100
5,500
5,500
55
0
0
Paringa Property
per acre
* *
* *
3
10
0
ADELAIDE MINING SHARE LIST.


MASTERS AND SERVANTS’ ACT.
By this important act (No. 9,1847, passed by the Legis-
lative Council on 23rd July, 1847), servants not entering
into service according to agreement, absenting themselves,
or guilty of neglect or misconduct, may be sentenced, on
conviction by two or more justices, to three months’ im-
prisonment, or the forfeiture of the whole or part of their
wages. Servants obtaining money, under pretence of ser-
vice or advance of wages, beyond the amount actually
earned, may be sentenced to imprisonment with or with-
out hard labour, for any period not exceeding three
months. Servants negligently or wilfully spoiling or
losing property, shall forfeit or pay reasonable damages,
but not exceeding the value thereof, or in any case £2O.
All cases for wages or money due for work, may be heard
and determined by two or more justices. This does not
apply to cases of insolvency. Servants to be entitled to
recover the amount of dishonoured cheques and orders,
with reasonable damages ; also amends for illtreatment.
This ordinance to apply to men contracting for task and
piecework. Penalty for harbouring servants already en-
gaged, not exceeding £2O. Provisions of ordinance to
apply to servants engaging in contracts in other countries,
but not after reimbursement of expense, or in any event
after the servant shall have been one year in the province.
The above are the chief provisions, the others being of a
formal nature. We must not omit, however, to mention
that clause XXIII. gives power to the Governor to nomi-
nate justices with authority to exercise singly the powers
of two justices: under this clause, Messrs. Lang, Koor-
ings; Butler, Guichen Bay; and Sturt, Mount Gambier,
have had this power conferred on them.


Produce.
Quantity.
Value.
tons cwts.
qrs
lbs.
£■
8.
d.
Animals, living (4C9)
695
0
0
Bacon and hams .
7
i
12
58
0
0
Beef and pork
6 10
0
0
133
0
0
Bread and biscuit .
29 12
0
0
348
0
0
Butter .
2 15
0
0
226
0
U
Bones .
4 0
0
0
36
0
0
Cheese .
2 15
2
18
130
15
0
Corn—Wheat
14,115
qrs
26,021
9
0
„ Flour
1,173 14
3
0
13,648
10
0
„ other Grain
1,108
1
9
Gum
51 17
0
0
969
0
0
Hay
2 11
0
0
15
0
0
Hides
11 10
0
0
155
0
0
Homs (4,224)
26
0
0
Lead, pig
10 19
0
24
263
0
0
Leather .
3 2
2
0
266
0
0
Ore, Copper .
9,153 17
3
0
171,883
0
9
,, Lead
144 10
3
18
2,104
0
0
Plants
32
0
0
Potatoes
3 0
0
0
15
0
0
Reaping Maclaine (1)
75
0
0
Sundries
706
0
0
Tallow . .
11 8
O
0
406
0
0
Whalebone .
2 13
2
15
607
0
0
Wool* .
1,112,462 lbs
56,010
17
0
£275,115
12
0
* It must be borne in mind that as the period to which
the returns are made up, is in the middle of the export sea-
son, the amounts are large and small in particular years as
the shipments are severally early or late. The wool of 1847
from Adelaide will be at least 10,000 bales.
RETURN OF EXPORTS FOR THE YEAR 1847,
THE PRODUCE OF THE COLONY,
N


New Regulations for granting of Leases, and Management of
Crown Lands beyond the Bounds of Location in New South
Wales and Australia Felix.
COLONIAL SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
Sydney, January Ist, 1848.
CROWN LANDS BEYOND THE SETTLED DISTRICTS.
(Tenders for Runs.)
, -w. ~ j y
His Excellency the Governor, in pursuance of her Ma-
jesty’s order in council, bearing date the 9th day of March,
1847, has been pleased, with the advice of the executive
council, to establish the following regulations for the re-
ceipt and disposal of tenders, as well for forfeited or vacated
runs, as for new runs.
I. —Forfeited or vacated Runs.
1. On the receipt of a notice from any person, of his
desire to purchase the lease of a run, which, after having
been occupied, may have fallen vacant, either by forfeiture
or surrender, and to the leasing anew of which no objection
shall arise, a notice will be issued in the Government Gazette,
describing the boundaries and grazing capability of the run
applied for, stating the maximum number of years for
which a lease thereof is granted, and fixing a time and
place, at which sealed tenders, in a prescribed form, will
be received from the applicant, and from any other person
desirous to enter into competition with him, for the pur-
chase of the lease of the described run.
2. Every such tender must state the term of years
within the limit mentioned in the notice, for which it is
proposed to take the run, and whether, in addition to the
rent required by the order in council, it is intended to offer
any, and if any, what amount of premium for the lease.
3. The tenders will be opened in the presence of a board
of officers appointed by the Governor, and will be disposed
of in the manner directed in the 12th section of Chapter
II. of her Majesty’s order in council, a copy of which is
annexed to this notice for more easy reference.


4. The lease will be made out as soon after the accept-
ance of the tender as may be practicable ; and the intend-
ing lessee will be required to take up the lease by payment
of the first year’s rent, and the premium (if any) within
sixty days from the date of the notification of the accept-
ance of his tender, in default of which the run will be again
declared open to public competition.
5 Until the lease has been actually taken out, the in-
tending lessee will acquire no title whatsoever to the occu-
pation of the land tendered for.
ll. —Tenders for new Runs.
1. Sealed tenders for new runs will be received on the
first Monday in every month, commencing on Monday, the
7th day of February.
2. The tenders in the prescribed form are to be ad-
dressed to this office, if the land be situated in the middle
district; or to the office of his honour the superintendent
at Melbourne, if situated in the Port Phillip district.
3. The tenders will be opened in the presence of a board
of officers appointed by the governor, and a record will be
made in each case of the name of the highest tenderer, so
as to secure to him the lease, in the event of the land ap-
plied for proving to be available.
4. The description of each run tendered for will then be
forwarded to the commissioner of the district in which it
is situated, with instructions to report whether it comprises
any land leased, or under promise of lease, or applied for
in any other tender, and if it does comprise any such land,
that he shall state what should be the run for which it shall
bo competent to parties to tender.
5. If the run applied for be available, the acceptance of
the tender will be duly notified to the applicant; and the
premium (if any) and first year’s rent computed in the
manner hereinafter described, will be required to be paid
within sixty days from the date of such notification ; in
default whereof, the run will be declared, by advertise-
ment in the Government Gazette, to be open for selection,
and a day for the receipt of fresh tenders for it will at the
same time be announced.


0. Until the first year’s rent and premium (if any) shall
have been actually paid, the intending lessee will acquire
no right whatever to the occupation of the land tendered for.
7. It is also to be distinctly understood, that the govern-
ment reserves to itself the right of excluding from any
such run, any lands which it may be deemed proper to re-
serve for any of the purposes referred to in the 9th section
of chapter 2 of the Order in Council.
8. In any case in which the boundaries of the run ten-
dered for may require to be adjusted, so as to exclude
from it any land leased, or under promise of lease, or ap-
plied for by another party, the amended description of the
run, and the day on which fresh tenders will be received
for it, will be publicly notified, in conformity with the
provisions in that behalf contained in the 13th section of
chapter 11, of the Order in Council, a copy of which is an-
nexed to this notice for more easy reference. The interval
between such notification, and the day on which the
tenders will be received, will not be less than one calendar
month.
9. Asa considerable interval must be expected to occur
in every case, between the acceptance of a tender for anew
run, and the survey of its boundaries, and the valuation of
its grazing capabilities, which will bo requisite for the
purposes of a formal lease and the final adjustment of the
rent, the following general rules will be laid down, under
which the occupancy of the ran during such interval, may
be granted to the successful tenderer, and the receipt of
rent secured to the public.
(1.) Tenders for new runs must contain not only ‘a
clear description of the run applied for, and the boundaries
of the same,’ but also an estimate of its grazing capabilities;
and the tenderer should state that in addition to any pre-
mium which he may offer, he will be prepared to pay a
yearly rent of ten pounds, with two pounds ten shillings
added for every thousand sheep, or their equivalent in
cattle, above four thousand sheep or their equivalent, which
the run shall be estimated as capable of carrying.
(2.) Until the number of sheep or cattle which the


nm can carry shall have been determined by valuation in
the manner prescribed in her Majesty’s Order in Council,
the intending lessee will be required to pay according to
his own estimate as given in his tender; and in the event
of the rent so paid according to his own estimate, proving
to have been less than that determined by valuation, he
will be required to make up the difference previously to
the execution of the lease.
10. Printed forms of tender for forfeited or vacated
runs, and for new runs respectively, may be obtained,
from the several Commissioners of Crown Lands beyond
the settled districts, as well as at the office of the Superin-
tendent of Port Phillip, and at this office.
EXTRACT FROM CHAPTER It., OF HER MAJESTY’S ORDER
IN COUNCIL, DATED OTH MARCH, 1847.
(Mode of acquiring Leases offorfeited or vacant Runs.)
Sect. 12.—When any run of lands, after being occu-
pied, shall be forfeited, or become vacant, without the
previous occupant’s having exercised his right of renewal
hereinafter reserved, it shall be competent for any person
desirous of acquiring a lease of such run of lands, to give
notice to the Governor or officer for the time being, ad-
ministering the government of the said colony, of his, her,
or their desire to purchase anew the lease of such run of
lands, and immediately after such notice the Governor, or
officer administering the government of the said Colony,
shall direct sealed tenders to be sent in at such time and
place, and in such form as he shall think fit, by the per-
son giving such notice as aforesaid; and also by such
other person (if any) as may be disposed to enter into
competition for the said lease ; and every tender so to be
made shall state the term of years for which it is proposed
to take the said run, and whether in addition to the mini-
mum rents required agreeably to the provisions contained
m sections two and three of the second chapter of this
Order in Council, it is proposed to offer any, and if any,
w hat amount of premium for the lease : and the said
tender or tenders shall be opened in the presence of two


or more persons, authorized by the Governor or officer
for the time being, administering the government of the
said Colony, for that purpose; and if there shall bo more
than one tender, the tenders shall be opened at the same
time ; and if there shall be only one tender, the lease of the
run shall be given to the person making such tender, pro-
vided the rent offered shall be admissible under the provi-
sions contained in sections two and three of this chapter of
the Order in Council ; but if there shall be more competi-
tors than one, the lease of the run shall be given to such
person or persons as shall tender the highest amount of
premium for the same; but if two or more tenders shall be
made for the same run, and no one of them be higher than
all the rest, a future day shall be announced by the per-
sons who open the tenders, on which day it shall again be
competent to all persons to offer fresh tenders in the
same manner as hereinbefore provided in regard to the
first tenders.
(Mode of acquiring Leases of new Huns.)
Sect. 13.—1 f any individual be desirous to acquire anew
run of land which has never been occupied before, he shall
be at liberty to send in a sealed tender, at such time and
place, and in such form as may be appointed by the
Governor or officer administering the government of the
said Colony for receiving tenders for new runs, and shall
set forth in his tender a clear description of the run for
which he applies, and of the boundaries of the same, and
shall state whether, beyond the amount of the rent to he
ascertained as hereinbefore provided, he is willing to offer
any, and if any, what amount of premium for the lease,
and such tenders shall be in all respects dealt with as
hereinbefore provided in section twelve of this Order in
Council for tenders for runs, which have been forfeited
or fallen vacant, save and except that if it shall occur that
two or more persons have thus applied for different runs,
of which part of one run would iuclude part of the whole
of another run, the Governor or officer for the time being
administering the government of the said Colony, or the
person or persons authorized by him to act in this behalf


shall declare what shall be the several runs, for which it
shall be competent to parties to tender, and another day
shall be named, at which the previous applicants, and all
other persons shall be at liberty to offer fresh tenders for
the runs so delivered.
CROWN LANDS BEYOND THE SETTLED DISTRICTS.
(Transfer of Runs.)
His Excellency the Governor, with the advice of the
Executive Council, has been pleased to establish the fol-
lowing rules respecting the transfer of runs beyond the
settled districts, previously to the issue of leases, under her
Majesty’s Order in Council, dated 9th March, 1847 :
1. Demands for leases of runs under the 11th section of
chapter 2 of the Order in Council, will (with the excep-
tions mentioned in the 2nd paragraph of this notice) be
received from those persons only who were the licensed
occupants of the runs at the date of the publication of the
Order in Council, by the Governor. But in consideration
of the delay that must necessarily take place in the issue
of the leases, any licensed occupant who, after having de-
manded his lease, may desire to part with his interest in
the same, will be allowed to have the lease made out in
favour of any person recommended by the Commissioner
of the district, on making written application to that effect
to the Colonial Secretary, in Sydney, or the Superintend-
ent of Port Phillip, at Melbourne, (as the case may be,)
such application to boar the applicant’s own signature, at-
tested by a Magistrate or a Commissioner of the Supreme
Court. In this case the original applicant will be de-
barred from all further claim to the lease, the right of
which will be thenceforth held to bo vested in the person
in whose favour ho requested that it should issue.
2. If, however, a person who had a right to demand a
lease of a run in his occupation, under the terms of the 11th
section of chapter 2, of the Order in Council, shall have
died or become insolvent, without having exercised such
right, the demand for the lease will be received by the


government from his representative, or from any one
coming forward on his representative’s behalf. The issue
of the lease, however, will, in such case, be suspended,
until the claimant thereof shall have satisfactorily proved
himself to be the legal representative of the deceased or
insolvent person ; and, in the meantime, the rent must be
regularly paid, in default whereof, the run will he held to
have become vacant, and the lease of it will he exposed to
sale.
3. The transfer of portions of existing runs will, in no
way, be allowed by the government. For each run, now
recognised as such, but one lease will issue, and any portion
of such run, which may not be demised to the lessee of the
remainder, will bo held to have become vacant, and to be
at the disposal of the government.
CROWN LANDS BEYOND THE SETTLED DISTRICTS.
(Proportion of Cattle to Sheep.)
Her Majesty, by order in council, dated the 9th March,
1847, having determined that the rent to be paid for each
several run of crown land beyond the settled districts of
New South Wales, shall be proportioned to the number of
sheep, or equivalent number of cattle, which the run shall
be estimated as capable of carrying, according to a scale to
be established for the purpose by authority of the Governor,
his Excellency directs it to be notified, that he has, with
the advice of the Executive Council, established the follow-
ing scale for such purpose, that is to say, —
Six hundred and forty head of cattle shall be considered
equal to four thousand sheep; and in cases in which the
stock upon a run may consist of sheep and cattle, the
amount of mixed stock (horses being reckoned as cattle)
shall be calculated in the proportion of six hundred and
forty head of cattle to four thousand sheep.
By his Excellency’s command,
E. DEAS THOMSON.
THE END.
Effingham Wilson, Printer, Royal Exchange.


CATALUUUIi Ur USEFUL. DUUB.O
PUBLISHED BY EFFINGHAM WILSON,
No. 11, ROYAL EXCHANGE, LONDON.
THE LIFE AND TIMES
OP
SIR THOMAS GRESHAM, Knight,
FOUNDER OF THE ROYAL EXCHANGE;
Including’ Notices of many of his contemporaries, by
John William Borgon, Esq.
Now offered, for a limited time, at the very reduced price qf 15s»
In two handsome large octavo volumes, embellished with a fine
portrait, and twenty-nine other engravings, elegantly hound in
Cloth» Recently published at £1 \os.
Sir Thomas GnesHAMlired in thereigns ofHcnry the Eighth,
Edward the Sixth, Mary, and Elizabeth,—Reigns, not exceeded in
interest by any period of our history; and never was a man's life
more actively and usefully spent in benefittingthe land of bis birth,
and enriching its metropolis. Commerce in particular then made a
gigantic stride, of which he was by no means an inactive spectator,
and has been not inaptly styled the “Great Patriarch of Commerce
and Commercial Finance.”
With a liberality truly patriotic, he erected for the conveni-
ence of Merchants, the Royal Exchange; and in addition to his
otherextensive Charities,founded and endowed Seven Lectureships,
for the Gratuitous instruction of the Citizens op London in the seven
liberal Sciences.
It is therefore confidently presumed, that few Merchants,
Bankers, or Members of the Corporation of the City of London,
will be without it.
Very few copies remain for sale of the large paper in 2 vols*
royal Bvo. with proof impressions of the plates, price £\ 55., pub-
lished at £3,
Partnership “en Commandite."
Partnership with Limited Liabilities (according to the cooimer*
cial practice of the Continent of Europe and the United States
of America) for the Employment of Capital, the Circulation of
Wages, and the Revival of our Home and Colonial Trade.
** The United State* are chiefly indebted for her rapid and prodigious rise to this
system of commercial association, especially in the extraordinary growth other manu-
factures, in which 6,000,0001 is now invested, giving employment to more than 100,000
persons, exclusive of those engaged in the cultivation of cotton.’’—Duujfitt* Jerroid.
In I vol. Bvo., Price 9s. in cloth*
Mr. Douhleday’s Financial and Monetary History.
A Financial, Monetary,and Statistical History or England,from
the Revolution of 1688 to the present time; derived principally
from Official Documents.
By Thomas DocßledAy, Esq.,
Author of “ The True Law of Population,” Ac. &c.
“Mr. Douhleday’s work is a very able, pains-taking, and useful exposition of the
Origin, progress, and evil consequences resulting from our funding system.’ —,4*ta*>
In 1 vol. Bvo.,Price 12s. cloth.


WILSON’S DESCRIPTION OF THE
NEW ROYAL EXCHANGE,
INCLUDING AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE FORMER EDIFICES ;
AND A BRIEF MEMOIR OF
SIR THOMAS GRESHAM, Knt.,
Founder of the original Burse in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
In 1 vol. 12mo. with 18 Embellishments, in cloth, 2s. 6d.
Ctommmial SSlovfc*.
G timers all’s Tables of Interest, &c.
Interest and Discount Tables, computed at2£, 3,3 j, 4, 4\, and
5 per cent from 1 to 365 days, and from to 000, that the
Interest or Discount on any sum,for any number ofdays,at any
of the above rates, may be obtained by tlie inspection of one
page only. Each Kate occupies eighty pages: the last five of
which are devoted to the same number of pounds from 1 to 11
months, and from Ito 10 years. They are also accompanied
with Tables of Time and Brokerage, being altogether a vast im-
provement on Thompson ami others.
By T, B, Cdmersall, Accountant, London.
This work is pre-eminently distinguished from all others on
the same subject by facility of reference, distinctness of type,
and accuracy of calculation.
Seventh Edition, in 1 vol.Svo. (pp. 500), price 10s. 6d. bound in cloth .
Tate’s Modern Cambist.
The Modern Cambist: forming a Manual of Eschanges in the
various operations of Bills of Exchange and Bullion; with
Tables of Foreign Weights and Measures, with their Equiva-
lents in English, according to the practice of all Trading
Nations.
By William Tate.
Sixth Edition just Published, 12s. cloth.
Chinese Duties.
Schedule Tariff of Duties on the Foreign Tiade with China, iu
Chinese ami Mercantile Currency, Reduced into the Equiva-
lent English Rates in Sterling Money.
By W. Tate, Author of ‘The Modern Cambist,’ on a large sheet
Price Is,
Transfer Stamp Ready Reckoner; for the use of
Sharebrokers and Investers.
Tables for Speedily Ascertaining the Cost of Transfer Stamps,
which are necessary for the conveyance of railway, canal, and
other shares. These Tables show at a glance the amount of
the Stamp required for the Transfer of any number of Shares
at any price.
»#y Henrv Bctterworth, of the Stock Exchange.
Price 2s. Gd., bound in cloth.
No. ll.&mM.iv/ti/ Corner,


Fenn’s Guide to the Funds.
A Compendium of the English and Foreign Funds, and the princi-
pal Joint-Stock Companies; forming an Epitome ofthe various
Objects of Invest meat negotiable in London: with some Account
of the Internal Debts and Revenues of the Foreign States, and
Tables for calculating the Value ofthe different Stocks,&c.
By Charles Fenn, of the Stock Exchange.
Third Edition, price ss, bound in cloth.
“Thi* little volume contains a variety of well-arranged information, indispensable
to every capitalist, banker, merchant, trader, and agriculturist.-”—J/oming Herald,
“ bo much useful mailer in so small a compass U seldom to be met with/’— Ttmtt.
Information about the British Funds :
Being an accurate Account of the different Funds and Stocks ; the
Days of Transfer; and Time of Payment of the Dividends of
each.
Small for the Pocket. Price 6d.
Money and its Vicissitudes in Value;
As they effect National Industry and pecuniary contracts ; with
a Postscript on Joint Stock Banks.
By Samcfl Bailey, Esq., Author of “ Essays on the Formation of
Public Opinion *’ &c. 234 pp. Svo. Price r educed to 6s. bds.
Tuck’s Railway Shareholders’ Manual;
Or, Practical Cuide to all the Railways in the World com-
pleted and in progress; containing Abstracts of the Railway
Acts; Advice to Shareholders; the Laws relating to Share-
holders and Speculators; Brokers* Rates of Commission lor
buying and selling Shares; Table to estimate Railway Divi-
dends; Cross Earnings of all the principal Railways; Table
showing the Price of Shares; Railways open; Railways m
course of Construction; Railways which received the Royal
Assent last Session; Foreign Railways; Railway Offices and
Officers, alphabetically arranged. The Accounts and Traffic
corrected to the present time; forming the most complete Rail-
way Synopsis ever compiled
By Henry Tuck.
Eighth Edition, greatly enlarged, Price 10s. bound in cloth.
Lynn's British Consul's Handbook.
British Consuls Abroad; their Origin, Rank, and Privileges, Du-
ties, Jurisdiction,and Emoluments; including the Laws,Orders
in Council,ami Instructions by which they are governed, as well
as those relating to Shipowners and Merchants in their con-
nexion with Consuls.
By Robert Fynn, Esq., Barristcr-at-Law
* This work is written with manifest care and judgment 5 us contents are not
only pf vital importance tn Consuls, but tu .'Merchants, Shipowners, Captains, and
* r * v tller». > ’ —Mot mng Chronicle,
New Edition. Price 65,, neatly bound, dedicated (by permission
to the General Shipowners* Society.
Royal Exchange.


Jackson's Book-keeping.
A New Check-Journal; combining the advantages of the Day-
Book, Journal, and Cash-Book; forming a complete System of
*-> Book-keeping by Double Entry; wih copious illustratior s of
Interest Accounts, and Joint Adventures; and a New Method of
Book-keeping, or Double Entry by Single.
By George Jackson, Accountant, London.
Seventh Edition, with the most effectual means of preventing
Fraud,Error,and Embezzlement, in Cash Transactions, and in
the Receipt and Delivery of Goods, &c. price 6s. bound in
cloth.
•* We can conscientiously add our meed of approval to that of the many who have
already preceded us in the same task, and strongly recommend it to general adoption/
/Uienimns.
Walton's Calculator's Guide.
Calculator's Sure Guide; or, the most comprehensive Reckoner
ever published: applicable to all Business Transactions.
By William Walton, Accountant.
Dividends on Bankrupts* and Insolvents* Estates.—lt will
readily be perceived that the amount of dividends on such estates
may be easily found, by considering tl e numbers as pounds sterling,
and the price as the dividend per pound; and lhe*‘ fractional parts”
In every page are exclusively calculated for that purpose. In the
Introduction to the work it will be seen that the author considered
this branch of paramount importance.
1 large volume Bvo, (600 pages), bound in cloth.
America compared with England:
The respective Social Effects of the American and English Sys*
terns of Government and Legislation, and the Mission of Demo-
cracy. This is the only'hook ever published in this country
explaining and contrasting the effects of the Institutions and
Laws of the United States and England upon the social con-
dition of the people. To Emigrants to the United States, who
are exp- ctcd to possess some acquaintance with the Institutions
of their adopted country, this work will be of great service.
“This is an admirable book. How its impartial and truthful exposures make u»
blush for our native land! ’’—Weekly Dispatch.
“ The book should have been called * a text book of present and future politicians,
for truly it will be.-’’—Weekly Times.
“ While we differ totally from many of the doctrines of the book, we must give thi
author credit for much diligence and much reading. Travellers, political writer*!
philosophers, are all brought to illustrate the comparative advantages of the Govern-
ment of the United Mates. Probably all that can be collected on the subject of any
value he has collected. The style is as neat and perspicuous ns the arraugemeut t>
convenient,”—’l he Economist.
“ He compares in a very masterly roanuer the respective systems of Government ad
legislation in England and the United Mates,”—! he Law Tunes.
** 1 hose who are curious upon (he subject will find in his 25111 chapter some remark
able accounts Of the experiments already made by Socialists and Communists within
the territory of the United Mates.’’—The Times.
‘‘This is an admirably written and excellently well-timed book.—We would espe-
cially recommend the publication before us to the general reader, because U is com-
posed in a calm, fair and must impartial spirit,”—Mandard of Freedom.
|a 18mo. (pp 313\ closely printed, price 4s , or Rost free on receipt
Of Queen's Heads.
No. 11, South-East Corner.


Tate’s Bankers’ Clearing-House.
The System of the London Bankers’ Clearances, and their Effect*
upon the Currency, explained and exemplified by Formuhe of
the Clearing-house Accounts.
By W. Tate, Author of“ The Modern Cambist,*’ «lc. 2s. 6d.
Drabwell’s Coal Tables.
Improved Coal-Market Tables, for ascertaining the Value of any
quantity of coals at any price; also. Discount and Scorage
Tables.
By William Drabwell, Accountant. ISmo. 6s. bds.
plobels of Commercial Setters for
Poutfj.
Anderson’s Mercantile Letters.
A Collection of Modern Letters of Business; with Notes, Critical
and Explanatory; an Analytical Index; and an Appendix, con-
taining pro formal Invoices, Account Sales, Bills of Lading, and
Bills of Exchange, Also, an Explanation of the German Chain-
Rule, as applicable to the Calculations of Exchanges: with a
Nomenclature of Technicalities not to be found in any Dic-
tionary.
By W. Anderson.
“ Youth designed for mercantile pursuits cannot be better occupied than in copy-
ing these letters ” — Standard.
“The style of these letters is simple, clear, concise, and correct, —saying much in
a little compass : the author is evidently a man of business, and his hook may be
regarded as an intermediate step between the school and the counting-house, and is
the only work of its kind in existence. There are also forms of invoices, hills of
lading, bills of exchange; in fact, we have rarely, if ever, seen so much useful matter
in so small a compass. To young men just entering counting-houses, this book will
be a very great assistant indeed t we have heard several elderly merchants of great
respectability and influence say, that if they had but possessed such a book in their
youthful days, it would have saved them a world of trouble." —London Mercantile
Journal.
“ A most comprehensive and complete guide to commercial transactions, the exam-
ples being taken from genuine commercial letters; and the whole work being direc-
ted to objects of practical utility and matters of genuine business, it forms a most aw-
ful assistant in all branches of trade and commerce.”—Courier-
“ 'Hie New Edition is not merely valuable as examples of commercial style, but as
introducing the reader and student, in the most familiar and intelligible manner, to
the system of commercial dealings in all Us branches, as carried on between this and
other countries; i* fact, it is a book width should be found in every counting-house
ami school, as the general mercantile information which it communicates and fami-
liarises cannot fail to render it interesting to all classes of readers.” —Examiner.
*• \\ t have only to announce a second edition of this excellent work. Of its merits,
as being the first of its class, we have already spoken. We perceive that in this edition
much has been inverted which tends to add to us previous utility. We would espe-
cially notice ‘Australian correspondence.’ This is novel mid striking, and speaks
much for the growing commerce of that rising colony, letters are models for
the man of business and the counting-house. Further commendation would be super-
fluous.” — Atlas.
Fifth Edition, in a neat l2mo. volume, bound in cloth, price 6s.
*** Inadditiontotheforegoing y every Commercial WoßKt*/ - reppte
far constantly on Sale,
Royal Exchange,


©eto anil approach School 23oofts,
With full Allowance to Schools and Private Teachers.
Tate's Elements of Commercial Arithmetic.
Containing a Minute Investigation of the Principles of the Science,
and their General Application to Commercial Calculations,and
in accordance with the present Monetary System of the world.
By W. Tatb.
•*lt* execution equal* any. The roles are clear and more precise than usual.
The Exercises are neatly composed, and have a greater relation to the actual busi-
ness of the world than is customary with elementary book* j whilst, to every branch
that will admit of it, rule* for mental calculation* or short cut* to answers, are
added.”— Spectator.
Fifth Edition, Improved and corrected, in 1 vol. ISmo. neatly
bound, price 2s. 6d.
Recently Published,
A Key to the Elements of Commercial Arithmetic.
Continuing the exposition of the principles of the science and of
the more intricate portions ot their application; exhibiting
variations in the modes of performing arithmetical operations ;
and conveying still further information respecting those com-
mercial regulations, by which the pupil must hereafter be
guided in his Commercial calculations.
By W. Tate.
Neatly bound, price 3s. 6d.
Just Published .
Tate's Counting-House Guide to the Higher Branches
of Calculations.
Part the First.
Forming an Appendix to the Elements of Commercial Arith-
metic*
By W. Tate.
A new and enlarged Edition, in 1 vol. 12mo. bound in cloth, 4s.
Tate's Counting-House Guide to the Higher Branches
of Calculations.
Part the Second.
Forming a Supplement and Key to the new and enlarged Edition
of the Appendix to the Elements of Commercial Arithmetic.
By \V. Tate.
In 1 vol. l-2mo. bound in cloth, 6s.
1 be two parts, bound in one, 9s. 6d.
** A work of great excellence.”— Times,
“ Mr. Tate has spared no pains to furnish himself with the best practical data.
The Koyal Mint, the ifank of England, Lloyd's, the Stock Exchange, as well as the
leading Mercantile Establishments, have been had recourse to. the work may be
satcly referred to, at a standard authority on the various matters treated upon.”—
Morning Post.
Sc. li, South-Cat Corner,


Schonberg's Chain Rule,
A Manual of brief Commercial Arithmetic, being an easy, simple,
and efficient auxiliary in the working of difficult and complica’
ted Problems; applied to Proportion, simple and compound, di-
rect and Inverse; Discount: Barter; Interest, simple or com*
pound; Profit and Loss; Fractional Numbers; Exchange ;Tare,
&c. For the use of Schools, Counting-houses, and Self-Tuition.
By Charles Louis Schonberc.
“The Chain-Rule is a simple, easy, am) clever system of arithmetical computation,
only requiring to be known to be generally adopted, to the total exclusion of Heady
Reckoners and the rule of Thumb. There is a fascination in the very arrangement of
the figures; in tact, uis an amusing as well as a most useful study, and we strongly
recommend the Chain-Rule as arranged and applied by Mr. Nchonberg.”— Lit. Gat.
Fourth Edition Neatly bound price Is. fid.
The Story Without an End,
The Story without an End. From the German of P. W. Carov6,
by Mrs. Austin.
“This is a delightful fairytale; we are all indebted to Mrs. Austin for one
literary work or another, but our children's children will thank her for this. The
book altogether is a literary gem."— Athenaeum.
Appropriately embellished with 18 Wood Engravings, In the first
style of the art, from the pencil of Harvey, price 2s. 6d. neatly
bound.
A New Tale for Young: People.
THE VOICE OF MANY WATERS. A Tale for Young People.
By Mrs. David Osborne.
In small 4t0., with Illustrations by A. Cooper, R.A., and
A. W, Cooper. Price 6s. bound in cloth.
New English Grammar.
An Elementary English Grammar, upon an entirely new prin-
ciple, especially adapted by its simplicity and its numerous
exercises, for the junior classes in schools, for private tuition,
or for self-instruction.
By W. 11. Pinnock, B.C.L,
New Edition. Price Is. bound in cloth,
“This little cheap volume is at once instructive and amusing, comprising exercises
on natural and everyday objects, especially adapted to the youthful capacity, and well
deserving of universal adoption by the enlightened teachers of youth, *--Atla»,
History in Rhymes.
Rhymes for Youthful Historians : designed to assist the Memory
in retaining the most important Dates In Ancient History, anti
the principal Events in the History of England.
" Uni* many are there of the common affairs of human life, which h* ve en
taught m early years by the help of rh)me, and have been like nadt fasten-
ed in a Mire place. * * * It is from this principle dial moral rules have
been cast into a poetic mould from all antiquity." — Dr. I'atH tmpt ertment
of the Mind. . . ...
“ Vou must not laugh at this, for ohronolngists do not pique themselves on their
poetry ; they make use of numbers and rhymes merely as assistants to me-
mory, being so easily learned.” —Mrs Chapone. .
Fifth Edition, with S 3 Portraits cf Sovereigns, price Is. 6d.
Miss Iselin’s Poems.
My Dream Book: Poems.
By Sophia Iselin.
Price Ss. 6(1. in cloth, or ss, in silk, with gilt edge*.
R njal Exchange.


A complete Course of Instruction
IN THE
dFreuci) Hanguage,
Which obviates entirely all necessity for leaving England to
learn French.
New French School by M. Le Page.
PROFESSOR OF FRENCH IN LONDON.
•» The gale of many thousands, and tfae almost universal adoption of these clever
little Books, by Mons. LE PAGE, sufficiently prove the public approbation of his plan
of teaching French, winch is in accordance with the* natural operation of a child learn*
mg its native language. 1 ' , _
The French School—Part 1.
L’ECHO DE PARIS; being a selection of Familiar
Phrases which a person would hear daily if living in France.
With a Vocabulary of the Words and Idioms.
“ Mons. Le Page’s excellent little work has, we are happy tc perceive, run through
•eveial editions with all the celerity it deserved. His book is decidedly the best we
have seen tor aiding the instruction of English children in the rudiments of the French
language; inasmuch as it approaches nearest to tbat beat of all possible methods, land*
liar conversation.—Morning Post.
Fifteenth Edition , with Additions, and numerous Woodcuts .
InlSmo. neatly bound in cloth, price is.
The French School—Part 2.
GIFT OF FLUENCY IN FRENCH CONVERSATION:
a Set of Exercises for the Learner of the French Language, cal-
culated to enable him, by means of practice, to express himself
fluently on the ordinary Topics of Life. With Notes.
Fifth Edition , improved.
12mo. neatly bound in cloth, price reduced to 3s.
•* Mons. Le Page's Elementary works are already well known and highly appreciated,
no books are better adapted to give the pupil a complete command ol words and
phrases, and a correct knowledge of the language, the arrangement is natural and
Judicious.I’— 1 ’— Atlni,
The French School—Part 3.
THE LAST STEP TO FRENCH; or, the Principles
ofFrencb Grammar displayed in a series of Short Lessons, each
of which is followed by Questions and Exercises: with the Ver-
sification.
Fifth Edition, 19mo. tieally bound in cloth, price reduced to 3s.
The Three Parts bound in One Volume, price reduced to 9s.
“ M. Le tabulation of the verbs is as complete as it is good t his syntax is
lucid and schularlike, and hts Exercises are well graduated, and likely to exercise
the student's mind with his memory. I ’—Kent's Mag.
“The first ol the works comprised in this collection is so well known to the pub*
lie, and has met with so large a sale, that we need not further notice it. To the
utility of the two latter woiks we beg to offer our unqualified testimony of praise.
In* 11 IE Last STEF TO FRENCH I we have a grammar ot the language, superior,
in our opinion, to any that has preceded it, both in sound etymological research, and
in the simplicity of its arrangement; whilst the collection ol IM. Le Page’s three works
into a single volume furnishes a complete library for the student in French, and at the
same time a manual ol conversation, enabling him at once both to leatn and to speak
the language. 11 — Parthenon.
“To schools and private ttsekers these volumes must he invaluable. 11 —Mon. Rev.
No. 11, South-East Comer ,


•„* Mons, Le Page, encouraged by a liberal public, bas also
published for the use of Junior Classes,
The French Master for the Nursery;
Or, First Lessons in French. Roy. 18mo. neatly bound; Ss. 6d. cloth.
‘‘This little work ii marked with the usual good tense and acumen fur tuition
which distinguish the works of Mont. Le Page. He is the best idiomatic
instructor we know of. His dialogues on the sound of French letters, and the parts
of speech, are of first-rate excellence.”—Court Maganne.
A Key to the Gift of French Conversation,
By Mons. LE PAGE, author of ‘ L’Echo de Paris,’ &c.
This little book, intended to assist those ladies and gentlemen
■who, after having left school, are desirous of being able to converse
in French, and the tutors and governesses who wish to teach it, will,
it is presumed, be found very desirable ; as, while the original work
supplies them with a large stock of English words and phrases of
daily use in familiar conversation, the key to it gives them the cor-
rect translation of the same into French, thereby showing them
which »s the proper expression for every topic of life.
Price Eighteen-pence.
Mons. Le Page's French Prompter;
HAND-BOOK FOR TRAVELLING ou the Continent
and Students in French.
A complete Manual of Conversation, arranged in Alphabetical
order, so as to obviate all difficulty of reference, each English
word is followedby thephrasesand idiomatic French in constant
use, forming a perfect English and French dictionary, and a
sure Hand-Book of Conversation,as it gives at each word all the
phrases relating to it which are heard daily in polite families.
Second Edition. In a neat Pocket Volume, pp.SSO,price Bs.
Petit Musee de Litteratnre Frangaise.
ELEGANT EXTRACTS from the most Eminent Writers
of France, in Prose and Verse; with chronological and critical
Notices of French Literature, from the Fourteenth to the Nine-
teenth Centuries,
By M. Le Page, Professor of the French Language in London,
Author of‘L’Echo de Paris,* &c.
4 * The selection* have been carefully made, and show at once the style and the
power of the writer. We strongly recommend the ‘Petit Musee’ to all those de-
sirous of becoming acquainted with the literature of France.” — Argus.
In One Volume, 12m0., handsomely bound, price ss. 6d.
This Work is kept in Elegant Binding, suitable for Presents, atBs, 6d.
Heady Guide to Trench Composition.
FRENCH GRAMMAR BY EXAMPLES; giving Models
as Leading Strings throughout Accidence and Syntax; and
presenting a Comparative View of the English and French
Idioms in their principal Differences,
By Mons. Le Page, Professor of the French Language, Author of
‘ L’Echo de Paris,’ ‘ The French Prompter,’ Ac.
“ VVe should not think of describing an object to make it know n, when we can show
it at once. Why should we thmk of teaching by precepts and rules when a model can
be set forth?”
Chervelle's First Step to French.
New and Improved Edition (in the Press).
Royal Exchange.


JRi'scellancous.
Railway Share and Stock Calculator.
Tables for Calculating Shares in Railway, Canal, Gas, Mining,
Insurance, and other Companies, at any Price from l-16th of a
Pound Sterling, or Is. 3d. per Share, up to *£3lo in value; and
from 1 Share to 500. Applicable also to foreign or English
Stocks, or Bonds, and for other purposes; to which is annexed
a Comprehensive Table of Income Tax.
By R. Edwin Robinson, Stock Exchange.
Third Edition, with Scale of Commissions, as agreed by
authority of the Committee of the Stock Exchange, London.
Price Ts. 6d.
This work will be found essential to Stock Brokers, Bankers,
Merchants, and all parties having transactions in Slock or
Shares, or having to pay or receive dividends,annuities, &c.
A Narrative of the Treatment Experienced by a Gen-
tleman, during: a state of Mental Derangement;
Designed to explain the causes and the nature of Insanity, and to
expose the injudicious conduct pursued towards many unfortu-
nate sufferers under that calamity.
By John Perceval, Esq.
In 1 vol. Bvo,, Bs.; ditto vol. 2, 10s^6d.
Consumption Curable.
Consumption of the Lungs and Asthma arrested and cured in the
majority of cases, by Inhalation and other rational means.
By Daniel Carr, M D.
In one volume, 12m0., price 3s. 6d., bound in cloth.
Dr. Fraser Halle's Philosophy.
Exact Philosophy. Books First and Second.
By Hughes Fraser Halle, P. LL.D.
Author of‘Critical Letters,’and of the Articles on ‘Hume’s Essay,*
‘ Schism,’ in the Britannic Censor of European Philosophy , &c.
This day, in 1 vol. post Bvo. Price 6s. cloth.
“Time and tide wait for no man.**
The Importance of Punctuality enforced,
With an Emblematical Border mi wood. For the use of Counting-
houses, Warehouses, Shops, &c. Price, on card-board, Bd.;
on paper, 6d.
Composition and Punctuation
Familiarly explained, for those who have neglected the study of
Grammar; and wherein
FOREIGNERS, WHO MAY BE LEARNING ENGLISH,
will also find information calculated to facilitate their progress
in the understanding of the Language.
By Justin Brenan.
Sixth Edition, considerably augmented, price 2s. Gd., bound in cloth.
No, 11, South-East Corner,


Eccles on Ulcers of the Leg*
Observations on the Treatment and Cure of Ulcers, particularly
Ulcers of the Leg,
By William Eccles, Surgeon, Old Broad Street.
**A useful book Lancet.
** A little volume of considerable practical utility.”— Medico-Chirurgical Review,
Second Edition, price 2s. 6d.
Jeremy Bentham's Remains.
A Lecture delivered overthe Remains of Jeremy Bentham, Esq.
in the Webb*street School of Anatomy and Medicine, on the
9th of July, 1832.
By Southwood Smith, M. D.
Hiysician to London Feter Hospital; Teacher of Physiology & Forensic Medicine, See.
With a Representation of the Body. Price 2s. 6d.
Exercises, Political and Others.
By Lieut. Colonel T. Pereonet Thompson, Author of the Corn
Law Catechism, &c.
Consisting of matter previously published with and without the
Author’s name, and of some not published before.
In 6 vols. small Bvo., price 15s. in boards.
Tuck's Map of the Railways;
Distinguishing the Lines for Traffic, the Lines In course of Con-
struction, and the Lines projected, their Termini, Length,
Capital, Ac.;
With Tables of Reference,
Showing the Lines leased and amalgamated; the whole forming
The Most Complete Map ever published.
Price 55., mounted on canvass, bound, cloth.
fcde Risk of Life Assurance,
Suggested by a History of the Case of Geach v. Ingall, In which
the Imperial Life Assurance Company, by the Verdicts of three
different Special Juries, was deleated in an Attempt to evade
the Payment of a Policy.
Second Edition. Price 6d ; or free by Post, lOd.
A Short and Sure Guide to Permanent Investments in
Railways.
A few Plain Rules how to invest and speculate with Safety and
Profit in Railway Shares. With some Remarks on the Mone-
tary Effect of Deposits and Calls.
By a Successful Operator.
Ninth Edition, price Is.; by post 16 Queen’s Heads.
Royal Exchange.


Corn, Currency, and Consols,
Their Fluctuations from 1790.
«» Exceedingly useful for reference; tbe engraving is clear and distinct.”— Times.
** The illustration from the eve to the understanding is perfect.”— Lit. Gax.
New edition, price Is. coloured.
Tuck’s Railway Directors for 1846.
Containing the Names of the Directors and Principal Officers of
all the Railways in Great Britain. From authentic Sources,
By Henry Tuck,
Author of the * Railway Shareholder’s Manual.’
New and Improved Edition, price Is. Gd.
Howitt’s Priestcraft*
New and Improved Edition of the Popular History of Priestcraft,
in all Ages and Nations, with large Additions.
By William Howitt,
Eighth Edition, 12m0., cloth, reduced to ss.
“ We spirits are not citizens of the earth, hut of the cily of God, called the uni*
verse; and our life fills not merely a moment, but eternity. In ibis exalted position,
what can we do more worthy of our destination than, like Christ, and by his word, to
release spirits from the shackles of error, and to bring them nearer unto G0d. ,4 ~
Skoberl'tPresent Stale of Christianity throughout the World.
•‘This is a book of strong facts and strong opinions. * • Such facts have never
been blended with such eloqnence.'WA'oncon/oimij/.
Hampden's Aristocracy.
The Aristocracy of England: a History for the People,
By John Hampden, Jun.
Author of*CriticalY»'ettoPs, n £ifif & , £'UVtrcfes Mss-.,.
* Schism,* in the Britannic Censor of European Philosophy , &c.
This day, in I vol. post Bvo, Price 6s. cloth.
“Time and tide wait for no man**
the Importance of Punctuality enforced,
With an Emblematical Border on wood. For the use of Counting- i 4
houses, Warehouses, Shops, &c. Price, on card-board, Bd.;
on AVUSWV. t /14 J ,„ i , , . . . -tl
With a Short-hand for both.
By V. D. de Stains, Graduate of the University of Paris,
** He "bo cannot say something in sympathy with or in aid of the great move-
ments of humanity, might as well hold his peace.”— H'ilUam E. CAanning.
Second Edition in 1 vol. Bvo., 10s. cloth.
“There is something truly original and interesting in the suggestions the author
has set forih, and hts plan is very* ingenious. It is curious to behold how b« has
Rttnplifi-d the notation and economized the space in depicting musical sounds ; this
'view of the subject is well worthy attention.”—Jforntn; Post.
Xo W, South-East Corner,


The Hallway Pioneer.
Observation* on a General Iron Railway, or Land Steam Con* •
veyance; to supersede the necessity of Horses in all public
Vehicles, Showing its vast superiority in every respect, over
all the present pitiful methods of conveyance by Turnpike
Hoads, Canals, and Coasting Traders, Containing every
species of information relative to Uailroads and Locomotive
•Engines.
By Thou as GaAy, the Original Inventor of Railways.
A Catechism of the Currency.
By the Author of “ The Catechism of the Corn Laws.”
Price 4d.; or free by Post, 6d,
A Letter to the Congestive Bankerhood of Great
Britain,
\\ ith a Proposition for a New Currency.
By a Travkller (not from Geneva).
Price 6d.; or free by Post, Bd.
Free-Trade, and the Cotton Question with reference
to India.
By Francis Carnac Brown, of Tellicherry.
Price Is.; or free by Post. Is. 6d.
The Risk of Life Assurance,
Suggested by a History of the Case of Gcach v. Ingall, in which
the Imperial Life Assurance Company, by the Verdicts of three
different Special Juries, was defeated in an Attempt to evade
the Payment of a Policy.
Second Edition. Price 6d ; or free by Post, lOd.
Be I’lnfluence des Capitaux Anglais
Surl’lndustrieEuropenne, depuisja Revolution de 1688, jusau’en
1846.
Par Ch. Wilson.
Chevalier dePOrdre du Lion Neerlanduis.
Price 4a ; or free by Post, 4s. 6d.
Royal Exchange


The Importance of a Right Study of the Principles
of Arithmetic.
By George Hutton,
Author of “The Manual of Arithmetic.”
Price Is ; or free by Post, Is. 4il.
A Comparative Table of French and English Measure.
By Jakes Emson.
Showing at One View the Length in Yards from One Metre to
One Thousand Metres
Price Is.
The Right of the Aristocracy to the Soil Considered.
By John Noakes.
Fifth Edition. Price 3d.; or free by Post, 4d.
Texas:
A Brief Account of the Soil, Climate, and Natural Productions of
Texas, and the Advantages offered to Emigrants by the Texas
Emigrating and Land Company.
Price Is.; or free by Post, Is. 4d.
Public Opinion;
Or, Safe Revolution, through S elf Representation.
By Hewett Cottrell Watsor,
Author of ** The Cybele Britaimica,” “ New Botanist's Guide,” Ac.
“There are two quite opposite modes of understanding the representative system;
in the one, power of » hat kind soever is conformable to the decisions of the majority;
in the other, power creates for itself * factitious majority."--Lamartine.
Price 6d.
liatest from the Gold Region.
THE GUIDE TO CALIFORNIA, with a Map. contain-
ing the latest Accounts from the Gold Region derived from
the Official Reports of Adjutant-Paymaster Richard Commodore
Jones, and Mr. Larkins. Agent of the United States Navy, and
from other authentic Sources.
Set ond Edition, price 6d-
The Land for the Labourers,
And the Fraternity of Nations. A Scheme for a new Industrial
System, just published in Paris, and intended for Proposal to
the National Assembly.
' Edited by Thomas Cooper,
A uthor of “ The Purgatory of Suicides.”
Price 3d.; or free by-Post, sd.
No. 11, South-East Corner,


Financial Reform Imperative;
Or, Remarks relative to the possibility of an Equitable Adjust-
ment of the National Debt.
Price 6d.; or free by Post, Bd.
The Principles of Insurance
Applied to Mercantile Debts; a Letter to the Right Honourable
Lord Ashburton.
Price fid.; or free by Post Bd.
The Author's Guide.
A Guide to Authors; showing* how to correct the press,according
to the mode adopted and understood by Printers, price 6d.
The National Debt and Public Funds Simplified.
By Justin Brenan,
Author of “Composition and Punctuation familiarly explained."
“Thii is the cleverest exposition of these otherwise complicated matter* ever
published,’’—The Critic.
Second Edition, price Is., or Post free on receipt of 16 Queen’s
Heads.
Dr. Yeoman on Comsumption and Diseases of the
Chest.
ASTHMA, INFLUENZA, BRONCHITIS, AND
CATARRH. The Cause, Symptoms and Rational Treatment.
By T. H. Yeoman, M.D.
Just Published, price 2s , or Post free on receipt of 30 Queen’s Heads
Also, by the same Author,
CONSUMPTION OF THE LUNGS. The Causes.
Symptoms, and Rational Treatment, with the Means of Preven-
tion
41 W« most cordially recommend the work to the heads of families.’’—Bell’*
Weekly Messenger.
Price 2s ; or, Post free on receipt of 30 Queen’s Heads.
“ Retrenchment, Peace, Reform ! ’’—Whig Fledges.
Tins Day (300 pp ), 2s. fid , or Post free, to any part of the kingdom,
on receipt of 3 J Queen’s Heads,
UNREFORMED ABUSES in CHURCH AND STATE;
with a Preliminary Tractate on the CONTINENTAL REVO-
LUTIONS.
By John W*de,
Author of “History and Political Philosophy of the Productive
Classes, Ac.
Royal Exchange,


WHHS&H M 11S 4 ©lAfl
AND
HOW TO GST THERE.
This Day is Published,
sEini.QViints - ©itfiret)
TO THE
BRITISH COLONIES,
IP IE H© S 3 ®KJH BIEIIEaItjSSSr© HA© IS,
By J. C. BYRNE, Esq.,
Author of 1 Twelve Years' Wmiderings in the British Colonies .
FORT NATAL, WITH A MAP.
NEW SOUTH WALES PROPER,
AVSTRi.HA. ri:i,ix,
AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Seventh Edition*
“This smalt hand-book, written by a man practically acquainted with the Colonies
of wbicb hr writes, is one of the best arranged, most economical and useful Guides
that we have seen. Eveiy point of real and general importance to the emigrant teems
to be touched upon briefly hut tersely*—from the qualities of the Colony which should
determine the choice of his location to the management of colonial property when it
is obtained. There are not many Guide-books to Australia which we could recommend
to the labouring classes in prelereuce to this one by Mr. Byrne.— Alkenttum.
THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE,
Second Edition, with a Map.
“ These clever little books contain all the information an Emigrant can require."
Critic-
Published by Effingham Wilson, No. 11, South-East Corner, Roy a I Exchaf>H




