

EMIGRATION.
Despatch from the Right Honorable Lord John Russell, to His Excellency Governor
Sir George Gipps, transmitting Report from the Colonial Land and Emigration
Commissioners, on the comparative advantages of the Government and Bounty Systems
of Emigration.
(No. 160.)
Downing-street,
7th October, 1840.
Sir,
I have to acknowledge the receipt of your Despatch of the 4th of December,
1839, enclosing the Copy of the Report made to the Legislative Council of New South Wales,
by the Committee appointed during the Session of 1839, to consider the subject of Immigration.
Having referred that Despatch and its enclosures to the Colonial Land and Emigration
Commissioners, I now transmit to you a Report which I have received from them, dated
the 14th ultimo, and which will engage the serious attention of yourself And of the
Legislative Council.
The main question controverted between the Committee of the Council on the one
hand, and the Commissioners on the other, respects the comparative advantages of the two
systems of supplying Emigrants to New South Wales. One of these is designated as the
“ Bounty System,” and the other as the “System of Government Emigration”. To myself
it appears that on either side this debate is urged somewhat beyond the real necessity of the
case. 'Die two Systems are contrasted, not merely as different, but as opposed to and
irreconcilable with each other. It seems throughout to be assumed that these two methods of
promoting the same common end, must necessarily be pursued by distinct agencies, if not in
a spirit of rivalry and competition. I cannot view the subject in this light, and I think it
inconvenient that it should be so regarded by others.
The ultimate object in both cases is the same. It is that of supplying New South
Wales with good and effective Manual Laborers, imported thither at no unnecessary charge
to the Public Revenue. In accomplishing this object there are two main considerations to
be kept in view.
First. —It is desirable that the existing Colonists in New South Wales should be
satisfied both with the choice of the Emigrants introduced there, and with the rate of the
expenditure which may be incurred on that account. But, secondly, it is not less necessary
that Her Majesty’s subjects in this Country should be protected against being seduced from
their homes by fraudulent or deceptive statements, and against their exposure, during the
voyage, to dangers or to hardships, needlessly affecting their lives, their health, or their
comfort.
Now, in order to secure both these objects, it appears to me that the two systems
might, to a certain extent, be advantageously combined with each mother. When Emigrants
are sent to New South Wales by the Commissioners, securities are taken both in this Kingdom
and in the Colony, against the abuses to which I have adverted. But when they are sent
under the care of persons receiving Bounty, there is no security whatever taken in this
Kingdom, either that they should not be induced to Emigrate by false representations, or
that the Vessels in which they sail should be sea-worthy, well found, and properly provisioned.
There is no apparent reason for this distinction. The Emigrants removed by the Receivers
of the Bounty, might, with as much facility as any other class of Emigrants, be brought
under the cognizance and protection of the Emigration Commissioners, and of their Agents
at the different Out-Ports.
By this method one of the great objections which the Commissioners have urged
against the System of Bounties, would be effectually obviated. The two plans would then
have thus much in common, namely:—That both at the commencement, and at the close of
the voyage, responsible Officers of the Government would watch over the safety of the
Emigrants, their proper selection, and the prevention of the frauds to which poor and ignorant
persons engaging in adventures of this kind, are so readily exposed.
For thesdrreasons, I have to direct that all persons to whom the Bounty may hereafter
be promised, should be required as a necessary condition for receiving it, to report to the
Emigration Commissioners in this Kingdom, or to their Agents at the Out-Ports, the number,
the names, the sexes, the ages, and the occupations of the various Emigrants whom they are
about to remove. On receiving such Reports, the Commissioners, or their Agents, will inspect
and communicate with the Emigrants. If they shall be satisfied that they are persons
corresponding with the terms prescribed by the Local Government, and that they have not been
induced to quit this Country by any fraud or misrepresentation, and that the Vessel in which
they are about to sail is sea-worthy, well found, duly provisioned, and of proper dimensions,
it will be the duty of the Commissioners, or their Agents, to deliver to the Master of the
Vessel a Certificate to that effect; and of every such Certificate the Commissioners will transmit
a duplicate to you. But without the production of such a Certificate, you will not hereafter
pay to any person the Bounty on the introduction of any Emigrant.
Hth Sept. IStO.


This Regulation is to take effect from the time of your receiving it, and in respect of all
applications for Bounty which may be made at any subsequent period.
I am, Sir,
Your most obedient humble Servant,
J. RUSSELL.
Governor Sir George .Gipps,
&c., &c., &c.
(Copy.)
Colonial Land and Emigration Office,
9, Park-street, Westminster, 14 th September, 1840.
Sir,
We have had the honor to receive your letter of the 17th July, enclosing a
Despatch from Sir George Gipps, together with a Report from the Committee of the Legislative
Council of New South Wales, on the subject of Emigration to that Colony.
The Committee, we find, most strongly urge the necessity of “ neither permitting
Immigration to be suspended, nor checked in its extent(page 13.) and it is satisfactory to
observe the tone which these Representatives, as they may be called, of the Colonists, take with
respect to the discontinuance of the system of Assigning Convicts, “ numerous hands” they
say (page 9.) “will be required to supply the deficiency of agricultural and mechanical laborers
“ thereby occasioned, but there will be, they trust, now that the principal source of contagion
“ is about to be stopped, a greater probability of the Immigrants continuing to preserve their
“ habits and character unvitiated. Thus will they be better qualified to lay the foundation of
“a community distinguished by superior regard to moral and religious principle.”
The principal subject, however, which is discussed in the documents that have been
referred to us, is the comparative operation of the two systems under which the Emigration of
the laboring classes has been conducted, and to the consideration of this point, we shall, in
the following paper, exclusively direct our attention. It is a subject of great importance to the
Colony, of which the Revenue defrays the conveyance of the Emigrants; and we are not
unmindful that it is one to which our attention was especially directed in Lord John Russell’s
Instructions upon the issue of our Commission. It is unnecessary, therefore, for us to say
that the whole question has been fully and attentively considered by us, and we have now the
honor to report the opinions at which we have arrived.
The two systems to which we have adverted, have been called respectively the Govern-
ment, and the Bounty systems. The Bounty system cannot be better described than in the
words of our instructions; —“The system of paying, from the Land Revenue, Bounties to
" persons proportionate to the number of eligible Emigrants whom they may introduce into
“ the Colony from this country; the candidates for such Bounties being entrusted with the
“ selection of the Emigrants, and with whatever relates to the management of the voyage.”
Under the Government system, on the other hand, the Emigrants have been selected, and the
ships engaged and dispatched by Government Officers in this Country, acting under the Officer
styled, the “Agent-General for Emigration.”
As regards the positive efficiency of both, we see with pleasure, that “the Committee
“ has arrived at the conclusion that each of the systems has had the effect of introducing great
“ numbers of useful and industrious individuals of both sexes into the country, whereby its
“ Moral, Physical, and Political condition, has already been much improved, and the ground-
“ work has been laid for a future much more extended melioration.” (page 4.) The most
important question, however, is, in what degree the two systems have respectively contributed
to this result.
In instituting this comparison, there are of course many considerations to which it will
be necessary for us to advert, but the two points on which it is mainly important to consider
and compare them, are the cost of conveyance, and the quality of the Emigrants whom they
are respectively the means of introducing.
Sir George Gipps, in the Despatch before us, declares his opinion to be in favor of the
Bounty system in both these respects. But as tills conclusion at which he has arrived is
founded upon the Report of the Committee of the Legislative Council, and as he adopts the
recommendations which are contained in it, it would perhaps be the most convenient course
if we direct our attention principally to that document, and to the evidence by which it is
accompanied; and at the same time furnish such information as to the past, as may be derived
from the Records of the Agent-General’s Office, or such suggestions for the future, as our own
experience may enable us to make.
We have named the cost as the first point for comparison, because it is that which is
first considered in the Report, and which appears very naturally to have attracted the most
attention in the Colony. We would not, however, be understood as thinking it by any means
the first in real importance. The character and description of Emigrants, the circumstances
under which they are selected in this Country, and prevailed upon to choose the spot to which
they will Emigrate, and the moral and physical condition in which they are landed in the Colony,
are all points, to our apprehension, of higher importance than the money which may be paid for
their introduction. And we are convinced that the Committee of the Legislative Council would
be the first to admit, that the introduction or continuance of any moral evil connected with the


removal of the poorer classes from this Country to the Colony, which could possibly be
prevented, would be very inadequately compensated by a small pecuniary saving in the cost of
their conveyance ; —we are far from saying that such evil is incurred, for such a reason, in the
Bounty system. We have only thought it necessary to direct attention to the point, as one
which should never be overlooked in considering any scheme for the Emigration of the
laboring classes.
The conclusion at which the Committee arrives, after calculations of a somewhat
complicated nature, is, that in the Government Ships the average cost of Immigrants per head,
that is, Men, Women, and Children,has been £l9 75.; and that in the Ships on Bounty, it
has been £ls 6s. Without entering into the details of these calculations, we will merely remark
that the periods for which the two Systems are compared, are not precisely the same; for the
Government Ships the calculation commences six months earlier than for the other, thereby
throwing it into a period when the arrangements were not thoroughly matured; while the
calculations for the Bounty System are carried over a whole quarter later than for the
Government System, thus affording greater scope for the operation of the constant improvements
which are practicable in the multifarious details connected with such a voyage. Another
observation that we must make relates to the heavy charges, which, in calculating the cost of the
Government System, are inserted on account of the Immigrant’s Barracks, and for the main-
tenance of the Immigrants after their arrival. Under the Bounty System the Immigrants are
only maintained by the Captain on board of Ship for forty-eight hours after their arrival, and
then have to provide for their own support;—they consequently are no longer a charge upon
the Colonial Fund when once they have arrived. We shall have occasion hereafter to remark
that objections of a serious character might be urged against this course, if the Bounty System
were greatly enlarged. We only advert to the subject here, because a considerable item of
expense is charged to the one system, which is not to the other, but which we are convinced
that other would have to bear, if ever the whole Emigration of the year should be thrown
permanently upon it. It should also be mentioned that the charges of the Immigrant Barracks
appear to be unnecessarily high, inasmuch as the period for maintaining the Immigrants had
been extended for four weeks, a period so long ns to entail a heavy loss upon the Colony,
without conferring any corresponding benefit upon the Immigrants, as its effect could only be
to indispose them from seeking employment. This, however, has been matter of Colonial
arrangement; and no Department in this Country is in the least answerable for any
inconvenience or unnecessary expense which it may have entailed.
We may further remark, that the experiment of the two systems can hardly yet be
said to have been fully tried. The Bounty System, indeed, has been only tried on a very
limited scale as compared with the other. During the Year 1838, to which the Report refers,
nearly three thousand more persons were introduced by the Government Ships than by the
Bounty ; and in both systems changes have been going on up to the latest time at which they
were respectively tried. Moreover, as the Governor remarks, the expense of the Bounty
System is progressive, while that of the Government System has gradually decreased. This
circumstance is admitted by the Governor in the Despatch before us; and in fact in the same
Report of the Committee in which the extraordinary cheapness of the Bounty System is so
greatly extolled, a very considerable augmentation in the amount of Bounty, and the introduction
of a scale of gratuities to the Surgeon and Officers of the Ships, is recommended and has been
adopted by the Governor. It appears also in the evidence that the sum now named by the
Governor, viz:—.£l9 per adult, is still below a remunerating price to the Principal Manager
of Bounty Ships, and therefore, that a further increase must eventually be made in it. Mr.
James, the Agent for the person in this Country who has taken out the greatest number of
Emigrants upon Bounty, and Mr. Smith, a Merchant in Sydney, engaged in the same trade,
both declare that the system cannot be carried on upon the present low rate of Bounties.
Under these circumstances it might naturally be asked, with some surprise, how the
Emigration has been hitherto carried on at a rate declared to be unremunerating; but this
point also we find explained in the evidence before us. By the copy of an advertisement, which
is printed in the Committee’s Appendix as having been issued in this Country to persons
collecting Emigrants on Bounty, it appears that the Emigration under this System has been
only an Assisted, not a Free Emigration. Each couple have been required to pay £4 out of
their own resources before a passage has been granted to them, and it is therefore not
surprising that paying in part for themselves, they have cost the Colony less than if taken
free. But we apprehend it must be exceedingly doubtful whether dependence could be put
upon this system for supplying the great stream of Emigration which is annually required
by the Colony. It must be very questionable whether a sufficient number of persons could be
found capable of contributing to the expense of their conveyance, even if it were a matter of
indifference that they should be landed in a penniless state in the Colony. We must note it,
therefore, as a material point, that the system would very likely be found not capable of such
extension as the wants of the Colony require.
Turning from the past to the future cost of the Emigration, we find that the amount of
Bounty now offered by the Colony to persons who will convey out eligible Emigrants, is £l9
per married adult, and it has been decided to grant gratuities to different Officers to the extent
of £1 10s. for each of the Emigrants landed. The whole cost, therefore, per adult, will be
£2O 10s. In stating this as the probable cost, we must observe that the Committe reckon on
a saving by abolishing the Immigrant Barracks, at Sydney, and requiring the Ship Owners to
maintain the Immigrants for ten clear days on board. We cannot but express our regret,
however, that motives of economy should have induced the recommendation of this course.
We much fear that if carried out it might prove neither very humane in itself, nor perhaps
expedient for the Colony, even in the pecuniary point of view in which it is recommended. It


Passage Money ,
£18
10
2
Agency
0
7
4
Maintenance
0
8
10
Mattresses and Books
0
7
4
Surgeon
10
11
Inspector of Ships
0
4
0*
Office
0
3
8
Incidental Expenses
0
7
2±
** 2
£20
19
6
Married Couple £41
19
0
One Child between 7 and 14, deducting Agency
not paid for Children 10
6
I
Two” Children between 1 and 7, deducting
Agency which is not paid for Children ,. 13
14
8
£65
19
9
would be felt by a number of persons, Men, Women, and Children, who had been crowded
together in a Ship during a long and trying voyage, as a considerable hardship to be forced to
remain on board the Vessel for ten days after its arrival, and if submitted to, we think it would
be likely to induce feelings of despondency, which would greatly predispose to disease. Should
such break out, the expenses of Quarantine would soon exceed the expense of any properly
regulated system of maintenance on shore in Barracks which have been already built. It would
be, moreover, the Captain’s interest that the people should ou board as little time as
possible. There are various modes in which this might be made sensible to them, and tend to
increase their discomfort in remaining, and in the end the greater number would probably be
induced to forego the maintenance which was offered them, and seek their fortunes at once in
the Colony. It would be another way in short of getting rid of any care over the Emigrants
when once they had arrived in the Colony; and in the Report of the Committe for the
preceding year, we find it stated (page 12) in speaking of some of the Bounty Immigrants, “that
“it Is in evidence that such persons too often come on shore in a state of much destitution,
“and are exposed to great hazards in the course of their inquiries for employment.
In a comparison, however, of the two systems of conveying Emigrants, it is not
necessary to dwell on this point, inasmuch as if the course proposed be right, and be adopted,
it is equally applicable to both. The Emigrants might remain in both the Government
ships as well as in those which are fitted out on Bounty. And in fact, whatever mode of
dealing with the Emigrants upon their first arrival should be decided upon as the best,
should be pursued in all cases alike, without reference to the mode in which the individuals
had happened to be conveyed into the Colony.
We shall now proceed to state the sum for which it may be estimated that Emigrants
could be conveyed in ships chartered by our Board, and filled under our direction ; and our
best mode of making this calculation will be, by giving the result of actual experience in
the management of the South Australian Emigration. The principle upon which it has
been managed, modified only by the improvements which have, from time to time, been
introduced into the details, has been tried for a considerable time, and appears to us to
work successfully :—The mode of proceeding is, to advertise for Tenders of Ships of a certain
size, each Tender to be sent into our Board by a fixed day and hour. At the appointed time
our Surveyor of Shipping attends and gives us such information as to the Ships which are
Tendered, and as to the usages connected with Shipping, as we may require; and then, if
no objection exists in the particular case, we accept, subject to his actual Survey of the Ship,
the Tender which offers to take the passengers at the lowest rate per Statute Adult, that is, for
Men, Women, and Children, only counting of the latter, three between one to seven, and two
between seven and fourteen, as one Adult, according to the terms of the Passenger’s Act.
Besides this direct charge for the passage, there are various expenses incidental to the
management of Emigration. There are the expenses of the Department in our own Office—
the Fee to the Agents for the selection—the Fees to the Surveyor for examining the vessel
and superintending her fittings, and inspecting the provisions—the remuneration to the
Surgeon who accompanies the Emigrants—and the expense of mattresses for the voyage,
books, and the maintenance at our Depot of parties who may arrive before the ship is ready
to receive them. The statement we are about to subjoin of the charges under each of these
heads, is derived from the actual cost in the year 1840. It may be remarked, however, that
the present year is by no means the most favorable to the system, inasmuch as from an
increase in freights, from the scarcity of the proper description of Ships, the average passage
money, which, in 1839, was .£l7 15s. s|d., has been raised to £lB 10s. 2d., that is, by
15s. BJd. per adult. It is also proper to mention that we have now reduced the Agent’s fee
by one-half, and the cost of maintenance by two-fifths, but we have not introduced into our
table the new rates of charge under these heads, inasmuch as the change has only recently been
made. At the same time it should be observed that they are reductions which are fixed and
.permanent, while the passage money may be expected to vary from time to time.
.According to this calculation the expenses of an average family will be as follows, viz


Married Couple
£41
0
0
One Child between 7 and 14 ..
11
10
0
Two Children between 1 and 7
13
0
0
£65
10
0
Under the Bounty System, adding to the passage money and allowance for Gratuities at
the rate of £1 10s. per head, which is the amount estimated by the Council, the same
family will cost as follows :
We have omitted, from each of these two statements, the cost of maintaining the
Emigrants upon their arrival in the Colony, because, as we have already said, we think
that whatever expense may be necessary for this purpose, ought to be incurred under both
systems alike, and cannot form a proper ground of contrast. By the present Bounty Regulations
the Passengers may be kept on board of Ship for ten days after their arrival, while under the
system pursued by this Office, the time named in the Tender of the Ship is’ seven days ; but
this is a difference too small to he taken into account, especially as it is probable that the
Passengers would in neither case remain on board even for the shorter period.
The result of the calculations is to shew, that under the system pursued in the South
Australian Emigration, the expense of taking out a married couple is 19s. more, but of the
whole of an ordinary family of five persons, only 9s. 9d. more than under the system of
Bounty in New South Wales. We are quite aware that the Bounty regulations are so framed
as to discourage the introduction of families, but we are satisfied from our experience, that
if the system be extensively tried, families must he taken, or children will be deserted; and we
would submit the remark, that as it is so greatly for the interest of the Colony to retain all the
laborers that are introduced at its expense, the ties of family form the most effective
means of securing that object.
Upon the whole we come to the conclusion, that upon the plan which leaves the control
and conduct of Emigration to private enterprise, some saving in the expense is effected, and
perhaps always will be; but that the advantage in this respect over the Government System is
not very great, and by no means sufficient, if any evils of another nature should arise in the
course of its operation to countervail them. We think also, that if tried on an extensive
scale, no certain dependence could be placed upon this plan for supplying the whole amount
of Emigrants which are annually required by the Colony.
We now turn to the important consideration of the description of Emigrants which each
system has been the means of introducing into the Colony. It is with regret that we observe
that the Committee report, that without designing to detract from the character of usefulness
and eligibility in many of the Immigrants introduced in Government vessels, they cannot conceal
the fact that there is evidence of a great proportion of this class being of a contrary description,
(page C.) It is of course not in our pow«r to dispute the correctness of a judgment pronounced
on the spot by competent authorities. It may be permitted to us to remark, however, that the
Returns made to us of the disposal of Emigrants upon their arrival, would not have led us to
suppose that a great proportion were either useless or ineligible; inasmuch as with a few
exceptions, where parties have gone to work upon their own account, they all appear to have
been engaged by different Proprietors and Masters in the Colony. Very great stress has been
laid by the Immigration Agent at Sydney upon the case of one ship with Emigrants from
Ireland, who were less successful, and he assigns as the reason, their ineligibility. When
asked whether the cause might not have been a feeling of prejudice, which unfortunately appears
to have obtained against the people from Ireland, Mr. Pinnock, who has always been remark-
able for his advocacy of the Bounty System, replied, that he thought not, for that he “ never
“ found difficulty in disposing of useful Irish Immigr ants, and remarked that in the Bounty
“ ships they got off quite as rapidly as any others.” This is a very different account, however,
from that which is given by the parties directly concerned in those ships. The Agent to whom
most of them have been consigned, states in evidence that he has “ generally observed a
“ prejudice against those from Ireland.” (James, page 39.) And a Merchant, whose house is
also engaged in the introduction of Emigrants upon Bounty, states (Smith Q. 18 and 21)
that the English and Scotch always go off first, and that he has written home in consequence,
instructions not to send Irish, if English or Scotch Emigrants can be obtained. We allude to
these facts only to shew that it may be from other causes than mere ineligibility, that difficulty
may have been experienced in disposing of passengers by a ship from Ireland. But we cannot
quit the subject of the alleged prejudice, to which we have thus had occasion incidentally to
advert, without expressing our regret at its existence, and our hope that no Public Officer will
permit himself, or be suffered by the Authorities over him, to give it any countenance. We
can only say so far as regards their conduct on board of ship, judging by the Records in the
Agent General’s Office, no people seem to us more susceptible of the influence of kind and
judicious management than the Irish, or more capable of being carried out in good health, and
certainly none to evince better feelings at the conclusion of their voyage, towards those under
whose care they have been safely guided to their destination.
There is another statement in Mr. Pinnock’s Evidence which we feel obliged to notice,
especially as it led to an expression of censure on the Officers at home, by the High Authority
before whom it was offered. Mr. Pinnock asserted (Q. 25) that a Notice was (C issued under the
“ authority of the Agent General in England, and circulated among the Poor Law Unions there,
“ inviting persons under the age of fifty to emigrate with their families.” The notice thus
referred to is placed in the Appendix, recorded there as it were against the Government depart-


ment for Emigration in this Country; it proves, however, to be a notice issued by a Clerk of a
Union in Sussex, without authority from any other quarter, and without pretending to have
authority, and invites people anxious to Emigrate to New South Wales to give in their names to
him, the object obviously being that he might forward their applications for consideration.
This appears to have been the regular practice in that part of the country, far too general and
too well understood for the people to imagine that the Clerk of the Union could have any other
power than to be the channel of collecting and forwarding their applications, or that the condi-
tions of their acceptance or rejection could depend on any other than the proper Emigration
Officer, by whom they were always inspected in person before any decision on their cases took
place. Far from being issued with the authority of the Agent General, there is not in the
Records of his Office the vestige of any communication of such a notice to him. The only
case in which, under the management of the Emigration Office, it was stated that married
couples under fifty years of age might be allowed a free passage was, “ provided they were still
“ hale, and capable of work, and had growing up sons and daughters, and none below seven
years of age.” And we find by a letter addressed to the same Clerk of the Union who
issued the above objectionable notice, and at a period not long subsequent to its date,
that the names of several candidates forwarded by him, were returned to him as being
not qualified, and that he was informed they could not be accepted under auy circumstances.
And yet it is upon the strength of this document, issued in a single Union of the County of
Sussex, not only without the authority of the Agent General, but in direct contradiction to
the spirit of his own Official Notices, of which the Agent at Sydney duly received copies, that
Mr. Pinnock gave the Committee of Council to understand that throughout the Poor Law
Unions of England, and with the Agent General’s authority, anintimation was circulated that
persons of fifty years of age, with any number of children, might obtain free passages to
New South Wales.
We regret to say, however, that we cannot be surprised at any inaccuracies of this
witness, when we advert to former instances of the same kind. On this point it must be
enough to refer to the incorrect statements pointed out by the Agent General in his Report,
at page 67, of the Parliamentary Paper of 1839, (House of Commons, No. 536, I.) The
whole force of the case can hardly be understood without turning to the passage itself to
which we allude j but we may briefly convey a sketch of the most material point, and for
fuller information, we subjoin an extract of the whole passage. A Report upon the causes of
sickness in Government Ships had been required from a Board of which Mr. Pinnock was
Chairman. The first question referred to them was, whether due care had been exercised in
the selection of Emigrants of proper health and constitution; beginning by suggesting a
distinction between Ships filled by Homo Agents, and Ships filled by the Surgeons who took
them out, the Report proceeded to say, that the Board had no means of ascertaining whether
proper vigilance had been exerted by the former, and then added the following sentence as to
the latter ; “ with respect to those Surgeons who have had the privilege of exercising their
own judgment in selecting and bringing out their people, we are not aware that there is an
instance of one of their Ships arriving in a sickly state, unless it might be urged that the
“ John Barry” came out under that denomination.” The implication in these words plainly
was, that the plan of allowing each Surgeon to select his own Emigrants was the best, and
that the result in practice had been the most successful. What was the reply of the Agent
General ? Of the Ships so favorably mentioned by the Report, without the least hint of auy
sickness or mortality during the voyage, the first had Twenty-six deaths on board; the third
had Fifty-eight / the fourth Ship had Seventy-two deaths; the fifth Ship Thirty-Jive
deaths; the sixth Ship had Thirteen deaths ; and the seventh Ship Twenty-three. This list
was made without including the “ John Barry,” which the Report, with so much apparent
regard for accuracy, expressed a wish to except. The deaths in that Ship were nearly thirty.
The Report stated, that there were no means of judging of the degree of care as to healthiness,
exercised by the Officers under the Agent General, and so dismissed the subject. But there
were Returns in the Colony of the deaths in both kinds of ships, and the effect was to shew
that the mortality in ships filled under the Agent General was much less than in the others.
The most material circumstance of the whole, however, and we mention it with much concern,
is, that all these facts were derived from Returns compiled and subscribed by the same
gentleman who was Chairman of the Board, and the reputed Author of the Report in its
name, which endeavoured to convey so different an impression.
Considering how important it is to be able to place reliance on the statements
of the individual acting as Agent for Immigrants at the place where they arrive, we cannot
but think it to be lamented that he should be found to lend himself to purposes of Party,
or to indulge in representations in Public Reports, and in Evidence before the Legislature of
the Colony, inconsistent with facts of which it was not merely his duty not to be ignorant, but
which previous and recent Returns imder his own name shew to have been directly within
his knowledge.
Returning,- however, from this digression on some of the evidence upon the first
management, we proceed with the more important question, means each system, when
best administered, may afford for securing the eligibility of the Emigrants? Under the Bounty
System, the check upon the fitness of the candidates is administered in the Colony, and under
the other it is administered in this Country. In the former case the scheme proposed is that
every Immigrant should appear before a Board of Inquiry, and if he be not found to conform
to the regulation, the Bounty for his introduction be refused to the person who has afforded
him a passage. It is supposed, and very justly, that if the Bounty be resolutely refused for
every unsuitable Immigrant, the operation of private interest will prevent a free passage from being
offered to those who are ineligible. When, however, it is asserted by the Committee that no


possible regulation could be conceived which would surpass the efficiency of this for its peculiar
end, and that it does not appear to them that the Agency of a Board in the Service of Govern-
ment, however earnest and faithful the members may be, can ever be expected to exercise so
scrupulous a care, we think it has been overlooked that the check, though well devised in
itself, yet derives all its value from the mode in which it is and that the adminis-
tration of it must alter all be vested in a Board in the service of Government. To the same
security, therefore, it comes at last, for there is no reason why an Emigration Board in this
Country should fail in its duty, more than one in the Colony.
There are indeed some difficulties in the performance of their duties, which would be
peculiar to the latter body. For example, it appears in evidence that the first step in the
inquiry before this Board relates to the character of the Immigrant, and in order to establish
this he is required to produce written testimonials from some respectable parties in England.
But who is to find out in the Colony what parties in this Country are respectable, and whether
the signatures are genuine. The person who freights the Vessel will of course have taken cafe
to provide all his Bounty passengers with such documents as he has learnt to know will prove
sufficient to pass them, but we would submit that any attempt at verifying them is utterly out
of the question, from a place at a distance of a four months’ voyage. Next, the names, ages,
and occupations of the parties are taken down as detailed by themselves, and we cannot
discover that any efficient check, beyond some improbability apparent in the person of the
applicant, is provided against mis-statements in all these respects.
The Immigrants are also asked if they have complaints to make of their treatment
during the voyage, and the water and provisions are inspected. In these respects, although it
is by no means certain that persons, when once they were out of the Ship, and had no longer
any evil to remedy, would be eager in preferring complaints for past ill treatment, yet we think
that searching inquiry into all particulars connected with the voyage should be made upon the
arrival of an Emigrant Ship, and that the accounts should never be settled in full, until a
satisfactory report had been made. But this need not be peculiar to the Bounty System;—it
should be done under whatever system the Immigrants had been conveyed.
As connected with the selection of Emigrants in this Country to be taken out on the
Bounty, we would remark, that we should by no means feel sure, that if tried on an extensive
scale, or even as it is, many evils might not arise in this Country, which the Colonial Immi-
gration Board ivould never attempt to check, nor have the means of doing so. For instance, the
greatest desire is manifested by the persons who select for the Bounty Emigration, to diminish
the number of children taken out. It appears in the Evidence sent home with this Report,
(James, Q. 46.) that though children are not positively prohibited, yet the person who regulates
the selection has announced that all young children, if allowed to go, must be entirely paid for
by the parties themselves. There is no denying that this regulation, though founded on a
sound principle, might lead to a danger of the separation of families, or of the desertion of
children, and it appears to us exceedingly improbable that any Board of Inquiry at Sydney
could discover this evil when it had occurred, and certain that it could not have the same
strong motive, as one acting in this Country, to remedy it if discovered.
Another evil which we think might result from the selection of the Emigrants upon
the Bounty System is, that by taking those only who can pay a portion of their fare, many
might obtain a free passage who were not really of the class of Laborers, and yet not sufficiently
above it, for a Board of Examiners, looking at them when they came off their voyage, to decide
that they were not proper objects for the Bounty. We are not aware whether this evil has
actually occurred, for although the greatest praise is bestowed upon the superior appearance
of the Bounty Emigrants, yet of the mode in which they were disposed of, which would
inform us if they were hired for wages, we know nothing. Of the disposal of the Emigrants
in Government Ships, the most accurate accounts are sent home.
In considering, moreover, the difficulties which must attend the performance of some
of its duties on the part of the Sydney Immigration Board, we cannot overlook the amount of
pecuniary loss which their decisions, when they refuse the Bounty, would inflict upon a
definite individual standing before them, while, if they grant it on insufficient grounds, the loss
is of a nature far more remote and indefinite. Frequent appeals to their commiseration would
be made. The Immigrant about whom they doubt, would probably not be wholly useless, and
the agent who had introduced him would probably have deservedwellof the Public by introducing
many valuable Laborers. If the Colony, moreover, were wholly dependant for its Immigration
upon the Bounty System, it would be attended with considerable risk to. the public good, that
much discouragement should be caused to persons engaged in freighting ships upon this
enterprise. If Immigrants were rejected in any numbers, the speculation would be considered
too hazardous to be engaged in. In the Report of the Committee for 1838, we find it
recommended, that in deciding on the qualifications of parties to receive the benefit of the
Bounties, attention should be paid rather to the equity of the case, than to a rigid literal
application of the Regulations; (page 6.) and the Bounty Agent, in his evidence before the
Committee for the past year, alludes to this, and says, (James, Q, 15.) “ of course Emigration
“ Agents would not be disposed to send out Emigrants, unless, on the faith of a liberal
“ construction on the part of the Colonial Government of -the spirit of the Regulations, they
“ were assured of the Bounty.” In regard also to the practical operation of the system as
hitherto pursued, we find it stated, that not above one in a hundred has been rejected by the
, Board, although it can hardly be supposed that so nearly every individual has really conformed
to the letter of the Regulations; and we observe that the Bounty Agent states in his evidence,
(James, Q, 11.) that there were cases in which the Governor had not confirmed the Report of
the Board, when their opinion had been expressed in favor of allowing the Bounty. Having
now, therefore, described, as far as we have been able to collect from the evidence before us.


what is the operation of the Colonial check upon the eligibility of Emigrants,—what it can
effect, and what it cannot,—we shall now briefly detail the system which we conceive our
Board ought to pursue, if entrusted with the selection of Emigrants for New South Wales.
There would be fixed Agents in different districts throughout the Country, who would
send up the certificates' of applicants, to be examined at this office. These certificates would
contain a full description of the age, calling, family, and circumstances of the parties. The
statements would also have been verified by our Agents, and attested by respectable neighbours.
If any doubt arose as to the signature of any person, whose name appeared on the document,
the fact would be ascertained by an immediate reference through our Agent, or direct from
this office. These District Agents Would be paid by the head, according to the number of
applicants eventually selected. They would, therefore, have an interest in procuring as great
a number as possible of candidates from whom the selection would have to be made. When
a certain number of certificates had been approved at this office, we should send down an
Inspector, who would make personal observations upon the parties, and if any did not conform
to the Regulations, or if their certificates had been falsely made out, they would be rejected
even at the last moment. The Inspector would be paid a fixed salary, and consequently
would have no interest in increasing the number selected, beyond those who were really eligible.
In exercising the right of rejection,- a Board in this Country would be free from the
influence of many feelings which might naturally be appealed to after the voyage was over.
No expense would have been incurred in making the application, and no loss be occasioned to
any one by its refusal.
The system we have described is at present in operation at this Office, and we
have found no reason to doubt that it supplies a selection of useful Laborers, and secures
well authenticated certificates of their character.
Among some of the subordinate points in which we think the Bounty Emigration is
capable of improvement, we would mention that it was originally the practice on Board
Emigrant Ships, freighted in expectations of Bounty, not to set apart a distinct portion of the
Vessel for the use of the sick. We do not know how far this practice may have been altered ;
but the use of distinct Male and Female Hospitals, on board the Government Ships, may be
considered one cause of the very remarkable healthiness which is made the subject of
comment even in the Report before us. In the five last Government Ships which had arrived
at the date of the Report, there had been 497 children, out of whom only 25 had died, or very
little beyond one in twenty; and in one of the Ships 73 children had been conveyed out
without the occurrence of a single death. In the course of the nine preceding months, there
had died on board the Government Ships,—
Of Adults 1 in 95 fj-
Of Children 1 in 17-H
While on board the Bounty Ships during precisely the same period, there had died
Of Adults 1 in 83
Of Children 1 in 9pH
Another point to which we would advert is, the practice of taking Intermediate Passengers
on board the Bounty Ships. As regards the health and convenience of the Steerage
Passengers this is found decidedly objectionable. The health Officer at Sydney, when
examined before the Committee, stated, (Dobie, Q, 23.) that he objected to Intermediate
Passengers “ because they encroached so much upon the comfort of the Passengers for whom
“ Bounty is paid, in preventing a free circulation of air fore and aft on the deck in which
“ they are living. There are both cabins and bulkheads built up for their accommodation
“ abaft. Which must totally interrupt air circulating by the stem ports.” On board the
Government Ships no such Passengers were ever taken. Although it does not appear that the
evidence which on this point was unfavorable to a practice prevailing on board the Bounty Ships
had attracted the attention of the Committee, yet we cannot but think it well deserving the
notice of the authorities in the Colony responsible for the working of this system.
We have already alluded to the objection to the arrangement now sanctioned by the
(Colonial Authorities, by which the Emigrants are not to be landed at once, and maintained,
but are to be kept on board their Ship for ten days, or any period within that time until they
obtain employment. The most judicious course, as it appears to us, would be to continue to
use the Barracks, which have already been made, for a Dep6t; to maintain the Immigrants
without work for four or five days, while they recovered from the effects of the voyage, and
treated with persons anxious to engage them; and then to employ them on the Government
Works at wages below the average rate in the Colony. A longer time for maintaining them
without labour appears to enable them to stand out for exorbitant wages; a shorter time would
not give them a mil chance of making an advantageous bargain.
There is one more point connected with the operation of the Bounty System in this
CollUtiy, which it is incumbent upon us to notice, and the more so because it is to this
Country that it relates, and therefore, is less likely to attract attention in the Colony. We
allude to the incorrect statements and exaggerations which are put forward bypersons engaging
Emigrants under this system. We fear that many Of the poor are prevailed upon to Emigrate
by Very false expectations being created in them of the advantages which await them; and many
induced to select the Colony to which they go, by false and injurious statements which are
circulated respecting allother Colonies indiscriminately. There is no part of our first instructions
which it has appeared to Us to be otir duty mdre strictly to follow, than the emphatic direction to
be careful to supply the “ignorant and unwary with authentic and unexaggerated intelligence;”
and it has been our earnest endeavour successfully to promote the object which Lord John
Russell informed us he had in view, Of pUtting'a stop to rivalries on the part of our Agents, and


checking “the evil of exaggerated appeals to the Public upon the merits of different
Settlements.” So long, however, as the Bounty System continues, we never shall entirely
effect this end. The Bounty Agent in this Country is a private person, responsible to no
authority, and yet possessing all the weight and influence which the virtual administration of
large sums of public money cannot fail to confer on him. We feel the evil, against which our
attention was so particularly directed, inseparable from the employment, inmanaging Emigration,
of Colonial Agents who are under no official responsibility, and the whole spirit, as well as the
letter of our instructions, compels us to notice this fact. Complaints are continually
reaching us, both from our Agents, and from private parties, of the system of extravagant
eulogies of one Colony, and unfounded calumnies on all the others, which is now pursued by
the Bounty Agents, or rather by the Agents of the one individual in London, who has in fact
hitherto secured to himself all the Bounty Emigration that has hitherto taken place, and who
is in consequence looked to throughout the Country as the authorised Agent of the Colony.
Books have been occasionally sent to us which are circulated by his Agents, and which are
certainly of such a nature, that we should dismiss any Agent of our own who made use of
them. In various other ways, also, irregularities have been represented to us, but having no
power of testing the allegations by evidence, we forbear from entering into them. We will
only say that many of them seemed to us too probable, if not certain, to arise out of the
employment of authorised, yet irresponsible Agents, looking to nothing but their own
pecuniary profit.
We have now offered such observations as the perusal of the Report of the Committee,
and the evidence taken before it, have suggested, and we have endeavoured, in no spirit of
partiality, to compare the merits of the two systems of Emigration. We certainly incline to
think that although a check upon the treatment and management of the Emigrants during
the voyage should be exercised at the other end of the passage, yet it will probably be found,
after sufficient experience, that the selection of the Emigrants, and the preliminary arrange-
ments for their conveyance, could be more efficiently executed by our Board) and perhaps
with nearly equal cheapness. We are not, however, prepared to recommend at this moment,
the abolition of the Bounty System. The Committee of the Legislative Council have reported
in its favor, and it is at present being tried upon a far more extensive scale than it has ever
been hitherto. Indeed the Emigration to New South Wales has been entirely removed from
the management of any Government Department in this Country. For as it is announced
in the Report before us, that the only available funds for the Emigration of this year,
amounted to -£23,458, and yet we know that Private Ships have been conveying Emigrants,
throughout the season, to an extent very far exceeding what these limited funds could meet,
the profusion with which the Bounty Orders thus appear to have been issued, joined to our
knowledge of the deficiency of funds, have completely paralysed the Departments at home,
and precluded them from sending out even one, ship. We think it best, therefore, that the
result of this large and exclusive experiment should be seen before any further change. If
successful, we shall be very glad of its good issue. If unsuccessful, we shall be prepared to
endeavour to supply its place by some such methods as we hate above sketched. But in the
meanwhile, our only object in the present letter has been to examine the general view
suggested by the Council’s Report, respecting different modes of conducting Emigration,
without recommending any immediate interference with the measures now in operation.
We have, &c.,
(Signed)
T. FREDK. ELLIOT.
E. E. VILLIERS.
James Stephen, Esq., &c, &c, &c.
EXTRACT FROM PARLIAMENTARY PAPER OF 1839.
(Copy.)
(No. 536.) I.
“ But in reference to this point of a comparison between different systems, I must
now enter a little more into the detail of the Board’s Report.”
“ After observing that they did not possess the means of ascertaining the degree of
caution exercised by the Agents at home in their selections, they proceed to the following
remarks on the parties made up by their own separate surgeons. “ With respect to those
“ Surgeons who have had the privilege of exercising their own judgment, and selecting and
“ bringing out their people, we are not aware that there is an instance of one of their ships
“ arriving in a sickly state, unless it might be urged that the “ John Barry ” came under
“ that denomination.”
“I must confess that I read with no inconsiderable suprise this statement of the Board
of Officers, until by carefully collating the context, and adverting to the actual facts, I
discovered that the observation of the Board was directed, not, as might have been expected,
to the healthiness, or unhealthiness of the Passengers during the voyage, nor to the mortality, i
however great, which might have occurred amongst them since they left home, but to the 1
single, and as it were accidental, and comparatively insignificant circumstance, whether or


not, on the day the Ship cast anchor at Sydney, she was deemed to be in a sickly state.
I shall therefore supply some of the facts which the point of view chosen by the Board of
Officers excludes from notice.”
“Whatever else may be argued respecting the “ John Barry”, it is certain that she
sailed long before the institution of this Office, or the adoption of any of the Rules which
have been established by it for the good of the service. The deaths of her Passengers were
nearly Thirty . But the Board propose to set aside the case of this Ship, because although
filled by the Officer selected for the purpose in the Colony, (and to the excellence of that
selection I beg to offer my cordial testimony) he was at the last moment prevented by
indisposition from taking the people out, lam willing then to omit the “John Barry” as
wished; and the case in regard to the Ships filled by their own Surgeons, will stand as
follows:
The first Ship had Twenty-six deaths on board; the third Ship had Fifty-eight; the
fourth Ship “ Layton” had Seventy-two deaths ; the fifth Ship Thirty-five deaths; the sixth
Ship had Thirteen deaths; and the seventh Ship Twenty-three. Of twenty-four Ships in all,
(excluding “John Barry”) of which from the beginning of 1837, up to the present time,
the arrival in the Colony has been heard of, I find that twelve were filled by their own
Surgeons, and twelve by selecting Officers at home. The proportion of deaths in the Ships
filled by their own Surgeons was BX%8 X %- percent; and the proportion in the others 5-rV per-
cent. The numbers of deaths in this statement are taken from the Official Returns made, as
Agent for Immigrants, by the same Gentleman who acted as Chairman of the present Board
of Officers. I enclose an abstract I have prepared on the subject.”
“ I have not mentioned these facts to draw any general inference from them, still less do
I mention them for the purpose of casting any imputation on the Officers who superintended
the vessels adverted to ; but it seemed to me not altogether immaterial to the prevention of
error, to supply some of the foregoing particulars respecting Ships, on which the Board have
observed, in their Report, that they do not know an instance of one which arrived in a
sickly state.”
“ It should be added, however, that the Board do proceed to notice the deaths in the
“Layton,” although I cannot say that I find the smallest allusion to the mortality in any ot
the others of this class of Ships, the “ John Barry” excepted. They state that there
certainly were seventy deaths in the “ Layton”, but that this they may venture to assert
arose from the Measles having been imported into the Ship ; a circumstance which, they add
that, it must be apparent, is not at all times under human control. I quote the words ot the
Report, and I beg leave entirely to subscribe to the justice of the last remark.”
“ There is no doubt that the difficulty of conveying in safety parties of Emigrants, consisting
of married people and their families, must be enhanced by the fact that children are liable to
infectious disorders which cannot be detected till they actually break forth, but then are liable
to spread to the passengers of all ages, and commit great destruction. But when I find the
Board go on from this consideration to mention respecting two of the Ships filled by the
Agents at home, that in the “ Palmyra” Scarlet Fever broke out early in the voyage, and in
the “Maitland” almost immediately on departure, and to point to these instances as proofs
ot the “ absolute necessity which exists for a previous acquaintance, on the part of the Surgeon
“ Superintendent, with the constitution and previous habits of the people,” I cannot but feel
at a loss how to understand the sar> e circumstance can with justice be adverted to at one
moment as beyond human control, and a sufficient exculpation of the Officer whom it concerned
from all its consequences, and at the next moment be brought forward as indicative of a radical
defect in the system under which it happened, and as a proof of the absolute necessity of
recurring to the other practice, under which the very same misfortune had been just before
(though so leniently) mentioned to have taken place.”
