

IB)
0
. ‘t
! WHAT IT IS; WHAT IT INCLUDES:
I
f ’
AND WHAT IT REQUIRES. *
’YA
!/
ig ;
. - 1 v '
: rs
|v* n
llplgg.
ft)
mm
n/
iv
Jv
■
p
.
, LONDON:
THE RELIGIOUS 'TRACT SOCIETY';
56 PATERNOSTER ROW, 65 ST. PAUL’S CHURCHYARD,
AND 164 PIOCADILDY ;
6
AND SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS,
v
CifmfgtatfiOtt 'M®. 1.
EMIGRATION:




ROBERT KERR


EMIGRANTS’ DEPARTURE.


EMIGRATION:
WHAT IT IS; WHAT IT INCLUDES;
AND WHAT IT REQUIRES.
LONDON:
THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY;
56 PATERNOSTER ROW, 65 ST. PAUL’S CHURCHYARD.
AND 164 piccaiilly:
AND,SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS.




ATION
WHAT IT IS; WHAT IT INCLUDES• AND
WHAT IT REQUIRES.
CHAPTER I.
WHAT IS EMIGRATION ?
One evening in July, 1852, a small company
was assembled in one of the cottages of a little
village in Kent. It consisted of a venerable
grey-headed old man and his wife; a group of
sons and daughters; sons-in-law and daughters-
in-law, for the most part middle-aged; and
a smaller group of boys and girls, the grand-
children of the aged pair.
This family meeting was not a lively one ; it was
solemn, and even tearful; a quiet, if not a silent
one. Every countenance bore an expression of
gravity; on some were traces of sorrow and
pain of mind. The grandmother of the boys
and girls, for instance—the lines which age had
drawn on her features were deepened and broadly
brought out now by present anxiety. She shed
not many tears, but a restlessness of lip, and eye,
and brow, and hand, betrayed a disturbed, if not
a desponding mind. The brothers and sisters—•
her sons and daughters—at times conversed


together in low tones of kind affection, at other
times sat in silence gazing fondly at each other.
The dusk of evening stole on, but none called for
a light; the darkness of the cottage room,
shaded with woodbine and eglantine, seemed
favourable to meditation and loving remem-
brances. If in times past sharp words and
angry glances had for a season alienated brothers
or sisters, parents or children, from one another
and perhaps they had—these sad passages were
now forgotten, or were remembered only to be
deplored. That family meeting was not a jealous,
unholy meeting, though somewhat sorrowful.
It was a sabbath evening, and the day had cast
its solemnizing influences over their minds: but
besides this, the purpose for which the several
members of the family were thus lovingly, yet
in some sort mournfully brought together, afforded
abundant cause for silent reflection, and endearing
remembrances, and gentle, soft-breathed, loving
words.
It was a final meeting, A few hours more,
and the family vvould be separated, never,
almost certainly, never to meet again. Not that
there is anything extraordinary in such a circum-
stance, simply considered ; for every day do
families meet and part, never to meet again;
and never do we say farewell to parent or child,
to brother or sister, with a certainty that our
intercourse shall be renewed. IVho can tell
what a day shall bring forth?
Tut this meeting was the prelude to a certain
and immediate parting. A few hours more, and
the last “ good-bye ” would be uttered; the last
grasp of the father’s hand, —-embrowned and


hardened with half a century’s constant toil,
but dear for all that—that last grasp would be
felt; the last kiss of the mother’s trembling lips
would be given : and among the brothers and
sisters were those who would thenceforward see
no more each other’s old, familiar faces. No
wonder, then, that a shade, or may be more than
a shade, of sadness shed its influence over the
family party.
One word will explain the entire scene : that
word is— Emigration.
The old man bore up bravely under the painful
thought that thenceforth his family would be
broken up. In a low tone he spoke comforting
and Christian words to wife, children, and grand-
children. He said that God in his providence,
and for wise and kind purposes, had frustrated
the hopes entertained by some of the group, now
for the last time gathered round him, of gaining
a livelihood at home; but that the same good
providence had opened a way for them, and was
pointing to homes beyond the seas. He said that
the same kind and loving father in heaven
would still wiAch over them all, because he was
ever present everywhere ; that therefore,
“ His people need not faint nor fear,
Sustained by this delightful thought;
Since He, their God, is
They cannot be where He is not
and that, while they forsake not him, he, the God
of infinite love, will not forsake them. The
patriarchal old man reminded his departing chil-
dren that they would have a Saviour to lean
upon, a throne of grace to which they might
ever approach boldly, wherever their wanderings


might be; and he charged them, in affectionate
solemnity, to seek God’s guidance in every future
step of their lives, and to dedicate, day by day,
those lives to his service. Then he told them
that though, thenceforward, they would be far off
in body, yet, with those who remained at home,
they might be one in spirit; and urged them
•—those who would remain at home, as well as
those who were about to depart —to constant and
affectionate intercourse.
And when he had spoken these and many other
words, the old man, kneeling before his God and
Saviour, commended in fervent prayer all present,
but especially the emigrants, to the Divine protec-
tion. It was a sacred scene. Stifled sobs would
rise, and struggling tears would fall ; but peace
was there —a peace that passeth understanding.
Once only did the old man’s courage fail him.
He would have the family sing, and for the last
time unitedly, an old favourite hymn:—
“ Guide me, O thou great Jehovah,
Pilgrim through this barren land.”
But it would not do: he could pray, but he could
not sing then.
And so the family meeting broke up. A few
hours, and the parting came ; a few days, and
the emigrants were “ at sea.”
Meeting the old man not many evenings after
as he was returning from his daily labour, the
writer was told that the parting was rather a sad
one, but not joyless either ; there was <c something
secret ” that sweetened it. Our aged friend
spoke cheerfully of his children’s hopes and
prospects, and reasoned very sensibly on the pro-
priety of their determination to seek in another


land the prosperity which seemed denied them at
home. It was plain that the bitterness of parting
was over, and that thenceforward the soothing
influences of time, and of submissiveness to God’s
appointment, would be felt, and remembrance be
gradually divested of all that remained of pain.
Such cases of separation as the one thus
briefly sketched are now of daily occurrence.
Week after week emigrant ships leave the shores
of Great Britain freighted with our countrymen
and countrywomen, bound for distant lands.
These emigrants are to be counted, not by tens,
nor hundreds, but by thousands, and tens and
hundreds of thousands. During twenty-five years,
ending in 1850, more than two millions and a
half of the population of Great Britain and Ire-
land have thus left their native shores ; and in the
later years of that period the number of emigrants
has increased to nearly three hundred thousand
for each year.* And still the stream of emigra-
tion flows on, widening as it flows.
Of course there is a cause for this. In general,
people do not readily forsake their native land,
never, probably, to return. It is not pleasant
Jo think of breaking suddenly and violently the
ties of kindred and friendship, by tearing our-
selves away from all hope of future personal
intercourse with those we love. Why, then, do
so many daily do these things? How is it there
are so many emigrants ?
Before answering these questions it may be
well to make a few preliminary remarks on the
subject of emigration itself.
* More than two-thirds of this number have consisted
of emigrants from Ireland.


The reader is sufficiently acquainted with the
habits of bees to know that these industrious and
valuable insects increase rapidly, and that when
there are so many in a hive that it can no longer
comfortably hold them, they cast off what is
called a swarm; and that some flourishing old
stocks swarm two or three times in a summer, if
the season be favourable for the formation of new
bee-colonies. In other words, the younger bees
emigrate, that is, they remove from one place of
industrious occupation to another. Natural
instinct teaches them to do so, and man takes
advantage of this, and by preparing other hives
for the emigrant bees, profits by their increase.
So also may we profit by the lesson thus
taught, and learn that what is to the bee an
instinct may become to us a duty. And indeed,
something like this process of swarming, so
noticeable in bees, is continually, though more
gradually, going on in human society. As
families increase, some of their members find it
necessary to seek elsewhere for employment and
subsistence, which it would be difficult for them to
find at home. This is emigration in its simplest
form.
So from villages and small towns where the
number of inhabitants continues nearly stationary,
although there may be, annually, many more
births than deaths, emigration is constantly, and
with a kind of quiet regularity, going on. The
younger part of the population especially, as they
grow up, find that they cannot obtain employ-
ment in their native place, and are thus compelled
to seek a living, some by domestic service, some
in mechanical occupations, others in commercial


employments, either in neighbouring towns and
cities, or in places at a greater distance from their
native parishes. This is another form of emigra-
tion with which most of our readers are familiar.
Then it not unfrequently happens that in some
places,—large manufacturing districts for instance,
—means of employment rapidly increase, while in
others, agricultural mostly, no small increase of
employment which might be found can keep pace
with a rapidly increasing population, so that if
emigration from one district to another were not
constantly going on, manufactures must stand still
for want of hands, while the labouring poor of the
other part of the country would be almost starving
for want of work, or would need to be supported
by charity. But in general, these two opposite evils
do not long exist together in the samecountry and at
the same time, because there is a natural instinct in
men stronger than the love of home, impelling
them to quit a spot which cannot sustain them,
and to congregate where workmen are needed, and
where daily toil may at least insure daily bread.
It sometimes takes a long time to shift the
population of a country in this way, from one part
of it to another, and, as people do not emigrate,
or migrate, which is the better word for this kind
of movement, like bees in swarms, it attracts but
little notice ; but that such a migration is con-
stantly going on is proved by the rapid increase
of population in some large manufacturing towns,
and by the fact that ki these towns are to be found
natives of almost all the rural counties of England,
or their descendants.
Again, emigration, or migration, on a larger
scale, from one part of the country to another


part, or from one neighbouring land to another, is
often observable. Thus, many Scotch families
are settled in England, not because they have no
natural preference for Scotland as the land of their
birth, but because they have found, or hoped to
find more scope for their industry and perseverance
in the southern part of Great Britain. Thus also,
Ireland sends, and has for a long time been send-
ing, a perpetual stream of its native inhabitants to
Great Britain, to seek in various forms of industry
the subsistence which they had despaired of earn-
ing at home.
The foregoing are sufficient illustrations of
emigration in its most common forms, and of the
reasons why so many are constantly removing
from one place of abode and from one sphere of
active labour to another.
But it is sometimes seen that an entire country
becomes so far over-peopled that its inhabitants
are inconveniently crowded, and that those who
have to depend upon their own exertions for con-
tinued subsistence find it increasingly difficult to
obtain employment; that, in short, there are more
who are able and willing to work than can find
work to do. In this case it matters little to the
unemployed that their country is fertile and rich,
that its commerce is extensive and still extending,
that it has extraordinary resources, good govern-
ment, and excellent laws, and that it abounds in
the conveniences ai d luxuries of life. All this,
and much more, may be very true; and yet it
will not relieve the anxieties of those who, while
they honestly desire to live by their own industry,
and have nothing else to live by, cannot find
or obtain certain and uninterrupted employment.


It is still more painful when parents look upon
the families growing up around them, and cannot
find the means of putting them into hopeful posi-
tions in life. For themselves they may care com-
paratively little, but they naturally wish to shield
their children from the rude assaults of poverty,
and from the dangers to which excessive compe-
tition for work seems likely to expose them. It
is, indeed, very possible that these dangers may
be magnified by undue carefulness, and that peo-
ple may form the habit of looking at the dark
side of every prospect until they can see nothing
bright and cheering in the future; and it is also
very possible that such an over-anxiety may tempt
us to distrust the care and kindness of Him whose
encouragement to all is, “ Seek ye first the king-
dom of God. and his righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you.” But, with-
out distrust, —indeed, with firm reliance upon
God’s good providence, it is right for every one
to look evident disadvantages manfully in the
face, and inquire whether they may not be over-
come or avoided ; whether, in fact, our heavenly
Father has not, in his providence, put before us a
remedy for the evils under which we suffer, or a
preventive to the greater evils we may anticipate.
It may be asked, further, whether those evils
are not permitted for wise and good purposes.
God “ created the earth not in vain, he formed it
to be inhabitedbut men are apt to overlook
this fact, and from various causes prefer remain-
ing on one favoured spot, unmindful that other
portions of the world on which they live are lan-
guishing for want of inhabitants. It seems, there-
fore, as needful as it is natural that the inconve-


niencesof over-population should be severely felt,
in order that the designs of the Ruler of the
universe may be fulfilled.
Emigration, then, in its most extensive mean-
ing, is the removal of the inhabitants of one part
of the world to another; and one of the causes—
perhaps the principal cause—for emigration is to
be found in the over-abundant population of coun-
tries which have been long inhabited. Doubtless,
there are other motives which lead to emigration.
Sometimes God, in his over-ruling providence,
has permitted persecution to drive many from
their native land to distant shores, where the
liberty of conscience and personal freedom denied
them at home, could be enjoyed. At other times,
peculiar worldly advantages, newly discovered,
have drawn to distant lands those w T ho have not
felt the immediate pressure of want, nor even the
dread of it. Extraordinary fertility of soil, an
inviting climate, or the prospect of obtaining
riches more quickly than in the ordinary course
of industry, are all inducements to emigration.
Thus, at this time, the discovery of hitherto
hidden stores of gold in Australia is tempting
many to that country who would otherwise have
remained at home.
The present work is intended for all classes ;
as well those who have felt the evils to which we
have briefly referred, and who, like our friends of
whom we have spoken at the beginning of this
chapter, are directing their thoughts towards
distant homes, as those who are induced by the
discoveries of gold to leave their country; to all
of these we are desirous of conveying the hints
which will be found in the following chapters.


CHAPTER 11.
A FEW WORDS ABOUT GREAT BRITAIN.
The British Islands contain, in round numbers,
an area of a hundred and twenty thousand square
miles, or about seventy-seven millions of acres of
land. Of these, about thirty millions are waste,
either as being incapable of cultivation, or as
being too poor to repay the expense of it. The
number of inhabitants on these islands, according
to the last population returns, is twenty-eight
millions.
This population rapidly increases; there are
now twice as many inhabitants in Great Britain
as there were fifty years ago, and every year adds
largely to the number, the average excess of
births over deaths being more than a thousand a
day. At the present time the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland has a population of
more than 230 individuals for every square mile
of surface, or of more than 400 for every culti-
vated square mile. Or, if England be taken
alone, the population for every square mile, cul-
tivated or waste, is more than 300.
There is but one other country in Europe with
so dense a population.* The kingdom of Norway
and Sweden numbers only 14 inhabitants for each
square mile ; Russia, has 25 ; Spain, 70 ; Por-
tugal, 97; Prussia, 130; Austria, 140; Ger-
* Belgium has a population of for every square
mile.


many, 155 ; Italy, 170 ; France, 170 ; and
Holland, 214 inhabitants for every square mile.
To sustain so large and increasing a population,
on so limited a space as that of our country, is a
matter of serious concern.
It would be a great mistake, however, to
suppose that because a country is very populous,
it must of course be very wretched. On the
contrary, the fact of a large and increasing num-
ber of inhabitants, is, to a certain extent, a proof
of a country’s prosperity. Hundreds of years ago,
when England and Scotland together had not a
fourth part of the population which England
alone now contains, they were not nearly so
prosperous as they now are, and the comforts of
even the higher classes of society were few and
small compared with those now at the command
of working men who have full employment and
fair wages. It is only when population increases
faster than the means of employment, that a
country may be said to have become over-peopled.
And if the population of Great Britain be very
dense, its resources are great and numerous. Its
soil is generally fertile, its climate mild and
healthy ; its position is favourable to commerce ;
and its mineral treasures give unlimited scope to
manufacturing industry. But all these and other
advantages would be of little avail without the
spirit of British enterprise and industry which has
turned them to account. This spirit exists, and
is in active operation. British merchant ships
spread their sails on every sea, to the most distant
parts of the world ; British manufactures are to
be found, and the language of Great Britain is
spoken in almost every land ; in the barren and


cheerless regions around the poles, and in the
scorching climate of the torrid zone, is this spirit
of British perseverance and energy manifested.
Everywhere are the proofs and effects of this
spirit to be seen. Though but a small island,
Great Britain has rule over a sixth part of the
world’s surface, and one-fifth of the world’s in-
habitants are subject to its laws; its distant
possessions are vast and incalculably valuable;
and every British colony is an infant empire.
Five hundred or a thousand years hence, if the
world should last so long, and God should permit
the continued increase of this large dominion,
and should smile, in his providence, on Britain’s
future progress, how amazing will be its results!
Now, “ the little one has become a thousand, and
the small one a strong nation what will it be then ?
At home, the same spirit is seen, in its effects,
all around us. We have been called “ a nation
of shopkeepers,” and Great Britain is spoken of
as “ the workshop of the world.” One only of its
numerous branches of manufacture, that of cotton,
aided by machinery, is said to give employment,
in one form or other, to a fourth part of its in-
habitants. Its cities are crowded with busy
artizans; its railroads are perpetually bearing-
witness to the activity of its trade and commerce ;
while the productions of its cultivated land, in
stock and crops, for a single year, yield a return,
in money value, of more than two hundred
millions of British pounds sterling. Nowhere,
under the arch of heaven, is so large an amount
of solid, substantial wealth accumulated in so
small a space, as is to be found within the seas
which encircle Great Britain.


This is one picture ; but there is another not so
pleasing to look at.
Poverty, ignorance, crime: these are its three
prominent features. These, working together,
perpetuate each other. Poverty and ignorance
produce crime; crime and ignorance produce
poverty ; poverty crime yield deeper and
more degrading ignorance as their natural fruit.
There is much poverty in Great Britain, and
still more in Ireland.* In the United Kingdom,
every seventh individual, it has been estimated, is
a pauper, receiving support from poor’s-rates, and
giving either no labour at all, or unprofitable
labour in return. In England, the most populous
and the most busy portion of that kingdom, every
ninth or tenth inhabitant is a pauper.
I here are, in Great Britain and Ireland, on an
average, two millions of the poor of both sexes,
who are able to work, and willing, who have
nothing but the labour of their hands to keep
them from destitution and misery, and who cannot
get employment.f
To support its “standing army” of paupers,
costs the United Kingdom seven or eight million
jaounds a year. For the relief of the poor in
* Poverty and pauperism in Ireland are not caused by
over-population. It is a fertile country ; its comparative
population is considerably smaller than that of Great
Britain ; and it is a lamentable fact that while emigration
is really diminishing the number of its inhabitants with-
out apparently alleviating the distress of thousands who
remain behind, there are large districts of country almost
entirely uncultivated, which might, under other circum-
stances, employ the unemployed, and furnish food in
abundance for the half-starved people.
f See Introduction to Mr. R. Montgomery Martin’s work
on “ The British Colonies ”


England and Wales alone, more than two hundred
millions of pounds have been drawn from the
general resources of the country, during the last
thirty-five years. Who shall say that there is no
poverty in Great Britain ?
Where labour is over-abundant, there will be
a constant struggling for employment, and this
brings about, in its natural course, a low rate
of wages. The man who has muscular strength
but very little skill, has many competitors, and,
when he obtains work, must not haggle for wages.
If he will not take what is offered there are others
who will. The agricultural labourer in Great
Britain has hitherto been in this position. In
some parts of England he may be able to earn
twenty pence a day, or ten shillings a week; in
other parts, he must give the same labour for
eight shillings ; or, it may be, for even less. If
in harvest time, for a few weeks, he should be
able to double the amount of his general earnings,
he must remember the days and perhaps weeks of
the coming winter, when he may be “ out of
work.” If he be married, his wife may add to
his income by occasional field labour, or some-
times, by other employments, but there will be a
wife to keep, and children. If he have boys,
they may add something more to the income of the
family, during a part of the year, and when they
are old enough to scare birds from the fields ; but
the boys will need more than they earn for food
and clothing. If he have girls, they will perhaps
go to service at an early age ; but until then, they
also must be fed and clothed, while they add
nothing to the family resources.
It is “a hard matter to live anyhow,” such a


man will tell us ; and how he does live at all, is
more than he can say ; but he “ rubs along some-
how.” If sickness comes, his resources fail at
once; and if it be continued, he sinks into pau-
perism. And, hale or ailing, he has little hope
for the future. When too old or too infirm for
work, his refuge must be the Union house ; he
Knows that, and too often, without an effort to mend
his condition, he looks forward to it as a matter
of course. His children, in time, will begin as he
began, and go on as he went on, happy, he thinks,
if it be no worse with them than it has been with
him.
That such a position as this is undesirable, is
evident enough; that it fosters ignorance, and
destroys or weakens the mainspring of energy and
perseverance, cannot well be questioned ; and that
such is the position of the larger number of
British agricultural labourers at home, is very
certain. A few surmount the difficulties which
surround them, and by superior abilities combined
with good character and favourable circumstances,
rise to comparative prosperity ; but they are, and
must necessarily be, few.
To some extent, the same difficulties are felt in
other branches of industry. Numbers of British
artizans have only irregular and uncertain employ-
ment. Here, as with the agricultural labourers,
a more than adequate supply of labour for the
wants of the community has introduced excessive
competition; and the effect is seen in reduced
wages, and, not unfrequently, much distress.
The lanes and courts of the large cities of Great
Britain are crowded with those whose only honest
dependence is casual, uncertain labour. Strong


muscular men may, day after day, be met there,
and elsewhere, by scores and hundreds; who,
having no useful occupation in which to employ
their natural strength, are ready to expend it on
that which is mischievous. Not unwilling to work,
they live in a sort of enforced idleness and con-
sequent wretchedness. Such men are surely not
wanted in a community. They consume food ;
they must have that, and they do have it; but
they add nothing to the nation’s wealth and pros-
perity ; everything would, to say the least, go on
as well without them as with them; were they to
leave in a swarm like bees, they would scarcely be
missed.
We say nothing of the outcasts of society, of
those who will not work, with whom beggary is
an occupation and dishonesty a trade and a habit.
Unhappily these abound; and unhappily, too,
poverty and the want that poverty brings, con-
joined with the ignorance and callousness which
are their offspring, lead to vice, and from one
degree of vice to another. Nor need we take into
account the criminal classes of society. Were all
the prisons in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
swept of their inmates, and every person convicted
of crime removed, it would still be a question
whether remunerative labour can be obtained by
all who are able and willing and needing to work.
An excess of labour beyond the means of
employing it, is not peculiar to what are called
the working classes of society at home. In com-
mercial life, many competent hands are unem-
ployed, so that at all times there are hun-
dreds of clerks, warehousemen, and shopmen,
of good character and ability, seeking employment


and finding none; nor could it be had except by
displacing others. And among the employers, as
well as the employed, how many are straggling
for a bare subsistence, or sinking gradually into
poverty !
How many parents are there in the middle
classes of society, who do not know what to do
with their children ! They look around them and
see, or think they see, every promising position
pre-oceupied, and are fain to content themselves
at last with such as hold out but faint prospects ot
future competence, hoping the best, but fearing
the worst. And the boys, when they emerge into
manhood, how anxiously they look around them,
and how often do they venture their hopes in some
frail bark, to be almost inevitably wrecked !
There are those who tell us that the sun of
Britain’s prosperity is setting; that the country
is ruined or hastening on to ruin with rapid
strides; that it will never again be what it has
once been. This is an old story. We have
heard it in youth ; and the story is much older
than ourselves. Our great grandfathers said or
heard the same thing.
It is not our province to pretend to utter pro-
phecies either of good or evil. The future is in
the hands of the Divine Sovereign of the universe;
but, judging from all that is passing around us,
there seems to be no sufficient grounds for such
gloomy forebodings. On the contrary, while there
is in our nation much of sin and evil to be
acknowledged and deplored, still there are many
grounds for hope that purposes of good and not of
evil are in store for us. There is a great work
for Britain to do—much at home, much abroad—


in the world’s future history. God is to be glori-
fied in the redemption of this lost world of ours,
and sinners in its remotest regions are'to be taught
the Saviour’s name, to rejoice in the Father’s
love, to be sanctified by the Holy Spirit’s grace.
Many are to run to and fro, and knowledge—the
knowledge of God and his gospel—is to be in-
creased. The earth is to be full of the knowledge
of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. And we
cannot admit the mournful thought that Britain,
where, by God’s grace, the light of the true gospel
shines brightly in so many hearts, is to be inactive in
this great and glorious revolution. On the contrary,
God appears, in his providence, to have provided
distant homes for the present and future redundant
population of the British islands, as one of the
means of a wide dispersion of his truth. And if
among Britain’s teeming millions, there are many
whom excessive competition is compelling to
seek a more certain subsistence in the distant
possessions of their country, we see in this fact
tokens of God’s care and kindness—not of his
displeasure; and rejoice to believe that such
emigration is among the means by which a full
answer to the universal prayer shall be given,—
“ Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on
earth, even as it is in heaven.”


CHAPTER 111.
CAUTIONS RESPECTING EMIGRATION.
In our colonies there is room enough, and
need enough, for all the workers Britain has to
spare. It would be a great mistake, however, to
suppose that every British colony is a fair field of
emigration for the British workingman—as great
a mistake as to think that every British working
man is fit for emigration. Very great and de-
plorable mischief has arisen from such erroneous
notions. It has very justly been said that “ though
there >s no act connected with his temporal inter-
ests for which every man should more fully and
cautiously feel and know his way, than the selec-
tion of a new sphere of existence for himself and
his race, yet there is none in which people act
with more recklessness. Where the knowledge
should be of the amplest, most minute, most care-
fully weighed kind, people take their chance, and
will be swayed, for or against, by light and limited
hints.”*
Terrible experiences in human misery have
resulted from such recklessness and ignorance.
Rendered uneasy by poverty, either actual or
anticipated, at home, and led on by uncertain
rumours of wealth and luxury to be obtained at
small expense of toil and trouble in some distant
regions, thousands and tens of thousands have, at
* Dissertation on Emigration, by J. H. Burton -
Chambers’ Emigrants’ Manual,


different times, left their native land to perish by
drought and famine, by fever and ague, by exces-
sive toil, by anguish of mind, or by all these evils
combined, in some inhospitable country, fertile
only in disappointment, disease, and death. Or
if, in some instances, the countries thus unhappily
ventured on have been really well adapted for
cultivation and habitation—fruitful in soil and
healthy in climate—other circumstances have
brought ruin to the new settlers, and opprobrium
upon the luckless settlements. The history of
emigration, if truly written, would be saddened
by many a narrative like the following, of fearful
sufferings endured by perishing emigrants, even
amidst scenes of more wondrous beauty and
greater natural fertility than those here des-
cribed :—•
“ In 1829, the stream of emigration began to
set in upon the settlement (Swan River, in Aus-
tralia). The first settlers arrived in June and
July—the mid-winter of that part of the world.
Many of them were people of considerable sub-
stance ; and they brought with them, besides
herds, flocks, and agricultural implements, sundry
articles of furniture, dresses and jewellery.”—ln
the company were also many workmen, who went
out in the capacity of servants, with the hope and
promise of good wages and cheerful homes.—
“ The settlers were landed on the beach, in the
neighbourhood of a bare limestone rock, the
country around devoid of agricultural or pastoral
capabilities, but filled with hostile savages. Not
even a secure anchorage had been ascertained ;
and several ships were dashed to pieces on the
beach.
c


“ There were no towns or dwellings, no store-
houses ; no one responsible for assisting the help-
less emigrants, who landed like fugitives before a
pursuing enemy. The allotments could not be
found, for the laud had not been surveyed ; and
those who had so many thousand acres assigned
to them, might find their property when they
could. Before the end of the year, twenty-five
ships had reached the shore, with nearly a thou-
sand emigrants, and property worth about fifty
thousand pounds. Early in the ensuing year, the
number of settlers, and the quantity of property
landed were more than doubled. The tide poured
in, until there was time to communicate at home
the disastrous reception of the settlers. Then,
indeed, it of necessity subsided, and people awaited
with uneasy expectation for further news from the
land of promise. The intelligence was distinct
enough. The colony was just as if so many
people had been shipwrecked, had been able to
get ashore, and then depended on the chances of
finding food, or being picked up. This incon-
siderate and unfortunate beginning of the colony
had a bad effect upon its progress ; and till the
present day, Western Australia is the least popular
of all the colonies in this quarter of the world.”*
The struggles which these unhappy settlers
had to undergo, are thus further described in an
address presented to the governor of Western
Australia:—
“The ghastly spectacle of the town-site of
Clarence —its sole edifices, crowded, hurried, and
neglected tombs; its only inhabitants, corpses,
* The British Colonies, by R. Montgomery Martin,
and Chambers’ Emigrants’ Manual.


the victims of disease, starvation, and despair;
the sea-beacli strewed with wrecks ; the hills and
borders of the rivers studded with deserted and
half-finished buildings, bear witness to these con-
sequences, and speak of brave men, delicate
females, and helpless children, perishing in
hundreds on a desert coast from want of food, of
shelter, and even of water, and surrounded by-
hordes of angry and armed savages. It were
wholly impossible to estimate the vast amount of
property of every sort buried for safety in the
sands of the shore, and never again recovered, or
the multitude of valuable and high-bred stock of
all descriptions, whose skeletons whitened the
beach, or filled the morasses they had been
forced to enter in the desperate search for even
fresh water. Can we wonder, then, that thou-
sands rushed from such a scene with the relics of
their capital to people other colonies ; or even
that numbers sat down in the frenzy of despair
beside the spirit-cask, never to rise from it alive?”
These painful scenes were experienced in what
has since proved to be a fine country, with a good
climate; and the colony, thus sadly founded, is
slowly rising in importance, and increasing in
population. It would now be far from an un-
promising field of emigration for working men ;
in fact, the great drawback to its prosperity is
want of labour. Hundreds of working men, with
their families, would find in it a hearty welcome,
profitable employment, and pleasant homes. But
the first attempt at emigration to that colony was
ill-judged and ill-directed, and the immediate
results were almost as deplorable as though the
shiploads of unhappy settlers had been dropped
c 2


upon the most inhospitable and barren region
under the sun, and left to perish.
Such an instance as this—and there are, as we
have said, many such in the history of emigra-
tion—should convince the emigrant of the neces-
sity (if he would do well for himself, and not
blindly run into difficulties) of making himself
acquainted with the country towards which he is
directing his thoughts. “ There is not a scrap
of obtainable knowledge about the selected field
which a man ought not to study before he casts
his lot, and that of his descendants, into it.
Books, the very best, should not be absolutely
;elied on for final guidance. They should be
studied beforehand, and made the means by
which the intending emigrant casts about, and
compares one field with another ; but ere he packs
up his trunks, and actually steps on shipboard,
he should have friendly, personal advice about
the land of his adoption, and its suitability to
his own position.”*
And the working man should not say, This is
all very well for people who have money to
spend on books, or whatever they please, and
who, when they choose to emigrate, take with
them capital to lay out on laud ; but for a work-
ing man, who has only his labour to depend
upon—it is no matter where he goes so that he
can get work, and be well paid for his labour.
It is because the working man has only his labour
to depend upon that it is needful for him to look
well before him, and not make emigration a sort
of leap in the dark. The capitalist who emigrates,
whether his capital be large or small, has some-
* J. H. Burton: in Emigrants’ Manual.


tiling to fall back upon if he finds himself deceived
or disappointed on reaching his destination. He
may, in most cases, return if he please, or seek
elsewhere for a more promising home. But to
the working man, who will probably have ex-
hausted all his resources in his first effort, at
emigration, disappointment is, for the time at
least, complete ruin. And if he have a family to
share with him his distresses, without the means
of lightening them, it is aggravated ruin. There
is not in ordinary emigrant life a situation more
distressing, perhaps, than that of a poor family,
recently arrived in a country to which they are
strangers, and in which everything is strange to
them, and finding themselves not wanted there.
All their property, besides the clothes they wear,
and a few scanty packages, consists, it may be, of a
small stock of silver, not enough to sustain them
for more than a week or two ; lodgings are expen-
sive, and employment is not to be obtained, though
ever so diligently sought. Very many such
cases of hardship arise from a culpable want of
foresight and prudence before leaving home ; and
the working man, of all others, should not emi-
grate without a clear idea of the character and
requirements of the country he thinks of making
his future home.
In such a case as we have supposed—though it
is by no means a mere supposition—it is useless
to think of returning home ; there are no possible
means for doing so : as useless is it to load oneself
with reproaches for having done that which can
not now be undone. But the distress would not
have existed to be deplored, and the consequent
struggles of an unsuccessful emigration would
o 3


have been avoided, if the man had taken some
slight trouble in searching out facts and consider-
ing consequences.
Certainly, it is not always easy to get clear and
correct information respecting distant emigrant
homes ; and it is very puzzling to find that while
in some quarters certain colonies are spoken of in
terms of high commendation, and every en-
couragement is held out to various classes of
society for making them the homes of their
adoption, in other quarters these same colonies
are referred to in very depreciating and dis-
couraging language. Even the experience of
actual emigrants to the same spot very widely
differs; and their letters show in what different
lights the same subject may be viewed. Some
praise the land as a good land, full of incentives
to perseverance, and holding out every promise
of success, while others tell us despondingly that
it is thronged with giant difficulties, impossible to
be overcome. Some “ only wish that all their
friends were there ” to share in their prosperity,
while others “ wish they had never gone out,”
and dissuade their friends from taking so disastrous
a step as emigration to that place. At the
present time, when thousands are flocking with
almost insane haste to the colonies of Australia,
the land of hope and promise, we have heard of
those who bitterly deplore having left their native
land for that country, and whose determination is
to reach England again as soon as they can set
sail.
These contradictions are very perplexing to
those who wish to obtain correct information;
but it is not perhaps very difficult to reconcile


them. In the first place, extravagant expecta-
tions are almost sure of disappointment, while
moderate hopes are sometimes more than fulfilled.
Many emigrants when they step on shipboard
fancy all care to be left behind them, and that
thenceforward all will be ease and plenty.
Vain expectation—rainbow-built,
Ending in showers of sorrow.
No wonder that such persons should write dis-
consolate letters to their friends, after a few
weeks’ or months’ experience of the drawbacks of
emigrant life.
Then, in the second place, all men are not
alike adapted, in body and mind, for an emigrant’s
life; there are some,'-indeed, who are altogether
unfit for it; and yet this very unfitness may
have been the cause of their emigration. The
evidence of this class of witnesses is most likely
to be distorted, and should be received with the
utmost caution.
A man about to emigrate, then, should call to
his aid, discrimination and common sense. He
should be careful to obtain facts rather than
opinions, and, without entirely setting aside the
latter, he should be guided mainly by the former.
And with regard to published information, we
may say that much which can be depended upon
may now be obtained at comparatively small
price. Individuals, as well as societies, have from
motives of benevolence turned their attention to
the subject of emigration, have obtained the best
and fullest information on all matters interesting to
emigrants, and are presenting it in a popular form,
and in numerous small books and pamphlets, so as
to be within the reach of all. And, “in so far as


books are to be relied on, it will be found that
those written on the spot”—that is, in the emi-
grant lands themselves—“ are less safely to be
depended on than the compilations, in which their
information is sifted and compared with that of
others, by persons who have no interest in emi-
gration or the success of theories, and whose
object is simply to prepare works of reference
and information.’’*
An emigrant should also be aware that for
some time there has been established a Govern-
ment Emigration Board, with agencies in differ-
ent parts of Great Britain ; and that practical
information and advice are readily given to those
who seek it. It would beVell if all emigrants
to the British colonies would carefully avail
themselves of this means of obtaining useful in-
struction. The assistance given by this Board
and its agents, however, is more particularly in
forwarding emigrants to their destination, and in
protecting them from fraud and imposition, than
in fixing the choice of a place to go to.f
In emigration, almost anything is better than
the hap-hazard of blind ignorance. We have
heard of instances in which a party of working
men have deputed one of their number to visit
the country to which they had thought of going,
of course paying the expenses of his voyage and
all other necessary charges, in order to obtain the
most satisfactory information, and having arrange-
ments made to facilitate their settling down at
once on their arrival at the colony. Where this
*J. H. Burton: in Emigrants’ Manual,
f A fuller reference to the Emigration Board will be
made in another tract of this series.


can be done, and the forerunner is trustworthy
and intelligent, it is difficult to conceive of a
better plan ; neither time nor money is likely to
be tiirown away by putting it into practice ; but
it is seldom, perhaps, that it can be judiciously
adopted.
There are many points to which inquiries
should be directed, and on which a man should
oeterraine to obtain satisfactory information
before leaving his native country. For instance,
he ought to be particular in ascertaining what is
the climate of the country towards which his
thoughts have been directed.
It is plain enough that if a working man loses
his health soon after his arrival in a new country,
he is in a worse position than he would have
been had he remained at home. There, prf,'
bably, he had some claim upon a sick or benefit
society for support during illness; or he had
friends who would assist and succour him ; or, at
the worst, he had a claim upon parochial relief:
but as a stranger, in a strange land, these resources
are lost. It is true, he may in such a case meet
with great and unexpected kindness from
strangers; but he will, at the same time, feel
that, in proportion as this kindness is shown, he
is a burden on those upon whom he has no other
claim than that of common humanity. And if
his sickness be long continued, he will be exposed
to many privations and sufferings arising from
his isolated position.
Now, we know very well, that no climate can
offer to the emigrant a certain exemption from
sickness; but it is equally certain that while the
climate of some lands is favourable to health,


that of others is loaded with the seeds of disease.
And it often has happened that this fact has been
lost sight of, or perhaps has never been con-
sidered, by the eager emigrant, while other in-
ducements have led him on to the speedy ruin of
his health, and probably to an untimely grave.
We have said that it is not every British colony
that is a fit field of emigration for working men.
The climate, to say nothing of other substantial
objections to many of these colonies, is injurious
to most European constitutions, and would very
soon take away the power for manual labour.
The West India Islands, for instance, or the
large possessions of British India, or the British
colonies in South America, —no one would think
of advising a working man to go to either of these
places, to better his condition ; the climate alone
would forbid it. But even in those parts of the
British empire to which emigration is more or
less briskly going on, there are differences in
climate which should be carefully considered,
with reference to a man’s constitution. In
general the climates of the North American pro-
vinces, of Australia, and’of Cape Colony in
Africa—and these are the three great fields of
British emigration—are healthy ; but all parts are
not equally healthy, nor are all parts alike suit-
able to all constitutions.
But there is another vast field of emigration
which is not included among British colonies.
Of the two and a half million of emigrants who,
between the years 1824 and 1851, left the shores
of Great Britain and Ireland, more than half
were bound for the United States of North
America ; and of late years especially, very con-


siderably more than this proportion has been kept
up. Now America, as the United States are
generally called in England, is a very wide
country, and embraces a great variety of climates.
Some parts are healthy ; but others are sadly
unhealthy: and hundreds of British workmen
have been tempted to emigrate to the unhealthy
parts of the States by the promise of a fertile soil,
high wages, and certain work, —to become the
almost certain victims of ague, fevers, and other
diseases incident to the climate. Every emigrant
should be made aware of this risk.
Then, another point to which his inquiries
should be directed is, the present condition of the
country which he proposes to make his future
home. To a working man, who has only his
labour to depfend upon for subsistence, this is a
matter of primary importance. It will do him
no good to be told, when he arrives at his desti-
nation, that it has been, and may be again, a
favourable spot, or a prosperous colony, if, at the
time of his arrival, he finds it in a state of distrac-
tion and work almost unattainable. The working
man will probably have experienced the effects of
fluctuations at home, by which he may judge of
the imprudence of starting to a distant settlement
at a time of general depression there, from what-
ever cause that depression may have arisen. In
the history of most of the present fields of emi-
gration there have been times of difficulty and
distress, affecting all the inhabitants, and pressing
very hardly upon the labouring classes; and
prudence would dictate to the emigrant to see
that his proposed home is at least free from such
present embarrassment. Prosoerity is intimately


connected with peace; and, if there he war, as
there lias been at the Cape of Good Hope with
the Calfre tribes, we should think the man so far
a wise man who should determine not to go
to the South African colonies, or any other,
under similar circumstances, until peace be, as
far as can be judged, permanently restored.
Then, an emigrant will do well to find out
what sort of labour is most in demand in the
quarter to which lie thinks of going, and whether
he can assist in supplying that demand. In a
new country, a rough carpenter is of more value
than a piano-forte maker, unless the latter can
lay aside his professional skill, and turn his hand
to rough carpentry. In some settlements, none
but men of stout muscular frame, who can Avield
the back woodsman’s axe, are in much request.
In others, the prime demand is for shepherds ; in
others, good ploughmen are sure of good wages.
In general, mechanics in those trades which are
necessary to the lowest forms of civilized life,
will find themselves appreciated and sought
out, when artizans of a higher order must teach
their right hands to forget much of their cun-
ning, in order to succeed as settlers in a new
country. But even there the “ rough and ready”
mechanic will sometimes find that his individual
services are not particularly wanted ; and that he
must either turn his hand to some kind of labour
foreign to his previous habits, or learn to live upon
nothing. All these matters should be considered
before hand, and a man should have good grounds
tor believing that he can supply the kind of
labour which is needed.
It is, perhaps, unnecessary to say that the rate
of wages likely to be obtained abroad should be


ascertained, since this is information our emigrant
is not likely to neglect; but lie should be aware
that this, even in a pecuniary sense, is not all that
he ought to know. High wages and low wages
are only relative terms ; that is, any sum of money
is large or small, only as compared with what it
will purchase. Before the rvorkman can judge of
the value of the wages he may expect to obtain,
he must know how much food, firing, lodging,
clothing, and other necessaries of life, they will
purchase. Thus, with regard to the United States
of America, it has been justly observed that, “ a
high remuneration is necessary to the workman.
Unless he can make there at least forty per cent,
more than he can in this country (Great Britain),
he is not substantially better off. All natural
productions are cheaper there than they are at
home ; but as to everything that attains its value
from industry, he must recollect that the induce-
ment to his proceeding thither is the high remu-
neration of industry, and so he must be prepared
to pay highly every one who works for him, in
keeping house, in preparing his victuals, in making
his clothes, and in keeping them clean. In fact, in
the cities of the United States, all people who
work are well paid, and therefore all who desire
to participate in the general advantage must work
hard and effectually themselves, and must be ready
to afford a satisfactory proportion of what they so
gain to those who minister in any shape to their
wants.”*
These remarks will apply to all countries where
labour is highly paid ; for no workman can reason-
ably expect ample remuneration for his own labour,
* Chambers’ Emigrants’ Manual.
D


without also amply remunerating the labours of
those who work for him.
There are other matters with regard to which
there ought to be neither indifference nor igno-
rance, Making money, or getting rich, or even
obtaining a larger share of the comforts of life
than could be hoped for at home, is not the sole
object of emigration. “ A man’s life,” we are
told, on the highest authority, “ consisteth not in
the abundance of the things which he possesseth
and it is very desirable that all who think of
emigrating should well weigh the sacrifices they
must make, and the temptations to which they will
be exposed in the land of their adoption. We
shall refer to these in the following chapter.*
* Cautions bearing upon the practical details of an
emigrant's voyage, will be given in other books in this
series.


CHAPTER IV.
SACRIFICES, INCONVENIENCES, AND TEMPTATIONS
CONNECTED WITH EMIGRATION.
Most persons love their country, and do not
like the thought of bidding it farewell. The
departing emigrant may have experienced many
hardships at home, and be driven from it, at last,
by the dread of trials still more severe ; but he
cannot leave it without very painful regret. On
board an emigrant ship strong-minded men have
been known to turn aside and weep like children,
at the last sight of their native land ; nor is he to
be envied who could bear this parting without
any emotion. Recollections of pleasures long
since departed, of mercies, perhaps sadly despised,
of errors and their consequences, crowd into the
mind at such a time with startling clearness.
Scenes of childhood’s happy home, and of later
domestic joys, pass rapidly in review. Oh, how
many sad hearts, throbbing with mournful remem-
brances, are there between the decks of every
outward bound emigrant vessel when the darkness
of night has hidden from view the land which, to-
morrow, will be left far behind.
With home, some friends will in most cases be
left behind. Emigration generally involves pain-
ful separation of kindred: children from parents,
and brothers and sisters from each other. To
those who remain, as well as to those w'ho depart,
this sacrifice is sometimes like the breaking asunder
i) 2


of the heart-strings. Let our readers picture to
themselves some such scene as that which has been
described in these pages, and think of themselves
as participating in the trial; of the father’s last
“ good-bye ” —the mother’s last kiss—the swim-
ming eyes —the overloaded hearts—the waving
hands in the distance—the final glance—the sick-
ness of soul when all is over—and he will under-
stand that emigration has its painful sacrifices.
And when these partings are ended, the emi-
grant will learn that there are inconveniences to be
borne as well as sacrifices to be made; incon-
veniences which, perhaps, he lias not sufficiently
taken into account. A few days ago we had some
conversation with a young man, who, with a wife
and three young children, was about to emigrate
to the United States, He seemed to think very
little of the inconveniences and annoyances, to say
nothing of the more serious possible troubles and
dangers of a voyage across the Atlantic. He
knew what being at sea was very well, he said,
and what storms were, and all about sea-sickness,
and all other of the minor miseries of a life at
sea; for he had once gone across from Dover to
Calais, and the sea was so rough that it washed
all over the deck, and the wind was so contrary that
he was twenty-four hours on the voyage. And he
was very sea-sick, but he knew what would cure
that, for an old sailor had told him of a certain
remedy. Then about his wife and children, they
would do very well; for he should not go out in
the lowest steerage “ among all sorts,” but was
going to pay ten shillings a-head extra to have a
whole room to himself and family, “ quite private,
in the upper steerageand he looked round the


room in which we then were, evidently expecting
that his “whole room in the upper steerage”
would be very superior to that cottage apartment.
It is to be feared that our young friend, before
he has reached New York, will have found that
an emigration voyage of a month or five weeks is
a' different affair from a trip across the channel,
even though the passage was a rough one. And
we can conceive the dismay on his countenance
when shown the “ whole room—quite private,”
in which his imagination had luxuriated.
To be daunted, and turned back from a course
which seems to be the path of duty, by the antici-
pation of the sacrifices that must be made, and in-
conveniences which must be borne, is cowardly and
wrong. But to shut out from our minds the know-
ledge of such certain drawbacks, is neither wise
nor brave. They should be looked manfully in
the face, and met, when they are experienced, with
fortitude and courage. Even in a well-appointed
and first-class emigrant ship, many discomforts are
experienced ; and in inferior vessels, these dis-
comforts are often expanded into grievous trials.
Steerage sights and smells and confusion are
not pleasant; and the emigrant, especially if he
have a wife and family to take care of, will find
that he has enough to do to keep up his own spirits
and theirs. The company into which he is incon-
veniently crowded, and with which himself and
his family must mingle, will not be very select,
probably, nor very congenial. Nowhere, we were
told the other day by one who has had very full
experience in such matters, are people so generally
disposed to quarrel as on board an emigrant ship.
Good-nature, fellow-feeling, kind-heartedness, for-
d 3


will liave to be called into constant
Without these, an emigrant’s voyage
wjlfbe a time of almost unbearable wretchedness ;
with these, especially if exercised on Christian
principles, discomforts will be greatly diminished,
and inconveniences and sacrifices will yield profit-
able fruit. But, for discomforts and inconveni-
ences let the emigrant prepare his mind.
There will probably be some things, on first
landing in the new country, to weigh down the
spirits a little. The emigrant and his family will
be cast into new scenes and among strangers.
There will be some uncertainty, perhaps, about
employment, with no one near upon whom to lean
for advice and assistance. Self dependence is a
rare quality, and the emigrant, when he needs it
most, may find out that he has but little of it at
command. It is good, in the end, for a man to
be cast upon his own resources, and thus taught
the art of self-reliance; but the first trial of this
sort is generally a painful one.
It may be that difficulties will present them-
selves in the outset on which the emigrant had
not calculated, and he will begin to question the
wisdom of his movements. As soon, however, as
employment is found, this feeling of despondency
will begin to subside, and, ere long, he will find
himself somewhat more at home. But before he
has been long in the country, he will become
sensible of some sacrifices which his new position
involves, especially if he has settled down where
he is almost cut off from society as in the back-
woods of Canada, or the “bush” of Australia.
He will find out then what is meant by the com
non phrase “ roughing it.”


It is a natural feeling to look back
regret at the advantages once possessed—though,
perhaps, formerly but little prized—when they
seem lost; and to overlook present advantages in
the comparison with the past. The lonely emi-
grant will feel afresh, as he labours hard from
day to day, the separation from old friends ; he
will wish for more intercourse with his fellow-
creatures ; and forget at times the strong and
urgent reasons which led him into what he will
look upon as the wilderness. The emigrant’s
wife will probably still more keenly feel the
sacrifices she has made, and be almost disposed to
murmur, and reproach her husband and herself
for the folly of emigrating. She will miss, more
than he, the intercourse with friends and neigh-
bours, and will find that for every domestic comfort
she will have to depend upon herself. What slie
had never thought of doing in u dear old Eng-
land,” she must, as an emigrant’s wife, do for
herself and her husband and children, or it must
be altogether left undone. Her “ log-hut ”
will, at first, be sadly destitute of conveniences
which she little thought would ever be missed ;
and she will have to contrive numberless “ make-
shifts ” before she can see anything like comfort
around her. If she be a wise woman, she will
make the best of her circumstances, put a cheer-
ful face on everything, and encourage her husband
to look on the bright side too; and in a very
little time, she uill think more of substantial
blessings enjoyed, than of sacrifices made, or
inconveniences endured.
There are temptations, too, connected with an
emigrant life, which ought very anxiously to be


guarded against. In the towns, especially, of
many of the British colonies, and in the United
States of America generally, there.are strong
inducements to intemperance, arising from the
low price of ardent spirits, and the influence of
example. Hundreds of emigrants have become
slaves, and soon victims to this most pernicious
vice ; they have blighted their prospects, reduced
their families to beggary, and themselves to con-
tempt, and ruined their souls by yielding to this
“ g reat a »d ceaseless temptation,” which probably
has crept upon them unawares.
Another temptation to which the emigrant
working man will be exposed—particularly Tf he
labour in the backwoods or the bush—is that of
suffering himself and his family to sink into a
kind of half-barbarism. While gradually pros-
pering in outward circumstances,' he will have
perhaps, few inducements for cultivating his
mind, and will permit it—unless he take °great
care—to go almost to sleep. His children will
grow up with ignorant and uncultivated minds,
seeking pleasurable excitement, or relief from
toil, in mere animal rather than mental gratifica-
tions. This is a sad accompaniment to prosperous
emigration, and one against which every one
ought to strive with might and main.
Among the sacrifices of emigrant life is that,
which often occurs, of being cut off from the
outward ordinances of religion. The emigrant
may be many miles from any place of worship,
and the few neighbours with whom he can hold
intercourse may be utterly ignorant, or careless
and unconcerned about eternity. Herein will
consist a great and terrible temptation. If the


in months past, as in the days when God preserved
me; wiien his candle shined upon my head, and
when by his light I walked through darkness ; as
1 was in the days of my youth, when the secret
of God was upon my tabernacle!” No worldly
prosperity will compensate for such saddening
accompaniments; and the Christian emigrant
will have need daily to “ watch and pray, lest he
enter into temptation.”
Before the man who contemplates emigration
takes a decisive step in his proposed course, he
ought faithfully to examine his own heart and
conduct, and set himself right in one particular.
By leaving his native land, he hopes to advance
his own and his children’s interests, and to find, in
another country, the temporal prosperity for
which he may have vainly striven at home. But
there is an infinitely more important matter to be
considered; and the question appeals to him, as
it indeed appeals to all —“ What shall it profit a
man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul ? or what shall a man give in exchange
for his soul ?”
If his conscience convict him of being far from
God by wicked works, his most immediate and
urgent necessity is to be reconciled to God —to
take refuge in his mercy, as freely offered in the
Lord Jesus Christ. Until this be done, he will
be but scantily prepared to meet with fortitude
the trials, and to resist with effect the temptations,
of emigrant life. And besides this, there will
hang over him, wherever his wanderings may be,
the wrath of God—the certainty of tremendous,
final, and eternal ruin.


CHAPTER V.
QUALIFICATIONS FOR AND ADVANTAGES OF
EMIGRATION.
There are some people—very many we fear—•
who think that if they can but “ get away,” and
become emigrants, their fortunes will be made
without much further trouble or care on their
parts; and there are others who look upon emi-
gration as a sort of cure for moral evils which
have cast a blight upon comfortable prospects at
home. We knew, some time since, a young man
in respectable life, who by idleness, extravagance,
and absolute dishonesty—in fact, by a total
abandonment of good principle—had ruined him-
self and brought misery and disgrace upon his
friends. He w r as sent to Australia :he would
redeem his character, and “ get on ” there, it was
said. We knew another, in a different rank of
social life, who “ could work if he had a mind,”
but who had oftener a stronger mind to sit in the
public-house than in the workshop, or timber-
yard, and did not know how it was that he did not
get on. He emigrated : better wages could be
obtained in Australia than at home. We knew
a third, honest, sober, and to a certain extent
industrious; but very fickle. How many modes
of getting a living he had tried, it would be hard
to say. He had been everything by tuihs, and
nothing long ; in truth, he did not like continuous
labour. At last, when Ids friends hoped that he


had steadied down to a permanent mode of life,
and was making towards a point of comparative
prosperity, he suddenly threw up his employment,
sold all his furniture, and, with a few pounds in
Ids pocket, and a wife and family to provide for,
departed to America. It is not uncharitable to
say that not one of these three had good qualifi-
cations for emigration.
Industrious, sober habits, and steady perse-
verance are essential: without these qualifications,
no man should think of emigrating to better his
condition. When an emigrant arrives at his
destination, he will very soon find it true that if a
man will network —and work hard—neither shall
he eat. “ Were a man in poverty in Australia
from laziness,” we are told in a work on that
country —and the same statement holds good with
regard to other emigrant lands —“ he would get
plenty of jeers, but not a soul would give him a
piece of bread, because it would be known that
Ids condition was deserved, and relief would be
refused on principle. Hospitality to industrious
people is a characteristic of the Australian colo-
nies ; the want of it to the lazy is an equally strong
characteristic.”
Aptitude at turning the hand to any kind of
employment, is another requisite for emigration.
The man who, at home, either disdains or thinks
himself incompetent to step out of the narrow
track of his ordinary occupation, who will make
no attempt to get an honest living in a line that
“ he has not been used to,” and who, when he
has faited of success in his own department of
labour, sinks into hopeless despondency though
employment be offered him in another—had better


not emigrate. Some of the most successful emi-
grants have been those who have turned, with a
will, to work for which their previous habits
might have been supposed to unfit them. Among
the shepherds in a certain district of Australia
were, a short time since, enumerated several who
had previously been engaged in the following
callings :—“ An apothecary, a lawyer’s clerk,
three sailors, a counting-house clerk, a tailor, a
barman, a merchant, a lieutenant in the navy, a
fiddler, and a dancing master;” there were also
in the same list—“ a Jew, a Portuguese sailor, a
gentleman’s son, a gipsy, and a Cingalese.”
And it is added that the best of these shepherds
were the gentleman’s son, the Jew, and the
barman.
Willingness to learn and to accommodate one’s
self to new ways, is another necessary qualification
for emigration. It is said, that in Australia, where
tending sheep is a very important occupation, the
sheep-owners like such men as those above men-
tioned for shepherds better than the regular-bred
English shepherd. Now this is not because law-
yers’ clerks, or Jews, or gentlemen’s sons know
more about sheep than do the shepherds—of course
it is not ; but the plain reason is that the shepherd
(like other regular tradesmen of one business) is
too apt to be wise in his own conceit; he thinks
he knows better than his master, and will not obey
orders which he fancies to be improper. A man,
to make a good emigrant, must not take with him
a conceit that the only right way of setting about
his work is the way in which it is done set home.
Obstinate and self-willed workmen are not wanted
as emigrants.


Courage and determination to bear present in-
conveniences, and make temporary sacrifices, are
other needful qualifications for emigration. Wo
have hinted at what some of these inconveniences
and sacrifices are. Let the man about to emigrate
think of these while there is yet time for him to
draw back. It will be too late when he has once
started on his long voyage. And let women, espe-
cially, think of these things. And if a woman finds
in her heart that she must have everything just as
she has been used to have it “at home,” that she
cannot put up with only her husband’s and her
children’s society, and should be “ moped to death
in those dreadful lonely places abroad,” she had
better, if she can, persuade her husband to stay at
home. And let husbands and wives of all classes not
deceive themselves with the hope of getting sud-
denly rich in the land of their adoption. Above
all, let not the emigrant beguile himself with
golden dreams. If he be not determined to work
—to work hard, and willingly, and well—to bear
great and small trials patiently, and to wait pa-
tiently for God’s blessing upon the honest labour
of his hands, he is not fit to be an emigrant.
What then are the advantages of emigration to
the working man and his family ?
In the first place, supposing him to possess the
requisite qualifications, and time and place be well
considered and chosen, he will be certain of ob-
taining work. In the British colonies to which
we have referred, especially in the Australian
colonies, workmen are needed, workmen of all
sorts; and men who have only the stout arm and
the will to labour, even though unskilled, will
find plenty to do. Whatever enforced idleness


there may be at home, how frequently soever it
may happen that the industrious and willing-, the
sober and honest, ask leave to toil, and ask in vain ;■
it is not so, nor can it be so, where work is plen-
tiful, even to excess, and labourers are few.
Then, the emigrant will find himself amply
recompensed for his toil. The working man, of
whatever class, who at home has had to struggle
with competition until his earnings have afforded
only a bare subsistence for himself and his family,
whose expectations for the future have centred in
ihe Union house, and to whom an increase in family
has been a source of almost angry feeling, or at
least of saddening anxiety, will be gladdened by
abundance of nourishing food, will be able to
provide comfortable clothing for his children, and
learn to rejoice in their number. They will be no
encumbrances to him there, and he may look for-
ward with cheerful hope of their future prosperity,
if they be but trained to industry, sobriety, and
integrity, in the fear and love of God.
“ The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and
he addeth no sorrow with it.” We intreat you,
reader, to pause, and consider well this statement.
You have made up your mind to emigrate, you
say. You have struggled long in the old country
without success, and it is time to try a new one.
Have you ever thought whether there may have
been a cause for your want of success, beyond and
above those causes to which in a former chapter
we referred ? Have you ever thought of seeking
God’s blessing upon the labours of your hands?


or have you trusted entirely to your own skill, and
judgment, and prudence, and industry? If so, can
■you very much wonder that you have not got on
well? and have you any reason to hope that God’s
blessing, unsought, will accompany you to the
land of your choice ? It is true, neglectful of his
mercies, and rebellious against his authority, and
rejecting his great salvation, some men do increase
in riches; but God’s frown is upon them all the
while, and often “ how are they brought into deso-
lation, as in a moment! they are utterly consumed
with terrors.” At best, their prosperity ends when
life ends, if it should last as long as life lasts.
Would you be like them ?
Reconsider, then, the motives and inducements
which have brought you to your present determi-
nation. It is even possible that you may find that
your duty does not point you so clearly towards
emigration as you have imagined. Your qualifi-
cations may not be so very palpable, or your pre-
sent position may not be so very undesirable and
unpromising, as to warrant you in quitting it.
Your desire to emigrate may proceed from rest-
lessness, nay, even from idleness, which will be a
bar to success anywhere. You may not be jus-
tified in leaving near relatives, aged parents for
instance, to languish at home without your aid and
sympathy.
All these points are worth reconsideration ; but
with them all, interweave 'the most important
inquiry, Does God’s blessing rest upon me?—upon
me, as a faithful servant of his ?—upon me, as a
pardoned sinner ?—upon me, as a humble follower
and friend of the Lord Jesus Christ ? And again,
we implore you, by all the hopes that Christians
11 .****.


6-1 QUALIfKfiI'IONS TOR EMIGRATION.
told most dear; not to;f>roceed.one Step further on
} our projected course till.'you have,•Tn God’s own_
appqT«(*qd way, eaj’neltfy and soyght
* ’ that •“ blessing whichAnaketli rich,” and to wliich
no scVrwdV is added* *
Ope.word piore to yon, reader: remember, we
pV&y you, that every emigrant who leaves the
shoi’es of Great Britain, to whatever country he
may be bound, takes with him, nay, is in himself,
either a blessing or a curse. A blessing, if he
love the Lord Jesus Christ—to himself, and to
the world a blessing. A curse, if he love not the
Lord Jesus Christ—to himself and to the world a
* • -• '
curse. Reader, which shall you be ?
