

Jbpfrtt of iSfsco&etj),
EMIGRATION.
New Colony on Swan River.
We have abridged the following very
important and interesting information re-
specting the New Settlement on the
Western Coast of Australia, from the
last Number of the Quarterly Review.
The writer appears to have profited by
access to official sources, and thus en-
hanced the value of his paper; but, dis-
posed as we are, generally, to coincide
with his views on the subject of Emigra-
tion, we do not think it necessary to de-
tail them in this place. We have, how-
ever, retained the “ Regulations,” as
issued from the Colonial Office, and made
occasional quotations from Captain Stir-
ling’s Report; besides availing ourselves
of a pamphlet lately published, entitled
“ Hints on Emigration to the New Set-
tlement on the Swan and Canning Ri-
vers.”* The Report of Mr. Fraser, the
government botanical surveyor, from Syd-
ney, who accompanied Captain Stirling,
is not so easy of access. The Quarterly
writer, by some coincident opinions and
references, appears to be acquainted with
the above pamphlet, although it is not
mentioned in the review. The official
Regulations are as follow :
1 His majesty’s government do not intend to
incur any expense in conveying settlers to Ihe
New Colony on the Swan River; and will not
feel bound to defray the. expense of supplying
them with provisions or other necessaries, after
their arrival there, nor to assist their removal to
England, or elsewhere, should they be desirous
of quilting the Colony.
2. Such persons who may arrive in that settle-
ment before the end of the year 1830, will re-
ceive, in the order of their arrival, grants of
land, free of quit rent, proportioned to the capi-
tal which they may be prepared to invest in Ihe
improvement of the land, and of which capital
they may be able to produce satisfactory proofs
to the Lieutenant Governor (or other officer ad-
ministering the l olonial Government,) or to any
two officers of the Local Government apnointed
by the Lieutenant Governor for that purpose, at
the rate of forty acres for every sum of three
pounds which they may be prepared so to invest.
3. Under the head of investment of capital
will be considered stock of every description,
all implements of husbandry, and other articles
which may be applicable to the purposes of pro-
ductive industry, or which may be necessary for
the establishment of the settler on the land
where he is to be located. The amount of any
half-pay or pension which the applicant may
receive from Government, will also be consider-
ed as so much capital.
4. Those who may incur the expense of taking
out labouring persons, will be entitled to an al-
lowance of land at the rate of fifteen pounds,
that is, of two hundred acres of land, for the
passage of every such labouring person, over
and above any other investment of capital. In
the class of “ labouring persons,” are included
• Published by J. Cross, 18, Holborn, oppo-
site Furnival's Inn.
women, and children above ten year* old. Pro.
vision will be made by law, at the earliest oppor-
tunity for rendering those capitalists, who may
be engaged in taking out labouring persons to
this settlement, liable fur the future maintenance
of those persons, should they, from infirmity, or
any other cause, become unable to maintain
themselves there.
5. The license of occupation of land will be
granted to the settler, on satisfactory proof being
exhibited to the Lieutenant Governor (or other
officer administering Ihe Local Government,) of
the amount of property brought into the colony.
The proofs required of such property will be
such satisfactory vouchers of expenses as would
be received in auditing public accounts. But
the full title to the land will not be granted in
fee simple, until the settler has proved, to the
satisfaction of the Lieutenant Governor (or
other officer administering the Local Govern-
ment,) that the sura required by Article 2 of
these regulations (viz. one shilling and sixpence
per acre) has been expended in the cultivation
of the land, or in solid improvements, such as
buildings, roads, or other works of the kind.
6. Any grant of land thus allotted, of which a
fair proportion, of at least one fouith, shall not
have been brought into cultivation, otherwise
improved or reclaimed from its wild state, to
the extent of one shilling and sixpence per acre,
to the satisfaction of the Local Government,
within three years from the date of the license
of occupation, shall, at the end of three years,
be liable to a payment of sixpence per acre, into
the public chest of the settlement; and, at the
expiration of seven years more, should Ihe land
still remain in an uncultivated or unimproved
state, it will revert absolutely to the crown.
7. After the year 1830, land will be disposed of
to those settlers who may resort to the colony,
on such conditions as his Majesty’s Government
shall see occasion to adopt.
8. It is not intended that any convicts, or
other description of prisoners, be transported to
this new settlement
9. The governm : will be administered by
Captain Stirling, oftlhe Royal Navy, as Lieut.
Governor of the settlement; and it is proposed
that a bill should be submitted to parliament, in
the couj se of the next session, to mage provision
for the civil government of the New Settlement.
Downing Street, 13th January, 1829.
The intended settlement is designated,
in the “ Regulations,” as the “ New
Colony on the Swan River ;”-f- but this
is a name, we think, not sufficiently com-
prehensive for the extent of territory
meant to be occupied. What its future
designation is meant to be, we pretend
not to know, but if its soil should prove
as fruitful as its climate is fine, the posi-
tion and aspect of this part of the coast
might justify the name of Southern, or
Australian, Hesperia; under which
might be included all that line of coast
from Cape Leuwin, the southernmost
point of New Holland, in lat. 34 deg.
30 rain., long. 115 deg. 12 min. east, to
the lat. 31 deg. (or a degree or two more
northerly) long. 115 deg. 15 min. east;
and from the former point easterly to
King George’s Sound, where an English
colony has already been established. This
extent of territory, between the sea-coast
and a range of mountains parallel to it,
hereafter to be described, may be esti-
t The Riviere cie Cygnes of the French is n
translation of the Zwanen Riviere of Vlaming.
THE MIRROR.


mated to contain from five to six millions
of acres, the greater part of which, from
the general appearance of the two extreme
portions (the only ones examined) may
be considered as land fit for the plough,
and, therefore, fully capable of giving
support to a million of souls. The de-
scription we are about to give of this ter-
ritory is mainly derived from Captain
Stirling, the intelligent officer who ex-
plored the country, and of which he has
been appointed the Lieutenant Governor,
and from Mr. Fraser, an excellent bo-
tanist, who accompanied him, and who
was well acquainted with the soil and
products of New South Wales, on the
opposite side of Australia.
Captain Stirling, when commanding
the Success frigate, was sent to New
South Wales on a particular service,
which the state of the monsoon prevented
him from carrying into immediate execu-
tion. He determined, therefore, on the
recommendation of General Darling, the
governor, to explore, in the meantime,
this western part of Australia, which was
omitted to be surveyed by Captain King,
on the ground that it had been visited by
the French in the expedition of Captain
Baudin : the result of that visit, however,
is so unsatisfactory, and so very inaccu-
rate, that we are rather surprised that
Captain King should have passed over so
interesting a portion, geographically con-
sidered, as the south-western angle of this
great country. Captain Stirling arrived
at Cape Leuwin on the 2nd of March,
1827, stood along the coast, and anchor-
ed in Gage’s Roads, opposite Swan River,
which he afterwards ascended to its source
in boats, and sent out exploring parties
to ascertain the nature of the surrounding
territory.
“ We found,” he says, “ the country
in general rich and romantic, gained the
summit of the first range of mountains,
and had a bird’s-eye view of an immense
plain, which extended as far as the eye
could reach to the northward, southward,
and westward. After ten days’ absence,
we returned to the ship ; we encountered
no difficulty that was not easily remov-
able ; we were furnished with abundance
of fresh provisions by our guns, and met
with no obstruction from the natives.”
> Captain Stirling describes the weather
as very different from that which the
French experienced ; but the latter were
on the coast at the commencement of the
winter season. They were apparently so
alarmed at the gales of wind, the rocks,
and the reefs, and the banks, that they
hastened to leave behind them this part
of the coast unexamined, with all conve-
nient speed. The strong westerly winds
that prevail throughout the year in the
southern ocean to the southward of the
tropic, appear to assume a northern di-
rection near this part of the Coast of
Australia. These winds are here found
to be cool and pleasant, and were gene-
rally accompanied by clear and serene
weather. The summer winds from the
N. W. are not infrequent; and, coming
charged with moisture from a warm re-
gion into a colder one, they are invariably
accompanied by rain; but, in the imme-
diate vicinity of the shore, land and sea
breezes are constant and regular. The
climate appears to be delightful. While
the Success was on the coast—that is, in
the autumn—the average height of the
thermometer was 72 deg., the extremes
being 84 deg. and 59 deg., the first oc-
curring before the sea-breeze set in, the
latter at midnight. The French found
the temperature when at anchor, in June,
from 14 deg. to 17 deg. of Reaumur, or
03 deg. to 70 deg. of Fahrenheit. On the
mountains, Captain Stirling says, the
temperature appeared to be about 15 deg.
below that of the plain. The alternate
land and sea breezes create a moisture in
the atmosphere which renders the climate
cool and agreeable; the mornings and
evenings are particularly so; and the
nights are almost invariably brilliant and
clear. Such a climate, it is almost unne-
cessary to say must be highly favourable
to vegetation, which was accordingly ob-
served to be most luxuriant. “ The ver-
dant appearance,” says Captain Stirling,
“ and almost innumerable variety of
grasses, herbaceous plants, shrubs, and
trees, show that there is no deficiency in
the three great sources of their sustenance,
soil, heat, and moisture.”
The general structure and aspect of the
country may be thus described;—from
Cape Leuwin to Cape Naturaliste (the
southern head of Baie Geographe,) which
is not quite a degree of latitude, the coast
is formed of a range of hills, of uniform
and moderate elevation. From Geogra-
pher’s Bay to the northward of Swan
River, the whole coast line is a limestone
ridge, varying in height from twenty to
six hundred feet, and extending inward
to the distance of from one to five miles.
Behind this ridge (whose occasional nak-
ed and barren appearance Captain Stirling
also thinks may have caused the early and
continued prejudice against the fertility
of this western coast) commences a great
plain, which occupies a space, from south
to north, of undetermined length, (reach-
ing, perhaps, to King George’s Sound,)
and varying, in breadth, from twenty to
fifty miles. The eastern boundary of
this plain skirts the base of an almost
THE MIRROR.


continuous and abrupt chain of moun-
tains, to which Captain Stirling gave the
name of “ General Darling’s Range.”
One of the points, the highest seen and
measured by him, was about three thou-
sand feet high. The average height is
stated to be from twelve hundred to fif-
teen hundred feet. The base is granite;
the sides, in many parts, naked ; and the
soil supports but little vegetation, except
the Stringy-bark and some hardy plants.
Captein Stirling observes, that coal
was not found, because it was not parti-
cularly sought for ; but he is of opinion
that the general character of the country
is such as to warrant the belief that it
might be found; “ for,” he observes,
“ all the concomitant strata or members
of the coal formation are exposed on dif-
ferent parts of the surface, below which I
had no opportunity to explore. Indeed,
the carboniferous order of rocks is that
which is most frequently exhibited
throughout this territory ; and I have no
doubt important results would arise from
a proper examination into its mineralogi-
cal resources.”
With reference to a supply of fresh
water, so indispensably necessary in every
settled country, the researches made by
Captain Stirling and Mr. Fraser were at-
tended with the most satisfactory results.
The former observes, that the clouds
which are impelled against the western
side of the range of mountains ate con-
densed into rain, the water of which is
conducted across the plain to the sea, in
numerous streams, but chiefly by three
principal rivers, terminating in estuaries,
or salt-water lakes. These are—the Swan
River, opposite the Island llottenest;
the Riviere Vasse, and Port Leschenault,
in Geographer’s Bay. “We found,”
says Captain Stirling, “ a great number
of creeks, or rivulets, falling into Swan
River, more particularly on the eastern
side ; and I am inclined to think, that
the country generally is much divided by
such water-courses. Its supply of fresh
water, from springs and lagoons, is abun-
dant ; for we found such wherever we
thought it necessary to ascertain their ex-
istence. At Point Heathcote,” he adds,
“ we met with a remarkable instance;
for there the beach of a narrow rocky
promontory is a bed of springs, and by
tracing the finger along any part within
four inches of the edge of the salt water,
pure and fresh water instantly occupied
the trace.”
Mr. Fraser’s testimony leaves no doubt
of the abundance of fresh water, “ I
was astonished,” he says, “ at the vivid
green of the Eucalyptus, and other trees
and shrubs, so distinct from those of New
South Wales; but, on digging the soil
to the depth of two feet, I found the
cause to arise apparently from the im-
mense number of springs with which this
country abounds ; for, at the depth above
mentioned, I found the soil quite moist,
although evidently at the latter end of an
exceedingly diy season ; and from the
same cause must arise the great luxuri-
ance of the herbaceous plants on the
banks, which exceeds any thing I ever
saw on the east coast. They consist prin-
cipally of the senecia and the sonchus ,
which here attain the height of nine feet.”
He further observes, that numerous ac-
tive springs issue from the rocks of the
limestone ridge, and particularly in Geo-
grapher’s Bay, the whole coast of which,
he says, “ is a perfect source of active
springs, discharging themselves on the
beach in rapid rills of considerable ex-
tent, every six or seven yards.”
Between the two heads which form the
entrance into Swan River, there is, un-
fortunately, a bar, made by the conti-
nuity of the limestone ridge. Over this
bar, the depth, at low water, is but six
feet, and is therefore practicable only for
boats or rafts. About a mile inside the
heads, the water deepens; and then com-
mences a succession of cliffs, or natural
wharfs, with four, five, and six fathoms
at their bases. The same depths are ex-
tended over a magnificent expanse of salt
water, to which Captain Stirling has
given the name of “Melville Water;”
and which, in his opinion, wants only a
good entrance to make it one of the finest
harbours in the world, being seven or
eight miles in length, by three or four in
width, and having a depth of water from
four to seven fathoms. This narrow en-
trance of the river, he thinks, might be
made navigable by ships of burthen,
without difficulty or great expense.
When the town begins to rise, and
substantial buildings are required, the
blocks of stone procured by quarrying
this entrance will go far towards paying
the expense of excavation.
Into this expansive sheet of water fall
two rivers; one from the north-east,
which is properly the Swan River ; the
other from the south-east, called Can-
ning’s River. Captain Stirling examined
them both : the former to its source, the
latter beyond the point where the water
ceased to be brackish. They are both
sufficiently convenient for boat naviga-
tion, even at the end of the dry season ;
and any obstruction might easily be re-
moved to make them more so, by which
the productions of an immense extent of
country might be transported by water-
carriage.
THE MIRROR.


Mr. Fraser remarks that nothing of the
mangrove appears along the banks of the
Swan River, the usual situation of this
plant being here occupied by the genus
Metrosideros. The first plain, or flat, as
it is called, contiguous to the river, com-
mencing at Point Fraser, is formed of a
rich soil, and appears, by a deposit of
wreck, to be occasionally flooded to a cer-
tain extent. Here are several extensive
salt marshes, which Mr. Fraser thinks
are admirably adapted for the growth of
cotton. The hills, though scanty of soil,
are covered with an immense variety of
plants; among others, a magnificent
species of Angophera occupied the usual
place of the Eucalyptus, which, however,
here as on the eastern side, generally
forms the principal feature in the botany
of the country, accompanied by Mimosa,
Correa, Melaleuca, Casuarina, Banksia,
and Xanthorea. The brome, or kanga-
roo grass, was most abundant. On a
more elevated flat, a little further up the
river, the botanist observes that the
“ magnificence of the Banksia and ar-
borescent Zamia, which was here seen
thirty feet in height, added to the im-
mense size of the Xanthorea near this
spot, impart to the forest a character truly
tropical.” He says that about five miles
to the eastward of the river, there is an
evident change in the character of the
country: extensive plains of the richest
description, consisting of an alluvial de-
posit, equalling in fertility those of the
banks of the River Hawkesbury in New
South Wales, and covered with the most
luxuriant brome grass. The Casuarina,
so common near the limestone ridge of
the coast, here disappears, and is sue-
ceeded by a pendulous species of Metrosi-
deros, which continues to the source of
the river.
“ From this point,” says Mr. Fraser,
“ the country resembles, in every essen-
tial character, that of the banks of those
rivers which fall to the westward of the
Blue Mountains in New South Wales,
varying alternately on each bank from
hilly promontories of the finest red loam,
and covered with stupendous Angopheras,
to extensive flats of the finest description,
studded with magnificent blue and water
gums, and occasional stripes of Accacias
and papilionaceous shrubs, resembling
the green wattle of New South Wales.”
The higher the river is ascended, the
more extended the flats become, and the
better is the quality of the soil. Here
the country is said to resemble in cha-
racter that on the banks of the Mac-
quarrie River, west of Wellington valley;
and though marks of occasional floods
appeared on the lower plains, the upper
flats had evidently never been flooded.
The sides of the mountains were bare of
underwood, and their summits covered
with large masses of iron stone, among
which were growing enormous trees of
Angophera, and some straggling plants
of Hakea. On a careful examination of
this part of the country bordering the two
rivers from the sea-coast to the moun-
tains, Mr. Fraser says, “ In giving my
opinion of the land seen on the banks of
the Swan River, I hesitate not in pro-
nouncing it superior to any I ever saw in
New South Wales, east of the Blue
Mountains, not only in its local charac-
ter, but in the many existing advantages
which it holds out to settlers. These ad-
vantages I consider to be,
“ First, the evident superiority of the
soil.
“ Secondly, the facility with which a
settler can bring his farm into a state of
immediate culture, in consequence of the
open stale of the country, which allows
not a greater average than two trees to an
acre.
“ Thirdly, the general abundance of
springs, producing water of the best qua-
lity, and the consequent permanent humi-
dity of the soil; two advantages not ex-
isting on the eastern coast. And,
“ Fourthly, the advantages of water
carriage to his door, and the non-exist-
ence of impediments to land carriage.”
( To be concluded in our next.)
St. Paul's Cathedral.
Our readers are aware that the interior
of the cupola of this magnificent cathe-
dral, represents the life of St. Paul, paint-
ed by Sir James Thornhill; but the ne-
glect and decay of this grand specimen of
pictorial decoration may not be so well
known. The great expense of erecting a
scaffold sufficient for its restoration, ap-
pears to have been the principal difficulty,
added to the want of artists experienced
in this department of art. These obsta-
cles, however, we trust have been sur-
mounted by Mr. E. T. Parris, of whose
talents we spoke in our account of the
Colosseum, and who has just completed a
model of an apparatus for getting at large
domes. The model has already been ap-
proved by an experienced architect, and
submitted to the dean and chapter of St.
Paul’s; so that the restoration of Sir
James Thornhill’s labours presents an
excellent opportunity for the immediate
application of Mr. Parris’s machinery ;
whilst its accomplishment would be the
means of rewarding individual ingenuity,
and rescuing from decay a valuable tri-
umph of British genius.
THE MIRROR.


Spirit of IBi'scofcfvg.
Copied from a handsome Chart, by permission of the publisher, Mr. Cross,
18, Holborn, opposite Furnivals* Inn.


EMIGRATION.
SWAN RIVER SETTLEMENT.
( Concluded from page 300. )
[We resume the description of the Swan
River Settlement, which will be further
illustrated by the annexed outline.]
The animal productions, we may take
fdr granted, are generally the same as
those of New South Wales. The human
species, in their physical qualities and
endowments are the same. Most of them
wore kangaroo cloaks, which were their
only clothing. They carry the same
kind of spears, and the womera, or throw-
ing stick, as are used by those in New
South Wales. In the summer months
they frequent the sea-coast, where their
skill in spearing fish is described as quite
wonderful. In winter they mostly ad-
here to the woods on the higher grounds,
where the kangaroos, the opossum tribe,
and the land tortoises are plentiful.
These, with birds and roots, constitute
their sustenance. They have neither
boat nor raft, nor did the party fall in
with any thing resembling a hut. They
made use of the word “ kangaroo ” and
other terms in use at Port Jackson. The
party saw only the three kinds of ani-
mals above-mentioned, and heard the
barking of the native dog ; no other rep-
tiles but iguanas and lizards and a single
snake presented themselves.
Of birds, the list is somewhat more ex-
tensive. The emu is frequent on the
plains, and that once supposed “ rara
avis," the elegant black swan, was seen
in the greatest abundance on the river to
which it has lent its name, and particu-
larly on Melville lake. Equally abund-
ant were numerous species of the goose
and duck family. White and black
cockatoos, parrots and parroquets, were
every where found. Pigeons and quails
were seen in great quantities, and many
melodious birds were heard in the woods.
Seals were plentiful on all the islands.
Captain Stirling says that it was not the
season for whales, but their debris strewed
the shore of Geographer’s Bay. The
French, in May and June, met with a
prodigious number of whales along this
part of the coast, and sharks equally nu-
merous and of an enormous size, some of
them stated to be upwards of two thou-
sand pounds in weight. Vlaming men-
tions the vast numbers of large sharks on
this part of the coast, and he, as well as
the French, found the sea near the shore
swarming with sea-snakes, the largest
about nine or ten feet long. Captain
Stirling’s party procured three or four
different kinds of good esculent fish ; one
in particular, a species of rock-cod, is de-
scribed as excellent.
“ The bottom of the sea,” says Captain
Stirling, “ is composed of calcareous
sand, sometimes passing into marl or
clay. On this may be seen growing an
endless variety of marine plants, which
appear to form the haunts and perhaps
the sustenance of quantities of small fish.
When it is considered that the bank ex-
tends a hundred miles from the shore,
and that wheiever the bottom is seen, it
presents a moving picture of various ani-
mals gliding over the green surface of
the vegetation, it is not too much to look
forward to the time when a valuable fish-
ery may be established on these shores.
Even now, a boat with one or two men
might be filled in a few hours.”
The island of Buache is admirably
adapted for a fishing town. The anchor-
age close to its eastern shore in Cockburn
Island is protected against all winds; and
the island itself, of six or seven thousand
acres, of a light sort of sand and loam, is
well suited, as Mr. Fraser thinks, for any
description of light garden crops. The
side next the sea is fenced by a natural
dyke of limestone, covered with cypress,
and in many places with an arborescent
species of Metrosideros; and all the val-
leys are clothed with a gigantic species of
Solanum, and a beautiful Brownonia.
The soil in these thickets is a rich brown
loam intermixed with blocks of lime-
stone, and susceptible, Mr. Fraser says,
of producing any description of crop.
Fresh water may be had in all these val-
leys by digging to the depth of two feet.
On this island Captain Stirling caused a
garden to be planted and railed out; on
which account he named it “ Garden Is-
land.”
' On this island, Buache, or Garden (as
the party named it) Captain Stirling left
a cow, two ewes in lamb, and three goats,
where, he observes, abundance of grass,
and a large pool of water awaited them.
They would be, at all events, perfectly
free from any disturbance from the na-
tives.
Rottenest Island is the largest in this
quarter, being about eight miles in
length; it contains several saline la-
goons, separated from the sea, on the
north-east side, by a beach composed
mostly of a single species of bivalve shell.
Like Buache, it is covered with an abund-
ant and vigorous vegetation, and a small
species of kangaroo is said by Freycinet
to be numerous upon it. Vlaming, who
first discovered it, speaks in raptures of
the beauties of this island, to which, from
th e multitude of rats, as he thought them
the mirror.


to be, he gave the name of the “ Rats’
Nest.” The French call this animal the
peramcle d long nez.
11 is not to be supposed that a hasty
visit could enable the party to explore the
mineralogical resources of the country.
It appears, however, by a list of the soils
and rock formations in Captain Stirling’s
report, that he brought home specimens
of copper ore, of lead ore with silver, and
also with arsenic, two species of magnetic
iron, several varieties of granite, and chal-
cedony, and of limestone, with stalag-
mite incrustations, &c. The high cliffs
of Cape Naturaliste abound with large
masses of what Mr, Fraser calls “ an ex-
traordinary aggregate,” containing petri-
factions of bivalve and other marine
shells, every particle of which was
thickly incrusted with minute crystals.
Here, too, he says, veins of iron of consi-
derable thickness were seen to traverse
the rock in various directions; and he
speaks of the caverns formed in the mi-
caceous schistus between the granite and
the limestone, as something very extraor-
dinary. They contained rock-salt in large
quantities, forming thick incrustations on
every part of the surface, beautifully
crystallized, and penetrating into the
most compact parts of the rock. In many
of these caverns were very brilliant stalac-
tites and stalagmites of extraordinary size
adhering to the nodules of granite which
form their bases or floors, and which are
from forty to fifty feet above the level of
the sea.
In several parts of the limestone for-
mation, mineral springs were found ; one
in particular was noticed within half a
mfle of the entrance into Swan River. It
bubbled out at the base of the solid rock
in a stream, whose transverse area was
measured by Captain Stirling, and found
to be from six to seven feet, running at
the rate of three feet in a second of time.
It was thermal, saline, pleasant to the
taste, and some, who partook of it, attri-
buted to it an aperient quality.
Such is the outline of a country on
which the government have determined to
establish a colony, and over which they
have justly, and we think judiciously,
appointed Captain Stirling to act as lieu-
tenant-governor. The plan on which it
is to be founded is, in our opinion, unob-
jectionable. It promises the most advan-
tageous terms to qualified settlers, and
deserves only to be known to ensure as
many of the most respectable agricultur-
ists as may in the first instance be desir-
able.
In point of climate, this colony and
New South Wales may perhaps be
equally salubrious, though we are dis-
posed to think that the western aspect
and the sea-breezes may preponderate in
favour of the new one ; —this being, pro-
bably, milder, as the western sides of all
continents and large islands are, than the
eastern sides, in the winter, —while the
refreshing breezes cool the air in the sum-
mer. “In my opinion,” says Captain
Stirling, “ the climate, considered with
reference to health, is highly salubrious.
This opinion is corroborated by that of
the surgeon of the Success, who states in
his report to me on the subject, that, not-
withstanding the great exposure of the
people to fatigue, to night air in the
neighbourhood of marshy grounds, and
to other causes usually productive of sick-
ness, he had not a case upon his sick list,
except for slight complaints unconnected
with climate.”
It likewise appears, from Captain
Stirling’s report, that the thermometer,
in the hot months of January, February,
and March, averaged, in the morning,
about 60 deg.; at noon, about 78 deg. ;
and in the evening 65 deg. The bare-
meter averaged about 30 deg. The wea-
ther generally fine, —some rain and show-
ery weather, and occasionally thunder
and lightning.
In geographical position it has an in-
calculable advantage over New South
Wales. In the first place, it is not only
much more conveniently situated than
that colony, but is much nearer to, and
has much more easy means of communi-
cation with, every par: of the civilized
world, the east coast of America perhaps
excepted. The passages to it from Eng-
land, and from the Cape of Good Hope,
are shortened by nearly a month, and the
return voyages still more. The voyage
from it to Madras and Ceylon is little
more than three weeks at all times of the
year, and only a month from those places
to it; while for six months in the year,
namely, from November to April, inclu-
sive, when the western monsoons prevail
on the northern coast of Australia, the
passage from New South Wales through
Torres Strait, always dangerous, is then
utterly impracticable; and that through
Bass’s Strait nearly so to merchant ves-
sels, on account of the westerly winds
which blow through it at all times of the
year, and which generally oblige them to
go round the southern extremity of Van
.Dieman’s Land. The Success frigate
left Port Jackson on the 17th of January,
and did not reach Cape Leuwin till the
2nd of February, being six weeks and
two days; and Captain Stirling observes,
that the only chance, by which the pas-
sage could be accomplished at all, was
by carrying a constant press of sail.
315
THE MIRROR.


One point of consideration, (says the
writer of the “ Hints,”) in the proposed
measure (although in reality of no essen-
tial importance to pecuniary success) is
of considerable magnitude, as regards
moral feeling and the pride of many—
that is, there being no admission of con-
victs into the proposed colony ! Without
any illiberal sentiment, this is a disad-
vantage under which Port Jackson and
Van Dieman’s Land certainly suffer.
Nevertheless these thriving colonies, in
the course of thirty or forty years, have
made surprising progress in agriculture,
population, commerce and wealth. The
situation of Port Jackson was the most
distant from the mother country; its
position was not peculiarly adapted to
production or traffic with any part of the
globe; therefore, the improvement can
only be attributed to a favourable soil,
free from the taxations of old European
governments, a low fee cost, or a nomi-
nal pepper corn rent, which circum-
stances have not only been capable of
maintaining those who adventured, but
of yielding a profit for capital sufficient
to induce others to pursue the same
course.
In the infancy of a colony, the certain
maintenance of the settlers should be well
established; and it is also right to know
with what facility and at what cost, an
adequate supply of necessaries, comforts,
and even luxuries may be obtained. Ad-
jacent, and favourably situated to Cock-
burn Sound, are the Mauritius, Cape of
Good Hope, Timor, Java, Sumatra, and
the East Indian Presidencies.
Rice , from Java, can be obtained in
five weeks, at or under Id. per pound.
The bantam fowls and China pigs at
equally moderate prices.
Sugar,* from the Mauritius, Java, or
Calcutta, at ‘.id. per pound.
Coffee , from Java, 4 d. per pound.
Spices, the production of the Moluc-
cas, Celebees, &c. &c. at the lowest pos-
sible rate :—viz. pepper, nutmegs, cloves,
&c.
Algoa Bay, the Cape of Good Hope,
furnishes cattle and sheep. The coast of
• Cunningham, in his account of New South
Wales, recommends the cultivation of sugar,
hut he ackuowledges the latitude of 28° scarcely
sufficiently warm for the purpose, and enters
into an argument of economy, whether convicts
or slaves would be the cheapest mode of supply-
ing labour; but this system would alter the
whole character of this proposed settlement in
the neighbourhood of Cockburn Sound, the great
feature of which is healthiness of the climate,
and a fertility of the soil, capable of producing
useful exportable commodities, more than suffi-
cient to pay for tropical productions of luxury,
raised at an increased expense of life and sla-
very ; and a very little insight into foreign trade
will show with what ease this may be accom-
plished.
Cockburn Sound and Swan and Canning
Rivers, promises plenty of fish for the
table—also, oil for use. Tea will not
cost more than 2s. (id. per pound through
Java ; from whence stock of cattle, poul-
try and pigs can be added of the best
quality.
There is no intention in these remarks
to shew the extent of production of which
the soil and climate are capable; time
and prosperity will be requisite to bring
forward all their capabilities. Nothing,
therefore, has been said of the articles
grown in similar latitudes in Asia, and
carried to Smyrna and other Turkish
ports at immense distances, for export to
England, France, and Holland. There
is, however, no reason for supposing that
silk, (equal to that of Brussa,) opium,
madder roots, goats’ wool, senna, gums,
currants, raisins, and the highly esteem-
ed Turkish tobacco, and various other
productions, may not be cultivated to ad-
vantage half a century hence. But in
the commencement, it is sufficient to look
to early, certain, and profitable returns;
without calculating upon chances of
wealth, which may not be realized in the
lifetime of the present adventurers.
It remains only for us to offer a word
of advice (says the writer in the Quar-
terly Review) to the multitudes who we
understand are preparing to take their
flight to this new land of Goshen, —
which is this: that no one should at pre-
sent think of venturing on such a step,
unless he can carry out with him, either
in his own person or in his family or fol-
lowers, the knowledge of agriculture, and
the capability of agricultural labour. It
is quite certain that, for the first few
years, every settler must be mainly in-
debted for the means of subsistence of
himself and family to the produce of the
soil; beyond this the country itself, for
the first year, will afford him nothing,
with the exception, perhaps, of a little
fish—the rest must be raised by the la-
bour of the ploughman and the horticul-
turist. The only settlers, therefore, who
can reasonably hope to thrive in the in-
fant state of the colony must consist of
this description of persons; any others,
with very few exceptions, must inevita-
bly be disappointed, if not irretrievably
ruined. A clergyman, a schoolmaster,
a land-surveyor, an apothecary,, a few
small tradesmen andjfishermen, may rea-
sonably expect employment and make
themselves useful to the new community';
as will also a limited number of house-
carpenters, joiners, bricklayers, black-
smiths, tailors, shoemakers, and common
labourers, the latter being required to as-
sist in building habitations ; but the un-
THE MIRROR.


productive class, or idlers, had better
wait a few years before they embark for a
country where, as yet, there is neither hut
nor hovel, and where the “ fruges con-
sumere nati” have unquestionably no
place in society. We cannot forget what
happened, when, a few years ago, the go-
vernment resolved to send out, at a very
considerable expense, a number of new
settlers to improve and extend the agri-
culture of the Cape of Good Hope; giv-
ing allowances to the heads of parlies,
proportioned to their respective numbers.
The persons best calculated for effect-
ing the improvement of the colony, and,
at the same time, their own condition,
must be looked for among the English
and Scotch farmers; these cannot fail.
To such we would recommend not to en-
cumber themselves, and incur a great and
unnecessary expense, by carrying out
live-stock from home, but to take them
from the Cape of Good Hope. At Al-
goa Bay, which is perfectly safe for six
months in the year, they may be supplied
with every kind of domestic animal, in
good condition, and at reasonable prices,
which may be carried to their destination
in the short space of twenty-eight days.
Seed corn and the seeds of culinary vege-
tables may be taken from home ; but of
young plants of peaches, pomegranates,
oranges, figs, and vines, it may be ad-
visable to take a supply from the Cape of
Good Hope. For these, and many other
species of fruit, the climate is admirably
adapted; and the vine, in particular, is
just calculated for the limestone ridge
which extends along the coast facing the
western sun.
It appears that apprehensions of in-
terruption were once entertained from a
prior settlement from France ; these fears
are however, removed by that nation
having fixed on a point, to colonize, in
latitude 25 deg. south, (which is distant
north of the Swan River 400 miles) call-
ed Shark’s Bay, within which there is an
inlet called Freycinet’s Harbour, The
country in this neighbourhood much re-
sembles the western coast.
SPIRIT OF THE
public journals
THE AIR BALLOON.
IN LAUDEM BULLjE AERO-NAUTICAI.
They may talk as they will
Of their steam-engine skill,
But, as sure as the sun shines at noon,
Straps, boilers, and springs
Are a wagon to wings,
Compared with the air-balloon.
If you’re troubled with taxes,
You cross the Araxes,
Or fly to the plains of Hairoun ;
In the height of the summer.
Cool as a cucumber,
You sit iu your air-balloon.
The ladies, poor souls 1 •
Once sent sighs to the poles;
We may now send the sighersas soon ;
Painted canvass and gas
Whisk away with the lass.
In the car of the air-balloon.
Our girls of fifteen
Will disdain Gretna Green,
The old coupler must soon cobble shoon ;
With a wink to the captain.
The beauties are wrapt iu
The carol the air-balloon.
Old fathers and mothers.
Grim uncles and brothers,
May hunt them from Janu'ry to June ;
They are oil to the stars,
And In Venus or Mars
You may spy out their air-balloon
Your makers of rhyme
May at last grow sublime,
Inspired by a touch at the moon;
And lawyers may rise
For once to the skies,
In the car of the air-balloon.
Your ministers, soaring.
May shun all the boring
Of country and city baboon—
Or, like ministers’ spouses.
Look down on both Houses
From the car of the air-balloon.
The sweet six months’ widow
Her weeds will abide, O,
No longer, nor cry “ ’Tis too soon !”
But range the skies over,
In search of a lover.
In the car of the air balloon.
If you wish for a singe-a
In Afric or India,
Or long for an Esquimaux’ tune,
Or wish to go snacks
With the king of the blacks,-
Why,—call fof your air-balloon.
If, on Tenerift'e’s Peak,
You’d wish for a steak,
Or dip in Vesuvius your spoon.
Or slip all the dog-days,
The rain-days, and fog-days,—
Go, call for your air balloon.
Your doctors of physic
May banish the phthisic,
Your cook give you ice-creams iu June
If a dun’s in the wind,
You may leave him behind.
And be off in your air-balloon.
On the top of the Andes,
Who’s tortur’d with dandies ">
On Potosi. who meets a buffoon ?
But, for fear I’d get prosy,
I’ll stop at Potosi,—
So, huzza for the air-balloon !
Monthly Magazine.
ALVISE SANDTO.
A Venetian Story.*
Alvise Sanuto was a young man of
whom his country entertained the proudest
* The nobility of Venice were subject to the
most rigorous surveillance, and dearly paid,
occasionally, for (he small degree of power con-
ceded by the ducal house. The jealousy of the
government with regard to these men was car-
ried to excess. I may mention three regulations
among the many that related to them, as Ulus-
317
THE MIRROR.
