

Regulations as to the Issue of Land Order Warrants
EMIGRATION DEPARTMENT-GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
8, Victoria Chambers, Westminster, S.W,
Issued under the Full Paid Land Order Warrcmt Regulations of “ The Immigration Jet, 1872.’'
A Land Order Warrant from the above Department is necessary to establish the claim upon arrival in
the Colony, to Land Orders—of the value of £2O for every adult above 12 and not exceeding 45 years of age, and £lO
for children between 1 and 12 years of age—to which persons are entitled who are approved as suitable by the
Emigration Agent for South Australia. These persons are required to pay their own passages in ships sailing “ direct”
to South Australia, and must not have previously resided in the Colony, or in any other part of Australasia.
In order that persons may avail themselves of the advantages now offered by the South Australian Govern-
ment of securing the Land Order Warrants before embarkation, it is necessary that the full amount of Passage-Money
should be paid, and a Certificate to that effect obtained from the Shipowners or Brokers produced, also the
legal proof of the age of each person, and the Certificate of a legal qualified practitioner that the Applicant is in
good health. Each Applicant must attend personally at the Office (as above) of Sir Arthur
Blyth, K.C.M.G., the Emigration Agent, for examination and approval.
Forms of application for Land Order Warrants can be obtained upon application to the above Address,
These Forms contain the Certificates (in blank) above referred to.


[Application for Land Order Warrant.]
EMIGRATION DEPARTMENT-GOVERNMENT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
8, Victoria Chambers, Westminster, S.W.
H
K 3
M
Issued under the Full Paid Land-Order Warrant Regulations of u The Immigration Act , 1872.”
§9
0) o
o 3
x
*a
A Zand-Order Warrant from the above Department is necessary to establish the claim upon arrival in
the Colony, to Land Orders—of the value of £2O for every adult above 12 and not exceeding 45 years of ago, and £lO
for children between 1 and 12 years of age—to which persons are entitled who are approved as suitable bv the Emigration
Agent for South Australia. These persons are required to pay their own passages in ships sailing ' direct” to South
Australia, and must not have previously resided in the Colony, or in any other part of Australasia.
In order that persons may. avail themselves of the advantages now offered by the South Australian Govern-
ment of securing the Land Order Warrants before embarkation, it is necessary that the full amount of Passage-Money
should be paid, and the Certificate “A” at foot, signed by the Shipowner or Broker. Besides this Certificate, the
legal proof of the ago of each person must be exhibited, and the Applicant must attend personally at
the office (as above) of Sir Arthur.Blyth, K.C.M.G., the Emigration Agent, for examination and
approval. The Certificate “B” must be signed by the Applicant, and the Certificate “C” by a legally qualified
Medical Practitioner.
a o
O '■H
*t< c
(A.)—C E R TIFI CAT E OF SHIPOWNER OR BROKER
Ship Tons Register.
95 .
a
rj 0/
M >
Master
To sail
From
I HEREBY CE LITIF Y that I have received the full Passage-Money for the
following person in the above-named Ship sailing direct for South Australia.
Statute Adult.
Soul equal to
Shipowner, or Broker,
Address
Rate
(B.)—C E RTIFI CAT E OF PASSENGER.
MERER Y DECLARE
that I have paid my own passage and the passage of the several members of my
family in the Ship
now about to sail from
Direct eor South Australia, and thai
I have not previously resided in the Colony, or in any other part of Australasia.
j Signature of
( Passenger.
Address
Town
County of
Date
(C.)—CERTIFICATE OF SURGEON OR PHYSICIAN.
I CERTIFY that the persons named in the above Certificate of Shipowner or
Broker (with the exception of J are sound bodily
and mental health, and exhibit no symptoms of disease likely to shorten life.
Signature
Address


SOUTH AUSTRALIA
LAND ORDER WARRANTS
OF THE VALUE OF
£2O
Are granted by the Agent-General for
South Australia, to all persons approved
as suitable who are in sound health, and
have not previously resided in Australasia.
They must pay their own passages and
proceed DIRECT to ADELAIDE, South
Australia, and reside in the Colony for
two years.
Forms of Application and other information may be
obtained from
THE AGENT-GENE HAL FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
8, Victoria Chambers, Westminster, London, S.W.


fern
Essex Farm, Rapid City,
North-West Territory, Canada,
February 24///, 1.881,
(To the Editor.)
Sir, —As many of my brother farmers are unable to
continue their farms in England and are looking forward
to emigrate somewhere, I am sure they will receive from
one of themselves any information that may direct them
where to go After three years’ residence in the North-
West Territory, Canada, I am able to give a better
description of this country with the prospects for the
future. My land is situated about three miles from
Rapid City on the little Saskatchewan river. The soil is
a black loam from 2 to 4 feet deep, clay subsoil, undu-
lating, with good drainage and water; what is not fit for
ploughing produces me excellent hay; roots of all kinds
do well and grow to a large size; my last year’s wheat
and oats were plump and heavy; I have seen better, but
my average was not bad.
The price of wheat now is 4s. to 4s. 6d. per bushel,
seed wheat by spring will fetch as much as 6s. to 6s. 6d.;
oats now are 3s. 9d., and expected to reach before the
new' ones come in, 4s. 6d. to 55.; potatoes, 3s. 6d. to
4s. 2d. ; butter, Is. 6d. per lb. You will, therefore, see
farmers are getting very good prices for what they
produce, free too from rent or taxes. Those of us who
have been here three years and overcome the first diffi-
culties of settlement are in a fair way to make good
livings in the future, besides being able to store up for a
rainy day. So fast is this section of country settling up,
we are getting all the society we want; in Rapid City
there are many stores where all the necessaries of life
can be purchased; we have also an Agricultural College,
a Literary Society and an Agricultural Society. Our
success may be judged by the fact that with two seasons
cultivation the settlers here held an agricultural show'
last October ; the excellence of the exhibit surprised the
Lieut.-Governor, who was present, and also the people of
Canada who read the particulars. Our Vice-President,
Mr. C J. Whellarns, to whom I owe my selection of land,
and who has personally conducted four parties of farmers
to this country, is now in England to form a fifth party ;
he can be communicated with at 10, Victoria Chambers,
Westminster, London, care of the Canadian Government
Offices,and will be glad to give information to any one seek-
ing it. Those of us who have emigrated to this section of
Canada know the value of coming with his parties ; he not
only saved us trouble but expense. You travel over
many miles of country by rail in Canada and the United
Slates, to reach Winnipeg ; there are numerous changes of
trains and depdts bewildering to a stranger. He also
makes a point of first seeing the land before he advises
emigrants. To search for land by yourself in this vast
region is most difficult, something like looking for a
plank on the ocean ; it costs money and much valuable
time in the spring of the year.
Those desirous of coming here, should start by the
latter end of April or first week in May; they can by
going direct with a party to their land get some little
crop in this season, and themselves and families housed
by winter.
Within the past year farms of 320 acres, land obtained
from the Canadian Government, viz., 160 acres free (the
homestead), and 160 the pre-emption, have been sold with
small improvements for £3OO to £5OO.
Those who should come are farmers having a few
hundred pounds and not afraid to put up with a little
discomfort for a year or two. The winter is long, but
withal, I have been able during the three winters I have
lived here to keep at work out of doors. The Canadian
Pacific Railway, which is now being built, will inn
through this section of country, and the large flow of
immigration over it will cause a demand in the market
here for all kinds of agricultural produce, and by the
time there is a surplus they will convey it to the sea-
board for shipment to England. Thanking you for your
kindness in inserting this letter,
I remain, yours truly,
CHARLES HOWARD, Junk.
(Late of Lon er House Farm , Whimhish , Essex.)
