

EMIGRATION,
Necessity and Advantages,
Printed by W. C. FEATHERSTONE,
Sold by Corson, Wheaton, and Ballg, Booksellers, Exeter
And Smith, Eider, & Co. Cornhill, London.
Q')!
■yvn^i


EMIGRATION, &c.
Among the various suhjcctsof high public concern, which are now occupy-
ing the minds of men, none has attracted more general attention, and grown
year after year, into greater and more pressing importance, than that of Emi-
gration.—lndeed the interest excited by this great, and to vast numbers of our
fellow countrymen, vitally important subject, is of a most intensely interesting
nature, and we cannot wonder that such is the case, when we contrast the limi-
ted degree of success that attends the exertions of industry, and the employ-
ment of Capital, in this thickly populated country, with the extraordinary im-
provement in their condition, which has been the reward of industrious and well
conducted men in some of the Colonies ; but pre-eminently in New South
Wales.—The desire for information, the correctness of which can be retied
upon, on this subject, is almost universal, and the press, in accommodating it-
self to this wide spread and growing feeling, has for the last two or three
years more particularly showered forth its productions, from the costly octavo
volume to the less pretending shilling pamphlet*; but while so much has been
done to furnish information on this most interesting and iropoitant subject to
those classes to whom the outlay of a few shillings in the purchase of a book,
is a matter of small moment, no publication has appeared adapted alike as re-
gards price and fullness of practical information, to the industrious agricultu-
rist of small means, or the farm labourer and mechanic. A thorough conviction
however, that to impart to these valuable classes of the community, a know-
ledge 0/ the great advantages to be derived, to themselves and their families
and connections, frem a prudent basis of emigration, may conduce in a
high, degree to their welfare and happiness, and that of their posterity,
and an earnest desire to contribute to a result so much to be desired by
every man tvho takes an interest in the well being qf his fellow creatures,
has induced the publication of this small volume.—
No one can have directed his attention to the condition of the labouring
classes of this country, without being fully convinced that vast numbers of
them endure gieat privations and suffering from the want of a sufficient supply
of the necessaries of life. Abundant proofs demonstrate that this arises from
there being in many districts a great redundancy of labour, and the consequent
insufficiency of remunerating employment, and this lamentable stale of things
enables the employer to reduce wages to so extremely low a rate, that the la-
bourer and his family almost perish even when employed. Great numbers
there are, who although willing and anxious to work, cannot obtain it for the
• Attention,!* here directed to an admirable little boot entitled 4f Twenty years experience
In Australia ”by far the best book that has appeared—all Intending Emigrants should
possess a copy of it—its price la only owe shilling—also to another very u?efuUlttte book
called "A voice from the JJush in Australia" price one shilling—both may be had of Smith,
Elder and Co t Comb ill, London.


greater part of their lime on any terms, and are, with their families, bowed
down and almost destroyed, in body and mind, by the bitter destitution of
their condition. A necessary consequence of this is, that the labourer is de-
bilitated and inefficient, prostrated alike in mind and frame: he cannot get
through half the work of which a well fed, well clothed, and well lodged man
is capable : mental dejection and apprehension for the future, overwhelm him,
and eventually disease and premature old age overtake him ; he sinks under
unrewarded toil and severe privations, and no longer able to work, becomes
a burthen on his parish : the man who anxiously desires to discharge his du-
ties to his family and society, by working for their maintenance, utterly un-
able to do so, descends from the honorable condition of an honest and inde-
pendent labourer, into that of a wretched dependent pauper—nor should the
effect on his family be forgotten, his wife, the partner of his misfortunes, will
also find her home in the workhouse. The friend of her bosom—the partner of
her youthful and happy days—he who has supported and shielded her in the
various sorrows and difficulties of life, is now separated from her, and she is
doomed to drag out the remainder of her days among strangers, and under
the restraint of the new workhouse discipline: whilst their children, deprived
in their youth of a proper quantity of nutritive food, become emaciated beings
—the wretched slock from whence again a deteriorated offspring will afterwards
proceed.
Grievous as are the effects of this state of things on the labouring classes,
they do not suffer alooe. There is not a trade or profession in the country
which is not overcharged with competitors : the keenest rivalry is found to
exist in every branch of trade, in every avenue for the investment of capital,
and in every profession, which renders the chance of a remunerating return
increasingly uncertain. Instead therefore of the exertions of industry being
rewarded by fortune or competency, the power of subsistence among persons
in ordinary occupations render indispensable the most rigid economy, self-de-
nial, and unremitting application, whilst the rearing, educating, and fitting
out a family for active life, is of great and growing difficulty in the middle
ranks of society.
This being undeniably the state of things in this country, it behoves every
man, of whatever condition, to lend his cordial and zealous aid to remove, if
possible, evils of so se-ious a character, and we ought to rejoice that the re-
medy is within reach, and easily attainable by the co-operation of those whom
providence has blessed with ease and competency. It is to reflecting, cautious
and well considered EMIGRATION to the healthy and eminently thriving
colonies cf this great Colonial Empire, that I would most earnestly and anxious-
ly direct the attention of those of my fellow subjects who are struggling under
the difficulties I have described, and I entreat the wealthier of my countrymen
to lend their aid to enable the poor and comparatively destitute to obtain con-
veyance to those of our Colonies which possess a genial climate, where labour
is in urgent demand, and where every honest and well conducted man, can,
not only support his family, but greatly improve his and their condition.
Many persons shrink from the idea of emigrating, because it seems like a con-
fession that they have been baffled at home, and that, where others have been
successful, they have failed. From this weak feeling, they continue to linger
on, struggling with constant discouragements, wishing rather to gain the cre-
dit of patient suffering and resignation to unavoidable troubles, than to en-
counter what they think the reproach of leaving the country. Such persons
(often among the worthiest of society) sTrould recollect that the same perseve-
rance and steadiness which in this country is only sufficient to keep their fami-
lies out of actual distress, will in a more favorable field of industry, acquire
for them comfort and independence. In this country every man’s exertions
are met and thwarted by the keen competition of his neighbours i whereas in


some of our colonies, the increasing density of population and neighbourhood
eminently contribute to enjoyment, to the profits of industry, and to ultimate
wealth. It used to be thought (and many still foolishly think so) that to
leave the country was a man’s last resource, and was only adopted by the
discontented and those who had been disappointed here ; but it is now well
known, that the colonies, (I speak more especially with reference to East Aus-
tralia,) instead of being only an asylum for the baffled and despairing, are in
reality boundless and rich harvest fields, calling for tens of thousands of reapers
of sobriety and ability, to come and exchange privation for abundance, penury
and dependence for smiling plenty, and every enjoyment reasonable man can
desire.
If vve consider the history of the world, we shall find that emigration has
been practically adopted from the earliest recorded period. When the family
of Adam settled, they did so by removing or emigrating to adjoining land, and
when Adam’s descendants became more numerous, they crossed rivers and
mountains, and became different nations. After the flood, the sons of Noah
emigrated and became the founders of all the nations of the earth. Egypt at
a subsequent period sent forth its emigrants to the Greek Islands and tire con-
tinent of Greece, forming at once the channel through which all those arts of
civilization, as well as science and learning, for which the Egyptians were
celebrated so early as the days of Moses, first reached the countries of Europe ;
hence arose the splendid country of Greece, so long celebrated as the deposi-
tory of excellence in all the various arts and sciences of ahighlycivilized people,
and w hich has been in fact the fountain from whence the several nations of
Europe, and indeed of the world, have drawn their knowledge. The arts of
Greece were carried into Italy, whence arose Rome—the eternal city. Eng-
land itself must at some period of the world, have been peopled by emigrants
from other countries. America is a modern instance of successful colonization,
and if we look to the mighty Colonial Empire of Britain, we shall see the
great advantages and blessings of emigration in our own day.
Thus we see that emigration is the course clearly pointed out, and indeed
made imperative upon us by Divine Providence, which has bountifully provided
rich and fertile lands, blessed with a delightful climate, governed by equal
British laws, and which are easily accessible, as an outlet for a superabundant
population, and has enjoined us to “go forth, and multiply, and replenish the
earth.” For what purpose indeed could so many vast continents and fertile
islands in various parts of the globe have been called into existence, but to
receive the constantly encreasing numbers of the human race from those over-
populated countries which in the emphatic language of scripture are said “ not
to be able to bear the people.” Surely no man entertaining just and proper
notions of the bounty of providence, can suppose for one instant, that these
rich lands were created for no other purpose than for the waves to dash against,
and wild animals to roam over—no —the common sense inferenceis, that they
were intended to yield their fruits and to stimulate the enterprise of the sons
of men, and only require to be occupied to support with their riches thousands
upon thousands of our fellow creatures, who are dragging out a listless and
miserable existence in this overpeopled country. It is therefore the duty as
well as the interest of every one who has not the means of supporting himself
in comfort, and duly providing for his family here, to remove at once to those
more favored spots, where the fertility of the soil, the delightfulness of the
climate, and the absence of excessive competition, secure success to every
well conducted man—we may indeed justly consider every individual Emi-
gration as a step towards the fulfilment of the great designs of a bountiful
providence.
Having seen that the state of the middle and labouring classes in this conn-


try, is such as urgently to call for immediate relief, and that the most certain
means of securing that, is by an extensive emigration to less thickly peopled
countries ; having also seen that in adopting emigration, we arc only acting
in accordance with the law of nature, and following outlhe designs of provi-
dence, it will be necessary to see which of our Colonics offer the greatest
benefit, rcilhlhe least disadvantage to the emigrant.
The United States of America offer advantages to emigrants, but much in-
ferior to some of our own Colonies. America is essentially agricultural, and its
operations are consequently more laborious and costly than those of a pastoral
country. The Eastern States are peopled already to such an extent as to send
out their swarms of emigrants across the Alleghany Mountains into the valley
of the Mississippi—in the Southern Slates, that foul blot upon civilization,
slavery, is still tolerated. Throughout the whole of the states, but particu-
larly in those newly colonized in the valley of the Mississippi, the climate is
not congenial to English constitutions —ague, yellow fever, and other diseases
engendered by the climate, prevailing to a fearful extent, and to which new
settlers are particularly liable.
The Provinces of Upper and Lower Canada in North America, offer con-
siderable advantages—they are only between three and four thousand miles
distant —the voyage is short, and there is plenty of fertile land which can be
had at a small cost—but the summers are very short and oppressive, succeeded
by long continued, rigorous, and trying winters, during several months of
which the frost is so severe that labour entirely ceases , and the cattle must
be fed on dry food, provided at a great cost of money and labour in the pre-
vious summer: dense forests entirely overspread the surface of the lands,
which must be cleared previous to the commencement of agricultural operations.
Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward’s Is-
land, all situated in or adjoining North America, are less distant than the
Canadas, but they possess a still shorter summer, and a longer and severer
winter, with less fertility of land, and a less extensive field for enterprise.
The West Indies are so unhealthy as to be totally unfit for European coloni-
zation. The British Colonies in the Southern Hemisphere are Van Uieman’s
Land, Swan River, including King George’s Sound, South Australia,and
New South Wales, with its several dependencies.
Van Dieman's Land is a small island, situated to the south of New Hol-
land—its climate is excellent, and admirably adapted to the English constitu-
tion. The land is however nearly all appropriated, and it raises very few ar-
ticles of produce which are not as successfully cultivated in New South Wales;
whilst many valuable productions, particularly maize, which is grown in
New South Wales, cannot be cultivated there.
The Swan River Settlement on the west coast of New Holland, or Australia,
proved so disastrous to the first settlers, that but a very small number of emi-
grants have proceeded there for some years.
South Australia, situate on the southern coast of New Holland, was first
colonized about four or five years since—the heat in summer is much greater
than in New South Wales. The geographical position of South Australia is
unfavourable, its coast line is limited, and abounds with shoals which render
its navigation particularly dangerous ; its rivers or streams are remarkably
insignificant, becoming mere chains of ponds in the summer, and such is the
want of water, that it has inflicted great distress on the colonists. Such were
the blunders in its original colonization, that a large portion ofthe best of its
lands is possessed by the South Australian Company, to the great and lasting
Injury of individual competitors. Adelaide, its capital, is distant nine miles
from the port, rendering it necessary to convey all goods by land, which is
at present done by bullock drays, frequently at a greater expence than the entire
voyage from England. The Port itself has not a sufficient depth of water for


-ships ol large burthen, which are constantly obliged to discharge their pas-
sengers and cargoes on an open beach at some distance. This Colony is also
taxed to a heavy amount to raise the necessary means for making roads,
bridges, jails, end other public works, and it depends to a very great extent
on importations from New South Wales and Van Ditraan’s Land for the ne-
cessary supplies of food—all kinds of which are at enormous prices.
New Zealand consists of a group of islands to the east of New South Wales,
in the South Pacific Ocean. A few yeais since, some missionaries settled there
in order to convert to Christianity the native inhabitants, since 'which
other Europeans have gone there to settle, many of whom are runaway con-
victs, runaway sailors, fraudulent debtors, who have escaped from their cre-
ditors iu New South Wales and Van Dieman’s Land, and needy adventurers,
equally disreputable. It should be specially remarked also, that New Zealand
is not a British Colony, the recent, sudden, and most extraordinary proceed-
ings of an association in London being without the sanction ol the British
Government. The settlers are consequently not entitled to its protection, nor
can Talid title to land be obtained. The natives, who are numerous, are a
fierce, revengeful, and treache:ous race, and to these qualities they add tho
more revi lling one of cannibalism. The climate is beautiful, the soil gene-
rally good. and if the Islands were not inhabited by numerous warlike abori-
gines, and wore regularly colonized by the British Government, with the
protection arid security of liritisli laws, no place would surpass them for
colonization; but life and property are utterly without legal protection there,
no authorised provision has been or can be made for the security of person and
property there, under the present circumstances of the country, and it seem*
little short of madness, that under such a total absence of all legal provision
for the redress of individual wrongs and grievances, and for the security of
life and property, persons should risk all their interests in life by going
there.
New South Wales is the entire eastern side ofNew Holland, situated in
the Pacific Ocean. The Colony extends from tho 10th to the 38th degree of
south latitude, and from the 141st. to the 1541 h. degree of cast longitude, ha-
ving on its eastern side nearly 3000, and on the south, 400 miles of coast—
New Holland is nearly as large as Europe—the colony of New South Wales
contains space three times as great as the British Isles. Its distance from
England by ships course is about 16,000 miles, and iho passage is made in
from 90 to 110 days. The greatest part of the interior is still unexplored.
The whole ofits sea coast abounds with gulfs, bays, and creeks, formingsafe,
capacious, and convenient harbours. New South Wales was first colonized
in 1788 —it is divided into counties, and in the one named Cumberland is the
capital, Sydney: beautifully situated on two necks of land, divided by a
small valley called Sydney cove, one of the many inlets of the magnificent
harbour of Port Jackson, and about seven miles from its head, with a suffici-
ent deplh of water to enable vessels of the greatest burthen to come close
along side the Town Quays or Warehouses. It has long wide English looking
streets—barracks—an hospital—handsome and well supplied markets; churches
and chapels of various denominations : banks, extensive warehouses, wharfs,
mills, distilleries, breweries, and steam engines, auction rooms, a theatre,
and capital inns, and other places of public entertainment. So valuable ha*
the space in Sydney now become, that building land in good situations, has
been sold at the rate of irSU.OOt) an acre. The laws and courts (with trifling
exceptions,) language, manners, and customs, ate the same as in England.
There are numerous societies connected with religion, humanity, literature,
and science—the colony containing two colleges, an agricultural and horti-
cultural society, a religious tract society, a society for promoting Christian
ksowledge, a society for promoting colonial'produce, a subscription library


five banks, two assurance companies, a benevolent asylum, a bible society,
a museum, a botanical school, an emigrant’s friend society,* a mechanic's
school of arts, several masonic lodges, a church missionary society, a Wes-
leyan ditto, an observatory, orphan schools, a school of industry, a steam
conveyance company, a gas company, a dispensary, and various other insti-
tutions, besides a theatre, with balls, concerts, races, and other public
amusements. Mails and other coaches depart regularly from Sydney for the
different towns in the interior. There are in Sydney alone five news papers
besides a government gazelle, which give fifieen publications a week: in short
this colony presents a state of things perfectly unexampled in the formation
of an irfant community, and exhibits the phenomenon of a colony that has
not yet existed fifty years with most of the distinguishing features hitherto
belonging only to ancient and thickly peopled states: the population of Sydney
is estimated now to approach 40,000; the entire colony is supposed to contain
130,000 souls or upwards. There are several other important towns, besides
those in progress of formation, and numerous fine rivers intersect the country
in every direction. The extent of fertile land is almost unlimited—nature has
been truly prodigal of her bounty, and the luxuriant soil now runs to waste,
only asking the hand of man to produce an abundance, not of food mere-
ly, but of comforts and luxuries. The soil, particularly in the vicinity of
rivers, has been so productive, as to yield abundant crops of wheat, maize,
and barley in some places for 30, and in others for 20 successive years, with-
out manure and without rest. Wheat on good soils, averages from 20 to 30
bushels per acre, weighing from 00 to 65 pounds the bushel: though in some
particular districts, 45 and even 50 bushels per acre have been reaped. The
seed time is from March to June, the harvest is in November and December r
it is the same for oats and barley, but maize, the most luxuriant of grain crops,
is sown in October and November, and ripens from March to June, producing
from 20 to 40 and 50 bushels nett to the acre, according to the qualities of the
soil, and the carefulness of the culture, so that there are two seed times and
two harvests each year at different seasons, and rarely have both been known
to fail. It is capable of producing every grain and vegetable useful to man,
with fruit in the highest perfection, and of all varieties, from the currant and
gooseberry of colder climes, to the banana and pine apple of the tropics:
green peas are gathered in winter as well as summer, and the potatoe produces
two crops in the year. Coal, iron, lime, and granite, abound in all parts of
the country : indications of copper and other metals prove also their existence,
but the two former, the indispensable requisites for steam, are of course re-
garded as most important: timber is also plentiful. There are no ferocious
animals, beasts of prey, or noxious reptiles in this favored land—the wild
dogs are the only causes of annoyance, but they are timid, and easily scared
away. Its climate is one of the finest in the world, far superior to that of
England, and perhaps only comparable to that of Turkey, Italy, or the far
famed island of Madeira. Snow is never seen except in the higher regions,
and in the lower parts there bloom an eternal spring and summer—the atmos-
.phere is clear and dry, and as yet unknown to have been tainted with the
breath of pestilence.
" For eight months during the year (says Dr. Lang) namely from the first of March'till
the first of November, the climate is peculiarly delightful, the sky is seldom clouded ; and
day after day for whole weeks together, the sun looks down in unveiled beauty from the
northern heavens. In ordinary seasons, refreshing showers are not infrequent."
The general health of the colonists is the best test of the excellence of the
• The objects of this society are to give advice to newly arrived emigrants, and assist
them in procuring good situations: William Macpherson, Esq., collector oi the internal re-
venue, is the honorary secretary, who procured situations in the interior for numerous families
•and Individuals within a few months after its formation.


climate: it is stated, on the best authority, that in those diseases which actu-
ally occur, at least three cases out of every four, are the result of excess and
dissipation: the low price of provisions (with rare exceptions) perhaps leads
men to an excess in the use of animal and other stimulating food, by which
they unconsciously undermine their constitutions and expose themselves to the
attacks of disease. The man of temperate and sober habits may calculate on
enjoying a far higher degree of health in the fine dry atmosphere of Australia,
than in the variable climate of England, charged as it is with moisture, from
whence arises our liability to cold, cough, and consumption, which in an ex-
posure to all weathers, and even to those sleeping uncovered on the ground,
are unknown in New South Wales. Even in summer the heat, though greater
than in England, is not oppressive—the thermometer in Sydney seldom rises
higher than 75 degrees of Farcnheit, and the air is tempered by a cool and
delightful sea breeze, which blows regularly throughout the day and is suc-
ceeded at night by an equally steady and grateful breeze from the land. The
great extent of coast line towards the Pacific Ocean, and the various elevations
of different parts of the interior, ensure a considerable variety of climate in
different parts of the colony ; it is particularly favourable to persons afflicted
with those dreadful scourges of England, scrofula and consumption, which
me generally eradicated in Australia. Also to children scarcely any of those
diseases to which they are so subject here, and which yearly carry off so
many thousands, being at all known there. It is equally favourable to all
other stages of human existence; it is free from that scorching heat which
renders the European unfit for toil, as well as those frosts and snows which
defy all agricultural labour for five or six months in the year, and there are
none of those swamps and morasses, which engender fevers to debilitate and
destroy the human frame. So congenial is the climate to European constitu-
tions, that the colonists can sleep under a tree in the open air with impunity.
The finest part of the colony is the extensive region named “Australia Fe-
lix,” (of which Port Philip is the Port, and Melbourne the capital) by its
discoverer Major, now Sir Thomas Mitchell, who describes it
“As of vast resources and the most various and fascinating description, more extensive
than Great Britain, equally rich in point of soil, and which is now ready for the plough, as
if especially prepared by the Creator for the Industrious hands of Englishmen, possessing a
variety of every thing most interesting in a newly discovered country, land which for natural
fertility and beauty, can scarcely he surpassed— streams of unfailing abundance, and plains
covered with the richest pasturage—stalely trees and majestic mountains adorn the ever vary-
ing scenery of this region thk most Southxbn of all Austbalia, and the best."
•'lt seemed that the land was everywhere alike good, alike beautiful, all parts were verdant
whether on the finely varied hills, or In the equally romantic valleys which seemed to open
in endless succession on both banks of the river (the Glenetg,”)
Melbourne, the capital Town of this fine district, exhibits an instance of
the most extraordinary and rapid rise—its site was only marked out three
years since, and already it is a handsome town, numbering more than 3000
inhabitants —it is situated on the splendid lake or bay of Port Phillip—an im-
tutnse place, large enough to contain every British ship, measuring 40 miles
by 35 miles, containing nearly a million acres of water, and being perhaps
the most magnificent harbour in the world. In a letter which the writer has
recently received from a friend at Melbourne, the country is described as re-
sembling Powderham Park, on the river Exe in Devonshire, but comprising
millions of acres of beautiful undulating thinly timbered land—the soil of the
richest description, with the river Yarra Yarra (which in the native language
signifies the “flowing, flowing”) winding its way: the trees are just sufficient
for the purposes of ornament and shelter, there being no necessity to cut down
any to carry on the operations of husbandry. Lying to the south of Sydney and
the older settlements, its climate and natural resources are superior—its cli-
mate indeed appears to be one of surpassing excellence—a clear sky—a warm


sun, with it cool and refreshing breeze constantly blowing from the souther
south west, renders it peculiarly bracing and healthful. Throughout the
whole colony there is an urgent demand for labourers and mechanics of the
ordinary descriptions, to an extent not generally known. In the evidence
taken before a committee, appointed by the Colonial Government, on emi-
gration at Sydney, it is proved by the testimony of numerous gentlemen ot
the highest respectability and local experience in the Colony, principally
themselves large proprietors of land and stock, to what an immense extent
the demand for labour exists, and also tire comfortable circumstances in
which even the commonest classes of labourers would be placed immediately
on their arrival in New South Wales,
Mr. Potter Macqueen, in his evidence before the committee of emigration at
Sydney, in 1536, stales
“ That in the district of the Hunter alone (one or two counties only ofthe colony) 2000
agricultural labourers, herdsmen, or shepherds, with or without their families, would find
immediate employment.’' and as regards masons, carpenters, smiths and other artisans. Mr*
Macqueen states “that in consequence of the dearth of assigned mf-chanics, ready employ-
ment at liberal wages would be immediately provided fur at least 500 mechanics in the same
district. 0
Mr. Wentworth, barrister, and a very considerable land and cattle proprietor, after statin?
that the scarcity of labourers aud farm servants was so preat, as to compel him to i-icreas®
the number of sheep under the charge of his shepherds, from 500 to <OO and even 1000, by
which from want of due attention to the sheep, he had sustained considerable losses, adds.
" 1 think 10,000 emijriants, including mechanics, farm servants, shepherds, cow herds, la-
bourers, and household servants, would not be too great a numberto import f.s soon as they
can be procured: and afterwards about 6000 yearly. I have no doubt that 10,000 would im-
mediately find employment.*'
Mr. Manning, the Registrar of the Supreme Court at Sydney, says, “ From a calculation
formed upon the exportation of wool durinz the last two years, and assuming that each bale
contains the product of 100 sheep, 1 should think that 1500 shepherds and hut keepers would
be required for weaning the lambs of last September and March—the increase of our cattle
might require the eighth part of that number—say 200 and 300 agricultural labourers would
be necessary for raising food for these additional consumers, which number of persons to-
gether amounting to 2000, with about COO general servants to lie employed in clearing ground
and other improvements, end as house servants to an increasing population, might, I think,
meet the absolute demand of the present year. I should think that mechanics will always
he require I In the p opoition perhaps of ten per cent ofthe gross number of emigrants, and
I think thattbey should be married men."
Great as was the demand for labour when these gentlemen gave the evi-
dence from which the foregoing extracts are taken, it is still greater and
more urgent nun —by the evidence of the principal proprietors of land and
cattle, as well as that of public officers of the colonial government, taken be-
fore a committee of the Legislative Council at Sydney, in August, 1833, at
which the Lord Bishop of Australia presided, it is proved that not only is
the enterprise of the colonists cramped from the exceeding scarcity of labour-
ers, bnt the usual and ordinary occupations on the establishments of the various
proprietors, ate carried on with difficulty. A circular letter was also addressed
to a large number of gentlemen residing iu various districts of the colony, too
remote from Sydney to expect them to attend before the Committee, calling
upon them for their opinion on this state that the scarcity of la-
borers of vaiions descriptions, is the want most severely felt—all state they
would gladly' employ many more if they could be procured at the same high
wages they were giving those they had—all seem to agree that to supply the
immediate wants of the colony, ten or twelve thousand persons of the various
descriptions of male and female domestic servants, mechanics, shepherds, and
agricultural labourers are required, and that this number would immediately
find employment at good wages. The system of transportation 100, is to be
changed—it is expected that no more convicts will be sent to the settled parts
of the colony. An Island remote from Sydney being fixed upon for tliera—


this, by depriving the colonists of assigned servants, which they have hitherto
selected from the convicts arriving from England, will still to an incalculable
extent, increase the demand for the labour of free emigrants ; besides
which the valuable and splendid discovery of Australia Felix, by Major Mit-
chell, has opened one of the finest districts in the world for settlement, and
numerous wealthy families have been hastening to that favored region, not
only from the British empire, but from the adjacent colonies, thereby increa-
sing the demand for labor. These and other capitalists are anxious to avail
themselves of the advantages of the country—all that is wanted, is a more
plentiful supply cf labourers — of those labourers whose numbers, as we have
seen, are so redundant at home, that employment cannot be found for
them on terms that wilt sustain life in comfort. The usual rate of wages for
agricultural labouters, and farm servants, is from ,£-10 to £OO a year, besides
a house and rations (consisting of ten pounds of beef or mutton, ten pounds cf
meal, tea, sugar, tobacco, and the milk of a cow and other privileges) for
themselves and families —useful mechanics are obtaining ten and twelve shil-
lings a day, and even more, as a great deal of the work is done by the piece—
an instance is known to the writer where a common carter, unfit for superior
labour, actually asked a gentleman at Melbourne £ 100 a year, merely to
drive his horse and cart. Under these circumstances the industrious labourer,
as well as the capitalist (small or great) must secure comfort, inde-
pendence, and happiness. The artisan comes to a country where a day's la-
bour may purchase provisions for a week —where but little clothing is required
—where the thought of daily subsistence is never intruded on his mind—and
wlmre bis savings may in time enable him to become an employer of labour
himself. The high price of labour, by making a family a source of wealth to
every man, gives the highest encouragement to the increase of the colonial
population ; while the large profits realized by sheep farming and commercial
undertakings, and the cheapness and plenty of good land, encourage improve-
ment, and enable the proprietor to pay those high wages : in those wages con-
sist almost the whole price of the land, and though they are high, considered
as wages of labour, they are low, considered as the price of what is so very
valuable. Thus, if a man in England rents an estate, whose entire produce,
with the best cultivation, shall be sold for £250., he will have to pay thereout
about £lO3 for rent (that being now the general proportion of rent of an
estate yielding that produce) about £SO for rates, taxes, and tithes—thus
leaving only £IOO for the maintenance of the farmer, his family and labourers,'
whilst in New South Wales, a man who rented an estate whose produce should
be worth £250 per annum, would have to pay a mere nominal or very trifling
rent, certainly not £2o—he would have to pay no rates, taxes, or tithes, and
would therefore have £230 or more left for the maintenance of himself and
labourers, and would thereby be enabled to give them at least treble the wages
that can be given in this country.
all land in the Colony is sold by public auction, periodically at a minimum
price of 12s per acre, and the proceeds are applied to bring out labour, that is
to provide a free passage for all suitable persons, the Colonists having wisely
and benevolently resolved to apply all monies raised by the sale of lauds to the
purposes of providing means for the emigration of their poorer fellow country-
men. Ships depart almost every week during the year, from the different
ports of Great Britain, for Port Philip and Sydney, and a regular succession
of first class Packet Ships are despatched punctually every month ; under
which arrangements the following descriptions of persons are conveyed by
these ships on the terras now mentioned—viz. —married mechanics (of whom
carpenters, joiners, stone masons, bricklayers, plasterers, blacksmiths, wheel-
wrights, glaziers, compositors, pressmen, andotheis, are most in requisition)
agricultural servants, farm labourers, shepheids, persons skilled in farriery


and horse breaking, and gardeners, if accompanied by their wives—of com-
petent skill in their respective pursuits, of good moral character, and not
exceeding 40 years of age, free. Single females, particularly those acquaint-
ed with dairy and farm house occupations, also good house servants (who are
much wanted in the colony, and are obiaining from £ls to £2O per annum as
wages) will also be taken free, if not under 15 nor above 30 years of age, and
can prove themselves of unexceptionable character. Single agricultural la-
bourers, above 18 and under 30 years of age, of good character, will be al-
lowed a passage when approved, on payment ol £5 each, unless accompanied
by one or more single sister of the above description, when all would be taken
free —the passage of all young children must be paid for by the parties them-
selves. Single mechanics pay their own passage, unless accompanied by two
or more sisters. Persons not eligible tor a tree passage, or who prefer paying
for themselves, will be conveyed by these ships as steerage passengers on the
following terras. A married couple £4o—a single male above 16 years old,
<£2l a single female £3o—a child not exceeding four years old, £7, and for
each child above four years old, £1 in addition to the last charge for each
year of age. For children above 10 years ot age going with parents who may
be admitted as free passengers, £4 only will be charged, provided they are
not more than 10 years of age, and £l in addition for each year of age be-
yond 10. These ships also contain the first order of accommodations for chief
cabin and intermediate cabin passengers, and are dispatched from London,
touching at Plymouth every month, by Mr. John Marshall* Australian Emi-
gration Agent, of 26, Birchin Lane, London, a gentleman whose long and
extensive experience in the business of emigration, and whose well known
liberality in the provisioning and equipment of the ships he sends out, has so
completely established the superiority of this line of Packets over all other
vessels leaving this country for New South Wales, as to have acquired for
them both in England and in the Colonies, the most extensive reputation, and
to have diawn forth the warmest eulogiurns from all classes of passengers who
have proceeded by them —they are always first class ships, from 500 to 1000
tons each, with the best arrangements for cabin, intermediate, and steerage
passengers, and are never allowed to remain beyond the day appointed for their
sailing, a point of vast importance to all persons emigrating.
As some misapprehension is believed to exist among English labourers as
to their condition when arriving in the Colony as free passengers, it may be
necessary to state that they are in every respect perfectly free to engage
their services for the best wages they can obtain, to whomsoever they may
think proper —no person whatever can or will in any way, or on any pretence,
interfere with their free agency.
The business of a sheep farmer or wool grower In New South Wales, is
much less toilsome and precarious than a similar profession in this country.
Here the rent of land is enormous; the diseases of the sheep numerous, and
often fatal; and the toil of preserving the animals from starvation or from
destruction by snow in winter, considerable. In New South Wales, extensive
tracts of land may be cheaply rented or purchased for a comparatively small
sum; and if a careful shepherd or overseer remain beside the animals to keep
them from straying, they require neither doctoring nor artificial feeding—the
whole process goes on naturally under the blessed canopy of heaven, and after
getting over the initiatory difficulties, the proprietor has little else to do than
pocket the profits of his speculation. To those persons however, who prefe r
* Mr. J, b. Wilcocks, Solicitor, Bartholomew Yard, Exeter, is the Agent for Mr. Mar-
shall. through whom every arrangement for cabin, intermediate cabin, or steerage passage
can be made; and by an application to that gentleman, forms of application for the free
passage may he obtained, as well as much usofal information on all matters connected with
New South Wales.


agricultural to pastoral pursuits, or who may not have so much as .£3OO and
upwards, to adventure on a stock of sheep, the country in every direction
presents facilities for settling on small arable farms, which may be purchased
or rented either in a natural stale, or partially cleared and cultivated.
The general import and export trade of New South Wales has been for some
years rapidly increasing. In 1825, the total value of imports was £300,030
and in the year 1833, it had increased to £713,979. In 1826, the total value
of exports (consisting of wood, hides, horns, cattle, horses, wool, provisions
&c„) was <£78,908. and in 1833, it had increased to ,£394,801. The shipping
belonging to the Colony is also increasing ; and already Sydney owns about
a hundred vessels, forty of which are engaged in the whale fishery.
Such has been the unparalleled success of those persons who have embarked
their capital in this certain and lucrative branch of comme r ce, that great numbers
have realized enormous fortunes and are like so many princes in the land—in-
stances are numerous of settlers deriving yearly incomes of from £4OO to £6OO,
to £*4ooo or £5OOO from their wool. A writer in the Morning Chronicle remarks
" There is no instance on record of such progress of a country in wealth, as that which has
resulted to New South Wales from the produce of its flocks. In the year 1812. Mr. John
M'Arthur had consigned to him a number of merinosheep. By a singular coincidence, they
were conveyed out by the ship ‘Argo’ and ths consequences that have followed, seem to
have realized the fable of the golden fleece—for such has been the rapid increase in the ex-
ports of fine wool, the produce of these flocks, that from 99,416 pounds imported in 1820. the
quantity last year (1837) had increased to 7,060,525 pounds.
The following table from Captain Sturt’s work on Australia, will be the best
means of shewing the profits derivable from the investment of capital in sheep
farming in New South Wales.
No. l.—Estimate or Increase.
Ewos.
Suppose two flocks of ewes of improved breed, purchased in the colony, comprising 670
Increase of lambs at the usual rate of increase, exclusive of deaths 595
Total number at the end of the first year 1265
Increase of lambs, exclusive of deaths, during the second year 610
Rams purchased 18
Total number at the end of the second year .. .. 1893
Increase of lambs during the third year 875
Rams purchased ~ 12
Total number at the end of the third year .. .. .. 2780
Increase of lambs during the fourth year 1143
Rams purchased 1$
Total number at the end of the fourth year 3941
Increase of lambs during the fifth year, exclusive of deaths and lambs slaughtered .. 1513
Rams purchased 10
Total number of all ages at the end of the fifth year 5464
No. 3.— Estimate or Expenditure.
£. s. d.
Original cost of 670 ewes at £l. 10s. a head 1005 0 O
Expense of management during the first year 80 0 0
Total expenditure during the first year .. .. 1085 0 0
Expense of management during.the second year 115 0 0
Cost of rams purchased 135 o
Total expendiiuie during the second year .. 250 0 0
Expense of management during the third year ISO 0 0
Cost of rams purchased .. . c .. .. 90 0 0


Total expenditure daring the thirJ year .. 271 9 0
Expense of management duringthe fourth year 240 9 9
Cost of rams purchased .. .. 135 t> 9
Total expenditure during the fourth year .. 873 0 0
Expense of management during the fifthyear 290 0 0
Cost of rams purchased .. .. .. .. .. .. *. 75 0 0
Total expenditure during the fifth year 365 0 0
No. 3,—Estimate of Income.
First year, 1265 fleeces of 2|lbs. each, sold at Is. 6d. per lb. .. ~ 213 9 0
Deduct cost of management, &c „ .. 80 00
Income at the end ofthe first year .. .. .. 133 9 0
Second year, 1893 fleeces, ditto ditto 319 8 6
Deduct cost of management and amount of purchases 250 0 0
Income at the end of the second year ~ ... 69 8 6
Third year, 2780 fleeces of 2Jlbs. each, sold at Is. 6d. per lb. .. .. 469 2 6
Deduct cost of management and purchases 370 0 0
Income at the end of the third year .. .. 199 2 6
Fourth year, 3911 fleeces, ditto ditto 665 0 0
Deduct cost of management aud purchases 375 0 0
Income at the end of the fourth year .. .. 290 0 0
Fifth year, 5464 fleeces, ditto ditto 922 0 0
Deduct cost of management and purchases .. .. •• .. •• 365 0 0
Income at the end ofthe fifth year .. .. 557 0 0
No. 4.—Estimate op value of Flock at tab bnd of the Fifth Ybab.
1614 ewes from one to four years old. at £l. 10s. each ... .. .. 2421 0 0
622 ditto from four to seven years old at £l. each 622 0 0
7SO female lambs at £l. each .. ~ 780 0 0
2405 wethers and male lambs at 15s. each ~ 1803 15 0
45 rams at £5. each ... .. .. «. ... .. 225 0 0
Total value .. .. 5851 15 0
A small capital will enable a man to embark in sheep farming—*osoo or less
will suffice, particularly if he adopts what in colonial phrase is called squatting—
that is procuring from the government a license to occupy and depasture some
o fthe unappropriated lands of the colony, which he may do, on paying a mere
nominal rent —by this system he reserves his capital for the purchase of stock—
not locking it up in the purchase of land—till he has begun to realize the fruits
of his exertions—to the larger capitalist the field of enterprise is still more ex-
tended—by investing his capital in sheep farming and grazing speculations, he
may easily realise from 20 to 50 percent —and should he prefer investing his
capital in mortgages or other securities, he may easily procure such, equally
good as any in England, and obtain 10 percent perhaps more, as interest forhu
capital; and the labourer may obtain seven per cent for every shilling of his
earnings, by placing the same in a savings bank.
The preceding statements (to use the words of Mr Martin, in his history of Australasia)
" sufficiently demonstrate how rapid has been the progress of New South Wales in all the
elements of social happiness. The position of the colony admirably adapts it for the seat of
» great empire In the southern hemisphere, while the numerous fertile Islands with which it


in surr®nnded, and iti ••ntifuity U India, South America, and Africa, (Cape of Good Hope)
place it in the centre of countriei which will hereafter exercise a powerful influence over the
destinies of the earth. There Is abundance of land within the present boundaries of the co-
iony, to say nothing of what is adjacent, capable of supporting millions of ou r fellow crea-
tures : and a field of emigration presents itself, where the industrious agriculturist or mechanic
will obtain remunerating employmerft. The small capitalist can nowhere find a more lucra-
tive place for the increase of his property; and as the feelings respecting emigrant* and eman-
tipfsts, are. 1 trust, passing away, society is becoming as pleasing as is to be found in any
other colony.”
It may be necessary to mention the only drawback upon the agricultural (not
the pastoral) capacity of this fine country—namely the occasional prevalence of
droughts, or want of rain, to which the entire continent of New Holland, is
occasionally (once in eight or ten years perhaps) subject. It rarely happens
that these droughts are general over the whole colony at once, and in the newly
opened district of Port Phillip, they are much less severely felt than in the other
parts of the country —this arises from the superiority of its geographical position,
the greater moisture of its climate, and the number of fine streams which it pos-
sesses ; but even in those parts where most felt, the evil is not insurmountable ;
when we consider the vast extent of the country, and the facility with which
flocks may be removed from spot to spot, over districts of hundreds of miles in
extent, without any hindrance, and when every settler has an opportunity of
selecting a territory suitable to his necessities —besides which, to those who exer-
cise foresight, it is doubtless compensated by some countervailing advantages—it
being ascertained that the droughts though injurious to agricultural, are favorable
to the pastoral business of the colony, which is the one of paramount importance.
On this subject the Rev, Mr. Carmichael, of Sydney, remarks
" The construction of artificial ponds, such as will contain water during the driest seasons,
does not seem to be a work of great difficulty or expence: and it is to be expected that im-
proved methods of Irrigation will arise out of the experience of every succeeding season. Be-
sides it is to be recollected that these dry seasons affect seriously, the grower of grain only ;
while the sheep farmer finds a long drought no drawback to the increase of his flocks or the
value of the fleece. The staple commodity of the country improves rather than deteriorates
under such circumstances, unless indeed in cases of extreme aridity, such as are of rare
occurrence—and as to the high prices of the first necessaries of life, consequent on these oc-
casional droughts, these are in the fair way of being prevented in future by timely importation/*
Before concluding, I would bespeak the attention of Poor Law Guardians,
Overseers, and country gentlemen, interested in the management of the poor, to
the following observations. By the 62 sec. of the poor law amendment act, power
is given to parishes to raise the necessary funds for assisting poor persons to emi-
grate by a rate on the parish—by this act any sum may beborrowad not exceeding
half the rates of the parish, for the purpose of emigration, to be repaid in five
years, and considering that the average expence to a parish would not be £5 per
head for those whom they may wish to send as emigrants, indeed that in most
instances theie would be no expenceat all, except that of furnishing a few ar-
ticles of clothing, it is submitted for the serious consideration of the landowners,
whether it would not even in an economical point of view, be more advantageous
to assist those industrious poor who doubtless would be willing to emigrate, were
the advantages properly placed before them, than to have theburtnen of maintain-
ing them, oral all events of contributing towards it some part ofevery year—in
thus assisting the emigration of the poor, the landowners would have the additi-
onal satisfaction of having been instrumental in removing them from the work-
house to independence. Should the landowners feel it more advisable not to in-
crease the rates much in any particular year, the legislature has given them
power to borrow a sum of money not exceeding half the rates of the parish, to be
repaid during five years.
FEATHERSTONE, PRINTER> EXETER.
