

EMïORATIOjNi
TO Q / TJSS2sTSX J^TsrnD.
Reprinted from the “ Grimsby Neivs ” of July 17th. 1883.
IMPRESSIONS OF QUEENSLAND
To the Editor of the Grimsby News.
Sir, —Kindly allow me a short space in your valua-
ble paper that I may submit to your readers a short
account respecting emigration out to Queensland.
Not eight months ago, I and my sister, together with
another friend of mine, left Grimsby Town-station at
7.30 a.m. on Monday morning, the 18th of December
last ; our nearest relatives and our agents (White
Bros.) wore gathered together to see us off. After
exchanging good-bye, and whilst receiving the many
good wishes of our friends, we slowly moved out of
the station. After a long and weary ride we arrived
at Plymouth at twelve o’clock (midnight). Arriving
at the station we engaged a cab which took us and
our luggage to the depot, a large and commodious
building. Having duly lodged there we were soon to
rest, and at six o’clock on Tuesday morning we were
aroused by a bell, which meant all up and wash ; after
breakfast our luggage was hastily looked over, we
spent the day in writing to our friends and amusing
ourselves the best we could. On Wednesday morn-
ing we were informed that the Dorouda lay anchored
in the bay. After our luggage was deposited in the
lighter, a tug-boat came alongside the wharf which
took us all to the steamer. We weighed anchor at
eight o’clock in the evening, and started on our voy-
age to Queensland. We had many stoppages on the
way and viewed some beautiful scenery, far superior
to what I have seen in Lincolnshire. After a pleasant
and favourable voyage of fifty-one days we arrived at
Bowen ; only nine disembarked here. In a week or two
everyone was employed ; the girls were engaged the
first day. This is rather a quiet district atT present,
but exceedingly pretty. The scenery round about is
beautiful to look upon. Bowen faces* the bay of Port
Denison, and is considered very healthy. I may say
I have not had a day’s sickness since my arrival. We
were well treated from the first day we landed, better
than what I looked for. In a few weeks I was as
comfortable as I cmld wish for. Bowen is only a
small town, but I may say I like it better than any
town I have lived in elsewhere.
Queensland is a large country only very thinly in-
habited ; it affords great advantages, ' particularly
to small capitalists, who cannot fail to do well. The
single girls, have a good prospect before them, and
they all do well that come, many of them after being
in their situations a few months get married, this is
a yery frequent occurrence. The climate is consider-
ably warmer than in England, it is very warm in the
daytime but the_ nights are pleasant and cool, the
three months’ winter is just coming on, and in the
evening a great coat is very acceptable. The climate
should be no drawback or preventative to anyone
coming out. Queensland is rapidly advancing in all
ways ; while corn can be grown in the south, tropical
produce bids fair to prove successful in the north.
There are large sugar plantations in this division,
some only a few miles from Bowen. We have abun-
dance of fruit in the neighbourhood, superior to the
home fruit. Horses and cattle are very plentiful and
cheap. We have meat freezing works a few miles
from here, nearly completed,when finished it will be
better for the graziers, as they will find a market for
their stock near at hand. Mining is carried on exten-
sively in many parts of the colon}'. The aboriginals
(native blacks) are very harmless in all the civilised
districts, occasionally outrages are made by them, but
wherever the white man settles the blacks clear out.
They follow European vices rather than virtues, con-
sequently they are fast dying out. A few weeks ago
about 150 of them, male and female, came in town
from the districts round about to receive their blan-
kets which the Queensland Government present them
with annually. The colonials are a social good
hearted people, all of which speak the English lan-
guage, being nearly all of British descent. They
make the new chum very welcome, who are coming
in the colony in great numbers at the present time.
We have plenty of music in Bowen, chiefly the piano,
which may be heard in a great many houses. The
colonials go in for plenty of sport ; we have a cricket
club and a race meeting every year. Nearly every
one owns a horse to ride on. The ladies are fond of
riding on horseback, some of whom are very expert at
it. I would recommend anyone who is anxious to
gain a position in life to come out here, but they must
be willing to turn their hand to anything that falls in
their way. The emigrants may have a few hardships
to contend with (particularly in the bush), but in
course of time they get used to it, and count them as
mere trifles. The wages are much better than in
England. Drink is the worst enemy a man has to
contend with ; he must keep clear of it or it is use-
less coming out here to attempt to do any good to
himself. The Government are making a survey for
a railway from Bowen to join the Charter Tower
Railway at Haughton Gap, so we are expecting to see
things mere lively in Bowen in a few months. I and
my sister felt very grateful to our agents (WTiiteßros.)
for the interest they took in shipping us, also for the
friendly counsel and advice they gave us. They de-
serve great credit, and we heartily wish them success
in their valuable labours in trying to benefit their
fellow-countrymen. With great respect and kind
regards to my Grimsby friends, and many thanks for
your kindness,—l remain, sir, vours faithfully,
AETÈUE M. BABTON.
Office of the Wangaratta Divisional Board, Bowen,
Queensland, May 25th, 1883.
HOW AND WHERETO EMIGRATE.
pc IT F;JL COUNSEL FREE -re VOYAGE,OOSfiv
'«'IPANIONSHIP. GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE.
PAMPHLET 7d. STAMPS FOR REPLY,
JOHN H. WHITE, OSBORNE 81., QUI»
